Summit in Washington;   Warsaw Alliance Schedules Summit Meeting in Moscow
LEAD: The Warsaw Pact will hold a summit meeting in Moscow next Thursday, the East German Foreign Ministry said today.


How to Introduce Sanity Into the Book Trade;   Browsing With Dogs
LEAD: To the Editor:


G.O.P. Convention Names Two To Complete New York Ticket
LEAD: The Republican Party completed its statewide ticket today but remained so divided on the abortion issue that some local leaders said publicly that they would not support the candidate for governor, Pierre A. Rinfret.


Whose Terror Teams, Mr. Arafat?
LEAD: It was not just another random raid by Arab zealots.
The Palestinian terror teams intercepted by Israeli forces as they tried to land on civilian beaches Wednesday were part of a carefully planned, elaborately equipped attack.
That blunt fact forces Yasir Arafat to make a fundamental choice: Take strong action against the responsible terrorist faction of his Palestine Liberation Organization or forfeit direct dialogue with the United States, thus his best chance to advance the


A. B. Roosevelt, a C.I.A. Veteran And Banking Official, Dies at 72
LEAD: Archibald B. Roosevelt, a former high-level official of the Central Intelligence Agency, died in his sleep Wednesday night in his house in the Georgetown section of Washington.
He was 72 years old.


U.S. ASKS JAPANESE TO JOIN IN PROJECT FOR SUPERCOLLIDER
LEAD: The United States asked Japan today to invest $2 billion and take a leading management role in building a giant Superconducting Supercollider in Texas, in what would be the largest scientific collaboration between the two countries.


Reviewed Over Protest
LEAD: Fifteen representatives of New Musicals met with editors at The New York Times on May 24 to protest a decision by the newspaper to review ''Kiss of the Spider Woman,'' the first production of the New Musicals company at the State University College at Purchase, N.Y.
They said the show was a work in progress and a Times review would be detrimental to the show's development.


Our Towns;   Cable Ready When the World Is on the Blink
LEAD: Tony Kazakeris was accustomed to a cable-ready life style.
Though it cost extra, he bought himself a cable-ready Zenith TV years before they were big, so he'd be able to sit on his living room couch and do everything with a single remote control.
He liked to switch stations a lot, cutting commercials, skipping between sports, movies, home shopping.


Stock Prices Turn Down Late in Day
LEAD: Stock prices slid narrowly in late trading yesterday as investors turned skittish in advance of the release of economic data today that could show strong inflationary pressures.


Why Vincent Gigante Is Known as the Chin
LEAD: Indictments of defendants suspected of being organized-crime figures routinely include unusual nicknames.


Reporter's Notebook;   Republican Convention Is a Model of Confusion
LEAD: As dark comedy, the Republican State Convention here was an unqualified success.


Review/Theater;   A Modernized Hamlet Amid One-Act Plays
LEAD: In Shel Silverstein's hipster ''Hamlet,'' Melvin Van Peebles rises from a front stoop and tells a loopy tale of royal Danish duplicity, replete with contemporary flourishes.
Both the writer and the actor are in fine comic fettle, an antic disposition shared by Curt Dempster as director.
Mr.
Silverstein's Shakespearean rewrite is the curtain raiser of Evening B in the Ensemble Studio Theater's continuing '


U.S. Jury Indictment Of Nynex
LEAD: A Federal grand jury in Washington accused the Nynex Corporation yesterday of criminal contempt involving the 1982 consent decree that broke up the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.


Review/Music;   John Colianni In Jazz Trio
LEAD: John Colianni, whose virtuosity as a jazz pianist has been heard both in a big-band context with Lionel Hampton's band and in solo engagements in local piano rooms, has joined with the cornetist Ed Polcer and Mr.
Colianni's regular bassist, Bill Moring, in a trio playing through Sunday at the Fortune Garden Pavilion, 209 East 49th


The Nation's Top Soldier Attends Graduation at West Point


Herbert S. Duckworth, Retired Admiral, 90
LEAD: Herbert Spencer Duckworth, a retired vice admiral who commanded the aircraft carrier Cowpens in World War II, died at St.
Luke's Hospital on Tuesday.
He was 90 years old.


'Gil' Harrelson Sits In Hodges's Old Office
LEAD: While Bud Harrelson was in a Cincinnati hotel Tuesday finding out that he was replacing Davey Johnson as the manager of the Mets, a package was being delivered to his home on Long Island.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
7.00
9.84
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.76
7.75
8.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.74
7.67
8.38
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.61
8.62
8.64
30-YR.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page headline on Saturday about United States efforts to capture a Mexican suspect referred incorrectly in some copies to testimony about payments to his captors.
A Federal court in Los Angeles was told that the United States paid $20,000 in expenses immediately after the capture - not $50,000, the amount of a reward reportedly offered for him.


If These Walls Had Ears, The Tales They Could Tell!
LEAD: The houses are very old, among the oldest and most gracious somehow left standing in a city whose watchword has been nonpreservation.
Old they are, but not too old to celebrate the Second Annual Historic House Festival, which is to start tomorrow and continue next weekend.


INSIDE
LEAD:
U.S. Navy Sent to Liberia
As rebels were reported nearing Liberia's capital, the United States sent three Navy ships there to help evacuate Americans.
Page A3.
Imelda Marcos Collapses
Mrs.
Marcos was rushed to the hospital after she collapsed, vomiting blood, at her racketeering trial in Manhattan.


China Places Order For 36 Boeing Jets
LEAD: The Boeing Company said the Civil Aviation Administration of China had ordered aircraft valued at up to $4 billion if all options are exercised.
The agency ordered 36 Boeing planes and took options on 36 more.
It is the largest aircraft order placed by the Chinese aviation agency, Boeing said.


We Need Unshackled Endowment for the Arts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Prices Paid To Farmers Up 2% in May
LEAD: Prices farmers get for raw products increased 2 percent in May from April, raising the overall commodity index 3.4 percent above a year ago, the Agriculture Department said today.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Avondale Mills Inc., Sylacauga, Ala., a fabrics and yarns company, said John G. Hudson, its president and chief operating officer, will retire on Aug. 31.
The company promoted Richard H. Monk Jr. to executive vice president and said he was expected to succeed Mr.
Hudson.
The company also announced the resignation of George B.


In a Research Advance, Scientists Infect Monkeys With a Cloned Simian AIDS Virus
LEAD: Researchers have given monkeys an AIDS-like infection using a cloned simian virus for the first time, and they say it could eventually help them better understand the disease in humans.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Common Stock


Review/Art;   Defining Nature by Its Battle Scars
LEAD: ''Paysage Demoralise: Landscape at the End of the Century'' defines, probably better than any previous exhibition in New York, the changing artistic perception of nature.
Nature still offers artists refuge and guidance, but with real-estate developers, oil spills, toxic waste and nuclear disasters and with beer cans budding in Serengeti grass and Himalayan snow, it is hard not to feel that nature needs refuge and guidance itself.


FLORIDA EXECUTION IS CALLED TORTURE
LEAD: Lawyers for a condemned murderer argue in an appeal that the last man Florida sent to the electric chair was tortured in a botched execution that the state is not investigating properly.


U.S. Sends Ships to Pull Americans Out of Liberia
LEAD: The United States is sending ships to evacuate Americans from Liberia because rebel forces are advancing on Monrovia, the capital, Bush Administration officials said tonight.


Carl Apfelschnitt Dies; Abstract Artist Was 42
LEAD: Carl Apfelschnitt, a painter, died of AIDS yesterday at the Chandler Hall Hospice in Newtown, Pa.
He was 42 years old and had homes in New York City and Madrid, N.M.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing in the Week in Connecticut column of The Connecticut Weekly on Sunday, about ''The Importance of Being Earnest'' at the Community Theater in Westport, misstated the number of performances.
There will be just one performance on Sunday, at 2 P.M.


House Tour in Brooklyn
LEAD: Brownstone and limestone houses built in the 19th and early 20th centuries are featured in a house tour on Sunday in the Brooklyn neighborhood of Prospect-Lefferts Gardens.
The tour, the 21st sponsored by the neighborhood association, will run from noon to 5 P.M.
Tickets - $7 in advance, $8 on the day - are on sale at the association's office, 575 Flatbush Avenue, between Midwood and Maple Streets.


Oakville-Tesoro
LEAD: Oakville N.V., an investment group controlled by the Hong Kong-based Kuo Investment Ltd., said in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing it had reached an agreement with the Tesoro Petroleum Corporation to receive confidential financial information so it could evaluate a possible acquisition of the San Antonio-based oil refining and marketing company.


Fighter and His Manager One Bout From Dream
LEAD: The last time Nick Baffi dreamed like this, the Dodgers were in Brooklyn, Harry Truman was in the White House and Milton Berle was the mainstay of ''The Texaco Star Theater.''


Cheerleader or Scorer, Aguirre Is Contributing
LEAD: It was a Thursday night in May at the Palace in Auburn Hills, Mich.
The Detroit Pistons had just beaten the Knicks, 104-97, to take a 2-0 lead in the Eastern Conference semifinal.
The Pistons' locker room was swarming with reporters, most of whom wanted to talk with James Edwards, who had scored a career playoff high 32 points and Isiah Thomas, who had 23 points, 12 assists and 3 steals.


Chronicle
LEAD: Old pals GIORGIO ARMANI and MARTIN SCORSESE have teamed up to make a documentary on the elusive art of fashion designing.
Mr.
Scorsese's 30-minute film stars Mr.
Armani, playing himself.


How to Introduce Sanity Into the Book Trade
LEAD: To the Editor:


Report Causes Tonka Plunge
LEAD: The Tonka Corporation's stock plummeted today after the company said it expected sharp declines in its toy market share and earnings.


Review/Film;   A Thriller on a Budget
LEAD: Liza Bear's ''Force of Circumstance'' has the skimpy, low-budget look of a student film, but it attempts the kind of slickness that usually comes with more expensive efforts.
Ms.
Bear favors, for instance, starting a scene with an attention-getting but largely irrelevant detail (a close-up of a swarm of bees at the start of a cocktail party, for example).


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Plantathon, the east side of Broadway will be closed tomorrow from 72d to 79th Streets from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Because of the Lower Second


On the West Side Today, Metal and Glass, Sorted
LEAD: The residents of 102 West 75th Street in Manhattan are fortunate that Vincent Fanuele lives in the building.
He cares about their garbage.


What All That Noise Will Be About
LEAD: AFTER the human voice, the drum may well be the oldest instrument.


Barbara Bush and the Norms of '47
LEAD: After one year and a summer semester, Barbara Pierce dropped out of Smith College to marry George Herbert Walker Bush.
If she was unusual in leaving school - only 29 percent of the Class of 1947 failed to get a degree - she was not in marrying young.
Those were the days, after all, when the Class Day


More Eligible for AIDS Drug
LEAD: The Government announced today that it had approved a plan to distribute an experimental AIDS drug more widely to patients who fail to benefit from two other drugs now available.


Review/Theater;   In a Prison Cell, 2 Men and a Movie Musical
LEAD: Almost 25 years ago, the director Harold Prince pushed Broadway a significant step forward with ''Cabaret,'' a show that folded Brechtian storytelling, abstract theatrical metaphors and the history of Nazism into the sophisticated glitter of a mainstream Broadway musical.
In ''Kiss of the Spider Woman,'' his first musical since ''Phantom of the Opera,'' Mr.


F.B.I. Studying Letter on Blast That Injured 2
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation is investigating an anonymous letter that takes responsibility for the bombing of an automobile in which two environmentalists were injured last week.
Officials say the letter includes previously unreleased information about an earlier bombing at a lumber mill.


Bush and Gorbachev Toasts at Dinner
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the toasts offered tonight by President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union at a White House state dinner, as recorded through the facilities of the Cable News Network:
MR. BUSH


Bergeron Dismissed
LEAD: When the Quebec Nordiques officially announced yesterday that Michel Bergeron had been dismissed as head coach, General Manager Pierre Page did not immediately name a replacement for Bergeron, whose second term as Nordique coach lasted only one season, six fewer than his 1980-87 stint.


Twins Complete A Merry Month
LEAD: Kirby Puckett and Gary Gaetti hit run-scoring doubles tonight and the Minnesota Twins finished their best May ever with a 3-2 victory over the Chicago White Sox.


Saints' Wilson Signs
LEAD: Another veteran quarterback, Dave Wilson, signed a one-year contract with the New Orleans Saints yesterday.


Law: At the Bar;   For Texas firm, the price of circulating a videotape proves quite steep.
LEAD: The letterhead says Hirsch, Glover, Robinson &amp; Sheiness.
But a local legal newspaper referred to the firm as ''Hirsch, Glover &amp; Shameless'' for its role in the Houston bar's version of ''Sex, Lies and Videotape,'' and many people here agree.


Summit in Washington: Reporter's Notebook;   The Man, the Mikes and the Moment
LEAD: The whole town was poised for something predictably unpredictable.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:
FRIDAY
AN EYE FOR FILM


Gorbachev Backs Lithuanian Sovereignty
LEAD: To the Editor:


Two-Year Contract For Patriots' Grogan
LEAD: The New England Patriots yesterday signed for two years a free-agent quarterback who is 36 years old and should not have much difficulty learning their system.
The quarterback is Steve Grogan, who for the last 15 years has been calling signals a good deal of the time for the Patriots.
Details were not made public.


How Do You Spell Oops?
LEAD: The 990 midshipmen who graduated from the Naval Academy will get a second diploma to fix a misspelling in the ones they received on Wednesday. ''The Seal of the Navel Academy is hereunto affixed,'' read the diplomas.
Officials said they would be reprinted.


Summit in Washington;   Making the Ruble 'Hard': 3 Ideas Win Prizes
LEAD: An American and two Soviet citizens won $10,000 prizes on Wednesday for their proposals on how to make the Soviet ruble convertible into dollars and other internationally accepted currencies.


Dr. Ora M. Rosen, 55, Scientist; Studied the Development of Cells
LEAD: Dr.
Ora M. Rosen, a research scientist who was a leading investigator of the ways hormones and other factors control the development of cells, died of breast cancer yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 55 years old.


Review/Television;   A Fairy Tale As a Ballet With Twists
LEAD: The Lyons Opera Ballet's production of ''Cinderella,'' presented by Alive From Off Center at 9 tonight on Channel 13, is not for purists.
Choreographed by Maguy Marin, the chic maverick of French ballet, the production is a child's-eye version of the fairy tale, with fat-faced stiff-moving doll figures with padded bodies enacting all the roles.


Testimony On Mulheren
LEAD: A former partner of John A. Mulheren Jr. yesterday directly linked the one-time stock speculator to an illegal trading scheme with Ivan F. Boesky, who admitted securities violations.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 502 money market mutual funds increased by $128.3 million, to $381.54 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 161 institutional funds decreased by $121.9 million, to $92.68 billion.
The assets of the 239 general-purpose funds were down by $231.2 million, to $129.25 billion.


John F. Hackett, 88, Ex-Bishop in Hartford
LEAD: John Francis Hackett, retired Auxiliary Bishop of the Archdiocese of Hartford, died of cancer yesterday at St.
Francis Hospital and Medical Center in Hartford.
He was 88 years old and lived in West Hartford.


Marcos Collapses During Her Federal Fraud Trial
LEAD: Imelda Marcos collapsed at the defense table yesterday and was taken from Federal court by ambulance, bringing her racketeering trial in New York to a sudden halt.


Review/Film;   A Schwarzenegger Torn Between Lives on Earth and Mars
LEAD: In ''Total Recall,'' Arnold Schwarzenegger finds himself facing an existential quandary.
It is the 21st century, and the technology of the day makes its possible for fully formed memories to be inserted into the minds of unsuspecting victims.
So is Mr.
Schwarzenegger actually a happily married construction worker named Doug Quaid?


Economic Scene;   Savings Rescue: Figuring the Cost
LEAD: THE cost of the savings and loan bailout could be a lot larger than anyone has expected - indeed, more than $1 trillion.


Car Loans Back $622 Million Issue
LEAD: The Merrill Lynch Asset-Backed Corporation 1990-1 yesterday priced $622 million in debt securities due in 1995 that are backed by Chrysler Credit Corporation car loans.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Tribute to James Beard


Wagner Faulted for Schools' Failures by Inquiry Panel Head
LEAD: The chairman of a commission investigating New York City's schools yesterday called the Board of Education a ''sleepy-eyed lumbering brontosaurus primarily interested in grazing'' and singled out its president, Robert F. Wagner Jr., for blame.


New Approach to Mafia Seen in Recent Charges
LEAD: This week's racketeering indictments of 15 men linked to organized-crime groups are part of a new law-enforcement strategy to cripple the Mafia in New York City through construction industry investigations.


Florio Leaves Knights of Columbus
LEAD: Gov.
Jim Florio said today that he had resigned from the Knights of Columbus, a Roman Catholic social organization, after the Bishop of Camden had announced that politicians favoring a woman's right to an abortion will not be allowed to speak at church gatherings.


Democratic Imperative
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev and George Bush are doing important business, but this summit meeting seems somehow apart from the real movement of history.
That is taking place 5,000 miles from here, in Moscow.


Woman's Claim Of Racial Crime Is Called a Hoax
LEAD: What had been depicted as racial harassment that left a black student at Emory University here traumatized and mute was instead apparently a hoax, the authorities said today.


Summit in Washington;   Muscovites Scoff at Talk of Summit
LEAD: Igor Repka had little time to ponder the world travels of Mikhail S. Gorbachev as he grabbed the collar of an interloper and thrust him back from the line at the money-changing bureau for this summer's throng of would-be Soviet travelers.


Macy's Names Finance Chief
LEAD: Diane Price Baker, the director of finance for Salomon Brothers Inc.'s retail group, yesterday was named senior vice president finance and chief financial officer of R. H. Macy &amp; Company.


Chronicle
LEAD: MARK FROST, executive producer of the television show ''Twin Peaks,'' said ABC fibbed when it claimed that Laura Palmer's murder would be solved in the final episode, shown last week, and that he purposely withheld the identity of the murderer so that the series would be renewed.


Blazers, Overcoming Road Jinx, Reach Final
LEAD: The Portland Trail Blazers were tired of hearing they could not win on the road against the Phoenix Suns.
They were tired of being compared with past Portland teams, who always seemed to fail during clutch moments in the playoffs.
And they were tired of watching other teams play in the National Basketball


How to Introduce Sanity Into the Book Trade;   Lincoln in Poland
LEAD: To the Editor:


Californian Said To Be the Choice For CUNY Chief
LEAD: A search committee has overwhelmingly recommended Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds, a former chancellor of California's state university system, to become the next chancellor of the City University of New York, university officials said yesterday.


Arafat Denies P.L.O. Tie to Raid But His Mild Stand Troubles U.S.
LEAD: Yasir Arafat, the Palestine Liberation Organization's chairman, said today that the P.L.O. was not responsible for the seaborne guerrilla raid against Israel on Wednesday, but he declined to deplore the operation or to take any action against the P.L.O. faction involved.


Eastern Meeting Reported
LEAD: The bankruptcy trustee for Eastern Airlines will meet with a United States attorney in New York City to try to head off possible indictments on charges of falsifying maintenance records, it was reported.


Appeal by Robinson
LEAD: In a 90-minute session yesterday at the American League office in Manhattan, Manager Frank Robinson of the Baltimore Orioles appealed his three-game suspension to the league president, Bobby Brown.
No decision was announced.
The Orioles begin a three-game road series with the Yankees today.


Evolution in Europe;   Yeltsin Faces a Sharply Split Russian Parliament
LEAD: Taking his place today as the presiding chairman of the Parliament of the Russian Republic, Boris N. Yeltsin came face to face with the first obstacle to his bold plan to carve out a sovereign Russia within the Soviet Union.


Democrats Take Off Gloves In Major California Contest
LEAD: The hotly contested but mostly polite Democratic race for the nomination for governor in California has finally turned nasty in the closing days of the campaign.


Bayside's Goal-Line Stand Rescues Almost-Dead Sport
LEAD: Thanks to the announcement that football was dead, football is alive and well again at Bayside High School in Queens.


$250 Million Conrail Notes
LEAD: The Consolidated Rail Corporation yesterday priced $250 million in notes due 2000 through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
COMPANIES
ABC said it would impose a new system for measuring the TV audiences that advertisers pay to reach.
Ad executives, caught by surprise, said they would fight ABC's plans to base audience guarantees in part on a three-year trend of viewing levels, instead of only Nielsen reports. [Page A1.


Top Player Named
LEAD: Arizona State's sophomore center fielder, Mike Kelly, was selected yesterday as Baseball America player of the year for 1990 after a season in which he hit .376 and had 21 homers and 82 runs batted in.


Japanese Pay $60 Million for Carolco Stake
LEAD: Carolco Pictures Inc. said today that it had sold a 10 percent stake to a Japanese electronics company for $60 million.
The move is the latest illustration of the international business ties being forged by American entertainment companies.


Alaska Natives Sadly Ponder Whether to Spend Their Land
LEAD: Nineteen years after Congress set aside almost a billion dollars and 44 million acres to make Alaskan native groups economically self-sufficient, some of the groups have built thriving financial empires.


Review/Music;   Fortepiano In Pianistic Rendering
LEAD: In her enterprising ''Art of the Early Keyboard'' series, now in its fifth season, Gwendolyn Toth has been offering a democratic view of the keyboard literature.
Her programs typically include not only solo works for organ, harpsichord or piano, but also pieces in which the keyboard is used as a chamber partner or an accompanying instrument.


World Trade Talks Advance Despite Farm-Price Dispute
LEAD: A meeting of the industrial democracies' finance ministers ended today with officials saying they had made some progress in global trade talks despite sharp differences between the United States and the European Community over agricultural trade.


Leaner Summer for Students in New York Firms
LEAD: As law students arrive at big New York law firms this week to begin their stints as summer associates, they may have to look a bit harder for the lavish trimmings that predecessors enjoyed in recent years.


Patrick V. Peppe, Professor, 49
LEAD: Patrick V. Peppe, an associate professor of political science at Lehman College of the City University, died yesterday at New York Hospital after heart surgery.
He was 49 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Gasoline Prices Fall Sharply On Report of Higher Supply
LEAD: Prices of unleaded gasoline plunged on the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday.


Home Makes A Hoopster Happiest
LEAD: rrHow does Chuck Daly explain the home-court advantage in basketball, which has been astonishingly evident in the playoffs?


Yankees Are Quiet, Maybe a Little Too Quiet
LEAD: The afternoon passed quietly and quickly in the Bronx, but like the hours that precede a storm, there was a sense yesterday that the uneasiness of the Yankees' first seven weeks will not be easily dismissed.


Corrections
LEAD: A restaurant review in Weekend on May 11 about Chez Louis misstated its opening date.
It was June 1986, not 1985.


Where Is the S&amp;L Money?
LEAD: Where did all the money go?


Westinghouse Spurns Statute
LEAD: The Westinghouse Electric Corporation, one of Pennsylvania's largest companies, said today that its board had voted to exempt it from coverage under the state's new anti-takeover law.


Evolution in Europe;   East Germany Seizes Defunct Party's Funds
LEAD: East Germany's Parliament voted today to seize millions of dollars from the coffers of the defunct Communist Party.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Wednesday about the New York State Republican convention misidentified the man with Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
He was John V. Scaduto, a delegate from Nassau County.


Summit in Washington;    Faces of the Summit: The Supporting Cast
LEAD:
AMERICAN SIDE
Brent Scowcroft
President Bush's national security adviser and the pre-eminent White House staff official on foreign affairs . . .
Retired Air Force general . . .
A habitually cautious man who tries to avoid the spotlight, ceding dominance in foreign policy to Secretary of State James A.


Pfizer on Lawsuit
LEAD: Pfizer Inc. said a Los Angeles Superior Court judge had dismissed a lawsuit filed by Public Citizen, a Washington consumer organization, against Pfizer and its Shiley Inc. heart-valve unit.
In the suit, filed on March 21 and dismissed on Wednesday, Public Citizen had sought to require Pfizer and Shiley to communicate directly with all recipients worldwide of Shiley's convexo-concave heart valves.


S.E.C. Votes to Collect Data On Tax-Exempt Offerings
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission approved the creation of a central depository today that would provide investors with information on tax-exempt bond issues.


On Stage
LEAD:
Merrick's 'Oh, Kay!'


Stein and Health Chief Fight Over Safety of Takeout Food
LEAD: A clash over the cleanliness of takeout food in New York broke out after the City Council President charged that much of the food contained high and possibly dangerous levels of bacterial contamination.
The Health Commissioner not only denied the assertion, but also said he intended to have a takeout dinner.


U.C.L.A. Star's Success A Learning Experience
LEAD: Every youngster from Little League to Pop Warner football to the sandlots has heard it over and over.
You have to work hard, learn how to win, learn how to overcome adversity.
After that, if you're lucky, you may achieve success.


Police Corps Recruit Plan Nears Vote in Congress
LEAD: After nearly a decade of lobbying and discussion, a plan that would entice young people to become police officers by paying for their college educations is nearing a vote in Congress.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:
Ricky Ford's Jazz


Insider Charges Are Settled
LEAD: The former chairman of Modulaire Industries and the wife of Modulaire's former president settled Federal charges today that they had violated the anti-fraud provisions of Federal securities laws by tipping off friends about a pending merger between the company and Waste Management Inc. in the spring of 1987.


Review/Art;   From Humble Postcard To the Cosmological
LEAD: The English artists Gilbert and George have formed a unit of singular genius for more than 20 years, perennially fusing art and life, abstraction and representation, morality and decadence with the greatest of ease and inventing new mediums as they go.
In the late 1960's and early 1970's they performed as what they called Living


Editorial Staff Cut at Lear's
LEAD: Lear's magazine dismissed 25 middle-level editorial people yesterday in a belt-tightening move.
The magazine had 83 staff members.


Some New Contenders In World Series Lineup
LEAD: With most of the familiar members of the cast missing, the 53d College World Series begins in Omaha this afternoon with eight teams vying for a national championship that has become more prestigious each season.


Review/Art;   Visions of a Violent Century In Francis Bacon's Paintings
LEAD: The Francis Bacon exhibition that opens Sunday at the Museum of Modern Art comprises 59 paintings.
Most of them are large, and some are made up of two or three canvases, each measuring 78 by 58 inches.
They cover the years from 1945 to 1988. (Bacon was 80 years old last October.) Many of the images in the show acquired classic status long ago and have been regarded by enthusiasts as central to the concerns of our day.


Cameo Players in an '84 Deal With Iraq: Nixon, Agnew, Ceausescu
LEAD: A little-noticed lawsuit in Federal District Court here has provided a footnote to the history of the Iran-Iraq war and involved a varied cast of characters, from Richard M. Nixon to his former Attorney General, John N. Mitchell, to President Nicolae Ceausescu of Romania.


New Chief At Advest
LEAD: Advest Group Inc., a financial services firm based in Hartford, said yesterday that it had named Allen Weintraub chief executive.


Factory Orders, Barometer for Output, Fell 2.3% in April
LEAD: Orders to United States factories slumped 2.3 percent in April, the Commerce Department said today.
Despite increased orders in February and March, the decline in April pushed orders down 2 percent for the year so far.


Publishers Put Off Decision On Rushdie's Next Work
LEAD: More than a year after Iran issued a death threat against the British author Salman Rushdie because of his novel ''The Satanic Verses,'' publishers are hesitant about his future projects and there appears to be nervousness over any association with the Indian-born writer.


Panel Seeks to Preserve U.S.-Owned Technology
LEAD: A Defense Department panel has recommended that the Government ''actively intervene'' to maintain American ownership of industries critical to national security.


An 'Old General' Talks Of Pride at West Point
LEAD: For Gen.
Colin L. Powell, a child of the South Bronx who rose to become the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, today was another landmark in his career.


Rodriquez Thrives on Brother's Advice
LEAD: The level of his play had fallen to the point that Chi Chi Rodriguez contemplated quitting golf.


Washington at Work;   Solicitor General's Career Advances At Intersection of Law and Politics
LEAD: Attired in the traditional outfit of striped pants and dark gray morning coat, Kenneth W. Starr, the Solicitor General of the United States, stood before the Supreme Court.


Fairs and Festivals This Weekend
LEAD:
TODAY
FESTIVAL OF SHAD TRADITIONS, South Street Seaport Museum, 207 Front Street.
Demonstrations of net-mending and shad cooking.
Today and tomorrow, noon to 4 P.M.
Information: 669-9430.
FEAST OF ST.
ANTHONY, Mount Carmel Catholic Church, 187th Street between Cambreleng and Arthur Avenues, Belmont section, the Bronx.


Clemson on Probation
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association placed Clemson's football program on one year's probation today after an investigation found that a coach and a booster gave money to players.
But the school averted serious sanctions that could have included a ban on post-season and television appearances.


$202 Million Issue By Port Authority
LEAD: A $202.07 million tax-exempt debt offering by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey on behalf of Continental Airlines and Eastern Airlines for a new passenger building at La Guardia airport was well received and was immediately oversubscribed, the underwriters, led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp;


Shuttle Engineers Fail to Pinpoint Fuel Leak That Halted Launching
LEAD: Workers found a tiny leak in the space shuttle Columbia's rear engine compartment today but judged it too small to have caused the hydrogen leak that delayed the shuttle's launching.


Review/Photography;   The Personal Side of Johnson as President
LEAD: THOSE who were not around in the 1960's will find ''L.B.J.: The White House Years,'' a show of some 120 black-and-white photographs at the International Center of Photography, an intriguing and occasionally edifying pictorial history of the Presidency of Lyndon Baines Johnson.
Those who experienced the years 1963 to 1968, however, may recognize the exhibition as something else: an ingenious attempt to rehabilitate the memory of a politician whose integrity and accomplishments are as much under attack today as they were some 25 years ago.


Criminal Type Meets Sunday Silence Next
LEAD: Having beaten Easy Goer in Monday's Metropolitan Handicap at Belmont Park, Criminal Type will now go west to challenge the sport's other kingpin.
The 5-year-old son of Alydar will make his next start in the Hollywood Gold Cup on June 24 against Sunday Silence.


U. of South Carolina Head Quits Under Fire
LEAD: The president of the University of South Carolina has resigned after weeks of criticism over lavish spending on fund-raising trips and big fees to lure celebrity lecturers and speakers to the school.


Asians to Press U.S. on Boat People
LEAD: Britain and six Southeast Asian nations plan a new attempt to persuade the Bush Administration and the Vietnamese Government to agree to the forced return of thousands of Vietnamese boat people later this summer.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''We've seen a world of change this past year, and now on the horizon we see what just one short year ago seemed a distant dream: a continent truly divided East and West has begun to heal with the dawn of self-determination and democracy.''
- President Bush.
[A7:2.]


Sanchez Vicario Loses Crown Early
LEAD: Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, the youngest defending women's champion in French Open history, today made the most premature exit ever by a defending champion here when she was dispatched by her own doubles partner, Mercedes Paz of Argentina, 7-5, 3-6, 6-1, in the second round.


Restaurants
LEAD:
Duane Park Cafe


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums
''STORIES BY HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN,'' the first of the summer story hours, told by Diane Wolkstein and Kathryn Farnsworth, 11 A.M. tomorrow, at the Andersen Statue, Fifth Avenue and 72d Street in Central Park.
Free.
''MEDIEVAL SPRING FESTIVAL,'' an outdoor event, with Robin Hood, Maid Marian, Kings, Queens and knights, singing and dancing in the streets, with refreshments, 2 to 4 P.M.


Mystery in Beijing: The Vanishing Dissidents
LEAD: The mystery in the Chinese capital today was what happened to three prominent Chinese dissidents who had called a news conference for this afternoon at which they planned to release a letter calling on the Government to release political prisoners.


Two Views On Whittle's TV Reports
LEAD: A PLAN by Whittle Communications to put advertiser-supported television programming into doctors' waiting rooms is meeting with widespread interest from advertising agencies.
But television executives are questioning the analysis used by the Tennessee company to support its claim that the programming will reach consumers whom network television does not attract.


Summit in Washington;   Excerpts From Remarks by Gorbachev at the Soviet Embassy Luncheon
LEAD: Following are excerpts from remarks by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev at a luncheon today at the Soviet Embassy, as provided by the Federal News Service, a transcription agency:


Not All Bias Crimes Bills Are Equally Effective
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ex-Ames Workers To Get $1.2 Million
LEAD: A Federal judge has allowed Ames Department Stores Inc. to pay $1.2 million to 6,500 employees who left the discount retailer before it filed for bankruptcy protection in April.
Bankruptcy Judge Howard C. Buschman 3d in Manhattan approved a request by Ames, based in Rocky Hill, Conn., to pay up to $2,000 in severance and vacation pay to employees who were not paid before the company filed for


Mystery Witness in Bensonhurst Case Still Mystifies
LEAD: Two weeks after she splashed into the news as ''Maria,'' the mystery witness who said she had seen the killing of Yusuf K. Hawkins in Bensonhurst, a former cleaning woman named Iris still has not decided whether to testify in the case.


TV Weekend;   A Quiet Wizard Behind the Muppets
LEAD: With the death of Jim Henson, at age 53, television lost one of its giants, a quiet, somewhat shy man whose wizardry with puppets gave the world landmarks in popular entertainment.
Valuable insight into the man and his work can be found in ''Henson's Place,'' a British documentary made in 1985.
It will be broadcast on


LMVH Increasing Stake in Guinness
LEAD: LVMH Moet Hennessy-Louis Vuitton, the French liquor and luxury-products company, moved to increase its stake in Guinness P.L.C. to 24 percent, in line with the British liquor company's stake in LVMH.
LVMH said the move was part of an agreement reached with Guinness in 1988 to hold equal stakes in each other.


'Weakness Is Strength'
LEAD: At the Moscow summit of 1974, a Soviet leader did what he could to sustain an American President in the waning days of his power.
With the shoe now on the other foot, we will see again how little one superpower can affect the internal turmoil of the other.


40 Arrested in Gambling Ring Crackdown


When the (New) World Was Portugal's Oyster
LEAD: First of all, they were great seafarers, the people of Portugal in the 15th and 16th centuries for whom exploration became a national way of life.
Their voyages led to the discovery of Brazil, to a route around Africa to India and to an impressive exhibition that is to open tomorrow at the New York Public


Ralph Bagnold, 94, Expert on Physics Of Sand in the Desert
LEAD: Brig.
Ralph Bagnold, an expert on the physics of desert sand and winds, died on Monday.
He was 94 years old and had fought in both world wars.


Dance Troupe Benefit
LEAD: Members of Dance Theater of Harlem will perform in works by George Balanchine, Louis Johnson, Arthur Mitchell and others at the company's annual benefit on June 13 in the ballroom of the Manhattan Center, 311 West 34th Street.
The evening begins with a reception at 7 P.M., followed by dinner and the performance.


Kenneth A. Noseck, Colonel, 72
LEAD: Kenneth A. Noseck, a retired Army lieutenant colonel who accepted the formal surrender of the city of Munich in 1945, died of cancer on Wednesday at Manchester (Conn.) Memorial Hospital.
He was 72 years old and lived in South Windsor, Conn.


Market Place;   Cleaning Up In Europe
LEAD: ENVIRONMENTAL companies in Europe are looking attractive, as a result of dirty water, dirty air, acid rain, hazardous waste, sewage and little room for landfills.


Summit in Washington;   Lunching At the Embassy
LEAD: Following is a partial list of American guests at President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's luncheon at the Soviet Embassy today:
Robert McC. Adams, head of the Smithsonian Institution
Isaac Asimov
Rildia Bee, Van Cliburn's mother
James Billington, Librarian of Congress
Ray Bradbury
Van Cliburn
Prof.


Symphonic Arts
LEAD: Alejandro Guzman is to conduct the New York Symphonic Arts Ensemble in Beethoven's Triple Concerto, Strauss's ''Four Last Songs'' and Martinu's ''Symhony No. 4 at 3 P.M. on Sunday at Julia Richman High School, 317 East 67th Street.
The soloists in the Beethoven are to be Larry Shiller, violinist, Allen McGill, cellist, and Daphne Spottiswoode, pianist.


Judge Rules on Auto Insurance
LEAD: In a major test of Gov.
Jim Florio's car insurance plan, a State Superior Court judge said today that while the law needs further legal scrutiny, the state could immediately begin collecting an estimated $50 million in surcharges from the insurance industry.


Treasuries End Narrowly Mixed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in light trading yesterday, as dealers awaited this morning's release of May employment data.


Going to the Rescue of an Insurer
LEAD: Richard H. Jenrette loves to restore stately old homes as a hobby. ''I like working with something that's beautiful, strong and powerful, but that has stumbled,'' said the 61-year-old executive who helped found the brokerage firm of Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette and who today owns estates in the Hudson Valley, on the Battery in Charleston, S.C., and on St.


On Flamenco Guitar
LEAD: The flamenco guitarist Manolo Sanlucar is to give the United States premiere of his ''Tauromagia,'' a work about bullfighting, at 8 tonight at Carnegie Hall.
Mr.
Sanlucar is to lead an ensemble including Charo Manzano, Antonio Carbonell and Jose Merce, vocalists; Tino di Geraldo, percussionist; Juan Parrilla, flutist, and Pedro Ontiveros and Jaime Muela on flutes and saxophones.


ABC Plans to Count Viewers Differently; Advertisers Angered
LEAD: ABC announced yesterday that it would unilaterally impose a new system for measuring the television audiences that advertisers have paid to reach.


People
LEAD: *
Robert C. Erwin has been appointed senior vice president and director of client services at Robert A. Becker Inc., a health care communications subsidiary of Eurocom WCRS Della Femina Ball.


Promotion That Crashed and Burned
LEAD: In a public relations effort gone awry, a newspaper editor who had criticized National Guard flyovers as dangerous was invited along on a flight exercise -and was nearly killed in a crash that destroyed two jets.


Chronicle
LEAD: For 40 years HENRY RINGLING NORTH, the nephew of JOHN RINGLING, has battled to have the flamboyant circus promoter and his wife, MABLE, buried at the Ringling Museum in Sarasota, Fla., along with Mr.
North's mother, IDA NORTH.
Mrs.
North was Mr.
Ringling's sister.


Chrysler Shifts Top Management
LEAD: A day after the abrupt resignation of the Chrysler Corporation's No. 2 executive, the auto maker swiftly realigned top management today but did so in a way that appeared to add to uncertainty about who would succeed Lee A. Iacocca as chairman and chief executive.


Kipp Alan Rogers, 32, Entertainment Lawyer
LEAD: Kipp Alan Rogers, a lawyer who represented entertainment figures and organizations, died of AIDS on Saturday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 32 years old.


Weicker Picks Lawyer As His Running Mate
LEAD: Former Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr., a Republican running for governor as an independent, said today that he had selected a Hartford politician and lawyer, Eunice S. Groark, who is largely unknown in the rest of the state, to be his running mate for the office of lieutenant governor.


Newsletters Fighting Back on Copyrights
LEAD: Photocopiers are great conveniences, but publishers of newsletters say the machines make one thing too easy: violating the copyright law.


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
West Glen Communications has produced a campaign for the Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America.
The spokesman is the former baseball pitcher Bob Gibson.


Paul Stuart to Expand In Asia, Mainly in Japan
LEAD: Paul Stuart, the specialty apparel store that has made a point of operating only one American store, will open more than 15 stores in Japan and elsewhere in Asia in a few years.


Books of The Times;   A Triangle of Mother, Father and Son
LEAD:
Wildlife
By Richard Ford
177 pages. Atlantic Monthly Press. $18.95.


Ad Bureau Chief to Take A Post With Scripps
LEAD: Craig C. Standen, the president and chief executive of the Newspaper Advertising Bureau, announced yesterday that he would leave the bureau in August to join the E. W. Scripps Company.
He will become vice president for marketing and advertising of the company's newspaper and publishing division.


Peru Begins to Dig Out as Earthquake Death Toll Is Put at 101


Gay Writers to Finish A Series of Readings
LEAD: Homosexual writers will speak and read from their work at the final events in the ''Writers on Writing'' series this month at the mid-Manhattan branch of the New York Public Library, Fifth Avenue and 40th Street.


Summit in Washington;   Over Caviar, Gorbachev Relaxes and Charms
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev showed his softer side to a crowd of American entertainment, literary, political and academic figures today, and proved in the process that however cool the audience at home he is still a seductive performer on the road.


Evolution in Europe;   Germany's Capital: Will It Be Berlin?
LEAD: Only a year ago, Mayor Hans Daniels proudly told a visiting Mikhail S. Gorbachev that Bonn was only standing in as capital for Berlin ''until such a time as Germany is united in peace and freedom.''


Rembrandt Doesn't Sell At a Christie's Auction
LEAD: Rembrandt's ''St.
Peter in Prison,'' from 1631, one of the most important early paintings by the artist still in private hands, did not sell yesterday at Christie's in New York.
The house's presale estimate for the painting was $10 million to $15 million.


Review/Ballet;   Cynthia Gregory Returns in a Familiar Role
LEAD: Cynthia Gregory returned to the Metropolitan Opera stage this week after an injury prevented her from dancing with the American Ballet Theater all season.
And the audience greeted Miss Gregory like returning royalty when she performed on Wednesday night.
But the vehicle for that performance was less happy, a lumbering, would-be bravura pas de deux called ''Grand Pas Classique.


Ruth Martin, 78, Dies; A U.S. Embassy Nurse
LEAD: Ruth M. Martin, a nurse who served in American embassies in Europe, Africa and Asia and who was later in charge of the international program of the American Nurses Association, died of pneumonia last Saturday in the Village Nursing Home in Greenwich Village.
She was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.


The Dollar Is Mostly Higher In Speculation on Job Data
LEAD: The dollar advanced yesterday against all major currencies except the Canadian dollar in advance of today's release of employment figures for May.


Feeling the Heat in Georgia
LEAD: With thick white bandages on his knees and elbows and another wrapped snugly around his head, Jimmy Carr, the Atlanta Falcons' secondary coach, last week bolted out of the locker room of the team's training center in this quiet, quaint town 40 miles north of Atlanta.


Toxic Drug Residues in Meat: U.S. Says Findings Are Mixed
LEAD: Residues of toxic drugs have virtually disappeared from the nation's supply of beef and poultry, the Department of Agriculture said today.
But it added that some pork and veal producers were still misusing drugs, resulting in illegal levels of antibiotics that could make the meat unsafe to eat.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Bobby Short's Singing


Defense Lawyer May Abandon Mondello Case
LEAD: Stephen G. Murphy, the flamboyant lawyer for Keith Mondello in the Bensonhurst murder trial, plans to appear in court today to ask that he be allowed to withdraw from the case because his client has not paid the bill.


Grand Met Names Canadian To Run Alpo Petfoods Unit
LEAD: Rob Hawthorne has been named president and chief executive of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C.'s Alpo Petfoods division.


Evolution in Europe;   Victim of Armenia Clashes Is Buried


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:
'Time' on Film


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-13


Finally, the G.O.P. Speaks
LEAD: New York State's Republican Party (yes, there is one after all) produced two big surprises at its party convention this week - one laudable, the other late.
For the first time, the party endorsed a woman's right to choose an abortion.
It also ended a long and embarrassing search by conferring on Pierre Rinfret the dubious honor of running against Mario


4 Exchanges to Test Trading O-T-C Issues
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission approved a pilot plan today to allow 100 stocks now traded in the over-the-counter market to also be traded on four exchanges, including the American Stock Exchange.


New Jersey Development;   Smaller Homes Rise in Affluent Warren
LEAD: Banking on location, architectural design and what it considers the right price to attract buyers, a New Jersey developer has begun work on a single-family housing project in this Somerset County community, despite a surfeit of new and existing homes offered for sale throughout the state.


Summit in Washington;   Guests at White House Dinner for Gorbachev
LEAD:
President Bush and Barbara Bush.
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Raisa M. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union.
Eduard A. Shevardnadze, Soviet Foreign Minister.
Yuri D. Maslyukov, Deputy Prime Minister.
Yevgeny M. Primakov, member of the Presidential Council.
Ambassador Aleksandr A.


Mother Charged in Fatal Stabbings of 4 Children
LEAD: A 36-year-old woman with a history of psychological problems was charged today with stabbing her four small children to death on Wednesday.


Mary Byrne Wed To Bruce Ling
LEAD: Mary Byrne and Bruce Ling were married yesterday evening at the Lotos Club in New York by U.S.
District Court Judge I. Leo Glasser.
The bride is the daughter of Thomas G. Byrne of Wayne, Pa., and Maurica Byrne of Seattle.
Her husband is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Delmer Ling of London, Ontario.


French Bank Stock Inquiry
LEAD: Jean-Charles Naouri, a senior adviser to the Finance Minister, Pierre Beregovoy, from 1982 to 1986, was one of five people named on Wednesday in an investigation of a 1988 attempt to take control of the Societe Generale bank.


A Men's Choir
LEAD: Chanticleer, a 12-voice men's choir from San Francisco, is to give the world premiere of Christopher Fulkerson's ''Celestial 60's I'' at 8 tomorrow at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
Mr.
Fulkerson's work uses lyrics from popular songs of the 1960's and 1970's, and is part of a larger work in progress, ''The Human Age.


Coke Campaign Is Ended Early
LEAD: Stung by bad publicity, the Coca-Cola Company yesterday ended part of its mishap-plagued promotional campaign in which a small number of prize-filled cans malfunctioned, exposing consumers to chlorinated water.


Newcastle Journal;   Sorry, but Andy Capp Doffs the Cap for No One
LEAD: Andy Capp without his cap?


For College Aid Forms, Help Is Available
LEAD: To the Editor:


Japan Backs Digital Tape
LEAD: After years of delay, Japanese electronics companies received Government approval this week to sell digital audio tape decks that can make virtually perfect copies of compact disks.


Summit in Washington;   Bush and Gorbachev Discuss New Ideas on Germany
LEAD: President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union opened their second summit conference today, and both leaders indicated that differences between the Soviet Union and the West on the difficult question of Germany's military status had narrowed slightly.


Convicted Drug Leader 'Unfit to Be Sentenced'
LEAD: Howard (Pappy) Mason, who was convicted of directing a violent crack operation in Queens and ordering the murder of a New York City police officer, has been declared ''unfit to be sentenced.''


In Plea Deal in Park Jogger Case, Youth Admits He Beat a Banker
LEAD: A Harlem teen-ager pleaded guilty yesterday to beating a banker in an attack that the police said preceded the rape of a jogger in Central Park.


Canadian Leader Announces Emergency Talks on Quebec
LEAD: Prime Minister Brian Mulroney today called Canada's 10 provincial premiers to an emergency meeting in Ottawa on Sunday in an effort to break a constitutional deadlock threatening to tear the nation apart.


Summit in Washington;   Seoul and Tokyo See Major Shift In Coming Gorbachev-Roh Talks
LEAD: South Korean and Japanese officials said today that the surprise meeting next week between Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader striving to rebuild a collapsing economy, and Roh Tae Woo, a former general who reversed his country's four-decade-long rejection of dealings with the Communist world, symbolizes the beginning of the biggest shift in northeast Asia's power relationships since the end of the Korean


Colorado Journal;   'Make My Day': More Than a Threat
LEAD: When a teen-age burglar tried to flee through the front door of a house recently, the owner of the house shot him in the back of the head, killing him.


B.A.T. Sells Unit
LEAD: B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C. sold its Eurotec car components business to Klockner-Werke A.G. of West Germany for $:155 million (about $263 million), including the assumption of debt.
The sale is part of B.A.T's program to sell assets and focus on tobacco and financial-services operations.
The conglomerate's strategy was devised in the face of a hostile takeover effort, since abandoned, by Sir James Goldsmith, the British-French financier.


Results Plus
LEAD:
GOLF
Two Share Kemper Lead
Pat McGowan, striving for his first victory in 13 years on the PGA Tour, shot a bogey-free six-under-par 65 in the Kemper Open yesterday at Potomac, Md., to share the first-round lead with Ted Schulz.
Both players finished two shots ahead of Jim Hallet, Denis Watson and Ian Baker-Finch.(AP)


American Financial In Circle K Filing
LEAD: The American Financial Corporation said it might exercise its right to name two more directors to the board of the troubled Circle K Corporation.
Circle K, the Phoenix-based chain of convenience stores, filed for protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code earlier this month, after it failed to pay overdue interest to its bondholders.


Review/Music;   North India Vocal Works With Rules
LEAD: Youth is life's period of resistance, if not revolt, so it was not surprising to see that Saturday evening's large crowd at the Washington Square Church was predominantly made up of young people.
They came to hear the vocal music of North India as practiced by Pandit Jasraj and Swapan Chaudhuri.
Mr.


Summit in Washington;   Raisa Gorbachev's Thaw in Relations
LEAD: Raisa Maksimovna Gorbachev, the prickly, self-assertive co-star of previous summit sideshows, threw out her old script today and emerged as a graceful and gracious guest.


Summit in Washington;   The Gorbachev's Trip: Today's Schedule
LEAD:
8:15 A.M.
Barbara Bush and Raisa Gorbachev leave for Wellesley College in Massachusetts.
9:30 A.M.
President Gorbachev meets with Congressional leadership at the Soviet Embassy.
11:00 A.M.
President Gorbachev and President Bush begin third meeting in the Oval Office.
1:00 P.M.
President Gorbachev leaves the White House for the Soviet Embassy for lunch and a semiprivate meeting with Vice President Dan Quayle.


Combining Old and New in Ballet
LEAD: The School of American Ballet's annual spring workshop performances usually include some new or different bit of choreography.
This year the students of the New York City Ballet-affiliated training institution will perform something that is at once very old and brand new. ''Puss in Boots (The Master Cat)'' a premiere by Robert La Fosse based on the Perrault fairy tale, set to a new score by Larry Spivack with fairy-tale sets by Gary Lisz, will be a highlight of the program tomorrow and Monday at the Juilliard


Auctions
LEAD:
From Waugh's Pen


Civil Rights Revision Would Lead to Quotas
LEAD: To the Editor:


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
APL Corp., Miami Beach, which makes home products, said American International Group, an insurance holding company, was seeking to acquire Fischbach Corp., of which it owns 54 percent, for $11 a share.


The Editorial Notebook;   Choosing a National Bug
LEAD: The Republic has survived this long without a national insect, but Congress can't rest.
Representative Leon Panetta of California is floating the monarch butterfly's candidacy.
Senator Larry Pressler of South Dakota favors the honeybee.
It does not take long to resolve this issue.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


U.S. Accepts Hacker's Sentence
LEAD: The Justice Department will not appeal the sentence given a Cornell University graduate student who was placed on probation for crippling a nationwide computer network with a rogue program, an official said today.


Perkins Is Injured
LEAD: Sam Perkins, the 28-year-old forward for the Dallas Mavericks, was injured Thursday night in an automobile accident in his hometown of Addison, Tex., a suburb of Dallas.
His car and another automoblie collided at an intersection, said Brad Freis, a spokesman for the Dallas police.
Perkins suffered a cut hand and possible neck and leg injuries, and was released late Thursday night after receiving treatment at RHD Memorial Medical Center in Dallas.


Texas Governor Agrees to Increase In Sales Tax, Ending Long Impasse
LEAD: Hours after a court-ordered deadline had passed, Gov.
William P. Clements Jr. agreed today to an increase in the state sales tax, ending a tumultuous three-month standoff with state lawmakers over how to revise the state's $13.5 billion system of school finance.


BREWERS REGAIN FIRST WITH 7-1 ROUT OF JAYS
LEAD: Teddy Higuera, who missed his last start after being struck on the knee by a line drive, held Toronto to a run and four hits in six innings and Paul Molitor drove in three runs as the Milwaukee Brewers regained first place in the American League East by defeating the Blue Jays, 7-1, tonight.


Population Explosion
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Reports 0.7% Decline In Construction Spending
LEAD: Construction spending fell seven-tenths of 1 percent in April, the Government reported today.
Analysts said the report signaled weakening in the building industry.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The Committee for Economic Development, an influential outfit of C.E.O.'s and educators, has chosen a non-economist as its president for the first time.
SOL HURWITZ took over yesterday from ROBERT C. HOLLAND, who is retiring.
The committee studies issues related to the future and tries to influence government policies.


Summit in Washington;   Excerpts From Gorbachev's Remarks at Breakfast With U.S. Lawmakers
LEAD: Following are excerpts from remarks by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev at a breakfast with Congressional leaders at the Soviet Embassy this morning, as provided by the Federal News Service, a transcription agency.
Mr.
Gorbachev spoke through an interpreter.
GORBACHEV STATEMENT


Death Sentencing is Still Discriminates By Race;   Rehnquist's Crusade
LEAD: To the Editor:


Her 8th N.C.A.A. Title Gives Favor a Record
LEAD: Suzy Favor is a tough athlete in a small package, and that toughness helped her make track and field history tonight at the 69th annual National Collegiate Athletic Association championships.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   The Berries of Summer
LEAD: The harvest of fresh berries, one of the joys of summer, is beginning at farms in the Northeast and will continue throughout the season.
Good strawberries from California are in the markets as early as April.
But locally grown berries are likely to be riper and lusher than varieties that have to withstand long-distance shipping - and cost less.


York College
LEAD: New York City Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown urged York College's class of 1990 yesterday to give something back to ''your communities, cities and country that needs you.''


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in the Home Section on Thursday with the ''Where to Find It'' column, about art reproductions, misidentified a copy of a painting.
It was ''Colonel Craig House Garden, Williamsburg, Va.'' by Lorna Kanter of Clifton, N.J., not a Monet


Chang Calmly Survives Marathon Test
LEAD: Michael Chang, a player whose panic threshold seems nonexistent, is not the sort of person to cry wolf.
Today, down by two sets to none as he continued the defense of his French Open title, Chang never flinched and never allowed Christian Bergstrom of Sweden to assume even the illusion that he had control of their match.


'Mystery Witness' In Bensonhurst Case Talks to Prosecutors
LEAD: The so-called mystery witness in the Bensonhurst case who had told reporters but not prosecutors that she had seen the killing of a black youth has been interviewed by the Brooklyn District Attorney's office, a law enforcement official said yesterday.


Melee by Inmates in Louisiana
LEAD: Fifteen to 20 Cuban detainees rioted at a jail here Thursday, smashing a wall, setting fires and throwing chunks of concrete at guards before the authorities used tear gas to regain control.
Two guards and four prisoners suffered minor injuries during the 20-minute disturbance at the Avoyelles Parish jail, and about 70 prisoners were treated for inhalation of smoke and tear gas, deputies said.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Yeltsin Meets Lithuanian


Helping Hands Rescue Joffrey's National Tour
LEAD: The Joffrey Ballet's national summer tour, which the board of directors of the financially hard-pressed company voted to cancel this week, has been saved by a last-minute package of new funds and other help.
The announcement was made yesterday at a press conference at the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. in Charleston, S.C., where the Joffrey is to perform next Thursday through


Religion Notes
LEAD: Rift Over a Rite The two women were in love and hoped to affirm that feeling, as do heterosexual couples, with the blessing of their union in church.


Books of The Times;   The Glitter That Brings On a Shiver
LEAD:
Markers
By Sidney Zion
426 pages. Donald I. Fine Inc.. $19.95.


Breakfast at Gorbachev's
LEAD: Following is a list of guests at President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's breakfast at the Soviet Embassy today:
Soviet Participants
Ambassador Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh
Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze
Yuri D. Maslyukov, chairman of the state planning agency
Yevgeny M.


Saks Chief Said To Plan Cuts
LEAD: A top American executive of Investcorp said yesterday that Melvin Jacobs, chairman of Saks Fifth Avenue, was preparing a business plan that would involve some cost savings and staff cuts after Investcorp formally acquires Saks on July 3.


Marcos Said to Be Recovering After Collapse
LEAD: A day after Imelda Marcos collapsed in a courtroom in Manhattan with severe stomach pains, doctors at New York Hospital said yesterday that the former First Lady of the Philippines was in stable condition.
The doctors added that she would probably be able to leave the hospital tomorrow.


Greyhound Plans To Rebuild Fleet
LEAD: Searching for ways to save money and attract new financing, Greyhound Lines Inc. said it would rebuild its fleet of 3,949 buses instead of buying new models.
Greyhound's president, Frank Schmieder, estimated the strike-bound bus line would save $318.5 million, compared with the cost of replacing the buses in two and a half years.


I.B.M. Signs Pact With Soviets
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation signed its biggest contract yet with the Soviet Union, under which it will supply more than 13,000 personal computers for use in schools.


Your Money
LEAD: Across the country, thousands of owners of small businesses and professional practices who have been socking away tidy sums in tax-deductible pension plans are facing audits of their plans by the Internal Revenue Service.
Some are having to pay substantial amounts in back taxes and penalties, in some cases exceeding $100,000.


Busy, Busy, How Romantic
LEAD: One thing Americans have in excess is idle time, but they hate to admit it.


Airlines Phasing In Safer Plane Seats
LEAD: All the major airlines in the United States are quietly installing new and safer passenger seats on airplanes.
But the changeover is so random that the level of seat safety varies from plane to plane and even between sections of the same aircraft.


Stronger Action Is Urged Against Campus Bigotry
LEAD: A national organization that studies incidents of bigotry has urged college presidents to take stronger steps to confront rising racial and ethnic tensions on campus.


Bulls Add To Streak And Even The Series
LEAD: The home-court advantage, which National Basketball Association teams hold so dearly, worked its magic again tonight at Chicago Stadium.
Of course, the magic supplied by Michael Jordan and Craig Hodges also helped.


Court Adds Newspaper Tax
LEAD: The Florida sales tax paid on magazines should be extended to newspapers, the State Supreme Court ruled on Thursday.


Death Sentencing Still Discriminates by Race
LEAD: To the Editor:


East Germans Remove Communist Emblems


Dr. Erich J. Kahn, 77, Professor of Pediatrics
LEAD: Dr.
Erich J. Kahn, retired director of pediatrics at Harlem Hospital and professor emeritus of pediatrics at the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, died of a stroke on Wednesday at Englewood (N.J.) Hospital.
He was 77 years old and lived in Englewood.


Patents;   Helicopter-Plane
LEAD: Daniel R. Zuck, a retired aeronautical engineer at the Lockheed Corporation, won a patent this week for a combined helicopter and airplane.
The proposed vehicle features wings on either side of the fuselage and does not use a rear stabilizing rotor.
Mr.
Zuck said the craft uses an overhead rotor to take off and land vertically; once it reaches the selected altitude, the overhead rotor stops turning and a rear-mounted propeller pushes the craft forward.


Pillar of Apartheid Falling
LEAD: The South African Government introduced legislation to do away with the law that provides for segregated public amenities, from libraries to toilets.
Page 3.


Fidelity Raises Spartan Fee
LEAD: Fidelity Investments announced yesterday that it would raise fees on its Spartan money market funds.
This will be the third time in the last year that fees have been raised.


Gunfire From Nearby Parking Lot Kills Doctor in Harlem Apartment
LEAD: A 60-year-old doctor was killed early yesterday when a bullet fired from a nearby parking lot tore through his kitchen window and hit him in the chest as he walked through his apartment in Harlem, the police said.


NASA Rocket Takes Observatory Into Orbit for a Study of X-Rays
LEAD: With the hobbled space shuttle Columbia standing silent 10 miles away, NASA today launched an unmanned rocket carrying an observatory that will scour the heavens for sources of X-rays.


L.I. Man Draws 25 Years to Life In Girl's Death
LEAD: Robert Golub, the 22-year-old Valley Stream man convicted of beating, stabbing and strangling a 13-year-old girl, was sentenced to 25 years to life today by a judge who called the murder the most horrifying he had dealt with in his 17 years on the bench.


At the Summit: Verify, but Trust
LEAD: Call it better living through political chemistry: Instead of building newer and more horrible chemical arms, the U.S. and the Soviet Union now show the good sense to end this nasty competition.


Double-Jeopardy Ruling Compounds Grief
LEAD: Brenda Dirago, 29 years old and newly wed, lost her life in a soft rain on a darkened highway here in the fall of 1987.
Now, after two and a half years of anguish and appeals that went all the way to the United States Supreme Court, the case has been put to rest.
But it is an unquiet rest.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Cleaning a Pool
LEAD: Maintaining clean water has always been the chief concern, and expense, for owners of swimming pools.
Now, simple and efficient products are available that make it easier and less time-consuming to maintain a pool's water quality, and the price is reasonable.


School of Visual Arts
LEAD: The writer Susan Sontag, speaking at the commencement for the School of Visual Arts yesterday, urged the graduates to fight increasing censorship of the arts.


Summit in Washington;   Text of the Statement On Long-Range Arms
LEAD: Following is the text of a statement today by President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union on strategic nuclear weapons:
Status of Treaty


Queens College Honors Nun for Aiding the Poor
LEAD: A missionary from Puerto Rico who has devoted more than 50 years to helping the poor there and in the United States was honored yesterday at the 66th commencement of Queens College.


Budget Certified as Balanced
LEAD: The State Comptroller, Edward V. Regan, today certified that the $49.8 billion budget passed by the Legislature two weeks ago is balanced.
The certification is required for the state to borrow the $4.1 billion it needs to make school aid payments that have been delayed for more than two months.
Although Mr.


Chrysler Cuts Some Rebates
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation announced a new summer incentive program today, while cutting the value of cash rebates on certain models.


Port-au-Prince Journal;   A Hospice Gives Testimony to AIDS's Rising Toll
LEAD: Past the huge mound of rotting garbage that stands in the place of a long-toppled statue of Francois Duvalier, to the muddiest recesses of a neighborhood called Sans Fil, threadbare Haitians come by the dozens to die.


Rank Makes Bid For Mecca Group


Evolution in Europe;   Anger in Britain Growing Over France's Ban on Beef
LEAD: With mounting indignation, British farmers are protesting the French Government's decision to ban imports of British beef in reaction to ''mad cow disease,'' a newly discovered nerve disorder that has infected more than 13,000 British cattle.


Cuomo in Queens: A Campaign Stop?


Kennedy Still No. 1, but Slipping
LEAD: Kennedy International Airport, long the biggest and most popular United States gateway for international travelers, is seeing its dominant position erode as major American carriers increasingly choose to fly abroad from other cities they use as hubs.


Review/Theater;   Brief Visions Of Horror From Today
LEAD: ''Orgy in the Air-Traffic Control Tower,'' the meatiest of the three one-act plays presented at Playhouse 91 under the title ''The Grand Guignol,'' tells a nasty Christmas Eve horror story.


Company Under Fire Loses Contract for Radiation Testing
LEAD: A laboratory accused by three Federal agencies of flouting safety regulations or committing fraud lost its contract yesterday to analyze soil and water samples at the Hanford nuclear reservation for chemical and radioactive contamination.


Joseph A. Gimma Is Dead at 83; A Banker and a G.O.P. Official
LEAD: Joseph A. Gimma, an investment banker, Republican Party official and former chairman of the New York State Racing Commission, died of a heart attack on Thursday at St.
Joseph Medical Center in Stamford, Conn.
He was 83 years old and lived in Manhattan and South Norwalk, Conn.


Art Museum at a New Mexico Track
LEAD: An art museum at a race track?
It may have the ring of culture schlock to some, but not to R. D. and Joan Dale Hubbard of Fort Worth.


Jobless Rate Dips but Economy Is Weak
LEAD: In a report signaling further withering of economic growth, the Labor Department said today that business payrolls in May failed to expand for the third consecutive month and that the number of factory jobs dropped by 35,000.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Thursday about fare increases for N.J.
Transit included an incorrect report from the agency about the effect on a monthly train ticket between Mahwah and Hoboken.
The price will remain $142.


SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON: Reporter's Notebook;   Masters of the Sound Bite Cede Match to Gorbachev
LEAD: If a K.G.B. villain in a John Le Carre novel had devised a fiendish torture for American politicians, it could not have been more effective than the one that Mikhail S. Gorbachev inflicted on Congressional leaders this morning.


Family First, Mrs. Bush Tells Friend and Foe at Wellesley 44
LEAD: Barbara Bush today gently confronted seniors at Wellesley College who had protested her choice as their commencement speaker, telling them that husbands and children are ultimately more important than careers.


New York Bottle Law Needs a Deposit Bank
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rift Causes Arts Endowment Official's Departure
LEAD: The senior deputy chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts is leaving the agency after disagreements with John E. Frohnmayer, the endowment's chairman.


The Census Count: An Update
LEAD: The following are the latest census completion rates from selected cities across the country.
The figure represent the precentage of households that have mailed forms to the Census Bureau or granted interviews to census enumerations. (Source: Census Bureau)


Teachers' Walkout Closes Yonkers Schools


CHRONICLE
LEAD: HAMISH MAXWELL, chairman of the world's largest tobacco company and a constant user of its product for many years, is scheduled to be released from a Manhattan hospital today, eight days after he underwent elective coronary bypass surgery.
The chairman of the Philip Morris Companies, Mr.
Maxwell, 63 years old, was not ill before his hospitalization, a company spokesman said, although he had a high cholesterol level.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Arix Corp., San Jose, Calif., said it intended to cut about 84 employees out of a total work force of 327 at its Arix Computer Corp. subsidiary.


Surgery for Barkley
LEAD: An examination on Thursday by Dr.
James Andrews in Birmingham, Ala., confirmed bone spurs in the right shoulder of Charles Barkley.
Barkley, the power forward of the Philadelphia 76ers, had complained of a loss of strength and occasional numbness in his right arm during Philadelphia's losing playoff series against the Chicago Bulls.


Summit in Washington;   Trade Accord Holds Many Prizes, But Obstacles to Passage Remain
LEAD: The decision by President Bush to sign a trade agreement with the Soviet Union today paved the way for a process that would normalize commercial and economic relations between the two countries for the first time in a half-century.


Dent Lights Fire, Yankees Burn Orioles
LEAD: It worked for the Mets when their play was tattered.
Call a meeting and get a quick lift.
Last night, it was Bucky Dent, the Yankees' manager, who opted to address his players before a game.


Marilyn Pickett Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Marilyn Seaman Pickett and William Irving Hollingsworth 3d were married yesterday at the home of her father, Alfred Jarvis Seaman Jr., in Upper Brookville, L.I.
Mr.
Seaman officiated in his capacity as Mayor of Upper Brookville.


Summit in Washington;   Summary Of Accord On A-Pacts
LEAD: Following is a White House summary of the agreement on verification of two older treaties limiting the size of underground nuclear explosions signed today by President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union:
BACKGROUND


Family Friend Charged With Fatal L.I. Arson
LEAD: A Brooklyn man described as a family acquaintance was charged with murder and arson today in connection with a house fire earlier this week that killed two young sisters, the police said.


Tepid Outlook Cools Once-Hot L.A. Gear
LEAD: The stock of L.A.
Gear Inc., the footwear and apparel maker that has undergone explosive growth since it went public three years ago, plummeted yesterday after the company said it expected sharply lower second-quarter earnings.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.31
8.18
9.73
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.70
7.76
8.36
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.62
7.74
8.13
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.48
8.61
8.46
30-YR.


A Rescue for Stranded Circus
LEAD: A university has come to the rescue of a Soviet circus troupe that has been stranded in the Atlanta area for almost a month after running out of money, The troupe, the Great Circus Bim Bom, had been housed at a motel in the suburban town of Marietta until this week, when it was evicted for failure to pay a bill of more than $9,700.


Summit in Washington;   Talks Fail to End Disputes On Long-Range Weapons
LEAD: Six days of arms talks here failed to overcome disputes on several issues holding up the completion of a new agreement to cut long-range nuclear arms.


Summit in Washington;   Wide Differences Over Germany Are Still Said to Divide the Superpowers
LEAD: Despite some vague remarks on Thursday from both President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev about narrowing their differences on Germany, American and Soviet officials said today that the gaps between them on this critical issue still appeared to be wide.


Feuding Couple Settle Ownership of Esprit
LEAD: In a last-minute agreement that prevents the sale of the company to outsiders, the husband-and-wife founders of Esprit de Corp. said today that they would transfer ownership of the clothing company to an investor group headed by the wife.


BUSH AND GORBACHEV SIGN MAJOR ACCORDS ON MISSILES, CHEMICAL WEAPONS AND TRADE
LEAD: President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today consolidated the gains of their new relationship by signing the broadest Soviet-American understandings in two decades, including commitments to cut stockpiles of long-range nuclear arms and to eliminate most of their chemical weapons.


MCA Will Decide On European Park
LEAD: Executives from MCA Inc., the American entertainment giant, met with the French Prime Minister, Michel Rocard, about the proposed construction of a movie-oriented theme park and studio near Paris to compete with the Walt Disney Company's Euro Disneyland.
The MCA delegation is considering Paris and


A Price War Forces Some Air Fares Down
LEAD: Travelers who plan to vacation in the United States this year - and already know when and where they are going - can get a very good deal if they buy airline tickets by next Thursday and are willing to put up with restrictions on their flights.


Purchasing Index Up, but Some Are Wary
LEAD: The National Association of Purchasing Management said yesterday that a survey of its members indicated that the nation's manufacturing economy grew in May to the highest level since January 1989.
The group said stronger production, a continued high level of new orders and brisker deliveries fueled the growth.


California Roads Not So Safe in Quakes
LEAD: Californians have long lived with the knowledge that many of the state's freeways, bridges and buildings might not withstand a major earthquake, but a new report from a state-appointed commission has concluded that even many structures thought to have been made safe remain dangerous.


Judson Hand, Writer, 61
LEAD: Judson Hand, a former education writer and editor, died on Thursday in Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
Mr.
Hand, who was 61 years old and lived in Manhattan, had suffered a stroke a month ago.


In Boxing, It's Just Coincidence
LEAD: For the first time since James (Buster) Douglas separated Mike Tyson from his mouthpiece and the world heavyweight championship, the bell rang here last night for a significant heavyweight joust.
Evander Holyfield, undefeated at 24-0 but still unscheduled for a title shot, methodically knocked out Seamus McDonagh after 44 seconds of the fourth round.


Grand Met Delays Listing A.D.R.'s
LEAD: Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. has postponed until February its plan to list the company's American depository receipts on the New York Stock Exchange, David P. Nash, the company's top financial officer, told securities analysts in a meeting this week in New York.
The company had originally planned the listing for sometime this fall.


Hudson River Day
LEAD: Games and entertainment are part of Hudson River Day today, from 1 to 6:30 P.M. at Wave Hill, West 249th Street and Independence Avenue, in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
Shad fisherman will discuss techniques and demonstrate knot-tying, and there will be a puppet show.
Admission is $2; $1 for children and the elderly.


Patents;   A Container Heats Food, Cools Drink
LEAD: A beverage container that can simultaneously chill a drink and heat food was patented this week.
The device uses no electricity; instead, it transfers heat from one item to the other using water.


Besieged Liberian Talks of Elections
LEAD: With rebel forces advancing on the capital, Gen.
Samuel K. Doe announced today that he would not seek re-election to the presidency next year.


Patents;   Windshield Wipers Heated to Prevent Ice
LEAD: Two patents were issued this week for heated automobile windshield wipers.
The goal of both inventions is to keep the blades from becoming encrusted with ice.


G.S.E.'s: Cuddly, and Dangerous
LEAD: Fannie Mae.
Farmer Mac.
Sallie Mae.
These cuddly-sounding private corporations were created by Congress to channel credit into housing, agriculture and higher education.
They, along with several other Government-sponsored enterprises (G.S.E.'s), now have $1 trillion - that's trillion - of outstanding liabilities that carry implicit Government guarantees.


Valdez Oil Vapors Found to Pose Risk
LEAD: Petroleum vapors vented into the air during the loading of oil tankers at Valdez pose cancer risks for the residents, according to a new study by the Federal Enviornmental Protection Agency.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: HAYDEN CARRUTH won poetry's richest prize and he's going to use it to buy a new garage.
He received RUTH LILLY Poetry Prize of $25,000 in Chicago yesterday.


3 Investment Banks Itemize Federated Fees, as Ordered
LEAD: Three of the nation's leading investment bankers submitted itemized accounts of their monthly fees yesterday to a Federal court overseeing the voluntary bankruptcy of Federated Stores Inc.


Lehman College
LEAD: Under picture-perfect skies, Dr.
Leonard Lief delivered his farewell commencement address yesterday at Herbert H. Lehman College, where he has been president since 1968.
That was the year the school was established in the western Bronx.


Man Shot in Head in the Bronx
LEAD: A 26-year-old emigre from Ecuador was shot and critically wounded after a near-collision at an intersection in the Bronx yesterday.


NBC Weighs A Change on Viewer Count
LEAD: Following ABC's initiative, NBC announced yesterday that it was considering whether to institute a new system to account for its television viewers when it sets its advertising rates for the fall television season.


Shuffled Lineup and an Ace Win for Mets
LEAD: Manager Bud Harrelson, trying to prime the Mets' offense by fixing one problem at a time, sent a revamped lineup out against the Phillies tonight.


Pretoria Moves to Repeal A Mainstay of Segregation
LEAD: The Government moved today to do away with the most conspicuous aspect of apartheid, legislation that for years barred nonwhites from buses, restaurants, parks, swimming pools and other public installations throughout South Africa.


New Track Announcer
LEAD: Marshall Cassidy, the race caller on the New York circuit since 1979, will be replaced by Tom Durkin, who calls harness races and backs up Dave Johnson as the thoroughbred caller at the Meadowlands.
The change will take place on Aug. 29 when racing resumes at Belmont after the Saratoga meeting.
Cassidy, 44 years old, will continue to work for the New York Racing Association as a steward or a placing judge.(


Dollar Gains Against Mark But Loses Ground to the Yen
LEAD: The dollar was mixed yesterday, gaining against the West German mark and Swiss franc and losing ground to the Japanese yen and British pound.


Pratt Institute
LEAD: Kitty Carlisle Hart, chairwoman of the New York State Council on the Arts, told Pratt Institute's class of 1990 yesterday that the freedom of artistic expression is at risk because of ignorance, and she urged the graduates to ''defend the right of all of us to say and do what we wish and fight the ignorance.


Japan Trims Trade Surplus
LEAD: Japan's trade surplus shrank 70 percent in April, the sharpest drop since June 1979, largely because of a jump in imports that reflects the expensive tastes of Japanese consumers, economists said today.


Precious Metals in Plunge; Livestock and Pork Climb
LEAD: Precious metals futures plunged yesterday on the New York Commodity Exchange in the wake of weak May employment figures and amid uncertainty on whether a trade agreement will result from the United States-Soviet summit talks.


Gorbachev Could Do It
LEAD: The summit conference is off to a good start on a new era of relaxed relations between the two superpowers, neither of which feels so super anymore.
Both President Bush and President Gorbachev will no doubt be accused by critics of giving away too much to the old enemy.


T-Shirt Offers Protection From the Sun
LEAD: Sunscreens work well, if you use them, but it's often difficult to keep track of active children.
As a result of frustrating attempts to protect her fair-skinned, red-haired young son from the Arizona sun, Jan Steinberg, a Scottsdale mother, developed an alternative, at least for the upper torso: Frogskin swim shirts.


Rhyan Ties a Record To Open Senior Event
LEAD: Ideal weather and receptive greens produced low scores today in the first round of the Nynex/Golf Digest Commemorative golf tournament at Sleepy Hollow Country Club.


Evolution in Europe;   Romania's Hungarians Shun Rulers' Coalition
LEAD: Leaders of the political party representing Romania's ethnic Hungarian minority in this country's newly elected national Parliament have decided overwhelmingly to stay out of a coalition with the ruling National Salvation Front.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
COLLEGE BASEBALL
Stanford Wins in 10th
Stanford scored twice in the bottom of the 10th to beat Georgia Southern, 5-4, yesterday in the opening game of the College World Series in Omaha.
Jeff Hammonds's sacrifice fly and Troy Paulsen's single drove in the winning runs for the Cardinal, who survived with some help from the umpires and six errors by Georgia Southern.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


New York's Plea to Mandela: This Will Just Take a Minute
LEAD: For weeks, a labor union official named Jim Bell has been one of the most sought-after men in New York City.
Scores of people and organizations have called him and dozens more have written letters, sent facsimile messages or slipped notes under his office door.
They all have the same request: Nelson Mandela.


Evolution in Europe;   Stunned North Korea Warns Soviets on Meeting With Seoul Leader
LEAD: Despite President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's plans to meet in the United States with the South Korean President next week, experts on North Korea say they do not expect the diplomatic opening to dislodge Pyongyang soon from its hard line against any contact with the South.


Ferry Joins the Cavaliers
LEAD: The Cleveland Cavaliers lured Danny Ferry, the former Duke basketball star, back from Italy yesterday, signing him to a multiyear contract.


Review/Music;   Leinsdorf's Mahler as Act of Boldness
LEAD: Over the last 30 years, Mahler and the New York Philharmonic have been Leonard Bernstein's turf.
So it would seem to take a certain degree of bravado for any other conductor, be he Zubin Mehta or, this week, Erich Leinsdorf, to address that composer's music at Avery Fisher Hall.


Writer, Her Dream Fulfilled, Seeks to Link Two Worlds
LEAD: For as long as she can remember, ever since she was growing up in Nigeria, Buchi Emecheta has wanted to write.


AIDS VACCINE TEST PROTECTS 2 CHIMPS FROM DEADLY VIRUS
LEAD: Scientists announced that they had developed an experimental vaccine that protected chimpanzees against infection from the AIDS virus.


Americans Confident In Tuneup
LEAD: With four victories and a tie in the last five games generating more confidence than ever, the United States soccer team will end its long exhibition season Saturday before heading south to Italy for the start of the World Cup finals next week.


Review/Pop;   An Evening of Phil Collins, Seriously
LEAD: For Phil Collins, it's apparently not enough to be the centerpiece of two groups (his own band and Genesis), a master of morose songs about romantic breakups and a multimillion-selling hit-maker.
On his current tour, his first outside Genesis since 1985, he makes efforts to be taken as seriously as Bruce Springsteen or Genesis's previous lead singer, Peter Gabriel.


Libya Behind Speedboat Raid, Israel Asserts
LEAD: Israeli officials today offered details of what they said was the extensive role played by the Libyan military in the planning and execution of an unsuccessful seaborne attack on Tel Aviv by heavily armed Palestinian guerrillas.


Strolling, Cuomo Talks About Slavery to Asians
LEAD: Making frequent references to slavery, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo dropped in on Asian merchants in Queens yesterday and told them that blacks had an immigrant experience very different from their own and deserved ''special efforts'' by the state to help them succeed.


Misspelling Is Cited in Threat
LEAD: A misspelled word led investigators to suspect that a black student at Emory University had faked racist threats she said she received, according to a police file released Friday.
The 19-year-old student, Sabrina Collins, has a habit of misspelling the word ''you're'' as ''your,'' the same way it was misspelled in a death threat she said she had received at the predominantly white school, according to the file, released by the Georgia Bureau of Investigation.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about a lawsuit involving former aides to Richard M. Nixon and the sale of military uniforms to Iraq referred incorrectly to Jeffrey S. Jacobovitz's departure from the case.
Court proceedings disclosed that Mr.
Jacobovitz, a lawyer, withdrew from the case; he was not dismissed by his client, Pan Aviation.


Repression of Rights In Kashmir Must End
LEAD: To the Editor:


About New York;   How to Stop Dis From Escalating Into Bif and Bam
LEAD: If you're being dissed, counsels Peter Martin Commanday, raise the tip of your tongue up behind your two front teeth (yeah, there) and push it up a little so it rests on the roof of your mouth.


Test of a Summit
LEAD: President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union have done much better at their second summit conference on the agenda from the past than on the agenda for the future.
They have done better on the issues that constitute the legacy of the cold war than on the issues thrown up by its demise.


Celtics Have to Wait On Yugoslav Player
LEAD: Dino Radja will not be able to join the Boston Celtics for at least another two years, Yugoslavia's basketball federation announced yesterday in Belgrade. ''A player cannot be allowed to play abroad until he has fulfilled his entire four-year contract,'' the federation's registration committee said in a statement.


The Other Agreements, in Brief
LEAD:
SIGNED BY BUSH AND GORBACHEV
AGREEMENTS
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy


U.S. Food Program Tightens Its Belt And Millions on Welfare Feel Pinch
LEAD: Among the millions of people affected by cutbacks in Federal food allotments for the poor is Marquell Rose, age 2, a boy whose future is already defined by the hardships he will face.


Giants' Bass Sidelined
LEAD: Injuries continue to plague the San Francisco Giants.
Kevin Bass is expected to miss three months after undergoing arthroscopic surgery for fractured cartilage in his left knee.
The procedure was performed at the Palo Alto (Calif.) Medical Clinic by Dr.
Gordon Campbell, who said Bass would not be able to begin rehabilitation for at least two months.(


Data Show Rising Plight of Displaced Homemakers
LEAD: While the number of women entering the work force grew steadily over the last decade, so did the number of women, often those divorced or widowed, who had trouble making the transition from full-time homemakers to jobs outside the home, according to a new report.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: A bunch of the boys planned a swell send-off from single life for ANDREW CUOMO last night.
In case you forgot, he's marrying KERRY KENNEDY, daughter of Senator ROBERT F. KENNEDY and ETHEL KENNEDY, next weekend.


What Campus Calm In Sex Case Means
LEAD: To the Editor:


Trail Blazers Earn Some Respect
LEAD: There were many reasons why the Portland Trail Blazers were not expected to become Western Conference champions.


Review/Dance;   Ballet Theater's Version Of a Balanchine Staple
LEAD: ''Stravinsky Violin Concerto'' was one of George Balanchine's best works for the New York City Ballet's 1972 Stravinsky Festival.
Since 1987, it has also been performed by American Ballet Theater, whose dancers are still trying to master the choreography.


Woman in the News;   CHANCELLOR FACES TEST: Wynetka Ann Reynolds
LEAD: Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds, the next chancellor of the City University of New York, spent her earliest years living on Indian reservations in Oklahoma and Arizona and says she believes that background helped to mold a commitment to minority rights in academia.
It will not take her long in her new position to be tested on those counts.


Review/Theater;   A Jew Confronts a Nazi In a Prewar Musical
LEAD: ''Hannah . . . 1939,'' the new Bob Merrill musical at the Vineyard Theater, takes place in Prague on the eve of World War II, but there is so much affability afoot that this could almost be the Budapest of ''She Loves Me.'' In tone, the show should have been closer to ''Cabaret.'' Though ''Hannah'' has its assets, beginning with Julie Wilson in the title role as a Jewish dress designer of international reputation, it is a soft-edged musical on a momentous subject.


Georgia Broker Accused
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission today charged Oscar Ayala, a Georgia broker, with defrauding 18 professional football players of at least $1 million since 1988.
He worked at the Marietta, Ga., branch office of the Robinson-Humphrey Company, a subsidiary of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., which is a unit of the American Express Company, and was dismissed last week.


Bridge
LEAD: The final of the prestigious Reisinger Knockout Team Championship today is likely to be between teams headed by David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., and Michael Moss of Manhattan.
When semifinal play resumed last night at the Beverly Club, 130 East 57th Street, the Berkowitz squad led by the overwhelming margin of 80 imps against Sam Lev of Israel and his team.


Interest Rates Fall Sharply
LEAD: Interest rates plunged yesterday after the Government reported an unexpectedly small increase in employment last month.
The almost insignificant rise in the number of new jobs in May renewed expectations of a further drop in interest rates, sparking a strong demand for Treasury and other fixed-income securities, raising prices and lowering yields.


F.C.C. Finds Phone-Rule Violations
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission announced yesterday that it had documented widespread abuses in the operation of pay telephones and guest room phones at hotels and other institutions.


Hubert O'Gorman, 64, Professor of Sociology
LEAD: Hubert J. O'Gorman, professor of sociology at Wesleyan University, died suddenly on Thursday at his doctor's office in Middletown, Conn.
He was 64 years old and lived in Middletown.


Holyfield Knocks Out McDonagh
LEAD: Seamus McDonagh, the English literature major from St.
John's University, didn't lack for ambition.
Tonight against Evander Holyfield, the World Boxing Council Continental Americas heavyweight champion, McDonagh came charging forward, throwing left hooks just seconds into the fight - wide-arcing, wind-making blows launched with an underdog's earnest hope of getting lucky early.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Plantathon, the east side of Broadway will be closed today from 72d to 79th Streets from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.


Overdue Discipline in Albany
LEAD: The dismal budget struggle in Albany has at last yielded a ray of light: a debt reform measure that could eventually break New York State's costly borrowing habit.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo, State Comptroller Edward Regan and the legislative leaders who contributed to the problem now deserve credit for seeking a solution.


Summit in Washington Summary of U.S.-Soviet Agreement on Chemical Arms
LEAD: Following is a White House summary of the agreement on chemical weapons signed today by President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union:
Background


News Summary
LEAD:
International
2-9
Broad Soviet-American agreements were signed by President Bush and President Gorbachev that include cutting their stockpiles of long-range nuclear arms, the elimination of most of their chemical weapons and steps toward normalized economic relations.
Page 1


Race for Courter's Seat Revives Issues of 1989
LEAD: After losing the race for governor last year to Representative Jim Florio, the 12th District's own Representative, Jim Courter, decided not to seek re-election to Congress.
But the spirited Republican campaign to succeed him has been dominated by the very same issues that were at the center of the statewide campaign.


Patents;   Getting Computer Data On a Fax Machine
LEAD: Inventors at Brooktrout Technology Inc., a small electronics company in Wellesley Hills, Mass., have patented a device that lets people retrieve material from computer data bases using a standard Touch-Tone telephone and a facsimile machine.


U.S. Worried Over Safety of Americans in Liberia as Crisis Grows
LEAD: Bush Administration officials expressed concern today that the increasing turmoil in Liberia is posing a threat to American lives and property.


The Best Medicine for Medicaid
LEAD: ''There ain't no such thing as a private doctor around here,'' laments a Harlem man quoted recently in The Times. ''I suffer from asthma.
But I'm dealing with it myself.
By the time you can see a doctor in the emergency room, you're half dead.''


Programs Find Adolescents' Use of Cocaine Can Be Curtailed
LEAD: Federal health officials in Washington announced yesterday the first evidence from research that drug prevention programs can curtail the use of cocaine by adolescents.


Mississippi Town Struck by Flash Floods


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Who knows, somewhere out in this audience may even be someone who will one day follow in my footsteps and preside over the White House as the President's spouse.
And I wish him well.''
- Barbara Bush, at the Wellesley College commencement. [1:4.]


In Nigeria, North vs. South Doesn't Apply
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in some editions yesterday about Marilyn Quayle's presentation of a photograph to Raisa Gorbachev misidentified the man with them.
He was an unidentified interpreter, not the Librarian of Congress.


Slalom Champion Quits
LEAD: Saying she was ''tired of the life style I have led since I was a little girl,'' Mateja Svet of Yugoslavia, the women's world slalom champion, announced her retirement yesterday in Ljubljana.


Eastern Air To Cooperate With Inquiry
LEAD: The court-appointed trustee for Eastern Airlines said yesterday that he had offered his cooperation in a Brooklyn grand jury investigation of whether the airline had ordered some employees to falsify maintenance records more than a year ago.


Deal Possible in the Barry Drug Case
LEAD: Lawyers for Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. have begun plea bargaining with Federal prosecutors over the 14 drug and perjury charges on which Mr.
Barry is scheduled to go on trial on Monday.


Revamping Ordered For Manville's Fund On Asbestos Claims
LEAD: Two judges in New York reopened the bankruptcy proceeding of the Manville Corporation yesterday by ordering a bankruptcy judge to overhaul drastically the procedures for compensating tens of thousands of victims of asbestos.


Summit in Washington;   Gorbachevs' Trip: Today's Schedule
LEAD:
9:30 A.M.:  President and Mrs.
Bush and president and Mrs.
Gorbachev leave by helecopter for Camp David from the White House South Lawn
10 A.M.:  The Gorbachevs and the Bushes arrive at Camp David for Leisure time and informal talks.
5 P.M.:  Marlin Fitzwater, Mr. Bush's Spokesman, and Arkady A.


Critics Say Draft Report on Climate Shift Ignores Urgency of Problem
LEAD: A draft report by an American-led policy group of the United Nations has proposed international measures to cope with global warming caused by pollution, but it calls for no specific goals or timetables for action.


Dow, Up by 24.31, Tops 2,900 Mark
LEAD: The Dow Jones industrial average scaled the 2,900-point benchmark yesterday to set another high just as the final bell sounded.


Libyan Leader Pays Surprise Visit to Cairo


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about the 24th commencement of Baruch College in New York referred incompletely to an honorary-degree recipient, Harriet R. Michel.
She is president of the National Minority Supplier Development Council, which promotes minority business development.


Aggressiveness Isn't a Man's Prerogative
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jersey Classic Set for Tonight
LEAD: After driving the winner last Saturday in both of the qualifying races for the New Jersey Classic, John Campbell had to decide which colt he would steer in the $421,970 one-mile race for 3-year-old pacers tonight at the Meadowlands.


Final Order Is Issued in Boston Rights Case
LEAD: Issuing his final order in this city's 16-year-old school desegregation case, Federal District Judge W. Arthur Garrity Jr. barred ''creating, promoting or maintaining racial segregation in any school or other facility in the Boston school system.''


Bondholders In Daisy Move
LEAD: The Daisy Systems Corporation said today that some of its bondholders had filed a petition for involuntary bankruptcy against the computer company.


Fire Again Strikes Liner That Was Grounded    There were no suspects and no evidence to indicate that the fire was linked to an earlier one that caused the ship to lose power and drift onto a sandbar. (Photographs by the Associated Press)


CUNY Arrives at Pact On Protest at John Jay
LEAD: The City University trustees and president reached an agreement yesterday with a student group that has been occupying the John Jay College of Criminal Justice.


Evolution in Europe;   2 Baltic Republics Appeal To Yeltsin for Cooperation
LEAD: In a dramatic display of solidarity between the Soviet Union's rebellious republics, official representatives from Lithuania and Estonia met today with Boris N. Yeltsin, the newly elected president of the Russian republic, to discuss cooperation.


Token Thief Shows Millions Are Up Sleeve
LEAD: At the 110th Street IRT subway station, where all the turnstiles were recently broken, an unidentified man held open the fare gate and instructed passengers to place their tokens in a large black fare box.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JUNE 2, 1990
LEAD:
Companies


3-Continent Concert On TV From Brooklyn
LEAD: ''Earth '90: Children and the Environment,'' featuring live concerts and broadcasts from three locations, will start at at 8:30 tonight at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, in the Fort Greene section.


Andrea Bond Is Wed
LEAD: At Christ Church Cambridge, Andrea G. Bond, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur D. Bond Jr. of Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday to John R. Wilson Jr., a son of Mr.
Wilson and Brayton Wilson, both of Cleveland.
The Rev.
Eugene Goetchius performed the Episcopal ceremony.
Mrs.
Wilson, 24 years old, graduated from Dana Hall School and Lake Forest College; Mr.


God, Humanity and the Holocaust
LEAD: To the Editor:


Elsa Davern: Jewelry Maker
LEAD: At jazz festivals and the private jazz weekends in Europe and the United States, unusual necklaces made of old beads and small artifacts have become a sign of recognition for women, likely to bring the question, ''Is that an Elsa?''


Data Update
LEAD:
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Mar.90
Mar. 89
Change
Starts
1,321
1,405
-6.0%
Completions
1,373
1,455
-5.6%
Sales
555
556
-0.2%
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES
(Averages)


Southern Art With a Sense Of Mission
LEAD: ''Next Generation: Southern Black Esthetic'' is a loose, uneven, but important exhibition of works by 22 artists, many of them unknown outside the South.
The selection was made by a curator outside the region, Lowery S. Sims of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, working from slides assembled by Southern curators, critics, artists and museum directors.


Gooden Sputters Again
LEAD: Dwight Gooden is struggling and the Mets continue to look for answers, literally from head to toe.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have a well with an expansion tank for the water.
Does this tank require maintenance, and can you give me some idea of how it works?


BRUSH ASIDE THE IDEA OF PAINTING CD'S
LEAD: It only takes a little practice to believe impossible things.
That's what the Queen told Alice in Wonderland. ''Why, sometimes,'' she said, ''I've believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast.''


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
CYCLING EVENT


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International


Review/Theater;   If the Song 'My Hero' Seems Silly, It Was Supposed To!
LEAD: ''My Hero,'' by far the most famous song from Oscar Straus and Stanislaus Stange's 1909 operetta ''The Chocolate Soldier,'' is one of the most wildly romantic ballads to have survived as a standard from the early part of the century.
In a paroxysm of dreamy fantasy, the narrator of this overheated waltz actually proclaims, ''Thou art divine,'' to the image of a lover who is not present.


Christine Warden Wed To Edward Malley Jr.
LEAD: Christine K. Warden and Edward H. Malley Jr. were married yesterday at the home of the bridegroom's parents in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Ronald Erbe, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Malley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stoddard Warden of West Barnet, Vt., graduated from the University of Vermont.


God, Humanity and the Holocaust
LEAD: To the Editor:


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Menu;   A Preview of Summer in Pasta With Basil
LEAD: The basil is looking better: the bunches are plumper, the leaves larger and with fewer black spots, the prices lower.


Mall Builders See Growth Continuing
LEAD: DESPITE falling retail sales, rising vacancy rates and problems at a number of major department store chains, a mall building boom is still under way in Connecticut.


Court Gives Killer Unwanted Stay
LEAD: A man scheduled to be executed for killing a bus driver won an unwanted stay today from a Federal court until the court can rule on his parents' plea to keep him alive.


Preparing Classic Italian Dishes, but With a Twist
LEAD: FOR a number of years, cooks and chefs have been taking some Italian classics as inspiration and giving them a new twist.
Pesto is a good example.


Visa Rules for Performers Are Disputed
LEAD: New Federal regulations intended to reduce the number of work visas granted on the basis of ''distinguished merit or ability'' are making it more difficult for new and less well-established performers from abroad to perform in the United States, music industry spokesmen contend.


Fashion;   A Star-Studded Season
LEAD: Consider the current state of fashion, and you realize just how good American designers really are.
To put it mildly, the situation is unsettling.
Store business ranges from tough to dismal.
The cost of most clothing is exorbitant.
Fashion itself is sort of standing still.
Clearly, consumers are in no mood to embrace big style changes.


Now Tries to Be Then in Land of Thunder Dragon
LEAD: In a country like no other in South Asia, a country where icy peaks glitter in an unpolluted sky and protected pine forests still cover the mountain slopes, where rhododendrons bloom in the glens, a 34-year-old King armed with modern technology and an ancient culture is fighting to save the last Shangri


CELL TRANSPLANT FOUND EFFECTIVE IN MUSCLE DISEASE
LEAD: The first attempt in humans to correct the muscle defect that is at the heart of muscular dystrophy was a success, researchers reported yesterday.


Some Subjects for Summiteers to Ponder On;   Revenge and Chance
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hers;   Pre-Wedding Syndrome
LEAD: I'd reached that certain age when some studies said I had a better chance of being attacked by nuclear terrorists than registering for silver at Bloomingdale's.


Fresh Blood for the Thin Blue Line
LEAD: The Senate is about to vote on a proposal for a Police Corps - college students who agree to serve as city cops in exchange for Federal scholarship money.
The program could foment a quiet, constructive revolution.


Walter C. Reisinger, Brewery Executive, 66
LEAD: Walter C. Reisinger, an executive of the Anheuser-Busch Companies, died of lung cancer on Friday at Jewish Hospital in St.
Louis.
He was 66 years old and lived in St.
Louis, where the brewery is based.


'Nannies Classes': When They Started
LEAD: This letter is written in regard to the article, ''Nannies' Workshop Offers a Link Between School and Home,'' which appeared in the Westchester Weekly on April 29.


Ideological Fireworks as Usual At Bavaria's Passion Play
LEAD: The traditional German greeting ''Gruss Gott!'' (''God be with you!'') could hardly be more appropriate anywhere this year than on the streets of this Bavarian village, where 2 of the 4,900 inhabitants are alternating in the role of Jesus Christ and many of the other men in town have sprouted biblical beards for the 20th century's latest and last version of the Oberammergau Passion


All Is Not Tranquil In the Machine Age
LEAD: ONE of the ways in which we show mastery over our environment is by controlling wild animals in zoos.
Machines also often seem like marauding animals raging back and forth across an otherwise civilized world.


Cautiously, Chile Investigates Political Killings
LEAD: Setting out to fulfill the promise of Chile's new President to mix truth with prudence, a commission of lawyers and human rights experts will begin next week to gather evidence on political killings and disappearances that occurred during the military dictatorship.


Coach Moves Up
LEAD: After serving as an assistant coach of the United States baseball team that won a gold medal in the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul, South Korea, Ron Polk, the head coach at Mississippi State, has been named to lead the American team that will try for a repeat of the victory at the 1992 Games in Barcelona,


Valvano TV Deal
LEAD: It may not exactly be a case of feeding from the hand that bit you, but Jim Valvano, the former North Carolina State basketball coach who was forced to resign after ABC reported allegations that several of his former players had conspired to shave points, is apparently on the verge of joining the network as a basketball analyst.


Looking Ahead
LEAD: MONDAY: First-quarter productivity figures are due out.
Soviet and American high-technology leaders meet in Santa Clara, Calif., to improve trade relations, while officials meet in Washington to discuss sales by American food companies in the Soviet Union.
TUESDAY: Companies report auto sales for May.


Some Subjects for Summiteers to Ponder On
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mandela Says He Is Fine After Surgery


Local Wines in a North Fork Setting
LEAD: VISITING California's Napa and Sonoma Valleys means both a tour of the vineyards and enticing food at charming restaurants.
The fine dining that usually follows the winemakers has not yet materialized on Long Island's North Fork.
From Riverhead to Orient Point, two or three restaurants, at best, are worth the trip.


Senate Democrats Offer Real Campaign Reform
LEAD: To the Editor:


A 64-Year Dream About Champagne
LEAD: ONE of Gutzon Borglum's most ambitious bronze works was viewed with renewed reverence in recent days, not because of its 42 life-size military figures representing all of America's wars, but because of a rumor that champagne had been secreted inside more than 60 years ago.


Use of Drug Impinges On Integrity of Racing
LEAD: During the last few years, I have been asked to explain New York's position on Lasix, which is banned 48 hours before post time.
New York stands alone on that position.


Question Of the Week;   What Should Mets Do About Strawberry?
LEAD: Strawberry should not be traded.
He is just warming up and will be a .300 hitter as the season gets going.
ALEX TIRSCHWELL
Brooklyn


The Male Athlete and Sexual Assault
LEAD: Once revered as much for his manly image as for his on-the-field performance, the male athlete is receiving increased scrutiny for his off-the-field behavior with women.


Lisa Gustin Weds P. D. Fitzsimmons
LEAD: Lisa Gustin, a daughter of Ralph Livingston Gustin Jr. of Wellesley, Mass., and a stepdaughter of Mrs. z Gustin, was married yesterday at the Wellesley Congregational Church to Peter Day Fitzsimmons, a son of Thomas Fitzsimmons of Mansfield, Conn., and the late Virginia Fitzsimmons.
The bridegroom's grandfather the Rev.


Barry Crawford Wed To Gizella Callender
LEAD: Gizella Anne Callender, the daughter of Gizella Parrish Callender of Lancaster, Pa., and Robinson W. Callender of Philadelphia, was married yesterday in Wellesley, Mass., to Charles Barrett Crawford, the son of Mrs.
Robert R. Viscount of Woodbridge, Conn., and the late Charles Barrett Crawford.
The Rev.


Another Victory for Capriati at the French Open


BERLIN AFFAIR: A THRILLER
LEAD:
THE INNOCENT
By Ian McEwan.
270 pp. New York: Doubleday. $18.95.


For the Much-Maligned Motel, *****
LEAD: Two and a half years ago my wife and I decided to try living without a fixed address.
We closed our house in Florida, packed all our hopes and dreams and socks and underwear into the trunk of our Buick Century, and set off in search of America.


Today's Sections
LEAD:
Special Today: Home Entertaining/Magazine Part 2


Fixing Sliding Patio Doors
LEAD: DURING warm weather, traffic through patio doors increases and doors that stick or are difficult to slide become nuisances.
Fortunately, most problems with sliding patio doors can be fixed relatively easily.


Caroline Brokaw to Wed R. S. Tucker
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Caleb Brokaw of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Caroline Johnston Brokaw to Robert Scott Tucker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert James Tucker of Montpelier, Vt.
A September wedding is planned.


Julia W. Barnes and Herbert A. May 3d Are Wed
LEAD: Julia W. Barnes, the daughter of Mrs.
William Barnes 3d of Decatur, Ill., and the late Mr.
Barnes, was married yesterday to Herbert A. May 3d, the son of Mrs.
May Jr. of Baltimore and the late Mr.
May.
The Rev.
Alfred R. Shands 3d officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Decatur.


Twins Drop Laudner
LEAD: After failing to get a hit in 29 times at bat during a two-week minor league rehabilitation assignment, Tim Laudner, the former Minnesota catcher who left spring training saying he had lost his desire to play, has been given his unconditional release by the Twins.


Danielle DiGiacomo to Wed in the Fall
LEAD: October wedding plans for Danielle DiGiacomo and David Kent Ganek have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Frank DiGiacomo of Paris.
Mr.
Ganek is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Ganek of New York.


Currency;   Gaining Ground on the Mark
LEAD: The dollar rose against the West German mark again last week, topping 1.70 marks to the dollar briefly on Friday before slipping back to 1.6985.
The dollar is now up more than 4 percent against the mark since the beginning of May.
Some foreign exchange traders say that part of the mark's weakness stems from the belief that the West German Bundesbank is having more disagreements than usual over economic policy with the West German Government.


Elaine Reader Is Wed To Stephen P. Arbeit
LEAD: Elaine Reader, the daughter of Eleanor Kiley of Ocean Grove, N.J., and the late William H. Kiley, was married yesterday in New York to Stephen P. Arbeit, the son of Claire Arbeit of West Palm Beach, Fla., and the late David Arbeit.
Rabbi Burt A. Siegel officiated at the Sign of the Dove.


Capriati Gains Round of 16 in Paris
LEAD: Jennifer Capriati, the reigning French Open junior champion, today continued to show why she has forsaken the junior ranks and defied chronology for bigger stadiums and stakes at the relatively tender age of 14.


UNPOLLUTED BY PASSION
LEAD:
RACE AND HISTORY
Selected Essays, 1938-1988.
By John Hope Franklin.
450 pp. Baton Rouge, La.:
Louisiana State University Press. $29.95.


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
Outdoor Drama Listing Available


OUTFITTING A HOST'S HAMPER
LEAD: There is little I enjoy more than a picnic.
What better way to celebrate that rare summer day than to head straight for the heart of it, setting off with a hamper and a handful of friends.
But to inhabit the outdoors with comfort, you need a well-equipped picnic hamper.
And while there are ready-made standard models available - the ultimate, perhaps, being the classic sold at Asprey in London for about $21,000, complete with caviar and champagne - they don't offer much personality.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: There are more of them around than one would think - those strange (to some) creatures who choose to spend most of their summer weekends in the city.


The Great New Drive to Rescue Wang's Computers
LEAD: Richard W. Miller wasn't frightened by difficult business situations.
After all, his first job after finishing business school in 1970 had been at the Penn Central Corporation, which was going through what was then the largest bankruptcy proceeding in the nation's history.


Kenneth Aretsky Weds Diana Lyne
LEAD: Diana K. Lyne, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Lyne of Boston, was married yesterday to Kenneth M. Aretsky, a son of Mrs.
Sidney Aretsky of North Miami Beach, Fla., and the late Mr.
Aretsky.
The Rev.
Vernon Nichols officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.


Kathy Donohoe to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Douglas 3d of Orangeburg, N.Y., have announced wedding plans for their daughter Sandra L. Douglas and Todd K. Parker, a son of J. Walton Parker of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., and Mrs.
Howard E. Wulff of Fairhope, Ala.
Ms.
Douglas, 33 years old, is a legal secretary at the law firm of Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer &amp; Feld in Washington.


Glacier
LEAD: To the Editor: The article on Glacier National Park (Travel, April 1) painted a great picture, but the paragraph about the spawning salmon and the eagles feeding on them in the fall may be a thing of the past.


P.L.O. Rejects U.S. Demand on Israel Raid
LEAD: The Palestine Liberation Organization rejects United States demands linked to a Palestinian guerrilla raid on the Israeli coast, a P.L.O. leader said today.


THE TOUGH GOT GOING
LEAD:
WHAT'S THAT PIG OUTDOORS?
A Memoir of Deafness.
By Henry Kisor.
270 pp. New York: Hill &amp; Wang. $18.95.


With Babies on Board
LEAD: They say that travel broadens a person, and I believe it.
This may seem strange, considering that I have only gone beyond the continental boundaries of the United States twice in my life.
Once I spent two weeks on the Caribbean island of St.
Barts, which was a little like going to heaven.
Once I spent two weeks in the Soviet Union, which was a little like going to Mars.


Left-Handers and Right-Handers Are Tilting Team Rotations
LEAD: Lee Thomas, general manager of the Philadelphia Phillies, scans the walls in his office and checks the pitching staffs on the rosters of the other major league teams.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
His First Cathedral
A blind man who has never seen and cannot imagine a cathedral asks another man, a sort of sexual rival, to describe one to him.
When this fails, they draw one together.
This is from Raymond Carver's story ''Cathedral,'' one of 20 in ''The Best American Short Stories of the Eighties,'' edited by Shannon Ravenel (Houghton Mifflin).


Jill Lepard Becomes a Bride
LEAD: At the Norwich (Vt.) Congregational Church, Jill Lepard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold J. Lepard Jr. of Ann Arbor, Mich., was married yesterday to Thomas D. French, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan F. French of Andover, Mass., by the Rev.
Mark Pickett.
Mrs.
French, 29 years old, graduated summa cum laude from Bowdoin College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


Lauren Stevens to Wed Michael Bolen
LEAD: The engagement of Lauren Elizabeth Stevens to Michael John Bolen, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
John E. Bolen of Riverside, Calif., has been made known by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Donald M. Stevens of Woodbridge, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.


Stop the World, Mexico Is Getting On
LEAD: As usual, Carlos Salinas de Gortari is a man in a hurry - and with some tough decisions to make.


Burst of Freedom in Czechoslovakia May Split Czechs From the Slovaks
LEAD: Seven months after the peaceful revolution that ended four decades of Communist rule in Czechoslovakia, the biggest political question is whether President Vaclav Havel can keep Czechs and Slovaks from going separate ways after free elections on June 8 and 9.


Summit in Washington;   Chevron and Soviets to Work Toward Oil Venture
LEAD: The Chevron Corporation signed an agreement today that could open the way for a major expansion of its commercial activities in the Soviet Union.


SIMPLY FOR SIPPING
LEAD: In summertime, when the livin' is easy, the drinking should be, too.
Hearty wines, robust wines, complex wines - they are for long winter evenings, important dinners and serious guests.
Summer is the time to drink wine, not think about it.


Technology;   Trying to Make Batteries 'Green'
LEAD: Every year, Americans buy over 2 billion dry-cell batteries for use in products ranging from flashlights to portable computers.
Since most are not rechargeable, they soon wind up in the trash, from which they go to a landfill or an incinerator.


Melissa Wilcox Married To David Bruce Kinyon
LEAD: Melissa Helene Wilcox, a daughter of Barbara Wilcox of Norwich, Conn., and James F. Wilcox of Hartford, was married yesterday to David Bruce Kinyon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Kinyon of Lancaster, Pa.
Msgr.
James O'Brien performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in Norwich.


Jennifer Schultz Wed in Scarsdale
LEAD: Jennifer Lockhart Schultz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Lockhart Schultz of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Bruce Allan Demaree, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Thomas Demaree, also of Scarsdale.
The Rev.
William J. Winterrowd, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Church of St.
James the Less in Scarsdale.


U.S. Lawmakers Tie Soviet Trade Pact to Kremlin Progress on Lithuania
LEAD: Members of Congress warned today that Congressional approval of an agreement expanding American trade with the Soviet Union would hinge on President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's willingness to end Moscow's economic crackdown on Lithuania.


Susan V. Gerrity to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph W. Gerrity of Loudonville, N.Y., have announced wedding plans for their daughter Susan V. Gerrity and Nathan A. Chase, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Chase of Clearwater, Fla.
Miss Gerrity, 28 years old and a graduate of the University of Vermont, is a tour coordinator with the Vermont County Cyclers in Waterbury Center, Vt.


Cable TV Needs a Dose of Competition
LEAD: Congress can best serve the short- and long-term national interest by permitting the telephone industry to compete in the cable television business.
The alternative proposal, to re-regulate cable television is a second-best solution.
And re-regulation would address only one facet of the issue - the concerns consumers have voiced about cable rates and service.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Style Makers column on May 20 about Judith Niedermaier, a display designer in Chicago, misstated her role in creating mannequins shaped like wooden clothespins for the Fendi boutique in New York.


Francie Fischer Is Engaged
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
David S. Fischer of Woodbridge, Conn., have announced wedding plans for their daughter Francine E. Fischer and Mark R. Malina, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mike Malina of Cheshire, Conn.
Both are Union college graduates.
Miss Fischer, 24 years old, is a financial analyst at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.


URBAN OASES: A HOST'S GUIDE TO FARMER'S MARKETS
LEAD: We've all heard about legendary French chefs who never make up a day's menu until they see what's in the local market.
While the dew is still on the lettuce, we're told, they scour the stalls, assiduously prodding tomatoes, hefting melons and nibbling critically at sweet peas.
Such expeditions are the envy of American cooks, especially at this time, when ripe, fresh seasonal produce seems particularly inviting.


Holyfield Clearly Makes His Point
LEAD: The ending was no surprise, less of one certainly than a prefight cameo appearance at ringside by Marla Maples, the supposed other woman in Donald Trump's life.


The Bank of Tokyo Responds
LEAD: To the Editor:


METALS IN SEWAGE MUST BE REDUCED
LEAD: In an attempt at cleaning up New York Harbor, the Federal Government will order New York City to limit toxic discharges of copper and mercury from its 14 sewage treatment plants.
It will be the first time the Government limits the maximum amount of a specific toxic substance in sewage-plant discharge.


The Work Week Grows;   Tales From The Digital Treadmill
LEAD: ON Wall Street in the 1960's, there was the theory of the paddling duck.
An employee would slip into the office at daybreak, do a couple of hours' hard work and then go out for breakfast.
He would amble back as his colleagues arrived and would glide through the day, impressing everyone with his effortless mastery of his chores.


FUTURES TRADING
LEAD: I share the view expressed in Louis Uchitelle's article ''Futures Trading: Does Chicago Run Wall Street?'' (April 22) that the equities markets and the stock-index futures markets, are, in effect, one market, but I do not believe that one market demands one regulator.
The leadership of the Treasury Department, which comes from Wall Street, may think so.


THE BASIC REPERTORY: ROOTS TO GROW BY
LEAD: When Virgil Thomson began writing music criticism in New York half a century ago, he was appalled to find the repertory in the grip of what he termed the ''50 famous pieces.'' Furthermore, he discovered, the tyranny of these masterworks was made possible with the complicity of a handful of big-name performers and their managers, who profited by keeping music in a stagnant state.


Review/Dance;   Bocca and Ferri Co-star In 'Romeo and Juliet'
LEAD: Sir Kenneth MacMillan's ''Romeo and Juliet'' has become a modern ballet classic in the 25 years since it was created for England's Royal Ballet.
And it is likely that everyone who has seen the production has a distinctive memory of the first time, whether of a performer or bit of choreography or the overwhelming first impression made by Nicholas Georgiadis's sumptuous Renaissance sets and costumes and the sheer spectacle of the way this version unfolds to its


Concerto Contest Names Winners
LEAD: AFTER the gala concert last month that officially marked its 60th anniversary, the Westchester Conservatory of Music could rest on its considerable laurels, at least till next season.
But not so: today at 3 P.M., the Conservatory Orchestra, directed by Elliot Magaziner, will be at Stepinac High School in White Plains to introduce and accompany the laureats of an all-Conservatory Concerto


Centralized Immigration Control Urged
LEAD: Over objections from the Bush Administration, a Federal advisory committee will recommend creation of an independent Government agency to formulate immigration policy and to enforce laws now administered separately by three Cabinet departments.


CAMPUS LIFE: Dayton;   Where Businesses Give Summer Interns, Yes, Real Responsibilities
LEAD: Clerical and even menial work is the usual fate of the college summer intern.
But typing, filing and ''go-fering'' are not in the job descriptions of a mentor program offered by the University of Dayton's business school.


How to Help Roses Keep Their Splendor
LEAD: JUNE belongs to roses.
The glorious flowers start to appear this month in all their colors: reds, pinks, yellows, creams, pure whites and everything in between.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
A FREE AND ORDERED SPACE: The Real World of the University, by A. Bartlett Giamatti. (Norton, $9.95.) The Renaissance scholar turned baseball commissioner, who died last year, examines the purpose of the university and the meaning of a liberal education in this series of essays, many of which were written while he was the president of Yale.


Headliners;   Smooth Exit
LEAD: In Derek C. Bok's two decades as president of Harvard, he has become practiced in perhaps the most prestigious job in higher education, and the university has become a more settled place.
The endowment has quintupled, Harvard and Radcliffe are peaceably merged, and the new ''core curriculum'' is not new anymore.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions;   Babylonian Kings and Other Bits of Historic Exotica
LEAD: This is another in a series of columns answering questions about New York's changing streetscapes.
The Chief Inspector


Council Panel Votes Sheriff Bill
LEAD: The City Council has taken a step toward giving Mayor David N. Dinkins wide latitude in appointing a new city sheriff, who would run an expanded municipal collection agency under a plan proposed by the Mayor.


The World: High Risk;   Colombia's Guerillas Break Into Politics
LEAD: TEN weeks after burning their jungle fatigues and melting down their guns, the 800 former fighters of the M-19 guerrilla army watched with euphoria as their new political party won 800,000 votes in last Sunday's presidential election.


FICTION
LEAD:
CRY SPY.
By William Hood. (Norton, $18.95.) Alan Trosper, the hero of William Hood's previous novel, ''Spy Wednesday,'' is happily in from the cold and out of the Firm, the fictional United States intelligence agency for which he worked as a case officer.
Trosper is just beginning to enjoy his new life in London with his new British wife when an old comrade-in-espionage contracts a rapidly fatal disease.


A Presence That's Meant to Command
LEAD: Gregory Peck is 74 years old now, but as the newly released OLD GRINGO (1989, RCA/Columbia, $89.95) illustrates, he remains a commanding screen presence and a credibly romantic figure.


Bomb Explodes in Crowded Square in Czechoslovakia


THE ISSUE THAT DEFIES AGREEMENT
LEAD:
ABORTION
The Clash of Absolutes.
By Laurence H. Tribe.
270 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


Headliners;   Different Direction
LEAD: Joseph Papp wanted something new for the New York Shakespeare Festival, and he is starting with JoAnne Akalaitis.
A director and a founding member of the experimental troupe Mabou Mines, she will have the title of artistic associate and can present and cast plays ''any way she likes,'' Mr.
Papp said last week.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Rental Apartments Thriving in Stamford
LEAD: RENTAL apartments are popular in Stamford, where housing now lingers unsold for an average of 163 days.
In the boom days several years ago it took only 30 days to sell a home, and prices have dropped 20 to 24 percent since then.


Markdowns On All Kinds Of Movies
LEAD: Everywhere in video these days there seem to be rafts of older feature films available at lower prices.
Typically, the movie companies - Warner, say, or MGM/UA - will put together a group of comedies, westerns, musicals, crime films or whatever and reissue them at $19.95 or so apiece.


Benefits for Cancer And a Harlem School
LEAD: The New York City Division of the American Cancer Society raised more than $600,000 Thursday night at a dinner dance in the ballroom of the Plaza Hotel.
The evening honored Tony Bennett, the singer.


Elizabeth Wright Weds A. C. Kaye
LEAD: Elizabeth Anne Wright, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
W.
Eugene Wright of Ogden, Utah, was married yesterday to Anthony Cummins Kaye, a son of Dr.
Robert Edward Kaye and Wendy Burnham Kaye, both of New York.
Judge David E. Roth of State District Court in Utah officiated at the home of Valeen Glasmann, the bride's aunt, in Ogden.


Nostalgia for The White Male
LEAD: To the Editor:


PASTIMES: Around The Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Cut peonies in the morning and plunge stems into deep water to make blooms last.
There is still time to dig up and divide hostas, asters and 'mums; wait until after bloom to dig and divide thick overgrown clumps of astilbe.
Stake Oriental poppies if their stems are floppy.
Cut off unwanted seed pods of early-blooming alpines.


Marie Webster to Wed Thomas Loose in July
LEAD: Marie Webster of East Conway, N.H., and Richard Webster of Intervale, N.H., have announced July wedding plans for their daughter Tina Maureen Webster and Thomas Maxwell Loose, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Loose of Painted Post, N.Y.


Lake Balaton, Where Hungary Summers
LEAD: Hungary has the largest freshwater lake in Central Europe: Balaton.
Shaped like a 50-mile-long paprika, of the pointed piquant variety, Lake Balaton is about 60 miles from Budapest by way of the M7 highway and the same distance from the Austrian border.


State Orders Removal Of Debris in Katonah
LEAD: WHEN Marilyn Dekker took her infant daughter, Nancy, for a walk in her Katonah subdivision last fall, she noticed an odd-looking pile of dirt that had recently been dumped on an empty lot on Old Village Lane. ''It looked funny, and it smelled,'' Mrs.
Dekker recalled, adding that the ash-colored material ''was very sparkly in the sunlight.


HE WORKED AT THE HERO'S TRADE
LEAD:
BEYOND THE BARRIER
The Story of Byrd's First Expedition to Antarctica.
By Eugene Rodgers.
Illustrated. 354 pp. Annapolis, Md.:
Naval Institute Press. $24.95.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The most important thing we're going to discuss today is to go over the planet and its hot spotss - in other words, to discuss regional issues.
And of course we will pursue our general discussions in order to understand each other better.''
-Mikhail S. Gorbachev
[1:5.]


Disney Studios Takes Care of Business
LEAD: These are boom or bust times in Hollywood.
Half a dozen smaller companies have collapsed in the last two years, and even some of the major studios are teetering on the brink of bankruptcy.
On the other hand, studios lucky enough to latch on to a blockbuster like ''Batman'' or ''Look Who's Talking'' can see their profits soar to record levels.


Postings: Report on a Chelsea Hybrid;   Condos Lag, Rentals Thrive
LEAD: An unusual hybrid development in Chelsea - part rental, part condominium, part renovation, part new construction - is offering evidence of the sluggishness in New York's sales market.
Almost 75 percent of the rental units have tenants, while only 30 percent of the condominiums have been sold, which has led to price reductions.


Mary G. Wells to Marry
LEAD: Mrs.
James L. Wells 3d of Doylestown, Pa., has announced the late-June wedding plans for her daughter Mary G. Wells and Henry M. Ogden 3d of Short Hills, N.J., Miss Wells, 30 years old, is also a daughter of the late Mr.
Wells.
A Cedar Crest College graduate, she is the director of admissions and a history teacher at the Vail-Deane School in Mountainside, N.J.


Wall Street;   Investing Goldman's New Money
LEAD: Until recently, an investor needed $5 million to open an account at Goldman Sachs &amp; Company.
But times are tough on Wall Street.
This prestigious investment bank has established a mutual fund and now welcomes smaller accounts.


Miss Shino Weds G. L. Johnson 4th
LEAD: Misao Shino, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Haruhiko Shino of Yokahama, Japan, was married yesterday to G. Leonard Johnson 4th, a son of Dr.
Johnson 3d of Arlington, Va., and Jessie Reed of Hico, W.Va.
The Rev.
John Dexheimer performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Alpine (N.J.) Community Church.


Jeanne Woodlock Married To James Gillispie in Jersey
LEAD: Jeanne Woodlock, a daughter of Margaret L. Woodlock of Crestwood, N.J., and the late John P. Woodlock, was married yesterday to James Gillispie, a son of Frank J. Gillispie and Barbara T. Gillispie, both of Mount Vernon, N.Y.
The Rev.
James Moore officiated at the Annunciation Roman Catholic Church in Crestwood.


America's Cup '92 Dates
LEAD: Challenger will meet defender in the first of a four-of-seven-race America's Cup match on Saturday, May 9, 1992, it was announced Friday.


STALKING THE HYENA
LEAD:
EDGE OF EDEN
By Nicholas Proffitt.
369 pp. New York: Bantam Books. $19.95.


West Virginia's Historic Panhandle
LEAD: In 1770, fearless George Washington scouted and surveyed some of the budding nation's most fertile and beautiful river bottomland in what was then western Virginia, home of the Delaware, Shawnee and Mingo tribes.
For his service in the French and Indian War, Washington was given the pick of the land, a tract on the east bank of the Ohio River, two miles south of the country's largest prehistoric burial mound.


Escalator Collapses in Subway, Injuring 14
LEAD: At least 14 people were injured last night when an escalator at the 161st Street-River Avenue subway station serving Yankee Stadium in the Bronx partially collapsed, Transit Authority officials said.


HELLO, COLUMBUS
LEAD:
THE HARP AND THE SHADOW
By Alejo Carpentier.
Translated by
Thomas Christensen and
Carol Christensen.
159 pp. San Francisco:
Mercury House. $16.95.


'Private' Lanai Is Private No More
LEAD: For years, Lanai has been the most inaccessible and, in a certain way, the most alluring of the major Hawaiian islands.
The smallest and least visited of the islands, it made few gestures to tourism.
Visitors had only one modest 10-room hotel, few paved roads and one drab town.
But those willing to brave rutted and dusty jeep tracks through pineapple fields found an isolated tropical paradise: deserted, pristine beaches and shipwrecks, red lava cliffs and deep gulches, mountains and tableland teeming with axis deer and pheasant, and magnificent views of nearby Molokai and Maui.


Red Smith Victory To Yankee Affair
LEAD: It was beginning to look as if age was catching up with Yankee Affair.


Donna E. Landau Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Donna E. Landau, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Loeber Landau of New York, and John L. Hardiman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold J. Hardiman of Bridgeport, Conn., were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Msgr.
George Bardes performed the ceremony.


Fixing Sliding Patio Doors
LEAD: DURING warm weather, traffic through patio doors increases and doors that stick or are difficult to slide become nuisances.
Fortunately, most problems with sliding patio doors can be fixed relatively easily.


Helen MacIsaac Is Married
LEAD: Helen A. MacIsaac, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren MacIsaac of Washington, was married yesterday at St.
Thomas's Episcopal Church in Amagansett, L.I., to Eric O. Kuhn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Kuhn of East Hampton, L.I.
The Rev.
Charles Haskins and the Rev.
Donald Desmond, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


What It Takes to Survive on a Bicycle
LEAD: To the Editor:


EL SALVADOR LAGS IN JESUIT INQUIRY
LEAD: Despite President Alfredo Cristiani's vow to push the investigation of the killing of six Jesuit priests, the Supreme Court has disclosed that a central piece of evidence in the case was destroyed and that the judge took evidence from the wrong soldiers.


Clean Water Enforcement Act Criticized
LEAD: A Tough new law that imposes mandatory penalties for violation of the state's water pollution regulations is being criticized by public utilities officials and business and industry representatives.
They say the law will ultimately cost taxpayers millions of dollars in fines and perhaps billions of dollars in waste-water treatment plant improvements that could be obsolete by the time they are in place.


Question Of the Week;   What Should Mets Do About Strawberry?
LEAD: They should do what any major league franchise should: get rid of him.
A .240 hitter who rarely delivers in the clutch, runs the bases like a minor leaguer and plays the outfield like Dave Kingman, is hardly likely to lead the way to another pennant.
Strawberry arrived in the majors in 1983; if he hasn't reached his potential by now, the prospects are beginning to look dim.


Pistons Want Comforts of Home
LEAD: Chuck Daly, coach of the Detroit Pistons, put it simply today.


Suzanne Marek Weds M. Q. Armstrong
LEAD: Suzanne Marek, a daughter of Zdenek R. Marek of New York and Jessica Ford Marek of Saddle River, N.J., was married yesterday to Matthew Quine Armstrong, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Q. Armstrong of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
John W. Bishop, an Episcopal priest, and Msgr.
Thomas P. Guinan, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Christ Church in


Jane Owen Weds Alexander Brash
LEAD: The Church at Point O'Woods, L.I., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Jane Owen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth J. Querengesser of Toronto, to Alexander R. Brash, the son of Mrs.
Douglas R. Brash of Essex, Conn., and the late Mr.
Brash.
The Rev.
Dr.
Daniel M. Young, a Baptist minister, officiated.


S.E.C. Expansion
LEAD: If the Southeastern Conference has his way, the 10-school conference will soon be adding at least two members, splitting into two divisions and holding a division playoff game to decide which football team goes to the Sugar Bowl.


Advocates for Homeless Assail Plan for Eviction From Penn Station
LEAD: The New York Civil Liberties Union and other advocates for the homeless yesterday lambasted a plan by the Long Island Rail Road to evict homeless people from Penn Station.


A Lot's Amiss, But the Indexes Could Care Less
LEAD: Just as all of Washington was celebrating the victory of capitalism over Communism, a symbol of capitalist excess surfaced last week at the most symbolic of places, where Monopoly is made.


Cards Are Stacked In Lawyers' Favor
LEAD: Your article ''Complaints Rising Against Lawyers'' (May 6) starts out by maintaining that ''More Long Islanders are complaining about lawyers than ever before . . . according to a state watchdog committee [the State Attorney's Grievance Committee for Long Island] .


Grim Reminder of World War II P.O.W.'s on Display
LEAD: THE many years since the end of World War II have diminished some of Walter Furca's abilities, but not all of them.
Not his ability to remember.


Summit in Washington;   Meanwhile, Back in Moscow, the News Is Bad
LEAD: Domestic issues ranging from economic reform to political opposition have shaped Soviet press coverage of the Bush-Gorbachev summit meeting in Washington.


GIFTED CHILDREN'S PROGRAMS
LEAD: Elizabeth Stone's article ''Gifted Children's Programs: A Matter of Class'' (May 6) makes clear that a number of hard questions need to be answered if gifted education is to fulfill its mission in this country.
However, to persist in debating whether gifted-education programs should exist at all is ludicrous.


Changing Change
LEAD: A new Gallup Poll confirms that people want the Mint to go on coining pennies, even though they're mainly a nuisance, and don't want a dollar coin, despite its genuine convenience.
To a skittish politician, that says don't meddle.
But the constructive message is that changing change takes leadership.


Sydney Ullman, Former Administrative Judge, 79
LEAD: Sydney Ullman, a retired Federal administrative law judge, died Thursday at a nursing home in Montclair, N.J.
He was 79 years old and lived in Bethesda, Md.


Some Subjects for Summiteers to Ponder On;   Germany in NATO
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nature of Clothing Isn't Evidence In Rape Cases, Florida Law Says
LEAD: A nationally publicized acquittal in a rape case last year has now led to a Florida law that bars rape defendants' lawyers from citing a woman's clothing as evidence justifying the attack.


Tankleff on Trial: 'Sweet' or 'Cowardly'?
LEAD: LIKE a student preparing for a test, he listens attentively and takes volumes of notes.
But 18-year-old Martin H. Tankleff has not been inside a classroom in nearly two years.
He has been mostly inside courtrooms, where the stakes are much higher.


Spain Honoring Jews 500 Years After Expulsion
LEAD: In an effort at reconciliation nearly 500 years after their ancestors' expulsion from Spain, the world's Sephardic Jews were selected on Friday to receive this country's most prestigious prize.


As Layoffs Loom, Defense Workers Mount a Battle for Jobs
LEAD: HAROLD E. MOSS worked for a paper mill in Maine until 15 months ago, when he returned to southeastern Connecticut to take a job at the UNC Naval Products plant in Montville. ''I wanted to get back to my friends and family,'' Mr.
Moss said. ''And I figured at UNC I had a job for many years to come.


Pickup Crew Wins a Gold
LEAD: A pickup crew from Northeastern University rewarded parents and patrons today by winning a gold medal at the Intercollegiate Rowing Association's annual regatta on Onondaga Lake.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
HOUSE TOUR


Legislation Sought on Lip-Synced Concerts
LEAD: The growing use of canned music and lip-syncing at concerts has drawn the ire of legislators in New York and New Jersey, who say listeners should be told if the live performances they are paying for are not entirely live.


On Language;   Looking Askance
LEAD: We all thought John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff, had at last been cornered.
The official Presidential position on the dread subject of tax increases (hikes in journalese) in budget talks was no preconditions.
Governor Sununu had been caught off base when he told reporters, not for quotation or attribution, that a tax increase was not in the works - that the Democrats at the ''budget summit'' might seek that way to reduce the deficit, but that President


Beijing's Bloody Thank You
LEAD: President Bush knew he'd draw criticism at home for proposing, despite Beijing's violations of basic human rights, a 12-month renewal of China's commercial access to U.S. markets.
But in return he must surely have expected gestures of reconciliation and good will.
Instead, Beijing's answer is cynical and cruel: kind words for Mr.


New Iran-Contra Grand Jury Hears North
LEAD: Oliver L. North appeared before a newly empaneled Federal grand jury on Friday in the continuing criminal investigation of the Iran-contra affair.


Some Subjects for Summiteers to Ponder On;   Trade and Emigration
LEAD: To the Editor:


CReators of 'Annie' Come Full Circle
LEAD: NO one wanted ''Annie'' in 1976, until Michael Price, the executive producer of Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam, said, ''Come up here and try it out.'' That's how Martin Charnin, who conceived, directed and wrote the lyrics for the legendary musical hit remembers its tentative beginnings.


China's Future on Hold With a 'Gang of Elders'
LEAD: In the middle of the crackdown against the democracy movement a year ago, Deng Xiaoping summoned the Government's leaders for a lecture that has turned out to be prophetic.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Golf
Hole-in-One Helps Jones: Steve Jones made a hole-in-one in a round of six-under-par 65 yesterday and took a three-stroke lead over four players after three rounds of the Kemper Open in Potomac, Md.(AP)
Gerring Ahead in L.P.G.A.: Cathy Gerring birdied three of the final five holes yesterday to build a two-shot lead over Elaine Crosby and Mary Beth Zimmerman after two rounds of the L.P.G.A.


Review/Pop;   M-Base Group Weaves Styles in Musical Balancing Act
LEAD: For many serious composers one of the main problems of the 1980's was finding a rapprochement between what had previously been considered high art - jazz and various other world classical music - and vernacular styles.
The balancing act isn't over.
At the M-Base collective's show at Symphony Space on Thursday night, the heart-jarring rhythms of funk and soul were subtly reworked into complex rhythmic webs.


Cynthia Rice Is Wed To Kyle E. Chadwick
LEAD: Cynthia A. Rice and Kyle E. Chadwick, Harvard University graduates, were married yesterday in Syracuse at the home of Verne Nesbitt, the bride's cousin.
The Rev.
Dr.
Richard L. Phillips, a Methodist minister, officiated.


God, Humanity and the Holocaust
LEAD: To the Editor:


Audrey Weaver: Scarf Designer
LEAD: ''A lot of women are intimidated by scarfs,'' said Audrey Weaver, a 33-year-old designer of scarfs and accessories who wants women to think of them as friends.
Ms.
Weaver herself seems to have a magician's touch.
Taking a silk oblong leopard-skin print from around her neck, in two minutes she drapes it into a bandeau top, a shawl, a headwrap, a sarong and a sash for her purse.


Ms. Countryman To Marry in July
LEAD: Rachel Carole Countryman and John Wescott Bracker are planning a July wedding, the prospective bride's mother and stepfather, Joan Countryman and Edward Jakmauh of Philadelphia, have announced.
Mr.
Bracker is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Earl Bracker of Concord, Mass.


God, Humanity and the Holocaust
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sheila Cole Nilva: Gift Basket Maker
LEAD: One career has not been enough for Sheila Cole Nilva.
She has been a travel writer and a model, has done promotional work for swimsuits and bedspreads and has been in the antiques business.
And because even one career at a time has seldom been enough, her careers often overlapped.


Agency to Use Dormant Law to Bar Homosexuals From U.S.
LEAD: On the eve of a major international AIDS conference in San Francisco, the Immigration and Naturalization service is preparing to invoke a little-enforced law that bars the entry of homosexuals to the United States as sexual deviants, agency officials say.


3-Way Race Focusing Campaign's Geography
LEAD: PEOPLE who want to plan their summer vacations so they can rub elbows on the beach with a leading gubernatorial candidate - or avoid those pesky office seekers altogether - can take heart.


Connecticut G.O.P. Seems in Disarray
LEAD: Battered by defections and internal bickering, Connecticut's Republican Party, which four months ago seemed confident in its ability to win its first gubernatorial election in 20 years, now appears on the brink of breaking apart.


Don't Lump Us All Into One Pile
LEAD: Regarding Mary M. Jeffords article (''This Island Is a Really Good Place to Be From,'' Opinion, April 29) I take personal offense.
I am 52 years old and have lived most of my life on Long Island.


Daphne D. Ross and John J. Dalton Are Married
LEAD: Daphne Davison Ross and John James Dalton, Bard College graduates, were married yesterday in the college's chapel in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The Revs.
Maurice and Sarah Fetty, Congregational ministers, performed the ceremony.


PASTIMES: Coins
LEAD: Bowers and Merena, Inc. will hold an auction on June 11 to June 13 in New York City to sell some remarkable examples of American numismatics.
Among the items are a rare 1893 silver dollar from the San Francisco Mint.


Seeing Is Believing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Who's That Behind the SUNY Curtains?
LEAD: WHEN the Flying Karamazov Brothers appeared at the Performing Arts Center at the State University of New York at Purchase, among the things they found in their dressing rooms were boxes of tea, both Earl Grey and English Breakfast; bottles of fruit juices, assorted sandwich and salad makings, flowers and good wishes.


A FIRST IMPRESSIONIST
LEAD:
BERTHE MORISOT
By Anne Higonnet.
Illustrated. 240 pp. New York:
An Edward Burlingame Book/
Harper &amp; Row. $25.


SURPRISE EXTENDS TO CITADEL COACH
LEAD: Chal Port listened intently the other day as his counterparts from Stanford, Louisiana State, Mississippi State and Georgia discussed the roads their teams had taken to Omaha for this year's college baseball World Series.


Reaching for the Sky to Add a Room
LEAD: STANDING atop the Plaza Hotel, with the leafy carpet of Central Park laid out 19 stories below, Lee Harris Pomeroy finds irony in the project he is about to begin - a $20 million reconstruction of the 83-year-old hotel's roof and top two floors into 14 penthouse suites.


Northeast Notebook: Philadelphia;   Costly Rehab Of the Past
LEAD: The first section of rehabilitated apartments has opened at the 700-unit Alden Park development, part of a $66 million project that the developer says is the nation's costliest rehabilitation of a historic residential property.
The location is between the communities of East Falls and Germantown, 20 minutes from Center


CAMPUS LIFE: Georgia;   A Student Group Works to End Racial Incidents
LEAD: Residents of a dormitory at the University of Georgia have organized to put a stop to racial harassment.


WE'RE STILL LOCO FOR COCO
LEAD:
CHANEL: A Woman of Her Own.
By Axel Madsen. (Holt, $19.95.) ''Women no longer exist,'' said a Frenchman in 1920. ''All that's left are the boys created by Chanel.'' They are still coming down the runways and the fashionable boulevards looking that Coco way.
Perhaps Gabrielle (Coco) Chanel (1883-1971) did not actually create the concept of chic.


Healiners;   Smooth Landing
LEAD: Just six weeks after resigning under pressure as chancellor of the California state university system, Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds has been named chancellor of the City University of New York.
The problem in California was the 45 percent raise that she and the system's trustees approved for her.
The public response to her new $198,000 salary was so loud that the raise was cut to 4 percent, about what faculty and staff members received, and Dr.


INSIDE
LEAD:
China, a Year Later
It is a year since hard-liners ordered the suppression of the democracy movement, yet there is still no clear sign of China's directions since the crackdown of June 4, 1989.
Page 20.
The Last Shangri-La
In a country like no other in South Asia, a 34-year-old King armed with modern technology and an ancient culture is fighting to save one of the last pristine lands.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended May 19
MANHATTAN
Flatiron District
$245,000
108 Fifth Avenue (16th St.)
1-bedroom, 1-bath, 825-sq.-ft. condo in a two-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, balcony, whirlpool in marble bath, washer and dryer; common charge $394, taxes $1,440 (Broker: Delson-Ginsberg Real Estate)


Jill C. Luftig Marries Michael Mendelsohn
LEAD: Jill C. Luftig, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark D. Luftig of New York, and Dr.
Michael G. Mendelsohn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Mendelsohn of Dix Hills, L.I., were married last evening.
The bride's cousin, Rabbi Dennis Math, assisted by his wife, Cantor Ellen Math, officiated at the Equitable Tower in New York.


Catherine M. Pugin, Banker, Marries Marwan Kreidie, a Doctoral Candidate
LEAD: Catherine M. Pugin and Marwan Kreidie were married yesterday at the Larchmont Avenue Presbyterian Church in Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
Michael A. Drake officiated.
The bride, 24 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Adrian Pugin of Larchmont.
A graduate of Bryn Mawr College, she is an assistant treasurer in New York for the Union Bank of Switzerland.


A Taste For Fidelity
LEAD: To the Editor:


CAMPUS LIFE: Southern Methodist;   Admissions Rule For Top Athletes Stirs Old Fears
LEAD: Southern Methodist University's admissions procedures for athletes were tightened after a scandal that led to the cancellation of the 1987 and 1988 football seasons.
Now those procedures are loosening, and that has some faculty members worried.


Juried Show: Best of a Good Lot
LEAD: HERE it comes again, ''Art of Northeast U.S.A.,'' on view at the Silvermine Guild Arts Center in New Canaan.
The 41st of these annual events, the show and its more than $5,000 in prize money attracted some 1,200 contenders, 90 of whom were selected by the critic Carter Ratcliff.


CELEBRITIES ONE-ON-ONE
LEAD:
In an era when vanity parades as substance and notoriety has become its own shallow reward, Roddy McDowall's DOUBLE EXPOSURE: Take Two (Morrow, $60) proves a reassuring reminder that some celebrity is still based on talent and accomplishment.
This collection of Mr.
McDowall's elegant photographs of 116 eminent subjects - culled primarily from the stage, film and music worlds - is amplified with commentaries by other celebrities.


The World;   The Mideast Defies A Trend to Diplomacy
LEAD: WHEN an Arab summit meeting ended here on Wednesday, the centerweight of Arab diplomacy seemed to have shifted perceptibly.
The relative moderation of Cairo appeared to be yielding to the tough talking of Baghdad that has captured a mood of frustration and anger.


Talking: Rate Shock;   Remedies For High Payments
LEAD: Many people who stretched their incomes wafer-thin to buy the best possible home at the height of the real estate boom two or three years ago are likely to be caught in an excruciating bind this summer.


Police Filch Faxes to Snare a Gambling Ring
LEAD: A tale of high-tech tactics in which the law-enforcement authorities out-faxed a major illegal-gambling ring emerged last week with the arrests of 43 people in New York City and the suburbs.


The Region;   It's Grand And Old But It's No Party
LEAD: THERE were 2,620,288 enrolled Republicans in New York State at last count.
Last week, the Republican State Committee couldn't find one to run against Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


Future Trades
LEAD: Hedging is not gambling; it is a mechanism for minimizing the risk of major changes in the prices of what an investor or asset manager owns.
It is called risk management.
Chicago has done it for generations in agricultural commodities and more recently in financial instruments.


Door to a Business of One's Own Can Be Good Exit From Welfare
LEAD: Zoraida Feliciano said she saw no exit from a world bounded by welfare checks and food stamps.
Then last year a door in her life opened and now she runs her own business, a party-supply shop here in South Philadelphia.


Eagerness in U.S., Ferment at Home
LEAD: Almost breathlessly, everyone from merchants to T-shirt salesmen and gossip columnists awaits the Gorbachev visits to Minneapolis and San Francisco.
Page 14.
Back in Moscow, Boris N. Yeltsin basked in the absence of his political rival.
And there are signs that the Soviet economy is sinking even lower.


The Nation;   From Coffee To Tobacco, Boycotts Are A Growth Industry
LEAD: YOU are what you buy, or, as a growing number of advocacy groups would have it, what you do not buy.


WHEN THE RIGHT SNUFF BOX REALLY MATTERED
LEAD: Queen Elizabeth condemned all forms of tobacco in 1584.
Her successor, James I, attacked its use in a 1604 pamphlet, ''A Counterblaste to Tobacco,'' and sought to eliminate it by imposing higher taxes and attempting to restrict its cultivation.
That their efforts were in vain can be seen in ''Powder Celestial: Snuff Boxes, 1700-1880,'' an exhibition at the Yale Center for British Art, through June 24.


Primaries in Nine States To Set Up Fierce Battles
LEAD: On the biggest primary day yet of this election year, voters will head to the polls in nine states on Tuesday and set the stage for some of the fiercest political struggles in the country.


A NEW TWIST ON POTLUCK
LEAD: An outdoor party FOR 140 friends - with 40 different dishes and lots of activities for children - can be held with little effort on the part of the hosts.
We have been giving such a party at our home in Washington every year for the past seven years, and it is a proven success.
A joint project, it is the one time our family entertains together.


Model Yachts Race in Central Park


Reporter's Notebook: Summit in Washington;   Smiles, Golf Carts and 2 Lethal Footballs
LEAD: The scene at Camp David this morning was tranquil and informal, if you did not count the 2 marines in fatigues frantically swabbing the landing pad, or the 14 marines in dress blues with rifles and Soviet and American flags, or the dozen sailors in dress whites standing at attention, or the swarm of security people, or the Soviet and American aides carrying the coded signaling devices for blowing up the world.


Headliners;   All Dressed Up, and Looking Like a Governor
LEAD: The truth about Viscount Cornbury, an 18th-century Governor of the colonies of New York and New Jersey, is in question again.
This time, a dispute has flared between historians in New York and London about whether he was, as has long been claimed, a transvestite.


Gifted Children's Programs
LEAD: Let's not confuse Intelligence Quotient with creative talent or motor skills.
Labeling as gifted those who give evidence of high performance in areas such as creative, artistic or leadership capabilities is justifiable.
But do not, in a misguided attempt at being democratic, disguise this as ''multiple intelligence.


Who Won On Abortion Law?
LEAD: CONNECTICUT'S new abortion law has been the most distorted and misrepresented piece of legislation to surfacefrom the 1990 session of the General Assembly.


The Region;   When Welfare Pays the Rent
LEAD: CAN a family of three survive in New York City on $286 a month for rent?
The city and state maintain that it can.
That is how much they give to the typical welfare family, a single mother with two children, for basic shelter.


The Executive Computer;   Who Would Buy Machines Without Disk Drives?
LEAD: The Houston-based Compaq Computer Corporation is best known for its powerful desktop and floor-standing PC's.
These are used by many businesses as ''servers'' for clusters of less-powerful machines connected on local area networks.
In such a setup, one fast server with a large amount of hard disk storage is the repository of most, or all, files needed by a group of workers.


Recycled Paper Is Not the Only, or Best, Answer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Playing the Game Against the Prevailing Sentiment
LEAD: Despite the stock market's rally to new highs last week, so-called ''market sentiment'' is not very strong.
In fact, there is still a high level of skepticism.
In the contrary ways of Wall Street, this may actually be good news, say portfolio strategists, who believe that as long as investors remain skeptical prices can go higher.


Elizabeth B. Hix Marries
LEAD: Elizabeth B. Hix and John T. Colby Jr. were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Cathedral of the Incarnation in Garden City, L.I.
The Very Rev.
Robert V. Wilshire officiated.
Mrs.
Colby, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jonathan R. Hix of Mill Neck, L.I., graduated from Skidmore College.
She is an international operations coordinator at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.


Singapore Releases Lawyer
LEAD: Teo Soh Lung, a lawyer who has been jailed for more than two years without trial since she was accused of taking part in a ''Marxist conspiracy'' to subvert Singapore, was released on Friday, but with limitations on her civic rights.
The case of Miss Teo and 22 others arrested in 1987 has prompted much international criticism of Singapore's policy on human rights and its limitations on political expression.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have a well with an expansion tank for the water.
Does this tank require maintenance, and can you give me some idea of how it works?


HOMELESS MAN SLAIN IN DISPUTE OVER A SODA
LEAD: A homeless man was fatally stabbed by another homeless man late Friday night at La Guardia Airport after the two argued over a can of cherry soda, the police said.


Florio's School Plan Angers Bergen
LEAD: Gov.
Jim Florio's proposed law redistributing state school aid to local districts, and slashing $97 million from Bergen County's aid by the mid-1990's, has left Bergen's superintendents incredulous, indignant and gloomy.


Fixing Sliding Patio Doors
LEAD: DURING warm weather, traffic through patio doors increases and doors that stick or are difficult to slide become nuisances.
Fortunately, most problems with sliding patio doors can be fixed relatively easily.


CHINA'S UNTOLD STORY: WHO DIED IN THE CRACKDOWN?
LEAD: A year ago there was no more potent symbol of China's crackdown than the television image of the young man who halted a convoy of tanks near Tiananmen Square.
And today, there is no better example of the uncertainties of what really happened than the confusion about that man's identity and fate.


Images of Infants; Words as Images
LEAD: THE photographer Garry Winogrand's America is not as weird as Robert Frank's and not as nasty as Diane Arbus's.
But it is for sure not the place that gave new meaning to glamour, a word that was first popularized by Sir Walter Scott, of all people.


Britain Says I.R.A. Appears to Be Stepping Up Its Attacks Outside Ulster
LEAD: British Government officials and analysts from both sides of the Irish Sea say the Irish Republican Army appears to be stepping up its attacks on British soldiers outside Northern Ireland.


Preparing Classic Italian Dishes, but With a Twist
LEAD: FOR a number of years, cooks and chefs have been taking some Italian classics as inspiration and giving them a new twist.
Pesto is a good example.


E.P.A. Drops Waste Case in North Carolina
LEAD: In a case watched closely by environmentalists and waste treatment companies, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency has abandoned an earlier effort to revoke North Carolina's authority to regulate hazardous waste.


God, Humanity and the Holocaust
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hispanic Playwright Follows 'the Dream'
LEAD: WHILE driving in Huntington one day last year, Eduardo Ivan Lopez took a wrong turn.
As he looked around, he had a sudden sense of deja vu.


FASHION: On the Street;   Craze of Spring: Dots, Dots, Dots On Everything
LEAD: No, this is not an eye test.
It's merely this spring's instant fashion craze, polka dots.
To be more precise, black and white dots, in various sizes, but mostly large, and in profusion.


BASEBALL: National League;   Giants Rally in 9th and 10th to Beat the Astros
LEAD: Mike Kingery's run-scoring single with two out in the bottom of the 10th inning, his second run-scoring single of the game, rallied the San Francisco Giants to a 5-4 victory today over the Houston Astros.


IN SEARCH OF BRUCE LEE'S GRAVE
LEAD: As an Asian-American born some 12 years before Shanlon Wu, I was surprised to read of his difficulty in finding Asian heroes in America (About Men: ''In Search of Bruce Lee's Grave,'' April 15).
When Mr.
Wu was a boy, Hiram L. Fong, a Chinese-American, and Daniel K. Inouye, a Japanese-American, were representing Hawaii in the United States Senate.


PASTIMES: Camera
LEAD: No doubt the average amateur photographer has heard by now of Robert Mapplethorpe whose photographs have caused a nationwide commotion over the past year.
Mapplethorpe's images sparked attacks on the National Endowment for the Arts and renewed efforts to crack down on ''obscene'' depictions of the human body.


Phoebe Zeeman Is Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Zeeman 3d of Larchmont, N.Y., have announced wedding plans for their daughter, Erica P. Zeeman and Mark T. Fitch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E Fitch of Leonia, N.J.
Miss Zeeman, known as Phoebe, graduated from the New York Restaurant School and is a student at the Fashion Institute of Technology, as is Mr.


SOMETHING IS OFF-KEY IN TIMBALI
LEAD:
THE MUSIC PROGRAMME
By Paul Micou.
240 pp. New York: A Birch Lane Press Book/
Carol Publishing Group. $16.95.


Postings: Developmental Center;   Finding New Use
LEAD: As glimpsed by motorists rushing by on the Hutchison River Parkway, the Bronx Developmental Center is an ''elegant summation of modern technology'' that evokes ''the majesty of a rectilinear dirigible,'' according to the AIA Guide to New York City.
But with a decline in the hospital's population of profoundly retarded patients, the plaudits of architecture critics are not enough to justify its existence.


Electronic Snooping: It's Not Just for Spies
LEAD: So, what you've always longed for is a vehicle tracking system: it sprays a tracking fluid on the road that is virtually invisible to all but the vehicle in pursuit.
Long no more: there's a new store in New York where you can purchase one for $595. (Father's Day, after all, is just around the corner).


Groups Seek Jews' European Roots
LEAD: MEMBERS of the Jewish Genealogical Society of Connecticut are tracing their roots, aided by old records - like a 1913 farm directory - and by new developments in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
Some society members have been searching for decades, but more have only recently felt encouraged to look.


Question Of the Week;   What Should Mets Do About Strawberry?
LEAD: Conventional wisdom states that when you sustain a stock-market loss, you should not average down by buying more of the poorly performing stock.
You sell your losing shares, accept your loss, and move on, without looking back.


Amy Shapiro Becomes Bride of Dr. John Arthur
LEAD: Amy Shapiro, the daughter of Esther W. Shapiro of Denver and Norman Shapiro of Jackson, Wyo., was married yesterday to Dr.
John Arthur, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
James Arthur of Denver.
The Rev.
James A. Hobart, assisted by Karen Schetina, the bride's cousin, performed the interfaith ceremony at the First Unitarian Society of


Laureate in the Land of the Pharoahs
LEAD: The Aly Baba Cafe in downtown Cairo is a cheerless place with yellowing walls and soiled soapbox-sized tables.
By day, couples rendezvous in its dark corners, and at night it is mostly empty.
But the cafe on Tahrir Square has two things to recommend it.


The Seating Game On Metro-North
LEAD: I enjoyed the ''Railroad Seating Primer'' on the Westchester Opinion Page of April 15.


Miss Lee Weds Dr. Young Kim
LEAD: Christina Sunmi Lee, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Yong Sik Lee of Weston, Mass., was married yesterday to Dr.
Young Han Kim, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jong Hyuk of Fairlawn, N.J.
The Rev.
Alan Hape, a Methodist minister, officiated at Memorial Church at Harvard University.


NOTHING BUT CURVE BALLS
LEAD: Nothing has come easy for Fay Vincent.
Not even his ceremonial appearance at the belated opening day at Yankee Stadium.


Sports of The Times;   All Roads Lead to Rome This Month
LEAD: When people heard we were leaving for the World Cup of soccer, they got worried looks on their faces and asked, ''But aren't you scared of the violence?''


Question Of the Week;   What Should Mets Do About Strawberry?
LEAD: The Mets themselves answered your question: they dismissed Davey Johnson. (It's sad, but losing is sadder.)
MICHELLE E. HAMMER
New York


FICTION
LEAD:
THE BISON: A Novel About the Scientist Who Defied Stalin.
By Daniil Granin.
Translated by Antonina W. Bouis. (Doubleday, $24.95.) The ''Bison'' of this fact-based, eulogistic novel is the great Soviet geneticist Nikolai V. Timofeyev-Resovsky, who died in 1981.
Daniil Granin, a Soviet writer who is now a member of the Soviet Parliament, openly admires his subject and assumes that readers are familiar with Timofeyev-Resovsky and numerous other personalities of his country's scientific community.


Parents Learn to Accent the Positive
LEAD: A hush came over the crowded room of parents when the psychologist asked them to remember their best and worst bosses.


SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON: The Gorbachev's Will Get a Close Look at the America Beyond Washington;   San Franciscans to Give a Big Party
LEAD: The T-shirt sellers are out in force, the gossip columnists are wondering why this C.E.O. was invited to meet Mikhail S. Gorbachev and that one wasn't, and the merchants at Fisherman's Wharf are hyperventilating about the boost to a sagging tourist industry.


BRAWLING BRAHMINS
LEAD:
THE MOUNT VERNON STREET WARRENS
A Boston Story, 1860-1910.
By Martin Green.
Illustrated.
270 pp. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons.
$24.95.


Jody Lynn Misher To Wed Next Year
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Misher of Woodmere, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jodi Lynn Misher to Steven Robert Peikin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alan Peikin of Bethesda, Md.
The wedding is planned for next year.


Advocates for Tenants in Mt. Vernon
LEAD: EVERY time it rains, the ceiling in Diane Brown's Mount Vernon apartment leaks.
The boiler in the Cortlandt Street building has been broken since March 31, leaving 50 families living there with no heat or hot water.


Making Foreign Auto Makers the Scapegoats
LEAD: To the Editor:


SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON: The Gorbachevs Will Get a Close Look at the America Beyond Washington;   High Technology and Diary Cows in Minnesota
LEAD: The grass along the freeways is freshly mowed, there are Soviet flags and signs everywhere, and out near suburban Rosemont, on the way to Richard Brand's dairy farm, the Dakota County highway department has painted a fresh yellow stripe down the middle of State Road 3.


Alabama Bound
LEAD: During a recent visit to the Alabama Archives in Montgomery, I felt a heavy hand on my shoulder and turned to find the bearish figure of Clarke Stallworth, who was my first city editor 25 years ago at The Birmingham Post-Herald.
Stallworth, now 64 years old, had been one of my early journalistic heroes for his crusade against the inequities of a tax system that soaked wage-earners so that United States Steel and other out-of-state corporations could pay token taxes on their vast acreage in Alabama.


Jerome Robbins, a Creator From Head to Foot
LEAD: When Jerome Robbins applied for a scholarship at George Balanchine's School of American Ballet in 1935, the man now regarded as one of the 20th century's greatest choreographers was rejected by a secretary and sent away.


THE TONYS VS. THE PULITZERS
LEAD: ''The Piano Lesson'' by August Wilson won this year's Pulitzer Prize for drama and was nominated for the Tony Award as best Broadway play, but if anyone thinks that winning the Pulitzer makes a play a shoo-in for the Tony, think again.
In the 42 years since 1948, the year the American Theater Wing gave the first Tony Award for best play, only 15 works have taken both.


PARSLEY: GOOD ENOUGH TO EAT
LEAD: ''It's like parsley.
If they take it away, no one's going to know the difference.'' - ''The Fabulous Baker Boys''


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Long Island City;   Citicorp Tower as a Harbinger for Jackson Avenue
LEAD: WHILE most eyes in Long Island City, Queens, have been trained on the waterfront as the enormous Hunters Point commercial and residential project goes through municipal review, city planners have also been devising a framework for much greater development along the nearby Jackson Avenue corridor.


How a High Roller Bets on Broadway
LEAD: Rocco Landesman, the 42-year-old president of Jujamcyn Theaters, is walking around his office describing the objects on the wall.


Richard W. Millar Is Dead at 91; Pioneer in the Aerospace Industry
LEAD: Richard W. Millar, a major force in the development of Southern California's aerospace industry and former chairman of the Northrop Corporation, died Friday in a nursing home in Pasadena, Calif.
He was 91 years old.


God, Humanity and the Holocaust
LEAD: To the Editor:


A TOUCH OF SPICE
LEAD: Chicken breasts, short ribs, bacon, a large spanish onion and head of cabbage lay on a worn-wood cutting board, evoking images of a 17th-century kitchen in a Dutch still life.
This particular tableau, however, belongs very much to the present.
It is in the home of Alberta Wright, the owner and chef of Jezebel, a popular Manhattan restaurant that has been a favorite of celebrities, critics and aficionados of Southern cuisine since it opened six years ago.


The Outdoor Play's the Thing
LEAD: Earlier this spring, I received an invitation to the 60th anniversary performance of Merton Floats - Oscar Wilde's ''Salome'' - in the gardens of Merton College.
It gave me quite a twinge.
Over three decades ago, as an American at Oxford, I'd been an avid member - as actor, even as playwright - of the Merton Floats, the amateur theatrical group at the college.


Data Bank/June 3, 1990
LEAD:
$
Index of Leading Indicators
April
March
Feb.
Monthly percent change
-0.2
0.1
-1.0
New Home Sales
April
March
Feb.
Monthly percent change
-1.6
-8.4
-1.1
Employment
May
April
Year Ago
In thousands
118,350
118,116
117,215
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
6,653(5.3)
6,770(5.4)
6,395(5.2)
Factory Orders
April
March
Feb.


YESTERDAY AND TODAY
LEAD: American Dance Festival begins its 56th year (and its 13th summer in Durham, N.C.) on Thursday with the series ''American Masters Plus,'' a salute to the roots of modern dance.
The festival has presented more than 40 foreign dance companies during the last decade, ''to see how American modern dance has taken root abroad,'' according to Charles L.


A Word on Parks And County Policy
LEAD: This is in response to a recent column, ''When Hatred Enters a Park, the Rats Cheer'' (Opinion Page, April 29), which addresses the issue of graffiti at Saxon Woods Park in White Plains.


What the Beauty And the Beasts Have in Common
LEAD: In ''Pretty Woman,'' Julia Roberts shows off legs that begin somewhere above Augusta, Me., and are still going strong beyond Baja California.
In fact, they are 44 inches from hip to toe - the measurements she gives in the movie.
The legs of the four teen-age mutant ninja turtles, in ''Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles,'' are a good deal shorter, stubbier and more rubbery, their feet two-toed.


King of Afghanistan, After 17 Years in Exile, Is on the People's Minds Again
LEAD: For most of the 17 years that Mohammad Zahir Shah has made his home in exile in Italy, the prospects that he would ever return to Afghanistan - much less return as the king he was for 40 years -seemed remote.


When 50 Labels Aren't Enough
LEAD: In a typical month, Koch international, an Austrian-based music and media technology company that is becoming an increasingly active presence in the United States market, floods record shops with more than 100 new releases of compact disks, cassettes and even an occasional LP.
As a distributor of some 50 labels from around the world, Koch regularly supplies collectors with such things as obscure Greek symphonies, Baroque English chamber music written in imitation of birds, or the showy piano music of Leopold


Suzanne Sullivan To Marry in Fall
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Sullivan Jr. of Saddle River, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Suzanne Sullivan to Second Lieut.
Kenneth James Zimmer, U.S.A., the son of Kenneth Joseph Zimmer of Kenmore, N.Y., and Mrs.
Harry Madigan Jr. of Orchard Park, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.


Time Warner Is Closer to a Cable Franchise Pact
LEAD: Negotiators for New York City and Time Warner have narrowed their differences over the renewal of franchises for two Manhattan cable television systems that Time Warner operates, officials on both sides say.


Police Kill Queens Man Paroled for Robbery
LEAD: A Queens man on parole was shot and killed by police yesterday in South Ozone Park after he pointed a gun at four officers who had been chasing him, the police said.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Freehold
$80,000
2-4 Atlanta Court
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 5-year-old condo apartment; den, c/a, w/w carpeting; monthly maintenance $65, taxes $1,541.
Chatham Township
$360,000
64 May Drive
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; deck, laundry room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $4,922.


Cara R. Kennedy to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Randolph M. Kennedy of Upper Saddle River and Sea Isle, N.J., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Cara R. Kennedy and Joseph C. Cuttone, a son of Ann J. Gallo of Mahwah, N.J., and Donato A. Cuttone of Grymes Hill, S.I.
Miss Kennedy attended Vista College.
Mr.
Cuttone is a broker with Cuttone Inc., a New York stock brokerage headed by his father.


Steinbrenner Box Score
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


WHEN LEGAL TITANS CLASH
LEAD: In a letter to the editor (May 20), Laurence H. Tribe wrote that a quotation he ''never uttered'' had been ''incorrectly attributed'' to him in my article ''When Legal Titans Clash'' (April 22).
The disputed quote was a reference by Professor Tribe to a colleague of his at the Harvard Law School, Alan M.


CAMPUS LIFE: UMass;   Using the Stage To Teach Students About Safe Sex
LEAD: A mysterious figure clad in a gray trenchcoat and a black hat slips noiselessly into the yellow beam of a mock street light.


Social Events
LEAD:
Man of the Year


William Elliott Burch, Horse Trainer, 36
LEAD: William Elliott Burch, a race-horse trainer and the son and grandson of members of horse racing's Hall of Fame, died of cancer on Friday.
He was 36 years old and lived in Garden City, L.I.


GRAND CENTRAL BASKS IN A BURST OF MORNING LIGHT
LEAD: A stunning thing happened the other day, which was the removal of the illuminated Kodak sign that had filled the east end of the main concourse of Grand Central Terminal since 1950.
Actually, it was the removal of the huge curtain that had been erected to obscure the dismantling of the sign, which has been taking place gradually over the past couple of months.


Gregory Anrig Jr. Weds Miss Reid
LEAD: Jeanne L. Reid and Gregory R. Anrig Jr. were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Dedham, Mass.
The Rev.
Jane Presler, an Episcopal priest, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


Leslie Hotchkiss Weds in Vermont
LEAD: In the garden of her parents' home in Chester, Vt., Leslie Ellsworth Hotchkiss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Winchester F. Hotchkiss, also of Bernardsville, N.J., was married yesterday to John Ewins Arndt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. S. Arndt of Southport, Conn.
The Rev.
Hal Miller, a Congregational minister, officiated.


J. T. Phillips Wed To Ms. Southgate
LEAD: Martha E. Southgate, a daughter of Joan E. Southgate of Cleveland and the late Robert L. Southgate, was married yesterday to Jeffrey T. Phillips, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Phillips of Gloucester, Mass.
The Rev.
John F. Keane, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Joseph's Chapel in Magnolia,


5 Museums With a Feel for the Road
LEAD: Last year, the Bridgewater Auto Museum in upstate New York closed its doors.
It was housed in a white warehouse, a dim but sincere display of old cars that were parked and left to be looked at for 40 years, along with license plates, hood ornaments and a collection of power lawnmowers.
The more valuable cars were kept behind chicken wire.


Future Tradings
LEAD: Your analogy of futures trading to gambling disregards the essential price discovery and risk-management services provided by our industry to investors.


Hendon Chubb Pingeon Is Married To Kate Coffin Mali in Connecticut
LEAD: Kate Coffin Mali, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Allen Mali of New York and Norfolk, Conn., was married in Norfolk yesterday to Hendon Chubb Pingeon, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Rene A. Pingeon of Mendham, N.J.
The Rev.
Bruce Anderson, a Congregational minister, and the Rev.
Frederick Buechner, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Congregational Church of Christ.


Italy
LEAD: To the Editor: It was a pleasure seeing Villa Lante featured in William Weaver's article (Travel, April 8).
American visitors to the villa will be interested to know that it has longstanding connections with the United States.
Three ladies who married into the Lante della Revere family in the late 19th and early 20th centuries were American.


Ms. Warner to Wed William Simmons
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Mooney of Washington, N.J., have announced August wedding plans for Mrs.
Mooney's daughter, Deidre Lin Warner, and William Richard Simmons, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Simmons of Plandome Manor, L.I.


Civvies for the American Military Economy?
LEAD: As the cold war fades into history, policy makers are beginning work on trimming the military budget.
But how easily can companies that serve the military convert their operations to civilian use?
Seymour Melman, professor emeritus of industrial engineering at Columbia University and chairman of the National Commission for Economic Conversion and Disarmament, and Lawrence Klein, Benjamin Franklin Professor of Economics at the University of Pennsylvania and a Nobel laureate, discussed the economic consequences of smaller military budgets with Joel Kurtzman of The New York Times.


Sun-Worshippers Go Under Wraps to Catch the Rays
LEAD: Noel Coward was among the first to warn us about the noonday sun.
He was followed by scores of dermatologists and cosmeticians.
Today more and more people are taking those warnings seriously and refusing to venture out into the sun unless they are slathered in sun block - or swathed in fabric.
Beach cover-ups have become almost as important as swimsuits for summer at the shore or by the pool.


Ms. Denk to Wed Alan J. Romney
LEAD: Ruth E. Schreyer-Denk of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter, Susanne Romy Thelen Denk, to Alan John Romney, a son of Piedad M. de Cardenas Romney of New York and Dr.
Harry Romney, who lives on the island of Majorca.
A September wedding is planned.


Postings: For 7A Administrators;   12-Week Training
LEAD: The course titles tell the story: ''Housing Abandonment,'' ''Tenant Organizing,'' ''Operation of the Housing Court,'' ''Record Keeping,'' ''Plumbing Systems'' and ''Narcotics Control.''


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


Growing Up in the Richard Rodgers Household
LEAD: LINDA RODGERS EMORY keeps a tiny framed note on the desk of her home here. ''Oh, how I envy you!'' it reads, in the handwriting of her father, Richard Rodgers.


Summit in Washington;   2 Leaders Spend Day in Relaxed Talks at Camp David
LEAD: President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev withdrew to the relative informality of Camp David, Md., today and applied their growing rapport to such problems as regional conflicts, Soviet emigration and anti-Semitism.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
SODA JERK
By Cynthia Rylant.
Illustrated by Peter Catalanotto.
48 pp. New York:
A Richard Jackson Book/Orchard Books. $14.95.
(Ages 12 and up)


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have a well with an expansion tank for the water.
Does this tank require maintenance, and can you give me some idea of how it works?


New Genetic Treatment Given Vote of Confidence
LEAD: In a surprising turn of events, the first proposal to treat children with a severe genetic disease by inserting new genes into their cells has received an enthusiastic vote of confidence.


CRIME
LEAD: Don't move to the suburbs, for crying out loud, if you're working on a serious love affair.
Detective Chief Superintendent Geoffrey Bailey and Crown Prosecutor Helen West, those attractive and mature lovers we met in ''A Question of Guilt,'' come to this conclusion in Frances Fyfield's NOT THAT KIND OF PLACE (Pocket Books, $17.95).


Works in Progress;   Kick Me
LEAD: For the world cup finals, the quadrennial showcase of professional soccer that begins in Italy on Friday, 7,000 press credentials have been issued to reporters and photographers from 80 different countries.
Perhaps four million fans are expected to witness the 24 national teams (including the United States', participating for the first time since 1950) vying for the world title.


Alison Friedricks Wed To Jonathan Alan Step
LEAD: Alison Hope Friedricks, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifford A. Friedricks of Harrison, N.Y., was married last evening to Jonathan Alan Step, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene Step of Indianapolis.
Rabbi Paul R. Siegel performed the ceremony at the Fenway Golf Club in Scarsdale, N.Y.


Orchestra Blends 3,000 Years' Talent
LEAD: SOME 60 musicians, ages 53 to 84, are scheduled to arrive in Mystic today.
The members of the National Senior Symphony are coming from 24 states to rehearse for the orchestra's second annual concert, on Thursday. ''Three thousand years of musical experience will be on the stage,'' said the symphony manager, Mary Anne


Fledgling Cable Networks Are Poised for Flight
LEAD: Television conventions tend to have their own loopy logic - this is, after all, show biz.
The recent National Cable Television Association convention in Atlanta was no exception: The cable system operator in search of fresh programming could sample networks for bingo players, for science-fiction fans, for armchair barristers - not to mention armchair cowboys, to single out just a few of the new channels hoping to sign up customers.


Gifted Children's Programs
LEAD: Our daughter graduated in May from Simmons College in Boston.
She did so with academic honors and distinction in the Department of Management.
She, like many other students, has never done well on standardized tests.
For her, achievement has come through hard work and persistence.
As your article intimates, the evidence is still inconclusive as to whether special curriculums produce exceptional young men and women.


Question Of the Week;   What Should Mets Do About Strawberry?
LEAD: Send him to the Boss's make-believe Yankees. They deserve each other.
OWEN A. MURPHY
Bronx


Robert K. Watson Wed To Ellen M. Harrington
LEAD: Ellen M. Harrington, a daughter of Dr.
Joseph A. Harrington of Andover, Mass., and Ellen Collins Philie of East Sandwich, Mass., was married yesterday to Robert K. Watson, a son of Robert C. Watson Jr. of Hanover, N.H., and the late Ann Killgore Watson.
Jeannette Jones, a justice of the peace, officiated at the Lighthouse Inn in West Dennis,


Botswana, Diamond Power, Is Still Dependent
LEAD: The newest addition to the skyline in this desert capital boasts the hallmarks of a skyscraper in the first world: reflective glass and polished granite.
Nearby, the Mercedes-Benz dealership sells more cars than dealerships in any city in neighboring South Africa.


'I AM ONE WITH THE MAD'
LEAD:
THE LOONY-BIN TRIP
By Kate Millett.
316 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Blueprint for a Better Propeller
LEAD: Engineers at the Lewis Research Center of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in Cleveland have been working for more than a decade on advanced high-speed propeller designs.
One promising prototype now undergoing wind-tunnel tests features two counter-rotating propellers, built by the Hamilton Standard Company, that could operate on aircraft flying at speeds as high as Mach 0.85.


The Nation;   How to Map The Best Places For Rare Species
LEAD: Scientists in Idaho, in a hopeful application of satellite and computer technology, have produced a powerful new tool for helping states and the Federal Government preserve the nation's diversity of plants and animals.


The World;   Voting Isn't Helping in Guatemala
LEAD: MORE often than not, President Vinicio Cerezo packs a pistol under his custom-made suits - a sign, he says, that he will defend his Government with his life.
But for many Guatemalans, the gun is a bitter symbol of the carnage plaguing this country, and of the Government's failure to uproot the military's regimented control.


Headliners;   Underachiever
LEAD: In baseball, a long memory is not always useful.
Neither is a good record.
Davey Johnson, for instance, is now the New York Mets' former manager, after six seasons and a winning percentage of .588, because the last few weeks have been bad.
In the broader view, they were only mediocre - just under .500 for the season - but the club's general manager, Frank Cashen, said the Mets were ''underachieving'' and left little doubt that he blamed Johnson's loose style.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD:
Additional titles of interest:


Long Line To the Cup
LEAD: Americans were among the thousands of soccer fans who waited in line all night hoping to buy a ticket to the World Cup championship game.


Dissidents in China Are Reported Arrested
LEAD: Three of China's most outspoken dissidents were arrested on Thursday morning, shortly before they were to hold a news conference to call on the Government to release political prisoners, a Chinese with access to information in the Public Security Bureau said.


God, Humanity and the Holocaust
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Music;   Love Songs, Sad and Satirical, by Cantori de New York
LEAD: The venerable musicologist Paul Henry Lang remarked recently, perhaps only half in jest, that someone should undertake a study of precisely what it is that choral conductors do with their batonless hands: all those arcane cupping and molding and waggling gestures, which presumably (though not always apparently) speak volumes to choristers.


India Uproots Thousands Living Near Sikh Temple
LEAD: In an effort to create a security zone around the Golden Temple, the holiest shrine of the Sikh religion, New Delhi and the Punjab state government have over the last year razed more than 1,000 houses and small shops, dislocating thousands of people and leaving a swath of destruction.


Fixing Sliding Patio Doors
LEAD: DURING warm weather, traffic through patio doors increases and doors that stick or are difficult to slide become nuisances.
Fortunately, most problems with sliding patio doors can be fixed relatively easily.


Moncrief Slaps Value of College
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Rain Dampens Campers, Not Spirits
LEAD: Ira Bligen, 17 years old, would go only so far.
He did not mind spending a rainy night in the woods with only a cot and wooden roof for comfort, he said, standing in a drizzle with his hands in his parka pockets.
A weekend of camping, even in the rain, was a welcome change from the ''buildings, sidewalks and sewers'' he sees every day in the


2 Charged With Random Killing of Harlem Doctor by Stray Shot
LEAD: Two 20-year-old Harlem men were charged yesterday with the killing of a 60-year-old doctor who died when a stray bullet tore through his kitchen window early Friday and hit him in the chest, the police said.


Today's 3 R's: Reduce, Reuse and Recycle
LEAD: THE time-honored adage of waste not, want not was heeded by many of our grandparents.
Not being wasteful to them was economical and virtuous.


Charles Leads By Shot
LEAD: With a hole-in-one and a six-under-par 64, Chi Chi Rodriguez created most of the excitment today in the second round of the Nynex/Golf Digest Commemorative tournament, but Bob Charles is still the man to catch.


New Jersey Opinion;   8th-Grade Views on Society's Problems
LEAD: As a class project, eighth-grade students at the John Adams Middle School in Edison chose topics from recent newspaper articles and gave their views in the form of letters to the editor.
Their teacher is Linda Cutler, head of the English department.
Here is a sampling of the students' opinions on society's problems and other issues.


Mary C. Rakowski Becomes Bride of Kyle S. Adler
LEAD: Mary C. Rakowski and Kyle S. Adler, both 27 years old and cum laude graduates of Harvard University, were married yesterday at the New Marlborough (Mass.) Meeting House by the Rev.
John W. McKinstry, a Congregational minister.


NO GOOD LIFE GOES UNPUNISHED
LEAD:
FAMILY SINS &amp; OTHER STORIES
By William Trevor.
251 pp. New York:
Viking. $18.95.


Rainy Start for Dragon Races
LEAD: Buddhist monks led the ceremonies this morning to open the 15th annual Hong Kong International Dragon Boat races, renacting the ritual aspects of the event that recall its 2,000-year-old history.


Megan Craven and Lukas Guenthardt Are Wed
LEAD: Megan Ann Craven, the daughter of Carolyn Morgan Palermo of Upper Grandview, N.Y., and the late Robert N. Craven, was married yesterday to Lukas Guenthardt, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rudolf Guenthardt of Basel, Switzerland.
Msgr.
Arthur Campbell performed the ceremony at St.
Ann's Church in Nyack, N


Bensonhurst March Protests Acquittal in a Racial Killing
LEAD: More than 350 demonstrators marched through the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn yesterday afternoon to protest the acquittal on murder charges of a defendant in the racial killing of 16-year-old Yusuf K. Hawkins, the police said.


Beyond Articulation?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lisa Marvin Wed To Stephen Laico
LEAD: Melissa E. Marvin, a daughter of John T. Marvin and Nancy T. Marvin, both of New York, was married yesterday to Stephen A. Laico, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. Laico of New City, N.Y.
The Rev.
Thomas Setzer officiated at St.
Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church in Short Hills, N.J.


BUSH AND BAKER
LEAD: The article on George Bush and Jim Baker mentions a lack of ''passion'' in their governing style (''The Fabulous Bush and Baker Boys,'' by Maureen Dowd and Thomas L. Friedman, May 6).
As far as I'm concerned, this country has concentrated too much on personal passions.
Give me rational thinking any day!


NONFICTION
LEAD:
IN THE LION'S DEN: The Life of Oswald Rufeisen.
By Nechama Tec. (Oxford University, $21.95.) As a Polish Jew in World War II, Oswald Rufeisen was fated for a death camp.
But he concealed his identity and worked as a translator for the German police. ''In the Lion's Den'' carefully recounts the nine months in 1942 that he helped Jews and partisans while ostensibly serving the Germans.


Question Of the Week;   What Should Mets Do About Strawberry?
LEAD: Management and fans have been frustrated with three seasons of minimal production from Strawberry.
For someone who possesses some of the best natural talent in baseball, it seems that his problems revolve around attitude, or lack of it.
Like fashion previews, fans are subjected to the appearance of the New Darryl each year.


Amy Wagner Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Wagner of Scarsdale, N.Y., have anounced that their daughter, Amy G. Wagner, and Corey R. Shanus, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sol H. Shanus of Delray Beach, Fla., will be married later this month.
Miss Wagner, a University of Pennsylvania alumna, teaches French and Spanish at Harrison (N.Y.) High School and is studying for a Ph.D.


What's Doing In;   Lisbon
LEAD: One of the world's great port cities since Roman times, Lisbon is rediscovering its waterfront, and major efforts have begun to revive, expand and spruce up the neglected port area on the banks of the broad, moody Tagus River estuary.
In modern times the stately Praca do Comercio, overlooking the river and framed by 18th-century arcaded government buildings was turned into a glorious parking lot.


Lilla C. Arnaboldi Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Lilla C. Arnaboldi, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo P. Arnaboldi Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to David K. Kelley, a son of Bruce R. Hennessy of New York and Edmund R. T. Kelley of Colebrook, Conn., at the Stanwich Congregational Church in Greenwich.
The Rev.
William Baugh officiated, assisted by Msgr.


Fargis Heads Riding Team
LEAD: Joe Fargis of Southampton, L.I., winner of the $50,000 Devon Grand Prix here Thursday evening, heads the roster selected to ride for the United States equestrian team at the world championships starting in Stockholm July 25.


Miss Pray Is Wed To Arno Fischer
LEAD: Sabrina S. F. Pray, a daughter of Mrs.
F.
Richards Ford 3d and Malcolm S. Pray Jr., was married yesterday to Arno B. Fischer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arno Fischer.
Both families live in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Richard Stearns officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in Greenwich.


Summer Camp For the Whole Family Stanford alumni's Sierra center
LEAD: I never went to summer camp as a kid.
My husband did, once; his most enduring memories are of bad food and bug bites.


God, Humanity and the Holocaust
LEAD: To the Editor:


Some Popular Favorites For Two Anniversaries
LEAD: NEW LONDON is marking the 125th running of the annual Yale-Harvard Regatta this week, while Greenwich celebrates its 350th anniversary with a joint concert by the Greenwich Symphony and Choral Society.


Preparing Classic Italian Dishes, but With a Twist
LEAD: FOR a number of years, cooks and chefs have been taking some Italian classics as inspiration and giving them a new twist.
Pesto is a good example.


Managing;   Less Is Becoming More at A.T.&amp;T.
LEAD: More than 200 people used to spend 12-hour days and lots of weekends producing internal training courses at the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's consumer-products unit.
Now just 112 people are churning out many more courses within a normal workweek. ''They've learned to work in teams, and I've learned to stop making them waste time on progress reports,'' said Jeffrey N.


Claire A. Goodrich Weds Richard Van de Berghe Jr.
LEAD: Claire A. Goodrich, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stewart E. Goodrich of South Windsor, Conn., was married yesterday to Richard L. Van de Berghe Jr., the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Van de Berghe of Fairfield, Conn.
The Rev.
Paul S. Johansson officiated at Emanuel Lutheran Church in Manchester, Conn.


COFFEE, TEA OR A FIBBER MCGEE?
LEAD: From the outset, we Americans have pursued a radical policy of laissez-faire when mixing drinks.
Our Colonial forebears threw everything but the kitchen sink into their punches, flips, shrubs and sangarees.
In the 19th century, celebrity bartenders would tour Europe and astonish the natives by shaking up blue blazers, Connecticut eye-openers, Alabama fog-cutters and lightning smashes.


SOME SUMMER RESOLUTIONS
LEAD: 1. Treat guests to fresh flowers - get to know the local farmers' market.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Outing;   In Kingston, the Waterfront Lives On
LEAD: The Rondout Creek waterfront is a gateway to the Hudson River, just as it was back in the early 1800's, when Kingston was the home port of a thriving barge industry transporting coal, cement and bricks to New York City.
A few old buildings remain as reminders of Kingston's industrial past, but today the waterfront area, at the confluence of the Rondout and the


'Yes - and No - Prime Minister!'
LEAD: For the past three months, Anglophiles have had reason to switch at 9 P.M.
Sundays from ''Masterpiece Theater'' on PBS to C-Span, in order to catch ''Prime Minister's Question Time'' from the House of Commons.


JOHN JAY GRANTS STUDENT AMNESTY
LEAD: After occupying a campus building for nearly a month, a group of students at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice gave up control of the building yesterday when the school's board of trustees granted them amnesty.


CAMPUS LIFE: Ohio State;   Students Moved For Harassing Gay Roommates
LEAD: Ohio State University officials moved 32 male students out of their dormitory here recently in response to complaints of harassment of two gay roommates who lived on the same floor.


PLAYING HOST ON THE ROAD
LEAD: Like innocents abroad, business travelers must navigate their way through a thicket of far-flung restaurants.
When entertaining away from home, they bank on their own dining instincts, a few simple precautions and a little kindness from strangers to help them impress their business clients.
Or at least insure a good meal.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on May 13 about the growth of computer networks misidentified a man using a computer keyboard and his company.
He was Dr.
Robert W. Root, a scientist for Bellcore.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 3, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.)
The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-
American women and their immigrant mothers.
2
1
WARRIOR'S WOMAN, by Johanna Lindsey.
(Avon, $4.95.) The adventures, romantic and
military, of a woman determined to rescue her
native planet from an evil ruler in the year 2139.


Rabbi Joseph Asher, Synagogue Leader, 69
LEAD: Rabbi Joseph Asher, the former senior rabbi of San Francisco's largest synagogue, Temple Emanu-El, died of cancer last Tuesday.
He was 69 years old.


Meg Smith Becomes Fiancee of George Kimball
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
F.
William Smith of Lexington, Mass., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Marilyn Ann Smith and George Jones Kimball, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Kimball Jr. of New York and Milbrook, N.Y.


Americans in Philippines Fear More Attacks
LEAD: As the Philippines gets ready for a new round of talks on the future of the United States military installations, many Americans living here are bracing themselves for increasing anti-American violence, which in the last year has taken the lives of eight Americans.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
171 AND COUNTING
Thank goodness for the Walt Whitman Birthplace Association; without it, we would probably never remember the poet's birthday.


To Farmers, Saving Rails Means Saving Livelihood


Some Subjects for Summiteers to Ponder On;   Lithuanian Injustices
LEAD: To the Editor:


How to Help Roses Keep Their Splendor
LEAD: JUNE belongs to roses.
The glorious flowers start to appear this month in all their colors: reds, pinks, yellows, creams, pure whites and everything in between.


Questions Nobody Asked
LEAD: So many people had the chance to stand up publicly in Washington and put the questions to President Mikhail Gorbachev, but nobody did.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Upper Second Avenue Festival, Second Avenue will be closed today from 68th to 96th Streets from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.


Nathalie Warriner and William Turecamo Marry
LEAD: Trinity Episcopal Church in Upperville, Va., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Nathalie T. Warriner, a daughter of Reuel E. Warriner Jr. of Laguna Beach, Calif., and Mrs.
William W. Blunt Jr. of Dallas, to William R. Turecamo.
The Rev.
Richard Peard officiated.
Mrs.
Turecamo, 22 years old, is a senior at Boston University.


A Play About Paris
LEAD: ''The Last American in Paris,'' a theater piece in English and French, will be performed through next Sunday at the Performing Arts Center of the State University College at Purchase, N.Y., Exit 28 of the Hutchinson River Parkway.
Performances are at 8 P.M.
Tuesday through Saturday and 7:30 P.M. on Sunday.


Kathy Donohoe to Wed
LEAD: Late-June wedding plans for Mary Kathleen Donohue and Jonathan A.D.
Morriseau, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Robert E. Morriseau of New City, N.Y., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Donohue of Short Hills, N.J.
Miss Donohue, 25 years old and known as Kathy, and her fiance, also 25, graduated from Franklin and Marshall College.


In The Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Elmont
$190,000
58 Landau Avenue
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 37-year- old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,400.
Franklin Square
$210,000
764 Princeton Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, office, finished basement; taxes $4,400.


Hard Line Taken
LEAD: The American League president, Bobby Brown, imposed a three-day suspension on the Baltimore Orioles manager, Frank Robinson, for bumping an umpire.
But if any National League managers or players think their president, Bill White, might be more lenient in such a situation, White wants them to think again.


Rex Harrison, a Leading Man With Urbane Wit, Dies at 82
LEAD: Rex Harrison, the suave British actor who won a Tony in 1957 and an Academy Award in 1964 for his portrayals of Prof.
Henry Higgins in ''My Fair Lady,'' died of pancreatic cancer yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 82 years old.
The actor, who was knighted in July 1989, played a wide variety of roles during his long career in theater and films, but he was best known for his portrayal of the waspish professor of phonetics in the musical based on George Bernard Shaw's play ''Pygmalion.


AND SCOTT TUROW'S NEW MYSTERY
LEAD:
THE BURDEN OF PROOF
By Scott Turow.
515 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.95.


Postings: Rye Brook Executive Park;   Learning Lessons Along the Way
LEAD: In the eight years it has taken so far to build the Royal Executive Park in Rye Brook, N.Y., the market has taught the developers some important and expensive lessons.
As a result, the final phase of the project will be rather different from the first.


The World;   In Isolation, The Burmese Vote, and Then Wait
LEAD: THE person bearing the brunt of explaining the positions and policies of the National League for Democracy - the party that swept Myanmar's first multiparty elections in 30 years last Sunday, humiliating the military authorities - is a gentle 72-year-old named U Kyi Maung.


The World;   45 Years of Change, But the Same Names
LEAD:
1942 - Japanese forces occupy Burma, a British territory.
1944-5 - The ''30 Comrades,'' young Burmese who trained with the Japanese, including U Aung San and Gen.
Ne Win, turn against the Japanese and fight for the allies.
1947 - A democratic constitution is formulated.
U Aung San and six Cabinet colleagues are assassinated.


PASTIMES: Chess
LEAD: The Berkeley, Calif., grandmaster Walter Browne summed up his unimpressive performance in the Dortmund International Tournament in West Germany by remarking, ''I was playing solidly but made blunders at the end.'' His wife, Raquel, added that he had not shaken the bad cold he got in the previous competition, in Rekjavik,


How to Help Roses Keep Their Splendor
LEAD: JUNE belongs to roses.
The glorious flowers start to appear this month in all their colors: reds, pinks, yellows, creams, pure whites and everything in between.


GROWING UP AT BIG BLUE
LEAD:
FATHER SON &amp; CO.
My Life at IBM and Beyond.
By Thomas J. Watson Jr. and Peter Petre.
Illustrated. 468 pp. New York:
Bantam Books. $22.95.


Camera Shy
LEAD: To the Editor: ''The How and Why of Turning Camera Shy'' by Martha Stevenson (Travel, March 11) reminded me of a visit to northern Thailand when my husband and I were approached by a guide for a Japanese couple our age with the request that they wanted to be photographed with us.
I found it amusing to be the object and did not mind accommodating our peers of the


THE DEFICIT: A LOOK AT THE BRIGHT SIDE
LEAD:
THE DEFICIT AND THE PUBLIC INTEREST
The Search for Responsible Budgeting in the 1980s.
By Joseph White and Aaron Wildavsky.
671 pp. Berkeley, Calif.:
University of California Press/
Russell Sage Foundation. $45.


Ranks of 'Reverse Commuters' Expected to Grow
LEAD: To live in New York City and spend one's days working in a suburban office complex in New Jersey is still regarded as an unusual way of life.
But if predictions by transportation analysts come to pass, by the end of the decade reverse commuters may have plenty of company as they cross the Hudson River against the traffic flow.


Let's Face It: Mets Are So-So
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Elderly Pair Arrested in Harlem Crack Case
LEAD: A 73-year-old woman and a 68-year-old man were arrested yesterday after narcotics officers found crack, money and guns in their apartment in Harlem, the police said.


S. M. Rose, 77, Dealer And TV Car Salesman
LEAD: Sam M. Rose, a Bronx car dealer who became well known in the New York area for appearing in his own local television commercials, died yesterday at the St.
Joseph Medical Center in Yonkers after a brief illness.
He was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Red Cross Takes Steps To Protect Liberians
LEAD: The Red Cross today officially began protecting refugees in Liberia, as rebels advanced on the capital for a showdown with Government troops.


Polls in Peru Show a Tight Race Shaping Up
LEAD: Peru's presidential race nears the runoff vote on June 10 with a near-tie in the polls between the two candidates: Mario Vargas Llosa, the novelist, and Alberto Fujimori, an agricultural engineer.


Fishermen Detained In Looting of Eggs Of Endangered Birds
LEAD: Federal agents have detained five fishermen and seized their trawler after dozens of eggs were plundered from the nests of endangered pelicans and sea gulls, wildlife authorities said.


A Politician's Life, From Militant to Mainstream
LEAD: If, a generation ago, old guard Democratic leaders had been told that Bobby Rush, the militant leader of the Black Panther Party here, would rise to a position of power in the Illinois Democratic Party, they would probably have scoffed or shuddered.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Dinner;   A Taste of Sicily, or Maybe Milan
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Here are some Italian restaurants that are open on Sundays.
Bice


Westward Ho, the Sackbuts
LEAD: The early-music-festival scene in America has come to resemble a glacially paced transcontinental tennis match.
In a biennial alternation of events, the West Coast (in even years) initially had difficulty mastering the East Coast's strong serve (in odd).
But the West's return has improved drastically of late, and a booming forehand this summer may even the contest.


The Male Athlete And Sexual Assault
LEAD: Male athletes receive plenty of training on how to unleash their aggression on the playing field.
But they get little on how to keep their aggression under control off the field.
Studies on college campuses indicate that athletes are involved in a disproportionate number of rapes and other sexual assaults.


GIFTS THAT CAN CHANGE THE CLIMATE OF A MUSEUM
LEAD: The art-world news from London, just two Sundays ago, concerned Heinz Berggruen, a 75-year-old art dealer who made his career in Paris between 1948 and 1980.
From 1982 to 1988 he kept an apartment in the Carlyle Hotel in New York.
Since then, he has lived in Geneva.


Americans In Paris: Disparate Images
LEAD: THE cinematic view of the American expatriate in Paris appears bounded by two extremes.
One is the happy-go-lucky fellow who is looking for love that is here to stay (Gene Kelly in ''An American in Paris'').
By contrast, witness the brooding and enigmatic loner who exudes lust (Marlon Brando in ''Last Tango in


Elizabeth Anderson Debs Is Married To Stephen C. Turner


Guerrilla War in Guatemala Heats Up, Fueling Criticism of Civilian Rule
LEAD: The three policemen sped past a Coca-Cola billboard here that advised them to ''have a safe trip.'' Moments later, guerrillas on a nearby hillock fired on the car, sending it tumbling down a 40-foot embankment into a stream.


BASEBALL: American League;   Gladden Ends Slump And Twins Benefit
LEAD: Dan Gladden broke an 0-for-10 slump with a two-out run-scoring double in the eighth inning, lifting the Minnesota Twins to a 2-1 victory over the Chicago White Sox tonight.


Gifted Children's Programs
LEAD: Elizabeth Stone describes well the concerns about gifted education in the 1990's.
One such concern is the limited number of programs.


Drive to Counter Computer Crime Aims at Invaders
LEAD: From Los Angeles to Atlanta, Federal and state law-enforcement agents have begun an intense battle against computer operators who break into government and business data systems.


Waterfront Renewal Turns to Greenpoint
LEAD: A developer who built his reputation in Manhattan high-rise construction is embarking on the first major effort to redevelop the long-neglected East River waterfront in the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn.


World Markets;   The Making of a European Market
LEAD: Rudiger von Rosen, executive vice chairman of the Federation of German Stock Exchanges, has been pushing for the development of a pan-European stock market.
But, at the same time, his continuing interest in protecting his home market shows why this effort is fraught with difficulty.


Chopped Liver in the Playoffs
LEAD: The mentors of the Windy City Bulls and the Auburn Hills Pistons have repaired to their separate rooms in order to cudgel their brains like never before this season.


August Wedding For Miss Murray
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald E. Murray of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Mary Jane Murray and Glenn Michael Creamer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Creamer of Pawtucket, R.I.


WHAT THEY KNEW AND WHEN THEY KNEW IT
LEAD:
THE WARS OF WATERGATE
The Last Crisis of Richard Nixon.
By Stanley I. Kutler.
Illustrated. 733 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Gorbachev's Trip: Today's Schedule
LEAD:
WASHINGTON
(All times Eastern daylight)


THE SMUGGLED MANUSCRIPT: TRANSLATING SAKHAROV'S MEMOIRS
LEAD: It was the oddest contract I had ever signed.
Dated Sept. 13, 1983, on Alfred A. Knopf stationery, its key sentence read:


COOKOUT WITH A WESTERN FLAVOR
LEAD: Life on a Wyoming cattle ranch is not for the weak in body or spirit.
Work-days last 18 hours, and the sheer vastness of the landscape insures a certain isolation.
That's why the Fourth of July is a true holiday for the family of Wayne and Biddy Bonham, who operate a 35,000-acre ranch 20 miles northwest of Cheyenne.


CAMPUS LIFE: Temple;   Three Students To Be Fined In Racial Incident
LEAD: Temple University will fine three students $100 each and place them on disciplinary probation for a year for their involvement in a racial incident on its North Philadelphia campus, officials announced Wednesday.


Amy Perera Is Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence T. Perera of Boston have announced the wedding for their daughter, Alice V. Perera and David P. Lucey, the son of Maureen Lucey of Jupiter, Fla., and Donald Gasiorowski of Holyoke, Mass.
Miss Perera, 27 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford, as did her fiancee, and teaches at the Park elementary school in Brookline, Mass.


STAGING A CONCERT PICNIC
LEAD: From New York's Central Park concerts to the Stern Grove Festival in San Francisco, people who have been too long indoors can savor the combined pleasures of a picnic on the grass and the sound of pure, clear music under an open sky.
Food tastes that much better in fresh air, and picnics give license to languor.


Lisa Battalia Weds Stephen Anthony
LEAD: Lisa A. Battalia, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
O.
William Battalia of Mamaroneck, N.Y., and Westhampton Beach, L.I., was married yesterday to Stephen P. Anthony, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reed Anthony of Concord, Mass.
The Rev.
John Replogle officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of the Immaculate Conception in Westhampton


PASTIMES: Bridge
LEAD: The world's highest bridge game will be played Friday with some high-visibility personalities taking part.
Play, with identical deals and scoring, will be at the top of the Empire State Building in Manhattan, the Eiffel Tower in Paris, and other towers in Berlin, London, Montreal, Moscow, Rotterdam, Seattle, Sidney, Tokyo and


Nina Middleton Marries Lars Toomre
LEAD: Eugenia Matthews Middleton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John G. Middleton of Rumson, N.J., was married yesterday to Lars Toomre, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alar Toomre of West Newton, Mass.
The Rev.
John Luttrell performed the ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal Church in Locust Valley, L.I.


Ms. Hodin Is Engaged To Elliot Cooperstone
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Solomon Hodin of Scranton, Pa., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Barbara Eve Hodin and Elliot Sheldon Cooperstone, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey M. Cooperstone of Montreal.


LOVE AND RUMORS
LEAD:
BEHIND THE WATERFALL
By Chinatsu Nakayama.
Translated by
Geraldine Harcourt.
213 pp. New York:
Atheneum.
$17.95.


A Time to Die
LEAD: When she visits her husband in the nursing home, she apologizes to him.
Ann is a nurse, and her husband was a carpenter, and when they came home from work in the old days, before the accident, she would tell him about the people on machines, the respirators and the feeding tubes.
And he would say, ''If that ever happens to me, I want you to shoot me.


Terrorist or Freedom Fighter? Pretoria Debates Whom to Amnesty
LEAD: Robert McBride, an African National Congress guerrilla, sits on Pretoria's death row for planting a bomb in Durban that killed three whites in June 1986.
Barend Strydom, a member of the neo-Nazi Afrikaner Resistance Movement, is there for shooting to death eight black pedestrians in Pretoria in November 1988.


How to Help Roses Keep Their Splendor
LEAD: JUNE belongs to roses.
The glorious flowers start to appear this month in all their colors: reds, pinks, yellows, creams, pure whites and everything in between.


That Incredible, Shrinking Indy 500
LEAD: The National Football League, which is trying to cut the average length of its games back to three hours, would love to have the problem that the Indianapolis Motor Speedway has.


Question Of the Week;   What Should Mets Do About Strawberry?
LEAD: I think the Mets should trade Darryl Strawberry to the Phillies for Lenny Dykstra and Roger McDowell, or to the Giants for Kevin Mitchell.
GENE SHALIT
West Stockbridge, Mass.


Men's Style;   Conservative Cool
LEAD: You should see his passport picture,'' says henri Marc Kessler of his cohort and business partner, Mark Zeff, and laughs.
Not so many years ago, Zeff used to wear long hair and earrings.
More outrageous still, Kessler says, ''He almost got a tattoo.'' That was then.
This is now.
And these days, Zeff, an interior designer, and Kessler, a nightclub entrepreneur, have made a few revisions in their style.


Cold War Mentality: Alive and Well
LEAD: The cold war is dead and has been buried by George Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev.
But the cold war mentality, and undemocratic policies and practices designed to limit Americans' thoughts and associations that it engendered, live on.
They, too, should be given a funeral.


Recycling Record At Blind Brook
LEAD: The April 22 article ''Sorting the Garbage: How Well Is It Working?'' stated: ''At Lakeland High School there, students . . . started the county's only plastics-recycling program.''


Waves of Emigration Are Washing Over Europe
LEAD: In the new Eastern Europe, millions of citizens of countries newly free of four decades of Communist rule and newly free to travel abroad are swarming out to see, to sell, to smuggle and to emigrate.


Bad Route to Meeting People
LEAD: There are a number of ways to meet nice people, and one of the worst is to have car trouble.
I know, because I've met some particularly nice people that way.


Dr. Tara Sherman Planning to Wed
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
David H. Sherman have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Dr.
Tara Lynn Sherman, and Dr.
Anthony Alan Weiss, a son of Dr.
Elizabeth Weiss of Riverdale, N.Y., and Dr.
Marshall F. Weiss of New York.


Alice Zimmerman Marries David Mott
LEAD: Alice Margaret Zimmerman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Weaver Zimmerman of Summit, N.J., was married yesterday to David Morrell Mott, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Adam Sutherland Mott of Frederick, Md.
The Rev.
Donald Raymond Kehew officiated at St.
Andrew's Roman Catholic Church on Block Island, R.I.


AT HOME WITH ROBERT MOTHERWELL
LEAD: This is my magic mountain,'' said Robert Motherwell, indicating his Greenwich, Conn., sanctuary of the past two decades - a converted carriage house that serves both as residence and studio.
The artist who coined the term New York School for himself and the other Abstract Expressionists that made their mark on the art world 45 years ago now lives 32 miles from the heart of


Mutual Funds
LEAD: The Mortgage and Realty Trust, an investment trust that dealt mainly in commercial real estate mortgages, defaulted on its commercial paper in March.
A month later, it went bankrupt.


A Midsummer Scottish Berry Binge
LEAD: At the Dome restaurant, facing the main square in Blairgowrie, Scotland and just nearby Hodge's solicitor's office, it is possible to eat ice cream topped with Scotland's best raspberries, and to ponder the coincidences - and in this case the culinary rewards - of history.
For in that solicitor's office a hundred years ago, James M.


The Truth About Engineering
LEAD: To the Editor:


Japanese Fare With Views of the Sound
LEAD: WATERFRONT dining is at a premium in Connecticut, reason enough to savor the experience of Sapporo in Stratford.
The Japanese restaurant, which faces Long Island Sound at the mouth of the Housatonic River, is at the very end of Sniffen Lane; Milford Point is directly across the water.


Hilary K. Colgate To Marry in Fall
LEAD: Mrs.
Howard Leach of San Francisco and John Kirtland Colgate Jr. of Mill Neck, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Hilary Kirtland Colgate to Mark Jeffrey McInerney, a son of J. Barrett McInerney of Pittsfield, Mass., and the late Marilyn McInerney.
A November wedding is planned.


Bush and Baker
LEAD: So two old friends get along well, like bawdy jokes, tease each other and enjoy killing fish and birds - so what?
Why are there no hard questions?
Nothing in the article suggests how Bush expects to become ''education'' or ''environment'' President without investing a dime in new Federal revenue.
Or on what grounds it was decided that the loss of lives and property in Panama was justified in order only to capture a drug dealer and former Central Intelligence Agency asset.


For Summer Films, Position Is (Almost) Everything
LEAD: Think of the summer as a giant chess game.
Last Christmas was barely out of the way before Hollywood's seven major studios began planning their moves.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
GREAT OCEAN: An Authorized Biography of the Buddhist Monk Tenzin Gyatso His Holiness the Fourteenth Dalai Lama.
By Roger Hicks and Ngakpa Chogyam. (Penguin, Paper, $8.95.) The story of His Holiness the Dalai Lama of Tibet is almost mythic in its beginning: the 2-year-old child who, in 1936, unerringly picked from a series of paired objects (two rosaries, two walking sticks, two drums) the one that had belonged to his predecessor, the 13th Dalai Lama, and eventually ascended to spiritual and political leadership of Tibet.


Gifted Children's Programs
LEAD: While the new theorists worry about how to structure curriculums for gifted programs and talk about nonsensical mots and plops, they should keep in mind the most significant element of successful programs: lots of bright, curious children challenging one another to new heights of achievement.
Creative, energetic teachers who respond to and further stretch these gifted minds are the other component of successful gifted programs.


Preparing Classic Italian Dishes, but With a Twist
LEAD: FOR a number of years, cooks and chefs have been taking some Italian classics as inspiration and giving them a new twist.
Pesto is a good example.


God, Humanity and the Holocaust
LEAD: To the Editor:


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Menu;   Sushi With a Difference: No Raw Fish
LEAD: When Katsu Toyota was growing up in Japan, the sushi parlor near his home served a dish that he describes today as steamed sushi.


Younger Democrats See Opportunities on Ticket
LEAD: THE state Democratic chairman, John F. Droney Jr., says competition is healthy for any slot on the Democratic ticket, as long as the competition ends at the nominating convention ext month and September primaries are avoided.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
Crystal Gazing


When a Drive Leads to Court
LEAD: The scenario goes something like this: Barreling down the highway in your new touring machine, you and your family and your pet sheepdog, Bosco, could not be happier.
Suddenly, in the middle of the 200th refrain of ''Row, Row, Row Your Boat,'' your good cheer is broken by the wail of a siren.
It's a state trooper, who pulls you off the highway for traveling too fast in a 55-mile-an-hour zone, directs you to follow him 15 miles down a country road, and deposits you in a sweltering, one-room courthouse where you wait all day for a justice of the peace to hear your case.


Sculptor's Horizons Have No Limits
LEAD: DESPITE having had numerous exhibitions of his work in the United States and other countries, and having received fellowships from the Guggenheim Memorial Foundation, the John Hay Whitney Foundation and the National Endowment for the Arts, the sculptor Melvin Edwards just recently had his first exhibition in a New


Changes Entice A Chinese Hurdler
LEAD: His mother, Jiang Yu-min, was the Asian record-holder at 100, 200 and 400 meters.
His father, Li Jing-ming, was the Chinese record-holder in the high jump at the mundane height of 6 feet 3 1/2 inches.
His brother, Bo Feng, was the Chinese 200-meter champion.


Q and A
LEAD:
Baseball Road Trip
Q.
Is there a company that offers trips to different cities to see major league baseball games?
I would like to stay in deluxe hotels in the city center. - Frank Fariello, New York
A.
Sports Tours Inc. (Post Office Box 84, Hatfield, Mass. 01038; 800-722-7701) offers what it calls the Ultimate Baseball Road Trip.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have a well with an expansion tank for the water.
Does this tank require maintenance, and can you give me some idea of how it works?


Rock-a-Bye Baby Boomer
LEAD: A guilty pleasure for which I have recently developed a minor addiction is the much-scorned national phenomenon of ''lite'' music radio, the latest variation of what is also called ''adult contemporary'' or ''easy listening.''


All About/Platinum;   A Thriving Market Guaranteed By Both Vanity and Pollution
LEAD: When the Ford Motor Company announced in December 1988 that it had developed a catalytic converter that would not require platinum, the metal's price plunged.
Platinum producers feared that demand would evaporate.
But Ford's new converter is still in testing, and platinum demand is near an all-time high.


SETTINGS FOR AN ALL-OCCASION MENU
LEAD: Like a little black dress, a menu that adapts to almost any occasion saves both time and worry.
The three plans for an outdoor meal given here not only offer this versatility, but allow doubling or tripling or even substituting ingredients.
All the host needs to do is vary the presentation of the dishes slightly in order to serve them at a casual gathering, as a festive buffet or for a formal dinner.


U.S. Is the Leader in Decentralization
LEAD: We are now entering an era in which our political allies - Germany and Japan - are our most formidable economic adversaries, and we do not know how to manage these changing circumstances yet, least of all in Washington.


Randi L. Simowitz, Graduate Student, Weds Andrew W. Feinberg, Law Clerk
LEAD: Randi Lynn Simowitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Simowitz of Wayne, N.J., was married last evening to Andrew William Feinberg, the son of Dean Lilienstern Feinberg Stein of Longmeadow, Mass., and Barry Feinberg of West Haven, Conn.
Rabbi Martin Freedman officiated at Temple Beth Tikvah in Wayne.


BUSINESS DIARY
LEAD:
COMPANIES
Greenwald Shifts His Bets From Chrysler to UAL
Gerald Greenwald would rather bet his career on an employee buyout of UAL Inc. than the prompt retirement of Lee Iacocca.
Last Wednesday, he resigned as the Chrysler Corporation's vice chairman and Mr.
Iacocca's likely successor to become chief-executive-in-waiting for UAL.


SUMMER STOCK
LEAD: Soup's on'' can mean dinner, supper, lunch or - in Japan - breakfast is served.
But with time in short supply for most cooks, soup increasingly is coming from a can, cube or metal packet.
As a passionate proponent of soup, I am only too happy to speed its return to today's entertaining menus.
Especially since soup, followed, say, by a fennel and radicchio salad with lemon dressing, thick crusty baguettes and fresh goat cheese, can make a gala luncheon or even a festive light supper on a hot day.


Fancy, Safe and Sentimental Proms
LEAD: Although sequin-encrusted spandex has replaced taffeta and ponytails are as likely to grace the back of a young man's head as a young woman's, the gala festivities that mark the end of high school differ little from those held decades ago.


PASTIMES: Stamps
LEAD: One thing that separates mere stamps from postal history is the evocativeness of an envelope or postcard.
A stamp may have a handsome design, best admired in mint condition, or a readable cancellation that says something about when and where a stamp was used.


A GOLDEN AGE FOR MOZART TENORS MAY BE DAWNING
LEAD: In 1966, shortly before his 36th birthday, the West German tenor Fritz Wunderlich fell down a flight of stone steps at a hunting lodge and died.
With him, it seemed at the time, died any hope of a revived golden age of Mozart tenorism.
Those left to sing this repertory lacked Wunderlich's honeyed beauty of tone and seemingly effortless musicality.


Jail in California Is a Breakout Artist's Dream
LEAD: Sheriff's Capt.
Benny McLaughlin is having trouble keeping prisoners in his jail, one of the most overcrowded in California, but nobody is blaming the judicial system.


CAMPUS LIFE: Union;   Space Problem: Trying to Fill 80 Empty Beds
LEAD: The dean of students at Union College, Joseph Mammola, thought he had a plan to fill 80 empty dormitory spaces next year.
The college would require all sophomores, in addition to freshmen, to live in college housing.


New Way to Tan: Slow and Healthy
LEAD: Covering up on the beach is a wonderful idea, but it takes more than clothing to do the job completely.
The face and other exposed areas of skin need to be protected in any outdoor activity.
It is always advisable to apply sun screens, which have proliferated in recent years.
Every cosmetic company today offers a range of products.


U.S. Team Defeated By Swiss
LEAD: It was a rude ending to a long season of World Cup preparation, but the lesson learned might prove valuable for the United States soccer team in the weeks ahead.


IF THE PROBLEM IS JIGGLING, THE SOLUTION IS NOW AT HAND
LEAD: When a new VCR is launched, its manufacturer usually feels obliged to say that it represents an improvement.
Such claims are often backed up merely by some added frill that has nothing to do with picture quality.
Not so in the case of Panasonic's new PV-S4990.
This model is one of the first home VCR's to include Time Base Correction, called T


Dinkins Tells Pace Graduates Not to Abandon Urban Roots
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins urged the class of 1990 from Pace University's Manhattan campus yesterday not to forget their urban roots and ''to be part of a great adventure: helping me to forge the destiny of the New York City of tomorrow.''


Three Decades Ago, Another Visitor
LEAD: Much has changed since Nikita S. Khrushchev barnstormed the country three decades ago, meeting American labor leaders in San Francisco, visiting an Iowa corn farm and touring a machine tool plant in Pittsburgh.


Doubts Remain After Lab Loses Nuclear Contract
LEAD: More than a year after the Government alleged fraud at the major laboratory for analyzing radioactive and chemical contamination at the Hanford nuclear weapons plant, the laboratory has lost its contract.


Casino Supporter Wins Mohawk Council Vote
LEAD: A Mohawk Indian who views reservation gambling as an economic boon unseated the tribe's only incumbent chief opposed to gambling in an election today.


Deborah Ellis Is Married
LEAD: Deborah A. Ellis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Homer N. Ellis of Madison, Wis., was married yesterday to Andrew W. Dwyer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Dwyer of Sarasota, Fla.
The Rev.
Fanny Erickson, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at Riverside Church in New York.
Ms.
Ellis, who will keep her name, is the legal director at the American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey, in Newark.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Will Soccer Gain More Popularity In the U.S.?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.


Baseball;   Orioles Wear Out Yankees
LEAD: Even Houdini ran out of tricks.


Broadway's Bounty: Dramas Brimming With Life
LEAD: ''What kind of day has it been?'' That was the question with which William Goldman closed ''The Season,'' his classic journalistic study of one season (1967-68) in the life of the Broadway theater just as it slid into its most precipitous period of decline.
Two decades later no one can say whether that decline has yet halted, but the 1989-90 New York theater season, on and off Broadway, has been one unexpectedly, perhaps inexplicably, bright day.


PAIRING OFF IN BUTTE
LEAD:
BUSTER MIDNIGHT'S CAFE
By Sandra Dallas.
277 pp. New York:
Random House.
$17.95.


Susan Kendrick to Wed B. P. Kaufman
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas B. E. Kendrick of Columbus, Ind., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Susan C. Kendrick and Benjamin P. Kaufman, a son of Mrs.
Robert C. Rosenberg of New York and Harold Kaufman of San Francisco.


In The Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Guilford, Conn.
$750,000
116 Prospect Avenue
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 96-year-old, winterized Victorian cottage; 140-foot waterfront, wide veranda, 0.5 acre; taxes $3,115.
Stamford, Conn.
$527,000
73 Maltbie Avenue
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 54-year-old riverfront colonial; waterfall, heated pool, 1 acre; taxes $5,848.


NERVOUS LAUGHTER
LEAD:
''MASQUERADE'' AND OTHER STORIES
By Robert Walser.
Selected and translated by
Susan Bernofsky.
Foreword by William H. Gass.
202 pp. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Cloth, $35. Paper, $12.95.


BEST SELLERS: June 3, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
4
THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Doubleday,
$24.95.) Doomsday brings horrors to America; the
uncut version of a novel first published in 1978.
2
1
7
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher.


Q and A
LEAD:
Sublet and Lease Renewal
Question: I expect to be out of the country from the last week in September to the first week in January.
I plan to arrange to have someone occupy my rent-stabilized apartment in my absence.
Must I have my landlord's permission even if I do not charge rent?
Also, can I renew my lease early since the renewal will arrive during my absence?


Mister Frisky Starts to Recover
LEAD: Mister Frisky, the beaten favorite in the Kentucky Derby, is beginning to recover from a softball-sized abscess discovered in his throat last week, but is still months away from returning to racing.


The Nation;   In Moscow, Yeltsin Has A Summit To Himself
LEAD: IT truly was the far side of the summit here last week as Boris N. Yeltsin could be found leaning back in the Kremlin and waxing presidential, using some of the cold war bromide language about ''mutual understanding'' to talk of mercy toward his antagonist, who was in Washington. ''I am prepared to go a good part of the distance towards Gorbachev,'' Mr.


Dinner Guests At Camp David
LEAD: Following is the official guest list for a dinner given by President and Mrs.
Bush at Camp David, Md., tonight for President and Mrs.
Gorbachev:
American officials
Vice President Dan Quayle
James A. Baker 3d, Secretary of State
Dick Cheney, Secretary of Defense
Michael J. Boskin, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers
John H.


CHET BAKER'S HORN AND VOICE ECHO WITH PATHOS
LEAD: The attention brought to a recently deceased musician inevitably inspires at least a brief flurry of activity around his or her slot in the record stores.
The new releases have been particularly abundant in the case of the trumpeter and singer Chet Baker, who died at the age of 59 in 1988 and who was one of the most recorded artists in jazz.


The Editorial Notebook;   Purity vs. Politics
LEAD: The novelist E. L. Doctorow was waxing lyrical the other day about literary men in politics like Vaclav Havel, President of Czechoslovakia, and Arpad Goncz, President of Hungary.
Unlike professional politicians, he said, amateurs don't cling to office by twisting the truth.
In fact, Mr.
Doctorow declared, ''I know of no better qualifications for a president anywhere: a total integrity on the one hand, and a precious lack of political experience on the other.


Clemens Wins 9th, Best in the Majors
LEAD: Roger Clemens sparked a first-inning fight with a fastball, then became the first nine-game winner in the major leagues as he struck out a season-high 11 in the Boston Red Sox's 8-2 victory over the Cleveland Indians today.


Indian Army Frees Reporter From Kashmir
LEAD: The Indian Army, which had denied any involvement in the detention of a Kashmiri journalist, released him today after nearly 30 hours.


Ethnic Issues Disrupt Soviet Rights Talk
LEAD: With the Kremlin no longer their common enemy, Soviet human rights specialists slipped into bouts of inter-ethnic feuding at a meeting today, prompting Helsinki Watch officials to take on a new role as peacemaker between angry Armenians and Azerbaijanis.


Reunification With West Spurs Uncertainty in East German Industry
LEAD: Ask Gunter Rhinow what will happen to his company, job and life when the two German economies merge and his answer rings of the uncertainty that grips all levels of East German society.


After a Decade of Drug Accusations, Mayor Barry's Day in Court Arrives
LEAD: For almost a decade Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. contended with unsubstantiated rumors that he used drugs.
On Monday, he and his accusers will finally have their day in court.


Reviews/Music;   Polish Pianist Makes Debut Playing Chopin and Liszt
LEAD: Jerzy Stryjniak, a pianist from Cracow, Poland, made an impressive New York City debut on Saturday afternoon at Weill Recital Hall.
His program was devoted to works by Chopin and Liszt in carefully conceived and sometimes provocative readings.


Gorbachev May Be a Prophet Without Honor at Home
LEAD: The most telling moment of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's appearance at the post-summit press conference today came when the man from Izvestia, the Soviet Government daily, was recognized for a question.


Tonys Are Won by 'Grapes of Wrath' and 'City of Angels'
LEAD: ''City of Angels'' was named best musical of the 1989-90 Broadway season and also wound up with the most awards, six, last night at the annual Tony Awards ceremonies. ''The Grapes of Wrath'' took the prize for best play.


Handball Education Doesn't Come Easy
LEAD: HANDBALL at first glance seems to be a simple game.
The players hit the ball with their gloved hands against the wall or walls until one player fails to return it to the front wall before it bounces twice.


Tutu Tells Wesleyan Its Help Paves the Way for Liberation
LEAD: In a commencement address, Desmond M. Tutu, the Anglican Archbishop of South Africa, praised Wesleyan University today for supporting the black liberation movement in his country and particularly for backing economic sanctions against its white Government.


From the Mighty to the Maybes, 24 Nations Gather
LEAD: This team-by-team analysis was written by Michael Janofsky.
Argentina
CUP HISTORY: Twice champion, in 1978 and 1986, Argentina has participated in the final round 10 of 11 times.
1990: Qualified as the defending champion.
COACH: Carlos Bilardo, since 1983.
OUTLOOK: An old team, beset by injuries in training and the unavailability of many players for training because they were playing in European club leagues, Argentina is relying heavily on the most famous player in the tournament, Diego Maradona, for the same kind of magic that helped the team win the cup in


Grace H. Barbey, 83, Consultant to UNICEF
LEAD: Grace Holmes Barbey, a consultant to the United Nations Children's Fund since its inception in 1947, died of a heart attack on Friday at New York Hospital.
She was 83 years old and lived in Manhattan and in Paradise Valley, Ariz.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The situation in Europe is changing all the time.
And I guess these letters N-A-T-O may stand for Navies, Aircraft, Tanks, Obsolete.''
-Gennadi I. Gerasimov, Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman. [A10:6.]


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Nintendo's Review
LEAD: Nintendo of America has narrowed the review for its $15 million advertising account to the Leo Burnett Company and the San Francisco office of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, advertising executives said Friday.
The incumbent is McCann-Erickson.


Ready (or Not) and Waiting, Italians Hail a Miracle
LEAD: When the Naples soccer team won the Italian national championship three years ago, its fans went predictably wild.
They danced.
They yelled.
They drove around town honking their horns.


Kansas City Journal;   Spreading The Word: Cancer Is Beatable
LEAD: To Richard A. Bloch, life began anew 10 years ago, on a day in May.
He had just been pronounced cured of a lung cancer once diagnosed as terminal.
Since then, he has been celebrating life and has invited millions of other survivors to join the party.


Harry Altshuler, Writer, 77
LEAD: Harry Altshuler, a former New York newspaperman, died of Parkinson's disease on Saturday in a San Antonio nursing home.
He was 77 years old.


China to Deal In Futures
LEAD: China will open what it says is the first futures market in a socialist country this summer, an official newspaper reported today.


Dr. Laura N. Sinai Weds Herbert M. Fellman
LEAD: Dr.
Laura N. Sinai, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Irving H. Sinai of East Brunswick, N.J., was married yesterday at the Martinsville (N.J.) Inn to Herbert M. Fellman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harvey E. Fellman of Woonsocket, R.I.
Rabbi Bennett Miller officiated, assisted by Cantor Lee Coopersmith.


The New Entrepreneurs
LEAD: The increasingly insecure corporate environment has led more executives who have been dismissed from their jobs to strike out on their own instead of looking for another corporate position, a study said last week.
One of five managers dismissed in the first quarter chose to become an entrepreneur, four times the rate five years ago, according to the survey of 600 former executives by Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas Inc., an employment consulting firm.


The Teacher Who Refuses To Give In To Paralysis
LEAD: For 11 years, Susan Schwartz was a vigorous teacher who breathed life into her lessons by pacing across her classroom, pausing to scratch an illustration on the blackboard, raising and softening her voice.
Then, seven years ago, she developed multiple sclerosis.


Liberian Rebels Are Said to Capture a Major Town
LEAD: Liberian rebel forces were reported today to have seized the country's third-largest town, further consolidating their control of the central part of the country.


Rachel Murphy, A Teacher, Weds


Bridge
LEAD: The most prestigious event in the New York calendar, the Reisinger Knockout Team Championship, ended yesterday in a victory for a squad led by David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J.
He and his teammates, Mark Cohen of Glen Ridge, N.J., Bill Pollack of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Bruce Rogoff of Oradell, N.J., and Robb Gordon of Manhattan, won the final by 22 imps.


Ellen S. Ilivicky Is Married to Dr. Ira L. Siegman
LEAD: Ellen Sue Ilivicky, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Ilivicky of Baldwin, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Ira Lowell Siegman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Siegman of Syosset, L.I.
Rabbi A. David Arzt and Cantor Avraham Albrecht officiated at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of June 4:
MONDAY
Alaska Air Group Inc
Cincinnati Bell
Davis Wtr &amp; Waste Inds
Harnischfeger Inds
Smith Corona Corp
Zurn Inds
TUESDAY
Conseco Inc
McDermott Intl
Premier Indl Corp
Witco Corp
WEDNESDAY


In Florio's Old Stumping Grounds
LEAD: Until an intense young New Jersey Assemblyman named Jim Florio won New Jersey's First District Congressional seat in 1974, no Democrat had held it since before the turn of the century.


Lisa J. Renfro, Physician, Is Married in Connecticut
LEAD: Dr.
Lisa J. Renfro, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William C. Renfro of Wethersfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jeremy S. Snow, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jules J. Snow of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Marcia R. Plumb performed the ceremony at the Inn at Mystic in Mystic, Conn.


Power of Weakness
LEAD: Actors have a device called ''playing against the words'' -conveying to the audience the opposite of what the actor is saying.
That is what took place in Sunday's dramatic joint news conference.


Cuomo to Run; Won't Promise A 4-Year Term
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo formally announced today that he would seek a third term, but he refused to commit himself to serving a full four-year term and seemed almost to be encouraging speculation about a possible Presidential bid.


Unifying the Yemens
LEAD: It's another sign of no more cold war: Yemen and Southern Yemen are unifying.
That may not mean much to most Americans, but it must be a relief to geopoliticians in Washington.
Unlike Korea and Vietnam, Southern Yemen was the pro-Communist one.
And that was only part of the confusion: Southern Yemen looked more like East Yemen.


Young and Lightly Regarded, U.S. Squad Might Surprise
LEAD: AT first, it seemed almost incomprehensible that the United States had qualified for the World Cup finals for the first time in 40 years.
Within a country so poor in world-class soccer tradition, a skepticism set in almost immediately, foretelling a future in Italy that the team would be remembered more like the Jamaican Olympic bobsledders of 1988 - who won an A for effort, nothing more - than the United


HONG KONG HONORS BEIJING'S VICTIMS
LEAD: More than 100,000 people, most of them dressed in the mourning colors of white and black, took part today in a march to honor pro-democracy demonstrators who were killed in the army crackdown in Beijing last June 4.


An Inventor of the Microchip, Robert N. Noyce, Dies at 62
LEAD: Robert N. Noyce, an inventor of a computer chip that revolutionized the electronics industry and gave rise to the high-technology era, died yesterday at Seton Medical Center in Austin, Tex., after suffering a heart attack at his home.
He was 62 years old.


Time Speaking With a New Voice
LEAD: While the pundits have been sitting around wondering what effect the Time-Warner merger would have on the integrity of Time magazine, a funny thing has quietly been happening at the magazine itself.


Moscow, With an Eye on Discontent, Puts Off Vote on Economy
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has apparently had second thoughts and decided against holding a national referendum on his Government's unpopular economic-reform plan to raise prices.


Dukakis, Scorned by Public, Endorses Service to It
LEAD: It would seem that the last 20 months in the political life of Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis would provide all the incentive a young person needs to dismiss thoughts of running for office.
He is a man vilified by talk show hosts, cursed by cabbies and shunned by the aspiring leaders of his own party.


Our Schools Can Teach Understanding of Cultural Differences
LEAD: To the Editor:


Keating Sues His Insurers
LEAD: Charles H. Keating Jr. and his law firm have sued a group of insurance companies for legal costs incurred in defending lawsuits related to the failure of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association.


NEVADA MURDERER IS PUT TO DEATH
LEAD: Thomas Baal, who killed a woman in a robbery because she had given him only $20, was executed by lethal injection early today after opposing his parents' legal effort to keep him alive.


Cambodian Factions to Meet Today
LEAD: A new round of talks on Cambodia begins here on Monday, with at least limited success already insured for their Japanese hosts who have stepping gingerly into regional peacemaking for the first time.


Special Baseball Protection
LEAD: A former Little League coach has created a special glove to fit inside a fielders' mitt for baseball and softball.
It is designed to protect the hand from bone bruises and damage to tissue.


Lisa P. Lobaito Weds Paul J. Van Heest Jr.
LEAD: Lisa P. Lobaito, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Lobaito of Grasmere, S.I., was married there yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Sylvester to Paul J. Van Heest Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Van Heest of Little Falls, N.J.
The Rev.
Eugene V. Mangan performed the ceremony.


Expos Rally to Edge Pirates
LEAD: Mike Fitzgerald doubled home the go-ahead run off Stan Belinda, a rookie reliever, in Montreal's three-run ninth inning to carry the Expos to a 4-3 victory over the Pirates today.


In Thatched Roofs of Argentine Poor, an Insect That Saps Health of Millions
LEAD: Ruben Juarez, a Government sanitary agent, stopped at the thatched-roof home of Luisa Chavez, opened two simple cardboard devices hanging on the bedroom walls and found what he feared.


Officer Kills Another At a Party, Police Say
LEAD: An off-duty correction officer attending a party in Brooklyn was killed early yesterday in a shootout with an off-duty New York City police officer who had walked over to complain that the music was too loud, the police said.


Walter C. Reisinger, Brewery Executive, 66
LEAD: Walter C. Reisinger, an executive of the Anheuser-Busch Companies, died of lung cancer on Friday at Jewish Hospital in St.
Louis.
He was 66 years old and lived in St.
Louis, where the brewery is based.


Victories, and Reality
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union said they would work together to avert a famine in Ethiopia and bring an end to the war.
Page A13.


Peru Limits Withdrawals
LEAD: Peru imposed sharp restrictions on withdrawals from savings accounts last week to apparently try to ease speculation in the American dollar.


Miss Heller Weds Dr. N. S. Heftler
LEAD: Jennifer Heller, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin F. Heller of Madison, N.J., was married yesterday evening to Dr.
Noah S. Heftler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold J. Heftler of East Hills, L.I.Chief Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.


For Some, Four Walls Are Not Necessary
LEAD: CONEY ISLAND may seem an unlikely place for a national sports competition.


4 Hurt When Airliner Crashes in Alaska
LEAD: An airliner with four crew members but no passengers aboard slammed into a fog-shrouded hillside and broke up Saturday, injuring all four.


Carol C. Dadakis Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Carol Coleman Dadakis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Constantine S. Dadakis of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Peter Thomas McKeever, the son of Mrs.
Paul B. McKeever of New Canaan, Conn., and the late Mr.
McKeever.
Msgrs.
Thomas P. Guinan and John J. Foley, the uncle of the bridegroom, officiated at the Church of St.


NCNB Wins Texas Bank
LEAD: The NCNB Corporation, which has aggressively expanded to become the biggest banking company in the Southeast, won the bidding contest Friday to buy from Federal regulators most of the operations of the ailing National Bancshares Corporation of Texas.


Israel Answers Soviets, Denies Plans for Settlers
LEAD: Israel reiterated tonight that it has no plans to settle Soviet Jewish immigrants in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   I.B.M. Work for Lintas
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation has awarded Lintas, the advertising agency for its personal computers, an undisclosed amount of business in Europe, the two companies said Friday.
I.B.M. said its relationship with GGK, its European agency, would not be affected by the move.
The new assignment, to be handled out of Lintas' Paris office, could bill $20 million to $30 million, a Lintas executive said.


U.S. and Soviets Will Seek to Prevent Ethiopia Famine
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union said today that they will work together to avert a famine in Ethiopia and announced that the Ethiopian Government has removed a major obstacle to the delivery of relief supplies.


Japanese Panel Urges More Help for Poor Nations
LEAD: For the first time, the Japanese Government has begun to spell out its strategy for directing more of Japan's huge private investments overseas to the developing world and Eastern Europe.


Rafting Adventure Offers a Varied Plot
LEAD: CANOEING, kayaking or rafting on a river of rapids quickly becomes an adventure because one is caught up in so many elements. ''That's the beauty of it,'' said Peter Franzoso, a river guide who never tires of his vocation. ''There's so much going on.''


German Leaders Say Talks Advance Union
LEAD: Leaders of the two Germanys said today that the summit meeting had improved conditions for the unification of their countries and praised Washington's readiness to expand trade with the Soviets.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a front-page Reporter's Notebook article yesterday about the Camp David talks between President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev mistated the year in which President Carter used Camp David as the site of Egyptian-Israeli peace talks.
It was 1978, not 1979.


Off-Field Behavior To Be Examined
LEAD: CONCERNED by documented instances of misconduct by athletes, the National Collegiate Athletic Association has included an examination of the off-field behavior of athletes as part of the reform movement advocated by Dick Schultz, the association's executive director.


Outdoors: Boating With Eye on Safety
LEAD: IF you spend much time on the water, you are likely to notice an increasing number of boats out there with you.
You might also question, and with good reason, how many of those boats are being handled by qualified helmsmen.
In a sport that knows few licensing bounds, safety has become a mounting concern.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   3 Accounts to McCann
LEAD: McCann-Erickson announced Friday that it had won three accounts, including the consolidated facsimile business of A.T.&amp; T. The agency estimated the billings for that account, to be handled by McCann New York, at $15 million to $20 million.
McCann also won the $10 million multinational advertising account of Nordica S.p.A., a ski company based in Milan.


Sydney Ullman, Former Administrative Judge, 79
LEAD: Sydney Ullman, a retired Federal administrative law judge, died Thursday at a nursing home in Montclair, N.J.
He was 79 years old and lived in Bethesda, Md.


One of the Greatest Shows on Earth
LEAD: As if the senses are not overwhelmed by the ordinary treasures of Italy -the silky wines, antiquity all about - now comes one of the premier athletic events on the planet.
Brace yourself.
The World Cup of soccer is a quantum leap from Super Bowls, Final Fours and other American curios, like the oddly named annual denouement of baseball, the World Series.


Results Plus
LEAD:
Golf
Morgan Takes Kemper Title: Gil Morgan, withstanding gusts of wind that helped spoil the chances of the third-round leader, Steve Jones, shot a two-under-par 69 yesterday to win the Kemper Open in Potomac, Md., by one shot over Ian Baker-Finch.
Playing in winds of up to 20 miles an hour, Morgan had six birdies and four bogeys in an erratic round, ending with a 10-under 274.(AP)


INSIDE
LEAD: No Soviet Referendum
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has decided against holding a national referendum on his Government's unpopular economic reform plan to raise prices.
Page A16.
Still Time to Eat
As book publishers grow bigger and deal with larger sums, the hallowed institution of the publishing lunch is resisting change.


Pessimism on Chinese Trade
LEAD: Ever since they sailed their clipper ships to China two centuries ago with cargoes of opium, foreign traders have brimmed with optimism about the potential of the vast China market.
These days, however, on the first anniversary of the bloody suppression of the democracy movement, the flush of optimism is gone, along with much of the business.


Fiscal Woes Have Hurt Cuomo, but How Much?
LEAD: As Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo prepares to campaign for a third term, politicians and strategists from both parties agree that he has been wounded by the state's torturous fiscal problems.


Re-creating a Musical Event of 1927
LEAD: Since 1987, Stephen Rogers Radcliffe and his New York Chamber Ensemble have been presenting some of New York's friskiest programming - and performances, one hastens to add, since intention without follow-through equals mere conceit.


Lone Protester Arrested in Tiananmen Square


L.I. Youth, Suspect In Student's Killing, Is Held in California
LEAD: A 17-year-old Long Island youth was arrested in Los Angeles yesterday and charged with slaying a fellow student two months ago in the victim's home in Herricks, L.I., the Nassau County police said last night.


Major League Draft Causes Disturbance
LEAD: Three hours before he was scheduled to pitch against Georgia in the College World Series, Mike Mussina, a Stanford pitching star, admitted that his mind wasn't as focused as he would have liked.


Abortion Stand Divides G.O.P. in Wisconsin
LEAD: Wisconsin Republicans rejected an anti-abortion party platform plank on Saturday that called for the ''legal protection of all human beings, from conception on.'' But a short time later, the party's annual convention endorsed a resolution opposing abortion as a method of birth control or for the convenience of the pregnant woman.


Expect Fewer Buses and Passengers, Transit Authority Warns
LEAD: Transit Authority officials say New Yorkers are all but certain to face further cuts in city bus service.
The cuts will compound those the Transit Authority has made over the last four years, when shrinking ridership caused the agency to eliminate 10 major bus routes and revise service on virtually all the remaining 198.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
ABB Asea Brown Boveri Ltd., Zurich, an electrical engineering company, appointed Donald H. Rumsfeld, former United States Secretary of Defense, to its board.


Vive la Difference?
LEAD: Former Mayor Dianne Feinstein of San Francisco may win Tuesday's Democratic gubernatorial primary and could even become governor of California, one political buff suggests, because ''she's the only candidate in the race who can dress in red.''


Agassi's Strength Thwarts Courier
LEAD: A man with a makeover, the new and improved version of Andre Agassi continued to cut a colorful swath through the rainswept French Open draw, and today he left his countryman Jim Courier behind following their four-set match in the round of 16.


Troop Cutback Would Limit Spread of AIDS;   For Case Management
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ARNOLD PALMER and other owners of the Bay Hill golf club in Orlando, Fla., are being sued by a Japanese company that had offered to buy the club for $46 million.
The company, WDI Systems Inc., wants its $3 million deposit back, The Associated Press reported.


Key Sections From the Bush-Gorbachev News Conference
LEAD: Following are statements by President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev yesterday at a news conference and excerpts from the question-and-answer session that followed, as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of the Cable News Network.
Mr.
Gorbachev spoke through a translator.


Now, a Tricky Observation
LEAD: The Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman, Gennadi I. Gerasimov, has offered a new meaning for NATO: ''Navies, Aircraft, Tanks, Obsolete.''


Case of Bias, Or Just Clash Of Neighbors?
LEAD: As Rafael Rivera Garcia tells it, the story behind his trial for attempted murder is one with touches of Bernhard H. Goetz and Bensonhurst, of desperate vigilantism and terrifying racial harassment in a predominantly white neighborhood.


Ocean Energy Raises Environment Issues
LEAD: To the Editor:


Galbreath Name Change
LEAD: The third-largest real estate development company in the United States has changed its name to the Galbreath Company from John W. Galbreath &amp; Company.
The company said the change reflected its growing status as a national full-service concern.
The 69-year-old Columbus, Ohio, company has built corporate projects for Mobil and Goldman, Sachs in New York, USX in Pittsburgh, American Electric Power in Columbus and Bank One in Columbus, Indianapolis and Cleveland.


New Warmth in Haiti
LEAD: Haiti's new President, Ertha Pascal-Trouillot, has a compassionate heart.
That's more than can be said for many of her predecessors.


Museums to Open Free In 12th Annual Festival
LEAD: Museums on upper Fifth Avenue will be open free from 6 to 9 P.M. on June 12 for the 12th Museum Mile Festival.
Ten museums from 82d Street to 104th Street will take part in the annual festival, which features outdoor entertainment as well as indoor displays.


Reviews/Music;   A Celebration in the Name of a Long-Dead Queen
LEAD: Last year a group of Queens residents formed the Friends of Queen Catherine, in honor of Catherine of Braganza, the Portuguese princess and English Queen who lived from 1638 to 1705.
The achievements of Catherine, Queen Consort toCharles II, are said to have included the introduction of tea, marmalade and the fork to England, but what interests the Friends about her is that the borough of Queens was named for her.


The Doubts That Linger
LEAD: For months, senior American officials have expressed confidence that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev would give way, if offered enough inducements, and agree to NATO membership for a united Germany, thus settling the most intractable issue facing Moscow and Washington.


Julie Mariash Is Wed To Charles D. Noble
LEAD: Julie Mariash, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond L. Mariash of Pine Brook, N.J., was married yesterday to Charles D. Noble, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Noble of St.
Augustine, Fla.
Judge Robert G. Fogelson of the Montville Township Municipal Court officiated at the Smoke Rise Village Inn in Kinnelon, N


Review/Music;   'Tauromagia,' a Flamenco Portrayal of Bullfighting
LEAD: Manolo Sanlucar's composition ''Tauromagia,'' which had its American premiere at Carnegie Hall on Friday evening, is considered to be a major work by this Spanish flamenco guitarist and composer, who performed it with a group of seven other musicians.


Canadians Meeting on Crisis
LEAD: Prime Minister Brian Mulroney met with Canada's 10 provincial premiers in Ottawa today in a last-ditch attempt to overcome opposition to the Meech Lake constitutional agreement before the June 23 deadline for its ratification.


Ms. Banker and J. L. Schneider Wed
LEAD: Caroline P. Banker, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel I. Banker of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married last evening to Jeffrey Lawrence Schneider, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Schneider of New York.
Rabbi Robert B. Lennick officiated at the Beach Point Club in Mamaroneck.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Monday
Productivity . . . 1st qtr.
Tuesday
New Car Sales . . . May
Wednesday
None
Thursday
Consumer Credit . . . April
Friday
None


Market Place;   Company Grows Beyond Fertilizer
LEAD: ONCE the biggest fertilizer company in the world, the International Minerals and Chemical Corporation has spun off several major components and bought back a substantial piece of its stock in the last five years.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-17
The summit conference ended between Presidents Bush and Gorbachev with warm talk of amity, but with little progress toward resolving their most divisive disputes over Germany and Lithuania.
Page A1


At Yellowstone Park, 1988 Fires Echo in Debate on Rangers' Role
LEAD: The snow is melting rapidly on the mountainsides, the bears have risen from their winter sleep and park rangers are praying for rain.


Frederick Mellinger, 76, Founder Of Frederick's of Hollywood Chain
LEAD: Frederick Mellinger, the founder of the Frederick's of Hollywood lingerie chain, died of pneumonia Saturday.
He was 76.


In Moscow, Long Lines for McMuffins


Japanese-U.S. Relations Undergoing a Redesign
LEAD: Thirty years ago, leftist protesters mobbed the streets of Tokyo to denounce a new security treaty with the United States.
The turmoil toppled the Government and forced President Dwight D. Eisenhower to cancel a trip to Japan.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: EMMA SOAMES has joined WILLIAM SHAWN, GRACE MIRABELLA, ANDRE SCHIFFRIN and ANTHEA DISNEY in the ever-growing group of editors to be dismissed by S. I. NEWHOUSE JR.
Ms.
Soames, who until last week was editor of Tatler, was dismissed during a five-minute meeting with two executives of Conde Nast Ltd., the magazine group's international company.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Over the years, KARL ELLER has given generously to the University of Arizona, his alma mater.
The grateful Tucson school has, in return, named parts of itself in his honor: the Karl Eller Graduate School of Management and the Karl Eller Center for the Study of the Private Market Economy, both in its College of Business and Public


Books of The Times;   Who Killed Director? Was There a Cover-Up?
LEAD:
A Deed of Death
The Story Behind the Unsolved Murder of Hollywood Director William Desmond Taylor
By Robert Giroux
Illustrated. 275 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Business Scene;   Offsetting the Rise Of Labor Costs
LEAD: DESPITE years of concessions from workers, the labor costs of American companies are rising again.
Not since the early 1980's have they gone up so fast.
But the increases do not reflect labor militancy.
The problem this time isn't escalating wages, but the escalating cost of benefits - and they are not easily controlled by labor or management.


California's Proposition for America
LEAD: Tomorrow, the state that gave birth to the tax revolt will decide whether to double its gasoline tax and lift spending limits.
California's initiative vote on $18.5 billion in highway and mass-transit propositions is viewed as a tax referendum with reverberating consequences.


Cari Robinson Wed to David Horowitz
LEAD: Cari S. Robinson, an associate at the law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, and David A. Horowitz, a project manager for the Tishman Construction Corporation, both in New York, were married yesterday in South Salem, N.Y.
Rabbi David Lincoln officiated at Le Chateau restaurant.


California Race Is Becoming Symbolic for Women
LEAD: When the race for the Democratic nomination for governor of California ends on Tuesday, it seems likely that the result will turn, more than anything else, on sex.
The candidate leading in the polls is a woman who has emerged in the minds of female Democrats as a strong symbol of their aspirations for political equality and power.


Book Industry Meets in Land of the Bookmaker
LEAD: ''Sports books'' and ''race books'' are by far the best sellers in this desert gambling mecca.
Gross revenues from those ubiquitous betting parlors, and from the other legal games of chance, add more than $3 billion a year to the local economy.


Recreation Properties To Be Sold
LEAD: Some of the country's best-known golf resorts and developed communities will be put up for sale this week by the Landmark Land Company.


Rating Group Finds Veterans' Hospitals Lagging in Quality
LEAD: A national accrediting group for hospitals has found that quality standards at Federal hospitals for veterans generally lag behind those of other hospitals.


O.A.S. Cautions Mexicans on Election Fraud
LEAD: Responding to allegations by opposition political parties of widespread electoral fraud here, the Organization of American States has warned the Mexican Government ''it must comply exactly with the obligation to guarantee the free and full exercise of political rights.''


Year Later, Chinese Father Grieves and Fears
LEAD: A year after soldiers shot dead his only son, the father's own odyssey through faith, heartbreak, bitterness and disillusionment with the Chinese Communist Party still leaves him confused and fearful.


Gandhi, Shaken by Defeat, Seeks a Comeback
LEAD: Rajiv Gandhi, who won the biggest election victory in Indian history in 1984, only to be decisively rejected by voters five years later, is now fighting his most important political battle: to survive as leader of the opposition and bring back a battered Congress Party.


Currency Fall a Cause Of Nicaragua Strikes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Title Meet Light In 1990's Prospects
LEAD: The national collegiate track and field championships ended here Saturday night, and the USA/Mobil national championships will be run June 14-16 in Norwalk, Calif.
The people who govern the sport in the United States hope these two meets will unveil the young talent that will become the backbone of


Review/Music;   From Nigeria, Sweet Juju With a Bit of the Blues
LEAD: In Nigeria, Dele Abiodun shares the top echelon of juju bands with Sunny Ade and Ebenezer Obey.
His first set on Saturday night at Kilimanjaro lived up to his reputation; he led a 14-piece band in juju that was forceful and amiable, intricate and improvisatory.


Correction
LEAD: The May 29 editorial ''Standing Up for the Arts'' said erroneously that arts groups advising Representative Pat Williams on reauthorizing the National Endowment for the Arts had recommended opening the deliberations of peer review panels to the public.
The proposal is that policy-making panels be opened.


Gorbachevs' Trip: Today's Schedule
LEAD: (All times are Pacific Daylight, which is three hours behind Eastern Daylight)
9:15 A.M. Gorbachevs go to President and Mrs. Reagan's home for coffee.
10:15 A.M. Gorbachevs leave for Stanford University.
11 A.M.
Gorbachevs meet Donald Kennedy, Stanford University president; Mrs.
Kennedy; and Mr.


Kara E. Oberlander Is Married to Roy A. Epstein
LEAD: Kara E. Oberlander, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvyn S. Oberlander of Lawrence, L.I., was married there yesterday at Temple Israel to Roy A. Epstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry M. Epstein of Scotch Plains, N.J.
Rabbi Joel Y. Zion officiated.


Gorbachev Passes Up Stunts But Dazzles the Heartland
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev took a pass on Cher, who offered to fly into Minnesota today after her Chicago concert appearance to meet with the Soviet President.


Lesley Topping, Producer, Weds
LEAD: Lesley E. Topping, a daughter of Seymour and Audrey Topping of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Randolph M. Ostrow, a son of Robert and Eleanor Ostrow of Newfane, Vt.
Rabbi Judith Lewis officiated.


A Field Of Controversy
LEAD: IT is as much a part of the panoply of baseball as spring training, hot dogs and the seventh-inning stretch, and, like those cherished traditions, this one seems destined to endure.


Hundreds March in a Protest at Beijing University
LEAD: Defying a huge display of police force, hundreds of Beijing University students marched around the campus in the pre-dawn hours this morning to mourn the democracy protesters killed precisely one year earlier.


Court Battle By Nintendo
LEAD: Nintendo of America Inc. has sued a South San Francisco, Calif., company to prevent distribution of a product that allows video-game players to change the way Nintendo games are played.


Jane Laura Koty Is Married on L.I.
LEAD: Jane Laura Koty, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Koty of Searingtown, L.I., was married yesterday to David Friedensohn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Oscar Friedensohn of Lake Worth, Fla., and Southampton, L.I.
Rabbi Myron M. Fenster officiated at Temple Beth-El in Great Neck, L.I.


Review/Music;   A Spoleto Premiere: Glass and Ginsberg
LEAD: We may not be living in a time of great music drama, but take heart: we are living in a time of great scenery.
For a demonstration of that truth, one need only experience the premiere production of ''Hydrogen Jukebox'' at this year's Spoleto Festival.
Evidently musical art, which is after all a variety of nature, also abhors a vacuum.


Chinese Are No. 1 In Dragon Boats
LEAD: The men's team from China today reclaimed the Cathay Pacific Cup, symbolic of dragon boat supremacy, in the final race of the 15th annual Hong Kong International Dragon Boat Festival.


Queens Family Finds a Body
LEAD: A family returning to their Queens home after a week discovered a body in their backyard yesterday, the police said.
The unidentified body of a young black man apparently had been there for several days, said Sgt.
Diane Kubler, a police spokeswoman.
He appeared to have been shot, but the body was partly decomposed, so the police could not be sure until an autopsy was performed, she said.


Plan Covers Foreign Bids
LEAD: United States shareholders of foreign stocks would be allowed to benefit from lucrative takeovers of foreign companies under a proposal released last week by the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Amy Rosenblatt Weds in Westport
LEAD: Amy Beth Rosenblatt, a daughter of Mrs.
Frederick U. Wetzler of Westport, Conn., and the late Herbert S. Rosenblatt, was married yesterday to Charles Thurman Rosoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney D. Rosoff of New York.
Rabbi Robert J. Orkand and Cantor Richard B. Silverman officiated at Temple Israel in Westport.


Side by Side at the Summit
LEAD: George Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev put pen to paper over the weekend to draw an end to the cold war.
They pledged deep cuts in nuclear and chemical arms.
And Mr.
Bush offered most-favored-nation trade status for the Soviets - a sign of his willingness to meet Mr.
Gorbachev's urgent economic and political needs.


On Television, at Least, Still Larger Than Life
LEAD: The advance publicity for the reappearance of Mikhail S. Gorbachev in the United States promised a show that had gotten bad reviews out of town.
The star, heading a company that included enough drum beaters and spin artists to staff every television news program in the nation, was hopefully returning to the stage and screen of past triumphs.


Immediate Move by Fed Not Expected
LEAD: Despite mounting evidence that the economy is expanding at an even more sluggish pace than the tepid 1.3 percent rate in the first quarter, many credit market analysts do not expect the Federal Reserve Board to begin efforts to stimulate growth until later in the summer.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.


Friendly Rivals
LEAD: NEW YORK is a dog-eat-dog kind of town and now even dogs can take part in the action.


Azeris Mourn Khomeini
LEAD: Muslims in Soviet Azerbaijan have declared three days of mourning to mark the first anniversary of the death of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the Iranian press agency said today.


Ann Eliasoph Marries
LEAD: Ann Levy Eliasoph, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Levy, was married yesterday to Albert M. Klein, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Reuben Klein.
Cantor Richard Botton officiated at the bride's home in New York.
Mrs.
Klein, a graduate of Vassar College, teaches at Central Synagogue Nursery School in New York.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Workbench, a furniture store chain, to Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, with a budget of $4 million.


South Korean Leader Arrives in U.S.


Orioles and Olson Stop Yanks Again
LEAD: The Yankees have trouble enough scoring against mortal pitchers; why should anyone expect them to score against Gregg Olson?


Villanova Track Coach Will Handle 2 Teams
LEAD: Villanova University, hoping to return to its glory days in men's track and field, has promoted Marty Stern, its women's coach for the last six years, to head both the men's and women's programs.
The announcement will be made Monday in Villanova, Pa.


Troop Cutback Would Limit Spread of AIDS;   Lift Haitian Exclusion
LEAD: To the Editor:


World Cup '90


Metro Matters;   And How About Arms Control In New York?
LEAD: On Friday, when the Presidents of the United States and the Soviet Union signed an arms control agreement in Washington, at least five people were killed by guns in New York City.
The victims included a doctor hit by a stray bullet in his Harlem kitchen.


New Laventhol Chief Sees Room for Growth
LEAD: ''I am very excited,'' Robert N. Levine said Friday after becoming chief executive of Laventhol &amp; Horwath, the nation's seventh-largest accounting firm.


Piston Defense Reigns Supreme
LEAD: Seconds before Bill Laimbeer of the Detroit Pistons stepped to the free-throw line in the closing seconds of the game today, a sign emerged from the Palace crowd that read, ''Maybe Next Year Michael.''


Storms Leave 13 Dead in Midwest; Indiana Twisters Worst Since '74
LEAD: Tornadoes and heavy storms in the Midwest killed at least 13 people over the weekend, littering a wide area with debris and leaving floods behind.


The Mystery of Depardieu: A Gentle Heart in a Boxer's Body
LEAD: The star nearly nobody knows was striding across Federal Plaza in downtown Manhattan, holding the hand of the beautiful woman in the long gray dress.
The cameras were rolling.
She stopped; then he stopped, tossing his long straggly locks.
A look of tenderness crossed his bouncer's mug as he turned and talked to his companion.


Dr. Melissa Scheer Weds
LEAD: Dr.
Melissa R. Scheer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hamilton Scheer of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., was married last evening to Dr.
Michael B. Finkelstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Finkelstein of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Charles Feinberg officiated at the Valeur Mansion in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
Dr.
Scheer, who will keep her name, is a resident in radiology at Montefiore Hospital.


WORDS OF RESPECT
LEAD: President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev concluded their second summit conference today with warm talk of amity, but with little progress toward resolving their most divisive disputes over Germany and Lithuania.


Henry Salko, 65, Dies; A B'nai B'rith Leader
LEAD: Henry Salko, the president of the New York and New England district of B'nai B'rith, died of prostate cancer yesterday at the Stamford (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 65 years old and lived in Stamford.


Review/Television Contact and Comfort In an AIDS Hospice
LEAD: ''I think your time will be soon,'' a counselor says to an AIDS patient. ''I hope so,'' the patient replies.


Troop Cutback Would Limit Spread of AIDS
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lisa A. Sharf Marries Eric Green in Boston
LEAD: Lisa A. Sharf, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic A. Sharf of Chestnut Hill, Mass., and New York, was married in Boston yesterday to Eric A. Green, the son of Craig A. Green of Marshall, Ind., and the late Diane Cox Green.
The Rev.
Katrina R. Finley, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at the Four Seasons Hotel.


Walter Davis Jr., 57, Jazz Pianist Who Played Bud Powell's Be-Bop
LEAD: Walter Davis Jr., a be-bop pianist and composer, died of complications from liver and kidney disease on Saturday afternoon at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 57 years old.


Meetings on Food Will Examine Soviet Shortages
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union will undertake their most ambitious efforts ever this week to deal with one of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's greatest problems - finding more and better food for Soviet consumers.


Masters Mix Chess's Past and Fast Play
LEAD: With historic chess artifacts from around the world for a backdrop, 16 of New York's best chess players crossed lances at the Metropolitan Museum of Art Saturday night and celebrated 14 centuries of the ancient, beguiling game with a barrage of five-minute speed chess.


Review/Theater;   Comedy and Satire Open Experimental Festival
LEAD: A dark comedy by Tom Judson and a timely, defiant satire by Kevin Malony opened the seventh annual Tweed (Theater Works: Emerging Experimental Directions) New Works Festival on Thursday evening.
The works made up the first of five programs in the festival, which runs through Sunday at the Ohio Theater, 66 Wooster


Tuna Industry Working to Save Porpoises
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Vision of Need-Blind Admissions
LEAD: Many private colleges face a dilemma over the high cost of need-blind admissions, the practice of accepting students regardless of ability to pay.
Two colleges are now responding in different ways.
Smith feels driven to cut back on the practice; Barnard vows to continue it.
Their responses dramatize the larger issue of how society ought to subsidize college for able but poor students.


For NBC, 'Party's Over' at Its Affiliates Meeting
LEAD: For the first time in five years, NBC is facing questions about its leadership in the industry at the annual convention of the managers of its affiliated stations.


Pistons Get Edge in Battle of Superstars
LEAD: Boxing and tennis are individual sports while basketball is a team game, but today one couldn't help noticing the premier individuals of the two teams in the Eastern Conference final and how their performances affected the outcome of the seventh game.


Jules L. Wacht, 76, A Scarsdale Lawyer
LEAD: Jules L. Wacht, a lawyer for more than 50 years and a former Scarsdale village official, died of heart failure on Saturday at the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y.
He was 76 years old and lived in Scarsdale.


No-Hitter Mood Strikes The Mariners' Johnson
LEAD: Randy Johnson's nickname is Big Unit.
At 6 feet 10 inches, the Seattle Mariners' left-hander is the tallest pitcher in major league history.
He's also the first player in the Mariners' 14 years in the American League to pitch a no-hitter.


Review/Ballet;   A Guest Star and a Principal Bring Life to a Spectacle
LEAD: Sir Kenneth MacMillan's ''Romeo and Juliet'' is a sumptuous theatrical spectacle.
But because it is weighty and choreographically slow-moving, it can easily turn ponderous.
Two fine artists helped bring it to life when American Ballet Theater presented it on Saturday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MICHAEL JACKSON was admitted to a hospital emergency room in Santa Monica, Calif., last night complaining of ''chest discomfort.'' The 31-year-old entertainer was in stable condition and undergoing tests at St.
John's Hospital and Health Center, a hospital spokeswoman said.


Trevino Is Winner On 5th Playoff Hole
LEAD: Lee Trevino, who at the age of 50 was the youngest player in this tournament, outlasted 67-year-old Mike Fetchick, a native of nearby Yonkers, over five playoff holes to win the Nynex/Golf Digest Commemorative.


If You Show Us Up Then You Go Down
LEAD: TIM DRUMMOND fires a pitch over Mel Hall's head.
Greg Harris plants a pitch in Kevin Elster's back.
Ken Patterson buries a pitch in Jeffrey Leonard's ribs.


N.B.A. Final Series Worth the Wait
LEAD: With 10 seconds remaining in the most important game of his life, Buck Williams felt as if he were staring down the barrel of a rifle.
Tom Chambers had the ball, he was isolated one-on-one against Williams, and he was preparing to make his move toward the basket.


Independence Fervor in Quebec Said to Grow
LEAD: It was a scene to mist the eyes of any Quebec patriot.
Standing in a churchyard behind a fluttering fleur-de-lis flag, 45 tiny drummers and buglers, Les Feux Follets de Berthierville, the Fireflies of Berthierville, played a beloved Quebec folksong, ''Les Gens du Pays,'' that has become the unofficial anthem of the separatist movement.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Norway's KING OLAV V, Europe's longest reigning monarch, lay partially paralyzed yesterday, after a stroke.
But he was conscious and could speak, his doctors said.


Schoolboy Titles on Line
LEAD: The Dodgers moved to the West Coast more than 30 years ago, but that doesn't mean there are no good teams left in Brooklyn.
Three of the four squads vying for the Catholic High Schools Athletic Association and the Public Schools Athletic League city championships today and tomorrow are from that borough.


Ethan Hofman, 40, A Photographer, Dies
LEAD: Ethan Hoffman, a photographer whose work appeared in magazines around the world, died on Friday at University Hospital in Newark, where he was being treated for injuries suffered May 26 while on assignment for Fortune magazine.
He was 40 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Daniel Burrows, 83; Was Dinkins Mentor And Father-in-Law
LEAD: Daniel L. Burrows, a businessman and former Democratic leader in Harlem who became the father-in-law and a political mentor of Mayor David N. Dinkins, died of cancer yesterday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 83 years old and lived in Belmar, N.J.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
International


Insuring That Capsules Aren't Lost to Time
LEAD: Three years ago, residents of the town of Wilkinsburg, Pa., prepared to dig up a time capsule buried in the last century.
But nobody could remember where it was.


Tonys Won by 'Angels' And 'Grapes of Wrath'
LEAD: ''The Grapes of Wrath,'' the Steppenwolf Theater Company's adaptation of the John Steinbeck novel, won the Tony as best play last night. ''City of Angels'' was best musical, and won the most awards, six.
Article, page C13


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Time-Life: A Big Score For Romann
LEAD: FOR most advertising executives, winning a $3 million account to promote a set of books would be cause for moderate excitement.
For Gad Romann, however, it has impelled visions of growth and glory.


Gorbachev, in U.S. Heartland, Dangles Visions of Fortunes in Soviet Trade
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev told America's business and agricultural leaders today that they need not fear investing in the Soviet Union while that country undergoes economic reform.


Tom Chapin to Join Environment Festival
LEAD: ''Festival for the Environment,'' a daylong event with music, dance, food and exhibits, is to be held Sunday from 1 to 6 P.M. on Fulton Street, between Church Street and Broadway; it is sponsored by Trinity Church.


Sports of The Times;   The Best Sports Event in the World
LEAD: EARLY last month, I had the pleasure of escorting my 20-year-old son to the barn area of Churchill Downs.
In rainy darkness before dawn, we watched a jockey make his acquaintance with the thoroughbred he would ride the next afternoon after they sang ''My Old Kentucky Home.''


Father's Vanishing Act Called Common Drama
LEAD: For all the talk about the new American father, those Cosby-like dads who are just as involved in diapers and day care as any mom, the reality in many families is quite the opposite: the disappearing American father, who leaves his children, emotionally and financially.


Elizabeth D. Schrero Weds Jeffrey Cooper
LEAD: Elizabeth D. Schrero, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Elliot M. Schrero of Teaneck, N.J., was married yesterday evening to Jeffrey A. Cooper, the son of Essex County Superior Court Judge Peter B. Cooper of Upper Montclair, N.J., and Gladys B. Cooper of Jamesburg, N.J.
Rabbi Elizabeth Rolle officiated at the The Woman's Club of Englewood, N.J.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Ziff-Davis Jobs
LEAD: The Ziff-Davis Publishing Company, a unit of Ziff Communications, has promoted Eric Hippeau to executive vice president for magazine operations.
The company also promoted J. Scott Briggs to group vice president for PC publications.
Ronni Sonnenberg will replace Mr.
Hippeau as publisher of PC Magazine.


Roseben Is Won By Mr. Nickerson
LEAD: The last time Dancing Spree met Mr.
Nickerson, Dancing Spree won the Carter Handicap at Aqueduct on May 5 as the 7-5 favorite, with Mr.
Nickerson beaten by 12 3/4 lengths at odds of 9-1.
Yesterday, in the $81,600 Roseben Handicap at Belmont Park, Mr.
Nickerson was the 7-10 favorite with Dancing Spree the second choice.


Business Leaders Meeting With Gorbachev in Minneapolis
LEAD: Here is a list of American business executives and trade representatives invited to meet with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today at the Radisson Plaza Hotel in Minneapolis.
The list was provided by the Minnesota Governor's office.
John F. Akers, International Business Machines
Edward Anderson, L'Orbits
Richard Anderson, World Trade Center, Washington
Dwayne Andreas, Archer Daniels Midland
Edwin Artz, Procter &amp; Gamble
H.


Question Box
LEAD:
No N.B.A. Tradition
Q.
With the Detroit Pistons playing the Chicago Bulls in one series and the Portland Trail Blazers playing the Phoenix Suns in the other one, this year's conference finals lacked those traditional National Basketball Association powerhouses: the Los Angeles Lakers, the Boston Celtics and the Philadelphia 76ers.


A Wheel of Misfortune in Mets' Loss
LEAD: When the Mets put an end to the Davey Johnson era last week, one reason given was that there was no longer ''a fire in the belly.''


Massachusetts Democrats Back Veteran as Silber Wins Ballot Spot
LEAD: John R. Silber, the president of Boston University, narrowly captured a place on the Democratic primary ballot for governor this weekend as the state Democratic Party endorsed Francis X. Bellotti, a veteran politician, as its favored candidate.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


True Grit
LEAD: CHANCES are Irene Fine couldn't make a National Football League team as a place-kicker even if the N.F.L. didn't have a rule against women suiting up with the men.
That's O.K.
As a 21-year-old engineering student in Moscow, Fine has better things to do, anyway.


Reviews/Music;   The Kid Creole Beat, Minus Latin Influences
LEAD: Kid Creole and the Coconuts have always been better at syncopation than career timing.
August Darnell's band was treating rock concerts as song-and-dance revues before most pop stars were doing the same.
And before ''world beat'' became a marketing category, he lived up to the Kid Creole name by merging Caribbean and North American dance music.


Cullinan Journal;   At Woodstock on the Veld, Rock Blasts Apartheid
LEAD: Joos Tinderbox and the Squabblers stepped up to the microphones and blasted a plea for amiable anarchy through a wall of amplifiers to some 10,000 young Afrikaners who had trekked to a dusty farm 20 miles northeast of South Africa's seat of Government in Pretoria.
As soon as you lie drooling on your cot,
Ideologies come howling like wolves.


A Day of Racial Harmony at Churches
LEAD: Racial harmony prevailed yesterday in New York, or at least inside its churches.
John Cardinal O'Connor preached against prejudice, the Rev.
Al Sharpton took his followers to a peaceful Mass with the Italian-Americans of Bensonhurst and churchgoers around the city pledged to respect all their neighbors.


Bus With Returning Britons Crashes in France, Killing 11
LEAD: A British double-decker tourist bus taking vacationers home from Spanish beaches flipped over today on a French highway.
Eleven people died and 61 were injured, the police said.


Martha Kramer and Neal Fox Marry
LEAD: Martha Kramer, the director of Ungaro Inc., a New York marketing and public relations company for the French designer Emanuel Ungaro, was married in New York yesterday to Neal J. Fox, the president and chief executive of A. Sulka &amp; Company.
Rabbi Balfour Brickner performed the ceremony at the Plaza.


Budget Crunch
LEAD: THE Southwestern Athletic Conference won't have Prairie View A&amp;M to kick around anymore.


High Cost of Fighting Drugs Strains U.S.-Colombian Ties
LEAD: As the cost of Colombia's war on cocaine trafficking rises, officials here are growing more impatient with the United States.


Miss Adams Wed To K. M. Sheers
LEAD: The marriage of Eleanor Sinclair Adams to Kenneth Michael Sheers took place yesterday at Morven Park in Leesburg, Va.
The Rev.
Jack Woodard, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Reeve R. Brenner officiated.


Dallas Bank Chairman Quits
LEAD: Charles Pistor has resigned as chairman of a small Dallas bank, a post he took after leaving the huge First Republicbank Corporation shortly before it failed.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Sandoz Pharmaceuticals, for the drug Miacalcin, and Forest Laboratories, for Micturin, to M.E.D.
Communications.


Shamir Rebuffs Gorbachev on Emigres
LEAD: Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir appeared to rebuff President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today by saying Israel will not dictate to Jewish immigrants from the Soviet Union where they can live.


State Must Offer Remedy on Unlawful Taxes, Court Rules
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that after a state tax has been found unconstitutional, the state must give ''meaningful relief'' to those whose taxes it has already collected.


Supreme Court Roundup;   Justices Say the Police Can Use Deceit to Gain Confessions From Prisoners
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that a law-enforcement officer can pose as a prison inmate and elicit a confession from an actual inmate even though the officer gives no Miranda warning about the inmate's constitutional rights.


A Haze of Debt Clouds The Plaza Hotel's Gleam
LEAD: Donald J. Trump is fond of calling the Plaza Hotel, which he bought two years ago, ''the ultimate trophy in the world.'' But the famed Manhattan luxury hotel has proved to be a costly trophy.


Sales Director Named
LEAD: Gerald D. Hotchkiss, the associate publisher of the advertising trade magazine Adweek, is leaving to become advertising sales director for Natural History.
He will replace Philip L. R. Du Val, who is retiring.
Mr.
Hotchkiss will also replace Mr.
Du Val as president and chief executive of Advertising Communications Inc., the company responsible for Natural History's advertising sales.


New Research Group Wary Of U.S. Global Enterprises
LEAD: A new research organization, the Economic Strategy Institute, built on the prestige of Clyde V. Prestowitz Jr., opens in Washington today, dedicated to the proposition that American corporations should not be lured into becoming ''stateless'' global enterprises.


Mastermind of Piltdown Hoax Unmasked?
LEAD: Scholarly sleuths trying to get to the bottom of the Piltdown hoax believe they have at long last got their man, the mastermind in the most famous science fraud of the century.


Another Shuttle Suffers Problems
LEAD: The space shuttle Discovery joined the Columbia today in experiencing problems when an overhead bridge caught a payload bay door and yanked it upward, space agency officials said.


Hewlett-Hughes Computer Venture
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company and the Hughes Aircraft unit of the General Motors Corporation agreed to develop and produce advanced work stations, personal computers and related equipment that meet United States Government, military and aerospace standards.


After the Summit;   U.S. Will Press the Soviets To Accept Plan on Germany
LEAD: Bush Administration officials say they have given the Soviet leadership a nine-point plan designed to induce Moscow to accept the presence of a united Germany in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.


Productivity Down by 2.7%
LEAD: The productivity of American businesses outside the farming sector was revised downward to 2.7 percent in the first quarter, the largest drop in more than eight years, the Labor Department said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Thursday about an attempted Palestinian raid on Israel referred incompletely to the festival of Shabuoth.
It commemorates the handing down of the Torah, not just the Ten Commandments, to Moses.


Beginning Scientists Face a Research Fund Drought
LEAD: DR.
KATHERINE WILSON joined the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine recently with high hopes.
The university had hired her as an assistant professor of cell biology and anatomy and invested $350,000 in her laboratory equipment and salary.


Review/Television;   Grand Old Man of Counterculture
LEAD: The beard is whiter and some of the front teeth look brand new but George Carlin, once of Cardinal Hayes High School in the Bronx, gives no indication of losing his ability to connect with younger audiences.
In his latest Home Box Office solo, his seventh since 1977, the wily comic is as irascible - and largely unprintable - as ever, quite comfortable in his role as grand old man of the counterculture.


A.T.&amp; T. Introduces Server Computer Line
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company yesterday introduced a more powerful line of specialized server computers based on Intel's 80486 microprocessor chip.


LOS ANGELES BOARD IS SAID TO EXERCISE ANTI-HISPANIC BIAS
LEAD: In a ruling that Hispanic political organizations equated with the landmark court decisions that desegregated the South, a Federal judge today declared that the Los Angeles County Supervisors had unconstitutionally gerrymandered their districts to exclude Hispanic people from representation.


Times Mirror
LEAD: The Times Mirror Company priced $100 million in 10-year notes yesterday through competitive bidding won by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
The 8.55 percent notes due in 2000 are priced at 98.866, to yield 8.60 percent, or about 26 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
The underwriters said the noncallable notes had a ''put'' option, which allows note holders to sell back the notes in the third year.


Booksellers Mixed on Fall Outlook
LEAD: The annual convention of the American Booksellers Association is as much a pep rally for publishers as an occasion to show off their wares for the fall.
So it is understandable that many publishers exude optimism despite what others say are troubling times.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amdura Corp., Denver, a hardware distribution company, said it would sell the assets of its Coast to Coast Stores Inc. subsidiary to Servistar, Butler, Pa., a hardware cooperative.
Terms were not disclosed.


Harold Israel, Media Researcher, 60
LEAD: Harold Israel, a media research executive, died of a brain tumor yesterday at his home in Pound Ridge, N.Y.
He was 60 years old.
Mr.
Israel, who designed research programs for newspapers and television companies, was the co-founder and former president of the Scarborough Research Corporation, which compiled data on radio, television, newspaper and magazine audiences.


L.I. 15-Year-Old Was Stabbed to Death by Classmate, Police Say
LEAD: A 15-year-old youth stabbed to death in his parents' home in Herricks in April was killed during an argument with a classmate, Nassau County detectives said today.


Champion Prices 10-Year Offering
LEAD: The continuing strength of prices of Treasury securities has set the stage for corporations to enter the debt market with new issues and dealer syndicates are expecting a wave of new offerings this week.


John Farley, Lawyer, 74
LEAD: John Farley, a patent lawyer in Manhattan for 40 years, died of a cerebral hemorrhage on Saturday at his home in Westfield, N.J.
He was 74 years old.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-21


A New Formula in Hungary: Speed Service and Grow Rich
LEAD: The road to riches in Eastern Europe?
A former Hungarian rock musician, Gabor J. Varszegi, found an answer: hire young people untainted by Communist work experience, pay them four times the going rate and then offer customers a one-hour film-developing service instead of the usual monthlong wait.


Masur, Out of Clinic, Returns to Conducting
LEAD: Kurt Masur, the East German conductor who is to become the music director of the New York Philharmonic in 1992, has returned to conducting after two weeks of observation at a heart clinic in West Germany.


Bush Nudges China on Anniversary of Crackdown
LEAD: Marking the first anniversary of the Chinese Government's killing of protesters at Tiananmen Square, President Bush expressed concern today about China's lack of progress in restoring human rights.


Patterns
LEAD:
Lycra After Dark


U.S. Puerto Ricans Debate Right to Vote on Island's Future
LEAD: In 34 years as a New Yorker, Reinaldo Pacheco has not voted in New York City.
But his apathy turns to indignation at the thought of being prevented from choosing, by ballot, the political future of his native Puerto Rico.


What Kind of Stewards of the Planet Are We?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corn and Soybeans Decline With Good Spring Planting
LEAD: Prices of grain and soybean futures closed mostly lower yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade as the weather forecast continued to be the guiding force of the market.


Expos Strike Back At Cone and His Mets
LEAD: David Cone has experienced some baffling and disappointing outings for the Mets this year.
Categorize last night's effort against the Expos under ''confusing.'' In the first six innings, Cone struck out 11 and the Mets led, 3-1.


Debt-Burdened Zambians Find Life Costly
LEAD: Judith Chileshe was looking forward to outfitting her children for school on a rare shopping pilgrimage to this provincial capital more than 100 miles from her village.
But when she arrived with her $20-a-month salary from a part-time teaching job, she was confronted by New York City prices.


Review/Dance;   In the Steps And Spirit Of Duncan
LEAD: The program that Lori Belilove and Company presented on Friday night at the Good Shepherd-Faith Presbyterian Church in Manhattan honored both the letter and the spirit of the choreography of Isadora Duncan.
The greatest of all modern-dance pioneers, Duncan, who died in 1927, based her technique upon such basic movements as walking, running and skipping.


Big Ten Conference Agrees to Make Penn State No. 11
LEAD: It took 41 years, but the Big Ten Conference has finally expanded.


Marsha von Mueffling Wed
LEAD: Marsha von Mueffling, the daughter of the late Claire Millard and the late Mark Millard, was married yesterday to George Crawford, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
George Crawford.
The Rev.
Peter M. Larsen, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's Dune Church in Southampton, L.I.


Stephen J. Hudacek, Monsignor, 82
LEAD: Msgr.
Stephen J. Hudacek, retired pastor of St.
John Nepomucene Roman Catholic Church on the East Side of Manhattan, died of a heart attack on Saturday at Yonkers General Hospital.
He was 82 years old and had lived at the Hudson View Nursing Home in Yonkers for the last five years.


Arafat To Choose
LEAD: Are Yasir Arafat and the P.L.O. committed to seeking a political destiny for the Palestinians by political means?
Or do they condone terrorist acts by Palestinians?


U.S. Ivory Market Collapses After Import Ban
LEAD: A YEAR after the Federal Government banned the importation of ivory from the African elephant, the commercial ivory market in the United States has collapsed, a study by a conservation group has found.


Familiar Name, Mota, Enters the Spotlight
LEAD: About a month ago, after a particularly dismal performance at the plate, Domingo Mota, the starting center fielder for Cal State-Fullerton, received a late-night call.


Bush and Colombian to Assess the Drug War
LEAD: When President Virgilio Barco Vargas meets with President Bush in Washington on Tuesday, the Colombian leader will bring news of military successes and legal setbacks in the war against cocaine traffickers.


If You Want to Soar
LEAD: FLIGHT simulators, which put you at the controls of a mock airplane, are among the most popular, and obsessive, computer programs.
For a nominal cost, they can give a surprisingly large part of the experience of real flying.


East Meets Somewhat Eastlike West
LEAD: From Day 1 of the 1989-90 National Basketball Association season, Chuck Daly, the Detroit Pistons' coach, said that this year, ''any one of five or six teams had a chance to win it all.''


M.I.T. Is Told Latin Nations Deserve Help
LEAD: In what he described as ''one of the last major speeches'' of his presidency, President Virgilio Barco of Colombia today urged graduates of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, his alma mater, to look beyond East-West relations and support economic development in Latin America.


'Sesame Street' Goes On
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ulster Gunmen in Masks Kill A Catholic Man in His Home
LEAD: Masked gunmen shot and killed a Roman Catholic man and wounded two of his sons early today in what an outlawed Protestant group called a mistaken attack.


McCarron Is Scheduled To Undergo Surgery
LEAD: The jockey Chris McCarron has come back from a broken leg before, but the three-time national riding champion will now have to try to come back after fracturing both legs and his right arm in a scary spill at Hollywood Park on Sunday.


After the Summit;   The Soviets and South Korea: At Odds Since Day 1
LEAD: By meeting yesterday, Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Roh Tae Woo underscored an anachronism of cold-war history.


A Workmanlike Summit
LEAD: If all goes well in Soviet-American relations, the summit just ended may be the last one in which mere gestures of friendliness between the leaders are enough to stir the emotions of the world.
For if the two Presidents fail to bring more imagination to their next couple of meetings, they are likely to find themselves with diminished ability to manage the historic upheaval now taking place.


Adweek Parent Acquisition Set
LEAD: Affiliated Publications Inc., the parent of the company that publishes The Boston Globe, has agreed to acquire 80 percent of the outstanding common stock of A/S/M Communications Inc., which publishes periodicals on the advertising and marketing industry.


Washington Talk;   Split at Top On Tactics For Talks On Budget
LEAD: Richard G. Darman and John H. Sununu, the twin towers of the Bush Administration's domestic and economic policy, are at odds.
Not over substance or personalities, but over tactics.


Wells Fargo &amp; Co., First Interstate Up
LEAD: The stock of Wells Fargo &amp; Company and of First Interstate Bancorp jumped on speculation that Wells may make a takeover proposal for First Interstate.
A spokeswoman for Wells said there had been speculation about a match-up between the two California banks for six months or more, but declined to confirm or deny that Wells was interested in First


It's Cuomo and the Battle-Scarred Veterans
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who defeated the Democratic Party establishment eight years ago to win his first gubernatorial nomination, was chosen by acclamation for a third term today by the party he now dominates.


Circus Circus Sets Opening of Resort
LEAD: Circus Circus Enterprises Inc. said it will open its new 4,032-room medieval theme resort here on June 19.
Excalibur, which is one of the world's largest resorts, cost $290 million.
Circus Circus said it would be profitable from the outset and was expected to account for most of the company's growth in revenues in the current fiscal year.


Reviews/Music;   'Boheme' as 'Bohemians': It Rocks
LEAD: Updated stagings of mainstream operas have their adherents and detractors, but they are no longer shocking or novel.
Now the composer Bob Kirschner and the lyricists Diane Brown and Lizzie Olesker have taken the updating impulse a few steps further in ''The Bohemians,'' a new work inspired by Puccini's ''Boheme.


Dow Up 34.22 Points, to a High of 2,935.19
LEAD: Without looking back, the stock market advanced into uncharted territory yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average pushing well past 2,900.
With an apparent clear horizon for inflation and interest rates, the Dow gained 34.22 points as buying surged in the afternoon.


Nova to Sell Unit
LEAD: The Nova Corporation of Alberta said it would sell its wholly owned valve manufacturing unit, Grove Italia S.p.A., to an investment group headed by Sanpaolo Finance S.p.A., a unit of the Italian bank Instituto Bancario Sanpaolo di Torino, for $114 million.
Nova will acquire a one-third interest in the group for about $9 million.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Chubb Corp., Warren, N.J., an insurance and real estate holding company, appointed Frederick W. Gaertner and Ned I. Gerstman corporate vice presidents.


British Group Near Bankruptcy
LEAD: An administrator called in to rescue the financial services group British and Commonwealth Holdings P.L.C. said he would try to prevent the company from becoming one of Britain's largest corporate failures.
B.&amp; C., a former shipping company that is laboring under $:1.3 billion or $2.2 billion in debt, is the largest British company to go into administration, a type of receivership introduced in Britain in 1986.


A Beirut 'Cease-Fire' Is but a Wary Interlude
LEAD: Elias Atallah, a shopkeeper in the largely Christian mountain resort of Brummana, says he has no intention of sending his son and daughter, aged 13 and 10, back to school ''because I am not sure this truce will last.''


Covenant House to Cut Staff and Close Centers
LEAD: As many as 100 staff members of Covenant House have been told that they will probably lose their jobs because of budget cuts forced by a decline in contributions to the charity for homeless and runaway youths.


Late Burst By Boston Thwarts Yankees
LEAD: The games and the losses have begun to run together, each of them resembling the one before and the one after.
In the end, even the players sound alike.


A Managing Director Named by Chase Bank
LEAD: Joel H. Glasky was named yesterday as a managing director of the Chase Manhattan Bank, where he will head the private placement operation.


No Headline


Campeau Units Report Losses
LEAD: Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation, which have been operating under bankruptcy court protection since January, lost $24.5 million in April, the companies said today.


Guy McElroy, Art Historian, 44; Organized Show on Black Images
LEAD: Guy C. McElroy, an art historian who organized a major current show dealing with the portrayal of black people in American art, died on Thursday evening at George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
The cause of death was a pulmonary embolism, the coroner's office said.
Mr.
McElroy was 44 years old and lived in


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Friday about the Securities and Exchange Commission's approval of a depository for bond information referred incorrectly to Christopher Taylor.
He is executive director of the Municipal Securities Rule-Making Board.
He is not with the commission.


Chip Group Is Left With A Solid Base
LEAD: Industry and Government officials said today that Robert N. Noyce had attracted enough financial resources and managerial and scientific talent to Sematech that the consortium could succeed without him in command.


Bankruptcy Filing by Greyhound
LEAD: Greyhound Lines Inc. said late today that it had sought court protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code in an effort to keep the nation's only coast-to-coast bus system from being whittled apart by creditors.


East German Leader to Meet Bush in Washington Monday
LEAD: President Bush will meet the East German Prime Minister, Lothar de Maiziere, on Monday in the first visit by an East German leader to the White House.


Few Subscribe to Private Trading System
LEAD: A new computerized trading system intended to match buyers and sellers of private securities is off to a slow start.
The system, called Portal, is scheduled to begin on June 15,but large insurance companies and other institutional buyers have been reluctant to subscribe - even though the system is being offered for free.


Shift at Ayer Unit
LEAD: In a bid to shore up its underachieving Los Angeles office, Ayer has named Donna F. Tuttle, a former United States Deputy Secretary of Commerce, as chairwoman and chief executive of the office.
The office -which Thomas F. Maxey, Ayer's vice chairman, said ''is smaller than we want it to be'' - will be renamed Ayer Tuttle, and it will add Ms.


A Fresh Wind in Africa
LEAD: For most of black Africa, the great promise of independence has proved a cruel mirage.
With few exceptions, colonial misrule has yielded to home-grown misrule.
War, drought and repression have fused malignantly, helping to make sub-Saharan Africa the world's poorest region.
From 1980 to 1987 its output grew a meager 0.4 percent, compared with an average annual leap of 8 percent in East Asia.


Playboy Stock Plan Opposed
LEAD: Industrial Equity (Pacific) Ltd., which holds a 7.6 percent stake in Playboy Enterprises Inc., has asked the company's board to alter or withdraw its recently announced recapitalization plan.


Bush Decision Expected on Whether to Delay Offshore Oil Drilling
LEAD: President Bush can be expected to announce in a few weeks his decision on whether to delay any oil drilling off the coasts of Florida and California until more environmental studies can be done, Administration officials said today.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JACK R. MEYER, who oversees how the Rockefeller Foundation manages its $2.1 billion, will become the new president of the Harvard Management Company.
It manages the investment of the university's $5 billion endowment.
He takes over Sept. 1.


917 Area Code Is Proposed For the Bronx
LEAD: The New York Telephone Company asked the state's Public Service Commission yesterday for permission to assign a new area code - 917 - to the Bronx and to all cellular phones and paging devices in the 212 area, which now covers 2.5 million lines in Manhattan and the Bronx.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Greyhound in Bankruptcy
The bus company, battered by a three-month drivers' strike, vowed no interruption of service and said no jobs would be affected.
Page D1.
Trump Confirms Bank Talks
Donald J. Trump is said to face difficulty paying interest on loans that financed his empire.
Prices plunged on bonds backing his casinos.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: After presiding over the Whitney Museum during its most turbulent period, WILLIAM S. WOODSIDE unexpectedly said yesterday that he would step down next week.
In a statement, he said his objectives had been met in the five years he has served as president of the museum of contemporary American art in New


Drug Killings Tied to Mob; 30 Are Seized
LEAD: More than 30 people identified as members or associates of the Bonanno organized-crime family were arrested yesterday and on Sunday and accused of taking part in an operation that specialized in robbing and killing drug traffickers, Federal authorities said.


MANDELA DEPARTS ON A WORLD TRIP
LEAD: Nelson Mandela left today on a wide-ranging tour that will take him to the United States and a dozen other countries over the next six weeks.


Windows 3.0 Software
LEAD: WINDOWS 3.0 is already being hailed by some analysts as the product of the year in the personal computer industry, quite an accomplishment for what is essentially an updated version of a software package that was first announced in 1983.


Man Is Killed During Robbery
LEAD: A 76-year-old Scarsdale, N.Y., man was robbed and killed yesterday as he was making a deposit at a bank machine in Washington Heights, the police said.
The man, Banard Watkins, of 356 Mamaroneck Road, was in the vestibule of a Chemical Bank branch at 164th Street and Broadway about 2:15 P.M. when two men demanded his money and took $900 from him, said Officer Fred Weiner, a police spokesman.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
CYCLING
Italians Maintain Leads


People
LEAD: *
Bonnie Barest, director of media; Sharon Chortek, director of broadcast production, and Chas Conklin and Barry Silverstein, management supervisors, have been promoted to senior vice presidents of the Bloom Companies.


Rare White Rhino Avoids Extinction in Preserve in Zaire
LEAD: A VIGOROUS anti-poaching effort in this nearly impenetrable corner of Zaire has pulled a rare subspecies of white rhinoceros back from the brink of extinction.


After the Summit;   In Europe, Few Are Cheering But Satisfaction Is General
LEAD: Political leaders and commentators in Western Europe said today that they were generally satisfied with the Soviet-American summit conference, but there was little outright cheering and even some harrumphing that the results were for the most part predictable.


Brady's Remarks on Rates Send Dollar Down at Close
LEAD: After a mixed performance overseas, the dollar declined yesterday in domestic trading against most currencies except the British pound and Japanese yen.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Four years ago, IRENE FINE, a young engineering student in Moscow who suffered from ulcerative colitis became virtually housebound because of a lack of medical appliances that would allow her to lead a normal life after surgery.
Then she learned of an American company that manufactures pouches for patients who have had an ileostomy, the creation of an opening to the small intestine.


On Horse Racing;   '90 Belmont Notables: Unbridled, Lasix, and Auto
LEAD: There have probably been Belmont Stakes surrounded by even less interest than Saturday's 122d edition: Back in 1882, a 1-5 shot beat two rivals, and in 1888, a 3-10 favorite won a match race by 12 lengths.


Lawyers Are Divided On Patent Judge's Attack
LEAD: A recent blistering court opinion by one of the nation's top jurists in patent law, irked over what he considered an unwarranted appeal of a lower court's decision, is causing a stir among lawyers.
Some say it is about time that frivolous lawsuits were curbed; others contend that an attorney must pursue all legal avenues in representing a client.


Martinez Strikes Out 18 As Dodgers Defeat Braves
LEAD: Ramon Martinez tied Sandy Koufax's club record with 18 strikeouts to take the major league lead and pitched a three-hitter as the Los Angeles Dodgers beat the Atlanta Braves, 6-0, tonight.


NBC to Increase Jane Pauley's Duties
LEAD: NBC News announced today that starting this evening its ''Nightly News With Tom Brokaw'' would begin a revised format to move the anchor Tom Brokaw outside the New York City studio to the scene of events and increase the presence of Jane Pauley as the anchor in New York.


Chess
LEAD: Nothing does more damage to a combination than an unexpected interpolation.


Teen-Ager Testifies Plot to Murder Her Mother Was Merely Fantasy
LEAD: Karin Aparo, who prosecutors say persuaded her teen-age lover to murder her mother and then betrayed him to the police, testified today that the plot had been a dark fantasy that she had never intended to go beyond her diaries and letters.


The Dewey Thruway Isn't Being Renamed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rig Count Falls in Week
LEAD: The number of working oil and natural gas rigs in the United States fell by 18 last week, to 983, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
A year ago, the Houston-based company's count stood at 784.


Braves Select Jones, a Shortstop, With the First Pick of the Draft
LEAD: The Atlanta Braves yesterday selected Chipper Jones, a high school shortstop from the Bolles School in Jacksonville, Fla., as the top choice in baseball's 1990 free-agent draft.


Lingerie Is Visible; So Are Its Designers
LEAD: The tulip print in zingy colors that Arnold Scaasi used in his couture ball gowns is surfacing in robes and sleep shirts for fall.
Valentino's black and white geometrics, derived from Josef Hoffmann's Wiener Werkstatte, are decorating nightgowns.


Worm Study Yields Clues to Nerve Cell Death
LEAD: SCIENTISTS studying roundworms have identified rare mutations in two genes that cause certain mature, functioning nerve cells in the animal to die, and a third gene that seems to be vital to the process.
The finding may yield clues to devastating neurological disorders like Huntington's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Alzheimer's disease.


Roger A. Moore, 58, Republican Counsel
LEAD: Roger Allan Moore, a lawyer who served as general counsel to the Republican National Committee from 1981 until last year, died of cancer of the esophagus yesterday at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston.
He was 58 years old and lived in Boston.


What Kind of Stewards of the Planet Are We?;   Power of Extremists
LEAD: To the Editor:


Baroque Series by Chamber Symphony
LEAD: A program of Bach cantatas conducted by Erich Leinsdorf, an appearance by the mezzo-soprano Marilyn Horne and a four-concert Baroque series are among the highlights of the 1990-91 season of the New York Chamber Symphony at the 92d Street Y.


Lasorda Gets New Pact
LEAD: Tommy Lasorda has received a two-year extension on his contract, a deal that should keep him in Dodger blue through 1992.
In giving Lasorda the extension following a meeting on Sunday, Peter O'Malley, the Dodger president, insisted he was not influenced by rumors that Lasorda would be offered the manager's job with the Mets.(


Failure of AIDS Drug Taints ICN
LEAD: Milan Panic, the enthusiastic chairman of ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc., takes any opportunity to retell how he arrived in America from Yugoslavia in 1956 with his family, a university degree and little else, and founded what is today a multimillion-dollar drug company.


Life After Acid Rain
LEAD: Two Canadian scientists have found that populations of lake trout ecimated by acid rain will rebound once nearby emissions of sulfur dioxide are reduced.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief appraisal of the Argentine World Cup soccer team in SportsMonday this week misidentified the Italian club team for which Maradona plays.
It is Napoli.


Donald L. Mulford, Publisher, 72
LEAD: Donald L. Mulford, former publisher of The Montclair (N.J.) Times and a past president of the New Jersey Press Association, died on Sunday at his home in Montclair.
He was 72 years old.


M.T.A. Gets $176 Million to Improve Tracks
LEAD: The Federal Government has given the Metropolitan Transportation Authority $176.5 million to rebuild tracks and modernize power and signal systems in Brooklyn, Queens, Manhattan and Westchester County.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Insect Senses
Q. Do insects see color, smell and hear?
A.
T.
A.
Green, an entomologist at the University of Massachusetts in Amherst, who also runs a company called Pest Management Control Inc., said that insects definitely see color, smell and sometimes hear, but not the way people do.


Santiago Journal;   Allende's Widow Meditates Anew on a Day in '73
LEAD: After wandering the world for 16 years on behalf of her fallen husband, Hortensia Bussi de Allende has come home to gather in the pieces of a life rent asunder by a violent military coup and join fellow Chileans in examining that era.


CUNY and School Chancellors to Confer on Goals
LEAD: Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds, the Chancellor-designate of the City University of New York, said yesterday that she was concerned over the large number of students who were unprepared for college and who drop out before they get their degrees.


Martinez Strikes Out 18


Citicorp Unit to Revamp Municipal Bond Operations
LEAD: Citing heavy competition, Citicorp Securities Markets Inc., the broker-dealer subsidiary of Citicorp, said yesterday that it was reorganizing its activities in the municipal bond business by dropping out of traditional areas like underwriting and trading and concentrating instead on providing derivative products like interest rate swaps to customers.


Higher Incomes, U.N. Finds, Do Not Assure a Better Life
LEAD: Challenging traditional ways by which the world has measured the growth of nations, a new report issued by the United Nations Development Program concludes that there is no automatic link between a country's per capita income and the well-being and progress of its people.


U.S. Securities Rise in Light Day
LEAD: The rally in the credit markets continued yesterday, as prices of Treasury securities rose in light trading.


UAL Seeks Routes
LEAD: The UAL Corporation's United Airlines subsidiary asked the United States Department of Transportation for authority to offer nonstop daily flights from its Chicago and Washington hubs to Moscow and Berlin.
The proposed service to Moscow would begin in April 1992, when current flight frequency restrictions are eased under a new bilateral agreement, United said.


2 Hotly Contested Provisions Jeopardize Crime Bill
LEAD: The divisive issues of the death penalty and gun control have put in doubt the fate of the crime bill that is before the Senate, Congressional officials and lobbyists say.


Tony Winner's Journey From Rock Bottom to Top
LEAD: Eight times a week, Michael Jeter of ''Grand Hotel'' stops the show at the Martin Beck Theater.
Sunday night, he stopped a very different show at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater.
In fact, he stopped it twice.
That show was the Tony Awards, and the first time the 37-year-old Mr.
Jeter brought it to a halt was with his wild Charleston number from ''Grand Hotel.


Confidence Index Slips
LEAD: Consumers were slightly less confident about the economy in May than in the previous month, according to a monthly survey released yesterday by the Conference Board.


LIBERIAN WARFARE HAS ROOTS IN 1985
LEAD: When historians assess the rule of Gen.
Samuel K. Doe, they may decide that the most serious crisis of his reign originated in 1985, at the height of his power, when his troops crushed a coup attempt.





Midwest Cleans Up After Deadly Tornadoes


Gallery Window Painting Is Covered After Protests
LEAD: As a result of public protests, a painting on the window of an art gallery in Richmond, has been covered over at the request of the local district attorney.


Shelter Syndrome Theory Has Dangerous Flaw
LEAD: To the Editor:


Court Seeks N.F.L. Limits
LEAD: The Supreme Court today asked the Bush administration to offer its opinions about key limitations on free agency in the National Football League.


No Church, No Ministry, No Pulpit, He Is Called Religious Right's Star
LEAD: James Dobson is a radio psychologist, not a television evangelist.
He heads no church.
His professional training is in the field of child development.


After the Summit;   WHITE HOUSE SEES AURA FROM SUMMIT
LEAD: President Bush plans to turn his new-found rapport with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev into a more informal Soviet-American dialogue, complete with the casual phone calls and dashed-off notes that are a mark of his personal diplomacy, Administration officials said today.


Careers;   Need Grows For Genetic Counselors
LEAD: GENETIC counseling is offering growing career opportunities, and few are currently considering it.


Bridge
LEAD: Efforts by the American Contract Bridge League to promote the game for young players are beginning to bear fruit.
Part of this effort is aimed at training teachers, particularly those in the academic community, and seminars are being held in various parts of North America.


Mideast Peace or Mideast Terror? U.S. Ponders Its P.L.O. Contacts
LEAD: Bush Administration officials said today that they would like to continue talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization, but were prepared to suspend the dialogue if Yasir Arafat refused to condemn the foiled seaborne guerrilla raid on Israel last week and failed to punish those responsible for the attack.


Books of The Times;   Cleopatra Behind Her Magic Mirror
LEAD:
Cleopatra
Histories, Dreams and Distortions
By Lucy Hughes-Hallett
Illustrated. 338 pages. Harper &amp; Row. $27.50.


Patriots' Sims Arrested
LEAD: Kenneth Sims, the New England Patriots' defensive end, was charged with possession of cocaine in Austin, Tex., after he was stopped for speeding.
Sims, 30 years old, was arrested about 10 P.M.
Sunday after the police clocked him at speeds of more than 75 miles an hour, said Sgt.
Joe Moore of the Austin police.


Two Recalls Issued by Ford
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said today that it was recalling about 2,700 Explorer sport-utility vehicles to replace hinges on detachable sunroofs.
The company said the roof could be misaligned, causing it to fly off a moving vehicle.
Ford also recalled 365 F- and B-series chassis in 1990 trucks and buses to replace an oversized brake cylinder.


After the Summit: Reporter's Notebook;   A Communist at Home With the Capitalist Elite
LEAD: When Nikita S. Khrushchev visited California in 1959, he made a point of declaring his sympathies in the class struggle by including leaders of the longshoremen's and auto workers unions in his wide-ranging itinerary.


Review/Theater;   Alone and Exploring The Primal Darkness
LEAD: The most indelible image in Benito Gutmacher's ''Cry of the Body,'' a solo performance piece inspired by the writings of Antonin Artaud, is its opening sequence called ''The Plague.'' Entering from the back of the audience at La Mama, the emaciated mime and acrobat from Argentina appears in a gas mask and staggers down the center aisle, wheezing desperately for air while stopping now and then to bang one hand violently on the floor.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
COMPANIES
Greyhound Lines filed for bankruptcy protection from its creditors under Chapter 11.
The company, whose bus drivers walked out on March 2, has missed more than $16 million in loan, interest and lease payments since the end of April, while spending money to fight the strike. [Page D1.


After the Summit;   Gorbachev at Stanford: Excerpts From Address
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's address at Stanford University yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of Cable News Network.
Mr.
Gorbachev spoke through an interpreter.
Imagining Destiny


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Business People column on May 25 about the selection of a president at ADC Telecommunications Inc. misstated the source of the company's recent revenue growth.
It came in large part from ADC's traditional copper-based products and from an acquisition, not just from fiber-optic products.


Daniel L. Burrows, Ex-Legislator And Dinkins's Father-in-Law, 83
LEAD: Daniel L. Burrows, a businessman and former Democratic leader in Harlem who became the father-in-law and a political mentor of Mayor David N. Dinkins, died of cancer Sunday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 83 years old and lived in Belmar, N.J.


The Editorial Notebook;   The Summit's Critics
LEAD: Just imagine: Presidents Bush and Gorbachev didn't solve the German problem.
They didn't solve the Lithuanian problem.
And they didn't resolve their remaining differences in the strategic arms reductions talks.


Xaverian Takes Title In Catholic League
LEAD: After operating all year in the shadow of Christ the King High School of Middle Village, Queens, Xaverian High School of Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, surprised the mighty Royals, 3-2, yesterday at Yankee Stadium to win the Catholic High Schools Athletic Association baseball championship.


By Design Black-and-White Style
LEAD: Color may be the big news of the season but let's hear it for black and white, too.
This summer, the snappiest casual stuff looks even niftier when it's put together in a sophisticated city-slicker combination of black and white.


Arabs Applaud Gorbachev Remark
LEAD: Palestinian and other Arab officials, increasingly worried by Washington's signals to the Middle East, today welcomed suggestions by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union that Soviet Jewish emigration might be limited to prevent further Jewish settlement of the occupied territories.


There's Wisdom in WIC
LEAD: The Federal nutrition program known as WIC - for Women, Infants and Children - is, quite simply, terrific.
Its food packages are specifically designed for poor pregnant and nursing women and their children.
Because women cannot receive the diet supplements without accepting regular medical checkups, it provides prenatal care for those reluctant to seek it.


Bank Talks Confirmed By Trump
LEAD: Donald J. Trump confirmed yesterday that he was holding discussions with representatives of the banks that have helped finance his far-flung business ventures.
On the news, the prices of the publicly traded bonds issued to finance Mr.
Trump's three casinos in Atlantic City plummeted, reflecting the market's increasing nervousness about the


Choreography Practiced as Anthropology
LEAD: Jawole Willa Jo Zollar has become the anthropologist of dance.
Her explorations of cultures that are both familiar and distant - the worlds of young Caribbean girls, women in a changing African tribe and street women and the homeless in New York City - are treatises that have the ring of powerful, luminous truth.


'Dip' on Earth Is Big Trouble In Space
LEAD: A SMALL weak spot in the Earth's magnetic field is causing big problems for sensitive instruments on scientific spacecraft, forcing changes in how astronomers observe the heavens.


After the Summit;   Gorbachev Urges Major Changes In the World's System of Alliances
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union ended an exhausting transcontinental visit to the United States today with an appeal for a radically changed system of global alliances.


D'Arcy Promotes Subsidiary's Co-founder
LEAD: The team that founded Penchina, Selkowitz is splitting apart.
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, which acquired the small but struggling creative agency last year, said yesterday that Arthur Selkowitz would move up to the parent company to become worldwide director of its Procter &amp; Gamble account and executive vice president of the agency's international division.


Judge Urges Impartiality by Jurors As Capital Mayor's Trial Begins
LEAD: The trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. on 14 charges of drug use, drug possession and perjury opened today in Federal District Court, with the judge ordering a pool of 250 prospective jurors to ask themselves whether they could render an impartial verdict in the much-publicized, highly charged case.


SOUTHERN POLITICS: RUNOFFS A FACTOR
LEAD: Groundbreaking political campaigns by black Democrats in North Carolina and Georgia are facing an oddity of Southern politics that could prove deeply divisive for their party as it struggles to stem Republican gains in the region.


Congress Looks Anew at Ties With Vietnam
LEAD: Pushed by Vietnam War veterans, Congress is reopening a debate on normalizing economic and diplomatic relations with Hanoi.


Review/Dance;   Spinning in a Web of Mysticism
LEAD: Slides projected during ''The Serpent Power'' showed drawings of human figures surrounded by webs of lines.
At times, Angela Caponigro appeared to be spinning gestural cobwebs in the program of solos she danced on Sunday night at the Nikolais/Louis Choreospace.
But instead of pulling viewers in to become involved in her concerns, these kinetic webs tended to isolate Ms.


White House Must Back HDTV Research
LEAD: To the Editor:


Evolution in Europe;   U.S. Says Soviets Will Field Fewer of Its Latest Bombers
LEAD: A classified estimate by American intelligence agencies concludes that the Soviet Union will field a smaller force of its new Blackjack bombers than previously expected, Administration experts say.


Jack Gilford, Actor, Dead at 81; Veteran of Stage, Screen and TV
LEAD: Jack Gilford, the actor and comedian whose malleable face, rapier wit and buoyant manner energized scores of plays, films and television shows, died of stomach cancer yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old.


Some Top Jobs Filled By Morgan Stanley
LEAD: Morgan Stanley &amp; Company announced a series of appointments yesterday that fill out the picture of who will run some key divisions after the retirement of S. Parker Gilbert, the chairman.


The Right Shoulder
LEAD: There has been a certain parallel in the reactions of Presidents George Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev to political problems.
They both tended to look compulsively over their right shoulders, bending toward conservative critics who are going to be hostile whatever they do.


Gemini Challenges Healthco Board
LEAD: Gemini Partners, a New York investment partnership, said it would solicit consents from the shareholders of Healthco International Inc., to replace the Boston-based dental equipment concern's directors with its own nominees.
In a filing with Securities and Exchange Commission, Gemini said it believed '


Yankees Obtain Nokes For McCullers, Parker
LEAD: After months of talks that led nowhere, the Yankees finally moved toward solving their need for an improved offense today.
But the addition of Matt Nokes, acquired from the Detroit Tigers for two pitchers, could open the way for at least one more trade.


U.S. Taking the Highroad on the Big Question
LEAD: Six days away from its opening match in the World Cup finals against Czechoslovakia, the United States soccer team concluded its first workout here today, and Coach Bob Gansler found himself answering the sex question again.


Cambodia Talks Quickly Collapse With Boycott by the Khmer Rouge
LEAD: A new round of talks on Cambodia lasted only 25 minutes today after the Khmer Rouge guerrillas complained about their representation here and boycotted the session.


Blood-Pressure Drug Employed to Defuse Cancer Cell Defenses
LEAD: THE cancer patients had exhausted all of the standard chemotherapies when Dr.
Sydney Salmon asked them if they wanted to try a new, highly experimental treatment.


Business and Health;   Quality of Care Being Measured
LEAD: A GROWING number of large employers are asking health insurers and prepaid health-care plans to come up with numbers that measure not only costs but also the quality of the care that patients get.
Such measurements include how often patients must be readmitted to the hospital and the frequency with which patients switch doctors.


Maxwell Has Talks in U.S.
LEAD: Robert Maxwell, a leading publisher in Britain who hopes to build a bigger presence in the United States, said yesterday that he was in talks to buy a big American newspaper.


Hull to Return to Blues
LEAD: Brett Hull, who led the National Hockey League in goals last season while playing out his option, says he's sure he'll be back with the St.
Louis Blues.


Prehistoric Mushroom
LEAD: THE oldest mushroom ever discovered has been found encapsulated in 40-million-year-old amber from the mountains of the Dominican Republic, scientists reported in the current issue of the journal Science.


Thomas Heard The Oracles
LEAD: There was a time when Isiah Thomas's greatest goal was to prove that a little man could make it in the National Basketball Association.
It was a personal goal, and a personal struggle, though it had another layer to it, one of universality for an underdog.


Polls Show Feinstein With a Lead in California
LEAD: California's Democratic primary campaign for governor ended today with two major polls giving former Mayor Diane Feinstein of San Francisco a comfortable lead over Attorney General John K. Van de Kamp in the race for the Democratic nomination.


Valvano Signed by ABC
LEAD: About two months after he agreed to a buyout of his contract as basketball coach of the North Carolina State Wolfpack, Jim Valvano yesterday agreed to a three-year deal with ABC Sports for a reported $900,000.
He is scheduled to be teamed with Brent Musburger as one of two ABC announcing teams that will present 11 weekends of college basketball next season.


Machine Politics; Slow Search for a Better Booth;   Favoritism Blocks New York From New Voting Machines
LEAD: Stymied by five years of bureaucratic infighting, favoritism and charges of corruption, New York City's highly politicized Board of Elections has failed to award a huge contract to replace its obsolete voting machinery.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.31
9.64
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.70
7.70
8.24
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.63
7.62
8.05
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.45
8.48
8.38
30-YR.


Transit Police Call for Merger With New York City Police Department


What Kind of Stewards of the Planet Are We?;   Every Cog and Wheel
LEAD: To the Editor:


Our Towns;   Tug-of-War Over A Golf Course For a Select Few
LEAD: This is a tale of old money and how it got to be that way.
It brings to mind the 19th-century reformer Henry George, who asked, ''How many men are there who fairly earn a million dollars?''


Spoleto Festival U.S.A.;   In Opera and in Dance, a Blending of Pagan Myth and Religion
LEAD: Wagner regarded ''Parsifal,'' his last and least approachable work, as a ''sacred dramatic festival'' whose mixture of Germanic idealism, pagan myth and Christian symbolism would forever remain a closed book to the uninitiated. ''Parsifal,'' however, long ago lost much of its cultish appeal and entered the international opera repertory.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about the illness of King Olav of Norway described him incorrectly.
At 86 he is Europe's oldest reigning monarch, not its longest-reigning.


Foreigners Criticize Venture Bill
LEAD: A bill intended to enhance the competitiveness of United States business has provoked such strong opposition from foreign investors that they have taken the unusual step of asking the Speaker of the House to take the measure off the House calendar.


Vanity Fair Plans Edition For Britain
LEAD: IN an experiment in international publishing that its competitors say they will watch eagerly, Conde Nast Publications announced yesterday that it would introduce a British edition of Vanity Fair that would have the same content as the American version except for its advertising, which would be British.


The Senate's Shameless Dawdling
LEAD: After all the earnest promises of reform, what has the Senate done to break its members' scandalous financial ties to special interests and favor-seekers?
The answer is itself a scandal: absolutely nothing.


Sides Differ on Reports Of Progress in TV Talks
LEAD: The broadcast networks and a coalition representing Hollywood producers disagreed today on whether they had made progress in their longstanding negotiations over financial control of television programs.


What Kind of Stewards of the Planet Are We?;   Squirrels and Telescopes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Top New Jersey Court to Issue Crucial School Ruling Today
LEAD: The State Supreme Court announced today that it would issue its long-awaited ruling on the constitutionality of the education-financing system on Tuesday.
The announcement was made as Gov.
Jim Florio's proposal to revise the formula to shift aid to poor communities suffered a second round of attacks in legislative hearings.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The cold-war ice on the Korean peninsula has now begun to crack.''
-President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea, after meeting with Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
[A1:6.]


Evolution in Europe;   COMMUNIST NAMED UKRAINE PRESIDENT
LEAD: The Communist Party leader of the Ukraine was elected the republic's President today despite protests from legislators and demonstrators who said he would have too much power, members of a Ukrainian nationalist group reported.


After the Summit;   Japanese Feel Ready for a Visit From Gorbachev
LEAD: After years of frigid relations with the Soviet Union, Japan today greeted President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's affirmation that he would soon visit Tokyo with relief and with a glimmer of hope that superpower summit meetings would no longer be something that this country's leadership watches on television.


Great 15-Year Project To Decipher Genes Stirs Opposition
LEAD: AS the human genome project drives steadily forward, the vast new effort to delineate all three billion chemical building blocks of humanity's genetic makeup is arousing alarm, derision and outright fury among an increasingly activist segment of the biomedical community.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
AMENDMENT CONFERENCE TO PARTIAL TEST-BAN TREATY - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE OF 24 - SUBCOMMITTEE OF SMALL TERRITORIES - 10:30 A.M.
COMMITTEE ON PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER SPACE - 3 P.M.
WORKING GROUP ON MIGRANT WORKERS CONVENTION - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Accord Opens Up Irving Berlin's Musical Legacy
LEAD: The administration of Irving Berlin's musical legacy has been taken over by the Rodgers and Hammerstein Organization, it was announced yesterday by the family of the songwriter, who died in September at the age of 101.
The agreement clears the way for the serious exploration of his unpublished work, for the preparation of an authorized biography and for the publication of Irving Berlin songbooks.


After the Summit;   GORBACHEV, ENDING U.S. TRIP, MEETS SOUTH KOREA LEADER, WHO SEES A RENEWAL OF TIES
LEAD: President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea met here today with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union and said later that the two nations would establish diplomatic relations in the future.


Vermont Court Upholds Delay in Civil Trials
LEAD: The Vermont Supreme Court unanimously upheld a six-month delay in civil jury trials in the state today, saying the constitutional guarantees of speedy trials do not mean instant ones.


Sabatini Is Surprised, 6-4, 7-5, by Novotna; Brash Leconte Upsets Chesnokov in Five Sets
LEAD: There is something kaleidoscopic in Gabriela Sabatini's game: it evokes the brilliance of a peacock's plumage, yet it seems always to be searching out new alignments with itself.


Resorts' Plan Approved
LEAD: A bankruptcy judge has approved a Resorts International Inc. statement outlining how the company plans to shed much of its $927 million in debt, the company said today.
Federal Bankruptcy Judge Rosemary Gambardella requested minor language changes before approving the plan, said Christopher Whitney, the casino company's executive vice president.


CANADA PREMIERS TRY TO SAVE PACT
LEAD: Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and the 10 provincial premiers continued their efforts today to save the Meech Lake constitutional agreement, and with it the Quebec government's commitment to remain part of the Canadian confederation.


3 School Unions Suspend a Strike For 40 Percent Raises in Yonkers
LEAD: Striking school employees agreed today to suspend a walkout that began Friday over wage demands, but said they would resume picketing next Monday if the pay dispute was not settled by then.


Reviews/Music;   An Evening of Sounds From England
LEAD: The Canticum Novum's well-conceived and wide-ranging concert of English music on Saturday evening at St.
Peter's Church in Manhattan seemed to take into account even the British fondness for mysteries.


Vinjamuri E. Devadutt, Theologian, 81
LEAD: Vinjamuri E. Devadutt, a retired professor of ecumenical theology and world Christianity at Colgate Rochester Divinity School, died of a heart attack May 26 at Strong Memorial Hospital in Rochester.
He was 81 years old and lived in Rochester.


Evolution in Europe;   Dubcek Rebukes Slovak Protesters Who Disrupted Speech by Havel
LEAD: Alexander Dubcek, the hero of Prague Spring, shed his image of kindly geniality today to chastise a large crowd of his fellow Slovaks after some of them had disrupted a speech by President Vaclav Havel, who comes from the Czech part of this country.


Mourners Gather in Iran to Mark Anniversary of Khomeini's Death


High Court Rules Religious Clubs Can Meet in Public High Schools
LEAD: The Supreme Court today upheld a 1984 Federal law that requires public high schools to allow students' religious and political clubs to meet on the same basis as other extracurricular activities.


Norman E. Richardson, Professor, 80
LEAD: Norman E. Richardson, chairman of the philosophy department at Gettysburg College from 1945 until he retired in 1979, died of heart failure on Saturday at Gettysburg Hospital.
He was 80 years old and lived in Gettysburg.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''My ultimate aim is to make euthanasia a positive experience.
I'm trying to knock the medical profession into accepting its responsibilities, and those responsibilities include assisting their patients with death.''
- Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, inventor of a ''self-execution machine.''[A1:4.]  ''Killing patients is not a good activity for doctors to be engaged in.


Mississippi State Coach Is Getting the Talent
LEAD: When Jim Robinson was a senior at Sullivan High School in Chicago three years ago, he received a visit one afternoon from a perky, bright-eyed man named Ron Polk, who identified himself as the head baseball coach at Mississippi State in Starkville, Miss.


Bonnie Soskin and David Sheer Wed
LEAD: Bonnie M. Soskin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Soskin of Monsey, N.Y., was married last evening to David A. Sheer, a son of Rabbi Charles H. Sheer of Riverdale, the Bronx, and the late Gloria Schrenzel Sheer.
Rabbi Sheer officiated at Bob Gilbert's Singers Caterers in Spring Valley, N.Y.


Corrections Many New Faces Likely for New York's School Board
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about the likelihood of new appointments to the New York City Board of Education misidentified a current member, Dr.
Gwendolyn C. Baker.
She is national executive director of the Y.W.C.A. of the U.S.A.
LEAD: As many as six of the seven members of the New York City Board of Education are likely to be replaced when their terms expire at the end of this month, the most sweeping change in the schools' policy-making body in decades.


Drexel's Plan To Call for Full Payment
LEAD: Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. will present its creditors today with a bankruptcy reorganization plan that will pay them 100 cents on the dollar.


Yields at 8.85% and 8.9% On Fannie Mae Offerings
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association yesterday priced a total of $1.4 billion in 5-year and 10-year debentures through its regular selling group of dealers.


Minnesota Journal;   Savoring the Afterglow Of a World-Class Visit
LEAD: Gov.
Rudy Perpich sat in the Governor's mansion here today and recalled the exact moment Sunday when he asked Mikhail S. Gorbachev the question that every journalist, civic leader and politician in the state had been wondering about.


'Having a Great Time': Americans on Vacation
LEAD: THE person who first noticed that vacations are anticipated with great joy and remembered with great nostalgia - but experienced with great difficulty - must have been a trenchant observer of the American experience.


Equibank's Chairman Resigns in Revamping
LEAD: Shrinking top management after a failed merger attempt, the Equimark Corporation said yesterday that Claire W. Gargalli had resigned as chairman and chief executive of Equibank, its main subsidiary.


'Her Mind Was Everything,' Dead Woman's Husband Says
LEAD: Ronald Adkins said tonight that music was the consuming passion in his wife's life and that when Alzheimer's disease robbed her of the ability to play the piano she no longer wanted to live.


Common Good in the Bronx: Will It Be Houses or Roses?
LEAD: High in the Bronx, on a modest patch of dirt trucked in from New Jersey, a small but determined band of horticultural rebels is poised for a last stand against the State of New York.


Murder Charge Ruled Invalid for Philippine Senator in Failed Coup
LEAD: In a rebuff to President Corazon C. Aquino, the Supreme Court ruled today that the Government's charge of rebellion against Senator Juan Ponce Enrile should not have included murder and was invalid.


MICROWAVE COOKING
LEAD: SOME cooks dismiss the microwave oven with a wave of the hand and the line ''Oh, it's just good for vegetables.'' Actually, the oven is good for many things, vegetables among them.


Review/Theater;   Love and Baseball All Mixed Together
LEAD: The season is not going well for the Nationals, the home team in ''A Perfect Diamond,'' Don Rifkin's mild baseball comedy at the Apple Corps Theater.
They've just dropped a 13-3 squeaker to the Cubs in which the Nats pitching staff gave up 15 hits and the defense committed 7 errors.
But if the team's manager, Legs


BUSH GAINS TIME AS MOSCOW DELAYS LAW ON EMIGRATION
LEAD: A conflict between the White House and Congress over the trade accord signed at the Washington summit meeting was averted today when the Soviet Parliament said it would probably not take up a new law permitting unfettered emigration until September.


Macy's Reviews Debt Options
LEAD: R. H. Macy &amp; Co., juggling a $5.67 billion debt load, said yesterday that it was looking at ways to restructure its liabilities.


Reports of Saudi Price Cuts Depress Energy Contracts
LEAD: Reports that Saudi Arabia reduced prices for its July oil exports to the United States by 40 cents a barrel from June levels sent energy futures traded at the New York Mercantile Exchange tumbling today.


U.S. Bars A Soviet Phone Deal
LEAD: The Commerce Department told U S West Inc. yesterday that the Government opposed a project to build a fiber-optic cable communications system across the Soviet Union, linking Japan and Europe.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 1
May 25
June 2
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
6.7
6.9
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.0
2.8
2.8
Gasoline stocks
216.5
214.2
221.0
Distillate stocks
104.0
100.0
99.3
Crude imports, daily
6.1
6.8
6.2
Product imports, daily
2.5
2.5
1.9
Crude stocks
384.4
381.8
344.8
Crude production, daily
7.2
7.2
7.8
Refinery utilization (%)
88.2
88.4
90.1


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about an American assessment of Soviet arms omitted a phrase in describing the report's conclusions.
The assessment said that by the turn of the century the Soviet Union would have about 2,300 weapons carried by bombers, not that the Soviet Union would have 2,300 bombers.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Economy


Dollar Ends Mostly Down; Gold Prices Climb in U.S.
LEAD: The dollar ended mostly lower yesterday, reflecting continued concern about the direction of interest rates.
Gold prices rose following a mixed performance overseas.


Tennessee Is Faulted In Collapse of Bridge
LEAD: The National Transportation Safety Board said today that a shifting river channel caused the highway bridge collapse that killed eight motorists in Tennessee last year but that state officials should have corrected the problems with the bridge a decade ago.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: EVERY so often I like to offer a twist on a basic recipe for meat loaf.
I have two reasons: first, I enjoy coming up with tasty new combinations for this versatile dish, and second, meat loaf is an ideal main course for time-pressed cooks.
And it's inexpensive.


A Pause for Wilander
LEAD: Over the last four months of 1988, after he had beaten Ivan Lendl in the final of the United States Open, Mats Wilander was the top-ranked men's tennis player in the world.
Since then, the Swedish player has been struggling to find motivation, and his dipping ranking has reflected his play.
He has competed little in 1990 and yesterday he even postponed a planned comeback by announcing in Stockholm that he would not play at Wimbledon later this month.


U.S. Envoy to Bulgaria Reports to Baker on Campaign Irregularities
LEAD: The United States followed up its complaints about unfair campaigning by former Communists by having its Ambassador fly to Copenhagen today to make a personal report to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d on the prospects for unimpeded voting in elections here this Sunday.


Chronicle
LEAD: MICHAEL JACKSON was in stable condition yesterday at St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica.
But his doctor, MARK ZATZKIS, said a ''temporary setback in his condition'' delayed some tests.


Windows 3.0 Sales At 100,000 Copies
LEAD: The Microsoft Corporation said it had sold more than 100,000 copies of its Windows 3.0 personal computer software since its introduction on May 22.
The program, which sells for $149 retail, allows users of I.B.M. and I.B.M.-compatible computers to add graphics and a mouse pointing device.
Industry analysts said the sales figure was in line with expectations.


Coke Bottler Deal
LEAD: Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc., the largest bottler of Coca-Cola, said it would purchase the Coca-Cola Bottling Company of Arkansas from the Coca-Cola Company for about $250 million.
It said it would also sell the Portsmouth Coca-Cola Bottling Company and its majority interest in the Coca-Cola Bottling Company of Ohio to the Johnston Coca-Cola Bottling Group for a total of about $120 million.


Student Interns Gain What Money Can't Buy;   Career Boost
LEAD: To the Editor:


Vote to Limit Debate on Crime Bill Falls Short
LEAD: In at least a temporary victory for opponents of gun control, the Senate failed today to limit debate on a comprehensive crime package, for the moment throwing doubt on the fate of the legislation.


Mostly Mozart to Open With One-Act Opera
LEAD: The 24th annual Mostly Mozart Festival will begin on July 10 with a concert version of the composer's one-act comic opera about theater life, ''The Impresario.''


Columbia to Close Library School
LEAD: Columbia University has decided to phase out its School of Library Science in two years and to try to move it to another institution, the university announced yesterday.


Hispanic Students Gain Under a Plan
LEAD: A six-year-old program in San Antonio that has been successful in reducing the dropout rate among Hispanic high school students will be expanded to five other school districts, using a $1.3 million grant from the Coca-Cola Company, the company announced yesterday.


No More Joe Isuzu
LEAD: Joe Isuzu, the pathological liar who has appeared for four years in commercials for Isuzu vehicles, is losing his job.
American Isuzu Motors Inc. said it would not use Joe, played by the actor David Leisure, to introduce its 1991 models this fall.
Della Femina, McNamee WCRS in Los Angeles created the character in ads that began in 1986.


DEMOCRATS PLAN TO SUE REPUBLICAN
LEAD: The Massachusetts Democratic Party announced today that it would sue a senior White House aide who it says plotted to sabotage the party's convention last weekend in Springfield.


Green
LEAD: It's as if somebody in authority had said ''Color everything green'' and suddenly it was.
The rains of May have made all the trees richer with leaves.
New York City parks, squares and luckier side streets are filled with green in all its arboreal tints and textures - the oaks glossy, the locusts lacy and the ginkgos velvety.


Book Notes
LEAD:
Big Gamble on Art
News from the annual American Booksellers' Association convention is often dominated by the major houses, because they have the money to buy, publish and promote the best-selling authors.


Michigan's Law Is Ambiguous
LEAD: Experts in right-to-die cases said yesterday that virtually no states allowed a person to help another commit suicide.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: *
Alan M. Rubin has been named senior vice president and creative director of Ted Thomas Associates, Philadephia.





New 'Witness' Recants Her Bensonhurst Story
LEAD: The woman who recently claimed that she saw the slaying of Yusuf K. Hawkins in Bensonhurst recanted her story yesterday, the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, said.


Mets Nearing Straw's Point Of No Return
LEAD: rrThe night Bud Harrelson took command of the Mets last week, the photographers in Cincinnati were posing him with Lou Piniella as the Reds' manager offered his congratulations.
Or maybe his condolences.


Homer by O'Malley Is Blessing for Mets
LEAD: Tom O'Malley of the Mets hit a 1-2 sinker from Dale Mohorcic long and deep in the 11th inning last night.
The ball carried to center field and Dave Martinez drifted back toward the wall with it.
It did not look like a homer.
O'Malley said later that he did not think it was going.
Martinez said the same.


Faction Presses Campbell's Sale
LEAD: A dissident faction of the family that owns much of the Campbell Soup Company's stock said it would continue to press for the company's sale.
The faction representing about 17.4 percent of Cambell's shares, said in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it had formed a trust to make it easier to act together and communicate with


Student Interns Gain What Money Can't Buy;   'Your Voice Is Mine'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rates Decline At Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates declined yesterday at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.


Asian Romance in San Francisco
LEAD: There's far more than post-cold-war symbolism in the courtship between Moscow and Seoul, further nurtured by Monday's meeting of Presidents Gorbachev and Roh Tae Woo in San Francisco.
A consummated relationship could bring real gains to both countries.
America, too, would benefit from a wider peace in Northeast


Review/Television;   Examining God's Dice With Quantum Mechanics
LEAD: The word ''quark,'' used by physicists for what may be the fundamental unit of matter, is drawn from a line in James Joyce's ''Finnegans Wake'' - ''three quarks for Mr.
Marks.'' To judge by ''The Quantum Universe,'' at 8 P.M. on Channel 13, the quark is even more resistant to explication than the book, though both invite it.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about the return of Salvador Allende Gossens's widow to Chile reversed the identities of Mrs.
Allende and Leonor Aylwin.
Mrs.
Allende was at the right.


Excerpts From New Jersey Court Ruling on School Financing
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the unanimous New Jersey Supreme Court decision today ordering the state to insure that the poorest cities spend as much on education as wealthy suburbs.


GREENS ALLIANCE SET BACK IN ITALY
LEAD: How do you win over 90 percent of the vote and still lose the election?


Limits Urged on Public's Access To Cockpit Talk in Plane Crashes
LEAD: At the request of the pilots' union, lawmakers are considering legislation that would delay the public release of transcripts of cockpit tape recordings until long after an airliner accident.


Risks Make Buying, and Selling, Condos at Auction a Bad Idea
LEAD: To the Editor:


Political Odors
LEAD: The staff of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission has recommended moving a proposed natural gas pipeline back onto property owned by Dr.
Joyce Brothers, the television personality, and Arnold Fisher, a Manhattan real-estate agent and political contributor to Senator Alfonse D'Amato of New York.


Treasury Securities Fall Slightly
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities dipped in fairly light trading yesterday, as dealers used auto sales data that were slightly stronger than anticipated as an excuse to take some profits after the rally over the last several sessions.


BARRY PROSECUTOR WARNS OF TAINTING
LEAD: A Federal prosecutor asserted today that public comments by Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. about his trial on 14 drug-related charges might have skewed the jury selection process that began this week.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD:
DEAR Diary:


Agassi, Dethroning Chang, Joins Capriati in Semifinals in Paris
LEAD: At this time last year, Andre Agassi was home in Las Vegas soaping up one of his vehicles at the local carwash while his countryman and contemporary, 17-year-old Michael Chang, was cramping and dehydrating but nonetheless having a whirlwind of an adventure in Paris as he fought his way to the French Open championship.


House Votes Funds For Western Victims Of Radiation Illness
LEAD: The House of Representatives approved a bill today for uranium miners and people who lived downwind from nuclear testing to get money and an apology from the Government for the radiation sickness they now suffer.


Real Estate;   Law Firm To Occupy Mobil Space
LEAD: THE Mobil Building, a fixture of east midtown since 1954 and one of the keystones of the area's renaissance a generation ago, has finally signed its first new outside tenant since the energy company sold the structure to Japanese investors three years ago.


Bankruptcy, Like the Strike, May Be Rough at Greyhound
LEAD: After facing one of the most violent modern labor strikes, Greyhound Lines Inc. now is headed for another rough ride in bankruptcy court.


Suit Seeks to End Curbs on Importing Cuban Art
LEAD: A suit that would abolish restrictions against importing art from Cuba has been filed against the Treasury Department by the National Emergency Civil Liberties Committee.


Norman W. Lee; Executive, 76
LEAD: Norman W. Lee, a retired shipping executive, died of leukemia last Wednesday at Fishermen's Memorial Hospital in Marathon, Fla.
He was 76 years old and lived in Ramrod Key, Fla.


Liberian Rebels Seem Set to Attack Capital
LEAD: Rebel forces captured the rubber plantation that is Liberia's biggest employer and several other important Government strongholds yesterday, and began moving southwest toward the international airport.


Market Place;   Sotheby's Bulls, Christie's Bears
LEAD: THE big question in the art world recently has been whether Japanese investors were so wounded in the plunge of the Tokyo stock market earlier this year that they would pull out of the art market, depressing prices.


Robert L. Yost; Diplomat, 67
LEAD: Robert L. Yost, a former United States Ambassador to Burundi and the Dominican Republic, died of liver failure on May 29 at Alta Bates Hospital in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 67 years old and lived in Oakland, Calif.


220 Revco Drugstores To Be Sold to Eckerd
LEAD: Revco D.S.
Inc. agreed today to sell 220 of its drugstores to the Jack Eckerd Corporation, Clearwater, Fla., a privately held chain with 1,575 drugstores.
The purchase price was not disclosed.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-12
A Soviet-American trade accord failed to create an anticipated conflict between the White House and Congress when the Soviet Parliament announced that it would probably not take up a new law permitting unfettered emigration until September.
Page A1


Author Facing Damages for Murder
LEAD: Jack Henry Abbott, the murderer, bank robber and jailhouse author who killed again in 1981 after he was paroled with the help of Norman Mailer, went to court yesterday to oppose an effort by the widow of his last victim to collect $10 million in damages.


Agency Head Criticizes Shamir on Soviet Jews
LEAD: Israel should heed President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's warning that the flow of Jewish immigrants could be halted if they are settled in the occupied territories, the top Israeli immigration official said in remarks published today.


Where Freshness Gets a New Definition
LEAD: IN downtown Brooklyn, Moustache, a newcomer on Atlantic Avenue specializing in Middle Eastern foods, rivals older establishments for freshness and flavor.
A simple request for pita bread, for example, brings out the raw dough and rolling pin.


Despite Tension, Marcos to Keep Her Top Lawyer
LEAD: Imelda Marcos said yesterday that she would keep her flamboyant lead lawyer, Gerry Spence, but her decision appeared only to add to the tension on her divided legal team.


Notebook;   Litigation, Purse Bids Blur Title Bout Picture
LEAD: You remember James (Buster) Douglas, the fellow who knocked out Michael Gerard Tyson in 10 rounds last February to become the heavyweight champion?


Gorbachev Returns to Duty As the Soviet Master of Spin
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev returned home today from his dual summit labors as chief Soviet negotiator and the nation's principal journalistic analyst of his own performance.


WINE TALK
LEAD: THIS is the time of year to plan your summer drinking.
At least that's what all the advertisements tell us.
Now, you could get out your pocket diary and write in, ''July 4: gin and tonic, iced tea.'' And so on.
But that's not what they mean.
The idea is to get you into the store, checkbook open and pen poised, ready to stock up.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the origins of ethnic strife in Liberia referred inconsistently to the date of a coup attempt that was crushed by President Samuel K. Doe's Government.
It occurred in 1985, not 1980.


Dow Falls 10.19 on Weaker Bond Prices
LEAD: Stock prices retreated yesterday, as the recent record-setting run-up faltered in the face of weaker bond prices.


Chronicle
LEAD: ABBA EBAN, a former Foreign Minister of Israel, gets a nice 75th birthday present tonight: a fancy dinner at the United Nations with his old friend HENRY A. KISSINGER as host.
All the living former Presidents of the United States are paying tribute to him, along with various diplomats, magnates and the culturati.


Czechs View Self-Portrait of a Nation in Captivity
LEAD: More than any political rally in these final days before Friday's first free elections in 42 years, a dramatic exhibition in the center of the capital is stirring Czechoslovaks to political debate and reflection.


Corrections
LEAD: Articles on Friday and Saturday about Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds, the new Chancellor of the City University of New York, misstated her age.
She is 52.


P.S.A.L. Title to Lincoln
LEAD: After Lincoln High School of Brooklyn lost the Public Schools Athletic League championship to Fort Hamilton last year, it vowed to return to Yankee Stadium this year and emerge victorious.
Yesterday the Railsplitters kept that promise by beating Canarsie, 3-1.


Chicago Sun-Times
LEAD: The British publisher Robert Maxwell has held talks recently with the owners of The Chicago Sun-Times about buying part of the tabloid, industry officials said yesterday.
Mr.
Maxwell said on Monday that he was in talks to buy an American newspaper, but he declined to specify the publication.
Leonard Shaykin, the chairman of The Sun-Times, declined to comment.


11 REPORTED SLAIN IN SOVIET UNREST
LEAD: Eleven people have been killed and hundreds wounded in Soviet Central Asia in riots set off by a land dispute, the Soviet press reported today, adding that the clashes continued even after a state of emergency was imposed.


Study Implies No Cancer-Cholesterol Link;   Reducing the Chances
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tonka Suits Filed
LEAD: The Tonka Corporation said several suits had been filed Monday by shareholders in Federal court in Minnesota in response to the company's announcement last week that it expects a significant loss for the second quarter on lower sales.
The toy company said the plaintiffs seek unspecified damages and have asked that a class of shareholders be certified for litigation.


Flagpole Electrocution Kills Town Official and Two Sons
LEAD: This town's Borough President, two of his sons and a Councilman were electrocuted Monday night when a flagpole they were taking down touched a high-voltage line.


Northern State Yield Put at 9.5%
LEAD: The Northern State Power Company is offering $100 million in 9 3/8 percent first mortgage bonds, due in 2020, at a price of 98.75 to yield 9.5 percent, through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs.


Executive Is Elected To a Top Goodrich Post
LEAD: The B. F. Goodrich Company said yesterday that John N. Lauer, a longtime executive of the Celanese Corporation who came to Goodrich last year, had been elected to succeed Leigh Carter as chief operating officer.
Mr.
Lauer will also become president of the company when Mr.
Carter retires from that position in


Reviews/Ballet;   'Puss In Boots' Retold In Mime
LEAD: There was a time when the School of American Ballet's annual springtime performances regularly offered a showcase for choreographers as well as for young dancers.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.25
9.58
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.71
7.70
8.17
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.61
7.63
7.93
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.48
8.45
8.36
30-YR.


Brutality Victims Urge Plan Aimed at Police
LEAD: Gerard Papa and James Rampersant Jr., who were awarded $5.6 million in a police brutality suit against the city, will give back more than $2 million if the city sets up programs to improve police conduct toward the public, Mr.
Papa said yesterday.


Good News For Florio
LEAD: Until this morning, administration officials here feared that today's State Supreme Court decision on how New Jersey finances public education might be to Gov.
Jim Florio what a brick wall is to a speeding truck.


Robert F. Pulleyn; Lawyer, 88
LEAD: Robert Francis Pulleyn, a corporate lawyer in Manhattan for 40 years, died yesterday at his home in Oldwick, N.J.
He was 88 years old.
Mr.
Pulleyn joined the law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett in 1926 after graduating from the Columbia University Law School, where he was editor of The Law Review.


White House to Endorse One-Year Endowment Term
LEAD: The White House plans to ask Congress on Wednesday to extend the life of the National Endowment for the Arts for just one year instead of the usual five, an Administration spokeswoman said tonight.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Green Fails to Finish His Round
Ken Green, a member of the PGA Tour, failed to finish his round yesterday at Summit, N.J., in the field of 69 competing in the 36-hole sectional qualifier for the United States Open, which begins June 14.
Disgusted by the way he was putting, Green walked off the 14th hole of the 6,911-yard Canoe Brook Country Club course after three-putting three consecutive greens in the second round.


FOREIGN REPORTERS COMPLAIN TO CHINA
LEAD: The Foreign Correspondents Club of Beijing complained to the Government today about a series of assaults in recent days against foreign reporters by security forces.
But the Government immediately rejected the complaint as ''utterly unreasonable.''


At the Bastille Opera, Chung Is Finally Free To Face the Music
LEAD: After the political squabbles, technical problems, first-night glitches and, at long last, the applause that accompanied the much-awaited opening of the Bastille Opera in March, Myung Whun Chung would like to turn his mind to music again.


New Election-Financing Scandal Linked to Mexico's Ruling Party
LEAD: For years, voters and opposition parties have suspected that Mexican Government funds are routinely used to finance the slick election campaigns of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party.
Now for the first time there appears to be proof of such illegal diversion, and a political scandal has been set off.


Economic Scene;   Cocaine Policy: Gauging Success
LEAD: ITEM: In recent months the price of Bolivian coca leaf has fallen below production costs.


Antitrust Limit Voted By House
LEAD: The House of Representatives today approved a bill intended to enhance the competitiveness of American companies by limiting their liability for antitrust violations, over the objections of foreign investors who would not receive the legislation's benefits.


Saatchi Selling Firm in Move to Quit Consulting
LEAD: The Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company, the troubled London-based advertising and communications group, said yesterday that it would sell the Hay Group, its largest consulting firm, for about $81 million to a group that includes Hay's partners.


New Paper Containers Extending Shelf Life
LEAD: The paper industry, trying to counter gains by plastics in the packaging industry, is developing new kinds of containers that are not only cheaper than plastic but significantly extend the shelf lives of juices, soups, fabric softeners, cereals, insecticides and many other products.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Boeing Co., Seattle, said that Lynjeflyg, the domestic airline of Sweden, had ordered four additional Boeing 737-500 jetliners worth about $130 million, including spare parts.


Covenant House To Cut Programs And Employees
LEAD: Suffering from a sharp drop in charitable contributions, Covenant House has decided to reduce its 460-member staff in New York by almost half and to cut several programs, including two group homes for youths, an outreach van and a residential unit for teen-agers infected with the AIDS virus.


Study Implies No Cancer-Cholesterol Link
LEAD: To the Editor:


Belinda Gets First Victory As Pirates Defeat Clubs, 6-5


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Two Awards Underscore Industry Split
LEAD: THE advertising industry showered itself with awards last night in two prestigious ceremonies that underscored the stark contrasts between what some marketing professionals deem effective advertising and what others say is creative advertising.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Perrier Group, to Lord Einstein O'Neill &amp; Partners, for its domestic bottled waters, with a budget of about $12 million, and to Waring &amp; LaRosa, for Volvic imported water.


Craig Atkins, 86, Dies; Ex-Federal Tax Judge
LEAD: Craig Starbuck Atkins, a retired judge of the United States Tax Court, died of Alzheimer's disease on Saturday at a nursing home in Fort Myers, Fla.
He was 86 years old and lived in Fort Myers.


$125 Million Issue By Boise Cascade
LEAD: The Boise Cascade Corporation is offering $125 million in notes, due in 2002, through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.
The size of the issue was increased from an original $100 million.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on May 19 about Arpad Goncz, the playwright who is interim President of Hungary, misidentified the American university that recently gave him an honorary degree.


Executive Director to Leave Port Authority
LEAD: Stephen Berger, executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, said yesterday that he planned to leave his post in July after five years with the agency to take a job in the private sector.


Eastern Europe's Turn For a Marshall Plan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lawyer Fails in Effort To Quit Mondello Case
LEAD: Stephen G. Murphy, the lawyer who represented Keith Mondello, failed yesterday in his bid to remove himself from the Bensonhurst murder case.
Mr.
Murphy said his client has not paid his fee.


$65 Million Qintex Deal
LEAD: Qintex Entertainment Inc. said today that it had agreed to sell its library of movies and television programs for a total of $65 million to pay off creditors and shareholders under the protection of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
The sale will be to a group that includes the New Line Cinema Corporation, the producer of ''Teen-age Mutant Ninja Turtles'' and other films, for $42.4 million.


REBELS IN LIBERIA SEIZE PLANTATION
LEAD: Rebel forces captured the rubber plantation that is Liberia's biggest employer and several other important Government strongholds today, and began moving southwest toward the international airport.


On campus, and elsewhere, should free speech include harsh words?
LEAD: Should there be limits to offensive speech on college campuses?
Should racist or sexist slurs be subject to penalties?
Do such penalties violate First Amendment rights of free speech?


SIHANOUK WIDENS KHMER ROUGE RIFT
LEAD: Responding to the concerns of his Western backers, Prince Norodom Sihanouk distanced himself further from the Communist Khmer Rouge today, signing a communique with Hun Sen, the Prime Minister of Cambodia, that the Khmer Rouge refused to support.


Bridge
LEAD: Very few clubs in North America own their own premises.
Manhattan's Cavendish Club is now looking for new quarters, and its directors are bemoaning a missed opportunity in the 1950's to buy a building.


Of Bible Groups and Scuba Clubs
LEAD: The Equal Access Act of 1984 was a sop to those in Congress who wanted to say something politically appealing about the role of religion in school.
Unable to pass a school prayer amendment to the Constitution, they eventually settled for a law requiring public schools to allow religious and political clubs to meet on the same basis as other extracurricular organizations.


Delay in Restarting Weapons Plant Is Sought
LEAD: A high-level panel of experts has recommended that reopening of the Rocky Flats nuclear plant be postponed from midsummer until at least October, and many of them say the complex cannot be safely opened before the end of year.


Program Trade Curbs Advance
LEAD: The House approved legislation today that would allow the Securities and Exchange Commission to curb computerized program trading.
Under the measures, the


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Black &amp; Decker Corp., Towson, Md., named Michael L. Convey president and general manager of Price Pfister, a division of the company's hardware and home improvement group.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


N.C.A.A. Field Is Down to 4
LEAD: The eight-team field for the College World Series was down to four tonight after Mississippi State and The Citadel were eliminated, both by 6-1 scores at Rosenblatt Stadium.


Tomkins P.L.C. To Buy Philips
LEAD: Philips Industries, a building and vehicle components manufacturer whose $672 million leveraged buyout collapsed in January, reached a preliminary agreement yesterday to be sold to the British industrial company Tomkins P.L.C. for $18.50 a share, or about $550 million.
The stock of Philips, based in


Whirlpool in Deal With Matsushita
LEAD: The Whirlpool Corporation and the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company said they had signed a joint venture to produce vacuum cleaners for the North American market from Whirlpool's vacuum manufacturing plant in Danville, Ky.


Chronicle
LEAD: Dashing the hopes expressed by MARGARET THATCHER last weekend that Iran was offering a ''significant olive branch'' to rescind the death threat against SALMAN RUSHDIE, Ayatollah ALI KHAMENEI demanded yesterday that the author be handed over to British Muslims.
Iran's spiritual leader reiterated the late Ayatollah RUHOLLAH KHOMEINI's order of February 1989, that Mr.


House of Lords Bars War-Crimes Trials in Britain
LEAD: In a rare challenge to the House of Commons, the House of Lords today overwhelmingly rejected a Government bill that would have permitted the prosecution of suspected Nazi war criminals now living in Britain for offenses committed in the Baltics, Byelorussia and the Ukraine 50 years ago.


About New York;   We Ride Bikes. She Rides Us. Bikercise!
LEAD: The 10 of us have ridden for more than a half hour, going nowhere as usual.
While pedaling, we have also been lifting weights and trying to dance.
There are things to be thankful for: we haven't fallen off, it will all be over in a half-century (er, half-hour) and no part of our body is in particular pain.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Name Change For Lowe Unit
LEAD: The Lowe Marschalk agency yesterday changed its name and creative director, while at the same time absorbing another advertising agency.


Student Interns Gain What Money Can't Buy;   Start Early
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lending Cap May Increase
LEAD: Savings and loan regulators are moving to ease a controversial new lending regulation after builders complained it was unfairly choking off their credit, an official said today.


Tom Brown Dies at 75; Actor on 'Gunsmoke'
LEAD: Thomas E. (Tom) Brown, who modeled Buster Brown shoes as a child and portrayed a rancher in television's ''Gunsmoke'' after a long film career, died of cancer on Sunday at the Motion Picture and Television Hospital in Woodland Hills, Calif.
He was 75 years old.


Portland Tries to Swallow a Bitter Loss
LEAD: They lost a 10-point lead with less than 7 minutes to play.
They did not score for more than 4 minutes during the fourth quarter.
And for the first time during the playoffs, the Portland Trail Blazers lost their composure in a crucial situation.


EATING WELL
LEAD: THE chances of getting a low-fat, low-calorie meal delivered to your home from a restaurant you have never had a meal in are only slightly better than guessing whether it will rain on Sunday.
And if you depend on the nutritional expertise of the order-taker on the restaurant's phone, you have a better than even chance of getting something your thighs don't want.


Abolish the Arts Agency
LEAD: This week, supporters of the National Endowment for the Arts will again come to Washington to defend the agency's record of accomplishment.
They will no doubt argue, as they have before, that the endowment supports many ''nice'' projects; that its lapses in judgment have been few and far between; that it is deplorable that certain members of Congress would even contemplate making an assault on such a fine institution.


Red Sox Cut Buckner
LEAD: Bill Buckner, who won a job in spring training after signing a minor league contract at age 40, was released yesterday by the Boston Red Sox, who have been pleased by the rapid development of Carlos Quintana at first base.


Coke Ends (for Now) a 70-Year Run on Broadway


Bradley Wins Jersey Primary
LEAD: Senator Bill Bradley eased to victory in today's Democratic primary, setting the stage for his general election race against the Republican candidate, Christine Todd Whitman.


Reviews/Ballet;   Young Feet And What They Can Do
LEAD: The School of American Ballet does more than offer an annual workshop program.
It gives several performances of it.
And changes of cast allow many young dancers to appear in leading roles.


Flyers Consider Farwell
LEAD: The office of general manager of the Philadelphia Flyers has been vacant since Bobby Clarke was let go on April 16, but three newspapers - The Philadelphia Inquirer, The Philadelphia Daily News and The Seattle Post-Intelligencer - reported yesterday that it would be filled soon by Russ Farwell, who has been general manager of the Western Hockey League's Seattle Thunderbirds the last two seasons.


Feinstein Wins Primary Race In California
LEAD: Dianne Feinstein, the former Mayor of San Francisco, won the Democratic nomination for governor of California yesterday in a campaign that was dominated in its final days by dramatic appeals to women voters.


Review/Recital;   A Pianist Offers Familiar Works Played Her Way
LEAD: Elizabeth Rich's piano recitals in past years have been devoted to inventive programs in which relationships between works and composers have been examined through juxtaposition.
Her Monday evening recital at Alice Tully Hall was a departure from that style.
Instead, it was a traditional program of Bach, Schubert and


Mattingly Optimistic But Yanks Fall Again
LEAD: He was tying his shoes in the near-darkness of the clubhouse, preparing to walk into the Boston night after another loss in a disheartening season.
But Don Mattingly summoned one more breath of hope when the game was over.


Stiv Bators, 40, Singer With Dead Boys Band
LEAD: Stiv Bators, the lead singer for the early punk band the Dead Boys, died Monday in Paris after being hit by a car.
He was 40 years old.


C.D. and Bank Fund Yields Are Mostly Down for Week
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were mostly down for the week ended yesterday.


Cuomo Takes 55 Minutes To Accept
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo accepted the Democratic nomination for a third term today and responded with a 55-minute speech that often sounded as though he was running for the White House rather than the Statehouse.


Detroit Rallies to Survive a Scare in Game 1
LEAD: The Detroit Pistons, seemingly beaten, made the run of a champion tonight.


Fickle Austrians Adore Polster, for Now
LEAD: For a backdrop, Toni Polster could not have chosen a more regal setting.
Behind him, atop a peak in the Tuscan hills about 15 miles northwest of Florence, stands the Villa d'Artimino, a four-story, 16th-century stone mansion once known as the Villa of the 100 Chimneys, for obvious reasons, and once a summer home of the


Triple Crown Latecomers Take Aim at Unbridled
LEAD: What has 4 heads, 16 legs and perhaps the only chance to keep Unbridled out of the winner's circle in the Belmont Stakes?


Chilean High Court Rejects Inquiry Into Envoy's Killing
LEAD: The Supreme Court rejected a request today for an inquiry into the 1976 assassination of a former Chilean diplomat in Washington.


Brady Backs Bill to Shift Stock Futures to S.E.C.
LEAD: Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady today threw the full weight of the Bush Administration behind legislation that would transfer jurisdiction over stock-index futures to the Securities and Exchange Commission from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.


Uphill Struggle to Adapt Wine to the World's Taste
LEAD: A WINE-BOTTLING line is noisy.
As the bottles bump along the metal belt waiting their turn to be filled, they clank, rattle and crash into one another, setting up a terrible din.


Bloomingdale Plans Cuts
LEAD: Bloomingdale's said yesterday that it would close two unprofitable stores in Dallas and in Stamford, Conn., this summer.


Doctor Tells of First Death Using His Suicide Device
LEAD: A doctor in a suburb of Detroit says he connected a woman suffering from Alzheimer's disease to a homemade suicide device Monday afternoon and watched as she pushed a button and died.


You Need a Brownie. But You're in Italy!
LEAD: FOR many Americans living abroad, and especially students, homesickness often shows up in cravings for brownies or chocolate-chip cookies.
Elizabeth Nicolosi and Carmel D'Arienzo, who had spent their junior year of college here with the Smith College Program in 1982 and 1983, were familiar with these pangs.


Lawyer in Plane Crash Pleads Guilty to Forgery
LEAD: Thomas L. Root, the lawyer whose crash in a small plane in the Atlantic Ocean last July remains a mystery, pleaded guilty today to five Federal counts of forgery and fraud in representing clients before the Federal Communications Commission.


3-Day Ban for Morgan
LEAD: The Red Sox manager, Joe Morgan, was suspended yesterday for three games by the American League president, Bobby Brown, for supporting a brushback pitch that led to a bench-clearing brawl Sunday night in Cleveland.
The suspension begins tonight, and Morgan said he would not appeal it.''(AP)


Revamping Is Set for Intergroup
LEAD: National Intergroup Inc., the Pittsburgh-based holding company once known as the National Steel Corporation, said yesterday that it planned to put its Ben Franklin merchandise stores up for sale.
The company will also pay a special dividend or repurchase stock, move its headquarters to Dallas and change its name to the Foxmeyer Corporation, the name of the drug-distribution company it bought four years ago.


Chronicle
LEAD: MARILYN QUAYLE, in her first appearance at the National Press Club in Washington, apologized for biting back at the press and talked about using her position to champion causes, particularly the fight against breast cancer.
Her mother died of it at the age of 56.


Problem-Solving Event Brings Nations Together
LEAD: As Mikhail Gorbachev talked about arms and trade with President Bush in Washington this weekend, some young Soviet citizens engaged in their own kind of diplomacy at a scholastic competition near the cornfields of central Iowa.


A Stronger Glove For Hospital Staffs
LEAD: A strong fiber that has been used for several years in bullet-resistant clothing for law-enforcement officers is now being applied to surgical gloves to protect operating-room personnel against accidental cuts and scrapes.


Fairfax Downey, 96, A Military Historian
LEAD: Fairfax Downey, a biographer and military historian, died last Thursday at New London (N.H.) Hospital.
He was 96 years old and had lived in West Springfield, N.H., since the mid-1950's, when he moved there from Manhattan.


Cowboys' Jones Retires; Will Be Ring Manager
LEAD: For 16 years after being drafted on the first round out of Tennessee State, Ed (Too Tall) Jones never missed a football game with the Dallas Cowboys, except for one year, 1979, when he tried his hand as a professional boxer.
So it was not much of a surprise yesterday when the 39-year-old defensive end announced his retirement and said he would return to the ring, this time as a boxing manager.


U.S. Sellout at the Summit
LEAD: The most poignant words spoken during the summit talks came from a nonparticipant, Lithuanian spokesman Algimantis Cekuolis.
Shortly after agreements on strategic weapons and trade were signed last Friday, he said of his beleaguered homeland: ''Today we were all alone.''


A.&amp;P. Insider Settlement
LEAD: Alan C. Goulding, a former senior executive vice president and chief operating officer of the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company, settled Federal civil anti-fraud charges today that he had told five business associates about pending takeovers and other A.&amp; P. corporate secrets.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
'Step by Step'


Art Lund Dies at 75; Band Singer in 40's And Stage Performer
LEAD: Art Lund, a lead singer in the Benny Goodman Orchestra in the 1940's who also appeared on Broadway, on television and in films, died of cancer on Thursday at his home in Holliday, Utah, a suburb of Salt Lake City.
He was 75 years old.


RAISES ARE GIVEN TO CENSUS TAKERS
LEAD: In an effort to bolster its work force, the Census Bureau has decided to increase field workers' salaries in those parts of the country where the bureau is having the most difficulty completing the 1990 population count.


Jogger Called Victim of Bias Attack in Park
LEAD: A group of girls threw rocks and shouted racial slurs at a female jogger in Central Park yesterday afternoon, the police said.
The victim was not injured, they said.


Coors Will Buy A Stroh Brewery
LEAD: The Coors Brewing Company, a unit of the Adoph Coors Company, announced a deal to acquire a brewery in Memphis from the Stroh Brewery Company, a unit of the Stroh Companies, Detroit.
It would be Coors's first brewery outside Golden, Colo., where the company has its headquarters.
Stroh said it will operate the 500-employee brewery until Sept.


Talks on Quebec Take 'Small Step' Forward
LEAD: Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and the premiers of Canada's 10 provinces averted an immediate breakdown today in constitutional talks that have raised new doubts about Quebec's future as a part of the Canadian confederation.


LAWMAKERS TOOK OVER 500 JUNKETS
LEAD: Senators accepted more than 500 expense-paid trips last year from corporate or trade groups, and New York City was by far the most popular destination, according to a report made public today.


NEW JERSEY RULING TO LIFT SCHOOL AID FOR POOR DISTRICTS
LEAD: The New Jersey Supreme Court, in the latest in a series of court decisions across the nation on how public schools are financed, ruled today that New Jersey must insure that the poorest cities spend as much on their children's education as wealthy suburbs.


Review/Television;   Children Wrested From Home to Learn a New Life
LEAD: ''American Playhouse'' on public television is presenting a Canadian film tonight.
To be broadcast at 9 P.M. on Channel 13, ''Where the Spirit Lives'' is a fictionalized account of the Canadian Government's long-running policy of forcibly taking Indian children from their reservations and placing them in subsidized religious schools, either Roman Catholic or


Gains Seen in Diagnostic Test for Alzheimer's
LEAD: Scientists have devised an experimental test for diagnosing Alzheimer's disease that seems to be significantly more reliable than any other diagnostic method now available.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary yesterday about Jack Gilford, the actor and comedian, misstated his age.
He was 82, not 81.


Reporter's Notebook;   Democrats Pick a Slate, But Blow Their Streak
LEAD: What's wrong with this picture?


Roosevelt Memorial
LEAD: A memorial service for Archibald B. Roosevelt Jr., a former high-ranking official of the Central Intelligence Agency, will be held tomorrow at 11:30 A.M. at Christ Episcopal Church in the Georgetown section of Washington.
Mr.
Roosevelt died in Washington last Wednesday at the age of 72.


Sales of U.S.-Made Autos Down 6% in May
LEAD: Sales of domestically produced cars fell 6 percent in May, as seven months of sluggish consumer demand showed a faint sign of revival during the last 10 days of the month.
Sales of domestically produced light trucks rose nine-tenths of 1 percent for the 10-day period.


Books of The Times;   A Doctor's Quiet Drama in a Small Clinic in Japan
LEAD:
Watcher From the Shore
By Ayako Sono
Translated by Edward Putzar. 376 pages. Kodansha International. $19.95.


Morton Securities Linked to Ratings
LEAD: Morton International yesterday priced $200 million in ''credit sensitive'' debentures, due in 2020, through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Soviets Promise to Pull Back Some Tactical Nuclear Arms
LEAD: Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze announced today that the Soviet Union would withdraw a small number of its short-range nuclear weapons from Central Europe.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:
From Bistro to Carry-Out


Cooking With Coke: Dishes to Swear by
LEAD: NOW listen up, you food snobs.


Trump Sued By Casino Bondholders
LEAD: Some bondholders of Donald J. Trump's Castle hotel and casino filed suit in the Federal District Court in Manhattan yesterday charging that Mr.
Trump and his executives defrauded investors by misrepresenting the condition of the company when the bonds were issued.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Moscow on Korean Ties
Apparently sensitive to its ties with North Korea, Moscow reacted with reserve to the South Korean leader's assertion that Moscow and Seoul would establish relations.
Page A3.
New Delay for Rocky Flats
The nation's sole producer of plutonium triggers for nuclear weapons should remain shut until at least October, a Government-commissioned safety panel said.


American Express Limits Insurance
LEAD: The American Express Company said it had stopped offering free car-rental insurance to large users of its corporate charge cards.
The travel, financial and information-services company made the disclosure in a letter to its corporate-card users.


No Free Smokes, Council Says
LEAD: Free cigarettes?
Not if the New York City Council has its way.
It voted 33 to 0 yesterday to ban tobacco companies from giving out free cigarettes to potential customers.
The intent, according to the bill's sponsor, Sal F. Albanese, Democrat of Brooklyn, is to stop young people from being tempted to smoke.


Hispanic Voters Girding for New Tests
LEAD: As Hispanic organizations celebrated a major court ruling Monday that opened the door to greater political empowerment, workers for a Hispanic voter registration group were busy in two small farming towns today laying the groundwork for future court challenges.


Seidman Traces Start Of Conflict
LEAD: In his first public comments on his relations with the Bush Administration, L. William Seidman, the outgoing chief of the savings and loan bailout, said today that his difficulties with the White House went back to the earliest days of the Administration when he irritated John H. Sununu, the chief of staff.


Lakers, Celtics Absent In Body Only at Finals
LEAD: Tonight, for the first time since 1979, the National Basketball Assciation championship series began without the Boston Celtics or the Los Angeles Lakers.


A Box-Office Record for the 3d Season in a Row
LEAD: For the third straight year, aided by rising ticket prices, Broadway set a box-office record in the 1989-90 season, according to figures made public yesterday by the League of American Theaters and Producers.
The number of new productions increased after setting record lows in the two previous seasons, but attendance rose only slightly, and only because the season had 53 weeks instead of the usual 52.


16 East European Journalists Observe at U.S. Magazines
LEAD: For the next 10 weeks, 16 Eastern European journalists will spend their days at leading magazine companies in New York to study how Americans edit, publish, promote, distribute and attract advertisers to their magazines.


THE SAVINGS DEBACLE: A SPECIAL REPORT:   A Financial Disaster With Many Culprits
LEAD: The cost, which seems to mount daily, will stretch out for decades.
By one current measurement, paying for the collapse of the savings and loan industry could cost American taxpayers as much as $500 billion, or about $5,000 for every household.


Citicorp Ratings: Jarring Reminders
LEAD: Citicorp is accustomed to superlatives.


Buwunga Journal;   For the Oppressed Sex, Brave Words to Live By
LEAD: The women of the village here took a rare break from their afternoon chores, put on their best dresses and walked up to seven miles to come and hear about something revolutionary: women's rights.


Presbyterians Address Modern Issues in Statement of Faith
LEAD: Presbyterians today adopted a new statement of faith that mixes traditional Christian beliefs with environmental concerns and images of God as both mother and father.


Long-Troubled Paroled Man Reports and Is Arrested Anew
LEAD: Dwayne Gosso, whose odyssey through the foster-care and criminal-justice systems has been recounted in Metro Matters columns in The New York Times, was taken into custody on Monday for violating his parole.
Mr.
Gosso is being held at the Manhattan House of Detention until a bed becomes available at a


Student Interns Gain What Money Can't Buy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Among the Puritans
LEAD: It was a wedding reception.
I was at the bar working on my third glass of ginger ale and gnawing a piece of carrot.
At the buffet I had already eaten three pieces of celery and had switched to the carrot to be on the safe side.


No Rush on Ties to Seoul, Moscow Says
LEAD: The Soviet Union reacted with reserve today to suggestions that it might soon establish diplomatic relations with South Korea in the wake of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's meeting with President Roh Tae Woo.


Braves Sign No. 1 Pick
LEAD: Chipper Jones, the 18-year-old shortstop who was the No. 1 selection in baseball's free-agent draft, signed a contract late Monday with the Atlanta Braves that contains a signing bonus of $275,000.
The total value of the package is about $400,000.
The 18-year-old will be assigned to the Gulf Coast League club in Bradenton, Fla.(


Sometimes a Good Read Is as Flavorful as Good Food
LEAD: THE number of cookbooks focusing on other times and places grows with each season.
Many such books, happily, are first-rate, intelligent and informed, with a range of coherent recipes.
A few, alas, are not.


Brazilian Labor-Union Chief Is Reported Slain in Amazon
LEAD: A Brazilian labor union leader who campaigned on behalf of landless laborers has been shot to death in the Amazon, his union said today.


The Capital Gains Promise: Still False
LEAD: When Washington's budget negotiators get to the dicey question of which taxes to raise, it will be no surprise if the Administration comes out for tax reduction.
President Bush still wants a special break for capital gains.
It's still a bad idea.


Vehicle Imports in Japan
LEAD: Sales of imported vehicles in Japan rose 21.4 percent in May from a year earlier, to 16,325, a record for the month and the 77th straight monthly increase from the month a year earlier, the Japan Automobile Importers Association said today.
But May sales were down from April, when 20,141 imported vehicles were sold.


An Adweek Executive Joins Hearst Magazines
LEAD: Hearst Magazines announced several personnel moves yesterday, including the hiring of David W. Bentley, the senior vice president and publishing director of Adweek, as director of corporate advertising sales.


Notes and Bonds Narrowly Mixed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were narrowly mixed in very slow trading yesterday, as dealers sifted through, and ultimately shrugged off, a series of potentially negative developments.


Moody's Finds Risk In Albany's Budget
LEAD: After assessing the New York State budget adopted three weeks ago, Moody's Investors Services lowered the state's long-term credit rating by one notch.


Review/Theater;   Two Disparate Women Who Find a Sisterly Tie
LEAD: In Marsha A. Jackson's ''Sisters,'' two disparate women are snowbound on New Year's Eve on the 20th floor of an office building in downtown Atlanta.
For dimly stated reasons, they decide not to challenge the elements.
Instead, they try to stretch the audience's credulity.
Repeatedly, the question arises why the two women do not leave the building.


SHUTTLE MUST GO TO REPAIR HANGAR
LEAD: The space shuttle Columbia will have to be returned to a hangar to repair a fuel leak, indefinitely delaying its launching, the space agency said today.


Metro Matters;   Turning Boycott Of Greengrocer Into Green Power
LEAD: For almost five months, a chorus of shrill chants has defined the boycott by a group of blacks against a Korean-owned greengrocer on Church Avenue in Brooklyn.
Meanwhile the real story behind the boycott was quietly unfolding around the corner.


Pervasive Racism and Boycott of Korean Stores
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Charge Barred in Howard Beach Retrial
LEAD: The judge in the Howard Beach racial-attack case ruled yesterday that the prosecution could not expand the charges against three defendants who face a retrial.


For Each Abortion Side, Comfort in Primaries
LEAD: The emerging power of the abortion rights issue was demonstrated anew in Tuesday's primaries as abortion rights supporters won a crucial victory in the Iowa Democratic primary for governor.


Kemp Urges Tightened F.H.A. Insurance Program
LEAD: The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development said today that the Government's mortgage insurance program for single-family homes was losing about $350 million a year and could be insolvent by the end of the decade without immediate changes.


The Unlikely Deal for MGM
LEAD: When Giancarlo Parretti, a garrulous Italian businessman who says he plans to build the world's most powerful entertainment company, announced a tender offer for the MGM/UA Communications Company three months ago, there was widespread skepticism about whether the deal would be completed.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-15
Violence erupted in a Soviet republic.
Moscow reported that at least 40 people had been killed in three days of ethnic rioting and Soviet troop countermeasures in the Central Asian republic of Kirghizia.
Page A1


At Bronx Zoo, a Damsel In Distress Is Rescued
LEAD: The Bronx Zoo introduced Rapunzel to her public yesterday, but this Rapunzel is distinguished not by blond braids but by the coarse reddish-brown hair that protects her 1,725 pounds.


Vasily V. Kuznetsov Dies at 89; A Soviet Vice President and Envoy
LEAD: Vasily V. Kuznetsov, a former First Vice President of the Soviet Union and a delegate to the United Nations, died Tuesday in Moscow, the official Soviet press agency Tass reported.
He was 89 years old.
The immediate cause of his death was not given.


People
LEAD: *
Susan Caughman has been named vice president of consumer marketing for the Time Inc.
Magazine Company.


George Girard, 83, Queens Pastry Maker
LEAD: George Girard, a pastry maker whose shop, La Vie en Rose in Long Island City, Queens, supplied prominent restaurants and airlines for a quarter-century, died on May 22 at his home in Long Island City.
He was 83 years old.
Mr.
Girard died of heart disease, his son Pierre said yesterday.


New Manager Might Help if He Can Hit and Pitch
LEAD: The last time the Yankees and the Mets changed managers during the same season, Yogi Berra left the Mets and Billy Martin began the first of his five terms with the Yankees.
The Yankees hired Martin to replace Bill Virdon on Aug. 2, 1975; the Mets dismissed Berra four days later.


On Deconstructivism
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Money-Fund Yields Down
LEAD: Yields of taxable and tax-exempt money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down slightly for the week ended yesterday.


A Setback For Albany: Agency Cuts Credit Rating
LEAD: Three weeks after the Legislature adopted a budget that political leaders insisted was sound, a major credit agency, Moody's Investors Services, dealt the state a stinging setback today, lowering its long-term credit rating one notch.


Rev. Vincent J. Hart, Educator, 91
LEAD: The Rev.
Vincent J. Hart, a former president of St.
Peter's College in Jersey City and a former director of development at Fordham University, died on Tuesday at the St.
Ignatius Retreat House in Manhasset, L.I., where he had been retreat master since 1969.
He was 91 years old.


Energy Prices Rise Again; Grains and Soybeans Gain
LEAD: Prices of energy futures finished higher again yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange, rebounding from early losses.


Q.&amp;A.
LEAD:
Paint-Protecting


On Bearding The Iris: Color
LEAD: A COUPLE of miles from my house there's a garden I usually contrive to drive by at this time of year.
I don't know the owners, but the character of their horticultural passion is clear, even at 35 miles an hour in a passing automobile.


Warmth and Ice
LEAD: The Washington summit talks did not reveal a great deal new about George Bush, but they did tell us a lot about Mikhail Gorbachev - certainly more than he intended.


New U.S. Fund Picks Salomon
LEAD: The United States Overseas Private Investment Corporation announced yesterday that it had selected Salomon Brothers to serve as the financial adviser to a new fund that will invest in Eastern Europe.


Home Improvement
LEAD: ROOM air-conditioners perform better and last longer with simple cleaning and maintenance twice a year: before the cooling season begins and midway through the summer.


Bush Meets Korean Leader at the White House


Personal Health
LEAD: While many people work hard to counter the drying effects of winter on their skin, warm weather actually harbors far more threats.


Lafleur: One More Time
LEAD: Guy Lafleur said yesterday in Quebec that at the age of 38 he will play one more National Hockey League season with the Nordiques and then retire, permanently this time.(AP)


Evolution in Europe;   40 REPORTED DEAD IN SOVIET CLASHES
LEAD: The Kremlin reported today that at least 40 people had been killed in three days of growing ethnic rioting and Soviet troop countermeasures in the Central Asian republic of Kirghizia.


Nicholas W. Danforth, Investment Counselor, 85
LEAD: Nicholas Williamson Danforth, a retired investment counselor, died of a heart attack on May 30 at his home in Weston, Mass.
He was 85 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Tuesday about Harold J. Corbett of the Monsanto Company misstated his action.


The Krzyzewski Talks
LEAD: Mike Krzyzewski, Duke's basketball coach, met in Washington yesterday with Red Auerbach, the president of the Celtics, to discuss the team's coaching vacancy.


Troupe Devoted to Obscure Operas
LEAD: L'Opera Francais de New York, a shoestring company that specializes in infrequently performed French operas, might not have been established if a promised conducting job had not fallen through.


Washington Talk;   Frank, It's Clear, Isn't Yet Done For
LEAD: If the prognosticators were to be believed, by now Representative Barney Frank should be finished politically.


Evolution in Europe;   East Europe's Nuclear Plants Stir West's Safety Concerns
LEAD: After closely studying nuclear plants in Eastern Europe, West European scientists have concluded that the reactors fall far short of Western safety standards and in many cases should be radically modified or closed.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: QUEEN ELIZABETH II makes her first appearance as an older woman on the new $:5 bank note, being issued today in Britain.
Jowly and with wrinkles, she is still smiling gently.


Medellin Journal;   In the Capital of Cocaine, Savagery Is the Habit
LEAD: Viewed from the window of a commuter helicopter, Medellin offers much of the provincial charm long associated with Colombia's second largest city.


Helms Change Added to Disabled Rights Act
LEAD: The Senate voted 53 to 40 today to support an amendment to a bill barring discrimination against the disabled that would allow employers to shift workers infected with AIDS and other contagious diseases out of food-handling jobs.


Hewlett-Packard, Mentor in Deal
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company and the Mentor Graphics Corporation signed a three-year contract under which Mentor will purchase up to $400 million worth of HP/Apollo work stations, servers and other computer hardware, software and services.


2d Activase Approval
LEAD: Genentech Inc. said today that the United States Food and Drug Administration had granted approval for the marketing of its cardiovascular drug Activase for the treatment of obstruction of the arteries of the lungs.
The drug, a tissue plasminogen activator, is already licensed as a treatment for heart attack patients.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
CINCINNATI (NL) - Signed Greg Margheim, Dan Tobin and Mike Ferry, pitchers, and Kevin Riggs, second baseman.
METS (NL) - Signed Aaron Ledesma, shortstop, and Michael Patrizi, catcher.
SEATTLE (AL) - Re-assigned the contract of Mickey Brantley, outfielder, from Calgary of the Pacific Coast League to Milwaukee's Denver farm club in the American Association.


Trenton Seeks to Tailor Florio School Plan to Court Order
LEAD: Representatives of the Florio administration and the State Legislature today began trying to tailor the Governor's proposals on how New Jersey raises and spends money to Tuesday's State Supreme Court decision on school aid.


Books of The Times;   The President's Husband and His Near-Fatal Puns
LEAD:
First Hubby
By Roy Blount Jr.
286 pages. Villard Books. $18.95.


INSIDE
LEAD:
China, Libya and Poison Gas
China is negotiating with Libya to sell ingredients for chemical weapons to the Qaddafi Government, Bush Administration officials said.
Page A14.
Arts Proposal Rebuffed
Members of Congress refused to back an Administration move to reauthorize the National Endowment for the Arts for only one year.


Drexel Plan Has Creditors Skeptical
LEAD: The creditors of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. voiced strong skepticism yesterday about the firm's reorganization plan, questioning whether Drexel's management should supervise the liquidation.


Loss No. 1 for Merrill And No. 32 for Yanks
LEAD: Stump Merrill's first day as the new Yankee manager could have easily been just another day at the ball park for Bucky Dent.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
COLLEGE WORLD SERIES
Stanford Stays Alive
Brian Sackinsky, a freshman, turned a surprise start into a sparkling pitching performance as he shut down fourth-seeded Georgia and kept top-seeded Stanford alive in the College World Series with a 4-2 victory in Omaha last night.


Judge Rejects Broad Testing For Drug Use
LEAD: A Federal judge in Manhattan has declared unconstitutional a New York City Transit Authority policy in the mid-1980's that mandated testing for marijuana use for all employees and job applicants.


Metromedia Wins Lawsuit
LEAD: The Metromedia Company was awarded $46 million in damages yesterday in a civil racketeering lawsuit against William D. Fugazy, a New York operator of travel agencies and limousine services.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


An Empire at Risk - Trump's Atlantic City;   Debt Forcing Trump to Play for Higher Stakes
LEAD: For Donald J. Trump, the 43-year-old entrepreneur who built his business empire during the 1980's with borrowed money, the stakes are highest, and the game hardest, along the sandy Boardwalk of Atlantic City.


Donations in U.S. Climb, but Worries Linger
LEAD: Americans gave $114.7 billion last year in philanthropic gifts, an increase over last year, but fund-raisers remain worried about the continuing adverse impact of 1986 tax laws.


Perfuming A Fund Drive
LEAD: A BLUE speckled egg with an orange beak emerging from it and a clear-glass apple with a red stem are among perfume bottles on display in the fragrance department of Bloomingdale's through tomorrow.


Sakowitz Planning To Close 5 Stores
LEAD: Sakowitz Inc. planned to liquidate all its specialty stores in Texas after no bids were received for the Houston retailer at a Federal Bankruptcy Court hearing in New York.
The chain, which has five stores in Texas and one in Cincinnati, is 80 percent owned by the L. J. Hooker Corporation, based in Atlanta.


Topics of The Times;   Ethical Update
LEAD: A decade ago, the Senate Judiciary Committee agreed to frown on nominees for the Federal bench who belong to clubs that engage in ''invidious discrimination,'' including racial or religious exclusion.
A few nominees have since been confirmed only on condition that they quit such clubs.
The policy has needed updating to include sex discrimination, and to make clear that last-minute resignations look fishy; any lawyer with judicial ambitions ought to quit such clubs now.


The Year That Ended On June 6
LEAD: In the centuries to come, when historians search the archives for the events of the year 1990, they will be surprised to learn that it ended on June 6 instead of Dec. 31.


Thomas Draws Raves For 4th-Quarter Effort
LEAD: A panel of judges was asked today to rate the most memorable games in Isiah Thomas's career in the National Basketball Association.


When Karan Handles It, Fur Can Look Like Silk
LEAD: IT'S casual, sophisticated and technically advanced.
Donna Karan's latest fur collection, her fifth for Birger Christensen, is clearly her best yet.
It focuses on furs made like blankets or chair throws, no more bulky than an afghan.


Lehman Unit Revived In Shearson Overhaul
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. overhauled its operations yesterday, reviving a respected investment banking name in its effort to rebound from record losses on Wall Street.


Bradley Wins New Jersey Primary
LEAD: Senator Bill Bradley, who won an easy victory in the New Jersey Democratic primary in his bid for a third term, will face a little-known Republican candidate, Christine Todd Whitman, in the November general election.


Beijing Frees 97 Held in Protests To Try to Ease Domestic Tension
LEAD: China announced today the release of 97 people who had been involved in last year's pro-democracy movement, including two student leaders, in a move that diplomats described as an attempt to ease domestic tensions and win favor in Western countries.


Sometimes, It Really Is A Bit Like Football
LEAD: During the United States' 2-1 loss to Switzerland on Saturday, several American players were hammered fairly hard.
The team's leading scorer, Bruce Murray, in particular, had a difficult time as the man marking him seemed more interested in kicking his legs than the ball.
On one play, the Swiss defender conked


Jets Re-sign McNeil
LEAD: Freeman McNeil, the Jets' career rushing leader with 7,146 yards gained on 1,605 carries over nine seasons, yesterday signed a series of one-year contracts.
Last season, a serious ankle injury sidelined McNeil, the Jets' No. 1 selection in the 1981 draft out of U.C.L.A.
He played in only 11 games, picking up only 352 total yards on 80 carries for the season.


Senate Panel Votes to Bar Export of Banned Pesticides
LEAD: The Senate Agriculture Committee approved legislation today to bar American chemical companies from exporting pesticides that are banned in the United States.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Adobe Systems Inc., Mountain View, Calif., provided Xerox Corp. with licensing rights to Adobe's Postscript language interpreter.
Postscript is an industry-standard language that supports computer systems and electronic printing and publishing products.
Details of the agreement were not disclosed.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: President FERNANDO COLLOR de MELLO of Brazil made a hot television appearance yesterday.
He was to set fire to a mound of seized cocaine and marijuana, to promote his anti-drug campaign.
Instead, the gas-soaked pile exploded in flames as Mr.
Collor dropped a torch on it.
He then covered his face and ran back.


Evolution in Europe;   Czechoslovak Demonstrators Hail Friendship With U.S.


Truck Disrupts Traffic On Verrazano Bridge
LEAD: Brooklyn-bound traffic on the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge was disrupted yesterday for three hours during the evening rush when a private sanitation truck struck an overhead beam on the lower level on the Staten Island side of the bridge, the police said.


LEADER OF LIBERIA REFUSING TO QUIT
LEAD: With rebel columns bearing down on the capital, a group of prominent Liberian religious leaders has urged President Samuel K. Doe to resign and create a transitional Government.
But Mr.
Doe rejected the demand with a scornful tirade, several participants in the meeting said today.


NBC, Citing Nielsen, Sees A $200 Million Ad Shortfall
LEAD: Acknowledging that it had lost ground competitively and economically over the last year, NBC said today that it faced a $200 million shortfall in advertising revenues because of lower prime-time ratings and problems with the ratings system.


Eritreans Demonstrate Ability to Govern
LEAD: To the Editor:


18 Years, 18 Times: Yanks Once Again Replace a Manager
LEAD: Bucky Dent's short and unproductive reign as Yankee manager ended suddenly today when Dent was dismissed with his team in last place.
In a strange twist, the move came in the city where Dent enjoyed his greatest triumph as a player.


Tobacco Ads in France
LEAD: The French Cabinet voted today to ban all tobacco advertising in France by 1993 in what would be one of the world's toughest anti-smoking laws.
The bill would also severely restrict advertising for alcoholic beverages.
A separate bill is expected to be introduced soon that would raise cigarette prices by 15 percent - the biggest single increase ever in France.


Woman Admits She Lied After a Slaying
LEAD: Testifying for the third day at her murder-conspiracy trial, Karin Aparo conceded today that she had lied to the police after her mother was killed and had lied to the former boyfriend who committed the slaying.


A Women-Only College Is Discrimination
LEAD: To the Editor:


Accounts
LEAD: *
Anderson-Little/Richman Brothers, a division of Woolworth Corp., to Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Partners, with a budget of $10 million.


Japan Picks U.S. Design For Phones
LEAD: The Japanese Government chose American technology yesterday as a nationwide technical standard for its next generation of cellular telephones.


Warsaw, Faulted by Walesa, Declares Market Conversion Complete
LEAD: Under renewed criticism from Lech Walesa, the Solidarity leader, the Government of Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki declared today that Poland had converted its economy to a Western-style market system in just five months, but that the price was high and that it was time to ease up on austerity.


Review/Television;   'Seinfeld,' A Comic As a Comic
LEAD: Jerry Seinfeld is still another comedian attempting to transform the essence of his stand-up act into a weekly television series.
Bill Cosby succeeded.
So did Roseanne Barr.
Jackie Mason didn't.
Currently in the midst of a limited run on NBC, Thursdays at 9:30, ''Seinfeld'' comes tantalizingly close to making it.


Tyson Works Out
LEAD: Mike Tyson's first public workout for his June 16 fight against Henry Tillman drew about 1,000 fans, who waited yesterday for the former heavyweight champion who was more than an hour late for the workout in the sports pavilion at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev.
Tyson will fight for the first time since losing his title Feb.


The Secret Is the Brows
LEAD: It takes 45 minutes to transform Pat Carroll into Sir John Falstaff.


Computer Retailer in Japan Deal
LEAD: Businessland Inc., a large computer retailer, announced today that it had formed a joint venture with several Japanese companies to sell personal computers and work stations in Japan.
The new venture, to be called the Businessland Japan Company Ltd., has headquarters in Tokyo.


Brent Staples Is Appointed To Times's Editorial Board
LEAD: Brent Staples, first assistant metropolitan editor of The New York Times, is moving to the newspaper's editorial board to write on politics and culture.
His appointment, effective this summer, was announced yesterday by Jack Rosenthal, editorial page editor.


An Artful Falstaff Who Transcends Sex
LEAD: It is the morning after, and Sir John Falstaff is sitting in a corner coffee shop not far from Capitol Hill, sipping decaffeinated coffee and munching a strip of bacon.


Physician Fulfills a Goal: Aiding a Person in Suicide
LEAD: For weeks before he first allowed a patient to use his homemade suicide device, Dr.
Jack Kevorkian said, he scouted southeastern Michigan for a clinic, church or funeral home that would allow him a haven in which to perform the procedure.


A Search to Bar Retardation in a New Generation
LEAD: Pediatricians throughout the 50 states are rejoicing at the remarkable success of a once-revolutionary screening program and diet therapy to prevent mental retardation in the nearly 300 American babies who are born each year with an inherited metabolic disorder called phenylketonuria.


CHINA WEIGHS SALE OF GAS CHEMICALS
LEAD: The United States has received intelligence reports that China is considering the sale of chemicals to Libya that can be used to make poison gas, Bush Administration officials said today.


White House Panel Says U.S. Can Fight Pollution and Grow
LEAD: The White House's Council on Environmental Quality says the progress of the last two decades shows that the nation can have both economic growth and environmental quality.


Once Destined for the Scrap Heap, a Famous Sign Gets New Life


Jackson Urges Barry to Seek Plea Agreement
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson called on Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. today to work out a plea greement with prosecutors on the 14 drug-related charges he faces, including an agreement not to seek re-election.


As Memory and Music Faded, Oregon Woman Chose Death
LEAD: Three years ago, her husband says, Janet Elaine Adkins began to notice slips in her memory and her ability to play the piano music she loved.


Police Hold Tokyo Broker
LEAD: The president of an unlicensed financial futures brokerage was detained today on suspicion of swindling 12 billion yen, or about $78.7 million, from 2,000 investors.


F.D.I.C. Rejects Bid
LEAD: The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation said it had declined an unsolicited offer for its 26 percent stake in the Continental Bank Corporation of Chicago.
The F.D.I.C. became a Continental shareholder after rescuing the former Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Company in 1984.


Brooklyn Judge Drops Charge Against Grocer
LEAD: The assault charge against a Korean grocer whose store has been boycotted for more than four months was dismissed yesterday, but prosecutors said they would continue to investigate the incident.
The boycott is expected to continue.


An Outsider's View of the Solar System


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Three young reporters got the Livingston Award in New York yesterday.
This is the ninth year MOLLIE PARNIS LIVINGSTON, the fashion designer, has given the awards to journalists under the age of 35.
They went to PETER GUMBEL of The Wall Street Journal, TOM ASHBROOK of The Boston Globe and MICHELE NORRIS of The Washington Post.


Spend Fairly for Schools. Then What?
LEAD: The New Jersey Supreme Court's remarkable decision on poor school districts deserves national notice for reasons of justice and elemental decency.
The state legislature will now have to spend as much on poor districts as on rich ones.
But eliminating spending inequities is only a starting point.
A quality education for all students cannot be conferred even by model court decisions or assured even with money.


Knicks' Ewing Chosen To All-N.B.A. Squad
LEAD: After finishing second to Akeem Olajuwon in the voting for center on the all-National Basketball Association team for the last two seasons, Patrick Ewing of the Knicks finally topped his talented rival from Houston and became the only newcomer on the 1989-90 team announced yesterday.
Ewing, who averaged 28.6 points, 10.9 rebounds and 3.99 blocks while shooting an average of .551 from the field, joined repeaters Magic Johnson of the Los Angeles Lakers and Michael Jordan of Chicago, the guards, and Charles Barkley of Philadelphia and Karl Malone of


Dr. Harry L. Segal, 90, Physician and Teacher
LEAD: Dr.
Harry Louis Segal, a gastroenterologist and educator, died of pneumonia on Monday at Strong Memorial Hospital in Rochester.
He was 90 years old and lived in Brighton, N.Y., a suburb of Rochester.


TAX REVOLT FADES AS CALIFORNIANS VOTE AN INCREASE
LEAD: More than a decade after they led a revolt against taxes and spending, California voters turned around in elections Tuesday and approved higher gasoline taxes, a looser limit on state spending and more than $4 billion in bonds.


Taylor Seeks New Deal
LEAD: Negotiations are under way between Lawrence Taylor and the Giants to sign the All-Pro linebacker to a contract extension or a new pact.


Business Wary of Gorbachev Pitch
LEAD: Although American business leaders were heartened by Mikhail S. Gorbachev's speeches in the last week on economic reform in the Soviet Union, they warn that a series of obstacles still prevents them from investing in a big way in that country.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Express Co., New York, appointed Richard M. Scroggins senior vice president for corporate real estate and general services and also named him chairman of the company's environmental protection committee.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It makes me look so old.''
- Elizabeth II of England, about the new $:5 bank note.
[B8:1.]


If a Hat Makes You Hang Your Head
LEAD: ALTHOUGH custom hatters are a thing of the past in New York City, Worth &amp; Worth tries to retain some of the old-fashioned service.
The shop will steam-clean and reshape hats, free of charge, while you wait.


Belmont Stakes a Weak Main Event
LEAD: The 122d Belmont Stakes is just one of seven stakes races over four days at Belmont Park this week.
Given the weakness of Saturday's main event this year, the other races seem even more interesting than usual.


Review/Ballet;   His First and Latest Works Open Robbins Festival
LEAD: A Festival of Jerome Robbins's Ballets opened Tuesday night at the New York State Theater with the deceptive simplicity that colors many of the more than 60 works choreographed by Mr.
Robbins since 1944.


London Bank Plans to Move
LEAD: The Abu Dhabi-controlled Bank of Credit and Commerce International said today that up to 500 British employees would lose their jobs in a reorganization that includes the transfer of its headquarters to Abu Dhabi from London.


States Turn to the Courts for Water As the Rain-Starved Missouri Falls
LEAD: To hear them talk, both the people who live upriver and those who live downstream on the Missouri River Basin are prepared to be completely reasonable.
All they want, they say, is their rightful share of the mighty river's water and its benefits.


American Sentenced by Bonn for Espionage
LEAD: A West German court sentenced a former United States Army sergeant today to life in prison for selling Soviet-bloc agents ''mountains of highly secret materials'' that could have undermined Western defenses in the event of war.


Small as a Bug on Radar, Stealth Is in Budget Sights
LEAD: Still trying to build support for the Stealth bomber, the Air Force said today that the aircraft would appear no bigger than an insect to an enemy radar operator.


Diagnosis of Alzheimer's Is No Matter of Certainty
LEAD: Many medical experts said yesterday that it seemed precipitous for an Oregon woman to commit suicide at the age of 54 after being told that she suffered from Alzheimer's disease.


Upjohn Selling South African Unit
LEAD: The Upjohn Company agreed to sell its 100-employee South African vegetable-seed operation, Asgrow S.A., to local management.
But an Upjohn spokesman, John P. Lambrechts, said the company was not pulling out of South Africa and would continue operating its 150-employee Upjohn Ltd. pharmaceutical and animal health products business there.


Hitachi Shows New Computer
LEAD: Hitachi Ltd. of Japan introduced a new computer yesterday that is faster than I.B.M.'s biggest mainframes.


Evolution in Europe;   Baker Seeks Europe Security Group Shift
LEAD: In an effort to parry Soviet hopes to have the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe rather than NATO take the leading role in shaping a new Europe, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today offered his own ideas of how the 35-nation organization should evolve.


Messier Wins the M.V.P. Award
LEAD: Mark Messier of Edmonton stepped out of Wayne Gretzky's shadow tonight by winning the Hart Trophy as the National Hockey League's Most Valuable Player, an award dominated by his former teammate in the 1980's.


New Findings Tie Cut in Smoking To Drop in Heart Disease Deaths
LEAD: New findings from a large heart study support the belief that reductions in smoking and other health risks have contributed importantly to a sharp decline in deaths from heart disease.
Researchers using data from the Framingham Heart Study, which has followed patients for more than 40 years in Massachusetts, estimated that nearly a third of the decline in coronary deaths may be a result of reductions in blood cholesterol levels, blood pressure and cigarette smoking.


MBIA Offers Common Shares
LEAD: MBIA Inc., the holding company of the Municipal Bond Investors Assurance Corporation, one of the leading municipal bond insurers, is offering 5.75 million common shares at a price of $36.25 a share through Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


B.S.B. Wins Best Foods Jobs
LEAD: Backer Spielvogel Bates yesterday won the advertising account for Mazola corn oil products, made by the Best Foods division of CPC International.
The agency's corporate cousin, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, resigned the account in April.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about the New York State Democratic nominating convention referred incorrectly to Ralph J. Marino, a Republican who is State Senate majority leader.
Mr.
Marino supports abortion rights but opposes Medicaid funds for abortions.
The article also misidentified Gov.
Madeleine M. Kunin, who has decided against running for re-election.


Hurled Roll of Papers Hits Quayle on Head
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle was struck in the head today with a rolled-up collection of papers thrown by a man who shouted to him as he got into his limousine near the Capitol.


Japanese Warrants Surge, But Many Investors Lose
LEAD: Japan is justly famous for its many natural hot springs, which seem to bubble from nearly every cleft rock in this mountainous land.
But never has there been a more bountiful gusher than the financial wellspring known as the Japanese market for stock warrants.


Wine Tax Should Match That on Liquor and Beer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Topics of The Times;   Beggaring the Beggars
LEAD: Victorious in court over subway beggars, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority did something bureaucratic and insensitive.
It filed an accounting of court costs, ordinarily the first step toward collecting them from an opponent.
Startled by protests, the M.T.A. then withdrew the filing, saying it never intended to extract $1,425.90 from the losing side.


U.S. to Clean Radium Sites In Three Towns
LEAD: After seven years of local uncertainty and fear, Federal officials said today that they would spend more than $250 million to remove radium-contaminated soil from around and under as many as 400 houses in Glen Ridge, Montclair and West Orange.


GUERRILLA HIDEOUT IS RAIDED IN LIMA
LEAD: Two pairs of thick eyeglasses left on a writing desk, medicine bottles on a bed stand and a bookcase filled with Maoist and Stalinist literature indicate that the mastermind of Peru's Shining Path rebellion recently stayed at a split-level house on a quiet middle-class street here.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Already banned at Stanford University and the University of California at Berkeley, the Grateful Dead have now been banned in Columbia, Md.


The Challenge to Designers
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Group Predicts Big Rise In AIDS for New York
LEAD: One in 25 New York City adults will become sick from the AIDS virus within the next 10 years, creating tremendous burdens on the local economy and health-care system, a national health organization said in a report yesterday.


Pic 'N' Save Corp. Wins Injunction
LEAD: The Pic 'N' Save Corporation said a Federal District Court had granted its request for a preliminary injunction enjoining Girard Partners L.P. from pursuing its proxy fight until it discloses more information about its partners.


Review/Jazz;   An Up-to-Date Big Band
LEAD: For almost 10 years, Toshiko Akiyoshi has maintained an unusually challenging role in jazz as a pianist who leads a big band playing a repertory made up solely of her own compositions and arrangements.
Since she organized her band in 1973, the ranks of major big-band leaders have dwindled with the deaths of Duke Ellington, Count Basie, Thad Jones, Mel Lewis and Gil Evans, leaving Miss


Bank Lending Said to Slow; No Credit Squeeze Is Seen
LEAD: Three top Federal regulators said today that there had been a slowdown in bank lending but no credit squeeze.
And they said that any slowdown should not be attributed to excessively harsh treatment of banks by examiners.


Leslie P. Barker, Physician, 88
LEAD: Dr.
Leslie P. Barker, a physician who founded the dermatological service at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan in 1942, died of colon cancer on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 88 years old.


Kirghizia; At A Glance
LEAD:
The People


The Public Voice - Amplified
LEAD: Voters in California this week needed to know a little bit about a lot of things - mountain lions, chiropractic and trial procedures, to name only a few.
That made the measly 39.5 percent of the electorate who actually went to the polls part of a dubious national trend - instant popular government.


Battling Back From Knee Surgery, Muster Gains Paris Semifinals
LEAD: Every morning, Thomas Muster of Austria walks two blocks toward center court from the apartment he is renting near Roland Garros.
He selected the apartment in order to be very close to the object of his desire, the French Open championship.


Easier Living for the Aged or Disabled
LEAD: THE two-story, three-bedroom house in this Prince Georges County suburb of Washington is notable for not being conspicuous.
It seems inspired by ''Ozzie and Harriet,'' but it is perhaps the best mainstream example of ''adaptable housing,'' designed to meet the needs not only of the general population but also of the disabled and the elderly.


Vuitton Off Moet Board
LEAD: In the final round in a 15-month bout between rival clans making up the French luxury group LVMH Moet Hennessy-Louis Vuitton, the last representatives of the Vuitton family were voted off the board today.


Puzzles Whose Pieces Fit Young Imaginations
LEAD: When children play with Bright Ideas puzzles, the brightly colored wooden pieces often wind up outside the frames as shapes for free-form designs, people and animals.
Dan Wetmore, the founder of the Bright Ideas puzzle company, likes it that way.


Legislators Rebuff One-Year Extension For U.S. Arts Panel
LEAD: Republican and Democratic members of the House panel that oversees the National Endowment for the Arts refused today to go along with the Bush Administration's recommendation that the endowment be reauthorized for one year without any restrictions, rather than the usual five years.


A Big Dream Comes True for Stump Merrill
LEAD: Carl (Stump) Merrill is many things, but first and foremost he is a baseball man.


Wasserstein Names Adviser
LEAD: The Wasserstein, Perella Group Inc., the mergers and acquisitions firm, said on Tuesday that it had named Franco Reviglio senior adviser.


Lectures on the Sistine
LEAD: A look at the restoration under way in the Sistine Chapel at the Vatican is to be given today at 5 and 8 P.M. at the New York Society for Ethical Culture, 2 West 64th Street.
The cleaning of the Michelangelo frescoes is to be discussed by Dr.
Walter Persegati, the secretary general of the Vatican Museums.


Dying, Dr. Kevorkian's Way
LEAD: To Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, who made it possible, the death by lethal injection of Janet Adkins this week was one more volley in his battle to make euthanasia ''a positive experience.'' To others, it seemed a lot more like an execution.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: AFTER six years of living with her husband and stepchildren, Kris Warhol said she finally feels like she is a real mother.
A few hours earlier she had appeared before a Hennepin County judge in downtown Minneapolis as the final step toward adopting her two stepdaughters, age 11 and 14.


M.T.A. to Run TV Ads To Gain Subway Riders
LEAD: If you watch television today you are likely to hear the following lines from a new set of commercials.


Parishioner Finds Suspect in '82 Church Theft
LEAD: When the Rockland County woman walked into the J. C. Penney store in Taos, N.M., a few weeks ago, she thought it had to be her church's missing treasurer.
He had a beard, which was new, but when they had traded a bit of chitchat about Rockland, she was sure.


Federal Judge Rules Rap Album Violates County's Obscenity Law
LEAD: The rap album ''As Nasty As They Wanna Be'' by the group 2 Live Crew was declared obscene today by a Federal judge who cited its graphic sexual lyrics.


Evolution in Europe;   Warsaw Pact Under Fire
LEAD: On his way to Moscow to attend a meeting of the leaders of the Warsaw Pact, Prime Minister Jozsef Antall of Hungary called today for the abolition of the military alliance by the end of 1991 and, more immediate, for the elimination of those parts of the treaty that violate the ''sovereignty'' of its seven member countries.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
COMPANIES
Donald J. Trump is relying on his three casinos to provide the cash he needs to keep his sprawling empire going.
But making a success of his once-lucrative gaming houses in an increasingly difficult market will require management skills that Mr.
Trump has yet to demonstrate. [Page A1.


Dollar Up in Light Trading As Gold Prices Are Mixed
LEAD: The dollar rose yesterday against all primary currencies except the Canadian dollar in sluggish domestic trading marked by various international considerations.


Seagram Net Declines 4.6%
LEAD: The Seagram Company said today that its profit fell 4.6 percent in its first quarter.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
8.25
9.48
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.70
7.71
8.11
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.61
7.76
7.83
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.48
8.48
8.27
30-YR.


North Carolina Democrat Sets Strategy in Taking On Helms
LEAD: Harvey Gantt, who on Tuesday won the Democratic nomination for the United States Senate here, said today that he would run a campaign aimed at sidestepping the emotional issues that are likely to be favored by his Republican opponent, Senator Jesse Helms.


Talking Deals;   Pressure to Sell On Savings Units
LEAD: LIKE the Landmark Land Company, which recently put its vast real estate portfolio up for sale, other California savings and loan associations are now trying to sell their properties to comply with new Government regulations.


Dan Turner, AIDS Lecturer, 42
LEAD: Dan Turner, a playwright, actor and composer who waged an eight-year battle against AIDS and lectured on how to live productively with the disease, died on Monday at a San Francisco hospice.
He was 42 years old.


Basing Pay On Results Gets Support
LEAD: PAYING advertising agencies based on how well the products they advertise perform in the market is ''an idea whose time has come,'' according to a new study of marketers and their agencies.


Restored Plaza Hailed (but Turn Down That General!)
LEAD: When water spills from the pedestal supporting the goddess Pomona atop the Pulitzer Fountain on Fifth Avenue this morning, a dry spell of almost 10 years will end, and Grand Army Plaza, a sort of urban courtyard for some of the city's most elegant commercial and residential establishments, will be reborn.


Measles Wave Calls for Drug, Not Just Vaccine
LEAD: To the Editor:


Manufacturers Buying Accounts
LEAD: The Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company plans to buy the $252 million credit card accounts and receivables of the Midlantic Corporation, the companies said.
The premium on the sale is expected to be about $60 million.
The deal, which is subject to Federal approval, should be completed in the second quarter, New York-based Manufacturers


Stocks Continue Down As Dow Retreats 13.35
LEAD: Stock prices continued falling yesterday, for the second straight day, with the Dow Jones industrial average dropping 13.35 points to close at 2,911.65.


Review/Jazz;   Drumming With Dramatics
LEAD: The drummer Roy Haynes is after drama.
He will smack his snare drum and cymbal simultaneously, stopping a few hearts in the audience, or he will just play his bass drum.
He'll change rhythm patterns every bar or so, or he'll raise the volume abruptly until the band can barely be heard.
At Condon's on Tuesday night, one band member was late, and Mr.


Corrections
LEAD: An explanatory article on Friday with a theater review of the musical ''Kiss of the Spider Woman'' referred incorrectly to the production at the State University College in Purchase, N.Y.
It was not unchanged between performances on May 25 and 29; a new production number, ''Sailor Boy,'' was added on May 29.


Close to Home
LEAD: IT was hot one Saturday in early May, hot enough for us to carol ''summer's here'' and for me to wear a dress so light the merest breeze could set it floating.
But on Sunday the cold came in again, along with a driving rain, and we weren't talking about summer any longer.
We weren't even talking about spring.


Canada's Latest Identity Crisis
LEAD: Once again, Canada is agonizing over a problem as old as the nation itself - the uneasy marriage between its English and French cultures.
Antagonism has reached another crisis.
There is even talk of Canada breaking apart.
That seems unlikely, but the tension creates unwelcome uncertainty in America's closest ally.


Evolution in Europe;   Czechoslovakia Detains Ex-Communist Party Leader and 4 Others
LEAD: The man who led Czechoslovakia as Communist Party chief for two years until the party was overthrown in the peaceful revolution in November was seized today for interrogation in ''criminal offenses,'' including his role in the Soviet-led invasion in August 1968.


Utility's Bonds To Yield 9.67%
LEAD: The Southern California Edison Company, a subsidiary of the SCE Corporation, is offering $200 million in first and refunding mortgage bonds due 2021 through an underwriting group led by Salomon Brothers Inc., which won the issue through competitive bidding.


Joe Loss, Band Leader, 80
LEAD: Joe Loss, a band leader who was one of the kings of the ballroom dance era, died of kidney failure today in a London hospital, his publicity agent said.
He was 80 years old.
Mr.
Loss's soft-spoken manner and easy-to-dance-to music won him millions of fans, including the British royal family, who frequently engaged his big band to play at royal affairs.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MICHAEL JACKSON will be released from St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif., today or tomorrow.
A spokesman for the hospital said yesterday that tests had shown no abnormalities for the 31-year-old singer, who was admitted Sunday after suffering chest pains.


Measles Wave Calls for Drug, Not Just Vaccine;   Shared Responsibility
LEAD: To the Editor:


Primary Results: Setting the Stage for November
LEAD: Results are not final.
ALABAMA
Paul R. Hubbert (D) 32%
Don Slegelman (R) 255
Runoff
Alabama Democrats set the stage for a June 26 runoff between two candidates for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination: Paul R. Hubbert, executive secretary of the Alabama Education Association, and Don Siegelman, the state attorney general.


Administration To Weigh Plan For Military Cut
LEAD: White House and Congressional negotiators resumed their budget talks today, with the first indication that the Bush Administration is prepared to offer a plan for reducing military spending.


From Voyager 1, a Space Snapshot of 6 Planets
LEAD: Looking back on the scene of its triumphant travels in the last 12 years, the Voyager 1 spacecraft has snapped a sequence of pictures showing six of the nine known planets in orbital array like tiny diamonds on a background of black velvet.


Court Bars F.C.C. Rule On Data Sent by Phone
LEAD: A Federal appeals court reversed two decisions yesterday that the Federal Communications Commission had made concerning the regulation of computer information services provided over telephone lines.


Evolution in Europe;   Anti-Communist Demonstrators Continue Protest in Bucharest


Armstrong Suits
LEAD: Armstrong World Industries and the Belzberg family have dropped all lawsuits stemming from their hostile takeover fight in a settlement that makes the Canadian family $4.4 million richer.
Under the agreement, Armstrong said, the Belzberg group will limit its holdings of Armstrong stock for 10 years to no more than 50,000 shares.


Subway Lifts Ban on Strollers
LEAD: The New York City Transit Authority said yesterday that starting on Monday token sellers would not enforce a longstanding ban on open baby carriages in the subway.


Review/Theater;   Arrogant Academic With a Midlife Crisis Has a Disastrous Day
LEAD: Since there is no new Simon Gray play in sight at the moment, the Manhattan Theater Club has imported a reasonable facsimile of one, ''Prin,'' by another British writer, Andrew Davies.
Like Mr.
Gray's ''Butley,'' ''Prin'' recounts a disastrous day in the midlife crisis of an arrogant, self-destructive academic.


JAIL POINDEXTER, PROSECUTORS URGE
LEAD: Government prosecutors have urged a Federal judge to sentence John M. Poindexter to prison for misleading Congress with a ''diet of lies'' about the Iran-contra affair, according to sentencing papers made public today.


Bridge
LEAD: By tomorrow there will be two undefeated teams surviving in the prestigious Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship.


Tyco Toys Halts Sale Negotiations
LEAD: Tyco Toys Inc. said talks about selling the company to an unidentified party had ended without an agreement.
John Selzer, Tyco's director and secretary, said the company was not actively seeking another suitor.


Evolution in Europe;   Interpreters' Lot: Hours of Tedium and Moments of Precision
LEAD: Did Mikhail S. Gorbachev say on Friday that centrally controlled economic planning was ''a vice,'' meaning immoral - or, did he say it was ''a vise'' constricting growth?


East/West Network
LEAD: The East/West Network, the publisher of seven airline magazines, said yesterday that it would create a new book-publishing division and named Fred R. Smith, the company's president, to be its chief.
Robert Schaeffer will become the division's marketing director, and Jody Rios its administrative director.


Review/Film;   A Documentary Chat With Abbie Hoffman
LEAD: Students of American parody will not want to miss ''My Dinner With Abbie.'' It steals its title from the Wallace Shawn-Andre Gregory ''My Dinner With Andre'' but, in every other way, it is a send-up of the Barbara Walters Finishing School of Television Journalism.


Joseph Tomassi Jr., 67, A Specialist in Mergers
LEAD: Joseph J. Tomassi Jr., an industrial executive and a specialist in mergers and acquisitions, died on Monday at his home in Milford, Conn., at the age of 67.
His family attributed his death to heart failure.


Evolution in Europe;   Soviets to Repay Lend-Lease After a Trade Accord
LEAD: Once the Soviet Union gets the lowest possible tariffs from the United States and access to American Government credits, Moscow will start repaying $674 million of World War II Lend-Lease debts to the United States, an agreement appended to the newly signed Soviet-American trade agreement says.


Change of Names Foiled in Court After Suspect Can't Name Parents
LEAD: Jerome Coughlin was about to be sentenced to probation yesterday in return for a guilty plea to a minor drug-possession charge in Queens Criminal Court.
It was expected that he would be freed from jail, the Queens District Attorney's office said.


Jack Henry Abbott, the 'Lawyer,' Objects
LEAD: Jack Henry Abbott, the murderer and jailhouse author who has been sued for civil damages by a victim's widow, began his defense yesterday by acting as his own lawyer, but with his every move in the courtroom shadowed by armed officers.


Fielder Belts 3 Homers As Tigers Beat Indians
LEAD: Cecil Fielder became the first Detroit player to hit three home runs in a game twice in a season, powering the Tigers over the Cleveland Indians, 6-4, tonight.


Keep American Art Within Our Borders
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ex-Kodak Executive To Head Kinder-Care
LEAD: When J. Phillip Samper found out in December that he had lost out in the competition to become the Eastman Kodak Company's next chief executive, he surprised many people by immediately announcing that he would leave the company.
But it has not taken him long to land a top position.


Older Pass-Throughs Called Stronger Than New Ones
LEAD: Analysts at Salomon Brothers Inc. noted that moderately seasoned pass-through securities now offer a better value than new pass-through issues, a recent research report shows.


Name Change Set For Texas Air
LEAD: The Texas Air Corporation announced it would change its name to Continental Airlines Holdings Inc.
The Houston-based concern, once the nation's largest airline company, owns Eastern Airlines, which is currently in bankruptcy proceedings, as well as Continental Airlines.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article on April 24 about violence by young children in New York public schools described a teacher who was assaulted by a 9-year-old boy.
The teacher, Joan Zale, was quoted as having said: ''I used to think I could make a difference in these kids' lives.
After the attack I thought, 'Why am I knocking myself out when most of them will end up at Rikers Island?


Foreign Investment Dip
LEAD: Foreign direct investment in the United States last year was $64.6 billion, down from $72.7 billion in 1988, but well above outlays in earlier years, the Commerce Department said this week.
It said in a preliminary report that British concerns continued to lead in direct investment, with purchases worth $22 billion last year.


Pregnant Women Can Gain More And Skip Vitamins, a Panel Says
LEAD: Pregnant women who eat balanced diets do not need extra vitamins and can safely gain more weight than previously recommended, according to guidelines released today by the Institute of Medicine.


Soviet Thaw With Seoul: What Is Real Depends on Whom You Listen To
LEAD: Within moments of the end of his meeting with Mikhail S. Gorbachev on Monday, the South Korean President, Roh Tae Woo, was broadcasting a message of victory back home, declaring that ''the cold war ice on the Korean peninsula has now begun to crack'' and predicting the imminent establishment of diplomatic relations with Moscow.


Class of '90On the Family
LEAD: TO the college class of 1990, how does the future look when it comes to balancing careers with family life?


24 Doghouses to Bark About
LEAD: BUDGET overruns, late delivery and ambitious designs often land architects in the doghouse.
These doghouses, however, might not be such bad places to be.


Parker Van Zandt, 96, Aviator and Developer
LEAD: J. Parker Van Zandt, who founded Scenic Airways at the Grand Canyon and established what is now Phoenix's main airport, died of complications of pneumonia on Sunday at a retirement home in Santa Barbara, Calif.
He was 96 years old.


Japanese Stores For Toys 'R' Us
LEAD: The Toys ''R'' Us Inc. expects to open five or six stores in Japan in 1991, the company's chief financial officer, Michael Goldstein, said after its annual shareholder meeting in New York.
Mr.
Goldstein said the Paramus, N.J., company's applications to operate in Japan were progressing well.
The retailer's bid to open in Japan is seen as a test of American retailers' ability to enter the


Mayor of Oakland Backs Football Deal And Loses Election
LEAD: Support for the return of professional football, which seemed a safe political issue, has cost Lionel Wilson his job as Mayor of Oakland, a city that grieved when the Raiders quit town nine years ago but rose up in protest recently at the prospect of their coming back.


Fernandez Weighing Lawsuit on Formula For State School Aid
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez said yesterday that he was contemplating legal action against the state to reduce disparities between school aid to New York City and the rest of the state.


Joseph C. Bevis, 80, Among First To Examine U.S. Public Opinion
LEAD: Joseph C. Bevis, a pioneer in the public opinion and market research industry, died of a cerebral hemorrhage on Tuesday at Martin Memorial Hospital in Stuart, Fla.
He was 80 years old and lived in Stuart.


A Gandhi Crusades Against a Befouled India
LEAD: Maneka Gandhi woke up the other day thinking about polluted water and onion patches.


Viola Gets 9th Victory as Mets Edge Expos
LEAD: Even Dwight Gooden considers it far-fetched: Two months after the delayed start of the baseball season, five of the Mets' six starting pitchers own a collective record of 8 victories, 20 defeats and many raised eyebrows.
The sixth, fortunately, is Frank Viola.
And he stopped the show again last night.


Justice Agency Warned on Inquiry of Loans to Iraq
LEAD: State Department officials say they have cautioned the Justice Department over the agency's investigation of the Atlanta branch of an Italian bank accused of making more than $2 billion in unauthorized and unreported loans to Iraq.


THE 1990 ELECTIONS
LEAD: Nine months after she nearly dropped out of the race for governor of California, Dianne Feinstein emerged today not only as the Democratic nominee but also as the party's new symbol, a charismatic centrist figure who many in the party hope will bring wayward Democrats and independents back into the fold.


Calendar of Events: The Subject Is Roses
LEAD: Roses, Roses, Roses June is the peak for rose blossoms, and the Queens Rose Society is sponsoring a free show on Saturday from 1 to 5 P.M. at Our Lady of the Snows Church, 258-15 80th Avenue (Union Turnpike), Glen Oaks, Queens; information: 718-347-6070.


Mets Dismiss Trade Rumors Of Strawberry to Yankees
LEAD: In a time of turmoil for both teams, the Mets declined to ruffle their relations with the Yankees yesterday when they dismissed rumors of a major trade involving Darryl Strawberry as ''irresponsible speculation.'' But they did acknowledge that they had been talking to the Yankees about a lesser deal that apparently would have involved Bob Geren and Dave Magadan, although even those talks were said to be ''in neutral.


2 Campeau Units See Smaller Losses
LEAD: In a sign that the retail divisions of the Campeau Corporation were improving faster than expected, Federated Department Stores and Allied Stores are expected to report narrower losses for the fiscal first quarter ended April 30 compared with the year earlier.


'Meet Me' to Close
LEAD: ''Meet Me in St.
Louis,'' a musical based on Sally Benson's ''Kensington Stories'' and the 1943 film, with music and lyrics by Hugh Martin and Ralph Blane, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Gershwin Theater, 222 West 51st Street.
Directed by Louis Burke with book by Hugh Wheeler, the show will have run for 253 regular performances and 16 previews.


10 Years Later, Grand Army Plaza Is to Reopen


U.S. to Relax Standards On High-Tech Exports
LEAD: Responding to political change in Eastern Europe and intense lobbying from Western companies, the United States and other major industrial powers agreed today to a sharp reduction of controls on high-technology exports to Warsaw Pact nations.


Fight the Philistines
LEAD: A small band of religious zealots and right-wing political opportunists is trying to show the world that America is an intolerant Puritan country, contemptuous of artists.
Are the rest of us going to take that in silence, wringing our hands, or are we going to stand up and fight?


Agassi to Face Svensson
LEAD: In the men's semifinals Friday, the most controversial player left in the French Open draw, third-seeded Andre Agassi, will face Jonas Svensson of Sweden, a meditative player who has career victories against Boris Becker and Ivan Lendl, but who has had trouble stringing victories together.


Dying by the Thousands;   Light in Ethiopia?
LEAD: The most pitiable victims of Africa's oldest war are three million Ethiopians trapped on battlefields and facing starvation.
But Ethiopia's tough President, Mengistu Haile Mariam, is not faring well either.
So it was certainly a breakthrough for decency, and perhaps for peace, when Presidents Bush and


SOUTH AFRICA ENDS EMERGENCY DECREE IN 3 OF 4 PROVINCES
LEAD: Addressing a major obstacle to full-scale negotiations with the African National Congress, President F. W. de Klerk announced today that national state-of-emergency regulations in effect for the last four years would be lifted in all but one of South Africa's four provinces.


Glenn Abernathy, 68, Political Scientist, Dies
LEAD: M. Glenn Abernathy, who taught at the University of South Carolina for 35 years, died of a stroke on Tuesday while visiting a son in Richmond.
He was 68 years old and lived in Columbia, S. C. Dr.
Abernathy retired in 1986 as the Olin D. Johnston Professor of Political Science at the university.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Victory for Edberg
Stefan Edberg, the 1988 Wimbledon champion, played his first grass-court match of 1990 yesterday, beating John Fitzgerald of Australia, 6-2, 6-2, in the third round of the Wimbledon warm-up event in Beckenham, England.
Top-seeded Ivan Lendl, who has never won at Wimbledon, beat Royce Deppe of South Africa, 6-2, 6-3, to reach the quarterfinals.(AP)


Mandatory Sentences in Drug Cases: Is the Law Defeating Its Purpose?
LEAD: The case before Federal District Judge William W. Schwarzer last fall made him weep as he sat on the bench.


Benefit Programs Emerging As Big Hurdle to Deficit Cuts
LEAD: White House and Congressional budget negotiators turned from military to domestic spending today in their search for a way to slash about $50 billion from the Governmment's deficit for the next fiscal year.


U.S. Jews Go to Geneva To Meet With Mandela
LEAD: A delegation of American Jewish leaders left for Geneva last night to meet with Nelson Mandela before his arrival in New York on June 20 for a 10-day visit to the United States.


Partnership to Buy U.S. Shelter Assets
LEAD: The Metropolitan Asset Group Ltd. and the Lambert Brussels Real Estate Corporation agreed to buy the assets of United States Shelter Corporation, which Metropolitan described as one of the nation's largest real estate syndicators and property managers.


Shock Greets Banning of a Rap Album
LEAD: Civil liberties experts and First Amendment lawyers expressed shock yesterday over a Federal judge's finding in Florida that a rap album by the Miami-based group 2 Live Crew was obscene under the Supreme Court's 1973 criterion of contemporary community standards.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.18
9.47
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.71
7.70
8.12
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.60
7.61
7.75
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.48
8.48
8.28
30-YR.


U.S. Delays On Iraqi Bid
LEAD: The Bush Administration has delayed a decision on Iraq's request for an additional $500 million in loan guarantees from the Commodity Credit Corporation until the conclusion of an Agriculture Department investigation into possible irregularities, including kickbacks, involving Iraq's purchase of American agricultural commodities.


Henry Russek, 78, a Cardiologist Known for Stress Research, Dies
LEAD: Dr.
Henry I. Russek, a cardiologist who conducted early studies of the relationship of occupational and emotional stress to heart disease, died on May 30 at Shands Hospital in Gainesville, Fla.
He was 78 years old and lived in Boca Raton, Fla.


The Captain Who Stays Anonymous
LEAD: In most countries, Mike Windischmann would be a legend.
In the United States, he is a man who may want another job in a few weeks.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Addenda
LEAD: *
Fairchild Publications has started a tennis business magazine, Tennis Merchandiser.
Terence Moffatt is the editor, and Diane Langhorst is the advertising manager.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: FRANK SINATRA spelled his last name backward and has put it, along with a very youthful picture of himself, on jars of spaghetti sauce.
Last week, the sauce, made by Artanis Foods International, hit the shelves in California and will work its way eastward by October.


Review/Circus;   Clowns Who Fly and Flies Who Clown
LEAD: At Circus Oz, almost everyone, no matter how daring, intends to be funny: jumpers, gymnasts and aerialists who crowd a trapeze so that they become as close-quartered as straphangers on a subway car during rush hour.
In this Australian circus, clowns can fly.


First Woman in Top A.B.A. Job Quits
LEAD: Jill Wine-Banks, the first woman ever to serve as executive director of the American Bar Association, resigned abruptly yesterday.
The move ends her stormy tenure of almost three years as the bar group's chief administrator.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: * Henkel Cosmetic, to Tracy-Locke in Los Angeles, for its Fa brand of toiletries.


TV Weekend;   End of the Run for Garry Shandling
LEAD: At the top of Showtime's comedy lineup tonight, at 10, is the final episode of ''It's Garry Shandling's Show,'' which, perhaps not so coincidentally, was pulled not too long ago from the Fox Broadcasting Sunday-night schedule.
The comic has no need to pout, as is his wont.
On the Showtime pay-cable service, ''It's Garry Shandling's Show'' compiled a total of 72 episodes over four seasons.


Killer Defends Himself in Suit by Widow


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Anti-Drinking Effort Aimed at Teen-Agers
LEAD: The Advertising Council and the Harvard Center for Health Communication have announced a project to combat alcoholism among teen-agers.
The effort will build on the campaign of public-service ads the council announced two weeks ago.


Washington at Work;   Attorney General Calm Despite Storm at Justice
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh is getting a lot of criticism these days, but no one can accuse him of that vintage Washington sin of holding on too long to a damaged assistant.
He shunted aside two key members of his ''Pennsylvania mafia'' with icy detachment.


Review/Photography;   Using the Camera as a Guide and Tool in Painting
LEAD: Since its invention, photography has served painters as an illustrational aid, helping them convey expressions, gestures and movements too fleeting for the naked eye.
In a few cases - Edgar Degas is the most obvious example - photographs have provided cues for composition as well.


Violence, as American as Apple Pie
LEAD: To the Editor:


No-Lick Blunder
LEAD: To the Editor:


Farm Credit Bonds To Yield 8.807%
LEAD: The Farm Credit System Financial Assistance Corporation yesterday priced $325 million in 8.80 percent bonds due 2005 at a price of 99 30/32, to yield 8.807 percent, through 25 securities dealers and dealer banks.


Ex-Church Official, Denying Theft, Tells Of $300,000 Profit
LEAD: A former New York church treasurer accused of disappearing eight years ago with church funds said today that he had left abruptly because he was the target of industrial espionage, not because he had stolen anything.


'Piano Lesson' Remarks And Artistic Growth
LEAD: To the Editor:


Icahn Loses USX Contest
LEAD: The USX Corporation said today that its shareholders had rejected the proposal by the takeover specialist Carl C. Icahn to spin off the company's steel division.


Now, NATO Is in Search of a New Self
LEAD: NATO Foreign Ministers meeting here agreed today that their alliance was going to have to begin defining itself more as a partner of the Soviet Union than as an enemy, a senior American official said.


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:
FRIDAY
THE NEW SPANISH DANCE


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-9
South Africa's state of emergency will be lifted in all but one of the nation's four provinces, President F. W. de Klerk announced.
The move addressed a major obstacle to full-scale negotiations with the African National Congress.
Page A1


INSIDE
LEAD:
U.S. Arms Sale to Saudis
The Administration plans a $4 billion arms sale to Saudi Arabia.
Some legislators expressed concern but did not threaten to block it.
Page A5.
A Chip Milestone for Japan
Hitachi said it led the race for a computer memory chip that can store 64 million bits of information.


Economic Scene;   How a Trade Pact Could Aid Soviets
LEAD: The trade agreement signed by President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev at the Washington summit meeting still has high hurdles to clear before it takes effect.


Chicago Journal;   A Source of the Blues Gathers Tributes Anew
LEAD: In the 1940's and 50's, scores of black musicians with nothing but their dreams and harmonicas left the bayous of the South to work the nightclubs and street corners of Chicago's South Side.


Dying by the Thousands;   Darkness in the Sudan
LEAD: What does it take to get the United States Government to express revulsion and horror?


East German Visa Card
LEAD: East Germans will be able to apply for Visa credit cards in the autumn, the Berliner Stadtbank A.G. said on Wednesday after joining the international Visa card network.
The Visa board of directors for Europe, the Middle East and Africa accepted the bank as a member at Visa's annual meeting in Berlin.


Senate's Leaders Move to Salvage Crime Measure
LEAD: A major anti-crime package that includes a provision banning the manufacture and sale of some semiautomatic weapons suffered a serious setback today amid swelling opposition from both gun control opponents and civil liberties groups.


Creditors to Fight Drexel's Plan for Revamping
LEAD: A committee of unsecured creditors of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. said yesterday that it would oppose the investment firm's reorganization plan.


Retailers Say Weather Hurt Sales Last Month
LEAD: Cool, rainy weather depressed sales last month, the nation's major retailers said yesterday, as consumers in many areas elected to delay shopping for spring and summer goods.


Wasserstein, Perella To Acquire Maybelline
LEAD: Wasserstein, Perella Partners L.P. said today that it would buy the Maybelline Company for $300 million, after a deal for the beauty-products concern collapsed.


Cuomo Vetoes Delay in Dredging of PCB's
LEAD: An attempt to delay cleanup of PCB's from the Hudson River was vetoed from the new $50 billion state budget today by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
The veto of the PCB measure included in the budget permits the Environmental Conservation Department to go ahead with plans to dredge contaminated sediment from the Hudson and develop a landfill for it in Washington County.


Piano Recital
LEAD: Jodie Gelbogis DeSalvo is to play Busoni's arrangement of the Bach Chaconne, Beethoven's Sonata No. 31 (Op. 110), Prokofiev's Sonata No. 6 (Op. 82) and the world premiere of Keith Pruitt's Sonata for Piano at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, on Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets are $12.
Information: 362-8719.


California Sets Phone Rules
LEAD: The California Public Utilities Commission issued new regulations on Wednesday for the cellular telephone industry in the state.


Iacocca Says He Will Stay At Chrysler's Helm Past '91
LEAD: Seeking to allay concerns among investors, dealers and employees that a leadership vacuum could develop at the Chrysler Corporation, Lee A. Iacocca said today that he would stay on as chairman beyond December 1991.


Du Pont Offers $1.85 Billion In Zero-Coupon Securities
LEAD: E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company is offering $1.85 billion in zero-coupon convertible discount notes with final maturity of June 14, 2010, through the First Boston Corporation as sole manager.
The size of the issue was originally to have been about $1.3 billion.


At the Movies
LEAD:
Donleavy on Film


Loss of Tropical Forests Is Found Much Worse Than Was Thought
LEAD: Tropical forests, which play a vital role in regulating the global climate, are disappearing much more rapidly than previously estimated, an international research group said today.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Newspaper Ads Down
LEAD: Newspaper advertising spending for the first quarter of the year fell by three-tenths of a percent, to $7.296 billion, compared with the first quarter of 1989, according to preliminary estimates by the Newspaper Advertising Bureau.
While retail advertising rose by 2.7 percent, to $3.835 billion, classified advertising dropped by 6.4 percent, to $2.495 billion.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   McCabe's New Agency Promotes Miami Heat
LEAD: The Miami Heat basketball team, which had previously handled its own advertising, has turned to Ed McCabe and his new agency, Beber Silverstein McCabe &amp; Partners, for additional marketing help. ''We would not have changed our posture had it not been for Ed,'' said Patrick Speer, the Heat's vice president of corporate affairs.


Robert Aaron Mayo, Priest, 53
LEAD: The Rev.
Robert Aaron Mayo, a priest in the Episcopal Diocese of Newark, died on Tuesday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Newark after a long illness.
He was 53 years old and lived in East Orange, N.J.


Aide to Bush Assails Cuomo On Drug Plansi
LEAD: William J. Bennett, the President's national drug policy director, issued a blistering attack on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's drug policies today and asserted that the White House has no fear of a Cuomo Presidential candidacy.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: * Margery Gladstone has been appointed associate publisher of Lear's magazine.


Demian Acquavella, Dancer, Is Dead at 32
LEAD: Demian Acquavella, a dancer with Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane and Company and other troupes, died of AIDS on Saturday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 32 years old.


Review/Art;   Themes of Vuillard: Naturalism to the Daring
LEAD: In ''The Intimate Interiors of Edouard Vuillard,'' an exhibition of 74 paintings, 32 prints and drawings by the French artist at the Brooklyn Museum, artistic radicality is couched in familial tenderness.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Nintendo's Account
LEAD: Nintendo of America, the video-game company, yesterday selected the San Francisco office of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding as its advertising agency.
The other finalist was the Leo Burnett Company; the incumbent was McCann-Erickson.
Nintendo said the account would bill $35 million, although an executive at McCann said the company had never spent more than $15 million.


Wider Race Gap in Writing Skill Is Found
LEAD: The gap in writing ability between white and minority students is even greater than previously indicated, according to the results of a nationwide test released today.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Tropical deforestation is an unparalleled tragedy.
If we don't reverse the trend soon, it will be too late.''
- James Gustave Speth, president of the World Resources Council. [B6:1.]


Dollar Rises in Flat Trading As Slump in Gold Continues
LEAD: Gold prices fell yesterday, briefly reaching their lowest levels in four years, as the dollar moved up against most other primary currencies in uninspired trading.


Some Babes in Uniform For House Ruth Built
LEAD: One day after he selected another new manager to take over his skidding team, George Steinbrenner promised more changes for the Yankees, probably within days.


Myron A. Wick Jr., Executive, 75
LEAD: Myron A. Wick Jr., former chairman and chief executive officer of Dominick &amp; Dominick, the investment banking house, died on Wednesday at his home in Hobe Sound, Fla.
He was 75 years old.


Investigator Delivers Steinbrenner Report
LEAD: John Dowd, the Washington lawyer who conducted baseball's investigation of Pete Rose, delivered the report of his investigation of George Steinbrenner to Commissioner Fay Vincent in San Francisco yesterday.


Boesky Bid for Paramount Alleged
LEAD: The chairman of Paramount Communications Inc. testified yesterday that Ivan F. Boesky tried to lure him into a leveraged buyout of the company with promises that he could personally profit by $100 million to $200 million.


U.S. PLANNING SALE OF ARMS TO SAUDIS
LEAD: The Bush Administration has announced plans to sell $4 billion in arms to Saudi Arabia, including light armored vehicles, antitank missiles and improvements for Awacs electronic surveillance aircraft.


Abbott Argues Actor He Killed Didn't Suffer
LEAD: Jack Henry Abbott, the imprisoned killer and author who is being sued for the death and suffering he caused when he killed an aspiring actor in the East Village, maintained yesterday at a court hearing that his attack on the young man was so quick that there was no suffering.


Ex-Tennis Star Heads SmithKline Drug Unit
LEAD: Jan Leschly, who was a top-ranked professional tennis player in the late 1960's, was named yesterday as chairman of SmithKline Beecham P.L.C.'s worldwide pharmaceuticals business.
He will head the largest of the British-based company's four divisions, one that accounts for 50 percent of sales and 60 percent of profits.


Teen-Age Duel: Seles Too Much for Capriati
LEAD: In what turned out to be a one-sided battle between two prominent members of the Swatch generation, 16-year-old Monica Seles used her double-whammy ground strokes to subdue 14-year-old Jennifer Capriati, 6-2, 6-2, today in the semifinals of the French Open.


Animals' Advocates Seen as 'Terrorists' By Health Secretary
LEAD: The Secretary of Health and Human Services today portrayed animal rights activists as ''terrorists'' and said raids on laboratories and similar tactics used by some of them jeopardized disease-curing experiments.


Market Place;   Some Managers Shunning Stocks
LEAD: As the Dow Jones industrial average flirts with 3,000, many market watchers are wondering whether a group of professional investors will be forced by their clients to join the rally and spend their huge sums of cash, thus pushing stock prices even higher.


Lawyers Ask Judge to Spare Poindexter From Prison-Term
LEAD: Lawyers for John M. Poindexter asked a Federal judge today not to imprison the former national security adviser for his crimes in the Iran-contra affair, asserting that he had already suffered enough.


For Children
LEAD:
SHOWS, NATURE, MUSEUMS
''THE WOMAN AND THE STARS'' and other stories are to be told by Melissa Heckler, 11 A.M. tomorrow at the Hans Christian Andersen Statue, Fifth Avenue and 72d Street in Central Park.
Free.
PUBLIC SCHOOL 87 STREET FAIR, sponsored by the Parents Association, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Colorado Town Cleans Up After Tornado


The Editorial Notebook;   The Other Illicit Traffic
LEAD: Antiquities smuggling can be seen as an unacknowledged twin of the narcotics traffic.
Each trade has its pushers, middlemen and addicted customers.
There is even a curious geographical overlap.
The soils of Latin America, the Middle East and Asia richest in ancient art are in many places highly suitable for cultivating the coca leaf, marijuana and opium poppies.


Marshall Field Chief Seen Coming to Saks
LEAD: Philip B. Miller, chairman and chief executive of Marshall Field &amp; Company, will become co-chairman of Saks Fifth Avenue and eventually be named its chairman and chief executive, financial and retailing executives said yesterday.


Dorothy Weeks, 97, A Physicist Who Led In Variety of Careers
LEAD: Dorothy W. Weeks, a physicist whose professional career spanned nearly six decades, died of a stroke on Monday at Newton Wellesley Hospital in Massachusetts.
She was 97 years old and lived in Wellesley, Mass.


New Russian Orthodox Head
LEAD: An ethnic Estonian considered a strong backer of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's reforms was elected the new Patriarch of the Russian Orthodox Church and its following of tens of millions today.
Metropolitan Alexi of Leningrad and Novgorod won election in a secret ballot, said Anna Generalova, a church spokeswoman.


Meyer M. Kailo, 73; Rose From a Clerk To a Housing Aide
LEAD: Meyer Mitchell Kailo, a career civil servant for the City of New York, died on Monday at the West Boca Raton (Fla.) Hospital.
He was 73 years old and had homes in Boca Raton and Suffern, N.Y.


Nationwide Arts Day Supports Endowment
LEAD: Joining hundreds of cultural organizations around the United States yesterday in support of the National Endowment for the Arts, the Metropolitan Museum of Art draped paintings in black, Carnegie Hall gave a sidewalk percussion salute and Mayor David N. Dinkins helped explain what Arts Day U.S.A. was all about.


U.S. Investigation Of Norton Merger
LEAD: The Federal Government will investigate whether the proposed merger between the Norton Company, an American manufacturer with military contracts, and a French company raises national security concerns.
Executives announced the $1.8 billion merger between Norton and France's Compagnie de Saint-Gobain this spring, thwarting a hostile bid made by BTR P.L.C., a British company, for Norton, based in Worcester,


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, JUNE 8, 1990
LEAD:
The Economy


Yankees Get 1 Hit; Merrill 2d Loss
LEAD: His career as a big league manager is two games old, but Stump Merrill has already seen the worst of times with the Yankees.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, a chart yesterday showing election results omitted a figure in some copies for the Democratic nominee for the Senate from North Carolina.
Harvey Gantt won the nomination with 57 percent of the vote.


Oil Is Spilled in New York Harbor And First Mate on Tanker Is Held
LEAD: A British-flag oil tanker ran aground yesterday morning while docking on the New Jersey side of the Kill van Kull in New York Harbor, spilling about 260,000 gallons of fuel oil into the waterway.


LAW:At the Bar;   The fetish of footnotes, or the folly of trying to eradicate the profession's enduring weeds.
LEAD: It was supposedly Noel Coward who once complained that encountering a footnote was ''like going downstairs to answer the doorbell while making love.'' Or was it John Barrymore, and was his choice of verbs more pungent?
For further information, see footnote 23 in ''Footnote#1 Skulduggery#2 and other Bad Habits#3,'' by Arthur D.


Don't Test Mandela on Israel
LEAD: Nelson Mandela is on his way to Geneva to meet with leaders of half a dozen mainstream American Jewish organizations who are asking him to clarify his position on Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Justice Confused
LEAD: Weird things are happening down at the law firm of Recusal, Entrapment &amp; Fluttering, formerly known as the U.S.
Department of Justice.
Some suspect it is a plot by the current Attorney General, Dick Thornburgh, to make Ed Meese look good by comparison.


Pic N' Save Truce With Dissidents
LEAD: The Pic 'N' Save Corporation reached a truce with Girard Partners L.P., a dissident shareholder group trying to gain control of its board.
The parties said Pic 'N' Save's annual meeting would be postponed until Aug. 15 and neither would solicit proxies or consents before July 15.
The pact allows Pic 'N' Save, based in Dominguez, Calif., and its investment bankers to concentrate on finding bidders for the company, which could include Girard.


Free Bus to 3 Museums For 'The Decade Show'
LEAD: There is a free Saturday bus service for visitors to the most dispersed art exhibition in New York, ''The Decade Show: Frameworks of Identity in the 1980's.'' The three participating museums are the Studio Museum in Harlem, 144 West 125th Street, the New Museum of Contemporary Art, 583 Broadway, near Houston Street, and its neighbor across the street in SoHo, the Museum of Contemporary Hispanic Art, 584 Broadway.


Keep Our Library Doors Open to All Students
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bankers Trust Sells Notes Due in 2000
LEAD: The Bankers Trust New York Corporation priced $200 million in 9 1/2 percent subordinated notes due 2000 yesterday through underwriters led by Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.


Argentina Pays Debt Interest
LEAD: Trying to improve relations with its foreign creditors, Argentina met today with leading banks in New York and made a $40 million interest payment.


Shift in Senate Control Gave Us McCarthy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nagasaki Journal;   With the Hugest Splash, the Japanese Go Cruising
LEAD: A while back Shoji Fukushima took a break from his job at the giant shipyard dominating the harbor here and signed up for one of those luxurious Caribbean cruises that haggard-looking Japanese executives see advertised on commuter trains as they are crushed toward their offices every morning.


Review/Film;   Myths of Race and Sex In a Breezy Examination
LEAD: The smoothly self-congratulatory hero of ''How to Make Love to a Negro Without Getting Tired'' is a black Haitian writer living in Montreal and concentrating most of his energies on sexual conquests.
Devoting himself exclusively to adoring white college-girl types, whom he and an African roommate privately refer to as Miz Literature, Miz Suicide, Miz Tickle-Tickle and so on, this writer, called Man (Isaach de Bankole), sometimes reflects upon racism.


Krzyzewski to Stay?
LEAD: Mike Krzyzewski has decided to remain at Duke as basketball coach, declining overtures to become coach of the Boston Celtics, according to a newspaper report.


Times Reporter Wins $15,000 Library Award
LEAD: Thomas L. Friedman, the author of ''From Beirut to Jerusalem,'' is the recipient of the Helen B. Bernstein Award for Excellence in Journalism, which is given annually by the New York Public Library.
Mr.
Friedman, a two-time winner of the Pulitzer Prize for international reporting, was bureau chief for The New York Times in Beirut and Israel.


Intel's Irish Plant
LEAD: The Intel Corporation said it would build a new $300 million, 200,000-square-foot plant to make chips near Dublin.
Intel, based in Santa Clara, Calif., said the plant would make its latest-generation of advanced logic components, primarily for the European market.
The company said the plant would be its most advanced one for producing semiconductors.


Johnson Leaving as No. 2 at Fed
LEAD: Manuel H. Johnson, an important voice of conciliation on the Federal Reserve Board and a leading expert on international finance, announced today that he would resign from the board in August when his term as vice chairman expires.


Scientists Say Risk From Asbestos Is Higher Than They Had Thought
LEAD: In a rejoinder to some scientists who have recently argued that asbestos in buildings poses little hazard to health, other scientists contended yesterday at an international asbestos conference that the threat was even greater than had been thought.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Adobe Systems Inc., Palo Alto, Calif., a software company, licensed its Postscript software technology to Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester.
Terms were not disclosed.


With Dance And a Play
LEAD: A typically rich mix of performance art and dance is being offered this weekend by Performance Space 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street.
The cheeky but venerable home for the arts has become one of the city's major sites for avant-garde theater.
Audiences have three very different events to choose from, in two funky, cozy theater spaces.


Review/Ballet;   Robbins Over the Years: Fresh Amid the Familiar
LEAD: The two-week event that is being called A Festival of Jerome Robbins's Ballets by the New York City Ballet promises few surprises in terms of repertory.


Soviet Official Urges Shift in Exchange Rate
LEAD: The Soviet currency's official exchange rate should be changed next month to reflect market conditions, Finance Minister Valentin Pavlov said in an interview published today.


Another Thriller As Blazers Tie Series
LEAD: Two free throws by Clyde Drexler tonight with 2.1 seconds left in the five-minute overtime enabled the Portland Trail Blazers to edge the Detroit Pistons, 106-105, in a 3-hour-14-minute struggle of heroics and changing leads.


Where to Go to Get Them
LEAD: Here is a list of pick-it-yourself strawberry farms in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, prepared by the Departments of Agriculture in New York and Connecticut and the Cooperative Extension Service in New Jersey.
NEW YORK
COLUMBIA COUNTY, Samascott Orchards, Kinderhook, (518) 758-7224; Taconic Orchards, Hudson, (518) 851-7477; the Berry Farm, Chatham, (518) 392-4609; Yonder Farms, Valatie, (518) 758-7011.


Restaurants
LEAD:
Bice


Colony of Film Stars Votes to Become a City
LEAD: Malibu, the famed colony of the stars, is now the 87th city in Los Angeles County Residents voted by 3,797 to 708 on Tuesday to incorporate into a city that will stretch 20 miles along the California coast and one mile inland into the foothills of the Santa Monica Mountains, where many of the celebrities have their homes.


Major Chip Advance Is Reported by Hitachi
LEAD: Hitachi Ltd., one of Japan's biggest electronics companies, said today that it was the first to reach a long-sought milestone in microelectronics: the development of a working prototype of a memory chip that can store more than 64 million bits of information.


Conagra In Deal for Beatrice
LEAD: In a surprise announcement, Conagra Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the Beatrice Company for $1.34 billion in a combination that would create the nation's second-largest food company.


The Queen's New Look


VPI Unit Name Change
LEAD: The Carter Organization, the proxy solicitation subsidiary of the VPI Group P.L.C., said Wednesday that it had changed its name to Quorum Communications Inc.
The firm said it was changing its name because its founder, Donald Carter, was no longer with the firm.
Mr.
Carter recently pleaded guilty to grand larceny and tax evasion.


18 Moscow Pupils Are Here to Dance


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Mariners' Johnson Retires 20 in Row
LEAD: Randy Johnson said he pitched as well today as he did last Saturday when he pitched a no-hitter.
The results weren't quite as good, but the 6-foot-10-inch left-hander wasn't complaining.


Norman Withdraws
LEAD: Greg Norman, who has played in the last two Buick Classics and nearly won one of them, has withdrawn from this year's tournament at the Westchester Country Club, June 21-24.


Universal's Park Opens in Florida
LEAD: Universal Studios' $630 million movie theme park formally opened today as more than two dozen entertainers attended the ribbon-cutting ceremony.
The 440-acre park includes working movie sound stages and tourist attractions featuring scenes from popular movies.


COMPUTER PROJECT WOULD SPEED DATA
LEAD: A group of private companies, universities, research laboratories and Government agencies is planning to develop an advanced computer network in which data would be transmitted at speeds 700 times faster than possible now.
The plan is to be announced today by the National Science Foundation.
It would be the first comprehensive effort in the United States to advance the technologically critical area of computer networks and is being called an important model for cooperation between business and government.


Filling the Body After Nourishing the Soul
LEAD: The East Village, for all its renown as an incubator for new ideas in music, art, film and theater, does not have a reputation as a hotbed of gastronomy.


Lewis in New York
LEAD: Carl Lewis, the first entrant in last year's inaugural New York Games, will return to the event July 29 at Columbia University's Wien Stadium, Fred Lebow, the executive director of the meet, announced yesterday.


Nynex Plan Spurs 4,000 Retirements
LEAD: The Nynex Corporation said about 4,000 managers had taken advantage of a special retirement incentive program that ended last week.
The company said 2,100 managers retired from its New York Telephone Company unit, 900 from the New England Telephone and Telegraph Company, 600 from the Nynex Service Company and the rest from other operations.


Correction
LEAD: A chart yesterday listing the Yankee managers hired during George Steinbrenner's ownership including incomplete records for three managers in some copies and, as a result, misstated the overall record.


G.M. AND MOSCOW IN $1 BILLION PACT
LEAD: In a move that could foreshadow closer ties between the Soviet Union and American companies, the General Motors Corporation signed a $1 billion agreement in the Soviet Union today to sell auto parts to the largest Soviet car maker.


Why Applaud Art Auctions?
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Three youths convicted of painting anti-Semitic graffiti on a high school in Westchester County got a letter from JAMES A. MICHENER on the shame of racism.
Their sentence had included reading a chapter on a Nazi concentration camp from the author's book ''Poland.''


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Return of the Founder


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Upper Columbus Avenue Street Fair, Columbus Avenue will be closed tomorrow from 86th to 96th Streets from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.


Auctions
LEAD:
Dotty Pottery


House Votes To Override Amtrak Veto
LEAD: The House of Representatives today overrode President Bush's veto of legislation continuing the Federal subsidy of Amtrak, the passenger rail line, but Senate action was delayed until next week as Republicans attempted to rally support for the veto.


AIDS Vaccine Shows Promise
LEAD: An experimental AIDS vaccine given to eight human volunteers started the production of immune cells able to seek out and destroy AIDS-infected cells in blood samples from three of them, researchers said today.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   More Nielsen Data On Minority Viewers
LEAD: Nielsen Media Research will bolster its efforts to report data on television viewing by minority audiences.
Nielsen, a subsidiary of Dun &amp; Bradstreet, has agreed to expand its National Audience Demographic Report to include black households and about 20 black demographic categories.
It will also include more marketing information, like estimates of the size of local minority populations, in its local market reports.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article on May 17 about problems in the field of psychiatry misidentified the editor in chief of The Psychiatric News.
He is Dr.
John L. Schwartz.
A related chart misstated the number of psychiatrists in the United States.
It is about 40,000, not 36,000.


Dow Falls 14.32 Points, To 2,897.33
LEAD: The stock market fell yesterday for the third consecutive day, with the Dow Jones industrial average losing 14.32 points, dropping below the 2,900 mark that it had hurdled so smartly last Friday.


Private Clubs May Be Bigger Barrier for Nominees
LEAD: The Senate Judiciary Committee moved today to warn lawyers that if they aspire to become Federal judges or senior Justice Department officials, they should not belong to clubs that exclude women, blacks or other minority members.


Sports People: TRACK AND FIELD;   Beatty to Be Inducted Into Hall of Fame
LEAD: The National Track and Field Hall of Fame will take in four new members this year.
In an announcement yesterday in Indianapolis, site of the hall, the new nominees were singled out: Jim Beatty, the first man to break the four-minute mile indoors; Charles Dumas, the first to high jump 7 feet; Doris Brown Heritage, winner of 14 United States distance titles and five world cross-country events, and Rick Wohlhuter, a two-time


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in Sports Pages yesterday listing the Yankee managers during George Steinbrenner's ownership included incomplete records for three managers in some copies and, as a result, misstated the overall record for the Steinbrenner era.
A corrected chart appears today on page B15.


In Peru's 'Holy War,' Strange Allies
LEAD: With polls leading up to the presidential runoff election Sunday showing a dead heat, Mario Vargas Llosa, who says he is an agnostic, may benefit from support from an unlikely source: the Roman Catholic hierarchy.


Jackson and Barry Meet on Call For Plea Bargain on Drug Counts
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson met over lunch today to discuss Mr.
Jackson's suggestion that Mr.
Barry offer not to seek re-election as part of a plea agreement with Federal prosecutors.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Express Co., New York, the diversified travel, financial and information services company, appointed Randy L. Christofferson senior vice president for strategic planning.


Mary Headlee Markham, Otolaryngologist, 81
LEAD: Dr.
Mary Headlee Markham, an otolaryngologist in Manhattan for almost 50 years, died Wednesday at Princeton (N.J.) Medical Center after suffering a stroke.
She was 81 years old and until March had lived in Manhattan.


Review/Ballet;   Fashion Merger: Dance, Dollars And a New Scent
LEAD: A ballet helped send a new perfume onto the market on Monday night when Christian Lacroix, the French fashion designer, introduced ''C'est la Vie,'' his first perfume, at a reception at the Palladium.
What made the occasion choreographically noteworthy was that it included a powerful performance of Maurice Bejart's ''Bolero,'' with Sylvie Guillem, a guest star from the Paris Opera


Science Careers Are Attracting Few Blacks
LEAD: Nearly 9,600 Americans earned Ph.D.'s in the natural sciences and engineering in 1989.
Only 133 of them were black.
As small as that figure is, it was an improvement on the 1988 total of 124, and it matched the highest previous figure, reached in 1978.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Randall Rothenberg Serious Plans Of Saatchi's New Leaders
LEAD: The Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company is planning to open agencies in Hungary and East Germany and is exploring the possibility of making its Campbell-Mithun-Esty agency in the United States a part of a small international advertising network, the company's chief executive and its group financial officer said yesterday.


Review/Theater;   Bleak Comedy of Grotesquely Piggish Male Views
LEAD: Though Jules Feiffer is always thought of first as an iconoclastic political cartoonist, it is his words for film and theater that really get people hopping mad.
It's still possible to find fans of Feiffer cartoons arguing about whether ''Carnal Knowledge,'' his 1971 movie about eternally adolescent American men, was mysogynist, or whether ''Grown Ups,'' his 1981 play about an imploding Jewish American family, was an act of Jewish anti-Semitism.


Can Money Alone Fix Urban Schools?
LEAD: The New Jersey Supreme Court ruling on public-school financing places two constitutional orders on state government, to equalize spending between the poorest and wealthiest districts and to create urban programs far broader than suburban offerings.


In Rocking East Village, The Beat Never Stops
LEAD: NEW YORK is a city of differences; in the East Village, those differences are just a little louder.
The street life is livelier, the hairdos are spikier, the short skirts a bit shorter than in other neighborhoods.
People in the East Village wear their differences proudly.
There are more tattoos, more black leather, more white T-shirts and more guitars than anywhere else in Manhattan.


Motorola To Announce New Phone
LEAD: Motorola Inc. applied yesterday to the Federal Communications Commission for permission to test and market wireless personal telephones in Chicago and Atlanta.


Money Fund Assets Off
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 504 money market mutual funds decreased by $804.80 million, to $380.73 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 161 institutional funds decreased by $475.30 million, to $92.14 billion.
The assets of the 241 general-purpose funds were up by $1.01 billion, to $130.30 billion.


KOHL, AT HARVARD, REAFFIRMS BORDER
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany reiterated today that the border between Germany and Poland would remain ''inviolable'' after his country reunites with East Germany.


2 New York Officials Sue to Overturn Ban On Positions in Party
LEAD: Two New York City borough presidents filed suit yesterday to challenge a provision of the new city charter barring many elected and appointed municipal officials from holding political party office.


In the Water
LEAD: The pool at the Manhattan Plaza Health Club, 482 West 43d Street, will be filled with dancers and their Hula-Hoops and other props in a water show presented by Water Works.
The show, ''Crosscurrents,'' is to be performed at 9 tonight and at 8:30 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday.
Tickets are $10.
Information: 459-4154.


Warsaw Pact Pronounces the End Of Ideological Conflict With West
LEAD: The Warsaw Pact members today pronounced an end to the notion of the West as ''ideological enemy'' and agreed to study ways of transforming the pact into a democratic alliance to better stabilize Europe.


New Civil Rights Bill Doesn't Mean Quotas
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dinkins and the Council Reach a Tax Agreement
LEAD: The Dinkins administration and the New York City Council agreed yesterday on the mix of higher taxes they would seek from Albany to balance the city's budget, including a personal income tax surcharge of $355 million, instead of the $300 million the administration originally proposed.


On Stage
LEAD:
Ron Silver's Tony Speech


Slaney to Run Outdoors
LEAD: Mary Slaney plans tonight to run her first outdoors race on the track since 1988.
She will attempt to qualify for next week's national championships in the 1,500 meters.


Side Issues Maintain Lead on Eve Of Belmont
LEAD: There were no surprises as the expected nine 3-year-olds were entered yesterday morning for the 122d Belmont Stakes tomorrow at Belmont Park.
The mood surrounding the draw, though, reflected the peculiar character of the final leg of the Triple Crown this year.


U.S. Holds Ex-G.I. On Spying Charges Tied to Bonn's Case
LEAD: Federal agents arrested a former soldier today on spying charges in Tampa, Fla., the Federal Bureau of Investigation said.


Northwest Air Sees Revenue Shortfall
LEAD: Northwest Airlines is facing a shortfall in expected revenues this year and has asked managers to come up with $34 million in cuts. ''This is not unusual,'' an NWA Inc. spokesman, Doug Miller, said. ''This company goes through budget reviews all the time.'' The projected shortfall, $80 million, totals 1 percent of the airline's 1989 budget, he said.


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
LEAD:
Fortissimo, Forsooth


U.S. Issues Rise in Light Trading
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities rose slightly in light trading yesterday, as interest rates remained locked in a tight range.


Drexler Is Confident As Blazers Go Home
LEAD: The Portland Trail Blazers believe they are a team of destiny.
And after tonight's 106-105 overtime victory, they are a major step closer to reaching their destination.


Graduates Are Urged To Aid Poor
LEAD: George Friedman, a philanthropist and former executive director of the ''I Have a Dream'' foundation, which pays for the college educations of underprivileged students, urged graduates of Brooklyn College to give back something to those who are less fortunate.


A Cuomo Away, but Not Far, From Albany
LEAD: At 24, Andrew M. Cuomo ran his father's first successful campaign for governor.
At 25, he moved into an office in the Capitol and joined the ruling elite of state government.
He spent his days, and many of his nights, with a telephone in one hand and a cigarette in the other, plunging from one political conflict to the next.


Durenberger Hearings May Focus on Intent
LEAD: Noting that Senator Dave Durenberger had so far not disputed the facts of the case that has been made against him by the Senate Ethics Committee, the panel's ranking members suggested today that their inquiry might now focus on whether any wrongdoing was deliberate or inadvertent.


Consumer Debt Rise Is Slower
LEAD: Consumers took on debt at a sharply lower rate in April by putting off purchases of new cars, the Federal Reserve Board said today.


Cable TV Bill Is Backed
LEAD: A Senate committee voted today to restore Federal regulation of cable television rates and service, after hearing scores of complaints from cable customers nationwide about high rate increases and poor service.
The bill was approved by the Senate Commerce Committee by an 18-to-1 vote and sent to the full Senate.


Out of Black Africa, Varied Perspectives Of Life and the Arts
LEAD: THIS is a weekend for the African explorer, and you don't have to go by way of the Cape of Good Hope, either.
In art, in dance and in music, the many cultures and esthetics of the big continent on the downtown side of the Mediterranean will be making a splash in Manhattan.


ESP? Camels? It's Time to Play
LEAD: The leading clairvoyants in Yaounde, the capital of Cameroon, were recently polled by a local newspaper to determine the fortune of the national team in the 1990 World Cup finals.
None offered an opinion.


Trump Aide Denies Talk Of Sales
LEAD: The executive in charge of Donald J. Trump's three casinos denied today that Mr.
Trump was seeking buyers for any properties and sought to dispel reports of poor casino performance, managerial dissension and widespread layoffs.


Bensonhurst Protesters Agree to End Marches
LEAD: Protest marches into the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn by blacks will end under an agreement between Bensonhurst community leaders and march organizers, a lawyer announced yesterday.


Democratic and Republican Leaders See Way to Trim Conventions
LEAD: Leaders of the Democratic and Republican Parties joined today to offer a horse trade of a singularly modern sort: They would shorten the Presidential nominating conventions if the television networks would provide free air time for the candidates to speak to the voters when they are paying most attention, in the fall.


Fairs and Festivals This Weekend
LEAD:
TODAY
FEAST, St.
Anthony's of Padua, Sullivan Street, from Houston to Spring Streets.
Food, games, entertainment.
Today through Sunday, noon to midnight.
Through June 17.
Information: 777-2755.
TOMORROW
WATERFRONT FESTIVAL, Hudson River Pier 45, West Street between Christopher and Perry Streets; sponsored by the Federation to Preserve the Greenwich Village Waterfront.


John Alexander, 71, A Newark Pediatrician
LEAD: Dr.
John W. Alexander, a pediatrician and educator who helped develop the first neonatal intensive-care unit in Newark, died of a heart attack on Sunday at his house in Orange, N.J.
He was 71 years old.


Contamination at 3 Labs Casts Doubt On Results Pointing to Cold Fusion
LEAD: Three top laboratories whose work supported low-temperature nuclear fusion said yesterday that their experiments had used palladium metal that was contaminated with tritium, a byproduct of fusion.


Lower Business Spending
LEAD: Spending by businesses to expand their production is expected to rise at an annual rate of 5.5 percent in 1990, down from an estimated 7.9 percent increase estimated two months ago, the Commerce Department said today.


Review/Film;   For Murphy And Nolte, A Sequel
LEAD: The difference between ''48 Hours,'' made in 1982, and the new ''Another 48 Hours,'' a sequel, is the difference between Eddie Murphy the young television actor making a terrifically engaging movie debut, and Eddie Murphy the 1990 supernova, the star of seven films that have earned more than one billion dollars at box offices around the world.


Read California's Rumbles
LEAD: California, no stranger to earthquakes, produced two political tremors on Tuesday that are likely to reverberate nationwide.
The voters who led a revolt against spending and taxes 12 years ago approved a sharp increase in gasoline taxes and loosened restrictions on spending.
They also named Dianne Feinstein as the Democratic candidate to run for governor in the fall.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Man Ray's New Incarnation


Ethnic Warfare Grows in Soviet Asia, With Toll at 48 in One City
LEAD: Ethnic warfare in Central Asia continued to grow today as mobs roamed the capital of the republic of Kirghizia demanding that the local government resign and armed militants reportedly massed on the Uzbek border.


Criteria Upheld On Adjustments For the Census
LEAD: A Federal judge in Brooklyn yesterday upheld Commerce Department guidelines for deciding whether the 1990 census should be adjusted to compensate for any undercount.


The Strawberries Are Ready! Are the Pickers?
LEAD: The pick-it-yourself strawberry season has arrived on farms in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.


High-Tech Embargoes On Eastern Bloc Eased
LEAD: The United States and its major industrial partners agreed to ease strictures on high-technology exports to the Warsaw Pact, with even broader access for Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and East Germany.


Son of Late Egyptian Leader Returns to Egypt to Stand Trial    ''I have come to stand trial to prove my innocence to the Egyptian people,'' Mr. Nasser said. (Associated Press)


Mets Get Shot at Pirates and Miss
LEAD: The Mets finally got their shot at the first-place Pittsburgh Pirates last night but, even with Dwight Gooden on the firing line, they could do nothing to change the strange standings of the season.


Review/Ballet;   2 Sets of Partners in 'Romeo and Juliet'
LEAD: Sir Kenneth MacMillan's ''Romeo and Juliet'' calls for as much dramatic as danced interpretation.
It is not a question of chewing the scenery, or even of gestural interpretation, but of full commitment to these now stereotypical star-crossed lovers.
That point was made, in two different ways, when American Ballet Theater presented the MacMillan-Prokofiev classic on Tuesday and Wednesday nights at the Metropolitan Opera


Oklahoma St. Routs L.S.U. on Way to Finals
LEAD: With two days remaining until the national championship game, the 53d College World Series, distinguished early on by sloppy play and big innings, has shaped up as a showdown among two traditional powers and one newcomer.


A Truant Officer Children Love to See
LEAD: Jonathan Fuzzell is only a kindergartner, but he has already fallen behind at Public School 94 in the north Bronx.
His teacher, Susan Kessler, says Jonathan is sweet, determined to learn and an outstanding artist.
But he has missed 50 days of school.


Energy Prices Off Again; Weather News Lifts Grains
LEAD: Energy futures, after trading higher for most of the day yesterday, resumed their slide of recent days and finished lower on the New York Mercantile Exchange.


Texas Researchers Develop 4 Gene-Altered Calves
LEAD: A team of scientists here has produced the nation's first genetically engineered calves, a new milestone in using advanced genetic technology to alter food-producing animals.


Line Between Villain and Victim Blurs As Barry Takes Case to Capital's Blacks
LEAD: On the morning the trial began, Kathy Hughes opened her radio talk show with the 27th Psalm: ''The Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?
When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes, came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell.''


OPEC Meeting Called Possible
LEAD: A top official of Indonesia, considered a moderate member of OPEC, said today that it was possible the organization might hold an emergency meeting because of plunging oil prices.


Neta Lohnes Frazier, Children's Writer, 100
LEAD: Neta Lohnes Frazier, an award-winning writer, died Saturday.
She was 100 years old.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: LEONARD BERNSTEIN and MICHAEL TILSON THOMAS will team up as artistic directors of the new Pacific Music Festival, to be inaugurated June 26 in Sapporo, Japan.
The three-week festival is modeled after the Tanglewood Festival, where both conductors have studied, taught and performed.


Corrections
LEAD: A music review on Tuesday about Wagner's ''Parsifal'' at the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. appeared under an incorrect dateline.
The festival is in Charleston, S.C., not Charlotte.


Corrections
LEAD: A music review on Tuesday about ''The Bohemians'' misstated the address of the Cooper Square Theater.
It is at 50 East Seventh Street, not West Seventh.


After No Choice, Czechoslovaks Now Have Many
LEAD: Czechs and Slovaks will put a formal end to 42 years of imposed rule Friday and Saturday with two days of parliamentary elections.


Our Towns;   Let Nature And Sweet Tarts Be Your Teacher
LEAD: Every year, first graders in the East Brunswick schools take a field trip to the town park, where they learn about nature from sixth graders.
It's always a pretty big deal.
Many have never met an actual sixth grader. ''No, I never have,'' said Sarah Kao.
Plus, first graders have a lot to learn.
They admit it.


North Korea Faults Roh and Gorbachev
LEAD: North Korea indirectly lashed out at President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea today for what it said was his ''shameless, flunkyist'' meeting with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev in San Francisco on Monday.
It also rebuked Moscow in milder terms for embarrassing Pyongyang by meeting with its archenemy in the United


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Burkhardt &amp; Christy's Spot for Sony Tapes
LEAD: Because audio tape is a product whose quality varies little from brand to brand, most advertising for the product relies on image.
Burkhardt &amp; Christy's first campaign for Sony audio tape, which starts next month, is no exception.


Pathe Delays Completion Of Its MGM/UA Takeover
LEAD: The Pathe Communications Corporation did not complete its takeover of the MGM/UA Communications Company yesterday and instead extended its tender offer to June 15.


James L. Green, Urologist, 70
LEAD: Dr.
James L. Green, a urologist who was a founding physician at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I., died of a heart attack on Tuesday at his home in Floral Park, L.I.
He was 70 years old.


Books of The Times;   Observations on Failures in Passion and Intimacy
LEAD:
Like Life
By Lorrie Moore
178 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


Miss Reger Wed To Howard Crash
LEAD: Patricia Reger, an interior designer, and Howard Crash, an investment banker, were married yesterday at the ''21'' Club in New York by Rabbi Harvey M. Tattlebaum.


Evolution in Europe;   Russian Republic Asserts Its Laws Have Primacy Over Kremlin Rule
LEAD: The Parliament of the Russian Federation directly challenged central authority over the largest and richest Soviet republic today by asserting that Russian laws take precedence over Soviet laws.


Store Owner Arrested for Selling Rap Record


Schweitzer Deplored Lab-Animal Suffering
LEAD: To the Editor:


Center at Tanglewood Commissions Overtures
LEAD: Five American composers have been commissioned to write overtures for the Tanglewood Music Center's 50th anniversary this summer.
The A.T. &amp; T. Foundation has given the center $50,000 for the commissions.


Some Other Big Upsets
LEAD: Cameroon's victory over Argentina, the defending champion, in the opening game of the World Cup today put the African nation in the same giant-killing club as the United States, North Korea and Algeria.


Two Injured by Explosions at Texas Chemical Plant


A.C.L.U. and Gay Groups Vow Legal Test on Immigration Policy
LEAD: The American Civil Liberties Union and homosexual groups said today that they would take legal action to stop Federal immigration and health officials if they try to bar self-declared homosexuals from entering the United States to attend an AIDS conference this month in San Francisco.


Krzyzewski Stays
LEAD: After a week of talks with top officials of the Boston Celtics, Mike Krzyzewski announced yesterday he had turned down an offer to coach the Celtics and would continue, as he has for the last 10 years, to coach Duke University.


Carters Guilty In Using a Dump On Staten Island
LEAD: Two owners of waste companies were convicted yesterday of illegally dumping thousands of tons of medical waste, asbestos and other hazardous materials at a landfill in Port Ivory, S.I.


Cable Bill Faces Hurdles, Despite Panel Approval
LEAD: The likelihood that the cable television industry will undergo some form of re-regulation gained momentum this week as the Senate Commerce Committee approved a bill that would let the Federal Communications Commission set guidelines on the fees cable subscribers pay to receive broadcast and public access channels.


New Kidney for Easley
LEAD: Kenny Easley, the former Seattle Seahawk safety, was in good condition yesterday after receiving a new kidney at the University of Washington Medical Center.


Begat by Puritanism
LEAD: The reproductive organs, always politically troubling in America, are even more so these days.
Consider the womb.
Hardly a day goes by without a news story about the womb.
It sometimes seems nobody in the entire country is willing to grant the womb any relief from politics.


In Rap Group's Album, Graphic Sexual Lyrics
LEAD: The rap album ''As Nasty as They Wanna Be,'' by 2 Live Crew, is a record loaded with graphic descriptions of sex, genitals and sodomy.
Using a variety of rhythms, including reggae, house music, hip hop and rock, members of the group revel in the sort of creative obscenity heard in locker rooms, telling stories about sexual encounters with women and giving descriptions.


Two Warring Shiite Factions In Lebanon Meet on Conflict
LEAD: Representatives of Lebanon's rival Muslim factions held their first face-to-face peace talks in 16 months today, and said they were discussing ways to end three years of conflict for leadership of the Shiites.


Getting Closer in Pretoria
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk has taken a new and vital step toward peaceful resolution of South Africa's racial problems, ending emergency rule in three of its four provinces effective today.
Pretoria is now within sight of meeting the African National Congress's preconditions for beginning formal negotiations, and


Evolution in Europe;   Britain Blocks European Move on Pollution
LEAD: Britain and three other countries blocked moves by the European Community today to set the year 2000 as a deadline for stabilizing carbon-dioxide emissions, which are thought to be contributing to the earth's warming.





Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Upper Columbus Avenue Street Fair, Columbus Avenue will be closed today from 86th to 96th Streets from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.


Burned Boy a Step Away From Home
LEAD: David Opont, the Brooklyn boy who was set on fire three months ago after refusing what he thought was drugs, was released from a Manhattan hospital yesterday and transferred by helicopter to a clinic in Queens for extensive rehabilitation therapy.


India Rejects Talks With Pakistan Over Kashmir
LEAD: India today rejected a suggestion from Pakistan that talks be held this month between high Foreign Ministry officials, ending a week of speculation that there is some immediate hope of reducing tension over the issue of Kashmir.


Two Military Contractors Plan Layoffs
LEAD: Texas Instruments Inc. and the General Dynamics Corporation, a pair of leading military contractors, plan to lay off at least 1,500 in Texas because of expected military budget cutbacks.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture yesterday with an article about Peter M. Brant, who was sentenced to prison for tax evasion in Bridgeport, Conn., was published in error.
It showed a different Peter Brant - Peter N. Brant, who was sentenced in 1988 to eight months in prison for insider trading.


SHAMIR ANNOUNCES A NEW GOVERNMENT OF THE RIGHT WING
LEAD: With his final deadline only hours away, Acting Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir announced tonight that he had succeeded in forming a new Government, the most conservative ever in Israel.


Jose Figueres Ferrer Is Dead at 83; Led Costa Ricans to Democracy
LEAD: Jose Figueres Ferrer, the Costa Rican leader who helped install democracy in his homeland in 1948 and was President three times, died yesterday of a heart attack, his physician said.
He was 83 years old and lived in San Jose, the capital.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.25
19.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.71
7.71
8.21
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.64
7.60
7.89
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.49
8.48
8.14
30-YR.


Beliefs
LEAD: Not long after his cause emerged victorious in Czechoslovakia, Vaclav Havel went to the Manhattan residence of John Cardinal O'Connor to receive an award from the Appeal of Conscience Foundation, a group concerned with religious freedom.
While Mr.
Havel met there privately with a number of New York's religious leaders, reporters milled about outside, trying to scrape together whatever they knew about Mr.


Up, and Down, With Donald Trump
LEAD: What's the right word, arrogance or audacity?


Ads That Misguide Consumers on AIDS Are to Be Prohibited
LEAD: New York City will ban advertisements that misleadingly imply that nutrients and vitamins sold as immune boosters can prevent or cure AIDS, the Department of Consumer Affairs said yesterday.


Affirmative Action Bears Great Moral Costs;   One Standard for All
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lavender Lights for Building
LEAD: After six years of lobbying by homosexual rights groups, the Empire State Building's manager has agreed to illuminate the building with lavender lights June 22-24 in honor of Gay Pride Weekend.
The building's manager, Helmsley-Spear Inc., said in a statement that it was in ''total agreement'' with ''leaders who seek to end the bigotry and discrimination directed against gay and lesbian New Yorkers.


Anne Bahr Weds R.E. Thompson
LEAD: Anne L. Bahr, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold H. Bahr of Elberon Park, N.J., was married yesterday in Edinburgh to Ronald E. Thompson Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thompson of Madison, Conn.
Katrina Hoy, Queen's Register for the District of St.
Andrew, performed the ceremony at the Queen's Registry.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


McDonald's Plans Nutrition Data
LEAD: The McDonald's Corporation said it would post complete nutritional information - including fat and sodium levels -on all of its products at its restaurants by the end of July.
McDonald's drew fire this spring from Phil Sokolof, an anti-cholesterol crusader from Omaha, who took out full-page ads in newspapers across the country pleading with McDonald's to cut the fat in its hamburgers.


Evolution in Europe;   Czechoslovaks Voting in Holiday Mood
LEAD: Czechs and Slovaks cast their votes today on the opening day of the first free elections since 1946.


Trump Stake Seen for Banks
LEAD: Donald J. Trump, trying to persuade his bankers to lend him more cash, could end up giving them a bigger stake in his properties, according to a banker familiar with the situation.


14 Paintings Found 2 Years After Theft On Upper East Side
LEAD: Acting on a tip from an informant, the police have recovered 14 of 19 paintings stolen from an art gallery on the Upper East Side more than two years ago.


Inside
LEAD:
14 Stolen Paintings Found


Transamerica Deal For Nova Financial
LEAD: The First Interstate Bancorp signed a definitive agreement to sell Nova Financial Services, a San Diego-based consumer lending operation, to the Transamerica Corporation for about $108 million in cash.
First Interstate said it would record a pretax gain of about $90 million.


Medtronic to Join With Bio-Medicus
LEAD: Medtronic Inc. and Bio-Medicus Inc. agreed to merge in a transaction that would swap 3.1 shares of Bio-Medicus's common stock for each share of Metronic stock.
The agreement calls for Medtronic stock to be priced between $77.50 and $92 a share at the time of the merger.
Its shares dropped $3.375 today, to $76.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Killer Cross-Examines the Widow Suing Him in Her Spouse's Death
LEAD: Jack Henry Abbott introduced himself in court yesterday to the widow of the man he stabbed to death nine years ago and then asked her:


Canada Premiers Near Accord
LEAD: Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and the premiers of Canada's 10 provinces reached agreement early today on a package of measures that clears the way for adoption of the Meech Lake constitutional agreement.


Michael Raffetto, Radio Actor, 91
LEAD: Michael Raffetto, a radio actor who played Paul Barbour, the eldest son on ''One Man's Family,'' during the 1930's and 40's, died on May 31.
He was 91 years old.


On World Soccer Stage, a Stunning First Act
LEAD: Amid the deafening roar of nearly 74,000 spectators, Cameroon upset the defending champion, Argentina, today in the opening match of the World Cup soccer tournament.
The result was one of the most stunning in the event's 60-year history.


Youth Hijacks Soviet Airliner To Sweden, Then Surrenders
LEAD: A Soviet airliner with 121 people aboard was hijacked by a teen-ager carrying a fake grenade and was forced to land at an airport north of here early today, the police said.


Evolution in Europe;   Ex-Sergeant Charged With Role In Selling Secrets to Warsaw Pact
LEAD: The Government charged in Federal court in Tampa, Fla., today that a former Army sergeant was part of a spy ring that provided valuable military secrets to Hungary, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union for which he may have been paid between $2.2 million and $5 million.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Stewart Ahead by a Shot
Payne Stewart shot a 67 and took a one-stroke lead yesterday at the halfway point of the Western Open tournament in Oak Brook, Ill.
Stewart has completed two trips over the Butler National Golf Club course in 135, nine under par.(AP)
Nicklaus Stays in Front: Jack Nicklaus bogeyed the final two holes yesterday but kept a one-shot lead over Lee Trevino and Terry Dill after the second round of the Senior Tournament Players Championship in Dearborn, Mich.(AP)


Plans and Costs Expand To Fix Subway Stations
LEAD: The New York City Transit Authority said yesterday that it plans to greatly expand its program for modernizing dilapidated subway stations.


Western Union Stock-Sale Step
LEAD: The ITT Corporation and a group of 31 banks have registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell 22 million common shares of the Western Union Corporation.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: INES DE LA FRESSANGE, who personified Chanel style as KARL LAGERFELD's top model and muse until she parted company with the designer in a public dispute last fall, is to be married today in the town hall at Tarascon, France, near Arles.
The bridegroom is LUIGI D'URSO, 38 years old, who is in charge of press relations for CIT, the


Titan 4 Launches Secret Military Payload
LEAD: A Titan 4, the nation's largest rocket, was launched here early today with a secret military payload.


Goodwill Team Named
LEAD: The Athletics Congress announced yesterday its selections for the United States men's marathon team that will compete in the Goodwill Games in Seattle, July 20 through Aug. 5.
Chosen on the basis of performances turned in between Sept. 30, 1989, and March 18, 1990, were Budd Coates, Jerry Marsh and Mike Keohane.(


Bridge
LEAD: At most tournaments only a minority of players are fighting for major titles.
The majority are engaged in lesser events, either because they are not qualified to play in the top echelon or because they prefer a fair chance of prevailing among their peers to a poor chance of besting the experts.


Chip Maker Signs Pact With Soviets
LEAD: The Cypress Semiconductor Corporation said it planned to make computer chips and other electronic devices for the Soviet Union in an unusual licensing agreement that will give the company Soviet chip-making technologies.
Cypress signed a letter of intent with the International Center for Informatics and Electronics of


Dow Falls by 34.95 in Fourth Straight Loss
LEAD: The slide in stock prices extended to a fourth day yesterday as the Dow Jones industrial average fell sharply, dropping 34.95 points, to 2,862.38.
The blue-chip index is now down by 72.81 from its historic high on Monday and off 38.69 from last Friday's close.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in some copies on Wednesday about primary elections around the country misstated the number of blacks who have served in the United States Senate.
There have been three, all Republicans; the article omitted Blanche Kelso Bruce, a Reconstruction-era Senator from Mississippi who served from 1875 to 1881.


Barbara Baxley, 63, Who Acted In Theater, Movie and TV Roles
LEAD: Barbara Baxley, a stage, film and television actress, was found dead Thursday in her Upper West Side apartment.
The medical examiner's office said the apparent cause of death was a heart attack.
She was 63 years old.


Taxi Commissioner Ignores Livery Drivers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Theater;   Artists' Home of Legend
LEAD: People come and people go, but most of all, people stay.
This is the Chelsea Hotel, the legendary West Side home of writers and artists, a building fallen from its former glory and surviving in memories conjured up by newer, younger residents and by the few who have been left in place.
The play, Nicole Burdette's ''Chelsea Walls,'' at the Naked


A Livery Driver Is Shot to Death On Bronx Street
LEAD: A 35-year-old Bronx livery-cab driver was shot in the head and killed yesterday, apparently for his wallet, the police said, and a man described as a frequent customer of the cab company was later charged with the crime.


Vote Backs Bid For Genentech
LEAD: Shareholders of Genentech Inc. approved a plan today for Hoffmann-La Roche &amp; Company, the Swiss pharmaceutical giant, to pay $2.1 billion for a controlling stake in the largest United States biotechnology company.


Evolution in Europe: East Berlin Journal;   A First U.S. Visit, and Maybe a Last
LEAD: For Lothar de Maiziere, the idea that he is about to be the first East German leader to visit the United States is not really that extraordinary.


The Russian Question
LEAD: Another period of sudden, dramatic change is beginning in Europe, or rather the implications of last year's upheavals are spreading even before they have been absorbed.


Report Warns of Decline Of U.S. Electronics Industry
LEAD: In a study that could cause the White House some discomfort, the Commerce Department warned today that the $200 billion-a-year American electronics industry, long considered a bellwether of the country's competitiveness, is losing its edge in the world market and may be eclipsed in this decade by Japan and newly emerging producers like South


Ms. Rosenbloom, Lawyer, Married
LEAD: Beth A. Rosenbloom and James S. Sigler were married last evening at their home in Watertown, Mass., by Rabbi Albert S. Goldstein.


NUCLEAR MISSILES ON SOME BOMBERS TO BE WITHDRAWN CONCERN ON SAFETY CITED
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney today ordered the Air Force to remove hundreds of short-range nuclear attack missiles from bombers in 10 states until safety studies are completed.


Tar Balls From Oil Spill Wash Up Along Beaches in Three Boroughs
LEAD: Gooey fist-size tar balls began washing ashore yesterday on several New York beaches as the impact of a 260,000-gallon oil spill on Thursday slowly spread from the site of a tanker accident in the Kill van Kull.


Correction
LEAD: An editorial yesterday on the California election erroneously described Dianne Feinstein as ''pro-life.'' As the context made clear, she favors the right of women to choose an abortion.


Eastern Air Recalls Pilots
LEAD: Eastern Airlines has for the first time recalled pilots who stayed off the job until the end of the Air Line Pilots Assocation strike, the company said today.


Last Hugo Aid Office Closes
LEAD: Nearly nine months after Hurricane Hugo pounded South Carolina, the Federal Emergency Management Agency shut down its last disaster field office today.
The office, in North Charleston, was opened two days after the storm smashed ashore Sept. 21, causing an estimated $5.9 billion damage and claiming 29 lives in the state.


Window of Hope for New York Schools
LEAD: Who's to blame for the failings of New York City schools?
A mayoral commission points an accusing finger at the central Board of Education.
Now there is a window of hope.
Staten Island's Borough President, Guy Molinari, has announced his new appointee to the board, and several other appointments are expected.


Corrections
LEAD: A map of Czechoslovakia yesterday, with a chart about elections there, reversed two regional labels.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about the likelihood of new appointments to the New York City Board of Education misidentified a current member, Dr.
Gwendolyn C. Baker.
She is national executive director of the Y.W.C.A. of the U.S.A.


New Disputes Threaten Pact on U.S.-Japan Trade
LEAD: Negotiations between Japan and the United States to conclude a major trade agreement before an economic summit meeting in Houston next month may be derailed by a struggle within the Japanese Government and resistance to American demands for more specific commitments, people on both sides of the talks said today.


Graf and Seles Rematch
LEAD: In a rematch of the German Open final that Monica Seles won last month, top-seeded Steffi Graf will be matched against the 16-year-old from Yugoslavia in the French Open women's singles final Saturday.


Premark-Sike Tie
LEAD: Premark International Inc., a maker of consumer and restaurant products, said it had completed its $201 million offer for the Sikes Corporation, a maker of ceramic tile.
Premark said it had purchased 10.3 million class A shares of Sikes under its tender offer of $16.40 a share, which expired on Thursday, and it had also bought all class B Sikes shares.


North Stars Hire Clarke As General Manager
LEAD: Howard Baldwin always thought it would be ideal to build a team around Bobby Clarke.
He also thinks Clarke is the ideal man to build a Stanley Cup team.
So yesterday, Baldwin, the Minnesota North Stars' president, hired Clarke as the team's general manager.


Recording Ruled Obscene Brings Arrest
LEAD: Armed with a Federal judge's finding that the lyrics of a best-selling rap music record are obscene, the authorities today arrested a record store owner who had continued to sell the album.


A New Yorker Seeks a Consensus on a National Black Museum
LEAD: Dozens of letters have arrived at the Smithsonian Institution in the last few months for Claudine Brown.


As Farm Meets Suburb, Sides Clash
LEAD: Among the defendants who will appear in Cook County Criminal Court on Monday to answer charges of rape, theft, drunken driving and other crimes against society will be Ray Dettmering, a young farmer.


Review/Music;   For Otto Luening at 90, an Evening's Choral Tribute
LEAD: The 90th-birthday party the Goodman Chamber Choir gave for Otto Luening at Merkin Concert Hall on Wednesday evening was wonderful, once it finally got rolling.
For reasons made only more obscure in prefatory remarks by the director, Andrea Goodman (something about poetry and music and American nationality), the first half of the concert consisted of works by Amy Marcy Beach and George Whitefield


On Big Bang, Einstein Outranks Aristotle
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bensonhurst Leaders Will Join Demonstrators in Unity Drive
LEAD: Leaders of the heavily Italian-American Bensonhurst area in Brooklyn and those who have been demonstrating over the racial slaying of Yusuf K. Hawkins, a black teen-ager, said yesterday that they would work together on a citywide effort to heal racial divisions.


Nick Kerbawy, Sports Executive, 77
LEAD: Nick Kerbawy, a former general manager of the Detroit Lions and the Detroit Pistons, died of cancer Thursday.
He was 77 years old.


With Air-Conditioners
LEAD: When temperatures push past 90 and stay there, air-conditioning is often the only relief.
But while you cool off, your neighbors may be hot under the collar about the noise your air-conditioner is generating.


Six Brokers Are Disciplined
LEAD: The Chicago Board Options Exchange said it disciplined six brokers for violating exchange rules.


Car Leasing Gains New Popularity
LEAD: Spurred by rising car prices and a sharp reduction in the tax deduction for interest payments, more people are leasing automobiles for long terms.
Dealers, banks and leasing companies are all offering long-term contracts - and individuals are following corporations in snapping them up.


For Communists in Bulgaria, A Ballot With no Guarantees
LEAD: The election season in Eastern Europe, which began last March in East Germany, is ending in Bulgaria with what amounts to a referendum on the fate of the last ruling Communist Party in the Warsaw Pact outside the Soviet Union.


IN MIDWEST, BUSH SELLS HIS SUMMIT
LEAD: Sounding defensive at times and triumphant at others, President Bush has stumped the Midwest the last two days, carrying his own analysis of last week's summit meeting with Mikhail S. Gorbachev away from his critics in Washington and into what a White House aide called ''the real America.''


Patents;   Bicycle Lock Avoids U-Shaped Vulnerability
LEAD: Robert Denison, owner of a chain of bicycle stores in New York City, has patented a double-looped lock that he said overcomes the inherent vulnerability of U-shaped locks to being cracked by thieves.


Cuomo Weighs Move to Drop Tobacco Stocks
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said this week that he is studying whether the state should ban the investment of state pension funds in tobacco stocks, an idea that he said has ''incredible appeal.''


Patents;   Upjohn Denies Charge Of Fraud on Minoxidil
LEAD: An attorney representing doctors who are being sued for infringing a patent on minoxidil, the hair-growing compound, asserted this week that the Upjohn Company obtained its key patent through fraud.


D. &amp; H. Railway
LEAD: A bankruptcy judge in Wilmington, Del., has approved the purchase of the Delaware &amp; Hudson Railway Company by CP Rail, a unit of Canadian Pacific Ltd., for $25 million.
In announcing the approval, Pennsylvania's Governor, Robert Casey, said the sale would improve business at the port of Philadelphia.


Lynn R. Callin, Physician, 82
LEAD: Dr.
Lynn R. Callin, a physician, died of complications of open heart surgery yesterday at the Southwest Regional Medical Center in Fort Meyers, Fla.
He was 82 years old and had moved to Fort Meyers from Rochester in 1982.


Baker Seeks to Avoid Breaking Off P.L.O. Talks
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d indicated today that the Bush Administration was trying to do all it could to avoid breaking off the United States-P.L.O. dialogue because that would mean an end to the current peace process.


Patents;   Lasers Used In Reversing Gum Disease
LEAD: An ophthalmic surgeon in New York City who is a leading authority on the use of lasers in eye surgery, obtained a patent this week on a method for using low-powered lasers to reverse gum disease.


Questions Outpace Contenders
LEAD: Can Unbridled win the Belmont Stakes without Lasix?
And what will be proved if he does?


Gloomy Report on the Health of Teen-Agers
LEAD: America's teen-agers are plagued with an array of physical and emotional health problems that make them less healthy than their parents were at the same age, a national commission said today.


No Use of Suicide Device
LEAD: A judge ordered Dr.
Jack Kevorkian today to stop using his suicide device until prosecutors decide whether to charge him for letting an Alzheimer's patient kill herself with it.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Danaher Corp., Washington D.C., a manufacturer of tools and transportation products, announced its acquisition of Easco Hand Tools Inc., Hunt Valley, Md. for $125 million.


Brooklyn Boy, Set on Fire 3 Months Ago, Is Released From Hospital


Old-Time Magic Makes Appearance for Mets
LEAD: For one evening at least, the Mets found the old-time formula and found that it still works.


Doctors Describe New Blood Substitute Test
LEAD: Guatemalan and American researchers announced yesterday that they had completed the first human safety trials of a new blood substitute, devised from an extract of cow's blood.


Jerome Metzner, 79, A Professor of Biology
LEAD: Jerome Metzner, who taught biology in New York City for more than 30 years, died of cancer on Thursday at his home in Lido Beach, L.I.
He was 79 years old.


Failed Memories and Vanished Witness Follow Killing in a Market
LEAD: It has been three weeks since Ernest Abdul Mateen, a father of nine from the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, was shot and killed in midafternoon in a crowded open-air vegetable market in Canarsie.


Penguins Eye Bowman
LEAD: Scotty Bowman, the top-winning coach in National Hockey League history, is being considered for a job with the Pittsburgh Penguins.


Ethnic Slayings Are Reported in Liberia
LEAD: Hundreds of Liberians are believed to have been killed in recent days in a surge of ethnic-related violence, Western diplomats and witnesses say.


News Summary
LEAD:
International#2-5
A conservative Israeli government may take office.
Acting Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir announced that he had finally succeeded in forming a new Government, which commentators are describing as the most conservative in the country's history.
Page 1
The U.S.-P.L.O.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: About 100,000 people sat down to play bridge last night, not a very unusual occurrence except that they were all dealt the same hand and they were all on top of things, like the Eiffel Tower and the Empire State Building and other towers in 90 countries.
The hand was predetermined in Paris by the actor OMAR SHAR


Peoria Unites to Aid One of Town's Own, Hostage in a Jungle
LEAD: After Scott Heimdal, an American who was working at a mining company in Northern Ecuador, was abducted in that country April 28 and taken to Colombia by Colombian guerrillas, his captors demanded $1.2 million ransom.


Infotechnology Purchases Shark
LEAD: Infotechnology Inc. completed the previously announced purchase of the Shark professional market quote business from Wang Laboratories Inc. for about $16 million, mostly in cash.
The business, now named the Shark Information Services Corporation, is majority-owned and controlled by Infotechnology, with Financial News Network Inc.


State Dept.'s Excellent Information Record
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rep. Studds Is Beaten on Washington Street
LEAD: Representative Gerry E. Studds was beaten by two teen-agers on a street corner here Thursday night, his office said today.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MICHAEL JACKSON was released Thrusday night from St.
Johns Hospitial and Health Center in Santa Monica, Calif., after chest pains he suffered were traced to bruised ribs.
The 31-year-old entertainer, who checked into the hospital Sunday, suffered from costochondritis, or cartilage inflammation of the front part of the ribs, according to his physician, Dr MARK ZATZKIS.


Herbert Blueweiss, Publisher, 67
LEAD: Herbert Blueweiss, executive publisher of a men's wear and textile industry newspaper and an officer with Fairchild Publications Inc., died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 67 years old and his death was attributed to an apparent heart attack by a spokesman for the family.


Opposites Attract: Agassi and Gomez in Final
LEAD: There is no comparing anyone to Andre Agassi, at least not with his permission.
He is very much his own invention and amalgamation, from the hairdo he kind of shares with Dweezil Zappa to the ground strokes he kind of borrowed from Zorro to the Las Vegas panache with which he punctuates every syllable and gesture.


An Executive Spin on Eastern's Pitch
LEAD: What Lee A. Iacocca did for the Chrysler Corporation in the 1980's, Martin R. Shugrue hopes to do for Eastern Airlines in the 1990's.
The court-appointed trustee, nervous and clutching two packs of Camels, began taping television commercials here this week in an effort to convince the public that his company deserves another chance.


Evolution in Europe;   Uzbek Leader Pleads for Moscow's Aid on Unrest
LEAD: The President of Soviet Uzbekistan said today that ethnic violence was spreading to his republic from neighboring Kirghizia and he asked Moscow to help stop skirmishes from degenerating into full-scale conflict in Central Asia.


Your Money;   Burden of Loads On Mutual Funds
LEAD: Loads, as mutual fund fees are known, are aptly named.
They can certainly weigh down a fund's return to shareholders.


Pistons Put the Game on the Line
LEAD: It's a cardinal rule in basketball that when the game is on the line you don't put your opponent there.


Shepard Clough, 88; Professor and Writer Of European History
LEAD: Dr.
Shepard B. Clough, who retired after 42 years as a history professor at Columbia University, died on Thursday at Northeast Vermont Hospital in St.
Johnsbury.
He was 88 years old and lived in East Peacham, Vt.
His son Peter said Dr.
Clough (pronounced cluff) had died after a stroke.


Needed: A Tough Exec for Two States
LEAD: Running the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is one of the most challenging executive jobs in government.
The Port Authority's operations are vast and so is its impact on the region's economy.
It oversees airports, commuter rail systems, bus terminals and bridges; runs container ports and the World Trade Center, and deals with airline executives and commuters.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''What were these people thinking when they moved to the country?
It's not like these farms snuck up on them.''
- Ray Dettmering, an Illinois farmer, responding to neighbors complaining about his plowing at night. [6:1.]


Cuomo's Real Race
LEAD: Four years ago, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo was swept into a second term by the biggest landslide in New York State history.
He defeated his opponent, Andrew P. O'Rourke, the Westchester County Executive, by a margin of more than 2 to 1, and carried 57 of the state's 62 counties.
This year, aides to the


Paying for Electric Power by the Time of Day
LEAD: A growing number of consumers are paying a price for electricity based on the time of day they use it.


Evolution i Europe;   Judge Rules P.L.O. Is Liable In Raid on the Achille Lauro
LEAD: A Federal judge in Manhattan ruled on Thursday that the Palestine Liberation Organization could be sued in United States courts for the October 1985 attack on the Achille Lauro, an Italian passenger liner assaulted by commandos in the Mediterranean Sea.


A Chapel in Florence Reveals Its Wonders Anew
LEAD: When a promising artist named Michelangelo was studying the human form, he came here to the Brancacci Chapel to sketch frescoes that had been put there decades earlier by one of the first geniuses of the Renaissance, Masaccio.


Double-Deck the Roads At Kennedy Airport
LEAD: To the Editor:


Securities Firm In Bankruptcy
LEAD: Thomson McKinnon Inc. said yesterday it had filed a voluntary petition for protection under Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy code.
It said the filing was expected as part of an orderly liquidation of the firm's assets that began almost a year ago.
The company is the parent of


Issue of Race Rules on test For Mayor
LEAD: Mayor James L. Usry, running for a third term, wears a button that says ''Do the Right Thing.'' His campaign literature, distributed only in black wards, urges people to vote for him because of ''the color of my skin'' and because, he says, the Lord wants him to ''make life better for you - my people.


Review/Ballet;   Robbin's-Eye View of Bach And Astaire
LEAD: A Festival of Jerome Robbins's Ballets is the descriptive name the New York City Ballet has given its panorama of choreography by a longtime resident genius, and the two-week event, initially, seemed as subdued as it title.


CONSUMER WORLDS: Guidepost;   Poisonous Plants
LEAD: It's time to beware of poison ivy, poison oak and poison sumac.
All three belong to the same genus of plants and have a sap that oozes oleoresin.
Mere contact can cause serious dermatitis.
Ortho Poison Ivy and Poison Oak Killer, available at garden centers and hardware stores, is an effective control.


New York Agencies Push Huge Queens Development
LEAD: In a plan that is being pressed with unusual urgency at City Hall, three public development agencies in New York City and several prominent business executives are trying to build a small new city along the East River in Queens.


Alfredo Poveda, 64; Led Junta in Ecuador
LEAD: The last military dictator of Ecuador, Adm.
Alfredo Poveda Burbano, died of a heart attack on Thursday in Miami, relatives in Quito said today.
He was 64 years old.
Family members said Admiral Poveda died at Mount Sinai Hospital in Miami, where he had gone for treatment.
His remains are to be returned to


The Stuff Of Legends: Stan, Ted
LEAD: Not long ago, Ted Williams was invited to stop by tonight's dinner celebrating Stan Musial's induction into the Brooklyn Dodger Hall of Fame.


Electricity Price Plan Is Backed
LEAD: A New York State court, in a decision disclosed yesterday, upheld the authority of the Public Service Commission to price electricity based on power saved, rather than power used.
The approach is an attempt by regulators to reduce air pollution and cut power costs.


Cocoa Prices Fall Sharply; Grains and Soybeans Drop
LEAD: Cocoa futures prices were sharply lower yesterday on New York's Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange.


Florio's Puzzling 'Vision' for New Jersey
LEAD: When you put together a puzzle, no one piece gives you the whole picture.
But piece by piece the puzzle becomes clearer, until the picture is complete.


Milton J. E. Senn, 88, Pioneer in Child Psychiatry
LEAD: Dr.
Milton J. E. Senn, a pioneering expert in child psychiatry, died of bladder cancer yesterday at the Connecticut Hospice in Branford, Conn.
He was 88 years old.


Delta Air Seeks Hong Kong Link
LEAD: Delta Air Lines said it had asked the United States Department of Transportation to designate the airline to serve Hong Kong,.
Delta said it would inaugurate service to Hong Kong no later than six months after Hong Kong and British authorities granted Delta the necessary operating permit.


Pier 1 Finds Success Beyond Brass
LEAD: The recent push by Pier 1 Imports Inc. into Manhattan caps a four-year overhaul that has transformed the company from a retailer of inexpensive imported goods into one selling moderately priced home furnishings for successful young professionals.


Italians Hoping For Fans' Support
LEAD: It was the reception the Italian national team should have gotten a month ago in Florence: 5,000 fans, welcome signs, singing and chanting, flags and banners draped about the packed streets and squares of this tiny town just a half-hour outside Rome.


Affirmative Action Bears Great Moral Costs
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JUNE 9, 1990
LEAD:
The Economy


Keeping Cars Cool
LEAD: Now that the weather is warm and getting warmer, the Automobile Club of New York, an affiliate of A.A.A., recommends having a professional check your car to prevent overheating.


U.S. Has Jurisdiction Over Noriega, Judge Rules
LEAD: In a setback today for Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's defense on drug-trafficking charges, a Federal district judge here rejected his challenges to American courts' jurisdiction.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ''Maybe this is what I'll give Barbara for her birthday present,'' PRESIDENT BUSH said yesterday in Des Moines as he accepted a gift box of six pork steaks from the National Pork Producers Council.
BARBARA BUSH's 65th birthday yesterday was obviously on the President's mind, as he mentioned it several times during political fund-raising events in Iowa and Nebraska.


Thomas Sheridan, 60, Robert Kennedy Aide
LEAD: Thomas R. Sheridan, a trial lawyer who was a special assistant to Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy in the 1960's, died of a heart attack on Thursday at St.
Vincent's Medical Center.
He was 60 years old.


Evolution in Europe;   NATO Overture to a Rival
LEAD: One day after the Warsaw Pact announced that it no longer viewed NATO as an enemy, NATO agreed to extend an olive branch to the Soviet bloc, saying that it wanted to join with it in a partnership that would insure that the Soviet Union and its allies would not be isolated in Europe.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on May 16 about a dropout prevention program in New York City misstated the amount spent by the Board of Education per participant.
It was $800, not $8,000.


About New York;   The Doctor Is In (Row F, Seat 12); Now Sing Ahhhh!
LEAD: In these bedraggled times, that old New York swagger has grown elusive.
Yankee Stadium is just a ballpark in a bad neighborhood where a last-place team bumbles along.
The British have bought Madison Avenue and the Japanese most everything else.


Yanks Get New Look But Same Old Result
LEAD: The Yankees, a team trying to change on the run, made more changes today.
But the results had a familiar, sad ring as the Orioles defeated the Yankees, 5-4, in 10 innings.
The loss was the Yankees' seventh in a row and 12th in 13 games.


Giving Death a Hand: Rending Issue
LEAD: The announcement by a Michigan doctor that he helped a 54-year-old woman with Alzheimer's disease to kill herself this week is likely to goad many Americans into confronting and discussing an issue that has rarely seeped to the surface of public discourse: whether and when physicians should help seriously ill people take their own lives.


49ers, er, Giants Rout Falcons, er, Braves, 23-8
LEAD: The rookie Rich Parker drove in seven runs and Will Clark hit two three-run homers as the San Francisco Giants set team records for runs and hits tonight in a 23-8 rout of the Atlanta Braves.


Gold Ends on a High Note; Dollar Advances Broadly
LEAD: Gold prices finished a sluggish week on an upbeat note yesterday, and the dollar ended the day stronger against major currencies.


Prices of Long-Term U.S. Bonds Ease
LEAD: Prices of long-term Government securities eased yesterday, but the market in shorter Treasury maturities was essentially unchanged in unusually lackluster trading.
One reason was the absence of any significant economic news.


Review/Music;   Jose Carreras At Carnegie, For a Cause
LEAD: A year ago, the Spanish tenor Jose Carreras returned to the American recital stage after an apparently successful battle with leukemia, and it was on behalf of the Jose Carreras Foundation Against Leukemia that he sang a benefit concert at Carnegie Hall on Thursday evening.


Ames Chain Closing 188 More Stores
LEAD: Ames Department Stores Inc. yesterday took its biggest cost-cutting step since its April 25 bankruptcy filing by announcing the closing of an additional 188 stores.
The chain had reported earlier that 33 would be closed.


BARBARELLA'S PROGRESS
LEAD:
CITIZEN JANE
The Turbulent Life of
Jane Fonda.
By Christopher Andersen.
Illustrated. 389 pp. New York:
A Donald Hutter Book/
Henry Holt &amp; Company.
$19.95.


The Beltway and the Globe
LEAD: Now that Communism is in retreat, need Americans care all that much about NATO or the messy third world?
Not really, argues Irving Kristol, a panjandrum of neo-conservatism, in The Wall Street Journal.
He is saddened, for example, by turmoil in Liberia but sees no reason why it ''should even be within the purview of American foreign policy - or why The Times should be devoting so much space to it.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I would unleash prices this way.
Take meat: the meat -mostly bones and fat - that we now sell for two rubles a kilo should remain on the counters at that price, but introduce free prices for quality meat and delicacies.''
- Nikolai Y. Petrakov,
Mikhail S. Gorbachev's
personal economic adviser.


BEST SELLERS: June 10, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Doubleday,
$24.95.) Doomsday brings horrors to America; the
uncut version of a novel first published in 1978.
2
2
8
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher.


BUSINESS DIARY
LEAD:
COMPANIES
The Trump Seesaw - Headed for a Downswing?
He flashed onto the scene more than a decade ago. (''I wasn't satisfied just to earn a good living. I wanted to make a statement.'') He flourished. (''I like thinking big. I always have.'') And now, could Donald J. Trump be in danger of flaming out?


Q and A
LEAD:
Clogged Ears on Descent


Corrections
LEAD: An illustration on May 27 with the Practical Traveler column was misattributed.
It was by Barbara Samuels.


640 Graduate at U. of Chicago
LEAD: Six hundred forty seniors received degrees yesterday at the University of Chicago's 417th commencement.


They're Just Wild About Trail Blazers
LEAD: PORTLAND, Ore.


Keeping Norton in the Family
LEAD: On May 27, The New York Times published an article by John Cahill, chief executive of the British conglomerate BTR P.L.C.
A month earlier, one of the state's oldest and best manufacturers - the Norton Company - fended off BTR's takeover attempt with the help of timely state legislation.


Informed Weeping
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss Limbocker Wed in Newport
LEAD: Trinity Episcopal Church in Newport, R.I., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Hilary duPont Limbocker, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Derek L. Limbocker of New York, and Anthony Dick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Mathews Dick Jr. of Washington.
The Rev.
Lorne Coyle performed the ceremony.


THE LOVE SLAVE
LEAD:
GALLOWGLASS
By Barbara Vine.
272 pp. New York:
Harmony Books.
$19.95.


Elections Board: Bad as Its Machines
LEAD: Years after other major cities switched to modern equipment, New York City limps along with outmoded voting machines prone to breakdowns that jeopardize fair elections.
The city's Board of Elections, showing contempt for voters, has failed to replace the machines.
It's time now to replace the board itself.


Not Only Does He Act The Part, He Wrote It
LEAD: On Wednesday at the Roundabout Theater, Charles Grodin the actor opens in ''Price of Fame,'' a comedy by Charles Grodin the playwright.
Throughout much of his career Mr.
Grodin has been both performer and writer.
Here he tells how one calling led to the other.


Bryant Gumbel, Forecast for 'Today': Cloudy
LEAD: Richard Nixon is sitting stiffly cross-legged in an interview area on the set of ''Today,'' NBC's beleaguered morning news program, his hands clasped tightly in front of him, nervously staring straight ahead.
Behind the cameras, where Nixon can't see him, Bryant Gumbel, the ''Today'' anchor, is waiting for the end of the newscast being read at the anchor desk.


In AIDS-Stricken Uganda Area, The Orphans Struggle to Survive
LEAD: Josephine Senyonga, a diminutive woman with decades of hard farm labor etched into her face, sat on the floor of her one-room house, surrounded by 12 grandchildren.


Safety Seats for Infants Winning Favor in the Air
LEAD: Despite many pressures, the Federal Government is still nowhere near a decision on a rule requiring that children under the age of 2 be strapped into portable safety seats for airplane takeoff and landing.
But while the cost-benefit analyses go on and deadlines are extended, parents seem to be accepting the wisdom of this step; safety seats are increasingly used on planes for both ticketed and unticketed infants.


All About/Dairy Farming;   Cows on a Technological Tightrope
LEAD: American agriculture has few symbols more popular than the Holstein cow.
Her wholesome, black-and-white form decorates bedsheets, coffee mugs and countless other household items.


For New Luxury Tax
LEAD: To the Editor:


John E. Stambaugh, Professor, 50
LEAD: John E. Stambaugh, a professor of classics at Williams College, died on Wednesday at his home in Williamstown, Mass., after a long illness.
He was 50 years old.


Firsthand Look At Sore Arms
LEAD: To the Sports Editor: rrMalcom Moran's ''The Tender Years and Sore Arms'' (The New York Times, May 27), was so on target.
Never have I seen a group of men do more harm to the game of baseball than overambitious high school coaches intent on winning at any cost.


Assessing the 10-Year-Old Facade Law
LEAD: TEN years have passed since Local Law 10 was enacted to protect pedestrians in New York City from falling masonry.
Over the decade, not only has it achieved its primary public-safety aim, but it also has preserved the integrity of many building facades.


Headliners;   The Suicide And the Doctor
LEAD: THErr ''suicide machine'' that a victim of Alzheimer's disease used to administer her own death last week was the main instrument in Dr.
Jack Kevorkian's main cause. ''They'll all be after me for this,'' said the retired pathologist, who devised the intravenous machine in his two-room apartment outside Detroit.


Philippines Says 2 Robbers, Not Rebels, Killed a Marine
LEAD: The authorities said today that two robbery suspects have confessed to killing a United States Marine officer who the police originally thought was slain by Communist rebels.


Senate Chief at Boiling Point Over Absentees
LEAD: The sight of a nearly empty Senate chamber on Friday was the last straw for the majority leader, George J. Mitchell of Maine.


CHURCHILL HAD A SENSE OF HUMOR
LEAD:
DON'T SHOOT, IT'S ONLY ME
Bob Hope's Comedy History of the United States.
By Bob Hope with
Melville Shavelson.
Illustrated. 315 pp. New York:
G. P. Putnam's Sons. $19.95.


The World;   Sound of Hands Shaking Wakes Asia
LEAD: AFTER fretting that it was being left out of the changes transforming Europe, Asia received its first bracing encounter with the global diplomacy of the 1990's last week as a Soviet leader met a South Korean President for the first time.
The hastily arranged visit in San Francisco handed President Roh Tae Woo a diplomatic windfall and gave President Mikhail S.


Andrea Kaplan Plans Wedding
LEAD: Andrea Robin Kaplan and Andrew Robert Peikon plan to marry in September.
Ms.
Kaplan is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Kaplan of Lawrence, L.I.
Her fiance is a son of June Peikon Sturz of Bayonne, N.J., and the late Isaac Peikon.


Question Of the Week;   Will Soccer Gain More Popularity In the U.S.?
LEAD: Americans are frustrated by the fact that there is little scoring in the game, and fans cannot appreciate a 1-0 strategic, defensive match (unless they're chess aficionados).
It is worse than college basketball before the shot clock.


Emily Lifland to Wed T. B. Michaud
LEAD: Judge and Mrs.
John C. Lifland of Summit, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Emily Jean Lifland to Thomas Beaulieu Michaud, the son of Anna G. Michaud of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Clarence L. Michaud.
A September wedding is planned.


Review/Music;   Julia Fordham's Reflections About Love and Pain, Etc.
LEAD: Among the dozens of performers who have been inspired by Joni Mitchell's confessional albums of the 1970's, Julia Fordham comes closest to capturing some of the stream-of-consciousness immediacy conveyed by Ms.
Mitchell's finest records.


Will Success Spoil Moscow's Underground?
LEAD: For nearly half a century the artists of the Moscow avant-garde lived on the fringe of society.
Denied studio space, prohibited from showing their work in public and even from buying canvas, paints and brushes, the Moscow underground subsisted as something of a masonic sect, committed to the principle of free expression, and fighting to prevent the Soviet regime from implementing the same sort of centralized, monolithic control over the arts that it exercised in most other facets of


Headliners;   Differing Views
LEAD: She said in resigning that her tenure had been ''an exciting time,'' and Jill Wine-Banks, until last week the executive director of the American Bar Association, had something there.
In her three-year administration, Ms.
Wine-Banks, who first achieved fame as a Watergate prosecutor, was criticized for favoring a chauffeur-driven limousine and storming out of a meeting when turned down for a raise in her salary, which eventually reached $225,000.


Tarrytowns Celebrate History and Diversity
LEAD: IN ''The Legend of Sleepy Hollow,'' the ill-fated Ichabod Crane rhapsodized over ''the ample charms of a genuine Dutch country tea table,'' feasting on ''the doughty dough-nut,'' the ''crisp and crumbly cruller'' and roast chicken, among a host of other delectables.


Fare of the Country;   Fresh From Ohio's Amish Ovens


Cheryl Neel Noble Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Cheryl Neel Noble, a lawyer, and Edward James Mendelson, a professor at Columbia University and the literary executor of the estate of W. H. Auden, were married yesterday at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia by Judge Richard M. Palmer of Family Court in Brooklyn.


Grand Opera In a Colorado
LEAD: AFTER Central City, Colo., completes its festival in honor of Lou Bunch, the ebullient madam who catered to the tastes of miners in the late part of the last century and into the early part of this one, , the city mothers light up their Victorian opera house and let the music of Mozart, Verdi and Copland prevail.


Ashley E. Davis and David J. Prend Are Married
LEAD: Ashley E. Davis, a daughter of Peyton C. Lewis of Washington and William P. Davis of Dallas, was married yesterday in New York to David J. Prend, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Prend of Stockton, Calif.
The Rev.
John A. Buehrens officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls.


Is the Governor A Long Islander?
LEAD: As someone who is employed on Long Island and resides in Queens, I agree with Governor Cuomo that Long Island is a critical economic part of New York State.


WHERE WALL STREET MEETS POLICE BEAT
LEAD: We put our money on the line every day, but the police put their lives on the line every day,'' says Albert Fried Jr., the managing partner of Albert Fried &amp; Company, a Wall Street investment bank.
Fried is the chairman of The Centurion Foundation, established in 1986 primarily to support New York


Ethnic Protesters Attack Troops, Soviets Say
LEAD: Soviet television reported tonight that militants in the Soviet republic of Kirghizia had fired on troops and attacked trucks as tensions mounted further in the Central Asian region.


Getting the Most Out of a Shade Problem
LEAD: POSSIBLY the greatest challenge any gardener has to contend with is too much shade.
Full sun is easy for planters.
But when a property is covered with leafy canopies, gardening can be tricky.


Randi Getz Plans to Marry Paul Tessitore in January
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart I. Getz of Massapequa, L.I., have announced that their daughter, Randi I. Getz, and Paul V. Tessitore, the son of Marie Tessitore of Massapequa and Vincent Tessitore of Spring Hill, Fla., are to be married next Jan. 26.
Ms.
Getz, 28 years old, graduated from Columbia University.


Children Disprove the Notion That Caring Is a Forgotten Value
LEAD: MOVE over, cynics, a good and caring generation is back.
All that talk about the me-me generation, about yuppies who care only about themselves, their possessions and their move up in finances, position, influence and acquisitions - all that is history.
Start paying attention to the evidence that shows that helping others and contributing to society are the values that have made it through again.


Michele Payson To Wed in Fall
LEAD: October wedding plans for Michele Payson and Dr.
Mark Rosenfield, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mashe Rosenfield of Liverpool, England, have been announced by Ms.
Payson's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Payson of Great Neck, L.I.


Dollars, Dragons and Del Rey
LEAD: To the Editor:


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


ADIRONDACKS BAN CALLED UNLIKELY
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's Commissioner of Environmental Conservation says he doubts that the Governor will endorse a plan to impose a one-year moratorium on permits for most new construction in the Adirondacks.


WHAT WE DON'T KNOW
LEAD: I don't believe we're still reading about E. D. Hirsch and ''cultural literacy.'' Who needs to hear more of this doleful crusade to cram even more disconnected and quickly forgotten facts into the American school curriculum.
We've already got what amounts to a national core curriculum.
We assure its survival through a seemingly benign process known as textbook adoption.


Review/Concert;   Early Music By Aurora
LEAD: Aurora, a classy New York-based early-music quartet, concluded a three-concert series at St.
Michael's Episcopal Church, 99th Street at Amsterdam Avenue, with a French-flavored 18th-century concert on Wednesday night.


Backstage, Bands on the Run Have Cleaned Up Their Acts
LEAD: In the mid- to late 1970'S, when Aerosmith was one of hard rock's most popular and powerful bands, the scene backstage at their arena concerts reflected the excesses of a very rich, very spoiled group of musicians.
The band members were known to be heavy drug users.
At every show they demanded a Thanksgiving-style roast turkey, which usually went untouched, as well as several cases of Budweiser and assorted bottles of liquor.


When You're Older and Out of Work
LEAD: THERE is a dark side to capitalism.
Take the experiences of the 20 educated, skilled, out-of-work executives who recently participated in a job-search workshop program in an effort to find jobs.


Oil From Spill Cleaned From S.I. Beach
LEAD: Cleanup crews removed about 1,000 pounds of oil clumps from Midland Beach on Staten Island yesterday as more than 300 Coast Guard and private workers continued their efforts to remove the gooey oil that spilled from a tanker into New York Harbor on Thursday.


Memories Are Made of This
LEAD: PERRY COMO memories abound in Port Washington. Sheldon Tarakan was singing his.


Miss Young Weds J. S. Reynolds Jr.
LEAD: Margaret Randolph Young and Julian Sargeant Reynolds Jr. were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Holy Spirit in Lake Forest, Ill.
The Rev.
Joseph Clark Grew performed the ceremony.


CONNECTICUT Q&amp;A: HUNTER HASTINGS Marketing in 90's Needs New Strategies
LEAD: CHANGING attitudes of consumers combined with the splintering of broadcast and print media has displaced advertising as the best way to market a product, says Hunter Hastings, a senior partner of the Ryan Management Group, in Westport.


Mets Defeat Pirates On Way to Revival
LEAD: The Mets took another step on the road to respectability last night when they subdued the first-place Pittsburgh Pirates for the second successive time, and they did it with more of the old-time virtues of no-nonsense pitching and power.


Brazil Court Ruling Curbs Fight on Inflation
LEAD: President Fernando Collor de Mello, fighting an increasingly uphill battle against inflation, has suffered his biggest political defeat so far with a Supreme Court ruling that effectively trims presidential powers.


AT MERRILL, A FRUSTRATING HUNT FOR PROFIT
LEAD: As their limousines streamed toward Arizona's CamelbacK Mountain on a Friday in February, en route to Merrill Lynch &amp; Company's junk bond conference, few of the 800 guests could have missed the various ironies surrounding the event.
For one thing, there was the conspicuously lavish site of the conference, a 130-acre spread called the Phoenician Resort; it seemed strikingly at odds with an announcement just 12 days earlier that Merrill had taken a $470 million writedown during the fourth quarter of 1989.


Changes Readied For Auto Insurance
LEAD: NEW JERSEY drivers, who have long clamored for a major reconstruction of the state's ailing and expensive insurance system, may soon get the changes they have been waiting for.


Janet Weiss Plans August Wedding
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Barry R. Weiss of Tenafly, N.J., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Janet Weiss, to Dr.
Thomas J. Dwork, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry R. Dwork, also of Tenafly.


Fashion: On the Street;   A Leisure Look For Midweek, Even at the Office
LEAD: Shorts are no longer just for days off.
They are now a smart and sophisticated alternative to skirts and pants at the office or for some serious shopping in the big city.


School Aid Ruling: The Court And Society
LEAD: WHEN the New Jersey Supreme Court last week declared the state's 1975 school-financing law unconstitutional as it applies to 28 of the state's poorest districts, it became the first state court in the nation to revisit the issue of school financing.


Lisa Kerr Grimmelmann Is Married
LEAD: At Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn., Lisa Kerr Grimmelmann, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ihler Grimmelmann of Greenwich, was married yesterday to Miles Oakley Bidwell Jr., the son of M. Oakley Bidwell of Vancouver Island, British Columbia, and the late Frances Jones Mott.
The Rev.
John W.


Style Makers;   Francine McMillan, Designer of Party Favors
LEAD: A few years ago Francine McMillan, a business executive in Manhattan, got hold of some bubble pack, those air-filled plastic bubbles used to insulate packages.
She took it home, kicked off her heels and started popping the bubbles with her feet.


Long-Magical Charm Is Wearing Out
LEAD: My first encounter with Saab's 900 Turbo was not a case of love at first sight.
For one thing, the car looked like nothing else on the road.
For another, it was different in the way that it approached almost everything.


Havel's Movement Seen Winning Majority Control in Parliament
LEAD: President Vaclav Havel's citizens' movement, which swept the Communists from power last November, completed its victory today by winning majorities in both houses of Parliament in Czechoslovakia's first free elections since 1946, official forecasts indicated.


IN FOR REPAIRS: AYER'S IMAGE
LEAD: ''HEY, GUYS, WAIT A MINUTE!'' SHOUTS JERRY J. Siano, chief executive of N.W.
Ayer.
Sitting sideways on a chair, his legs thrust out under one of the metal arms, Siano is watching the mock-up of a television spot roll across a video monitor.
The ad is part of a presentation that Ayer will be making for the Dexatrim over-the-counter diet pill account.


Margaret Kyle Marries
LEAD: Margaret S. Kyle was married yesterday to Frank T. Iorio at the Rye (N.Y.) Presbyterian Church by the Rev.
Donald W. Poole.
Mrs.
Iorio, 29 years old, is the daughter of Susan P. Kyle of Rye and Donald W. Kyle of Scarsdale, N.Y.
She graduated from Skidmore College and is an account executive at Carrafiello, Diehl &amp; Associates, an advertising agency in Irvington, N.Y.


Campus Life: Grinnell;   Program Allows Underprivileged A Chance to Learn
LEAD: ''I felt lucky to be in this adoption,'' said 11-year-old Jesus Avila, a fifth-grader at Moulton Elementary School in Des Moines. ''I thought I wasn't going to college.'' That is until he and 48 classmates were adopted by Grinnell College, the first academic institution to sponsor a class under the ''I Have a Dream'' program underwritten by Eugene Lang, a New York business executive.


Festival Beginning 61st Season
LEAD: MUSIC MOUNTAIN, which says it is the oldest continuing summer chamber-music festival in the United States, returns for its 61st season this afternoon, in Gordon Hall, the resonant all-wood auditorium just outside Falls Village.


Iron Mike or Straw Mike? Tyson Is Replying
LEAD: The lingering image of Mike Tyson is of a fighter, once regarded as invincible, on his knees groping almost comically for a displaced mouthpiece that is about to become secondary to the imminent loss of his heavyweight title.


DIED 30 B.C., STILL GOING STRONG
LEAD:
CLEOPATRA
Histories, Dreams and Distortions.
By Lucy Hughes-Hallett.
Illustrated. 338 pp. New York:
Harper &amp; Row. $27.50.


Review/Dance;   Gregory as Ax Wielder in 'Fall River'
LEAD: American Ballet Theater's revival of Agnes de Mille's ''Fall River Legend'' on Friday night for the first time since 1980 was treated as the major event it is.


No Headline
LEAD: DRUGS, violence and death may be all too familiar on the streets of Hartford, but hope is there, too.
That is what art students at Weaver High School say in ''The Streets of Hartford: An Exhibition of Provocative Art and Information.''


Italy Edges Austria
LEAD: Seventy-eight minutes of crisp, aggressive soccer were rewarded tonight for the hometown fans when Italy scored a goal to beat Austria, 1-0, in the Italians' first game of the World Cup finals.


Baltimore Bomber Foils the Yanks
LEAD: If the Yankees thought their plight could not get any uglier, any more embarrassing, any more hopeless, they were wrong.


Peruvians Vote Today in Neck-and-Neck Runoff
LEAD: After a bitter campaign, Peruvians go to the polls on Sunday to choose a President to lead them out of a decade of economic collapse and spreading guerrilla war.


Sarah Edwards Becomes Bride
LEAD: Sarah Chamberlin Edwards, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David F. Edwards of Essex, was married yesterday to Robert James Feeney Jr., the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Feeney of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
Kenneth D. Thomas officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Essex, Conn.


No Benefit Seen In Longer School Year
LEAD: As a college professor and the parent of a young child, I have some serious reservations about Assemblyman William J. Pascrell Jr.'s proposal to lengthen the school year Opinion page, May 6).


Less Maple Syrup Produced In New York State This Year
LEAD: Warm weather in March led to a 23 percent drop in maple syrup production in New York this year, despite an increase in the number of maple-syrup farmers, the State Agricultural Statistics Service said this week.


Q and A
LEAD:
Lot-Line Windows
Question: My co-op just finished a major window replacement program.
The board decided, however, not to include the lot-line windows.


Getting the Most Out of a Shade Problem
LEAD: POSSIBLY the greatest challenge any gardener has to contend with is too much shade.
Full sun is easy for planters.
But when a property is covered with leafy canopies, gardening can be tricky.


Gansler Says He'll Stay
LEAD: Bob Gansler, the coach of the United States team, was shocked and agitated this morning after reading a published report saying that he intended to resign after the World Cup competition. ''There's no truth to that at all,'' he said.
The report, from Agence France-Presse, said Gansler had announced his intentions before Cameroon beat Argentina in the opening game in Milan on Friday.


Sabina Martin Weds Joseph Milbank
LEAD: Mary Sabina Martin, the daughter of Mrs.
Michael Bender and William Redmond Martin, both of Shoreham, L.I., was married yesterday to Joseph Hunter Milbank, a son of Jeremiah Milbank Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Andrea Hunter Milbank.
The Rev.
Robert M. Olton officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Ivy,


Letters on Travel;   Luggage Codes
LEAD: To the Editor: Kenneth Lahn of New York (Letters on Travel, April 1) wrote about the confusion of luggage codes.
In actual fact, there should be no confusion whatsoever, assuming the passenger knows where he/she is going.


Social Events
LEAD:
Party at the Seaport


A BORN-AGAIN FRANKLIN INSTITUTE BANISHES STODGINESS
LEAD: The Transition is one of the most startling in Philadelphia: to go from the domed neo-classical hall of the original Franklin Institute to the vibrant atrium of the museum's just-opened Futures Center is not only to move from old to new but also from static to dynamic, from formal to relaxed, and from sumptuous to sleek.


Rains Bring In Large Morel Crop
LEAD: HEAVY rains this year have led to a good morel season.
It started in mid-April and is expected to last through July.
Those fragrant mushrooms are highly prized.
Their delicate but pungent flavor produces the same ecstatic reaction on the part of those who eat them as do truffles or the best caviar.


Letters on Travel;   Glasgow
LEAD: To the Editor: Craig R. Whitney has been misled by troublemakers (''Good Grief, It's Glasgow,'' Travel, May 20). ''Auld Reekie'' is a derogatory description applied to Edinburgh not Glasgow.
I ought to know.
I was born in Glasgow.
JOHN M. BURGESS
Old Greenwich, Conn.


Dr. Deborah Rubin to Wed Dr. Howard Herrmann
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Walter Rubin of Gladwyne, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Deborah M. Rubin, to Dr.
Howard C. Herrmann, a son of Mrs.
Fred Herrmann of Brookline, Mass., and the late Mr.
Herrmann.
An August wedding is planned.


Yonkers Loses a Bid to Bar Housing for Poor
LEAD: Construction of the first 200 units of low-income housing in Yonkers may continue, a judge has ruled.
But he ordered Federal officials to study the housing's potential environmental impact on the city.


If You're Thinking of Living in:;   Harding
LEAD: By RACHELLE GARBARINE


Maintaining Wood Shingles
LEAD: WOOD shingles are durable and generally trouble-free.
But because wood is susceptible to rot and damage from moisture and insects, regular inspection and maintenance are necessary, and repairs should be made promptly.


Alarmed at Turn in Israel, Arabs Forecast War
LEAD: Arab and Palestinian commentators responded today to the formation of a new, right-wing Israeli Government with forecasts of war, reflecting a mood across the region that blends apprehension, anger and a deepening hostility toward the United States, Israel's main supporter.


Miss Watchman Weds T. F. Burchill 4th
LEAD: Sarah Link Watchman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Surtess Watchman Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Francis Burchill 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burchill 3d of Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
George Busler officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Raymond Schroth, a Roman Catholic, at St.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:
CLASSICAL
Borodin: 'Prince Igor'
Stefka Evstatieva, soprano; Boris Martinovich, baritone; Nicolai Ghiaurov, bass; Sofia National Opera Chorus and Festival Orchestra conducted by Emil Tchakarov.
Sony S3K 44878; three CD's and cassettes.
No opera in the repertory deserves the term ''epic'' more than ''Prince Igor'': A sprawling pageant of warrior heroes and brave women, the opera, completed by Rimsky-Korsakov and Glazunov after Borodin's death, also requires epic forces.


The Cookie Monster Makes Policy
LEAD: A not-so-funny thing happened to Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner on the way to the White House, where he was to deliver America's new national transportation policy.
The policy got eaten up by a Cookie Monster named Richard Darman, director of the Office of Management and Budget.


Zerline Goodman To Wed in August
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Jack Goodman of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Zerline Lehman Goldman and Michael Andrew Rothenberg, a son of Dr.
Eleanore Dubin Rothenberg and Stanley Rothenberg, both of New York.


Not Just An Ordinary Man
LEAD: Rex Harrison thought of himself simply as an entertainer, not as an artist with inner genius.
As an embodiment of that perception, he consistently delighted audiences during his seven decades in his profession, while occasionally challenging himself in roles he was at first hesitant to undertake.
Sir Rex, who died on June 2 at the age of 82, was in fact an underrated actor and an interpretive artist of the first rank.


Works in Progress;   Steeped in History
LEAD: On Aug. 10, 1628, THE VASA, A three-masted, 64-gun Swedish warship, capsized and sank on its maiden voyage in the waters outside Stockholm, a blow to King Gustaf II Adolf - the family dynasty, begun by Gustaf I in 1523, was known as Vasa - whose nation was about to enter the Thirty Years War.
The ship remained at the bottom of the ocean for more than three centuries.


A SHOT IN THE DARK
LEAD:
A DEED OF DEATH
The Story Behind the Unsolved Murder of
Hollywood Director William Desmond Taylor.
By Robert Giroux.
Illustrated. 275 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


A Cafe Reopens: Lunch Returns to the Prairie
LEAD: When Louisburg's last cafe closed its doors in 1988, Keith Hansen and John Lund and the other men who farm the rich, rolling prairies of western Minnesota found themselves confronting a new and lonely challenge: lunch.


Right to Choose Schools Gains in Debate on Bias
LEAD: The people who elected Polly Williams and Lawrence Patrick are expected to recoil at the words ''choice'' and ''voucher'' when they are applied to the public schools.


Amazing Space;   Flights of Fantasy
LEAD: Forget, for a moment, about practicalities.
And about the perennial problems of living efficiently in the 20th century.


JUST FIND A MILLION READERS AND SUCCESS WILL SURELY FOLLOW
LEAD: Summoned to New York in May to pitch my new novel, I managed, between interviews, to meet my wife for a quick drink in the upstairs bar at Sardi's.
There were two women seated nearby.
One of them complimented my wife on her appearance and then turned to me. ''I know you,'' she said.
A Canadian born and bred, I contrived to lower my eyes modestly.


How the $8 Billion Space Station Became a $120 Billion Showpiece
LEAD: America's planned space station, sold to Congress in 1984 as an $8 billion project, will actually cost at least $120 billion when operating and other expenses are counted, and even then it will not meet what has become the Government's top objective in space.


Mary Balderston Wed in Rochester
LEAD: Mary McKinney Balderston, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Balderston 3d of Rochester, was married there yesterday at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church to Richard Andrew Somerby, a son of Mrs.
Peter L. Wastrom of Stamford, Conn., and Richard A. Somerby of Hartsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert Wainwright officiated.


Correction
LEAD: An art review on May 6 about the show ''Constructed Reality'' at the New Jersey Center for Visual Arts misstated the role of Anne Hoy.
She wrote the catalogue but did not organize the show.
A recent letter from the gallery's director, Ann Williams, has pointed out that the exhibition was organized by Joan Good, Benita Wolff and Perijane Zarembok.


Gorbachev, Though Besieged, Isn't Defeated;   Shades of the Czars
LEAD: To the Editor:


Currency;   The Dollar Keeps to a Steady Course
LEAD: The dollar was generally steady last week against both the West German mark and the Japanese yen.
It closed the week at 1.6980 marks to the dollar, down slightly from the 1.7005 at which it began; it was also down slightly against the yen, ending the week at 153.50, down from 152.40 at the start.
Although the dollar pushed slightly above the 1.70 marks point, the trading range was narrow and the market lacked the momentum to sustain a big advance.


Review/Music;   Debut Recital By a Pianist On the Verge
LEAD: For a performer, a New York debut can mean many things.
For the 23-year-old Israeli pianist Avner Arad, who made his debut on Thursday evening at Weill Recital Hall, one of those things was a warm-up for the Tchaikovsky Competition in Moscow, which begins next Thursday.


WHAT WE DON'T KNOW
LEAD: I enjoyed Christopher Hitchens's article about E. D. Hirsch, and I agree that we need a common body of shared knowledge (''Why We Don't Know What We Don't Know,'' May 13).
In his penultimate paragraph, the author mentions advertising slogans as the only memorable things in the 1984 political campaigns.


SPEED UP CHANGE, SOVIET AIDE URGES
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's personal economic adviser has disavowed the Government's plan for a gradual transition to a market-oriented economy, and instead proposed a series of presidential decrees to move the country more rapidly toward a free market.


A Soviet Violinist Is Adopted By Pupils as 'Their Very Own'
LEAD: THE gym was decorated with banners proclaiming Soviet-American friendship.
Chairs for special visitors proclaimed the importance of the occasion.
A group of 200 hushed third through sixth graders, well-prepared for their guest of honor, waited cross-legged on the floor for the assembly to begin.


October Wedding For Mimi Fisher
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Charles T. Fisher 3d of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich., have made known the October wedding plans for their daughter Mary Florence Fisher and John Francis Hickey Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hickey of Denver.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
And the Winner Is...


Rachel Cartmell Marries James Ault Jr.
LEAD: Rachel Davies Cartmell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathaniel Madison Cartmell Jr. of Manchester, N.H., was married yesterday to James Mase Ault Jr., the son of Bishop and Mrs.
Ault of Fogelsville, Pa., and Haines Falls, N.Y.
The ceremony was performed at the Church of All Angels in Haines Falls by the bridegroom's father, a bishop in the United Methodist


Heavy Rains in Ohio Force Thousands to Flee
LEAD: Heavy rains forced the temporary evacuation of up to 10,000 people today, including 2,000 living near a man-made lake whose retaining wall is in danger of collapse, the authorities said.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
ARTS 'JUBILEE'


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Coins of the Nelson Bunker Hunt collection form a fascinating record of changes in the Roman Empire.
The different silver and gold coins along with several medals document the rise and fall of emperor after emperor, their wives and favorites.
In some cases the coins even depict some of the great buildings of


MINDING THEIR OWN BUSINESS
LEAD: As the decade's first batch of college graduates enters the working world, many will be eager to hit the ground running - as long as it is their own piece of ground.
In a nationwide Roper poll, college students rated operating one's own business as the best way ''to get ahead,'' when presented with a list of choices that included working for a large corporation or the government.


Arabs Plan a Move in U.N. to Aid Palestinians
LEAD: In an attempt to isolate Israel and the United States in world opinion, Arab countries plan to convene the United Nations General Assembly in emergency session this month to seek an international force to protect Palestinians in the occupied territories against Israeli security troops.


Election Buoys Bulgaria's Ethnic Turks
LEAD: After decades of harassment and an official campaign of forced cultural assimilation, Bulgaria's ethnic Turkish minority appears set to re-emerge from this country's political underground in Sunday's multiparty election.


Lewis Enters Mobil
LEAD: A year after he boycotted the Mobil Track and Field Championships because of a feud with The Athletics Congress, Carl Lewis plans to compete at the 1990 championships this week, but not because he and T.A.C. have patched things up.


Katherine Eresian Weds
LEAD: Katherine A. Eresian, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John G. Eresian of Chevy Chase, Md., was married there yesterday at the Woodend Audubon Naturalist Society to David C. Chenok, a son of Philip Chenok of Greenwich, Conn., and Ann Chernow of Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
Kenneth MacLean, a Unitarian, officiated.


FILTHY LUCRE
LEAD: It was a nice touch that our more important clients appreciated, and one that didn't cost us anything,'' an executive at a New York bank recalls.
He is bemoaning the fact that his bank can no longer offer a guaranteed supply of crisp, new bills as part of its check-cashing services.


Edward Embury, 84; Designed Zoo in Park
LEAD: Edward C. Embury, an architect who designed the Children's Zoo in Central Park among other recreational, educational and residential projects, died on Wednesday of emphysema at the Winchester (Va.) Medical Center.
He was 84 years old and lived in Berryville, Va.


Damage Seen From January Oil Spill
LEAD: Five months after more than half a million gallons of oil spilled from a leaking pipeline into the Arthur Kill, environmentalists and conservationists say that many of their worst fears about damage to the fragile marine and bird life there are being realized.


An Updated Menu in a Venerable Setting
LEAD: IN an industry of ebb and flow, Scribner's is a tribute to the staying power of owner managership.
The chef-owner, Scribner Bliss, and his wife, Beth, have kept the 16-year-old seafood restaurant on course with the consistent high performance that made it notable in the first place.


Review/Dance;   Shang's 'Rituals' in Renaissance Setting
LEAD: Ruby Shang's ''Urban Rituals'' evoked both the court festivities of the Italian Renaissance and the pomp of the French Baroque era.
The work was performed by Ruby Shang and Company, Dancers, Thursday night in a mansion at 972 Fifth Avenue (at 78th Street) that was designed by Stanford White in an Italian Renaissance style in 1906 and that is now the headquarters of the Cultural Services of the French


A Changed Biennale Remains the Same
LEAD: The latest Venice Biennale opened to the public several days ago, and the mediocre result that has become almost predictable revives a familiar question: Has this most august of international art exhibitions outlived its usefulness?


The Nation: Los Angeles Ruling;   A Shot at the Action For Hispanic Citizens
LEAD: TWO important events in California last week illustrated the gap between the ethnic makeup of the country's largest state and its politics.


Clearwater's Revival Returns to Valhalla
LEAD: MUSIC MOUNTAIN, which says it is the oldest continuing summer chamber-music festival in the United States, returns for its 61st season this afternoon, in Gordon Hall, the resonant all-wood auditorium just outside Falls Village.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a typographical error, an article on April 29 about Mozart in Vienna misstated his age at the time he was ordered kicked down the stairs at 7 Singer Strasse.
As a reader has recently written to point out, he was 25, not 15.


Miss Gorewitz Is Engaged
LEAD: Marian E. Gorewitz and Mark L. Kleinman are planning a July wedding, the prospective bride's parents, Freide Gorewitz of West Nyack, N.Y., and Rubin L. Gorewitz of New York, have announced.
Miss Gorewitz, a magna cum laude graduate of Ramapo College with a master's degree in creative writing from City College, teaches English at Pomona (N.J.) Junior High School.


Outdoors;   Looking to Books For Angling Tips
LEAD: Those who began sport fishing during the past 20 years have had an astonishing variety of instructive books at their disposal.


C.I.A. - Costly, Inept, Anachronistic
LEAD: Of all the rusting relics of the cold war, none lingers on with more irony, more resistance to its growing anachronism than the Central Intelligence Agency.


Surprise Charges Upset Condo Buyers
LEAD: Apartment buyers in the expensive new Belaire condominium in Manhattan's Upper East Side got the news in April that their monthly common charges were going up 16 percent, and when the annual meeting of owners convened last month, many were in a mood to argue.


The Region;   The New Math Of Rich and Poor
LEAD: AS a tide of lawsuits seeking more equity in the financing of public schools spreads across the country, a court ruling in New Jersey last week underscored a seemingly intractable struggle.
It pits the protectors of local control of the schools against advocates of absolute equality in the money that poor urban systems and affluent suburban districts can spend to educate their children.


Lisa McNamara Plans To Marry Next Month
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William Carey Hogan Jr. of Shelburne, Vt., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Hogan's daughter Lisa McNamara to David A. Hughes Jr., a son of Sarah Hughes and David Hughes, both of Tucson, Ariz.
A July wedding is planned.


Question Of the Week;   Will Soccer Gain More Popularity In the U.S.?
LEAD: Unfortunately, no. For these reasons:


Lynne Loposer to Wed Robert Weber in 1991
LEAD: The engagement of Lynne Louise Loposer to Robert Matthew Weber, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Weber of Hartsdale, N.Y., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Dan Loposer of Jackson, Miss.
The wedding is planned for next year.
Miss Loposer, 29 years old and a graduate of the University of Texas at Austin, is an advisory financial analyst at the International Business Machines Corporation in Somers, N.Y.


Campion at Age 13? In Tennis, It's a Long Shot
LEAD: The professional debut of Jennifer Capriati at 13 and the success of Monica Seles at 16 have sent shock waves into the world of junior tennis.
Parents watching the French Open and other pro tournaments are wondering if they should quit their jobs and move to a training center in Florida, and kids are questioning their futures in the game.


The Forgiving Municipal Bond Market
LEAD: Is it a hard time for debtors? Not in the municipal bond market.


Across the Wide Prairie By Wagon Again
LEAD: THE Flint Hills Overland Wagon Train trip begins ''just past the drive-in,'' in the high school parking lot, of the tiny town of Rosalia, Kan., about 40 miles from Wichita.
Although the Santa Fe Trail ran diagonally across the state some 40 miles to the northwest, the organizers of the modern-day trail ride chose Rosalia because the 50-mile-wide stretch of bluestem or tallgrass prairie land of south-central Kansas surrounding it, called the Flint Hills, is the only unplowed tract of true prairie remaining in the United


DECISIONS, DECISIONS
LEAD: He is tall and handsome, and on this cold, rain-whipped morning in Manhattan he is having the time of his life.


18 Are Injured in Bus Crash on Thruway
LEAD: A chartered bus with 18 people on board crashed on the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway early today.
All 18 were injured, the state police said.


Rail Workers Back to Work After Picketing in 6 States
LEAD: Under court order, striking railroad workers in six states dismantled their pickets on Friday and went back to work for CSX Transportation Inc.


Near Prospect Park;   40 Condo Units on the Block
LEAD: Forty condominium units in Brooklyn are to be put on the block this afternoon by a company that last month auctioned off most of the apartments in another condominium project just two miles away.
The latest auction involves a development called Windsor Place by the Park, 128 Prospect Park Southwest at Terrace Place in the Windsor Terrace neighborhood.


The Nation;   Waiting for the Lightning Or Anything, to Strike Voters
LEAD: MIDWAY through the primary season, this election year has the look of a half-hearted Broadway revival.
To be sure, there are some intriguing new stars, but the script is familiar and the audience is often disengaged.


Agassi and Gomez Ready
LEAD: Andre Agassi, the flamboyant Las Vegan, and Andres Gomez, the mild-mannered Ecuadorean, insist they'll square off in the French Open final Sunday afternoon as absolute equals.
Agassi said the abundance of experience Gomez possesses in Grand Slam events, 27 appearances, and on this surface, 15 titles on clay, was immaterial.


The Executive Computer;   Planning for Summertime Is Not Always a Picnic
LEAD: Electrical fluctuations that seem relatively mild, causing a display screen to flicker or shrink for less than a second, can batter the delicate circuitry inside the computer.
In most cases, built-in power regulators absorb the fluctuations and keep things humming along smoothly.
But in some cases, power spikes and dips can cause physical damage.


Gorgeous Bits Of Vocabulary
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss McMullen Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Caroline Lovell McMullen, the daughter of Mrs.
David Rule Pyott of Alexandria, Va., and the late Richard Park McMullen, was married in Alexandria yesterday to David Van Scoyoc Hemphill, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
James T. Hemphill of Johnstown, Pa.
The Rev.
Mark Anschutz officiated at Christ Episcopal


BOOKS FOR VACATION READING
LEAD: This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas issue of December 1989.
It only suggests high points in the main fields of reader interest.
Books are arranged alphabetically under subject headings.
Autobiography and Biography


Re-regulate? Not on Your Life;   Triumphs on the Road, on the Phone, in the Air
LEAD: Small towns howl about losing bus and rail service.
Travelers complain about rising air fares and congested airports.
Cable television users resent soaring rates, and many people occasionally pine for the days when Ma Bell cared for their every telephone need.
The widespread elimination of Government regulation in the Carter and Reagan years has hit some


Corrections
LEAD: The Art View column in the Arts and Leisure section today, about the Venice Biennale, refers incorrectly to the artist Jenny Holzer, as did an art review on May 28.
She is the first woman to be the sole participant in the United States pavilion, not the first woman represented there.


The Nature of Peter Mattiessen
LEAD: PEter Matthiessen may be the world's most hard traveling writer.
He has steamed by freighter from Brooklyn to the head of the Amazon, trekked over 17,000-foot-high passes to the Tibetan plateau, bounced by lorry around East Africa - and each time he has returned with a book.
On all continents he has gone in search of pristine places and societies untainted by Western culture.


TRAVEL
LEAD: Travel guides are, like travel itself, wonderful providers of curious information.
Picking through a wide assortment, as I have recently done, would seem to qualify one for a trivia contest, or at least put one at risk of becoming a bore at the next cocktail party.


Time For Children
LEAD:
''I talk to them often, but do not like to beat my children - the world will beat them enough.''
- Elihu Burritt, 19th-century reformer


Amid Dire Warnings, Glimmers of Optimism
LEAD: ''Internationalism in dance, Past, Present and Future'' seemed like the usual call to brotherhood and cooperation when Dance/USA, the 200-member service organization for nonprofit professional dance companies and presenting organizations in this country, opened its biennial roundtable in Philadelphia last weekend.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 10, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.)
The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-
American women and their immigrant mothers.
2
2
WARRIOR'S WOMAN, by Johanna Lindsey.
(Avon, $4.95.) The adventures of a woman
determined to rescue her native planet.


Question Of the Week;   Will Soccer Gain More Popularity In the U.S.?
LEAD: Sure.
When baseball, football and basketball cease to exist and/or the United States team wins the World Cup. ''Don't touch the ball, use your head!'' Please, no mas.
Let this silly, boring ''game'' die a peaceful death.


Wall Street;   The Gumshoe of Annual Reports
LEAD: Do not expect to see Behind the Numbers spreading sunshine on coffee tables throughout greater corporate America.
In the two years since the pricey, and influential, investment newsletter made its debut, it has recommended the stock of only one of the 78 companies it has written about.


The Trouble With Tinkering
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ruth S. Feldstein To Wed in August
LEAD: The engagement of Ruth Sara Feldstein to Dr.
Asa Joel Nixon, the son of Tamara Nixon and Dr.
Daniel Nixon of Miami Beach, has been made known by Ms.
Feldstein's parents, Shirley Feldstein and Dr.
Donald Feldstein of Teaneck, N.J.
An August wedding is planned.


UGLY DEBATE ENDS AS PROVINCES SIGN ACCORD ON QUEBEC
LEAD: Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and the premiers of Canada's 10 provinces signed a package of measures tonight to clear the way for a constitutional accord to keep Quebec a part of Canada.


On Language;   Cosmetological Chartist
LEAD: Be careful of parenthetical remarks; these asides can get you into unexpected trouble.


THE BEST-SELLER BLUES: HARD LESSONS FROM A COSBY BOOK
LEAD: In May 1986, the flanks of buses plying the streets of Manhattan sported jaunty advertisements proclaiming, ''Congratulations, it's a book!'' The happy event they signaled was the arrival of the latest offspring from the publishing house of Doubleday - a compendium of the wit and wisdom of the television paterfamilias Bill Cosby on the subject of ''Fatherhood.


Sepp Ruschp, 81; Skier Who Brought Sport to U.S. Is Dead
LEAD: Sepp Ruschp, an Austrian-born skier who helped develop skiing in the United States as a recreational and competitive sport, died Friday at his home in Stowe, Vt.
He was 81 years old.


Jacqueline Elliman Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Jacqueline Munroe Elliman, a daughter of Lawrence M. Elliman of St.
Helena, Calif., and Judith Sperry Beavers of Old Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Robert Gerard Leonard Jr., the son of Mrs.
Martin Winkler of Jericho, L.I., and the late Mr.
Leonard.
The Rev.
David Fountain officiated at the First Congregational Church in Old


A Way To Improve Mass Transit
LEAD: UNDER the leadership of Thomas Kean as Governor, New Jersey developed a comprehensive mass transit policy out of the fragmented and poorly financed program he inherited.
Gov.
Jim Florio has the opportunity to continue the commitment to long-term planning and develop a long-range plan for stable financing to improve and expand, as well as maintain, our existing highway and rail transit network.


The Long Campaign for a Perfect Prom
LEAD: Esther Truzman, the class secretary, fiddled with her notes and spoke up: ''The club has to be a nice space.
A lot of clubs, you walk in and they're so blah.
Hot Rod last year was nice, but the music wasn't so hot.''


Letters o n Travel;   Reading
LEAD: To the Editor: It seems unlikely that Andrea Barnet (''Literary Logistics,'' Travel, April 8) had ''the pleasure of reading Willa Catha'' on the Golan Heights or anywhere else without noticing the spelling of Miss Cather's name.


Michelle Jordan Becomes Bride
LEAD: Michelle Jordan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George William Jordan Jr. of Carmel Valley, Calif., was married yesterday to David Allison Carpenter, a son of Kenan Casteen Carpenter of Winston-Salem, N.C., and Dr.
Harry Mitten Carpenter of Coca, Fla.
The Rev.
Andy Strachan, a Baptist minister, officiated in the home of the bride's parents.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical BEETHOVEN: PIANO CONCERTOS NOS. 4, 5 - Wilhelm Backhaus, piano; Vienna Philharmonic conducted by Clemens Krauss.
In authoritative accounts from the early 50's, one senses that everyone involved is confident he knows what the music is about.


Turning Short-Lived Fads Into Steady Growth
LEAD: Strolling into his debut fashion show in 1987, Rick Fayer had little more than an idea for a new pair of pants.
He was a fashion designer with no name recognition, no track record and not even enough money for a display booth.


Kerith L. Sheehan Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Kerith Leah Sheehan, the daughter of Mrs.
Robert T. Sheehan of Brooklyn and the late Mr.
Sheehan, was married yesterday at Grace Episcopal Church in Brooklyn to Marvin Stanley Putnam Jr., a son of Janice Crawford Putnam of Bangor, Me., and Mr.
Putnam of Portland, Me.
The Rev.
David B. Hoopes officiated.


Pausing on Mars, Arnold Ponders His Success
LEAD: The souvenir posters that go from floor to ceiling in Arnold Schwarzenegger's colorfully modern office tell the tale of what by now is clearly a major event in pop culture history.
They show the primevally muscled, don't-mess-with-me, ultratough (though, in real life, entirely gentle and congenial) Mr.


What's New at Frisbee U.
LEAD: Hampshire College was born 20 years ago this fall in an apple orchard in western Massachusetts.
As the many journalists who described its infancy were wont to say, the school had a silver spoon in its mouth and a frisbee in its hand.
It was a college that gave no grades, had no departments, and didn't offer tenure to faculty.


SAIGON SWAP
LEAD:
MESSAGE FROM NAM
By Danielle Steel.
389 pp. New York: Delacorte Press. $21.95.


Adelman Keeps Blazers Confident
LEAD: Imagine a coach leading his team to the National Basketball Association championship series in his first full season on the job.


OBJECTS OF HIS DESIRE: ONE COLLECTOR'S CHINA SYNDROME
LEAD: The color-splashed and richly figured Chinese ceramics on view at the Metropolitan Museum of Art through Aug. 26 are a highly personal document of more than 2,000 years of stylistic developments in pottery.
The vessels and figures, which date from the Han Dynasty (206 B.C. to A.D. 220) through the Ching Dynasty of the 19th century, are from a collection amassed over 50 years by Stanley Herzman, a New


Other Factors In Assaults
LEAD: To the Sports Editor: rrIn regard to Gerald Eskenazi's article (''The Male Athlete and Sexual Assault,'' The New York Times, June 3), it seems to me that three important contributing factors were omitted.


Rains Bring In Large Morel Crop
LEAD: HEAVY rains this year have led to a good morel season.
It started in mid-April and is expected to last through July.
Those fragrant mushrooms are highly prized.
Their delicate but pungent flavor produces the same ecstatic reaction on the part of those who eat them as do truffles or the best caviar.


Lena Wu to Wed M. V. McConnell
LEAD: The engagement of Lena Wu to Michael V. McConnell has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
James T. Wu of Salt Lake City.
Mr.
McConnell is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent M. McConnell of New York.
The wedding is planned for next year.


New Jersey Motor Vehicles Plans to Close on Saturdays
LEAD: The New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles' 50 local agencies and 35 inspection stations will be closed on Saturdays beginning July 2 unless legislators and Gov.
Jim Florio find money to keep them open, a division spokesman, Arthur Smith, said on Friday.


Board Control
LEAD: To the Editor:


Maintaining Wood Shingles
LEAD: WOOD shingles are durable and generally trouble-free.
But because wood is susceptible to rot and damage from moisture and insects, regular inspection and maintenance are necessary, and repairs should be made promptly.


Arsenic Detected in System of a Former Hostage
LEAD: Arsenic was found in the system of a freed hostage, Frank Reed, shortly after his release from 44 months in captivity, hospital officials said Friday.


Humble Beginnings
LEAD: Most fans know that the top players in the National Basketball Association come from a galaxy of perennial big-time college basketball powerhouses: schools like U.C.L.A., Indiana, North Carolina, Georgetown and Indiana.


Clock Tower as a Mask;   Conversions With T.L.C.
LEAD: A British real estate company run by a Scottish family has been quietly investing in New York City properties that its owners feel ''need tender loving care'' and developing them in diverse ways for long-term gain.
The latest project of the Western Heritable Investment Company of London and Glasgow is the conversion of an old factory at 307 East 53d Street near Second


Getting the Most Out of a Shade Problem
LEAD: POSSIBLY the greatest challenge any gardener has to contend with is too much shade.
Full sun is easy for planters.
But when a property is covered with leafy canopies, gardening can be tricky.


In The Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Malverne
$147,000
224 Rolling Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old Cape Cod; porch, patio, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,700.
Mineola
$221,000
206 Horton Highway
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 55-year-old colonial; den, finished basement, attic, aluminum siding; taxes $2,200.


Ms. Rosse Weds Dennis E. Foster
LEAD: St.
Thomas' Episcopal Church in Orange, Va., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Lesley A. Rosse and Dennis E. Foster.
The Rev.
Robert Marston officiated, assisted by Msgr.
Edward Foster and the Rev.
Dennis Worzalla, Roman Catholic priests who are uncles of the bridegroom.


Letters on TRavel;   Car Rentals
LEAD: To the Editor: In reference to car rentals in Europe (Practical Traveler, April 1), you refer to Kemwel Company as a broker for ''many overseas rental companies.'' Kemwel is also referred to in many Pan Am ads as the supplier of cars in their promotions.


Jennifer C. Shikes Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Jennifer C. Shikes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph E. Shikes of New York, was married yesterday to David L. Haines, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald L. Haines of Schenectady, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard A. Taber performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church of Salisbury, Conn.


Miss Duffy Weds A Fellow Teacher
LEAD: The Edith Memorial Chapel at the Lawrenceville (N.J.) School was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Shannon Mary Duffy and Peter Guyon Weiland Jr.
The Rev.
Vincent Gartland performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
He was assisted by the Rev.
Richard Downes, the Episcopal chaplain at the school, where the bride teaches


Campus Life: Harvard;   Huge Fund Drive May Not Survive Bok's Departure
LEAD: Toying with tradition at Harvard University is no easy task, so President Derek C. Bok's decision to resign next spring has raised doubts about whether an ambitious, controversial fund-raising drive he planned can survive in its present form without his leadership.


Dance Festival Opens New Season at Duke U.
LEAD: The American Dance Festival is featuring major American choreographers and new choreographers from abroad in its new season, American Masters Plus, which opened Thursday and runs through July 21 at Duke University in Durham, N.C.
This is the schedule: Erick Hawkins (today); Eiko and Koma (Tuesday and Wednesday); Martha Graham (Thursday to next Saturday); Ann Carlson (June 19 and 20); the Black Tradition with revivals, performed by the Dayton Contemporary Dance Company and the Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Ensemble (June 21 to 23), and the African-American Dance Ensemble, with a premiere by


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Golf
Nicklaus, 19 Under, Has Record Day: Jack Nicklaus tied three records and broke another yesterday after shooting an eight-under-par 64 to take a three-shot lead into the final round of the Senior Tournament Players Championship in Dearborn, Mich.
Nicklaus, playing in only his third senior tournament, is at 19-under 197, which breaks the third-round Senior T.P.C.


Votes in Congress
LEAD: Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Crime Bill: Vote on a motion to cut off debate on a comprehensive crime package and end delaying tactics that threaten to kill the bill.
Failed, with 54 votes in favor and 37 opposed (60 votes in favor needed to end debate), June 5.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our house has a concrete basement floor with a one-inch trench around the perimeter.
For years, this floor has had a hairline crack about five feet long that goes from one corner out toward the center.
The crack has widened to about a sixteenth of an inch, and there seems to be a new hairline crack that goes about eight feet past this.


Truman's 'Police Action'
LEAD: To the Editor:


UP TO NO GOOD IN HOLLYWOOD
LEAD:
AN INCONVENIENT WOMAN
By Dominick Dunne.
458 pp. New York:
Crown Publishers. $19.95.


Elizabeth Latane Ware Weds A. M. Brown Jr.
LEAD: Elizabeth Latane Ware, the daughter of Guilford D. Ware of Norfolk, Va., and the late Nancy Smith Ware, was married yesterday to Archibald McDowell Brown Jr., the son of Mrs.
Wootton Walker and Mr.
Brown, both of Virginia Beach, Va.
The Rev.
A.
Heath Light, Bishop of the Diocese of Southwestern Virginia, performed the ceremony at Christ and St.


Matthew P. Connolly Weds Maura A. Cronin
LEAD: Maura Ann Cronin, a daughter of Neil R. Cronin of Hyannis, Mass., and the late Irene Heinsohn Cronin, was married yesterday to Matthew Powers Connolly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Connolly of Weston, Conn.
The Rev.
Gildon Stillings officiated at the Pilgrim Congregational Church in Harwich Port, Mass.


A Flurry of Red Cards Hits the World Cup
LEAD: At long last, most Americans have something to relate to at the World Cup of soccer.
Not only is a squad of Yanks playing Czechoslovakia in Florence today, but a more drastic version of baseball's dreaded Balk-o-Mania has broken out.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
BLOOMSDAY BASH


Lifestyle;   The Making of a College Cult
LEAD: For money and sometimes for fun, Mark Leyner writes advertisements for products like artificial saliva. ''I say that it's pleasant tasting,'' said Mr.
Leyner, an affable 34-year-old with a deadpan manner, ''and that it's the most effective remedy for chronic dry mouth.''


Liza Hathaway Is a Bride
LEAD: Liza Phillips Hathaway, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Grant Hathaway Jr. of Ruxton, Md., was married yesterday to E. Brent Matthews, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Earl Franklin Matthews of Towson, Md.
The Rev.
William P. Baxter Jr. officiated at St.
Thomas' Episcopal Church in Garrison Forest, Md.
Mrs.


Arrested Retailer Plans More Sales of Album
LEAD: A owner of a South Florida record store who was arrested on Friday for selling a rap music album that has been ruled obscene, said today that he would order a new shipment of the recording and sell it next week.


Riley May Resign
LEAD: Is he or isn't he?
Only Pat Riley, the Los Angeles Laker coach, and Jerry Buss, the team's owner, know for sure, according to Riley, whether he will be stepping down after nine seasons.
But if Riley does decide to leave the Lakers, the team's general manager, Jerry West, already has a short list of possible replacements, including Mike Dunleavy, a Milwaukee


Noreen R. Weiss Is Wed to Derek J. T. Adler
LEAD: Noreen R. Weiss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Weiss of Wilkes-Barre, Pa., was married yesterday to Derek J. T. Adler, the son of Florence Cousins of Palm Harbor, Fla., and Lee Adler of Climax, N.Y.
The Rev.
Orlanda R. Brugnola officiated at the First Unitarian Church of Brooklyn in Brooklyn Heights.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended May 26
MANHATTAN
East Midtown
$223,000
19 East 57th Street
1-bedroom, 1-bath, 850-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, dining ell, high ceilings; maintenance $550, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: David Day Realty)
Murray Hill


Editor of Street News Steps Down
LEAD: The founder of Street News, under attack from former staff members, has resigned as the paper's editor in chief, saying he hopes his departure will permit the paper to continue publication, friends and a board member said on Friday.


A Noteworthy Collection
LEAD: This selection of paperbacks is from the New &amp; Noteworthy column since the 1989 Christmas issue.
GEEK LOVE, by Katherine Dunn. (Warner, $9.95.) A carnival family learns that do-it-yourself genetic experimentation can be fun and profitable.
ALL CONSUMING IMAGES: The Politics of Style in Contemporary Culture, by Stuart Ewen.


Why Gorbachev Frets;   In Europe, Peace Comes easier Than Peace of Mind
LEAD: IN separate meetings over the last week, NATO and the Warsaw Pact each agreed that it had met the enemy, and found that he no longer existed.
But how to replace the balance of terror that kept Europe at peace, if divided, for four decades now that the cold war has been declared over - or at least ending - is not as easy as it sounds:


COMPANY SHOWS FACE THE MUSIC
LEAD: The hand-lettered sign on the door of a nondescript office in downtown San Francisco read, ''Please Wait Til Called.'' A dozen bankers stood nervously in line outside the door, gripping their attache cases.
Inside, Ellen Marshall, an assistant vice president of First Interstate Bank of California, was singing: ''Ah-mare-i-ka, Ah-mare-i-ka, God shed His .


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
Eastern Offers New Tickets For Old Ones


A THIN PAPER TRAIL IN NORIEGA INQUIRY
LEAD: Despite an unceasing search to find physical evidence of drug dealing by Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, disappointed American officials say they have found almost no documents so far that conclusively prove General Noriega trafficked in drugs.


IS THE BBC LOSING ITS GRIP ON QUALITY?
LEAD: Alan Bennett's ''Talking Heads,'' a series of dramatic monologues currently being broadcast Sunday nights at 10 on Channel 13, is precisely the sort of television that adds to the luster of the British Broadcasting Corporation's reputation for quality television.
The overall BBC schedule still tends to be just as ordinary and mediocre as its


A New Orchestra Sets Summertime Concerts
LEAD: A NEW orchestra has formed in the state, just in time to fill the music void left by other ensembles that traditionally are silent in June, July and August.


Technology;   The Phone Company Untangles Its Lifelines
LEAD: Simple diagrams of how a local telephone call reaches its destination usually show a line from the customer to a telephone company switch, and then another line from the switch to the desired party.


Biddle Duke to Wed Idoline Scheerer
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William Scheerer 2d of New York and East Hampton, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Idoline A. Scheerer to A. Biddle Duke Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Angier Biddle Duke of New York and Southampton, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.


About Men;   Wet Behind The Ears
LEAD: I'd left my childhood in the murky waters of the Westhill High School pool.
The school's administration had invested a great deal of money installing the pool and, in order to justify the expense, swimming class was deemed mandatory for all freshmen.
It seemed logical that only freshmen should be forced to submerge themselves in the frigid waters for a few minutes each morning, then creep through the courtyard, hair soaking wet, to the next class.


TRAVEL
LEAD: I've been reading the latest batch of travel books.
Which means I've been reading an awful lot about snow-capped peaks set against limitless blue skies and how such sights inspire awe, reverence and a renewed desire to preserve the wilderness.
In book after book, I've been bombarded with fine, soulful sentiments.


A FATHER'S PAWN
LEAD: Your article touched me.
Gata Kamsky and I are the same age.
My family comes from Russia and I, too, have felt my father's hand trying to push, or, rather, lead me through life.


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: Times Square Novelty;   North of Duffy Sq., a Butler-on-Every-Floor Hotel
LEAD: THE Latin Quarter.
Cotton Club.
Coca-Cola.
Castro Convertibles.
With its hot nightclubs, dazzling signs and sprawling showrooms, the block at the northern end of the ''bowtie'' formed by Broadway and Seventh Avenue was always an important part of old Times Square.
The developer Jeffrey Katz is betting that a $220-a-night hotel with butlers on every floor will suit the new Times Square, as well.


Nancy Klein to Wed Jordan Ira Bailowitz
LEAD: The engagement of Nancy Sue Klein to Jordan Ira Bailowitz, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Bailowitz of Fort Lee, N.J., has been announced by Miss Klein's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Norman I. Klein of Baltimore.


Maintaining Wood Shingles
LEAD: WOOD shingles are durable and generally trouble-free.
But because wood is susceptible to rot and damage from moisture and insects, regular inspection and maintenance are necessary, and repairs should be made promptly.


Dare We Mention Socialism?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Indian Shrimp With Apples
LEAD: This shrimp dish might have been aptly named Curried Shrimp, but whenever something is called curry and there is no curry powder in it, someone invariably calls and asks if the curry was inadvertently omitted.


Hilary Lea Weds Matthew Bernard
LEAD: Hilary Martin Lea and Matthew Lionel Bernard were married yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn., by the Rev.
John W. Bishop.
The bride is a daughter of Charles L. Lea Jr. of New York and Avice Stevens Lea of Greenwich.
Mr.
Bernard is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan H. Bernard of Greenwich.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: The most enduring international postal system is celebrating the 500th anniversary of its founding.
Known to collectors as Thurn und Taxis, it was founded in 1490 by Franz von Taxis, ruler of a Germanic duchy who traced his roots to northern Italy.
The royal house that ran the system survives, but the service ended more than a century ago.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
PUTNAM CELEBRATED


'I SHOULD HAVE KNOWN BETTER'
LEAD: In March 1988, after meetings with the American representatives of Australia's Hooker Corporation, I became president of Bonwit Teller, the specialty store chain.
Two months later I sat down for the first time with the top management of the Sydney-based real estate developer that owned the chain.
There were four of us that day in New York, everyone jovially shaking hands and patting backs.


SOME CUSTOMERS ARE ALWAYS WRONG
LEAD: At first glance, it was a scene to gladden a retailer's heart.
In the men's department of a Dayton Hudson store in a suburb of Minneapolis, a well-dressed, 20-year-old man strolled toward the register, bearing four Ralph Lauren shirts and a sweater.
But with $500 worth of merchandise on the counter in front of him, the sales clerk rang up only two of the shirts, for a total of $159.


Homeless in America
LEAD: One of the most incongruous snapshots of America's homeless men and women can be taken daily at about 4:30 in the afternoon on one of the two large lawns that flank the entrance to City Hall on Main Street in Santa Monica, Calif.
The neatly trimmed grass, the blue canopy and Art Deco mosaic tiles over the front doors of the white, two-story building just two blocks from the serene Pacific, is an odd setting for a soup kitchen.


Miss Kittredge Wed to R. P. Wastrom
LEAD: Jennifer Ann Kittredge, a daughter of Mrs.
David Brayton Kittredge of Charlotte, Vt., and the late Mr.
Kittredge, was married yesterday to Richard Paul Wastrom, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Dale Wastrom of Upper Saddle River, N.J.
The Rev.
Mark Bolles officiated at the Congregational Church in Charlotte.


Data Update
LEAD:
BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED
(Housing units)
Apr. 90
Mar. 90
Apr. 89
New York
2,692
2,623
4,555
New Jersey
1,872
2,200
3,417
Connecticut
632
545
940 Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES
(Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago


Heather Willson Marries
LEAD: Heather Noel Willson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marlon E. Willson of Alexandria, Va., was married there yesterday to David A. Freeman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Freeman Jr. of Mobile, Ala.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anschutz officiated at Christ Church Episcopal.
Mrs.
Freeman, 28 years old, graduated from Sweet Briar College; Mr.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Campus Life pages on May 27 about Sarah Lawrence College referred incorrectly to selection standards for the Joseph Campbell professorial chair.
Drawn in rotation from several disciplines, scholars appointed to the chair will be specialists in the peoples and cultures of Africa, Asia, Native America, Latin America or the Middle East.


Jane West Weds Steven Welker in Connecticut
LEAD: Jane Hamilton West, the daughter of Maria McDonald West of Darien, Conn., and the late Herbert Buell West, was married yesterday to Steven Richard Welker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles J. Welker of Somers, N.Y.
The Episcopal ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Anne Kimball at St.
Luke's Church in Darien, assisted by the Rev.


Is a Mall Really 'Home'?
LEAD: I found an inconsistency in Mary M. Jefford's article (''This Island is a Really Good Place to Be From,'' April 29) very interesting.
She describes wanting to go ''home'' after a visit to Long Island and its status-seeking populace, where people have everything yet are somehow sour on life.
Three paragraphs later she writes of going to the ''hometown mall'' and meeting a bejeweled woman who complains of the cold as she gets out of her


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Why does it happen?
It's a combination of things, but the principal one is simply sending out wrong signals.
It's rarely done deliberately because this kind of situation usually only occurs between friends, or with the innumerable people who aren't friends but are somewhat more than acquaintances.


After 3 Weeks, Dominican Vote Still Unsettled
LEAD: Three weeks after national elections, this country still awaits the results of a presidential contest in which a margin of well under one percent separates the two leading candidates.


ROUND ONE: ELECTIONS IN BULGARIA
LEAD: THE VOTING Two rounds of secret-ballot voting will be held to fill the 400 seats in Bulgaria's unicameral Grand National Assembly.
In its next session, the Assembly will function both as a constituent assembly and a legislature.


U.S. Rights Groups Fault U.N. Panel's Growth
LEAD: American human-rights monitoring organizations are warning that the main United Nations group charged with enforcing respect for human rights in the world is likely to become less effective as a result of last month's decision to increase its membership and give all 10 new seats to third world countries.


The Framers Had Muskets in Mind, Not Semiautomatic Rifles
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dancing In the Street
LEAD: It was already a national holiday, so the 10 million inhabitants of the Republic of Cameroon hardly knew how to celebrate on Friday when the West African nation's soccer team defeated the defending champion, Argentina, in the opening round of the 1990 World Cup.
They found a way.
As soon as the game was over,


No One Can Avoid Exposure to Radiation
LEAD: One has to give the residents of West Sayville who oppose the installation of the National Weather Service's new weather radar installation (''Warning Sounded Over Weather Radar Station,'' April 22) the benefit of the doubt that they are generally concerned for their health and are not zealots.
In exercising their rights of opposition they also have the responsibility to become informed, and the scientific community has the responsibility to educate.


Mindy Gerber Is Married
LEAD: Mindy Gerber and Comdr.
Charles Harry Barber 3d, U.S.N., were married yesterday at the Homestead in Hot Springs, Va., by Judge James H. Michael Jr. of Federal District Court in Charlottesville, Va.
Mrs.
Barber, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herman Gerber of Charlottesville, attended Hamilton College.


Allergy Sufferers, Keep the Tissues Handy
LEAD: THE Island's trees have been pollinating since March, grass pollen and mold spores are now in the air and thousands of allergic Long Islanders are suffering from runny noses, itchy eyes, blocked sinuses and asthma.


Missing the Issues In Child Custody
LEAD: The headline ''Who Gets the Children?
There's No Easy Answer'' for Janice Cohn's and Gary Skoloff's article on custody of children in divorce (Opinion page, April 29) tells legions about the key problem.
The authors' language ''gets'' hints of property rights, and it is in this mentality that the Legislature, driven by the matrimonial attorney lobby, seeks to perpetuate the problem.


Dream Come True For Irish Trainer
LEAD: Dermot Weld was looking not at all unhappy to be standing around with his black loafers caked with mud.
It was, after all, the mud of a winner.


Missing the Issues in Child Custody
LEAD: The article ''Who Gets the Children?
There's No Easy Answer'' is certainly timely.
Considering the major flaws in proposed custody legislation and the harm done to the ''children of divorce,'' it is a relief to have some responsible recommendations from knowledgeable professionals.


Young Jazzmen Revive A Style Be-Bop Banished
LEAD: When Be-Bop made its way onto the American scene in the 1940's, it did more than introduce a new musical and cultural language.
It also banished, for nearly 40 years, a way of playing that's slowly beginning to make its way back into jazz.


Maintaining Wood Shingles
LEAD: WOOD shingles are durable and generally trouble-free.
But because wood is susceptible to rot and damage from moisture and insects, regular inspection and maintenance are necessary, and repairs should be made promptly.


Liberia's Government Plans to Hold Peace Talks
LEAD: The Liberian Government said today that it had agreed to hold peace talks with rebel forces in an effort to end the nearly six-month-long civil war.


Numbers Crunch;   Getting a Mental Grip On The Dimensions of The Savings Disaster
LEAD: ONE of the more curious aspects of the savings and loan debacle is how much money has been lost and how little anyone seems to be upset about it. ''Twin Peaks'' appears to have generated more intense national discussion.


The Polysided Views of Ives's Personality
LEAD: Did Charles Ives, the revered pioneer of American music, secretly revise and redate manuscripts of his older compositions to promote the legend of his originality?
That has long been the suspicion of some music historians, following a clue first dropped by his onetime disciple Elliott Carter in 1939 and dilated upon 30 years later in an oral-history interview.


AN ABORTION BAN GAINS IN LOUISIANA
LEAD: The Louisiana House is preparing to take up a bill that would create the strictest abortion law in the country, banning all abortions except to save the life of the woman.


HOW A 30'S STIFF BECAME A CHARMER FOR THE 90's
LEAD: Though in many ways wooden and expressly two-dimensional, the figure of Dick Tracy has an enduring attraction.
Right now, we see his face everywhere.
We can eat off it, lean back on it, walk the dogs in it and wipe the dishes with it.
Come Friday, we can see a feature film in which Warren Beatty produces, directs and plays the title role and


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: If daffodils did not bloom profusely, they may need dividing; now while the leaves are visible, dig up and separate thick clumps of bulbs; replant them and water well, but the foliage must remain above ground to ripen naturally.
Protect roses with a fungicidal spray to prevent development of black spot, a fungus disease that spreads rapidly.


Tech Notes;   The Next-Generation Computer?
LEAD: First there was the desktop personal computer, then the laptop.
Now there is the walk-through PC.
The what?
It's not really a computer at all but a two-story working model of a PC with a 108-square-foot monitor and a 25-foot operational keyboard.
It was built as an exhibit for the Computer Museum in Boston, to show how computers work, will open there June 23 and then tour the country.


THE MOVIE'S CREATORS USED THE STRIP TO TEASE
LEAD: Where do people dress in orange hats, green shirts, red pants and blue coats?
In the comic strips; and now, thanks to ''Dick Tracy,'' in the movies.
Not only are the film's characters and story line drawn from Chester Gould's original cartoons, but its look is, too.
The reason is simple: ''I wanted to be 7 years old again,'' says Warren


White Sox Executive Illustrates How to Follow a Game Plan
LEAD: Players snickered at Larry Himes when, as the rookie general manager of the Chicago White Sox, he checked their feet to see if they were wearing socks with their loafers.
If they weren't, he fined them.


Same Time, Different Place
LEAD: To the Editor:


Looking Ahead


Question Of the Week;   Will Soccer Gain More Popularity In the U.S.?
LEAD: Soccer is already an immensely popular sport in the United States.
Nearly all elementary and secondary schools play the sport.
Cosmopolitan leagues filled with players of all nationalities play in regular leagues around the country.


WestHELP Wins Approval For Sites in White Plains
LEAD: THE Board of Legislators reached a milestone last week as it approved the last of the three Westhelp housing projects that County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke had hoped would serve as a catalyst for community assistance to the homeless.


A Fresh Air Fund Romance, 30 Years Later
LEAD: When Elba Rosa was 15, her aunt sent her to the country to keep her away from the boys in their Lower East Side neighborhood.


No Headline
LEAD: At no time since he burst upon the scene as a New York City developer and then as an Atlantic City casino operator has Donald J. Trump seemed in more financial trouble than in the last few weeks.
The 43-year-old entrepreneur has been closeted with his bankers amid concerns that he lacks the cash to make timely payments on his huge business debt.


Dawn M. Haase Is Bride of James C. Stephens 2d
LEAD: Dawn M. Haase, the daughter of Mary Salerno of Westport, N.Y., was married there yesterday to James C. Stephens 2d, a son of Simone S. Stephens of Westport and Clay G. Stephens 3d of New York.
The Rev.
Floyd George, a minister of the Federated Church of Westport, officiated at Camp Dudley in Westport.


Shelby P. Tison, Banker, Is Wed
LEAD: Shelby Pamela Tison, the daughter of Paul Tison Jr. of Corte Madera, Calif., and Patricia Richardson Badig of Mahwah, N.J., was married yesterday to Jarvis Cromwell 2d, a son of Joan Van Pelt Cromwell of New York and Roger J. K. Cromwell of Cheshire, Conn.
The Rev.
Hays H. Rockwell officiated at St.


Headliners;   Two Heads
LEAD: For a generation paleontologists have known that the Piltdown Man of England was a counterfeit, a couple of bones deftly patched together to suggest a large-brained prehistoric ancestor.
But who assembled him?
The list of usual suspects reads like a parody of an Agatha Christie cast: Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, fossil buff; Dr.


Troubled Co-ops
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Dance;   Christine Dunham In New Role
LEAD: Christine Dunham made a triumphant role debut as Nikiya in the Kingdom of the Shades scene from ''La Bayadere,'' presented by American Ballet Theater on Thursday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Miss Dunham faltered a little at times.
But it made the strength and speed of her dancing even more dazzling to know that this haughty ghost was actually mortal.


BETTING THE FARM ON BIOTECH
LEAD: The sun beats down on green fields of corn that have never seen chemical insecticides or weed killers.
Over the ridge, docile Holsteins are producing more milk on less feed than has ever before been possible, and piglets are growing into lean adults at uncommon speed.
The air is free of dust from eroding topsoil and a stream drains the gentle slopes, its waters as sweet and pure as a mountain spring.


Baptism of Desire
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cuomos and Kennedys Sit on Both Sides of the Aisle
LEAD: At the bridegroom's quarters at the Sheraton Carlton Hotel, most of the morning was spent trying to pin the tail on the Governor.


Sisters Torn Apart by the Holocaust
LEAD: OCCASIONALLY, the story that a play tells transcends its plot, characters and quality of production.
The audience fills in pauses in dialogue with personal or familial memories that expand whatever is unfoldling on stage.


Ms. Friedman to Wed Judah Shechter
LEAD: September wedding plans for Amanda Beth Friedman and Judah Aryeh Shechter have been announced by the parents of the future bride, Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Friedman of Toms River, N.J.
Mr.
Shechter is a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Jack Shechter of Beverly Hills, Calif.


Institutions Should Pay
LEAD: To the Sports Editor: rrRegarding Gerald Eskenazi's article on sexual assault:


UNEASY ABOUT THE GERMANS
LEAD: Arthur Miller tells us that he is concerned about the German problem but is still supportive of unification (''Uneasy About the Germans,'' May 6).
He concedes that there is no way to assure ourselves that the Germany of the 1990's will not return to the politics of internal repression and external aggression once the constraints of the cold war are loosened.


COOKING
LEAD: Suddenly and for no apparent reason, on a recent azalea-brightened late spring day, I started to think about barbecued ribs, spicy-sweet and moist, and was captured by the thought of them.


A DEATH IN THE ART WORLD
LEAD:
NAKED BY THE WINDOW
The Fatal Marriage of Carl Andre and Ana Mendieta.
By Robert Katz.
Illustrated. 428 pp. New York:
The Atlantic Monthly Press. $19.95.


LORD OF THE 'RING'
LEAD: It is five hours into richard wagner's ''die Walkure,'' the second opera in his massive ''Der Ring des Nibelungen'' tetralogy.
In one of the most dramatic moments in the entire 17-hour ''Ring'' cycle, Wotan, the king of the gods, sung by James Morris, has just banished his beloved daughter Brunnhilde from


Style Makers;   Carol Cohen, Raincoat Designer
LEAD: Carol Cohen specializes in coats that are as dramatic as they are rainproof.
Her first collection for the Sanyo Fashion House, where she has been the head designer since last August, are not for the faint of heart or the meek in style, though they are exceedingly practical.


Fashion;   Cool Summer Whites Can Also Turn Up the Heat
LEAD: A symbol of purity and innocence, white can also be wanton.
This summer's white-hot looks include lace bodysuits and leggings that tease the imagination, and figure-hugging cotton-Lycra skirts and tops that look great against the skin.


'Real Allusions' Show Offers a Crew of Surrealist Riddlers
LEAD: IN the late 20th century, there is the obsession with technology on the one hand and the cult of the childlike on the other.
Not so long ago, the two seemed to be in opposition, but now it looks as if they go hand in hand.


Spirited Comeback Has Its Rough Side
LEAD: What a wonderful drama it almost was.


HIS TURN: WHITE HOUSE SPOUSE TELLS ALL
LEAD:
FIRST HUBBY
By Roy Blount Jr.
286 pp. New York:
Villard Books.
$18.95


Letters on Travel;   Jamaica
LEAD: To the Editor: ''Jamaica Fights Harassment of Visitors'' (Travel Advisory, April 15) reminds me of that pungent caveat, ''You never get a second chance to make a good first impression.'' An object lesson is an experience in 1969 on a desolate seaside highway late one evening returning to Montego Bay from a day's outing in


A FATHER'S PAWN
LEAD: I was very hurt to see Fred Waitzkin's article ''A Father's Pawn'' (May 13).
The negative publicity that it has given my son, Gata, will add yet another obstacle to his difficult way to success in the chess world.
That way is already blocked by envy on the part of many American and Soviet emigre chess players who resent the competition from


Corrections
LEAD: The festival listings in the Summer Arts supplement of the Arts and Leisure section last Sunday misstated the information telephone number for the New York City Opera.
The correct number is (212) 870-5570.


Talking; Co-ops;   Boards' Powers Sustained
LEAD: THE opportunity for a shareholder in a New York cooperative to challenge a decision by the building's board of directors or for a condominium unit owner to overrule the board of managers has been sharply curtailed by an April decision of the Court of Appeals, New York State's highest court.


The World;   With Luck and Ingenuity, Ethiopian Aid Gets Through
LEAD: WHEN the rains failed in northern Ethiopia last year and the civil war reached new levels of destruction, with thousands of casualties inflicted each month, the specter of skeletal children and mass starvation loomed again, recalling the suffering of 1984.


Susan A. Anton to Wed James Clancy in October
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Mark J. Anton of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan A. Anton to James P. Clancy, a son of Dorothy Clancy of Morristown, N.J., and Richard Clancy of Boston.
An October wedding is planned.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
A Tough Review


What's Doing In;   Zurich
LEAD: Switzerland's largest city has lately become a prime gateway to Europe because of its no-nonsense efficiency, with never a strike or an unscheduled work stoppage, its clocklike communications with all other areas of the Continent, its financial services and its affluent cosmopolitanism.
In the warm months Zurich even manages to smile, although twinkling bonhomie isn't usually considered an outstanding trait of its citizens.


Correction
LEAD: A report in the Headliners column last week about Davey Johnson and the New York Mets misstated the day on which Bud Harrelson took over as manager.
It was Tuesday, May 29, the day Mr.
Johnson was dismissed.


Zambian Culture In a Crafts Shop
LEAD: AS a founder of Zintu, the leading crafts store in Zambia, Gwenda Chongwe has had her share of the kind of serendipitous adventures travelers in Zambia must learn to love.


FOR BARRY'S JURY, QUERIES AND MORE
LEAD: Most of the excitement this week surrounding Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug and perjury trial has occurred outside the courtroom, with the legal proceedings overwhelmed by rampant speculation over whether he will reach a plea arrangement with Federal prosecutors.


Wrangling in Wyoming On the T Cross Ranch
LEAD: ''ANYBODY up for a cattle drive tomorrow?'' asked the ranch owner as guests and wranglers lingered at the table after dinner planning the next day's adventures. ''My neighbor is driving a herd up to summer pasture a half-day's ride from here,'' she said, ''so if anyone's interested, be at the corral right after breakfast.


Ms. Rosenauer Becomes Bride
LEAD: Kathleen V. Rosenauer, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Adolf Rosenauer of Reno, was married yesterday to Dr.
Horace F. Henriques 3d, a son of Claire W. Henriques of Greenwich, Conn., and Mr.
Henriques Jr. of Buyck, Minn.
The Rev.
John J. Cantwell officiated at Corpus Christi Roman Catholic Church in Tahoe City,


Burks Drives in 6 as Red Sox Win 7th in a Row
LEAD: Ellis Burks continued to feast on Cleveland pitching today, driving in six runs with a homer, a double and a single as the first-place Boston Red Sox beat the Indians, 11-6, for their seventh consecutive victory.''


'Mad Dads' of Omaha Take On Gangs and Drugs
LEAD: John Foster decided that something new needed to be done here to combat drugs and violence after his son, a 20-year-old college student, was beaten up last year by youths who thought he belonged to a rival gang.


Susan Carpenter Weds Mark Hill
LEAD: Susan E. Carpenter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund M. Carpenter of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Mark R. Hill, a son of Patricia A. Hill of Waukegan, Ill., and Joe R. Hill of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
Dr.
John W. Bishop officiated at Christ Episcopal Church.


TV Policy Irks Basketball Fan
LEAD: A FUNNY thing happened to the Hartford basketball viewer this season: He was almost denied broadcasts of both Boston Celtics and New York Knickerbockers games.
Behind this peculiar outcome lay the antiquated and illegal territorial restrictions of the National Basketball Association.


Susan I. Jacobson to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Simon Jacobson of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced 1991 wedding plans for their daughter, Susan I. Jacobson, and Dr.
Edward D. Fein, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold Fein of Brooklyn.
Miss Jacobson, 24 years old, graduated from Washington University and is studying for an M.B.A. at New York University.


Wall Street;   Revisionist Research on Proxy Dissidents


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-19


THE MERRY SOUL AT 82
LEAD:
THE PLEASURES OF AGE
By Robert Morley.
Illustrated. 159 pp.
San Francisco:
Mercury House. $15.95.


SUITCASE MUSIC TRANSPORTS PEOPLE AND VICE VERSA
LEAD: Skipping town is an old summertime urge.
Even in ancient Rome, those who could afford it headed for their seaside villas when the weather got hot; and in the backwoods of New England, where this column is written, cabins and cottages are now filling up with summer people from the cities.


Rains Bring In Large Morel Crop
LEAD: HEAVY rains this year have led to a good morel season.
It started in mid-April and is expected to last through July.
Those fragrant mushrooms are highly prized.
Their delicate but pungent flavor produces the same ecstatic reaction on the part of those who eat them as do truffles or the best caviar.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our house has a concrete basement floor with a one-inch trench around the perimeter.
For years, this floor has had a hairline crack about five feet long that goes from one corner out toward the center.
The crack has widened to about a sixteenth of an inch, and there seems to be a new hairline crack that goes about eight feet past this.


A Composer Whose Time Never Seems to Come
LEAD: In 1965, while taking part in the centennial celebration of Carl Nielsen's birth, Leonard Bernstein indulged in a bit of prophecy.
He said the world was ready at last to accept the Danish composer as the equal of his celebrated Finnish neighbor, Sibelius.


Go and Go Runs Away With the Belmont
LEAD: Go and Go, an Irish colt who was flown to New York from Dublin on Wednesday, thrashed what was left of the American Triple Crown crop when he scored an 8 1/4-length victory over Thirty Six Red yesterday to win the 122d Belmont Stakes at Belmont Park.


Arts Agency Post
LEAD: ALVIN S. FELZENBERG, former Assistant Secretary of State in New Jersey, is reportedly leaving his post as No. 2 man at the National Endowment for the Arts, a job he began in February.
But he denies that he is leaving.


A CROWBAR FOR CARLA HILLS
LEAD: The office of the United States Trade Representative is housed in a 19th- century building that once served as Union Army headquarters.
Gen.
Ulysses S. Grant occupied the spare, high-ceilingedroom that now is the office of Carla A. Hills, the nation's chief trade negotiator.


Julie Williams Is Wed To Daniel B. Murphy
LEAD: Julie Hunt Williams, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Fox Williams of Savannah, Ga., was married there yesterday to Daniel Bryn Murphy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent Bernard Murphy Jr. of Bedminster, N.J.
The Rev.
George M. Maxwell performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.


Bridget Venus Weds
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York, Bridget A. Venus, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael T. Venus of Sparta, N.J., was married yesterday to Henry M. Bonner Jr., a son of Mr.
Bonner of Southport, Conn., and the late Anne C. B. Bonner.
The Rev.
John G. Hartnett officiated.
The bride, 26 years old, will keep her name.


And It Was Once a Corner Pizza Parlor
LEAD: FEEL like a hearty meal in the old neighborhood?
There is no need to go to Arthur Avenue in the Bronx or Little Italy's Mulberry Street.
Rather, head for Lincoln Avenue in Roslyn.
There, on an unlikely suburban street, is Antonio's.
You can return to your roots along with a shirt-sleeved crowd complete with babies and grandparents.


By 1942, Britain's Darkest Hour Was Over
LEAD: To the Editor:


Second Honeymoon in Niagara Falls
LEAD: WHEN my wife and I got married, we had only the briefest of honeymoons - just a couple of days in a small, rundown Fire Island cottage lent to us by a friend who had rented it for the season.
So it was with a sense of happy surprise that on our 24th wedding anniversary we found ourselves driving past Niagara Falls en route to visit my wife's brother in


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Should the Nets Trade The No. 1 Draft Pick?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.


Promise Into Peril: The Kirby Fight
LEAD: It all began with a letter that ended, ''With Kindest Regards.'' Sent in the spring of 1986, the letter caused long-simmering family frictions to erupt in a battle over an obscure charitable foundation.
Since then, the Kirby family feud has turned into a tale of sibling rivalry played out on a billion-dollar stage.


Jacqueline Lupichuk Weds
LEAD: At St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in East Islip, L.I., Jacqueline M. Lupichuk, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Lupichuk of Wayne, N.J., was married yesterday to Gary W. Skubik, a son of Mr. and Mr.
Henry Skubik of Massapequa, L.I.
The Rev.
Gennaro DiSpigno officiated.
The bride, a graduate of Rutgers University and its law school, is an associate in the law firm of Richard A.


Managing;   The Need for Cooperation
LEAD: Sandra L. Helton, Corning Inc.'s assistant treasurer, coveted the excellent return on equity that Merck &amp; Company, a pharmaceutical and chemical corporation, enjoys.
Merck envied the track record that Corning, which makes such things as optical fibers and consumer products, has established for successful joint ventures.


Too Silly To Be Said
LEAD: To the Editor:


BLASTS AND FIRE HIT TANKER IN GULF
LEAD: Three explosions rocked a Norwegian oil tanker carrying more than 38 million gallons of crude in the Gulf of Mexico off Galveston early today, setting off a fire and killing at least two crew members.


Margaret M. Suraci Marries
LEAD: At the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Gregory in Clarks Green, Pa., Margaret M. Suraci, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry A. Suraci of Clarks Green, was married yesterday to Thomas D. DeVita, a son of Dr.
Marie N. DeVita of Paramus, N.J., and Dr.
Michael R. DeVita of Oakland, Me.
Msgr.
John H. Louis officiated assisted by the Rev.


U.S. Grant to 2 Czech Parties Is Called Unfair Interference
LEAD: An American attempt to foster democracy is being denounced here as unfair interference favoring the political parties closest to President Vaclav Havel.


Rhoda Han-Pu Woo Weds
LEAD: Rhoda Han-Pu Woo and Mark D. Wainger were married yesterday at the Sonesta Beach Hotel in Southampton, Bermuda, by the Rev.
Michael Davis, an Episcopalian.
The bride, 31 years old, is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Tse-Chien Woo of Pittsburgh.
She graduated from Yale University and received an M.B.A.


Survey Finds 14% Tested for AIDS
LEAD: ONE of every seven Connecticut residents has been tested for the AIDS virus, and nearly one in six reports knowing someone who has the disease, a survey conducted for state health officials has found.


'Grease' Played Straight in Darien Production
LEAD: EVEN though you're bound to get just the right measure of tutti-frutti fun from the Darien Dinner Theater production of ''Grease,'' it's hard to resist the temptation to take a sober view of the historicity of an innocuous musical.


In The Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales


Shannon Shuman Weds C. M. Herzfeld
LEAD: Shannon Stock Shuman, the director of international trade services at the law firm of Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer &amp; Feld, was married yesterday to Charles M. Herzfeld, the director of defense research and engineering in the Office of the Secretary of Defense, both in Washington.
The Rev.
William R.


Seles Stuns Graf to Capture French Open Title
LEAD: The girl with the biggest grunt in the game and tennis strokes lifted from the blueprints in her father's physics textbook swiftly and noisily rendered a rainy afternoon in Paris historic today.


Patent Sense
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cuomo Neglected To Cite Lilco Deal
LEAD: The article by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo (''Helping the Island Helps the State,'' May 6) mentions the amounts of money that the state is spending on high-tech industries, research and transportation to help the Island's economy.
But it neglects to mention the much larger amount that will be removed from the Island if the Governor's deal with Lilco sticks.


Gone Fishin' at Belmont
LEAD: A man wearing a cap that read ''Wishin' for Walleye'' was at Belmont Park before the first race yesterday, leaning on the rail, and reading the form chart with a certain scientific interest and a circling pen.
It was fishing, to be sure, but in a different kind of stream.


Special Today:
LEAD:
The Business World/Mag. Pt.2


Hearings Near, Durenberger Stumps
LEAD: As he kissed babies, glad-handed passengers and chatted up the crew aboard Northwest Airlines Flight 323 from Washington Friday night, Dave Durenberger acted as if he were still the most popular politician in Minnesota, not a man struggling to salvage his personal reputation and his seat in the United States


A Hackley Teacher Fights Dismissal
LEAD: THE founder of the well-known music conservatory program at the Hackley School, a private day school here, has been accused of misconduct and incompetence and asked to leave the school this month, but she is contesting the dismissal.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our house has a concrete basement floor with a one-inch trench around the perimeter.
For years, this floor has had a hairline crack about five feet long that goes from one corner out toward the center.
The crack has widened to about a sixteenth of an inch, and there seems to be a new hairline crack that goes about eight feet past this.


Wedding Planned By Anne Weiner
LEAD: A September wedding is planned by Anne R. Weiner and Alan M. Rifkin, the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Weiner of North Caldwell, N.J., have announced.
Mr.
Rifkin is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel A. Rifkin of Worcester, Mass.


Douglas Sent Offer by King
LEAD: The promoter Don King sent a letter today to representatives of Buster Douglas offering the heavyweight champion $20 million plus 50 percent of the gross revenue in excess of $34 million to fight Evander Holyfield.


Ruth Redmond Wed To William D. Bloom
LEAD: Ruth E. Redmond, a daughter of Claire Driver Redmond of West Orange, N.J., and John R. Redmond of Convent Station, N.J., was married last evening to William D. Bloom, a son of Charles Bloom of West Orange, and the late Marie Bloom.
The Rev.
Thomas Setzer, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Baltusrol Golf Club in Springfield, N


New Brooklyn Bishop Leads Prayers at Abortion Clinic
LEAD: Bishop Thomas V. Daily of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn led more than 500 parishioners in a prayer vigil outside a women's clinic in Forest Hills, Queens, yesterday morning to protest abortions being performed there.


GLOBAL DEALS: THE FAUX PAS FACTOR
LEAD: When United Technologies Sikorsky Aircraft began negotiations to sell two dozen helicopters to the Chinese government early in 1985, Marion P. Spigener bore the title of customer relations representative.
But by the time a top-level Chinese delegation arrived that July to seal the deal at Sikorsky's headquarters in Stratford, Conn.,


Tracing the Complexity of Indian Art and Its Wide Influence
LEAD: THE buxom little figure illustrating this review is identified as a celestial musician and, despite its leonine legs, a centauress, too.
An 11th- to 12th-century carving from Bangladesh, it is in ''Leaves of the Bodhi Tree: The Art of Pala India and Its International Legacy,'' a show that comes to the Newark Museum from the Dayton Art Institute in Dayton,


Gorbachev, Though Besieged, Isn't Defeated;   Why We Should Help
LEAD: To the Editor:


Adventures in Cooking;   Tippy Canoe And Eating, Too
LEAD: Reading the diaries i kept on backpacking trips in the Pacific Northwest, I find glowing descriptions of glacial cirques, alpine tundra, perilous mountain passes and wretched meals.
A typical dinner: freeze-dried chicken with instant rice and gravy.
Dessert: instant butterscotch pudding, chilled in a nearby stream.


Don't Trust Humpty Dumpty
LEAD: To the Editor:


Letters on Travel;   Czechoslovakia
LEAD: To the Editor: Having spent a marvelous week in Prague with my wife in July 1988, I read with interest Jane DeLynn's piece (''The Tape Is Still Red in Prague,'' Travel, April 15).
I was curious to learn what, if anything, had changed insofar as a tourist was concerned.
Not enough, it seems.


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   Special Menus for Special Fathers
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Here are some restaurants particularly suited for Father's Day next Sunday.
Hudson River


Lifestyle;   Graduates' Wish Lists and Gift Givers' Actualities
LEAD: For many parents, college is so expensive these days that they consider it a gift in itself.
So searching for the perfect gift for the high-school graduate gift is often overshadowed by the demands of preparing for freshman year or finding that first job.


Hull Re-Signs
LEAD: The St.
Louis Blues ended months of negotiations by re-signing Brett Hull, the highest-scoring right wing in National Hockey League history, to a multiyear contract yesterday.


In the Name of Ecology
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miriam Makeba Plans Return to South Africa
LEAD: Miriam Makeba, the black musician dubbed ''Mama Africa'' by her fans, is expected to return home to South Africa on Sunday.


Mosaic Postcards From Paradise
LEAD: IT'S a brick building, not as big as a private home, not apt to catch the eye of a casual visitor.
The windows are small and narrow, and the roof is so low that the building might be mistaken for a public restroom by anyone who fails to notices that it's shaped like a Latin cross.


Saddling Up at a Dude Ranch
LEAD: BUFFALO BILL CODY was still taking his Wild West Show on the road and Billy the Kid was fresh in his grave when cattle ranchers in the Rocky Mountains first started accepting paying guests, or ''dudes,'' as the visitors from back east came to be known.
Much of the Old West is gone but this tradition has prospered.


It Wasn't Tom Sawyer, But Huck Finn
LEAD: Lou Ann Walker refers (''My Career as Huck Finn at the Picket Fence,'' May 6) to the fence-painting episode in ''Tom Sawyer'' as a story which she believes parallels a recent episode in her life during which she painted her own fence.
The error we perceive in her analogy occurs when she admonishes passers-by who call her Tom Sawyer rather than Huckleberry


For Overloaded Eyes and Ears, Bite Makes Right Bite Makes Right


The Region;   The Latest Plan for the Adirondacks Leaves Adirondackers Skeptical
LEAD: WITH dozens of majestic peaks, 31,000 miles of rivers and streams and millions of acres of forested wilderness, New York's Adirondack Park is often referred to as the largest park in the lower 48 states.
Indeed, the area encompassed within the Adirondacks Park's boundary - larger than Yellowstone, Grand Canyon, Glacier and Olympic National


Books On the Block
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hilary A. Weston Planning to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Josh S. Weston of Montclair, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Hilary Ann Weston and Capt.
Alexander Walter Joel, U.S.A., the son of Sunja Joel of Washington and Dr.
Clark Joel of La Paz, Bolivia.


'Gremlins 2' Required a Whole Team of Mischief Makers
LEAD: Walking into the office of the director Joe Dante at the Burbank Studios is like walking into the room of a 12-year-old movie brat.
Posters from his favorite films - ''Son of Dracula,'' ''Invaders From Mars'' and ''Tomb of Ligeia'' - are plastered on the walls.
The bookcase at the back of the room is overflowing with Gremlin toys,


Streetscapes: Facades in Storage;   Links to the Cast-Iron Era Await Reconstruction
LEAD: THE Landmarks Preservation Commission's Architectural Salvage Warehouse reopened last month at 337 Cherry Street in Brooklyn with hundreds of salvaged mantels, doors, windows and other items meant principally for home renovation.
But the commission's biggest item, in an undisclosed open lot, would scare off even the most dedicated old-house nut: two full cast-iron facades, each 39 feet wide and six stories high.


Campus Life: Radcliffe;   Students Organize Campaign to Build A Women's Center
LEAD: Administrators from Harvard University and Radcliffe College will meet this week to review documents submitted by student advocates petitioning for a women's center to be built in or near Harvard Yard.


Review/Music;   Opera Francais Company Presents a Cherubini Rarity
LEAD: The fledging Opera Francais de New York made its leap into orchestrally accompanied, fully staged productions Friday night at Florence Gould Hall, with generally auspicious results.
Certainly the chosen vehicle, ''Les Deux Journees'' of Luigi Cherubini, was well worth encountering.


Bush and Kohl Discuss Moscow's Concerns
LEAD: After meeting with Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany, President Bush said Friday night that ''we're making progress'' in easing Soviet fears about a united Germany in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Mr.
Bush said he and Mr.
Kohl agreed that Moscow has ''understandable interests'' in the military future of


C.I.A. TIE REPORTED IN MANDELA ARREST
LEAD: The Central Intelligence Agency played an important role in the arrest in 1962 of Nelson Mandela, the African National Congress leader who was jailed for nearly 28 years before his release four months ago, a news report says.


Headliners;   Day in Court
LEAD: It is too late for Bridget Mergens Mayhew to have her high school Christian Bible club, but she has a Supreme Court decision bearing her name.
Mrs.
Mayhew, now 23 years old, was a senior at Westside High School in Omaha when she and other students were denied school sponsorship of their club.
School officials reasoned that to give the group recognition, and the same modest perks enjoyed by such after-school groups as the chess and scuba clubs, would violate the First Amendment prohibition against government aid to religious organizations.


Overstating Ink Toxicity?
LEAD: To the Editor:


With Southern Baptists Gathering, Dissension Arrives From the North
LEAD: The pastor of Bergen Baptist Church here is opposed to abortion, believes that the Bible is the infallible word of God and each Sunday invites visitors to step forward and ''give your life to Christ'' while the congregation sings ''Amazing Grace.''


RIGHT UP THERE WITH HAROLD ROBBINS
LEAD:
DANCE WITH THE DEVIL
By Kirk Douglas.
306 pp. New York:
Random House.
$19.95.


GARDENING
LEAD: After much puzzling over the question of whether there are generic differences between American and British garden writing, I find that a growing hunch about the answer is confirmed in several of this spring's crop of books.
British writers tend toward the impersonal, apparently assuming that the only reliable point of similarity between themselves and readers of very diverse tastes and backgrounds is their common interest in gardening.


UNEASY ABOUT THE GERMANS
LEAD: As an Indian-American, born and raised in Bombay, and having lived mostly in Chicago since 1969, I cannot say that I have been directly affected by the authoritarian element in the German psyche - but I have been directly affected by its artistic, scientific and philosophical elements through the works of Luther, Beethoven, Goethe, Brahms, Wagner, Kant, Rilke, Mann and


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: Next year is likely to be the changing of the guard for the United States in World Championship competition.
In the past 10 years American players, mainly from Texas and the West Coast, have won six world team titles, finished second three times and been out of the money only once.


Chess
LEAD: The goings-on in chess often flout prediction, as was shown once again by the performance of Aleksandr Belyavsky in the Mephisto-SKA International Tournament, which took place in Munich from April 27 to May 11.


You're Now Entering A State That Went For Dewey in 1990
LEAD: Dewey did not defeat Truman, but he won a smaller moral victory on Friday when the New York State Thruway Authority announced that it would restore his name to signs at the entrance to the Thruway.


Campus Life: Syracuse;   Students Fight For the Right To Be the Orange
LEAD: For 40 years Lambda Chi Alpha fraternity brothers have closely guarded the right to wear the Syracuse University mascot uniform, the Syracuse orange.
But in a new agreement between the fraternity and university officials, the orange will have a new identity this fall.


A Conflict Develops Over a Musical
LEAD: NOBODY made a fuss over ''The Rothschilds,'' the musical, when it opened on Broadway in October 1970.
But now that the show has been having two coincidental productions - one at the Forum Theater Group in Metuchen, the other off Broadway at the Circle in the Square - the artistic director of the Forum, who believes that theaters should share and share alike, is fretting over being forbidden to extend the musical's engagement beyond tonight's performance.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Where Twain Had a Tree House
LEAD: A welcome escape for the nature-starved New York City dweller lies on a hill in the quiet, tree-lined neighborhood of Riverdale in the Bronx, across Independence Avenue from the house where Don Corleone and his family lived in ''The Godfather.''


IF AT FIRST YOU DO SUCCEED, REMIX AND REMIX AGAIN
LEAD: Say you're a bright young up-and-coming superstar, with an album that sends single after single up the dance and pop charts.
The video clips have swarmed over MTV's air time, the album has sold a few million copies, and the 900 telephone line is buzzing.
Yet sooner or later the question will arise:


The Elite No Longer Meet, So a Landmark Heads for Auction
LEAD: MANY a political deal was made behind the scenes at the Parkview Hilton in Hartford, with hopes for office realized or dashed.
Cabinet officials, vice presidents and presidents were among the hotel's visitors.
But now it is to meet the same fate as two of Connecticut's other landmark meeting places: the auction block.


Teresa Taggart Weds James R. Vogel
LEAD: Teresa A. Taggart, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Taggart of Oldwick, N.J., was married yesterday to James R. Vogel, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin L. Vogel of Framingham, Mass.
The Rev.
Vincent Dwyer, a Roman Catholic, and Rabbi Ari Fridkis performed the ceremony at the bride's parents' home.


Focus: Time Shares;   Owners Call New Florida Law Unfair
LEAD: A LAW passed by the Florida Legislature last July to eliminate abuses in the time-share resale market is coming under fire from unit-owner representatives as too restrictive.
It requires any person who lists, advertises, promotes or sells time shares to have a real estate license, and although individual time-share owners are not affected, critics say it makes it harder for them to resell their shares.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Travel Advisory column on May 13 about a New Orleans guide for wheelchair users, called ''Rollin' by the River,'' misstated its availability.
It is $1 at the office of the Advocacy Center for the Elderly and Disabled (210 O'Keefe Avenue, New Orleans, La. 70112) or $2.25 by mail; it is not free.


Dean Says He's Leaving Wesleyan
LEAD: THE highest-ranking black administrator at Wesleyan University says he will resign in September, leaving behind a campus where complaints about the inability to recruit and keep black faculty and staff have fueled racial tensions.


U.S. Is Inspired by Cameroon
LEAD: After a week of calm, productive preparation for its first match of the World Cup finals Sunday in Florence against Czechoslovakia, the United States team has received a fresh bolt of energy from an unlikely source.


Georgia Pitches Its Way Past Oklahoma State
LEAD: Had someone predicted before this afternoon's championship game that Oklahoma State would be limited to one run and five hits, chances are he would not have been taken seriously by anyone at Rosenblatt Stadium.


Blaine Hammer Wed To Allen T. Levenson
LEAD: Blaine A. Hammer, a daughter of Martin L. Hammer of New York and Ronnie S. Hammer of Westport, Conn., was married last evening to Allen T. Levenson, a son of Paul H. Levenson of Framingham, Mass., and the late Rose H. Levenson.
Rabbi Robert Orkand officiated at Temple Israel in Westport.


Kathleen DiTolla to Wed in August
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred W. DiTolla of Glen Rock, N.J., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Kathleen Mavourneen DiTolla and Donald Michael McCarty, a son of the late Gladys E. and M. David McCarty.





Rains Bring In Large Morel Crop
LEAD: HEAVY rains this year have led to a good morel season.
It started in mid-April and is expected to last through July.
Those fragrant mushrooms are highly prized.
Their delicate but pungent flavor produces the same ecstatic reaction on the part of those who eat them as do truffles or the best caviar.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Grilled Ginger-Mustard Lamb With Orzo
LEAD: Orzo, the Greek rice-shaped pasta, appears to have become the newest pasta fad.
It has a wonderful texture that is both slippery and firm.
And even if you never ate it as a child, it still falls in the category of comfort food.


Sierra Club Gratified By Estate Purchase
LEAD: The 6,500-members of the Sierra Club were quite gratified by Suffolk County Executive Patrick G. Halpin's Earth Day announcement of the purchase of the 1,400 acre Hampton Hills estate.


Darien's 'Grease' Catches The Mood of a Decade
LEAD: ONE is bound to get just the right measure of fun from the Darien Theater production of ''Grease,'' the 1970's view of the inanity of the 1950's. 'Grease' is a useful footnote to the nostalgic craze for a decade of intellectual and political snoozing.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Oil Spills and Wildlife
As the cleanup from the latest spill in New York Harbor continued, researchers said damage to wildlife from an earlier spill has been extensive.
Off the Gulf Coast, explosions rocked a tanker.
Pages 32 and 33.
Dialogue in the West Bank
Breaking a mold of unyielding attitudes, Jews in the settlement of Efrat have opened a rare dialogue with Palestinians.


Victors In the Cold War
LEAD: Max Schmeling looked up from the floor of the boxing ring, saw Joe Louis still standing there and said:


A FATHER'S PAWN
LEAD: I found Fred Waitzkin's profile of Gata Kamsky and his father disturbing.
I have observed this odd pair at several large chess tournaments and have wondered about their curious relationship.
How sad to have my suspicions about them confirmed - that this father is robbing his son of a childhood to further his own dream of glory.


Mutual Funds;   On the Road With Grace Pineda
LEAD: Grace Pineda, daughter of a Filipino diplomat, lived in France, Switzerland and the Philippines before her family settled in the United States.
Here she studied Russian, one of four languages she now speaks, and later earned a graduate degree in international business from Fordham University.
She has specialized in the Pacific markets since 1982, when she got her first money management job and was assigned to watch a promising spot called


In a Bad Year, N.R.A. Sounds Alarm
LEAD: There is talk of war here.
Not just the kind that lobbyists wage (though plenty of that, too), but the real thing: a possible foreign invasion.


CORRECTION
LEAD: A chart on May 27 with an article about Conner Peripherals Inc. misstated revenues for Apple Computer Inc. in its first and third years of operation.
The first year was 1977, and revenues were $770,000.
In Apple's third year, 1979, revenues were $47.9 million.


Gorbachev, Though Besieged, Isn't Defeated
LEAD: To the Editor:


AN INTRIGUING NETWORK FOR THE PROXY WARS
LEAD: Near the end of UAL's melancholy annual meeting in Chicago on April 26, an elderly gentleman requested the microphone.
What had been done, he asked, to persuade ''Mr.
Coniston'' to increase his offer to buy the airline at $203 a share?


Nancy Illman Engaged
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold M. Illman of Massapequa, L.I., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Nancy Caralyn Illman and Eliot Nelson Meyers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mitchell Meyers of Cincinnati.
Miss Illman, 23 years old and a graduate of Harvard University, is an account executive at Omni Development and Marketing Ltd., a consumer products company in New York.


International Clowning In a One-Man Show
LEAD: IN a crisis, they send in the clowns.
As a theatrical variation on circus lore, the George Street Playhouse, unable to win the right to produce the world premiere of a new play, had no show for its end-of-the-season slot.
So it sent in a clown: Geoff Hoyle in his one-man divertissement, ''Feast of Fools,'' which was seen off Broadway in March.


Ashley Richards Wed in Virginia
LEAD: Ashley Louise Richards, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Wayne Richards of Albany, Ga., was married yesterday to Jonathan Thomas More Reckford, a son of Kenneth J. Reckford of Chapel Hill, N.C., and the late Mary Stevens Reckford.
The Rev.
John D. Burley, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Falls Church in Falls Church, Va., assisted by the Rev.


Anne G. Walsh Is a Bride
LEAD: Anne G. Walsh, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John E. Walsh of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday at the Resurrection Roman Catholic Church to Steven B. Bopp, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Curtis Bopp of Northfield, N.J.
The Rev.
Daniel J. Fitzpatrick officiated.
The bride, a graduate of Dickinson College, is an assistant investment representative at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.


For John Guare A Return to Roots In the Comic Style
LEAD: On Oct. 18, 1983, an unusual news item appeared in The New York Times.
On four occasions a teenager calling himself David Poitier talked his way into the homes of prosperous Manhattan couples.
David would claim to be a friend of the couple's children and a fellow student at college.
He would say that he had come to New York to meet his dad, the actor Sidney Poitier, but that his father would not be arriving until the following morning.


Getting the Most Out of a Shade Problem
LEAD: POSSIBLY the greatest challenge any gardener has to contend with is too much shade.
Full sun is easy for planters.
But when a property is covered with leafy canopies, gardening can be tricky.


THE BEATNICK'S BEATNICK
LEAD:
GUILTY OF EVERYTHING
The Autobiography of Herbert Huncke.
Foreword by William S. Burroughs.
Illustrated. 210 pp. New York:
Paragon House. $19.95.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our house has a concrete basement floor with a one-inch trench around the perimeter.
For years, this floor has had a hairline crack about five feet long that goes from one corner out toward the center.
The crack has widened to about a sixteenth of an inch, and there seems to be a new hairline crack that goes about eight feet past this.


A CROSSOVER LIFE
LEAD:
ALMOST LIKE A SONG By Ronnie Milsap with Tom Carter.
Illustrated. 259 pp.
New York: McGraw-Hill Publishing Company. $19.95.
By Sharon Liveten


The Nation;   Greyhound Takes the Road to Bankruptcy
LEAD: PUTTING the nation's only coast-to-coast bus company into bankruptcy was far from Fred G. Currey's thoughts when he led a debt-loaded buyout of Greyhound Lines Inc. three years ago.
But last Monday he filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy code, freezing payments on debts of $540 million, after Citicorp and some other large creditors took steps toward repossessing as many as 1,000 of Greyhound's 3,800 buses.


Preservationist Panel;   A Call for 'Irreverence'
LEAD: ''We'd like a few arguments,'' said Halina Rosenthal, president of the Friends of the Upper East Side Historic Districts, speaking of a panel discussion Thursday among those who have headed the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission since 1974: Beverly Moss Spatt, Kent L. Barwick, Gene A.


Leslie Troy Wed To Walter Tsui
LEAD: Leslie B. Troy, the daughter of Joan B. Troy and Michael C. Troy, both of Chapel Hill, N.C., was married yesterday in Durham, N.C., to Walter W. Tsui, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Tsui of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., and Hong Kong.
The Rev.
Charles T. Midyette 3d officiated at St.
Philip's Episcopal Church.


Review/Music;   Trombone Gets Its Moment In an Avant-Garde Program
LEAD: A concert of avant-garde music for trombone, alone and in flocks, might seem arcane.
But a hardy band of avant-garde trombone fanciers rallied to attend Rob Bethea's concert on Monday night at the Washington Square Church.


Data Bank/June 10, 1990
LEAD:
$
Consumer Borrowing
April
March
Feb.
Percent change, annual rate
1.0
4.0
0.1
New Car Sales
May
April
March
In units
884,663
813,384
861,122
Truck production
Last Week
Prior Week
Year Ago
In units
92,593
77,455
90,287
Business Productivity (non-farm)
I Q'90
IV Q'89
III Q'89
Percent change, annual rate
-2.7
0.5
2.4
Sales at Retail Outlets
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
3.5
-0.6
-0.2
Money Supply Growth
3 mos.


Marie Whelan and Patrick Dolan Wed
LEAD: The marriage of Marie Dignam Whelan and Patrick Daniel Dolan took place yesterday at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bedford Village, N.Y.
The Rev.
Martin A. Dolan, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony.


Taking the Train to Escape the Q Bridge
LEAD: ANN AND ROBERT JOSE of Old Lyme like to drive together to their jobs in New Haven, he to Connecticut National Bank and she to Connecticut Savings Bank.
But Mrs.
Jose's classes two nights a week have disrupted their schedule.
Rather than drive separately, as they have been doing on those two days, Mr.


Kuwait Vote Seen as Essential to Democracy
LEAD: Kuwaitis vote on Sunday for a new assembly portrayed by the Government as necessary for the future of democracy in the Persian Gulf state but condemned by opposition leaders as unconstitutional.


Seafaring Cook Shares Her Secrets
LEAD: COOKING can be perilous enough on dry land, but Elizabeth Wheeler, of Rowayton, can turn out formidable feasts strapped into the galley in the throes of rolling swells.


India Reports Drug Smuggling on Burmese Border
LEAD: Drug traffickers in Burma and Thailand are stepping up their use of the lightly patrolled Indian-Burmese border to funnel heroin out of Southeast Asia and to the West.


Fashion;   Long Skirts That Sigh With the Summer Breezes
LEAD: Yard-long skirts are catching breezes around town.
The freshest versions of skirts that graze calves or billow about the ankles offer a casual alternative to snug miniskirts, and they are anything but dowdy.


Hit Men Have Guns, Will Direct
LEAD: Leave it to the hardest-working film students of the future to determine just what ''Bird on a Wire,'' ''Whose Life Is It Anyway?'' and ''Saturday Night Fever'' have in common.
Or what underlying qualities ''Cadillac Man'' shares with ''No Way Out,'' ''Cocktail'' and ''The Bounty.'' Only the most dedicated among them will be able to analyze the bonds linking ''Die Hard,'' ''Die Hard II'' and ''The Hunt for Red October'' with ''The Adventures of Ford Fairlane,'' which stars Andrew Dice Clay.


Aguirre Will Start Game 3
LEAD: Mark Aguirre will start at small forward for the Detroit Pistons in Game 3 of the National Basketball Association championship finals on Sunday.
He replaces Dennis Rodman, who has a severely sprained left ankle.


Correction
LEAD: The Sports of The Times column on the World Cup last Sunday misidentified the site of the 1989 soccer game at which 95 spectators died.
It was Sheffield, England.


Headliners;   Tony Collector
LEAD: Tommy Tune had a nice evening when the Tony awards were given out last weekend.
The director-choreographer won two of them for ''Grand Hotel,'' one for direction and one for choreography, and the play won three more.
It was not the first for Mr.
Tune, who took the rather unlikely vehicle of tap dancing to great fortune on Broadway.


In a West Bank Town, a Quiet Dialogue Between Settlers and Palestinians
LEAD: At 2,700 feet this Jewish settlement stands aloft, unique not only for its red-tiled townhouses and green lawns, but mostly because its inhabitants initiated talks with the Palestinians of the cheerless Arab villages and towns whose vineyards come right up to the settlement's fences.


No Financial Mystique
LEAD: To the Editor:


Burlington, Vt.;   Old Doctrine Finds New Use
LEAD: An Ancient but seldom-used legal concept that Vermont courts cited to squelch a railroad's waterfront development proposal has started to come into more general use as an anti-development tactic.


Campus Life;   Thesis on Civil War Sites Finds Ear in Congress
LEAD: From start to finish, Georgie Holder Boge's senior thesis has been a little different.
Miss Boge's interest - a land-use study of Civil War battlefield sites -gave her reason to log only a few hours in the Princeton University library but lots of time on the road and at the sites themselves.


Carleton College
LEAD: Carleton College presented degrees to 478 students yesterday at its 116th commencement ceremony.


In Tennis, Love and Hate
LEAD: AS I stand here on the base line, racket at the ready, peering across the net at my good friend Craig, I am wondering how to avoid ingesting the fuzzy yellow projectile that he is about to launch in my direction.


Harvard's Power Too Much for Yale
LEAD: On the finish line it was Harvard again, again and again today against Yale in their 125th annual regatta.


4 Towns Told to Boil Water
LEAD: A power failure at a chlorination plant led authorities to advise about 344,000 residents in Jersey City, Hoboken, Lyndhurst and West Caldwell to boil drinking water as a precaution.


Fielder Is Taking His Fast Start in Stride
LEAD: It was shortly after 3 P.M. on a warm and humid afternoon Friday when Cecil Fielder emerged from the cool of the clubhouse into the milky sunshine of Tiger Stadium to begin his long day on the job.


Correction
LEAD: An article on May 27 about racial tensions on college campuses misstated minority enrollments at several colleges and misattributed the figures.
According to fall 1989 enrollment figures published by the Connecticut Department of Higher Education, 10.2 percent of the undergraduates at the University of Connecticut are minority students.


COLD WAR CROSSINGS: A QUIZ
LEAD: The struggle between intelligence forces of East and West began years before the Berlin wall went up in 1961, and that conflict inspired many espionage novels.
But the wall, as deadly fact and evocative symbol, engaged a whole new generation of writers, and it seemed as though it figured in all spy novels and thrillers for a while.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: Those who think that the spirit of photographic invention has fled from the United States to Japan should pay a visit to Joe Saltzer's darkroom, a scant hour's drive north of New York City.
You won't find the latest hybrid 35-millimeter camera there, but you will see some of the best designed and easiest to use darkroom tools ever developed.


Question Of the Week;   Will Soccer Gain More Popularity In the U.S.?
LEAD: Yes.
Just look at the increase in soccer clinics, soccer camps, the number of young participants in leagues both in summer and fall, and the number of periodicals devoted exclusively to soccer.
The recent exhibition game by the U.S. soccer team at Yale Bowl drew over 30,000.


Looking for a Laugh?
LEAD: Established comedians and those who are trying to get their careers off the ground are to perform in a five-part comedy series beginning tonight at 8 o'clock at the 92d Street Y on Lexington Avenue.
Pat Cooper is the opening act; other comedians scheduled during the Jesters in June series are Jim Morris (Tuesday), Alan King (June 18), Rhonda Fink and Judy Gold (June 24) and Robert Klein (July 16).


Ms. Dodson Engaged To Eric I. Greenberg
LEAD: The engagement of Kathleen Dodson, a daughter of Naomi Dodson of Evanston, Ill., and the late Richard J. Dodson, to Eric I. Greenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Greenberg of Peekskill, N.Y., has been announced by the future bride's mother.
The wedding is to be next year.


Evening Hours
LEAD: New York City itself was the backdrop for three recent parties.


Mothers: Tired of Taking the Rap
LEAD: INfant colic,'' i remember a child psychopathology professor in graduate school casually asserting one day, ''develops when mothers are having problems with their maternal role.'' The professor was unmarried and had never mothered, but I copied the comment down.
If an experienced child therapist connected colic to a maternal deficit, I had no reason to question her.


The Guys in White Hats from Sony
LEAD: In 1989, the Materials Research Corporation, which I founded, was faced with a critical challenge: raise capital or probably fail.
The capital we finally raised came from Japan.
We are now a wholly owned subsidiary of Sony U.S.A.


Score in Thrifts Crisis
LEAD: To the Editor:


Damian Woetzel: 'I Like That Feeling Of Letting Loose'
LEAD: Several years ago, when Damian Woetzel was studying at the Boston Ballet school, he attended a master class taught by Edward Villella.
Although he didn't give it much thought at the time, in retrospect Mr.
Woetzel believes that this brief encounter was one of his most significant experiences as a young dancer.


Swedish Solution
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week;   Will Soccer Gain More Popularity In the U.S.?
LEAD: In response to the question, may I say that in my small town more kids are playing little league soccer than baseball and the high school has an excellent team.
The colleges in my small state - the University of Vermont in particular - have good teams and great support from fans.
When Sports Illustrated ran an article on the United States goalie, Tony Meola, it was sold out at our local store.


PEACE PLAN ALIVE, SHAMIR MAINTAINS
LEAD: With two days to go before Israel's new Government is submitted for formal parliamentary approval, Acting Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir began rebutting criticism today that the right-wing coalition will be unable to move Israel toward peace with its neighbors.


40 Years Ago, an Obscure Cup Team
LEAD: The 1950 United States World Cup story should be considered ancient history, but every four years the record is replayed.


There's More to Bohemian Music Than Dvorak
LEAD: Mention Czechoslovak music to the average American concertgoer, and the immediate association no doubt will be Dvorak's lilting strains.
A few may remember Smetana's ''Moldau,'' and even fewer Janacek's name.


Edward Campbell 4th, Entertainer, 33
LEAD: Edward Campbell 4th, an actor and dancer who made his Broadway debut in the musical ''Black and Blue'' and performed in it until last April when illness forced him to retire, died of AIDS on Friday in a private hospice in Los Angeles.
He was 33 years old.


West Comes Alive in A Ghost Town
LEAD: LIFE in the West's rough-and-tumble mining camps didn't get much harsher than in Bodie, Calif., a treeless, wind-whipped site some 8,500 feet above sea level on the east slope of the Sierra Nevadas.
The lure of gold brought hard-rock miners, drifters and toughs to a town that once boasted a population as high as 10,000 at its peak in the early 1880's.


'The Hand'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Dance;   Spaniards Explore Dark Emotions
LEAD: Six Spanish dancers currently studying and choreographing in New York City participated in the Second Annual Spanish Modern Dance Festival on Friday night at Casa de Espana.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We have a potentially serious situation.
We are trying to prevent a catastrophic loss of oil.''
-Lieut. Comdr. F. L. Whipple of the Coast Guard, in Galveston, Tex.
[A1:6.]


Corrections
LEAD: A caption in the Weekend section on Friday with the Pop/Jazz column misidentified the rock group in the picture.
It was the Black Angels, not Sylvain Sylvain.


Books of The Times;   Being Brought Up In a Family in Decline
LEAD:
What We Had
A Memoir
By James Chace
187 pages. Summit Books. $17.95.


No Snow Job
LEAD: For years top skiers have been making as much as $80,000 for winning a single race, so the news that next season they'll have a chance to earn as much as an extra $4,500 in prize money for each victory would hardly seem to be worth more than a yawn.


Mets Get Hot And It Pays Off
LEAD: Howard Johnson lit a fire under the Mets yesterday, and he didn't even play.


Rose Takes Another Licking
LEAD: Major league baseball has broken another link with Pete Rose, and thus deprived the people of the Caribbean nation of Grenada of a postage stamp they had no need for in the first place.


How an Off Broadway Hit Stumbled on the Road
LEAD: You've heard of ''Other People's Money,'' the Off Broadway hit that turned Wall Streeters who didn't know the difference between ''The Wild Duck'' and Cold Duck into theatergoers.


Ivy M. Steiner Is a Bride
LEAD: Ivy M. Steiner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin A. Steiner of Merrick, N.Y., was married yesterday to Daniel Guetta, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Guetta of Tenafly, N.J.
Rabbi Sheldon Thall officiated at the Water's Edge at the East River Yacht Club in Long Island City, Queens.
Mrs.
Guetta, an associate at the New York law firm of Windels, Marx, Davies &amp; Ives, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from George Washington University.


Little Risk in G.M.'s Soviet Foothold
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation's $1 billion contract to supply catalytic converters and engine parts to the Soviet Union's Volga Auto Works, known as VAZ, has gained attention from economists and experts on Soviet industry mostly because the Soviets have promised to pay in hard currency, something the country painfully lacks.


Czechs Humble U.S., 5-1
LEAD: In its first World Cup finals game in 40 years, the United States was humbled to the point of embarrassment today as it was beaten, 5-1, by Czechoslovakia.


Canada Pact Signed but Doubts Remain
LEAD: Canada's provincial leaders dispersed to their capitals today after signing a pact with Prime Minister Brian Mulroney that is intended to keep Quebec within the confederation.
But serious doubts remain as to whether all 10 provinces will go along with a deal that would endow Quebec with a special constitutional status.


Passenger Ship Runs Aground
LEAD: Hundreds of passengers were ferried ashore today from a cruise ship after the ship ran aground in heavy fog and began taking on water.
No injuries were reported.


2 Environmentalists Linked To Bomb Parts, Paper Says
LEAD: Two environmentalists accused of transporting a bomb that blew up in their car had a sack of nails like those used in the explosive, The San Francisco Examiner reported on Saturday.
The newspaper said investigators found the nails in the car after the blast on an Oakland street on May 24.


Record Jackpot for Douglas
LEAD: With a purse bid of $32,100,000, the Mirage, a casino in Las Vegas, Nev., headed by Steve Wynn, yesterday won the right to promote James (Buster) Douglas's first title defense as heavyweight champion, against Evander Holyfield.


Steady Game Puts Strange in Spotlight
LEAD: IN attempting to become the first man in 85 years to win the United States Open three times in a row, Curtis Strange has achieved something nearly as rare.


Brazil a Winner In Opening Game
LEAD: The star striker Careca scored once in each half tonight as Brazil beat Sweden, 2-1, in an opening-round match of the World Cup finals.


COUNT OF HOMELESS IS SEEN AS FLAWED
LEAD: Census Bureau workers failed to find many of the homeless people they set out to count in America's cities, according to the first formal report evaluating the agency's effort.


President Aims to Cut Debt At Hotel Investors Trust
LEAD: Hotel Investors Trust, which owns and manages hotels throughout the United States, has named John D. Morrissey as its president and chief executive.


Gold-Mine Cuts In Australia
LEAD: Hurting from low gold prices, producers at Australia's largest gold mine are eliminating jobs and closing some high-cost underground operations.
Two joint venture partners, Gold Mines of Kalgoorlie Ltd. and Homestake Gold of Australia Ltd., said Friday that the costs of production at their Fimiston underground mines were running more than $385 an ounce, while gold prices were about $30 an ounce lower.


Beijing Plans Bond Offering
LEAD: China is planning to issue about $1.2 billion in corporate bonds to support state construction projects and increase export-oriented enterprises, the New China News Agency reported.


Merrill Finds Yanks Can't Lose 'Em All
LEAD: Stump Merrill's plans for the Yankees very much include imbuing the club with the confidence he believes the players have somehow lost in what has been New York's most difficult start to a season since 1913.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Mandela Reassures Jews
Nelson Mandela told American Jews he recognized Israel's right to exist and regretted misunderstanding over a meeting with Palestinians.
Page A6.
More Trade Barriers to Fall
President Bush is expected to announce plans to negotiate a free trade pact with Mexico.
Page D1.


Metro Datelines;   5 Are Shot Outside A Club in Brooklyn
LEAD: Five people were shot outside a Brooklyn social club early yesterday, and one of them was critically injured, the police said.


U.S. Magazines, Seeking Readers, Hear Moscow Calling
LEAD: Drums and Drumming wants to get in on it. So does Sew News.


Riley Announcement Set
LEAD: The Los Angeles Lakers have called a news conference for Monday afternoon, when the team will clarify ''the coaching situation,'' a team spokesperson said tonight.


Rap Singers Seized on Obscenity Charge
LEAD: Two members of the rap group 2 Live Crew were arrested early today after they performed songs that a Federal judge has ruled obscene.


Orioles' Manager Riding Storms
LEAD: THIS season, Frank Robinson has had a serious dispute with the umpire Drew Coble and, as a result, been suspended for three days.
He is conducting a quiet little feud with Tom Kelly, the manager of the Minnesota Twins, because of the Orioles' penchant for running no matter what the score.
And he has sicked the American League on the Chicago White


Sentences Due For 2 Today In Racial Case
LEAD: By the time Justice Thaddeus E. Owens leaves his Brooklyn courtroom tonight, he will have changed the lives of two young men and, perhaps, the uneasy racial tensions smoldering in New York.


New Executive Style Takes Hold at Saatchi
LEAD: Robert Louis-Dreyfus, who took over as chief executive of the financially troubled Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company a little more than five months ago, clearly is not following in the footsteps of Charles and Maurice Saatchi, the enigmatic brothers who built the giant advertising and communications group.


Nathaniel M. McKitterick, Trade Adviser, 64
LEAD: Nathaniel M. McKitterick, a retired Government consultant on international development, trade and finance, died Friday at his vacation home in Woodville, Va.
Mr.
McKitterick, who was 64 years old, also had a home in Alexandria, Va.
The cause was a heart attack, said Allan Eustis, a son-in-law.


Padres Edge Dodgers in 10th
LEAD: Roberto Alomar singled home Bip Roberts from second base with one out in the 10th inning today to give the surging Padres a 2-1 victory over the Los Angeles Dodgers.


Sport for Good Listeners: Goalball
LEAD: WHAT team sport requires quickness, strength, mental toughness, agility, concentration, and blindfolds?
Are you stumped?
The sport is called goalball and it is played worldwide by the blind and visually impaired.


Candidates and Issues on 5 State Ballots Tomorrow
LEAD: The battle between a white supremacist and a black businessman will be decided Tuesday in an Arkansas runoff for the Republican nomination for lieutenant governor.


Now, the Czech Reality;   Political 'Amateurs,' After Free Elections, Turn to Problems Left by the Communists
LEAD: The inspired amateurs and improvisers who toppled a Communist system entrenched for 42 years and seized the Government of Czechoslovakia in a ''velvet revolution'' turned professional this weekend.
In their first chance to vote freely in 44 years, the Czechoslovaks overwhelmingly confirmed President Vaclav Havel's citizens movement as the governing party.


Yonkers Teachers Agree to a 5-Year Pact
LEAD: Yonkers teachers and administrators agreed to a five-year contract with the city today.


Michelle Cirillo Marries
LEAD: Michelle T. Cirillo, a daughter of Marie V. Cirillo of Saddle River, N.J., and the late Paul A. Cirillo, was married last evening to Bruce M. Meisel, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Harry A. Meisel.
Rabbi Fredric S. Dworkin officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Meisel, 29 years old and a graduate of Fairleigh Dickinson University, was until recently an assistant at the First Boston Corporation in New York.


No Headline
LEAD: Some weeks ago, Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, wearing a white dress uniform, went to Chile's new Congress in Valparaiso and shared good food, fine wine and reminiscences of battle with some of the politicians who dethroned him.


In Racial Harmony Drive, Dinkins And Sharpton Go to Bensonhurst
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins, the Rev.
Al Sharpton and representatives of the Bensonhurst community met yesterday - though not all at the same time - at a church not far from where Yusuf K. Hawkins was killed last summer.


Oregon Woman Who Chose Death Is Remembered at Upbeat Service
LEAD: Janet Elaine Adkins, who took her own life last week using a newly developed suicide device, was remembered by friends today at a memorial service that also followed her careful planning.


Victoria Eastus Weds Edward Janger
LEAD: Victoria Lea Eastus, a daughter of Christine R. Eastus of Dallas and the late Thomas Alex Eastus, was married yesterday to Edward Jacob Janger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen R. Janger of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Rabbi Edward Schecter officiated at the Woman's National Democratic Club in Washington.


Karen Horwitz Becomes Bride of Bruce G. Sabath
LEAD: Karen Lynn Horwitz and Bruce Guggenheim Sabath were married yesterday at Temple Beth-El in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., by Rabbi Charles Feinberg and Cantor Joseph Weiselman.
Mrs.
Sabath is a daughter of Sanford R. Horwitz of Bedford Hills, N.Y., and the late Myra B. Horwitz.
Mr.
Sabath is a son of Mr. and Mrs.


Ivy S. Morrison Wed To Joshua C. Newman
LEAD: Ivy Susan Morrison and Joshua Casey Newman were married yesterday at Terrace on the Park in Flushing Meadow Corona Park in Queens by Rabbi Gilbert Rosenthal, a cousin of the bride.


A Long-Lost Painting By Bierstadt Is Found
LEAD: Lost to scholars for more than a century, a major 1858 painting of Lake Lucerne in Switzerland by Albert Bierstadt was discovered recently among thousands of artworks, antiques, coins and stamps in the home of a near-recluse in Exeter, R.I.


The Best Revenge
LEAD: Not too many years ago Americans were hearing a lot of talk about limiting Presidents to one six-year term.
Nothing came of that, and it's to be hoped no more will result from current agitation for a limit on legislative terms.


Susan L. Werber Weds A. S. Rokito
LEAD: Susan Lynn Werber, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Werber of Great Neck, L.I., was married yesterday at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I., to Dr.
Andrew Scott Rokito, a son of Dr.
Evelyn Wolf Rokito and Dr.
Michael Rokito of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman performed the ceremony.


With Thin Staff and Thick Debt, Anti-Abortion Group Faces Struggle
LEAD: These are not the best of times for Randall Terry and Operation Rescue, the anti-abortion group he founded three years ago.


Saab Venture Reports Loss
LEAD: Saab Automobile, the venture created in January after the neral Motors Corporation bought the automotive unit of Sweden's Saab-Scania A.B., lost money in the first four months of 1990.


Past, Present Clash in Race To Be Mayor Of Trenton
LEAD: History fits comfortably on the streets of this city, where the Hessian barracks stormed by George Washington still stand and the 18th-century home of William Trent, the city's namesake, is open to all.


U.S. Avoids Germany's Ground Floor
LEAD: Shortly after the Berlin wall burst open in November, the International Business Machines Corporation was on the move in East Germany.
Within two months, Johann Weihen, one of the company's top young executives, was assembling a unit to rebuild business in the ''other Germany,'' which had severed ties with the world's leading computer company in 1952.


John Caples, 90, Author in 1926 Of 'They Laughed When . . .' Ad
LEAD: John Caples, a retired advertising executive who as a fledgling copywriter in 1926 wrote one of the most famous advertising headlines - ''They Laughed When I Sat Down at the Piano but When I Started to Play!'' - died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 90 years old and lived in Manhattan.


40% of New York Harbor Oil Spill Cleaned Up
LEAD: More than 40 percent of the 260,000 gallons of oil that spilled from a ruptured tanker into New York Harbor on Thursday has been recovered, the Coast Guard said yesterday.


Vintners Assail French Ad Ban
LEAD: French wine makers are protesting a Government plan to curb advertisements for alcoholic drinks, saying it would damage sales and France's prestige overseas.


Israel's Time of the Shtarker
LEAD: Arab dictators have begun what could become a ''war process'' to resist what they see as an invasion of Soviet Jews.


Gene-Altered Rabies Vaccine Faces Roadblocks
LEAD: The testing of a genetically altered vaccine against rabies in raccoons has run into roadblocks even as the disease is spreading across populous areas of the eastern United States.


With More Say in Budget, City Council Finds a Guide
LEAD: The finance director for the New York City Council, Marc V. Shaw, looked too tired to get up from his chair the other day.
The late nights and cigarette butts were beginning to accumulate.


Favored Go for Wand Wins
LEAD: Go for Wand reclaimed the leadership of the country's 3-year-old fillies by mowing down Stella Madrid and then holding off Charon to win the $227,600 Mother Goose Stakes by 1 1/4 lengths yesterday at Belmont Park.


Ripken Ties for 2d In Playing Streak
LEAD: Cal Ripken Jr. played his 1,307th consecutive game today, all of them starts, to tie Everett Scott for second place on baseball's career list.
Only Lou Gehrig, the Yankees' Iron Horse who played in 2,130 straight, remains ahead of Ripken.


Indians Bill New York Town As Its 99-Year Leases Expire
LEAD: In 1892 it seemed like an idea with a future.


Critic's Notebook;   On the Edge of the Permissible: Madonna's Evolving Persona
LEAD: Don't think of Madonna as one more singer clawing her way up the pop charts.
Think of her, instead, as a continuous multi-media art project dedicated to examining notions of glamour and success, and the limits of mainstream sexuality.
The project also sells millions of records, of course, but by now - after a decade of hits and poses - it is larger than simple self-promotion.


Joan Whipple Weds H. W. Trimble 3d
LEAD: Joan Morgan Whipple and Henry Weeks Trimble 3d were married yesterday at the bride's home in Cape Neddick, Me., in a nondenominational ceremony performed by the Rev.
Bruce L. Brown of the Bible Speaks church.


Videotapes Are Core of Central Park Jogger Case
LEAD: The heart of the case against six youths charged in the Central Park rape case is on videotape.


Los Angeles Names Rector From Harlem As Assistant Bishop
LEAD: The Rev.
Chester L. Talton, the rector of St.
Philip's Episcopal Church in Harlem, was elected Saturday as the first black assistant bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Los Angeles.
He announced his appointment yesterday to 400 parishioners during two morning services at St.
Philip's.


A Student, Too
LEAD: The Little Professor (doctorate in greensward from Fenway U) was in New York last week, textbook in hand, to conduct a seminar on some of the nuances of the 1941 season and his own modest career.


New Chief Taking Over Savings Bailout Board
LEAD: Peter H. Monroe, the new president of the Resolution Trust Corporation's oversight board, has been accustomed in the business world to managing real estate and selling it at a profit.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Monday
None
Tuesday
Trade Current Account
1st Quarter
Wednesday
Retail SalesMay
Thursday
Business InventoriesApril
Producer Price IndexMay
Friday
Balance of Trade


Chronicle
LEAD: The Choral Synagogue in Moscow and the Park East Synagogue in Manhattan share a historic note in the growing religious freedom in the Soviet Union.
Last night, the ties between the two synagogues and their senior rabbis were strengthened at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, when ADOLPH SHAYEVICH, chief rabbi of Moscow, presented a Torah to Rabbi ARTHUR SCHNEIER on the 100th anniversary of the Park East


Review/Ballet;   For Grown-Ups, Or at Least Those Who Pass
LEAD: George Balanchine's ''Theme and Variations'' is a ballet for adults to dance.
That may sound like a strange thing to say about a work that consists of nothing but abstract patterns in space to music by Tchaikovsky.
In fact, it can be performed by dancers of any age.
But they must be able to command attention with their stage presence and look at ease in both the brilliant and the tender passages.


2 BOROUGHS FACE A BAN ON BUILDING
LEAD: New York State is threatening to halt new building in lower Manhattan and downtown Brooklyn if the city does not decrease the amount of sewage flowing to the city's largest treatment plant.


E for Error
LEAD: It would seem to be hard enough to get to first base against major league pitching without having all those pesky border crossings to contend with.
But they, it seems, are among the hazards batters face at Yankee Stadium, at least if the official 1990 Yankee program is any authority.


Michelle I. Gitlitz, Economist, Weds
LEAD: Michelle Ilene Gitlitz, a daughter of Mrs.
Morton J. Dimenstein of Milford, Conn., and Michael Gitlitz of Gaithersburg, Md., was married yesterday in Orange, Conn., to Jonathan Daniel Lupkin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley N. Lupkin of Bayside, Queens.
Rabbi Alvin Wainhaus and Cantor Sol Zim officiated at Congregation Or


Amy Perry, an Advocate For the Environment, Wed
LEAD: Amy Perry, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger F. Perry of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Joshua T. Basseches, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert T. Basseches of Washington.
Rabbi Yechiael E. Lander performed the ceremony at Castle Hill in Ipswich, Mass.


Nancy N. Radin Is a Bride
LEAD: Nancy N. Radin and Jerome Tarnoff were married yesterday at the bride's home in New York by Rabbi David M. Posner.
Mrs.
Tarnoff, who was a widow, is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur L. Newman of New York.
She is a partner in the Paper Clip, a personalized stationery service in New York.
The bridegroom, a son of Anne Tarnoff of Brooklyn and the late Meyer Tarnoff, is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Berger &amp; Steingut.


Review/Music;   A Portuguese Ensemble With Period Instruments
LEAD: In the heyday of early-music ensembles, from the 1950's to the 70's, great efforts were made to uncover the ancient repertories of England, France, Germany and Italy.
But if the music of Portugal and Spain has not benefited from quite the same thoroughness, it does have its champions.


Indians Terminate Red Sox Streak
LEAD: Trying to hit Tom Candiotti's knuckleball, says Boston's Jody Reed, is like ''trying to swat a fly.''


Amy A. Heller Is a Bride
LEAD: Amy A. Heller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Heller of Teaneck, N.J., was married yesterday to Dennis R. Doros, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay R. Doros of Springfield, N.J.
Rabbi Susan L. Einbinder officiated at Bridgewaters Banquet Facilities in New York.
Mrs.
Heller-Doros, 32 years old, is the director of educational video and print sales at New Yorker Films.


Wendie Klapper and Thomas Janover Are Married
LEAD: Dr.
Wendie Nan Klapper and Thomas Troy Janover were married yesterday at the Pierre in New York by Rabbi Morris S. Friedman.
The bride, who will keep her name, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert J. Klapper of Hewlett Harbor, L.I.
Her husband is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan van Straaten Janover of New


Let Trees by Billboards Grow, Highway Agency Tells States
LEAD: Trees and other foliage should have the right of way over highway billboards, the Bush Administration is telling states in a reversal of a 13-year-old Federal policy.


Navy Investigators Face New Attack
LEAD: The recent reopening of the inquiry into the explosion that killed 47 sailors on the battleship Iowa last year has set off a new round of criticism of the Navy's investigative service.


Mandela Moves to Reassure Visiting Group of U.S. Jews
LEAD: Nelson Mandela, the South African anti-apartheid leader, assured a delegation of prominent American Jews today that he recognized Israel's right to exist as a nation, and said he regretted any misunderstanding created by a recent meeting with Palestinian leaders.


Puerto Rico's Future Is Spirited Topic at Parade


Metro Matters;   A Child's Tale: Call It Alicia In Welfare Land
LEAD: Ten-year-old Alicia Gordon finally returned home to her father in New York on Friday, at least a year late.


Gomez Wins French Open In Four Sets
LEAD: In the space of one short afternoon, Andres Gomez, who sometimes has been too patient for his own good, finally secured the goal he has worked a tennis lifetime to achieve when he defeated Andre Agassi, 6-3, 2-6, 6-4, 6-4, and earned the right to reign as champion of the 1990 French Open.


Americans Seek to Improve Transportation for Soviets
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union are trying to build a new commercial relationship across the spectrum of transportation - moving goods by land, by sea, by air, or even into orbit.


Flaming Oil Is Spilled Into Gulf as Blasts Rack Tanker
LEAD: Five explosions in 10 minutes aboard a Norwegian tanker spewed flaming plumes of oil into the Gulf of Mexico this afternoon, about 36 hours after a large section of the 853-foot vessel first burst into flames.


Canadians Sign Pact, But the Doubts Linger
LEAD: Canada's provincial leaders dispersed to their capitals after signing a pact with Prime Minister Brian Mulroney that was intended to keep Quebec within the confederation, but doubts remain as to whether all 10 provinces will go along.


Pride and Plebiscite Stir Puerto Ricans' Parade
LEAD: Cynics might argue that it was just a beautiful day.


Free Elections Are for Teamsters, Too
LEAD: Democratic unionism won only a partial victory in last year's settlement of the Federal racketeering suit against the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.
A U.S.
District Court allowed the tainted teamster leadership to remain in office, watched over by three court-appointed trustees with limited powers.


Caution Replaces Glamour As the Key Word in Books
LEAD: MANY book publishers would normally mount eye-catching exhibits of their fall books at the American Booksellers Association's convention.
But at this year's gathering, most of the displays were unusually subdued.


Public Libraries Explore World of Video
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chronicle
LEAD: Matters of money are rarely simple, and so it is that some legal big guns have been marshalled to negotiate severance pay for PETER COHEN, 43 years old, the ousted chairman and chief executive of Shearson Lehman Hutton.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL REPORT
President Bush is expected to announce that the United States will begin preparing for free-trade talks with Mexico, senior Administration officials say.
American officials have long favored the principle of free trade between the two countries, but opposition in Mexico has until recent months made the issue moot.


Nancy K. Eisner, Lawyer, Is Wed
LEAD: Nancy K. Eisner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Kislik of New York and Waccabuc, N.Y., was married yesterday to Clifford H. Schoenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark Schoenberg of White Meadow Lake, N.J.
Rabbi Sandy K. Bogin officiated at the home of the bride's parents in Waccabuc.


Sallie Mae Issue Is Set to Be Priced Today
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Cynthia Page Is Married
LEAD: At the Inn-at-Mystic in Mystic, Conn., Cynthia Dorothy Page, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon Wells Page of Madison, Conn., was married yesterday to Gilbert Alan Samberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eli Samberg of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Judge Paul Cravinho of Surrogate Court in Stonington, Conn., officiated.


Peter Throckmorton, Archeologist Of Ancient Shipwrecks, Dies at 61
LEAD: Peter Throckmorton, an underwater archeologist who located and explored shipwrecks, died last Tuesday at his home in Newcastle, Me., at the age of 61.
The family said he was found dead in bed of natural causes.


Suzanne Hawkins Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Suzanne E. Hawkins, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard R. Hawkins of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Richard M. Gibbons, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James S. Gibbons of Jersey City.
The Rev.
John Halborg, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.


Atlanta Journal;   Granite to Honor What Words Built
LEAD: At the age of 93, Judge Elbert P. Tuttle still holds forth in the old granite building that houses the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit.
His small office above the vaulted space that was once Atlanta's main post office is uncluttered, suggesting the spit-and-polish order long associated with the judge, a retired general in the Army


Pamela Bernard Is Wed
LEAD: Dr.
Pamela J. Bernard, a postdoctoral fellow in clinical psychology at the Kaiser Permanente Medical Group in Fremont, Calif., was married in Scarsdale, N.Y., yesterday to Dr.
Richard S. Shames, a postgraduate fellow in allergy and immunology at the University of California at San Francisco.
Rabbi Jack Stern officiated at the Westchester Reform Temple.


Youth Is Served in Vast Tennis Tournament
LEAD: FOR two weeks every year, the quality of play at the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows, Queens, is raised to levels not usually encountered on the well-kept public courts; athletes struggle in summer heat and searing jet noise.
And, at tournament's end, champions emerge and trophies are distributed.


Susan Siegel and Alan Attia, Physicians, Marry
LEAD: At the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I., Dr.
Susan Beth Siegel, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert L. Siegel of Naples, Fla., was married yesterday to Dr.
Alan Lawrence Attia, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Albert A. Attia of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Arnold Marans and Cantor David Absiker officiated.


Writer Chosen By Foundation
LEAD: Fred M. Hechinger has been appointed senior adviser to the Carnegie Corporation of New York, the philanthropic foundation.
Mr.
Hechinger, who has written about education for The New York Times since 1959, is on the foundation's board.
He will assume his new position Feb. 1 when he retires from the board.


A Celebration of Brooklyn


A Taste of Jail for John Poindexter
LEAD: Prosecutors and defense attorneys describe two very different John Poindexters for sentencing today in Washington's Federal Court.
Convicted felon, liar, obstructor of Congress, subverter of the rule of law, says Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel.
Distinguished public servant, brilliant naval leader, devoted family and community man, say his lawyers.


Prank That Backfired
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nicklaus's 27 Under Triumphs
LEAD: Before joining the Senior PGA Tour this year, Jack Nicklaus might have considered the Mazda Senior TPC a neat summary of why he wouldn't be able to get motivated to play over-50 golf.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Levi Captures Western Open: Wayne Levi birdied the first two holes on the way to a four-stroke victory yesterday in the Western Open in Oak Brook, Ill.
Levi shot a final-round 69 in posting his second victory in three weeks.
His 13-under-par 275 tied the course record at Butler National Golf Club set by Mark McCumber last year.


In China, Dissent Is a Necessary Safety Valve
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Rock;   Reveling in the Agonies Of Good Love Gone Bad
LEAD: ''If I could have my way, I'd be sleeping in the alley on a couch with a friend and a bottle of gin,'' sings Melissa Etheridge in the opening lines of the title song of her second album, ''Brave and Crazy.'' The song, which Ms.
Etheridge performed on Friday evening at the Beacon Theater, where she ended a four-night engagement yesterday, is a typically melodramatic expression of the lovelorn angst that sparks almost all of her material.


A Rare Enterprise Grows in Korea
LEAD: Lee Youn-Jae had been planning for months to move his small company - the largest supplier of recreational tents to the American market - into golfing equipment when he received a call recently from a man who said they had to meet right away.


Papers End Joint Accord
LEAD: The Knoxville News-Sentinel and The Knoxville Journal agreed last week to dissolve their four-year-old joint operating agreement by the end of 1991, ending a lawsuit.


Too Little Deregulation
LEAD: Deregulation has worked.
Over two decades, consumers of airline, transportation and telephone services have benefited from lower prices and improved services as new companies were allowed to enter, old companies allowed to exit and prices allowed to reflect competitive pressures.
The net benefit to the economy totals tens of billions a year.


Barry and Aides Meet On Re-Election Effort
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. called a meeting of his top political advisers tonight amid signs that he was seriously considering not seeking re-election to induce Federal prosecutors to drop some of the drug charges he faces.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of June 11, 1990:
MONDAY
Northeast Utils
TUESDAY
Amer. Stores Co New
Oklahoma Gas &amp; Elec
Chesapeake Corp
Proler Intl Corp
Consolidated Nat Gas
Toro Co
Fleetwood Enterprises
Wrigley W. M. Jr Co
Fluor Corp
Wyle Labs


Contras Continue to Surrender Arms
LEAD: President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro sealed the fragile peace accord here today by kissing a rebel leader on the cheek, just below a bullet wound he said he received fighting the Sandinista Army five years ago.


More Foreign Buying Is Expected
LEAD: Some credit market analysts say that although foreign investors for the most part shunned Treasury securities in the first quarter, they have been active buyers in recent weeks and are likely to continue buying in the near term.


Review/Television;   Speculating on a Post-Cold-War World
LEAD: Toward the end of ''After the Cold War,'' one of the specialists on international affairs assembled by Ted Koppel says something startling.
Fyodor Burlatsky, a member of the Supreme Soviet, predicts that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics may be transformed into an ''alliance'' or a ''commonwealth.


Evacuations in Liberia Sadden Some Who Stay
LEAD: Among the people who gathered today at Spriggs-Payne Airport to see relatives leave for the United States was a 64-year-old retired foreman named J. H. Riedel, who was visibly unsettled by the evacuation scene.


Adele Lewis Corwin, Executive, 67
LEAD: Adele Lewis Corwin, who founded the Career Blazers employment agency in 1949 and headed it until she retired in 1975, died on Saturday at Beth Israel Hospital.
Mrs.
Corwin, who was 67 years old and lived in Hawley, Pa., died of complications from lung cancer, her son, William Lewis, said yesterday.


New York City Chooses Firms for Bond Offering
LEAD: Ending a fierce competition on Wall Street, New York City has named the five securities firms that will serve as senior managers for its general-obligation bond offerings over the next two years.


Ad for Nike Wins Again
LEAD: Wieden &amp; Kennedy continued its sweep of the leading advertising awards last night, winning the best-of-show prize for print at the National Addy Awards in St.
Louis, presented by the American Advertising Federation.


Market Place;   Intergroup Sees Profits In Drugs
LEAD: AFTER National Intergroup Inc. announced last week that it would shed everything but its Foxmeyer Corporation drug distribution business, both management and a group of dissident shareholders began to take credit for what each considers the road to recovery for the former steel giant that had been mired in an effort to diversify.


Evolution in Europe;   SOVIETS INTERVENE IN ETHNIC VIOLENCE
LEAD: The police and troops broke up attempts to organize nationalist rallies today in the Central Asian republic of Kirghizia after a week of ethnic clashes that have left 107 people dead, officials said.


Birth of a Global Book Giant
LEAD: Over the last two years, an amiable Scotsman with a tough glint in his eye has transformed one of America's oldest publishers, the sleepy house of Harper &amp; Row, into a dynamic global conglomerate.


Backcourt Gives Pistons 2-1 Edge
LEAD: Faced with the challenge of ending a 20-game losing streak in Portland, the Detroit Pistons' backcourt players came to the forefront today.


Promotions at Y.&amp;R.
LEAD: Young &amp; Rubicam said John Sanders, the chairman of its Detroit office, would become president and chief executive of its direct marketing subsidiary, Wunderman Worldwide.
Y.&amp; R. named Mitchell Kurz chairman of the unit's North American division and G. Steven Dapper president.
Michael Kilby will become chairman of the international division.


Behind Pro Bono Stands The Sixth Amendment
LEAD: To the Editor:


In China, Dissent Is a Necessary Safety Valve;   Not to Be Hurried
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Building by Any Other Name. . . .
LEAD: Some benefactors endow buildings with fanfare, especially if those buildings will bear their names.
Not Frederick P. Rose, the real-estate developer who for decades has used his personal fortune and engineering experience to support education and the arts.


Question Box
LEAD:
Pitchers Who Never Led
Q.
Among the pitchers who have won 300 or more major league games, did any ever fail to lead the league in victories for every season of his career?
A.
Only two since 1900, and maybe two more by 2000.
One is Don Sutton, who was the winning pitcher 324 times in a 23-year career from 1966-88, but who was never the top-winning pitcher in his league for a season.


Metro Datelines;   Judge Bars 4 Dogs From Visiting Inmate
LEAD: An imprisoned animal rights advocate may not be visited by her dogs while she awaits sentencing on an attempted murder conviction, a Federal judge has ruled.


4 Miles Over Britain Pilot Is Sucked Out; Crew Holds On Tight
LEAD: The pilot of a passenger plane was partly sucked out of the cabin window onto the nose cone of the jet today after its windshield blew out at 23,000 feet.
But he was saved by crew members who clung to his ankles for 15 minutes until the co-pilot landed the plane safely in southern England.


Is Europe A Common TV Market?
LEAD: IF Marcella Rosen is right, the ''Hallmark Hall de Celebrite'' could soon be a fixture on French television - and perhaps, in the appropriate languages, on video screens across Europe.


Review/Music A Guitarist Introduces Spanish Rarities
LEAD: Lawrence Del Casale, a guitarist who teaches in the New York City public school system, played an appealingly nonstandard program at Weill Recital Hall on Saturday evening.


Singer Back in South Africa
LEAD: The singer Miriam Makeba, who won international acclaim during her 31 years in exile from her native South Africa, received an emotional homecoming today.


Fed Officer Sees Dangers
LEAD: A member of the Federal Reserve Board warned today of the dangers posed by the weakness of the United States economy and urged a relaxation of the central bank's monetary policy by the end of the year.


An Oak-Filled Course Both 'Long and Tough'
LEAD: Medinah No. 3 is noted for the dramatic arrangement of oak trees and water on many of its holes, a characteristic befitting the finest course in the City of Big Shoulders.


Let's Tax Big Science To Aid Small Science
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Senior Crown at Age 14
LEAD: When people meet Kim Zmeskal, they invariably ask her, ''Are you going to be the next Mary Lou Retton?''


Learning About the Human, Often Young, Face of Homelessness
LEAD: To the Editor:


Night Light for Runners
LEAD: A retired engineer from New Jersey has developed a blinking night light for runners.
The light blinks faster as the runner's pace speeds up.
Referred to as the Run-N-Light, the device is shaped as a triangular 4-inch patch with three strobe lights embedded in its surface.
The patch is powered by a nickel-sized lithium battery and weighs about two ounces.


The Face of the City - Turning Shameful: An occasional series;   A New Look for the 'Brownies'
LEAD: New York City transportation officials offer an ominous statistic: In the first four months of 1990, assaults on traffic agents, who ticket illegally parked cars, increased 33 percent from the same period last year.
The agents deserve more respect, and Transportation Commissioner Louis Riccio would help them claim it.


Concerned Coaches Are Wondering, Why So Few Blacks?
LEAD: AS college baseball continues to make major strides toward more widespread popularity, the virtual invisibility of black players at the sport's college level has raised a concern about its future growth.


Metro Datelines;   Hit-Run Driver Kills A Brooklyn Girl, 7
LEAD: A 7-year-old Brooklyn girl was killed by a hit-and-run driver near her home yesterday morning, the police said.
They said witnesses saw a black 1979 Buick hit Sheryl Williams, of 592 Vanderbilt Avenue, about 11:50 A.M. as she was crossing Vanderbilt at St.
Marks Avenue, in the Prospect Heights section.


Reality Cannot Kill the Soccer 'Passion'
LEAD: IT was over so fast.
Lightning in the sky before the game, Czechoslovak fans chanting in the end seats, and hordes of players in red uniforms racing down the wings.
Then, boom.


Carol Glazer Is Bride Of David Michael Ross
LEAD: Carol Ann Glazer, the daughter of May Glazer and the late Dr.
Harold Glazer, was married yesterday to David Michael Ross, a son of Raye N. Ross of Chicago and the late Dr.
Jacob N. Ross.
Rabbi David H. Lincoln performed the ceremony at the National Arts Club in New York.


Free-Trade Talks Seen For Mexico
LEAD: President Bush is expected to announce this week that the United States will begin preparing for free-trade talks with Mexico, senior Administration officials said over the weekend.


Lynn Feldman Is Married
LEAD: Lynn Kallins Feldman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Feldman of Newton, Mass., was married yesterday to Dr.
Michael Myer Segal, a son of Barbara Segal Liebgott of Jerusalem, and the late Ralph G. Segal.
Rabbi Richard Yellin officiated at Congregation Mishkan Tefila in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Mrs.


Wendy Schlossman Weds
LEAD: At Temple Emanuel of Great Neck, L.I., Wendy Anne Schlossman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ralph E. Schlossman of Jamaica Estates, Queens, was married yesterday to Douglas Nelson Firtel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton Firtel of Cheshire, Conn.
Rabbi Ronald Millstein performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Firtel, who is studing for a master's in education at Georgia State University, and Mr.


Rat Patrol in Park Turning to Poison as Owl Force Fails
LEAD: Millions of rats in New York City's parks, each able to run up a brick wall as though it was a ladder, survive a five-story fall unharmed, swim a half a mile and tread water for three days, wriggle through a hole the size of a quarter, and chew through sewer pipes with chisel teeth that can exert 24,000 pounds of pressure per square inch, which is a lot of bite.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Blackstone Group, New York, an investment banking firm, named David C. Batten a general partner responsible for financial advisory services and fund management.


Robin Carpenter Marries
LEAD: Robin Carpenter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Carpenter of Kent, Ohio, was married yesterday to Kazuhiko Miwa, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fumio Miwa of Nagoya, Japan.
Dr.
Robert J. Berson, a leader of the Ethical Society of Northern Westchester, performed the ceremony at the Seventh Regiment Armory in New York.


FUJIMORI ELECTED PERU'S PRESIDENT OVER VARGAS LLOSA
LEAD: Alberto Fujimori, a son of Japanese immigrants, was elected President of Peru today, soundly defeating the novelist Mario Vargas Llosa.


Susan E. Morris Is a Bride
LEAD: Susan Elaine Morris, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl N. Morris of Mount Lebanon, Pa., was married yesterday at Congregation Beth Israel in Honesdale, Pa., to Steven Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Smith of New York.
Rabbi Mark Glickman officiated.
The bride, 25 years old, attended the University of Pennsylvania and is the assistant to the vice president for subscriptions at Murdoch Magazines in New York.


Ideas About Garbage
LEAD: What is garbage for one person is inspiration for another, as a design show on view through Sept. 12 at the Municipal Art Society demonstrates. ''Garbage Out Front: A New Era in Public Design'' features proposals by artists, architects and urban planners for disposal systems in New York City, and illustrations of the methods that are now used.


Newsweek Account
LEAD: Newsweek said Friday that it had awarded its advertising account to John Emmerling Inc.
The agency resigned the account of Money magazine, which is published by Time Warner Inc,, the owner of Newsweek's rival, Time magazine.
Emmerling picked up the Money account in 1978.
Money is where the agency's chairman, John A.


At 53, Villella Is Back Dancing, Minus the Beer and Ice Cream
LEAD: When Edward Villella steps onto the stage at the New York State Theater tomorrow night in ''Watermill'' as part of the New York City Ballet's festival of ballets by Jerome Robbins, he will be returning to a career and a company he left 11 years ago.
He will also be dancing a role that was one of his most controversial - and most telling.


Review/City Ballet;   Fairy Tales and an Elegy In the Robbins Festival
LEAD: ''Mother Goose (Fairy Tales for Dancers)'' and ''Piano Pieces,'' two works that Jerome Robbins created for festivals staged by George Balanchine, shared the bill with a later piece, ''In Memory of . . .'' when the New York City Ballet's current festival - devoted to Mr.
Robbins's ballets - presented its fourth program.


Threats From 3 Already Rattle Shamir's Coalition
LEAD: Acting Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's proposed new governing coalition appeared in danger of unraveling tonight when three members of Mr.
Shamir's party told him that he could not count on their votes because they had not been offered posts in the government.


Bombs Injure 17 in London And Off-Duty Ulster Soldier
LEAD: A bomb exploded Saturday in a military barracks rented for a birthday party, injuring 17 civilians, and the police said today that the attack had ''all the hallmarks of the I.R.A.''


Wendy Gorlin and Marc Tayer Marry
LEAD: Wendy E. Gorlin, the daughter of Mrs.
Thomas Gilbert of Rye, N.Y., and Dr.
Richard Gorlin of Bedford Hills, N.Y., was married yesterday at the Sunningdale Country Club in Scarsdale, N.Y., to Marc L. Tayer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald S. Tayer of Tiburon, Calif.
Rabbi Marc Weiner officiated.


Ruling Adds Zeal to Bible Students' Crusade
LEAD: Students gathered in a school library in suburban Rankin County to rejoice in what they see as a Supreme Court victory and to give thanks for a new hope that religious activity can now sweep across the high school campuses of America.


Evolution in Europe;   Ex-Communists Decisively Lead Bulgaria Voting
LEAD: The Bulgarian Socialist Party, heir to the Communists who have controlled this Balkan country since 1944, took a decisive lead in early returns in Sunday's parliamentary elections.


People
LEAD: *
Joel J. Fineman has been named senior vice president and group account director at Burkhardt &amp; Christy.


Learning About the Human, Often Young, Face of Homelessness;   Helpless No Longer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Business and the Law;   Solving Problems Of Manville Trust
LEAD: ONCE again, a Federal bankruptcy judge in Manhattan has turned to Leon Silverman to work out the difficulties facing the victims of asbestos produced by the Manville Corporation.


Evolution in Europe;   Amid Soviets' Changes, Who Owns the Papers?
LEAD: Last April, just as a newly elected group of insurgents were about to take over Moscow's City Hall, the local Communist Party laid claim overnight to the capital's main newspaper by simply erasing all references to the City Council, or Mossoviet, from its masthead.


Body of Westchester Man Is Found in Bronx
LEAD: The body of a 67-year-old man from Westchester County was discovered Saturday afternoon inside the trunk of a black Jaguar sedan parked in the Bronx, the police said yesterday.


Bridge
LEAD: It is not uncommon for a young bridge player to abandon the game to pursue a career and then return to the card tables several decades later with almost undiminished energy.
One such was Michael Gottlieb, a member of the great Four Aces team in the 30's.
He retired in 1936, made a fortune in real estate and came back 40 years later, winning several tournament events in the last years of his life.


U.S. Scrutiny On Price of Amgen Drug
LEAD: Amgen Inc. is coming under pressure from Government officials who contend that Medicare is paying too high a price for the company's anti-anemia drug, erythropoetin, or EPO.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article on Saturday about the formation of a governing coalition in Israel misidentified a defecting member of Parliament from the Labor Party.
He is Ephraim Gur, not Mordechai Gur.


European Action on Ozone
LEAD: The European Community's environment ministers have agreed to set 1997 as the deadline for eliminating the manufacture and use within the community of chlorofluorocarbons, which destroy the earth's protective ozone layer.


Valedictorian at Dartmouth Cites College's New Diversity
LEAD: In the valedictory address at Dartmouth College yesterday, Michael Lowenthal, a senior from Chevy Chase, Md., cited himself as an example of the school's new diversity, but he questioned whether its students had unified into a community.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-13


Mozambique and Rightist Rebels Seem Ready to Begin Peace Talks
LEAD: The Government of Mozambique and the right-wing guerrillas opposing it say they are preparing to begin talks to end their long civil war, which has taken 100,000 lives and created 800,000 refugees.


Outdoors: Giving Guide Duty a Spin
LEAD: HAVING contrived to fall and break my collarbone while engaged in wood-cutting chores in Maine late last month, I robbed myself of some of the best freshwater and saltwater angling the spring-to-fall season offers.


Mortgage Rates Drop
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages were averaging 10.10 percent last week, down from 10.29 percent the previous week and the lowest since a similar rate was reported on Feb. 16, according to a national survey released by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.50 percent last week, down from 8.55 percent the week before.


Voters Face Racial Choice in Arkansas Runoff
LEAD: Fearing that they may lose the popularity they have gained in Arkansas in recent years, Republican leaders have disavowed a neo-Nazi white supremacist who is seeking the party's nomination for lieutenant governor and endorsed his opponent.


Two Young Old-Timers of 7th Ave.
LEAD: While it is not the best of times economically speaking, it is a period in fashion when the work of new designers is treated with respect.
Retailers, even though their budgets are restricted, are constantly on the lookout for fresh, preferably young, companies to attract new customers.


BULGARIAN VOTING STUNS OPPOSITION
LEAD: Stunned by the Bulgarian Socialist Party's decisive victory in Sunday's parliamentary elections, leaders of the main opposition group told a rally today that they would keep up their fight against the former Communists, refusing all offers to form a coalition government.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   American Photo Picks Its Favorite Ad Images
LEAD: ''Some of the most creative photographs being made are advertising images,'' the magazine American Photo declares in its July/August issue.
In a 40-page section, the magazine picks its favorites among recent campaigns.


Let the Wealthy Pay Their Fair Share of Taxes;   A Quarter per Share
LEAD: To the Editor:


Saks's Chief To Keep Job
LEAD: Investcorp, the Mideast investment company, denied yesterday that it would name Philip B. Miller a co-chairman of Saks Fifth Avenue and said it planned to keep Melvin Jacobs as Saks's chairman and chief executive.


The Secret Behind Feats Of Sea Turtle
LEAD: SEA turtles have long confounded scientists by performing extraordinary feats of navigation, often traveling 1,000 miles or more between feeding and nesting sites.
The means by which they manage such long and exacting journeys has been a mystery.


Thailand Defense Minister Quits Just Before Premier Flies to U.S.
LEAD: Hours before the Thai Prime Minister left for a long-planned visit to Washington, his Government was thrown into crisis today by the resignation of his Deputy Prime Minister and Defense Minister.


Hormone Could Close Half of Dairy Farms
LEAD: To the Editor:


Supreme Court Roundup;   Misled Retiree Loses Disability Claim
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that the Federal Government could cut benefits to someone who had gained eligibility by relying on the erroneous advice of a Government employee.
The 7-to-2 decision held that courts are constitutionally barred from ordering a Federal agency to spend money that Congress has not appropriated.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
8.25
9.30
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.73
7.71
8.22
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.64
7.64
7.87
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.49
8.49
8.22
30-YR.


Entertainment Weekly Editor Quits
LEAD: After a clash with senior management at Time Warner Inc. over the direction of the company's Entertainment Weekly magazine, the publication's managing editor, Jeff A. Jarvis, resigned yesterday.


Careers;   Bright Future Seen for Product Managers
LEAD: A REFUGEE from the New York retailing scene, Mary Jane Schmuhl happily works in Andover, Mass., for a leading national retailer, and she lives in Boston, which means reverse commuting from the city to the small town.
She also travels the world.


More Glory for Old Glory
LEAD: America's flag has survived another attempt to force the nation to treat it as sacrosanct.
The Supreme Court holds that the new Federal law against flag burning is just as unconstitutional as the one it struck down in a Texas case last year.
It suffers from the same constitutional flaw: suppression of free speech because the


Jobless Rate in Connecticut, At 5.6%, Tops U.S. Average
LEAD: Connecticut's unemployment rate rose to 5.6 percent in April, from 5 percent in March, exceeding the national average for the first time since May 1977.


Bridge
LEAD: Some inattention to detail on the part of local organizers appears to have robbed two women in South Carolina of a major victory in the Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest played on Friday.


Entrepreneur With a Circle Of Close Political Friends
LEAD: During the six years Carl M. Rheuban owned First Network Savings Bank, he and his family contributed hundreds of thousands of dollars to political candidates and causes, forging close relationships in the process with politicians like Senator Alan Cranston, the California Democrat.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Coalition Approved in Israel
Parliament narrowly approved Prime Minister Shamir's new right-wing Government after a day of suspense.
Page A7.
Ruling on National Guard
The Supreme Court held that the governors do not have the right to block the call-up of state National Guard units for duty overseas.


Lower Cigarette Sales Linked to Tax Rise
LEAD: A new study suggests that raising taxes on cigarettes helps to reduce smoking, lending momentum to a movement in Congress to raise Federal levies on tobacco as a way to curb use and to ease the Federal deficit.


Greek Leader's Visit: Diplomacy and Parties
LEAD: More than 800 Greeks and Greek-Americans gave a warm welcome last night to Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis of Greece at a banquet hall in Astoria, Queens.


Arthur Mangelsdorff, 85, Official For Medical Services at Prudential
LEAD: Dr.
Arthur Mangelsdorff, retired vice president for medical services of the Prudential Insurance Company, died yesterday at Princeton Medical Center.
He was 85 years old and lived in Rossmoor, N.J.


Penny Stock Quote System
LEAD: A new electronic system that gives brokers the prices of low-priced stocks has been a success, with use nearly doubling in the first week, the industry trade group that began the service said today.


Pacific Gas Prices $150 Million Issue
LEAD: A $150 million offering of first and refunding mortgage bonds issued by the Pacific Gas and Electric Company was priced yesterday through competitive bidding won by a group of underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


March Of Folly, Again
LEAD: The extremes have found each other in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
There is less and less room for the middle between opposite sides of the same coin of confrontation.
The choice is narrowing to war and peace, builders and blasters, regardless of being Jew or Arab.


TANKER IS INSURED AGAINST POLLUTION
LEAD: The owners of the tanker that is burning off the coast of Texas, the Mega Borg, have $700 million in pollution insurance through a Norwegian shipping insurance company, the insurer said yesterday, and the money is available for the cleanup and apparently to pay damages to those hurt by the spill.


India to Lift Nepal Embargo and Discuss Rift
LEAD: Fifteen months after imposing crippling trade restrictions on Nepal, India has agreed to lift its embargo on July 1 while beginning negotiations on new treaties between the neighbors.


Dunleavy Replaces Riley as Coach of Lakers
LEAD: Pat Riley, who coached the Los Angeles Lakers to four National Basketball Association championships in the 1980's, resigned today and was replaced by Mike Dunleavy, an assistant coach with the Milwaukee Bucks.


Nuts to the Peanut Law
LEAD: The nation's system for regulating peanuts is, well, nuts.
The laws don't allow farmers to grow and sell peanuts to fellow Americans unless they own a Federal license, very few of which have been issued since the early 1940's.
That keeps peanut production low and prices high.
Americans pay 50 percent more for home-grown peanuts than do foreigners.


Perez Will See a Shoulder Specialist
LEAD: At the start of the season, Pascual Perez was at the core of the Yankees' hopes and wishes for improved starting pitching.
But with each passing day and each physical setback, the saga of the injury-plagued right-hander seems more of a nightmare for the Yankees than a dream come true.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Canadian Pacific Ltd., Montreal, a holding company for real estate, transportation, telecommunications and manufacturing interests, said it would not proceed with its plan to distribute 80 percent of its subsidiary Marathon Realty Co. to its common share holders.


On Sardinia, Irish Gain Fulfilling Tie
LEAD: Ireland finally played its first match in the finals of a World Cup tournament tonight, and it came away with a delightful 1-1 tie against none other than England.


Top Executive Retires At Citizens Utilities
LEAD: In a long-planned move, Ishier Jacobson, president and chief executive of the Citizens Utilities Company, yesterday announced his retirement after more than 35 years with the company.
Daryl A. Ferguson, senior vice president for operations and engineering, will replace him as president and chief operating officer, but the chief executive position remains vacant.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Microcom Shares Are Off Sharply
LEAD: Microcom Inc. said yesterday that it expected to report sharply lower quarterly earnings, sparking a free fall in the stock of the data communications equipment concern.
Microcom shares plummeted 46.7 percent, or $8.50, to $9.75, in over-the-counter trading, as almost 1.8 million shares changed hands.


Dow Rallies in 30.19 Rise On Light Day
LEAD: Led by Boeing and I.B.M., stock prices rebounded sharply yesterday in light trading, with the Dow Jones industrial average gaining 30.19 points - recovering much of the ground it gave up last week.


IRAN-CONTRA ROLE BRINGS POINDEXTER 6 MONTHS IN PRISON
LEAD: John M. Poindexter, the former national security adviser under President Ronald Reagan, was sentenced to six months in prison today for committing five felonies in the Iran-contra affair, including conspiracy to deceive Congress and lying to lawmakers.


Nestle Realigns U.S. Operations
LEAD: Nestle Holdings Inc. announced yesterday that it was reorganizing several of its businesses in the United States, including its coffee and ice cream operations.
The coffee units of the Nestle


Putting Tradition to the Test
LEAD: The Iroquois Nationals, a team reflecting a millennium of Native American history, will journey into the world of big-time lacrosse in the next month.


AMR and Delta Gain In Japan Route Quest
LEAD: The Department of Transportation said yesterday that it had made preliminary recommendations on six hotly contested air routes between the United States and Japan, giving two each to American Airlines and Delta Air Lines.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Addendum
LEAD: *
Chiat/Day/Mojo's San Francisco office, most of which is being sold to its managers, will be renamed Goldberg Moser O'Neill, Chiat/Day.
The principals will be Fred Goldberg, president and chief executive of the office; Mike Moser, group creative director, and Brian O'Neill, creative director at McConnaughy Barocci Brown, Chicago.


Dumars Expects to Play
LEAD: Joe Dumars, the Detroit Piston guard, is expected to play Tuesday night in Game 4 of the National Basketball Association championship series against the Trail Blazers despite the death of his father.


Review/Dance;   Robbins and His Human Insights
LEAD: Insight into human nature is not Jerome Robbins's sole concern in ballet, but it is certainly an aspect that explains much of his popularity.


Books of The Times;   Where Everyday Life Intersects With the Magical
LEAD:
The Barnum Museum
By Steven Millhauser
237 pages. Poseidon Press. $18.95.


New-Music Record Distributor Is Closing
LEAD: The New Music Distribution Service, a pioneering concern that distributes independently produced recordings of jazz, contemporary classical music and underground rock, is suspending its operations this week.
The company helped establish the recording careers of musicians as diverse as Philip Glass, David Murray and the Cowboy


Correction
LEAD: An article Sunday about the Central Intelligence Agency incorrectly identified its author.
Roger Morris was a staff member of the National Security Council in the Johnson and Nixon Administrations.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Animated Ads Used by VH-1
LEAD: In its last advertising campaign, the VH-1 cable music network presented a radiant, stylized view of the life style of young urban professionals that was reminiscent of the television show ''thirtysomething.''


Skyscrapers Scrape Only A Shin Here
LEAD: The building boom of the 1980's, which everyone believed had slackened, is surging ahead into the 1990's, if only on a scale of 1 to 1,200.
This time-lagged explosion of architecture is changing the face of the Panorama of New York City, the world's largest scale model of a city.


Chronicle
LEAD: Minutes after he was re-elected president of the Grandmasters Association Sunday, GARY KASPAROV quit in a dispute with the International Chess Federation.
Mr.
Kasparov, the world chess champion, resigned to protest an agreement by the Association's board to collaborate with the Federation on chess rules.


Three Men Who Took Aim at Rap Group
LEAD: A campaign to rid South Florida of a rap group's popular record and to arrest those who perform or sell its songs appears to have come about through the efforts of a national pro-family group and three men: a Miami lawyer who fights pornography, a county sheriff and a retired F.B.I. agent who advises the sheriff on what is and what is not obscene.


News From the Macintosh Front
LEAD: SO much attention has recently been paid to Windows 3.0, a program that makes Compaq and compatible computers work in much the same fashion as Apple Computer's Macintosh, that some Macintosh owners are becoming testy.
Via old-fashioned paper mail, electronic mail, voice mail and fax modem, they complain that the accolades rightfully belong to the original, not to the imitation.


Bible Is a Guide For Setting Bail In Church Theft
LEAD: A Rockland County judge reached into the Bible today to set bail for Clyde M. Womer, the former treasurer of the Christ Episcopal Church in Suffern who is accused of fleeing eight years ago with $267,000 in church funds.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in SportsMonday this week about the Mayor's Cup All Scholastic Tennis Championships in Queens misstated two results.
In middle school team play, Mark Twain Junior High School, not Ryan Junior High School, was runner-up.
In middle school boys' individual play, Jeremy Kleiner beat Arkady Libo, not the reverse.


Cambodia's Khmer Rouge Won't Go Away
LEAD: To the Editor:


Untouchable at 43: Ryan Hurls 6th No-Hitter
LEAD: Nolan Ryan pitched the sixth no-hitter of his career tonight, extending his major league record as the Texas Rangers beat the Oakland Athletics, 5-0.


U.S. Exporters Wary Of Technology Accord
LEAD: Despite a lengthy briefing yesterday at the Commerce Department, representatives of American exporters of manufactured goods remain reluctant to assess the potential effect of last Thursday's agreement between the United States and other large industrial nations to relax cold war trade restrictions.


Our Towns;   When a Hospital Is Transformed Into a Battlefield
LEAD: City people tend to look at small towns and see a simpler, sweeter life.
But in a small town, a few can control power and anyone who doesn't get along can have a problem.


Bush Meets East German Leader And Pushes NATO Membership
LEAD: Lothar de Maiziere, East Germany's first freely elected head of government and probably its last, conferred today with President Bush on German unification and related issues.


Governors Cannot Thwart Guard Call-Up, Court Rules
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that the Constitution does not give state governors the right to block the call-up of state National Guard units for duty overseas.


Dollar Lower in Light Day As Reports Are Awaited
LEAD: The dollar was lower yesterday against most primary currencies except the Japanese yen.
Trading was slow.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
International


Variable Rate Note From Sallie Mae
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association yesterday priced $600 million in short-term floating-rate notes, due Dec. 13, 1990, through various securities dealers.


Statement by P.L.O. in Tunis
LEAD: Following is the text of the Palestine Liberation Organization statement issued in Tunis today, as translated from the Arabic by The Associated Press:


Lloyd B. Seaver; Executive, 96
LEAD: Lloyd B. Seaver, who spent nearly 50 years with Belding Heminway, the textile concern, died on Sunday at his home in Thompson, Conn.
Mr.
Seaver, who was 96 years old, died of complications from a stroke, his family said.


When X Marks the Movie
LEAD: The voluntary rating system of the Motion Picture Association of America, by which movies are given grades ranging from G to X, is a big improvement over the old Production Code.
The latter's stringencies made even the double bed a no-no, and Rhett Butler's ''Frankly, my dear, I don't give a damn'' a cause celebre.


Group Expanded to 15
LEAD: The group that will seek approval this week from major league owners to buy the San Diego Padres for $75 million has been expanded to 15 members from the original 10 partners.


Court's Majority and Dissenting Opinions on the Flag Protection Act of 1989
LEAD: Following is the text, without footnotes, of the Supreme Court's 5-to-4 ruling today that the new Federal law against flag-burning is unconstitutional.


Poland Receives Loan
LEAD: The World Bank is providing a $250 million loan to help Poland develop natural gas.
The new non-Communist Government of Poland has received $781 million in loans from the bank.
The loan for natural gas is repayable in 15 years.


New York Port Loses Top Spot To Los Angeles
LEAD: New York has been eclipsed by Los Angeles as the nation's pre-eminent port, the result of surging trade with the Far East and changing shipping trends in this country.


Bias Crime Bill Makes Some Victims More Equal Before the Law;   Constitutional Question
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tax Exemptions Cover 30% of New York Land
LEAD: More than 30 percent of the land in New York State, by value, was exempt from property taxes in 1988, a slight decrease from the year before, the State Division of Equalization and Assessment said today.


'Nearshore' Is Plumbed For Clues to Explain How Beach Waves Act
LEAD: USING rugged gauges tethered in the waves, a converted Army landing craft and a giant instrument platform that wades through the surf like a three-legged water bird, scientists are beginning to track the movement of sand and water in a part of the beach that no one ever sees.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Washington at Work;   Senate Ethics Chairman: Judicial Temperament for an Often Emotional Job
LEAD: ''Now the Bork fight, that was pressure,'' said Senator Howell Heflin. ''That was what I call walking the plank.
You had sharks on one side, barracudas on the other.
You knew somebody was going to be chewing on you.''


Patterns
LEAD:
Dior's Copycat


Horace Havemeyer, 75, Ex-Head Of National Sugar Refining, Dies
LEAD: Horace Havemeyer Jr., a former president of the National Sugar Refining Company, died yesterday at his home in Dix Hills, L.I.
He was 75 years old.
Mr.
Havemeyer died of lung cancer, his son William said.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Southern Zodiac
Q.Since the zodiac was invented in the Northern Hemisphere, can a person born in the Southern Hemisphere have a sign of the zodiac?
A.''The real sky that the zodiac corresponds to is simply those constellations through which the Sun appears to move during the course of the year as seen from the Earth,'' said Dr.


A Treatment for Lower Back Pain Is Faulted
LEAD: A widely used method for treating lower back pain is ineffective, according to a new study.


Arbitrator To Decide Williams Case
LEAD: The monetary stakes will be high when John Williams's unusual arbitration case goes before Daniel Collins, a New York University law professor, on June 21.
The Cleveland Cavaliers' power forward is seeking to become an unrestricted free agent through an interpretation of the 1987 Bridgeman antitrust settlement that sets the standards for free agency in the National Basketball Association.


Chronicle
LEAD: Even White House officials had to giggle: the Soviet Government has sent an official to study the management techniques of the White House chief of staff, JOHN H. SUNUNU.


Bonn and Moscow Ministers Consult on Germany
LEAD: The foreign ministers of West Germany and the Soviet Union met for more than seven hours of private talks here today on the problems of German unification.


Kampala Journal;   The Land Amin Seized Now Preoccupies Uganda
LEAD: For sale or repossession: $1 billion worth of commercial buildings, tea and coffee plantations, residences.


Chronicle
LEAD: A story that said ELIZABETH TAYLOR had just had surgery and that she was involved in a new love affair appeared in hundreds of newspapers and on news broadcasts yesterday.
The story, which quoted Miss Taylor's spokeswoman, was a hoax.
It was perpetrated by a woman who said she was an employee of Miss Taylor's real spokeswoman, CHEN SAM.


P.L.O. Criticizes Attacks on Civilians
LEAD: Under strong United States pressure to denounce a recent seaborne Palestinian raid off Tel Aviv, the Palestine Liberation Organization registered opposition today to ''any military action that targets civilians,'' but withheld specific denunciation of the aborted attack.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: *
Thomas E. Burke has been appointed executive vice president and general manager of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Marketing Services Group.


Election Victor in Peru Plans Drug Appeal to U.S.
LEAD: Marking a change in Peru's anti-drug policy, President-elect Alberto Fujimori said today that he planned to visit the United States this month to argue for development aid to wean Peruvian coca leaf growers from the illicit crop.


Millions for Art, a Lot of It Unfinished
LEAD: When the Guggenheim Museum recently sold three major works by 20th-century masters to help pay for a collection of Minimalist art from the 1960's and 70's, the move was criticized by many museum professionals as selling great art to buy that of lesser magnitude.


Market Place;   Lessons for Banks In Trump's Castle
LEAD: TO understand what has gone wrong with Donald J. Trump's empire, one need look no further than his least successful casino -Trump's Castle.


Time for Bridge Traffic Jams
LEAD: Two Manhattan-bound lanes on the Queensboro Bridge were closed for rebuilding yesterday, causing a major traffic jam.
Traffic officials said the construction, like the work on the bridge last summer, would continue to delay drivers every day, and they recommended that drivers switch to mass transit.


Fannie Mae Yields At 8.9% to 10.35%
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association is offering, through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, $300 million in real estate mortgage investment conduit securities that are backed by 9.5 percent Fannie Mae mortgage-backed securities, and in turn themselves are backed by 30-year fixed-rate mortgages.


Mets Rally But Then Falter
LEAD: The Mets brought their June revival to Wrigley Field tonight, but it collided with the Chicago Cubs' revival and did not survive.


Japonica on Allegheny
LEAD: The private investment group Japonica Partners L.P. said today that it had bought enough of Allegheny International's debt to own more than 50 percent of the company once it emerges from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
The group has been trying to buy Allegheny through bankruptcy court proceedings and has lined up bank financing for a reorganization plan that includes a takeover.


Supreme Court Voids Flag Law; Stage Set for Amendment Battle
LEAD: The Supreme Court declared today that the new Federal law making it a crime to burn or deface the American flag violates the free-speech guarantee of the First Amendment, setting the stage for a political showdown in Congress on the emotional issue of the flag.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Chanel Inc., New York, promoted Jean Hoehn Zimmerman, its senior vice president for marketing and advertising, to the newly created position of senior vice president for marketing and sales.
Chanel also named William Spence senior vice president for administration, international, and promoted Robert Roof, the head of its sales force, to senior vice president.


Thai Visit, Cambodian Opportunity
LEAD: New Thai diplomatic initiatives offer a realistic chance to break the long diplomatic stalemate over Cambodia.
Tomorrow Thailand's first democratically elected Prime Minister, Chatichai Choonhavan, turns his attention from a military crisis at home to Washington and a meeting with President Bush.
It's a chance for the U.S.


THE SAVINGS DEBACLE: A CASE STUDY - A SPECIAL REPORT:   How One Savings Institution Came Apart
LEAD: Carl M. Rheuban founded First Network Savings Bank in 1983, and for six years poured its Government-insured deposits into questionable real estate deals, a solar energy company and even a ''museum of magic'' in the savings and loan institution's headquarters here.


One Defendant In Bensonhurst Tells of Threats
LEAD: John S. Vento reneged on his agreement to testify for the prosecution in the Bensonhurst racial killing because of threats made by the family of Joseph Fama, Mr.
Vento's lawyer said yesterday.


Plaintiff Regards Schools Ruling From a New Jersey Jail
LEAD: During the nine years that the landmark school-financing lawsuit bearing his name inched through New Jersey's courts, Raymond Abbott's young life slid downhill as he went from truant to runaway and then to school dropout, drug addict and burglar.


COURT SAYS OHIO CAN PENALIZE U.S.
LEAD: A Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that Ohio can fine the United States Department of Energy $250,000 for violating Federal and state pollution laws at the Department's nuclear weapons plant near Cincinnati.
The court rejected the contention of the Energy Department and the Department of Justice that the Federal


KEY CANADA VOTE SET FOR NEXT WEEK
LEAD: Newfoundland's vote on the Canadian constitutional accord will take place in its legislature late next week, the province's government announced today.
The Newfoundland vote is considered crucial to deciding the fate of the agreement for the whole of Canada.


Laimbeer Excelling, Oblivious To Boos
LEAD: After the Detroit Pistons' victory over the Portland Trail Blazers on Sunday, Bill Laimbeer walked out of the Detroit locker room wearing a black hat.


Marvin Cohn; Professor, 66
LEAD: Marvin Cohn, a professor of reading and head of the reading clinic at the Adelphi University School of Education, died on Sunday at Glen Cove (L.I.) Hospital.
He was 66 years old and lived in Plainview, L.I.
He died of cancer, a university spokeswoman said.


Wasps Being Trained To Destroy Crops Pest
LEAD: Farmers soon may have an environmentally safe alternative to pesticides: swarms of tiny wasps trained seek out and destroy destructive caterpillars.


U.S. Security Prices Are Stable
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were essentially unchanged yesterday after moderate losses earlier in the day were erased toward the close.
The declines after the opening in New York followed earlier weakness in the Tokyo and London markets for Treasury debt issues.


Maxwell Bid In Australia
LEAD: Robert Maxwell, the British publisher, announced today that he planned to take a 49 percent stake in a newspaper, The West Australian, but Australia's Treasurer, Paul Keating, said that the Government would object to the sale.


Dinkins Puts Y.W.C.A. Chief Back on Board of Education
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins, as expected, yesterday appointed Dr.
Gwendolyn C. Baker, the executive director of the national Y.W.C.A., to a new four-year term on the New York City Board of Education.
He first appionted her to the board four years ago, when he was Manhattan Borough President.


The Apt Quotation, Via Electronics
LEAD: ''IF you put tomfoolery into a computer, nothing comes out but tomfoolery.
But this tomfoolery, having passed through a very expensive machine, is somehow ennobled and no one dares criticize it.''


Let the Wealthy Pay Their Fair Share of Taxes;   Don't Limit Indexing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fingerprint-Matching Displayed in Albany
LEAD: A fingerprint system that the state police hope will help them solve 10,000 more crimes a year was displayed here today.


That Loathsome Winchell. A Natural for a Book.
LEAD: His initials were W. W., and in the 1930's and 1940's, they were enough to identify him to most of America.
He was widely considered the creator of modern gossip writing, and in his heyday this rude, abrasive, egotistical and witty man was the country's best known and most widely read journalist and one of its most influential.


U.S. Voices Disappointment at P.L.O. Statement
LEAD: The Bush Administration said today that it was ''disappointed'' that the latest Palestine Liberation Organization statement about the recent Palestinian guerrilla assault on Israel still failed either to condemn the raid or to denounce those responsible for it.


Martha Graham Troupe Goes Modern on Money
LEAD: Martha Graham celebrates her birthday tonight, a month late but in the company of friends in a glittering benefit at the Martha Graham Center for Contemporary Dance.
At the age of 96, she is stepping boldly into a new world with her company, a world very different from the one that existed when the troupe came into being 63 years ago.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Weight Watchers
LEAD: Watchers International has allocated an additional $10 million to advertise its weight-loss classes, said its agency, DDB Needham Worldwide.


Let the Wealthy Pay Their Fair Share of Taxes;   Not Just Capital Gains
LEAD: To the Editor:


Senator Takes Savings-Issue Stance
LEAD: Following the political strategy of another member of the ''Keating Five,'' Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr. today criticized regulators and Federal prosecutors for moving too slowly in resolving the savings and loan crisis.


An Alien System
LEAD: Secret, autocratic government is bad government.
That familiar lesson has been taught again the last dramatic months in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
The old Communist regimes were not just cruel.
They were incompetent, leaving behind them wrecked economies and ravaged landscapes.


With Tanker Ablaze in Gulf, Oil Cleanup Plans Languish
LEAD: Announced with much fanfare after oil from the Exxon Valdez stained a thousand miles of Alaskan coastline, grand plans to improve the nation's ability to respond to large oil spills are still mostly that: just plans.


Boeing Gets Big Order For 747's
LEAD: The Boeing Company, which has seen soaring demand from the world's airlines for its planes, announced today that Korean Air Lines had agreed to buy 23 of the aircraft maker's long-range 747-400 wide-body jets in a deal worth nearly $5 billion.


Mother and Son Found Slain in Home in Bronx
LEAD: A mother and her 7-year-old son were found stabbed to death in their ransacked apartment yesterday afternoon in the Unionport section of the Bronx, the police said.


'I'm Convinced That Gorbachev Wants A Free-Market Democracy'
LEAD: Three years ago today I stood in front of the Berlin Wall and urged Mikhail Gorbachev to tear it down.
This was not a spur-of-the-moment idea.
Rather, it reflected my belief that both my relationship with Mr.
Gorbachev and the effects of his policy of glasnost at home had reached a point where I could publicly call for this act of East


Loan Reported, Giving Trump Time to Raise Cash
LEAD: Donald J. Trump and the banks that have backed his empire with billions in loans reached a tentative agreement yesterday that would give Mr.
Trump an additional $60 million in loans and temporarily suspend some interest payments on other debt, bank officials said.


Winning Numbers Don't Add Up
LEAD: When does one plus one plus one equal zero?
It happened this spring, when an outstanding Kentucky Derby, an even better Preakness and an engaging Belmont Stakes added up to a dreadful Triple Crown.


Racism Is a Potential Focus Of Attempted Murder Trial
LEAD: As another chapter in the Bensonhurst racial killing ended yesterday in Brooklyn, a Bronx jury began hearing a trial that advocates of Puerto Rican rights say is not a case of attempted murder but one of a man striking out in self-defense against someone who hated him because he is Hispanic.


Farmer Won't Be Tried for Plowing at Night
LEAD: A Cook County judge today dismissed charges against a farmer who had been arrested for disturbing the peace by plowing his fields after dark.


Courier Robbed of $31,000
LEAD: A courier on his way to the bank with $31,000 in cash and $9 million in checks was robbed of it all today when a gunman accosted him in front of the bank, the Suffolk County Police said.
The courier, Scott Mussin, 20 years old, was robbed of the money and checks on his way to the Marine Midland Bank at 1:20 P.M.


Incumbent President Named Victor in Dominican Election
LEAD: President Joaquin Balaguer was declared the winner today in Dominican presidential elections.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
COMMITTEE ON THE PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER SPACE - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Daily News Announces More Cutbacks in Jobs
LEAD: With labor tensions rising, The Daily News announced yesterday that it was laying off almost a quarter of its 57 electricians.


Corrections
LEAD: A theater listing in the Arts and Leisure section on June 10 for a play, ''Everybody Knows Your Name,'' appended a critical comment erroneously.
The reference was to a different play, ''A Quiet End.'' The Times has not reviewed ''Everybody Knows Your Name.''


Jack Paparo; Manufacturer, 86
LEAD: Jack Paparo, a retired clothing manufacturer, died yesterday at his home in Miami.
He was 86 years old and had suffered from Parkinson's disease, his son said.


Judge Gives Maximum Sentences To 2 in Bensonhurst Murder Case
LEAD: Ten months after the murder of a black teen-ager inflamed racial passions and divided New York City, a Brooklyn judge sentenced two white men yesterday to maximum prison terms for their roles in the killing.


Nintendo Denied in Court
LEAD: A Federal judge declined a request today by the Nintendo Company to stop Lewis Galoob Toys Inc. immediately from selling a new device that allows novices to master the popular Nintendo video games within minutes instead of hours.


China Gives Cool Reply to Taiwan Overture
LEAD: China issued a cool response today to Taiwan's offer last month to allow contacts between the rival Governments, and said direct trade and telecommunications links should be established before formal negotiations begin.


ASSEMBLY ACCEPTS SHAMIR'S COALITION
LEAD: The Israeli Parliament narrowly approved Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's new right-wing Government tonight after a day of suspense over whether he could count on his party's full support.


Dykstra Streak Ends at 23 Games
LEAD: Len Dykstra, leading the major leagues in batting, went hitless in consecutive games for the first time this season and saw his hitting streak end at 23 tonight as the Montreal Expos swept a doubleheader from his Philadelphia Phillies, 5-0 and 3-2.


Tanker May Have Left Ship Channel
LEAD: A tanker that ran aground on Thursday and spilled 260,000 gallons of oil in the Kill van Kull was outside the authorized 35-foot-deep channel dredged to permit the safe passage of larger vessels, the Army Corps of Engineers said yesterday.


Use of Suicide Device Sets in Motion Debate On a Disturbing Issue
LEAD: IN helping Janet Adkins kill herself, Dr.
Jack Kevorkian dramatized the issue of the right to die in a way few physicians have in the past.


Will Medinah Be Nicklaus's Last Open?
LEAD: In the 90th United States Open, which begins Thursday among the towering trees of Medinah Country Club's No. 3 course, the big question is: Can Curtis Strange join Willie Anderson, a turn-of-the-century champion, in winning the championship three consecutive years?
But there's another big question inside a sentimental question: Is this Jack Nicklaus's last Open?


Results Plus
LEAD:
TENNIS
Chamberlin Advances in London
Paul Chamberlin of the United States beat Pat Cash, the 1987 Wimbledon champion, 6-4, 1-6, 6-1, yesterday in London on the opening day of the Stella Artois grass court championships.
Chamberlin's victory spoiled the expected second-round match between Cash and the reigning Wimbledon champion, Boris Becker, who had a first-round bye here along with Ivan Lendl, Stefan Edberg and John McEnroe.


Request Is Granted
LEAD: A Federal judge in Newark yesterday told eight football players battling the National Football League's free-agency restrictions to argue their antitrust case in Minnesota, where a similar case has been proceeding since 1987.


Gasoline Prices Up a Bit
LEAD: Gasoline prices have made another small move upward, according to a survey of service stations.
The average price for a gallon of gas, including all taxes, was 117.96 cents as of Friday, according to the Lundberg Survey of nearly 13,000 stations nationwide that was issued on Sunday.
The average price was 1.91 cents higher than in the last survey on May 18.


Investor Buying Large FPS Stake
LEAD: FPS Computing Inc., the troubled supercomputer maker formerly known as Floating Point Systems, said today that it had signed a letter of intent for an institutional investor to acquire 9.67 million shares of newly issued convertible preferred stock for $14.5 million.


An Uphill Fight to Reopen 2 Churches
LEAD: When the Roman Catholic Diocese of Albany merged this town's three parishes into one in February, closing two of the churches, officials knew the decision would be taken hard.
How hard, they couldn't have imagined.


Chronicle
LEAD: ANA MAE DIAZ, a 23-year-old law student, and GUILLERMO ENDARA, the 54-year-old president of Panama, were married Sunday in a Roman Catholic ceremony in Panama City.
The couple met in September when Mr.
Endara, a widower, staged a hunger strike protesting the rule of Gen.
MANUEL NORIEGA.
Mr.
Noriega was deposed in the American invasion last December, and Mr.


Fed Approval for 3 Banks
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board yesterday granted approval for the Chemical Banking Corporation, Citicorp and the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation to arrange private placements of all kinds of securities and provide brokerage and other financial advisory services.


Advances In Treatment Change Face Of AIDS
LEAD: THE array of infections that strike people with AIDS is undergoing a profound shift that will affect patients, their doctors and the ability of the health care system to cope with the rising number of AIDS cases.


Savings Units Are Sold
LEAD: The Resolution Trust Corporation today approved the sale of American Savings in Salt Lake City and Willamette Savings in Oregon to Pacific First Federal Savings Bank.
Pacific First, a subsidiary of the Seattle-based Royal Trust Holdings, will assume deposits and liabilities totaling about $1.3 billion.


Germans' Currency Union: A Fantasy Becoming Reality
LEAD: The currency union planned by the two Germanys for July 2 would seem the stuff of an Eastern European's fantasy: to wake up one morning with sheaves of real Western money to spend on kiwi fruit, a Mercedes or a weekend in Paris.


Socialists Are No Spoilers
LEAD: West Germany's divided opposition Social Democrats said today that they would not block an economic treaty with East Germany that is scheduled to take effect in three weeks.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Friday about a new issue of zero-coupon notes from E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company misstated the credit rating by Moody's Investors Service.


Victory Propels Gomez To No. 4
LEAD: It seemed only fitting that Andres Gomez, the new French Open champion and temporary toast of Paris, honed the serve that put Andre Agassi out of commission Sunday in a four-set final by using Perrier caps for target practice in the last two weeks.


10 People Are Selected For Barry Jury Pool
LEAD: Ten people were chosen today for the prospective jury pool for the drug and perjury trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr., bringing the total number of potential jurors to 58.


Moody's Cuts Chase Ratings
LEAD: Moody's Investors Service Inc. yesterday reduced slightly some short-term and long-term ratings for the Chase Manhattan Corporation, citing the banking company's exposure to losses from real estate lending.


Rex Harrison Memorial
LEAD: A memorial celebration to honor Sir Rex Harrison will be held Monday at 11 A.M. at the Little Church Around the Corner, 1 East 29th Street.
Speakers are to include the author and critic Brendan Gill, the actress Maggie Smith, and Noel and Corey Harrison, Sir Rex's sons.
Sir Rex died of pancreatic cancer on June 2 at the age of 82.


Mulheren's Witnesses
LEAD: The prosecution rested its case yesterday in the Federal securities fraud trial of John A. Mulheren Jr., a former associate of Ivan F. Boesky, the convicted stock speculator.


Talking Business; with Breeden of the S.E.C.;   Risks of Market Fragmentation
LEAD: Richard C. Breeden, the 40-year-old head of the Securities and Exchange Commission, has a knack for making waves.
In his short tenure, the Bush Administration appointee has taken a hard line toward people suspected of violating securities laws, has made overtures toward helping Eastern Europe develop stock exchanges and has made it clear he wants to eliminate creaky regulations that may inhibit United


Foxboro Stock Up On Takeover Talk
LEAD: The stock of the Foxboro Company rose yesterday on speculation about a possible takeover after the process instrumentation company said it was exploring a ''strategic alliance,'' which could involve an equity investment in all or most of its stock, analysts said.
Foxboro shares rose $1.50, to $30, on the New York Stock


A European Tax Accord
LEAD: European Community member states put aside differences dating back more than 20 years and agreed today on three new laws intended to end double taxation of some companies.


Stern of Tanker Is Awash, Raising Risk of Bigger Spill
LEAD: The stern of the oil tanker that has been burning out of control since early Saturday was awash this afternoon, increasing the chances that large amounts of oil would spill into the Gulf of Mexico and that the ship would sink.


A's Canseco to Remain In Traction a Few Days
LEAD: Jose Canseco will remain in traction for at least a few more days, according to a spokeswoman at a San Francisco hospital where the Oakland Athletics' star right fielder is undergoing a treatment of rest, therapy and medication for back pain.


Angus McBean Dead; Photographer Was 86
LEAD: Angus McBean, the best-known British photographer of actors and other entertainers, died of undisclosed causes on Saturday at Ipswich General Hospital in eastern England.
He was 86 years old and died a day after his birthday.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: *
H.P.
Hood, to Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Partners, for its ice cream division.


Bias Crime Bill Makes Some Victims More Equal Before the Law
LEAD: To the Editor:


Let the Wealthy Pay Their Fair Share of Taxes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Voting Ruling Shows Judge Willing to Act
LEAD: Even Federal District Judge David V. Kenyon has joked that his courtroom demeanor can sometimes seem to be ''wishy-washy'' and ''kind of slow.'' But after what some courtroom observers call indecisiveness and others call soul-searching, Judge Kenyon has shown that he is capable of handing down an uncompromising decision that can shake the foundations of a political system.


Review/Television;   Sex, Violence and a Leavening Grace
LEAD: In any formula for pop entertainment, the two most time-tested ingredients are sex and violence.
Of course, purveyors must be careful.
Too much of one or the other can attract unwanted attention and public outcries for restraint.
It's all, perhaps, a matter of balance or, as in the case of ''Tales From the Crypt'' on Home Box Office, a shrewdness that is almost, if you will, diabolical.


Corn and Soybean Prices Close With Strong Gains
LEAD: Corn and soybean futures posted strong gains yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade after a lower opening.
Analysts attributed the rebound largely to technically inspired buying.


U.S. Team Grim as It Turns to Italy Game
LEAD: A sense of foreboding has touched the United States soccer team in the aftermath of its resounding loss on Sunday to Czechoslovakia in its opening game of the World Cup finals.


Legionnaires' Disease Cases Tied to Showers
LEAD: RESEARCHERS studying a spate of Legionnaires' disease cases in a South Dakota hospital have identified showers as the vehicle for transmitting the bacteria that cause the disease.
They have also linked the abundance of the bacteria in the shower heads with the presence of certain amoebas in the water supply.


Wilder Says Debate on Race Hides Progress
LEAD: Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia said today that the current debate over racial relations obscures the progress that has been made in the last 20 years and gives too much attention to voices like that of the Rev.
Al Sharpton.


New York's New Cases Of AIDS Level Off
LEAD: The number of new AIDS cases in New York State appeared to level off in 1989 and survival rates for those with the disease have increased sharply, state health officials said today.


Poll Finds Americans Give Soviets Priority Over the Chinese on Trade
LEAD: The American public approves of the way President Bush is handling foreign policy by nearly 3 to 1, but the public disagrees with the Bush Administration's priorities on trade with China and the Soviet Union, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.


A Key to Post-Traumatic Stress Lies In Brain Chemistry, Scientists Find
LEAD: A SINGLE instance of overwhelming terror can alter the chemistry of the brain, making people more sensitive to adrenaline surges even decades later, scientists are finding.


Chess
LEAD: ''No, no, he cannot draw that -White has a great advantage,'' said Yuri Averbach about the final position of the game between the Seattle grandmaster Yasser Seirawan and the current challenger for the world championship, Anatoly Karpov of the Soviet Union.
This was no doubt a moot point, because Karpov overstepped the time limit and lost the game, which was played in the second round of the Sweden International Tournament in early May in Haninge, a suburb of Stockholm.


British Jetliner Pilot Praises His Rescuers


Lisbon Plans Cutbacks
LEAD: The Portuguese Government plans to cut the country's deficit and lower inflation to prevent Portugal from falling behind as Europe approaches economic and monetary union by the end of 1992.
The Finance Minister, Miguel Beleza, said Friday that the economic adjustment plan would cut Government spending and possibly raise some tax rates on purchases.


By Design;   What to Wear to a Wedding
LEAD: These days brides wear whatever they want.
Guests are pretty loose about their dress etiquette, too, but there are still a few dos and don'ts for them.


Chrysler Unit Chief Retires
LEAD: In another top-rung departure from the nation's No. 3 auto company, Bennett E. Bidwell, the chairman of the Chrysler Corporation's Chrysler Motors automotive unit, said today that he plans to retire at the end of the year.


Coach May Be Named
LEAD: The Pittsburgh Penguins have scheduled a news conference at noon today in the Civic Center amid speculation they are planning to name Bob Johnson as their new head coach.


'Accomplice' Closes
LEAD: ''Accomplice,'' a comedy-thriller by Rupert Holmes, closed after the matinee on Sunday at the Richard Rodgers Theater, 226 West 46th Street.
Directed by Art Wolff, the play ran for 52 regular performances and 23 previews.


Soviet TV To Get U.S. Money Show
LEAD: During an installment of the television show ''Adam Smith's Money World'' last November, Donald M. Kendall, the president of Pepsico, speculated that perestroika and glasnost would translate into great opportunities for American business.
He advised the business community to take advantage of those opportunities before Japan and Western


Rice Fertility
LEAD: Scientists have discovered a rare rice plant that changes its sex, depending on the amount of daylight it receives, the United States Department of Agriculture has reported.
They say their findings could help rice growers increase yields by as much as 20 percent.


Samuel Levine; Lawyer 79
LEAD: Samuel Levine, a retired lawyer, died on Sunday at Yale-New Haven Medical Center.
He was 79 years old and had lived in Guilford, Conn., for 14 years.
He died of lung cancer, said his son Robert, of Guilford.


Chip Indicator Resumes Climb
LEAD: United States orders for computer chips reached a high last month as the semiconductor industry's leading indicator resumed its climb.
The Semiconductor Industry


Strawberry Honored
LEAD: Darryl Strawberry, who hit .417 with 4 homers and 9 runs batted in, was named the National League's player of the week yesterday.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Memories Goes Beyond Newsstand
LEAD: MEMORIES magazine will soon be hard to forget.
The name of the publication born two years ago as a newsstand test product is about to turn up in all sorts of unlikely places.


Smaller Wineries Gain in Power
LEAD: There used to be one power base in the California wine business and it was in Modesto, in the Central Valley 85 miles east of San Francisco.
That is the home of the giant E.&amp; J. Gallo Winery, which built its fortune on inexpensive jug wines.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-13
A U.S.-Mexico free-trade agreement may soon be on the agendas of the two countries.
They agreed in principle to move toward negotiations on the subject, but stopped short of announcing the start of formal talks.
Page A1


Did Cuomo Cry in Chapel?
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who has often been said to have a question for every answer, appeared true to form today when a radio announcer asked him if he had cried last weekend at the wedding of his son, Andrew, to Kerry Kennedy.


C. Robert Haines; Banker, 79
LEAD: C. Robert Haines, a retired banker in Philadelphia and New York, died on Thursday at Shore Memorial Hospital in Somers Point, N.J.
He was 79 years old and lived in Linwood, N.J.
The cause of death was pneumonia, family members said.


Patriotism and Politics Mix in Reaction to Flag Ruling
LEAD: President Bush today renewed his call for a Constitutional amendment to outlaw flag desecration while the Democratic leadership in Congress reiterated its opposition to the measure and both sides began organizing for another emotional struggle over the flag.


U.S. AND MEXICANS CAUTIOUSLY BACK FREE-TRADE IDEA
LEAD: The United States and Mexico agreed in principle today to move toward negotiating a ''comprehensive free-trade agreement'' but, in an acknowledgment that substantial economic and political hurdles remained, the two nations stopped short of announcing the start of formal talks.


In Possible Compromise, Moscow Is Said to Invite Lithuanian
LEAD: Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov has invited the Prime Minister of Lithuania to Moscow for talks this week, Lithuanian officials said today, giving rise to speculation in Lithuania that the Kremlin was preparing to end its partial economic blockade of the republic.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If the court were not to impose such a penalty here, when the defendant before it was the decision-making head of the Iran-contra operation, its action would be tantamount to a statement that a scheme to lie and to obstruct Congress was of no great moment.''
-Judge Harold H. Greene, sending John M.


U.S. Removes Ban On Hughes Bids
LEAD: The Hughes Aircraft Company, a unit of the General Motors Corporation, said the United States Air Force had lifted a new business suspension against the Hughes Missile Systems Group.
The Air Force action allows the unit to bid for Government contracts.


Apathy and Disaffection on the Rise Among California Voters
LEAD: California voters may have made national waves by nominating Dianne Feinstein to run for governor and passing a ballot proposition to raise taxes, but Ethan J. Henderson had nothing to do with it.


The Home's Link To School Success;   A New Road to Learning: Teaching the Whole Child
LEAD: For more than 20 years in this city of scholars and elms, schoolchildren and their parents have been studying a basic axiom: students in troubled schools learn better when families and educators work together.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-19


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.25
9.30
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.74
7.73
8.14
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.64
7.64
7.84
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.50
8.49
8.30
30-YR.


House Votes To Amend Hatch Act's Provisions
LEAD: Defying a veto threat from President Bush, Congress gave final approval today to a bill that would allow Federal workers to take part in many partisan political activities from which they have been barred for a half-century.


Advertising Federation Asks Officers to Remain
LEAD: The American Advertising Federation has asked its chairman and vice chairman to serve an additional one-year term, it announced yesterday at its annual business meeting in St.
Louis.


James Carreras, 81; Headed Film Studio Known for Horror
LEAD: Sir James Carreras, who as head of Hammer Films produced horror movies that chilled a generation of filmgoers, died of a stroke on Saturday at his home at Henley-on-Thames, west of London, according to a death notice published by his family.
He was 81 years old.


NBC Alters Its Count Of Viewers
LEAD: NBC announced yesterday that it would change the system it uses to account for the number of viewers its programs deliver to advertisers.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
Mariah Carey's Debut


Compromise on Endowment Sought
LEAD: An influential Republican member of the House subcommittee that oversees the National Endowment for the Arts met today with John E. Frohnmayer, chairman of the endowment, and White House officials in an effort to work out an agreement that would restrict the kind of art the Government supports.


Edna McRae, 88, A Teacher of Ballet And Choreographer
LEAD: Edna McRae, a Chicago ballet teacher who received national recognition as a trainer of young dancers, died Thursday in a residence for the elderly in Evanston, Ill.
She was 88 years old.


Ferry Leaves Bullets
LEAD: After an hourlong meeting with the Washington Bullets' owner, Abe Pollin, Bob Ferry resigned yesterday as general manager of the team.
Ferry, a former Bullet player, had served in the job for 17 years.
Washington missed the National Basketball Association playoffs the last two seasons and has not advanced past the first round since 1982.


Panel Urges Halt in Stock Trades During Times of Stress in Markets
LEAD: A panel created by the New York Stock Exchange to restore investor confidence after the stock plunge in October 1989 recommended yesterday that the Government require most financial markets to close for as much as a full day at times of great volatility.


Eating Well
LEAD: AS many people know, lead is a highly toxic metal that builds up in the body over a lifetime and can cause chronic illness.
What fewer people realize is that lead is still found in metal food cans that have lead-soldered seams.
It can leach easily into the food inside.


Foreign Investors Held $2 Trillion in U.S. in '89
LEAD: Foreign investment in the United States rose to a record total of $2 trillion in 1989, up 12 percent from $1.786 trillion in 1988, according to preliminary statistics released today by the Commerce Department's Bureau of Economic Analysis.


Valerian S. Rybar, 71, Designer Of Lush Rooms and Lavish Parties
LEAD: Valerian S. Rybar, the interior designer internationally known for creating opulent rooms and extravagant party designs, died Saturday at his Manhattan home.
He was 71 years old.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: A VIVID memory from my childhood is helping my father empty the frail white nets we set in the Burgundy canal and carrying home the catch of eels, carp, pike and various other freshwater fish.
I would clean the catch while my mother began sauteeing vegetables to make a base for the matelote, a fish stew.


Editors' Notes
LEAD: An article on June 5 described an anthropologist's new theory about the perpetrator of the ''Piltdown Man'' hoax of 1912.
The article dismissed several previous theories, recalling that John H. Winslow, an American archeologist, had accused Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.
The anthropologist was quoted dismissing Dr.


Howe Said to Improve
LEAD: Steve Howe, the National League rookie of the year in 1980, whose pitching career over the last decade has been beset with suspensions for drug use, was reported improving and in satisfactory condition yesterday with a blood clot in his lung at Antelope Valley Hospital Medical Center in Lancaster, Calif.


Evolution in Europe;   Czechoslovak Premier Keeps Job
LEAD: President Vaclav Havel today named the incumbent Prime Minister, Marian Calfa, to form Czechoslovakia's first democratically elected government in more than 40 years.


A Bolshoi Star Joins the Royal Ballet
LEAD: Irek Mukhamedov, one of the best known male stars of the Bolshoi Ballet, has left the Soviet Union to become a principal dancer and full-time member of the Royal Ballet, the London company announced today.


1,082 Graduate at Princeton
LEAD: Princeton University conferred 1,082 bachelor degrees and 571 advanced degrees at its 243d commencement today in front of Nassau Hall.


Royal Bank Deal
LEAD: The Royal Bank of Canada said it had signed a binding agreement to buy International Trustco Inc.
The price was not disclosed.
International Trustco is a Toronto-based trust company.
At the end of 1989, it had assets of about $3 billion and about 80 employees.
The purchase is subject to Government approval.


Adults Befriend Old Foe (the Piano)
LEAD: AFTER years of whining about those dreaded piano lessons or after missing the experience as children, the thirtysomething crowd is sitting down to scales and sonatas.
Without being scolded into practicing or, later, being implored to perform, more and more adults are taking piano lessons, sometimes vying with their own children for time spent on practicing.


Times Is Planning Op-Ed Changes
LEAD: Flora Lewis is to retire on Dec. 31 as the foreign affairs columnist of The New York Times and will be designated as the paper's senior columnist.
Her successor as foreign affairs columnist will be Leslie H. Gelb, who is now deputy editorial page editor and Op-Ed page editor.


A Tireless Voice and Bedrock Beliefs
LEAD: After more than 20 years of widely proclaiming the benefits of his teamwork approach to public education, Dr.
James P. Comer found his voice had grown tired and worn just when the nation had begun to listen.


Wagner's Schools Legacy: Varied Grades and a Major Impact
LEAD: Robert F. Wagner Jr. will be ending his four-year presidency of the Board of Education at the end of the month, leaving behind a school system that he altered in important ways through both his artfulness as a politician and his scholarly grasp of the system's fundamental flaws.


Evolution in Europe;   Soviets Approve Law to Provide Press Freedoms
LEAD: The Soviet Parliament today approved a law on freedom of the press that is intended to end decades of Government censorship and allow individual citizens to start newspapers.


Sara Lee Layoffs
LEAD: The Sara Lee Corporation said its Sara Lee Bakery division planned to close its Deerfield, Ill., plant, which employs 500 people, by March 1.
The company also said that the division was reducing its administrative work force by 100 people.
Sara Lee said the 26-year-old plant's production of frozen baked goods would be shifted to other plants.


When the Weather Gets Hot, The Hot Decide to Make
LEAD: THE question often arises by midafternoon at our house: ''What are we cooking for dinner?'' Sometimes my wife, Gloria, decides; sometimes I do.
But when neither of us feels like eating much, and this happens often in hot weather, we usually end up with pasta.
It is quick, easy, economical and always welcome.


Bankruptcy Court to Assess Validity of Revco Takeover
LEAD: A United States bankruptcy court yesterday appointed a law professor to answer the novel question of whether the leveraged buyout of Revco D.S.
Inc. in 1986 was so poorly constructed that the company was essentially bankrupt from the moment the buyout was completed.


Nepal Grants Amnesty For Conversion Efforts
LEAD: Acting on the recommendation of Nepal's new Prime Minister and his center-left Cabinet, King Birendra decreed a blanket amnesty today for all people who have been jailed or are awaiting trial on charges of encouraging the religious conversion of Nepalese.


What Economic Decline? What Exported Jobs?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Johannesburg Journal;   An Exile Comes Home to Soweto's Sad Embrace
LEAD: When Max Sisulu came home to visit this month after 27 years in exile abroad, he found that some things had changed.
Many more, he said, had not.


Democracy on Hold
LEAD: If the Bush Administration has its way, the people of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union will hear the sounds of democracy with one ear.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''About some players you have to say the jury is out concerning the Hall of Fame; but I think in his case the jury is already in.
If people had doubts 10 years ago, they don't have them now, and it's not just one statistic, like no-hitters or strikeouts, or his age, but the totality of what he has done.


Cheney Backs His Budget and His Cuts
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney went to Capitol Hill today to lobby against deeper cuts in the Pentagon's proposed budget for the fiscal year 1991.


KOREAN STUDENTS ATTACK A U.S. SITE
LEAD: Radical students threw hundreds of homemade firebombs early today at the newly reopened American Cultural Center in the southwestern city of Kwangju.


GE Credit Offers Notes Due in 2008
LEAD: The GE Credit Corporation, a unit of the General Electric Company, is offering $250 million in 8 5/8 percent notes due 2008 through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company as sole manager.


Sterling Drug Settles Suit
LEAD: Sterling Drug Inc., a maker of non-prescription drugs, will pay $375,000 to settle Federal charges that it had made unfounded claims about the healing powers of some of its Midol-brand products.


Corning Holders Form Trust Unit
LEAD: A group of the descendants of Corning Inc.'s founders have formed the Market Street Trust Company, to hold their 5.9 percent stake in the Corning, N.Y., specialty and houseware manufacturer.


Secrets of the Trade
LEAD: Dave Barry, the humor columnist, has turned 40.
The news is embedded in the best-seller charts with a book titled ''Dave Barry Turns 40'' by Dave Barry.


U.S. Court Overturns S.E.C. Rule
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today threw out the ''one share one vote'' requirement imposed by the Securities and Exchange Commission in 1988, a time when many companies sought to thwart hostile takeovers by issuing shares with extra voting powers.


President Balaguer Declared Winner in Dominican Voting
LEAD: President Joaquin Balaguer won last month's election by a margin of less than 25,000 votes over Juan Bosch, the Central Electoral Board announced Monday night.


Improving Magazines' Prospects
LEAD: TO break out of their advertising slump, American magazines must sharpen their journalism, position themselves as partners of television and broaden their trade advertising's target audience, say ad executives whose agencies handle major magazine accounts.


Chevron Acts to Clean Fuel
LEAD: Chevron U.S.A.
Inc., the largest subsidiary of the Chevron Corporation, said today that it was offering a premium unleaded gasoline and a new diesel fuel reformulated to enhance performance and reduce vehicle emissions.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Libbey-Owens-Ford Co., to J. Walter Thompson USA/Detroit, for its LOF Glass Centers division, Dallas.


Conviction Is Upheld In Rep. Lukens's Case
LEAD: A state appeals court today upheld the conviction of Representative Donald E. Lukens for having sex with a 16-year-old girl.


Hearings on Durenberger's Ethics Open With Call for Stern Penalty
LEAD: Accusing Senator Dave Durenberger of ''reprehensible conduct'' in his financial practices, the Senate Ethics Committee's special counsel recommended today that the full Senate publicly denounce the Minnesota Republican and that his party consider stripping him of his seniority.


Clam Hash From All Over
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Evolution in Europe;   Russian Patriarch Asks Church Role in Schools
LEAD: The new Patriarch of the Russian Orthodox Church challenged the Government today to demonstrate its commitment to democratization by allowing optional religious education to replace official atheism in Soviet schools.


Apple Computer's Price Cuts Ended
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc.'s chairman, John Sculley, said price cuts intended to help the company increase its market share of lower-priced products were mostly over.
In expectation of the recent introduction by the Microsoft Corporation of its Windows 3.0 software, Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., cut prices in February for its Macintosh


Study Finds Gains For Infants at Risk
LEAD: Babies who weigh less than normal at birth have higher risks of medical and developmental problems.
But a large new study has found that with concerted efforts to help them, such children can function better socially and achieve strikingly higher scores on intelligence tests.


There's No Tolerating Terror
LEAD: If President Bush wants to be taken seriously about the Middle East in Congress, Israel and the Arab world, he'll have to suspend U.S. talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization.
That's the only way to show he holds Yasir Arafat accountable for his promise to renounce terrorism.


3M Faulted in Polonium Leaks
LEAD: The 3M Company sold air guns for use in unacceptable situations and did not fully report leaks of the radioactive chemical polonium from the devices, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said Monday.
The agency proposed a $160,000 fine against the manufacturer, based in Maplewood, Minn.
The two-inch air guns, also called ionizers, were used by manufacturers to eliminate static electricity and remove dust from production areas.


Senate Upholds Bush Veto of Bill to Keep Amtrak Subsidies
LEAD: By a margin of three votes, the Senate today upheld President Bush's veto of a measure that would have continued Federal subsidies for Amtrak, the nation's passenger rail system, and expanded the Government's regulatory power over freight railroads.


Passaic Housing Aides Guilty
LEAD: Three officials of the Passaic Housing Authority pleaded guilty today in Federal District Court to charges of conspiracy and agreed to cooperate with an inquiry into the authority's handling of Federal money.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: NELSON MANDELA is to make his first television appearance during his first visit to the United States on the ABC News program ''Nightline,'' on June 21 with TED KOPPEL.
Billed as a Town Meeting, the interview on the campus of City College of New York, which is scheduled to last at least two hours, will be held before an invited audience that will be able to question Mr.


High Seas Delay Work On Liner off Cape Cod
LEAD: Sunny skies today raised hopes that work might begin on the on a 90-foot gash in the Bermuda Star, a cruise ship that ran aground off Cape Cod on Sunday.
But choppy seas delayed the effort to insure that thousands of gallons of oil stay in the ship.


Gasoline Rebounds Briskly From Its Previous Losses
LEAD: Gasoline for July delivery soared more than 2.6 cents a gallon yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange, erasing the steep losses from the three previous trading sessions.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


A Little Warmth Is Said to Do Wonders for the Florida Tomato
LEAD: A FEW weeks ago Beth Mahaffey was behind enemy lines.
Deep in the territory of the Jersey Beefsteak and the Long Island Big Boy, she was trying to promote Florida tomatoes for the Florida Tomato Committee.


Tilden Wins Four Relays
LEAD: Tilden High School of Brooklyn won four relay events last night at the girls Eastern States track and field championships at Columbia University's Wien Stadium.


Books of The Times;   Fuentes's Rich Mixture, Now in Novella Form
LEAD:
Constancia and Other Stories for Virgins
By Carlos Fuentes
Translated by Thomas Christensen. 340 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.95.


Securities Rule Struck Down
LEAD: A Federal appeals court threw out the ''one share one vote'' rule imposed by the Securities and Exchange Commission in 1988.
Page D1.


Maud Oakes, 87, Dies; Ethnologist and Writer
LEAD: Maud Van Cortlandt Oakes, an ethnologist, writer and artist who chronicled the culture of primitive Indian tribes in Guatemala, died Sunday at her home in Carmel, Calif.
She was 87 years old.
The cause of death was Alzheimer's disease, said her conservator, Kay Woolsey.


Market Place;   Common Worry: Brokers' Honesty
LEAD: BROKERS say their customers are petrified by program trading, but the customers themselves say they are much more worried about the honesty of brokers.


Florio Woos A New Kind Of Coalition
LEAD: After a decade of Reaganite anti-tax rhetoric in this state, how does a new Democratic Governor persuade a Democratic legislator to vote for new taxes and then run for re-election the very next year?
He must insure that lower-middle-class districts, often lost to Republicans in the 1980's, get plenty of money.


Study Finds Gains for Babies of Low Birth Weight
LEAD: The first large-scale study of a development program for babies who weighed less than normal at birth showed that it achieved striking success in raising their scores on intelligence tests and improving their social functioning.


Photographer Allowed To Dive to Sunken Ship
LEAD: For the first time in 11 years, the Government is allowing a civilian undersea photographer to dive to the wreck of the armored Union ship Monitor, which lies 16 miles off Cape Hatteras, N.C.
The ship sank in a gale 128 years ago after her celebrated battle with the Confederate ironclad ship Merrimack.


Reactor Restart Is Challenged Over Hot Water in Wetlands
LEAD: Two environmental groups have sued the Department of Energy over its plan to restart a reactor in South Carolina that makes fuel for nuclear weapons, arguing that the reactor illegally discharges scalding water into a wetland.


A Team With a Genius for Successful Sitcoms
LEAD: There are two ways of looking at Tom Miller and Bob Boyett, a team of television sitcom producers who have an extraordinary six shows either on the air or scheduled for next season.


Otto Sturzenegger, Head of Ciba-Geigy, Dies of Cancer at 64
LEAD: Otto Sturzenegger, chairman of the Ciba-Geigy Corporation, the United States subsidiary of the Swiss chemical company, died on Saturday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 64 years old and lived in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.


Plan to Increase Power At Indian Pt. Is Delayed
LEAD: Consolidated Edison has obtained permission from the Federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission to increase the power level at its Indian Point 2 nuclear reactor in Buchanan, N.Y., by 12.9 percent.
But the utility has not been able to do so because of the discovery of cracks in metal vessels at the plant.


Food Notes
LEAD:
Chilies in the Food Section


Joffrey Ballet Raises $1 Million
LEAD: The Joffrey Ballet announced yesterday that it has raised $1 million in the last month.
Gerald Arpino, the company's artistic director, said the money will help meet the Joffrey's short-term commitments.
He added that the company hopes to raise $1.5 million more by July 15.


IMMUNITY GRANTED TO H.U.D. WITNESS
LEAD: A special prosecutor has granted immunity to a longtime aide to Samuel R. Pierce Jr. and has issued a flurry of subpoenas in a broad expansion of the criminal investigation of fraud and political abuses at the Department of Housing and Urban Development, people involved in the inquiry said today.


Changes Looming for U.S. Team
LEAD: Bob Gansler began his search today for a suitable lineup to use against Italy Thursday in Rome, where the United States plays its second and probably most difficult first-round match of the World Cup finals.


A 3d Bell Is a Pro
LEAD: A third-generation baseball Bell put on a pro uniform for the first time yesterday, with his father and grandfather on hand.
David Bell, 17, a recent graduate of Cincinnati Moeller High School, joined 30 other Cleveland Indian draft picks in a workout at Cleveland Stadium.
His dad, Buddy Bell, a major leaguer from 1972-87, was one of his instructors.


Evolution in Europe;   GORBACHEV YIELDS ON ALLIANCE ROLES IN A NEW GERMANY
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today removed one of the main conditions that his country had imposed on German unification.
He agreed for the first time that West German troops could remain in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization without a corresponding role for the East Germans in the Soviet-led Warsaw


Book Notes
LEAD:
A Doubleday Closing


THAI TEMPERS COOL AFTER ARMY CRISIS
LEAD: With the Thai Prime Minister in Austria on his way to the United States, tempers cooled in Thailand today after the fervid political and military maneuvering on Monday.


Detroit Passes Endurance Test to Lead by 3-1
LEAD: It was an exciting game, a strange game, and it ended in confuing fashion.
But when all was said and done tonight, the Detroit Pistons were one victory away from winning their second consecutive National Basketball Association title.


Grace &amp; Rothschild
LEAD: Grace &amp; Rothschild, the agency behind the J &amp; B Scotch campaign, has been given the United States advertising for the Metaxa line of Greek spirits from the Morgan Furze Ltd. unit of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C.
The account has a budget between $2 million and $3 million.


The Pound Rises Sharply As the Dollar Ends Mixed
LEAD: The dollar ended mixed yesterday as the soaring British pound attracted the most attention, reaching a four-month high against the American currency in European trading.


Mentor Buying Sun Computers
LEAD: The Mentor Graphics Corporation said today that it will buy $300 million worth of Sun Microsystems Inc.'s Sparc computers over the next three years.
Mentor, based in Beaverton, Ore., will resell the Sun computers bundled with its software, which is primarily used to design chips and printed circuit boards.


Japan Criticized on Trade Progress
LEAD: The Senate Finance Committee's ranking specialists in trade policy expressed concern today that Japan was not living up to promises to open its economy and warned that Congress ''may have no choice'' but to respond with retaliatory legislation.


Ryan's Reaction? Back to Work.
LEAD: On the morning after Nolan Ryan pitched his sixth no-hitter, he didn't go to the doctor.


Penguins Employ Johnson and Bowman
LEAD: The Pittsburgh Penguins yesterday acquired more hockey experience than you can shake a stick at by naming, as expected, Bob Johnson as head coach and Scotty Bowman as director of player development and recruitment.


Selling Authorities To Private Industry Is Backed by Rinfret
LEAD: The Republican candidate for governor, Pierre A. Rinfret, said today that he favored selling several state agencies to private industry.


A Correction
LEAD: Lines were omitted from a letter May 28 by Rey Koslowski on taxes.
The sentence affected should have read: ''The proposed capital gains tax cut and expanded individual retirement accounts could be replaced by a more equitable and simpler investment incentive - eliminate the tax on the first $4,000 of interest income (8 percent interest on $50,000 of savings).


Wife of Commerce Secretary Is Robbed in Barbizon Hotel
LEAD: Georgette Mosbacher, a cosmetics executive and the wife of Robert A. Mosbacher, the Secretary of Commerce, was robbed at gunpoint last evening in the Barbizon Hotel in Manhattan, the police said.


Connecticut Democrats 'Kind of Depressed'
LEAD: Next month, five old friends from this small town, all of them leaders in the Democratic majority that dominates the local government, will drive the 19 miles to Hartford to help select their party's nominee for governor at its state convention.
They're not exactly thrilled at the prospect.


Yes, Prosecute the Torture Doctor
LEAD: In April, it looked like a first-order fiasco: U.S. drug agents set up the kidnapping of a Mexican doctor indicted in the United States - apparently with careless disregard of Mexican sovereignty.
But now the case of Dr.
Humberto Alvarez Machain looks considerably less flawed.
It is a defensible law enforcement operation marred by inattention to diplomacy and poor timing.


Braves Sweep Slumping Reds
LEAD: Greg Olson hit a grand slam and Ron Gant had two doubles, a triple and a homer as the Atlanta Braves swept the slumping Cincinnati Reds, 8-3 and 3-2, tonight.


In Texas, a Look at a Deal Bringing Profit and Peril
LEAD: The sight of an oil tanker ablaze provoked little surprise along the Texas coast, where many people have struck a bargain with industries that can bring both wealth and danger.
But after watching the ship burn for four days, some officials and politicians say they are beginning to wonder whether the bargain should be re-evaluated.


Management Woes Hobble U.S. Air Fleet in Drug War
LEAD: A private air force organized by the State Department to support United States paramilitary operations against the illicit drug industry in Latin America has developed an array of management problems, officials involved in the program say.


T.A.C. Drug Policies Under Heavy Criticism
LEAD: The Athletics Congress, the governing body of track and field in the United States, has drug-enforcement policies that are flawed and inconsistent, according to documents obtained by The Los Angeles Times.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
June 8
June 1
June 9
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
6.7
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
2.7
Gasoline stocks
217.1
216.5
220.1
Distillate stocks
104.5
104.0
98.9
Crude imports, daily
6.1
6.1
6.2
Product imports, daily
2.0
2.5
2.0
Crude stocks
385.6
384.4
341.5
Crude production, daily
6.9
7.3
7.6
Refinery utilization (%)
88.1
88.2
88.8


State Agency Now Suggests Keeping a Maternity Ward for Harlem
LEAD: In a reversal, a state hospital planning agency is recommending that the St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center keep open a maternity ward to serve a poor, minority community in central Harlem, even though a review has found it may not be needed.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Citing letters received by prominent cultural figures like MILOS FORMAN, RAFAEL KUBELIK and YO-YO MA, the Landmarks Preservation Commission agreed yesterday to hold a public hearing on a date not yet decided for possible landmark designation of the Dvorak House.
The house at 327 East 17th Street in Manhattan was home to Antonin


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Cascade International Inc., Boca Raton, Fla., a cosmetics and women's apparel holding company, said it had made a tentative offer to the management of Conston Corp., Philadelphia, an operator of women's retail stores, to make an equity investment of $12 million in Conston.


Lean Beef at Hardee's
LEAD: Hardee's Food Systems Inc. today announced the debut of a light hamburger sandwich called the Lean 1.
The hamburger is the lowest-fat quarter-pound burger offered as a standard-menu item by any national fast-food chain, company officials said.
According to Bill Prather, Hardee's president and chief executive officer, the Lean 1 is made entirely from American beef and contains an average of 18 grams of total fat, which is about 30 percent less than the chain's other quarter-pound hamburgers.


Cut the Red Tape for Using Schools as Community Centers
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Lendl Advances in London
Ivan Lendl, the defending champion, beat Simon Youl of Australia, 6-4, 6-2, yesterday in the second round of the Stella Artois grass court championships in London.
Boris Becker and Stefan Edberg also won easily.
Edberg, the second-seeded player, beat Markus Zoecke of West Germany, 6-0, 6-3.


People
LEAD: *
Harry L. Blomgren has been named senior vice president and management supervisor at Cramer-Krasselt, Milwaukee.


Crackdown on Limousines Cruising for Fares Starts
LEAD: New York City began cracking down last night on the hundreds of limousines that cruise airports, hotels and theaters, illegally picking up tourists and people who cannot find taxis.


Fuel Leak in Minnesota River
LEAD: More than 75,000 gallons of diesel fuel leaked from a pipeline into the Minnesota River and spread downstream for about eight miles just south of the Twin Cities, the authorities said today.
Al McColl, the chief of the Savage Fire Department, said the leak came from a Williams Pipe Line Company pipe where it crosses the river in Eden Prairie.


Joint Plan to Be Drafted By Drexel and Creditors
LEAD: A Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday gave Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. a Nov. 15 deadline for filing its reorganization plan.
And, heading off a likely showdown, Drexel and its unsecured creditors agreed in principle to draft a joint plan by that date.


Arts Agency Needs Cleaning Up, Not Scrapping
LEAD: To the Editor:


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: FOR many people in Alameda County, summer begins the second weekend in June at the Livermore Rodeo, where you can pick up a clearly detailed map guiding you to farms, vineyards and produce stands that sell directly to visitors.


Provost From Michigan Named to Head M.I.T.
LEAD: Charles M. Vest, the provost of the University of Michigan and a former dean of engineering there, has been selected to be the new president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, school officials announced today.


SHUTTLE COLUMBIA IS BACK IN HANGAR
LEAD: The space shuttle Columbia was returned to the hangar today for repair of a hydrogen leak that has delayed the shuttle's mission until at least August.


In Public Schools, Class Will Tell
LEAD: There is a consensus that public school education is either poised on the precipice or already dashed upon the rocks below.
We are regularly barraged with admonitions, advice and policy proposals to remedy the situation.
Depending on whom you trust, you may believe that what is required is more tax money, the same or less money spent differently, vouchers, more individual choice, more direct intervention by the private sector or a combination thereof.


Old Elite Becoming New Target in Liberia's Civil War
LEAD: They buried three men today under a mango tree.


East Meets West Over Reindeer Sausages
LEAD: To the Editor:


Century 21 Chooses Campbell-Mithun-Esty
LEAD: The Century 21 Real Estate Corporation yesterday chose Campbell-Mithun-Esty Advertising, Minneapolis, as its new agency.
The agency, a unit of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, was selected over six other finalists in the review: BBDO, Young &amp; Rubicam, Chiat/ Day/Mojo, D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Tatham-Laird &amp; Kudner and McCann


The Editorial Notebook;   It's a Wired, Wired World
LEAD: Expatriate Iranians exported revolutionary ideas from Paris by videocassette.
East Germans imported ideas from West Germany by television.
Last year Chinese students used telephones, fax machines and laptop computers to organize their protest in Tiananmen Square and tell a watching world about it.


Excerpts From Committee Counsel's Statement on Ethics of Durenberger
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the statement of Robert S. Bennett, the special counsel to the Senate Ethics Committee, at the opening of hearings today by the committee into the ethics of Senator Dave Durenberger, Republican of Minnesota, as supplied by the Federal News Service, a transcription company.


Tanker Flames Controlled, But Oil Still Flows Into Gulf
LEAD: Firefighters gained the upper hand today in their efforts to control the blaze on a crippled supertanker in the Gulf of Mexico, but because the flames no longer consumed the leaking oil, a growing slick formed behind the Norwegian ship.


SOUTHERN BAPTISTS PICK CONSERVATIVE
LEAD: Conservatives solidified their grasp on the Southern Baptist Convention tonight when the fundamentalist standard bearer, the Rev.
Morris Chapman, was elected president of the 15-million member denomination.


Rita Jacobs Willens, Radio Pioneer, 62, In the Chicago Area
LEAD: Rita Jacobs Willens, a co-founder of radio station WFMT, died of lung cancer on Sunday at her home.
She was 62 years old and lived in suburban Barrington Hills.


Arts Agency Needs Cleaning Up, Not Scrapping;   Cultural Responsibility
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
MARKETS
A panel created to restore investor confidence after last October's stock plunge recommended that the Government require most financial markets to close for as much as a full day at times of great volatility.
But the panel recommended only minor curbs on computerized program trading.


Stump Gets Over A Hump
LEAD: ''Is it true,'' someone asked Stump Merrill, the new manager of the Yankees, ''that for a long time George Steinbrenner thought your name was Lump?''


Most Papers Won't Name the Jogger
LEAD: Though the name of the Central Park jogger is easily available from court documents, editors at many news organizations say they plan to keep her identity secret, as they have for more than a year, as her accused assailants go on trial today on charges of rape.


Stray Bullet Leaves a Harlem Oasis Feeling Vulnerable, and Angry
LEAD: The doormen dress in spiffy blue uniforms and work around the clock.
The private parking lot has trees and benches and glistening cars.
And the long tenant list includes a roster of leading New York politicians, executives, lawyers and doctors.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: When MIKE PLANT set a round-the-world sailing record in April, more than 25,000 people cheered him when he landed in Les Sables d'Olonne, France.
But when he returned home to Newport, R.I., nobody noticed.


About New York;   Common Taste, Or Its Absence, For Commerce
LEAD: ''I'm looking for buffalo skulls,'' a Connecticut woman said to a Florida man with a stuffed rattlesnake head and other suspicious varmints festooned on his Stetson. ''I need wholesale.''


JAPAN AMBIVALENT ON PERUVIAN VOTE
LEAD: Japanese have applauded the election of Alberto Fujimori as President of Peru, but the Government, worried about perceptions that it could be swayed by ethnic ties, has said it will not provide special financial aid to Peru just because its new President is the son of Japanese emigrants.


SmithKline Suit on Generics
LEAD: SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. filed a lawsuit yesterday seeking triple damages from three New York-based companies that sold low-priced generic versions of SmithKline's blood-pressure drug Dyazide.


Next Challenge for Solar Power: Cheaper Cells
LEAD: Scientists have been continually improving photovoltaic cells by raising the amount of electricity they produce from a given amount of sunlight.
Now, industry experts say, progress in the technology of manufacturing is at least as important as gains in the lab in the struggle to make the cells more competitive in cost with conventional ways of making electricity.


A Struggle for U.C.L.A. Before the First Stroke
LEAD: Among college sports, rowing can always claim to be a little different.
Consider, for example, Zenon Babraj, the head coach at U.C.L.A. who a decade ago was coaching in his native Poland.


Economic Scene;   Unusual View On Interest Rates
LEAD: THE good news, say Robert J. Barro of Harvard University and Xavier Sala i Martin of Yale University, is that high interest rates are not bad for the economy.
The even better news, say the two economists, is that the size of the Federal deficit doesn't matter.


Mozambican Foes Go to Malawi for Talks
LEAD: Government and rebel leaders traveled to Malawi today for their first direct peace talks aimed at ending a 13-year civil war, the official Mozambique press agency reported.


China Removes a Culture Official
LEAD: China today announced the replacement of a Deputy Minister of Culture, Ying Ruocheng, who was well known here and abroad as an actor and who came to symbolize the relaxed cultural environment that prevailed until the crackdown a year ago.


Savings Fraud Suspects Listed
LEAD: Several savings and loan executives and associates suspected of fraud in the failures of their institutions have been singled out for possible Federal prosecution, a spokesman for the Office of Thrift Supervision said today.


Bank Profits Down 15% in Quarter
LEAD: Bad real estate loans and lagging payments on foreign debts continued to plague the earnings of the nation's commercial banks in the first three months of the year, driving them down 15 percent from the record set in the first quarter of 1989, bank regulators said today.


Corrections
LEAD: The Careers column in Business Day yesterday about product managers misstated the number of stores operated by the Limited Stores division of the Limited Inc., the nation's largest apparel chain.
It is 780, not 78.


Fresh Juice Not Served
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Editors' Notes
LEAD: A brief article in Business Day yesterday said that a Middle East investment company had denied intentions to name the chairman of Marshall Field &amp; Company as co-chairman of Saks Fifth Avenue, which the Middle Eastern company has agreed to buy.


London Times Changes Style
LEAD: The venerable Times of London has revised its Victorian-era style guide to include such contemporary language as the title ''Ms.''


Evolution in Europe;   Prague Says Moscow Has Agreed to Turn the Warsaw Pact Into a Political Grouping
LEAD: Foreign Minister Jiri Dienstbier of Czechoslovakia said today that at last week's Warsaw Pact meeting the Soviet Union agreed in effect to convert the organization from a military alliance under Soviet control to a more political grouping fully respecting the sovereignty of its seven member nations.


For Summer, Cool Tastes From Vietnam
LEAD: WHEN the barometric pressure sinks and the mercury rises like a lazy bubble of molasses, life leans toward the shade and moves as slowly as a swing on an indolent veranda.
Inspiration rides the occasional breeze, but it evaporates faster than a quake of heat lightning.


Review/Theater;   A Boy Settles Accounts Before Leaving Ireland
LEAD: It has been 25 years since ''Philadelphia, Here I Come!'' established Brian Friel as a vibrant new voice in the English-speaking theater, and it is New York's loss that his work is so infrequently staged here.
Perhaps that is changing.
Last season the Manhattan Theater Club mounted a splendid production of Mr.


Treasuries Off in Quiet Trading
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities dipped slightly in lifeless trading yesterday, as credit market participants marked time before a slew of economic reports are released.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
CHICAGO (NL) - Placed Mitch Williams, pitcher, on the 21-day disabled list.
Recalled Joe Kraemer, pitcher, from Iowa of the American Association.
CINCINNATI (NL) - Signed Keith Gordon and Derrick Graham, shortstops; Roy Hammargren, first baseman-catcher; Juan Loyola, outfielder; and John Roper, pitcher.


Home Economics Lives On
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Rates Rise a Bit At Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates were only slightly up yesterday at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.


Corrections Washington Talk;   Amendment on the Flag Raises Fears in Congress
LEAD: The Washington Talk column on June 13 about Congressional debate of a proposed Constitutional amendment on the flag referred incompletely to procedures for amending the Constitution.
Amendments can be proposed by two-thirds majorities in both houses of Congress, or by a convention requested by two-thirds of the states.
LEAD: As Congress begins a new battle over whether to amend the Constitution to outlaw flag burning, there is one ragged emotion that haunts the lawmakers and could determine the outcome: fear that a vote against an amendment could be portrayed as a vote against the flag.


Bridge
LEAD: After some hesitation, the French organizers, headed by Jose Damiani, announced yesterday the winners of the Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest played last Friday.


Ex-Sergeant, Charged as Spy, Is Ordered Held Without Bail
LEAD: Roderick James Ramsay, a former Army sergeant arrested on espionage charges last week, was ordered held without bail today by the United States District Court in Tampa.


7 States Accuse Mobil on Plastic
LEAD: Seven state Attorneys General filed suit yesterday against the Mobil Corporation, accusing the company of making false claims about the environmental benefits of its plastics products, specifically its Hefty trash bag line.


Review/Pop;   In Kitsch and Patter, Iron-Willed Madonna Flouts the Taboos
LEAD: Madonna is a lean, mean dancing machine in her ''Blond Ambition'' tour, which arrived tonight at the Nassau Coliseum.
During her first tour since 1987, no one will mistake Madonna for an easygoing party girl or pliant fantasy object; she is in full control, casting herself as vicious or coy or devout in vignettes that are all ready for videotape.


ITT Reducing Its Stake in Alcatel
LEAD: The ITT Corporation said yesterday that it would sell 7 percent of Alcatel N.V. for $640 million.


MIPS Computer, Daewoo in Deal
LEAD: MIPS Computer Systems Inc. said it had signed an agreement for the Daewoo Telecom Company Ltd. to resell MIPS's entire product line in Korea under a Daewoo brand.
MIPS, based in Sunnyvale, Calif., produces computers, software and components using RISC, or reduced instruction set computing, which it distributes primarily through resellers.


TV Barred at Jogger Rape Trial
LEAD: The judge in the Central Park jogger rape case yesterday banned television and still cameras at the trial of the first three defendants, which is to begin today in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


Injury Has Perez Season in Jeopardy
LEAD: Pascual Perez, the $5.7 million pitcher whose first season as a Yankee has been slowed by a shoulder injury, is scheduled to undergo more testing today in New York that could lead to arthroscopic surgery and an end to his season.


Evolution in Europe;   U.S. Thinks Gorbachev Might Give In on NATO
LEAD: Bush Administration officials are growing increasingly convinced that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union is slowly reconciling himself to the idea that a united Germany will be in NATO, provided Moscow's economic, political and security concerns are met, Administration officials said today.


Poorer Countries Are Hit Hardest By Spread of AIDS, U.N. Reports
LEAD: The AIDS pandemic is spreading rapidly through the world and is switching from a disease of the industrial world to a disease of the developing nations, says Dr.
Michael Merson, director of the United Nations' Global Program on AIDS.
In an interview on Monday, Dr.
Merson said that five years ago about half the world's known human immunodeficiency virus infections were in the developed countries, most in the United States.


For Rap Singer, Rags to Riches Through Music
LEAD: Luther Campbell, the lead singer and producer of the first record to be found legally obscene by a Federal judge, is a former leader of a youth gang who turned to music and became a self-made millionaire.


Current Account Deficit Is Lowest in Six Years
LEAD: The deficit in the broadest measure of United States trade shrank to $22.94 billion from January through March, the lowest quarterly imbalance in six years, the Commerce Department reported today.


Three Baltic Leaders Meet With Gorbachev
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev met with the presidents of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania and laid out terms that he said could lead to negotiations on Baltic independence and an end to economic sanctions against Lithuania, the Baltic leaders said.
Acting as the Parliament of the Russian republic overwhelmingly adopted a nonbinding measure asserting sovereignty, Mr.


BOTH SIDES HARDEN LINE ON UPRISING
LEAD: Mohammed Manasreh, a Palestinian writer from Bethlehem, was asked his view of a hunger strike staged here by leading Palestinians as a peaceful protest against Israeli occupation. ''These people are finished,'' he said. ''We are looking for a different leadership.''


MERCURY'S POLES CALLED VERY HOT
LEAD: Astronomers today reported the first observations showing that Mercury, because of its peculiar orbit close to the Sun, has two extremely hot spots penetrating deep into the surface on opposite sides of the planet's equator.


Japanese Trade Surplus Down
LEAD: Japan's trade surplus declined slightly in May, the 12th month in the last 13 during which the surplus narrowed from a year earlier, the Finance Ministry reported today.


Citicorp and Freddie Mac In Deal for Home Mortgages
LEAD: Citicorp Mortgage Inc. of St.
Louis, a subsidiary of Citicorp, said yesterday that it had agreed to swap $5 billion worth of new single-family home mortgages for Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation mortgage participation certificates and a new, enhanced Freddie Mac product called Gold PC's.


Milestone for Righetti in Yankee Victory
LEAD: The streets were still empty when Stump Merrill pulled into the Yankee Stadium parking lot yesterday and walked into the office where he will conduct business for the rest of the summer.
There were no fans waiting outside the ballpark, no one calling out for an autograph or offering an encouraging word.


Correction: Advance-Decline Line
LEAD: A chart in Business Day yesterday lacked a description and scale.
This corrected chart shows the running total of N.Y.S.E. stocks rising in price minus stocks falling in price.
The measure is the simplest indicator of the market's board direction.
Jan. 1, 1990-0.


Strategic Interests Tie U.S. to Liberia
LEAD: United States strategic interests tie Washington to the Liberian crisis, even as American officials privately voice criticism of the nation's embattled President and the leader of rebel forces moving on the capital.


New President Named At Bank of New York
LEAD: As a junior officer at the Bank of New York's branch in the CBS Building in the mid-1970's, Alan R. Griffith had a ringside seat on the fast-growing communications industry and soon developed an expertise in lending to those companies.


Durenberger Hearings: A Jury of His Peers
LEAD:
THE SENATORS
Howell Heflin, Chairman
Democrat of Alabama...68 years old...Former Chief Justice of the Alabama Supreme Court...Elected to Senate in 1978 and immediately made chairman of the Ethics Committee, the first freshman to head a Senate committee since 1910...Member of the Congressional committee that investigated the Iran-contra affair...Moderately conservative voting record...Reflecting his years on the bench, tends to be cautious and hesitant in reaching decisions...A down-home manner, given to folksy aphorisms.


East Europe Market Panel
LEAD: A Polish Ministry of Finance official today urged a Securities and Exchange Commission panel to take immediate action to help develop capital markets in Eastern Europe.


Aquino Backers Form Political Organization
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino announced the formation of a political organization today to mobilize support for her administration.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in Business Day yesterday headed ''Advance-Decline Line,'' with the opening of the stock market tables, appeared incompletely.
A corrected version appears today on page D17.


Y Plans Recitals and Chamber Concerts
LEAD: Performances by the New York Chamber Symphony, a Distinguished Artist Series, and recitals by three pianists who were contestants in the Van Cliburn competition are to be part of the 1990-91 season of concerts at the 92d Street Y. The Distinguished Artist Series opens on Sept. 24 with a recital by the pianist Emanuel Ax and the cellist Yo-Yo Ma.


Hearings Planned on Bass Rules
LEAD: New York State's proposed regulations for sport and commercial striped-bass fisheries are scheduled for public hearings at 7 P.M. on June 26 and 28.


Addendum
LEAD: *
Business Week said it would spin off its supplement Assets, which makes its debut this week, as a bimonthly magazine starting in November.
The magazine's editor will be Marc Frons, and its advertising director will be Sue Swarzman.


Rabbi Solomon Freehof, 97, Dies; Leading Interpreter of Jewish Law
LEAD: Rabbi Solomon B. Freehof, a leader of the Reform Jewish movement and a world-renowned interpreter of Jewish law, died yesterday at Montefiore Hospital in Pittsburgh.
He was 97 years old.


'Conagra Who?' Seeks Mainstream Success
LEAD: With more than 100 acquisitions over the last 16 years, Conagra Inc. has changed itself from an obscure and troubled agricultural commodities business into one of the nation's largest companies.
Now, with a $1.34 billion agreement last week to acquire the Beatrice Company, the executive behind the transformation, Charles M.


Review/Television;   'Enemy of the People,' Set in Maine
LEAD: This week's timeliest television drama comes out of a play written in 1882.
Arthur Miller first adapted Henrik Ibsen's ''Enemy of the People'' for the stage in 1950, when Communist hunting in the United States was becoming a form of national hysteria.
Now after the greed-infused 1980's, Mr.
Miller is returning to Ibsen's morality tract at 9 tonight on Channel 13, this time moving the locale of the play from Norway to a village in


Head of U. of Utah Quits Amid Furor Over Cold-Fusion Funds
LEAD: The president of the University of Utah, Chase N. Peterson, is retiring, apparently because of criticism of a hidden transfer of $500,000 that he authorized for the university's cold-fusion research programs.


U.S. Urged to End Opposition to Ozone Aid
LEAD: The head of the United Nations Environment Program strongly urged the United States today to reconsider its decision to oppose new financial aid to third-world countries to help them phase out chemicals that are destroying the earth's ozone layer.


Chrysler-Renault Project Is Ended
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation, which has lost several top executives in recent weeks, suffered another big disappointment today as an international joint venture with Renault, the French auto maker, fell apart.


'I'll Take a Six-Pack; Hold the Alcohol'
LEAD: AMONG the ever-increasing variety of beers, light beers, dark beers and dry beers is a new and fast-growing category.
But it can't legally be called beer.


American Express to Issue Shares
LEAD: Moving to shore up its balance sheet, the American Express Company announced yesterday that it planned to raise $825 million by issuing an additional 27 million common shares.


Swissair-S.A.S.
LEAD: The Scandinavian Airlines System said it and Swissair would swap stakes of 7.5 percent in each other within the next 18 months.
The airlines last September announced plans to swap stakes of 5 percent to 10 percent to form a leading European airline alliance.
The airlines said in a statement that S.A.S.


Flushes With a Difference: Less Water
LEAD: An Oregon company has developed what it considers an answer to the growing call for water conservation.
Saying the average American toilet uses more water than is necessary, Con-Tech Industries has devised an attachment for new and existing toilets that saves large amounts with a mechanism that provides a short flush for liquid waste and paper and a fuller flush for solid waste.


Hauptmann Widow Pleads to See Florio Mrs. Hauptmann insists that her husband, Bruno Richard, who was executed in 1936, did not commit the kidnapping or murder.   At a Trenton news conference with her was her lawyer, Robert R. Bryan. (Associated Press)


Court Allows Seizure Of Tanker in a Spill In New York Harbor
LEAD: New Jersey, New York State and New York City obtained a Federal court order yesterday allowing them to seize the tanker that spilled 260,000 gallons of oil into the Kill van Kull.


Real Estate;   New Sports Complex for Cleveland
LEAD: THIS city is moving ahead with an ambitious plan to have its new baseball stadium and basketball arena ready for the 1994 season, after voters approved an excise tax to help finance the downtown sports complex.


Arts Agency Needs Cleaning Up, Not Scrapping;   Touching the Soul
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mississippi Fireworks Plant Is Leveled as Blasts Kill Two
LEAD: Explosions that were felt up to 30 miles away leveled a small fireworks plant near this east-central Mississippi town today, killing two people and injuring two others.


Arts Agency Needs Cleaning Up, Not Scrapping;   Utilitarian Test
LEAD: To the Editor:


Celtics Choose Ford As New Head Coach
LEAD: The Boston Celtics yesterday returned to the tradition of having a former player as their coach by naming Chris Ford, their longtime assistant coach, to replace Jimmy Rodgers.


Holtzman Offers Investment Plan To Help Budget
LEAD: City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman made a suggestion to ease New York City's fiscal problems yesterday, but minutes later, City Council leaders and labor union officials accused her of poor timing that could jeopardize the city's fragile tax package in Albany.


Oil Companies Rethink Risks of Having Tankers
LEAD: The explosion on the tanker Mega Borg, along with the wreck of the Exxon Valdez and other spills, is giving some major oil companies second thoughts about their liability as owners of tankers.


Changes at the 4A's
LEAD: The American Association of Advertising Agencies announced that Bernard Ryan Jr., its senior vice president for public affairs, would retire at the end of the month.
The 4A's promoted Joyce Harrington to vice president in charge of its public affairs division.
Susan Sewell, now managing editor of Adweek's Eastern edition, will become manager of public relations.


The Senator's Statement
LEAD: Following is the text of a statement issued today by Senator Dave Durenberger, Republican of Minnesota, after the Senate Ethics Committee began hearings on his conduct.


Foxboro Reports Several Offers
LEAD: Shares of the Foxboro Company rose $2.375, to $32.375, after the company said it had received several proposals for all its stock.
It said it might receive additional proposals.
The company declined to identify the bidders or the terms of the proposals.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly


UAL's Finance Chief Leaving the Company
LEAD: John C. Pope said yesterday that he was resigning as executive vice president, chief financial officer and treasurer of the UAL Corporation, parent of United Airlines, the nation's second-largest carrier.
No successor has been named.
Mr.
Pope is expected to leave upon the completion of an employee-led buyout of the company, for about $200 a share, or $4.4 billion.


The Doubt Continues For Holyfield Promoter
LEAD: It would figure that Dan Duva, the promoter of Evander Holyfield, would be breathing easier now that his fighter is set to meet the heavyweight champion, James (Buster) Douglas, at the Mirage in Las Vegas, Nev.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Bankers Trust Co., New York, a financial services company, named Paul Worthen Higgins senior vice president and head of international private banking at the Private Bank at Bankers Trust.


French Artists Boycott Museum Opening
LEAD: A group of important artists and critics have decided to boycott the inauguration of the new Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art in Nice later this month to protest anti-Semitic remarks made by the city's Mayor, Jacques Medecin.


Norman Has His Boosters As Best Player in Game
LEAD: Although he missed the cut in the first major championship of 1990 at The Masters, some of golf's other major indicators say Greg Norman is the best player in the world.


Home Loan Banks' $1.34 Billion Issue
LEAD: The Office of Finance of the Federal Home Loan Banks system is offering a total of $1.34 billion in bonds through its regular group of securities dealers.


South Africans Mend a Fence With the U.N.
LEAD: South Africa's long-strained relations with the United Nations appear to have improved with the arrival of a team sent by Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar to examine President F. W. de Klerk's progress in dismantling apartheid.


Dow Spurts in Last Hour; Finishes Up 40.85
LEAD: Showing a resiliency that took traders by surprise, stocks soared in the last hour yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average adding 40.85 points, to 2,933.42.


Wine Talk
LEAD: ''Mr. Morgan, will the market go up or down?''


In Tunnel, 'Mole People' Fight to Save Home
LEAD: The occasional shaft of light descends from a grate 25 feet overhead, and rats scurry across the dirt floor, but otherwise the wide railroad tunnel beneath Riverside Park is a dark and peaceful place.
It suits the needs of its inhabitants, who number perhaps 100 and sometimes call themselves the Mole


Gusty Mets Gauge Wind, Walk Away In a Rout
LEAD: It may have been the way the wind was blowing out of old Wrigley Field from home plate toward Lake Michigan at a brisk 25 miles an hour this afternoon.
Or it may have been the way the pitches were wafting in toward home plate in old Wrigley Field this afternoon.


Two May Join Trump Talks
LEAD: Two New Jersey banks, Midlantic Banks Inc. and the First Fidelity Bancorp, are about to join discussions on restructuring the enormous bank debt of Donald J. Trump, people close to the talks said yestrday.


Evolution in Europe;   Moscow Lays Out Terms for Baltics
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev met with the Presidents of the three Baltic republics today and laid out terms that he said could lead to negotiations on Baltic independence and to an end to economic sanctions against Lithuania, the Baltic leaders said.


Review/Film;   Looking for a Scholar; Ending Up With a Doctor
LEAD: ''The Imported Bridegroom'' has a featurelessly genteel look that would be as appropriate to Jane Austen as it is to this story of a Polish Talmudic scholar and his American sweetheart.
Not even the sight of freshly plucked chicken feathers in a bowl on the kitchen table can give this film much ethnic flavor.


James Goslee 3d, 39; Did Floral Designs For Major Parties
LEAD: James Edward Goslee 3d, a floral designer who planned decorations for some of the city's brightest social events, died on Monday at Beth Israel Medical Center.
He was 39 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Klan Supporter Is Soundly Beaten By Black in Runoff in Arkansas
LEAD: A black businessman overwhelmed a Ku Klux Klan supporter yesterday in an Arkansas runoff for the Republican nomination for lieutenant governor.


C.D. Yields Unchanged For Week
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were essentially unchanged for the week ended yesterday.


Algerian Vote Begins Despite Calls for a Boycott
LEAD: Algerians cast ballots today in the country's first contested elections since French rule ended in 1962, but some opposition parties contended that the voting was rigged and urged a boycott.


Ex-F.B.I. Agent Admits Slaying and Gets 16 Years
LEAD: A former agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation was indicted on a manslaughter charge today, pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 16 years in prison.


Street News Editor Rescinds His Resignation
LEAD: Four days after he resigned as editor in chief of Street News, Hutchinson Persons issued a statement on Monday saying he had no intention of leaving the New York City tabloid.


A Heavy Shadow Is Lifted, and Venice Sighs
LEAD: Along the Grand Canal and the latticework of alleys that it snakes past, there were relieved sighs today as Venetians learned that they had been saved from a world's fair that many feared would sink their fragile city beneath crushing new waves of tourism.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Tanker Fire Under Control
The Coast Guard said there was no longer a danger that the supertanker Mega Borg would sink in the Gulf of Mexico, but oil kept flowing from at least one ruptured tank.
Page A26.
A New Target in Liberia
Funerals for three descendants of the country's American-born founders suggest that the old elite is a new target in Liberia's civil war.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD:
FATHER'S DAY
Now, looking back
I was wet behind the ears
at the beach each June
with sand castles in our skies.
We would wander and wonder
about the rhythm of the waves
as my father teased me of the
moon's magical magnet and
He used to hold my hand,
an old man of at least 30, without
his three-piece suits and Monday morning
meetings, and me, at 10, without my
homework and Little League games
and we would skim shells together
and laugh in love at the seashore
now, looking back.


Hitachi Plans Hewlett Chip
LEAD: Hitachi Ltd. and the Hewlett-Packard Company said that Hitachi would develop, manufacture and market microprocessor chips based on Hewlett-Packard's Precision Architecture RISC, or reduced instruction set computing, technology.


Critic's Notebook;   A Rap Group's Lyrics Venture Close to the Edge of Obscenity
LEAD: Sex in the bedroom, sex in the kitchen, sex with girlfriends, sex with prostitutes, sex with a homeroom teacher - the 2 Live Crew, Miami's notorious rap group, has one main theme with plenty of variations.
Its latest album, ''As Nasty as They Wanna Be,'' is the first recording ever to be declared obscene by a judge in Federal District


Taiwan to Purchase Gold
LEAD: Taiwan's central bank, a big buyer of gold in 1988, is expected to resume buying gold to mint coins in commemoration of next year's 80th anniversary of the founding of the Chinese republic.
The Economic Daily News reported last week that the central bank would buy about 8,000 ounces to mint the fine gold coins.


Tokyo Official Ties Birth Decline to Education
LEAD: One of Japan's most powerful politicians, Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto, told the Cabinet this week that the reason for an alarming decline in the country's birth rate is the Government's policy of encouraging Japanese women to obtain a higher education.


Review/Music;   English Homage to Sinatra
LEAD: Since making its recording debut in 1984, the English pop duo Everything but the Girl has experimented with sounds that range from a moody, country-flavored folk-pop to the sultry Los Angeles pop-funk of its newest album, ''The Language of Life.''


A Place for Tiffany Lamps
LEAD: A 150-piece collection, mostly of iridescent lamps graced with peonies, cherry tree blossoms, dragonflies, spider webs and the other intricate leaded bronze designs that have become synonymous with the name Tiffany, has been acquired by the William Benton Museum of Art at the University of Connecticut in


Ready, Set, Scan That Melon!
LEAD: For Kate Boland, the supermarket checkout lane at the new Pick n' Save in this suburb of Milwaukee is the site of her latest battle with technology.


Baker Rebukes Israel on Peace Terms
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today sternly criticized conditions for peace talks laid down by Israel's new right-wing Government and said peace in the Middle East would be impossible if Israel stuck to this hard-line approach.


Boxes Don't Have to Look, Well, Boxy
LEAD: ''TREASURE BOXES'' is a show with a couple of pegs.
It is a celebration of the 10th anniversary of the Ferrin Gallery in Northampton, Mass., and also a fund-raising event: 10 percent of the sale of each box goes to charities chosen by the gallery and the artists.


Emmanuel Mesthene, Rutgers Professor, 69
LEAD: Emmanuel George Mesthene, a professor of philosophy and a former dean at Rutgers University, died yesterday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 69 years old and lived in New Brunswick, N.J.


Silverware of Old: Snip Me a Grape
LEAD: ''IF you have a 25th wedding anniversary, what do you give someone?'' asked Richard Wyler, owner of S. Wyler Inc.
Silversmiths.
An antique English ink stand with winged claw feet?
A sterling Victorian button hook?
An ivory-handled dinner bell?
A filigreed fish slicer?


Maradona Has Arm (Maybe) In Victory
LEAD: Diego Maradona may have touched the ball with his arm to block a shot tonight in an echo of his famous ''hand of God'' goal against England in 1986 World Cup play as Argentina, the defending champion, beat the Soviet Union, 2-0.


MOSCOW LOOSENS ECONOMIC SANCTION AGAINST LITHUANIA
LEAD: The Soviet Government eased one of its economic sanctions against Lithuania today as an encouragement for negotiations to begin over the rebellious republic's attempt to thrive independent of Moscow.


Barry's Speech: 'Now Is a Time for Healing'
LEAD: Following are excerpts of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s statement today announcing his decision not to run for re-election, as recorded by The New York Times:


Canseco Is Disabled
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics yesterday placed Jose Canseco on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 8.
Canseco had received treatment in a hospital for a pinched sciatic nerve.
He will remain in the Bay Area to undergo therapy while the team is on a seven-game road trip.(AP)


New Disk Players
LEAD: The Matsushita Electric Industrial Company and the Kenwood Corporation said they plan to market new disk players in the United States this year.
Matsushita said it would sell players capable of playing both audio and video disks beginning in July for $850 and that it would also sell a higher-quality player at $1,400 later this year.


Study Confirms Importance Of Keeping Cholesterol Low
LEAD: Cutting cholesterol levels may be even more important for people with heart disease than it is for those with healthy hearts, a study suggests.


Clemens Defeats Yankees for His 11th Victory


Zale Said to Plan Stores in Japan
LEAD: The Zale Corporation, a big United States jewelry store chain, will create franchises in Japan in collaboration with Japanese concerns.
According to the spokesman at Japan's C. Itoh &amp; Company, who spoke on condition of anonymity, the Texas-based jewelry store chain will open its first store in downtown Tokyo in September jointly with C.


Centennial at Shinnecock
LEAD: The United States Golf Association announced today that the 1995 United States Open, the centennial of the event, would take place at Shinnecock Hills Golf Club in Southampton, L.I.


Clemens Wins 11th As Yankees Relapse
LEAD: There was really nothing left to say last night. So Tim Leary said nothing.


Cash Is Selected
LEAD: Pat Cash of Australia, who won the Wimbledon men's singles crown in 1987, was one of 16 players named yesterday as wild-card entries for this year's singles draw.


Dow Loses 3.47 After Rally Fails
LEAD: Stock prices swayed up and down yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average finally closing off 3.47 points.


'Junk Bonds' of RJR Holdings Surge
LEAD: Prices of RJR Holdings Inc.'s bonds surged in heavy trading yesterday following a report that Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company would invest $1.7 billion in the company.


Review/Music;   A 'Rigoletto' on a Chilly Evening in Central Park
LEAD: Some might churlishly contend that criticism is always beside the point, but it is certainly incidental to the pleasures offered by the Metropolitan Opera's annual free concert performances in the area's parks.
The series, underwritten as usual by the Chemical Bank and introduced for the first time this year by Mayor David N.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt





Bhaktapur Journal;   The Katmandu Valley, Stage Set for Urban Ritual
LEAD: A West German architect calls it a valley of urban cultures so perfect that they are ''beyond expression.''


C.P.A.'s to Sell Stock in Practice
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission has approved a proposal by three Florida accountants to raise cash by selling stock to the public, rekindling a debate about whether an accounting practice should be permitted to have outside owners.


Merchant Slain Trying to Stop Armed Robbery
LEAD: The owner of a pizzeria in Brooklyn who had stayed after closing to discuss renovations with his partner and a contractor was fatally shot late Tuesday when he surprised two men who were robbing his associates outside the shop, the police said.


School Union and Democrats In Bergen Fight Florio Budget
LEAD: Gov.
Jim Florio's budget proposals began to wend their way through the Legislature here today, but his plan to raise taxes and increase school aid to poor districts seemed threatened by attacks from the state teachers' union and Bergen County Democrats.


Review/Dance;   Villella Returns to 'Watermill,' A Robbins Meditation on Time
LEAD: Jerome Robbins's ''Watermill'' and its original star, Edward Villella, both returned to the New York City Ballet on Tuesday night for the first time since 1979.
Is it an irony that time has tempered one of the most theatrical and controversial disquisitions on the nature of time itself?


Let's Shine Some Light on Albany Pet Projects
LEAD: To the Editor:


House Approves $4 Billion in Relief for AIDS
LEAD: The House of Representatives overwhelmingly approved a bill today to give $4 billion in emergency relief to the cities hardest hit by AIDS and to the states.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.75
8.25
9.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.67
7.74
8.13
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.58
7.64
7.79
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.41
8.50
8.26
30-YR.


Gas Barge Springs Leak, Closing the Arthur Kill
LEAD: A leak in a barge carrying two million gallons of unleaded gasoline forced the closing of the Arthur Kill last night, the Coast Guard said.
The waterway was reopened three hours later.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   People
LEAD: * Glenn E. Corlett has joined Ayer as chief financial officer.


Near-No-Hitter for Giants' Wilson
LEAD: Trevor Wilson, called up 15 days ago by the Giants after injuries decimated the regular staff, carried a no-hitter through eight innings tonight, then lost it on Mike Pagliarulo's leadoff single in the ninth as San Francisco beat the San Diego Padres, 6-0.


Mulheren Takes the Stand
LEAD: John Mulheren Jr. took the stand yesterday in his own defense and denied accusations by Ivan F. Boesky that he had carried out illegal stock deals to help the once-powerful stock speculator report bogus tax losses.


Richard P. Martel Jr.; Executive, 35
LEAD: Richard P. Martel Jr., a senior vice president and associate creative director of BBDO New York, the largest operating division of the advertising agency BBDO Worldwide Inc., died on Tuesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 35 years old and lived in Manhattan.


I. D. White, World War II Commander, Dies at 89
LEAD: Gen.
I.
D.
White, who commanded the Second Armored Division in the European Theater in World War II and later was overall commander of United States Army forces in the Pacific, died Monday at Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital in Hanover, N.H.
He was 89 years old.


Can Small Be Cheap and Also Beautiful?
LEAD: IT is the architectural equivalent of the Japanese compact car, without options like power steering or a tape deck.
But two professors at McGill University are betting that many young prospective homeowners would willingly trade closets and other amenities for a home of their own that is efficient and affordable.


HomeFed Plunges
LEAD: The stock of the HomeFed Corporation dropped $8.25 a share today, to $25, on the New York Stock Exchange, reflecting investor uneasiness about its rising nonperforming loans.
HomeFed said late on Tuesday that gross nonperforming loans rose by $81 million in May, almost double the rise of $44 million in April.


P.&amp;G. Agrees to Purchase Part of American Cyanamid
LEAD: The American Cyanamid Company said yesterday that it had agreed to sell part of its consumer-products business, including Old Spice after shave, to the Procter &amp; Gamble Company.


Fund Yields Are Lower
LEAD: Yields of taxable and tax-exempt money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were lower for the week ended yesterday.


Police Photos Of Protests Are Attacked
LEAD: A New York police commander is under investigation to determine whether he violated a court ban against political surveillance by photographing participants at demonstrations in midtown Manhattan.


Talks for Mozambique Collapse in First Hours
LEAD: Attempts to start the first direct peace talks between Mozambique's left-wing Government and rightist rebels collapsed today, hours after the talks were supposed to have begun.


If It's Broken, It Might Still Work as Art
LEAD: IN ''Garbage Out Front: A New Era of Public Design,'' a show that opens today at the Municipal Art Society, more than 100 artists, architects, landscape designers and city planners contribute ideas, real or imagined, on dealing with garbage.


Networks and Studios Fail To Agree on TV Profit Rules
LEAD: Negotiations to end the longstanding dispute between the broadcast networks and Hollywood producers over financial control of television programs collapsed yesterday, one day before the Government's deadline for a settlement.


Architect's Home On View
LEAD: THOSE interested in seeing the root of Ogden Codman Jr.'s designs can visit the Grange, the family home of the neo-classical architect in Lincoln, Mass.
It is an example of an American estate planned in the English manner.


Pratt Jet Engine Orders
LEAD: The Pratt &amp; Whitney subsidiary of the United Technologies Corporation said today that the International Lease Finance Corporation had placed firm orders for 48 PW2000 and PW4000 jet aircraft engines.
The $312 million order is for engines to be delivered beginning in 1994, Pratt &amp; Whitney said.
It said the 28 PW2000 engines are for use in the leasing company's fleet of Boeing 757 aircraft and the 20 PW4000 engines are for use in its wide-body aircraft.


Par for the Course Could Win
LEAD: Mohammed was born in Mecca and buried in Medina, a process the 90th United States Open will basically reverse.


Vincent Says Steinbrenner Inquiry Must Proceed
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent, whose office is conducting the inquiry into George Steinbrenner's dealings with Howard Spira, an admitted gambler, said today that he took no pleasure in this task, but felt compelled to proceed.


Think of the Delights of Insects in Summertime;   Fungus Did Them In
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Phone Concerns In New Zealand Deal
LEAD: Ameritech and the Bell Atlantic Corporation announced yesterday that they and two New Zealand companies would buy most of the Telecom Corporation of New Zealand, the state-owned telephone company, for about $2.4 billion.


Excerpts From Durenberger's Senate Testimony
LEAD: Following are excerpts from testimony today by Senator Dave Durenberger, Republican of Minnesota, before the Senate Ethics Committee, on the second day of hearings into his financial activities, as supplied by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:


Death Toll at 148 in Unrest in Soviet Asia
LEAD: Ethnic clashes in the Central Asian republic of Kirghizia this month have left 148 people dead, the official press agency Tass said today.


Lord O'Neill, 75, Ulster's Leader In 1963-69 and Foe of Violence
LEAD: Lord O'Neill, who was Northern Ireland's top official from 1963 to 1969, died yesterday at his home in southern England.
He was 75 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


Fred Severud; Civil Engineer, 91
LEAD: Fred Severud, a civil engineer whose work included the structural design of Madison Square Garden and the Gateway Arch in St.
Louis, died on Monday at his home in Miami.
He was 91 years old.


Yields Fall to a Four-Month Low
LEAD: Bond prices rose yesterday and yields dropped to their lowest levels since mid-February after the Government announced that retail sales had fallen sharply in May, the third straight monthly decline.


MAYOR OF CAPITAL SAYS HE WON'T RUN FOR A FOURTH TERM
LEAD: Ending five months of uncertainty after his arrest on drug charges, Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. announced tonight that he would not seek re-election to a fourth four-year term.


Female Coach Named
LEAD: The first female assistant coach in a Division I men's college basketball program will be Bernadette Locke at the University of Kentucky.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Economy


Ryan's Back Improving
LEAD: Watch out, Seattle: Nolan Ryan's back is getting better.


2 Climbers Are Found Dead On Slope of Mount McKinley
LEAD: The bodies of two American climbers were spotted Tuesday at the 15,800-foot-level of 20,306-foot Mount McKinley, the National Park Service said today.


New Orleans Journal;   Bourbon Street Woos Wary Southern Baptists
LEAD: There are many signs on Bourbon Street, some advertising Dixieland jazz, others telling of spicy Creole specialties and still others hawking ''Girls, Girls, Girls.''


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD: INTERNATIONAL
A3-21
Moscow eased economic sanctions against Lithuania as an encouragement for negotiations to begin over the rebellious Soviet republic's attempt to break free of the Kremlin.
Page A1


Tamil Rebels Are Said to Kill 90
LEAD: The Sri Lankan Army accused Tamil guerrillas today of killing 90 kidnapped policemen after attacks on security forces.


Events: Spotlight on Studio Ceramics
LEAD:
A Tradition Begun, American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; 212-956-3535.


Bush Sees 'Significant Change' in Baltic Standoff
LEAD: The United States today hailed Moscow's reported decision to ease its economic sanctions against Lithuania, and President Bush called President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's talks with Baltic leaders a ''significant change'' that could help end the Baltic crisis.


Beatrice Coleman, Philanthropist, 74; Headed Maidenform
LEAD: Beatrice Coleman, chairwoman of Maidenform Inc., a manufacturer of lingerie, died on Tuesday at her home in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.


Gold Prices Close at $352, Lowest in Nearly 4 Years
LEAD: Gold futures prices flirted with $350 an ounce yesterday, dropping to within 50 cents of that psychologically important level before rebounding to $352, the lowest daily settlement on New York's Commodity Exchange in nearly four years.


Sometimes, Even War Takes a Back Seat


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: ASPHALT driveways should be kept in good condition and coated with sealer every three to five years to protect them from moisture, chemicals and the effects of weather.
Summer is the best time for the job, because many repair compounds and most sealers must be applied when temperatures remain above 50 degrees, even at night.


Hong Kong Money Shifts
LEAD: Hong Kong residents are moving more of their wealth out of the British colony, bankers said this week.


N.B.A. Proves It Can Make a Short Story Long in a Big Game
LEAD: When the fourth quarter of Game 4 of Tuesday night's National Basketball Association the championship series began, it was 11:01 P.M. in the East.
A viewer could have turned on the local news for the next half hour, taken the dog for a quick walk, then tuned in Ted Koppel on ''Nightline.'' And then switched back to the game on C


Ephraim London, 78, a Lawyer Who Fought Censorship, Is Dead
LEAD: Ephraim London, a lawyer who specialized in constitutional law and who won landmark cases involving the censorship of films, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan at the age of 78.
The cause of death was complications from diabetes, his family said.


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: FROM early June until mid-November, I am out on the street by 8 o'clock on Saturday mornings because if I'm not, I'll miss the best of the swordfish or the tunafish or the cleaned squid.
I'll miss the best bunch of mountain laurel, too, and in July the best of the windflowers, and in August the best of the dahlias and asters.


Middle East Traps
LEAD: In the last days of the Reagan Administration, the United States walked into a Middle Eastern trap.
The bite hurts the United States, Israel and the hopes of peace in the Middle East.


Rushdie Publisher Explains Absence of a Paperback
LEAD: A spokesman for the publisher of Salman Rushdie's ''Satanic Verses'' said today that the effect that publication of a paperback version might have on Western hostages in the Middle East was one reason no date had been set for one.


Hearings Start on Sharing TV Revenue
LEAD: Ever since signing a $1 billion television contract with CBS in December, the National Collegiate Athletic Association has watched its members engage in polite but intense jockeying for a significant share of the freshly baked pie.


Cocaine Prices Rise; Police Role Is Cited
LEAD: For the first time in almost 10 years, the wholesale price of cocaine is rising sharply in New York and other American cities, suggesting that extensive law-enforcement efforts in this country and Latin America may finally be reducing the availability of the drug, Federal officials and independent drug experts say.


New Mexico Utility Picks Leader
LEAD: Ashton B. Collins Jr., an expert in electrical services, will take over next week as chairman of the Public Service Company of New Mexico, a large electric and natural gas utility in Albuquerque.
He will replace Jerry D. Geist, who is retiring after spending 30 years at the helm.


So Long, High-Tech; Nega-Tech's Here
LEAD: ''WE aren't country or Ralph Lauren, and we're certainly not high-tech,'' Meg Staley said. ''In fact, we coined the phrase nega-tech to describe our furniture.
Everything is heavily crafted and decorated.''


Foxboro Stock Up In Bid Speculation
LEAD: The stock of the Foxboro Company rose another $3.625 a share, to $36, on the New York Stock Exchange, as traders and arbitragers said European companies were likely suitors for the industrial-controls company.
Foxboro, based in Foxboro, Mass., said it had received several takeover proposals.


Dinkins Drafts Bill for New Curbs On Company Ties to South Africa
LEAD: Keeping a longtime promise, Mayor David N. Dinkins has drafted a bill that would tighten New York City's restrictions on doing business with companies that have ties to South Africa and reward companies and banks that actively put pressure on the apartheid system.


GERMAN CONFESSES ON LIBYAN PLANT
LEAD: A West German businessman ended months of denials today by confessing in court to helping Libya secretly build a chemical factory that Western officials have described as a poison gas plant.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
When Grout Comes Out
Q.
The grout between the tiles on my bathroom walls has been coming out in small pieces.
Can you tell me how to repair these open spots before they get worse?
A. Hardware stores and home centers sell ready-mixed tile grout in small cans.


Chronicle
LEAD: June means a glut of weddings, but here's one to warm your day: MARIAN SELDES and GARSON KANIN plan to marry on Tuesday morning in a private ceremony in Manhattan.
Then Miss Seldes will rush back to the Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam, Conn., where she is appearing in ''Annie 2.''


Dollar Is Mostly Weaker As Pound Keeps Surging
LEAD: The dollar ended weaker yesterday against most major currencies after a mixed performance overseas, while the soaring British pound continued to take center stage.


U.S. Likely to Forgo Sanctions Against India
LEAD: Although India has refused to negotiate removal of trade barriers with the United States, the Bush Administration has ruled out sanctions against New Delhi lest broader trade liberalization talks be undermined, American trade officials said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the military budget misstated the party affiliation of Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania.
He is a Republican.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Accounts
LEAD: * After Six, a manufacturer of formal wear, to W.B. Doner and Company.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Now is a time for healing.''
- Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. of Washington. [A1:6.]


Talking Deals;   Private Placement Could Save FPS
LEAD: CAN FPS Computing Inc. come back to life?


East Europe Deals For Control Data
LEAD: The Control Data Corporation said it had received a $9 million letter of intent from Poland to buy a computerized energy management system.
The system, expected to be financed by the World Bank, may not require an export license because of an easing of export restrictions agreed to by the United States and its allies in Paris last week, said Dieter Porzel, vice president of Control Data's central


S.E.C. to Review Rules on Mutual Funds
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission decided today to begin the process of overhauling 50-year-old regulations that govern the $1.2 trillion mutual fund industry.


While in Guatemala Terror Goes Unnoted
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ex-RJR Nabicso Executive Brings Expertise to Candy
LEAD: Edward A. Horrigan Jr., founder and head of the EAH Corporation, which on Tuesday acquired Candy USA, is highly experienced in food and tobacco manufacturing after a four-year stint as vice chairman for RJR Nabisco.


The Washington Mayoral Race: After Barry Who?
LEAD: These six people have said they intend to run for mayor of Washington.
David A. Clarke: District of Columbia Council Chairman, Democrat.


New Mayor Sets Goal Of Atlantic City Unity
LEAD: The winner of Tuesday's runoff election for mayor, Jim Whelan, pledged today to heal racial divisions, foster openness in government and clean up this casino city so that the state would not move in to run things.


Chrysler Under Review
LEAD: Moody's Investors Services Inc. said yesterday that it may cut its ratings on $22.3 billion of Chrysler Corporation debt because of the company's falling auto sales and increased competition.
Moody's, said it was concerned about the ''financial flexibility'' of Chrysler and its Chrysler Financial Corporation subsidiary in an increasingly competitive environment.


Early June Vehicle Sales Down 12.6%
LEAD: Sales of domestically produced cars and light trucks declined 12.6 percent in early June, puncturing hopes by manufacturers that a surge in late May signaled an end to the auto industry's eight-month slump.


Offering by New York City Produces Top Yield of 7.9%
LEAD: New York City yesterday tentatively priced a $710 million issue of general obligation bonds with a maximum yield of 7.90 percent for bonds due 2018 through 2028.


Leonard Lauder to Head Whitney Museum Board
LEAD: Leonard A. Lauder, president and chief executive officer of Estee Lauder, the cosmetics conglomerate, was elected president of the board of the Whitney Museum of American Art at its annual meeting yesterday.
He replaces William S. Woodside, who resigned after serving in the post for five years.


Retail Sales Down 0.7% Last Month
LEAD: In a surprisingly weak performance, American shoppers cut retail spending by seven-tenths of 1 percent in May, the third straight monthly decline, the Commerce Department said today.


More Fun at Wrigley: Sun, Wind and Runs
LEAD: The sun was shining, the wind was blowing, the ball was soaring again in Wrigley Field this afternoon.
And on the day after they hammered the Chicago Cubs with 21 hits and 19 runs, the Mets hammered out 36 more hits and 24 more runs and swept a doubleheader from the Cubs with the greatest offense in their 29 seasons in the National League.


Personal Health
LEAD: A young man was given medication to relieve depression that was causing debilitating fatigue.
After three days he developed hallucinations and delusions, complaining, among other things, that his energy was being sapped by radioactive rays from his neighbor's house.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Action on Soviet Economy
The Soviet Parliament told President Mikhail S. Gorbachev to move faster to a market economy, but not by cutting bread subsidies.
Page A18.
Price of Cocaine Is Up
For the first time in almost 10 years, the wholesale price of cocaine is rising sharply in New York and other American cities.


Pistons' Backcourt Stifling the Blazers
LEAD: The Portland Trail Blazers have not stopped them.
Personal problems have not stopped them.
And unless the Trail Blazers regroup quickly, it appears nothing will stop Isiah Thomas, Joe Dumars and Vinnie Johnson from leading the Detroit Pistons to their second consecutive National Basketball Association title.


Fast-Killing Simian AIDS Found
LEAD: Subtle genetic changes turn an AIDS virus in monkeys into a fast-acting killer, researchers have found.


BULGARIANS STAGE ELECTION PROTEST
LEAD: Demonstrators halted traffic in much of the capital today to protest what appeared to be the victory of the heirs to the long-ruling Communists in Bulgaria's first free elections in 58 years.


For 50 Years, Architect Lets Nature Call the Tune
LEAD: HE does not think of himself as a modernist, nor does he think of his architecture as futuristic.
The labels postmodernist and deconstructivist only raise his ire. ''Fads, fashions, tricks, gimmicks,'' John Lautner calls them, with considerable disdain.
The 78-year-old architect, whose houses have for some 50 years swooped and curved unlike any others, will not be typecast.


'Participants May Testify In Jogger Case
LEAD: Fourteen months after a jogger was raped, beaten and left for dead in Central Park, the trial in the case began yesterday with the judge telling prospective jurors that the prosecution might present witnesses who had participated in the attack.


Hospital Unions Call for Universal Health Care


Preventing Soviet Disunion
LEAD: The different republics of the Soviet Union are changing at different speeds.
In some areas, like the Russian and Baltic republics, economic reconstruction moves too slowly to satisfy demands for change.
In others, like Uzbekistan and Kirghizia, where more than 100 people died in nationalist clashes last week, the pace of change is too swift, threatening the fabric of life.


Scientists Find Gene That Causes Albinism
LEAD: Scientists have discovered a specific genetic defect that causes a kind of albinism, in which people lack pigment in their skin and hair.


Abbott Berates Widow For Weeping on Stand
LEAD: Jack Henry Abbott, the imprisoned murderer and jailhouse author, yesterday scoffed at the courtroom tears of the widow of the man he killed nine years ago and chided her for seeking financial damages in her husband's death.


Eccentric's Legacy Gets a Pro's Touch
LEAD: THIS part of the world is thick with historic sites and small museums like the home of Wharton Esherick, a sculptor and furniture maker who reputedly refused to do anything he didn't enjoy. ''If it isn't fun, don't bother doing it,'' he used to say.


Bache Officer Is Leaving In Shake-Up
LEAD: Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. announced a shake-up of its management yesterday, which included the departure of one of the firm's top executives.


Foreigners' Investments
LEAD: The Federal Government must keep closer watch on foreign investment in this country, backers of legislation to let Federal agencies share data on investors told a House panel today.


Unesco Prize for Havel
LEAD: President Vaclav Havel of Czecholovakia won the 1990 Simon Bolivar Prize from Unesco today for his struggle to lead his country to freedom, the organization said.


Oil-Spill Cleanup Role Is Weighed for S.I. Port
LEAD: Seeking a new use for the partly built Navy port on Staten Island that it opposes, the Dinkins administration is talking with a petroleum industry group about using part of the site as a base for a 200-foot ship and crew that could be dispatched to clean up oil spills in the region.


John C. Goodbody, 75 Episcopal Church Aide
LEAD: John Collett Goodbody, retired director of communications for the Episcopal Church, died on Sunday at Roper Hospital in Charleston, S.C.
He was 75 years old and lived on Seabrook Island, S.C.


Think of the Delights of Insects in Summertime
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: Two tables in Business Day yesterday with the opening of the stock market tables misstated the Tuesday low of the Dow Jones industrial average.
It was 2,877.23.


We the People. And Our Flag.
LEAD: To the Members of Congress:


George Armistead Jr., Internist, Is Dead at 74
LEAD: Dr.
George Clayton Armistead Jr., a retired physician who had specialized in hematology and internal medicine, died on Saturday at Lewis Gale Hospital in Salem, Va.
He was 74 years old and lived in Pelham Manor, N.Y.


Think of the Delights of Insects in Summertime;   Flypaper on the Trees
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: Two pictures in Business Day yesterday, with an article about a decision by Chrysler and Renault against jointly building a mini-Jeep, were reversed.
General Motors' Geo Tracker was at the left, Suzuki's Sidekick at the right.


Women Voters Elect Chief
LEAD: Susan Sturc Lederman, a professor of political science at Kean College in New Jersey, was elected without opposition today to a four-year term as president of the League of Women Voters.
Mrs.
Lederman, who was born in Czechoslovakia and lives in New Providence, N.J., has been a member of the league since 1961 and was president of its New Jersey chapter from 1985 to 1989.


Big Board Plans Night Operation, Using Computers But Not Traders
LEAD: For the first time in its nearly 200-year history, the New York Stock Exchange will begin trading after its normal hours later this year and hopes to start trading during the night in 1991, exchange officials told brokerage firms yesterday.


Review/Theater;   Battle of the Sexes, Deadlier Than Usual
LEAD: Club Nirvana, the South American singles' resort that is the setting of Susan Kim's provocative one-act play ''Death and the Maiden,'' could be a nightmare version of Club Med.
The place is surrounded by barbed wire, and a popular recreational sport is a game called ''combat,'' in which the battle of the sexes is waged with camouflage and toy rifles.


Action to Revise Teacher Hiring Gains in Albany
LEAD: Long-stalled efforts to abolish the independent agency that licenses teachers in New York City appear to be advancing here, and several New York City lawmakers said today that such a move could be voted on as early as next week.


The U.N. Today
LEAD: Security Council
Meets at 11 A.M.
General Assembly
COMMITTEE ON PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER SPACE - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allen Group Inc., Melville, L.I., a maker of automotive products, and Handy &amp; Harman, a fabricator, refiner and processor of precious metals, have combined their after-market heat transfer businesses into a 50-50 joint venture.


U.S. Uses More Imported Oil
LEAD: Imports accounted for 52 percent of the United States' oil consumption in May, or 8.5 million barrels a day, the American Petroleum Institute said yesterday.


Technology Means Democracy in Romania
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mosbacher On Exports
LEAD: Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher said today that some advanced technology would slip into the Soviet Union under the new Western export control policy this month, but the risk was worth it.


Chronicle
LEAD: Esquire's June issue, on the American wife, so offended TAMMY BRUCE, president of the Los Angeles chapter of the National Organization for Women, that she has called for a boycott of the magazine.
The issue features articles on the perfect wife (obedient, thrifty, reverent), ''Your Wife: An Owner's Manual'' (''her bra, her plumbing'') and a nostalgic paean to ''The Last Housewife in America,'' complete with picture of what the editors called ''the endangered species'' scrubbing the toilet.


Horseback Is a Risky Place, U.S. Health Agency Warns
LEAD: Horseback riding has a much higher rate of serious injury than other activities perceived as more dangerous, according to a report by the Federal Centers for Disease Control.
Horseback riders suffer about one injury for every 350 hours of riding, the report said; motorcyclists are injured once every 7,000 hours of riding.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Garrison Advances
Top-seeded Zina Garrison beat France's Catherine Suire, 7-5, 6-2, in the second round of the Dow Classic tournament at Birmingham, England, yesterday.
Helena Sukova of Czechoslovakia, seeded second, defeated Cecilia Dahlman of Sweden, 6-3, 6-2, to also advance in the grass-court warmup for Wimbledon.(AP)
Duncan and Carbonell Advance: Lawson Duncan of the United States and Tomas Carbonell of Spain had straight set victories at the Florence International tournament in Italy yesterday.


Prison Term For Ex-Banker
LEAD: A Federal district judge in Texas has sentenced the former president of a Texas bank to a 12-year prison sentence for bank and income tax fraud.


Gastineau to C.F.L.
LEAD: The former Jet defensive end Mark Gastineau signed a contract with the British Columbia Lions of the Canadian Football League yesterday, a spokesman for the team said.
Details of the deal were not released.


Owner of Stranded Satellite to Pay For Rescue by Shuttle Astronauts
LEAD: The owners of a stranded communication satellite said today that they would pay the space agency to rescue it.
The effort will be made by astronauts walking in space.


Bridge
LEAD: Some of the play in the fifth Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest last Friday was on a very high level.
Games were played on the top floors of 10 of the world's tallest structures, including the Empire State Building in Manhattan, the Eiffel Tower in Paris and similar towers in Montreal, London, Rotterdam, Munich, Vienna, Moscow, Sydney and Tokyo.


Violent Crime: 'Every Hotel's Nightmare'
LEAD: The armed robbery of Georgette Mosbacher, a cosmetics executive whose husband is the United States Commerce Secretary, outside her hotel room on Tuesday night reflects a rising tide of crime in the city, but one that remains rare in large hotels in Manhattan, the police and hotel managers said yesterday.


Deficit Posted By Philippines
LEAD: The Philippine balance of payments showed a large deficit in the first three months of 1990, as imports surged and money to pay back the country's large foreign debt flowed out, the central bank said today.


Home of the Brave?
LEAD: This week the President of the United States proposed an amendment to limit the First Amendment to the Constitution, the American guarantee of freedom of speech, assembly and religion.


House Flag-Burning Amendment Advances on Subcommittee Vote
LEAD: Legislation for a constitutional amendment against flag burning began winding its way through the House today, with the Democratic leadership committed to a vote before the Independence Day recess The House Judiciary Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights voted to send the proposed amendment to the full committee, but with a negative recommendation.The vote was 5 to 3.


Re-using Garbage? What To Do


Hearing Cut Off As Durenberger Offers Apology
LEAD: The Senate Ethics Committee abruptly ended the public hearings into Senator Dave Durenberger's ethical conduct today after the Minneapolis Republican said he would not contest the evidence and apologized to the panel for his conduct.


Soviet Legislators Back Market Economy, but Balk at Bread Price Increase
LEAD: The Soviet Parliament gave President Mikhail S. Gorbachev a mandate today to speed the dismantling of the moribund, state-owned economy and the introduction of a market economic system.


T.A.C. Testing Controversy Brings About More Charges
LEAD: More charges were hurled today in the continuing feud over drug control in American track and field.
Edwin Moses, a leader in the antidrug crusade, said that six athletes who tested positive for illegal drugs a year ago were improperly cleared.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: BOTH parents had thought of their 2-year-old son as the sickly child, and their 5-year-old daughter as the healthy one.
Lisa had had occasional colds and earaches, of course, but nothing out of the ordinary.
Dan had suffered from severe asthma since birth.


Designs From the 80's, Under Glass
LEAD: For many Britons, the 1980's were the age of acquisition.
They woke up to coffee made in espresso machines from Italy, donned Paul Smith business suits or Azzedine Alaia bodysuits and headed to their offices.
Ruled by their Filofaxes, they worked until the hour when they could strap on their Nikes and Sony Walkmans before settling down to an evening meal made with more designer appliances from


Banc One Sees Loan Problems
LEAD: The Banc One Corporation, Columbus, Ohio, which plans to sell 10 million shares of common stock, said in documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission that its holdings of problem loans are likely to increase by $50 million to $70 million in the quarter ending June 30.
Banc One's increase in problem loans, which are those not paying interest or in trouble, is a sign that difficulties with bad loans are not limited to banks in the Northeast, which have been hurt by depressed real estate market.


Depletion of Savings Rescue Funds Seen
LEAD: L. William Seidman, the official overseeing the nation's bailout of the savings and loan industry, said today that the Resolution Trust Corporation would need an infusion of cash by the end of this year, at least six months sooner than expected.


Drexel Furnishings Items Sold at Auction
LEAD: Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., the once-powerful investment house now in Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, came under the auctioneer's gavel yesterday in a sale of items from the corporate kitchen to the chief executive's rolltop desk.


Tough Test in Peru
LEAD: In just 10 weeks, Alberto Fujimori has rocketed from obscurity to Peru's presidency.
The speed of his ascent shows.
Though confronted with staggering problems, he has yet to produce a serious program.
His inauguration is due next month; there's no time for delay.
Other Latin countries and the United States have a stake in his success.


BONN WELCOMES NEW SOVIET SHIFT
LEAD: West German officials today welcomed as ''fundamentally positive'' President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's latest remarks on Germany, describing them as a softening of the Soviet position on a unified Germany's status but again rejecting the suggestion of dual alliance membership.


P.L.O. Is Said to Start Inquiry Into Raid on Israel
LEAD: In an effort to ease a crisis with the United States, the Palestine Liberation Organization has opened a high-level internal investigation into a seaborne raid on Israeli beaches by armed Palestinians to determine whether the attack's targets were civilians, Arab diplomats and Palestinian officials said today.


Scientific Research Seen as Gaining in Europe
LEAD: European science is growing stronger and more influential as increasing numbers of top researchers from different countries collaborate on papers with one another, according to the authors of a study to be made public today.


Ratings Cut For 2 Banks
LEAD: The long-term credit ratings of the Security Pacific Corporation of Los Angeles and the Wells Fargo Corporation of San Francisco were reduced yesterday by Moody's Investors Service.


Prime Accepts Blackstone Bid
LEAD: Prime Motor Inns Inc. said it would sell its entire Ramada and Howard Johnson motel franchises to Blackstone Capital Partners L.P. for $170 million in cash and the assumption of $15 million in royalty obligations.


Review/Theater;   A Lonely Hollywood Hero In 'Price of Fame,' a Comedy
LEAD: Charles Grodin is one of those actors whom audiences are always glad to see - whether he is appearing as the wry star of an independent-minded film comedy (''Real Life'') or the saving grace of a Hollywood turkey (''Ishtar'') or an island of civility on a late-night television talk show.
Even so, some theatergoers may find their affectionate regard for Mr.


Think of the Delights of Insects in Summertime;   Futility of Spraying
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Friday about Dr.
Henry I. Russek, a cardiologist, misstated the cause of his death.
His daughter, Dr.
Linda Russek, says he died of pneumonia complicated by candida hepatitis.
She also says he stopped treating patients a few months ago to pursue other interests, not because of a deterioration in his health.


Review/Dance;   New Ailey Center Celebrates With 9 Works and Money
LEAD: The Alvin Ailey American Dance Center celebrated itself with spirit and that special Ailey warmth on Wednesday at its handsome new headquarters near Lincoln Center.
Part of the celebration included the announcement of a $300,000 matching grant from the Ford Foundation and a $500,000 grant from Philip Morris, with an additional $25,000 to help match the


U.S. Concern Over Japan's Surplus
LEAD: The Bush Administration today interjected itself publicly into a domestic policy debate in Japan that Washington contends is slowing bilateral trade talks.


Books of The Times;   Maybe the Greatest Act of All
LEAD:
The American Circus
By John Culhane
Illustrated. 504 pages. Henry Holt. $39.95.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Addenda
LEAD: *
McCann-Erickson Worldwide has established a joint venture in Korea with Creworld Advertising.
The new agency will be run by David Healy.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Tuesday about the coming introduction of ''Adam Smith's Money World'' on Soviet television misidentified the organization for which the program is preparing an hourlong special on perestroika and glasnost.
It is the Public Broadcasting Service.


The Senate on Trial
LEAD: The Senate Ethics Committee has concluded its first public inquiry in more than a decade into the ethical behavior of a colleague - Senator Dave Durenberger of Minnesota.
But the Senate's own ethics are still on trial.


Chinese Army In A.T.&amp;T. Pact
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company is selling $5 million worth of telephone equipment to the Chinese Army, a company spokesman said.
The contract, for digital telephone exchanges, was signed last month and is awaiting United States Government approval, an A.T.&amp;T. spokesman, Tom Harris, said in a telephone interview from the headquarters of the A.T.&amp;T.


Foam Is Sprayed On Tanker Fire, But Oil Spreads
LEAD: Strong winds pushed a growing oil slick toward the Texas Gulf Coast today as salvage workers aboard a burning Norwegian supertanker sprayed foam on a five-day-old fire for the first time, the Coast Guard said.


World Bank Aid to Poles
LEAD: Poland and the World Bank initialed an agreement today for a $300 million loan to finance structural changes in Poland, the Deputy Finance Minister, Marek Dabrowski, said.
He said that bank officials had approved Poland's long-term plans for economic development but that the first $100 million installment of the loan might be released only after the Government formally adopts the plans in August.


$50 Million Issue By West Virginia
LEAD: The West Virginia Housing Development Fund is offering $50 million in tax-exempt housing finance bonds with a maximum yield of 7.95 percent through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Liberia and the Rebels Agree To End Attacks on Civilians
LEAD: Liberian Government and rebel delegations met for six hours today and agreed to an appeal from Liberia's religious leaders to end attacks on civilians.


Japanese Say Their Country Has Sold Its Soul
LEAD: Japan's postwar mistake has been selling its soul to the West along with its cars and computers, several Japanese novelists and critics told an international literary conference here this week.


Brooklyn Drug Dealer Guilty in Racketeering
LEAD: A drug dealer from Brooklyn who was also an enforcer for a drug chieftain from Queens pleaded guilty yesterday to Federal racketeering charges that named him as a participant in five murders and two attempted murders.


Man Says Professor Tried to Kill Him
LEAD: Staring coolly at the Puerto Rican art professor who once lived next door, a 34-year-old appliance repairman told a Bronx court yesterday how the delicate-looking scholar in the wire-rimmed glasses riddled him with bullets one night last year.


ELECTION DIVIDES THE NEO-GAULLISTS
LEAD: In a sign of the disarray among French conservatives about how to battle the far right, France's largest center-right party has suspended one of its leaders for urging voters to support a Socialist candidate in a runoff election against a candidate of the far-right National Front party.


A Cry, Then Hues at Crayola
LEAD: The children of America have spoken.
And the people who manufacture Crayola crayons have been listening.


Where Black Ties and Bolos Meet
LEAD: MARGARITAS were served in the men's department, guacamole was on the sunglasses counter and frijoles were in the handbag area.
Flamenco dancers pounded the floor at the subway entrance, buffalo dancers shook their heavy headdresses in the Estee Lauder area, and ducks quacked on B'way.
It was just another fiesta at


Credit Fraud By 8 Charged
LEAD: Employees of a group of car dealerships were charged today with fraud on credit lines of $300 million.


Disrupted Massachusetts Democrats File Suit
LEAD: The Massachusetts Democratic Party today sued a senior White House aide and a state Republican campaign official, accusing them of conspiring with a pro-Republican police union to disrupt the Democrats' state convention in Springfield earlier this month.


Seiko to Introduce Wristwatch Pager
LEAD: The Hattori Seiko Company said it would introduce a wristwatch next month with a pager capable of receiving and displaying short messages on a liquid-crystal display.
The Seiko Receptor, which took four years to develop, is scheduled to be introduced next month in Portland, Ore., at an introductory price of $255 and may gradually appear in other United States cities for $275, a spokeswoman, Noriko


Tough Medical Choices: Letting the People Decide
LEAD: In grange halls, community clubs and churches across the country, thousands of ordinary citizens are getting together to discuss two of the thorniest issues in public policy: What kind of health care should Americans have, and who should pay for it?


Shamir Toughens Peace Talks Stand
LEAD: Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel added tougher conditions to his plan for peace talks with Palestinians, eliciting a stern rebuke from Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.
Testifying before a House panel, Mr.
Baker recited the White House telephone number and urged Israel and the Palestinians to ''call us when you are serious about peace.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Cabot Names New President
LEAD: John V. Allen yesterday was named president and chief operating officer of Cabot Communications in Boston.
Mr.
Allen, who is 41 years old, had been director of client services at Geer, Dubois in New York before taking the same position at Cabot seven months ago.
He said he was recruited by Cabot's chief executive, William H.


4 DIE, 93 ARE HURT
LEAD: Soldiers shot demonstrators outside the Romanian Interior Ministry tonight after protesters raided state television offices and burned down the police headquarters, witnesses said.


Chronicle
LEAD: Senator BOB PACKWOOD announced yesterday that he had filed for divorce from his wife of 25 years, GEORGIE PACKWOOD.
They have been separated since January.
Since then, Mr.
Packwood, a Republican of Oregon who is 57 years old, has lived in Washington while Mrs.
Packwood remains in their house in suburban Maryland.


Shamir Toughens Line on Negotiations
LEAD: Less than 48 hours after taking office, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir laid down restrictive new conditions today on his plan for Israeli-Palestinian peace talks.
The new requirements make the talks, already just a remote possibility, even less likely.


Algerian Front Formed in '54 to Fight French
LEAD: A radical group of indigenous Algerian nationalists, calling itself the National Liberation Front, was formed in 1954 and began an armed revolt against French rule of its homeland, which was one of France's chief colonies.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   A Friendship Outlasts A Partnership
LEAD: TOD SEISSER lighted a candle on Saturday at the bar mitzvah of Jay Taub's son - an act demonstrating that in advertising, friendship can outlive partnership.


Olympic Stadium or Colosseum?
LEAD: No sooner had Italy established itself as one of the best teams in the World Cup finals and the United States as one of the worst then speculation began about the outcome of their match Thursday night here in the glorious Olympic Stadium.


Trial for Actress's Assailant
LEAD: The obsessed fan who nearly killed the actress Theresa Saldana in a knifing attack eight years ago was ordered by a Municipal Court judge today to stand trial on five felony counts of sending threatening letters to her from prison.
The judge, Alma Soper, scheduled arraignment for next Tuesday and ordered that the 54-year-old defendant, Arthur Jackson, remain held without bail.


Bank Guard Kills Suspect In a Shootout on East Side
LEAD: A blazing shootout between two robbers and two guards behind the automatic teller machines of an East Side bank yesterday afternoon left one suspect dead and one guard wounded, the police said.


After Winning a School, Some Find It's Off Limits
LEAD: Lloyd Merrill remembers well the battle for an elementary school in TriBeCa.


Suicide Causes 3 Deaths
LEAD: A woman who committed suicide on Friday by running her car in a closed garage also killed her two roommates.
The 55-year-old woman, Ruth M. Goran, was found sitting in a car with the ignition on, said Sgt.
James Flonacher; the carbon monoxide fumes that took her life had seeped into her condominium and killed her roommates.


Review/Music;   Songs of Spring Eternal
LEAD: As though playing both piano and harp simultaneously while he sings were not enough of a challenge, Paul Balfour is devoting most of his current program in the Oak Room of the Plaza Hotel to songs about spring.


Evolution Of English Taste
LEAD: THOSE Anglophiles who eagerly drive miles and miles to glimpse a great English country house are no doubt familiar with Country Life, a monthly British publication that has featured stately homes since its inception in 1897.


Owners Approve Sale of Padres
LEAD: Baseball owners today unanimously approved the sale of the San Diego Padres to a group headed by Tom Werner, a Los Angeles television producer.


Commercial Credit In Note Offering
LEAD: The Commercial Credit Company, a unit of the Primerica Corporation, is offering $100 million in notes due 1995 through Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.


'I Feel No Hatred Toward the Boy'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chronicle
LEAD: JACKIE MASON has been ordered to pay child suport of $2,000 a month, retroactive to the Dec. 15, 1985, birth of SHEEBA REITER.
The decision by the Florida Court of Appeals in Miami on Tuesday ended a bitter three-year paternity suit by GINGER REITER.


Senate Passes Measure to Protect Alaskan Forest
LEAD: Seeking to strike a compromise between environmentalists and the timber industry, the Senate overwhelmingly approved legislation today to prohibit logging on 673,000 acres of pristine Alaskan land in the Tongass National Forest.


Islamic Party in Algeria Defeats Ruling Group in Local Elections
LEAD: The Islamic Salvation Front, which advocates turning Algeria into an Islamic republic, scored a stunning success in this country's first free election since it gained independence from France 28 years ago.


Yugoslavs Urge Multiparty Vote
LEAD: About 30,000 people rallied here today to call for free multiparty elections in Serbia, the largest of Yugoslavia's six republics.


3-Game Suspension Of Morgan Is Upheld
LEAD: Bobby Brown, the American League president, announced yesterday that he had upheld a three-game suspension imposed on Manager Joe Morgan of the Boston Red Sox.


Metro Matters;   Migrant Labor: The McShuttle To the Suburbs
LEAD: Ramona Hardy, a 17-year-old Bronx high school student, needs more money to help support her young son.


The Meolas Come Home With a Son
LEAD: A bank teller paid Vincent Meola a large compliment the other day.
Meola was cashing a traveler's check with his American passport, and the teller said, ''You speak Italian very well.''


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Advanced Telecommunications Corp., Atlanta, announced the resignation of Dale M. Gregory as president and chief operating officer.
Stephen E. Raville, the company's chairman and chief executive, will become president.


Hydrangea And Ivy On the Wall
LEAD: ALTHOUGH Donghia fabrics and wall coverings bear the name of their creator, the late Angelo Donghia, the company now invites different designers to create new products.
One of its latest, a line of wall coverings with muted textures inspired by turn-of-the-century English gardens, is the work of Lembo Bohn Design Associates in


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Richmond Playing Host To Tobacco Exhibition
LEAD: Richmond, once a capital of the American tobacco industry, is the site of an exhibition entitled ''Smoke Signals: Cigarettes, Advertising and the American Way of Life.''


Two Germanys Seize Second Terror Suspect
LEAD: East and West German officials teamed up to capture a second leftist terrorist suspect, and a newspaper said today that the police were on the trail of another such fugitive.


Yanks Want Surgery For Perez
LEAD: The Yankees yesterday recommended arthroscopic surgery for Pascual Perez, whose injured right shoulder has kept him sidelined for seven weeks and will now apparently finish the pitcher for the rest of the season.


Officials Reviewing Limits on Arts Funds
LEAD: Members of Congress, White House officials and the chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts worked today to try to resolve the Congressional debate about the sorts of restrictions that could be imposed on Federal support of the arts.


Channel 13, Citing Cost, Cancels 'The 11th Hour'
LEAD: New York's major public television station, WNET, yesterday canceled its award-winning nightly public affairs show, ''The 11th Hour,'' citing a lack of long-term financial support and the need to cut costs at the station.


Texan Indicted Over Payments By Savings Unit
LEAD: The free-spending former owner of a collapsed Texas savings institution, Don R. Dixon, was indicted by a Federal grand jury today on charges of using the institution's funds to make illegal political contributions as well as pay the rent on a California beach house and finance three pleasure outings for executives and guests.


Chronicle
LEAD: The sequins glittered Tuesday night at an anniversary party at Lincoln Center Theater, celebrating five years of JOHN V. LINDSAY, BERNIE GERSTEN and GREG MOSHER running the show.
As chairman, executive producer and director, respectively, they rescued the theater in 1985, after it had been dark for five years.


A Trove of Medieval Art Turns Up in Texas
LEAD: A hoard of medieval artworks and illuminated manuscripts missing since they disappeared from an ancient castle town in Germany in the final weeks of World War II, appears to have surfaced in this small farm town in north-central Texas, 15 miles from the Oklahoma border.


Significance of the Works That Vanished From Mine
LEAD: An illustrated manuscript dating from the ninth century is the most important item in the group of art objects that disappeared from the Quedlinburg church, now in East Germany, as World War II came to an end.
The manuscript was restored to West Germany in April for a $3 million ''finders fee'' but the other artworks are still believed to be in


Corrections
LEAD: A brief note on the Health page yesterday with an article about organizations studying health issues gave an incomplete address for a grouping of state organizations.
The group, American Health Decisions, can be reached in care of the National Health Council, 350 Fifth Avenue, Suite 1118, New York, N.Y.


Market Place;   Is Kravis Playing A Waiting Game?
LEAD: IN the big-money game being played by RJR Nabisco Inc. and its bondholders, Henry Kravis put an important card on the table this week when it was learned that he had raised $1.7 billion from his partners to invest in RJR Nabisco.


Only Washington Can Break Mideast Stalemate
LEAD: To the Editor:


Clark Sues Saints
LEAD: Bruce Clark, a former Pro Bowl defensive end, has sued the New Orleans Saints, saying the team used a phony ''eyeball physical'' to get around his no-cut contract.


Minolta Move by Honeywell
LEAD: Honeywell Inc. filed a complaint today with the International Trade Commission seeking to ban the import of Minolta cameras, saying the Japanese company uses autofocus technology developed by Honeywell.


Americans Lose to Italy but Regain Dignity
LEAD: With abilities in question, confidence flagging and expectations fleeting, the United States played a courageous soccer match against Italy tonight and lost by only 1-0 when a rout had been widely anticipated.
Certainly many of the 73,000 spectators at the Olympic Stadium were disappointed.
They jeered the winners as they left the field.


Howe Treated for Clot
LEAD: Steve Howe, the former major league pitcher who has been hospitalized for treatment of a blood clot in his lung, apparently will be able to resume his comeback.


Our Towns;   Better Mousetrap For the 1990's Is a Prison Cell
LEAD: It's turning into a high-prestige business, the manufacture of prison cells.
Michael Rosenberg, vice president of Mark Correctional Systems, can't keep up with all his invitations. ''Our cell will be at the Fontainebleau Hotel on Miami Beach, July 15-17, for the National Association of Counties,'' said Mr.


Review/Art;   An American Modernist In Pursuit of an Identity
LEAD: Morgan Russell is a peculiar and fascinating case.
Born in Greenwich Village in 1886, he traveled to Italy and France when he was 20 and then, in 1908, settled in Paris, where he was swept along by the energy and purpose of avant-garde painting.
With Stanton Macdonald-Wright, he invented Synchromism (With Color).


White House Tutors Kremlin In How a Presidency Works
LEAD: On his visit to Camp David this month, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev dropped German unification and Soviet political reform for a moment to quiz President Bush about the logistics of being President.
How does paper flow in his office?
Who decides who gets into the Oval Office?
How does his staff handle


Germans Send Lawyers To Texas for Stolen Art
LEAD: The church of Quedlinburg in East Germany - whose medieval treasures appear to have surfaced in this small farm town in north-central Texas nearly a half-century after they disappeared from their wartime hiding place - has retained two lawyers to seek the return of the priceless artworks.


Active Urban Ministry Grows in Brooklyn
LEAD: To the Editor:


Israeli Boy Stabbed in East Jerusalem


Paul Rigo, an Engineer And Scandal Witness
LEAD: Paul Wilson Rigo, an engineering contractor whose testimony in 1970 led to the conspiracy and extortion conviction of former Mayor Hugh J. Addonizio of Newark, was buried on Tuesday after a Mass in Nutley, N.J., where he grew up.


Steven A. Martindale, Lobbyist, 46
LEAD: Steven A. Martindale, a Washington lawyer and lobbyist known for his access to socialites and for the parties he gave, died of complications from AIDS on Wednesday at George Washington University Hospital.
He was 46 years old.


Washington Talk;   Protectors Of Industry Hard Up For Battles
LEAD: For all the talk of the ris= ing tide of American protectionism, one of the few precise markers available, the caseload of the International Trade Commission, seems to show that the storm surge has passed.


Rampage in Romania
LEAD: For Eastern Europe's nascent democracies, the acid test is whether they can bring themselves to tolerate opposition.
Romania's misnamed National Salvation Front fails it.
Challenged by peaceful demonstrators, it has responded with Tiananmen-like ferocity, staining Bucharest with ever more blood.


Westinghouse Shifts Top Jobs
LEAD: Paul E. Lego, who will take over as chairman and chief executive of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation on July 1, announced a series of new assignments for top executives yesterday.


Some Low Opening Scores At Rain-Gentled Medinah
LEAD: Perhaps the United States Golf Association fooled with Mother Nature a little too aggressively in making the Medinah No. 3 course a verdant torture chamber for the 90th United States Open.


Chronicle
LEAD: ROBERT D. BLACKWILL, the National Security Council's senior director for European and Soviet affairs, is leaving his post to return to Harvard University as a lecturer at the John F. Kennedy School of Government.
MARLIN FITZWATER, the White House spokesman, said yesterday that Mr.
Blackwill will leave at the end of


A Defeat Revives A Dream
LEAD: They will never forget it, entering a stadium filled with the shrill crescendo of 73,000 fans whistling against them, and turning those whistles into delusion for the home team.


Bush Vindicated
LEAD: The political right in this country had a fine old time beating up on George Bush after the recent summit meeting.
He was not tough enough on a weakened Soviet Union, conservatives complained; he was taken in by Mikhail Gorbachev.


Texaco Loses In High Court On Discounts
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that Texaco Inc. violated Federal antitrust law during the 1970's by selling gasoline to two big distributors at discounts that it did not give to its smaller retailers.


Savings Debate Gets Partisan Tone
LEAD: In a new sign that the 10-month-old savings and loan bailout could finally be turning into a partisan issue, House Democrats today disputed the Bush Administration's contention that the slumping real estate market was responsible for the escalating costs of the rescue effort and charged that mismanagement by the


Review/FIlm;   A Cartoon Square Comes to Life In 'Dick Tracy'
LEAD: The bold black headlines of The Daily Paper, which is what the daily paper is called, proclaim the dread details of the crime wave gripping the large city: ''Gangland Toughs Break Arms of News Dealer.''


Out of Lineup, Magadan Voices Some Bitterness
LEAD: The Mets roared into town from Chicago today with their hottest streak and hottest bats of the season.
But it didn't take long for them to start paying the price of success: Dave Magadan, their hottest hitter, was left out of the lineup tonight and carried his grievance personally and bitterly to Manager Bud


Stressed-Out Stock Markets . . .


Review/Cabaret;   Thinking Of Songs As Movies
LEAD: Those who only remember Betty Buckley as the steely voice of the fallen feline, Grizabella, singing ''Memory'' in the Broadway musical ''Cats'' may be surprised to discover that there is a lot more to her musical personality than just the ability to belt out Andrew Lloyd Webber's most famous tune.


How Many More Spills?
LEAD: In the Kill van Kull, a narrow waterway separating New Jersey from Staten Island, thick gobs of No. 6 crude oil from the bowels of the BT Nautilus foul the shoreline.
In the Gulf of Mexico, a carpet of oil the color of dried blood surrounds the stricken supertanker Mega Borg.


Ratings Drop For Chrysler, Ford Debt
LEAD: The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation downgraded its credit ratings today for the Ford Motor Company and the Chrysler Corporation, signaling sagging faith in the auto industry's finances.


Noriega Gains on Asset Issue
LEAD: A Federal district judge demanded today that prosecutors in the drug case against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega justify their seizure of all his assets, saying failure to do so violated the fallen Panamanian leader's constitutional rights.


In Kashmir Valley, Alienation Turns Deadly
LEAD: Silent, barefoot men dug a very small grave recently at the Idgar Martyrs' Cemetery, a new landmark on the outskirts of this battered city.
The grave was for 6-year-old Sajad Ahmad Sofi, shot by Indian troops, his relatives said, as he tried to hide between his father's legs during a search of the family home.


At the Bar
LEAD: Milton Gould has been called many things in his 50 illustrious years of law practice.
But after his recent article in The New York Law Journal, he has heard something new: he stands accused of being naive and cunning at the same time.


Baker's Ploy: A Middle East Timeout
LEAD: When Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d bluntly told the Israelis on Wednesday that they should telephone the White House when they are ready to get serious about peace, it sounded as if the Administration was actually preparing to take the unusual step of disengaging from Middle East diplomacy.


On Frame Appreciation
LEAD: Frame-consciousness is rising.
To wit: On a cleaning and reframing campaign in anticipation of its 50th anniversary next year, the National Gallery of Art in Washington has remounted its famous Leonardo, ''Ginevra dei Benci.''


Review/Theater;   The Schisms of the City, Comically and Tragically
Ouisa Kittredge, the Upper East Side hostess at the center of John Guare's ''Six Degrees of Separation,'' delights in the fact that it only takes a chain of six people to connect anyone on the planet with anyone else.
But what about those who are eternally separated from others because they cannot find the right six people?


The Best AIDS Programs Are Too Few for Too Many
LEAD: To visit Puerto Rico's best AIDS programs is to realize just how much more needs to be done.


Prosecutor Pursues Links Of Mulheren With Boesky
LEAD: A Federal prosecutor tried yesterday to discredit John Mulheren Jr. -who is on trial on charges that he helped Ivan F. Boesky break securities laws - by implying that Mr.
Mulheren had misled the jury about his relationship with the once-powerful speculator.


ABC to Use NBC Plan On Ratings
LEAD: ABC, which had proposed its own viewer measurement system, announced yesterday that it would instead use NBC's plan to verify audience size to advertisers.


Books of The Times;   Czar's Younger Brother, Like Europe, in Malaise
LEAD:
The Princess and the Dragon
By Roberto Pazzi
Translated by M. J. Fitzgerald. 162 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


John Summerskill Is Dead at 65; Led San Francisco State in 60's
LEAD: John Summerskill, an educator who was president of San Francisco State College for two years when the campus was swept by political and social unrest in the 1960's, died yesterday at his home in Belle Mead, N.J.
He was 65 years old.
His family said he died of liver cancer.


Ib Andersen to Retire From the City Ballet
LEAD: Ib Andersen, a principal dancer with the New York City Ballet, is to retire from the stage at the end of the company's 1990 summer season at the Saratoga Performing Arts Center in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
He joined City Ballet as a principal in 1980, at the invitation of George Balanchine, founder of the company with Lincoln Kirstein.


Tough Abortion Legislation Advances in Louisiana House
LEAD: The Louisiana House of Representatives voted overwhelmingly today in favor of a new law that would ban virtually all abortions, permitting them only to save the life of a pregnant woman.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''How could anyone think of burning the symbol of our country, the American flag?''
- Katie Appelget of Princeton, N.J.
[A12:4.]


Court Approves Sobriety checks Along the Road
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that the Constitution permits the police to stop drivers at roadside checkpoints and examine them for signs of intoxication.


Inquiry Finds Aid Abuses at Jersey Institute
LEAD: The New Jersey Institute of Technology, one of New Jersey's fastest-growing centers of learning, is a favorite point of entry into the United States for graduate students from overseas, especially India and China.


Chronicle
LEAD: A Hungarian Horatio Alger tale: PETER ZWACK has been appointed the new Hungarian Ambassador to Washington.
He has no diplomatic experience and until recently had not lived in Hungary for 40 years.
And he's an American citizen.


Britain May Reverse 7 Terrorist Convictions
LEAD: The British Government took steps today that could lead to the quashing of the convictions of seven people who were jailed in 1976 on charges of running a bomb factory for the Irish Republican Army.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Krishna Procession, Fifth Avenue from 59th Street to Washington Square Park will be closed tomorrow from noon until about 3 P.M.
Because of the Broadway Mall


Review/Art;   In the Sun-Dappled World of Maurice Prendergast
LEAD: The retrospective of the American artist Maurice Brazil Prendergast (1858-1924) at the Whitney Museum of American Art is a pleasure, but a mixed one.
This is partly because of the repetitiousness of Prendergast's charming, highly personable style.
Most of his sun-dappled mosaic-like paintings and watercolors describe a peaceful, idyllic world where every day is


Dow Drops 1.48 in Light Trading
LEAD: Stock prices edged down yesterday in light volume as investors turned cautious and the outlook for corporate earnings brought new concerns.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
7.75
9.46
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.67
7.67
8.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.57
7.58
7.89
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.38
8.41
8.37
30-YR.


Congress Questions Its Own Policing Act
LEAD: As the Senate Ethics Committee moves toward a judgment of Senator Dave Durenberger on ethics charges, its members and other lawmakers are expressing doubts and concerns over how Congress polices itself.


Evolution in Europe;   United Germany Will Have to Decide What It Will Do About All the Spies
LEAD: The arrest of two terrorists and a rash of spies this year points to a problem likely to haunt a united Germany for some time to come - what to do with the thousands recruited on both sides as clandestine soldiers in the more than four decades of the cold war.


Harold C. Roser Jr., Executive, 69
LEAD: Harold C. Roser Jr., retired manager of community development programs for the Exxon Corporation, died on Wednesday at New York Hospital.
He was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan and Southampton, L.I.


Fire Sweeps Through Home For Mentally Ill, Killing Man
LEAD: One person was killed and three others were injured tonight when a fire broke out in a group home for the mentally ill, the authorities said.


A Phonetic Idol
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lopez, a Shot Off Lead, Hoping for Turnaround
LEAD: Health and family problems have distracted Nancy Lopez to the point that she is suffering through the longest victory drought of her active career.
She hopes the Atlantic City Classic, in which she began the defense of her title today, may be the beginning of better things.


Chronicle
LEAD: Green Seal Inc., an offshoot of the ''green'' consumer movement that wants industry to use its seal of approval and an environmental consciousness in developing products, yesterday announced a board with many stars of the environmental movement.
Green Seal, a private nonprofit group, is headed by DENIS HAYES, chairman of Earth Day 1990.


Rohatyn Proposes a Bailout Tax
LEAD: Felix G. Rohatyn, the Wall Street investment banker, yesterday proposed a 5 percent surcharge on Federal income taxes to pay for the bailout of the savings and loan industry.


Bertrand Latimer New, Psychiatrist, Dies at 63
LEAD: Bertrand Latimer New, a psychiatrist and teacher, died on Wednesday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 63 years old and lived in Manhattan.


John H. Manley, 82; Helped Build A-Bomb
LEAD: John H. Manley, who helped build the first atomic bomb, died of heart disease on Monday.
He was 82 years old and lived in Los Alamos.


No Sanctions On India Trade
LEAD: The Bush Administration said today, as expected, that it would not impose economic sanctions on India for trade barriers the United States deems offensive.


Chairman of Vitalink Steps Down Abruptly
LEAD: The Vitalink Communications Corporation said yesterday that George Archuleta had resigned as president, chairman and chief executive.
The announcement surprised Wall Street and sent the data communications company's stock price tumbling.


Review/Dance;   Bringing Together the Many Jerome Robbinses
LEAD: The New York City Ballet presented the seventh program in its Festival of Jerome Robbins's Ballets on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater.


Ruling Likely to Increase Strains on Medicaid
LEAD: The nation's already troubled health care program for the poor is likely to face new financial strains because of the Supreme Court's decision today holding that hospitals and nursing homes have a judicially enforceable right to ''reasonable and adequate'' payment under Medicaid.


Japan Seen Easing on China
LEAD: The former Japanese Prime Minister, Noboru Takeshita, said on Wednesday that he expected Japan to lift its freeze on loans to China soon.


Principals Face Transfer Orders And Retraining
LEAD: Acting on their ground-breaking agreement for the first time, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and the New York principals' union announced plans yesterday to transfer 15 to 20 principals - some deemed ineffective and some who volunteer - for retraining in the fall.


A Publisher Who Was Dedicated to Education
LEAD: To the Editor:


Only Washington Can Break Mideast Stalemate;   Agent for Iraq
LEAD: To the Editor:


Long Subway Fare Lines May Get Longer
LEAD: Losing funds because of a sharp rise in fare-beating, New York City transit officials are seeking to cut costs in a way that will mean fewer token clerks at busy stations and thus even longer lines.


Auctions
LEAD:
For Sale: One Dionysus


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Rams Reward Coach
LEAD: Dan Gallagher is finally a full-time coach.
Gallagher, who has led Fordham University to the National Collegiate Athletic Association playoffs in three of the last four years despite coaching the Rams on a part-time basis, was rewarded Wednesday with a multiyear contract.(AP)


Cable TV Rate Found Rising Twice as Fast as Price Index
LEAD: A Government study of the cable television industry released yesterday showed that rates for the lowest-priced basic cable service last year rose more than twice as fast as the Consumer Price Index.
The report is expected to add to the momentum for cable re-regulation under way in the House and the


Murder Trial Adds Facet to the Abortion Debate
LEAD: In a case closely watched by both sides in the national abortion debate, a Minnesota man will go on trial soon facing separate accusations of murder: one of shooting his girlfriend to death, and the other of killing the 28-day embryo she was carrying at the time of her death.


Strange Is Not Rolling to a 3d Title
LEAD: With a 20-foot birdie putt on the 18th hole, Curtis Strange felt ''halfway decent'' today after a one-over-par 73 in the first round of his quest to join Willie Anderson, a turn-of-the-century golfer, as the only winners of three consecutive United States Open championships.


Corrections
LEAD: The Gardening Guide section of the Weather Report yesterday appeared in error; it was for fall, not spring.


FLAG DAY BRINGS A DAY OF DEBATE
LEAD: Here at the Betsy Ross House, where America's first flag was supposedly sewn 213 years ago, a schoolgirl read a Flag Day essay questioning how anyone could even think of burning the American flag.


Weekend Fairs
LEAD:
TODAY
FEAST OF ST.
ANTHONY, St.
Anthony of Padua Roman Catholic Church, Sullivan Street from Houston to Spring Streets.
Food, games, entertainment.
Today through Sunday, noon to 11:30 P.M.
Information; 777-2755.
SPRING FAIR, West 21st Street between Eighth and Ninth Avenues; sponsored by the P.T.A.


S.E.C. Settles Fraud Charges
LEAD: A former international sales manager of Apollo Computer Inc. settled Federal civil charges today that he had violated anti-fraud statutes when he sold Apollo common shares while possessing inside information about pending bad news on the computer company's quarterly earnings in July 1988.
The Securities and


Review/Theater;   Ibsen's 'Ghosts,' Updated In Ireland
LEAD: In updating Henrik Ibsen's ''Ghosts,'' what could be flashier than to change the disease that represents an upper-class family's tragic curse from syphilis to AIDS?


Bonds Higher in Active Trading
LEAD: Bond prices rose in active, volatile trading yesterday, as market participants shifted out of short-term securities and into bonds after figures on producer prices were released.


Slow Growth Projected for Spending
LEAD: A LEADING advertising industry forecaster predicted yesterday that growth in advertising spending in the United States would continue at a sluggish pace through 1990, dragged down primarily by a recession in local ad spending.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Producer prices rose by 0.3 percent in May as a sharp upturn in the cost of food was largely offset by another hefty decline in the cost of energy, the Government reported. [Page D1.]  Business inventories inched upward by 0.1 percent in April, while sales fell 1.1 percent, the Commerce Department said.


Addenda
LEAD: *
Ketchum International and Far East Advertising Holding Ltd. have agreed to dissolve their joint venture in Hong Kong, Far East Ketchum Advertising.


Four Arrested in Japan In Stock-Trade Scandal
LEAD: Japan is facing what is potentially its biggest stock trading scandal since the Recruit case toppled a government last year.
Four former senior executives of a large company were arrested on charges that they used inside information during a takeover attempt to reap about $10 million in gains and then evaded taxes on their profits.


They're Back. (But Much Nicer.)
''Gremlins 2: The New Batch'' speaks to the gleeful hell-raising monster in each of us, and it speaks with much more verve, cleverness and good humor than the film on which it is based.
Add this to the very short list of sequels that neatly surpass their predecessors.
''Gremlins 2'' moves away from the sleepy small-town setting of the 1984 film, in the process shedding its fondness for movie references and taking on more personality of its own.
Freed from the ''It's a Wonderful Life'' ambiance of Kingston Falls, it develops a more savvy, urban feeling and a faster pace.
Another and more important alteration has to do with the gremlins themselves, who were often vicious and predatory in the earlier film but are a lot more playful this time.
The new gremlins can also turn ugly, but what they most enjoy is throwing things, making colossal messes and playing practical jokes.
They're a lot less like horror-film fixtures, and a lot more like mischief-loving children.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-10
Soviet bread prices will not increase this summer.
The Parliament rejected the Government's proposal for a steep rise in bread prices, delivering a serious setback to President Gorbachev's plan to wean consumers off state subsidies.
Page A1


Phoebe Zeeman, A Student, Weds
LEAD: Erica P. Zeeman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Zeeman 3d of Palm Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Mark T. Fitch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Fitch of Leonia, N.J.
The Rev.
William Weisenbach, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the nondenominational ceremony at the One If By Land, Two If By Sea restaurant in New


Maradona Admits Foul
LEAD: The Argentine captain, Diego Maradona, admitted today he used his right hand to knock the ball away from the goal line in Argentina's 2-0 World Cup victory over the Soviet Union.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Armstrong World Industries, Lancaster, Pa., a furniture maker, completed the second phase of its sale of 89,000 acres of Georgia woodlands to an undisclosed buyer, which will result in a pretax gain of about $40 million for the quarter ending June 30.


Restaurants
LEAD: When this rollicking fish house opened on lower Amsterdam Avenue in 1987, Upper West Siders took to it like a school of minnows to breadcrumbs.
The food was surprisingly good, although the pace was a little rushed owing to the overflow crowds.
Another problem was the noise, which built to such a peak some evenings that it seemed to rattle the glass walls.


Evolution in Europe;   SOVIET PARLIAMENT REJECTS INCREASE IN PRICE OF BREAD
LEAD: The Soviet Parliament today resoundingly rejected the Government's proposal for a steep increase in bread prices this summer, delivering a serious setback to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's plan to wean consumers from state subsidies.


Aid to Harlem Dancers
LEAD: The Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund has announced a $1 million grant to Dance Theater of Harlem to help with the fiscal crisis that led the company to lay off its dancers and staff for five months, through August.
The dance company is to announce other awards in a press conference in New York on Monday.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Guinness Peat In Joint Venture
LEAD: Guinness Peat Aviation Inc., the world's largest aircraft leasing concern, went into the helicopter business in a joint venture with the CHC Helicopter Corporation of Canada.
GPA Helicopters Ltd., based at Shannon Airport in western Ireland, will have an initial equity capital of $20 million and acquire, own and lease helicopters worldwide.


After Barry, Uncertainty;   Mayor's Move Brings Painful Era to Close
LEAD: A painful era in this Federal city's relationship to Congress and the country comes to an end with Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s decision not to run for re-election, but it is far from clear whether what follows will be a political rebirth for the troubled city or just a refocusing of complaints by its legion of critics.


An Ancient Punishment, Rarely Used
LEAD: Excommunication, which was first mentioned in church documents in the 4th century, is the gravest punishment the modern-day Roman Catholic church can impose.
It is administered so infrequently that some priests with long experience say they have gone through their entire careers without being involved in a case in which a formal declaration of excommunication was issued.


Oil Cleanup Plan Aims At Protecting Refuges
LEAD: The Coast Guard said today that the blaze aboard the stricken Norwegian tanker Mega Borg had resisted firefighting efforts, and state officials announced a strategy for coping with oil that is expected to begin washing ashore this weekend.


Public TV Financing Service Names Head
LEAD: The executive producer of ''Alive From Off Center,'' a popular, offbeat series on public television, has been selected to head the Independent Television Service, which was created last year by Congress to provide direct financing of programs made for public television by independent producers.


President Is Named At Inter-Continental
LEAD: Saison Overseas Holdings yesterday named J. T. Kuhlman, an experienced hotel executive, to replace Helmut Hoermann as president of the Inter-Continental Hotels Corporation.
Mr.
Hoermann was dismissed last Friday in a change that included a reshuffling of top management and plans to lay off almost half of Inter


Hugh Jerome Smallen Jr., Architect, 71
LEAD: Hugh Jerome Smallen Jr., an architect and interior designer, died on Monday at Sarasota (Fla.) Memorial Hospital.
He was 71 years old and lived in Osprey, Fla.


Excerpts From Supreme Court's Decision Upholding Sobriety Checkpoints
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's 6-to-3 decision today upholding sobriety checkpoints as constitutional.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote the majority opinion.
Justice Harry A. Blackmun wrote a separate concurring opinion.
Justices William J. Brennan and John Paul Stevens both filed dissenting opinions.


HIGH COURT RULES HOSPITALS CAN SUE ON MEDICAID RATES
LEAD: In a decision likely to fuel the growing debate over how to pay for medical care for poor people, the Supreme Court ruled today that hospitals and nursing homes can sue states for higher Medicaid reimbursement rates.


Barry's Move: Mayoralty as Chit in Old Game
LEAD: For prosecutors and defense lawyers alike, it is a familiar pas de deux.


Changes at Chase
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Corporation said it plans to sell some of its real estate worldwide and trim an unspecified number of employees in the next six months to increase earnings.
A spokesman declined to discuss the financial goals of the planned moves.
Chase, faced with souring loans and stiffening competition and regulatory requirements, last year reported a loss of $655 million.


People
LEAD: *
George Bragg, executive vice president and director of broadcast production at Lintas New York, has been named a director.
Bethann Eisenfeld, a management supervisor at Lintas MCM, has been promoted to senior vice president.


Jay Gorney, 93; He Wrote the Music For a Depression Hit
LEAD: Jay Gorney, who wrote the music for ''Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?,'' one of the most enduring songs of the Depression, died yesterday at the Jewish Home and Hospital for the Aged in Manhattan.
He was 93 years old.


24-Hour Trading Plan Gets Mixed Reviews on Wall St.
LEAD: John J. Phelan Jr., the chairman of the New York Stock Exchange, yesterday officially disclosed a five-phase plan to establish 24-hour trading on the Big Board by the year 2000.


Final Count in Algeria Shows Islamic Party Sweep
LEAD: Final results announced today for the municipal and provincial council elections in Algeria on Monday showed that the fundamentalist Islamic Front for National Salvation had won an even bigger victory than was intially believed.


No Headline
LEAD: The National League will expand from 12 teams to 14 teams in 1993 and announce by late next season where the new franchises will be situated, Bill White, the league president, said today.


Fallon McElligott Wins 6 Clios for Print Ads
LEAD: Fallon McElligott's print advertising earned the agency six gold statuettes at last night's Clio Awards at the Manhattan Center.
The clients for the agency's winning campaigns include Porsche, Timex and Rolling Stone.
Levine, Huntley, Schmidt &amp; Beaver won four Clios for print.


Government Plans Major Cut In Washington State Logging
LEAD: Federal officials have proposed a plan to reduce logging by 46 percent in Washington's largest national forest, and more drastic reductions might be ordered to protect the northern spotted owl.


Fraud in a 'Cold' Fusion Lab Is a Concern, Magazine Says
LEAD: Science magazine, the nation's leading scientific journal, is reporting today that ''worries about possible fraud'' had been raised against the work of a prominent laboratory supporting the disputed phenomenon of ''cold'' nuclear fusion.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Cafe Galette


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums
''TRICKSTER STORIES,'' told by Kathryn Farnsworth and Diane Wolkstein, 11 A.M. tomorrow at the Hans Christian Andersen Statue, Fifth Avenue and 72d Street in Central Park.
Free.
''THE KRAZY KRITTERS OF KRACKERVILLE FOREST,'' a play by Rebecca Maiden about mischievous animals who live in a magical forest, 2 P.M.


Precious Metals Fall Again; Silver Drops to 12-Year Low
LEAD: Precious metals prices continued to plunge yesterday in what dealers described as a demoralized market.
Gold prices dropped to four-year lows and the silver market plunged to levels not seen in more than 12 years.


Cetus Countersuit Against Du Pont
LEAD: The Cetus Corporation filed a countersuit against E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company for infringement of two Cetus patents covering the company's proprietary Geneamp polymerase chain reaction, or P.C.R., technology.
Cetus's P.C.R. technology is a method for rapidly multiplying desired segments of genetic information.


Congress Voices Concern Over Trade Pact With Mexico
LEAD: Members of Congress today warned the Bush Administration that ratification of a free trade agreement between the United States and Mexico could be held up by concerns that the wages of American workers might suffer.
Lawmakers also said that curbing the flow of illegal drugs should be part of the negotiations.


O'Connor Warns Politicians Risk Excommunication Over Abortion
LEAD: John Cardinal O'Connor warned Roman Catholic politicians yesterday that they risked being excommunicated from the Catholic Church if they were persistent in supporting a woman's right to abortion.


Convention Unit In Bond Offering
LEAD: The Franklin County Convention Facilities Authority, in Ohio, is offering $97.99 million in tax and lease revenue anticipation bonds with a maximum yield of about 7.195 percent for an issue due in 2019 through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc.
Yields on the short-maturity serial bonds range from 6.20 percent in 1994 to 6.70 percent in 1999.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Germany's Jobless Spies
Among the problems to be resolved in the drive toward German reunification is how to handle the thousands on each side who were combatants in the cold war.
Page A6.
Treasures Sought in Texas
An East German church whose medieval treasures are thought to be in Texas is sending two lawyers to try to recover them.


Sol Orlinsky, Manufacturer, 73
LEAD: Sol Orlinsky, president of S. O. Textiles, which manufactures plastic hangers and supplies notions to the garment industry, died on Wednesday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 73 years old and lived in Woodmere, L.I.


Troubles Continue to Plague Orbiting Hubble Telescope
LEAD: Seven weeks after its launching, the Hubble space telescope is giving controllers and engineers fits as they struggle to overcome difficulties with antennas, guidance sensors, star trackers and the spacecraft's bad case of jitters.


The Mayor, Out of Politics, Is Back in the Courthouse
LEAD: The nation's capital reacted today with sorrow, joy and plain relief to Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s decision not to seek re-election after being the all-dominant local political figure for a dozen years.


Review/Film;   A Frankenstein Monster of the Suburbs
LEAD: There is a legitimate sense of the absurd lurking within Frank Henenlotter's ''Frankenhooker,'' the comic horror film opening today at the Bleecker Street Cinema.
It is, however, overshadowed by elaborate special effects and by an emphasis on partly clothed, great looking young women, which suggests soft-core porn more often than it does either humor or horror.


Yankees Capitalize On Red Sox Miscue
LEAD: Through 56 games, 36 losses and two managers, the Yankees lamented their endless run of bad luck and their near-misses.
But last night at the Stadium, a ray of hope burst through the heavy drizzle.
They finally got a break.
An attempted pitchout by the Boston Red Sox turned into a wild pitch that allowed the


GOING OUT GUIDE
LEAD:
FRIDAY
ON STATEN ISLAND


Prospect for Pact on Armies Dims As Moscow Balks at Compromise
LEAD: Hopes for a breakthough on conventional arms were set back today when Soviet officials raised last-minute objections to a compromise proposal to reduce tanks and armored troop vehicles in Europe, Western diplomats said today.


White Sox Close Gap, Defeating A's by 3-2
LEAD: The Chicago White Sox climbed within one game of first-place Oakland in the American League West tonight by defeating the Athletics and Dave Stewart, 3-2.


Chronicle
LEAD: Among his first acts as the new president of the Whitney Museum of American Art, LEONARD A. LAUDER proposed that THOMAS N. ARMSTRONG 3d be named director emeritus.
Mr.
Armstrong was dismissed as director earlier this year after a protracted dispute among Whitney trustees.
Mr.
Lauder was a major critic of Mr.


Japan Sees More Growth
LEAD: The Japanese Finance Ministry's latest corporate survey shows the country's economy is firmly on an expansion path and is unlikely to be affected much by the recent plunge in its financial markets, a ministry official said today.


Marion Barry's Good Years, and Bad
LEAD: The announcement by Marion Barry that he will not seek a fourth term as Mayor of Washington D.C. comes as a relief to a city beset by drugs and by the strong suspicion that Mr.
Barry himself may be a drug abuser.
Now both the Mayor and the nation's capital can get on with recovery.


Economic Scene;   Soviets Rule Out 'Big Bang' Test
LEAD: ON the Soviet economic front, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev continues to struggle with the democratic forces his political reforms have unleashed.
Liberals want to move faster to a free-market economy, and conservatives blame him for moving too fast and kicking off panic buying in the stores by announcing planned price increases.


Growth Plus Grace on the Audubon Site
LEAD: The old movie house and ballroom in Washington Heights where Malcolm X was murdered 25 years ago is shabby and empty.
Yet it still whispers of memories and grandeur.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 504 money market mutual funds increased by $988.6 million, to $382.14 billion, for the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 160 institutional funds fell $455 million, to $91.59 billion.
The assets of the 239 general-purpose funds rose $1.01 billion, to $131.32 billion.


Southland in New Step To Trim Debt Burden
LEAD: The debt-ridden Southland Corporation, owner of 7,000 7-Eleven convenience stores, sweetened a deal today to pay off its bondholders.
The proposal slashes the amount of control the founding Thompson family will have.


Only Washington Can Break Mideast Stalemate;   Up to Palestine Council
LEAD: To the Editor:


FYI, Mr. Baker: No Israeli Calls
LEAD: The White House's switchboard operators were not amused.
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d gave out the White House's telephone number - (1-202) 456-1414 - during Congressional testimony on Wednesday and, in a stern rebuke to Israel's leaders, invited: ''When you're serious about peace, call us.


Mesa to Reduce Its Edisto Shares


Nixon Library Dedication
LEAD: President Bush will join former Presidents Ronald Reagan, Gerald R. Ford and Richard M. Nixon in Yorba Linda, Calif., on July 19 for the dedication and formal opening of the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace, the White House has announced.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Amoco Corp., Chicago, named Charles A. Mast vice president of supply.
He replaces William J. Montgomery, who retired.


His Vision Realized, a Union Leader Retires
LEAD: Bertram A. Powers, the dapper, bow-tied chief of the printers' union in New York City, has a vivid memory of the day he first glimpsed the shape of things to come.
Like H. G. Wells, he found it a sobering experience.


Review/Art;   Varieties of Colonialism In Dockside Installation
LEAD: ''The Wilds and the Deep,'' the latest collaboration between Martha Fleming and Lyne Lapointe, is something of a disappointment.
The duo's installation ''Eat Me/Drink Me/Love Me,'' which was on view last winter at the New Museum of Contemporary Art in SoHo, marked a departure for the Montreal-based artists, who prefer as venues unused or dilapidated buildings, places that evoke their works' recurrent themes of abandonment and isolation.


Israel, Rebuked on Peace Position, Says U.S. Denied It a Honeymoon
LEAD: The new Israeli Government reacted with anger today to the rebuke by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d over Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's hardened position on peace talks with Palestinians.


Results Plus
LEAD:
TENNIS
Garrison Gains Quarterfinals
Top-seeded Zina Garrison survived a first-set scare and advanced to the quarterfinals of the Dow Classic at Birmingham, England, yesterday with a third-round victory over Maya Kidowaki of Japan.
Garrison lost the first-set tie breaker by 3-7, but finished with a 6-7, 6-2, 6-1 victory.


Harvard Protesting R.O.T.C. Rejection Of Homosexuality
LEAD: Following the lead of other colleges and universities, the president of Harvard University has written to Defense Secretary Dick Cheney to protest the policy of excluding homosexuals from the Reserve Officers Training Corps.


Review/Film;   Politics And Youth In Postwar Yugoslavia
LEAD: Near the start of ''My Uncle's Legacy,'' we hear an old man's bizarre dying wish.
A former local official in the Yugoslav Communist Party, he now wants a religious burial.
Soon a priest appears at his funeral, and several irate party members stalk away from the grave site, thinking that the man's nephew, a famous writer named Martin, has planned this final insult.


F.C.C. Adopts Dial-a-Porn Rules
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission adopted rules today to keep minors from listening to sexually explicit telephone recordings, an action that is expected to set off a new round of litigation over dial-a-porn services.


'Traviata' on S.I.
LEAD: The Metropolitan Opera will present Verdi's ''Traviata'' in the South Meadow at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center, 1000 Richmond Terrace, Livingston, S.I., tomorrow at 8.
The cast includes Karen Huffstodt as Violetta; Alfredo Kraus as Alfredo and Sherrill Milnes as Germont.
Christian Badea will conduct.


Officer Says Sergeant Kicked Youth in Face
LEAD: A police sergeant was suspended yesterday after another officer accused him of kicking a 15-year-old who was being arrested on Wednesday on a street in Brooklyn.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Chuck Berry's Walk


Hill, Holliday's New Creative Chief
LEAD: Ted Shaine, the associate creative director of Ammirati &amp; Puris, has resigned to become the co-creative director of Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston.


Executive Surrenders
LEAD: In remarks to reporters after turning himself in to Government officials, the former owner of the collapsed Vernon Savings and Loan Association said today that Congress and Federal regulators were responsible for the savings industry crisis.


As Proxy Use Widens, New Rules Are Urged
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission is considering the most sweeping changes in its history in the rules that govern proxy contests.
The move, which is still in the preliminary stages, could increase the power of dissident shareholders and make it easier to oust corporate boards of directors.


From Africa, The Roars And Growls Of a Lion
LEAD: ''He has a voice you cannot find anywhere else in the universe,'' the South African record producer, band leader, and saxophonist West Nkosi said the other day of the legendary singer Mahlathini, who is nicknamed the Lion of Soweto.


Hometown Displays Its Pride
LEAD: On this slightly drizzly afternoon, the two worn-out town soccer fields, once home to John Harkes, Tony Meola, and Tab Ramos, were silent and empty.
It was just the opposite at any one of several noisy and crowded bars, where the three local heroes were the source of a celebration.


On Stage
LEAD:
Moving to the Front Burner


S.E.C. Inquiry On Great Western
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission has begun an inquiry into the 1989 financial statements of the Great Western Financial Corporation, a savings and loan association based in Beverly Hills, Calif., the institution has disclosed.
In a filing with the S.E.C., Great Western said the Federal agency was examining the timing and internal controls on an announcement by the savings institution last


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:
Of Firemen


Study Says Many Gay Black Men Don't Guard Against AIDS
LEAD: Many black homosexual men do not take precautions to prevent the spread of AIDS, and some say they would have unprotected sex even with men they know are infected with the AIDS virus, according to a non-scientific Government-sponsored study conducted by a gay group.


Senate Sends Parental Leave Bill to White House
LEAD: The Senate today passed landmark legislation requiring companies to grant workers' requests for up to three months of annual leave when a child is born or adopted and when members of the immediate family become ill.


Harvard May Drop 1992 AIDS Meeting Over Travel Limits
LEAD: Harvard University said Thursday that it would cancel its plans to be the host of the annual international AIDS conference in 1992 unless the United States removed travel restrictions on people infected with the AIDS virus.


Review/Rock;   A Double Dose of Guitar Magic at the Ritz
LEAD: The Church and the Blue Aeroplanes brought a few hours of guitar heaven to the Ritz on Tuesday night.
It's hard to imagine a more compatible double bill; both bands combine impressionistic lyrics, Dylanesque vocals, tunes steeped in folk-rock and psychedelia, and, overshadowing everything else, layer upon layer of guitar textures - riffs, chords, overtones, feedback and echoes that add up to vast, tingling whirlpools of sound.


Liberia and Rebels Discuss A Cease-Fire, Mediator Says
LEAD: Talks to end Liberia's six-month rebellion adjourned today with little sign of progress as both sides appeared to hold firm to their demands.


GTE Unit Issues Mortgage Bonds
LEAD: General Telephone of the South, a unit of GTE South Inc., is offering $125 million in first mortgage bonds due in 2030 through underwriters led by Paine Webber Inc., which made the winning competitive bid on the issue yesterday.


Key Roles for Jersey Banks In Loan Talks With Trump
LEAD: The roles of two New Jersey banks have become pivotal in the talks between Donald J. Trump and his bankers as uncertainty grew about whether a deal would be reached in time to enable Mr.
Trump to meet his debt payments, bankers involved in the talks said yesterday.


New Works and Slides
LEAD: Silent Treatment, a composers' collective, will perform Patrick Grant's Five Pieces for Small Ensemble, Brian Jost's ''Peace Suite in Three Phases,'' ''Harlem Etudes,'' a new untitled work by Frank Pergolizzi, and Larry Simon's ''Sol and Larry's America'' at Actors Outlet, 120 West 28th Street, on Sunday at 3 P.M.


Dollar, Mixed Abroad, Ends Higher in Domestic Trading
LEAD: The dollar finished mostly higher in domestic dealings yesterday after putting in a mixed performance overseas.


Digital Cuts Estimate of Net
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation unsettled investors yesterday when company officials told analysts that earnings expectations were too high.


Inventories Edged Up in April as Sales Fell
LEAD: Business inventories inched upward by one-tenth of 1 percent in April, while sales fell 1.1 percent, the Commerce Department said today in the second report this week showing increasing consumer caution.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Elvin Jones and Band


Researchers Determine How Herpes Enters the Cell
LEAD: Ending a fierce, 15-year hunt by dozens of laboratories, scientists say they have at last discovered how the herpes virus that causes cold sores invades human cells.
And in related studies, they and other researchers have detected evidence linking the virus to atheroslerosis, hardening of the arteries.


AIDS Travels New York-Puerto Rico 'Air Bridge'
LEAD: For half a century, millions of Puerto Ricans have crossed back and forth over the ''air bridge'' linking New York and San Juan.
These days, the air bridge also joins New York and its southernmost ''suburb'' in the devastating epidemic of AIDS.


Mazola's Maker Agrees To Drop Cholesterol Ads
LEAD: Without admitting wrongdoing, CPC International, the maker of Mazola corn oil products, has agreed not to run advertising that critics said overstated the products' ability to reduce cholesterol.


Top Holder Of Reebok To Sell Stake
LEAD: Reebok International Ltd., a major producer of athletic footwear, said yesterday that its largest stockholder planned to sell its Reebok shares.


Pro Bono
LEAD: * Business Committee for the Arts, to Bozell.


Evolution in Europe;   ROMANIAN MINERS INVADE BUCHAREST
LEAD: Responding to an emergency appeal by President Ion Iliescu, thousands of miners from northern Romania descended on the capital city today with wooden clubs and rubber truncheons and sought crude revenge for anti-Government rioting Wednesday.


Brevity Is Word For Tyson-Tillman
LEAD: The pre-fight rhetoric was brief.
And expectations are that the fight -Mike Tyson versus Henry Tillman tomorrow night at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev. - won't be long, either.
Neither fighter seemed much interested in bluster yesterday at the final news conference before Tyson's first bout since he lost the heavyweight title to James (Buster) Douglas in February in


Johnson Replaced
LEAD: Baaron Pittenger, the former head of the United States Olympic Committee, has been named executive director of USA Hockey, the sport's national governing body, and will assume his new job July 1.
Pittenger replaces Bob Johnson, who left Tuesday to become head coach of the Pittsburgh Penguins.(AP)


Court Blocks Censure of Judge Over Delays
LEAD: A state judge in Manhattan cannot be censured even though he took more than nine years to decide a case, the state's highest court ruled today.


Karlovy Vary Journal;   Spa Plans a Facelift, the Better to Seduce the West
LEAD: Karl Marx came here for a cure.
But now, 114 years later, this famous spa is desperately seeking to cure itself of Marx's legacy.


Why the Flag-Waving?
LEAD: Do you wonder why the ordinarily reasonable George Bush is wrapping himself in a ''flag amendment'' to lead an assault on the Bill of Rights?


15-Year-Old Shot in Subway After He Follows a Couple
LEAD: A 15-year-old boy who had followed a young couple into the Grand Central subway station was shot and seriously wounded yesterday by the girl's companion as the boy stood on a crowded platform, the police said.
The shooter then fled.


A Shanghai Cellist, 18, Wins Naumburg Prize
LEAD: Hai-Ye Ni, an 18-year-old cellist from Shanghai, has been awarded first prize in the Walter W. Naumburg International Cello Competition.
The award consists of $5,000 in cash, two Alice Tully Hall recitals, a recording with Musical Heritage Records, and orchestral and recital performances.


Jurors Are Selected For Bensonhurst Trial
LEAD: A jury was selected in the case against the Bensonhurst defendant John Vento yesterday as prosecutors and defense lawyers clashed over the panel's composition.


Frames for Frames' Sake at the Met
LEAD: With all those empty picture frames in the Lehman and American wings, the Metropolitan Museum looks as if it's been mugged.
The frames, stripped of the pictures they once contained, hang idle, protectors of nothing but space.


Holtzman Responds to Critics of Pension Plan
LEAD: Under criticism for a proposal on Tuesday to ease New York City's fiscal problems, City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman issued a terse two-paragraph statement yesterday to clarify her position.


How Gown Outwitted Town in Hanover
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Catskill Museum Celebrates Irish Culture
LEAD: The Irish American Heritage Museum opens tomorrow in East Durham, N.Y., a town, appropriately, in Greene County in the heart of the Irish Catskills.


Drug Cartel Figure Is Slain in Medellin
LEAD: The police delivered another blow to the Medellin cocaine trafficking ring by killing the man who they said masterminded a 10-month campaign that has killed hundreds of people, officials said today.


TV Weekend;   Africa to Cuba: A Musical Journey
LEAD: From the rumba to salsa, the Latin beat has become an integral component of American music.
Xavier Cugat, Carmen Miranda, Celia Cruz, Ruben Blades, Gloria Estefan and the Miami Sound Machine - past and present, they are all included in ''Routes of Rhythm With Harry Belafonte,'' a three-part documentary series getting under way tonight at 9 on Channel 13.


Argentine Soap Opera: 'First Family'
LEAD: Although the separation of President Carlos Saul Menem and Zulema Yoma de Menem has the flavor of a melodrama, she says the real issue between them is that he is unable to control corruption in his Government.


Producer Prices Up 0.3% in May
LEAD: Prices at the producer level rose by three-tenths of 1 percent in May as a sharp upturn in the cost of food was largely offset by another hefty decline in the cost of energy, the Government reported today.


Neiman Marcus Stake Acquired
LEAD: A group led by the New York investment adviser Mario J. Gabelli acquired a 5.49 percent voting stake in the Neiman Marcus Group for a total purchase price of $26.93 million.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Gabelli group said it had acquired the shares for investment purposes.


Lord Ponsonby, British Politician, 59
LEAD: Lord Ponsonby of Shulbrede, chief opposition whip in the House of Lords, died Wednesday, the Labor Party announced.
He was 59 years old and was hospitalized last month, but no cause of death was given.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article yesterday about plans by the New York Stock Exchange for late-night trading misidentified the nation's oldest stock exchange.
The Philadelphia exchange, founded in 1790, is two years older than New York's.


Goodwill Rule Is Rushing Some Stars Back to Track
LEAD: Carl Lewis, working on an autobiography, is not in the best of shape.
Butch Reynolds has a tender hamstring.
Mary Slaney is coming back from her latest leg injury.
Roger Kingdom has hay fever.
Leroy Burrell has the flu.


Review/Ballet;   Bustamante Makes Debut In 'Giselle'
LEAD: American Ballet Theater continues to present debuts in a season that has been marked by outstanding performances.
Ricardo Bustamante's first appearance as Albrecht in ''Giselle'' at the Metropolitan Opera House fell well within this category.


Liberties Union Asks New Police Complaint Board
LEAD: The New York Civil Liberties Union yesterday called for a sweeping reorganization of the Police Department's Civilian Complaint Review Board, asserting that many New Yorkers had lost faith in the panel's ability to investigate allegations of police abuse impartially.


Service for Ethan Hoffman
LEAD: A memorial for Ethan Hoffman, a magazine photographer, will be held on Wednesday at 7:30 P.M. at the Kaufmann Hall of the 92d Street Y, Lexington Avenue at 92d Street.
Mr.
Hoffman, who was 40 years old, died on June 1 after being injured on an assignment in Newark.


Willis Peter Bilderback, Lacrosse Coach, 81
LEAD: Willis Peter Bilderback, whose Naval Academy lacrosse teams won eight consecutive national titles between 1959 and 1966, died Tuesday.
He was 81 years old.


Pistons Rally to Repeat as N.B.A. Champions
LEAD: Vinnie Johnson's jump shot swished through the net with 0.07 seconds left in tonight's game, sinking hearts in Portland and giving the Detroit Pistons a place in basketball history.


Only Washington Can Break Mideast Stalemate;   Stupid, Immoral Act
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S.-Canada Pact Review
LEAD: The 18-month-old United States-Canada free trade agreement is working well, although some problems remain, United States officials told Congress today.


Florio Battling For Fiscal Plan In Radio Appeal
LEAD: Gov.
Jim Florio began an unusual radio campaign today to win the hearts and minds of middle-class voters in New Jersey as political pressures mounted for a crucial vote in the Legislature next week on his plans to raise taxes and drastically change the way state spends money on schoolchildren.


Prices of Treasury Securities Drop
LEAD: Economic indicators that suggested some strength in the economy sent prices of Treasury securities tumbling yesterday.


Berlin Has Good Claim as German Capital;   No Decision Soon
LEAD: To the Editor:


A DISRUPTION OF IRT SERVICE
LEAD: There will be no uptown subway service on the Nos. 1, 2, or 3 lines between the 42d Street and 96th Street stations for three weekends beginning today, the Transit Authority announced yesterday.


In Consumer's World: Air Bags, Pill Bottles
LEAD: Auto makers are planning to put air bags in more models - at $1,000 each - and install them on the passenger side as well as the driver's side.
In addition, air bags and automatic seat belts will become more common in pickup trucks, minivans and sport and utility vehicles.


Joyce Typescript Moves to Texas
LEAD: A typescript of the opening chapter of James Joyce's ''Finnegans Wake,'' with the author's additions written in by hand, has turned up in Texas after being discovered in a private collection last year in Paris.


Mandela's Visit Propels Talks on Civil Rights Bill
LEAD: The Bush Administration has intensified efforts to reach a compromise with Congress on civil rights legislation, partly to avoid a divisive debate later this month during the visit of Nelson Mandela, the African National Congress leader.


174 Seized as U.S. Moves Against 2 Gangs
LEAD: Federal agents moving against members of two violent Los Angeles-based street gangs have arrested 174 people in 11 states over the last two days, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms announced today.


Chamorro to Cut Army by a Third, With Sandinista General's Assent
LEAD: President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro of Nicaragua announced today that she had ordered a one-third reduction in the size of the Nicaraguan Army, the biggest force in Central America and the most powerful political weapon in the arsenal of the opposition Sandinista Front.


Prol Prices Down Sharply; Orange Juice Demand Slows
LEAD: The prices of pork futures fell sharply here today because retail food stores are promoting beef and chicken rather than pork.


Executive Raises Stake in Ultimate
LEAD: Norman Elowitz, a New York fashion executive, has raised his stake in the Ultimate Corporation to 8.4 percent from 7.2 percent.
Between May 1 and June 5, Mr.
Elowitz bought 64,500 shares for $5.25 to $7.125 each.
The company's stock slipped 25 cents today, to $6.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Writers Sue Computer Maker Over Injuries
LEAD: Seven writers and an editor from different news organizations filed a $270 million product liability suit in Federal District Court in Manhattan yesterday against Atex, Inc. claiming the company's computer system they used on the job had caused them personal injuries.


Holder Sues Bond Unit
LEAD: A shareholder in one of Alan Bond's companies filed suit this week contending that the struggling Australian company had illegally siphoned about $720 million out of a subsidiary without intending to repay the money.


'If I Could Be HIV Positive, Any Woman Can'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss Katz Weds Robert Kasanof
LEAD: Stephanie S. Katz, a psychotherapist, was married yesterday to Robert Kasanof, the chairman of the New York City Board of Correction, at the home of Yolanda Mestre, a friend of the couple, in Valle de Bravo, Mexico.
Judge Mario O. Alvarez of the Civil Court of Valle de Bravo officiated.


Evolution in Europe;   Romanians Ponder Burst of Violence
LEAD: Ion Ratiu, an opposition leader in the Romanian Parliament, surveyed the wreckage left by a band of marauding miners who occupied his house on Thursday.
Amid the papers strewn across the floor, the broken pictures and the ripped-open boxes, he pondered his next step.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ELIZABETH TAYLOR left St.
John's Hospital and Medical Center in Santa Monica, Calif., on Thursday night after a two-month bout with viral pneumonia and complications.
She is to recuperate at her home in Beverly Hills.


Iranian Accord With Amoco Lifts a Barrier to U.S. Trade
LEAD: Iran removed one of the biggest obstacles to a renewal of trade with the United States today by agreeing to pay an American oil company $600 million for installations seized in the Islamic revolution in 1979.


CHANCES SEEM DIM ON CANADIAN PACT
LEAD: With about a week to go before a June 23 deadline, Canada's chances of approving a package of constitutional measures to keep Quebec in the confederation appear to be diminishing.


Patents;   Quick Way To Analyze Cholesterol
LEAD: A professor at the University of Wisconsin in Milwaukee this week patented a method for measuring a person's levels of ''good'' and ''bad'' cholesterol in about 15 minutes.


Two Citibank Couriers Held in Aborted Heist
LEAD: Two couriers for Citibank were arrested yesterday on charges implicating them in an aborted bank robbery in Manhattan on Wednesday that ended in a shootout with bank guards.
One suspect died, another was arrested and a guard was wounded in the incident.


Braniff Asset Sale Brings $59 Million
LEAD: A Federal bankruptcy judge on Thursday approved bids totaling $59 million for Braniff Inc.'s most valuable assets.
The airline, based in Orlando, is liquidating under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code and has received $7 million more than originally planned for the assets.


Lina Plowden-Wardlaw Weds in Paris
LEAD: Lina du Fontenioux Plowden-Wardlaw, a daughter of Mrs.
Jacques C. Bouteiller of Paris and James C. Plowden-Wardlaw of New York, was married yesterday in Paris to John-Marc Clouet Quilter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Q. Quilter of New York.
The Rev.
Paul Francis officiated at a Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.-Medard de Paris after a civil ceremony performed by Mayor Georges Gorse at the Boulogne District Town


No Word for Harrison On Tony Broadcast
LEAD: To the Editor:


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.25
9.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.69SY7.67
8.14
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.63
7.58
7.97
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.47
8.38
8.38
30-YR.


Jay Doyle, Actor, 59
LEAD: Jay Doyle, a character actor who worked primarily in regional theaters, died June 2 in St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 59 years old.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Exhausted by their revels on the party circuit this spring, organizers of the annual gala to benefit MERCE CUNNINGHAM's dance company had an idea: would-be patrons are being invited to stay at home and watch Mr.
Cunningham's video ''Changing Steps.'' For a $300 donation, they get a free copy.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JUNE 16, 1990
LEAD:
Companies


Tanker Blaze Out; Bacteria Test Begins
LEAD: On a day of jubilance and optimism, firefighters today extinguished the fire on a Norwegian supertanker and stopped the flow of oil.
Minutes later scientists sprayed natural bacteria across a 40-acre patch of floating oil in the first open-sea test of a novel method for controlling oil pollution.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Mortgage Rates
LEAD: Mortgage lending rates, which were up earlier this year after falling at the close of 1989, have dropped sharply in the last month.
If you are in the market for a mortgage loan, the Federal National Mortgage Association says there is plenty of mortgage money available.
However, you can expect to be asked to come up with a larger down payment and more documents to show the sources of your income.


Arrest in Fire at Group Home
LEAD: A Bridgeport man was charged with arson-murder and held on $1 million bail today in a fire Thursday at a home for the mentally ill here in which a man died and three people were hurt.
The authorities said the suspect, Joe Miller, 29 years old, set the fire to punish an ex-girlfriend at the home, the Transitional Living Center.


Clyde Allison Jr., 31, A Manhattan Lawyer
LEAD: Clyde H. Allison Jr., a former special counsel to the Congressional subcommittee investigating allegations of mismanagement at the Department of Housing and Urban Development during the Reagan Administration, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 31 years old.
Mr.
Allision died in his sleep, apparently of a stroke, said Martin London, a partner in the Manhattan firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, where Mr.


Joe Wright, Civil Rights Protester In North Carolina, Is Dead at 37
LEAD: Joe Wright, one of 10 people whose arrests and jailing for the firebombing of a grocery store became a rallying point for the civil rights movement, died on Wednesday at Hanover Memorial Hospital here.
He was 37 years old.


PAYMENT DEADLINE MISSED BY TRUMP, BUT TALKS GO ON
LEAD: Donald J. Trump failed to pay about $73 million that was due yesterday to banks and bondholders, but bankers said substantial progress was made during the day on a deal to provide new loans to keep the Trump empire afloat.


Author Is Told To Pay Millions For '81 Slaying
LEAD: A Manhattan jury awarded $7.57 million in damages yesterday to the widow of a young aspiring actor who was stabbed to death nine years ago outside an East Village restaurant by the jailhouse author Jack Henry Abbott.


NATO A la Francaise
LEAD: For France, this is de Gaulle's year: a memorial with subtle Gallic undertones of change to adjust to a new shape of Europe.
The emphasis is on nostalgia, grandeur and, just below the surface, NATO.


Who's Afraid of Foreign Ideas?
LEAD: Exposure to Western ideas helped undermine Communism in Eastern Europe.
So it's scarcely surprising that Communist regimes in Cuba, North Korea and Vietnam now worry about infection from Western visitors, cultural imports and educational exchanges.
Perversely, U.S. law helps hard-liners exclude American ideas by restricting the right of


Off Florida, Rangers to Rescue of Fragile Reef


I.B.M.-Kodak Venture Set
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation and the Eastman Kodak Company said yesterday that they had formed an alliance to develop advanced publishing systems for newspapers and magazines.


Valises of Body Parts Linked to Mob Family
LEAD: Two suitcases containing dismembered bodies believed to be those of victims of an organized-crime ring that specialized in robbing and killing drug dealers were unearthed yesterday on Staten Island, Federal authorities said.


In Senate, Less Action But More Name-Calling
LEAD: This is the time of year when the wheels of government usually start spinning faster and faster, when lawmakers abandon all pretense of measured deliberation and pass dozens of bills at a clip in an effort to finish their annual session and go home.


Evolution in Europe: Moscow Journal From Black (or Red) Market to White
LEAD: While all about the Kremlin Mikhail S. Gorbachev's planners and worriers puzzle about the fallen Soviet economy as if it were Humpty Dumpty, Gennadi M. Poleshuk has quietly sold this city government on creating an oasis of capitalism called the white market.


Holtzman Haste, Albany Urgency
LEAD: New York City was bound to have a rough time getting the State Legislature to authorize its package of new and higher taxes.
But this week, because of a remarkably clumsy move by the new City Comptroller, Elizabeth Holtzman, the task got harder still.
Now, unless Albany quickly meets its responsibility, the city is likely to miss the June 30 deadline for a new budget.


Jump in Industrial Output Seen as Temporary
LEAD: Industrial production jumped by six-tenths of 1 percent in May, the Federal Reserve reported today, but analysts said the sharp increase was mainly because of a temporary buildup in automobile inventories.


Lewis C. Robbin, Health Official, 80
LEAD: Dr.
Lewis C. Robbins, the first chief of cancer control for the United States Public Health Service, died of cancer on Thursday at Methodist Hospital here.
He was 80 years old and lived in Indianapolis.


FLASH FLOODS KILL AT LEAST 11 IN OHIO
LEAD: Torrential thunderstorms sent a flash flood surging through a valley and into this Ohio River town Thursday night, killing at least 11 people and leaving dozens missing and dozens more Homeless.


Louise Howlett, Chaplain, Weds
LEAD: The Rev.
Louise Howlett and G. Lindsay Brown were married yesterday at the Williams College Chapel in Williamstown, Mass., by the Rev.
Kenneth Coleman, an Episcopal minister.


Consumer Prices Show Modest Rise
LEAD: Consumer prices rose by two-tenths of 1 percent in May, the second straight month of modest inflation after a first-quarter surge that is now clearly seen to have been an aberration.


Pakistan Fans Flames of Kashmir Violence
LEAD: To the Editor:


Childproof Caps Are Often Ignored
LEAD: Safety caps designed to prevent children from ingesting drugs and chemicals are resistant to many adults, as well.
As a result, adults do not use the caps or fail to close them properly and young children are still poisoned at an alarming rate.


Detroit Basketball Celebration Turns Violent
LEAD: Basketball fans' spontaneous celebrations of the Detroit Pistons' league championship degenerated early today into violence, vandalism, looting and eight deaths.


Guetterman Loses Battle and Yanks Lose, Too
LEAD: Lee Guetterman could not sustain the dramatics, missing by an inch or so last night.
And so the Yankees extended their sorry American League record by bowing, 5-4, to the Eastern Division leaders, the Toronto Blue Jays.


World Bank Applicants
LEAD: The World Bank's president, Barber B. Conable Jr., said on Wednesday that Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria had applied for membership and could become members as early as this fall.
Mr.
Conable said he expected that the two East European nations would ''doubtlessly be accepted by the time of the annual meeting,'' which is scheduled for late September in Washington.


Late Gain of 7.67 Puts Dow at Record High
LEAD: The stock market yesterday weathered the uncertainties of its ''triple witching hour,'' a weak bond market and disparate economic reports as the Dow Jones industrial average closed with a last-minute gain of 7.67 points to set a record high in strong volume.


Visa Loses British Suit
LEAD: A high court judge today backed the Government's plan to allow retailers to charge cash customers less than those who use credit cards.


Microsoft Planning Bigger Work Force
LEAD: The Microsoft Corporation, the large independent software manufacturer, will increase its work force by more than 50 percent in the next year, a company official said.
Employment of 5,200 will expand to about 8,000 by the end of June 1991, said Frank Gaudette, chief financial officer for the company, based in Redmond,


Chrysler Pact With Honda To Sell Jeeps
LEAD: The Honda Motor Company Ltd. has agreed to make part of its dealer network in Japan available to the Chrysler Corporation to sell two Jeep sport-utility vehicles, the companies said today.


Nine Hours, Nine Killings, No Answers
LEAD: At 3 P.M., 14-year-old Shawn Chapman saw two friends being harassed by another teen-ager on a Bronx street.
He tried to intercede.
Without a word, the teen-ager pulled out a revolver and shot him.


Second Manuscript Turns Up in German Hands
LEAD: A second illuminated manuscript from the hoard of medieval treasures stolen from the German town of Quedlinburg in the closing days of World War II has just been sold to a West German art dealer.


Albany Must Certify Voting Machines
LEAD: To the Editor:


Liberian President Criticizes U.S. on Aid
LEAD: President Samuel K. Doe bitterly criticized the United States today for not assisting the Liberian Government, ''its oldest ally on the African continent,'' in the Government's six-month civil war with rebel forces.


Import Fall Narrows Trade Gap
LEAD: As a softer economy cut demand for imports, the trade deficit fell 17 percent in April, to $6.94 billion, the Commerce Department reported today.
It was the second-lowest level in more than six years.


Ballesteros Rediscovers Magic Wand
LEAD: Someday there should be a golf museum to celebrate Seve Ballesteros the magician.
His wedge out of a parking lot to the 16th green at Royal Lytham and St.
Anne's in winning the 1979 British Open.
His 7-iron over a leaderboard to the 17th green at Augusta National in winning the 1980 Masters.
His birdie 3, eagle 3, par 4, birdie 2 start in the final round in winning the 1983 Masters.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Krishna Procession, Fifth Avenue from 59th Street to Washington Square Park will be closed today from noon until about 3 P.M.


British Challenge to Nielsen Ratings Seen
LEAD: AGB Television Research, the British rating company that lost a 1980's bid to supplant the A. C. Nielsen Company in measuring American television audiences, will renew its challenge to Nielsen at the invitation of the three big American broadcast networks, a senior network executive said yesterday.


Hispanic Growth in California Makes State a Testing Ground
LEAD: The vibrant prosperity of California has drawn and rewarded many waves of migrants, both American and foreign, but some see a gloomy alternative prospect if more is not done to absorb the state's fast-growing Hispanic work force.


Key Inside Trader Gets 2 Months
LEAD: More than three years after he pleaded guilty to insider trading charges, Martin A. Siegel, a former takeover specialist at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, was sentenced yesterday to two months in prison and five years of probation.
He received no fine.


William Casey, 76, Theology Professor And Jesuit Educator
LEAD: The Rev.
William Van Etten Casey, a former academic vice president of Boston College and later professor of theology at Holy Cross College, died Wednesday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 76 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Tuesday about the political ties of a savings and loan owner, Carl M. Rheuban, misstated the Federal charges on which a business associate, Michael R. Goland, was convicted last month.
He was convicted of having exceeded the individual donation limit in contributions to a third-party candidate in the 1986 Senate race in California won by Alan Cranston.


The Meese Mess, Thornburgh Variation
LEAD: The spectacle of the Attorney General of the United States wired to a lie detector is an uncomfortable sign that all is not well at Dick Thornburgh's Justice Department.
Mr.
Thornburgh is said to have passed that polygraph test, which cannot be said for two of his trusted aides.
These are surprising, sad developments for an Attorney


Photo: Coast Guard Cutter Dallas Rejoins Fleet


Review/Ballet;   Robbins's Vision of Three Concertos
LEAD: Concertos dominated the program Thursday night at the New York State Theater.
Three of the four works the New York City Ballet presented as part of its Festival of Jerome Robbins's Ballets were set to concertos.


David Corcoran Dies; Ex-Drug Executive, 86
LEAD: David M. Corcoran, president of the international division of Sterling Drug Inc., for 40 years before his retirement in 1973, died in his sleep on Thursday at his home in Waterville Valley, N.H., his family reported.
He was 86 years old.


Sri Lanka Rebels Raid Vital Airfield in North
LEAD: Tamil rebels today fired mortars at a vital airfield in the Jaffna peninsula at the north of this island nation, minutes after a Government minister had left at the end of a round of peace talks, military officials said.


Clerics at Odds on Excommunication for Abortion
LEAD: Roman Catholic clergymen and scholars are voicing widely varying views on John Cardinal O'Connor's warning to Roman Catholic politicians that they risk excommunication if they persist in supporting a woman's right to abortion.


'Dick Tracy' Sends Disney Shares Up
LEAD: The common stock of the Walt Disney Company rose today on speculation that its new ''Dick Tracy'' movie would provide a big payoff to the company.
Disney's shares rose $2.75 each today to close at $131.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.


'Junk Bonds' for Casino Fall On News of Missed Payment
LEAD: ''Junk bonds'' of casinos owned by Donald J. Trump fell sharply yesterday on the news of a missed interest payment to holders of two junk bond issues by Trump's Castle.
But the decline did not spill over into the rest of the market for low-rated bonds, where traders called the action quiet.


Books of The Times;   A Time of the Tyrants in a North African Village
LEAD:
Lion Mountain
By Mustapha Tlili
Translated by Linda Coverdale. 180 Pages. Arcade/Little, Brown. $18.95.


PRESIDENT VETOES A BILL AND MAKES THREAT ON SECOND
LEAD: President Bush today vetoed a bill that would have relaxed restrictions on partisan political activity by Federal workers.
The White House said Mr.
Bush would also veto another hotly debated piece of legislation mandating unpaid leave for workers with new babies or facing a family emergency.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Among the most cherished of British honors is the bestowal of a title that allows one to be called Sir or Lady.
As part of the observance of Queen Elizabeth's official birthday today, the writer KINGSLEY AMIS and the actor PETER USTINOV are being made knights, and ROBERT RUNCIE, the Archbishop of Canterbury, is being awarded a life peerage.


Review Set on Harrods
LEAD: The British conglomerate Lonrho said today that it had been granted permission for a new court challenge in connection with its failed effort to take over Harrods, the London luxury department store.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: wards flutter like diplomas and confetti in June:


Pistons Get a Taste Of N.B.A. History
LEAD: One championship was not enough to satisfy the Detroit Pistons' thirst for winning, their thirst for respect or their thirst for a place in history.


Your Money;   'Junk Bond' Funds Seem to Glimmer
LEAD: ''Junk Bond'' funds, after a bruising first quarter, seem to be on the mend.
And with high-yield, high-risk funds making money in the last couple of months, instead of losing it, more investors are buying fund shares than redeeming them.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Selecting a Nursing Home
LEAD: If you are seeking a nursing home for yourself or a family member, or anticipating such a decision, a new Government publication can be another helpful tool.
It answers a good many questions about the population and performance of homes throughout the country.


Berlin Has Good Claim as German Capital
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Boost for Both Countries
LEAD: Remove trade barriers between the U.S. and Mexico: it's a good idea that the United States has long favored.
Now President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico accepts the idea.
By agreeing, Congress can bring more jobs and cheaper consumer goods to both countries.


Baking Soda Maker Strikes Again
LEAD: Nearly 150 years after the family-run business that became the Church &amp; Dwight Company began making baking soda, a new and more aggressive management and the environmental movement are breathing new life into the company's famous Arm &amp; Hammer trademark.


Town's Serenity Shattered By 17 Fires Linked to Arson
LEAD: At 11:15 P.M. on Thursday, when the film ''Enemies: A Love Story'' ended, the owner of the Copake Theater, Allen Lampman, carefully pulled the master electric switch to ''off'' as a precaution against fire before going home.


Harry F. Bliss Jr., 75, Executive at Cyanamid
LEAD: Harry F. Bliss Jr., a former president of the international division of the American Cyanamid Company, died last Saturday at his home in Naples, Fla.
He was 75 years old.
His family said he died from bone cancer.


Praising Mandela, Dinkins Shakes Fragile Coalition
LEAD: For David N. Dinkins, political tempests over the approaching visit of Nelson Mandela have proved again just how hard it is to hold together the tiles of the city that the Mayor never tires of calling a gorgeous mosaic.


Critics Notebook;   Laurel With and Without Hardy
LEAD: ''Officer,'' says Uncle Piedmont (Oliver Hardy), both haughty and embarrassed, ''make those people stop laughing at my nephew.''


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the retirement of Bertram A. Powers as president of the New York Typographical Union misidentified his successor in some copies.
He is James Grottola, not Grattola.


Holyfield Sends Manager Packing
LEAD: Evander Holyfield, who is scheduled to fight James (Buster) Douglas in September for the heavyweight title, said yesterday that he had dismissed his manager, Ken Sanders.


Celtics Press for Shaw
LEAD: The Celtics asked a Federal Court in Boston yesterday to prevent Brian Shaw from playing another season for an Italian team after an arbitrator confirmed the validity of a contract signed by the guard with the Celtics over the winter.


John T. Ega, Monsignor, 71
LEAD: Msgr.
John T. Egan, pastor of St.
Sebastian's Roman Catholic Church in Woodside, Queens, died on Thursday.
He was 71 years old and lived in Queens.


Helen Mazer, 78, Dies; Led Charitable Groups
LEAD: Helen Cohen Mazer, long active in New York civic affairs, died on Thursday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
She was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Evolution in Europe;   Sharply Split Bulgaria Votes Again Tomorrow
LEAD: As this country prepares for the final round of its first multiparty parliamentary elections in more than four decades, scheduled for Sunday, a broad political chasm separates supporters of the renamed Communist Party and backers of the anti-Communist opposition.


Still Sizzling, the Mets and Magadan Go 4 for 4
LEAD: To Dave Magadan, the hottest hitter on a team of hot hitters, this is the way life on a streak looks these days: ''The ball is in front of me.
It looks like it's coming in slow motion.
I feel better swinging at it than I've ever felt.
And, if it's two or three inches inside or outside, I'm not swinging at it.


RESULT PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
McEnroe and Lendl in Semifinal
John McEnroe and Ivan Lendl, who both reached the semifinals of the Stella Artois tournament in London yesterday, will meet on grass today for the first time in seven years.
Lendl, the No. 1 player in the world, breezed past David Pate, 6-2, 6-4, while McEnroe had more of a problem with Richard Fromberg, 6-7, 6-3, 7-5.


Undersea Police Protect Fragile Reef Off Florida
LEAD: Reef rangers prowl the depths here, armed with grease pencils, plastic slates and scuba tanks, ticketing any who abuse the fragile coral heads that make up the third largest barrier reef in the world and the only one in the continental United States.


Island's Hushed Scandals, Unhushed
LEAD: After years of hushed scandals that failed to spoil the calm of this tourist haven, the discovery that a shipment of Israeli arms was sent through Antigua on its way to Colombian drug traffickers has shaken the nearly five-decade dominion of Prime Minister Vere C. Bird.


THE TRUMP EMPIRE
LEAD: Debt payments due yesterday on Trump's Castle and Bank loans were not made.


Auto Makers, Under Pressure, Plan Air Bags in More Models
LEAD: Under pressure from safety advocates, facing stiffer Federal laws and expecting a possible groundswell in consumer demand, auto makers plan to increase the number of car models that offer air bags.
They will be installing them on the passenger's side as well as the driver's side.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
2-5
The United States will support a fund intended to help developing countries phase out chemicals that are destroying the earth's ozone layer, the White House said, reversing its earlier opposition to the international fund.
Page 1
Nicaragua's army would be reduced by one-third under an order issued by President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro.


2 Lead By 2 Shots In L.P.G.A.
LEAD: The winds were higher during the afternoon in the second round of the Atlantic City Classic today and the scores followed suit.


Patents;   A No-Needle Method For Inoculating Eggs
LEAD: In an attempt to help newborn chicks ward off contagious illness, two researchers at Iowa State University have invented a method for inoculating unhatched eggs without puncturing them with needles.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about the Newtown Creek sewage treatment plant in Brooklyn referred incorrectly to the area it serves.
It accepts waste from much of northern Brooklyn, but not from downtown Brooklyn.


Evolution in Europe;   Final Months of Berlin Wall
LEAD: East Germany has set a deadline of December for total demolition of the Berlin wall, which sealed citizens off from the West for 28 years.
The state press agency quoted Maj.
Gen.
Dieter Teichmann, chief of the border troops, as saying that the concrete barrier would be gone by December.
On Wednesday, East Germans began knocking out wall slabs all over the city to reopen blocked streets.


BUSH AIDE OPPOSES SANCTIONS ON IRAQ
LEAD: While strongly criticizing the Iraqi Government for its human rights record and foreign policy, a senior Bush Administration official urged Congress today to resist growing sentiment among legislators to apply economic sanctions against the Government of President Saddam Hussein.


Welch Wins 7th in Row as A's Hold Off White Sox, 5-4
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics, five outs away from dropping out of first place in the American League West, got two-run hits from Dave Henderson and Terry Steinbach tonight in an eighth-inning rally and slowed the surging Chicago White Sox, 5-4.


Religion Notes
LEAD:
Conventions at Variance


Passengers Go Greyhound, and Driving Is Left to Them
LEAD: A bus passenger took the wheel yesterday from a replacement driver for strike-plagued Greyhound Bus Lines and drove from Delaware to New York after the driver told riders he didn't know how to use a stick shift.


Union Assails Pickens Plan
LEAD: The labor union at the Koito Manufacturing Company today denounced an attempt by the Texas oilman T. Boone Pickens to get a seat on the company's board.


Japan's Personal Savings
LEAD: The Japanese are saving more than ever despite American demands that the country reduce its emphasis on thrift.
Personal savings in Japan grew by 71.6 trillion yen, or about $468 billion, in the fiscal year that ended in March, to reach a record high of 713.5 trillion yen ($4.66 trillion).


Evolution in Europe;   Gorbachev Supporter Voted Russian Premier
LEAD: A national bureaucrat was elected Prime Minister of the Russian republic today, defeating an ally of the republic's President, Boris N. Yeltsin, the official press agency Tass reported.


Contel to Offer 900 Early Retirement
LEAD: The Contel Corporation said it was offering early retirement to about 900 employees in a previously announced cost-cutting program.
The company said it was using the program to avoid layoffs while reducing its work force.
Under the plan, a retirement ''window'' will be created in July, during which retiring employees will have three years added each to their ages and to their service dates in determining individual benefits.


Financier Sentenced


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


Laura Lord Scale, Retired Dean, 110
LEAD: Laura Lord Scales, a former dean of Smith College and its oldest graduate, died Tuesday at a retirement home in Northampton.
She was 110 years old.


Czech Phone Pact
LEAD: The Bell Atlantic Corporation and U S West Inc. said they had won the right to form a joint venture company with the Czechoslovak Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications to help to modernize that nation's telecommunications system.
No financial terms were disclosed.
Bell Atlantic said the venture would be 51 percent owned by the Czechoslovak agency and the rest by the American companies.


Guy Paulin Is Dead; Clothes Designer, 44, Created Casual Style
LEAD: Guy Paulin, the Parisian fashion designer, died on Wednesday at Pitie-Salpetriere hospital in Paris.
He was 44 years old.
The cause of death was not made public.


Move by Pilots At Eastern
LEAD: The leaders of the pilots' union at Eastern Airlines said yesterday that they would not take any action against the 600 union pilots who crossed picket lines after Aug. 6 of last year, months before the union called off its strike.


KENNEDY CENTER NAMES A TV CHIEF
LEAD: James D. Wolfensohn, chairman of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, has announced the appointment of Carolyn Reynolds as director of television and special projects.
The position is new; the only regularly scheduled Kennedy Center television program in the past has been the annual Kennedy Center


Federal Inquiry Into USAir
LEAD: The Pittsburgh operations of USAir Group Inc., parent of the nation's seventh-largest airline, are being investigated by the Justice Department for possible antitrust violations, a Pittsburgh law-enforcement official said yesterday.
James Dodaro, Allegheny


Executive Charged With Selling 'Star Wars' Data
LEAD: A software company executive was arrested today after allegedly selling ''Star Wars'' technology to a Federal agent posing as a buyer for South Africa.


When a Tick Takes a Bite
LEAD: When you spend time outdoors this summer, a real concern should be ticks that might carry Lyme disease.
If you are bitten, removing the tick or ticks quickly and cleanly is vital, but can be a problem.
A new instrument, the Tick Solution, makes it easier to remove the pinhead-size deer ticks that spread the disease, thus decreasing the possibility of further infection.


For Errant Senator, Warm Embrace
LEAD: Senator Dave Durenberger returned home today to the warm embrace of Minnesota Republicans and, with the sort of emotion that had once been rare in his public life, asked their forgiveness for ''my actions, my inactions and for how all of this is reflecting on you.''


Police Patrol West Jerusalem After Rioting


Tim Simpson Leads as Records Fall at Open
LEAD: Like a groggy prizefighter struggling to recover from a brutal knockdown, Medinah continued to take a pummeling from the world's best players today as record scores mounted up after two rounds of the 90th United States Open.


Meg Concannon Wed to Timothy Joyce
LEAD: Margaret Anne Concannon, a daughter of Dr.
Patrick J. Concannon of New York and Carol Anne Concannon of Manhasset, L.I., was married last evening to Timothy Michael Joyce, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Joyce 3d of New Rochelle, N.Y.
The Rev.
Leo J. O'Donovan, president of Georgetown University, officiated at St.


Pathe Again Extends Offer for MGM/UA
LEAD: The Pathe Communications Corporation said yesterday that it was again extending its $1.2 billion offer for of MGM/UA Communications.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allegheny International Inc., Pittsburgh, which makes appliances, said its Sunbeam Corp. (Canada) Ltd. unit would consolidate some operations of its Solaray and Sunbeam divisions in Toronto by the end of the year.


Lewis Blasts to a Victory Over Witherspoon in 100
LEAD: The sports director of KHYS-FM in Houston was up at 4:30 this morning to tape his 7:20 and 8:20 A.M. shows.
He talked about the National Basketball Association playoffs, gave the baseball scores and told how good he felt after running his first real races in nine months.


Dollar, Mixed Abroad, Dips In U.S. After Data's Release
LEAD: The dollar lost ground in domestic trading yesterday and finished mixed in Europe in volatile action after the release of several economic reports.


Czechoslovakia Reaches Round 2
LEAD: Czechoslovakia today assured itself of advancing beyond the first round of the World Cup finals for the first time since 1962 by defeating Austria, 1-0.


U.S. Team Savoring the Thrill of Defeat
LEAD: A perceptible sense of relief seemed to radiate from the United States soccer team today, as memories of the night before continued to underline a job well done.


Tyson in (New) Shape
LEAD: Some big questions about Mike Tyson remain to be answered as he prepares for his first bout since he lost his heavyweight title to James (Buster) Douglas in February in Tokyo.


Soviets Assail Refereeing
LEAD: Soviet soccer officials today protested what they called biased refereeing in the World Cup matches of the Soviet team, which has been virtually eliminated from the tournament.
The protest was made to FIFA, soccer's international governing body.


Almost 6% On Subways Beating Fares
LEAD: A record number of people are riding the subways without paying - by vaulting over turnstiles, passing through gates illegally, slipping less than the full fare into collection boxes and stealing millions of dollars worth of tokens.


U.S. Financing Unit Established by Nissan
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Company today established an American-based corporate finance unit, Nissan Capital of America Inc., opening a new channel for raising money to expand its activities here.


Corrections
LEAD: A dance review on Thursday about Jerome Robbins's ''Watermill'' at the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center misidentified the male dancer in the duet.
He was Brian Reeder, not Robert Lyon.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I want a sacred Nicaragua, which instead of burying its sons in a war between brothers will forever bury its arms so that the cannons will never roar again.''
- President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro. [1:5.]


Probably Needed Rewiring
LEAD: Glancing at the sports page, I was amazed to find the basketball season still in progress.
Then I glanced at the Washington pages and was amazed again, which reminded me of why I swore off Scrabble years ago.


Brooklyn's Representative Renamed to School Board
LEAD: Despite indications that he was considering new candidates for the Board of Education, Borough President Howard Golden of Brooklyn yesterday reappointed Dr.
Irene H. Impellizzeri, who has served on the board for the last 10 years.


Western Union Plan Approved
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission has approved a plan by the Western Union Corporation to swap $530 million in debt for new notes and stock in an effort to avert bankruptcy.


Dual Trade Ban Challenged
LEAD: Two studies that were released this week have attacked the underlying premise of a rule proposed by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission that would restrict dual trading.


'If I Could Be HIV Positive, Any Woman Can';   Food-Handling Ban
LEAD: To the Editor:


An Eakins Classic Stays In Texas
LEAD: Thomas Eakins's painting ''The Swimming Hole'' (circa 1884) was bought today by the Amon Carter Museum here from the Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth.
The sale, for $10 million, ends a complex and sometimes acrimonious negotiation that began over a year ago between the neighboring institutions.


U.S. TO BACK FUND TO PROTECT OZONE
LEAD: Reversing a policy decision, the White House said today that it would support a new international fund to help poorer countries phase out chemicals that are destroying the earth's ozone layer.


John Sloane, 72, Dies; Investment Counselor
LEAD: John Edison Sloane, an investment counselor and a grandson of Thomas A. Edison, died on Thursday at his home in Summit, N.J., at the age of 72.
He died of multiple strokes, the Brough Funeral Home said.


Lobster Dealer Guilty in Insurance Plot
LEAD: The president of the largest offshore lobster business in Connecticut, James P. Garbo, was found guilty today of scheming with a captain to sink a company boat to collect $270,000 in insurance.


About New York;   At Age 98.6, Love and Laughs In Large Supply
LEAD: ''A lot has changed since 1891,'' remarked Sigmund Sternfeld, sipping a whiskey sour.


Frank S. Endicott, 85, Job Placement Expert
LEAD: Frank S. Endicott, creator of the annual Endicott Report, the job barometer for graduating college students and the business community, died of heart failure on June 8 at a retirement home in Evanston.
He was 85 years old.


Bridge
LEAD: Runners are sure that physical exercise promotes longevity, and bridge players are equally confident, without scientific evidence, that mental exercise serves the same end.
The number of centenarian players is relatively high, and nonagenarian enthusiasts are thick on the ground.


Inside
LEAD:
Romanians Take Stock


Prospect Park Welcomes Brooklyn Expatriates
LEAD: To the Editor:


At Least 11 Dead in Flash Flood in Ohio


Ryszard Cieslak, Actor, 53
LEAD: Ryszard Cieslak, an actor and a central figure in the Polish Laboratory Theater, died Thursday at the Burzynski Research Institute in Houston.
He was 53 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Harbor Regatta on a Small Scale


Ford's Theater Director 888&lt;
LEAD: Michael Gennaro, former general manager of the George Street Playhouse in New Brunswick, N.J., has been named managing director of Ford's Theater.
Before becoming an arts administrator, Mr.
Gennaro was an actor and a lawyer with a specialty in entertainment law.


Financial Decontrol in Japan Slowed by Negative Report
LEAD: A long-awaited report on furthering financial deregulation in Japan was released by the Ministry of Finance today, but if anything it struck a blow against swift progress by supporting continuing protection for the securities industry against competition from banks.


Patents;   New Frozen Dessert Is Based on Rhubarb
LEAD: Using rhubarb, sugar and fruits, an inventor in New York City has patented a frozen dessert that he said tastes like ice cream but contains no fats or cholesterol and about one-third as many calories.


Patents;   Japanese at the Top In Annual Rankings
LEAD: Intellectual Property Owners Inc., a Washington trade group for inventors, has identified the 200 organizations that obtained the most American patents in 1989.


Law Firm for Lincoln To Pay to Settle Suits
LEAD: The main law firm representing the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association agreed today to pay $20 million to settle two securities-fraud and racketeering lawsuits brought by investors.


Evolution in Europe;   East Germans Seize 4 Tied to Terror in West
LEAD: The East German police said today that they had arrested four more people suspected of being West German terrorists.


Italy
LEAD: To the Editor: The reference made by Maureen B. Fant in her story on Rome (Travel, April 22) brought back some unforgettable memories about that famous or infamous No. 64 bus, which goes from the Stazione Termini, the beautiful main train station in Rome, to St.
Peter's, a favorite of American tourists but a prolific source of pilfering for the pickpocket.


Josephine Berrafati Weds
LEAD: Josephine Berrafati, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald Berrafati of Irvington, N.Y., was married yesterday in Harrison, N.Y., to Kevin S. Tice, the son of Mr. and Mrs Donald Tice of Denver.
The Rev.
John J. Leonard officiated at St.
Gregory the Great Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Tice, 26 years old and a graduate of Tufts University, has an M.B.A.


Lifestyle: Sunday Brunch;   For Breakfast-Oversleepers, A Sampler of Midday Menus
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Harold's


Topics of the Times;   Promises in Myanmar
LEAD: The electoral triumph of Myanmar's democratic opposition last month was so complete that the rejected military regime scrapped earlier plans to delay the transfer of power for as long as two years.
Yet power remains in military hands, Myanmar remains a police state and promises of change remain promises.


Reflections on the Family for Father's Day
LEAD: To the Editor:


Court Ruling to Give More Drivers Experience With Sobriety Checks
LEAD: ''What are those empty bottles on the floor?'' the police officer asked the young man in a Yankee cap who sat behind the wheel.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
The Thrill of Working


LIFE, ITALIAN STYLE
LEAD:
THAT FINE ITALIAN HAND
By Paul Hofmann.
238 pp. New York:
A Donald Hutter Book/Henry Holt &amp; Company. $19.95.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Farmingdale
$75,000
268 Asbury Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old colonial; brick fireplace, new furnace, dining room; taxes $1,673.
Freehold
$254,000
395 Concord Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; patio, c/a, 2-car garage; taxes $3,611.


Macedonians Blocking Greek-Yugoslav Border
LEAD: Tens of thousands of Macedonian nationalists blocked the border between Yugoslavia and Greece with trucks and trailers today, putting new strains on already difficult relations between the two states.


Cape Cod
LEAD: To the Editor: As an avid Cape Cod auction goer and bargain hunter, I enjoyed the article on Cape Cod auctions (Travel, May 13).
Unfortunately, you did not mention the Eastham Auction House (Holmes Road, North Eastham; 508-255-9003).
They run monthly antiques auctions in the summer, have their share of bargains and, in Bill Fidalgo, easily the cape's most entertaining auctioneer.


Anita MacMillen Wright Is the Bride Of James R. Bird Jr. in New Jersey
LEAD: Anita MacMillen Wright, the admissions director at the Hewitt School, and James Raymond Bird Jr., an English teacher at the Spence School, both in New York, were married yesterday at the home of the bridegroom's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Bird Sr., in Bay Head, N.J.
The Rev.
Edward B. Gammons Jr. performed the


Wall Street;   A Dark Side to New York City Bonds
LEAD: Municipal bond underwriters and city officials are congratulating themselves for the success of the New York City bond issue sold last week.
The $710.5 million offering was ''oversubscribed,'' the lead underwriter, Merrill Lynch, announced sedately.
Privately, traders say the bonds were ''a blowout,'' snapped up before they hit the shelves.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: According to Canon, I'm holding the future of photography in my hands.
Actually, I'm holding the Canon Photura, a new 35-millimeter ''hybrid'' camera that may or may not auger the shape of things to come.


From France, Fruits Rouges Offer a Vivid Difference
LEAD: THE French have a handy term, les fruits rouges, or red fruits, for mixtures of summer berries and cherries.
Jams are sometimes labeled that way and the term is often used on menus.
Some restaurants list desserts made with red fruits separately from those using other fruits like apples or pears.


All About: Discount Brokers;   Now Fewer Firms Are Chasing Small Investors Discount Brokers
LEAD: Like most of their more glamorous Wall Street cousins, discount brokers have never fully rebounded from the 1987 stock market crash.
They are uniquely dependent on the small investor, who remains stubbornly aloof even as the market reaches new heights.
While a few firms continue to profit, the industry is being buffeted by consolidation and change.


Quieting Ghosts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Today, the highest valued American circulating note is the $100 bill.
Congress has even authorized a study to see if discontinuing it and the $50 note would hinder illicit drug transactions.Not too long ago, $50 and $100 bills were considered small potatoes.
Notes from the last century and the early part of this one carried denominations of $500, $1,000 and even $5,000.


POLLUTION IN EAST DESCRIBED AS GRIM
LEAD: Environment ministers from Central and Eastern Europe today painted a grim picture of pollution in their countries, saying it was killing their citizens and destroying their cities, rivers and seas.


On Language;   Pop Me No Pops, Pop
LEAD: What word, of onomatopoeic origin and more than six centuries of use in English, has been taken to the bosom of ballplayers and bakers, warriors and drug abusers, cartoonists and concertizers, each group having its own special sense of it?
What unappreciated little word deserves the honor of scholarly examination on this day?


Robert Gold Wed To Amy Barrett
LEAD: Amy Elizabeth Barrett, the director of the New York office of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, was married yesterday to Robert Lowell Gold, a vice president of Ridgewood Energy, an oil- and gas-investment concern in Ridgewood, N.J.
Rabbi Charles Lippman and Msgr.
John F. Casey officiated at the Fort Totten chapel in Bayside,


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   The Synergy of Tuna, Peas and Tomatoes
LEAD: There is a synergy to this simple dish of tuna and peas that produces something far more interesting than it sounds.
The sweetness of the peas and the onion takes the edge off the acidity of the tomato puree.
Put the individual elements together, add the ease of preparation, and fresh tuna with peas becomes a recipe staple.


Miss Walsh Weds Grant Lippincott
LEAD: Donna Marie Walsh, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Walsh of St.
James, L.I., was married yesterday to Grant Edward Lippincott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip E. Lippincott of Riverton, N.J.
The Rev.
Mark H. Earl, a Methodist minister, and the Rev.
Patrick Earl, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Seaville (N.J.) United Methodist


A Father and a Bicycle
LEAD: The first bicycle, a stylish black, gleamed from its hooks in the shop.
The son, then in high school, insisted he had to have it, even though its price, in the hundreds of dollars, exceeded anything the father had ever thought a bike could be worth.


Video and Theater Shape a New Madonna
LEAD: Platinum hair perched in an ''I Dream of Jeannie'' ponytail, she first appears as a vision, a goddess amid the drones.
She descends a steel staircase into a sinister cityscape straight out of Fritz Lang's ''Metropolis,'' a landscape of metal girders, turning gears and gritty, urban smokestacks.


The Phoenix Is Rising As Others Are Falling
LEAD: THE artistic theme of the Phoenix Theater Company is ensemble, but its new emphasis is expansion.


Incentives for Improving Health Care
LEAD: I believe that business and government - working together - can maintain or improve the quality of the country's health care system, while making it more accessible to many uninsured Americans.
And, most important, America could very substantially reduce the cost of universal health care coverage.


School Board Group Facing Challenges
LEAD: THE New Jersey School Boards Association, one of the state's most visible educational organizations, is under attack.
In the wake of a blistering report by the State Commission of Investigation on its activities, a legislative assault and a revolt among some of its members, there is concern about the future of the 76-year-old organization.


Brazil Advances To Second Round
LEAD: Brazil outplayed Costa Rica today, 1-0, but could manage only one goal, scored by Muller in the first half.


READ HIS LIPS: NO MORE TAXES
LEAD: If Gov.
Jim Florio needs more money to run New Jersey, why doesn't he get it from his constituents who live in New Jersey but work across the river (''Read His Lips: More Taxes,'' by Peter Kerr, May 20)?
It's not hard to find people in New Jersey earning $100,000 in New York City.
The irony is that they pay (in one instance I know of) $6,000 in state taxes to New York and $400 to New York City, but not one penny to New Jersey.


City Plan for a Huge Sewage Tank In a Park Divides Queens Groups
LEAD: A plan by New York City to clean up some of its most polluted waters by building a mammoth underground sewage tank in a major Queens park is dividing environmentalists and parks advocates.


Correction
LEAD: The number for information on the New York Antiquarian Coin Show to be held Saturday is 201 288-3910.


THE GROUND RULES SHIFT WHEN MUSIC JOINS WORDS
LEAD: Music is a tyrant whose grip on the listener is nowhere stronger than in opera.
With just a few notes a skilled composer can establish an atmosphere that a great novelist or playwright might still be working to evoke after a hundred pages.
Is that fair?
Certainly not, but it helps explain why so many attempts to stage old operas in trendy dress fail, no matter how inventive the director's concept, how craftily remodeled the libretto or how striking the scenery.


WAR OVER KASHMIR IS FEARED BY U.S.
LEAD: Despite a recent easing in tensions, Bush Administration officials say they are still worried that war could break out between Pakistan and India by early fall unless the two countries take further steps to defuse their confrontation over Kashmir.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: The United States Postal Service has announced that four more Olympians will join Jesse Owens on the commemorative issue, July 6.
They are Ray Ewry, Hazel Wightman, Eddie Eagan and Helene Madison.
The stamps will be printed se-tenant, five in a row, seven rows in a pane.


HE DRANK THE MILK OF PARADISE
LEAD:
COLERIDGE
Early Visions.
By Richard Holmes.
Illustrated. 409 pp. New York:
Viking. $22.95.


Upgrading Electric Outlets
LEAD: IF your home has old-fashioned, ungrounded, two-slot electric wall receptacles, you can can easily determine whether the wiring will accommodate newer, more convenient and safer three-slot grounding models.
You can also perform the replacement if local building codes permit.


Headliners;   Peronist vs. Peronist
LEAD: Not one for politicking in the family values department, President Carlos Saul Menem of Argentina has called himself ''a seducer'' and says his marriage doesn't work.
Now Argentines can see - and their appetite for the story is enormous - that it indeed doesn't.
President Menem's marriage to Zulema Yoma has become so nasty that last week he locked her out of the presidential mansion, she threatened to sue him, and the couple's 21-year-old son said on a television talk show that his father's household administration was ''worse than a dictatorship.


Wills for Single People, Too?
LEAD: To the Editor:


FICTION
LEAD:
PIRATE JENNY.
By April Bernard. (Norton, $18.95.) Can a teen-age girl obsessed with Bertolt Brecht, Kurt Weill and Lotte Lenya survive on the streets of Manhattan?
The amoral antiheroine of this frustrating first novel by the poet April Bernard is immediately familiar: bored, alienated Connie Frances LaPlante is the product of a broken home in a dull New England town.


'Kill the Lawyers,' A Line Misinterpreted
LEAD: In reference to the review of ''Guilty Conscience,'' (May 20) Leah D. Frank is inaccurate when she states that when Shakespeare had one of his characters state ''Let's kill all the lawyers,'' it was the corrupt, unethical lawyers he was referring to.
Shakespeare's exact line ''The first thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers,'' was stated by Dick the Butcher in ''Henry VI,'' Part II, act IV, Scene II, Line 73.


Athletes Reflect Their Treatment
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Question Of the Week;   Should the Nets Trade The No. 1 Draft Pick?
LEAD: Yes.
While there are many talented players in the upcoming college draft (Derrick Coleman, Dennis Scott, Gary Payton, etc.), there are no ''franchise players'' such as Patrick Ewing and David Robinson.
The Nets are in need of a prolific scorer, and can trade their first selection to the Clippers for Ron Harper, along with one of their selections.


Some Like It Better In a Box
LEAD: In video a film like ''Always'' (Reviewed on this page) happens hardly ever.
Rarely is a movie tape released in the letter-box format only, without a panned-and-scanned version usually adapted for television.
With bands across the top and bottom of the screen, letter boxing preserves the perspective of the theater screen.


Ship Burned All Week; Salvagers Explain Why
LEAD: Salvage officials said today that once the stricken tanker Mega Borg was fully ablaze, crews had little choice but to spend a week slowly cooling it down while it spilled crude oil into the Gulf of Mexico.


Ann K. Fleming Married
LEAD: Ann K. Fleming, the associate dean of admissions at Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., and Michael S. Brown, the director of financial aid there, were married yesterday at the Stuart Country Day School of the Sacred Heart in Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
James T. Burtchaell, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


IS THAT YOU, PAPA?
LEAD:
HEMINGWAY'S SUITCASEBy MacDonald Harris.
288 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.


The Region;   Why It Costs So Much To Run New York State
LEAD: WHEN New York State's politicians hit the campaign trail this summer, voters can expect to hear some nasty exchanges about the state's financial problems.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is already blaming the difficulties on a national economic slowdown presided over by a Republican President.
And the Republican gubernatorial candidate, Pierre A.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Tennis
Lendl and Becker Reach Final: Top-seeded Ivan Lendl, honing his game for Wimbledon, beat John McEnroe yesterday, 6-2, 6-4, and advanced with Boris Becker to the final of the Stella Artois grass-court tournament in London.
Becker, seeded second, breezed past third-seeded Stefan Edberg of Sweden, 6-4, 6-4, in 1 hour 25 minutes.


Campus Life: Texas;   After Complaint, Aid is Cut Off To Hispanic Paper
LEAD: A battle is shaping up over a decision by the University of Texas to stop financing a Hispanic student newspaper accused of trying to influence public policy.


Melissa Shackleton Weds T. S. Dann
LEAD: Melissa Kent Shackleton, the special assistant to the president of the World Wildlife Fund and the Conservation Foundation in Washington, was married yesterday to Thomas Semmes Dann, a lawyer in Washington.
The Very Rev.
Mark C. Sullivan performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Cathedral in Easton,


'The False Prophet'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week;   Should the Nets Trade The No. 1 Draft Pick?
LEAD: As a maniacal lover of Syracuse Univarsity basketball, and an equal zealot of Derrick Coleman and his skills, I would love for the Nets to trade their top pick.
It would be a shame for such an outstanding talent to play for the poorest-run team in organized sports outside of the Bronx.
ADAM S.


Does Visionary Business Call for a Corporate Sage?
LEAD: An illuminating fringe benefit of going to the recent Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago was the opportunity to chat informally with Akio Morita, co-founder and chairman of Sony.
There had been rumors that, at the age of 69, this principal shaper of Japan's industrial ascent was about to retire.


Alice V. Perera Weds David P. Lucey
LEAD: Alice Victoria Perera and David Phillips Lucey were married yesterday at Trinity Episcopal Church in Boston by the Rev.
Spencer Morgan Rice, assisted by the Rev.
Alexander S. Daley.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Thacher Perera of Boston.
Her husband is a son of Maureen T. Lucey of Jupiter, Fla., and Donald E.


A FEMINIST MEMOIR
LEAD: The outcry over Vivian Gornick's article ''Who Says We Haven't Made a Revolution?'' (April 15) is really a testimony to the importance of The New York Times Magazine.
One can understand that when it appeared, complete with a delightful tongue-in-cheek photograph of major feminists on the cover, every feminist in the country eagerly prepared herself or himself for a definitive essay on the movement.


Wright Fires a 64 In L.P.G.A. Event
LEAD: Pamela Wright shot a six-under-par 64 today - the lowest round of the year on the Ladies Professional Golf Association Tour - to move into a three-way tie for the lead in the Atlantic City Classic at the Sands Country Club.


The World;   The World Is No Longer Unthinkable
LEAD: THE mood is changing in the Middle East.
From the seaside cafes of Tel Aviv to the presidential palaces in Damascus and Baghdad - and in Jordan, in Egypt and in Libya as well - political discourse is no longer of the peace process.
It is about how a new Arab-Israeli conflict has become feasible, and about how safeguards against it have been evaporating.


STREAKING GIANTS ROUT BRAVES FOR 7TH STRAIGHT
LEAD: The San Francisco Giants continued their June rampage today as Scott Garrelts pitched a three-hitter and Matt Williams drove in three runs in a 7-0 victory over the Atlanta Braves.


Campus Life: Washington;   Making Science More Appealing To the Young
LEAD: To junior high school students here, classroom visitors can be as much a novelty as the knowledge they bring. ''You look like the guy in 'Back to the Future, Part II,' '' a seventh-grader told Patrick C. Gibbons, a Washington University associate professor of physics who ventured into Brittany Woods Junior High School recently.


After Weeping for Mandela, Many Prepare to Savor Visit
LEAD: For 30 years Willard Johnson fought an often thankless battle in Boston, protesting racial inequities in a country most Americans knew little about.
He helped organize some of the earliest demonstrations against South Africa's system of racial separation and was even arrested for it once.


Sir Richard's Curious Career
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jay Jennings Wed To Jessica Green
LEAD: Jessica Hawkins Green, a daughter of Helen Spaidal Hawkins of Somerville, Mass., and Edwin Hall Green 3d of Portland Harbor, Me., was married yesterday to Earp Franklin Jennings 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Clark Jennings of Little Rock, Ark.
The Rev.
Edward O. Miller Jr. officiated at All Saints' Episcopal Church in Belmont,


Free Ragtime Program In an Outdoor Series
LEAD: ''Spring Into Summer,'' a series of free outdoor concerts in the midtown area, is to continue on Tuesday at noon with a performance of ragtime music by Cynthia Sayer and the Crazy Rhythm Jazz Band at 2 Grand Central Towers, 45th Street between Lexington and Third Avenues.
The concert is sponsored by the Grand Central Partnership and 2 Grand Central


Public Services Go Private in Beirut
LEAD: In this city of endless civil war, the collapse of public services has given rise to a new class of entrepreneurs who have taken control of international communications, the mail and power generation.


Belgians and Dutch Seize 2 Suspected of I.R.A. Activity
LEAD: The Belgian and Dutch authorities arrested two people suspected of being I.R.A. members today after a local farmer reported hearing target practice in the woods along the border.


Review/Piano;   American In Recital At Gould Hall
LEAD: Elizabeth Wolff's piano recital at Florence Gould Hall on Thursday night was an intermittent struggle between a considerable musical intelligence and some intrusive nervous energy.
It was a serious, substantial program - Beethoven sonatas early and late, the Schubert A-minor Sonata (D. 845) and Andrzej Panufnik's ''Pentasonata.


An Album is Judged Obscene;   Rap: Slick, Violent, Nasty and, Maybe Hopeful
LEAD: RAP music now has a criminal record.
On June 6, United States District Court Judge Jose Gonzalez of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., declared that ''As Nasty as They Wanna Be,'' an album by the 2 Live Crew, a rap group that is based in Miami, was obscene in the three counties under his jurisdiction, making it the first recording to be declared obscene by a Federal court.


Boat People's Plight Seen as Likely to Worsen
LEAD: Despite a dramatic drop in the number of Vietnamese boat people seeking asylum here and in other parts of Southeast Asia in recent months, Hong Kong officials and international relief workers said this week that they expected to see scores of the fragile Vietnamese boats pushed back to sea this summer by angry


Corrections
LEAD: An answer in the Q &amp; A column on May 27 about tours from Fiumicino Airport in Rome misidentified a company offering tours to Ostia Antica.
It is Italia Tour.


BLUEPRINT AN AIRPORT THAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN
LEAD: Few airports are architectural masterworks, but most are barely even tolerable as public environments.
Harsh, cold, unrelentingly grim, they are designed more for the convenience of their tenants, the airlines, than for the pleasure of their users, the passengers.
How often is it that people linger at airports longer than they have to, as they once did at train stations?


Reflections on the Family for Father's Day;   Isolated and Disaffected
LEAD: To the Editor:


NONFICTION
LEAD:
THE HELMSLEYS: The Rise and Fall of Harry and Leona.
By Richard Hammer. (NAL Books, $18.95.) The estimated value of the fortune shared by the real estate entrepreneur Harry B. Helmsley and his wife, Leona, ranges from $5 billion to $10 billion.
So it seems perfectly logical that they'd want to save a few bucks on their taxes.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: If early spring bulbs are dug up by mistake when planting annuals and perennials, put bulbs back in place promptly as they should reroot and flower next spring.
Use water-soluble fertilizer at half-rate on seedlings and window boxes to boost growth and flowering.
Pinch back succulent tip growth on chrysanthemums so plants are full to produce abundant fall flowers.


Blending the Rigid And the Flowing
LEAD: EDWARD HOPPER was born here, most likely at 82 North Broadway.
This is the house the artist grew up in, attending the local high school, hanging out at the shipyard, sketching the yachts made there and, at the age of 15, building a boat of his own.


Q and A
LEAD:
Storm Windows
Question: My husband and I rent an apartment from Columbia University through its married students' program.
There are no screens or storm windows in our apartment even though we have seen them in other apartments.
We would like the university to put them in.
Are owners required to provide screens and storm windows?


DAT Decks Stand Ready for Shipment
LEAD: The free market, as an economic principle, has been gaining new friends in many places lately.
But nowhere are unbridled enterprise and competition more evident than at the Consumer Electronics Show held in Chicago every June.


Upgrading Electric Outlets
LEAD: IF your home has old-fashioned, ungrounded, two-slot electric wall receptacles, you can can easily determine whether the wiring will accommodate newer, more convenient and safer three-slot grounding models.
You can also perform the replacement if local building codes permit.


French Debate Armed Role in Africa
LEAD: Long accustomed to playing keeper of the peace in its former colonies, France hardly blinked last month when the Government ordered troop reinforcements to Gabon in response to anti-Government riots in the tiny West African nation.


Reflections on the Family for Father's Day;   Roads Not Taken
LEAD: To the Editor:


Great Pianists From the Past Re-emerge
LEAD: Benno Moiseiwitsch, who died in 1963, is a 20th-century piano immortal, and there were cheers about two years ago when APR in England started a project intended to transfer all of his many records to LP and CD.
Thank goodness it does not seem to have been an abortive effort.
Now comes a two-disk CD album, APR 7005 (also available on


New World, New C.I.A.
LEAD: The cold war is over.
And some now argue that in this dramatically changed world, intelligence services like the C.I.A. are costly anachronisms that should be sharply reduced.
In fact these changes have increased, not decreased, the need for the right kind of intelligence.
What's called for is not less intelligence activity but the acquisition of new and different kinds of information.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Paris and the Africans


Question Of the Week;   Should the Nets Trade The No. 1 Draft Pick?
LEAD: The Nets should draft Georgia Tech's Dennis Scott with their No. 1 pick.
Trading this pick for a veteran player would not benefit the club over the long run.
At 6 foot 8 inches, Scott could provide the long-distance 3-point shooting that they expected from Dennis Hopson.


Baudelaire the Visionary
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Life: Purdue;   A Short Course In Farm Advice Follows Storms
LEAD: Because it is a land-grant college, Purdue University found itself last week dispensing advice on how to save and plant crops after devastating floods and tornadoes ripped through Indiana in the last month.


The Cardinal's Crusade
LEAD: Suddenly, John Cardinal O'Connor has become an important part of the political lives of non-Catholics as well as members of his church.


WRONG MAN FOR THE JOB?
LEAD:
THE RELUCTANT KING
The Life and Reign of George VI, 1895-1952.
By Sarah Bradford.
Illustrated. 506 pp. New York:
St. Martin's Press. $25.


Streetscapes: IRT Stations;   Underground Art the Way It Was Meant to Look
LEAD: THIS is an interesting time to tour the older IRT stations in Manhattan.
The Wall Street and Astor Place stations and a few others are landmarks and have received fairly intelligent attention, almost restoration.


Works in Progress;   Needed: Grease for the Wheels
LEAD: Surrounded by a weathered green fence, the Mullaly Rink Center in the south Bronx is a bit forlorn-looking.
The structures inside it -wooden ramps of different shapes and sizes - are ramshackle.
But there, in the shadow of the elevated train, a long outfielder's peg from Yankee Stadium, New York's first skateboarding and bicycling park is taking shape.


Jean R. Weinberg Weds
LEAD: Jean R. Weinberg, a daughter of Mrs.
Raymond Weinberg of New York and Tamarac, Fla., and the late Mr.
Weinberg, was married in New York yesterday to Thomas C. Pedersen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas R. Pedersen of Warren, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles A. Amstein officiated at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church.


Golf's Hot Question: One Tour Ball?
LEAD: On any United States Open course, the greens are always faster and the rough is always thicker than at other tournaments.
But for the golfer, the Open is also different in subtle ways.


Mark E. Ventling Weds Miss Bean
LEAD: Emelie R. Bean, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin T. Bean Jr. of Buffalo, was married there yesterday at the Westminster Presbyterian Church to Mark E. Ventling, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Doyle Ventling of Dodge City, Kan.
The Rev.
Rex T. Stewart officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Thomas D. Doyle, a Roman


Cynthia Johnson and Patrick Rogers Are Married
LEAD: Cynthia Cole Johnson, a daughter of Mrs.
H.
Alden Johnson Jr. of Marblehead, Mass., and the late Mr.
Johnson, was married yesterday in Marblehead to Patrick Joseph Rogers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
John Rogers of Rochester, at the Episcopal Church of St.
Andrew.
The Rev.
Howard W. Gamble Jr. and the Rev.


A Cup Rehearsal For New Zealand
LEAD: The first of many rehearsals for the next America's Cup match, scheduled for May 1992, has drawn Michael Fay's yachting team to San Diego for the first time since losing the controversial 1988 cup series.


BUSINESS DIARY
LEAD:
COMPANIES
A New Game at Trump's Tables
Donald J. Trump had better hope he can bargain better than he can run a casino.
He failed on Friday to pay about $40 million due on ''junk bonds'' and another $30 million on bank loans that financed his purchase of Trump's Castle Hotel and Casino in Atlantic City.


WHAT WENT WRONG, WHAT TO DO
LEAD: PERIL AND PROMISE: A Commentary on America.
By John Chancellor. (Harper &amp; Row, $17.95.) As John Chancellor, the television commentator, looks at the United States, he sees a country facing a complex and competitive world with great power but failing confidence.
This loss of faith results, he writes, from ''years of hopes raised and hopes dashed'' - defeat in the ''moral blunder'' of Vietnam, the Arab oil embargo, Watergate, the hostage crisis, inflation and the ''wanton mismanagement of the nation's finances.


Residents Alarmed by State Plans for Town
LEAD: CHESHIRE is the site of two state prisons.
Now that two more are under construction, slated for completion in the fall, and the state has proposed taking over almost half of a condominium project in the town for low- and moderate-income housing, people in Cheshire are saying that they are being asked to shoulder too much of the state's social responsibility.


They're Drilling in the Oil Patch Again
LEAD: Lord, they ask here in West Texas, let there be one more boom.
Oil boom, of course.
Then, again, no one here is exactly sure whether West Texas or the rest of the nation could actually produce one more boom.
The oil people are asking themselves whether the nation has conceded too much power over oil prices to the Persian Gulf or whether too much of their old boom-time rigs and labor has simply disappeared.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Portuguese Fare and Value in Waterbury
LEAD: FOR people who like to dine out but lament the rapid escalation of restaurant prices, there is still some basis for hope: think ethnic.
Many ethnic restaurants are less expensive than other types.
And among these establishments, none offer more reasonable prices or greater value than the Portuguese.


Americans Still Don't Want to Give Up the $1 Bill for a $1 Coin;   Canada's Success Secret
LEAD: To the Editor:


Caroline Campbell Weds
LEAD: Caroline Cushing Campbell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Campbell Jr. of Short Hills, N.J., was married there yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church to John Sanford Bouton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Bouton of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Charles A. Cesaretti officiated.
Mrs.
Bouton, a freelance artist, graduated from Colgate University.


English Soccer Fans Riot Before Match Against the Netherlands


Tunis at Impasse on Political Change
LEAD: When word of Algeria's election results began to filter to its neighbor here, the people in the offices at 26 Gamal Abdel Nasser Street and 2 Madrid Avenue began drawing comparisons.
While Algeria is pressing ahead with liberalization, they said, Tunisia has halted.


West Side Subway Work Has Riders Lost and Late
LEAD: Hundreds of thousands of subway passengers heading for stores, picnics, weddings, work or wherever were caught in a straphanger's nightmare yesterday when they discovered there was no uptown West Side service on the Nos. 1, 2 or 3 trains between 42d and 96th Streets.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Madison Avenue will be closed today from 37th to 56th Streets from noon until about 3 P.M. for the International Immigrants Parade.


BACK FROM THE BOG
LEAD:
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF A DRUID PRINCE
The Story of Lindow Man, an Archaeological Sensation.
By Anne Ross and Don Robins.
Illustrated. 176 pp. New York:
Summit Books.
$19.95.


Their Yard Now a Pond, Couple In Chappaqua Assail Planners
LEAD: THE backyard of the Lopez home on Brevoort Road here used to be quite pleasant.
It had a vegetable garden, a badminton court and lawn chairs, and it was large enough that Rudy Lopez bought a lawn tractor to mow the grass.


Sarah Newman Married To Dr. Zachary G. Klett
LEAD: Sara E. Newman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter Newman of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Zachary G. Klett, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Klett of Berkeley, Calif.
The Rev.
Shannon Bernard officiated at St.
Mary's Episcopal Church in Bedford, N.Y.


Style Makers;   Julie Jordan Fleps and Laura Ledford, Clothing Designers
LEAD: Julie Jordan Fleps and Laura Ledford often use thrift shop finds to inspire their Julie Laurie collection of dresses and sportswear.
Details like covered buttons and rounded collars may derive from the past, but the way the designers mix the eras together makes the clothes distinctly modern.


'Mr. Huggy' Crusades for Self-Appreciation
LEAD: REACHING into the back of his red Subaru station wagon stamped with ''Give Peace a Chance'' stickers, Paul Thomas pulled out four canvas bags stuffed with his band of furry crusaders.
After slipping a harmonica into his shirt pocket, he swung the bags over his shoulders, crept through the doors of the Dorothy C.


Miss Woods Weds Michael Leonard
LEAD: St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Elisabeth Barrell Woods, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Appleton Woods of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., and Michael George Leonard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter A. Leonard of Stuart, Fla.
The Rev.
John J.


A Disruption of IRT Service
LEAD: There will be no uptown subway service on the Nos. 1, 2, or 3 lines between the 42d Street and 96th Street stations today or for the next two weekends, the Transit Authority has said.


Miss Sargent and T. J. Corcoran Wed
LEAD: Elizabeth A. Sargent, a daughter of Diana Woods Sargent of Penllyn, Pa., and Hugh A. A. Sargent of Gwynedd Valley, Pa., was married yesterday in Philadelphia to Theodore J. Corcoran, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Corcoran of Somers, Conn.
The Rev.
Charles A. Carter 3d officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal


Unleaded Fuel
LEAD: To the Editor: Last year I spent six months touring Europe in rented automobiles and was surprised to find that 95 percent of the cars in the larger group, such as Mercedes-Benz and B.M.W., ran on unleaded gas.
I was surprised at the availability of unleaded gas, even though some of my friends tell me that


Marri Davis Wed To David Moffly
LEAD: Marri Heller Davis, a daughter of Marvin W. Davis and the late Nancy Turcott Davis, was married yesterday at her father's home in Southampton, L.I., to David Wesley Moffly, a son of Louisa Peace Egleston and William Tennant Moffly 3d, both of Fort Washington, Pa.
The Rev.
Peter Heist, a minister of the American Fellowship


Quick Help for Lost Motorists
LEAD: Ask anyone who knows me and you will be told that I have a serious problem at the wheel: I get lost a lot.


A Time for Everyone to Take Responsibility
LEAD: In some of the articles I've read, one of the reasons for high dropout rates for many students is the lack of consistent, positive and literate role models.
By contrast, some successful students, when asked if they have a role model, say there are many people whom they admire and to whom they give credit for their achievements.


Ms. Powers Weds George B. Ligeti
LEAD: Jennifer Sieglaff Powers, a daughter of Mrs.
Walter M. Hupfel Jr. of Waterford, Conn., and Ralph A. Powers Jr. of New London, Conn., was married yesterday to George Bela Ligeti, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George F. Ligeti of Vancouver, British Columbia.
The Rev.
David J. Robb, an Episcopalian, officiated at the Pequot Chapel in New


YOUNG, GIFTED AND COOL
LEAD: Just what we need - more jazz hype (''Young, Gifted and Cool,'' by Tom Piazza, May 20).
When will this country begin to take its native art form seriously?
There are improvisers who have lived in relative obscurity because they refused to electrify or pander to the fortissimo tastes of the rock-weaned generation (the late Warne Marsh and the very much alive and still-recording Sal Mosca, to name but two).


Corrections
LEAD: An article on June 3 about Czechoslovakia misidentified the Slovak leader who helped found the Czechoslovak Republic in 1919.
He was Milan Stefanik, not Miroslav Stefanik.


The World;   Moscow Rethinks The Art Of the Deal
LEAD: AN old negotiators' adage has it that Americans play poker, Russians play chess.


2 Bystanders Shot as Gangs Clash
LEAD: A confrontation between two rival Chinese gangs on a busy street in Chinatown erupted into gunfire yesterday, leaving one one gang member critically wounded and two bystanders injured, the police said.


The Cost of Letting Phone Companies Enter Cable TV
LEAD: To the Editor:


Perspectives: Rent Guidelines;   Gathering Data for a Board's Judgment
LEAD: A CURIOUS thing happened this year on the way to the annual hearings of the New York City's Rent Guidelines Board.
The board met May 9 and proposed new guidelines, doing so before it had in hand the cost study that is supposed to play the key role in formulating the guidelines.


The Nation;   The Stakes Are Raised For Catholic Politicians
LEAD: John Cardinal O'Connor of New York raised the abortion controversy to new heights last week, putting the authority of the church over Roman Catholic politicians on the line with threats of excommunication for any Catholic who persists in supporting a woman's right to abortion.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We want to give him goose bumps.
We want him to know he's not alone, that we're with him.
Whatever the Pope means to Catholics that's what Mandela means to us.''
- The Rev. Jim Holley,
pastor of the Little Rock
Baptist Church in Detroit.
[14:1.]


Campus Life: Arizona State;   Racist Graffiti Leads to a Ban On Harassment
LEAD: The governing board of the three Arizona state universities has approved an addition to the schools' code of conduct that prohibits ''engaging in harassment or unlawful discriminatory activities.''


Kate Judge Wed To Joseph Longo
LEAD: Kate Judge, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Curtis H. Judge of Seabrook Island, S.C., and Joseph E. Longo, the son of Alberta Longo of Mamaroneck, N.Y., were married yesterday at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York by the Rev.
Gary P. Fertig.


A NEGATIVE VOTE ON AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
LEAD: Shelby Steele is out in ''right'' field in his put down of affirmative-action policy (''A Negative Vote on Affirmative Action,'' May 13).
In the past, many affirmative-action programs, while not targeted toward particular ethnic groups, were targeted toward them de facto, through administrative rules and practices.


Question Of the Week;   Should the Nets Trade The No. 1 Draft Pick?
LEAD: Only on the Nets is a breakaway dunk an iffy proposition.
The Nets need to get the best shooter they can.
Thank God that Harry Weltman is gone.
At least we know the Nets won't use the pick to trade for Keith Lee again.
PETER MCINTYRE
Matawan, N.J.


Domesticating the 'Ring' For the Home Audience
LEAD: Though Wagner's operatic cycle ''Der Ring des Nibelungen'' has been staged repeatedly since its first production at Bayreuth, Bavaria, in 1876, its presentation has never become entirely routine even in the theater.
Quite apart from the difficulty of sustaining musical and dramatic continuity through four evenings, each of the operas - ''Das Rheingold,'' in one act lasting 2 3/4 hours, and ''Die Walkure,'' ''Siegfried'' and ''Gotterdammerung'' in three acts running four to five hours - is epic in scope and dimension.


Postings: Homes and Sports;   Putnam Project
LEAD: A 338-acre country club near the Hudson River in the village of Garrison in Putnam County, N.Y., is going to be redeveloped by a Japanese company as both a sports center and a housing development.
The Garrison Golf &amp; Country Club in the Town of Philipstown, about 40 miles north of Manhattan, was purchased in February by the Urban Life Company of Osaka for $18 million, according to a broker involved in the sale, William H.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The hot-water heating system in our house is very noisy, especially at night when we are trying to sleep.
When the heat comes on, there are annoying gurgling and gushing sounds.
Plumbing and heating contractors have told us that we needed a new expansion tank, which we added.
The problem continued, however, and so they flushed, purged and ''bled'' air out of the system three times.


Thomas Is Named In Betting Report
LEAD: An angry Isiah Thomas denied reports today that he ran high stakes dice games in his home and was the target of a Federal gambling investigation.


Question Of the Week;   Should the Nets Trade The No. 1 Draft Pick?
LEAD: Yes.
Since there isn't a bona fide ''franchise'' pick in the draft, the Nets might be better off trading the pick for an established player or two.
I think the Nets could pry loose Chris Mullin from Golden State.
GREG KIERNAN
Stamford, Conn.


Anti-AIDS Idea in France: Revive Bordellos
LEAD: Should brothels be reopened to help prevent the spread of AIDS by prostitutes?


Some Riffs on a Dream Jazz Festival
LEAD: Of all the cities in the world, New York ought to have a great jazz festival.
It's the jazz capital of the world, with most of the major jazz musicians in residence and a sophisticated audience to hear them.
New York has been a fountainhead for jazz innovation and a magnet for out-of-towners with new ideas.


Page P. Vincent Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Page Pendleton Vincent, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Vincent Jr. of Bedford, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Thomas Duncanson Walker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles L. Walker of Barrington, R.I.
The Rev.
William Foley officiated at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church.


THE IRAN-CONTRA INVESTIGATION
LEAD: Between the lines of Arthur L. Liman's rebuttals, Liman basically admits he abused his discretion in handling the first Iran-contra investigation (Letters, May 20, in response to ''The Iran-Contra Committees - Did They Protect Reagan?'' by Seymour Hersh, April 29).
Why else would he need geopolitical rationales?


Israeli Aide Has Heart Attack
LEAD: Israel's new Foreign Minister, David Levy, has apparently suffered a slight heart attack, doctors reported today.
Mr.
Levy, a 52-year-old Likud bloc member who is seen as a possible successor to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, arrived at a hospital in northern Israel on Thursday from his home in Beit Shean.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The hot-water heating system in our house is very noisy, especially at night when we are trying to sleep.
When the heat comes on, there are annoying gurgling and gushing sounds.
Plumbing and heating contractors have told us that we needed a new expansion tank, which we added.
The problem continued, however, and so they flushed, purged and ''bled'' air out of the system three times.


For Today's Fathers, Their Holiday Seems a Bit Set in Its Ways
LEAD: Poor dad.
He just wants to stretch out on a hammock and watch the clouds roll by.
But no one will leave him alone.
Not today.


JUST PLAIN FOLK: THE ART OF EVERYDAY OBJECTS
LEAD: Barry Cohen's 30-year-long involvement with American 19th-century folk art was reflected in the artworks he constructed and the artifacts he collected.


From France, Fruits Rouges Offer a Vivid Difference
LEAD: THE French have a handy term, les fruits rouges, or red fruits, for mixtures of summer berries and cherries.
Jams are sometimes labeled that way and the term is often used on menus.
Some restaurants list desserts made with red fruits separately from those using other fruits like apples or pears.


Co-op Sales
LEAD: To the Editor:


There's Comedy Tonight
LEAD: IN a room where stars are born, dreams don't seem so impossible.


Ideas &amp; Trends;   With Catalogues and Cookies Nonprofit Groups Seek Profits
LEAD: MERCY HOSPITAL in Toledo, Ohio, decided two years ago that it could help support the cost of its vast kitchens by going into the private catering business, but it wasn't easy at first.
Customers would order 40 lunches one day and 200 lunches the next, and the people at the new venture, the Mobile Chef, didn't know how to cope.


Does Mr. Trump Have Cold Feet?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Deborah Forsythe Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Deborah Cooke Forsythe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dall W. Forsythe of Stockport, N.Y., was married yesterday to Lewis George Perry, a son of George Lewis Perry of Washington and Jean M. Perry of Chevy Chase, Md.
The Rev.
Christopher Powell officiated at St.
John the Evangelist Episcopal Church in


Evening Hours;   Closing The Season With a Flourish
LEAD: The spring party season closed with a flourish Thursday night as guests turned out for charity all over New York City.
There was a spectacular ball at the New York Botanical Garden in a vast tent with no poles, a setting that suggested an 18th-century fete at the court of Versailles.
The two dance floors were painted to resemble Aubusson carpets, and enormous swags of roses and greens in the della


Dr. Hatterer Wed To Dr. M. L. Gelb
LEAD: Dr.
Julie Anne Hatterer, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence J. Hatterer of New York, was married last evening to Dr.
Michael Lawrence Gelb, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Gelb of New York and Delray Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Martin J. Zion officiated at the home of the bride's parents in Pawling, New York.


Costa Rica's Fierce Pacifist
LEAD: If Costa Rica has eluded the familiar afflictions of Central America - war, poverty and repression - much of the credit belongs to Jose Figueres Ferrer, a fighter for democracy who died recently at the age of 83.


Ballet Theater's Season: Hints of What Lies Ahead
LEAD: Everyone can agree that American Ballet Theater is winding up an exceptionally well-danced season, ornamented by individual performances of top caliber and, more unexpectedly, with a great leap forward on a stylistic level by the entire corps.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD: REAL FANTASY


Technology;   The Rising Popularity Of Home-Built Planes
LEAD: A new generation of high-performance kit-built aircraft is leading a rebirth in light plane design.
As traditional producers of single-engine aircraft have either left the market or continued to market decades-old designs, kit manufacturers have stepped forward to fill the void.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
Bourgeois Romanticism


Black Group Assails Giving Bleach to Addicts
LEAD: Saying that giving bleach to drug addicts has never been shown to prevent the spread of AIDS, a group of black professionals and religious leaders in New York City has denounced its distribution to intravenous-drug users.


One Sunny Day a Seatbelt Saves a Future
LEAD: NOV. 13, 1989.
Warm and sunny, unusual weather for this time of the year.
On this day, my life might have been taken had I not been wearing a seat belt.
The memories are vivid, still new, clear in my mind.


Mutual Funds;   When You Have a Choice of Fees
LEAD: When it comes to fees, mutual funds get you coming or going.
But you may be able to start picking the direction.


Corrections
LEAD: A theater listing last Sunday for a play, ''Everybody Knows Your Name,'' appended a critical comment erroneously.
The reference was to a different play, ''A Quiet End.'' ''Everybody Knows Your Name'' has not been reviewed by The Times.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: The Fifth Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest, played nine days ago in more than 80 countries, fulfilled hopes of its organizers with a record participation of about 88,000.
But there were some unusual problems.


Wrigley Isn't the Only Place Balls Are Going, Going, Gone
LEAD: Whitey Herzog, the outspoken manager of the St.
Louis Cardinals, noted the deluge of runs that the Mets and the Chicago Cubs produced at Wrigley Field last week - 80 in four games - and didn't hide his disdain for the quaint old park.


VOICES AT THE WALL
LEAD: Whenever I read about the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, I am reminded of the negative uproar Yale architectural student Maya Lin's design generated when it was first revealed in 1981 (''Memorial Day 1990: Voices at the Wall,'' by Michael Norman, May 27).
Many Vietnam veterans demanded a more traditional monument - a realistic statue similar to those erected for other American conflicts.


Preventive Medicine, Soviet-Style
LEAD: ''DAVAI!
DAVAI!'' or ''Go on!
Go on!'' shouted the young female obstetrician to the woman in labor at Leningrad's Obstetrics Polyclinic.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on May 27 about Christie's and Sotheby's auction houses misstated the sum that represents 1 percent of their combined annual sales.
It is $50 million.


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bellmore
$160,000
2391 Swenson Place
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 22- year-old Cape Cod; dining area, eat-in kitchen, basement; taxes $4,300.
Glen Cove
$250,000
32 Harwood Drive
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; fireplace, family room, office w/separate entrance; taxes $4,100.


Fan Violence at World Cup Finals
LEAD: Two hours before the kickoff of the World Cup match between England and the Netherlands on Saturday night, Italian police officers and about 1,000 English soccer fans exchanged rocks and tear gas during a clash.


Disney World Without Tears
LEAD: DIRECTLY behind Cinderella's Castle, at the center of the Fantasyland section of Walt Disney World's Magic Kingdom, is a merry-go-round of 10 cross-eyed flying elephants, soaring and swooping, each holding two or three squealing children.
The ride lasts 90 seconds.
The wait one Sunday afternoon last month was 35 minutes.


Robin D. Smith Is Wed To Charles Swanberg
LEAD: Robin D. Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Smith of Hamden, Conn., was married yesterday to Charles H. Swanberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund R. Swanberg of New Canaan, Conn.
The ceremony at the Unitarian First Church in Chestnut Hill, Mass., was performed by the Rev.
Joseph Bassett and the Rev.


Wall Street;   gold Is Not the Safe Haven It Used to Be
LEAD: Gold is supposed to be a safe haven in times of turmoil.
But those who fled to it last winter as Communist regimes dissolved in Eastern Europe have suffered since.
Last week, gold traded as low as $341 per ounce in London, a four-year low.


Jacqueline A. Sheahan Weds Arthur J. Holly
LEAD: Jacqueline A. Sheahan and Arthur J. Holly were married yesterday at St.
Ignatius Loyola Church in New York in a ceremony performed by Msgr.
John J. Barry.
Mrs.
Holly, 27 years old, is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Donald P. Sheahan.
Mr.
Holly, 27, is the son of Mrs.
Arthur J. Holly of Bloomfield, N.J., and the late Mr.


Can Perestroika Produce a Good Map of Moscow?
LEAD: EXPERIENCED travelers say good maps of Moscow have always been scarce, but with increasing interest in traveling to the Soviet Union, any map is now hard to find.
When I was in London in the middle of March, Foyle's, at 113 Charing Cross Road, was out of the popular Falk English-language street map of Moscow, although a salesman in the travel department suggested that I take Baedeker's Moscow, then $:5.95 (about $10), which included a Moscow city map on the base used by Falk, created by Cartographia in Budapest.


Mary Martin Weds Robert Livingston
LEAD: Mary P. Martin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry W. Martin of Houston, was married there yesterday to Robert E. Livingston, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Livingston of Chevy Chase, Md.
The Rev.
John C. Perusina officiated at St.
Michael's Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, a magna cum laude graduate of Brown University, and her husband, a Harvard University graduate, are Ph.D.


Fashion;   Out of Africa: Beads With a History
LEAD: In centuries past, European traders bartered brightly colored handmade beads in Africa for natural resources like gold, ivory, cocoa, coffee and palm oil.
Beads were taken by traders to Africa as highly specialized currencies as late as the 1950's.
Today, vintage and antique glass, ceramic and early plastic strands, and more recent interpretations, are among Africa's most popular exports to the United


Topics of the Times;   California's Message on Ethics
LEAD: California voters, rebelling against the corrupting influence of special-interest money in politics, have approved sweeping ethics and campaign finance reforms.
The results ought to inspire members of Congress still stalling similar Federal measures.


Total Objectivity Is an Old Centrist Canard
LEAD: To the Editor:


Capital Residents Ready To Move On After Barry
LEAD: As the long-running drama of Marion S. Barry Jr. sputters on in court, residents of the nation's capital are increasingly tuning out, wearily grateful that the Mayor's titillating but troubling saga will soon be off the air.


Trial to Start in Killing of 2 Detectives
LEAD: Last November 13, two New York City police detectives were driving a prisoner back to Rikers Island from their squad room in Queens Borough Hall.
As the car headed west on the Grand Central Parkway, shots rang out from the back seat, where the handcuffed prisoner had been sitting alone.


Sarah Klenk Marries J. E. Chanin in Denver
LEAD: Sarah A. Klenk, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Eugene L. Klenk of Denver, was married there yesterday to James E. Chanin, a son of Gerald M. Chanin of New York and the late Rima M. Chanin.
Canon David F. Morgan performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Cathedral.


Phone Charges
LEAD: To the Editor: Reader Paul Prager's problem (Letters on Travel, April 29) with undisclosed phone surcharges is not uncommon for even the most careful traveler.
Last year, a similar problem came up with the Marriott-Twin Bridges in Washington, D.C.


Preston Carter Rise Is Wed To Louise S. Lionberger
LEAD: Louise Shepley Lionberger and Preston Carter Rise were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of St.
Michael and St.
George in St.
Louis by the Rev.
William K. Christian 3d.
Mrs.
Rise, 29 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Lionberger Jr. of St.
Louis.
She and her husband are University of


Presidential Nominees To Get PBS Air Time
LEAD: The Public Broadcasting Service plans to offer air time for talks by the major parties' Presidential nominees in 1992.


Army Compensates Soldier Terrorized by Officers
LEAD: A soldier who was terrorized by superior officers after reporting his rifle stolen last year and who was then stripped of rank and thrown out of the Army has now received an honorable discharge and been granted back pay of about $10,000.


Nigerian School Collapse Is Said to Kill 100
LEAD: A private school collapsed in the eastern oil city of Port Harcourt on Friday, reportedly killing at least 100 people.


Senate Campaign Finance Talks Break Down
LEAD: Senate negotiators have abandoned efforts to reach common ground on changes in campaign financing, raising doubts that a partisan deadlock over the legislation can be broken in the months ahead.


Postings: East 85th Town Houses;   All in the Family
LEAD: A New Jersey woman with an interest in the arts whose husband is an estate developer has decided to strike out on her own by building two single-family town houses on the Upper East Side that will be priced at $6 million when they are completed early next year.
The houses are being designed by the New York architectural firm of Gwathmey Siegel and Associates, which first gained renown for its designs of vacation homes in eastern Long Island.


New Director Offers Continuity at Purchase Theater Complex
LEAD: IT is a time of flux for the Westchester arts community, with at least eight major institutions either looking for a director or easing a new one into the job.
But Christopher Beach, who was recently named the director of the Performing Arts Center on the State University campus here, is not really new at all.


Alexandra F. Anderson, Editor, Weds
LEAD: Alexandra F. Anderson, a daughter of Marion Fuller Brown of York, Me., and the late Henry Morrill Fuller, was married yesterday to Samuel O. J. Spivy, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Dixon F. Spivy of Chicago.
Town Justice Thomas Gibbons of Claverack, N.Y., officiated at the bridegroom's home in Kinderhook, N


Fashion: On the Street;   A Springtime That for Once Is Truly Diaphanous
LEAD: Right in step with the sunny, breezy spring days we've been enjoying recently comes a fashion look for daytime that suits the weather perfectly.
It combines airy, transparent skirts with opaque tights in a silhouette that is at once modern and romantic.
The effect makes one feel, well, very springlike.


2-Wheel Commuters Bypass Gridlock
LEAD: SANDY JEFFREY'S rush-hour commute from her home in Milford to her job in New Haven hardly ruffles her, she says.
She travels the 20-mile round trip by bicycle and on back roads. ''It's such a great way to relieve tension,'' said Ms.
Jeffrey, an administrator at the Yale University School of Medicine.


Dr. Cimino Weds V. J. Gandolfo Jr.
LEAD: Dr.
Lisa H. Cimino, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph A. Cimino of Pocantico Hills, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Vincent J. Gandolfo Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gandolfo of Newton Centre, Mass.Msgr.
Stephen J. Fitzgerald performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Mary Magdalene in Pocantico


A London Group Helps Heal Torture Victims
LEAD: Efiler Ocak needed someone to bear witness.


WIFE LEFT IN '88
LEAD:
WINTER VISION
By Geoff Page.
175 pp. Portland, Ore.:
University of Queensland Press/
International Specialized Book Services. Paper, $12.95.


The Task Facing Lowey's Challenger
LEAD: WHEN Nita M. Lowey decided two years ago to challenge Representative Joseph J. DioGuardi, the two-term Republican from Westchester's 20th Congressional District, she faced some formidable obstacles: it was her first run for elected office, her opponent was well-financed and two other Democrats were seeking the post.


East 86th Street
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bonni Orgler Wed To Jay D. Gottlieb
LEAD: Bonni Gaye Orgler, a daughter of Edith Orgler of New York and Boca Raton, Fla., and Joel W. Orgler of Point Pleasant, Pa., was married last evening to Jay David Gottlieb, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen S. Gottlieb of Beverly Hills, Calif., and Boca Raton.
Rabbi Robert A. Raab officiated at the Metropolitan Club in New


The Long and Short of the N.B.A. Finals
LEAD: The recently concluded National Basketball Association season was too long.


The Great Divide
LEAD: For as long as I can remember, there has been a mean-spirited proposal to settle the problems New York City presents for the rest of the country.
It is this: Loose the island of Manhattan from its moorings and let it float out to sea.
Goodbye dirt, noise, crack dealers, street peddlers, fast talkers, big spenders.


Altered States;   Free Choice Revives the Best And Worst of Eastern Europe
LEAD: STRETCHED out on a cot in the Emergency Hospital, his head and left hand bandaged, a Romanian student leader who had been beaten by a squad of pro-Government vigilantes last week was asked about democracy's chances in Romania.


To Cut Costs, State Curbs Car Phones
LEAD: CAR phones, once a symbol of power and success, are becoming a symbol of budget excess, at least for state officials.


Correction
LEAD: An article last Sunday about the Huntington Township Art League exhibition misidentified an artist.
She was Norma Friedman, not Norman.


Chernobyl Hero Turns Gravely Ill in Seattle
LEAD: A Soviet helicopter pilot is in critical condition at the Seattle hospital where he recently underwent a bone-marrow transplant for the leukemia he developed after his heroics in the Chernobyl nuclear disaster four years ago.


More Than One Sluggish Met
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


'Don Giovanni'
LEAD: The June Opera Festival of New Jersey will give a performance of Mozart's ''Don Giovanni,'' today at 3 P.M. at the Allan P. Kirby Arts Center of the Lawrenceville School, Route 206 in Lawrenceville.
The production, directed by Edward Berkeley, has James Busterud in the title role, Dale Travis as Leporello, Carmen Pelton as Donna Anna and Linda Wall as Donna Elvira.


George Nakashima Is Dead at 85; Designer and Master Woodworker
LEAD: George Nakashima, the master woodworker and designer who sought to capture the noble character of trees in chairs, tables and cabinetry, died on Friday at his home in New Hope, Pa.
He was 85 years old.
His family said he died after a brief illness.


A Conversation That Made Me Rich
LEAD: Five years ago, I had a second-rate job in the publicity department of a publishing company in Montreal.
I hadn't finished college and didn't own a house or drive a decent car.
Now I am a millionaire.


Slaney, 'Not Fit to Race,' Bows Out
LEAD: It was uncharacteristic.
It was almost embarrassing.
But it could have been predicted.
To be brutal, Mary Decker Slaney, the best middle-distance runner in American track history, looked awful Friday night in the USA/Mobil outdoor track and field championships.
She barely qualified for tonight's 1,500-meter final, and she decided not to run.


James Bell Weds Miss Whittemore
LEAD: Jeannette L. Whittemore, the daughter of Dr.
Jeanne M. Whittemore of Stamford, Conn., and the late Edward W. Whittemore, was married yesterday to James W. Bell, the son of Doris Bell of Framingham, Mass., and the late Walter Bell.
The Rev.
Edward Wright performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Flying Cloud Farm in Petaluma,


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended June 2
MANHATTAN
Gramercy Park Area
$950,000
242 East 19th Street
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op penthouse; manned elevator, dining room, large kitchen, fireplace, wraparound terrace, four exposures; maintenance $2,176, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Eychner Associates)


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-17


A FAMILY TOO CLOSE TO THE FIRE
LEAD:
WILDLIFE
By Richard Ford.
177 pp. New York:
The Atlantic Monthly Press. $18.95.


Panel Faults Westchester G.O.P. on Patronage
LEAD: The New York State Government Integrity Commission last week criticized the Westchester County Republican leader's influence over the county government, saying it was a ''case study'' of an overly close relationship between political parties and government.


Hawkins Redeems Himself but Yanks Lose
LEAD: Andy Hawkins might have been down to his final chance, but last night at the Stadium, just eight days after it appeared he might be released by the Yankees, Hawkins rose and gave a performance worthy of an ovation.


The Rental Market Loosens Up a Bit
LEAD: ACROSS the New York region, there is good news for renters.
There are many more apartments and houses available for rent; rents on market-rate units are either stable or falling, and landlords are courting tenants with aggressive promotions.


Miss Rose Weds Craig W. Hupper
LEAD: St.
Anne's Episcopal Church in Annapolis, Md., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Susan Kent Rose, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth H. Rose of Annapolis, to Craig William Hupper, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Hupper of New York.
The Rev.
Mark Gatza performed the ceremony.


Patience in St. Louis
LEAD: The Yankees are not the only team that may be performing beneath their stat-sheet potential, but the man who built the St.
Louis Cardinals into the last-place team in the National League East is getting more time to turn things around.


No. 120 Gives Shilton Record
LEAD: Make room in the trophy case.
Another royal-blue cap is about to be delivered to the home of Peter Shilton.


Saugerties Lighthouse Being Restored on Hudson
LEAD: A half-mile out into the Hudson River, the old Saugerties Lighthouse, abandoned 36 years ago, is getting a new lease on life as a historical landmark, a tourist attraction and a restored aid to navigation.


Caramoor Festival at 45, From Orchestra to Jazz
LEAD: IN 1946, three recitals in the Music Room at Caramoor began what has become one of the most prestigious and esthetically satisfying summer series in the country, the Caramoor Music Festival.
Now, for the 45th season in Katonah, there are six orchestral programs (one of them with full chorus and soloists), five solo recitals, fifteen chamber concerts, a half-dozen matinees for children and even two jazz sessions.


Morning to Night in Moscow: Waiting, Ever More Angrily
LEAD: It's morning in Moscow and the streets are a tangle of lives: bureaucrats riding to their jobs in black Volga sedans, housewives rushing between stores, trying to forage meals for their families; streetworkers clogging traffic in their vain attempts to repair the gaping holes in the city's main roads.


The World;   Canada's Crucial Seven-Day Countdown
LEAD: TO many Canadians, it seems scarcely credible that it could have come to this.
After 123 years, the nation stitched together from the British colonies that shunned the American revolution faces a real possibility of being sundered at its core.


Cynthia Murphy Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Cynthia A. Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas B. Murphy of Sterling, Mass., was married yesterday to Gregory E. Dermksian, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
George Dermksian of New York.
The Very Rev.
Anoushavan Tanielian, assisted by Archpriest Vahrich Shirinian, officiated at SS.
Vartanantz Armenian Apostolic Church in Ridgefield, N


Ellen Oltman Wed to Charles Kellner
LEAD: Ellen E. Oltman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Oltman of Hartsdale, N.Y., was married to Charles R. Kellner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Emil M. Kellner of Wilkes-Barre, Pa., in a Jewish and Quaker ceremony yesterday.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman officiated at the Warwick hotel in New York.


A Woman's View On Love's Trials - And Hold the Tears
LEAD: The recording business rediscovered female singer-songwriters in the 1980's when an assortment of oddballs broke through to reinvent pop's female points of view.
The Pretenders, the Eurythmics and Sinead O'Connor made a dent in rock; Madonna and Janet Jackson burned up the dance charts; Suzanne Vega, Tracy Chapman, 10,000 Maniacs (led by Natalie Merchant) and Edie Brickell revitalized folky introspection.


Americans Still Don't Want to Give Up the $1 Bill for a $1 Coin;   Think Bigger
LEAD: To the Editor:


On the Nature Of Delusions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fashion: European Report;   Paris, Mixing It All Up
LEAD: It would be facile to say that the Paris fall showings were a mess.
It would be more candid, though, to describe the mise en scene as an eclectic melange.
The collections were full of clothes that were, by turns, scrambles of rearranged themes from the past, reruns of 1960's affectations, lifts from theatrical turns, references to L.


Cordelia Pitman Wed to W. J. Furber
LEAD: Cordelia Taylor Pitman was married yesterday to Winslow James Furber.
The Rev.
Joseph Tyrell, a Roman Catholic, and the Rev.
Edward Gammons, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the home of the bride's aunt and uncle, Mr. and Mrs.
Dick Zuver, in Bay Head, N.J.


Alyson Grunder Marries
LEAD: Alyson Lynn Grunder, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul E. Grunder of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to William Varick Bassett Jr., a son of Eloise W. Miller of Bethlehem, Pa., and the late William V. Bassett.
The Rev.
Van S. Merle-Smith Jr. officiated at the West Side Presbyterian Church in Ridgewood.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Drive-Ins Endure, and Woo Back Some Old Fans
LEAD: Along a suburban highway, just a few hundred yards from the concert hall at the Westbury Music Fair, is a remnant of a quickly disappearing - and somewhat less highbrow - form of American popular culture: the drive-in movie.


Managing;   Getting the Brightest to Go Abroad
LEAD: William L. Godsey had headed the General Dynamics Corporation's European operations in Brussels for three years when he got a call from Frederick S. Wood, a vice president at St.
Louis headquarters.
Mr.
Wood thought Mr.
Godsey should apply for the newly opened job of vice president for international programs at the company's Pomona,


Switchbacks Make a Lively Ride for a New I.B.M. Line
LEAD: The market for the AS/400 family of minicomputers introduced by the International Business Machines Corporation two years ago hasn't exactly developed in a straight line.


U.N. Panel Backs 3 Translators Ousted at Beijing's Request
LEAD: In a ruling likely to have far-reaching consequences for Chinese and Soviet staff members here, a United Nations tribunal has said the organization had no right to dismiss three Chinese employees at the Beijing Government's request earlier this year.


Spare the Shears and Spoil the View
LEAD: THINK of pruning as a form of plant discipline.
If this important deed is considered from this viewpoint, gardeners will overcome their fear of cutting anything and will proceed with confidence.


Patricia D. Funt Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Patricia D. Funt was married yesterday to Kenneth J. Oxman at the Monterey, Calif., home of her father, Allen Funt.
The Rev.
Charlie Moore, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


Miss van Pallandt Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Beatrice van Pallandt, a daughter of Frederik Baron van Pallandt of Manila and Dorthe Holm Jensen of London, was married yesterday to Jeffrey-Werner Graf von der Schulenburg, a son of Susanna von der Schulenburg of Fishers Island, N.Y., and London, and the late Friedrich-Werner Graf von der Schulenburg of Cologne, West Germany.


Bonn Links Detainee in East to G.I. Killings
LEAD: A suspected member of the left-wing Red Army Faction arrested in East Germany is wanted for killing three United States servicemen in 1985, the West German authorities said today.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD:
Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


Michael Haimsohn, 34, Dancer and Puppeteer
LEAD: Michael Anthony Haimsohn, a dancer, actor, puppeteer and set designer, died on Thursday at the University of Southern California Medical Center in Los Angeles.


A Child's Invitation to Summer Camp Provokes a Crisis
LEAD: The search for summer shoes began in February, when the city was cloaked in gray and the streets were slick with ice.


Deirdre A. Lowe Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Deirdre A. Lowe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Lowe Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Christopher C. Burke, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Burke of Chelmsford, Mass.
Msgr.
Thomas P. Guinan officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Michael the Archangel.


The World;   Is There a Reformer In China's Future
LEAD: AS Chinese and foreigners puzzle over the future of China, a fundamental question is this: Is there a Chinese Gorbachev lurking within the leadership?


In Job Interviews, Both Sides Have Rights
LEAD: THE thousands of college graduates who start touring personnel offices this month should know their rights as employees as well as the rights of their prospective employers, says Felix J. Springer, an employment litigation specialist in the Hartford law firm of Day, Berry &amp; Howard.


Principles of Word-Building
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article in the Travel section today and headlines on pages 1 and 14, about the French city of Nantes, refer to it incorrectly.
Nantes is the capital of the Loire-Inferieure department and not of Brittany, which is a region.


A Negative Vote On Affirmative Action
LEAD: There is much in Shelby Steele's argument that is persuasive.
But as a former staff member of the 1968 National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders (also known as the Kerner commission), I must raise a question.
The commission criticized ''our nation . . . moving toward two societies, one black, one white - separate and unequal.


From France, Fruits Rouges Offer a Vivid Difference
LEAD: THE French have a handy term, les fruits rouges, or red fruits, for mixtures of summer berries and cherries.
Jams are sometimes labeled that way and the term is often used on menus.
Some restaurants list desserts made with red fruits separately from those using other fruits like apples or pears.


Sara S. Barrett Becomes Bride
LEAD: Sara Shaffer Barrett, a photographer, and Alec Wilkinson, a staff writer at The New Yorker, were married yesterday at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in Mount Kisco, N.Y., by the Rev.
Lisa Keppeler.


A Master Glassmaker's Legacy
LEAD: ACKNOWLEDGED as one of the master American glassmakers of the 19th and early 20th centuries, Christian Dorflinger is still remembered in his adopted northeastern Pennsylvania home.
He was one of those extraordinary Victorians who dedicated a long life to the perfecting of the craft that he learned as a 10-year-old apprentice in his native Alsace.


Carolyn Nourie Weds D. B. Aspinall Jr.
LEAD: Carolyn J. Nourie and Donald B. Aspinall Jr. were married yesterday at Old St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Edward Jarvis performed the ceremony, assisted by Deacon Edward L. Doyle, an uncle of the bride, and the bridegroom's sister, the Rev.
Barbara Aspinall, a Presbyterian.


Q and A
LEAD:
Volcano in Hawaii


Review/Music;   Florilegium's Zoological Analogies
LEAD: Presumably meant to be varied and diverting, the concert by the Florilegium Chamber Choir on Wednesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall came off as half-baked and mostly tedious.
The program had a zoological theme of sorts.
But its major offering, Schubert's late cantata ''Mirjams Siegesgesang'' (D.


Review/Music;   Jean Genet's 'Balcony' Makes Debut as Opera
LEAD: At the time Robert DiDomenica completed his opera ''The Balcony,'' in 1972, atonality was still the dominant compositional style in this country, and serialism was not yet a dirty word.
It is a very different world that Mr.
DiDomenica's opera entered this evening, when the Opera Company of Boston presented its premiere under the musical and artistic direction of the endlessly enterprising Sarah Caldwell.


Bimbos Embody Retro Rage
LEAD: In ''Bird On A Wire,'' Goldie Hawn plays a high-powered lawyer who talks tough to her adversaries, then can't decide which brand of bottled water she wants with lunch.
She wakes up wearing skimpy black lingerie, then scampers through one of the film's many chase sequences wearing a pink satin wrapper that flies upward in a strong breeze.


Mets Blamed Wrong Person


Upgrading Electric Outlets
LEAD: IF your home has old-fashioned, ungrounded, two-slot electric wall receptacles, you can can easily determine whether the wiring will accommodate newer, more convenient and safer three-slot grounding models.
You can also perform the replacement if local building codes permit.


Defense Workers Lobby to Save Jobs
LEAD: WORKERS and executives from UNC Naval Products, faced with the possible shutdown of the company's Montville plant, brought their case to Congress on Tuesday.


Style Makers;   Marc Black and Ed Bialek, Creators of Commercials
LEAD: For Marc Black and Ed Bialek, who produce music for commercials, the catchy jingle is passe.
They compose musical mantras - music and chants - for such clients as A.T.&amp;T., Converse sneakers and the Mets.


East 86th Street
LEAD: To the Editor:


Recycling And Recycling
LEAD: As a civic leader of a community in South Westbury which has been environmentally aware long before it was fashionable to be so, I could not agree more with Alan Fortunoff that we can no longer continue to be a throwaway society. (''Recycling Property for the Future,'' May 20).


Waging Guerrilla Warfare Against the Art World
LEAD: The group known as The Guerrilla Girls turned five a few weeks ago, but if they held an anniversary celebration, it was typically secret.
Since 1985, this mysterious band of art-world women, who boldly - some would say presumptuously - call themselves the ''conscience of the art world,'' has regularly papered sections of lower Manhattan with smartly designed black-and-white posters.


Prescription For Boredom
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fashion: European Report;   Milan
LEAD: Poor sybilla! arguably the most inventive of the new guard designers to exhibit their fashions in Milan, she may also be the most misunderstood.
Maligned by many of the professionals who clambered up steep bleachers for a glimpse of her fall line, Sybilla Sorondo, who is known simply by her first name, has developed a protective front.


A Morality Musical For the Modern Era
LEAD: THEATER 3 in Port Jefferson, which is presenting the Long Island premiere of the Stephen Sondheim musical ''Into the Woods,'' has always boasted the finest musical comedy talent on the Island.


An Exhibition That Is Really An Exhortation
LEAD: In 1941, the captive leaders of the Terezin Ghetto in Czechoslovakia convinced the Nazis that the Jewish artifacts being confiscated daily should be preserved as the museum of an extinct race.
Seeing the propaganda potential in this move, the Germans assigned the task to the curators at the Central Jewish Museum in


Soviet Jews In U.S. Don Blue Collars
LEAD: For 15 years, Rafail Fishman taught violin, and his wife, Shelya, taught piano in a high school for talented youths in the Black Sea city of Odessa.
But when they emigrated from the Soviet Union last year, they soon learned that there was no demand for Ukrainian music teachers in New York City.


Bill Against Condo-Conversion Evictions Debated
LEAD: A BATTLE pitting landlords against tenants is coming to a climax after five years of conflict as efforts are under way to win final agreement on a bill that aims to prevent the eviction of thousands of tenants in condominium conversions.


Headliners;   No Hitting
LEAD: Last week, Nolan Ryan made people over 40 happy, especially if they were not Oakland fans.
The A's were on the receiving end as Ryan pitched his sixth no-hitter, at the age of 43, in his 24th major league season, but even they were approving as Ryan and the Texas Rangers beat them 5-0. ''A masterpiece,'' said Carney Lansford, a former teammate of Ryan's, who struck out as a pinch hitter Monday night.


Campus Life: Chicago;   Math Professor Inspires Women By Her Example
LEAD: For the last six years, Diane Herrmann has been encouraging and supporting female mathematics students at the University of Chicago.
Her efforts now appear to be paying off.


Laura Robinson and James Young Wed
LEAD: Laura Cecilia Robinson and James Bernard Young were married yesterday at St.
Catherine of Siena Roman Catholic Church in Riverside, Conn.
Msgr.
William A. Genuario officiated.


As Summer Nears, a Rabies Reminder
LEAD: If a raccoon or a fox wanders into your campsite or backyard this summer and seems to show no fear of you, don't try to feed or pet it: you might be dealing with a rabid animal.


FICTION
LEAD:
SECONDS.
By Lois Wyse. (Crown, $19.95.) Leave the tough times to the first wife, Lois Wyse's contemporary fairy tale asserts.
Let her suffer her husband's arduous climb to the top.
Then, when she exits (or is dumped), move in and pick up his wealthy pieces.
The smart ones are the ''Seconds.'' Here they are Sienna, Anne and Bronwyn, second wives of men with billion-dollar fortunes and hopes of becoming ambassadors.


Poetry as an Inexact Science
LEAD: To the Editor:


Full House at Gallery in Marlborough
LEAD: THE Connecticut Gallery in Marlborough has a full house, with solo shows by the late Yannis Maltezos and Deborah Muirhead and a roundup of 21 other artists.


Food;   Sweet Heat
LEAD: Having been raised by a sugar fiend, i've always had a pretty jaded attitude toward sweets.
My mom baked a cake virtually every day of my childhood, and all it did for me was create cravings for spicy food.
Given a choice between a chili and a chocolate, I would head for the heat every time.


Caroline King Becomes Bride of Robert Chang
LEAD: Caroline King, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas King of New York, was married yesterday at the Central Presbyterian Church in New York to Robert Chang, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wei Kong Chang of Livingston, N.J., by the Rev.
William H. Pindar.


Mary L. Beardsley Is Wed to Kent A. Kelley
LEAD: Mary L. Beardsley, a daughter of Mrs.
Alling P. Beardsley of Slingerlands, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Beardsley, was married yesterday to Kent A. Kelley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward A. Kelley of Harlingen, Tex.
The Rev.
Stephen G. Kendrick officiated at the Universalist Church in West Hartford, Conn.


Lee R. Jamieson Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Lee Reddan Jamieson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas C. Jamieson Jr. of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday at the Edith Memorial Chapel at the Lawrenceville (N.J.) School to Ronald Jerome Kane Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kane of Princeton.
The Rev.
Michael J. Maruca, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


Facing Prejudice In the Suburbs
LEAD: I am responding to Mary C. Curtis's article, ''That Awful Question at the Store'' (Opinion page, April 29).
How saddened I was to read this poignant article on discrimination.


A Negative Vote On Affirmative Actionv
LEAD: Shelby Steele's article is the most sensible analysis of affirmative action I have seen.
His statement, ''Preferential treatment does not teach skills, or educate, or instill motivation.
It only passes out entitlement by color, a situation that in my profession has created an unrealistically high demand for black professors,'' is the direct answer to Professor Derrick Bell, of Harvard Law School, who said that until the school hires a black female professor with tenure, he would go on an unpaid leave of absence.


Where's The Cash, Mr. Trump?
LEAD: Is Donald a deadbeat?


F.D.A. Warns Beef Producers On Use of a Veterinary Drug
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration has warned beef producers against using a non-prescription veterinary product intended to prevent copper deficiency in beef cattle.


2 Airliners Bump on Runway
LEAD: An Alitalia 747 arriving from Rome and a USAir Fokker jet departing for Syracuse collided yesterday while taxiing at Kennedy International Airport, causing minor wing and tail damage but no injuries, the Port Authority said.
The 51 USAir passengers were put aboard another flight.


New Study Says AIDS Bias Grows Faster Than Disease
LEAD: Acts of discrimination against people with AIDS have steadily increased even though most people realize that the disease cannot be spread by casual contact, the American Civil Liberties Union said in a report made public today.


A ROACH CLIP WITH EVERY PAID SUBSCRIPTION
LEAD:
ROLLING STONE MAGAZINE
The Uncensored History.
By Robert Draper.
Illustrated. 389 pp. New York:
Doubleday. $19.95.


TYSON WINS IN 1st ROUND
LEAD: Mike Tyson, in his first bout since losing his heavyweight title, detonated a right hand on the chin of Henry Tillman and knocked him out at 2:47 of the first round of a scheduled 10-round bout tonight at Caesars Palace.


SPEAKING THE TRUTH
LEAD:
DISTURBING THE PEACE
A Conversation with Karel Hvizdala.
By Vaclav Havel.
Translated by Paul Wilson.
228 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Postings: Avoiding Problems;   Co-op Seminar
LEAD: ''We have already seen many serious problems,'' Frederick K. Mehlman, assistant attorney general in charge of the New York State Real Estate Financing Bureau, said earlier this year about financial difficulties at converted cooperatives and condominiums. ''Unless the real estate market picks up, we expect more problems over the next few months.


FALL RIVER LEGENDS
LEAD:
WHAT WE HAD
By James Chace.
187 pp. New York:
Summit Books. $17.95.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 17, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.)
The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-
American women and their immigrant mothers.
2
3
CREATURE, by John Saul. (Bantam, $4.95.) A
siege of horror besets a high school football team.


Data Bank/June 17, 1990
LEAD:
$
Sales at Retail Outlets
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
-0.7
-0.9
-0.4
Consumer Price Index
May
April
Year Ago
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.2
0.5
Producer Price Index
May
April
Year Ago
Monthly percent change
0.3
-0.3
0.9
Business Inventories
April
March
Feb.


In Managua, Fresh Hope
LEAD: President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro's three-week-old Cabinet was exasperated, ready to give up.


Hard-Hitting Pirates Turn Tables on Mets
LEAD: The Mets, who hit .381 in their last eight games and won seven of them, finally got bashed by somebody else tonight: the Pittsburgh Pirates, who outhit them, 15-10, and outscored them, 11-6.


Fashion;   New Wheels in Town Set Styles and Sell Band-Aids
LEAD: New waves of rolling people now weave in and out of traffic, adding speed and precariousness to city life, as well as flashes of fashion.
They wear Rollerblades, a new generation of roller skate with a single row of polyurethane wheels that has transformed this archetypal urban pursuit.


Schools in Tarrytowns Go Back to the Voters
LEAD: VOTERS in Tarrytown and North Tarrytown return to the polls this week, for their second opportunity to approve financing for the joint school system the two communities operate.


Nice Ladies Work for Less
LEAD: To the Editor:


LITHUANIA LEADERS URGE SUSPENDING INDEPENDENCE BID
LEAD: The government of Lithuania endorsed a proposal today that it suspend the republic's declaration of independence, provided that the Gorbachev Government end economic sanctions and begin negotiating a compromise settlement of the sovereignty crisis.


U.S. Horse Team
LEAD: An experienced champion named Walzertakt and three other competitors, Gifted, Dimitrius and Unanimous, have been named to carry the American hopes in the dressage division of the world equestrian championships in Stockholm next month.
Their riders were also named to the team, including, Robert Dover of Lebanon, N.J., a two-time Olympian who rode Walzertakt to the 1989 and 1990 national dressage championships.


Votes in Congress;   Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
LEAD:
Senate
1.
Veto Override: Vote to override President Bush's veto of a measure that would have continued Federal subsidies for Amtrak and expanded the Government's regulatory power over freight railroads.
Failed, with 64 in favor and 36 opposed, which was three votes short of the two-thirds vote needed for an override.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
JACQUELINE DU PRE: A Life.
By Carol Easton. (Summit, $19.95.) From the ages of 16 to 28, Jacqueline du Pre was one of the most sought-after cellists in the world.
The music stopped in 1973 when she was found to have multiple sclerosis.
She lived almost 14 years in a wheelchair until her death at the age of 42 in 1987.


Campus Life: Washington and Lee;   N.A.A.C.P. Seeks Dormitory Space For Urban Poor
LEAD: An influx of students from Washington and Lee University into low-income neighborhoods is creating friction with black residents, who charge that the movement has driven up rents to a point where some families can no longer afford to live here.


Overachieving?
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Nation;   Designing Tankers To Minimize Oil Spills
LEAD: Lately, and to everyone's disgust, oil and water do mix.
As oil globules wash ashore from a spill in the Kill van Kull and fan out from the smoldering tanker in the Gulf of Mexico, America's latest oil import crisis, getting the stuff safely to shore, is stirring new interest in tanker safety.
Engineers have proposed several steps, but they often contradict each other.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Travel Advisory column on June 3 about Katmandu, Nepal, misstated the address of one of two craft shops named Haftakala.
The store near the Annapurna Hotel coffee shop is on Durbar Marg.


Miss Cairns Weds Christian Sampson
LEAD: Megan Clifton Cairns, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur Clifton Cairns of Montreal and Prouts Neck, Me., was married yesterday at St.
James Episcopal Church in Prouts Neck to Dr.
Christian Edward Sampson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Jennings Sampson of Carlisle, Mass.
The Bishop of New Jersey, G.


Bats In Bronx: A Yankee Caper
LEAD: Members of the Yankees' front office, acting under orders from George Steinbrenner, have for several years checked the visiting clubhouse late at night after games to see if the opposition's bats were altered, former Yankee employees say.


Czech Nuns Are Leaving Their Decades of Hiding
LEAD: Sister Milada, a Franciscan, did not have a nun's habit to wear yet, and on her nurse's uniform she still displayed the regulation badge that declared, ''We Serve the Health of the Nation,'' topped by a red Communist star.
But she and the other nuns of her order have come out of the shadows.


Jennie McGregor Weds Andre Bernard
LEAD: Jennie Francis McGregor and Andre Philippe Bernard, book editors in New York, were married yesterday at the Church on the Hill in Lenox, Mass., by the Rev.
Douglas L. Moschella Clark, a United Church of Christ minister.


Elizabeth Varley Is Wed
LEAD: Elizabeth Burch Varley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph R. Varley of Winnetka, Ill., was married yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church in Winnetka to Gregory Talcott Camp, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard T. Camp of New York.
The Rev.
A.
Nichols Taylor officiated.
Mrs.
Camp is a limited partner in the investment firm of Gibbons, Green, van Amerongen in New York.


Malle Uncorks the '68 Crop
LEAD: The last time Louis Malle dug deeply into his memory and his conscience, the result was ''Au Revoir les Enfants,'' his remarkable, highly praised testimonial to a childhood schoolmate taken away from occupied France by the Nazis and killed at Auschwitz.
The mood now has changed.
An earlier Louis Malle has returned.


Review/Dance;   Charles Moore Group and Drums of Africa
LEAD: Happy people are often dancing people.
That became evident on Monday night when the Charles Moore Dance Theater presented ''Dances and Drums of Africa'' at Marymount Manhattan College.
The program of celebration featured works derived from traditional African dances, and there was also a dance from


In Defense of Circumcision
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dr. Sheehy Wed To Dale Hamel
LEAD: Dr.
Mary Beth Sheehy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert N. Sheehy of Weston, Conn., was married yesterday at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Ridgefield, Conn., to Dale M. Hamel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Hamel of Big Rapids, Mich.
Canon Charles W. Stubbs officiated.


Question Of the Week;   Should the Nets Trade The No. 1 Draft Pick?
LEAD: Chances are that if the Nets draft Derrick Coleman, he'll have more of an impact than did Chris Morris, Dennis Hopson or Mookie Blaylock, the Nets' first-round picks the last three years.
However, the Nets need an experienced veteran who can score and become a leader in the clubhouse.
This can be accomplished only by trading their first pick.


Miss Streeter Marries Anwar Wissa Jr.
LEAD: Cornelia Van Rensselaer Streeter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry S. Streeter of Wenham, Mass., was married yesterday in South Hamilton, Mass., to Anwar E. Z. Wissa Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wissa of Orlando, Fla.
The Rev.
William T. Lovell officiated at Christ Episcopal Church.


New Jersey Jokes Fill 'Mikado Inc.'
LEAD: FOOLING around with ''The Mikado'' is nothing new. ''The Swing Mikado'' and ''The Hot Mikado'' go back to the 1930's, ''The Black Mikado'' even further, to the 1880's. ''Mikado 2001'' is but a few years old, and a touring version of the 1982 Stratford (Canada) Theater Festival's modernized ''Mikado'' replete with references to insider trading, beepers, joggers and Jane Fonda was seen on


Headliners;   The Defendant Stops Running
LEAD: EVEN though Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. was on trial last week, he gave many Washingtonians reason to stop paying attention to it.
Before the questioning of prospective jurors had been completed, Mr.
Barry announced that he would not run for a fourth term as mayor.


Let's Be Frank About Fairness And Accuracy
LEAD: Two watchdogs over television and the press - Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting (FAIR) and Accuracy in Media (AIM) - have taken exception to a recent column of mine that suggested they were less interested in the ideals advertised in their titles than in promoting their ideologies.
They seem to be especially irked by having been mentioned in the same breath.


J. P. Thibault Bouet, Designer, 42
LEAD: J. P. Thibault Bouet, a fashion designer, died on Thursday at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 42 years old and also lived in Manhattan.


Hers;   A Good Dad In Any Age
LEAD: I was only 3 when my mother, having given birth to my baby brother, fell victim to postpartum complications and returned to the hospital for several weeks.
I was convinced that she was going to die; the cruel hospital rules of the 1940's, which prohibited visits by children, confirmed my worst suspicions.


Andrea Suess and Jonathan Taylor Are Married
LEAD: Andrea Maija Suess, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John Suess of Pepper Pike, Ohio, was married yesterday to Jonathan Billings Taylor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul D. Taylor of Lockport, N.Y., and Chevy Chase, Md.
The Rev.
Ernest DuRoss performed the ceremony at St.
Martin's Episcopal Church in Chagrin Falls,


Recollections Of a Combat Medic
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mt. Sinai Deal Causing Concern
LEAD: Your recent article concerning bulldozing of state-owned land (''Mount Sinai Enraged by Dispute Over Land,'' May 20) failed to include that only the residents and civic associations of the neighboring communities, not the State of New York (the land owner), are concerned about the raping of the environment that took place on this property.


Philharmonic Summer Tour
LEAD: The New York Philharmonic will give eight concerts on its summer tour before returning to New York on Sept. 1 to prepare for its 149th season.
The orchestra, under the direction of Zubin Mehta, will play in these places: Wolf Trap Farm Park in Vienna, Va. (Aug. 22-23); Tanglewood in Lenox, Mass. (Aug.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Lessons in Building Connecticut Schools
LEAD: IN the wake of the 80's housing boom that brought development to the hinterlands, a surge of school construction has begun, spurred by the coming of age - kindergarten age - of baby-boomers' children.


In Sports, a Gulf Between Sexes
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


India's Embattled Leader Struggles With Rising Violence and Party Rivals
LEAD: For Prime Minister V. P. Singh, leading an alliance of diverse opposition parties to victory in national elections nearly seven months ago was the easy part.
Consolidating his new Government's power over this fractious nation of 840 million people is proving to be much more difficult.


Spare the Shears and Spoil the View
LEAD: THINK of pruning as a form of plant discipline.
If this important deed is considered from this viewpoint, gardeners will overcome their fear of cutting anything and will proceed with confidence.


FERNANDEZ TAKES CHARGE
LEAD: New York City's new schools chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, cannot abide mess and disorder.
He keeps his desk in a reproachful state of tidiness, and has trouble understanding why others can't do likewise.
And so he wasn't just miffed, he was genuinely upset when he saw graffiti on the back of an elementary school, P.S.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article in the Business section on May 13 about printing inks discussed health hazards that could lead to restrictions on the use of some colors in packaging.
A chart with the article, showing where inks are used and which colors contain dangerous metals, was headed ''Hazardous Inks.''


Tatyana Yassukovich, An Actress, Is Married
LEAD: Tatyana Alexandra Eugenie Yassukovich, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanislas M. Yassukovich of London and Bibury, Glouchestershire, England, was married yesterday to Charles Stewart Dubow, the son of Isabella Breckinridge Dubow of Washington and Arthur D. Dubow of East Hampton, L.I.
The Rev.
Francis Bruce officiated at St.


K.G.B. Abuses Still Reported
LEAD: A retired senior official of the Soviet security agency accused its leadership of continuing a campaign against citizens perceived as political enemies.
Page 12.


Where Budapest Indulges Its Sweet Tooth
LEAD: HUNGARIAN cuisine is not all paprika and salami.
The people of Budapest especially relish tortes, strudels and fine pastry.
Their craving for sweets may be a legacy from the Turks who were overlords of the Danubian city for nearly 150 years in the 16th and 17th centuries and are believed to have substituted sugary concoctions for alcohol, which their Muslim faith forbade.


The Reverse LBO Survives, but in a Downsized Model
LEAD: The tumult in the equities market and the wreckage of the 1980's ''junk bond'' market has brought many of the nation's financial wizards back down closer to earth.
Their leveraged buyouts are no longer flying as high as they were - and selling them back to the public is much harder than it was.


Brittany's Rich Capital
LEAD: NANTES, capital of Brittany, is a town of white stone sculptured buildings, with wrought-iron balconies, cobblestone streets and lovely gardens.
There is a whiff of sea air, and all roads lead to a river or a river view - although many of its once intensely active quays are now flowery promenades.


Susanna Shore and John Le Boutillier, Students, Are Wed in Harvard Church
LEAD: Susanna G. Shore, a daughter of Dr.
Miles and Dr.
Eleanor Shore of Needham, Mass., was married yesterday to John Le Boutillier, a son of Mrs.
Gilbert Lincoln of West Hartford, Conn., and Martin LeBoutillier of Lyme, Conn.
The Rev.
Preston Hannibal performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Memorial Church at Harvard University in Cambridge,


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: There's a ubiquitous new accessory around.
It's not what one might call fashion.
It's not good-looking.
It adds nothing to any outfit.
It's bulky, heavy and, in fact, a nuisance.
It has to be replaced daily.
Most of the looks it attracts are of astonishment or amusement.


Bucky II?
LEAD: If Bucky Dent knows anything, it is recent Yankee history.
So it should come as no surprise that less than two weeks after he was replaced by Stump Merrill in the 18th managerial switch of the George Steinbrenner era, Dent was already talking about returning to his old job, although not right away.


From France, Fruits Rouges Offer a Vivid Difference
LEAD: THE French have a handy term, les fruits rouges, or red fruits, for mixtures of summer berries and cherries.
Jams are sometimes labeled that way and the term is often used on menus.
Some restaurants list desserts made with red fruits separately from those using other fruits like apples or pears.


The Man Who Writes What the Mayor Means
LEAD: When the formal, soft-spoken Mayor who leads New York City speaks out formally in public these days, the words he utters are often the work of John Siegal, a liberal young lawyer who toils in a spare aerie above him with a black pen, a yellow legal pad and a single dictionary.


Corrections
LEAD: Two picture captions on page 14 of The Long Island Weekly today about plans for the former Roosevelt Raceway property are reversed.
The upper picture shows a scale model of the raceway project, and the lower photograph shows plans for a mall and the renovation of a Fortunoff store.


In Lithuania, An Old Trouper Called Resistance
LEAD: A few weeks before the Lithuanian Parliament defiantly declared its independence from Moscow, four actors stood on the stage of Lithuania's Revolutionary Museum and sang a toast to Stalin.
Waving their arms to the jaunty accompaniment of a red accordion, they lavished syncopated praise on the man who had sentenced thousands of their countrymen to death in Siberian labor camps:


Question Of the Week;   Should the Nets Trade The No. 1 Draft Pick?
LEAD: The Nets have floundered more from a lack of leadership than a lack of talent.
They should trade the No. 1 pick for a proven veteran (or two) from a winning program.
Maybe they can make it a point guard to pull the reins in on Dennis Hopson, and to get the ball to Sam Bowie.
Fat Lever and Sleepy Floyd might be available.


Campus Life: UCLA;   Professor Joining Reopened School In Lithuania
LEAD: The city of Kaunas was home to Lithuania's premier university before the Soviet Union annexed the Baltic country in 1940 and the school closed.


Fact That Outperforms Fiction
LEAD: The corporate nose has never been tweaked, or its leg pulled, to such serious and delirious effect as it is in Michael Moore's instant classic, ROGER AND ME (1989, Warner, $89.95).
The brilliant feature-length documentary is now available on a videocassette that looks almost as mint-fresh as the movie.


Reviews/Jazz;   Elvin Jones's Drumming Inspires Quintet of Soloists
LEAD: It took one tune to soak the drummer Elvin Jones's shirt in perspiration in his first set at the Blue Note on Tuesday night.
Mr.
Jones, who revolutionized jazz drumming in the early 1960's as a member of the John Coltrane quartet, beats up his drums, hitting them with mallets, brushes and sticks.
The music he played with Mr.


Reflections on the Family for Father's Day;   Women at Risk
LEAD: To the Editor:


Elizabeth Davis Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Elizabeth Pyper Davis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlisle Ragland Davis Jr. of Birmingham, Mich., and New York, was married yesterday in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., to Hartley Raymond Rogers, a son of Dr.
Adrianne E. Rogers and Hartley Rogers Jr. of Winchester, Mass.


Headliners;   It's Been Years
LEAD: Miriam Makeba is still an expatriate, but she can go home again and she has.
Just months ago, after Nelson Mandela's release, Miss Makeba said she wanted to be ''on the first plane home'' from Brussels but remained too leery of the South African authorities.
But last week she was on the plane, for her first visit in 31 years, and when she stepped off a crowd began the anti-apartheid anthem, ''God Bless Africa.


U.S. Bike Title Is on the Line
LEAD: The annual CoreStates United States pro cycling championship, a grueling 156-mile race through the streets of Philadelphia on Sunday, will match those traditionally strong American teams, Coors Light and 7-Eleven.


Next Week;   How Do The Pistons Rank in N.B.A. History?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: Auctions of three- and six-month Treasury bills.
TUESDAY: Housing starts for May.
Opening of the world's largest hotel, the $290 million, 4,036-room Excalibur in Las Vegas.
Sotheby's auctions the Nelson Bunker Hunt collection of ancient coins and vases.
WEDNESDAY: The Federal Reserve Board releases its ''beige book'' on regional economies.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
THE DAY WE MET YOU
Written and illustrated by Phoebe Koehler.
Unpaged. New York:
Bradbury Press. $12.95.
(Ages 2 to 5.)


BEST SELLERS: June 17, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow.
(Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney
tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death
while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.


Liberia and Rebels Call Jointly for Restraint
LEAD: The Liberian Government and the rebels fighting to overthrow President Samuel K. Doe called jointly for ''self-restraint'' today after five days of talks but did not order a cease-fire in their conflict.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
THE COCKROACHES OF STAY MORE, by Donald Harington. (Vintage Contemporaries, $9.95.) Dwelling within the cracks of a small Arkansas town, a society of cockroaches undergoes a religious upheaval.
This is ''a truly captivating and appealing book,'' Harry Middleton said here last year, ''one that probes the transitory and fragile worlds of man and cockroach alike.


Equality for Women On the Golf Course
LEAD: Recent articles have highlighted the question of women's access to golf facilities in New Jersey and the metropolitan area (''Golf on Saturday, but Not for Women,'' Opinion page, March 25, and Letters to the New Jersey Editor, April 29).


Bill on Radon Seeks Testing of Schools
LEAD: MEMBERS of Congress are battling Federal officials over how to protect schoolchildren from radon, which the Federal Environmental Protection Agency ranks among the nation's most serious environmental health hazards.


The Region;   It Isn't Easy To Design A Board of Education
LEAD: ROBERT F. WAGNER JR., the New York City Board of Education's departing president, likes to fantasize about how the next board might be picked.


Campus Life: Vermont;   Lab Workers Exposed To Minor Radiation
LEAD: A University of Vermont biomedical laboratory and four of its workers were found to be slightly contaminated by radiation earlier this month during a routine unannounced inspection by university radiation safety officials.


275,000 Pieces of Theater History
LEAD: Sarah Bernhardt's headdress from ''Cleopatra,'' Moliere's walking stick, tens of thousands of playbills and a scale model of a theater, complete with working footlights, are among more than 250,000 items to be auctioned next weekend, just a stage shout away from President Bush's Kennebunkport estate.


SPIES &amp; THRILLERS
LEAD: Any journalist who has worked in Moscow will instantly recognize many of the things Robert Cullen is writing about in SOVIET SOURCES (Atlantic Monthly, $19.95).
There is the journalistic compound, that ghetto in which reporters are stationed.
There is the Soviet bureaucracy, the bugged rooms, the difficulty of reaching contacts.


Lifestyle;   Killer Croquet Games in Central Park
LEAD: They sauntered across the lawn in their summer whites, armed with mallets and cordial handshakes, prepared for a civil game of killer croquet.


Americans Still Don't Want to Give Up the $1 Bill for a $1 Coin
LEAD: To the Editor:


Signa V. Merrill Is a Bride on L.I.
LEAD: Signa Vernon Merrill, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Gordon Merrill of Locust Valley, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert Ringen Hermann Jr., the son of Lilly Busch Hermann and Mr.
Hermann, both of St.
Louis.
The Rev.
Charles G. Newbery officiated at St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal Church in Locust Valley.


Sri Lanka Rivals Declare Truce; Toll Is Put at 376
LEAD: The Government and Tamil rebels declared a cease-fire today in a new attempt to end a seven-year separatist campaign that has claimed more than 11,000 lives.


THE GUIDE
LEAD:
SPECTACULAR GARDENS


Corrections
LEAD: An article on May 13 about Genesee Country Village in Genesee, N.Y., characterized the 158-mile Genesee River incorrectly; it is not America's longest north-flowing river, as a reader has recently written to point out.
That distinction belongs to the Yellowstone River, which the United States Geological Survey puts at 678 miles.


Hardy Leaders Arrange Far-Flung Vacations
LEAD: THE usual kind of touristy vacation does not satisfy Bill and Joanne Russell, of Fairfield.
They say they would rather explore out-of-the-way places, preferably on foot or on skis, and share the experience with like-minded members of the Appalachian Mountain Club.


After AIDS Diagnosis, Some Embrace Life
LEAD: Eric Sorensen, a tall blond from Nebraska, was acting in New York in ''As the World Turns'' and other television shows when he learned that he had the AIDS virus.
Although he was well, he was forced to admit that illness and death could come any day.


The Cardinal Gets Tougher
LEAD: It's not for outsiders to judge the moral discipline that John Cardinal O'Connor imposes on Roman Catholics in the Archdiocese of New York, including those holding public office.
Teaching on abortion is surely church business; as a prince of the church, he speaks with resonant authority.


Steven Rattner Weds Beth Stevens in Tarrytown
LEAD: Beth Stevens, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Stevens of New York, was married last evening to Steven Rattner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Rattner of Pittsburgh, at Tarrytown House in Tarrytown, N.Y., by Rabbi Alan Fuchs.


Cakes, All Kinds of Cakes, From Casual to the Computerized
LEAD: HAPPY BIRTHDAY! To the greatest dad...Congratulations to the graduate!


'SITTING HER STRANGELY, ON TOP OF THE SUNLIGHT'
LEAD:
ABOVE THE RIVER
The Complete Poems.
By James Wright.
Introduction by Donald Hall.
387 pp. New York:
A Wesleyan University Press Edition/
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux and University Press of New England. $27.95.


Politicians Forced to Confront Issue of Defacing Flag
LEAD: From one end of the country to another, candidates are suddenly finding themselves forced to take a stand on just the kind of visceral, uncompromising issue that politicians like to avoid: whether the Constitution should be amended to outlaw the desecration of the flag.


Wisconsin Is No. 1
LEAD: The Wisconsin crew caught up with Harvard at last today at the Cincinnati Regatta and beat the Crimson eight in a 2,000-meter race to decide the nation's best college heavyweight crew.


Pure Groundwater Could Succumb To Developers
LEAD: MANY Long Islanders are more familiar with the source of water for New York City than their own source of water.
This can be accounted for by the world-renowned reputation of the city's water supply system.


A Negative Vote On Affirmative Action
LEAD: Much is commendable in Shelby Steele's insistence that blacks be considered capable of achievement without preferential treatment.
But I was saddened because he has, unwittingly, done hundreds of thousands of blacks, and other minorities and women, a great disservice.


Currency;   Losing Steam at the Close
LEAD: The dollar fizzled as the week ended.
It closed slightly lower against the German mark, after managing to trade at times above the key level of 1.70 marks to the dollar.
Dealers said the dollar still appeared to be locked in a fairly narrow band of trading, despite the release of a slew of economic indicators in the United States.


HOW WELL DO WE KNOW THIS MAN?
LEAD:
GORBACHEV
Heretic in the Kremlin.
By Dusko Doder and Louise Branson.
450 pp. New York:
Viking. $24.95.


Upgrading Electric Outlets
LEAD: IF your home has old-fashioned, ungrounded, two-slot electric wall receptacles, you can can easily determine whether the wiring will accommodate newer, more convenient and safer three-slot grounding models.
You can also perform the replacement if local building codes permit.


Miss Bush Weds M. P. McAllister
LEAD: Ethel Walker Smith Bush, a daughter of Mrs.
Byron Cleveland Herbert of Edenton, N.C., was married yesterday to Malcolm Percy McAllister, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Hoitt McAllister of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
John C. Harper performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church on Fishers Island, N


A Capital Offense; Reagan's America
LEAD: The 1980's were the triumph of Upper America - an ostentatious celebration of wealth, the political ascendancy of the rich and a glorification of capitalism, free markets and finance.
Not only did the concentration of wealth quietly intensify, but the sums involved took a megaleap.
The definition of who's rich - and who's no longer rich - changed as radically during the Reagan era as it did during the great nouveaux-riches eras of the late 19th century and the 1920's, periods whose excesses preceded the great reformist upheavals of the Progressive era and the New


LOOKING BETTER AND BETTER
LEAD:
GENERAL OF THE ARMY
George C. Marshall: Soldier and Statesman.
By Ed Cray.
Illustrated. 847 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $35.


Reflections on the Family for Father's Day;   Other Side of Divorce
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:
My Left Foot
1989. HBO. $89.99. Laser disk, $34.95. Closed captioned. R.
Daniel Day-Lewis won the Oscar as Christy Brown, the disabled Irish painter and writer, in an ''intelligent, beautifully acted'' adaptation of Brown's first book.
Hugh O'Conor is equally as good playing Christy as a young boy with ''a furious intelligence lurking inside a body that is all twitches and spasms.


Sportsmanship And Golf Balls
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


More States Trying to Curb Teen-Age Pregnancies
LEAD: Fearing the high long-term costs of adolescent pregnancies, more than two-thirds of the states have taken steps to reduce their incidence and enhance the lives of teen-age mothers and their children, according to a new study by the National Governors' Association.


Talking: Rentals;   Bargaining For Better Terms
LEAD: RENTALS used to be in such short supply in the New York area that few people even considered haggling over the advertised rent or lease terms.
Renters just assumed that the landlord's offer was carved in granite.


Review/Dance;   Mellower 'Swan Lake' In Baryshnikov Staging
LEAD: Mikhail Baryshnikov's new staging of ''Swan Lake'' did not have the kind of success that American Ballet Theater must have wished for when it opened in New York last season.
But last year's novelty has grown older gracefully, as evidenced by the production's return to the repertory on Friday night at the Metropolitan Opera


Edwin Ayscue 3d Weds Ms. Mahoney
LEAD: Kathleen Mahoney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David F. Mahoney of North Hampton, N.H., was married yesterday in Exeter, N.H., to Edwin Osborne Ayscue 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ayscue Jr. of Charlotte, N.C.
The Rev.
Daniel J. Mahoney, a Roman Catholic, and the Rt.
Rev.
Frank H. Vest Jr., an Episcopalian, officiated at the Phillips Church at Phillips Exeter Academy.


Spare the Shears and Spoil the View
LEAD: THINK of pruning as a form of plant discipline.
If this important deed is considered from this viewpoint, gardeners will overcome their fear of cutting anything and will proceed with confidence.


Woman in Fetal Alcohol Case Gives Birth to Healthy Infant
LEAD: A woman who was cleared of child abuse charges arising from her drinking while pregnant has given birth to an apparently healthy boy, a doctor said.


He's Still Out
LEAD: As commissioner of baseball, Fay Vincent has enough decisions to make, thank you, without second-guessing his most storied predecessor, Kenesaw Mountain Landis.


Corrections
LEAD: A report on June 10 about the engagement of Susan Ilene Jacobson misidentified the university where she is studying for an M.B.A. degree.


Lynn Kennedy Wed To Robert P. Macrae
LEAD: Lynn Haviland Kennedy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Haviland Kennedy of Nyack, N.Y., was married yesterday to Robert Preston Macrae, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Allan Macrae of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
George B. Higgins officiated at the Briarcliff Congregational Church in Briarcliff Manor, N


The Executive Computer;   A Program That Harnesses Other Software's Strengths
LEAD: It has been less than a month since the Microsoft Corporation introduced Windows 3.0, a major upgrade of its software ''environment'' that overlays the DOS operating system with a quilt of windows, graphical symbols and English-language command menus.
Even as Windows 3.0 is being hailed as a breakthrough for office personal computers, however, the Hewlett-Packard


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
Oberammergau Ticket Frauds Are Reported
BONN


Is Poland Getting Bad Advice?
LEAD: Poland is the only country in Eastern Europe that is attempting to rush from a command-and-control economy to a free-market economy.
All the other countries have chosen a gradual transition.
My prediction is that Poland will not make it.
I base my prediction on sociological, psychological and political factors as well as economics.


Tech Notes;   A Silicon Chip's Acidity Test
LEAD: A company in Menlo Park, Calif., has developed a technology combining living cells and a silicon chip which it says will reduce the need for live animals in chemical and drug toxicity testing, help physicians select drugs for cancer therapy and facilitate the discovery of new drugs.
The device sandwiches a small chamber for living cells, an insulator and a chip called a light-addressable potentiometric sensor.


34 Still Missing in Ohio Town Ravaged by Flood
LEAD: Twenty-six dog teams, closely followed by National Guardsmen with shovels and earth-moving equipment, searched along 12 miles of creek shoreline today for 34 people still listed as missing after a flash flood.


Sir Richard's Curious Career
LEAD: To the Editor:


Trades Steal Show In N.H.L. Draft
LEAD: Dale Hawerchuk and Joe Mullen, two of the National Hockey League's top scorers in the 1980's, found new homes today in a pair of draft-day trades.


Deborah Diver Marries
LEAD: Deborah F. Diver, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur G. Diver of Wilmington, Del., was married there yesterday to J. Scott Kephart, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Kephart of San Anselmo, Calif., The Rev.
James R. Bennett 3d officiated at Westminster Presbyterian Church.
A graduate of Mount Holyoke College with an M.B.A.


Kezia Keeble, 48, a Top Publicist And Shaper of American Fashion
LEAD: Kezia Keeble, a former Vogue editor and a powerful public-relations executive who helped reshape the image of American fashion, died at her home in Manhattan on Friday night.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: When a top player takes a layoff from the game, the first casualty when he returns is his patience.
He tries to control and force everything before laying the groundwork of attack by solid, logical maneuvering.
The result is a disaster.


Rare Gold Ingot Is Raised From Sunken Galleon
LEAD: An extremely rare type of gold ingot plucked from a sunken wreck off southwest Florida appears to offer the strongest evidence yet that the ship is a treasure-laden Spanish galleon from a fabled, ill-fortuned fleet that set sail from Havana in 1622.


Virginia Tibbitts and Peter J. Srere Are Married
LEAD: Virginia K. Tibbitts, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Tibbitts of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday at the Scarsdale Community Baptist Church to Peter J. Srere, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Benson M. Srere of Pelham Manor, N.Y.
The Rev.
Jim Morrison officiated.


Has Bayreuth Become 'Just Another Opera House'?
LEAD: ''Richard Wagner wanted his Bayreuth Festival to be an avant-garde cultural center, European as well as German, where there would be give-and-take among all the arts.
But in this century his concept has never been realized.
The festival has become just another opera house.''


Portland, Me.;   Gassing Up At the Lobster?
LEAD: TWO designs, one featuring giant lobsters and one with canopies that float in the wind, were judged the best of 160 entered in a nationwide contest to design a gas station here, but it remains to be seen whether either will be built.


Carmen Chuidian Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Carmen Chuidian, the daughter of Consuelo Sayson of Manila and the late Juan T. Chuidian, was married yesterday in Garrison, N.Y., to Lawrence Hui Cheng Chao, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard H. Chao of Hamden, Conn.
The Rev.
Francis H. Geer officiated at the Bird and Bottle Inn.


Sasha L. Iglehart Wed in Maryland
LEAD: Sasha Lonsdale Iglehart, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Corning Iglehart of Glyndon, Md., was married yesterday to Michael Elliot Richardson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot L. Richardson of McLean, Va.
The Rev.
William P. Baxter Jr. performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas' Episcopal Church in Garrison Forest,


Co-op Sales
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nina Angelene Barrigar Is Married To Thomas W. Daniel in Vermont
LEAD: Nina Angelene Barrigar, a daughter of Mrs.
David Sheppard of Jonesboro, Tenn., and Gary W. Barrigar of Elizabethton, Tenn., was married yesterday to Thomas Washington Daniel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifton Daniel of New York.
Mary Jane Potter, a justice of the peace, officiated at the Inn at the Round Barn in Waitsfield,


PRO FOOTBALL
LEAD: Braxton Banks missed the 1989 Notre Dame football season because of a leg injury.
Banks, a running back, toiled last March over a delicate decision: whether to return for his final season at Notre Dame and earn his degree in English, or enter the National Football League draft in April and lose his Notre


Strange Closes In On Open Leaders
LEAD: The United States Open has begun.


Of Jobs and Jails
LEAD: To the Editor:


Commercial Property: Assessments;   Class B Building Owners Call Tax System Unfair
LEAD: THE owners of secondary commercial properties in New York City - those smaller prewar structures at less-than-choice locations where rents and amenities tend to be low - are banding together to battle tax assessment practices that they believe to be illogical and discriminatory.


THE BEST AND THE ANGRIEST
LEAD:
AN AMERICAN ORDEAL
The Antiwar Movement of the Vietnam Era.
By Charles DeBenedetti.
Charles Chatfield, assisting author.
Illustrated. 495 pp. Syracuse:
Syracuse University Press.
Cloth, $49.50. Paper, $16.95.


Data Update
LEAD:
VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
(Residential in millions of dollars)
Apr.90
Apr.89
Change
New York
307.9
654.4
-53%
New Jersey
156.2
370.5
-58%
Connecticut
74.8
132.2
-43%
%Q*4*(Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
)
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


On the Run All the Time
LEAD: For the last year, Edwin Moses has been serving many masters.


Israel Reopens Nursing School at a West Bank University


Antarctica
LEAD: To the Editor: Magazine and newspaper articles plus TV programs have decried the impact of tourism on Antarctica.
Having just completed a cruise on the Illiria to that area, the following observations are offered to contradict many erroneous allegations.


'Kindness of Strangers' Sustains Playhouse
LEAD: AS its 60th anniversary season begins, the Westport Country Playhouse's real cause for celebration is that it's still here.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The hot-water heating system in our house is very noisy, especially at night when we are trying to sleep.
When the heat comes on, there are annoying gurgling and gushing sounds.
Plumbing and heating contractors have told us that we needed a new expansion tank, which we added.
The problem continued, however, and so they flushed, purged and ''bled'' air out of the system three times.


Everybody Stands Up For 'Rose Garden' Piece
LEAD: WHEN the Hartford Symphony offers the premiere of David Macbride's ''Rose Garden'' at 6:30 P.M. on Friday, a standing ovation is virtually guaranteed, because nobody, except possibly the cellists, sits down.


Spare the Shears and Spoil the View
LEAD: THINK of pruning as a form of plant discipline.
If this important deed is considered from this viewpoint, gardeners will overcome their fear of cutting anything and will proceed with confidence.


Review/Dance;   Chapman In 'Giselle'
LEAD: With his boyish blond looks and stripling frame, Wes Chapman is more Romeo than Albrecht.
And so his success was impressive in the latter role, which he danced for the first time in New York on Wednesday night, when American Ballet Theater presented ''Giselle'' at the Metropolitan Opera House.


More Support Urged for Soccer
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Review Jazz;   Marlon Jordan, Trumpeter, Keeps His Cool Under Fire
LEAD: Marlon Jordan, the young New Orleans trumpeter, has learned something about jazz cool.
Mr.
Jordan performed at the Blue Note on Monday night; his three sets were being videotaped, and he was making his first appearance with his own band in New York.
In front of a room full of fans, critics and other musicians, his trumpet broke.


Campus Life: Michigan State;   Protest Shanties Are Torn Down; 5 Are Arrested
LEAD: Michigan State University last week tore down five plywood shanties that had been built on campus to promote various causes, and the campus police arrested five students who protested the move.


Israeli Election Reform Awaits Another Crisis
LEAD: The flags still flutter, the posters still scream and the blank petition forms still lie on a folding table, waiting for more signatures from angry citzens.


PBS Plans More Time for Candidates
LEAD: Public television is planning to provide air time to Presidential candidates in 1992 as an antidote to the commercials and brief news squibs that now dominate political campaigns.


Detour Off a Well-Worn Chinese Route
LEAD: DO you have a yen for Chinese food, but would rather not travel the moo shu pork/egg roll route?
Fu Ho in Syosset is tempting diners with the likes of black pepper veal, fresh banana chicken and shredded jellyfish.
Long Island standbys are also available, but Chinese food fanciers who want to abandon well-worn culinary ruts can do so at this attractive newcomer.


JUST ANOTHER SACRIFICE
LEAD:
HOMESICK
By Guy Vanderhaeghe.
292 pp. New York:
Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
DAD'S DAY OUT


Nation's Mayors Assail Governors Over Control of Anti-Drug Funds
LEAD: Members of the United States Conference of Mayors, gathered here for their annual meeting, accused the nation's governors today of scuttling talks that the mayors had hoped would give cities more control over how Federal anti-drug dollars are spent.


Careers Explored Through Summer Jobs
LEAD: WHEN he was 17 years old and newly graduated from Yonkers High School, Joseph Dahdal landed a summer job as a trainee at McDonald's on South Broadway in Yonkers.


A Plea For Remorse
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ex-K.G.B. Officer Asserts Spy Agency Is Unchanged
LEAD: A recently retired senior officer of the K.G.B. appeared today before a gathering of Communist Party insurgents to accuse the leadership of the state security police of a continuing campaign against Soviet nonconformists.


Jeremiah Evarts Weds Kara Cater
LEAD: At the Community Church in Landgrove, Vt., Kara Patricia Cater, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Peter Cater of Westerly, R.I., was married yesterday to Jeremiah Maxwell Evarts, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jasper M. Evarts of Landgrove.
The Rev.
Nicholas Van Dyck, a Presbyterian minister, performed the nondenominational service.


Other Ways at the Shakespeare Festival
LEAD: With the recent naming of JoAnne Akalaitis as artistic associate, and the possibility that she will succeed Joseph Papp as artistic director, the New York Shakespeare Festival has taken a bold step into the future.
For years, Ms.
Akalaitis, a founding member of the Mabou Mines experimental theater company, has been one of the most innovative - and one of the most controversial - figures in the American theater.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Guilford, Conn.
$265,400
79 Russet Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-year-old contemporary; 2-story entrance foyer, master bedroom, new kitchen appliances, 0.75 acre; taxes $3,049.
Litchfield, Conn.
$207,000
99 Saw Mill Road
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 240-year-old Cape Cod; modernized, pool, barn, 3 acres; taxes $2,321.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
OUTCATS: Jazz Composers, Instrumentalists, and Singers.
By Francis Davis. (Oxford, $22.95.) In ''Outcats,'' the jazz critic Francis Davis has collected a number of the articles he wrote in the late 1980's.
He casts a wide net, covering renowned musicians like Cecil Taylor, Sun Ra and Wynton Marsalis; lesser-knowns like the Parisian expatriate Steve Lacy; and jazzwomen like Jane Ira Bloom and Michele Rosewoman.


Equality for Women On the Golf Course
LEAD: I am all for equality for women on the golf course.


Opening Hearts And Homes
LEAD: Too often we hear and read only about the bad things our neighbors are doing.
It is refreshing to read about people like the Andersons, who are opening their hearts and homes to less fortunate people (''Harlem Boy Finds 'Big Hugs' in Jersey,'' May 13).
Congratulations to them and the Fresh Air Fund for their efforts.


Headliners;   New York on the Moskva
LEAD: Plenty of Americans are baffled by the commodities markets, the Producer Price Index, M-1 and M-2 and so on, so one could expect serious difficulties in explaining it all to the average Soviet citizen.
The average Soviet citizen will nevertheless have ''Adam Smith's Money World,'' just like Americans do, starting next fall on the Soviet Central Television Network.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The hot-water heating system in our house is very noisy, especially at night when we are trying to sleep.
When the heat comes on, there are annoying gurgling and gushing sounds.
Plumbing and heating contractors have told us that we needed a new expansion tank, which we added.
The problem continued, however, and so they flushed, purged and ''bled'' air out of the system three times.


Employer Responsibility and Early Retirement Offers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corinne Ham Is Married
LEAD: Corinne M. Ham, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen B. Ham of South Orange, N.J., was married yesterday to Dwight T. Collins, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Collins of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Harvey Ballance officiated at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Providence, R.I.
Mrs.
Collins, 24 years old, graduated from Boston University and is the marketing production coordinator in New York for the Spanish-language television network Univision.


Music Abroad
LEAD: To the Editor: With events in Eastern Europe happening at breakneck speed, it is not surprising that your information on the Prague Spring Festival (Travel, April 29) was not 100 percent up to date.
In your listing of conductors scheduled to perform, you omitted Rafael Kubelik.
Maestro Kubelik was the conductor of the Czech Philharmonic until 1948 when he fled Czechoslovakia after the Communist coup.


How to Hold On Till 'Gotterdammerung'
LEAD: Among those who spend any time thinking about Richard Wagner and his works, there seem to be only two points of view.
One is exemplified by a friend of mine whose attitude toward Wagner might be called, in polite understatement, devotion.
Another friend - literate, musical, no mere Philistine - takes the contrary stance.


A Negative Vote On Affirmative Action
LEAD: Shelby Steele has made it and he tells us he thinks that ''affirmative action has shown itself to be more bad than good and that blacks . . . now stand to lose more from it than they gain.'' Steele would close the door on the aspirations of some who haven't yet made it, simply to enhance the ease with which he interacts with his new peers.


The World;   In the Middle East, Stability Means More of the Same
LEAD: IN a season when conflict resolution seems to be the order of the day, from South Africa to Nicaragua and from the Iron Curtain to Angola, one area of the world seems to stubbornly resist this trend: the Middle East.


Lawrence Miller Weds Ms. Chazen
LEAD: Kathy Ann Chazen and Lawrence Scott Miller were married yesterday at the Plaza in New York.
Rabbis George Stern and William Berkowitz officiated.


Arafat's Allies Rout Abu Nidal Group in Lebanon
LEAD: Followers of Abu Nidal, the terrorist leader, were routed today after two days of fighting in a Palestinian refugee district in southern Lebanon, Palestinian and Lebanese security officials said.


Bolshoi's Director Has New Adversary: Some of His Artists
LEAD: In his iron-fisted direction of the Bolshoi Theater, Yuri Grigorovich has wrestled muse and Communist Party hack with equal virtuosity over the years, and the world has often savored the results.


Ex-Klansman Puts New Racial Politics to Test
LEAD: It's racial politics for the 90's - not Old South race baiting, but a post-civil-rights-era assault on welfare abuse and programs like affirmative action that his audience sees as helping blacks while hurting whites.


After the Cold War, the Land of the Rising Threat
LEAD: Even as the cold war fades into history, American authors and publishers are discovering a new enemy: Japan.
In a deluge of recent books and books to be published soon, the country that was once depicted as the land of geishas and cherry blossoms is increasingly being portrayed as the land of a rising threat to the United


WITNESSES HINDER PRETORIA INQUIRY
LEAD: In a Dutch Reformed Church office building in downtown Pretoria, a parade of witnesses, some wearing ill-fitting disguises and testifying under false names, have been telling South Africa's equivalent of a grand jury that they do not know, cannot remember or will not testify for fear of incriminating themselves.


Aline M. Hutner, Physician, Weds
LEAD: Dr.
Aline M. Hutner, a daughter of Mrs.
Arthur I. Hutner of New York and the late Dr.
Hutner, was married yesterday at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York to Mark H. Mulgay, the son of Cantor and Mrs.
Albert Mulgay of Summit, N.J.
Rabbi Joseph Brodie and Cantor Mulgay officiated.


Drug Policy Debate Turns to Feud Between Moynihan and Bennett
LEAD: A disagreement over drug treatment programs has suddenly grown into a political feud between President Bush's drug policy director and Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday
None
Tuesday
Housing Starts . . . May
Wednesday
None
Thursday
G.N.P. . . . 1st Qtr.
Corporate Profits . . . 1st Qtr.
Friday
Durable Goods .


Program Trading Down
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange said last week that program trading in the week ended June 1 dipped to 7.7 percent of its daily volume of 172.6 million shares, or 13.3 million shares daily.
The previous week, program trading accounted for 8.1 percent of the exchange's average daily volume of 163.5 million shares, or 13.2 million shares daily.


Evangeline Johnson Merrill, 93, Prominent Supporter of the Arts
LEAD: Evangeline Johnson Merrill, a prominent figure in the arts who was the last surviving child of Robert Wood Johnson, co-founder of Johnson &amp; Johnson, died yesterday at Bryan Health Care Center in Hendersonville, N.C.
She was 93 years old and lived at World's Edge Apple Organic Farm in Hendersonville.


We Still Need Missile Defenses
LEAD: Have the dramatic changes in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union undermined the need for continued research on ballistic missile defenses?
Absolutely not.
If anything, the case for some type of missile defenses is more compelling today than at any time since the advent of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles.


Soviet Family's Plight: Leave for Israel or Hold On and Hope?
LEAD: In a desk drawer in the apartment of Sergei Kuznetsov and Olga Avilova is a document that could drastically change their lives: an application to emigrate to Israel.


Stasia Butsikares Weds R. J. Tompkins
LEAD: Stasia Butsikares, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Socrates Butsikares of New York was married yesterday to Richard J. Tompkins of White Plains.
The Rev.
Daniel Novotny of the United Church of Christ officiated at the St.
Moritz in New York.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in The Home Section on June 7 about the New York fall fur collections misidentified a designer and manufacturer.
He is Jerry Sorbara, not Sorbaya.


Officials Brace for Exodus Of Foreigners from Panama
LEAD: Immigration officials say the arrest of 63 Chinese on an isolated Alabama airstrip last week was a sign that thousands of foreigners may soon try to enter the United States illegally from Panama.


Soviet Family Weighs Whether to Go or Stay
LEAD: Olga Avilova, an art historian, wants to save her family from the Soviet Union's social, economic and environmental problems by emigrating to Israel.
Her husband, Sergei Kuznetsov, a mathematician, says the country's educated professionals have an obligation to stay.


Nasty, but Not Obscene
LEAD: The rap music group 2 Live Crew, one of the raunchiest in the trade, is in the toils of Florida law for its record album ''Nasty as They Wanna Be.'' If mere offensive talk were a crime, the record's self-styled vulgar lyrics would be criminal.
But the charge is obscenity, which has two other independent elements: an appeal to prurient interests and lack of serious artistic value.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Canary Islands Tourism Board to Grupo Backer Spielvogel Bates, Madrid, for advertising in Spain, Germany, Britain and Scandinavia, with an annual budget of about $9 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Economy


Another Talker
LEAD: KURT THOMAS is the best male gymnast in American history.
He retired 10 years ago because of an injured left shoulder.
Now, at age 34, he is making a comeback and, he said, ''I will be on the 1992 Olympic team, without question.'' Preposterous?
There is more. ''If I stay healthy,'' he said, ''the only question is how well I will do against the Soviets, Chinese and East Germans.


One Killed in Church Van Crash in the Bronx


The Ghost of Khomeini
LEAD: Ayatollah Khomeini died just over a year ago but his gloomy spirit survives.
It dominates his feuding successors, who want the benefits of better relations with the West without truly departing from his harsh line.
They resist freeing remaining hostages in Lebanon.
They are accused of sending gunmen abroad to kill troublesome exiles.


Pollutants Still in Building Despite Cleanup
LEAD: Efforts to remove toxic chemicals from the Binghamton State Office Building have so far failed to lower the level of air contaminants in the structure, state officials said.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Bystander Hit as Officer Fires at a Pit Bull
LEAD: A bystander was grazed by a ricocheting bullet yesterday when a police officer fired twice at an attacking pit bull terrier on a Harlem street, authorities said.


Emotional Cases Try Officers' Mettle
LEAD: ''Order in the court!''


Make Election Day A National Holiday
LEAD: To the Editor:


Arkansas to Be the 14th State to Execute an Inmate
LEAD: Barring the unexpected, John Edward Swindler will be put to death about 9 P.M.
Monday as Arkansas joins 13 other states, including most of its Southern neighbors, in carrying out the death penalty.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-11
The National Security Agency is debating plans to shift its global electronic eavesdropping network to other activities, including spying on world trade and financial transactions, Government officials and intelligence experts say.
Page A1


Indignantly, Marcos Defends Her Name
LEAD: Smiling as if no one has said a bad word about her lately, Imelda Marcos entered the room, held out her palm and said, ''Here I am.'' She lowered herself into a soft armchair as she shook her head.
A trace of glowing afternoon sunlight settled on her from a window off Second Avenue, and she said without so much as a question to prod her:


National League;   Giants Capture 8th Straight
LEAD: Matt Williams broke a tie with an eighth-inning single, and the Giants downed the Atlanta Braves, 9-7, today to bring their record this month to 15-1 with their eighth straight victory.


Review/Television;   Taking the 17-Hour Plunge With Wagner's 'Ring' at the Met
LEAD: Think big.
Dispensing with its customary caution, that's what public television has decided to do in its latest encounter with Richard Wagner, the German composer who could never be accused of thinking small.
Beginning tonight on Channel 13 with ''Das Rheingold,'' Wagner's ''Ring des Nibelungen'' will be telecast over four consecutive evenings at 8 o'clock.


Large Shareholder Finds Reebok Strategy Troubling
LEAD: The decision by Reebok International's biggest shareholder, Pentland Group P.L.C., to sell its stake stemmed in part from clashes with Reebok's management over how to make and sell the company's popular athletic shoes, a senior Pentland executive said last week.


Sneers for Trump's Taj In the Land of the Original
LEAD: In the land of the Moguls, an incredulous public is coming to terms with the news that somewhere in America - Atlantic City, New York, according to one newspaper - a rich man has built himself a Taj Mahal.


Lion-Hearted Cup Team Gives Hope to Cameroon
LEAD: The name of the country evolved from the Portuguese word for shrimp, camarao, which might have been an appropriate nickname for Cameroon when the World Cup finals began earlier this month.
Though champion of Africa, the team was still viewed as only an appetizer for other teams in its group in the world championship soccer tournament.


Review/Pop;   A World of the Wounded
LEAD: Suzanne Vega populates her songs with the wounded.
An abused child in ''Luka,'' a prostitute in ''Neighborhood Girl'' and amputees in ''Men in a War'' turn up alongside Ms.
Vega's recurring first-person persona of a woman trying to numb her emotions.


Welch Journal;   Labor Wars Recalled As the Past Is Dug Up
LEAD: If it were not for termites eating away at the Victorian courthouse here, the long-lost trial records of one of the labor movement's most infamous killings might not have been discovered until World War III.
Unbeknownst to anyone, the 70-year-old trial records had been stored in a dungeonlike room in the courthouse basement that had been set aside as a nuclear fallout shelter.


Sandy Weinberger Is a Bride
LEAD: Sandy Weinberger and Steven Sloane were married yesterday at Temple B'Nai Shalom in Rockville Centre, L.I., by Rabbi Barry Dov Schwartz and Cantor Leon Berger.
Mrs.
Sloane, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Weinberger of Delray Beach, Fla., graduated from Tufts University.
She is the marketing director at WPIX-TV in New York.


Rabbi Nancy Ann Kasten Is Bride Of Rabbi David Eli Stern of Dallas
LEAD: Rabbi Nancy Ann Kasten, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Kasten of Newton, Mass., was married yesterday in New York to Rabbi David Eli Stern, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Jack Stern of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The bridegroom's father and Rabbi Bernard Mehlman officiated at the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion.


Cab Driver Is Found Stabbed to Death
LEAD: A livery-cab driver was found stabbed to death and slumped over the steering wheel of his car in Brooklyn Saturday afternoon, the 18th livery- or gypsy-cab driver to be slain in New York City this year.


Knockouts Spark Excitement
LEAD: The fights were widely regarded as set-ups, a conventional way to hype the careers of two former heavyweight champions, Mike Tyson and George Foreman.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: rrFirst, there was WARNER LeROY.
Next, there was JEROME KRETCHMER.
Now comes LARRY FORGIONE.
After deals with the owners of Tavern on the Green and the Gotham Bar and Grill fell through, DAN BIEDERMANN, of the Bryant Park Restoration Corporation, began talking with Mr.
Forgione, owner-chef of An American Place.


Bacteria Appear Successful In Eating Section of Oil Slick
LEAD: Oil-eating microbes spread over part of an oil slick from the supertanker Mega Borg appear to have broken down the oil, but officials said they began another experiment today to make sure.


Reroute Buses With Care
LEAD: New York City's Transit Authority, faced with losses on bus service, does well to re-evaluate bus routes.
It ought not to be deterred by the initial complaints from riders fearing abandonment.


How to Make Europe Secure
LEAD: Now that President Gorbachev has reconciled himself to a united Germany in NATO, he still must find a new place in Europe.
And his newly independent neighbors in Eastern Europe need a sense of security.
A collective security pact for all of Europe could meet both these needs.


California Campaign Opposes Channel One
LEAD: California's top education official has begun a public offensive against Channel One, the advertiser-sponsored news broadcast to secondary-school classrooms.


John T. Shannon, Airline Executive, 87
LEAD: John T. Shannon, a retired senior vice president of operations of Pan American World Airways, died after a long illness Saturday at Greenwich Hospital.
He was 87 years old and had lived in Greenwich, Conn., for more than 40 years.
The cause of his death was not disclosed.


A Backlash in Romania;   In Calling Out Miners to Stifle Opposition, President Forfeits Control and Good Will
LEAD: Less than a month after it won elections by a landslide, the Government of President Ion Iliescu has been plunged into a crisis that shows it is at the mercy of groups and forces beyond its control.


Mandela In the U.S.
LEAD:
Wednesday, June 20: Arrives in New York City (1).
Rides in lunchtime ticker tape parade.
Thursday, June 21: Early evening motorcade through Harlem. Rally at Yankee Stadium.
Friday, June 22: Address before United Nations General Assembly.
Saturday, June 23: Travels to Boston (2). Midday rally at Esplanade.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''In Cameroon, big lions are like gods.
When we play, we have lions in our hearts.''
-Jean Claude Pagal, a defenseman for Cameroon in the World Cup finals. [C9:6.]


'90 Among Worst Years for Weather
LEAD: The first half of 1990 has distinguished itself as one of the most violent periods of weather of the last four decades.


British Inflation Up
LEAD: British inflation rose at a steep 9.7 percent annual rate in May, the Government said Friday.
The Central Statistical Office said the rise reflected increases in housing costs, higher tax rates on alcoholic beverages and tobacco and increased charges for natural gas and electricity.
The inflation rate that excludes the cost of home loans and the poll tax, a new levy to finance local government services, rose to an annual 7 percent in May, from 6.5 percent in April.


A Gay Protest Against Attacks Becomes Violent
LEAD: What began as a peaceful march through Greenwich Village late Saturday night to protest violence against homosexuals broke up into clashes, chases and threats early yesterday morning when hecklers taunted demonstrators as the march drew toward its conclusion.


How Minorities Are Sold Short
LEAD: One of the unacknowledged underlying reasons for today's racial tensions in New York City is decades of small slights and systematic exploitation of minorities by banks, insurance companies, department stores and other businesses -not just one contested incident at a grocery run by Korean-Americans.


EAST GERMANS ADD TO UNITY PRESSURE
LEAD: Reflecting growing impatience for the joining of the two Germanys, the East German Parliament unexpectedly debated a motion today calling for immediate unification.


SECURITY AGENCY DEBATES NEW ROLE: ECONOMIC SPYING
LEAD: Facing the decline of the Soviet military threat, the National Security Agency is debating plans to shift its global electronic eavesdropping network to other activities, including spying on world trade and financial transactions, Government officials and intelligence experts say.


Outdoors: This Club's Mission Focuses on Stripers
LEAD: BEFORE 10 P.M., we were over the rocky rough and tumble of Sow and Pigs Reef off the western end of this little island that for more than a century has been regarded as one of the East Coast's striped bass hot spots.


With Canada's Future in Question, Newfoundland Ponders a Vital Vote
LEAD: Above a mist-shrouded harbor where English and French troops fought their first battles in North America 330 years ago, Newfoundland families gathered today and prayed that Canada, a nation forged in reconciliation, could survive the latest crisis between its founding people.


Review/Dance;   'Undertow' Evokes the Pull Of Dark Human Emotions
LEAD: Yung Yung Tsuai covered a lot of territory in a program of dance she presented on Thursday night at the Marymount Manhattan Theater.
Miss Tsuai, who teaches at the Martha Graham school, draws on childhood training in Chinese traditional dance and later modern-dance study.
She is also a humanist.
And the territory of her dances was traveled unhesitatingly, but with small, reflective steps.


At an Anti-Abortion Convention, Setbacks Aren't Cause for Alarm
LEAD: Leaders of the nation's largest anti-abortion organization played down recent setbacks this weekend as they prepared themselves for state-by-state trench warfare that they said could last 10 to 20 years.


Judith Hofrichter Wed at Wesleyan
LEAD: Dr.
Judith A. Hofrichter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Hofrichter of Killingworth, Conn., was married yesterday to Stewart E. Novick, a son of Frances Novick of Delray Beach, Fla., and the late Jacob Novick.
The ceremony, at Honors College at Wesleyan University in Middletown, Conn., was performed by Drorah Setel, the university's Jewish chaplain, and the Rev.


Susan Poser Wed To S. G. DiMagno
LEAD: At the Brooklyn Botanic Garden yesterday, Susan Poser, the daughter of Norman S. Poser and Miriam Poser, both of New York, was married to Stephen G. DiMagno, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Eugene P. DiMagno of Rochester, Minn.
Judge Edward R. Korman of the Federal District Court in Brooklyn officiated.


Italian Captures CoreStates Title
LEAD: An Italian rider set a course record today when he won the sixth annual CoreStates United States Pro Cycling Championship, a 156-mile race through the streets of Philadelphia.
Paolo Cimini of the GIS/Benotto team lunged past the Frenchman Laurent Jalabert of the Toshiba team in the last few meters of the race to win with a time of 6 hours 1 minute 54 seconds.


Books of The Times;   The View From Above: New Yorker Covers
LEAD: As an index to the mores, the daydreams and the taken-for-granted assumptions of well-to-do Manhattanites from 1925 to 1989, this collection of covers from The New Yorker would be hard to beat.
At a certain level of prosperity and self-assurance, everything is there.
We glimpse the minor misadventures of marriage, the loose cannons of white-tie hospitality, the well-behaved wedding parties on the shaven lawn and the late but decorous nights on the town.


Erica Buchsbaum Is Bride of Andrew Goldberg
LEAD: At Beth Sholom Congregation in Elkins Park, Pa., Erica Ruth Buchsbaum, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ladislav Buchsbaum of Wyncote, Pa., was married yesterday to Dr.
Andrew Claude Goldberg, the son of Anshel Goldberg of South Orange, N.J., and the late Marcia Goldberg.
Rabbi Aaron Landes officiated.


Corning Set To Pursue India Venture
LEAD: Joining a group of American companies lining up to enter India under liberalized investment laws, Corning Inc. disclosed that it was ready to go ahead with a joint venture with a local partner to manufacture glass bulbs for television picture tubes.


O'Connor Denies Plan to Excommunicate Anyone
LEAD: John Cardinal O'Connor said yesterday that an article he wrote last week saying that Roman Catholic politicians who support abortion rights could be ''at risk of excommunication'' had been widely misinterpreted.


Third Trial Starts Today In Bensonhurst Murder
LEAD: The third trial in the Bensonhurst racial killing case, which begins today, will center around a sworn statement that the defendant, John Vento, made about events surrounding the slaying of Yusuf K. Hawkins and whether Mr.
Vento knew that night that the man later convicted of murdering the 16-year-old youth had a gun and intended to use it.


Art Agent Opposes Finder's Fees
LEAD: A representative of the church of Quedlinburg in East Germany, who is here trying to negotiate the return of a cache of stolen artworks, said today that he strongly opposes the paying of a finder's fee of $500,000 for part of the treasure now in the hands of a West German art dealer.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Since the late 1930's, HENRY LeTANG has been teaching tap dancing to some of our brightest lights - LENA HORNE, BILLIE HOLIDAY, GREGORY HINES and HARRY BELAFONTE among many others.
And many saluted him recently when he celebrated his 75th birthday.


Gail Gordon, Lawyer, Wed To Cesar Silva, Professor
LEAD: Gail Kimberly Gordon, an associate in the New York law firm of Skadden Arps Slate Meagher &amp; Flom, was married yesterday to Cesar E. Silva, an assistant professor of mathematics at Williams College.
The Rev.
Harvey Fleming, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Thompson Memorial Chapel of Williams College in Williamstown,


Revived Giants in Pursuit of Top
LEAD: The San Francisco Giants, given up for dead by the faint-hearted among their followers only a couple of weeks ago, are pennant contenders again, as befits their status as defending champions of the National League.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Science Times on Tuesday about findings relating brain chemistry to post-traumatic stress referred incorrectly to the National Center for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.
Its headquarters are at the Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center in West Haven, Conn., not at Yale.


After 225 Years, A Library Is Closing
LEAD: The township's Public Library, one of the five oldest libraries in the state, closed its doors Friday, at least temporarily ending a 225-year tradition.
Officials said a shrinking budget and cutbacks in funds forced the library, which serves 5,000 members, to close.


Johnson Is L.P.G.A. Winner
LEAD: Chris Johnson survived a treacherous trip around the Sands Country Club course today to win the Atlantic City Classic with a five-under-par 275.
The victory was her first on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour since 1987.


Mandela Arrives in Canada


Sri Lanka Cease-Fire Broken
LEAD: Tamil separatist guerrillas and Government troops clashed in northeastern Sri Lanka today, breaking a day-old cease-fire, officials said.
They said two soldiers and a civilian were killed.
The cease-fire went into effect at 6 P.M. on Saturday after five days of fighting that killed 400 people.


What Price Panama?
LEAD: As indications of brutal U.S. overkill in the illegal invasion of Panama keep turning up, the Bush Administration is mounting only a weak case against the invasion's prime target, the alleged drug kingpin, Manuel Antonio Noriega.


Parachutists Cancel Drop in a Dispute
LEAD: A helicopter company carrying visitors over Niagara Falls refused to stop flying to let an Army parachute team to land near the falls, an Air Force Reserve officer said yesterday.


A Birdie And a Tie At Open
LEAD: After a raucous final round in which many of the game's best players fired and fell back, the 90th United States Open will elevate either Hale Irwin to all-time great or Mike Donald to all-time great grinder.


Nothing Easy About Race Terminology
LEAD: To the Editor:


Results Plus
LEAD:
Auto Racing
Michael Andretti Wins at Detroit: Michael Andretti shook off the bad luck that has plagued him since the middle of last season, running away with the Detroit Grand Prix yesterday.
The 27-year-old driver, who lost two weeks ago at Milwaukee when he ran out of fuel, led all 62 laps around the 2.5-mile 17-turn downtown street circuit.


From the Pages of Time, a Story for Newsweek
LEAD: First question:


Business Scene;   Reviving a Role For Apprentices
LEAD: ACROSS Europe, apprenticeship programs train millions of young people for skilled jobs.
In the United States, where millions of young people leave high school without much hope of entering skilled, well-paid trades, apprenticeship programs barely exist.


Convention of Bassists Is Offering Concerts
LEAD: Several hundred bass players are expected to join for the first of two free concerts on Thursday as part of a weeklong series of events in the annual convention of the International Society of Bassists, which began yesterday.


The 2d Man at the Helm of New Jersey's Taut Ship of State
LEAD: If Jim Florio is the imperial Governor of New Jersey, then Douglas Berman, his 37-year-old State Treasurer, is both his keeper of the vault and the chief of the palace guard.


Aviva Ebstein Is Wed
LEAD: Aviva C. Ebstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Yehuda Ebstein of New York, was married yesterday to Stephen Kroninger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Kroninger of Orefield, Pa.
Rabbi Joel Goor officiated at the New York Hilton.
Mrs.
Kroninger, 34 years old, graduated from Brandeis University.
She is the director of publications at the New York advertising agency of Young &amp; Rubicam.


Ms. Weiss Wed To Allen Frechter
LEAD: Adrienne Elizabeth Weiss and Allen Richard Frechter were married yesterday at the Lotos Club in Manhattan by Rabbi Rachel Cowan.
The couple's parents are Dr. and Mrs.
Harvey Jerome Weiss of Haworth, N.J., and Mr. and Mrs.
George Frechter of Fort Lee, N.J.


George Nakashima Is Dead at 85; Designer and Master Woodworker
LEAD: George Nakashima, the master woodworker and designer who sought to capture the noble character of trees in chairs, tables and cabinetry, died on Friday at his home in New Hope, Pa.
He was 85 years old.
His family said he died after a brief illness.


Sports of The Times;   'As Sweet as a Baby's Kiss'
LEAD: HALE IRWIN had shot 67 for 280, jogging a victory lap around the 18th green under a warm waterfall of applause after holing a 45-foot putt to finish the 90th United States Open at eight under par.
And now, as the 45-year-old touring pro answered questions in the interview tent, he politely refused to discuss what his feelings would be if he were to win his third


Warily, San Francisco Braces for AIDS Forum
LEAD: Under the watchful eye of gay rights advocates and civil liberties lawyers, scores of San Francisco police officers gathered last week in Golden Gate Park to practice wielding billy clubs, controlling barricades and using a horse's rump to disperse demonstrators.


Anatomy of Series: Success Is No Accident
LEAD: JEFF TORBORG, the manager of the Chicago White Sox, sat in his office in Comiskey Park and smiled the best smile possible for a manager whose team had just lost by nine runs.
As he contemplated the 12-3 drubbing delivered by the Oakland Athletics on Saturday night, Torborg suggested that the White


Private Pension Systems Are Doing the Job
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.C.L.A. Hears Soviet 'Messenger of Peace'
LEAD: The Soviet space scientist Roald Z. Sagdeyev, the architect I. M. Pei and the astronaut Anna L. Fisher were among those honored this weekend at 12 college and school graduation ceremonies in the 71st commencement at the University of California at Los Angeles.


French Mark 50th Anniversary of de Gaulle's Wartime Call to Arms


Tunnel Train Plan Is Stalled
LEAD: The British Government has said it will not provide any public money for a proposed multibillion-dollar high-speed rail link between London and the English entrance to the channel tunnel at Folkestone.


Train Engineer Hurt By Hurled Stones
LEAD: A Long Island Rail Road engineer was injured yesterday when an unidentified youth threw stones at a train on the Port Washington line near the Queens Boulevard overpass at 12:15 P.M., breaking its windshield, the railroad said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television;   Networks and Sponsors Vie In $4 Billion Game of Chance
LEAD: THE war being waged over the hearts and eyes of America escalated significantly last week.
The television networks invited a British company to become the new official scorekeeper.
And they set up a new method of counting viewers and charging advertisers for them.


Socialist Victory Seen In 2d Bulgarian Round
LEAD: Bulgarians went to the polls today in runoff elections that pitted the former Communist Party against opposition groups for control of Parliament.


Bond Rally Is Expected to Stall
LEAD: Credit market analysts say that for the time being the bond market's heady rally has probably stalled.
Indeed, over the next few weeks interest rates may tend to rise somewhat, even though underlying fundamental factors point strongly to sluggish economic growth and a moderating inflation rate.


Gooden Stops Pirates
LEAD: When it was over, when the Mets headed home after firing 100 hits and 65 runs at enemy pitching in seven games and winning five of them, Bud Harrelson reflected on the turnaround executed during his brief reign as their manager and said: ''The trip?
I think it was a great trip.''


Trump Loan Plans Hit a Snag
LEAD: Donald J. Trump's effort to obtain $60 million in new loans has become mired in disputes among his largest bankers, people involved in the talks said yesterday.


Breeze in Africa Doesn't Blow From East
LEAD: To the Editor:


High Hopes for 2 Champions
LEAD: She is 28 years old, the world-record holder in the heptathlon and a former co-holder of the world record in the long jump.
He is 22 years old, a Baylor senior who could be a world-record holder himself if he keeps improving and stays healthy.


Nutri/System Agency
LEAD: Nutri/System Inc., the weight-loss company, said Friday that it had selected Lewis, Gilman &amp; Kynett of Philadelphia as its national advertising agency after a 15-month search.
The other finalists for the $10 million account were Hal Riney &amp; Partners; Lord Einstein O'Neill &amp; Partners, which remains the agency for the company's Crave-Free program introduction; and Brugnatelli &amp; Partners, which remains Nutri/System's agency for a testimonial campaign.


Joy on the Way to a Tie


Definitely Not The Last Word
LEAD: MAGIC JOHNSON may have edged out Charles (''You have to realize this is a business, and I'm not the most popular business guy'') Barkley in the voting for the National Basketball Association's most valuable player award.
But as Barkley would no doubt be willing to tell you, Barkley is the league's real m.v.p.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Decision Near in Canada
As a decision looms on a pact granting special status to Quebec, remote Newfoundland ponders its own grievances and hardships.
Page A3.
New Snags in Trump Talks
Once in accord, New York banks have begun to fight over terms for new loans to Donald J. Trump, who is in default on two bond issues.


Suppliers Brace for Arms Cuts
LEAD: If the Pentagon follows its plan to shut the M-1 tank program in a budget-cutting move, the impact will not end with the General Dynamics Corporation, the big weapons maker that assembles the tank at factories in Ohio and Michigan.


FLOOD SEARCHERS FIND MORE BODIES
LEAD: Hope is beginning to fade for finding the 17 people who are still missing from the flash floods that washed over parts of this small village in eastern Ohio.


Ethnic Feuding Divides Parade For Harmony
LEAD: It was billed as a parade to foster ethnic harmony and understanding.
But anyone standing on Madison Avenue and 38th Street at 2 P.M. yesterday would have been excused for thinking otherwise.


Dame Eva Turner, 98, Soprano and Teacher
LEAD: Dame Eva Turner, a dramatic soprano of extraordinary range and power and later a voice teacher, has died.
She was 98.


Jays' Stottlemyre Has Gift for Dad
LEAD: Todd Stottlemyre, who grew up running around Yankee Stadium, traveled from fantasy to reality yesterday, and when he completed his trip, he said, beaming, ''This one's for you, Pops.''


From 12th St. to Harlem, Lucky's Legacies Vary
LEAD: Brian Lockhart was buried on Friday, and it is probably safe to say that thousands of people in Greenwich Village miss him.
They knew him as Lucky, an extraordinary beggar.


Running Supports the Work of a Diet
LEAD: AN overweight 33-year-old Manhattan school administrator needed to lose 60 pounds.
Last year, he began a liquid diet program.
He lost 30 pounds in six weeks, but the rapid weight loss made him ill.
He quit the program and soon gained the weight back.


Marjorie Miller Becomes Bride
LEAD: Marjorie Roni Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Miller of Jericho, L.I., and Boca Raton, Fla., was married yesterday at the Stanhope in New York to Andrew Lawrence Porter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Porter of Jericho.
Cantor Kalman Fliegelman officated.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of June 17:
MONDAY
Bunker Hill Income Secs
HomeFed Corp
PHH Corp
Rykoff Sexton
TUESDAY
Bankers Tr NY
Brunswick Corp
CPC Intl Inc
Harsco Corp
Hexcel Corp
House Fabrics Inc
Upjohn Co
WEDNESDAY


Surplus of College Graduates Dims Job Outlook for Others
LEAD: Hundreds of thousands of jobs, once performed creditably without a college degree, are going to college graduates today as employers take advantage of an oversupply of them.


Question Box
LEAD:
Seasonal Overlap


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article and headline on Saturday about President Bush's use of his veto power misstated the time he has been in office.
He has been President nearly 17 months.


No Time for Temper Tantrums
LEAD: When the P.L.O. betrayed the basis for talks with the U.S. by launching a major terrorist attack on civilian families on the beaches of Tel Aviv, Mr.
Bush sent his Secretary of State to the Congress to lash the new Government of Israel with sarcasm.


Bridge
LEAD: A year ago a rumor suggested that Deng Xiaoping, China's leader, had competed in the fourth Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest.
This seemed unlikely in the wake of political turmoil, and it proved false, but he did compete 10 days ago in the fifth Epson.


Breathing Easier in Cagliari
LEAD: The day after, relieved Italian and British officials concluded that it could have been a lot worse.
They had come away in fairly good shape from what many had feared would be the worst night of violence in the 1990 World Cup soccer finals.


N.B.A. Mum on Thomas
LEAD: David Stern, the commissioner of the National Basketball Association, declined to comment yesterday on reports that Isiah Thomas, the Detroit Pistons' playmaker, had run high-stakes dice games in his home and that Thomas's name had surfaced in a Federal gambling investigation.


Esther L. Budoff Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Esther Lynne Budoff, the daughter of Eleanor Budoff of New City, N.Y., and the late Norman Budoff, was married yesterday to Laurence Loeb Beilenson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Beilenson of White Plains.
Rabbi Daniel S. Wolk performed the ceremony at Congregation Emanu-El of Westchester in Rye, N


Firefighters Save 3 Children From Fire in Housing Project
LEAD: Three firefighters were recommended for bravery citations after rescuing three children from a housing project fire in Queens yesterday.


Reshaping The Los Angeles Times
LEAD: Rather than celebrate its recently achieved status as the nation's largest metropolitan daily newspaper, The Los Angeles Times is engaged in polite but bruising internal warfare regarding its future.


Private Pension Systems Are Doing the Job;   Alternative Is to Save
LEAD: To the Editor:


Market Place;   Las Vegas Is a Winner for Casino Owners
LEAD: As Donald J. Trump wrangled with his banks last week, Circus Circus Enterprises Inc., one of the most profitable gambling companies in Las Vegas, was able to raise $100 million in new debt with barely a yawn from the credit markets.


Adirondack Park Needs Immediate Action
LEAD: To the Editor:


Playoff!


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.


U.S. Moves To Shore Up Texas Bailout
LEAD: The Resolution Trust Corporation transferred $2.1 billion in deposits late Friday to the Federally owned Sunbelt Savings F.S.B. in Dallas from two insolvent savings institutions.
The unusual deal is intended to resolve two expensive situations for the Government.


East Berlin Undecided on Quick Unification Plan


Czechs Have an Edge In East's Reform Efforts
LEAD: There is much talk nowadays about how bumpy Eastern Europe's road to capitalism will be, but Czechoslovakia hopes to defy the odds and engineer a relatively smooth transition.


Kezia Keeble, 48, a Top Publicist And Shaper of American Fashion
LEAD: Kezia Keeble, a former Vogue editor and a powerful public-relations executive who helped reshape the image of American fashion, died at her home in Manhattan on Friday night.


Law on Second Offenders Fills New York Cells
LEAD: To the Editor:


Two More Weekends Of IRT Disruptions
LEAD: Uptown service on the Nos. 1, 2 and 3 trains between 42d and 96th Streets in Manhattan was scheduled to resume at 5 A.M. today.


Heather Winters Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Heather Ann Winters, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard J. Winters of Armonk, N.Y., was married yesterday to E. Cary Holcomb, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward S. Holcomb of Gloversville, N.Y.
Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the ceremony at Le Chateau, a restaurant in South Salem, N.Y.


San Salvador Journal;   After the Funerals, a University Mourns for Itself
LEAD: The rage rose as news spread of the November killings of six Jesuit priests.
But bit by bit their colleagues' fury passed, replaced by a smoldering bitterness.


Words for a Mind, Scents for a Nose, Sales for a Publisher
LEAD: At Random House, they are irreverently called ''smelly books.'' But their effect on the publisher's bottom-line is distinctly fragrant.


Writers Talk on Their Craft
LEAD: Writers on Writing, a free lecture series sponsored by Barnard College, will conclude on Wednesday at 8:15 P.M. with readings by Ann Birstein, author of ''Last of the True Believers'' and other works, and David Ignatow, a poet and author of ''The One in the Many: Literary Memoirs.'' Another reading sponsored by the college, featuring Arnold Weinstein, a playwright and author, is scheduled for June 25 at 8:15 P.M.


American League;   A's Top White Sox to Stretch Lead to 4
LEAD: Mark McGwire hit his 17th homer and Felix Jose singled home the go-ahead run as the Oakland Athletics scored twice in the eighth inning today and beat the Chicago White Sox, 5-2.


A Window for School Progress
LEAD: High on the reform agenda of New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez has been elimination of the Board of Examiners, an agency that duplicates the state certification process for teachers.
Now, finally, the State Senate may be willing to go along.


Metro Matters;   A Final Insult: It May Even Cost More on Way Out
LEAD: When Benjamin Franklin said that nothing is certain but death and taxes he did not anticipate the inevitable outcry over taxes imposed upon death.


Nets Seek Bidders For Top Draft Pick
LEAD: The word is out.
The Nets' No. 1 choice, the first pick in the draft June 27, can be had for a price.


Janet Goodman Weds Dr. David Taylor
LEAD: Janet Sylvie Goodman and Dr.
David Henry Taylor were married yesterday at the Sleepy Hollow Country Club in Scarborough, N.Y., by Rabbi Emily Korzenik.


Review/Ballet;   Princeton Troupe's Manhattan Debut
LEAD: The Princeton Ballet, a small professional company that grew out of the regional ballet movement that has spread across the country since the 1950's, made its New York debut over the weekend.


D. J. Goldschmidt Weds Ellen Klestzick
LEAD: Ellen Helene Klestzick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Klestzick of Brooklyn, was married yesterday in Cedarhurst, L.I., to David Jay Goldschmidt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Goldschmidt of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Kenneth Auman and Rabbi Solomon Scharfman officiated at Temple Beth-El.


Central American Presidents Focus on Economics
LEAD: After years of meetings to settle ideologically driven wars, the five Presidents of Central America today celebrated a sea change in the region by concluding a summit meeting devoted almost entirely to economics.


For Museum, a Theft Was Only the Start
LEAD: The $200 million burglary at the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum last March stripped the tranquil, beloved museum of masterpieces by Rembrandt and Vermeer.
But even as the F.B.I. continues to pursue what a bureau spokesman says are some ''active leads,'' the theft has sparked an embarrassing fight between the museum and The Boston


China's Debt Called Bearable
LEAD: China's foreign debt repayments will not exceed $7 billion annually in this decade and the country will have no problem meeting its payments, a top official of the nation's central bank said last week.


Co-defendant in Marcos Case Is Imposing in His Own Way
LEAD: All things considered, Adnan M. Khashoggi said, life on the 46th floor of the Olympic Towers on Fifth Avenue is not uncomfortable.
Indeed, there is something to be said for staying put in one place for a long stretch of time.


Dr. Henry Brill, 83, Ex-Director on L.I. Of Mental Hospital
LEAD: Dr.
Henry Brill, an authority on drug addiction who was director of the Pilgrim State Psychiatric Center in West Brentwood, L.I., from 1958 to 1974, died yesterday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Islip, L.I.


Fitting Shaft And Swing
LEAD: A new system for matching a golf club shaft to its head combines three design variables: kickpoint, the spot where the shaft flexes most; torque, the sideways flex needed to bring the club head square at impact; and weight, a factor that governs how far and fast the ball is hit.


Ursula Susanne Werner, Law Student, Wed to Geoffrey Klineberg, a Lawyer
LEAD: Ursula Susanne Werner, a daughter of Katinka Werner of Hamburg, West Germany, and Dr.
Rudolf Werner of Coral Gables, Fla., was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Geoffrey Morris Klineberg, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen L. Klineberg of Houston.
The Rev.
Dr.
David R. Adams, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Prospect House faculty club at Princeton


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Broaching Death's Toll With Dignity
LEAD: A COMMERCIAL that will be shown for the first time tonight takes on a subject rarely talked about seriously in television advertising - death.


I.R.S. AUDITS RISING FOR FOREIGN BANKS DOING U.S. BUSINESS
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service has sharply increased its audits of foreign banks that do business in the United States, after finding that many paid little or no income tax in the mid-1980's.


Woman Facing Homicide Count In Baby's Death
LEAD: A one-year-old Brooklyn girl in a Roman Catholic program for abandoned infants died early yesterday after being beaten by the 39-year-old woman who was adopting her, the police said.


Star System
LEAD: IT'S not that the United States doesn't have some perfectly accomplished three-day riders, not to mention a stable of well-regarded coaches and instructors.


5 Children Saved From Fire in Locked Van
LEAD: Three Brooklyn men rescued five children yesterday from a locked van that caught fire while their father was at a nearby bank teller machine, the police said.


Ireland and Egypt Play 0-0 Tie
LEAD: Ireland missed a number of scoring opportunities in the second half today and was held to a 0-0 tie by Egypt.
The tie was the fourth in four games in Group F of the World Cup competition.


New Interactive TV Threatens the Bliss Of Couch Potatoes
LEAD: New television services that capitalize on computer technology are beginning to allow viewers to become more involved in what they watch, either by controlling what is seen on the screen or by becoming armchair participants in game shows or sporting events.


Lendl Mows Down Becker
LEAD: Continuing to hone his grass game for Wimbledon, Ivan Lendl beat Boris Becker, a three-time Wimbledon champion, by 6-3, 6-2 today for his second straight victory in the Queens Court tournament.


Memorial Service
LEAD: A memorial service for the advertising copywriter John Caples will be held at 10:30 A.M.
Friday at the Episcopal Church of the Transfiguration (Little Church Around the Corner) at 1 East 29th Street in Manhattan.
Mr.
Caples died June 10 at the age of 90.


Preparations Are Hectic for Mandela's U.S. Tour
LEAD: When Nelson Mandela arrives in New York on Wednesday for a grueling, hastily scheduled 12-day, 8-city tour of the United States, he has a single, clear political objective in mind, organizers say: keeping economic sanctions and other pressure for change on the white South African Government.


For Adolfo Loyalists, Style and Comfort
LEAD: The Adolfo show opened with fringed wool jackets in intense, stained-glass colors.
It ended with gloriously embroidered sleeveless jackets over gold-shot brocade skirts.
There were sporadic bursts of applause throughout, and when the designer in his white laboratory coat waved to the crowd at the end he was given a standing ovation.


Quick and Painless Death Should Be a Right;   'This Is My Decision'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Japan to Help Clean Mexican Air
LEAD: Japan said today that it would provide $850 million in loans to Mexico to help battle air pollution there.
It will be Tokyo's first expenditure from a $2 billion fund intended to help poorer countries deal with environmental problems.


Japanese Bought Software Linked to 'Stars Wars' Effort
LEAD: Three major Japanese companies, including the country's two largest military contractors, said today that they had each purchased software for tracking rockets and missiles from an American executive who was arrested last week on charges of selling military technology without an export license.


Ex-School Board Head Is Convicted of Bribery
LEAD: A former Bronx school board chairman was convicted last night of accepting a $5,000 bribe for allowing an acting assistant principal to keep her job.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: After a year of intrigue and legal battles, the divorce of JEAN-CLAUDE (BABY DOC) DUVALIER, former Presi dent of Haiti, and MICHELE DUVALIER is final.


Quick and Painless Death Should Be a Right;   The Laws He Violated
LEAD: To the Editor:


F.B.I. Takes Steps to Give Agents More Freedom in Firing Weapons
LEAD: The Federal Bureau of Investigation is taking steps to ease its policy on the use of deadly force, allowing agents to shoot not only to defend themselves but also to stop fleeing suspects believed to have caused death or injury.


Bridge
LEAD: A player with a strong distributional hand frequently has difficult bidding decisions to make when both opponents bid before he has a turn.
Consider South's problem on the diagramed deal when West has opened one club and East has responded one spade.
The hand was played May 4 in the Stratified Regional Pairs in Secaucus, N


Books of The Times;   An Unauthorized Life Of a Difficult Genius
LEAD: As Thousands Cheer
The Life of Irving Berlin
By Laurence Bergreen
658 pages. Viking. $24.95.


Probation Overload;   Glutted Probation System Puts Communities in Peril
LEAD: Local and Federal probation systems, overwhelmed by the increase in drug-related crimes, are changing in ways that experts say are making communities less safe.


Pathe Discusses Extension
LEAD: Pathe Communications Inc. said yesterday that it was in discussions with MGM/UA Communications Inc. for another extension on its $1.2 billion bid to acquire MGM/UA.


Algeria's Ruling Party Criticizes Islamic Front
LEAD: The ruling National Liberation Front called today for an alliance of democratic forces opposed to the fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front, which won a surprise victory in Algeria's first free election last week.


Corrections
LEAD: A biographical note in the Sports section on Sunday with a Views of Sport article about role models misstated the location of Stuyvesant High School.
It is in Manhattan, not Brooklyn.


Insurer Denies Role by Milken
LEAD: The head of the First Executive Corporation said today that Michael R. Milken did not dictate investment strategy to the giant California insurance concern, which invested heavily in the high-risk ''junk bonds'' that Mr.
Milken sold at Drexel Burham Lambert.


Portal Trading Begins
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers said trading had begun on its Portal system, a computer-based market for trading private-placement securities.
As of Friday, the first day of trading, 20 securities firms in the United States and Europe had signed up to use the system.
Three securities are so far listed on Portal: a $200 million offering from Atlas Copco A.B.


Brazil Police Accused of Torture and Killing in Rights Report
LEAD: Amnesty International asserted today that five years after the end of military rule, the police in Brazil continue to routinely torture and sometimes kill prisoners.


Harcourt Appoints Officers And Plans a Consolidation
LEAD: In his most important decisions since succeeding his father last month as chairman of the executive committee of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc., Peter Jovanovich announced the appointment yesterday of Robert E. Evanson as chief financial officer.
He also named new presidents for three Harcourt publishing divisions and said some operations would be consolidated.


Chip Maker's Income Down
LEAD: The National Semiconductor Corporation today reported lower earnings in its fourth quarter and an increased loss for the year.


Disney Stock Hurt By 'Dick Tracy'
LEAD: Shares of the Walt Disney Company tumbled yesterday on disappointment over opening gross box office revenues for the movie ''Dick Tracy,'' analysts said.
The stock fell $4.625 a share, to $127.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Star Explosion of 1054 Is Seen in Indian Bowl
LEAD: When the prehistoric Mimbres Indians of New Mexico looked at the moon, they saw in its surface shading not the ''man in the moon'' but a ''rabbit in the moon.'' For them, as for other early Meso-American people, the rabbit came to symbolize the moon in their religion and art.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''And then we realized the guy was pointing his gun underneath people's desks and killing them one by one.
I just saw the bottom of the carpet and just prayed.''
-Richard Langille.
[A14:1.]


U.S. Says Evidence Points to Hoax In Fire at Libyan Chemical Plant
LEAD: American intelligence experts now believe that a report of a major fire at a Libyan chemical plant in March was almost certainly a hoax and that the installation was not seriously damaged, Bush Administration officials said today.


Our Towns;   Does Law Care If Her Mother Is Dangerous?
LEAD: Cheryl Shahine's 7-month-old baby was taken away from her by Orange County in January 1985.
Baby Nadia had been hospitalized three times in four months for malnutrition and dehydration.


Injured Molitor Is Out
LEAD: Paul Molitor, the Milwaukee Brewers' second baseman, will miss at least four to six weeks with a fractured knuckle on his left index finger.
Molitor was injured Saturday night in a game at Cleveland when he bumped into the Indians' first baseman, Brook Jacoby.
He was batting .291 with 7 homers and 25 r.b.i.(


KOHL SEES BALLOT BY TWO GERMANYS BEFORE END OF '90
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl said today that a December date for the first all-German elections in more than 50 years was ''coming near to being very, very likely.''


Higher Sales for Books Expected
LEAD: Book sales are projected to increase an average of 8.3 percent in each of the next five years and to exceed $27.3 billion in 1994, according to a report released yesterday by a committee of publishers, manufacturers and other industry-related executives.


Ruling Halts Moves to Unload Plan Costs on U.S.
LEAD: Retirement benefits for some of the employees and retirees of the LTV Corporation are likely to shrink and settlements with the company's 31,000 creditors are expected to be reduced because of the Supreme Court ruling today, pension and legal experts said.


Westinghouse Seeks Growth in Old Lines
LEAD: Conglomerates may be out of vogue in much of corporate America, but not at the Westinghouse Electric Corporation - the company remains committed to its diversity.
But with growth in a number of its lines languishing, the company is forcing itself to look at old businesses in new ways.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: GENE WILDER has taken to television with public-service messages on ovarian cancer, which killed his wife, GILDA RADNER, last year.
The messages stress the importance of early detection and tell of medical procedures that might have saved her life.


People
LEAD: *
Linda Mezo has been named president of Keyes Martin, Springfield, N.J., and she remains chief operating officer.
Edward Stukane has been promoted to executive vice president.


Rinfret's Record: New Scrutiny for Candidate
LEAD: Ever since party leaders seeking a gubernatorial nominee plucked his name from the address book of a New York Republican loyalist, Pierre A. Rinfret has portrayed himself as a renowned economist who has advised four Presidents and breezily turned down offers to join the Cabinet.


One Note of Joy For Nation in Strife
LEAD: For a few dangerous minutes tonight, Romania was on the brink of being eliminated from the World Cup soccer finals, but Gavril Balint headed in a goal to tie Argentina, 1-1, and qualify the Romanians for the second round.
Argentina will also advance.


Variety of Draft Hopes
LEAD: The Rangers looked for help on defense, the Islanders emphasized offense and the Devils took a goaltender in last weekend's National Hockey League draft.
The Rangers' No. 1 pick was Michael Stewart, an 18-year-old defenseman for Michigan State.
The Islanders' top choice was Scott Scissons, a center from Saskatoon of the Western Hockey League.


Careers;   Rethinking Business Education
LEAD: IT is no secret that one of today's overriding challenges is the need to make changes in graduate business schools.
In fact, a recently published report, ''Leadership for a Changing World - The Future Role of Graduate Management Education,'' discusses some of the steps business school deans and business leaders consider necessary.


Tokyo Bank Promotion
LEAD: The Bank of Tokyo Ltd. said yesterday that Keishi Fujii, an investment banker who has specialized in managing its Latin American debt portfolio, had been elected president of the Bank of Tokyo Trust Company New York.
Mr.
Fujii, 51 years old, succeeds Hiroshi Hayashi, who has returned to the Tokyo office.


Nevada County Prices Offering
LEAD: A $100 million bond offering by Clark County, Nev., was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Suit Seeks to Force Repair of Pollution's Damage
LEAD: The Federal Government and the State of California joined in a lawsuit today to force eight companies to pay for restoration of coastal fish and bird habitats damaged by toxic chemicals flushed into the sea through county sewers from three manufacturing plants.


4-Year 'Workout' Trims Loan Loss
LEAD: The business of salvaging troubled properties is thriving as a result of the downturn in real estate values.
But the savings and loan crisis has made many of these ''workout'' projects vastly more complicated than in the past.


Andersen Gains Soviet Entry
LEAD: Arthur Andersen &amp; Company said yesterday that it had become the first American accounting firm to receive clearance from the Soviet Union's Ministry of Finance to offer audit services to Soviet companies and to ventures between Western and Soviet companies.
Until now, a Soviet company, Inaudit, has had a monopoly on this business.


Review/Opera;   In St. Louis, Small Is Beautiful And So, Too, Is the Bel Canto
LEAD: Current wisdom tells us that the art of bel canto singing - with its grace and easy command of complexity - has long since been lost or destroyed.
Yet maybe it has only been misplaced, left behind somewhere in the bigger opera houses of the world.


U.S. Team Selected
LEAD: Five players from teams that competed in the Final Four of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament last April were among 16 collegians named yesterday to the United States national team.
The selections were made by Mike Krzyzewski, coach at Duke University in Durham, N.C.


Prudential-Bache Sells Canada Unit
LEAD: Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. became the second United States brokerage to bow out of the retail securities business in Canada this year, selling its Canadian division to a rival, Burns Fry Ltd., for an undisclosed sum.
George McGough, president and chief executive of Prudential-Bache Securities Canada Ltd., said


Attorney General Receives Records From Street News
LEAD: The financial ledgers, records and letters relating to Street News, a newspaper for the homeless, were delivered yesterday to the New York State Attorney General in response to a subpoena ordering the publication's directors to cooperate in an investigation.


Orioles Put Halt To Clemens's Streak
LEAD: The Baltimore Orioles stopped their skid at five games and ended Roger Clemens's winning streak at seven tonight, chasing him in the second inning and beating the Boston Red Sox, 7-2.


Healthco Looking At Possible Merger
LEAD: Healthco International Inc. said its board had decided to explore a possible merger or other transaction.
Earlier this month, it was reported that Gemini Partners, which holds about 10 percent of Healthco's shares, planned to solicit consents from shareholders to replace Healthco's board.


Seeing Flowers in Zigzags of the Spider's Web
LEAD: THE zigzags, bars and crosses that common garden spiders weave into their webs do not look like flowers to people, but they may to insects.
According to Catherine L. Craig, an assistant professor of biology at Yale University, and Gary D. Bernard, an affiliate professor of electrical engineering at the University of


Wary Negotiators Nearing Crossroads in Budget Talks
LEAD: This may be the week something finally happens in the budget talks between Congress and the White House.


Evolution in Europe;   Action on Romania Protest
LEAD: A parliamentary chamber today gave the police and soldiers the authority to clear anti-Government protesters from a square where they have reassembled since violence last week.


Hale The 18-Hole Playoff
LEAD: If it had been the Masters, the Professional Golfers Association Championship or any of hundreds of golf tournaments all over the world, Mike Donald would have won the sudden-death playoff with a 4-foot birdie putt at the first hole.


Public TV May Expand Into Cable
LEAD: The Public Broadcasting Service and two of its member stations may create a new educational cable network, Bruce Christensen, the president of PBS, said yesterday.


Irwin Captures U.S. Open in Sudden Death
LEAD: It went 91 holes, the longest United States Open in 44 years.
Fittingly, it was won by Hale Irwin, the man who has made his name as a survivor in the hardest golf tournament in the world.


Advances Raise Hope For Crops That Grow In Salty Conditions
LEAD: AGRICULTURAL scientists say advances in identifying and developing plants that thrive in salt water and salty soils may help alleviate severe food shortages in developing countries.


Banks Seen Closer to Trump Pact
LEAD: Bankers negotiating a $60 million loan package for Donald J. Trump moved closer to agreement yesterday after the contributions of some large New York banks were reduced, people involved in the talks said.


400 Animals in Small Shelter: Kind or Cruel?
LEAD: To many animal lovers in Westchester County, Mimi Stone is the patron saint of pets.
Her Elmsford Animal Shelter is the only shelter in the county that will neither turn away a pet nor put one to death.


Great Western Buys Branches
LEAD: The Great Western Financial Corporation, parent company of the Great Western Bank, said today that it had agreed to acquire 13 branches and $700 million in deposits from Carteret Savings Bank in Florida.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in SportsMonday this week about the White Sox loss to the A's on Friday misidentified the man at the left.
He was Ron Clark, Chicago's first-base coach, not Jeff Torborg, the manager.


Thousands Of Winners In Duel Of Fillies
LEAD: There was not much besides a three-day carryover in the Pick-Six pool to attract anyone except the hard core to Belmont Park last Saturday, but horseplayers who stayed home missed what might have been the most exhilarating race of the season.


Palestinian Journalist Is Sentenced by Israel
LEAD: A military court has sentenced a Palestinian journalist to three years and nine months in prison after convicting him of belonging to the underground leadership of the 31-month Arab uprising.


Tragic End To Adoption Of Crack Baby
LEAD: They came together in gray February like outcasts: a 39-year-old woman of solitary habits and little accomplishment searching for deeper meaning in her lonely life, and a frail infant girl born eight months earlier to a crack addict who had abandoned her with nothing but a name.


Dow Down 53.71 to End At 2,882.18
LEAD: Stock prices took their worst tumble in five months yesterday, with analysts attributing the fall to heavy computer program selling, a weak bond market and renewed worry over corporate profits and the interest-rate outlook.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-12


Report Urges Job Training
LEAD: Most American workers ''will see their dreams slip away'' unless society invests far more in improving their skills in school and on the job, a commission led by two former Labor Department Secretaries officially reported today.


Jaunty Cuomo Hits the (Campaign?) Trail
LEAD: Items today from the official schedule of Gov. Mario M. Cuomo:


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Ametek Inc., Paoli, Pa., a maker of monitoring instruments, completed the purchase of Du Pont Co.'s Process Instrument business and its Air and Noise Monitoring Instrument business.
Terms were not disclosed.


Mary H. Coulston Wed in Montana
LEAD: Mary H. Coulston, a daughter of Norman G. Coulston of Donna, Tex., and the late Margaret A. Coulston, was married yesterday to Nicholas Kuskin, the son of Charles M. Kuskin of New York and Karla Kuskin Bell of Brooklyn.
Michael D. Morris, a justice of the peace, officiated at the home of Lane E. Coulston, the bride's brother, in Missoula,


Elephant Forgets
LEAD: To the Editor:


By Design;   Getting Used to Stretch Fabric
LEAD: Cotton and Lycra leggings took off at least two summers ago.
Now they're as popular as jeans.
Stretch fiber has also made the miniskirt a solid fashion, giving it the resiliency to cling to curves yet allow energetic movement.


Unreal Estate Taxes; Also Unfair
LEAD: No other tax produces as much money as dependably for local governments as the real estate tax.
Everyone agrees in principle that fairness in collecting it requires all property to be valued at its current market value.
But in New York City that principle is forgotten in practice.


Florida Gunman Kills 8 and Then Himself


Daily News Lays Off 14 More
LEAD: In the fourth round of layoffs of unionized workers in a month, The Daily News announced yesterday that it was dismissing 14 clerks, all members of the newspaper's largest union, the Newspaper Guild.
The 14 workers are among 45 audit clerks in The News's finance department, which monitors the return of unsold newspapers, for which dealers get credit.


Irwin Wins Playoff for 3d Open Title


O'Rourke Proposes Curbs on Financing For County Races
LEAD: Stung by a state investigation's findings that he condoned the ''blurring'' of Westchester government with the county's Republican Party, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke called today for the creation of a commissioner of investigations and severe limits on local election campaign financing.


Army Says U.S. Fire Killed 2 G.I.'s in Panama Invasion
LEAD: Two of the 23 American soldiers killed in the invasion of Panama late last year were accidentally killed by gunfire from United States troops, the Pentagon said today.


Smith Barney Hires Lawyer at Davis Polk
LEAD: John J. McAtee Jr., a lawyer, will join Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company on July 5 as a vice chairman with responsibility for the firm's domestic and international investment banking.
The appointment was announced yesterday by Frank G. Zarb, the investment and brokerage firm's chairman and chief executive.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Senate Takes Up Housing
Setting the stage for a battle with the House, the Senate began debate on a less costly version of a bill to provide affordable housing.
Page A19.
California Pollution Suit
Federal and state governments have sued eight companies, which could be forced to restore coastal wildlife habitats damaged by pollution.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Sears to Open 198 Brand-Name Units
LEAD: Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company will open 198 in-store, brand-name electronics and home appliance outlets this week in 16 states and Puerto Rico.
The openings will complete Sears's plan to establish more than 840 Brand Central outlets.


Real-Estate Board Urges Tax Breaks for Business
LEAD: The Real Estate Board of New York proposed a major new tax-incentive program for businesses and developers yesterday, saying that the plan would keep and attract enough jobs and encourage enough investment to more than pay for itself.


Aide to Japanese Prime Minister Is Accused in Stock Transactions
LEAD: In an uncomfortable reminder of the stock and influence-peddling scandal that roiled Japan for more than a year, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu was forced today to order an investigation into the stock-trading activities of a top political aide.


Get Fat Farmers Off Welfare


Review/Ballet;   A Tribute in Roses as the Robbins Festival Ends
LEAD: Jerome Robbins, in blue business suit and bright blue tie, stood alone onstage in the New York State Theater Sunday night as the New York City Ballet's audience gave him a standing ovation.


Child's Anti-Smoking Poster Won't Be Riding the Subway
LEAD: With a 12-year-old artist at his side, the city's Consumer Affairs Commissioner yesterday asked the Metropolitan Transportation Authority to overrule a decision not to show the young artist's contest-winning anti-smoking poster in the subways.


TRIAL FOR BARRY IS READY TO BEGIN
LEAD: After five months of legal maneuvering, defense and prosecution lawyers finally chose a jury today to hear the Federal Government's drug case against Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.
The panel will be sworn in Tuesday, then hear opening statements.


Cuomo The Statesman
LEAD: Mario Cuomo took a traditional step last week to show that he is ready for the White House: He made a speech on foreign policy.
What he showed is that he has a long way to go before he can be taken seriously as a candidate for President.


Militant Environmentalists Planning Summer Protests to Save Redwoods
LEAD: Some look like latter-day hippies with sandals and long hair, meditating and focusing love on corporate leaders of the timber companies that are cutting down their cherished redwoods.
Some wear cowboy hats and boast about their ability to consume beer equal to that of any logger.


Division in Solidarity Pits Walesa Against Allies of Poland's Premier
LEAD: The Solidarity movement, which overthrew Communism and took over the Government a year ago, is splitting apart just as this country's ambitious program to create a free-market economic system reaches a crucial moment.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ''We have never been allowed, as a party, to do a fund-raising event at the Kennedy Center,'' said PAMELA HARRIMAN, a political activist and the widow of W. Averell Harriman.
But when she saw that PRESIDENT BUSH celebrated the first anniversary of his inaugural there with a gala for big contributors, she picked up the telephone.


Stop Zaire Aid, Pending Violence Inquiry
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nash Joins Bullets
LEAD: John Nash, who resigned earlier this month as general manager of the Philadelphia 76ers, took over the general manager's post with the Washington Bullets yesterday.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Saturday about trading in the bonds of casinos owned by Donald J. Trump misstated the price of two bonds issued by the Trump's Castle Funding Corporation.
Bids on the 13.75 percent senior subordinated issue due in 1997 fell about $4 on Friday for every $100 face amount, to about $56, and bids on the 7 percent senior subordinated bonds due in 1999 dropped about $4, to about $33.


Minister Denies He Opposed College for Japanese Women
LEAD: After several days of controversy that has embarrassed the governing Liberal Democratic Party, Japan's Finance Minister has denied saying that the growing number of women seeking higher education are responsible for the sudden decline in Japan's birth rate.


Friends of Rex Harrison Deliver Homage to a 'Total Matinee Idol'
LEAD: Admirers of Sir Rex Harrison filled the seats and some aisles of the Little Church Around the Corner on East 29th Street yesterday to celebrate the actor's life with jazz interludes and recollections.


Turnaround Specialist Named Purolator Chief
LEAD: Roman E. Boruta, a turnaround specialist, has replaced James R. Malone as president and chief executive of the troubled Purolator Products Company, the automotive filter maker and marketing subsidiary of the Pennzoil Company, the energy conglomerate.
Mr.
Malone was dismissed last week after 11 years as president and six as chief executive.





Review/Music;   Danes Honor Nielson on His 125th
LEAD: Almost 60 years after his death, Carl Nielsen still seeks the eminence that his admirers once so ardently predicted for him.
His music survives, even prospers.
It remains an object of respect and often affection.
Most important, it is played - lacking the huge following of such contemporaries as Sibelius, Bartok and


Gun Is at Issue As Trial Begins In Racial Killing
LEAD: The case against John Vento, one of eight youths charged in the Bensonhurst racial attack, opened yesterday with the prosecution and the defense battling over whether he knew a gun was being carried by any of the white youths who participated in the attack.


Palmira Henry, Model, 44
LEAD: Palmira Henry, a fashion model known as Pal, died of a cerebral hemmorrhage on Sunday at New York Hospital, her daughter, Lisa, said.
She was 44 years old and had modeled for more than 20 years.


Sluggish Yankees Fall Meekly to Brewers for 4th Loss in Row
LEAD: By now, victories have become little more than short pauses in long losing streaks.
In their season of unending horror, the Yankees have moved through 61 games in painful jumps, losing three here, five there, at home and on the road, in daytime and at night, with one manager or the next.
There is no end to it.


Stocks Drop in Tokyo
LEAD: Share prices fell on the Tokyo Stock Exchange Tuesday morning and the dollar was slightly lower against the yen.
The 225-share Nikkei stock index lost 361.99 points, or 1.12 percent, from the Monday close, and ended the morning session at 32,014.81.
The index, which had lost 161.60 points on Monday, was off more than 460 points at one point.


David Herzbrun Tells Tales of the 'Glory Years'
LEAD: Back in the 1960's, David Herzbrun recalls in his recently published book ''Playing in Traffic on Madison Avenue'' (Dow Jones-Irwin), he rented a car from Avis and found its ashtray, as he delicately writes, ''jammed up with butts.''


India and Nepal End 15-Month Trade Rift
LEAD: India and Nepal ended a bitter trade dispute today as trucks loaded with grain rolled through this border outpost for the first time in 15 months.


President Nominates Washington Lawyer To Be Ethics Director
LEAD: President Bush, who promised in the 1988 campaign to expand the Government ethics office and appoint a tough administrator to run it, today announced the nomination of Stephen D. Potts to be the Director of the Office of Government Ethics.


Wallace Revs Up in Bid for Title
LEAD: Rusty Wallace, the 1989 Nascar Winston Cup champion, got off to a quiet start this year in defending his title.
But a look at the results of the last few weeks and an analysis of his 1989 finishes show that Wallace may be in the middle of his big push for another title.


Bankers Trust Plans To Cut Jobs
LEAD: The Bankers Trust New York Corporation said yesterday that it would cut 10 percent of its corporate finance staff.


Herman S. Bloch, 78, Chemist and Inventor
LEAD: Herman S. Bloch, a retired chemist and inventor and a former chairman of the American Chemical Society, died on Saturday at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
He was 78 years old and lived in Skokie, Ill.


At the Clios, BBDO Is Big Winner
LEAD: AT the 31st annual Clio Awards last night, BBDO's New York office walked away with the most honors for television advertising - a total of six statuettes - and the agency's chairman and chief executive, Philip B. Dusenberry, helped to create one of the evening's most amusing moments.


Kaypro the Target Of S.E.C. Inquiry
LEAD: The Kaypro Corporation, a computer maker operating under Federal Bankruptcy Court protection, said today that it was being investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission and that a fight for control of the company had broken out between the current management and the company's founder.


Alaskan Brown Bear Faces Greatest Peril
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ryan Bruises Thumb On Pitching Hand
LEAD: Nolan Ryan of the Texas Rangers has a new ailment to contend with, although an apparently minor one: a sore right thumb caused by a taxicab door in Seattle.


CMS Energy Reports Closing of Power Deal
LEAD: The CMS Energy Corporation, the parent of Consumers Power of Michigan, said yesterday that it had completed a $2.3 billion sale-leaseback of its Midland Co-generation Venture.


Woman Wins Tenure Case
LEAD: The United States Supreme Court today upheld a decision granting unconditional tenure to Julia Prewitt Brown, a professor of English who alleged that Boston University had denied her a permanent teaching post because of her sex.


Grain and Soybeans Rally; Oil Prices Decline Sharply
LEAD: Grain and soybean futures rallied yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade, ending a three-day slide amid buying prompted in part by concerns about flood damage to corn and soybean crops.


Barbra Walz, 39, Photographer Known for Fashion Work, Is Dead
LEAD: Barbra Walz, a fashion photographer known as much for her informal pictures of designers as for their clothes, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 39 years old.
The cause of death was breast cancer, her husband, Kevin, said.


Dana G. Munro, 97, A Retired Professor And Ex-Diplomat
LEAD: Dana Gardner Munro, a retired professor of Latin American history at Princeton University and a former State Department official, died on Saturday at his summer home in Waquoit, Mass.
He was 97 years old and lived in Princeton.


Unicef Reports Donor Fatigue
LEAD: The head of the United Nations Childrens Fund accused the world's richer countries of '' aid fatigue'' today as he appealed for more help for the victims of two of Africa's longest running and bloodiest civil wars-- the decade-old conflicts in Sudan and Mozambique.


New Offerings From Hewlett
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company today introduced a new series of computer work stations and file servers that are the first combined products after its acquisition of Apollo Computer Inc. in May 1989.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
CHICAGO (NL) - Placed Jerome Walton, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Gary Varsho, outfielder, from Iowa of the American Association.
CINCINNATI (NL) - Called up Hal Morris, outfielder, from Nashville of the American Association.
DETROIT (AL) - Traded Tracy Jones, outfielder, to the Seattle Mariners for Darnell Coles, third baseman.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Satellite Sightings


Software Expertly Diagnoses A System
LEAD: ANYONE who wants to get under the hood of a personal computer without actually opening the box should take a look at System Sleuth, a kind of screwdriver for the brain.


August Publication for Trump Book
LEAD: Despite Donald J. Trump's financial problems, Random House is optimistic and still plans August publication of his second book, ''Trump: Surviving at the Top.''


Evolution in Europe;   Challengers New and Old Nip at Gorbachev's Heels
LEAD: With two weeks to go before the Communist Party debates its future at a national congress, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev faced increasing political challenges today from old and new sources of party power.


Fuel Oil Barge Runs Aground Off Coast of Massachusetts
LEAD: A barge carrying about five million gallons of crude oil that was being towed by a tugboat ran aground in Buzzards Bay this morning, but leaked only briefly, the Coast Guard said.


Muslim Militants in Kashmir Focusing Attacks on Military
LEAD: Militants in the Kashmir Valley appear to have begun a concentrated campaign of attacks on Indian Army and paramilitary troops in what they describe as a battle for independence from India.


Arkansas Electrocutes Killer of Police Officer
LEAD: A man was electrocuted tonight for the 1976 murder of a patrolman, becoming the first inmate to be executed in Arkansas since 1964.


Doubts Voiced on Tests for Jet-Engine Cracks
LEAD: The National Transportation Safety Board said today that inspections of DC-10 jet engines, ordered after a crash in Iowa last July killed 111 people, probably could not detect the kind of cracking that caused the accident.


New Support For Merck
LEAD: Merck &amp; Company and Medi-Cal, the California Medicaid program, said yesterday that they had agreed on Merck's offer to supply prescription drugs at discount prices.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Ames Department Stores Inc., Rocky Hill, Conn., appointed Jack E. Bush executive vice president for stores, replacing Jeffrey W. Dentz, who will leave the company in September.


U.S. Securities Decline in Price
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities fell in quiet trading yesterday, as selling that began on Friday continued.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
The U.S. agency that insures private pension plans was handed a crucial victory by the Supreme Court, which gave it the power to make an employer take back responsibility for its pension obligations.
The ruling will provide needed relief for the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, with liabilities outweighing assets by a $1 billion deficit, and will aid virtually all retirees.


Chess
LEAD: In one of the best performances in recent years by an American, Yasser Seirawan took first place in the Sweden International Tournament in early May in Haninge, a suburb of Stockholm.


Researchers Closing In On a Large-Scale Test To Screen for Diabetes
LEAD: SCIENTISTS say they are nearing a long-sought goal of producing simple, easy-to-use tests that can screen large numbers of people to find those prone to developing insulin-dependent diabetes.


Quick and Painless Death Should Be a Right;   Whose Body Is It?
LEAD: To the Editor:


PRESIDENT OF SYRIA INVITED BY SHAMIR
LEAD: Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir today formally invited President Hafez al-Assad of Syria to visit Jerusalem for peace talks.


Witness Recalls Seeing Prisoner Kill 2 Detectives
LEAD: A man who was driving on a Queens highway when two detectives were shot dead as they were driving a prisoner to jail last November gave a graphic description of the killing in court yesterday.


Dance Theater of Harlem Gets a 2d Million-Dollar Grant
LEAD: The Dance Theater of Harlem yesterday announced a gift of $1 million from the American Express Travel Related Services Company and gave details about another million gift from the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund.
Faced with a deficit of as much as $1.7 million, the ballet company has laid off its dancers and staff for six months.


Annegret von Winterfeld Is Married
LEAD: Baroness Annegret von Winterfeld, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gustave Schlomann of Eidinghausen, West Germany, and Andrew A. Lanyi, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis Lanyi of Budapest, were married yesterday at the Municipal Building in New York.


Turnstile Injustice
LEAD: New York City's long-suffering subway riders now face a new aggravation.
Vandals are jamming whole rows of turnstile token slots in order to collect the tokens themselves.
The problem is infuriating to customers and costly to the subways, and raises serious doubts about who's in control.


Mark Costantino, 70, Senior Judge In U.S. District Court in Brooklyn
LEAD: Mark A. Costantino, a senior judge in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, died on Sunday at Staten Island University Hospital after a long illness.
Judge Costantino, a lifelong resident of Staten Island, was 70 years old.


Poll Tax in This Aide's Environment
LEAD: Christopher Patten, the British Cabinet Minister for the Environment, is at the very center of the storm over Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's ''poll tax.''


N.I.H. Neglects Women, Study Says
LEAD: THROUGH inattention or lack of direction, the National Institutes of Health is failing to follow its own policy of actively including women in medical research studies, the General Accounting Office contended yesterday.


Quick and Painless Death Should Be a Right;   Try Him for Conspiracy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Madonna Reschedules
LEAD: Tonight's performance by Madonna at the Brendan Byrne Arena in in East Rutherford, N.J., has been postponed to June 25, and other concert dates have been rescheduled or canceled due to the singer's chronic laryngitis, her management announced.
Tickets to tonight's show will be honored on June 25, or refunds may be obtained before that date at the place of purchase.


Texas Realty Executive Appointed by Bramalea
LEAD: Marvin G. Marshall, a Texas real estate executive, has been named president and chief executive of Bramalea Ltd., a Toronto-based developer that has nearly $5 billion in assets.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: WILLY BRANDT, ADOLFO PEREZ ESQUIVEL and 28 other Nobel Prize laureates suggested that the foundation create a Nobel environmental prize.
Yesterday, the Nobel Foundation rejected their idea.


Offer for Thompson
LEAD: After meeting Sunday night with the owners of the Denver Nuggets, Georgetown's John Thompson said he expects to remain coach of the Hoyas.
USA Today reported yesterday that Thompson had been offered a $700,000 contract for four or five years to become the general manager of the Nuggets.


HIGH COURT RULING SUPPORTS POWERS OF PENSION AGENCY
LEAD: The Supreme Court handed a crucial victory today to the troubled Federal agency that insures the nation's private pension plans, giving it the power to make an employer take back responsibility for pension obligations.


Preparations Mount for Mandela's Visit


Bank in Texas Admits It Has Missing German Art Treasures
LEAD: The president of the First National Bank of Whitewright, Tex., admitted today that medieval artworks from the East German town of Quedlinburg are in the vault of his bank.


Charter Savings Seized
LEAD: The Federal Office of Thrift Supervision placed Charter Savings Bank of Newport Beach, Calif., in receivership and chartered a new Federal savings bank to take its place.
The new institution, Charter Savings Bank, will assume certain assets and liabilities of the old savings institution and will operate under the supervision of the Resolution Trust Corporation.


U.S. Squad Is Awaiting Match With Austria and, Probably, Journey's End
LEAD: The United States soccer team's long odyssey through the World Cup of 1990 continues Tuesday night in Florence, which in all probability will be the final stop.


Thomas Not Target of Investigation
LEAD: A Federal prosecutor in Michigan said yesterday that Isiah Thomas is not the target of a gambling investigation.


Quick and Painless Death Should Be a Right
LEAD: To the Editor:


LATIN LEADERS GET NEW U.S. AID PLAN
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today gave the five Central American Presidents the bare outlines of a plan to marshal and coordinate international aid to this poverty-ravaged region.


Johnson Comes Back As a Man of Leisure
LEAD: Upon his head sat a golf cap, not a baseball cap.
The stick he carried was made of steel, not wood.
His shoes were fixed with cleats for the fairway, not the rubber-soled footgear with which he paced the Mets' dugout as manager for six seasons and a fraction - a recent fraction - of a seventh.


Incomplete Bulgarian Tally Shows Socialists in Control
LEAD: Bulgaria's former Communist Party is virtually certain to win a majority in this country's new Parliament, based on runoffs in the the first free multiparty elections here in more than 45 years, according to incomplete official results made public today.


William J. Wolf, Episcopal Theologian, 72
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr.
William J. Wolf, a theologian and Episcopal minister, died on June 6 at his home in Heath, Mass., at the age of 72.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, said his son, Edwin.


Peaceful Party in Detroit
LEAD: A city's celebration rekindled today, this time in joy and adulation, as the Detroit Pistons held their second championship victory parade in as many years.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Roosevelt Hotel, on Madison Avenue and 45th Street in Manhattan, to Altschiller Reitzfeld Davis Tracy-Locke.


Grace Under Pressure: Dancers Go Head to Head in Contest
LEAD: International ballet contests have gradually become a highly competitive, popular institution in the dance world since 1964, when the first event of what is now a circuit of six major competitions was held in Varna, Bulgaria.
The medals won at those contests are bankable career assets, and dancers who survive the stress learn some of the hardest lessons of their profession.


Business and Health;   Employers Resist Accounting Rule
LEAD: FORECASTING health costs, an uncertain art at best, has become the subject of a vigorous debate between employers and the accounting profession's rule-making board.


Florida Gunman Kills 8 And Wounds 6 in Office
LEAD: A man sprayed dozens of rounds from a semiautomatic rifle through the office of a finance company here today, killing eight people and wounding six others before shooting himself to death.


Florio Tax Plan Clears Hurdle in Assembly Vote
LEAD: The state Assembly late last night passed Gov.
Jim Florio's plan to double the income tax for New Jersey's most affluent taxpayers.
The vote was the first hurdle in the new Governor's attempt to enact a host of bills that would raise taxes on the wealthy and provide aid to low- and modest-income residents and school districts.


Taking Shakespeare's Shrew To the Old West of the Late 1800's
LEAD: It's dinnertime for cast and crew at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, and Tracey Ullman has decided to spend the two-hour rehearsal break at a landmark as revered on the Upper West Side of Manhattan as Shakespeare's tomb is in Stratford-on-Avon.


Supreme Court Roundup;   Court Broadens Use of Videotape In Trial of Drunken-Driver Suspect
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that a videotape of a drunken driving suspect's booking at a police station can be introduced at trial, even though no Miranda warning of the person's rights was given and the tape included incriminating evidence of slurred speech.


Washington Talk;   Unmasking the Fallacy Of the 'Women's Vote'
LEAD: They say that in politics this is the year of the woman.
Perhaps so.
In an electorate yearning for something different, not being one of the boys can finally be an advantage.
But it is also fast becoming clear that a political appeal based on one's sex is no simple matter.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.19
8.25
9.44
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.74
7.69
8.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.64
7.63
7.98
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.52
8.47
8.42
30-YR.


Mandela Urges Canadians to Maintain Sanctions
LEAD: Nelson R. Mandela appealed today to the Canadian Parliament to continue economic sanctions against South Africa.


Huge Space Platforms Seen as Distorting Studies of Earth
LEAD: THE costliest environmental research project ever mounted by the Federal Government is being challenged by earth scientists who fear that it will compromise and distort the collection of data that are critically important to understanding how the global environment is changing.


Quick and Painless Death Should Be a Right;   Increased 'Death Span'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jiucun Journal;   In a Chinese Desert, Once-Barren Lives Bloom
LEAD: The soil is sandy in this unpretentious little village on the edge of the desert.
The 40 homes are made of mud and have plastic windows, but they are buttressed by hope: a yearning by the peasants who come here that the village will mark an escape from the poverty that has been the lot of their families for scores of generations.


Patterns
LEAD:
That Secondhand Look


Openings for Vilnius, and Moscow
LEAD: President Bush's refusal to grandstand on Lithuania by berating Moscow publicly has been vindicated.
President Gorbachev eased economic pressure on Lithuania last week.
And if Lithuania's parliament now suspends its declaration of independence, negotiations can start.


3 Exchanges Set Plan For All-Night Trading
LEAD: Seeking to stake out a leading position in global trading, three American financial exchanges announced plans yesterday for all-night trading of stocks and options, starting in 1992.


Bush's Balancing Act Over Financing of Arts
LEAD: President Bush's new willingness to accept restrictions on Federal funds for the arts is a textbook example of how Mr.
Bush governs when faced with competing interests: His inclinations move him in a moderate direction, but his check-the-pulse politics often yanks him back to a more conservative position.


Senate Begins Debate on Legislation to Overhaul Policy on Low-Income Housing
LEAD: The Senate today began debate on legislation that would mark the first major overhaul of Federal housing policy in a decade.


Amid More Rain, Mets Do Some Shifting
LEAD: The Mets and Cardinals were rained out at Shea Stadium last night, bringing more congestion in the schedule but an opportunity for the Mets' manager, Bud Harrelson, to restructure his rotation as well as his bullpen.


Show Salutes Artists With Multiple Sclerosis
LEAD: ''Art for Artists' Sake,'' a mixed-media exhibition saluting artists who have multiple sclerosis, is to be on view through July 7 at the Fashion Institute of Technology, 27th Street and Seventh Avenue.


On the Trail Of a 'Wildman,' And Creatures Nearly as Elusive
LEAD: IN the wilderness of Shennonjia Forest in central China investigators are seeking an elusive creature that might be an unknown hominid or the product of farmers' imaginations.
Whatever it is, the ''wildman'' of China has given members of the International Society of Cryptozoology new food for thought.


Sea-Level Changes
LEAD: Using a model that simulates ocean circulation, scientists studying pollution-induced warming of the globe have calculated changes in sea level by region.
Their findings may be good news for penguins, but not for people.


Soviets Win but Bow Out
LEAD: The Soviet Union handed Cameroon its first 1990 World Cup defeat, a 4-0 thrashing tonight, but the Cameroonians won Group B and advanced to the second round.
It was the Soviets' first victory of the tournament after two losses, and was worth 2 points, but they will not advance.
Cameroon had already qualified with 4 points.


Action on Trump Site
LEAD: The Los Angeles School Board voted unanimously today to condemn the site of the Ambassador Hotel, owned by a group headed by Donald J. Trump, as a first step in its legal effort to confiscate the land for a high school.
The board will now ask to receive $50 million from the State Allocation Board, which has promised the money to acquire about 17 acres of the 23-acre site on Wilshire Boulevard.


M.I.T. Trustees Elect a University President
LEAD: Charles M. Vest, provost of the University of Michigan, was elected by university trustees as the 15th president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology today, ending the school's year-long search for a new leader.


Dollar Is Generally Lower; Gold Slips in U.S. Trading
LEAD: The dollar fell against most major currencies yesterday, buffeted by technical factors and expectations of lower interest rates in the United States.


What to Remember
LEAD: Thank Heavens for recording tape.
It was a German invention, used to allied disadvantage during World War II, but quickly taken over when the chance came.
If it didn't exist now, there would probably be planes roaring past my window instead of recorded sounds of bombs and bombers to remind France of nights of war.


Market Place;   Wary Investors Await UAL Deal
LEAD: AGAIN the predictions about a ''done deal'' are rolling easily from the tongues of investment bankers advising the unions of United Airlines in their bid to buy the carrier's parent, the UAL Corporation.


Chips for the Year 2000
LEAD: TWENTY-FIVE years ago, Gordon Moore and Robert Noyce, the co-founders of the Intel Corporation, discovered that computer power seemed to evolve so that about every 18 months, the number of transistors that could be placed in an integrated circuit doubled.
Mr.
Noyce, who died earlier this month, said in an interview last year that he believed the trend would continue, and probably accelerate, in the last decade of the 20th century.


Slow Readers Sparkling With a Handful of Words
LEAD: Eleven-year-old Erik Rotger likes to say 13 words out loud as he walks down the street in his north Bronx neighborhood: outstanding, frolicsome, comprehensive, impressionable, Walt Disney, Poconos, Leonardo, oneiromancy, coruscation, conclusions, discombobulate and, his favorite, hierophant.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Frazier Beats Halard to Advance
Amy Frazier of the United States won her opening-round match yesterday at the Pilkington Glass Championship at Eastbourne, England, the women's final tuneup for Wimbledon.
Frazier beat Julie Halard of France, 2-6, 6-2, 6-4.
Frazier's match was one of only 10 completed before rain interrupted the schedule.


Foundation Handling Farm-Research Prize
LEAD: Six months after Philip Morris said it was withdrawing financial support for the most prestigious award in farm research, an Iowa foundation announced today that it would administer and pay for the $200,000 World Food Prize.


No Commitments to Nielsen Rival
LEAD: Executives from the three leading broadcast networks said yesterday that they had made no commitments yet to a British television research company that is seeking to compete with the A.C.
Nielsen Company but that they would listen to the company's plans for devising a new television measurement system in the United


Sayde B. Busch, 90, Who Once Headed Tisch Hotel Chain
LEAD: Sayde Brenner Busch, who as Sayde Tisch was a member of the family that founded the chain that is now Loews Hotels, died yesterday at Victoria Hospital in Miami.
She was 90 years old and lived in Bal Harbour, Fla.
She had been in a coma for 10 days, the family said.


Scientists Struggle to Undo Tanning's Deadly Damage
LEAD: AS the sun arcs toward the summer solstice and swarms of unregenerate sunbathers head for the beach, scientists are struggling mightily to undo the damage of profligate tanning.
They are racing to devise new therapies against malignant melanoma, the deadly skin cancer that is rising faster than any other cancer in the world.


Chronicle
LEAD: OSCAR DE LA RENTA is in Paris exploring the possibility of showing his fall 1991 fashion collection there, which would make him the only American designer on parade in the Paris fashion tents.


Hazy Records Helped Florida Gunman Buy Arms
LEAD: The police said today that ballistics tests had confirmed what witnesses told them earlier: that the man who killed eight people at an automobile loan office Monday was the same man who killed two people in shootings over the weekend.


Polish Burial Site Identified
LEAD: Soviet authorities have disclosed the probable burial site of 6,200 Polish officers massacred by the Soviet secret police during World War II, Polish news organizations reported today.


Thompson Considers A Switch to Nuggets
LEAD: The Denver Nuggets are still hopeful that John Thompson will accept their offer to become the team's general manager, but all the Georgetown coach will say is he is considering what he will do.


Etching the Chips of the Future
LEAD: As computer chips shrink, yet grow more sophisticated, they are nearing the point at which beams of visible light are not sharp enough to etch circuitry more than 150 times thinner than a human hair onto wafers of silicon.
A high-stakes search has begun for the best way to produce more complex chips in the next decade.


Japan's Soba Dish, Prepared by Masters (And Soon in SoHo)
LEAD: Long before America dreamed up fast food, the Japanese had soba, steamy bowls of buckwheat noodles, hastily slurped up at counters in train stations and on street corners across the land.


U.S. Asserts Note Proves Case on Keating
LEAD: Lawyers for the Office of Thrift Supervision ended their defense of the Government's seizure of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association today by presenting a memo they say proved Charles H. Keating Jr. operated Lincoln solely for the benefit of its parent, the American Continental Corporation, which Mr.


'La Traviata' Postponed
LEAD: The Metropolitan Opera's free performance of Verdi's ''Traviata,'' scheduled for last night on the Great Lawn of Central Park, was postponed because of rain.
The performance will take place on the Great Lawn tomorrow at 6 P.M.
The cast includes Marilyn Mims as Violetta, Alfredo Kraus as Alfredo and Sherrill Milnes as Germont.


Thomas Nyfenger, A Principal Flutist And a Teacher, 53
LEAD: Thomas Nyfenger, the principal flutist of the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra and the New York Chamber Symphony of the 92d Street Y, died on June 12 at his home in Guilford, Conn.
He was 53 years old.
Sandra K. Wehner, Mr.
Nyfenger's companion, said he committed suicide after a long hospitalization for chronic depression.


Book Notes
LEAD:
China Text a Hit


CHENEY GIVES PLAN TO REDUCE FORCES BY 25% IN 5 YEARS
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney today sent to Congress his promised plan for cutting the armed forces by 25 percent over the next five years, outlining a smaller Army, Air Force and Navy than proposed by the military services.


CS Holding In Takeover
LEAD: The parent company of Credit Suisse won control today of Switzerland's oldest bank, the 235-year-old Bank Leu.


Revived Cone Sets Back Cardinals On 4 Hits
LEAD: The Mets' batters have sent strong signals throughout the month that they are quickly rounding into the form long expected of them.
They are now being followed by some pitchers of whom so much was expected but so little delivered.


Note to Readers
LEAD: The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge receipt of or return articles unless they are accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Economic Scene;   Car Makers' Fight For Market Share
LEAD: WITH the slump in domestic automotive sales nearly nine months old, there has been little cause for rejoicing in Detroit, where the Big Three have been hurt by the downturn harder than their Japanese rivals.
As the overall market has gotten smaller, the Japanese share has grown.
A point of light amid the gloom, however, has been the apparent halt of a loss in market share by the General Motors


3 Shootings Linked to Notes on Zodiac
LEAD: The police say they believe a gunman obsessed with the 12 signs of the zodiac has shot and seriously wounded three people in Brooklyn and Queens since March 8.
They say he has mailed ominous letters to two news organizations suggesting he will shoot more.


Chronicle
LEAD: JOAN SUTHERLAND made her opera house debut at the Royal Opera in London nearly 30 years ago and planned to sing her last operatic role there in December.
Yesterday, she canceled that engagement, saying she wanted to be remembered for her voice in its prime.


U.S. Hearings To Explore L.I. Jet Crash
LEAD: Federal safety investigators will begin public hearings on Wednesday into the crash of an Avianca Airlines jetliner that killed 73 people in January, focusing renewed attention on the crowding, delays and air traffic control difficulties afflicting the New York region.


Stanley Eisenberg, 59, An Optometrist on L.I.
LEAD: Dr.
Stanley Eisenberg, an optometrist on Long Island for 32 years, died Monday at his home in Woodbury, L.I.
His wife, Sondra, said he died of cancer.
He was 59 years old.


In South Mexico, a Forest and Culture Die
LEAD: To the Editor:


Goodyear Plans to Cut 1,100 Jobs
LEAD: The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, which was recently bumped from its long-held position as the world's largest tire producer, announced yesterday that it was laying off 1,100 workers and taking a $35 million charge against earnings as part of a sweeping restructuring program.


U.S. IS TO RETURN LAND IN OKINAWA
LEAD: The United States and Japan announced today that the American military had agreed to return about 4 percent of the land from its base installations on the southern Japanese island of Okinawa, in a long-awaited move that appears likely to leave the strongly anti-military residents of Okinawa unsatisfied.


It's Big, Mysterious And Seats 2 Safely
LEAD: The vehicle that will carry Nelson and Winnie Mandela up Broadway during a ticker tape parade this afternoon looks like an armored truck, weighs several tons, is bulletproof and maybe rocketproof and is at least 12 feet long.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Garrison and Capriati Are Beaten
Second-seeded Zina Garrison and 14-year-old Jennifer Capriati were defeated in second-round play yesterday at the Pilkington Glass women's tournament in Eastbourne, England, a warmup event for Wimbledon.
Most players had to play two rounds yesterday because of rain on Monday, the opening day.


U.S. Finishes Cup Appearance With a 3d Loss
LEAD: After an emotional roller coaster of frustration, anger, regained confidence and high expectations, the United States soccer team finally ran out of resources tonight.


Trade Fee Listings Backed
LEAD: World trade negotiators tentatively agreed today that countries should list all charges in addition to fixed tariffs that importers must pay.


Colleges Scrambling to Fill Up Freshman Classes
LEAD: Many colleges and universities say they expect substantial declines in the size of their freshman classes this fall - the first unequivocal sign that the nation's pool of college-age students is indeed shrinking.


Stockholm Journal;   In a Haven for Refugees, Hate Makes an Entrance
LEAD: Bertha Inca de Zevallos said that when she came to Sweden two years ago from her native Peru and no longer had to worry about police harassment, ''I felt peace.''


Corrections
LEAD: A picture on Thursday with an article about medieval art treasures that disappeared from a German town after World War II was published in error.
The reliquary shown was not the one that disappeared; the missing one is pictured today on page C11.


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
Cato Johnson New York, a unit of Young &amp; Rubicam, has created a multimedia campaign for the Huntington's Disease Society of America.


Fairleigh Dickinson Closing Laboratory On Virgin Islands
LEAD: Fairleigh Dickinson University's board of trustees has voted to close the school's West Indies Laboratory for Underwater Research in St.
Croix, V.I., to avoid the high cost of rebuilding it from damage done by Hurricane Hugo last fall.


Four I.R.A. Suspects Seized in Europe
LEAD: The Dutch and Belgian police have arrested four people whom they suspect of being involved in attacks by the Irish Republican Army in Europe.
Law enforcement officials said this was an important development in halting violence by the I.R.A. across the Continent.


Market Place;   A Dangerous Beat Worries Investors
LEAD: IS the ''market mambo'' starting right on time, with the stock market ending a two-month advance as fears grow of bad earnings reports?


Ardis R. Whitman, 85, A Writer and Lecturer
LEAD: Ardis Rumsey Whitman, a writer and lecturer, died on Sunday at Presbyterian Hospital in Charlotte, N.C.
She was 85 years old and lived for many years in New Britain, Conn., before moving to Charlotte.


Schools' Fear Is Said to Hurt The Teaching of Moral Values
LEAD: Fear of indoctrinating public school children with specific religious beliefs has led to a dearth of school programs that teach moral values, according to a joint report issued yesterday by leading Roman Catholic and Jewish organizations.


Israeli Labor Party Deserting Peres In Favor of Rabin as Next Leader
LEAD: Israel's Labor Party is falling in behind former Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who is challenging Shimon Peres for party leadership, and has scheduled a meeting for next week to start the process of choosing a new leader.


Holyfield Not Taking Douglas for Granted
LEAD: Evander Holyfield is not yet the heavyweight champion, but the oddsmakers figure he will be after he meets James (Buster) Douglas on Sept. 21.


Real Estate;   A Face Lift In Midtown Manhattan
LEAD: IN the vernacular of office building renovation, a face lift is usually a cosmetic updating of a tired-looking property through methods ranging from basic cleaning and repairs to elaborate resurfacings.


The Development Bank Of Africa
LEAD: The African Development Bank is offering $300 million in subordinated notes due in 2000 through underwriters led by Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company.


Nuclear Arms Plant Program Stalls
LEAD: The Energy Department's program for repairing and restarting its two most important nuclear weapons plants is encountering stiff opposition in Congress and growing criticism in the states.


Critic's Notebook;   Robert Wilson Wins A Faithful Following, But It's in Europe
LEAD: Robert Wilson may count for many critics as America's most innovative ''theater artist,'' but that distinction hardly makes his work any easier to see in the United States.
To encounter it, one must usually travel to Europe, this season, in particular, to West Germany, where state-supported theaters, eager for new work, are seemingly in competition for the latest Wilson premiere.


Dmitri Baltermants, Soviet Photographer Of War, Dead at 77
LEAD: Dmitri Baltermants, a Soviet photographer best known for his pictures of the Soviet battlefield during World War II, died on June 11 in Moscow.
He was 77 years old.


More Alternative Paths Lead to Teaching Jobs
LEAD: The number of states with alternative routes for certifying teachers is growing, but few states focus on recruiting older, educated adults with experience in other fields, according to a study released today by the National Center for Education Information.


Bishops' Meeting Likely to Focus on Abortion Issue
LEAD: They are calling it a spiritual retreat, and abortion is not even on the agenda.
But when the nation's Roman Catholic bishops gather today in Santa Clara, Calif., abortion is sure to be at the top of the list of topics of concern.


Portia P. Dunham; Nurse, 80
LEAD: Portia Playfair Dunham, a registered nurse who had been active in mental-health causes in Westchester County and Binghamton, N.Y., died on Monday at Binghamton General Hospital.
She was 80 years old and lived in Binghamton.
She died of a stroke, her son said.
Mrs.
Dunham was a founding member of the Westchester Adoption Service and a former vice president of the Westchester Children's Association and the Westchester Mental Health Association.


Thousands of Romanians Protest Despite Arrests
LEAD: Several thousand people gathered in small groups on a central square late this afternoon in a show of defiance against the Romanian Government, despite reports of new arrests of opposition leaders.


Mandela the Messenger: Celebrated, Yet Life-Size
LEAD: Since he was freed after 27 1/2 years in prison, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela has shed his legend as one of the world's most celebrated political prisoners and emerged as a consistent and tough spokesman for the African National Congress.


Car Kills a Florida Panther
LEAD: One of an estimated 30 to 50 Florida panthers believed to be surviving in the wild was struck and killed by a car on Monday, game officials said today.
The 50-pound, 10-month-old male was run over while crossing a remote road about six miles north of the Big Cypress Seminole Indian Reservation in the Everglades.


New Rules for Rookies
LEAD: Last week, the Calder Trophy for the 1989-90 season, symbolizing the N.H.L. rookie of the year, went to Sergei Makarov of Calgary, a right wing from the Soviet Union.
But he is 32 years old, had played 11 seasons with the Central Red Army team and had participated in three Olympics and 10 world championships.


An Arrest Is Made After Fires Damage Rutgers Fraternities
LEAD: Fires burned through three Rutgers University fraternity houses and two private homes within an hour of each other on Monday night.
Today, the fires were labeled arson, and a 33-year-old man was charged with setting one of them.


People
LEAD: *
John Barnes has been promoted to executive vice president and management supervisor at Lintas New York.


French TV Giant Turns Global
LEAD: In just five years, Canal Plus has used its position as France's only pay television company to become the largest buyer of American film rights in Continental Europe.


Ex-F.D.A. Official Indicted in Scandal Over Generic Drugs
LEAD: A Federal grand jury today indicted the retired head of the Food and Drug Administration's generic-drug division on two counts of perjury in a corruption scandal involving the division.


Rig Count Up Modestly
LEAD: The number of working oil and natural gas rigs in the United States increased by eight last week, to a total of 999, Baker Hughes Inc., announced on Monday.
A year ago, the count was 795.


The Editorial Notebook;   Flagging Interest
LEAD: Flag burning isn't what it used to be; it has lost its provocative quality.
That's the complaint of Justice John Paul Stevens, in his dissent in the 5-to-4 decision last week that struck down the Federal flag law.
It's an odd but telling lament.


Bank Yields Fall Narrowly
LEAD: Bank yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were narrowly down for the week ended yesterday.
It was the third consecutive weekly decline.


Herbicides Linked to Cancer in Military Dogs
LEAD: Military dogs that served in Vietnam and were exposed to the same chemical sprays as American soldiers developed almost twice as many tumors of the testicles as military dogs that served elsewhere, a study has found.


Namibia in I.M.F. Bid
LEAD: Namibia, newly independent of South Africa, has asked to join the International Monetary Fund, the fund announced on Monday.
Switzerland, Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia are also seeking to join the 152 governments that are now members.


Canadian Study Finds Condoms Little Used
LEAD: Despite the risk of contracting sexually transmitted diseases like AIDS, most college freshmen in Canada do not use condoms regularly, a survey has found.


Apartheid Law Repealed
LEAD: South Africa's Parliament removed a pillar of apartheid today when it voted overwhelmingly to scrap a 37-year-old law segregating public facilities.
Only the far-right Conservative Party voted to retain the 1953 Reservation of Separate Amenities Act, a mainstay of the apartheid race law structure created by the ruling white National Party after it came to power in 1948.


Flag Amendment Sent to House Floor
LEAD: The House Judiciary Committee today sent to the House floor a proposed constitutional amendment to protect the American flag, but votes by the committee indicated that many lawmakers had strong reservations about the measure.


Even Caviar Can Be a Bore


For Industrial Growth, Give Risk Capital a Break
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fiat Deal Rumors Lift Chrysler Stock
LEAD: The shares of the Chrysler Corporation rose amid speculation about a possible link between the American auto maker and Fiat S.p.A. of Italy.
Chrysler confirmed it was in discussions with Fiat but would not provide details.
Fiat would not discuss the rumors.


With Some Rare Hits, Yankees Earn Victory
LEAD: In a season short on victories and long on losses, there was something doubly satisfying for the Yankees tonight.
They won a game and got news about Pascual Perez that bordered on hopeful: The right-handed pitcher's season might not be over.


Triton in Deal With Conoco Unit
LEAD: The British oil group Triton Europe P.L.C. said it was selling its oil and gas assets in the British North Sea to Conoco (U.K.) Ltd., a unit of E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, for $61 million.
Triton said the assets include interests in the Alba oilfields and Kilda and Anglia gas fields, which have not received development approval.


Mr. Bush, Keep Your Promise to American Families
LEAD: Congress has passed the Family and Medical Leave Act, confronting President Bush with a decision that goes to the heart of the concerns facing hard working, tax-paying American families.
That's why I am so perplexed that White House sources continue to predict that the President will veto this bill despite his frequently stated support for family values and job security.


To the Snap of Gum, Panel Decides 5,000 Can Do the Toyi-Toyi
LEAD: ''7:30 A.M.? C'mon, get real.''


Chronicle
LEAD: After undergoing surgery last week, WILLIAM S. SESSIONS, director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, plans to return to work today.


Books of The Times;   What Went Wrong at M-G-M, by a Participant
LEAD:
Fade Out
The Calamitous Final Days of M-G-M
By Peter Bart
Illustrated. 304 pages. William Morrow &amp; Company. $19.95


New Strategy Suggested in Battle on China Trade Status
LEAD: Anticipating that President Bush's decision to renew trade benefits for China this year will ultimately survive any challenge, opponents in Congress have started lining up behind legislation that would impose human rights conditions before similar benefits are granted next year.


Starts of Housing Fall for 4th Month
LEAD: Housing starts fell in May for the fourth consecutive month, dipping to their lowest level since the last recession, the Government said today.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of Nelson Mandela's visit, New York City transportation officials have issued a Gridlock Alert for today through Friday.


More Wheat to China
LEAD: China has bought an additional 359,775 metric tons of American wheat under a price subsidy program, the Agriculture Department said today.
F.
Paul Dickerson, general sales manager for the department's Foreign Agricultural Service, said six private exporting companies had made the deals under the department's Export Enhancement Program.


Israeli Guard to UConn
LEAD: Four days after he committed himself to Providence College for next season, Gilead Katz, a point guard for the Israeli national team, has decided instead to attend the University of Connecticut, where he will become a teammate of Nadav Henefeld, a fellow Israeli who was the Big East Conference rookie of the year last season.


Soviet Hijacker Forces Jet to Land in Finland
LEAD: A Russian-speaking hijacker forced a Soviet airliner to land in Helsinki today when he threatened the crew with what they believed was a bomb, officials said.


Wages of Fame: An Unquiet Death
LEAD: ''SAMMY DAVIS Jr. weighs 60 pounds and lies in a fetal position,'' a wire service reported, igniting a weeklong death watch last month outside the entertainer's house in Beverly Hills, Calif.


Motorola Chip Sale Barred In a Dispute With Hitachi
LEAD: A Federal district judge in Texas barred Motorola Inc. from selling one of its high-speed computer chips today, in a ruling stemming from Motorola's 18-month dispute over patent and contract violations with Hitachi Ltd., one of Japan's largest makers of computer chips.


Mandelas' Visit: Today's Schedule
LEAD:
9:45 A.M.: The Mandelas arrive at Kennedy Internation Airport.
After brief remarks, he travels to Boys and Girls High School in Brooklyn.
10:45 A.M.: Speech at Boys and Girls.
1:30 P.M.: Ticker tape parade from Battery Park up lower Broadway to City Hall.
2 P.M.: At City Hall, Mayor Dinkins presents Mr.


4 Picked for Jogger Trial Jury
LEAD: Four men were picked as jurors yesterday in the case against three teen-agers charged with the rape and attempted murder of a woman jogging through Central Park on the night of April 19, 1989.
The rest of the jury is expected to be chosen by Monday.


30,000 Jam New Las Vegas Casino
LEAD: Thirty-thousand people today stormed a drawbridge that does not raise, ignored security guards in medieval costumes and raced to the gambling tables at the opening of Excalibur, which is billed by its owner as the world's biggest casino hotel.


East Germans Arrest More Terror Suspects
LEAD: The East German police have arrested two more terrorist suspects wanted by West Germany, the eighth and ninth alleged members of the Red Army Faction captured in less than two weeks.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
The Outdoor Advertising Asssociation of America is scheduled to announce today the adoption of a new voluntary code of advertising practices that would restrict the placement of ads for products, like tobacco and alcohol, that are not sold to minors.


Europeans to Consider Proposal on Economic Help for Soviet Union
LEAD: The 12 European Community heads of government, meeting in Dublin next week, will consider a proposal for aid to help the Soviet Union overcome its deepening economic crisis, according to diplomats and government officials.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article on Monday described the role of Douglas Berman, the State Treasurer of New Jersey, as Gov.


Heinz Net Climbs 15.4%
LEAD: The H. J. Heinz Company said today that its earnings increased 15.4 percent in the fourth quarter.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Advantage Life Products Inc., Laguna Hills, Calif., and More Direct Health Products Inc., Carlsbad, Calif., extended in perpetuity the Cigarrest Stop Smoking System retail distribution agreement scheduled to expire in 1995.


Clarke Selects Gainey To Coach North Stars
LEAD: The Minnesota North Stars, who have never finished any of their 24 seasons by skating round the rink with the Stanley Cup, hired as head coach yesterday a former player who took that spin five times in his career.


Japan Talks By Publisher
LEAD: Owen J. Lipstein, the publisher of Smart, Psychology Today and Mother Earth News, said yesterday that he was negotiating with a Japanese company interested in a buying a 50 percent stake in his publications.


Ames Posts Larger Loss
LEAD: Ames Department Stores Inc., which has been in voluntary bankruptcy since April 25, said yesterday that it had a much larger net loss of $431 million in the first quarter that ended on April 28 than the year before, while its revenues dropped slightly, to $935 million from $1 billion.
The previous year's loss was $16.5 million.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 15
June 8
June 16
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
6.9
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
2.6
Gasoline stocks
216.6
217.1
220.6
Distillate stocks
107.4
104.5
97.6
Crude imports, daily
7.0
6.1
5.9
Product imports, daily
2.3
2.0
2.2
Crude stocks
384.4
385.6
340.2
Crude production, daily
6.9
7.3
7.6
Refinery utilization (%)
88.1
88.1
88.8


Help Is Given in the Pursuit of Education Dreams
LEAD: Eugene Lang's ''I Have a Dream'' Foundation opened its fourth annual convention in Washington on Monday with evidence of its importance as fresh as the morning news.


Bensonhurst Witness Recalls Night of Killing
LEAD: Hours before Yusuf K. Hawkins was killed last summer, groups of white youths, some with guns, drove around their Brooklyn neighborhood preparing to confront a group of blacks they expected to arrive that night, a major witness in the third Bensonhurst trial said yesterday.


Beatrice Chief Leaving To Be Head of NWA
LEAD: Frederick B. Rentschler, president and chief executive of the Beatrice Company, is leaving the food business for the airline industry to become president and chief executive of NWA Inc., parent of Northwest Airlines.


Potomac Electric Mortgage Bonds
LEAD: The Potomac Electric Power Company yesterday priced $80 million in first mortgage bonds due 2020 through a group of underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, which successfully bid for the offering.


Accord to End License Board For New York City Teachers
LEAD: State officials agreed today to abolish the New York City Board of Examiners, the much-criticized independent body that has tested and licensed teachers and administrators in the city for almost a century.


Late Start Can't Keep Jumper Down
LEAD: In the middle of April 1989, Eric Taylor-Perry showed up for varsity track practice at Montclair High School in New Jersey for the first time.
After a few minutes at the long-jump pit, he wandered away and then tried to high jump for the first time.


James F. White; Executive, 69
LEAD: James F. White, a retired vice president and treasurer of the National Broadcasting Company, died on Monday at his home in Wilton, Conn., at the age of 69.
The cause of death was congestive heart failure, his son Bryan said.


Fall in Orange Juice Prices Continues for a Third Day
LEAD: Speculators continued to sell heavily into the orange juice futures market yesterday, extending to three days a collapse that analysts attribute almost entirely to bearish chart patterns.


DRUG TRIAL BEGINS FOR MAYOR BARRY
LEAD: Arguments and testimony began today in the drug and perjury trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr., with the prosecution charging that he was a deceitful public official addicted to cocaine who once had drugs delivered to his City Hall office and at other times supplied his friends cocaine-laced cigarettes that he called ''M.


New Hopes of Finding Lost and Looted Art
LEAD: With the inexorable march of the decades, the recovery of lost and looted artifacts of the Nazi years has become rarer and rarer as the trails have grown colder.


Chinese Dissident Turns Up Again And Reports a 3-Week Detention
LEAD: Nearly three weeks after several prominent dissidents disappeared just hours before they were going to hold a news conference, one of them has reappeared at his home and said he was detained by the police.


Stocks Rebound a Bit as Dow Rises 11.38
LEAD: Stocks rebounded slightly from Monday's selloff, but despite strong program trading, volume remained light as investors took to the sidelines.


About New York;   Read, Read Against the Dying Of the Light
LEAD: Jason looked so small in the hospital bed.
Two tubes were impaled in his left arm while digital readouts flashed up-to-the-second news of the inner workings of his 42-pound body.
As a volunteer read ''101 Dalmatians,'' the 8-year-old pursed his lips and smiled expectantly.


Gorbachev, Pressed by Foes, Assails the 'Narrow Minded'
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev delivered a spirited defense of his national reform program today, striking back at critics on his right and left and even assailing the Soviet public's ''narrow-minded attitudes'' after decades of totalitarianism.


Grey Series Urges Risks For Creativity
LEAD: MANDY PATINKIN, the Broadway actor, recently taught advertising executives an important lesson.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Action Industries, Cheswick, Pa., a marketer of housewares and giftware promotional programs, announced the retirement of its chairman, Ernest S. Berez, who will remain a director and consultant.
Action named its president, R. Craig Kirsch, to the new post of chief executive.


Bell Traded to Raiders
LEAD: Greg Bell, a 1,000-yard rusher for the Los Angeles Rams each of the past two seasons, was traded to the Los Angeles Raiders yesterday for an undisclosed future draft pick.


Judgment For Ferranti
LEAD: Britain's High Court Monday ordered a former deputy chairman of Ferranti International P.L.C. to pay the British military contractor $189 million in damages for fraud involving its United States subsidiary.


Ernst &amp; Young In Soviet Pact
LEAD: Ernst &amp; Young, the big United States accounting firm, said yesterday that it had received clearance from the Soviet Union's Ministry of Finance to offer its auditing services to Soviet companies and to the growing number of alliances between Western and Soviet companies.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: THE possibilities for summer salads are endless.
I don't think I ever make precisely the same salad twice; improvisation is half the fun.
Take chicken salad, for example, which can be served in a mayonnaise-based dressing flavored with curry or other spices, in a mustard vinaigrette, in an Oriental manner with a soy or sesame dressing, or with pasta.


A Quiet Disaster of Criminal Justice
LEAD: John Augustus was a Boston shoemaker who liked to visit the criminal court near his shop.
One day in 1841, as a judge was about to jail a drunk, Augustus offered to look after the man if the judge would set him free.
The judge agreed and was much impressed three weeks later when Augustus returned with the offender, sober and reformed.


Ralph Mills, 88, Dies; Led a Bank in Yonkers
LEAD: Ralph J. Mills, a former president and chairman of the Yonkers Savings Bank, died on Sunday at his home in Southbury, Conn.
He was 88 years old.
He died of pneumonia, his son said.
Mr.
Mills went to work at the Yonkers Savings Bank in 1918 as a high school student.
He retired as chairman in 1967.


Mandela to Get New York-Style Greeting
LEAD: Nelson Mandela, who spent the last 27 years in jail, will be greeted today the way New York welcomes its heroes: with one of the biggest security blankets in history, a three-day traffic Gridlock Alert, a panoply of events, a sideshow of internecine squabbles and 150 miles of ticker tape specially imported from


Amoco Spill Ruling Near
LEAD: A judge said on Monday that he would rule that the Amoco Corporation should pay about $160 million in damages for a huge oil spill off northern France in 1978.


Review/Television;   Some Surprises on Disney Channel
LEAD: One of the more admirable aspects of the Disney Channel is its ability to surprise.
The pay-cable service, focused on family entertainment, certainly offers what its subscribers no doubt expect: all those Disney cartoons and feature films along with ''The Mickey Mouse Club'' and innumerable other tie-in productions that make the service a formidable exercise in seamless marketing.


NBC Shows Are Sought For Cable
LEAD: In a move with complicated political implications for the cable and broadcast television industries, Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable operator, has asked NBC to allow it to show the network's programs on cable channels in areas that do not have an NBC affiliate.


Judaism's Alive and Well and Living in America;   Rediscovered Tradition
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soviet Anarchists Try to Disorganize
LEAD: The anarchists are back, with word processors in place of bombs, urging the frazzled Soviet public in these chaotic times to accept no substitute for the real thing.


Babies, Rice Farms and Diplomas
LEAD: Can it be that Japan's alarmingly low birth rate is the Government's fault because it encourages women to get a higher education?
That's what Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto told the Japanese Cabinet last week.
He has since been backing and filling, but there seems little doubt about the original sentiment - the more women in college, the fewer in accouchement.


Hiring Ban Is Shrinking Military's Civilian Force
LEAD: Five months after Defense Secretary Dick Cheney imposed a freeze on hiring, the military's million-member civilian work force is slowly shrinking.


Robert K. Campbell; Utility Executive, 59
LEAD: Robert K. Campbell, chairman and president of the Pennsylvania Power and Light Company, died Saturday at the Lehigh Valley Hospital Center.
He was 59 years old.
The cause of death was not made known.


NCNB Enlarging Mortgage Division
LEAD: The NCNB Corporation plans to purchase a mortgage servicing portfolio that will triple the size of the NCNB Mortgage Corporation, making it one of the 15 largest mortgage companies in the country.


New Menus: Blueprints For Profits
LEAD: IN this era when many restaurants are increasingly scrambling to stay afloat, some are turning to an important new selling device: the menu.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the Republican candidate for Governor of New York, Pierre A. Rinfret, misstated his home address.
He lives on Fifth Avenue, not Park Avenue.


A New India Inquiry Is Weighed in Death Of Axis Ally in '45
LEAD: The Indian Government is considering a new investigation into the disappearance 45 years ago of the country's most enigmatic nationalist hero, Subhas Chandra Bose.


Cincinnati Art Gallery and Director to Stand Trial
LEAD: A judge today ordered a Cincinnati art gallery and its director to stand trial this fall on an obscenity charge stemming from the gallery's exhibition of the works of Robert Mapplethorpe.
The gallery would apparently be the first in the United States to face prosecution for the content of work it displayed.


NICARAGUAN SAYS ARMS STILL FLOW
LEAD: President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro of Nicaragua has expressed concern to Salvadoran and United States officials that shipments of arms continue to pass through her country to the guerrillas in El Salvador, a senior State Department official said.


The War on Apartheid is Far From Over
LEAD: Nelson Mandela is visiting the U.S. to pay tribute to the long and arduous struggle of so many Americans who supported him and to urge all Americans committed to democracy, justice, freedom and equality to continue sanctions against Pretoria.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article by The Associated Press in Business Day yesterday about the Commission on Skills of the American Work Force described its recommendation on job training incompletely.
It recommended that no one under age 18 be allowed to work without earning a ''certificate of initial mastery'' of basic skills or enrolling in a program toward the certificate.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''That's a major-league mistake, like Astroturf and the designated hitter.
The truth is that baseball was born here in Hoboken.''
- Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey,disparaging the idea that the game came from Cooperstown, N.Y. [B4:5.]


Report by Nuclear Official Was Falsified, Inquiry Finds
LEAD: The former chief of staff at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission gave false and contradictory information to Congress, says the commission's inspector general, who has sent a report on the case to the Justice Department for possible criminal prosecution.


A Constitution for Andorra
LEAD: The principality of Andorra has decided to draft its first constitution.
The legislature, the General Council of the Valleys, agreed unanimously Monday night to draft a constitution for the little principality of 50,000 betweeen France and Spain in the Pyrenees Mountains, which is ruled by two co-princes - the President of France and the Roman Catholic Bishop of the Spanish town of Urgel under a 700-year-old agreement.


Protesters at U.S. Consulate In Sydney Assail AIDS Curb
LEAD: Demonstrators protesting American immigration restrictions on people infected with the AIDS virus surged into the United States Consulate today after destroying an American flag and scrawling graffiti on the building.


New Terms for Trump From Big Bank Lenders
LEAD: Donald J. Trump's four leading bank lenders worked out a tentative agreement yesterday to lend the developer $65 million and defer interest and principal payments on about $850 million of the developer's nearly $2 billion of debt, people involved in the talks said.
But the banks must now persuade other lenders to go along, and several hurdles remain to be cleared with Mr.


Lithuanians Plan Poll on Gorbachev Offer
LEAD: Lithuanian parliamentary deputies made plans today for a survey of public opinion in advance of their debate over the proposed moratorium on the Soviet republic's declaration of independence.


Treasuries Fall in Light Trading
LEAD: Treasury security prices inched lower again yesterday, in business so slow that dealers said the decline was virtually meaningless.


2 Killed as Rebellion Resumes in Liberia


Paul Giovanni Is Dead; Director and Writer, 57
LEAD: Paul Giovanni, a director and playwright, died in Cabrini Medical Center on Sunday.
He was 57 years old and had homes in Columbia, S.C., and Manhattan.


Gilford Memorial Service
LEAD: A memorial service for the actor and comedian Jack Gilford is to be held at 1 P.M. tomorrow at the Plymouth Theater, 236 West 45th Street.
Among those scheduled to participate are the actors George C. Scott, Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee, the folksinger Pete Seeger and the songwriters Betty Comden and Adolph Green.


Marcos's Lawyers Won't Call Witnesses for Her
LEAD: Without any ''crescendo'' witness to bring its case to a close, prosecutors rested yesterday in the racketeering trial of Imelda Marcos.
Moments later, Mrs.
Marcos's lawyers told the judge that they did not plan to call a single witness in her defense.


Judaism's Alive and Well and Living in America;   The Nature of Identity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kollmorgen Vote May Be Challenged
LEAD: The Vernitron Corporation said it was considering legal action to challenge an election inspector's ruling in favor of the Kollmorgen Corporation's management.
Vernitron had waged a proxy fight for six board seats at Kollmorgen's annual meeting.
Vernitron, a New York-based maker of electro-mechanical devices, said it had presented a number of significant challenges to votes affecting hundreds of thousands of shares.


Veterans of Franco's Jails Want Spain to Pay
LEAD: Those who took part in resistance movements in Western European countries occupied by Nazi and other fascist forces in World War II were long ago given certificates, medals and pensions by societies grateful for the risks they took in keeping alive the flame of freedom.


49ers Get 3-Hour Hearing
LEAD: Paul Tagliabue, the commissioner of the National Football League, and Carmen Policy, the general counsel of the San Francisco 49ers, met for three hours yesterday in the first phase of a hearing into whether changes in the team's ownership violates league rules.


Judaism's Alive and Well and Living in America;   The Israeli Fallacy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Raymond Huntley, 86, A British Comic Actor
LEAD: Raymond Huntley, an actor who specialized in comedy roles deflating pompous officialdom in a career on the stage, in movies and on television, died on Friday in Westminster Hospital here.
He was 86 years old.


5 Western European Countries To Establish a Common Border
LEAD: France, West Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg agreed today to allow the free movement of people across their borders in a step toward the elimination of all frontiers in the 12-nation European Community by 1993.


WINE TALK
LEAD: NO one disputes the quality of German wines.
The problem seems to be finding an occasion to drink them.
O.K., we've solved it.
Think of them as wines to listen to Wagner by.


Dole Predicts a New Budget Plan
LEAD: Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, said today that the Administration had told him that the White House budget director, Richard G. Darman, would present a negotiating proposal when budget talks resume Wednesday.
Mr.
Dole said he had not seen the proposal, but described it as ''enough to satisfy the Democrats' request.


Alan Schwarz; Professor, 58
LEAD: Alan Schwarz, a retired Rutgers University law professor, died on Friday at his home in Talent, Ore.
He was 58 years old and died of a heart attack, a university spokeswoman said.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
Hammer Label


Democrats Are Assailed In the Savings Scandal
LEAD: The White House began a searing attack against the Democrats today on the savings and loan scandal, hoping to counter Democratic charges that a decade of Republican rule led to the debacle.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.19
8.19
9.41
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.74
7.74
8.16
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.65
7.64
8.08
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.53
8.52
8.36
30-YR.


Bush Son Faced Ban In January
LEAD: In January Federal regulators considered action against Neil Bush, the President's son, that would have banned him from ever again serving as an official of a savings and loan institution or a bank, according to a document released today by the House Banking Committee.


About Education
LEAD: Two political scientists affiliated with the Brookings Institution have proposed a radical plan that would deregulate and, in effect, make the public schools private.
It would encourage private schools to compete for students with public schools in a free market.
It would let parents pick their children's schools, public or private, with the taxpayers footing the bill.


The Dollar Retreats Again While Gold Moves Lower
LEAD: The dollar continued to fall against major foreign currencies yesterday in a market once again dominated by technical factors.
Gold prices slipped lower.


Weather At Open Eased the Challenge
LEAD: Hale Irwin won his third United States Open Monday on the first hole of sudden death after he and Mike Donald had shot two-over-par 74's in their 18-hole playoff.
That was the kind of score the United States Golf Association had thought the leaders would shoot at Medinah's No. 3 course.
But Irwin and Donald had reached the playoff by playing the regulation 72 holes at eight under, and that annoyed the U.S.G


Julia Child Boiling, Answers Her Critics
LEAD: Julia Child was boiling.


Hunt Sale Sets Antiquities Records
LEAD: Antiquities and coins from the collections of Nelson Bunker Hunt and William Herbert Hunt, the former Dallas billionaires, were auctioned last night - some for remarkable prices - at Sotheby's in a record-breaking sale.
It was the first session of a yearlong court-ordered dispersal.


J.A.L. Uniforms
LEAD: Hoping its experience outfitting on-board flight staff will carry over, Japan Air Lines said it was moving into schoolgirls' fashions.
The airline will soon sell a line of school uniforms.
The clothing will be sold through mail-order catalogues, and is aimed at expensive private schools.
The average price for a jacket, skirt and blouse outfit will be about $580, a company spokesman said.


War Is the Word for the Bolivian Drug Fight
LEAD: As dawn broke over the dense Chapare jungle one recent day, American drug agents wearing camouflage uniforms and carrying M-16 rifles lifted off in two helicopters with their Bolivian counterparts for an operation that had many of the characteristics of guerrilla warfare.


Giants' Streak Halted At Nine by Padres, 4-3
LEAD: The San Francisco Giants' nine-game winning streak ended with Roberto Alomar getting three hits and a run batted in as the San Diego Padres won, 4-3, tonight.


Corrections
LEAD: The Books of The Times column on Monday, about ''The Complete Book of Covers From the New Yorker: 1925-1989,'' misidentified an artist in the collection.
He is Arthur Getz, not George Getz.


Olivetti Forms Cellular Venture
LEAD: Ing.
C.
Olivetti &amp; Company, the Italian office machine and computer concern, announced it had formed a consortium to build a second cellular telephone system in Italy.
Olivetti said the venture, called Omnitel-Sistemi Radiocellulari Italiani, would invest at least $1.2 billion if the Italian Ministry of Post and Telecommunications allows a rival to the cellular operations of S.I


Italian Branch Bank Fined For Lapse on Arab Boycott
LEAD: The New York branch of an Italian bank previously accused of making unauthorized loans to Iraq has been fined by the Commerce Department, which said the bank had violated United States anti-boycott laws by furnishing information to Oman and Saudi Arabia about an exporter's business relationships with


Biggest Division a Giant Leap in Math
LEAD: In a mathematical feat that seemed impossible a year ago, a group of several hundred researchers using about 1,000 computers has broken a 155-digit number down into three smaller numbers that cannot be further divided.


Arts Endowment's Fate Is Left Up to Full House
LEAD: A divided House panel that oversees the National Endowment for the Arts sidestepped any action on the Administration's bill extending the life of the arts agency for five years.


I.B.M. Products To Ease Links
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it would offer a series of networking products that meet international standards.
The products are aimed at enhancing communications between I.B.M. computers and those of other manufacturers.


Jamesway Resignation
LEAD: The Jamesway Corporation said today that its president and chief operating officer, Arlie G. Lazarus, will leave the discount department store chain on Aug. 3 to pursue other interests.
The company said its chairman and chief executive, Herbert Fisher would temporarily assume Mr.
Lazarus's positions until a permanent replacement could be found.


President of American Exchange Resigns
LEAD: Kenneth R. Leibler, who played a central role in some of the most rapid growth in the history of the American Stock Exchange, resigned yesterday as president of the exchange.


Mr. Mandela's Moment
LEAD: Put aside Nelson Mandela's problems in South Africa.
Consider only the symbolism of his arrival and welcome today in New York, the first stop on a tour of eight cities in the United States.
Millions will strain for a glimpse of this uncommon ex-prisoner who expresses a common yearning for freedom.


Boeing Continues Production Drive
LEAD: Boeing 737 jets are being produced at a rate of 17 a month, the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group said.
The company, increased production for the small jet from 14 a month earlier this year.


'94 Cup Play: Indoor Debuts?
LEAD: In 1994, games of the World Cup finals may be played indoors for the first time.


Roy Nutt Dies at 59; Helped to Develop Computer Language
LEAD: Roy Nutt, a pioneer in the computer software industry who was a developer of the computer language Fortran, died Thursday at his home in Seattle.
He was 59 years old.


Soviet Troops Kill an Inmate During Riot in Ukrainian Jail
LEAD: Soviet troops sent into a prison to quell mass rioting opened fire on escaping inmates, killing one and wounding another, the official press agency Tass said today.


Judaism's Alive and Well and Living in America
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Bad Boy of Dance Scampers Off to Brooklyn
LEAD: Astonishingly big goblets of the house beer at the Brasserie Lipp are called serieux, and Mark Morris has knocked back two of them while reflecting on his new ballet for the Paris Opera company.
Ahead of him was a summer's tour in Brooklyn and Boston and at Jacob's Pillow in Becket, Mass., but his mind was still on the recent


Free Performance Series in Central Park
LEAD: Dancing, music, poetry and storytelling will be part of the fifth Summerstage series of free performances in Central Park, beginning June 27 at 8:30 P.M. in Rumsey Playground, at 72d Street east of the Band Shell.


Roy K. McDonald, 88, Chattanooga Publisher
LEAD: Roy Ketner McDonald, publisher of The Chattanooga News-Free Press, died in his sleep yesterday at his home in Lookout Mountain, Tenn.
He was 88 years old.


Florio's Budget Passes, but Tax Fight Continues
LEAD: The State Legislature narrowly approved Gov.
Jim Florio's $12.4 billion budget early this morning, but faced at least two more days of struggling over the Governor's plans to raise income taxes, offer some property tax relief and shift money from wealthier to poorer school districts.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:
No-Fat Cheese


Implanted Device Could Benefit Parkinson's Patients
LEAD: A Massachusetts company is developing a tiny electronic component that can be implanted in the body to release small amounts of drugs or other biologically active materials in response to a pulse of electrical current.


If Communism Is Waning, Asia Defies the Trend
LEAD: About the same time that Mikhail S. Gorbachev was ending his visit to the United States and voters in several Eastern European countries were heading into multiparty elections, the Communist Party of India was issuing a statement that began, ''The U.S. imperialists have intensified their aggression against Cuba.


New President of Nike Plans to Turn Up Burner
LEAD: With 11 children, Richard K. Donahue has a demanding audience, but his recent appointment as president and chief operating officer of Nike Inc. appears to be a crowning achievement.


Patriots Release Sims
LEAD: Kenneth Sims, who was the first pick in the 1982 National Football League draft, was released yesterday by the New England Patriots, who said he failed to stay in proper physical shape.
The move came 16 days after Sims was arrested and charged with possession of cocaine in Austin, Tex.


Woman, 61, Ordered to Trial In the Murder of 9 Tenants
LEAD: A 61-year-old woman was ordered today to stand trial on charges of murdering nine tenants in order to get their pension and disability benefits.


When It Comes to Takeout, Restaurateurs Scorn Their Own
LEAD: STANDING in the checkout line at the supermarket a couple of weeks ago I was shocked to see Dick Swanson buying little plastic containers of prepared salads, sandwich bread, frozen tofu and a potato.


Sharpton's Arrest Plan Is Stymied by a Judge
LEAD: The Rev.
Al Sharpton had planned to have himself jailed today, moments after Nelson Mandela arrived in New York City.
But Mr.
Sharpton's plans were stymied yesterday when the judge at his fraud trial in Manhattan told him she had arranged for his continued freedom.


Citicorp Rates Up at Auction
LEAD: Interest rates were up narrowly yesterday at Citicorp's regular weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.
It marked the third consecutive week that rates have risen.


INSIDE
LEAD:
In Israel, Rabin's Star Rises
Yitzhak Rabin is gaining support in his challenge to Shimon Peres as leader of the Israeli Labor Party.


Walter Bieringer, 90; Helped War Refugees
LEAD: Walter H. Bieringer, who as president of the United Service for New Americans in the 1950's helped resettle European Jews in the United States, died Monday at his home in Boston.
He was 90 years old.


Princeton Student's Brainstorm: A Peace Corps to Train Teachers
LEAD: It was at yet another conference bemoaning the state of American education that 21-year-old Wendy Kopp, bored and restless, decided that one solution was right in front of her.


Nathan Horwitt, 92; His Designs Included The Movado Watch
LEAD: Nathan George Horwitt, an independent industrial designer whose Movado watch is part of the permanent collection of the Museum of Modern Art, died last Wednesday at his home in Stockbridge, Mass.
He was 92 years old.


Chief Judge of New York Urges Less Secrecy in Civil Settlements
LEAD: New York's highest ranking judge is pressing the court system he heads to give the public greater access to the records of civil court settlements where there is evidence of danger from consumer products, environmental contamination or other hazards.


Rinfret Defends His Education And Experience
LEAD: Seeking to refute a report in The New York Times that he has exaggerated his educational and political experience, Pierre A. Rinfret, the Republican gubernatorial nominee, today released copies of his academic degrees and a statement of praise from former President Richard M. Nixon.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD:
Dear Diary:


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Economy


Bridge
LEAD: The most imaginative player on the international bridge scene is surely Zia Mahmood, the cosmopolitan Pakistani star who spends most of his time in New York City these days.
He has been the driving force behind a Pakistani team that has twice come very close to winning world titles, and hopes to do even better.


Judaism's Alive and Well and Living in America;   Orthodox Revival
LEAD: To the Editor:


To Hoboken, Baseball Began Here
LEAD: If proclamations passed by the Legislature and signed by the Governor are worth the paper they're printed on, then Hoboken is the birthplace of baseball.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-11
Some European borders will open.
France, West Germany and three other nations agreed to allow the free movement of people across their borders in a step toward the elimination of all frontiers in the 12-nation European Community by 1993.
Page A1


Global Credit Certificates Are Priced to Yield 9.271%
LEAD: A $1 billion offering of certificates backed by credit card receivables was priced yesterday through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Sasquatch Feet, Maybe?
LEAD: This is the fog season in Nantucket, so the other evening we were all sitting on the porch down at Joy's place between the pond and the Atlantic Ocean admiring the fog when Rust observed that Carl Sandburg had been wrong about fog.


Fed Up, L.I.'s Young Are Thinking Florida
LEAD: Like many young couples on Long Island, Kenneth and Sharon Jaeger both work, he during the day and she at night.
Whoever is home looks after the baby.


Benjamin Alk; Underwriter, 98
LEAD: Benjamin Alk, a life-insurance underwriter and real-estate investor, died on Friday at the Courtland Gardens Health Center in Stamford, Conn.
He was 98 years old and had lived for many years in Manhattan and Norwalk, Conn.


Immigration Laws Protested On Eve of AIDS Conference
LEAD: On the eve of the Sixth International AIDS Conference here, about 500 demonstrators tonight protested Federal immigration laws that bar infected people from entering the United States or qualifying for permanent residency here.


It's Trendy. It's Hot. It's Cool. It's Salsa.
LEAD: Tex-Mex cooks who turn out enchiladas, refried beans and combination plates are probably wondering what happened to the familiar bowl of salsa on its way to trend-setting status.


Americans Abroad: Sad Ending
LEAD: The earnest venture of the United States into the big, bad World Cup of soccer always conjured up memories of that charming film ''Breaking Away.''


Somalis Say 40 Are Arrested For Criticizing Government
LEAD: Somali authorities have arrested more than 40 people for distributing what the Mogadishu Government says are seditious pamphlets criticizing President Mohammed Siad Barre's rule.


3 Killed and 7 Hurt As Christian Rivals Resume Beirut Strife
LEAD: An outbreak of fighting between Christian factions in East Beirut killed three people today and wounded seven others, the police said, and clashes were reported between Muslim guerrillas and Israeli-backed Christian militiamen in southern Lebanon.


Barbara Cason; Actress, 61
LEAD: Barbara Cason, an actress in theater and television, died Monday in her home in the Hollywood Hills area of Los Angeles.
She was 61 years old.


Dinkins Has Chance to Make Property Taxes Fair. Here's How
LEAD: To the Editor:


Italians Continue to Coast By Beating Czechs, 2-0
LEAD: Italy received goals from its two newest starters, Salvatore Schillaci and Roberto Baggio, to beat Czechoslovakia, 2-0, tonight and finish atop Group A in the World Cup soccer finals.


Currents;   Retro Phones and More
LEAD: THEY look as though they've leaped out of ''Dick Tracy,'' but in fact, they've come by way of Hong Kong.
The latest entries in retro-mania are telephones, clocks and boom boxes from Cicena.
The ''Overdrive'' boom box, due out in the United States later this year, has a red and white dashboard dial and a steering wheel handle.


Cuomo Turns Down Request To Extradite Cable Officials
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo denied a request today from the Governor of Alabama that he extradite four executives of a New York company to face charges of transmitting sex films by satellite.


Evolution in Europe;   At Romanian Inauguration, Promises and Doubts
LEAD: Ion Iliescu was inaugurated President today, ending six months of provisional rule that began with the violent overthrow of President Nicolae Ceausescu last December.


Trims at Philips
LEAD: Philips N.V., the Dutch electronics company, said it would cut 210 jobs this year of a total of 700 at its Dutch computer division based in Apeldoorn.
The company said it would cut costs at the division to make it profitable again. ''The company will make strategical choices about the product range and reduce costs drastically,'' Philips said in a statement.


First Thompson Ad For Wall St. Journal
LEAD: In its first advertising campaign from the J. Walter Thompson Company, The Wall Street Journal will try to assure media planners that it is not a stuffy business newpaper read only by the gray old men of high finance.


Why So Defensive at Defense?
LEAD: Defense Secretary Cheney has finally given Congress what it long sought, his idea of the size and shape of the armed forces over the next five years.
That's laudable.
But the 25 percent cut in forces he envisions would save only 10 percent in spending over five years, about the amount President Bush originally proposed in January.


Ohio Flood Toll Rises; More Rain Expected
LEAD: A body was discovered in the Ohio River about two miles south of this eastern Ohio village today, bringing to 22 the death toll from the flash flood that devastated the town last week.


Newsweek-ABC
LEAD: Newsweek and ABC Radio Networks said they would offer advertisers cross-media promotion programs.


Harris Bankcorp Will Lay Off 320
LEAD: Harris Bankcorp, Illinois's third-largest bank, said it would discharge 320 employees and take a $16 million pretax charge in the second quarter.
The job reductions, cutting 8 percent of the bank's work force, ''took place at all levels of the organization and at all departments,'' a Harris spokeswoman said.


The P.L.O.: From Birth Amid Mideast Strife to Suspended U.S. Talks
LEAD: 1964 The Palestine Liberation Organi-zation is formed.


Ortega Says Castro Is Offering Health Aid
LEAD: Former President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua said today that President Fidel Castro was ready to continue giving aid to Nicaragua with a special emphasis on health.


SAFETY IS AN ISSUE AT ATOMIC PLANT
LEAD: Government memorandums show that top officials of the Federal Energy Department are still giving production of nuclear weapons a higher priority than safety, an influential Congressman says.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: KAZIMIERZ DZIEWANOWSKI (pronounced KAZ-mee-ush JAH-va-now-skee), a Polish dissident journalist, has been named Ambassador to the United States, replacing JAN KINAST.
In 1981, Mr.
Dziewanowski became deputy editor of the Solidarity union's newspaper, Tygodnik Solidarnosc.
The author of more than a dozen books, Mr.


Judge Refuses to Order Silence in Art Case
LEAD: A Federal judge today rejected a plea by the family holding the Quedlinburg art treasures to order all parties in the suit over the ownership of the artworks to refrain from discussing the case in public.


Two Chinese Protesters Tell Of Detention on Anniversary
LEAD: Two Chinese dissidents who disappeared last month before a planned appeal to free political prisoners said today that they were held by the police to prevent unrest on the anniversary of last year's army crackdown.


Authorities Release Profile of Gunman Haunted by Zodiac
LEAD: The gunman who the police believe has shot three people since March 8 and is obsessed with the 12 signs of the zodiac is a loner with a limited education who may be acting out of a desire for attention, authorities theorized yesterday.


Ralph Neuhaus, Rabbi, 81
LEAD: Ralph Neuhaus, the rabbi of Congregation Ohav Sholaum in the Inwood section of Manhattan, died on Tuesday at Presbyterian Hospital.
He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Review/Music;   Master of 40's and 50's Jazz
LEAD: In the 1940's, when swing was giving way to be-bop, the pianist Sir Charles Thompson epitomized the change of style as he drew on both the spare, swinging manner of Count Basie and the new ideas of be-bop.
He was considered ''the house pianist of 52d Street'' when Lester Young, one of many jazz stars he worked with, dubbed him ''Sir Charles.


Government Securities Unit Closed by Westpac Banking
LEAD: In the latest sign of financial troubles in the Government securities business, Westpac Pollock Government Securities Inc., a primary dealer in Treasury securities since late 1986 and one of the 10 largest in terms of trading volume, ceased operations yesterday.


British Hope for Talks on Ulster Rule
LEAD: The British Government is expected to announce in early July that the political parties in Northern Ireland have agreed to negotiations intended to return a large degree of self-rule to the strife-torn province, British officials said today.


Albany Pact Resolves Fight Over Welfare
LEAD: After a yearlong delay that cost New York State millions of dollars in Federal aid, legislative negotiators reached a compromise on welfare reform today aimed at expanding educational opportunities and job training for mothers.


Westchester Spotlight On Irwin and Donald
LEAD: A change in the calendar has kept several top players away, but the Buick Classic has the two names that are the talk of the golfing world.


George F. Addes, 79; Helped Found U.A.W.
LEAD: George F. Addes, a founder of the United Automobile Workers union and its secretary-treasurer from 1936 until 1947, died on Tuesday at Bon Secours Hospital in Grosse Pointe, Mich.
He was 79 years old and lived in St.
Clair Shores, Mich.


Trump Shuttle To Cut Flights
LEAD: Starting July 1, the Trump shuttle will cancel six of its hourly flights on weekends because they do not generate the traffic that would cover the cost of operating them, Bruce Nobles, the head of the Trump shuttle, said yesterday.
He said that on Saturdays the


A Conference Call Transmits Noise of
LEAD: PLACE: A dozen or so apartments around town.


Peru Drug Fund Used in War, Aide Says
LEAD: The State Department's chief narcotics specialist acknowledged to Congress today that millions of dollars in American drug-control aid to Peru would be used in part to fight leftist guerrilla groups that are said to protect coca growers and traffickers.


Review/Film;   Sex in Fact and Fiction on a Twin Bill
LEAD: Stuart Marshall's feature-length documentary, ''Desire: Sexuality in Germany 1910-1945,'' leaves a lot of material unexplored, but it is still a fascinating introduction to a huge subject.


Excerpts From President's News Conference on the P.L.O. and Other Issues
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference in Huntsville, Ala., yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times through the Cable News Network:
OPENING STATEMENT


Corrections
LEAD: A diagram in Science Times on Tuesday with an article about diabetes referred incorrectly in some copies to the interaction between two substances - antigens and antibodies - as part of the body's immune reaction.
Antibodies form in the presence of antigens, not the reverse.


Clorox Buying Brands Of Cyanamid Division
LEAD: The American Cyanamid Company, one of the nation's largest chemical and pharmaceutical conglomerates, said yesterday that it had agreed to sell a large part of the Shulton Group, its faltering consumer-products division, to the Clorox Company for $465 million.


Newtown Creek Plant Doesn't Serve Downtown Brooklyn Area
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:
3d World Arms Sales Down
A report that arms sales to the third world declined 24 percent in 1989 suggested that cooling regional conflicts and heavy third-world debt were major causes.
Page A10.
Changes to Hatch Act Gain
The House voted to override President Bush's veto of a bill that would loosen restrictions on Federal employees' political activities.


Facts on File No Longer for Sale
LEAD: Commerce Clearing House Inc. said yesterday that it had taken its Facts on File subsidiary off the auction block because bids for the New York-based book publishing house ''were not at an acceptable level.''


Israel Halts U.S. Radio Relay To Study Negev Environment
LEAD: Israel has decided to suspend work on a Voice of America radio relay station in the Negev for two years to allow completion of an environmental study, causing the United States to express disappointment in a statement today.


AIDS Conference Is Told Danger Of Disease Is Spreading in U.S.
LEAD: Looking ahead at the second decade of the AIDS epidemic, the National Academy of Sciences's research arm concludes that the disease is not leveling off as some have said, but is moving to new groups in society.


Fed Report Sees Growth As Sluggish
LEAD: The economy is continuing to grow sluggishly, although the construction sector appears to be weakening, the Federal Reserve said today in releasing results of a survey of its 12 district banks.


Public TV Is Seeking To Centralize Programs
LEAD: Public television, historically a dense tangle of competing bureaucracies, unveiled a sleek look for the 1990's during a meeting of station and programming executives this week in Dallas.


FRAUD UNCOVERED IN PROPERTY SALES IN SAVINGS RESCUE
LEAD: The Federal rescue program to sell billions of dollars worth of property seized from failed savings and loans is just beginning, but Government auditors have already detected evidence of misconduct.


Administration Is Criticized
LEAD: The Bush Administration's efforts to prosecute savings and loan fraud have resulted in the recovery of less than 2 percent of the money lost in the ''worst financial scandal in U.S. history,'' a consumer group charged today.
Public Citizen's Congress


3 Killed as Train Hits Truck
LEAD: A freight train ran into a tractor-trailer carrying alcohol on Tuesday, causing an explosion that killed three members of the train's crew.
Peggy Young, a dispatcher for the Police Department in Brownsville, 60 miles northeast of Memphis, said the caution lights had not been working properly at the crossing where the collision occurred.


No More Singles Events For Mandlikova
LEAD: After 13 years, $3 million and four Grand Slam titles, Hana Mandlikova is calling it quits for her singles career after Wimbledon.


John Williamson, 85, Interior Designer, Dies
LEAD: John Markay Williamson, an interior designer, died on Sunday at a convalescent home in Palm Desert, Calif.
He was 85 years old.


The Mandela Visit;   Mandela's Visit: Today's Schedule
LEAD:
8 A.M.: Mr. Mandela speaks at a service at Riverside Church.
10 A.M. to 6:45 P.M.: No public events scheduled.
6:45 P.M.: Rally outside the Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
State Office Building, 163 West 125th Street and Powell Boulevard.
7:00 P.M.: Rally begins at Yankee Stadium. Mr. Mandela is to speak at about 9 P.M.


The Mandela Visit: Reporter's Notebook;   Pride and Confusion Mix in a Talk on Education
LEAD: By the time Nelson R. Mandela arrived in the city, New Yorkers had already turned him into an instant American celebrity, a civil rights leader they could call their own.


McDonnell Douglas Plans Wide Layoffs and Cost Cuts
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation, facing continuing losses from its commercial aircraft business, cost overruns on its military planes and declining Pentagon budgets, said yesterday that it was planning extensive layoffs as part of a sweeping cost-cutting effort.


Currents;   Miniature Furniture On Display
LEAD: IT all started while playing canasta, William P. Yankauer recalls.
He looked at a canasta divider and said to his wife, ''I can do that.''


The Keys to Success for the Saltwater Fly Fisherman
LEAD: Saltwater fly fishermen have been appearing in greater numbers in the Northeast during the past decade.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Stains on a Hearth


In Abrupt Reversal, U.S. Offers to Free Some Noriega Assets
LEAD: After nearly two months of legal bickering, the United States Government abruptly reversed itself today by offering to release some frozen bank accounts belonging to Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega to permit the deposed Panamanian leader to pay for his defense against drug-dealing charges.


How to Restore a Victorian Mansion: Slowly, Very Slowly
LEAD: MICHAEL HALBERIAN scoffs when he hears complaints from people who are restoring brownstones. ''They've got it so easy, they don't know,'' he said. ''They should tackle my house; my house is murder.''


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about Nelson Mandela's visit to New York City misstated the ticket price for a fund-raising event he is scheduled to attend tomorrow evening.
Tickets for a cocktail party at the home of the film executive Arthur Krim are $2,500.


President's Post Added At Kemper Securities
LEAD: Thomas E. Meade was named yesterday to the newly created position of president and chief operating officer of the Kemper Securities Group.
In his new position, Mr.
Meade will oversee the activities of the Kemper Corporation's group of regional brokerage firms.


Cray Plans to Buy Computer Maker
LEAD: Cray Research Inc., the maker of supercomputers, said it had signed an agreement to purchase Supertek Computers Inc. of Santa Clara, Calif., for $32.5 million in cash.
Supertek designs and manufactures a Cray-compatible mini-supercomputer system.
Cray said the acquisition completed its previously announced plan to enter the mini-supercomputer market.


N.F.L. Apparently Ready To Limit Rookie Camps
LEAD: The National Football League, faced with criticism from some college coaches because of rookie minicamps that keep drafted players out of school, is apparently ready to limit the length of these special sessions.


Looking for Moviegoers In a Magazine
LEAD: TO hear some Hollywood studio executives tell it, moviegoers absolutely loathe watching commercials before the main attraction.


Bass Group Holds 5.3% of Healthco
LEAD: A group of investors, including members of the Bass family of Fort Worth, has acquired a 5.3 percent stake in Healthco International Inc., a Boston-based distributor of dental equipment.
The group said in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing that it supported efforts by the company's management to maximize shareholder value.


The Mandela visit;   Mostly Favorable Ratings
LEAD: A majority of New Yorkers have a favorable opinion of Nelson R. Mandela, but he is much more popular among blacks than among whites, according to a New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.


Sidney Blumenthal, Cardiology Professor Who Was Dean, 80
LEAD: Dr.
Sidney Blumenthal, an educator, a pediatric cardiologist and a former director at the National Institutes of Health, died on Tuesday at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Ina Balin, 52, Dies; Actress Adopted Vietnamese Girls
LEAD: Ina Balin, a film and stage actress whose adoption of three Vietnamese orphans was dramatized in a 1980 television movie in which she played herself, died yesterday at the Yale-New Haven Hospital.
She was 52 years old and lived in Westport, Conn.


Metro Matters;   Hailing Mandela Can Be Easier Than Hailing Cab
LEAD: During the nine years that he has lived in New York, Victor Mashabela has grown accustomed to the vicissitudes of getting a taxicab in Manhattan. ''It's a problem,'' he said.
First, Mr.
Mashabela figured some cabbies were simply reluctant to go as far as the Bronx, where he lives, from the office building in which he works on Second Avenue in midtown.


Buffalo Works Hard for a National League Team
LEAD: The National League will add two teams in 1993.
Why it will take another three years to expand when Peter Ueberroth issued criteria for potential franchises in 1985 isn't clear.
Maybe it will take the league that long to find enough talent to stock the new teams.
General managers have been looking for talent, especially pitching talent, for this season and can't find much.


Bridge
LEAD: A world champion recently made the most expensive blunder in the history of tournament play.
It cost him nothing, except embarrassment, and he showed that he is of world class as a person as well as a player by making a public apology to a large audience.


Rent Hearing, Scene 1: Enter Kangaroos
LEAD: Mayors come and go.
The business cycle waxes and wanes.
Fortunes are won and lost in real estate.
Among the few constants in the ever-shifting panorama of New York City is the spring skirmish between landlords and tenants over whether rents should rise and, if so, by how much.


Stephen Spurr, 72; Ecologist Who Led University of Texas
LEAD: Stephen H. Spurr, a noted forest ecologist who was president of the University of Texas in the early 1970's, died yesterday at Seton Hospital in Austin.
He was 72 years old and lived in Austin.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: PRINCE EDWARD, the Queen Mother's grandson, has quit his job as a production assistant with ANDREW LLOYD WEBBER'S Really Useful Group to become a theatrical impresario with five colleagues from the theater organization.


Passed Ball Helps Expos Set Back the Cubs by 3-2
LEAD: Wallace Johnson's pinch-hit single in the seventh inning - coming after a passed ball kept the inning alive - highlighted a rally as Montreal scored three unearned runs against Greg Maddux and went on to a 3-2 victory over the Cubs tonight.


Don't Destroy the Hatch Act
LEAD: President Bush was right to veto legislation easing Hatch Act restrictions on political activity by Federal employees.
Now that the House has overridden his veto, a showdown looms in the Senate.
The Senate would be well advised to uphold the veto and then consider a more modest revision of the act, preserving its valid protections against political abuse.


Both Parties Fault U.S. on Competitiveness
LEAD: Trying to tap an issue that could figure in campaigns this fall, Democratic and Republican lawmakers today criticized the Bush Administration's policies on economic competitiveness.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Chiquita Brands International to W. B. Doner &amp; Company, for its blended fruit juices.


Florio's Tax-Increase Plan Is Passed by Senate, 21-17
LEAD: The State Senate today granted Gov.
Jim Florio's request for $2.8 billion in new taxes, passing bills by slim margins that will double the state's top income tax rate, raise the sales tax to 7 percent from 6 percent and impose a host of other tax increases.
The Assembly had passed the measures in earlier sessions.


Witness Says He and Barry Plotted Lie for Police
LEAD: Charles Lewis, the prosecution's chief witness in the drug trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr., testified today that he and Mr.
Barry had conspired to lie to the police about smoking crack together.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Brawny in the Gallery
LEAD: The art gallery has become a popular place to set commercials.
On the heels of a Clio-winning Honda Accord ad from Rubin Postaer &amp; Associates come the latest ads for Brawny paper towels from Scali, McCabe, Sloves.
A gaggle of high-brow art lovers admire the latest prints from Brawny's macho woodsman.


Home Improvement
LEAD: EFFICIENT water use can save money on utility bills and make a valuable contribution to the environment.
Without changing their habits, people who install water-saving devices can cut down their indoor water use by more than a third.


St. Clair Drake, Pioneer in Study Of Black Americans, Dies at 79
LEAD: St.
Clair Drake, a pioneer in black studies who was the first permanent director of Stanford University's African and Afro-American studies, died Friday at his home in Palo Alto, Calif.
His death, at age 79, resulted from a heart attack, a family spokesman said.


BILL ON SEX CRIME ASSESSED IN SENATE
LEAD: Seeking to combat what legal experts say is a rising wave of violence against women, the Senate Judiciary Committee opened hearings today on legislation that calls for tougher penalties for sex crimes and designates sexual assault a violation of Federal civil rights laws.


A Witness Tells Of a Confession In Police Deaths
LEAD: A former girlfriend of a man charged with murdering two New York City police detectives on a Queens highway testified yesterday that he ran up to her near her Brooklyn home an hour and a half after the shootings and insisted on quickly going inside, where he confessed to the killings.


House of 2 Faces: Prim and Romantic
LEAD: Perfection it was not.


Safety Lapses Seen in Derailment and Blast
LEAD: Federal safety investigators blamed a railroad and a pipeline company on Tuesday for inadequate procedures in a derailment and a subsequent pipeline explosion that killed six people in San Bernardino, Calif., a year ago.


Eastern to Seek Escrow Funds
LEAD: Martin R. Shugrue, the trustee appointed by the bankruptcy court to run Eastern Airlines, said yesterday that he would ask the unsecured creditors and the court to approve the withdrawal from escrow of $50 million for lease payments due in July on many of its planes.


Calendar: Antiques And Plants
LEAD: In the Statue's Shadow, Train Terminal at Liberty State Park, exit 14B of the New Jersey Turnpike, Jersey City; 201-768-2773.


New Oil Chief For Kuwait
LEAD: Kuwait's oil minister, Sheik Ali Khalifa al-Sabah, was given a new job as finance minister and replaced by a chemical engineer little known in the international oil market, the official Kuwaiti News Agency reported today.


2 Added to Hall of Fame
LEAD: William (Buddy) Gilmour and Clint Galbraith, two celebrated and successful Canadian-born driver-trainers, will be inducted into harness racing's Hall of Fame of the Trotter in Goshen, N.Y., on July 1.
They were named on more than 86 percent of the ballots in voting by the United States Harness Writers Association.


Another Inquiry in Albany Brings Sadness and Anger
LEAD: Scandal has never been a stranger to the New York State Legislature.
Over the last year alone, two state senators have been expelled from office because of felony convictions, and two senators - one of them the Senate minority leader - are currently under indictment.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
The savings bailout effort has a high potential for fraud and abuse, Government officials and real estate experts say.
The problem is expected to worsen as the Government moves quickly to expand sales of properties acquired from failed institutions. [Page A1.]  If Republicans and Democrats move to a full-scale battle over who is to blame for the savings crisis, the outcome may be decided by how far back the public can remember.


Currents;   Buatta's New Honeysuckle Fragrance
LEAD: WHAT with fabrics, wallpaper, furniture, bed linens, needlepoint and carpets, it seemed only a matter of time before Mario Buatta, decorator and licenser extraordinaire, concocted the Smell of Honeysuckle, his new home fragrance with the Buatta label.


BUSH CALLS OFF U.S.-P.L.O. TALKS, CITING ARAB RAID
LEAD: President Bush announced today that he was suspending the 18-month United States discussions with the Palestine Liberation Organization because of the P.L.O.'s failure to condemn a foiled Palestinian terrorist attack against Israel and to discipline those responsible.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-15


2 Die in Sewage Plant Blast
LEAD: An explosion killed two workers at a sewage treatment plant in this Cleveland suburb today.
While the authorities investigated, a lawyer for the Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer District, which operates the plant, said the blast might have been caused by a gas leak.
The lawyer, William Schatz, estimated damage to the plant at $1 million.


Krickstein May Sit Out
LEAD: The sore right arm that bothered Aaron Krickstein at the recent French Open championships will apparently keep the eighth-seeded American from competing at Wimbledon.
Krickstein was forced to default his first-round match on Tuesday at the Open at Manchester, England.
He was top-seeded at Manchester and was seeded eighth for


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Aetna Life and Casualty Co., Hartford, announced the resignation of Philip R. Roberts, its senior vice president for investments.


Ex-Holders Of Shell Oil Win Case
LEAD: The Delaware Chancery Court has ruled that 20,000 former shareholders of the Shell Oil Company were shortchanged in 1985 when the Royal Dutch/Shell Group acquired the portion of Shell Oil it did not already own for $5.5 billion.


Ralph McElvenny, 83, Utility Executive, Dies
LEAD: Ralph T. McElvenny Sr., a retired utility executive and a leader in the renaissance of Detroit, died on Monday at the Henry Ford Hospital there.
He was 83 years old and lived in Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich.


Washington Talk;   A Cost-Benefit Blend That's Hard to Swallow
LEAD: To most people, the fine details of the Federal regulatory process are about as appetizing as a tour of a bologna factory.
And those who disregard Bismarck's advice to remain ignorant of the manufacture of sausages and laws often discover that regulators have liberally peppered their products.


When Do Savings and Loan Crooks Go to Jail?
LEAD: To the Editor:


A High Death Toll Is Feared In Earthquake in North Iran
LEAD: An earthquake measuring 7.7 on the Richter scale rocked northern Iran early today and the Iranian press agency reported widespread destruction.
It said high casualties were feared and that people were being pulled from collapsed buildings.


Rent Increase Proposals Draw Fire From Both Sides


Surgeons' AIDS Risk Tallied
LEAD: Researchers who studied surgical procedures at San Francisco General Hospital say that on average, one surgeon or operating room nurse every eight years will be infected with the AIDS virus on the job there.


House Unit Votes Curb On Insurers
LEAD: The House Judiciary Committee approved legislation today that would strip insurance companies of most of their exemptions from antitrust law.


McGraw-Hill Inc.
LEAD: McGraw-Hill Inc. is offering $250 million in notes due in 2000 through Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
Underwriters said the 9.43 percent notes were priced at par to yield about 90 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.
The issue was rated A-1 by Moody's but was not rated by S.&amp; P., which is a unit of McGraw-Hill.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, an obituary on Tuesday about Sadye Brenner Busch, a member of the family that owned what became the Loews Hotels chain, omitted information on survivors in some copies.
Her first husband, Al Tisch, died in 1960.
In 1969 Mrs. Tisch married S. Harry


Evolution in Europe;   For Berlin's Envoys, a Farewell to Diplomacy
LEAD: One year ago, Joachim and Irmelin Mlensky were eagerly anticipating their annual summer trip home to a three-room apartment in East Berlin.


Review/Theater;   A Nostalgic Monologue, Both Comic and Barbed
LEAD: In ''Florida Girls,'' Nancy Hasty's autobiographical memory play set in Crestview, Fla., in 1965, Ms.
Hasty, a big-boned, deep-voiced actress, portrays all eight members of the Van Helms family, a blue-collar clan that includes five sisters and their loony, Bible-toting grandmother.


Outlook Hazy on Bringing U.S. Success in Soccer
LEAD: If the events of the past two weeks were easy to forecast, the future is less so.
Little was expected of the United States national soccer team in the World Cup finals, and little was achieved.
The players began dispersing today after a third consecutive defeat on Tuesday night eliminated any chance they had to advance in the tournament.


Child's Unprovoked Seizure Is Probably Not Epilepsy
LEAD: Contrary to widespread belief, most children who have an unprovoked seizure do not have epilepsy and do not need treatment with anti-convulsant drugs, researchers say.


Outdoor Soccer Deserves a Chance in New York
LEAD: To the Editor:


Judge Dismisses 2 Minor Charges In Racial Killing
LEAD: A judge yesterday dropped two lesser charges against the third young man on trial in the Bensonhurst racial attack, John Vento.


Currents;   U.S. Crafts: Quirkiness In a Guide
LEAD: THOSE who worry that America is being subsumed with sameness would do well to look at Suzanne Carmichael's new two-volume ''Travelers Guide to American Crafts'' (E. P. Dutton, $14.95).
It is a celebration of quirkiness.


Don't Be Limited by 'Tyranny of Flowers'
LEAD: IT IS one of the first lessons gardeners learn, and if we ever unlearn it, it is usually not until late in our careers.
I call it the tyranny of flowers.
This doctrine holds that no plant has much esthetic value except when it is in bloom.
Corollaries are that the more briefly a plant blooms, the less consideration it deserves, and that the longer it blooms, the better it is.


Oil Slick Still Stalled in Gulf
LEAD: A 30-mile oil slick from the crippled tanker Mega Borg remained off the Texas coast today as volunteers kept their vigil to scoop up tar balls if they wash ashore.
The slick, about 10 miles from marsh and wildlife areas along the shore, is the residue of 3.9 million gallons of light crude oil that spilled into the Gulf of Mexico after an explosion and fire aboard the tanker on June 8.


The Mandela Visit;   Mandela Gets an Emotional New York City Welcome
LEAD: Nelson Mandela, the living symbol of resistance to South African apartheid, swept tired but triumphant yesterday into an emotional New York welcome.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Navratilova Gains Quarterfinals
Martina Navratilova needed just 59 minutes to ease into the quarterfinals of the women's grass-court tournament at Eastbourne, England, yesterday with a 6-3, 6-2 victory over Samantha Smith of Britain.


Market Place;   Rate Shifts Called Peril for Insurers
LEAD: AMID the growing fears about the effect of lower ''junk bond'' prices on the health of insurance companies, a new concern has emerged: that insurers could suffer big losses if interest rates rose or fell precipitously.


Review/Art;   With 1,500 Works, Italy Portrays A Region's Culture in the 1700's
LEAD: In this gracious city, about an hour's drive west of Venice, the art of the 18th century is everywhere to be seen at the moment. ''The Tiepolos and the Settecento in Vicenza,'' which opened on May 23 at two settings here and at sites in the nearby towns of Montecchio Maggiore and Bassano del Grappa, is a grand, rambling reconstruction of the eclectic and refined culture of this region during the 18th century, which Italians call the Settecento.


When Do Savings and Loan Crooks Go to Jail?;   Stop Kicking Chrysler
LEAD: To the Editor:


Talking Deals;   One Bank's Way Of Raising Capital
LEAD: BANKERS who need to raise capital are facing a predicament that might be familiar to many of their borrowers - the greater the need for cash, the harder it is to raise at a reasonable price.


OPEC Talks on Output
LEAD: The president of OPEC, Sadek Boussena, is expected to visit Saudi Arabia on Sunday for consultations on overproduction by the group amid fears of an oil price crash, Government sources said today.
The sources, who spoke on condition they not be identified, said Mr.
Boussena would make the Saudi trip as part of a tour of OPEC states to seek to stabilize oil prices.


White House Urges $51 Billion Cut in Deficit
LEAD: The Bush Administration sought today to initiate serious bargaining with Congressional negotiators on how to cut the 1991 Federal budget deficit, proposing a plan aimed at reducing it by $51 billion.


C. P. Farnsley, 83, A Colorful Fixture In Kentucky Politics
LEAD: Charles P. Farnsley, a colorful fixture of Kentucky politics for many years and a former Mayor of Louisville, died in a Louisville nursing home on Tuesday at the age of 83.


Wesley L. Bailey, Executive, 80
LEAD: Wesley Lefferts Bailey, a retired magazine executive, died June 13 in Tampa, Fla.
He was 80 years old and had moved to Tampa last year from Sea Cliff, L.I.


Rolling Stone's Publisher To Start a Men's Magazine
LEAD: Yet another general-interest men's magazine is on the drawing board.
Straight Arrow Publishers Inc., the publisher of Rolling Stone, announced yesterday that it would introduce the new men's magazine in the fall of 1991.


New Species of Monkey Is Found In Populated Area, Brazilians Say
LEAD: Brazilian scientists say they have discovered a new species of monkey in a highly unusual habitat, an island along the country's heavily populated Atlantic coast.


Politics and the Crisis in the Savings and Loan Industry
LEAD: If Republicans and Democrats move to a full-scale battle over who is to blame for the savings and loan crisis, the outcome may be decided by whether the public has a long memory.


Evolution in Europe;   Vote in Cracow Reflects Poland's Quandary
LEAD: Poland's raucous national debate over the nature of democracy reached this medieval city today, as the City Council struggled for five hours to elect a new Mayor.


22 Pillars of the Capitol Now Crown a Hill
LEAD: Twenty-two Corinthian sandstone columns that once held up the East Portico of the Capitol now stand on the crest of a rolling hill at the National Arboretum, as if supporting the sky.


Ad Campaigns Join Battle Over Arts Aid
LEAD: As the yearlong dispute over Federal support of the arts moves toward a showdown in Congress next month, Pat Robertson's Christian Coalition today opened a $200,000 advertising campaign against renewed financing of the National Endowment for the Arts.


For Family, The Mails As a Bridge
LEAD: Tim Nelson, an 8-year-old in Woodinville, Wash., whose parents are divorced, knows that every Thursday he will receive a letter from his father, who lives in Phoenix.
He also knows it will not be an ordinary letter but will include a special crafts project, a stamped return envelope and suggestions from his father to draw a picture or write about something that happened at school.


McReynolds's Power Keeps Mets on a Roll
LEAD: The Mets, having repossessed their old ability to dominate teams with both pitching and power, are on the move in the National League East.
Such a reawakening cannot be lost on the teams they chase, including the first-place Pittsburgh Pirates.


Yankees Defeat Brewers on 9th-Inning Home Run by Kelly
LEAD: It might have simply been their euphoria, but there seemed no harm in allowing the Yankees to let this victory settle in, to enjoy it for a while.


Commodities Traders Case
LEAD: Attacks on the credibility of the Government's three main witnesses are unfounded, a prosecutor said today in his closing arguments at a trial stemming from the F.B.I.'s investigation of the nation's largest commodity exchanges.


Police Chief vs. Officer: Symbolic Rift on Guns
LEAD: Officer Tony Perez squats behind a trash bin, nervously fingers his weapon and mulls what he has just been told: the suspect has a crate of Uzis. ''It doesn't make sense that cops have to go up against assault rifles,'' he says to himself.
Nine minutes later, a shootout leaves a partner dead.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I felt a blessing from God that I could be part of this.
I came of age in the 1960's, but the regret of my life is I never met Dr.
King or Malcolm X. I told my son today to be in the presence of Nelson Mandela was an honor.''
- Taraja Samuel, a New York City schools administrator.
[A1:2.


Borden Plan for Profits: One Nation, One Pasta
LEAD: When pasta was merely spaghetti, and ''carbo loading'' was more an indulgence of the fat than the fit, most pasta makers could only hope to sell their products locally.


Fire and Blasts on a U.S. Carrier; 16 Hurt and 2 Missing Off Japan
LEAD: Two explosions and an intense fire seared through the aircraft carrier Midway, one of the United States Navy's oldest operating warships, today, injuring 16 crew members, some of them with severe burns, officials said.
Two others were listed as missing.


Europe Seeks Film, TV Bar
LEAD: In a move certain to set off a battle with Washington, the European Community wants the right under new international trade rules now being negotiated to keep out foreign films and television shows, government sources said today.


East Europe Deal For Bally Machine
LEAD: The Bally Manufacturing Corporation said an East German company had agreed to distribute Bally gaming machines in several Eastern European countries.
It said Heim-Electric G.m.b.H., an electronics distributor based in East Berlin, would sell a modified version of Bally's West German-made wall-mounted machine in the Soviet Union, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and


House Panel Approves Measure on Penny Stocks
LEAD: A House subcommittee today approved by voice vote a measure that calls for increased Federal oversight of the penny stock market.


Transco Offering Notes, Debentures
LEAD: The Transco Energy Company, a Houston-based oil and gas holding company, is offering $250 million in debt securities divided equally between notes and debentures.
Merrill Lynch Capital Markets is the sole underwriter.


Evolution in Europe;   Nettled, Gorbachev Dares His Critics
LEAD: As disgruntled hard-liners stepped up their criticism of his leadership, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today offered his strongest hint thus far that his contemplated shift from the Communist Party's helm might come sooner rather than later.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
BALTIMORE (AL) - Purchased the contract of Donell Nixon, outfielder, from Rochester of the International League.
CLEVELAND (AL) - Signed Tim Costo, shortstop, and assigned him to Kinston of the Carolina League.
Signed Patrick Bryant, outfielder, and assigned him to Burlington of the Appalachian League.


Review/Cabaret;   Song and Dance, Both Light
LEAD: Ingenuousness is not a quality one ordinarily associates with cabaret, a form of entertainment that often seems synonymous with sophisticated urbanity.
That's why it takes a performer as enthusiastic as the Broadway dancer, singer and choreographer Gregg Burge to show that sweetness and light have their place in cabaret.


Du Pont Purchase
LEAD: E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company said it would acquire Fibremakers, the largest supplier of continuous-filament nylon and polyester in Australia, from JGL Investments for $150 million.
Du Pont said the acquisition, which is expected to be completed by July 1, is part of its planned $1 billion expansion in the Asian Pacific region over the next decade.


Police Arrest 44 in Redwood Protest
LEAD: Forty-four environmental protesters were arrested today as they blocked a logging truck loaded with cut trees in what was billed as the first in a series of militant protests against redwood logging in Northern California.


H &amp; R Block in Buyback
LEAD: H &amp; R Block Inc. said today that it intended to purchase from time to time up to 1.5 million of its 53.6 million common shares outstanding.
The shares are expected to be used for employee stock ownership plans, the company said.


For Pupils: The War After the Battle
LEAD: At last, New York State officials have agreed to eliminate the Board of Examiners.
Much of the credit belongs to two of the city's six Republican Senators, Roy Goodman of Manhattan and Guy Velella of the Bronx.
But having won this battle, they now face a larger war: getting more state aid for city schools.


PERSONAL HEALTH
LEAD: It would come as no surprise to teachers of the Alexander technique, a method of adjusting body postures to relieve damaging stresses, to hear that my neck is plagued by perpetual tension, occasional pain and even crippling spasms.


Judge in Marcos Case Asks, Why Is U.S. Court Hearing It?
LEAD: The judge in the trial of Imelda Marcos told prosecutors yesterday that he was not convinced that they had proved their case against Mrs.
Marcos, and he questioned what the case was doing in an American court in the first place.


Reporter's Notebook;   Protest, Not Poignancy, Marks AIDS Gathering
LEAD: The tumultuous Sixth International Conference on AIDS opened here today amid talk that this may be the last time that the world's most prominent AIDS researchers and policy makers gather in one place to assess their achievements and plot their future.


Auction Set At Centrust
LEAD: More than 16,000 pieces of fine china, 1,450 Baccarat crystal goblets and a serving tray large enough to hold a roast pig are among the items from Centrust Bank to be sold at auction.


U.S. Target of Arab Raid
LEAD: Israel's new Police Minister said today that an investigation had found that the Palestinian guerrillas who tried to assault a Tel Aviv beach last month actually intended to attack the American Embassy.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: When LEON BRESSLER unleashed the radical designer CLAUDE MONTANA on the conservative world of haute couture, fashion followers squealed with delight, though critics panned his first collection.


The Life of Fakery and Delusion In John Guare's 'Six Degrees'
LEAD: It's every boy's dream - that his mean, old, ordinary parents really aren't his at all.
That he was meant instead to be the child of someone infinitely more suitable - a king, a president, a movie star.
Someone who would finally understand him.


Dollar Advances Broadly; Gold Prices Increase in U.S.
LEAD: The dollar rose against most other major currencies yesterday in light trading, bolstered by concern about political uncertainty in the Soviet Union, traders said.


School Cafeterias Enter Age of the Plastic Card
LEAD: Students at the Simon Lake Elementary School are using plastic cards to charge their soup, sandwiches and milk.
The school is taking part in a pilot program to allow the use of the cards instead of cash to pay for lunch in cafeterias at schools in Milford and West Hartford.


Fund Yields Rise Slightly
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were narrowly higher in the week that ended yesterday.
Over all, the fixed-income market was flat, with some corrections in longer maturities, while the shorter maturities that are more closely tied to Federal


Topics of The Times;   The Z Word
LEAD: The recipe in the food section for Zucchini Boats with Herb Stuffing struck one reader with horror.
It was not the prospect of 14 ingredients, 30 minutes in the oven and five more under a broiler.
It was the prospect of zucchini.


The Fidgets Aren't Just in Childhood, Adults With Troubles Are Learning
LEAD: In her early 40's, in the midst of a frustrating struggle to finish a doctorate in medieval history, Barbara Karler went to the psychiatry clinic at the University of Utah for treatment of depression.


Riser Foods Executive Is Chairman and Chief
LEAD: Riser Foods Inc., a Midwestern supermarket chain that has grown to a billion-dollar business, has named Anthony C. Rego chairman and chief executive.
The company operates 50 supermarkets in the Cleveland area and one of the largest wholesale food distributors in the Midwest.


Close to Home
LEAD: ''USING New York'' is what an acquaintance called it.
Anyone who went regularly to the museums and theaters and galleries and downtown shows and uptown galas was, she said approvingly, ''using New York.'' She herself seldom used New York.
Too busy, she said, what with her job and the house in the country and the household arrangements and a biggish social life and the lure of Bloomingdale's only nine blocks away.


Olsen Going to CBS
LEAD: Merlin Olsen, the National Football League commentator, will leave NBC after 13 years to join CBS.


F.A.A. Sued as Jetliner Crash Inquiry Starts
LEAD: Twelve passengers injured in the crash of Avianca Flight 052 sued the Federal Aviation Administration today, contending that air traffic controllers had failed to insure the safe flight of the jetliner, which ran out of fuel and crashed while trying to land at Kennedy International Airport.


G.M.'s New Saturn Model Is Said to Be Facing Delays
LEAD: Production of the General Motors Corporation's much-awaited Saturn car has been delayed slightly because of technical problems, including plastic doors that did not quite fit.


Detroit Acts on Rental-Car Problem
LEAD: After years of hearing dealers complain that rental companies were poaching on their business by selling nearly new cars, auto makers have offered a remedy that may ease the tension.


Puerto Rico Issue Has 5.6% Yield
LEAD: A $250 million bond anticipation note issue from the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico was tentatively priced yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: LAURIE BECKELMAN, the new chairwoman of New York's Landmarks Preservation Commission, is being honored tonight as she celebrates a landmark of her own - her 40th birthday.


League and Players Approve Benefits Plan
LEAD: The members of National Basketball Players Association have approved a plan that will provide them with financial and medical security in the years between retirement and the time they begin to draw their penisons.


Paper Closes In Kansas City
LEAD: The Kansas City Evening News, a modest new newspaper in a city that recently lost its afternoon daily, is halting publication after 27 issues.
The publisher, Stephen F. Rose, attributed the paper's demise to the refusal of city officials to allow teen-agers to sell it on the streets. ''We simply wouldn't be making any money if we had to convert to home delivery,'' Mr.


P.L.O. Sees Deeper Arab Hostility After U.S. Move
LEAD: A senior adviser to Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, said tonight that Washington's suspension of talks with the P.L.O. would produce ''a loathing of the Americans'' and prompt the organization to seek a greater Arab show of military strength in the conflict with


Parent &amp; Chile
LEAD: IT was a swat heard round the world.


Books of The Times;   A Vision Beyond the New Gilded Age
LEAD:
The Politics of Rich and Poor
Wealth and the American Electorate in the Reagan Aftermath
By Kevin Phillips
Illustrated. 262 pages. Random House. $19.95.


Why Won't Mandela Renounce Violence?
LEAD: Who is the real Nelson Mandela?
Before his supporters drape him in the garments of Abraham Lincoln or Martin Luther King Jr., they should take a close look.


After Renaissance of the 70's and 80's, Philadelphia Is Struggling to Survive
LEAD: The urban renaissance here, marked by the frenzied construction of $5 billion worth of downtown office buildings and the rebuilding of frayed neighborhoods in the 1970's and 80's, is sputtering out.
The new urban issue here, as framed by the city's austerity budget for next year, is survival.


Timing of Flag Vote Brings Heated Words
LEAD: A House Republican accused Speaker Thomas S. Foley today of ''kowtowing'' to groups like the Communist Youth Brigade by refusing to delay Thursday's vote on a constitutional amendment to prohibit flag burning.


Dow Up 1.74 Points on Sluggish Volume
LEAD: Stock prices ended the day with a thin gain, after rising in early trading and then quickly falling.
Volume continued to be sluggish.


St. George's Journal;   Grenada Is Target of U.S. Jets (Carrying Tourists)
LEAD: Seven years after 6,000 G.I.'s landed here to protect 500 medical students and restore order after nearly a week of violence between rival factions of the Marxist Government, Grenadians are eagerly awaiting a second airborne invasion from the north.


Currents;   In Philadelphia, Designs From the 50's
LEAD: ''WE wanted to show the more classical side of the 50's,'' said Donna Corbin, an assistant curator at the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
So she organized ''From the Collection: Designs fo the 1950's,'' on view through Oct. 14.
The show includes examples of European and American furniture, glass, ceramics, tableware, appliances and textiles of the period, which saw a new generatiuon of designers addressing the problems of mass production.


Cheney's Cuts Called Inadequate Because of Programs He'd Spare
LEAD: Congressional budget officials said today that a plan to cut the armed forces by 25 percent could produce more than twice the savings projected by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Adobe Systems Inc., Palo Alto, Calif., a software company, said it had acquired BluePoint Technologies, a New Hampshire-based maker of computer chips, for undisclosed terms.


Refinancing Plan Sought For Nabisco
LEAD: RJR Nabisco Inc., which went private in 1989 in the largest leveraged buyout ever, announced yesterday that its biggest stockholder, Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company, was working to refinance the heavily indebted company.


Leadership Changing At Chase
LEAD: In a changing of the guard that reflects the ascendancy of the consumer banking business, the Chase Manhattan Corporation announced yesterday that Willard C. Butcher, chairman, would be replaced by Thomas G. Labrecque, president, and that Arthur F. Ryan would become the new president.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of Nelson Mandela's visit, New York City transportation officials have issued a Gridlock Alert through tomorrow.


Review/Ballet;   Roses for a Swan Queen's 20th Year
LEAD: ''Swan Lake'' has been the ballet in which Martine van Hamel has always excelled and moved audiences, and it was, aptly, the work with which she chose to mark her 20th anniversary with American Ballet Theater on Tuesday night.


When Do Savings and Loan Crooks Go to Jail?;   Curb the High Rollers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hitchcock Company May Get A Reprieve
LEAD: Earlier this month it appeared that production of the Hitchcock chair had ended for good after the Hitchcock Chair Company filed for bankruptcy and laid off its 150 workers here.


Massachusetts Prices Bonds
LEAD: More than $452 million in general obligation bonds of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts were tentatively priced yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Telephone in Jerusalem
LEAD: There he goes again, J. Danforth Quayle, Vice President of the United States, doing that peculiar thing that seems to have become a habit with him.


Travelers Cutbacks Set in 9 States
LEAD: The Travelers Corporation said it would leave the automobile and homeowners insurance markets in nine states and that it had trimmed its agency force and overhauled its agent commission schedule as part of a revision of its personal-lines business.
The company said the actions were part of a plan to make the company's personal-lines operations more competitive and to focus on markets with the greatest potential for growth and profitability.


In Colombia, Political Murder Is Thriving
LEAD: To the Editor:


Canada Moves Closer to Pact, but Barriers Remain
LEAD: Canada cleared one obstacle toward approval of the Meech Lake constitutional accord today when the Manitoba legislature began debate on the issue, but the prospects that the accord will be ratified before the deadline of midnight on Saturday appeared to be slim.


Decorating With Nostalgia, Emotion and Other Intangibles
LEAD: CHENILLE bedspreads hang from the windows, and a frieze of magazine covers rings the room.
On the top of a desk said to have been Al Jolson's makeup table is a small color photograph of a smiling 7-year-old.


When Do Savings and Loan Crooks Go to Jail;   Played by New Rules
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cheering a Flip-Flop
LEAD: When a politician changes his position, he or she is usually derided for a ''flip-flop.'' But here are two cheers for President Bush's about-face decision to help poor countries stop using chemicals destructive to earth's vital ozone shield.


Big East Head To Be Named
LEAD: Now that Dave Gavitt has left the Big East Conference, which he almost singlehandedly built into one of the nation's basketball powers, to take on the task of rebuilding the Boston Celtics, the conference he left behind needs a replacement.


R. J. Reynolds Agrees Not to Run Some Ads
LEAD: The R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company has agreed not to run ads that the Federal Trade Commission said misrepresented a study on smoking and health.


People
LEAD: *
Sheri Colonel, an executive vice president for account management at Lintas New York, has been named a director.


No Headline
LEAD: AN appraisal may be necessary to put personal property in order for insurance, estate or tax purposes or in a divorce settlement.
But there are several factors to consider when hiring an appraiser, said Victor Wiener, executive director of the Appraisers Association of America, which is based in New York


When Young Love Is Soiled By Agony of the Drug World
LEAD: It was a teen-age romance that thrived on drugs.
Angelo B. and Jacqueline S. shared a crack pipe, snorted heroin and sold the potions that transformed the drab gray streets they roamed in Brooklyn.


AIDS Drug Is Promising in Study, But F.D.A. Officials Urge Caution
LEAD: A large study of a substance meant to improve the immune system of people infected with the AIDS virus has indicated it can delay the onset of disease.
But Federal officials caution that the study leaves many questions unanswered and needs to be repeated.


One Group Still Objects To New Deal for Trump
LEAD: A loan package to rescue the developer Donald J. Trump has won approval from most of the banks involved but is being held up by a handful of foreign banks, people in the talks said yesterday.


Review/Opera;   Peter Sellars Tries Out His Magic on the English
LEAD: Peter Sellars's English debut as a stage director of a standard-repertory opera has come not at some provincial byway but at the Glyndebourne Festival, the center of British Mozart worship.
Mr.
Sellars's typically iconoclastic staging of Mozart's ''Zauberflote'' ruffled Mozart conservatives here at its premiere on May 21, occasioning mostly negative reviews and what was said to have been the first widespread booing in


Treasury Prices Are Down Again
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds fell again yesterday, as speculative accounts sold securities after an economic report from regional Federal Reserve banks was not as positive as had been hoped.


Mets' Marshall Unhappy
LEAD: Mike Marshall, who has lost his starting job at first to the hot-hitting Dave Magadan for the time being, said yesterday that he might request a trade at the end of the season, as is the right of any player acquired while in the middle of a long-term contract.


Sarah Wiener, 80, Advocate for Elderly
LEAD: Sarah Wiener, a retired teacher who became an advocate for retired people, died on Monday at her daughter's home in Teaneck, N.J.
She was 80 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Wiener died of lung cancer, her husband, Abraham, said.
Mrs.
Wiener taught in New York high schools for more than 30 years.


Judge Rejects Heirs' Claims to an Oil Fortune
LEAD: A Federal district judge has ruled that thousands of people who say they are heirs to the Spindletop oilfield fortune have no claim to the land or the estimated $200 billion generated since the first gusher there in 1901.


Government Critics Harassed in Mexico, Setting Off a Storm
LEAD: A campaign of intimidation and harassment of critics of the Mexican Government, apparently by Government security forces, has provoked a growing human rights crisis here, grave enough to have required the direct intervention of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari.


New MCI Rates For Businesses
LEAD: The MCI Communications Corporation, the provider of long-distance telephone service, introduced a new package of services and discounts to begin next month for small- and medium-sized businesses.
During peak business hours, rates for normal calls will be a flat 20 cents a minute.
For dedicated access lines, private telephone lines set up by businesses, the rate will be 15 cents a minute.


Give the Loot to the 'Amateurs'
LEAD: The $64 million question for the National Collegiate Athletic Association is: What to do with the extra $64 million - or even as much as $75 million - it will receive from its new television basketball contract with CBS?


Disney Increases Option Offering
LEAD: The Walt Disney Company said today that it had increased its offering of liquid-yield-option notes due in 2005 to $2.25 billion, from $1.5 billion.
The offering through Merrill Lynch Capital Markets is expected to earn about $927 million for Disney.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
NAMIBIA DONORS' PLEDGING CONFERENCE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


TEMPLE MAY HOLD A KEY TO MEDICINE
LEAD: Archeologists digging in Iraq have uncovered the ruins of a huge temple to the Babylonian goddess of healing that they believe will produce new insights into the early practice of medicine, the University of Chicago announced yesterday.


At Teacher Board, a 'Family' Faces Demise
LEAD: The people who work for the Board of Examiners were examining themselves yesterday and what they concluded left them dispirited and nervous.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Festivities for the 90th birthday of QUEEN ELIZABETH THE QUEEN MOTHER, on Aug. 4, are taking an unusual turn.
A ceremonial parade next Wednesday will feature, along with assorted guards and cavalries, an Aberdeen Angus bull, six chickens and a pack of dachshunds.


Topics of The Times;   American Honor
LEAD: After three losses, America's young soccer team is out of the World Cup finals, nonetheless a winner.
There was never more than a slim chance that it would survive the first round.
But the U.S. effort was admirable.


Energy Prices End Mixed As Fall of Crude Continues
LEAD: Prices of energy futures were mixed yesterday in trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange, as crude oil futures continued their plunge in a market plagued by oversupply.
On other markets, grain and soybean prices were also mixed.


House Rejects Veto on Workers' Politicking
LEAD: The House of Representatives voted overwhelming today to override President Bush's veto of a bill that would loosen restrictions on partisan political activities by Federal employees.


Project for Rockaways Is Approved by Panel
LEAD: The New York City Planning Commission yesterday unanimously approved a proposal for the construction of up to 10,000 condominium apartments for middle-income families on a two-mile stretch of beachfront in the Arverne section of the Rockaways in Queens.


Arms Sales to Third World Said to Decline Sharply
LEAD: Arms sales to the third world decreased sharply last year as the United States, the Soviet Union, China, France and Britain found fewer buyers for their weapons, the Congressional Research Service reported today.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.19
9.21
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.76
7.74
7.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.66
7.65
7.70
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.57
8.53
7.98
30-YR.


Area Surrounding Iran Quake Is a Zone of Seismic Disasters
LEAD: Geologists said that the earthquake in northern Iran yesterday was the largest ever recorded in the immediate vicinity, but they pointed out that the entire surrounding region lies in a zone known for its seismic catastrophes.


Pasta Deal With Soviets
LEAD: The Fasolino Foods Company International says it plans to manufacture and sell pasta in the Soviet Union, with the profits going to build hotels and condominiums there.
Antonio Fasolino, the chairman and chief executive of the company, based in North Bergen, N.J., said on Wednesday that it would spend $60 million to produce pasta in two, 500,000-square-foot manufacturing plants by mid-1992.


Senate's Vote Keeping Hatch Act Intact
LEAD: Here is the roll-call vote by which the Senate today sustained President Bush's veto of a bill amending the Hatch Act.
The vote, 65 to 35, fell two short of the two-thirds required to override.
A yes vote was a vote to override and a no was to sustain the veto.
Voting yes were 55 Democrats and 10 Republicans.


New Jersey's New Tax Plan
LEAD: Major elements of Gov.
Jim Florio's budget, property tax and school-aid plan approved yesterday by the Legislature:
SCHOOL AID
Adds $1 billion in new aid to about 360 poor and middle-income school districts in 1991. cuts aid to about 220 affluent districts over the next four years.
Bases aid on district's property wealth and residents' incomes.


For Children
LEAD: Shows, Nature, Museums


Oil Slick in the Gulf May Not Come Ashore
LEAD: The oil slick from the Norwegian supertanker Mega Borg two weeks ago has remained stalled in the Gulf of Mexico for days, and the Coast Guard now says it may not come ashore at all.


Positives for Myricks
LEAD: Larry Myricks, a long jumper who is serving a three-month suspension for drug use during the 1990 Mobil Indoor Championships, has tested positive for a banned substance at two other meets, The Athletics Congress said yesterday in Indianapolis.


Reviews/Film;   A Household Engulfed In Prenuptial Jitters
LEAD: The lunacy factor in big family weddings is so high that it would be impossible to count all the parents who have thought, ''This could be a funny movie!'' It could, but it won't be unless they have some zany, original twist on seating arrangements that require United Nations intervention, caterers who turn into extortionists and other staples of real life.


Negative Votes Would Wake Up the Candidates;   When the People Lead
LEAD: To the Editor:


Evolution in Europe;   GORBACHEV REBUTS RIGHT-WING CRITICS
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev accused his right-wing critics today of trying to slander him and he denied hatching his national reform program without consulting the Communist Party.


At the Movies
LEAD:
The Fast Track


The Mandela Visit;   Excerpts Form Remarks by Mandela to Newspaper Editors and Writers
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a question-and-answer session held by Nelson Mandela with a group of reporters, editors and editorial writers from The New York Times at Gracie Mansion, as recorded by The New York Times:
Insights Into de Klerk


The Senator's Right on Drug Treatment
LEAD: The Senator accuses the drug czar of seeking the ''political rewards to be had for tough-guy talk.'' The drug czar calls the Senator's attack ''bilious, dyspeptic, orotund.''


Asset Sales By Campeau
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation, which this week reported a $1.7 billion loss for 1989, said yesterday that it would ask shareholders at its annual meeting on July 30 to approve the sale of all or part of the company's Canadian real estate.


Evidence Is Said to Increase On Microbe's Role in AIDS
LEAD: Dr.
Luc Montagnier, the French virologist who was co-discoverer of the AIDS virus, says increasing evidence is leading him to conclude that AIDS is caused not by a virus alone, but by a microbe and a virus working together.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about proposed legislation on sex crimes misidentified a rape victim who testified before a Congressional committee.


Economic Scene;   National Security: New Priorities
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney this week submitted a proposal to Congress for cutting the armed forces by 20 to 25 percent over the next five years.
But his plan would reduce military spending by only 10 percent, because savings from force reductions would be largely offset by rising outlays on antimissile defenses, procurement of new strategic nuclear weapons systems, purchases of new conventional weapons and more spending on research and development of new weapons.


Government Employees May Face Less Pressure
LEAD: The Supreme Court decision today on political patronage, addressing a system with deep roots in American history, could ultimately change the face of politics by easing the pressure on low-level state and local employees to serve as foot soldiers in campaigns.


Canada Drug Report In
LEAD: Chief Justice Charles Dubin's report on the use of drugs in sport has been submitted to the Canadian Government, and Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's office said yesterday that the report would be released to the public shortly.


Cedric Belfrage, 85, Target of Communist Inquiry
LEAD: Cedric H. Belfrage, an author, editor and translator who was deported from the United States to his native Britain in 1955 after refusing to tell Congressional investigators whether he had ever been a Communist, died yesterday at his home in Cuernavaca, Mexico.
He was 85 years old.


On Stage
LEAD:
London Too Costly for Merrick


The Mandela Visit: Reporter's Notebook;   Where Can Mandela Stroll? Why, Anywhere He Wants
LEAD: When Nelson Mandela took a spontaneous morning stroll along the East River yesterday morning, he behaved like an ordinary foreign tourist: a little uncertain, quite courteous and more than a little inquisitive about the city's grime and the life styles of the rich and famous.


Yanks Stop Jays' Rally and Win 3d in a Row
LEAD: A month ago, this kind of game would have exploded in their faces.
The Yankees would have wilted in the ninth inning, not held on as they did tonight.
Somehow, they would have lost it, then trudged to their clubhouse and sulked.


A Real Blockbuster, Or Merely a Smash?
LEAD: To the Walt Disney Company, the opening of ''Dick Tracy'' last weekend was a smashing success, bringing in $22.5 million at the box office in its first three days, the most lucrative debut for any Disney film.


TEXAS DEVELOPER REFUSES QUESTIONS
LEAD: A Texas housing developer accused of paying thousands of dollars in kickbacks to a senior Federal housing official refused to testify today before a Congressional panel, citing his Fifth Amendment right against compelled self-incrimination.


Notebook;   Fans May Not Get Rematch Wish
LEAD: A rematch between Sunday Silence and Easy Goer is at the top of every racing fan's wish list this year, and it is supposed to come true on Aug. 4 in the new Arlington Challenge Cup at Arlington Park in Illinois.
Almost no one, though, seems to believe that the race will really happen.


High Court Narrows Shield in Libel Law
LEAD: In a major decision on libel law, the Supreme Court ruled today that the First Amendment does not automatically shield expressions of opinion from being found libelous.


The Navy Shows Its Muscle in New York Harbor


Daily News Unions Hire Labor Lawyer To Mount Campaign
LEAD: After five months of fruitless contract talks and the layoffs of scores of workers, union leaders at The Daily News announced yesterday that they had hired a battle-tested labor lawyer from Detroit to help mount a counterattack at the bargaining table.


Woolworth Weighs East German Move
LEAD: The Woolworth Corporation hopes to gain from German unification by opening discount stores in East Germany, where it operated before World War II, the company's chairman and chief executive, Harold E. Sells, said at the annual shareholders meeting.
He also said the company would make record capital outlays of $365 million this year to increase the number of its stores.


Supreme Court Roundup;   Court Widens Curb on Patronage In Jobs for Most Public Workers
LEAD: The Supreme Court dealt a sharp blow to political patronage systems today, ruling 5 to 4 that the Constitution prevents the use of partisan political considerations as the basis for hiring, promoting or transferring most public employees.


Evolution in Europe;   Walesa, From Hero to Foe
LEAD: Lech Walesa's former comrades have asserted that he is becoming a threat to Poland's fledgling democracy and have rebuked him for his criticism of the Solidarity-led Government.


Subway Riders Treated to a Different Kind of Rumble


Network Group Sees Advantage
LEAD: In support of its contention that broadcast television is the best vehicle for advertisers, the recently formed Network Television Association released a report yesterday showing that ''viewers are significantly more inclined to stay tuned to broadcast network television than they are to other television alternatives.


Keating Seeks Rules on Testimony
LEAD: Charles H. Keating Jr. said yesterday that he had refused to testify before a Senate ethics panel investigating five senators who purportedly intervened on his behalf to halt a regulatory inquiry into the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association.
But he added that he would testify before a Congressional panel investigating his dealings if the committee set certain ground rules.


New Features of World League: No Huddles, Players' Headsets
LEAD: The World League of American Football came courting sponsors in New York yesterday, promising shorter games punctuated by a mandatory no-huddle offense for the benefit of impatient Europeans.


Perrier in U.S. to Y.&amp;R.
LEAD: The Perrier Group of America said it had awarded its $24 million consolidated media buying account to Young &amp; Rubicam in New York.
The agency has no other Perrier business, although Lord Einstein O'Neill &amp; Partners, of which Y.&amp;R. owns 49 percent, is the agency for Perrier's domestic bottled waters.


High School: Sometimes 7 Years to Diploma
LEAD: Only one-third of New York City's public high-school students graduate with conventional diplomas in four years, but after three more years, as many as 57 percent will have either a diploma or an equivalency certificate, according to a Board of Education dropout study released yesterday.


Fairs and Festivals This Weekend
LEAD:
Tomorrow
BLOCK PARTY, West 46th Street between Ninth and 10th Avenues; sponsored by the West 46th Street Block Association.
Crafts, food, flea market, entertainment.
Noon to 6 P.M.
Rain date: Sunday.
Information: 247-5501.
FOURTH SUMMER ARTS, CRAFTS AND ANTIQUES FESTIVAL, Broadway from 72d to 77th Street; sponsored by the Save the Beacon Theater Committee.


Execution Stayed in Electric-Chair Dispute
LEAD: In a case centering on whether Florida's electric chair is fit for use, a Federal district judge today delayed for at least 24 hours the execution of a murderer who would be only the second woman in the nation to suffer the death penalty since the Supreme Court reinstated capital punishment in 1976.


Senate Upholds Veto of Bill On U.S. Workers in Politics
LEAD: By a two-vote margin, the Senate today upheld President Bush's veto of a bill that would have allowed Federal employees to play a more active role in partisan politics.


Concert on Toy Piano
LEAD: Wendy Chambers will play new works for a two-and-a-half-octave toy piano at the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, tonight at 7:30.
The free concert will include premieres of pieces by Ms.
Chambers, John Cage, Alvin Curran, Kyle Gann, Patrick Hardish, Charlie Morrow, Steven Swartz, Paul Somers, Bill Hellerman, Bernadette Speach and Dale Semegen.


Nissan in Germany
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Company said it would begin sales and service operations in East Germany, with plans to expand by the end of the year.
A spokesman said Nissan Motor Deutschland G.m.b.H., the company's West German distributor, had concluded sales and service contracts with 36 East German automobile dealers.


Case by Case, New York's Court of Appeals Moves Forward
LEAD: To the Editor:


F.C.C. Trims Phone Charges
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission yesterday ordered local telephone companies to reduce their annual charges to long-distance companies by $1.1 billion.
The move was the latest step in an annual rate-setting procedure for the fees that local telephone companies charge for conveying telephone calls from residences and businesses to the nearest switching center of a long-distance telephone company.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
Friday
ALL ABOARD


Reviews/Film;   A Wine Country Family Gathers and Stampedes
LEAD: Louis Malle is the most eclectic of France's first-rate film makers, a director of documentaries (''Phantom India,'' ''Human, Much Too Human'') that are as rich in their different ways as the best of his fiction films, from ''The Lovers,'' made in 1958, through ''Au Revoir les Enfants'' (1987).


American Air and Eastern in Route Dispute
LEAD: American Airlines and Eastern Airlines have become involved in a dispute over the sale of Eastern's Latin American routes that may reduce the price Eastern gets but is not expected to break up the sale.


THE PALESTINIANS BELITTLE U.S. ROLE
LEAD: In al-Manara square this afternoon, a cool wind swept through streets emptied by a protest strike.
But around an impromptu vegetable market on the street corner, the calm evaporated as Palestinians fell into angry and defiant conversation about the American decision to suspend the discussion with the Palestine Liberation


Navy Seeks to Assure Japan That Aircraft Carrier Is Safe


Review/Theater;   Panic the Night Before the Wedding
LEAD: It is one of the myths of matrimony that both bride and groom suffer last-minute misgivings the night before the wedding.
But rarely does an epidemic of panic infect an entire family as in Joan Casademont's ''Maids of Honor,'' a new play at the WPA Theater that is, to be quite honest, a bit of a mess.


Liability Issue Stalls Bill on Oil Spills
LEAD: Congress has debated a liability law for oil spills every year for the last 15 years, and with growing intensity since the Exxon Valdez spill last spring.
But passage has been blocked by a question that divides even environmentalists: Should limits be placed on the liability faced by owners of ships and the cargoes they carry?


The Mandela Visit;   Mandela Takes His Message To Rally in Yankee Stadium


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Like the 80's, Manhattan,inc. Ends
LEAD: Only barely surviving the decade that it had come to symbolize, Manhattan,inc. announced yesterday that it would cease publication with its July issue.


Restaurants
LEAD:
Chez Josephine


AMENDMENT TO BAR FLAG DESECRATION FAILS IN THE HOUSE
LEAD: After a year of emotional debate among Americans that occasionally flared into angry confrontations, the House of Representatives today rejected a proposed amendment to the Constitution to prohibit desecration of the American flag.


Our Towns;   Despite Parents, A Bride, Only 16, Felt Blessed
LEAD: Rachel Lydecker is from a family of well-educated people.
Her father, Garrit, is an artistic director for regional theaters who designed his own home.
Rachel's mother, Lelia, makes jewelry.
The home radio is tuned to classical.


A 'Distinct' Quebec: But What Then?
LEAD: Jean-Marie Gauthier sat on a bench in Dominion Square here today, resting from his deliveries as a bicycle courier and musing about two words that have thrown Canada into turmoil.


Jets Add to Staff
LEAD: The Jets, who have added a new head coach, Bruce Coslet, and a new general manager, Dick Steinberg, hired a new director of player personnel yesterday.
He is Ron Wolf, who comes from the Los Angeles Raiders, the franchise with which he started as a talent scout in 1963.


Canary Wharf Gets Bank
LEAD: Olympia &amp; York Canary Wharf Ltd. announced yesterday that Manufacturers Hanover Bank would relocate its British operations to Canary Wharf, a 71-acre office development in the West End of London.


Corrections
LEAD: The Our Towns column on May 18, about efforts to save a farm in Ramapo, N.Y., misstated the role of a local group, the West Branch Conservation Association, in seeking the aid of the American Farmland Trust.
The head of West Branch, Martus Granirer, proposed that the trust help the farm's owners obtain Federal relief under the 1985 farm bill; he did not ask it to donate money.


5 in the Arts Are Awarded A $100,000 Japanese Prize
LEAD: The American composer Leonard Bernstein and the Italian film maker Federico Fellini are among the five winners of the 1990 Japanese Praemium Imperiale awards for lifetime achievement in the arts, it was announced at Claridge's Hotel here today.


Florio School-Aid Plan: Cutting 2 Ways at Once
LEAD: Gov.
Jim Florio's sweeping overhaul of education financing will send tens of millions of new dollars to cities and middle-class districts but confront wealthy suburban schools with four years of declining state aid, rising property taxes and possibly cutbacks in programs.


The Bill of Rights Rewrite, Defeated
LEAD: A sizable and courageous minority in the House of Representatives stood up to the fierce politics of flag burning last evening and cast enough votes to block the Bill of Rights Rewrite Amendment.
Not the Flag Protection Amendment, as President Bush calls it - Old Glory keeps flying even when someone burns a copy.


In Emigre Crush, Tent Towns Sprout for Israelis
LEAD: Little tent towns began springing up across the nation this week.


In '88, 6 Oil Spills Every 7 Days
LEAD: The spill of over 250,000 gallons of fuel oil into New York harbor on June 7 would be reason enough for a national strategy to prevent yet another such environmental disaster.
The sad reality is, however, that this is just one of hundreds of spills that plague New York waters every year.


Dow Advances by 6.43 to Finish at 2,901.73
LEAD: Stocks rose slightly yesterday in listless trading, confounding the professionals, who said the market should have gone down - particularly after Monday's 53.71-point slide, which they took as a sign that the rally was fading.


Review/Film;   Complain About Dinner, And Look What Happens
LEAD: Tom Sharpe, the coolly acerbic and very funny English novelist whose ''Wilt'' is the basis for a new film built upon a series of escalating misunderstandings, has said this story has its origins in a quarrel he had with a girlfriend.
They were on a car trip on a quiet road.
He asked what they would be having for dinner, and she told him.


Storm King Art Center
LEAD: The first of three excursions to the Storm King Art Center in Mountainville, N.Y., from the Upper East Side of Manhattan, is to take place tomorrow.
A shuttle bus is to leave at 10 A.M. from the corner of Madison Avenue and 75th Street to travel about 55 miles north to the 400-acre outdoor sculpture center; it is to return at 6 P.M.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 512 money market mutual funds increased by $1.29 billion, to $385.40 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 161 institutional funds rose by $425.9 million, to $92.02 billion.
The assets of the 246 general-purpose funds were up by $567.9 million, to $133.85 billion.


The Essential Mandela
LEAD: Nelson Mandela is both a symbol and a political leader.
In celebrating the first, Americans should not overlook the realistic burdens - the very heavy burdens - of the second.


Oakland Paper, in Cutbacks, Plans to Reduce Staff by 25%
LEAD: The Oakland Tribune, a prize-winning California newspaper that has lost money in recent years, plans to reduce its staff by 25 percent in an effort to become profitable and survive.


Review/Photography;   Felix Teynard Took a Trip. It Transformed Egypt.
LEAD: ''Oasis for the Eye: Felix Teynard's Photographs of Egypt, 1851-52,'' at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is a compact exhibition that effectively demonstrates the glorious yet undervalued artistic bounties of 19th-century travel photography.
But its underlying message is one of cultural and historical dislocation.


Rises for Philip Morris and Suchard
LEAD: Speculation that the Philip Morris Companies may acquire Jacobs Suchard A.G., the Swiss chocolate and coffee maker, caused rises in the share prices of both companies yesterday.


Auctions
LEAD:
Summer Sales in Europe


No Longer Invincible Viola Looks to Rebound
LEAD: Frank Viola started the season invincibly.
With a 7-0 record he became the untouchable of an otherwise disappointing Mets pitching staff.
But now, as the team has climbed out of its slump with victories in 10 of the last 12 games, Viola has proved he is only human.


Uncovered Short Sales Set Another Record on Big Board
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that short interest increased by 16.6 million shares to a record level for the period ended June 15.
The new total is about 2.5 percent above that for the month ended May 15, the previous record level.


Merrill to Pay Fine
LEAD: The Chicago Board of Trade said Wednesday that it had accepted a settlement of trading violation charges against Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith Inc. and Merrill Lynch Government Securities Inc.
The investment companies, which are members of the exchange, agreed to pay $30,000 and to ''implement certain corrective measures,'' the Board of Trade said.


Review/Art;   Matisse and the Mark Left on Him by Morocco
LEAD: In the way of international cooperation at the highest level nothing more intelligent has lately reached us than the exhibition ''Matisse in Morocco,'' at the Museum of Modern Art.


School Official Held In Theft and Fraud In Brooklyn District
LEAD: A Brooklyn school official has been charged with stealing more than $50,000 by filing fraudulent purchase orders for textbooks and consulting services, the Brooklyn District Attorney said yesterday.


Books of The Times;   A Fearless Man Who Challenged an Outrageous State
LEAD:
Memoirs
By Andrei Sakharov
Translated by Richard Lourie. 740 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $29.95.


Soviet Grain Exchanges
LEAD: The Soviet Union plans to set up Western-style commodity exchanges for grains early next year, Oleg Klimov, chairman of the Soviet grain trading agency, Exportkhleb, said in an interview on Wednesday.
Exchanges to trade contracts for the delivery of wheat and barley are planned, he said.
The Soviet Union is the world's largest producer of both.


Jack Gilford Is Given a Memorial With 28 Acts and Fond Ribbing
LEAD: The performers, the writers, the composers, the audience itself came to the Plymouth Theater on West 45th Street yesterday to pay tribute to the actor and comedian Jack Gilford, not because he died but because he lived.


Couple Are Promoted In Tandy Brands Shift
LEAD: Robert and Aagje Nourse were promoted yesterday to president and vice president of marketing, respectively, by Tandy Brands Inc.


Melvin Van Peebles Retrospective
LEAD: In Melvin Van Peebles's cinematic farce ''Identity Crisis,'' a flamboyant French fashion designer and a black rap performer happen to die at exactly the same moment.
Through a capricious act of magic, the soul of the designer is reincarnated in the young rapper's body.
And for the rest of the movie, the two personalities struggle for dominance, as one keeps wresting control from the other at the most inopportune moments.


TV Weekend;   A Trail of Broken Hearts And a Memorable Rat
LEAD: British television has long had an enviable reputation for finding just the right actor for the right role.
The result is a steady flow of really quite wonderful performances that can make something special out of seemingly ordinary vehicles.
For current illustration, there is ''The Charmer,'' a London Weekend Television mini-series that, far too quietly, first slipped through ''Masterpiece Theater'' on public television just over a year ago.


P.G.A. Site Bars Blacks
LEAD: The Shoal Creek Country Club, which will be host to the P.G.A.
Championship from Aug. 6 through Aug. 12, will not be forced into accepting blacks as members, its founder said today.


As Sun Sets, Tempers Rise at Border
LEAD: As the sun went down here at the nation's southern border one recent evening, the headlights of nearly 300 cars parked along a narrow gravel road flicked on, shining toward Mexico in an angry demonstration against illegal immigration.


Concert on Toy Piano
LEAD: Wendy Chambers will play new works for a two-and-a-half-octave toy piano at the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, tonight at 7:30.
The free concert will include premieres of pieces by Ms.
Chambers, John Cage, Alvin Curran, Kyle Gann, Patrick Hardish, Charlie Morrow, Steven Swartz, Paul Somers, Bill Hellerman, Bernadette Speach and Dale Semegen.


LAW: At the Bar;   The lawyer who helped set the flag debate aflame calmly prepares to move on
LEAD: In David Cole's office at the Center for Constitutional Rights, the only place Old Glory flies is on a commemorative envelope by the window.
It contains a doctored photograph of the nine Justices of the United States Supreme Court wrapped in robes cut from the American flag, and commemorates last year's ruling that flag burning is legally protected speech.


Four Get Ayer Posts
LEAD: Ayer has named as senior vice presidents the four principals of the agency it merged with its Chicago office to form Zwiren, Collins, Karo, Trusk &amp; Ayer.
They are Jan Zwiren, president and chief executive of the office; Alan Karo, managing partner for marketing and media; Timothy Collins, managing partner for strategy and planning, and John Trusk, managing partner and creative director.


U.S. Securities Rebound in Price
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities rose slightly yesterday, stemming what had been a four-day slide.


Ogilvy Promotes Eight
LEAD: Ogilvy &amp; Mather announced the appointment of eight senior vice presidents: Don Blashford, account director; Marcia Christ, associate creative director; Julie Friedlander, director of national broadcast negotiations; Rosalinde Rago, director of advertising research; Richard Russo, associate creative director; Daisy Sinclair, head of casting; Harold Sogard, account director, and Karl Westman, music producer.


Cheney Backs Off Some Building Plans
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney asked Congress today to cancel $327 million in United States military construction projects like fireplaces in officers' quarters, child care centers and fuel depots.


Top New Orleans Law Enforcer on Trial
LEAD: The longtime District Attorney of New Orleans, Harry F. Connick, has gone on trial in Federal District Court on charges of aiding an illegal gambling operation.


Evolution in Europe;   2 Germanys Adopt Unity Treaty And Guarantee Poland's Borders
LEAD: The Parliaments of the two Germanys adopted matching measures moving them another step closer to union today, one a resolution guaranteeing Poland's existing borders and the other the treaty on monetary and economic union.


Bush Bid Seen To Fight Fraud
LEAD: President Bush, prodded by Congress, will seek to increase spending for savings and loan fraud investigation and prosecution by $25 million this year, White House officials said today.
Mr. Bush was to announce on


Plan on Drug Program Is Being Withdrawn
LEAD: The Bush Administration is withdrawing a proposal for a methadone program to give heroin addicts easier access to the drug while they wait for an opening in a comprehensive treatment program.


THOUSANDS OF IRANIANS DIE AS A MAJOR QUAKE DESTROYS MANY VILLAGES IN THE NORTH
LEAD: A major earthquake struck the densely populated Caspian Sea region of northwest Iran early yesterday, devastating scores of towns and villages and burying thousands of people in the collapsed rubble of their homes.


Wendell Johnson, 62, A Professor of English
LEAD: Wendell Stacy Johnson, a retired professor of English at Hunter College and a teacher at the graduate school of the City University of New York, died on Sunday at Southampton (L.I.) Hospital.
He was 62 years old and lived in Southampton.


Eliahu Elath, a Founder of Israel And an Ardent Zionist, 86, Dies
LEAD: Eliahu Elath, a journalist who championed the Zionist cause, helped found the State of Israel and became its first Ambassador to Washington in 1948, died Thursday in Jerusalem.
He was 86.
The cause of death was not announced.


Steinbrenner Hires 2 More Layers
LEAD: With the commissioner's hearing in the George Steinbrenner investigation less than two weeks away, the number of lawyers involved in the case is growing.


Review/Ballet;   Bubbling to Gershwin
LEAD: George Balanchine's ''Who Cares?,'' presented by the New York City Ballet on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater, is both a salute to and an evocation of the breezy, sometimes wistful songs of George and Ira Gershwin.
The ballet has a show-biz look that is a good deal more superficial than the pas de deux that are at the heart of ''Who Cares?


G.N.P. Rise Put at 1.9% In Quarter
LEAD: The economy grew faster in the first quarter than previously estimated, the Commerce Department said today, but the 1.9 percent annual growth rate remained the second lowest in two and a half years.


Moody's Reviews Military Suppliers
LEAD: In a move reflecting continuing unease on Wall Street about the prospects for the arms industry, Moody's Investors Service Inc. said yesterday that it was considering whether to downgrade the debt ratings of four large military contractors.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, an article yesterday about talks on Northern Ireland carried a subheading from another article in some copies.
The subheading should have read, ''London could eventually end direct rule.''


Review/Film;   New Challenge and Enemy For a Cybernetic Organism
LEAD: In ''Robocop 2,'' Robocop (Peter Weller plus a pile of hardware) quite literally goes to pieces.
In a lame reprise of the horrifying torture sequence that turned this flesh-and-blood police officer into a cyborg (or cybernetic organism) in the first place, he is attacked by a band of malicious goons wielding magnets, sledgehammers, electric shocks and machine guns.


Excerpts From Majority and Dissenting Court Opinions on Patronage Issue
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's 5-to-4 decision today that the Constitution bars most patronage-based hiring and promotion decisions.
Justice William J. Brennan Jr. wrote the majority opinion.
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote the dissenting opinion.
FROM THE OPINION


Try Rehabilitating Campus Hatemongers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sharpton Wins Bid for Abrams To Take Stand
LEAD: The judge in the criminal fraud trial of the Rev.
Al Sharpton upheld subpoenas yesterday requiring State Attorney General Robert Abrams and Mayor David N. Dinkins to testify for the defense.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
In Central Park


Irwin Gives Hand to Fans After Scoring Hole-In-One
LEAD: Running around in exhilaration and high-fiving the gallery is becoming Hale Irwin's trademark.


Chick Whittelsey, 79; Designed Naval Vessels
LEAD: Souther (Chick) Whittelsey, a naval architect and yachtsman, died on Wednesday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 79 years old and lived in Greenwich.
He died of a brain tumor, his wife, Harriet, said.


Market Place;   North Star's Bid For Small Savers
LEAD: For many companies, borrowing the money they need to keep operating has become much more difficult.
The market for high-risk ''junk bonds'' has all but closed, and banks are getting distinctly more cautious in lending.


Negative Votes Would Wake Up the Candidates;   Pass Registration Bill
LEAD: To the Editor:


On 20 Hits, Royals Club Twins, 14-4
LEAD: Kevin Seitzer went 5 for 6, hitting a home run and two of Kansas City's eight doubles; Steve Jeltz drove in four runs, and Bo Jackson hit a three-run homer as the Royals pounded the Minnesota Twins tonight, 14-4.


UAL Group Is Said To Be Seeking Aid
LEAD: The group seeking to buy the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, has had discussions with the General Electric Company, the Boeing Company and others about helping finance the planned employee buyout of UAL, a person close to the group said.


Relapses Into Risky Sex Found in AIDS Studies
LEAD: After making major strides in avoiding sexual practices at highest risk for spreading AIDS, some homosexuals are relapsing into high-risk behaviors, AIDS experts said here today.


Retired Top Executive Hired as Celgene Chief
LEAD: For a small company with no products on the market, the Celgene Corporation has some high-powered executives.
And now it is getting another, John L. Ufheil, the former chief operating officer of Mallinckrodt Inc.


Changes to Hatch Act Defeated
LEAD: The Senate barely upheld President Bush's veto of a bill that would have allowed Federal employees a more active role in politics.
Page A15.


Pathe Deal For MGM Extended
LEAD: Giancarlo Parretti, the Italian financier whose attempt to acquire the MGM/ UA Communications Company has been on the brink of collapse in recent days, said today that he had reached an agreement with MGM that will give him four more months to come up with the cash he needs to complete the deal.


Excerpts From Ruling On Opinion Privileges
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's ruling today that the First Amendment does not automatically shield an expression of opinion from libel suits.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote the majority opinion.
Justice William J. Brennan Jr. wrote a dissenting opinion for himself and Justice Thurgood Marshall.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Remi


Elders Stock Off
LEAD: The stock of Elders IXL Ltd., the Australian conglomerate, slid after The Australian Financial Review reported that the company could experience a loss of up to $770 million (United States) this year, which is well above market expectations.
An Elders spokesman declined to comment on the article.
Elders shares closed 4 cents lower today, at $1.77 (Australian) each.


Nuggets Trade Lever To Dallas for 2 Picks
LEAD: Citing a need for a ''face lift,'' the Denver Nuggets traded their leading scorer, rebounder and playmaker, Fat Lever, to the Dallas Mavericks last night for two draft choices.


Cuba Seeking 10 to 12 Years For 7 Accused of Conspiracy
LEAD: Cuba's state prosecutor is seeking prison terms of 10 to 12 years for seven dissidents accused of conspiracy and rebellion against the Government, official news organizations reported today.


Ceausescu's Brother Draws 15 Years for December Role
LEAD: A military court here convicted the brother of the country's former dictator today of incitement to genocide and attempted aggravated murder.


For 16 World Cup Teams, 'Real' Contest Is Beginning
LEAD: The first round of the World Cup finals ended tonight with yellow balls, red balls and giant brandy snifters setting matchups for the 16 teams that will begin an elimination tournament on Saturday leading to the final on July 8 in Rome.


Edward Coffey Jr., 55, Professor of Pathology
LEAD: Dr.
Edward L. Coffey Jr., an educator and a pathologist at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I. for more than 20 years, died on Tuesday at St.
Francis Hospital in Port Washington, L.I.
He was 55 years old and lived in Port Washington.


The Mandela Visit;   At Gracie Mansion, Intense Security and Warm Hospitality
LEAD: Tight security around Gracie Mansion yesterday froze more zones than there are in the Arctic, but inside the pale lemon cake of a house where he spent his first night in the United States, Nelson Mandela felt another kind of freeze: he asked for an extra blanket to counter the air-conditioning.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of Nelson Mandela's visit, delays are expected today on the East Side of Manhattan from 9 A.M to 9 P.M.
Motorists should avoid lower Manhattan from 7:30 A.M. to 10 A.M.


Ex-Governor Is Said To Rethink His Plea In Corruption Case
LEAD: Former Gov.
Arch A. Moore Jr. will try to back out of a deal that he made with Federal prosecutors two months ago and withdraw his guilty pleas to political corruption charges, according to news reports here.


The Mandela Visit;   In Harlem, a Name to Add to Martin and Malcolm
LEAD: Geneva Valladares calmly brushed her daughter's hair, but her voice was coated with excitement because soon, she said, ''Nelson Mandela will actually be in Harlem.''


Corrections
LEAD: A calendar listing in The Home Section yesterday misstated the date for two classes given by the American Rhododendron Society.
They are on July 14, not tomorrow.


Credit Cards Back $1.4 Billion Issue
LEAD: Standard Credit Card Trust 1990-6 yesterday priced $1.4 billion in seven-year asset-backed securities in two classes through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


Evolution in Europe;   Freed Romanians Tell Of Beatings by Police
LEAD: When the long-awaited bus pulled up to a dusty rural crossroads here this afternoon, a dozen women who had maintained a weeklong vigil on the roadside cried as their sons and husbands stepped gingerly to freedom.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Science Times on Tuesday about a skin cancer, malignant melanoma, included an incorrect reference from a researcher about the vaccinia virus's disease-causing effect.
Vaccinia is a close relative of the smallpox virus but does not cause the disease.


Liggett to Change Its Focus With Shift From Cigarettes
LEAD: In a bid to de-emphasize its tobacco business, the Liggett Group Inc., the smallest of the nation's six cigarette makers, said yesterday that it planned to change its name to the Brooke Group Ltd. and diversify further into sports and entertainment products.


Flutie Job Interview
LEAD: In what is shaping up as a huddle of former Patriots quarterbacks, Doug Flutie, the 1984 Heisman Trophy winner from Boston College, headed to Vancouver yesterday from Boston to meet with Joe Kapp, general manager of the British Columbia Lions, about the possibility of Flutie's playing for the Lions in the Canadian Football


FOLEY VINDICATED BY VOTE ON FLAG
LEAD: The House vote to reject a constitutional amendment barring flag desecration was a vindication of Speaker Thomas S. Foley's strategy to combine high-flown argument and personal persuasion to achieve political victory.


Central Park Jury Is Seated
LEAD: Five women and a man were chosen as jurors yesterday in the case against three youths charged in the rape and attempted murder of a 29-year-old woman jogger in Central Park.
Opening statements will begin on Monday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
The jury includes 10 men and 2 women.
The other women and a man will be alternates.


The Mandela Visit;   Mandela's Visit: Today's Schedule
LEAD:
8 A.M.: Nelson Mandela meets with business leaders at One World Trade Center.
11 A.M.: Mr. Mandela addresses the General Assembly of the United Nations.
3 P.M.: Winnie Mandela attends a women's leadershop symposium at House of Lord Church, 415 Atlantic Ave., Brooklyn.
4:25 P.M.: Mrs.


New Disclosure in Inquiry On Avianca Plane Crash
LEAD: A captain for Avianca Airlines told Federal investigators today that the company did not train its flight crews to use specific words in asking air traffic controllers for priority treatment when a plane was running out of fuel.


Review/Operetta;   Sullivan's 'Rose of Persia'
LEAD: Sir Arthur Sullivan's collaborations with librettists other than W. S. Gilbert have not weathered history well, although now and again they are revived as footnotes to the enduringly popular Gilbert and Sullivan canon.
One of them, ''The Rose of Persia,'' resurfaced at a meeting of the Gilbert and Sullivan Society of New York, at CAMI Hall last


France Ties Africa Aid to Democracy
LEAD: While pledging to stand by Africa during its current acute economic crisis, President Francois Mitterrand said today that French aid would in the future flow ''more enthusiastically'' to those countries that take steps toward democracy.


Pop/Jazz;   Theme and Endless Variation: Jazz at the JVC Festival
LEAD: THE JVC Jazz Festival, which has rumbled into town and is opening its many doors tonight, is half a jazz festival and half a festival about jazz.
For every Dizzy Gillespie, who is playing at Carnegie Hall with a big band, there is a group like the Jazz Passengers, who can play jazz but who mostly use it, query it, poke some fun at it and revivify it.


Gone With the Wind, A Certificate Returns
LEAD: Thirty-three years after John Hook's birth certificate was swept away by a tornado, the document arrived in his mother's mail.


Here Comes The Other World Cup
LEAD: Hands are still not allowed in soccer, except for our boy Diego Armando, of course, but hands do keep getting into the act.


Garfinckel's In Chapter 11
LEAD: In a move reflecting continuing problems in the retailing industry, the owner of the Garfinckel's department store chain said today that it had filed for bankruptcy protection and would liquidate the inventories of its 10 stores.


A City With a Big Stake In Trump, the Debtor
LEAD: Laura McNichol has been on the job at Trump Castle for only four months, but she, like others in the heavily leveraged Trump empire, is concerned that her boss, the onetime billionaire Donald J. Trump, may soon need some charity.


Review/Art;   Hans Hofmann: New Perspectives
LEAD: IT is perhaps a measure of the lingering skepticism about Hans Hofmann's worth as a painter that the exhibition now at the Whitney Museum of American Art is the first to survey his entire career.
The two major retrospectives before Hofmann's death in 1966, one at the Whitney in 1957 and the other at the Museum of Modern Art in 1963, were both limited in scope, as was the 1976 show at the Hirshhorn Museum in Washington and the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston, which focused on


Defending Germany
LEAD: Facing the prospect of the end of the division of Germany within six months, Westerners with historical recall face this dilemma: Whom should we distrust more - the Russians or the Germans?


Rome Journal;   Soccer Cup Nights: Take a Deep Breath and Enjoy
LEAD: After long watching their monuments wither under the pitiless assaults of air pollution, Romans have finally figured out how to solve their suffocating traffic problem.
It turned out to be so simple.


Flutie Job Interview
LEAD: In what is shaping up as a huddle of former Patriots quarterbacks, Doug Flutie, the 1984 Heisman Trophy winner from Boston College, headed to Vancouver yesterday from Boston to meet with Joe Kapp, general manager of the British Columbia Lions, about the possibility of Flutie's playing for theLions in the Canadian Football


New Unit At Maxwell
LEAD: The Maxwell Communication Corporation yesterday announced the formation of a new unit, Maxwell Electronic Publishing, and named Frederick Bowes 3d as its president.


Chicago Trial Nears Its End
LEAD: The Government's charges in a commodity futures fraud trial are ''a house of cards'' based on a desperate and phony theory, a defense lawyer said today in his closing arguments.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Abitibi-Price Inc., Toronto, a lumber maker, will build a $56 million de-inking plant at the Alabama River Newsprint Co. mill in Claiborne, Ala.
The project involves its joint-venture partner, Parsons &amp; Whittemore Inc., a wood products company.


Results Plus
LEAD:
TENNIS
Chang Upset by Australian
Michael Chang of the United States lost two tie breakers yesterday and with them his second-round match, bowing to Mark Kratzman of Australia, 7-6, 7-6, at the Manchester Open grass-court tournament in England.
Chang was seeded third.
Pete Sampras, seeded second, beat Joey Rive, 4-6, 6-3, 6-2.(AP)


Florida's Ex-Tax Chief Pleads No Contest to Ethics Charge
LEAD: Florida's former top tax collector pleaded no contest Wednesday to a reduced charge of attempted official misconduct and was sentenced to a year's probation.


Shaw Case Goes To Federal Court
LEAD: A Federal judge has scheduled a hearing for next Tuesday in the case involving the Boston Celtics and the guard Brian Shaw.


How to Make Sure Of What Ivan Thinks
LEAD: To the Editor:


Devon Fredericks Weds Eli Zabar
LEAD: Devon S. Fredericks and Eli Zabar were married yesterday at their home in New York by Rabbi Robert Levine.
The bride is a daughter of Tina S. Fredericks of East Hampton, L.I., and New York, and the late Pierce Griffin Fredericks.
Mr.
Zabar is a son of Lillian Zabar of New York and Miami Beach and the late Louis


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.25
9.66
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.77
7.76
8.15
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
8.65
8.66
8.13
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.53
8.57
8.42
30-YR.


Barry's Lawyer Assails Star Witness's Credibility
LEAD: The defense in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug trial unleashed an all-out assault today on the credibility of the prosecution's star witness, Charles Lewis.


Hitachi Revamps
LEAD: Hitachi Ltd., a Tokyo-based maker of electronics and electrical products, said it would merge its two California-based American consumer manufacturing and sales companies to form a new company called Hitachi Home Electronics (America) Inc.
The consolidation of Hitachi America Ltd. in Anaheim and the Hitachi Sales Corporation of America in Compton is designed to strengthen the parent company's position in the American market.


12 Indicted As Mob Rulers Of Painting
LEAD: Twelve men, including eight top painters' union leaders, were indicted yesterday and accused of participating in a Mafia-led conspiracy that rigged bids for almost every major public and private painting contract in New York City for 12 years.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JUNE 22, 1990
LEAD:
The Economy


O'Connor Revives Talk Of Excommunication
LEAD: John Cardinal O'Connor once again raised the specter of excommunication for Catholic politicians who favor abortion rights when he said yesterday that he could not guarantee he would never use the penalty.
But he also said he had no intention of excommunicating anyone in particular on abortion or any other issue.


Cocoa Prices Drop Sharply; Analyst Says Rally Is Over
LEAD: Cocoa futures prices fell sharply yesterday on the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange in New York.


Review/Theater;   A Revival Of a Show By Lerner And Weill
LEAD: ''Love Life,'' a 1948 Kurt Weill-Alan Jay Lerner musical that is being given its first major revival by the American Music Theater Festival in Philadelphia, is a fascinating, odd duck of a show.


Kaypro Is Backed On Board Position
LEAD: The Kaypro Corporation, which is operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, said its founder, Andrew F. Kay, had received court permission to add a fifth, friendly member to the computer maker's board.
The company said that after regaining control of Kaypro's operations, Mr.
Kay ousted Roy Y.


Joffrey Ballet Arrived in Los Angeles Debt-Free
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dancing at Lincoln Center, for Even Uninitiated Feet
LEAD: Dancin' fools can direct their feet to Lincoln Center tomorrow to whirl and boogie under the stars.


High Court Bars States From Energy Trust Suit
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that states cannot bring Federal antitrust suits on behalf of consumers charging energy producers with illegal price-fixing.


'Fledermaus' in Jersey
LEAD: The June Opera Festival of New Jersey is presenting ''Die Fledermaus,'' by Johann Strauss Jr., at the Allan P. Kirby Arts Center of the Lawrenceville School, Route 206 in Lawrenceville, N.J., tonight at 8 and Sunday at 3 P.M.
The production (sung in English) is directed by William Woodman and conducted by David Hoose, and features Richard Byrne as Eisenstein, Lauren Wagner as Rosalinda, Karen Smith Emerson as Adele and Gregory Powell as Dr.


After Bush Puts P.L.O. on Sidelines: Is Shamir the Man for U.S. to Press?
LEAD: Having suspended its discussion with the Palestine Liberation Organization, partly under pressure from Israel, the Bush Administration has now decided to focus on Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel to revive the fading hopes for Middle East peace negotiations.
The suspension of the


Gunmen Fire at Officials in Haiti In Pre-election Surge of Violence
LEAD: Gunmen opened fire this morning at a hotel where the governing Council of State was meeting to discuss a wave of pre-election violence, killing one man and critically wounding two others.


Hungary Opens Exchange
LEAD: Hungary reopened its stock exchange today, 42 years after it was closed by the Communist Party.


Evolution in Europe;   Bonn, After Arrests, Checks For Honecker Link to Terrorists
LEAD: After the arrest of 10 West German terrorist suspects in East Germany, a West German prosecutor has opened an investigation to determine whether Erich Honecker and other officials of the fallen East German Communist Government can be charged with obstruction of justice.


At Sotheby's, the Resident Old Master Is the One Wielding the Hammer
LEAD: On the blocka t Sotheby's was a collection of the Old Masterpaintings and on the podium was the resident old master, the man with the golden gavel, John L. Marion. ''Lot No. 100, a pair of Canalettos,'' he announced as the scenes of 18th-century Venice appeared on the platform. ''What shall we say?


Review/Music;   Returning The Artifice To an Opera With Dance
LEAD: Heading the list of unrealities in a field full of them is opera's relationship to real time.
Music is the culprit in the medium's losing battle to relate song to the natural unfolding of human intercourse on stage.
Music creates its own time scheme, and it is a lingering one regardless of how fast or slow its movement is.


Hill, Holliday Meets Lotus Conditions
LEAD: Just seven months after the Lotus Development Corporation gave its estimated $15 million account to Scali, McCabe, Sloves, the computer software company announced yesterday that it had chosen a new agency, Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston.


Judge to Rule in July on X Rating for 'Tie Me Up!'
LEAD: Lawyers debated the fairness of the X rating given to the Pedro Almodovar film ''Tie Me Up!
Tie Me Down!'' yesterday in the first courtroom challenge to the Motion Picture Association of America's film-rating system in 20 years.


Bennett Defends Plan to Fight Drugs in Peru
LEAD: The national drug policy director, William J. Bennett, insisted today that American military aid to Peru, including the use of American military trainers in coca-producing regions of the country, would not create ''another Vietnam.''


A Savings Fiasco in Texas Ends at a Fire-Sale Price
LEAD: In the mid-1980's the Stonebridge Ranch, a 6,250-acre development planned as a sprawling community of million-dollar homes, scenic golf courses and 13 man-made lakes, symbolized the vigor of the North Texas economy and the optimism of the aggressive savings and loan that poured an estimated $330 million into buying and upgrading the property.


No Dismissal of Marcos Case
LEAD: The judge in the racketeering trial of Imelda Marcos yesterday denied defense motions to dismiss the charges.
The judge, John F. Keenan of Federal District Court in Manhattan, said he planned to send the case to the jury on Thursday.
Mrs.
Marcos is charged with stealing more than $200 million from the Philippine Treasury while her husband, Ferdinand, was that country's president.


L. A. Moskowitz, 74, A New York Banker And Philanthropist
LEAD: Louis A. Moskowitz, a banker and philanthropist, died on Wednesday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 74 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Narciso Puente Jr., Judge, 70
LEAD: Narciso Puente Jr., a retired administrative law judge, died on Wednesday at Beth Israel Hospital.
He was 70 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Bell Atlantic Talks
LEAD: The Bell Atlantic Corporation says it is in talks with some Latin American countries concerning the possible privatization of national telephone companies.
The company declined to be specific, but Argentina, Mexico and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico are actively studying whether to sell their state-owned telephone systems.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
On the Tuba


A Drop-Dead Poster
LEAD: Melissa Antonow is only 12 years old so it's fair to say she'll probably pick up and discard any number of career choices before maturity.
But it's also fair to say that she already shows a talent for the drop-dead graphic and the strong headline.
Melissa Antonow may have a future in advertising.


DNA Fingerprinting Showdown Expected in Ohio
LEAD: DNA fingerprinting, widely promoted by law-enforcement officials as a powerful tool for prosecutors, has increasingly come under criticism as unreliable by some molecular biologists.
Beginning next week many leading experts on this method of analyzing genetic material to identify people will gather in a Federal courthouse in Toledo,


Negative Votes Would Wake Up the Candidates
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dollar Mixed in Light Day As Gold Increases in Price
LEAD: The dollar was mixed against other major currencies yesterday, gaining against the yen but falling against the West German mark in light trading.





Arabs Split in Reaction to Bush's Move on P.L.O.
LEAD: The United States decision to suspend contacts with the Palestine Liberation Organization produced forecasts today of increased violence from many Palestinian and Arab commentators, but some Arab nations sought to dampen the furor with more muted expressions.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Opinions Can Be Libel
In a major decision on libel law, the Supreme Court ruled that the First Amendment does not automatically shield expressions of opinion from being found libelous.
Page A17.
Painters Union Indictments
Twelve men were indicted in a Mafia conspiracy that rigged bids for nearly all major public and private painting contracts in New York City.


Brazil Backed on Economy
LEAD: United States Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher expressed strong support today for President Fernando Collor de Mello's sweeping economic changes and the opening of Brazil's economy.


A Top Senate Budget Official Dismisses White House Cuts
LEAD: The chairman of the Senate Budget Committee said today that the deficit-cutting proposal offered by the White House on Wednesday was not enough to serve as the basis for serious negotiations with Congress.


Florio School-Aid Package Gains Final Approval
LEAD: The State Assembly gave final approval to Gov.
Jim Florio's ambitious legislative program today, passing a school financing formula that will pump billions of dollars into poor and middle-income districts in the coming years.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''To the victor belong only those spoils that may be constitutionally obtained.''
- Associate Justice William J. Brennan Jr. on patronage.
[A16:1.]


Greenspan Says Credit Is Sufficient
LEAD: The chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Alan Greenspan, said today that lax lending standards by banks and insufficient supervision by regulators in the 1980's were two key elements that have forced bankers in certain areas of the country to restrict credit to businesses.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an obituary on Wednesday about Roy Nutt, a computer software executive, misidentified the man with whom he founded the Computer Sciences Corporation.
He was Fletcher Jones, not Fletcher James.


Bombing at London Air Base
LEAD: A bomb exploded at the Royal Air Force's administrative base at Stanmore Park northwest of London today, but a guard had spotted a suspicious-looking rucksack and the base and a nearby senior citizens' home were evacuated before the blast, the police said.
No casualties were reported.
The police said the Irish Republican Army was the main suspect.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-11


Roll-Call in House Rejection Of a Flag Amendment Plan
LEAD: Following is the roll-call vote of 254 to 177 by which the House of Representativs today rejected a proposed constitutional amendment to prohibit physical desecration of the flag.
Approval would have required a two-thirds majority.
A yes vote is a vote to approve the amendment.
Voting yes were 95 Democrats and 159 Republicans.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
CPC International Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J., a food processing company, named Lawrence K. Hathaway a corporate vice president.
Mr.
Hathaway will remain president of the Best Foods grocery products unit.


The Bailout: No Savagery Required
LEAD: Chairman Dan Rostenkowski of the House Ways and Means Committee startled a meeting of mayors this week by declaring there would be no peace dividend for the cities.
Why?
Because the Federal money freed by defense cuts would be gobbled up by the bailout of bankrupt saving and loan institutions.
At the same conference, Mayor David Dinkins of New


Surging Mets Less Interested in a Trade
LEAD: Three weeks after ''the change,'' as they tactfully call the sacking of Davey Johnson, even the Mets are startled by the change in their fortunes.
And they admit that for now it has taken them out of the trading market, where they were desperately searching for salvation before Bud Harrelson replaced Johnson as manager on


Fourth Victim In Zodiac Case Is Shot in Park
LEAD: A gunman who is obsessed with the 12 signs of the zodiac struck again yesterday morning, claiming his fourth victim by shooting a homeless man in the chest as he slept on a park bench in Central Park, the police said.


Sports People: BASEBALL;   Steinbrenner Hearing
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent announced yesterday that he would hold a hearing July 5 for George Steinbrenner, principal owner of the Yankees, to answer questions about his dealings with Howard Spira.


Minolta Charge Is Withdrawn
LEAD: The Minolta Camera Company said today that Honeywell Inc. had withdrawn a complaint to the International Trade Commission accusing the Japanese company of violating its patent on auto-focus technology.


A Woman Is in a Cell and a Baby Is Buried
LEAD: Yessana Jordan, 12 months old, was buried here today in the tiniest of white coffins before a gathering of those who had known and cared for her as she was carried through the adoption system.


Isabelle Silverman, Museum Aide, 81
LEAD: Isabelle Silverman, a former public relations consultant for the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, died on Thursday at the Jewish Home &amp; Hospital for the Aged in Manhattan.
She was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Federal Cancer Experts Endorse Less-Radical Breast Surgery Form
LEAD: A Federal panel of experts says removing a cancerous tumor in the early stages of breast cancer gives as good a survival chance to women as removal of the entire breast.


Review/Theater;   Landlocked In Suburbia By the Pool
LEAD: Perhaps there's a play to be written about four people sitting around a backyard swimming pool in the Midwest on a sunny Sunday in May discussing the vagaries of the fiberglass business between dips, but Wesley Moore's ''Swim Visit,'' the current production at Primary Stages, is not it.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.19
8.25
9.57
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.76
7.77
8.07
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.63
7.65
7.96
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.52
8.53
8.27
30-YR.


May Spending Unchanged; Income Shows a Small Rise
LEAD: Personal spending was flat in May, the Government said today in a report pointing to growing caution among consumers who have been a major source of strength for the economy during seven years of growth.


Brooklyn Museum to Cut Staff, Hours and Exhibits
LEAD: Anticipating a sharp cut in financial support by New York City and a projected deficit of more than $1 million, the Brooklyn Museum plans to eliminate 15 percent of its 300 staff positions, cut its visiting hours and effectively keep one of its finest collections from public view.


First Brands Stock
LEAD: The First Brands Corporation, whose products include such familiar brands as Glad plastic bags, Prestone motor oil and STP motor oil additive, said it might place itself on the auction block.
Shares in the Danbury, Conn., consumer products maker zoomed 20.1 percent yesterday, or $4.75, to finish at $28.375.


Thousands of Sailors on the Town for Fleet Week


Panel Proposes Cut in Radiation Limit
LEAD: Governments should drastically cut the maximum allowable radiation dose for nuclear power plant workers, medical personnel and others exposed in their work, an international commission of experts said today.


Dow Falls 44.55 Points, To 2,857.18
LEAD: Stocks tumbled late yesterday as program traders moved in heavily toward the end of the day selling stocks along a broad front.


News Summary
LEAD: International
2-5
Ottawa's plan for Quebec collapsed.
The Canadian Government conceded that a long and divisive effort to confer a special constitutional status on Quebec had failed.
Page 1
A global relief effort for Iran began as the stunned nation started to grasp the magnitude of what appeared to be the country's worst earthquake.


Books of The Times;   2 Views of Korean War, One Lofty, One Muddy
LEAD:
The Coldest War
A Memoir of Korea
By James Brady
Illustrated. 248 pages. Orion Books/Crown Publishers.
$19.95.
Drawing the Line
The Korean War, 1950-1953
By Richard Whelan
Illustrated. 428 pages. Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.


Judge Halts Regents Censure Of Two Doctors in Zion Case
LEAD: A state judge today temporarily blocked punitive action against two doctors in the Libby Zion case.


Affirmative Action Is at Least on the Right Track;   Nature and Nurture
LEAD: To the Editor:


Evolution in Europe;   Soviets Are Said to Pull Nuclear Arms From Some Restive
LEAD: The Soviet Government, concerned that ethnic unrest in some regions could imperil control of its nuclear arsenal, has begun moving scores of battlefield nuclear weapons out of troubled areas and into the more politically stable Russian republic, American officials said today.


Hugh Southern Resigns As Met Opera Manager
LEAD: In a move that has taken the opera world by surprise, Hugh Southern announced yesterday that he would resign as general manager of the Metropolitan Opera effective July 1.


Regents Exams Called Secure
LEAD: Education Commissioner Thomas Sobol said today that Regents examinations had been completed this week without a repetition of last year's stolen tests.
The state shipped 1.6 million examinations and 900,000 answer keys to high schools, and not one was reported stolen, Mr.
Sobol said.
The one-week testing period ended on Thursday.


A Brazen Assault on Legal Services
LEAD: The Legal Services Corporation is a survivor.
It's been attacked by losing litigants and Ronald Reagan, who felt that providing lawyers for the poor was an exercise in radical social engineering.
President Bush, urged by his right wing to press the assault, has instead pursued moderation, appointing a mixture of friends, foes and the uncommitted to the corporation's board.


Robert H. Lurie, Teams' Owner
LEAD: Robert H. Lurie, a part-owner of two professional sports teams in Chicago, died of cancer Wednesday at Northwest Memorial Hospital, hospital officials said today.
He was 48 years old.


Henley May End Its Stake in Itel
LEAD: The Henley Group Inc. said it might dispose of its 38.5 percent stake in the Itel Corporation.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Henley said it planned to register to sell between 8 million and 16.7 million Itel shares through a public offering.
The remaining two million Itel shares will be contributed to its Fisher International Inc.


Chicago Shuts Out Athletics By 5-0
LEAD: Eric King pitched a six-hitter and Dan Pasqua and Scott Fletcher hit two-run homers as the Chicago White Sox cut the Oakland Athletics' lead in the American League West to three games with a 5-0 victory tonight.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about accounts of violence in Romania carried an incorrect dateline.
It was transmitted from Magurele, not Magheru.


M.T.A. Keeps Token Clerks, But Cuts Trains and Painting
LEAD: Transit officials yesterday abandoned a plan to reduce the number of token sellers at busy subway stations but agreed on several other budget cuts: reducing service on the 4, 5, C, J and R lines, imposing a hiring freeze and scaling back painting of subway stations.


Big Growth Disclosed in List of Barred Aliens
LEAD: The Government during the last decade added as many as 238,143 people to its list of foreigners barred from the country for political or security reasons, more than double the number who had been placed on the list since it was created in 1904.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about the ''Masterpiece Theater'' television broadcast of ''The Charmer'' misidentified the actress shown.
She was Fiona Fullerton, not Judy Parfitt.


The Mandela Visit: Review/Television;   Making a South African Into a Hometown Hero
LEAD: Television viewers in New York had an opportunity this week to watch two Nelson Mandelas in action, both equally formidable and impressive.


Bensonhurst Suspect No Racist, 4 Blacks Say
LEAD: Lawyers for John S. Vento, the third defendant in the Bensonhurst racial killing case, rested their case yesterday after calling four black friends of Mr.
Vento, who testified he was not a racist.


Patents;   A New Way To Evaluate Race Horses
LEAD: When horse-racing professionals evaluate a thoroughbred before purchase, they scrutinize its pedigree, its health and its physical characteristics, like the length of its legs and the breadth of its chest.


Shelter Finds Popularity By Doing Good Invisibly
LEAD: When a homeless shelter was first proposed deep in the canyons of Wall Street, the idea inspired a barrage of opposition from residents and businesses in the area.
There were leaflets and angry words and ultimately, a lawsuit.


College;   Big College Football Leagues Are Trying to Get Bigger Still
LEAD: Like superpowers dividing up the globe to expand their empires, the nation's major football conferences are raiding other conferences and courting independent schools for stronger teams.
Inspired by the lure of larger television market shares, the conferences are setting the stage for regional college football monopolies by the middle of the 1990's.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Healthy, Fragrant Roses
LEAD:
June belongs to roses.
All rose plants require at least six hours of full sun a day to bloom well.
Protect them from black spot and mildew by spraying with a nontoxic fungicide.
And set traps for Japanese beetles when they begin to feed on the flowers.
Mulch the soil with buckwheat hulls or wood chips to preserve moisture and keep down weeds.


Sales Officer For Apple Unit
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. said today that Michael L. Dionne had been named vice president, sales, of the Apple U.S.A. division, effective immediately.


Liberia Talks in Lull; Rebels Take Town
LEAD: Efforts to reach a peaceful settlement of the Liberian crisis made little headway today, and there were indications that the rebel forces are poised to advance on Monrovia unless major political concessions are offered soon.


First Lady Attends Opening of Children's Home


San Pellegrino Recalls Bottled Water In New York After Contamination
LEAD: Some bottles of San Pellegrino, the Italian mineral water, are being recalled in much of the New York City area after the discovery of the chemical xylene in four bottles.


Drexel Aide's Sentence Cut
LEAD: A former trading assistant at Drexel Burnham Lambert, Lisa Jones, was sentenced yesterday to 10 months in prison for lying to the Government during its investigation of the Wall Street firm.


Sir Tom Hopkinson, Photojournalist, 85
LEAD: Sir Tom Hopkinson, a pioneer in British photojournalism, died on Wednesday at his home in Oxford, his family said today.
He was 85 years old.
Mr.
Hopkinson was editor of the now defunct magazine Picture Post from 1940 to 1950 and of the South African magazine Drum, which was aimed at black readers, from 1958 to 1961.


CANADA ABANDONS ACCORD ON QUEBEC
LEAD: The Canadian Government conceded tonight that a long and divisive effort to confer a special constitutional status on Quebec had failed.


Let Well Enough Alone in Adirondacks Park
LEAD: To the Editor:


Witness in Barry Trial Describes Incident at Hotel
LEAD: A prosecution witness in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug trial testified today that he had seen the Mayor and a friend take cocaine and crack-smoking paraphernalia into a hotel bathroom, then had seen and smelled heavy smoke.


An F.D.R. Memorial Finally Wins Approval
LEAD: The Commission of Fine Arts has approved a $47 million memorial to President Franklin D. Roosevelt, ending a quarter-century of controversy and stalemate over its design.


Paul J. C. Friedlander, 79, Dies; An Ex-Travel Editor of The Times
LEAD: Paul Josef Crost Friedlander, retired editor of The New York Times Travel section, died on Thursday at Arlington (Va.) Hospital.
He was 79 years old and had recently moved to Falls Church, Va., from his home in Roslyn, L.I.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JUNE, 23, 1990
LEAD:
The Economy


A Corrupt Alliance in New York Clenches the Construction Trade
LEAD: Authorities say Thursday's indictments of 12 men accused of rigging painting contracts spotlights a wider problem in the city's construction industry: the secret pacts between the Mafia, union officials and corrupt contractors.


Sports People: BASEBALL;   Cox Replaces Nixon As Braves Manager
LEAD: The Atlanta Braves, last in the National League West, dismissed Manager Russ Nixon yesterday and replaced him with General Manager Bobby Cox, who managed the team a decade ago.


Coniston Pool For Investing Is Disbanded
LEAD: Coniston Partners has run out of companies to raid.
Coniston, one of the best-known and most-feared corporate investors of the 1980's, said yesterday that it planned to dissolve its $700 million investment pool and return the money to its limited partners.


The Mandela Visit;   Meeting New York on Her Own, Winnie Mandela Takes Homage in Stride
LEAD: With serene dignity and an occasional bit of playfulness, Winnie Mandela continued accepting tributes across New York City yesterday.
She spoke of her suffering, vowed to continue her fight against apartheid, and reassured those worried about the effects of the demanding tour on her 71-year-old husband, Nelson


I.B.M. Set To Re-enter PC Market
LEAD: Trying again in an area where it suffered its most embarrassing defeat, the International Business Machines Corporation plans to introduce a new home computer line next week.


Strong 2d Round Leaves McCallister in Lead
LEAD: If his first two rounds at the Buick Classic are any indication, Blaine McCallister has apparently overcome the problem with mononucleosis that has dogged his game this year.


John Adams, 85, Dies; Cold-Storage Executive
LEAD: John Quincy Adams, a retired cold-storage company president, died Thursday at Mountainside Hospital in Glen Ridge, N.J.
He was 85 years old and lived in Montclair, N.J.


'Robin HUD' Given A Stiff Sentence
LEAD: ''Robin HUD,'' a former real estate agent who said she stole from the Government to give to the poor, was sentenced today to serve almost four years in prison and pay $600,000 in restitution.


Creditors Reject Plan for Allegheny
LEAD: Creditors of Allegheny International Inc. defeated a New York investment firm's plan for putting the small-appliance maker back on its feet.
As a result, United States Bankruptcy Judge Joseph L. Cosetti will proceed with a hearing next Thursday on the company's reorganization plan.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Yesterday was fund-raising day in New York as 1,700 experts in coaxing money for worthy institutions held their 11th annual conference.
As usual, they tossed some bouquets at luminaries in the philanthropy field.


Sports People: TRACK AND FIELD;   Stuice Tests Positive
LEAD: Mike Stulce, the National Collegiate Athletic Association shot-put champion in 1988 and 1989, has been suspended from competition for two years after testing positive for high testosterone levels, The Athletics Congress announced yesterday in Indianapolis.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Acton Corp., Raleigh, N.C., an insurance and real estate company, said its Hickory White Co. subsidiary had completed the acquisition of Hickory Furniture operations for $44.5 million.


Evolution in Europe;   Shevardnadze Seeks Curbs On Forces in New Germany
LEAD: The Soviet Union proposed unexpectedly today that an international endorsement of German unity include provisions for a staged withdrawal of all foreign troops from a united Germany and strict limits on its military.


Prosecutor Lauds F.B.I. Man
LEAD: An undercover F.B.I. agent in an investigation of corruption at the world's biggest commodity exchanges was ''no bumpkin,'' a Federal prosecutor said today in concluding his case against three traders.


Trial of Former Party Leader Opens in Prague Next Week
LEAD: Miroslav Stepan, the former leader of Czechoslovakia's Communist Party, will go on trial on Monday on charges of abusing his office in connection with anti-Government protests crushed by the police in 1988 and 1989, the state press agency C.T.K. reported today.


For Theatrical Palaces Of 42d St., a New Life
LEAD: To the Editor:


Air Link Snag Seen
LEAD: The European Commission will block a linkup of British Airways, Belgium's Sabena World Airlines and the Netherlands' KLM Royal Dutch Airlines on the ground that it restricts competition, commission sources said.


The Mandela Visit;   The Defiant Freed Fist Collects a Few Dollars
LEAD: Nelson Mandela finished his whirl through New York last night in the time-honored fashion of foreign revolutionaries: he asked for money.
He didn't have to ask, really.
Even before Mr.
Mandela set foot in New York City, Madonna, Mike Tyson and others well-known, powerful or just rich had written checks to stand in the same room with him, drink the same


Mortgage Rates Up
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages are averaging 10.16 percent, up slightly from 10.12 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.50 percent this week, up from 8.44 percent the week before.


Quaker Oats Expects Flat Earnings for Year
LEAD: Faced with persistent softness in its important cereal and pet food businesses, William D. Smithburg, chairman and chief executive of the Quaker Oats Company, said today that sales and earnings for the fiscal year ending June 30 would be flat or ''slightly lower'' than last year.


M.T.A. Can Go Ahead With Fare Automation
LEAD: Legislative leaders announced an agreement today that will enable the Metropolitan Transportation Authority to install a long-awaited automated fare-collection system on subways and buses.


Dayton Clearance On Marshall Field
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission cleared the way for the Dayton Hudson Corporation to acquire Marshall Field &amp; Company for about $1.05 billion, Dayton Hudson announced today.
The proposed takeover was being examined under Federal antitrust law, and the F.T.C. allowed the waiting period to expire without issuing an opinion.


Representatives Speak Out on Flag Desecration Amendment


Bush Promising Quicker Pursuit In Savings Cases
LEAD: President Bush entered the political battle over his Administration's handling of the savings and loan crisis today by announcing a plan to send ''teams of razor-sharp prosecutors and auditors'' to pursue and speed hundreds of investigations into savings and loan fraud.


To Buy or Rent?
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Mandela Visit: Reporter's Notebook;   'Amandla!' 'A-Mandela?!' 'Awanda?' 'Amandla!'
LEAD: The 50,000 people who attended the Nelson Mandela rally at Yankee Stadium on Thursday night enthusiastically and repeatedly roared ''Amandla!''


Traffic Alert
LEAD: The east side of Broadway from 72d to 77th Streets will be closed today from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Beacon Theater Street Fair.


Many Catholics Object to Excommunication Threat
LEAD: Roman Catholic New Yorkers say they disapprove of John Cardinal O'Connor's threat of excommunication for elected officials who are Catholic and who support abortion rights, although they continue to view the Cardinal favorably in general, according to a new New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.


Single in 15th Gives Yanks 4 in a Row
LEAD: The manager was slumped in his chair.
It was well past midnight, but the game had just ended and he was trying to sort things out in his mind.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing of fairs and festivals in Weekend yesterday gave an incorrect date for the Summer Flea Market at Snug Harbor, S.I.
It is tomorrow, not today.


About New York;   Striving to Heal Young Lives Filled With Pain
LEAD: The 8-year-old girl staring at the floor might as well have been on another planet.
Then Diane Des Plantes gave her a big smile, tenderly touched her face and called her ''Sweetie Pie.''


Church Says Artworks Were Moved
LEAD: Representatives of the Church of Quedlinburg charged in Federal court here this afternoon that an unidentified person entered a bank vault where some of the ''Quedlinburg treasures'' are being kept, and placed items in a newly acquired safe deposit box only minutes before the judge in the case ordered the defendants not to move the artworks.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the House defeat of a proposed constitutional amendment on the flag referred to Representative Tim Valentine incorrectly in some copies.
He is from North Carolina, not Tennessee.


NATO Considering Proposing a Ceiling For German Troops
LEAD: To satisfy Soviet concerns about the size of a united Germany's armed forces, the NATO allies are considering offering Moscow a specific limit for the future German Army as part of the conventional-arms-reduction treaty being considered in Vienna, Administration officials said today.


Make Nuclear Weapons Safer Still
LEAD: Even as the threat of nuclear war ebbs, the risk of accidents and unauthorized launches deserves constant attention.
American nuclear weapons are extremely safe but still not safe enough.
The Air Force, for example, has now been ordered to remove hundreds of short-range nuclear attack missiles from its bombers until doubts about their safety are put to rest.


Review/Music;   Mims and Kraus in 'Traviata' in Park
LEAD: Circumstances seemed to conspire against the Metropolitan Opera's free performance of ''La Traviata'' on the Great Lawn of Central Park.
The Verdi opera was to have been heard on Tuesday, but a thunderstorm forced the company to postpone the performance until Thursday evening.


Levin Kipnis, Author, 96
LEAD: Levin Kipnis, a prolific writer of children's literature, died Wednesday in Tel Aviv.
He was 96 years old.


CHINA ENDS PURGE OF PARTY'S RANKS
LEAD: A year after the Communist Party announced a purge of members who were involved in the democracy movement, party members say, with relief and a bit of surprise, that the purge has fizzled.


In Washington, Banking At the Market Flopped
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lawsuit Is Filed to Halt Clinic Demonstrations
LEAD: The village of Dobbs Ferry, beleaguered by anti-abortion demonstrations and abortion-rights counterdemonstrations, has filed suit to keep the advocates from disrupting the village.


Patents;   Blow Dryer for Horses
LEAD: A Swiss company received a patent this week on a blow dryer for horses.
The machine was designed to dry the animals before they catch cold from either their own sweat or from being washed.
The machine consists of a large, heated blower that can be raised or lowered along a vertical track inside a large, vented, tent-like structure.


Ex-Head of Dutton To Be Editor at Crown
LEAD: Richard Marek, the former president and publisher of E. P. Dutton, has been named editor at large of the Crown Publishing Group.
Joyce Engelson, who had been editor in chief at Dutton, will become a special editor at Crown.


Largest Wing of Soviet Party Leans Toward Leninist Chief
LEAD: The nation's newest and largest wing of the Communist Party brandished a decidedly hard-line stamp today as it leaned in its leadership vote toward a doctrinaire Leninist who is critical of Gorbachev reforms.


Patents;   Improving the Accuracy Of Your Putting
LEAD: When golfers try to estimate the slope of a putting green, they routinely hold up a club to establish a vertical reference point.
Now, Albert N. Ronnick of Sarasota, Fla., has patented a putter featuring a built-in level indicator - like the ones in a carpenter's level - to make the job more accurate.


Agreement Near in Albany To Speed Some Adoptions
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders are nearing agreement on changes in the adoption laws that could shorten the time to adopt children who have been abandoned or neglected by their biological parents.


Mandela Seeks to Keep Pressure on South Africa


On Not Getting Lost in the Translation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Thompson Will Stay As Coach of the Hoyas
LEAD: John Thompson, the basketball coach at Georgetown, yesterday chose to remain at the school, where victories seem to come easily, rather than become general manager of the Denver Nuggets, a National Basketball Association franchise in search of consistent winning ways.


Nissan-Cray Deal
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Company said it had ordered a $22 million supercomputer from Cray Research Inc.
Japan's No. 2 auto maker said the Cray Y-MP8-664, to be installed in August, provides 2.5 times the processing power of the Cray X-MP-432 it will replace.
Nissan said it would use the new supercomputer in research on improving vehicle safety, resolving environmental problems and designing more attractive cars.


Oil Transfer From Crippled Tanker Off Texas Continues


Is 'Zodiac' Stalking His Prey?
LEAD: The gunman who calls himself the Zodiac appears to be stalking his victims and not selecting them at random as the police had thought, New York City's Chief of Detectives, Joseph R. Borrelli, said yesterday.


Topics of the Times;   Pride of the Yankees
LEAD: Repeatedly during his three days in New York, Nelson Mandela demonstrated magisterial bearing, tough intelligence and cogency.
At Yankee Stadium Thursday night, he demonstrated something else: remarkably graceful charity.


Canadian Dollar Declines Amid Worries on Quebec
LEAD: Activity in the currency markets yesterday centered on the Canadian dollar as the deadline approached for Canada to approve a much-disputed constitutional accord.


Carlyle Raises Stake in Harsco
LEAD: The Carlyle Group, the Washington-based merchant bank, has raised its stake in the Harsco Corporation to 8.47 percent from 7.25 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Carlyle also said it continued to hold discussions with financial sources and possible partners about ''increasing its investment in Harsco through a possible business combination transaction.


Philip Morris Will Buy Suchard's Europe Units
LEAD: Philip Morris Companies Inc., the world's largest consumer-products company, announced plans yesterday to become the world's second-largest coffee manufacturer and marketer by buying most of a Swiss coffee-and-candy giant for $3.8 billion.


Viola Wins 10th as Mets Pull Within 3 of Pirates
LEAD: Len Dykstra blew into town with his .384 batting average last night and made his first appearance of the year in the old ball yard.
But neither he nor Ken Howell nor the rest of the Philadelphia Phillies could slow the streaking Mets, who rammed across five runs inside two innings and bowled on past the


Topics of the Times;   The Chinese Take-Out Wars
LEAD: A woman who lives in a high-rise on the West Side of Manhattan finds herself in the middle of a cold-noodle fight.
Some 20 Chinese restaurants within 10 blocks of her building have made her a target.


Heat Drives Youngsters Under a Wading Pool


Beliefs
LEAD: It is midday in this Bavarian village, and Otto Huber is speaking with an intensity that makes his eyes squint.
He tugs and twirls the shaggy black hair and beard surrounding his broad face.
A few hours earlier, he had delivered the lines opening the morning segment of the daylong Oberammergau Passion Play.


Sri Lanka Reports Massacre
LEAD: Tamil guerrillas hacked to death 62 Muslims in eastern Sri Lanka today after accusing them of being Government informants, the Defense Ministry said.
A ministry official said the massacre at the village of Nintavur came on the 11th day of fierce fighting between the rebels and Government forces for control of the northeast.


Nonproliferate Peace
LEAD: The assumption that the Soviet-American arms race has ended, and with it the risk of global nuclear holocaust, has spread much faster than the facts.
Some troubling new issues are coming to the fore as countries contemplate the role of nuclear weapons in a world not dominated by East-West confrontation.


New Chairman At Circle K
LEAD: The Circle K Corporation has appointed as its new chairman a Cincinnati lawyer who is a partner with the law firm representing the company's largest shareholder.


The Long-Lost Road
LEAD: For the last six months, a special committee on revenue distribution has attempted to find a long-forgotten path that might lead collegiate athletics back to a time when all that truly mattered was how the game was played.
It has been a source of frustration for many of the committee members that every method they devise to parcel out $70 million annually in surplus television money cannot get away from a formula that rewards financial success and victories.


Grumman Plan On Retirement
LEAD: The Grumman Corporation, a military contractor hurt by the recent cutback in Pentagon spending, said today that it was offering early retirement to 6,000 employees.


The Mandela Visit;   Mandela Backs Sanctions And Meets U.S. Executives
LEAD: Nelson Mandela pressed his call for continued economic sanctions to force change in South Africa in an address at the United Nations yesterday, and perhaps more importantly, at a private meeting with major American business executives and investors.


Prices of Treasury Issues Rise a Bit
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were slightly higher yesterday despite several seemingly negative currents swirling about the credit markets.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Norway's 86-year-old KING OLAV V was released Thursday from the Oslo hospital where he had been recovering from a stroke suffered June 2.
He will continue his convalescence at the royal farm near Oslo, according to news reports.


The Mandela Visit;   Pretoria Arrests 11 Whites Reportedly Tied to Plot to Kill Mandela
LEAD: The South African police arrested and later released 11 whites who were linked by an Afrikaans-language weekly newspaper to a reported plot to kill Nelson Mandela, President F. W. de Klerk and other prominent South Africans.


Sports People: COLLEGE BASKETBALL;   Tarkanian Ruling Near
LEAD: After a 13-year journey that took them to the Supreme Court, Jerry Tarkanian and Nevada-Las Vegas are about to end the longest-running case in National Collegiate Athletic Association history.
The association's six-member infractions committee -minus one person - will hear the school's final presentation today.


U.S. DECLARES OWL TO BE THREATENED BY HEAVY LOGGING
LEAD: The northern spotted owl was formally declared a threatened species today, clearing the way for protection of the ancient forests in which the owls live and setting in motion a plan that could bring further economic trouble to timber towns in the Pacific Northwest.


Your Money;   Family Businesses Helped by Ruling
LEAD: Financial advisers to family-owned businesses are taking heart from a court decision in March on the estate of the publisher Samuel I. Newhouse.
The court held that the younger generation of the Newhouse family had been actively involved in managing the business, and therefore some of its value was attributable to them, rather than to the pater familias.


Japanese Store in Search of Sizzle
LEAD: With a wince, Makoto Nezu, the executive vice president of the Tobu Department Store Company, recalled the painful moment in late April when he heard that his company's $1.3 billion bid for Saks Fifth Avenue had fallen short.
He and his partners had been so confident of success that they were enjoying a pre-victory dinner at the ''21'' Club in New


Roscoe V. Elsworth, Judge, 97
LEAD: Roscoe V. Elsworth, a retired justice of the State Supreme Court in Ulster County, died on Wednesday at his home in Port Ewen, N.Y.
He was 97 years old.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Car Stereo Theft
LEAD: In cities around the country, ''No Radio'' window signs in cars have become a common sight.
The more desirable that car stereos become, the more likely they are to be stolen.
But there are ways to reduce the risk.


Milt Hinton at 80: A Celebration
LEAD: Milt Hinton, who is being honored tonight at Town Hall as part of the JVC Jazz Festival for his 80th birthday, can still walk a bass line that awes other musicians.
The fat and firm Hinton sound is propelled by an unfailingly perfect beat in which notes fall in the sort of geometric perfection that few can equal.


West Germans to Meet Dutch in 2d Round
LEAD: Organizers of the World Cup would not have minded a final between West Germany and the Netherlands.
Franz Beckenbauer, the coach of West Germany, does not mind having that matchup in the second round.


20 Stranded in Elevator at IRT Station in Brooklyn
LEAD: About 20 people in an elevator at the Clark Street subway station in Brooklyn Heights were stranded for 90 minutes in 80-degree heat last night when the cab became stuck between floors.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The biological evidence says that the northern spotted owl is in trouble.
We will not, and by law cannot, ignore that evidence.''
- John Turner, director of the Fish and Wildlife Service. [1:2.]


Bonn to Aid Kremlin Reforms With a $3 Billion Bank Credit
LEAD: The West German Government said today that it would guarantee a bank credit of five billion Deutsche marks, or about $3 billion, for the Soviet Union in an effort to bolster President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's flagging reform program.


Furry Trout and Other Creations
LEAD: Somewhere in China there lives a something with a human's face, a primate's shaggy coat and a penchant for weaving bamboo.
It is said to have lived there for 2,500 years but never within distance of a hunter or, in recent times, a photographer.
The closest anyone has got to the ''wildman,'' Science Times reported this week, is the 12 or so hairs snagged on bushes and recently scanned by electron microscopes.


70's Oil Suit Is Reinstated
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today reinstated a potential multibillion-dollar lawsuit by the states of California, Arizona, Oregon and Washington that accuses oil companies of conspiring to fix prices and contrive a gasoline shortage in the early 1970's.


Corrections
LEAD: The Diner's Journal column in Weekend yesterday included an erroneous report of a restaurant closing.
The restaurant, 150 Wooster, in SoHo, remains open.


French Erase a Few Flourishes From the Language
LEAD: The French will never again have to complain about having oignons (onions) and huitres (oysters) at their pique-niques.


2d Week of IRT Disruption
LEAD: There will be no uptown subway service and limited downtown service on the West Side IRT's Nos. 1, 2 and 3 lines between 42d and 96th Streets beginning at 12:01 A.M. today, and ending at 5 A.M. on Monday.
The disruptions, which are due to a switch replacement, will also occur next weekend.


For Flag Vote, History Won Over Political Risk
LEAD: Representative Mary Rose Oakar of Ohio reread the Bill of Rights and wondered why she had not done so sooner.
Representative Glenn Poshard of Illinois revisited some of the sacred shrines of American history.
Representative Peter Hoagland of Nebraska consulted his old law school friends and veterans' groups.


Affirmative Action Is at Least on the Right Track
LEAD: To the Editor:


Testing the Testers: Questions Raised About Labs' Accuracy
LEAD: At a time of rapidly growing demand for tests of environmental hazards, many commercial laboratories are producing misleading and inaccurate information.


Court Ruling on Patronage Gets Some Mixed Reviews
LEAD: To get his job, Jim Weyrick never submitted a resume, never took a test.
He just knew the right people.
And he volunteered to distribute the right political literature.


Patents;   A Swimming Belt To Deter Shark Attacks
LEAD: David P. Schneider, an inventor in Apalachin, N.Y., has won patent approval for a swimming belt designed to ward off sharks.


INSIDE
LEAD:
'Robin HUD' Sentenced


Du Pont to Construct Plants For Ozone-Safe Refrigerant
LEAD: Du Pont announced yesterday that it would design four plants to produce refrigeration chemicals that do not endanger the earth's ozone layer, but said it was continuing to delay a commitment to produce another family of compounds that would have a different use.


China Flood Toll Put at 254; Thousands of Houses Ruined
LEAD: The death toll from flooding in the southern Chinese province of Hunan has reached 254, a province official said today.


Evolution in Europe: West Berlin Journal;   Goodbye Charlie, Beige Symbol of the Cold War
LEAD: Checkpoint Charlie, long a focal point of the cold war and a principal crossing point between East and West Berlin, was removed by crane today before Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union and top German, French and British diplomats.


Studies Don't Support Passive Smoking Risk
LEAD: To the Editor:


3 Arrested for Welfare Fraud
LEAD: Hudson County Welfare Department case worker and two welfare clients were arrested on fraud charges, a county official said today.
The case worker, Bruce Matthews, 33 years old, of Jersey City, was arrested on charges of fraud, forgery, theft of services and falsifying records, said Lori Rankin, the county director of communications.


FUTURES/OPTIONS Plunge in Pork Belly Prices Seen as Likely to Continue
LEAD: Pork belly futures, which have taken a severe beating in the last two weeks, were expected to fall even further after a Government report yesterday showed a greater supply than the market had expected.


PBS Calls 'Ring' Ratings a Success
LEAD: Two years in the making at a cost of nearly $5 million, public television's broadcast of ''Der Ring des Nibelungen'' this week was a deliberate risk that appears to have drawn a broader audience than predicted.


A Leg Up for Ailing Pets
LEAD: Pets who are old, ailing or injured don't have to be confined to the floor.
Even if they find it difficult to jump to their favorite high spot, they can now make it there with the aid of PawsWay, a ramp designed for cats and small dogs with limited mobility.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MARTHA STEWART, the home decorating and entertainment writer, has angered some residents of Westport, Conn., for refusing to disclose how much she raised for charity through a decorator show house.


Toll in Iranian Quake Is Put at 29,000
LEAD: Thousands of people, dead and alive, were dug today from the rubble of what appeared to be Iran's worst earthquake.
A global relief effort got under way and a stunned nation began to grasp the magnitude of the disaster, which killed thousands and laid waste to a region half the size of New York State.


Bridge
LEAD: Half a century ago two English experts tried an experiment that is now barred by officials: They agreed that they would pass throughout a duplicate session, and explained this unsual tactic to their bewildered opponents.
They scored above average, in spite of passing out a lot of deals, because the opposing declarers had no clues from the bidding.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JUDITH JAMISON, the artistic director of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, was given the Medal of Achievement by the Philadelphia Art Alliance yesterday.
Established in 1940, the award honors individuals identified with Philadelphia who have contributed to the growth and development of the arts.


One Holdout Said to Snag Trump Deal
LEAD: A major German bank is now the biggest obstacle between Donald J. Trump and a $65 million loan package to rescue his empire, bankers said yesterday.


Durables Orders Up Last Month
LEAD: Orders for ''big ticket'' durable goods jumped 3.9 percent in May, the Government reported today.
Analysts said it was further evidence that the economy's sluggish manufacturing sector might be bouncing back.


Panel Urges Limiting Exposure to Radiation
LEAD: Governments should drastically cut the maximum allowable radiation dose for nuclear power plant workers, medical personnel and others exposed in their work, an international commission of experts said.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Sampras and Bloom Reach Final
Second-seeded Pete Sampras of the United States and unseeded Gilad Bloom of Israel advanced to the final after winning two matches each yesterday in Manchester, England, in a rainy warm-up for Wimbledon.(AP)
Navratilova to Final: Top-seeded Martina Navratilova overcame a flare-up of recurrent knee pain yesterday to beat seventh-seeded Jana Novotna of Czechoslovakia, 7-6, 3-6, 6-3, and reach the final of the Wimbledon grass-court warm-up in Eastbourne, England.(AP)


Review/Music;   Elevator Japes and Other Flights of Fancy
LEAD: In the varied musical and theatrical program presented last week by the Golden Fleece company at the Sanford Meisner Theater, Memrie Innerarity was a dynamo.
About the only thing she didn't do was manage the house.
If she had, she might have been able to the make the air-conditioning work properly last Sunday evening during the concluding performance, for everything she touched proved successful.


Clinical Tests of New AIDS Drug Assailed at Parley
LEAD: A new drug against AIDS being tested in unconventional clinical trials is showing good results, the leader of the experiment announced today at the Sixth International Conference on AIDS, but his report and the trials themselves were criticized at the conference.


Review/Theater;   A Mother Is Cheerful But Dead
LEAD: There is something about the phrase ''coping with loss'' that conjures a television melodrama in which people bravely learn to deal with a future that's minus someone near and dear. ''What's Wrong With This Picture?,'' a new comedy by Donald Margulies at the Jewish Repertory Theater, takes off on this theme, but instead of evoking tears it goes for the laughs, and certainly gets them.


All New Jersey Schools to Face New Limits
LEAD: Restrictions on spending await both the troubled urban school systems in New Jersey that are gaining millions of dollars under the state's revised school-financing formula, and the wealthy suburban districts facing sharp cutbacks in aid.


Danaher Filing
LEAD: Two New York investment partnerships, West Associates and KD Associates I, said in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that they planned to register to sell 1.51 million common shares of the Danaher Corporation, lowering their holding in the Washington-based manufacturing concern to 3 percent from 8.2 percent.


Two Summer Places
LEAD: We started coming to this island in summertime 25 years ago because it was beautiful, oceanic and hard to get to, but within our price range, which was not extensive.


A Civil Rights Theme For A Writing Course Campus Life: Texas
LEAD: Beginning in the fall, first-year students in composition courses at the University of Texas will no longer write extemporaneous essays on whichever William Faulkner short story or Henry James essay their instructor picks from their textbooks.
Instead, their reading and writing will focus on landmark affirmative- action and civil rights cases, as a result of curriculum changes by the


Hartford Losing a Link to Past Heads of State
LEAD: AS Sam Lubka reels off a list of past customers, you can see the faces of Connecticut's history going by. ''We've supplied hats to Governor Ribicoff, Governor Dempsey, Governor Meskill . . .,'' says Mr.
Lubka, pausing in silence over the current Governor, William A. O'Neill. ''Governor O'Neill does not wear hats,'' Mr.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I agree with those who say we must hurry quickly away from Marxism-Leninism, through Socialism, to Reaganism.'' - Pyotr S. Filipov, an economist on the Leningrad City Council. [1:4.]


Wendy Goldberg Marries Derek Pew
LEAD: Wendy Lynn Goldberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur M. Goldberg of Westfield, N.J., was married last evening to Derek Nicholas Pew, a son of Richard Glenn Pew of San Diego and Lydia Geacintov of Springfield, N.J.
The Rev.
Brenda Husson performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New


Review/Dance;   How to Turn Nothingness Into Humor
LEAD: The humor in the comedies that the Eva Dean Dance Company offered Thursday night at St.
Mark's Church derived from the way people in them always started to do things, yet only seldom managed to get them done.
Ms.
Dean invented many amusing ways for nothing to happen in her choreography.


Questions of Purpose and Leadership For Morgenthau's Harlem Branch
LEAD: The telephone rings occasionally.
Fewer than a dozen people drop in during the course of a week.
There is little about this office in the Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
State Office Building in Harlem to suggest that it is an outpost of the Manhattan District Attorney in the fight to stem the tide of crime swamping upper


INVENTING INNOCENCE
LEAD:
GONE PRIMITIVE
Savage Intellects, Modern Lives.
By Marianna Torgovnick.
Illustrated. 328 pp. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press. $24.95.


Search Continues for Survivors of Iranian Earthquake


OFFICER CHEE HAS SOMETHING TO PROVE
LEAD:
COYOTE WAITS
By Tony Hillerman.
292 pp. New York:
Harper &amp; Row. $19.95.


Talking: Mediation;   Resolving Disputes In Condos
LEAD: More than 30 million Americans now live in condominiums, cooperatives and homeowner associations.
And increasingly their internal disputes have been clogging the courts and bringing pressure for alternative forms of dispute resolution.


David Bailey Lee Is Wed To Hallie B. Stephenson
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Messiah in Woods Hole, Mass., Hallie Buford Stephenson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Eustis Stephenson of West Falmouth, Mass., was married yesterday to David Bailey Lee, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Holman Lee Jr. of Middletown, Conn.
The Rev.
Myrick T. Cross officiated.


Staying on the Safe Side; Nairobi
LEAD: Nairobi, where most people stay for just a few days before or after a safari, is no longer a town on the edge of the African bush.
It is a city of two million people with marked distinctions between rich and poor and, consequently, crime.
But with simple precautions, most visitors leave unscathed.


FINE STEREO COMES IN A SMALL PACKAGE
LEAD: It used to be said that what this country needs is a good five-cent cigar.
But in the course of cultural evolution, perceived needs change, and cigars no longer seem quite as vital.
Nowadays, at least if you listen to audio salesmen, the primary need is for a good sound system for people who hate gadgetry - something that's all music and practically no hardware.


Fashion;   Under The Sun And Out Of It, Too
LEAD: Some women wear hats all the time and some women never wear hats.
Other women don them for special occasions - a wedding or a funeral, maybe.
Then there are those for whom hats are purely functional, something to keep their heads warm in winter or dry in the rain.
But there is one time everyone should think about wearing a head covering: when out in the sun, whether sitting on the sand or strolling through town.


Competition Grips Mothers And Daughters
LEAD: THE competition between mother and daughter is hard to explain.
It is certainly far more than the Electra Complex purports to encompass.
And, while this competition may be labeled a stage in the young girl, we have no adequate description of this behavior in the adult female.


Staying on the Safe Side; New York
LEAD: The Big Apple is a mecca for the arts, theater, music, nightlife and historical attractions, but an unwary visitor makes easy prey for confidence men, rip-off artists and muggers, the police say.


Rock From Inspiral Carpets
LEAD: Manchester, England, has lately been the center for the latest British rock furor: all-night dance parties with a strong tinge of psychedelia.
The music revolves around a drone and a beat.
It can draw on current synthesizer-driven club styles (as does one leading Manchester band, Happy Mondays) or on 1960's models, as do the Stone


SOCCER'S LITTLE BIG MAN
LEAD: My compliments to George Vecsey for the fine article ''Soccer's Little Big Man'' (May 27).
Vecsey mentioned that Diego Maradona's education stopped in his early teens, and that this is ''typical'' of world-class players.
However, there have been a few exceptions.
Carlos Bilardo of Argentina, a national team coach and former professional player, is a medical doctor.


Cheryl Nassberg Wed To Jeffrey L. Haiken
LEAD: Cheryl M. Nassberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward H. Nassberg of Dix Hills, L.I., was married yesterday evening in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., to Jeffrey L. Haiken, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward R. Haiken of North Bellmore, L.I.
Rabbi Morris Shapiro and Cantor David Hiesiger officated at the Cold Spring Country


PICTURE THIS: FRAMES WITHOUT PAINTINGS AT THE MET
LEAD: Walking home from the remarkable exhibition of Italian Renaissance frames that can be seen through Jan. 6 at the Metropolitan Museum, I realized all over again that a frame is not just there to make a picture look good.
It can have in it elements of painting, architecture, sculpture, furniture and the decorative arts.


Reports From Phnom Penh Indicate New Instability
LEAD: With the Cambodian Government this week announcing a failed coup attempt and dismissing an outspoken editor, there is a new period of instability in Phnom Penh that can only benefit the Khmer Rouge guerrillas, Asian diplomats and political analysts say.


What's Art All About? Truth, Beauty, Unruliness
LEAD: Truth alone is not good enough in art.
The camera and audio and video recorders have taught us that.
Art is not only truth and beauty and any number of other, often unpremeditated things, but also the consideration of those things in equations that refine and rearrange to suggest something more than verifiable reality.


Stoppard's New Version Roasts an Old Chestnut
LEAD: A COMPOSER eavesdrops upon an actress, his inamorata and the star of his new operetta, who is carrying on a real-life love scene with an actor, her former lover.
It looks like curtains for all, until a playwright, who is also a snoop, takes down the overheard lines, drafts them into the script and convinces the composer that the seduction scene was but a late-night rehearsal.


Staying on the Safe Side; Cairo
LEAD: The traveler told his tale like this: He had been strolling in central Cairo when something unpleasant spilled on his leg and a man seemed to materialize from nowhere to help clean it away.
Only when this self-appointed benefactor had disappeared in a car that also seemed to come from nowhere did the man realize that his wallet, stowed in a back pocket, had gone too.


Miles Davis's Variations on Familiar Theme
LEAD: Miles Davis's show at Avery Fisher Hall on Friday night, part of the JVC Jazz Festival, didn't prove much about Mr.
Davis except his continuing ability to fill the hall.
Mr.
Davis has been playing roughly the same set for several years now, and like his previous shows recently, his context -dated jazz-funk - fell pathetically short of his abilities.


Managing;   Soliciting the Foreign Perspective
LEAD: A couple of weeks ago, Tenneco Inc.'s directors flew to Europe.
First they held their regular board meeting.
Then they held a meeting of an entirely different sort: They brainstormed about economics, about markets, about products, about all kinds of things with the chief executive of Switzerland's F.


A New Effort For Holocaust Memorial
LEAD: A PLAN has begun to take shape for building a memorial here to the victims of the Holocaust, to ''document the past as a commitment to their memory,'' as Stefan Weinburg, a concentration camp survivor put it.


Style Makers;   Nicholas Treadwell: Art Dealer
LEAD: In the 1960's, Nicholas Treadwell crisscrossed England with a mobile art gallery - two furniture vans and a doubledecker bus. ''I've never found a better way to sell pictures,'' said the art dealer, who has operated galleries in London and Amsterdam, as well as an ''art safari park'' in a Canterbury mansion where artists lived and worked.


LARGER THAN LIFE, DEADER THAN DEAD
LEAD:
KILLING MISTER WATSON
By Peter Matthiessen.
372 pp. New York:
Random House. $21.95.


Review/Pop;   Jennifer Holliday Shares Stage With Johnny Mathis
LEAD: When the Broadway musical ''Dreamgirls'' made a star of Jennifer Holliday in 1981, it was immediately apparent that the singer with a mountainous pop-gospel voice possessed a singular talent.
Finding a place for that talent in the sleek world of commercial pop-soul music, however, has proven a frustrating task because her rugged, idiosyncratic delivery couldn't easily be confined within pop formulas.


Technology;   The Lure of Digital Television
LEAD: As recently as last year, proponents of a futuristic union between high-definition television and computers were being dismissed as woolly headed idealists who did not understand business.
Today, however, these radicals are gaining credibility in their push to combine HDTV - with its crisp, film-like images and sound - and the interactive capacities of a computer work station.


The World;   Poland Hits Some Bumps On the Road to Democracy
LEAD: THE former political prisoners who run this country dispatched a squadron of police officers backed by water cannon and armored personnel carriers the other day to break a farmers' blockade of the main Warsaw-Gdansk highway.





White Sox Halt A's And Inch Closer
LEAD: Ron Karkovice snapped a sixth-inning tie with a bases-empty home run as the Chicago White Sox spoiled the return of Jose Canseco to the Oakland lineup by defeating the Athletics today, 5-3.


Miss Armstrong Wed in Pennsylvania
LEAD: Elisabeth Ely Armstrong, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Armstrong Jr. of West Chester, Pa., was married there yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Holy Trinity to Robert Hattersley Connell, the son of Philip G. Connell Jr. of Village of Golf, Fla., and the late Nancy Somerville Connell.


A Plot Line That Becomes Defused
LEAD: OF all the news stories chronicling carnage and trauma, among the most frightening are those that involve violence toward children.


Libya
LEAD: To the Editor: Regarding a recent letter (Letters on Travel, April 8), your readers should be advised that travel to Libya is subject to severe restrictions under Federal law.


Frank H. Platt 3d, 77, A Lawyer and Official
LEAD: Frank Hinchman Platt 3d, a retired lawyer and conservationist died at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital on Wednesday.
He died after a brief illness, his wife, Audrey said.
He was 77 years old.


Eliza Knowlton, Teacher, Marries
LEAD: Eliza Courtney Knowlton, a daughter of Grace Knowlton of Palisades, N.Y., and Winthrop Knowlton of New York, was married yesterday at St.
Mary's Episcopal Church in Scarborough, N.Y., to Mark Nevill Oursler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fulton Oursler Jr. of Nyack, N.Y.
The Rev.
Hillary R. Bercovici officiated.


City Officials and Airport Operator Debate Airfield's Future
LEAD: FORTY-FIVE years ago, low-flying aircraft were a welcome sight in this blue-collar industrial city.
The Navy fighter planes produced at the General Motors Corporation plant along Route 9 here helped to employ thousands of workers in the name of the war effort.
And when the war ended, the city got to keep the airfield across the highway that had been used as a test strip.


Excerpts From Mulroney Address on Treaty
LEAD: Following are excerpts from Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's address to the Canadian people today after the failure of the Meech Lake constitutional accord:


From Japan, an 'Italian' Car
LEAD: YOU say you want a Lamborghini Diablo but the $200,000 tag seems a bit steep?
And you'd settle for a new Ferrari 348, except that the kids need braces?
Is that your problem?
Is that your trouble, Bunkie?


Business Books for New-Age Bosses
LEAD: I think of books as leading indicators.
The ideas people grapple with today shape the future.
But the books business readers are reading and the ideas writers are writing about tell me that traditional management ideas may no longer be relevant.
The marketplace says traditional ideas about business and management don't excite much passion anymore.


The Draw
LEAD: The draw for the singles fields at the Wimbledon tennis championships, June 25-July 8 (seedings in parentheses):
MEN
Ivan Lendl (1), Czechoslovakia, vs. Christian Miniussi, Argentina.
Qualifier vs. Jakob Hlasek, Switzerland.
Bryan Shelton, Huntsville, Ala. vs. Thomas Hogstedt, Sweden.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The bathroom window inside our tub/shower area has deteriorated from exposure to dampness.
For the new window, we are trying to decide between another one of wood or a vinyl one.
Which do you recommend?


In Portugal, Fresh Sardines
LEAD: When the Portuguese talk about sardines, they generally don't mean those tiny skinned and boned creatures compressed into a minute can.
They are referring to fresh, succulent sardines, the bigger, the fatter - the better.
In Portugal, more than 60 percent of the national sardine catch is consumed fresh: 12 pounds a person, on average, compared to only 2 pounds of the fish canned.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
LEAD: SHE makes an unlikely crusader, this 66-year-old former nun with gray hair and glasses who smokes too much, doesn't drive a car and hates to get up early in the morning.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/DINOSAURS PLUS
LEAD:
THE LITTLEST DINOSAURS
Written and illustrated by Bernard Most.
Unpaged. San Diego:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
$12.95. (Ages 3 to 8)
FOUR &amp; TWENTY DINOSAURS
Written and illustrated by Bernard Most.
Unpaged. New York: Harper &amp; Row.
$8.95. (Ages 3 to 7)


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
3-17
Canadian leaders appealed for calm after the collapse of a constitutional settlement with Quebec.
Canada's Prime Minister and Quebec's Premier promised careful reflection before they address the province's place in the Canadian confederation.
Page 1
Quebec's economy is growing and could operate on its own, should the province choose to leave Canada, economic experts say.


Rapid-Fire Real-Estate Auction Enters Manhattan
LEAD: The real-estate auctioneer's gavel finally fell on Manhattan yesterday as $17 million worth of prime condominiums in the heart of midtown went on the trading block.


Dr. Lynda Smith Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Dr.
Lynda Marie Smith, a daughter of Delores Preston Smith of St.
Albans, N.Y., and Paul David Smith of New York, was married in New York yesterday to Theodore Harris, a son of Rosetta Long Harris of Beverly Hills, Calif., and Hugo Harris of Bridgeport, Conn.
Patricia A. Williams, an Acting Justice of the Supreme Court in New York County, officiated at


Question Of the Week;   How Do The Pistons Rank in N.B.A. History?
LEAD: The Pistons, who look like the team of the 90's, will go down as one of the best, if not the best defensive team in the history of the game.
This opinion comes from the biggest Michael Jordan fan.
CARRIE B. HOUSE
Brooklyn


Britain: No Voice For Terrorists
LEAD: British television has as many national news broadcasts as the United States, with more coming all the time on the new cable and satellite systems.
Whether on the Government-owned BBC or competing commercial stations, the most widely watched news programs are all slow-paced, sober recitations.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


Question Of the Week;   How Do The Pistons Rank in N.B.A. History?
LEAD: Detroit is the best football team ever to play basketball.
In an era when guarding means hand-checking, pushing, and holding, when setting a pick means putting up both hands and throwing a block, when offensive players are allowed to palm the ball and take six steps before they shoot, Detroit is a master.


Brazil: The Show Belongs To Globo
LEAD: Across this continent-size nation, the single largest source of news is ''Jornal Nacional,'' a 30-minute nightly news program produced by Globo Television, the world's fourth largest network.
Low literacy levels, high rates of television set ownership and a long-dominant market position by Globo have combined to give the news program enormous power in Brazil, where an estimated 55 million of Brazil's 140 million residents watch


Bodies of Two Crew Members Lost in Navy Crash Are Found
LEAD: Searchers today found the bodies of two of the four crew members lost when their helicopter crashed off the Virginia coast.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Mandela Tours Boston


THE BROWN-RICING OF AMERICA
LEAD:
APPETITE FOR CHANGE %How the Counterculture Took On the Food Industry, 1966-1988.
By Warren J. Belasco.
311 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $24.95.


20 Years Later, a Photograph Brings Vindication
LEAD: On a January night 20 years ago, a Northeastern University physics student named Malcolm Emory stopped on his way home from the library at an anti-Vietnam War rally nearby.
In moments, Mr.
Emory was on the ground, his head bleeding and his hands cuffed behind his back.
His supposed crime: assault and battery on a police officer.


Voice of Experience
LEAD: COLLEGE basketball stars who don't make it to the National Basketball Association the first time around often look to the Continental Basketball Association.


Thailand: More Democracy And More Control
LEAD: The American happy-talk model for television news has been embraced in Thailand, too, even by those stations whose job it is to reflect the military's views of the news.


Cecilia Capuzzi Marries
LEAD: Cecilia M. Capuzzi, a freelance writer, and James F. Simon Jr., a senior lawyer in the New York office of the Natural Resources Defense Council, were married yesterday in Philadelphia at the Sugar Loaf estate.
Richard Kiniry, the leader of the Philadelphia Ethical Culture Society, officiated.
The bride, 33 years old, is the daughter of Rachel Capuzzi of Upper Darby, Pa., and the late Edmund C.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Central Park South from Columbus Circle to Fifth Avenue, and Fifth Avenue from Central Park South to Washington Square North will be closed today from 9 A.M. to 2:30 P.M. for the Gay Pride Parade.


U.S. Sued in Death of a Journalist in Panama
LEAD: In a case that is beginning to strain relations between Washington and Madrid, the family of a Spanish photographer killed during the United States invasion of Panama last December has filed an administrative claim for wrongful death and damages from the United States Government.


Lenin's City of Revolution Is Turning Its Back on Him
LEAD: This city still bears Lenin's name, but these days it seems to have lost patience with his revolution.


For Chichester, Greater Expectations
LEAD: The Chichester Festival Theater achieved its heights in the 1960's when the newly formed company was directed by Laurence Olivier in conjunction with his leadership of the Old Vic.
Since then, Chichester has survived - with highs and lows - under what has sometimes seemed to be a revolving-door management.


Correction
LEAD: An article on June 10 about executives who are out of work because of mergers and acquisitions misstated the age of Charles M. Anson.
He is 54.


Irwin Tied for Lead in Buick Classic
LEAD: Just when it appeared that fatigue was setting in on Hale Irwin in the hectic days after his United States Open triumph last Monday, he rallied this afternoon with birdies on the last two holes for a share of the lead in the Buick Classic.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
CAT AND I. By Doris Schwerin. (Harper &amp; Row, $17.95.) The protagonist in Doris Schwerin's deeply felt memoir is an uppity gray feline named Miss Willow, a moody, highly opinionated creature with a distinctive voice and many roles.
Like the pigeons in her earlier autobiographical work, ''Diary of a Pigeon Watcher,'' the cat is a mirror of the author's moods, an extension of her psyche, as well as an object of her projections.


Francesca K. Pomerantz Weds George Vining 4th
LEAD: Francesca Kazan Pomerantz and George Joseph Vining 4th were married yesterday at the summer home of the bridegroom's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Vining 3d, in Barnard, Vt.
The Rev.
Bruce W. Robins, of the United Methodist church, officiated at the interfaith ceremony.


Curator Questions 'Pollock' Review
LEAD: As curator of ''From Pollock to Polyester,'' the exhibit at Wunsch Arts Center, I have been urged to reply to Helen A. Harrison's intemperate and scattershot attack on it ( May 6) and to reject the more egregious of her assumptions.
But before doing so I really must deny the intention imputed to me to ''steal the Modern's (The Museum of Modern Art's) thunder'' in mounting this exhibit.


Thinking Too Precisely?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Simona McCray Weds Kenneth R. Peterson
LEAD: Simona McCray, the executive vice president of the WQXR radio stations in New York, was married yesterday to Kenneth R. Peterson, who will retire this month as a manager in public relations for Mobil in New York.
Samuel J. Silverman, a retired justice of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court, officiated at the couple's home in


Hazards At the Keyboard: A special report:   Automation: Pain Replaces the Old Drudgery
LEAD: For nine years, Paula Tydryszewski has operated a video display terminal in New Jersey's tax collection office.
She types numbers and names from tax returns at woodpecker speeds into a keyboard that is tied to a big computer in the center of the room.


Man Who Headed Crock-Pot Concern Is Beaten to Death
LEAD: I. H. (Hack) Miller, who brought the name Crock-Pot to millions of households, was killed in his home Friday, and a grandson was charged in the slaying, the police in Kansas City, Mo., reported yesterday.
He was 83 years old.


Leslie Hodges Is Bride Of Andrew McD. Blau
LEAD: Leslie Fox Hodges, a teaching assistant at the Chapin School in New York, was married yesterday to Andrew McDara Blau, a stockbroker at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.
The Very Rev.
Arnold E. Mintz performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Bryn Mawr, Pa.


Where the Quiz-Show Mania is Hot
LEAD: RANDY PIRO, the manager of the Tiffany Wine and Cheese Cafe, had a telephone in his hand, a reporter at his back and a group of prospective customers charging towards him.


The Mandela Visit;   Two Mandela Daughters Still Wait for Their Turn
LEAD: After 27 years of waiting for their father's release from prison, two of Nelson Mandela's daughters will just have to wait a bit longer for a quiet family reunion.


Ideas &amp; Trends;   A Stroll in the Country For City Dwellers Starting Downtown
LEAD: WHEN people here speak of the Oregon Trail, the name of the route that brought thousands of settlers to the West nearly 150 years ago, chances are they are not nostalgically evoking history but advocating a vision of the future.


SCIENTISTS REPORT FASTER OZONE LOSS
LEAD: New scientific evidence that the earth's ozone layer is being destroyed more quickly than previously reported is being presented in London to negotiators working on a treaty to speed the elimination of chemicals that cause the problem.


Headliners;   Endless Melody
LEAD: Brunnhilde has probably never had such exposure.
All week long, Hildegard Behrens was in front of the prime-time television audience in almost every city in America, along with Jessye Norman, Siegfried Jerusalem and other cast members of Wagner's ''Ring des Nibelungen.'' The Metropolitan Opera production, which was filmed over two years at a cost of $5 million, was quite a risk for the Public Broadcasting System.


Beaches and Tourism Go Together
LEAD: Re: ''A Beach Fee Dispute and a Question: Is Tourism Necessary?'' May 27:


When the Business of a Family Is Business
LEAD: To the Editor:


The World;   Can Central America Win a War on Poverty?
LEAD: THE futility of efforts to attack the basic causes of Central America's endemic poverty preoccupied President Vinicio Cerezo one day three years ago as he sat in a hotel room with friends.
Some topics, he complained, were so explosive they could not even be mentioned.
Asked for an example, he paused.


Headliners;   Extra Curriculum
LEAD: Optimism is necessary to any undertaking to improve the nation's educational system, and Wendy Kopp, graduated from Princeton one year ago, is the type for the job.
Ms.
Kopp decided to start a teacher corps, then actually did it, setting up a program for 500 new graduates to start next fall. ''I really have this attitude that things will all work out,'' Ms.


The Ultimate Punk Rocker as a Prodigal Son
LEAD: In 1982, an Australian rock group called the Birthday Party arrived in New York on its first tour of the United States.
The music was harsh and hellish, a mess of screaming guitar and relentless rhythms that was as chilling as a mangled corpse.


No Headline
LEAD: ASSEMBLYMAN JOHN C. COCHRANE, the Suffolk Republican leader for the last two years, has emerged from the tortuous process of selecting a state Republican ticket as a major state politician and a prospect for state party chairman.


The Danes Prize American Jazz. Why Don't the Americans?
LEAD: A month ago, the gifted American tenor saxophonist and composer David Murray won a $30,000 prize.
And along with the money, he won the chance to perform concerts in France and Denmark and spend a week rehearsing with a Danish group - Pierre Dorge's New Jungle Orchestra - and other Danish musicians for the performances.


Fashion: On the Street;   The Whalebone-Free Summer Corset Look
LEAD: Madonna's ''Blonde Ambition'' tour has received almost as much attention for the costumes the star wears as for the music.
No wonder.
It's kind of hard to ignore someone whose attire leans toward exaggerated cone bras and turn-of-the-century corsets as outerwear.


Joseph Murumbi, Kenyan Politician, 79
LEAD: Joseph Murumbi, who served briefly as Kenya's second Vice President in 1966, died on Friday after a long illness, Kenyan newspapers reported.
He was 79 years old.
Mr.
Murumbi, who had been confined to a wheelchair since damaging a nerve in a fall eight years ago, died at his home, the papers said.


Postings: Wertheimer's Branch;   New Retailer For Jamaica
LEAD: Wertheimer's, a retailing name long familiar to shoppers on Brooklyn's Fulton Street and in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan, has thrived in the last decade as other small department stores throughout the country withered in the face of competition from factory outlet malls and discount specialty stores.


Staying on the Safe ; Rome
LEAD: Rome has such a deep-rooted reputation for being a city of pickpockets and purse snatchers that it is easy to lose sight of the fact that travelers generally are quite safe there.
In the historic center, one can venture forth alone at night without fear, even down desolate alleys that in New York would scream out danger.


Marketing 'Mama': A Little Gospel And a Lot of Savvy
LEAD: On the seventh anniversary this spring of the black gospel musical ''Mama, I Want to Sing,'' Vy Higginsen, who wrote and produced the show with her husband, Ken Wydro, beamed her thanks from the stage to ''all of you wonderful people who have made our show the longest-running black musical in theater history.


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Farmingdale
$145,000
538 Segatogue Avenue
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old ranch; dining room, attic, 1-car garage; taxes $3,200.
Glen Cove
$260,000
57 Dosoris Way
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $3,600.


How the Building Slump Affects the Trades
LEAD: SOME are bartenders.
Some are security guards.
Others drive taxicabs.
Two years ago they were working in the construction industry, but today many of the 32,000 members of the building trades in Westchester and Putnam Counties are ''taking whatever they can get,'' said Arthur Colasanto, president of the Building and Construction Trades


FICTION
LEAD:
A GENTLEMAN'S GUIDE TO THE FRONTIER.
By Joanne Meschery. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) ''You've lost your wife,'' Reg Vickers tells the recently widowed Andrew Marsh, ''and worse yet, your idea.'' So Reg, a pedantic, stubborn old black man who's lost his son, invites Marsh to share their idea - the plan they had made to retrace the routes that Algie, Reg's father, had taken as an Indian fighter on the Western frontier with the all-black Ninth Cavalry.


Expeditions in the Boundary Waters
LEAD: MY husband likes to go places he's been before and I like to go places new to me so when we began discussing a late summer holiday I said we could compromise and go someplace where neither of us had ever been.
And then, before he could examine that compromise too closely, I began talking about canoeing in the boundary waters.


Intriguing Mix Offered In Three One-Act Plays
LEAD: GROWING up heterosexual has seemed just fine to the twice-married Marcy, until Joan reminds her of a sexual experience they shared when, as fourth graders, they were playing doctor under the dining room table.


PASTIMES: Coins
LEAD: A couple of new coins have been announced in recent weeks.
The most startling is the production of a new gold coin by the Soviet Union.
The legal tender gold pieces in denominations of 50, 100 and 200 rubles are expected to be released later this year.
Called ''Glasnost/Perestroika,'' the coins have the word peace in English, German, French, Japanese and Russian and the reverse shows the dove of peace with the motto ''Glasnost.1990.Persestroika.


County Parks Prepare For Ethnic Festivals
LEAD: THE county's Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation will present a summer of diversified outdoor music and other cultural activities.
The most ambitious cycle is the nine-week series of Heritage Celebrations - festivals celebrating ethnic traditions and accomplishments.


Staying on the Safe Side; Geneva
LEAD: Street crime is so rare in Geneva, the cosmopolitan Swiss city that houses the European headquarters of the United Nations, that an occasional purse-snatching will be reported in the ''Faits Divers'' columns of the local newspapers.


Believing in Mao
LEAD: To the Editor:


It's Time to Foil Three Hungry Pests
LEAD: THE bugs have arrived.
Anyone who has been out digging, mowing, raking and planting can attest to this.
For general chores, gardeners can protect themselves by spraying clothing, hats and exposed areas (particularly the back of the neck) with insect repellent.
It will also help to discourage ticks, especially if long pants are worn tucked into socks.


Recycle Now, Before It Is Ash
LEAD: The report ''Study Urges Recycling Ash from Municipal Incinerators'' (May 6) provided one of the best illustrations of why trash incineration should be the least desirable solid waste management option: 25 percent to 30 percent of the burned garbage - by weight - remains as ash and will be expensive to dispose.


HAS THE CLOCK RUN OUT FOR EARLY MUSIC?
LEAD: In the late 1940's, the coincident arrival of two technological advances, high-fidelity sound and the LP record, created a synergetic wave that engulfed every aspect of music.
It changed how, why and when we listen to music.
The flood of recorded works, new and old, forced millions of listeners to realize that musical history did not begin with Bach and end with Brahms.


Kersti E. Magi, Editor, Marries
LEAD: Kersti Ellen Magi, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin Magi of Bellevue, Wash., was married yesterday to Harden L. Crawford 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Crawford 3d of Far Hills, N.J.
Canon John T. Morrow performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Peapack, N.J.


Food;   Healthy Indulgence
LEAD: EVERYONE I SPEAK TO THESE DAYS IS EITHER ON A diet, has just been on a diet or is planning to go on a diet.
For most people, dieting is an act of such great sacrifice that, though they may commit to it for a lifetime, they can endure it only sporadically.
It's a somber, serious endeavor, requiring strength of character, discipline and perseverance.


Expos Overtake Pirates
LEAD: Montreal moved into first place in the National League East tonight as Zane Smith pitched seven strong innings to help the Expos beat the slumping Pittsburgh Pirates, 6-1.


Maintaining Wicker Furniture
LEAD: WICKER porch furniture is durable if maintained, but neglected items can rapidly deteriorate beyond the point of easy repair.


Miss Nields Wed To David Jones
LEAD: Nerissa Franklin Nields, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Nields Jr. of McLean, Va., was married there last evening to Michael David Jones, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
William Burns Jones Jr., also of McLean.
The Rev.
John Sonnenday officiated at Immanuel Presbyterian Church.


Elizabeth Colston Is Wed
LEAD: Elizabeth Maria Colston, an M.D. and Ph.D. candidate at Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons, was married yesterday to Leo Danni Titus, a consultant with ALK Associates, transportation specialists in Princeton, N.J.
Msgr.
John F. Corr officiated at the Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J.


Sprinklers in the Home Gain Support High Death Toll in Fires Cited by Local Officials
LEAD: Joseph and Karen Jenkins went apple picking one Sunday in the fall of 1985, and the next morning, as Mrs.
Jenkins rushed to get to work, a bag of the fruit on the kitchen floor of their Westchester County home blocked her way.
She picked it up and dumped it on the kitchen counter, next to the toaster.


Canoe Camping, Family Style
LEAD: IMAGINE a day without telephones, cars, newspapers, or television; a week where money means nothing; two weeks without caring to know more about the time than the sun can tell you.
Now place your unharried self on a peninsula that juts out into a corner of an uninhabited lake a two-day trip from the nearest road.


Elizabeth Harwood, A British Soprano, 52
LEAD: Elizabeth Harwood, one of Britain's best-known sopranos in the 1960's and 1970's, died of cancer on Friday, her family said.
She was 52 years old.
Miss Harwood, who died at her home in Fryerning, 20 miles northeast of London, specialized in lyric and coloratura roles and in the music of Mozart.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Deep in Brooklyn, a Slave Plantation Illustrates How Both Sides Lived
LEAD: Surviving more than 200 years in Brooklyn has given the Lefferts Homestead a timeless quality.
Its hedges have outlived generations of gardeners, and the slender columns, wide porch and detailed dormer windows of this historic Dutch colonial farmhouse in Prospect Park still retain an aura of plantation life.


Commercial Property: Office Leasing;   A Wall Street Law Firm Stays in the Neighborhood
LEAD: Contrary to the prevailing uptown drift of downtown law offices, Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton has decided to stray no farther than three blocks from Wall Street.
Last weekend, the firm moved into six of the upper floors of One Liberty Plaza - 253,000 square feet altogether.


FROM RUSSIA, 300 YEARS OF GLASS
LEAD: The dazzling and colorful exhibition of 300 years of Russian glass at the Corning Museum of Glass - the first such comprehensive presentation held in the West - was conceived in Moscow on Christmas Eve in 1980.
What was not foreseen at that meeting - between Nina Asharina, now vice director of the State History Museum in Moscow, and Dwight P.


High-Tech Monarch for National Insect
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Poppers and the Plains
LEAD: BUFFALOES THUNDER ACROSS POSTERS, POSE FOR BUMPER STICKERS and glower from coffee mugs in Frank Popper's crowded office at Rutgers University in New Jersey.
There is even a sack of dried buffalo droppings. ''Genuine Virgin Buffalo Chips,'' the label reads. ''Pioneer Fertilizer and Fuel.
Not for Microwave Ovens.


The Mandela Visit;   Education Is Mighty Force, Boston Teen-Agers Are Told
LEAD: Nelson Mandela paused for a moment today in his single-minded concentration on ending South African apartheid to offer some advice to black teen-agers.


Rebecca Chase Marries W. L. Hughes
LEAD: Rebecca Ellis Chase, a daughter of Alison A. F. Chase of New York and the late Ryland Ellis Dickinson Chase, was married yesterday to William Leggette Hughes, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack Hughes of Durham, N.C.
The Rev.
Dorsey McConnell performed the ceremony at the Church of the Epiphany in New York.


Indy-Car Race Set For Australia
LEAD: An Indy-car race - the first ever outside North America - will be staged in Surfer's Paradise in Queensland next March 17.


France: Making the Time For Gallic Musing
LEAD: France has always waxed poetic about its tradition of freedom, yet, with its three main television channels state-owned, until the mid-1980's news broadcasts were presumed to favor the Government of the day.
Opposition parties would, of course, complain loudly.
When they took office, though, they, too, found the arrangement pleasing.


Woman Dies and 5 Are Hurt After A Nightclub Shooting
LEAD: A 23-year-old woman was killed and five other people were wounded early yesterday morning at a popular reggae club in lower Manhattan when a patron opened fire on the club's bouncers, the police said.


SMALL TRAGEDIES AND ORDINARY PASSIONS
LEAD:
LANTERN SLIDES
By Edna O'Brien.
224 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $18.95.


Despite Tensions With Iran, Americans Aid Quake Relief
LEAD: Despite tensions between the United States and Iran, relief officials say American citizens and businesses are offering money, medicine and other aid to victims of the earthquake that struck northwestern Iran on Thursday.


Big Science, Little Gain
LEAD: The space station will cost $40 billion to build and $80 billion to operate.
The bill for the supercollider has climbed to $8 billion.
The human genome project will cost $3 billion.
These enormous projects are justified in the name of science, yet many scientists have serious doubts about their merit.


Simon Fill Wed To Miss Cumming
LEAD: Llewellyn Cumming, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Milledge Cumming of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Simon Charles Fill, the son of Meiling Yeh of Bel Air, Calif., and Dennis C. Fill of Seattle and New York.
The Rev.
John W. Bishop officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich.


Narrowing 400 Entries Down to 29: A Fine Job of Selection
LEAD: THINGS are looking up in the New Jersey State Council on the Arts, or at least in the department that deals with sponsoring exhibitions.
The fine-arts annual, now in its sixth edition, at the Jersey City Museum appears to have been chosen not by the usual electronic scanner programmed for the unexceptional, but by informed human sensibilities.


Coast Guard Celebrates Fleet Week With Drills and Thrills


CRIME
LEAD: You wouldn't want to be in Peter Scattergood's loafers, despite their snazzy shine.


Reporter's Notebook;   City Hears Harmony, With a Few Jarring Notes
LEAD: A ragtag army of AIDS protesters joined hands today with researchers and policy makers from the Sixth International AIDS Conference and marched through downtown San Francisco to tell the world that they shared an agenda to help people with AIDS by speeding treatment, improving health care and ending discrimination.


Campus Life: Indiana;   Anti-Bias Policy Could Start R.O.T.C. Conflict
LEAD: Indiana University has revised its student ethics code, but officials differ on whether a ban on discrimination against homosexuals can coexist with the Reserve Officer Training Corps.
The revised code, which the trustees approved last month, prohibits bias based on race, sex or sexual orientation.


Question Of the Week;   How Do The Pistons Rank in N.B.A. History?
LEAD: The Pistons rank with the top five teams in the history of the N.B.A.
But even though their record is strong, their contribution to the development of the game is not as great as some other outstanding teams.
The Lakers with George Mikan led to the widening of the three-second zone; the Celtics of the Bill Russell era revolutionized defensive play; the Knicks of the 70's emphasized teamwork, and the short reign of the 1977 Trail Blazers emphasized Bill Walton's passing from the post.


Hungary: Loosening Up On a Longer Leash
LEAD: Hungarian television news, which even before the democratic reforms was on a longer leash than most Communist broadcasts, has loosened up considerably in the last year as the Communist Party went into retreat.


Some Pitching Rotations Seem Like Revolving Doors
LEAD: LIKE replacements for canceled shows in the middle of the television season, new pitchers have been inserted into starting rotations in abundance this year.


Ms. Chung Weds John F. R. Smilgin 4th
LEAD: Christina Laisheung Chung, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Chung Sing of Hong Kong, was married yesterday to John F. R. Smilgin 4th, a son of Carol Hill Smilgin and Mr.
Smilgin 3d of New York.
Msgr.
Harrold A. Murray, assisted by Msgr.
George F. Bardes, officiated at St.
Thomas More Church in New York.


Case of the Missing Holmes Society
LEAD: It certainly was exciting to see the interview with Tom Stix, now titular leader of our beloved Baker Street Irregulars (''New Leader Carries On Sherlockian Tradition,'' May 6).
I am always pleased to see recognition of Sherlock Holmes and his devotees.


Owners of Stranded Satellite Send Another Aloft
LEAD: A $150 million communications satellite similar to one that became stranded in a uselessly low orbit three months ago was launched on Saturday, officials said.


National Triage: Are Cities or Countryside Sicker?
LEAD: From the community health center where she works, Dr.
Dianne C. Ritchie ministers to the poor and often-troubled people of the Bronx, taking the time to listen to the latest complaints of patients who have rarely had the luxury of seeing the same doctor twice in a row.


World Markets;   Where to Gain From the Dollar's Loss
LEAD: While the dollar has been relatively tame this year, it has still raised the returns of some Americans who invested away from Wall Street.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The bathroom window inside our tub/shower area has deteriorated from exposure to dampness.
For the new window, we are trying to decide between another one of wood or a vinyl one.
Which do you recommend?


Sri Lanka Lowers Muslim Toll
LEAD: The military said today that it erroneously reported that Tamil Tiger separatists massacred 62 Muslims.
Officials said three Muslim men were killed in the raid on an eastern village.
As the fighting continued today, Government troops fanned out from military camps in the country's north and east, destroying Tamil rebel hideouts and bunkers, military officials said.


It's Sink or Swim in East Germany
LEAD: On July 2, Heinz Warzecha, the straight-talking, unflinching head of one of East Germany's most important industrial groups, will greet the new capitalist era by laying off 7,000 people, nearly a third of his work force.


Student Reports She Was Raped At a Fraternity
LEAD: Officials at the University of Southern California and the Los Angeles police are investigating a student's report that she was raped in a fraternity house while on a date last December and later subjected to a parade of mostly undressed members.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The bathroom window inside our tub/shower area has deteriorated from exposure to dampness.
For the new window, we are trying to decide between another one of wood or a vinyl one.
Which do you recommend?


Canadian Party Elects Quebecer
LEAD: Electing a new leader to reverse its election fortunes, Canada's opposition Liberal party today chose Jean Chretien, a Quebec lawyer and former finance minister.


Irene Piskor, Teacher, Wed
LEAD: Irene Teresa Piskor, a teacher at the Burns School, and Theodore Burnham Lewis Jr.,a grants and contracts manager at the Connecticut Department of Human Resources, both in Hartford, were married there yesterday at Our Lady of Sorrows Roman Catholic Church by the Rev.
David W. Lonergan.
Mrs.
Lewis is the daughter of Mrs.


A Musical Partnership Forged on L.I.
LEAD: CRAIG CARNELIA, a songwriter and performer, says he ''often invents reasons'' for going back to Floral Park.


FICTION
LEAD:
PAPER PRODUCTS.
By James W. Hall. (Norton, $18.95.) Satire is the most difficult of literary pursuits, yet in many ways the most rewarding.
It requires that the writer have a well-wrought sense of irony and an intelligence that strikes but isn't cruel.
If this kind of writing pleases you, try spending some time with ''Paper Products,'' James W.


THE GUIDE
LEAD:
AUTHENTIC RAGTIME


For the Blind
LEAD: To the Editor: I am a caseworker for the New York State Department of Social Services, and I am also visually impaired.
Like most New Yorkers, I have begun to think of vacation plans.
Several of my friends who are also blind recommended that I contact a travel agent, one who according to them had been extremely helpful arranging their trips.


Review/Dance;   Ashley as Firebird In City Ballet Program
LEAD: ''Firebird'' burned brightest when Merrill Ashley was dancing on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater.
Although the New York City Ballet's production of Stravinsky's musical fairy tale has choreography by both George Balanchine and Jerome Robbins, it is only intermittently compelling.
Nevertheless, a fine dancer can make the role of the


The Executive Computer;   The Latest Laptops: Faster, Sleeker, More Powerful
LEAD: The inexorable trend in portable computers has been smaller, faster, cheaper, more powerful.
Even so, there were a number of surprises among the latest products on display last week at the annual PC Expo show in Manhattan.


It's Time to Foil Three Hungry Pests
LEAD: THE bugs have arrived.
Anyone who has been out digging, mowing, raking and planting can attest to this.
For general chores, gardeners can protect themselves by spraying clothing, hats and exposed areas (particularly the back of the neck) with insect repellent.
It will also help to discourage ticks, especially if long pants are worn tucked into socks.


Style Makers;   Jean Pearman: Designer of Tennis Clothes
LEAD: If your husband happens to be a champion croquet player, you spend a lot of time wilting as you watch him play in tournaments.
A tennis player herself, Jean Pearman found herself thinking about the perfect outfit to play in - one that would look as crisp after a couple of sets as when she started out.


Review/Dance;   Baryshnikov's 'Swan Lake' With Harvey and Graffin
LEAD: Both sleekly modernistic and full of dramatic detail, Mikhail Baryshnikov's production of ''Swan Lake'' took on a reverberant extra passion in the hands of Cynthia Harvey and Guillaume Graffin when American Ballet Theater presented the ballet classic on Wednesday afternoon at the Metropolitan Opera


SHE KNEW HOW TO WHISTLE
LEAD:
SLIM
Memories of a Rich and Imperfect Life.
By Slim Keith with Annette Tapert.
Illustrated. 319 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.95.


A Chinese Restaurant Branches Out
LEAD: SEVERAL times in recent years, successful New York Chinese restaurants have opened branches in Fairfield County, and the ride from city to suburbs has been a bumpy one.
The explanation is elusive.
Perhaps the parent thinks that standards are lower outside the city, and that less effort need be extended.


Christina Margareta Swanson Is Wed
LEAD: Christina Margareta Swanson, a daughter of Dolores Swanson of Montclair, N.J., and the late Edward R. Swanson, was married yesterday at the First Congregational Church in Montclair to John Anthony Montgomery Jr., the son of Mr.
Montgomery and J. Pauley Montgomery , both of New York.
The Rev.
Park P.


JEFFERSON AND THE PRESIDENCY
LEAD: As a Jefferson enthusiast, I felt I should write to you concerning the statement in Christopher Hitchens's article ''Why We Don't Know What We Don't Know'' (May 13), that ''the stone obelisk at Jefferson's grave . . . modestly and perhaps ironically omits his Presidency from the list of accomplishments.


Mei Chu Is Married
LEAD: Mei F. Chu and Christopher R. Morin were married yesterday at the Fay Club in Fitchburg, Mass., by Michael K. Bolock, a justice of the peace.
Mrs.
Morin, 26 years old, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wai Chu of New York, is a Bryn Mawr College graduate with an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago.
Mr.


Corey Rohr Shanus Wed To Amy Gayle Wagner
LEAD: Amy Gayle Wagner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Wagner of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Corey Rohr Shanus, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sol Shanus of Delray Beach, Fla., at the Brae Burn Country Club in Purchase, N.Y., by Rabbi Arnold Turetksy and Cantor Jack Mendelson.


Juliet Brigitte Karelsen, Art Student, Is Wed to William F. Roorbach, Writer
LEAD: Juliet Brigitte Karelsen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Karelsen 3d of New York, was married yesterday in Enfield, N.H., to William Forsyth Roorbach, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Roorbach of New Canaan, Conn.
Jean Somerville Kotkin, a leader of the Ethical Culture Society in New York, officiated at the summer home of bridegroom's family.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article last Sunday about the use of roadblocks to find drunken drivers referred incorrectly to two standard blood alcohol levels.


Fashion;   Summer and Slouching
LEAD: Nostalgic play clothes are offering an alternative to high-velocity summer wear.
Loose-fitting one-piece rompers with roll-up sleeves and legs evoke the sandbox.


Evolution in Europe;   Russian Party Elects Hard-Liner; Gorbachev to Keep Political Post
LEAD: The hard-line heart of the Communist Party chose Ivan K. Polozkov, an outspoken regional boss, as its leader today, and he immediately set a militant course for the coming party congress by criticizing President Mikhail S. Gorbachev as too tolerant, slow and cautious in dealing with the nation's turmoil.


BRIGHTNESS BELOW
LEAD: As a child I used to wander through the biggest art gallery in the world - the London Underground stations - enthralled by the colorful posters that not only promoted travel by ''tube'' but also encouraged me to go to plays and concerts, visit the zoo or take a trip to the countryside.
The posters were commissioned by London Transport (then the Underground Group) starting in 1908, with displays of as many as 40 posters a year.


Mary J. Hoene Is Married To Nathaniel M. Floyd Jr.
LEAD: Mary J. Hoene, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David D. Hoene of Boise, Idaho, was married yesterday at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York to Dr.
Nathaniel M. Floyd Jr., a son of Dorothy H. Floyd of Santa Monica, Calif., and the late Mr.
Floyd.
The Rev.
Seymour J. Flinn officiated.
Mrs.
Floyd, who is 40 years old, graduated from Seattle University and earned a law degree at the University of Notre Dame.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended June 9
MANHATTAN
Carnegie Hill
$950,000
1170 Fifth Avenue (98th St.)
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,500-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, 2 maids' rooms, library, Central Park view; maintenance $1,753, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Carnegie Hill Properties)


Deregulation Is Nothing but a License to Steal;   We Can Go Further
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nina Purviance Marries Andrew West
LEAD: Anna Harris Purviance, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Purviance of Middletown, R.I., was married there yesterday to Andrew Phelps West, a son of Patricia S. Bradshaw of New York and the late Davenport West Jr.
The Rev.
John Rogers performed the Episcopal ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Ashton


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   A Chicken Dish for Parties Is Trimmed to Supper Size
LEAD: This chicken and bulgur recipe was originally designed for entertaining.
But with a few nips and tucks it is simple enough to put together for a Sunday supper or for a meal to make quickly after work.


Cabaret Pieces for Norfolk's Opening
LEAD: MUSICAL performances at Norfolk goes back to the early years of the century, when Sibelius, Rachmaninoff, Kreisler and Caruso were among the notables appearing in the Music Shed.
But officially this year is the golden anniversary of the Norfolk Chamber Music Festival, the 50th time that the Yale Summer School of Music has convened on the 70-acre grounds of the Ellen Battell Stoeckel estate in the


Elizabeth Howell and Ian MacCallum Jr. Marry
LEAD: Elizabeth Warren Howell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Warren Howell of Winnetka, Ill., was married yesterday to Ian Barrie MacCallum Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
MacCallum of Ridgewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Brian A. Lathrop officiated at Grace Episcopal Church in Manhattan.


Staying on the Safe Side; Madrid
LEAD: Petty crime against tourists in Spain appears to be rising, but the level is hardly high enough to deter visitors, and violence remains rare.


Kathryn Wood Becomes Bride
LEAD: Kathryn Patricia Mai Wood, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Douglas Wood of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to George Vaz-Ferreira, the son of Prof. and Mrs.
Raul Vaz-Ferreira of Montevideo, Uruguay.
The Rev.
Edward J. Howley officiated at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church.


Jazz Festival;   Dizzy Gillespie and Horn In an Exploratory Mood
LEAD: The Dizzy Gillespie United Nation Orchestra turned in a pan-American variety show at Carnegie Hall on Friday, the opening night of the jazz festival.
Mr.
Gillespie was the featured performer with a big band whose players hailed from the United States, the Caribbean and Brazil, and while the show honored Mr.


At Fresh Air Camp, a Chance to Play in Safety
LEAD: Getting Barbara O'Brien to join the Fresh Air Fund was not easy.
Last summer, when Catherine O' Brien tried to convince her daughter to leave the Brooklyn housing project where they live to take a Fresh Air vacation in the countryside, Barbara thought she was being punished for something bad she had done.


NOWHERE TO HIDE
LEAD:
THE ART LOVER.
By Carole Maso. (North Point, $18.95.) Dedicated to a friend of the author's who died of AIDS, Carole Maso's second novel reads like an anguished meditation on the insufficiency of art as a refuge from life.
Fragmented and hesitant, as if unsure of its powers, ''The Art Lover'' eventually centers on a character named Caroline, herself a writer, whose novel-in-progress turns out to have peopled the opening pages of the book we are reading.


Guerrilla Says Arafat Can Penalize His Unit
LEAD: The Palestinian guerrilla leader Abul Abbas said today that he and his faction were prepared to accept disciplinary action by the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, for the raid that they staged on an Israeli beach last month.


PHILADELPHIA CARVES OUT A NEW SKYLINE
LEAD: The battle for Philadelphia's skyline is over, and now it is time to talk about the spoils.
Nearly three years have passed since the completion of One Liberty Place, the first skyscraper to rise higher than the statue of William Penn atop City Hall, and it's been longer still since the unveiling of the plans for that building by the Chicago architect Helmut Jahn caused the biggest disruption in town since the Athletics left for Kansas


Campus Life: Wisconsin;   Officials Criticized For Failing to Give Crime Statistics
LEAD: Of ficials at the Uni versity of Wis consin here are drawing criticism for failing to release sexual-assault statistics to incoming students, as required by a new state law.
The University of Wisconsin system is required to include such statistics as well as safety information in orientation programs to new students under the law, which was enacted last


Postings: 70 Units in Stamford;   'Mutual Housing' Complex
LEAD: City and state officials in Stamford, Conn., are planning a ''mutual housing'' complex whose 70 one- to three-bedroom units are to be owned and managed by a not-for-profit mutual housing association.
Tenants will pay $2,500 to join the association and rents will average $400 a month, with higher rents for larger apartments.


Deregulation Is Nothing but a License to Steal
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE JOURNALIST AND THE DICTATOR
LEAD:
STALIN'S APOLOGIST
Walter Duranty,
The New York Times's Man in Moscow.
By S. J. Taylor.
Illustrated. 404 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $24.95.


Two Old Stars, One Obsession
LEAD: IN what is part soap opera, part epic and very much a dual quest for a specialized silver grail, Martina Navratilova and Ivan Lendl both seem to be wearing their hearts on their sleeves as they take on Wimbledon for what they hope will be a full two-week engagement.


ROMANIA'S LOST CHILDREN: A Photo Essay by James Nachtwey
LEAD: PERHAPS the harshest legacy of the Ceausescu regime fell to the children.
In 1966, a year after Nicolae Ceausescu came to power, Romanian State Decree No. 770 declared abortion illegal for any woman under 45 who had not yet produced four children.
Last year, still in pursuit of a larger work force, the Communist dictator increased the number to five.


Quebec Could Easily Prosper On Its Own, Economists Say
LEAD: Whatever the outcome of Canada's crisis over Quebec, the French-speaking province has slowly developed an economy strong enough to allow Quebec to separate and become a nation three times the area of France, taking with it nearly a quarter of Canada's wealth.


It's Time to Foil Three Hungry Pests
LEAD: THE bugs have arrived.
Anyone who has been out digging, mowing, raking and planting can attest to this.
For general chores, gardeners can protect themselves by spraying clothing, hats and exposed areas (particularly the back of the neck) with insect repellent.
It will also help to discourage ticks, especially if long pants are worn tucked into socks.


James Dearden's Latest Fatal Attraction
LEAD: A dusty amber light fills the air in Stage H at Shepperton Studios in Middlesex, where, high in the rafters, in what is supposed to be the windowed cab of a crane, the American actress Sean Young stands staring down into a massive steel cauldron below.
She does not speak; she barely moves.
She just looks down, watching.


Postings: Razing Times Square;   The First Casualties
LEAD: Almost always in New York, before you can build up you have to tear down, and that is what is happening with the long-delayed Times Square redevelopment project.
In preparation for demolition, tenants are now being cleared out of properties along the east side of Broadway between 43d and 42d Streets, where the first and tallest of four new office towers will be erected in about three years.


Carol L. Rosenau Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Carol L. Rosenau, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Rosenau of White Plains, was married last evening to Scott V. Truncellito, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond F. Truncellito of Manchester, N.H.
The Rev.
Clifford M. Lawrence Jr. officiated at the Congregational ceremony at the New York Botanical Gardens.


Say, Bud, Do You Own That Burning Flag?
LEAD: To the Editor:


A School of Today, With Yesterday in Mind
LEAD: Tanglewood opens Friday, and for nine weeks concertgoers will stream in with picnic hampers to relax to the strains of the classics played by - and under - the stars.
Across the lawn, students at the Tanglewood Music Center will learn a Grail-like dedication to their art.
While the past is always present at the Boston Symphony Orchestra's big weekend concerts, the music of today is central to the school.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Freehold
$229,000
1 Overbrook Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old colonial; fireplace, 2-car garage, family room; taxes $3,880.
Howell
$155,000
9 Petal Patch Drive
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; c/a, fenced yard, pool; taxes $2,577.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
JAZZ AND ROCK


Correction
LEAD: A photograph on June 10 with a review of ''Naked by the Window: The Fatal Marriage of Carl Andre and Ana Mendieta'' was published in error.
It shows the artist Hans Breder, not Carl Andre.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on June 10 about the tomb of Galla Placidia in Ravenna, Italy, misstated its age.
It was built in the fifth century, not the sixth.


The World: U.S.-P.L.O. Talks;   An Unlikely Dialogue Comes to an End
LEAD: PRESIDENT BUSH'S decision last week to suspend the dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization for its failure to condemn a terrorist raid by one of its factions brought to an end an 18-month relationship that was probably doomed from the start.


Question Of the Week;   How Do The Pistons Rank in N.B.A. History?
LEAD: On paper, the Detroit Pistons may not stack up against the Bill Russell Celtics, but 12 players have never played so well as a team.
With Isiah Thomas as the catalyst and Chuck Daly at the helm, this team had such a shrewd grasp of the game that it made up for any weakness.
Each player did whatever was needed to win, evincing unique skills as the demands varied from game to game.


Laws Quiet the Ice-Cream Bells of Summer
LEAD: Jonathan Zahm had just handed a couple of Disney Pops through the window of his ice-cream truck when he spied the police car at the curb and thought to himself, ''Here comes trouble.''


Japan: Controversy Saved For Late Night
LEAD: In a society saturated with information, there is television news virtually every hour of the day.
Most surveys show that television is the primary source of news for the Japanese, and many newscasters are celebrities.
By far the most popular nightly show is News Station, broadcast for 78 minutes by TV Asahi, one of the major networks.


The Mandela Visit;   MANDELA'S TRIP IS TRIUMPH AT HOME
LEAD: As he was hailed with a ticker-tape parade and other festivities in New York this week, Nelson Mandela was treated in the press back home as a son of South Africa who had made good.


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   For Children: Videos, Crayons, Antelope Chandeliers and Food
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Here are some restaurants suitable for children.
Border Cafe 2637 Broadway, at 100th Street (212-749-8888) - This restaurant with a Southwestern theme is particulaly congenial for children and tries to keep them entertained with crayons, balloons and even video monitors overhead.


Campus Life: Tufts;   Dental Students Offer Free Exam To Emigres


If You're Thinking of Living in: Oakwood
LEAD: A stroll down tree-lined Oak Avenue is all a visitor needs to see how Oakwood got its name.
But some residents say the name could also apply to the town's solid family life; three and four generations of some families live on the same streets.
The Oakwood Girls, a group of 20 women who grew up in the Staten


5 Die in Taiwan as Typhoon Sweeps In From Philippines
LEAD: A typhoon struck eastern Taiwan today with 86 mile-an-hour winds and heavy rain, killing at least five people.
The storm earlier took 30 lives in the Philippines and forced tens of thousands to flee their homes.


WORLD ECONOMY: THE PROPHET OF BOOM
LEAD:
THE COMING GLOBAL BOOM
How to Benefit Now
From Tomorrow's Dynamic World Economy.
By Charles R. Morris.
267 pp. New York: Bantam Books. $19.95.


The Robbins Festival: A Panorama of Humanity
LEAD: The New York City Ballet season, which continues through next Sunday at the New York State Theater, has been unpredictable.
Peter Martins's superb ''Fearful Symmetries,'' a cannon shot of propulsive energy to a post-minimalist score by John Adams, will apparently not be the only premiere during the engagement.


Theresa E. Heaney Becomes the Bride of Jan Galla
LEAD: Theresa E. Heaney, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Heaney of Oradell, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jan Galla, a son of Anne Galla Hutchinson of Lighthouse Point, Fla., and the late John Galla.
The Rev.
Joseph Kukura officiated at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Oradell.
Mrs.
Galla, a graduate of Lafayette College and the University of Alabama in Birmingham, is a surgeon's assistant in New York at Mount Sinai Medical Center, where her husband is a heart surgeon.


Staying on the Safe Side: Buenos Aires
LEAD: Many visitors to this vast city of 11 million believe the most dangerous thing about it is the drivers, who invent the rules as they go along - always to the dismay, if not outright terror, of pedestrians.


Lifestyle;   Perils of a Musician's Life in the Month of Weddings
LEAD: If Andrew Bolotowsky could change the words to just one song, it might well be ''A Policeman's Lot is Not a Happy One'' from Gilbert and Sullivan's ''Pirates of Penzance.'' A musician's lot is not an easy one.
Especially not in June.


Israel: A Nation of News Hounds
LEAD: It's hard to imagine how a national news program could have a wider or more interested audience.
Viewership of ''Mabat'' (''View'') -Israel's nightly news program - exceeds 90 percent of the population.
The program is similar in style to its American counterparts, but the environment is far different.


Soviet Union: Soliloquies Still, But With a Smile
LEAD: Mercifully, the changes sweeping Soviet news organizations have thus far stopped short of happy talk breaking out on the main nightly television news program.
But the anchors on the 40-minute broadcast, which is a major source of Government-controlled information, have started to smile a bit more and dress more brightly, and there is less Orwellian authority in their voices as they present a changing mix of stories that always pay heaviest attention to the words and pictures of Mikhail S.


Hero Hunger
LEAD: America's adulation follows Nelson Mandela everywhere.
Ticker tape, created for the occasion; shouts of joy; TV talkathons, a crunch of celebrities and an effusion of politicians - such is the affectionate ordeal that he is expected to endure.
This is an undoubted tribute to Mr.
Mandela's unfailing grace under exhausting pressure.


Data Bank/June 24, 1990


Review/Rock
LEAD: The English group Depeche Mode, which played at Radio City Music Hall on Monday night, knows how to get an audience screaming.
The lead singer, David Gahan, pays it a bit of attention.


Antonia Munroe and Jay Fischer Wed
LEAD: Antonia Hughes Munroe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry W. Munroe of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Joseph J. Fischer, the son of Mrs.
William D. Robertson of Charlottesville, Va., and the late Richard E. Fischer of New Haven.
The Rev.
Robert Simon, a Congregational minister, officiated at All Souls by the Sea Chapel in Steuben,


Maggie Koenig Weds Michael Mongeau
LEAD: Margarette Whittemore Koenig, the senior nurse practioner at Benjamin Rush Medical Associates in Philadelphia, and Michael E. Mongeau, the dean of faculty and head of the middle school at the Moorestown (N.J.) Friends School, were married yesterday at the Westbury (L.I.) Friends Meeting House.


Celtics Change Dividend Plan
LEAD: The Boston Celtics used to pay their fans yearly dividends.
Now, the Celtics' limited partnership will reward its shareholders in the same way.


The Civil Rights Act: White Men's Hope
LEAD: President Bush and Congress have overlooked an important reason why they should immediately enact the Civil Rights Act of 1990: to help white men overcome their feelings of inferiority.


Sometimes Light Comes From Dark Places
LEAD: Viewers who enter movie theaters to see Pedro Almodovar's ''Tie Me Up!
Tie Me Down!'' or Garry Marshall's smash Hollywood success ''Pretty Woman'' or the recent revival of Bertrand Blier's 1974 ''Going Places'' also enter into a tricky bargain with the film makers.
Audiences are asked to leave their scruples at the door.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. The bathroom window inside our tub/shower area has deteriorated from exposure to dampness.
For the new window, we are trying to decide between another one of wood or a vinyl one.
Which do you recommend?


Another Look at That Record


BEST SELLERS: June 24, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
2
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow.
(Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney
tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death
while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.


PASTIMES: Chess
LEAD: The other extreme from the player who can't wait to attack before he gets his pieces out of the box is the one who meanders around with infinite patience, move after move, without undertaking anything.
That does not necessarily mean he is not interested in winning; it could mean he is willing to let perseverance play its part.


Handy Sauces and Relishes for Dishes From the Grill
LEAD: WHEN grilled foods need a dash of something, one doesn't have to look far to come up with an interesting sauce or relish.
For grilled lobster, scallops or vegetables, a simple aioli flavored with red peppers and garlic makes a superb dipping sauce.
Grilled chicken, veal chops or fish steaks go well with a relish served on the side made from roasted tomatoes, mixed with olive oil and tarragon.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on May 27 about the Eisenhower Museum in Abilene, Kan., misidentified an artillery piece.
It was a 57-millimeter antitank gun, not a 50-millimeter howitzer.


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
New Hotel Tax Is Protested In New York


Gardening Equipment Provokes a New Look At Noise Ordinances
LEAD: SOME residents complain that spring and summer arrive in this suburban community not with the gentle sound of birds chirping in the treetops and children gamboling in the yards but with the deafening sounds of high-powered garden equipment going full blast, as crews of landscape maintenance workers mow lawns, trim bushes and blow away the debris.


PROTECTING THE WORLD'S 'SPECIAL PLACES'
LEAD: SUSAN MERROW, of Colchester, was recently elected president of the Sierra Club, one of the nation's oldest and largest environmental groups.
Founded by John Muir in 1898, the club has grown to 560,000 members from 182,000 in 1981.


Rescuers Dig for Survivors of Iran Quake
LEAD: Weary disaster teams dug for survivors with fading hope and buried uncounted bodies in mass graves in earthquake-stricken northwestern Iran yesterday.
Foreign emergency aid poured in and official estimates of the toll of death and destruction continued to climb.


Giuseppina Lacarra Is Wed To Howard B. Bloomer 3d
LEAD: Giuseppina Lacarra, a daughter of the late Cavaliere Riccardo Lacarra and the late Olga Ricciardi, both of Naples, was married yesterday at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York to Howard Bradley Bloomer 3d, a son of Katherine Leadbeater Bloomer of Alexandria, Va., and the late Mr.
Bloomer Jr.
The Rev.


Kubelik in Prague - and in the Catalogue
LEAD: After an absence of 42 years, Rafael Kubelik returned to Czechoslovakia several weeks ago to conduct the CzechPhilharmonic Orchestra in the two performances of Bedrich Smetana's symphonic cycle ''Ma Vlast'' (''My Country'') that opened this year's Prague Spring Festival.


Anglers Hail a Salmon Limit
LEAD: THE decision to restrict the harvest of Atlantic salmon by commercial fishermen in Newfoundland has been greeted with delight by sport-fishing interests and condemned by the netters.


Legal Aid Beats Second Bidder to Renew Contract
LEAD: In New York State's first competitive bidding process for legal representation of the poor, the Legal Aid Society last week won a renewal of its state contract to represent indigent children in New York City's Family Courts.


Adoption Of Cats Increasing
LEAD: CATS are becoming the pet of choice on Long Island.
Because of economics, convenience and housing regulations, officials of the Island's pet adoption centers say, the percentage of cat adoptions is rising.


Allithea Lango Married
LEAD: Allithea E. Lango, a daughter of Allithea Cary Lango of Boston and the late Francis E. Lango, was married yesterday to Henry W. Killeen 3d, the son of Ruth Dold Killeen of Buffalo and the late Henry W. Killeen.
The Rev.
Ward Ewing officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church in Buffalo.
Mrs.
Killeen, 41 years old, is an assistant Attorney General for the State of New York in Buffalo.


A Living Will
LEAD: This living will applies to New York State.
Forms for other states are available from the Society for the Right to Die, 250 West 57th Street, New York, N.Y. 10107.


Theater Takes To the Streets
LEAD: What are the Brothers Karamazov doing in the meat-packing district of Manhattan?
Beginning Wednesday, Dimitri, Alyosha, Ivan and Smerdyakov can be found sitting at a 120-foot-long dining table in the middle of West 13th Street.
But Dostoyevsky's characters are not the only dinner guests.
They will be joined by a variety of real and fictional characters who, with an audience of up to 200 a night, will become part of En Garde Arts's new production, ''Father Was a Peculiar Man.


HIGH-TECH GLADIATORS
LEAD:
AMERICA'S STRUGGLE FOR LEADERSHIP IN TECHNOLOGY
By Jean-Claude Derian.
Translated by
Severen Schaeffer.
309 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
The MIT Press. $29.95.


Toni Florin Is Married
LEAD: Toni Florin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Florin of Southampton, L.I., was married yesterday in New York to Scott V. Donahue, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Donahue of LaGrangeville, N.Y., by M. Michael Grupp, an American Ethical Union leader, at Le Club.
Mrs.
Donahue, a Boston University graduate, is a real-estate broker with R.


GOODBYE, YELLOW BRICK ROAD
LEAD:
FADE OUT
The Calamitous Final Days of MGM.
By Peter Bart.
Illustrated. 304 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company. $19.95.


Lower Budget, Lower Spending?
LEAD: Having spent a good many of my 80 years absorbing the budget talks of a good many politicians, I have just about come to the reluctant conclusion that budgets will never get smaller, and that government agencies will never leave a single budget penny unspent, no matter how unwisely.


Jennifer Hoffman Wed in Rochester
LEAD: Jennifer Y. Hoffman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin J. Hoffman of Rochester, was married there last evening to Mark Frederic Hirshorn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Hirshorn of Ambler, Pa.
Rabbi Judea Miller officiated at Temple B'rith Kodesh.


Who Should Control Professional Tennis?
LEAD: FOR tennis people June is a time to ask, ''Where do we go from here.'' For the top-flight players, the answer is easy.
They go where the money is, and that means they go to Wimbledon, and from there to the remaining Grand Slam events and other major tournaments around the world.
For the spectators, the answer is much the same.


Where Credit Is Due
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Life: Chicago;   Student Group Seeks Closer Ties To Neighborhoods
LEAD: Taking their cue from a long-dor mant neighborhood organization, students at the University of Chicago have formed a community action group that aims to dissolve what they see as racial and economic barriers separating the university from surrounding neighborhoods.
The group is modeled on the Student Woodlawn Area Project, founded in 1966 with the same objectives.


Manholes by Another Name
LEAD: Sacramento city officials, having found the word ''manhole'' sexist, have now come up with a new name for those utility holes in streets.
Without fanfare, the City Council adopted the term ''maintenance hole'' this week to replace ''manhole'' on official maps and documents.
Public works officials had proposed finding a non-sexist term in jest, but Mayor Anne Rudin liked the idea and the debate quickly spread.


Northeast Notebook: Freeport, Me.;   Downtown Fee Raises Hackles
LEAD: To generate revenue, the Town Council in this coastal community has imposed a special fee on some downtown buildings to cover the cost of services.
The fee applies only to downtown buildings that house retail and eating establishments and property owners call it discriminatory and illegal.


The Jazz Passengers on a Trip Beyond Hard Bop
LEAD: The saxophonist Roy Nathanson, who leads the Jazz Passengers with the trombonist Curtis Fowlkes, couldn't hold his tongue at the end of the septet's superb set. ''Thanks a lot for coming at this ridiculous time to this very odd place,'' he said to the audience Friday afternoon at the Equitable Auditorium, at Seventh Avenue and 52d


Jamie Wade Wed To Nyr Indictor
LEAD: Rebecca French Wade, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeptha H. Wade of Bedford, Mass., was married yesterday to Nyr Indictor, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Indictor of New York, at the bride's parents' home.
Judge Rudolph Kass, an associate justice of the Massachusetts Court of Appeals, officiated.


Tracy, Tracy - Aaaugh!
LEAD: Warren Beatty. Warren Beatty and Madonna.


ALABAMA BOUND
LEAD: Howell Raines is to be congratulated for a thoughtful article on the backward state of affairs in Alabama.
If anything, the article understated the extent of the problem.


Reviews/Music;   Rarities Of 1700's In Berkeley Festival
LEAD: Despite some financial instability, the biannual Boston Early Music Festival and Exhibition has pretty much had the field to itself in the United States when it comes to combined performance showcases and trade exhibitions for early music.
Now, the University of California at Berkeley has inaugurated a mirror event to take place during Boston's off-years entitled the Berkeley Festival and Exhibition: Music in History.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Most people have security blankets.
Security blankets, plural - because rarely is it only one thing that provides a sense of tranquillity.


On Language;   The Bonding Market
LEAD: MRS.
GORBACHEV and Millie FITGbondedFNMG.'' That good news was the word from Barbara Bush and must have caused much head-scratching at Tass.
They knew that Millie was the name of the Bushes' (which should be pronounced bush-iz-zizz) English springer spaniel, sometimes referred to irreverently as the First Dog, but what means FITGbondedFN


Shootings in Haiti Set Back Election Hopes
LEAD: When holdups and shootings began breaking out with unnerving frequency here last month, many Haitians laid the violence to ordinary criminals.


Are There Really Any Billionaires?
LEAD: In an age when millionaire no longer sounds very rich, billionaire still has a certain ring to it.
Last week, on Manhattan's East Side, two very different men, each of whom became the best-known ''billionaire'' of an era, could reflect on shifting fortunes.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
Taking Aim at the Swans


Headliners;   No Relief
LEAD: If Dennis Barrie's job is bringing the avant garde to the public, then he has succeeded, and he is not going unpunished.
Last week, the director of the Contemporary Arts Center in Cincinnati was ordered to stand trial on obscenity charges brought when the Robert Mapplethorpe exhibition opened at the center in April.


Country Hotels, Splendid Gardens
LEAD: IT is the lot of many travelers to find the rapture of reaching journey's end modified by a heartfelt desire never again to see a car, plane or train.
The feeling soon passes, but respite can be sought meanwhile in the kind of hotel that offers real tranquillity in which to relax and refresh the spirits.


WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE
LEAD: Peril and Promise: A Commentary on America By John Chancellor Harper &amp; Row. 176 pages. $17.95.


ALABAMA BOUND
LEAD: So the secret's out - the world knows that I and my fellow Alabamians live in a time warp dreamily reliving the Wallace years.
Howell Raines's article ''Alabama Bound'' (June 3) contains a laundry list of everything that is wrong with the state.
Granted, Alabama has problems, but it does not have a monopoly on substandard medical care for the poor and other items that


'A Teacher Affects Eternity'
LEAD: AFTER being asked to speak at my former high school English teacher's retirement dinner, a quote by Henry Adams, which I used in a senior English class, came to mind: ''A teacher affects eternity: he can never tell where his influence stops.'' How true, I thought.


Staying on the Safe Side; Vancouver
LEAD: Often called the San Francisco of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, shares more than a bracing waterfront and international flavor with the Bay Area.
Western Canada's largest city also has a property crime rate to rival other Pacific Rim ports.


Staying on the Safe Side; Mexico City
LEAD: Because of its proximity to the United States, Mexico City has long been one of the favorite destinations of American tourists.
The welcome is usually warm, but foreign visitors also rank among the favorite marks of Mexican petty criminals.
Pickpockets, for example, often prey on Americans emerging from museums, especially as they board buses or enter the subway near Chapultepec Park or on Paseo de la Reforma.


Trappings of Affluence Draw Crowd to Auction
LEAD: The glitziest remnants of Florida's glitziest, but now bankrupt, savings and loan went on the block here today, as eager bidders carted off such necessities of modern American business as 1,440 Baccarat crystal goblets, a sprinkling of gold-washed serving dishes, pounds of silver flatware and a mahogany cigar humidor.


Northeast Notebook: Wilmington, Del.;   Sears Moving To a Mall
LEAD: After 40 years as a free-standing store in the northwestern part of town, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company will move to a suburban mall whose owner is planning a $70 million expansion over a two-year period.
It will be the first major anchor store to move in as part of the expansion of the Concord mall off


Staying on the Safe Side
LEAD: An American woman was enjoying a midday walk on a quiet side street in Florence when a motorcycle roared by, slowing just long enough for the motorcyclist to grab the woman's leather shoulder bag.
She clung to the strap, but it broke and the motorcyclist sped off with her passport, her traveler's checks, wallet and camera.


Susan Yannella and Jeffrey Harrigan Are Wed
LEAD: Susan A. Yannella, a daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
Donald Yannella of Marlton, N.J., was married yesterday to Jeffrey J. Harrigan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Harrigan of Corona del Mar, Calif., at Our Mother of Consolation Roman Catholic Church in the Chestnut Hill section of Philadelphia.
The Rev.


AIDS Experts Tell of Work on Possible Vaccines
LEAD: Optimistic after a string of laboratory successes, researchers are assembling potential vaccines against AIDS and may start preliminary testing within a year, scientists at the Sixth International Conference on AIDS said today.


No Headline
LEAD:
MAY YOU BE THE MOTHER OF A HUNDRED SONS
A Journey Among the Women of India.
By Elisabeth Bumiller.
Illustrated. 306 pp. New York:
Random House. $19.95.


Canada's Beleaguered Currency
LEAD: The British pound is on the up and up.
On Friday, it rose to $1.7330, its highest level against the dollar since March of 1989.
The jump came after the release of trade figures that were slightly better than expected and another statement of commitment to high interest rates from John Major, the Chancellor of the Exchecquer.


Research Lab And Budget: Striking A Balance
LEAD: UNAWARE of the shadow that had been cast over their fate in recent weeks, hundreds of thousands of insects from places like India, Korea, Yugoslavia and South America eat, sleep and energetically reproduce in climate-controlled cages at the Phillip Alampi Beneficial Insect Rearing Laboratory.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart with the Travel Advisory column on page 3 of the Travel section today, about per diem allowances for Federal employees traveling abroad on business, mislabels the fourth column from the right in some copies.
The figure of $177 is for Rome, not Paris.


Gooden Pitches 2-Hitter
LEAD: It's hard to imagine that Dwight Gooden could start 32 games without completing one, but he did.
That is, he did until last night when he not only started a game but dominated it, muzzling the Philadelphia Phillies by 3-0 and allowing just two hits and two walks for nine innings of mastery that led the Mets to their fifth consecutive victory and their 14th in 17 games.


Question Of the Week;   How Do The Pistons Rank in N.B.A. History?
LEAD: The Pistons' three guards are possibly the greatest rotation in history.
Thomas, Dumars, and Johnson can all score, defend, and control a game.
Rodman and Laimbeer are strong rebounders.
But the lack of one great scorer or rebounder among the league leaders is one reason why the Pistons have not been fully recognized for their ability.


The 3 R's Are Romance...
LEAD: Julius Portnow (''Romance Time in a Nursing Home,'' May 27) was right!
Residents at most health-related facilities on Long Island will tell you that the 3 R's are not the Risk/Reward Ratio; it's Romance/Romance/Romance - with a capital R. For true Romance aficionados like Molly Goldberg, an 89-year-old ''snow-bird'' from Plainview, bring on Johanna Lindsey, Janet Dailey, Eugenia Price, Kathleen E.


The Nation;   Arms Debate Flares Anew As Critics Deploy Their Second-Striking Capabilities.
LEAD: THE Berlin wall has fallen, the military budgets of Moscow and Washington are in decline, and the cold war is over.
But as a new treaty to cut strategic arms is emerging, many of the debates that surround it have not changed.
Since the new treaty was approved in principle at the summit meeting earlier this month between Presidents Bush and Mikhail S.


Tracy Peck Weds Thomas Phillips
LEAD: Tracy Ann Peck, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Peck of South Yarmouth, Mass., and Pittsfield, Vt., was married yesterday to Thomas Notter Phillips, a son of William E. Phillips of New York and Paula W. Shamberg of Mount Kisco, N.Y.
The Rev.
David Good performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Old Lyme,


INTRODUCTION
LEAD: Turn on a television set in Tel Aviv or Mexico City or about anywhere else in the world and one would instantly recognize the nightly news.
These newscasts, as much or more of a fixture abroad as they are in this country, generally assume the same form and habits.
In many countries there is one broadcast in the early evening, usually a half-hour to an hour long, and another program later.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:
CLASSICAL
Nyman: 'The Cook, the Thief, His Wife and Her Lover'
London Voices; the Michael Nyman Band, conducted by Michael Nyman.
Venture CDVE 53.
CD and cassette.
Audiences tend to be so diverted by the visual richness of Peter Greenaway's films that they sometimes miss the importance of Michael Nyman's music.


PASTIMES: Gardening;   If Insect Pests Are on the March ...
LEAD: Now that the gardening season is well under way, and plants are growing, the insect pests that feed on them are increasing in numbers.
What is to be done?
One reaction is to reach for a spray can and knock the population out.
Never mind about identifying the insects or learning about their life cycle.


Question of the Week: Next Week;   How Can The U.S. Improve Its Soccer Team For 1994?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.


Just a Matter of Dividends?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Some Eggheads Have Their Sunny Side, Too
LEAD: When I was in high school, my secret weapon for gaining admittance to the college of my choice was competing on a television talk show called ''The World Youth Forum.'' Broadcast weekly on CBS, the forum was in my mind a mini-version of ''It's a Wise Child,'' the radio program on which all the members of J.


'The Proper Measure' Insults Men
LEAD: Regarding ''Taking the Proper Measure of a Man'' (May 20): Barbara Klaus's article is full of prejudicial statements and insulting remarks in regard to our male counterparts.


Evolution in Europe;   Moldavia Assembly Declares Sovereignty of the Republic
LEAD: The Parliament of Moldavia approved a declaration of the republic's sovereignty today, asserting that its laws supersede those of the Soviet Union, the Soviet press agency Tass reported.


WORLD COURT PLAN MEETS DIFFICULTIES
LEAD: An attempt by the United States and the Soviet Union to expand the authority of the World Court has run into difficulties, with Britain and other critics contending that the initiative might reduce the role of international law rather than enhance it.


Empty Nests on the Tappan Zee Disappoint Bridge's Falcon Fans
LEAD: THE nest is empty.
Weeds grow in the gravel that covers the bottom of the peregrine falcon's nest box on the west tower of the Tappan Zee Bridge.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/DINOSAURS PLUS
LEAD:
TRACES OF LIFE
The Origins of Humankind.
By Kathryn Lasky.
Illustrated by Whitney Powell.
144 pp. New York: Morrow Junior Books.
$16.95. (Ages 10 to 14)


Miss Waterbury to Wed G. H. Brown
LEAD: The engagement of Suzanne Elaine Waterbury, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Waterbury of Minneapolis, to Geoffrey Hewlett Brown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thatcher M. Brown 3d of New York and Dorset, Vt., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents.
A January wedding is planned.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Tennis
Sampras Wins Manchester Open: Second-seeded Pete Sampras of the United States beat the unseeded Gilad Bloom of Israel yesterday, 7-6, 7-6, in Manchester, England, to win the Manchester Open and his first grass-court title.
He won the tie breakers, 11-9 and 7-3.
Sampras, an 18-year-old Californian, is the youngest player to win an Association of Tennis


Staying on the Safe Side: London
LEAD: The biggest threat to the safety of tourists in London comes from the traffic, which is increasingly heavy and moves on the wrong side of the street.
Wrong, that is, if your first instinct is to look to your left and start crossing before looking to your right, which is where the traffic in England will be coming from on a two-way street.


Elizabeth Colston Marries
LEAD: Elizabeth M. Colston, a candidate for M.D. and Ph.D. degrees at Columbia University, was married yesterday to Leo D. Titus, a consultant for ALK Associates, transportation specialists in Princeton, N.J.
Msgr.
John F. Corr performed the ceremony at the Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J.
The bride, 25 years old, is a daughter of Dr.


Reagan Rexrode Weds James Dryfoos
LEAD: Reagan Hope Rexrode and James David Dryfoos were married yesterday at the Greenbrier in White Sulphur Springs, W.Va., by the Rev.
Jeffrey Dennis May, a Lutheran minister.
Ramona R. Goodwin, the bride's sister, was her matron of honor.
Seth Richard Thomas 3d, a cousin of the bridegroom, was the best man.


Handy Sauces and Relishes for Dishes From the Grill
LEAD: WHEN grilled foods need a dash of something, one doesn't have to look far to come up with an interesting sauce or relish.
For grilled lobster, scallops or vegetables, a simple aioli flavored with red peppers and garlic makes a superb dipping sauce.
Grilled chicken, veal chops or fish steaks go well with a relish served on the side made from roasted tomatoes, mixed with olive oil and tarragon.


Perspectives: The Shift at Clasons Point;   Adding a Simplex to Broaden the Market
LEAD: Two years into construction, the largest low-rise residential development ever undertaken in the Bronx is tacking with the winds of the sales market this summer.


Stitches In Time
LEAD: Some lesser-known stories pertaining to the Wimbledon championships:
1877: Overmatched


Will Knicks' Picks Include Bianchi?
LEAD: Four days before the National Basketball Association draft, the Knicks were pondering their future off the court as well as on it.


Anne W. Gudaitis Is Wed
LEAD: At the Wellesley (Mass.) College Chapel, Anne Wentworth Gudaitis, an administrative assistant to the associate provost at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, was married yesterday to Robert Roy Evans, an artist.
The Rev.
George Chapman, an Episcopalian, officiated.
The bride, 34 years old, is a daughter of Mr.


Tory Lord Weds Mark Eckenwiler
LEAD: Victoria Marie Lord, a daughter of Athena V. Lord of Albany and the late Victor A. Lord, was married yesterday to Mark W. Eckenwiler, the son of Leah Eckenwiler of Tulsa, Okla., by the Rev.
Patric Legato at St.
Sophia's Greek Orthodox Church in Albany.
The bride, who is known as Tory and is keeping her name, is a doctoral candidate in medieval history at Columbia University.


Deregulation Is Nothing but a License to Steal;   Only Consumers Lose
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mutual Funds;   STAID MUNIS LEARN THE P-BOP
LEAD: For the most part, municipal bond investors are an ultraconservative breed.
They look not for appreciation but for income, and managers of muni bond funds crank it out, quietly but steadily, year in and year out.
Innovation rarely rears its head.


South Africa: News Control For Neophytes
LEAD: When Nelson Mandela was released from prison in February, the South African Broadcasting Corporation sent a news team to provide live coverage.
But Mr.
Mandela emerged 75 minutes late, and SABC-TV was unprepared.
While foreign networks filled the time with interviews of people in the crowd and background pieces, SABC-TV's correspondent stood in front of his camera making awkward small talk without turning to interview any of several thousand supporters of Mr.


Business Diary: June 17-22
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Profiting From the Bailout
How to profit from the savings and loan bailout: First, default on a real estate project.
Then, go back into business under a new name.
Finally, turn around and buy the property from the Government at a fraction of its initial cost.
Such are the shenanigans already afflicting Federal sales of property seized from failed savings and loans.


Alleghany's Record Speaks for Itself
LEAD: To the Editor:


Shared Space;   Germany Again Forces a Redefining of Europe
LEAD: FIFTY years ago this summer, Germany had traumatized Europe for the second time in this tragic century: Austria had been annexed; Poland, France, Holland, Norway and Belgium had been defeated, Czechoslovakia and Denmark were occupied, and British troops had been driven into the sea from Dunkirk.
The Battle of Britain in the skies over London lay ahead, as did the subsequent decision to turn instead on the Soviet Union.


The Germanys: Influential, Serious And Hold the Glitz
LEAD: For many years, West German programs have also brought news to East Germany.
Since the fall of the old regime in East Germany, that country's news programs have become sources of serious information, but most East Germans still tune in from habit to the evening West German newscasts.


Czechoslovakia Gains
LEAD: Tomas Skuhravy scored two goals tonight as Czechoslovakia eliminated Costa Rica from the World Cup finals, 4-1.


From Ballplayer to Broadcaster: A Rocky Road
LEAD: THERE is nothing so disheartening in the wrenching drama of professional sports than to watch a great athlete hang on a little too long and be humbled.
It happened to Muhammad Ali when, at 38 years old, he attempted to win the heavyweight title for the fourth time, against Larry Holmes.
It almost happened to Jimmy Connors when, at 36 and playing in the quarterfinals of the 1988 United States Open, he was nearly ground stroked to death by Andre Agassi in three lopsided sets.


Karen Kesselman, Ad Executive, Wed
LEAD: Karen Ruth Kesselman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur Kesselman of Woodmere, L.I., was married yesterday to Lindsay Adam Gardner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Gardner of Beverly Hills, Calif., at Alger House in New York, by Cantor Ellen Math.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   It's 'Chinese,' But It Has A Latin Twist
LEAD: Don't take the name of this pork dish too literally; the Chinese don't use rum in their cooking and are unlikely to use lime juice either.
But the combination of ingredients is certainly Chinese in flavor, and if you like very hot food, add more chili paste.


Streetscapes: The Leake &amp; Watts Orphan Asylum;   A Castoff in the Path of a Growing, Great Cathedral
LEAD: As masons lay course after course of stone for the south tower of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine for the first time in decades, it seems that this huge structure may actually, someday, be completed.


Honoring A Father's Legacy
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Mandela Visit;   Not All Felt Invited to Mandela's Party
LEAD: While Nelson Mandela's visit may have been a special celebration for black New Yorkers, some whites in middle-class neighborhoods far from the throngs watched his triumphal tour with the sense that it was not really their party, and described the guest of honor with a mix of admiration, wariness of his intent and, occasionally, hostility.


Two Children Are Wounded By Stray Shots in Flatbush
LEAD: Two girls walking in front of a Brooklyn variety store were wounded last night, one critically, as they were hit by stray shots fired in an argument, the police said.


CANADIAN LEADER APPEALS FOR CALM ON QUEBEC DISPUTE
LEAD: With the collapse of a deal that many here thought might be the last chance to keep Quebec in Canada, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney appealed today for calm while new ways were sought to keep this bitterly divided country intact.


Staying on the Safe Side; Dublin
LEAD: The Irish are such a friendly lot that it often seems that the most serious crime in Dublin is the reluctance of Dubliners to let a visitor get a word in edgewise.


The 'Girls' Gather to Write And Reflect
LEAD: THE ''girls,'' as they call themselves, are gathered in the living room of my mother's small Mount Kisco apartment on a cloudy Friday afternoon.
Each has a notebook and pencil in hand, and on this day some time ago Marguerite begins:


Mandela's Visit, New York's Pride
LEAD: SINCE at least 1927, when a startlingly large crowd of 30,000 waited outside a Harlem funeral parlor to pay respects to the entertainer Florence Mills, the black community in New York City has bathed its heroes in the most public expressions of love and support.


VIETNAM VETERANS MEMORIAL
LEAD: When I read ''Voices at the Wall'' (May 27), I thought that my father, Tad Yoshizawa, a retired lieutenant colonel in the United States Air Force, might have contributed to the poignant reflections in Michael Norman's article.
I was wrong, of course.
But I would like to contribute his experience now.


Let's Go To the Rescue Of the Guard
LEAD: THE other night I picked up a newspaper and there it was: an article predicting virtual elimination of the 50th Armored Division, an Army National Guard unit based in New Jersey.
Many of the division's fighting battalions have roots that go back to World War II.


Testing of Homeless Saves $400,000
LEAD: THE county saved $400,000 in costs associated with the homeless during the first six months of the year, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke said last week,by having applicants undergo three-day physical and mental evaluations.


East Berlin Opera Nervously Awaits The Next Act
LEAD: ''It was always so peaceful here,'' murmured the mild-mannered Stephan Stompor, a historian of German musical theater and the longest-tenured dramaturge at the Komische Oper, East Berlin's innovative alternative opera company.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
'BACHANALIA'


A Court Case Weighs Down Corporate Bounce
LEAD: A messy courtroom wrangle involving the Rite Aid Corporation, originally set for trial in April, is dragging on into the summer - a pain for investors as well as the principals.


Czyz and Maynard To Fight Today
LEAD: Bobby Czyz, a former light-heavyweight champion, continues his comeback attempt Sunday with a 10-round bout against Andrew Maynard, an undefeated 1988 Olympic gold medalist.


Art, Love and a Refrigerator Door
LEAD: IF it's a visceral, confrontational, obscure play you're after, the Penguin Rep would be a likely place to find it.
And even though John Patrick Shanley has hit the big time as a screenwriter with ''Moonstruck,'' most of his plays - and screenplays - are little known and less noticed.


Blasphemy, Italian-Style
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Wedding Plans For Kyoko Ono
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Tokuyuki Ono of Tokyo have announced the engagement of their daughter Kyoko Ono to Peter Stenwall Kirby, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Kirby of Forest Hills, Queens.
Miss Ono, 27 years old, graduated from Amherst College.
She is an account executive at Backer Spielvogel Bates Japan, the Tokyo subsidiary of a New York advertising agency.


No Wedding, But the Cake Isn't Wasted
LEAD: Kathleen Gooley was to have been married today.
The wedding was called off, but the reception went on.
Instead of friends and relatives, Ms.
Gooley's guests were 150 people from homeless shelters, soup kitchens and drug rehabilitation centers in Norwalk, Stamford and Bridgeport.


Backers Push Louisiana Abortion Bill Toward Supreme Court Test
LEAD: For national strategists on both sides of the abortion debate, the broad legal concerns raised in a restrictive new bill under consideration by Louisiana lawmakers are of critical importance.


Past As Prelude
LEAD: To the Editor:


India: Getting Back Into Old Habits
LEAD: There is no commercial broadcasting in India, so national television news, broadcast for a half-hour in both Hindi and English, is a Government monopoly.
The program hit rock bottom in credibility under former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, whose ministers made it a propaganda machine.
When the Government of Vishwanath Pratap Singh came to power in December, it promised to free the news by setting up a public corporation something like the BBC.


Miss Gibson Wed To J. P. Bailinson
LEAD: Nancy S. Gibson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Curtis S. Gibson of Indianapolis, was married yesterday to James P. Bailinson, the son of Jean Paaswell Bailinson of New York and Frank Bailinson of Chapel Hill, N.C.
The Rev.
Dr.
Richard Simpson, a Congregational minister, officiated at the Concord Country Inn House in Woodstock, Ill.


STREET-SMART DRESSING: OUR OWN WAY
LEAD: Jusuf Andrews, a one-time model who makes jewelry with an African cast, has a penchant for mixing things up. ''I like a rough look and a smooth look at the same time,'' says Andrews, whose outfit on any given day makes an eloquent case for eclecticism.
His Wrangler work shirt falls open to reveal a cascade of African-mask pendants, Moroccan trading beads, gold chains and cowrie shells.


Major and Minor Differences
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brucie Ketcham Is a Bride
LEAD: Mary Bruce Ketcham, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Ketcham of Lawrence, L.I., was married yesterday to Thomas M. Donahue, a son of Beatrice Donahue of Barre, Vt., and the late Howard Donahue, at Trinity St.
John's Episcopal Church in Hewlett, L.I., by the Revs.
Earle W. Pratt Jr. and Edyth Baker.


Accuracy in Media Has Enviable Record
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rona Stein, Physician, Wed To S. H. Kaufman, Lawyer
LEAD: Dr.
Rona L. Stein, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Herman Stein of Hewlett Harbor, L.I., was married last evening to Stephen H. Kaufman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Kaufman of Henrietta, N.Y.
Rabbi Stanley Platek officiated at the Hewlett East Rockaway (L.I.) Jewish Center.


Giap Remembers
LEAD: WE MET AT THE FORMER FRENCH COLONIAL governor's palace in Hanoi, an ornate mansion set in a spacious garden ablaze with hibiscus and bougainvillea, where senior Vietnamese officials receive guests.
A short man with smooth skin, white hair, narrow eyes and a spry gait, he wore a simple olive uniform, the four stars on its collar the only sign of his rank.


Q and A
LEAD:
Rent Overcharge Payment
Question: The State Division of Housing and Community Renewal ruled in my favor in a rent overcharge complaint case.
The judgment supported my claim that I was overcharged by about $8,000 over 10 year.
The building has been sold and I have heard that the new owner may not be liable for overcharges that occurred before he took over.


Miss Sullivan to Wed William Galvin
LEAD: The engagement of Catherine Ann Sullivan to William P. Galvin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald M. Galvin of Forest Hills, Queens, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
John Donal Sullivan of Rockville Centre, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Sullivan, 25 years old, graduated from St.


Data Update
LEAD:
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS/N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
May
Apr.
May 89
Rents
157.1
-0.3
5.1
Homeowner's costs
164.4
0.6
7.3
Fuel and utilities
100.9
-0.8
3.7
*4*(Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics)
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester,
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union,
*4*Hudson, Middlesex, Somerset and Passaic.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/DINOSAURS PLUS
LEAD:
THE FOSSIL FACTORY
A Kid's Guide to Digging Up Dinosaurs, Exploring Evolution, and
Finding Fossils.
By Niles, Douglas and Gregory Eldredge.
Illustrated by True Kelley and Steve Lindblom.
111 pp. New York:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
Paper, $8.95. (Ages 7 to 12)
FOSSILS TELL OF LONG AGO
Revised edition.


Q and A
LEAD:
Bumped From a Flight


Shanley Examines Pleasure and Pain
LEAD: IF it is a visceral, confrontational, obscure play you are after, the Penguin Rep would be a likely place to find it.
And even though John Patrick Shanley has hit the big time as a screenwriter with ''Moonstruck,'' most of his plays - and screenplays - are little known and less noticed.


Never Too Old to Travel Light
LEAD: THIS is the story of two somewhat over-the-hill physical fitness buffs who traveled through Europe for four weeks last summer, carrying nothing but small backpacks.


Robert Frost
LEAD: To the Editor: In the May 13 Travel section there was a photo illustrating an article by Susan Allport with the caption ''Robert Frost Farm in Shaker Village, New Hampshire.''


Jazz Festival;   The Ragtime Piano Man, Terry Waldo
LEAD: The JVC Festival opened its Solo Piano series at Weill Recital Hall on Friday night with a performance by Terry Waldo, a ragtime and early jazz specialist.
Mr.
Waldo, who studied with the pianist and composer Eubie Blake, is an amiable performer - he spent part of the show fielding questions from the audience - who never lets the archival presentation of the music interfere with the music's basic swing.


Miss Hohn Weds Bradley L. Brehm
LEAD: Patricia La Rosa Hohn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Hohn of Scarsdale, N.Y., and New York, was married yesterday to Bradley L. Brehm, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth E. Brehm of Coram, L.I.
The Rev.
William H. Pindar officiated at the Central Presbyterian Church in New York.


'S' Is for Scribbler
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Life: Penn State;   Bilingual Teachers Aim for Posts As Principals
LEAD: Joseph Prewitt Diaz does not believe he or anyone else should have to give up a language or a culture.


Rising Party in Italy's North Wants to Get Rome and the South Off Its Back
LEAD: On a chilly spring evening in this northern Italian town, a dozen leaders of the new local government gathered on the front porch of the Coba Bar, talking about revolution.


Yugoslavia
LEAD: To the Editor: Robert D. Kaplan's article on Ljubljana, Slovenia (Travel, April 1), paints an inaccurate picture of Yugoslavia's currency situation.
His figures of 125,000 dinars or $2.50 for two plum brandies and a cup of coffee probably put his visit in October of last year, when the dollar was valued at 50,000 dinars.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
North Salem, N.Y.
$300,000
Lakeview Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 52-year-old ranch; fireplace, finished basement, pool, 3-car garage, 1.5 acres; taxes $4,406.
Rye, N.Y.
$998,000
90 Greenhaven Road
5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 2-year-old Georgian colonial; sunken living room, den, 4 fireplaces, patio, family room, whirlpool; taxes not yet assessed.


Under the Spreading Sycamore Tree, the Village Arborist Stands
LEAD: SPRING in this village brought a worrisome sight.
Three large sycamore trees along the sidewalk outside the post office seemed to be dying.


Reading, Writing and Power
LEAD: To the Editor:


A New Hotel and Its New Restaurant
LEAD: AN out-of-towner staying at the new Radisson Plaza Hotel in Melville wanders down to La Prima, the hotel's dining room.
He looks at the menu and sees that a veal chop costs $38.50.
Does he storm out or assume that this is typical of Long Island prices?


Will a Morning Star Continue to Shine at Night?
LEAD: For 13 years, television viewers have looked into Jane Pauley's smiling eyes and seen exactly what they wanted to see.
The hip have detected a suppressed soulmate, restraining herself in deference to the bland requirements of morning television; traditionalists have perceived a fresh, levelheaded young woman forced to cope with - but miraculously unchanged by - the fast-track world she inhabits.


The Editorial Notebook;   Trenchcoats, Then and Now
LEAD: On Christmas Day in 1933, Joseph Stalin conferred this orchid on his favorite Western journalist:


Power Authority Is Necessary To Oversee Lilco
LEAD: ROBERT McMILLAN, former Republican candidate for the United States Senate, recently suggested that the State Legislature should scrap the Long Island Power Authority and allow the Long Island Lighting Company to manage Long Island's energy affairs.
While Mr.
McMillan may have full confidence in Lilco, I don't.


With Regrets
LEAD: To the Editor:


Moody and Torn, Quebecers Explore a Future Quite Apart
LEAD: Bright blue and white flags bearing the fleur-de-lis were already aloft and fluttering throughout Montreal today in anticipation of the Quebec national holiday of St.
Jean Baptiste, which will be celebrated on Sunday.


Co-op Converters' Money Woes Spread
LEAD: New financial disclosure filings are revealing widespread problems in New York co-ops and condominiums, where bank loans on unsold units are in arrears, maintenance payments are behind schedule and other shortfalls are emerging.


Handy Sauces and Relishes for Dishes From the Grill
LEAD: WHEN grilled foods need a dash of something, one doesn't have to look far to come up with an interesting sauce or relish.
For grilled lobster, scallops or vegetables, a simple aioli flavored with red peppers and garlic makes a superb dipping sauce.
Grilled chicken, veal chops or fish steaks go well with a relish served on the side made from roasted tomatoes, mixed with olive oil and tarragon.


Debra J. Lee Weds Dean W. Fichtner
LEAD: Debra Jeanne Lee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles R. Lee of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Dean Walker Fichtner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clifton Wales Fichtner of Old Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Merton Rymph officiated at the Second Congregational Church in Greenwich.


Mets Go South With West
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Mr. Nickerson Beats Sewickley by a Bob
LEAD: Mr.
Nickerson bobbed his head back down after being passed by Sewickley in the penultimate stride and won the $85,600 True North Handicap by a nose yesterday at Belmont Park.


Wall Street In Search of Itself on the Yampa
LEAD: The band of Wall Streeters and other executives had already scaled 100 feet of the side of a mountain, when Al Brown yelled the news.
The group had to name the next two climbs, he said, adding that they would be difficult.


Secord, Striking New Deal, Drops Appeal of Conviction
LEAD: Richard V. Secord, a leading defendant in the Iran-contra affair, is dropping the appeal of his conviction, the office of the independent prosecutor for Iran-contra cases said today.


Ideas &amp; Trends;   For Japanese Art Collectors, Acquisition Begins at Home
LEAD: IF high-rolling Japanese buyers are snapping up paintings by big-name Western artists - Van Gogh, Renoir and Lichtenstein -who's buying Japanese art?


The Mandela Visit;   Mandela Sees Links to de Klerk
LEAD: Nelson Mandela appears to have held out the possibility of a political alliance between his African National Congress and President F. W. de Klerk's National Party in South Africa, if Mr. de Klerk can extend voting rights to the black majority.


Island Feeling Effects of Slump In City Economy
LEAD: AS New York City's financial problems deepen, Long Island, an important source of labor for the city and a major market for its products, is beginning to feel the effects.


China: The Product Is the Party
LEAD: Chinese television news programs have no commercials, but then the entire program is pretty much a commercial for the Communist leadership.
Only rarely are there interruptions for the news.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: Sales of existing homes for May. Ten-day auto sales through June 20.
TUESDAY: I.B.M. plans to announce its first line of home computers in almost five years.
American and Japanese negotiators are scheduled to meet to draft a final agreement on economic reforms aimed at reducing the United States trade deficit.


Maintaining Wicker Furniture
LEAD: WICKER porch furniture is durable if maintained, but neglected items can rapidly deteriorate beyond the point of easy repair.


Tech Notes;   How Does the Micro-Motor Wear?
LEAD: Researchers at the Massachussetts Institute of Technology and the University of California at Berkeley have been working for years to develop micro-motors.
Now, they say, they know a bit about how these tiny engines wear. ''We are beginning to get a foothold in understanding the wear process and in learning how bearings hold up,'' said Jeffrey Lang, an associate professor of electrical engineering at M.I.T., who is building the motors.


SOCCER'S LITTLE BIG MAN
LEAD: As a Brazilian, I was shocked to read that after England's cup victory in 1966, there was a ''diminishment of the influence of . . .
Pele.'' In 1970, Brazil had the best soccer team ever assembled - it was Pele's best cup performance and we owed nothing to the English.


Staying on the Safe Side; Paris
LEAD: Along with all the other superlatives that it proudly attaches to its name, Paris can probably claim to be one of the safest capitals in the world today.
In how many major cities, after all, can an unaccompanied woman take the subway at midnight without being considered foolhardy?


Explosion on Dead Sea Beach
LEAD: A bomb in a trash can exploded today on a Dead Sea beach, wounding four people, the police said.
The explosion occurred at the Ein Gedi campground, a beach frequented by tourists and run by the Ein Gedi kibbutz.
The area is south of the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
No group took responsibility.


Beckenbauer Looks to Final and Beyond
LEAD: THE television producer asked him for just five minutes.


Staying on the Safe Side: New Delhi
LEAD: The capital of India is really two or more cities, a fact worth remembering for safety sake.
New Delhi, the imperial capital built by the British in the 1920's and 30's, is still mostly a spacious city of tree-lined streets where tourists walk comfortably at almost any hour of the day or night without problems.


Longer School Year: Some Disadvantages
LEAD: Assemblyman William Pascrell's recent article concerning the extension of the school year into the summer (''Needed: A Longer School Year,'' Opinion page, May 6) fails to take to account that the schools are not educating students within the 10-month time period.
Extending the school year for two months will mean that there will be two more months of schools' failing to educate.


The Region;   As Token Lines Lengthen, Fare-Beating Rises
LEAD: FARE-BEATING has become so serious in New York City's subways that the Transit Authority expects a $55 million deficit this year, mainly because of the record number of people who are riding without paying.


Tragic Chapter In Cup Story
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Ellsworth Kelly Loads the Dice at the Modern
LEAD: It is not every artist who is allowed to go into the most important museum of modern art in the world, select the art in it that defines his modern artistic heritage and his esthetic beliefs, install it in one of the museum's galleries, and set one of his own paintings in the center so that it seems to conduct all the other works, or hover over them like a bird, or stand over them with raised hands like a priest.


Staying on the Safe Side; Rio de Janeiro
LEAD: Rio's irreverent citizens love a spectacle, but a photograph in newspapers here last summer was a bit downbeat: 26 foreign tourists on a hunger strike after thieves cleaned all their valuables out of a hotel safe.


PASTIMES: AROUND THE GARDEN
LEAD: For This Week: FITGWeed, weed, weed.
These unwanted plants usurp valuable soil moisture and soil nutrients.
Check cucumbers and tomatoes to be sure they are securely fastened to their supports.
Prune hedges.
Dig, divide and replant wild flowers after the soil has been enriched.
Plant the seed of biennials.


A DISCORDANT INTIMACY
LEAD:
BLOOD, CLASS, AND NOSTALGIA
Anglo-American Ironies.
By Christopher Hitchens.
398 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.95.


Michele A. Brown Wed to Steven L. Sweetwood
LEAD: Michele Ashley Brown, a senior at Brandeis University, and Steven Louis Sweetwood, a financial investment consultant at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company in New York, were married at the Pierre last evening by Rabbi Judah Nadish.
The couple's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Lewis Brown of Norwood, N.J., and Madeline M.


No Easy Path Over This Grass
LEAD: Like so much pretty patchwork, the lawns at Wimbledon, as well groomed as the royalty that gathers yearly at Centre Court to anoint new champions, await an onslaught of tennis players intent on capturing the most prestigious of the Grand Slam tournaments.


Gate Keeping
LEAD: THE WILD CELEBRATIONS AT THE Berlin Wall last New Year's Eve damaged the already corroding Quadriga, the copper statue of the goddess Nike in a chariot drawn by four horses (below) that has ridden atop the famed Brandenburg Gate for nearly two centuries.
The statue was a particularly ambiguous symbol for the 28-year existence of the wall; Nike is the Greek goddess of victory, and King Frederick William II of Prussia remarked on the


ABU NIDAL'S RIVALS SEEM TO BE GAINING
LEAD: The Palestinian terrorist Abu Nidal appears to be losing ground in a struggle for control of his group to rivals who say they will follow the less militant guidelines of Yasir Arafat's Palestine Liberation Organization.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on May 27 about the Eisenhower Museum in Abilene, Kan., misidentified an artillery piece.
It was a 57-millimeter antitank gun, not a 50-millimeter howitzer.
An article last Sunday about the Maine coast misstated the dates of the Maine Lobster Festival in Rockland.
It will be held from Aug.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
FIRE ON THE RIM: A Firefighter's Season at the Grand Canyon, by Stephen J. Pyne. (Ballantine, $4.95.) During 15 summers at the Grand Canyon, the author learned about the most awesome of nature's wonders, the runaway chemical reaction called fire. ''Stephen J. Pyne is to fire what Theodore White was to American politics,'' Andrew H.


June Christy, Singer, 64, Is Dead; Gained Fame With Kenton's Band
LEAD: June Christy, whose wistful, foggy alto epitomized ''cool'' jazz singing in the 1940's and 50's, died Thursday at the age of 64 at her home in Los Angeles.


Thomas Edison's Florida
LEAD: THE most important day in Fort Myers history, many believe, was March 6, 1885, when Thomas Alva Edison landed in what was then a sleepy tropical village on Florida's west coast.
Edison, then 38 years old and widely known for his invention of the incandescent lamp and the phonograph, came for rest and sunshine and to shake off a lingering illness.


Guatemala President Stars in Political Drama
LEAD: This country's most avidly watched drama features a dashing executive, a coterie of young women and a cabal of high-living friends whose reputations make J. R. Ewing look like a choirboy.


The Region;   As Floria Changes Politics, His Foes Are Overwhelmed And His Allies Are Nervous
LEAD: RELENTLESSLY over the last five months, Jim Florio, who took over the governorship of New Jersey on Jan. 16, has overwhelmed his enemies and unnerved his allies with a series of initatives that, as of last December, most politicians said a governor should not, would not or could not get done.


Staying on the Safe Side: Los Angeles
LEAD: In the cultural cacaphony of the new Los Angeles, which has become the nexus between Latin America and Asia, slick bands of thieves flourish, taking advantage of the city's enormous numbers of foreigners and travelers.
At Los Angeles International Airport, several families make their living preying on visitors.


Postings: On the Beach in the Hamptons;  $1.5 Million and Up
LEAD: Resort property prices may be in a slump, but when four of his 12 new houses sit on the last buildable lots on the ocean beach, and the beach in question is in the Long Island Town of Southampton, their developer believes there is nothing to worry about.


Staying on the Safe Side; Lisbon
LEAD: A visitor can still venture into any nook or neighborhood in Portugal without fear of violent crime.
But gone are the days, a dozen years or so ago, when people could leave valuables in unlocked automobiles.


John S. P. Burke Wed To Mary S. Schambach
LEAD: Mary S. Schambach, a daughter of Mary W. T. Schambach of Lexington, Va., and the late William J. Schambach, was married yesterday to John S. P. Burke, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John A. Burke of Hilton Head, S.C.
The Rev.
J.
Morton Biber officiated at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Lexington.


Evening Hours;   At MOMA, Morocco And Matisse
LEAD: Moroccan music wafted through the garden of the Museum of Modern Art Wednesday night at the gala opening of the Matisse in Morocco exhibit.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
At the Other End of Poetry


'A Fearful Freedom'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Maintaining Wicker Furniture
LEAD: WICKER porch furniture is durable if maintained, but neglected items can rapidly deteriorate beyond the point of easy repair.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 24, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
WWeek
List
Fiction
1
5
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.)
The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-
American women and their immigrant mothers.
2
4
CREATURE, by John Saul. (Bantam, $4.95.) A
siege of horror besets a high school football team.


The Nation;   Campaign-Fund Limits: Congress Blushes, States Act
LEAD: FRUSTRATED and fed up with the state of American politics, they say, Minnesota legislators have done what the politicians in Washington are apparently afraid to do.
They have tried to put a brake on the costs of campaigns by enacting a law that allows candidates for Congress in Minnesota to receive public subsidies if they limit their spending.


Mexico: The Word According To Jacobo
LEAD: Every weeknight television sets in lavish mansions and humble cantinas are tuned to a dour middle-aged man in glasses and an elegantly tailored suit.
All of Mexico knows it is again time for ''24 Hours,'' the main news program of the perpetually top-rated Televisa network, and when the anchorman Jacobo Zabludovsky speaks,


Nilan Says He's Leaving
LEAD: THERE was no official announcement, but Chris Nilan, the personable hockey enforcer who was sidelined with injuries for most of his two and a third seasons with the Rangers, said yesterday that the team would trade him to the Bruins this week.


Priscilla S. Reed Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Priscilla Shattuck Reed, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathaniel Reed of Amherst, Mass., was married yesterday to Jerome Ward Anderson, a son of Duane B. Anderson of Tucson, Ariz., and the late Lois G. Anderson.
The Rev.
Peter M. Larsen officiated at the Episcopal St.
Andrew's Dune Church in Southampton, L


Church Lawyers Say Stolen Art Was Moved
LEAD: Lawyers of the Church of Quedlinburg have charged in Federal District Court that minutes before a judge ordered that stolen church artworks not be moved, there was suspicious activity at the bank vault where they are stored.


Ms. Esmay Weds Macauley Taylor
LEAD: Kimberly Jean Esmay, a daughter of Dr.
Richard F. Esmay of Troy, N.Y., and Mrs.
Esmay of Guilderland, N.Y., was married yesterday to Macauley Robert Taylor, a son of June Irmiger Taylor of Chicago and Macauley Worth Taylor of Washington, Conn.
The Rev.
George A. Phillips officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in


Jody Koch Weds Joseph R. Megale
LEAD: St.
Dominic's Roman Catholic Church in Oyster Bay, L.I., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Jody Lynn Koch, a daughter of Mrs.
Paul C. Lehmuller of Mill Neck, L.I., and the late Charles G. Koch, to Joseph Raleigh Megale, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph L. Megale of Freeport, L.I.
The Rev.
Charles


Dramatic Harmony in Student Exchange
LEAD: THREE drama students were rehearsing a scene from Tennesee Williams's play ''A Streetcar Named Desire.'' Stella, played by an American, spoke English; Blanche, played by a student from the Soviet Union, spoke English with a Russian accent, and Stanley spoke Russian.
When the young actors finished, their fellow students applauded, and their teacher, Sylvia Harman, smiled.


Tom Stoppard's Version Of an Old Reliable
LEAD: A COMPOSER eavesdrops upon an actress - his inamorata and the star of his new operetta - who is carrying on a real-life love scene with an actor, her former lover.
It looks like curtains for all, until a playwright, who is also a busybody, takes down the overheard lines, drafts them into the script and convinces the composer that the seduction scene was but a late-night rehearsal.


Revolution's Heirs Keep Patriotism High and Profile Low
LEAD: BENEATH the timber-beamed ceiling of Matthie's Meeting Hall on the 250-year-old Oliver Ellsworth Homestead in Windsor, 33-year-old Lynn Stewart stood at a podium next to an American flag and recited a roll call of the 55 chapters of the Connecticut Society of the Daughters of the American Revolution.


New Drugs for Long-Time Travelers' Maladies
LEAD: EFFORTS to protect the health of United States travelers have advanced two big steps, although one step was more like a stumble for a while.
The first is Federal approval of an oral antityphoid vaccine that in tests produced fewer side effects (1 person in 100,000) than the customary injections.
The second is arrival on the market of a new drug against malaria that is effective against protozoa that have developed a resistance to older drugs.


Helen Edwards, Account Executive, Weds Michael D. Ryus, Art Director
LEAD: Helen Munro Edwards, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Edwards of Brunswick and Orr's Island, Me., was married yesterday to Michael Denslow Ryus, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Denslow Ryus 3d of New York and Hamilton, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
William Imes, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Hamilton.


Dana K. Cairns and Robert N. Watson Are Married
LEAD: Dana K. Cairns, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren E. Cairns of Walnut Creek, Calif., was married yesterday in Canoga Park, Calif., to Dr.
Robert N. Watson, a son of Dr.
Barbara Bellow Watson of New York and the late Dr.
Goodwin Watson.
The Rev.
Donald E. Hartsock, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the bridegroom's home.


Ms. Klinges Wed To M. D. Kraus
LEAD: Jane A. Klinges, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Karl G. Klinges of Paramus, N.J., was married yesterday to Matthew D. Kraus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving R. Kraus of Chappaqua, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert Wolfe performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Mount Carmel Roman Catholic Church in Tenafly, N.J.


On the Home Front
LEAD: To the Editor:


Concerts Expanding at the Shore
LEAD: AS bandmasters strike up their concert orchestras this month and string bands plunk their way down the boardwalks, they are maintaining a summer tradition of live music at the Shore that is more than 120 years old and growing.


Headliners;   Prime Time Breakthrough
LEAD: Along with calculating pi to the zillionth decimal place, a favorite sport among mathematicians is factoring gigantic numbers into primes.
A prime is a number like 3 or 67 that has no divisors other than itself and 1.
The prime factors of 15, for example, are 3 and 5.


WHERE GENGHIS KHAN IS IN
LEAD: Having traveled through Mongolia in the summer of 1989, I was quite taken by your article ''Where Genghis Khan Is In,'' by Nicholas D. Kristof (May 27).
I was there just before the events of the last six months; however, there were some signs of democratic stirrings.
When my companion and I crossed the border between the Soviet Union and Mongolia, we were stopped by border guards.


Handy Sauces and Relishes for Dishes From the Grill
LEAD: WHEN grilled foods need a dash of something, one doesn't have to look far to come up with an interesting sauce or relish.
For grilled lobster, scallops or vegetables, a simple aioli flavored with red peppers and garlic makes a superb dipping sauce.
Grilled chicken, veal chops or fish steaks go well with a relish served on the side made from roasted tomatoes, mixed with olive oil and tarragon.


Kerry Garon Wed To J. P. Burns Jr.
LEAD: Kerry Lee Garon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph D. Garon of Bronxville, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Joseph Patrick Burns Jr., a son of Mr.
Burns of Rumson, N.J., and Joan Burns of Red Bank, N.J.
The Rev.
Francis Courneen and Msgr.
Patrick Sheridan officiated at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic


Linda A. Volpert Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Linda A. Volpert, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Volpert of Sherman Oaks, Calif., was married last evening to Lawrence S. Gross, a son of Dr.
Charles S. Gross of Tarzana, Calif., and Jane Fishman of La Canada, Calif.
Rabbi Harold M. Schulweis officiated at the home of the bride's parents.


PASTIMES: CAMERA
LEAD: Workshop season beckons now that summer has officially arrived.
From now until September many photographers, neophyte to seasoned, will take to the hills and beaches to improve their skills by attending a short but intense workshop session.


Ann S. Copeland Planning to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Ann Stuart Copeland, the daughter of Ann Bellah Copeland of New York and Locust Valley, L.I., and Gerret van Sweringen Copeland of Greenville, Del., to Andrew Carnegie Rose, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Harden Rose of New York and Bridgehampton, L.I., has been announced by Miss Copeland's parents.


In Defense Of the Irish
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Italy: What's a Newscast Without Some Bias?
LEAD: Few matters in Italian public affairs are free of partisan political considerations, and television news is no exception.
Aside from one program on a relatively small private station, televised news is confined to the state network, Radiotelevisione Italiana, or RAI.
But RAI is divided into three parts, each in the hands of one of the three major political parties - the Christian Democrats, the Communists and the


It's Time to Foil Three Hungry Pests
LEAD: THE bugs have arrived.
Anyone who has been out digging, mowing, raking and planting can attest to this.
For general chores, gardeners can protect themselves by spraying clothing, hats and exposed areas (particularly the back of the neck) with insect repellent.
It will also help to discourage ticks, especially if long pants are worn tucked into socks.


Mary K. Donohoe Marries
LEAD: Mary K. Donohoe and Jonathan A. D. Morisseau, graduates of Franklin and Marshall College, were married yesterday at St.
Teresa's Roman Catholic Church in Summit, N.J., by Msgr.
Hugh J. Phillips and the bridegroom's father, the Rev.
Robert E. Morisseau, the rector of St.
John's Episcopal Church in New City, N.Y.


Rachel A. Nardin, Student, Married
LEAD: Rachel A. Nardin and William P. Schmitt, medical students at Harvard University, were married yesterday at the home of the bride's grandparents, Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Watts in Wellfleet, Mass.
Anna Marie Pluhar, a justice of the peace, officiated.


The Old Man Waited for the Shadows
LEAD: IN Yaounde, the capital of Cameroon, they were already taking up a public collection to erect a statue of Roger Milla.
Donations will surely go up today.


Moscow Street Trade Heats Up
LEAD: The Intourist bus pulls to a stop at the foot of Red Square and is immediately surrounded by young men hawking military hats, military belts and watches.
The prices range from $5 for a belt (pungently scented leather with a handsome brass hammer-and-sickle buckle) or hat (several services are represented, all with colorful badges) to $20 or $25 for a watch (some bear the legend ''Perestroika,'' while others are of the military model).


All in The Family
LEAD: To the Editor:


Carol E. Sawyer Is a Bride
LEAD: At Our Lady of Perpetual Help Roman Catholic Church in Chocorua, N.H., Carol E. Sawyer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Sawyer Jr. of Worcester, Mass., was married yesterday to Alexander G. Grant, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher Grant of Dedham, Mass., by the Rev.
George Majka.
Mrs.
Grant, 28 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and has a master's in education from Harvard University.


PASTIMES: BRIDGE
LEAD: For tournament players and the American Contract Bridge League, which provides for their needs, the 1990's began much better than the 1980's ended.
Last year saw the climax of a dispute about gender-based events and a national championship in Lancaster, Pa. that spawned complaints.
This year began with successful Spring Nationals in Fort


Jewish Leaders Went Away Delighted With Mandela Meeting
LEAD: To the Editor:


Staying on the Safe Side Bangkok
LEAD: Unlike certain European populations, the Thais actually like tourists and are renowned for their grace and desire to help.
Still, there seems to be something about the tropical heat and exotic surroundings (a monk in sneakers or a family of six on a motorbike) that causes some Western tourists to lose all judgment.


Neuberger Examines Effects of Modernismo on Graphic Arts
LEAD: ''A Gothic tavern for those in love with the North.'' The quote comes from George Heard Hamilton's ''Painting and Sculpture in Europe, 1880 to 1940'' and the place it describes is El Quatres Gats.
This cafe in Barcelona was frequented by the artists and writers of Modernismo, which resembled the Pre-Raphaelite and Arts and Crafts movements in England but was at the same time a manifestation of


What's Doing In;   San Francisco
LEAD: While there was an automatic assumption that he would, of course, love it, most people in San Francisco never guessed that Mikhail S. Gorbachev would emerge as the city's biggest booster.
But on his visit earlier this month, the Soviet president declared that if he were President George Bush, he would charge a tax for the privilege of living here.


Headliners;   Divorced for Life
LEAD: The former President for Life of Haiti, Jean-Claude Duvalier, is now the former husband for life of Michele Bennett Duvalier, famous shopper and mother of his two children.
The divorce came through 10 years after their wedding, which held all Haiti in thrall for its sheer ostentation, and four years after their countrymen sent them into exile and ransacked their palace.


Longer School Year: Some Disadvantages
LEAD: Although I'm sure Assemblyman Pascrell has our students' best interests in mind, I'm not convinced that extending the school year by 20 days is the best solution.
What we really need is an educational system that is attentive to the varied needs, learning styles, and abilities of its students.


New Battles Over Disclosure
LEAD: William Steiner of Great Neck, L.I., and Morton Levine of Brooklyn get angry when a company withholds information they believe they have a right to know.
What sets them apart is that they may be at the vanguard of a new class of courtroom confrontation: shareholders claiming to have been financially damaged by corporations that have failed to disclose environmental problems.


The Wimbledon Dropout Delays His Education
LEAD: WHEN the first splash of cream sweetens the first dish of strawberries at Wimbledon tomorrow, all of the world's best tennis players will have gathered on the All England Club's grass courts for the world's best tennis tournament.
All except Andre Agassi.
For the third consecutive year, the mop-haired American has chosen not to enter Wimbledon after having been eliminated in his first match there by Henri Leconte of


Corrections
LEAD: An article on June 17 about the rental market misidentified the company with three brokerage offices managed by Roberta Faulstick.
It is William B. May.


Evolution in Europe;   At East Europe Nuclear Plants, Blame for Soviets
LEAD: Experts describe the hair-raising incident at an East German nuclear-energy plant like this: 11 of the 12 cooling pumps of a nuclear reactor were knocked out by fire and power failure, and workers scrambled to work a last remaining pump.
Without that pump, the core of the reactor would overheat, begin to melt down and set in motion a near unstoppable process.


Yankees' Streak Ends at 4
LEAD: If he could have picked a moment for his troubles to end suddenly and finally, this would surely have been it: ninth inning, bases loaded, the Yankees down by four runs, the crowd on its feet.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/DINOSAURS PLUS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


One by One, Ohio Town Buries Dozens Lost in Flood
LEAD: James Moore spent his last days building a windmill along the east bank of WeeGee Creek, where he met his wife and reared their children.
Today, more than a week after tumultuous rains made the placid creek malicious as a mad dog, the 72-year-old welder and tinkerer was buried.


Question Of the Week;   How Do The Pistons Rank in N.B.A. History?
LEAD: Stressing the ''W'' over the ''$'' is precisely what the Pistons are best at doing.
Led by the spirit of Dennis Rodman, a man who gets his satisfaction from becoming a brick in a wall, each of the Pistons has a specific task, a particular aspect of the game that they excel in, adding up to a team that can overcome individual foul troubles, cold shooting, and injuries.


Foiling Theft
LEAD: To the Editor: The pickpocket always seems to be with us, but my husband and I solved this problem long ago with a petticoat with ''his'' and ''hers'' pockets.


A FAMILY INSTITUTION
LEAD:
MENNINGER: The Family and the Clinic.
By Lawrence J. Friedman. (Knopf, $29.95.) In 1919, Karl Menninger joined his father's medical practice, changing its emphasis to his own specialty, neuropsychiatry.
By 1973, the Menninger Foundation, with a budget of nearly $15 million, employed 900 people in 39 buildings across two campuses.


Wall Street;   Broker vs. Investor: The Scorecard
LEAD: The first year's worth of public statistics are out on how investors have fared in the securities industry's highly controversial broker-investor arbitration hearings.
And the results, although they offer a wealth of detail about how the process works, remain distinctly unencouraging to outraged customers.


Deregulation Is Nothing but a License to Steal;   The View From the Air
LEAD: To the Editor:


Amy Bartlett Marries Robert A. Regan
LEAD: Amy C. Bartlett, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Bartlett of Bolton Landing, N.Y., was married yesterday to Robert A. Regan, a son of Mildred M. Regan of Binghamton, N.Y., and the late Martin P. Regan.
The Rev.
Peter Young officiated at Blessed Sacrament Roman Catholic Church in Bolton Landing.


IRT Service Is Disrupted
LEAD: There will be no uptown subway service and limited downtown service on the West Side IRT's Nos. 1, 2 and 3 lines between 42d and 96th Streets until 5 A.M. tomorrow.
The disruptions, which are due to a switch replacement, will also occur next weekend.


WHEN IT WAS DANGEROUS TO TALK
LEAD:
KONSPIRA
Solidarity Underground.
By Maciej Lopinski, Marcin Moskit and Mariusz Wilk.
Translated by Jane Cave.
Afterword by Lawrence Weschler.
Illustrated. 261 pp. Berkeley, Calif.:
University of California Press. $24.95.


The Elbowing Is Becoming Fierce For Space on the Radio Spectrum
LEAD: The pizza-delivery business, the cellular telephone industry and futuristic high-definition television have something unfortunate in common.
All covet the same bands on the already crowded spectrum of broadcast frequencies.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on June 10 about monthly charges in co-ops and condominiums carried an incorrect given name for David Clurman, a lawyer who wrote New York State's current law governing conversions.


N.B.A. Must Pick Up the Pace
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


No Safe Way To Dispose of Ash
LEAD: The Long Island Regional Planning Board has finally discovered the problem and enormous expense of incinerator ash disposal.
Proponents of full-scale-recycling have long contended that, besides the critical problem of hazardous emissions created by mass-burn incineration, there is no safe and economical way for disposing of ash.


Three Infants Dead After Hospital Gives Them Wrong Drugs
LEAD: Three critically ill infants died last week after they were given the wrong intravenous solution at a hospital, which announced the deaths today and said it had discharged two pharmacy workers.


STAYING POWER
LEAD: ONE OF MY FAVORITE FAMILY pictures is of my mother, taken in the early 1950's.
Clad in a chic parka and stretch pants, she is poised atop a tall mountain. ''I didn't know you skied,'' I shrieked as the picture was being glued into a framed collage.


Electric-Chair Dispute Brings Another Stay
LEAD: A murderer who contends that Florida's electric chair is unfit for use won a stay of execution from a Federal appeals court today, one day after a Federal district judge had rejected the same argument.


FREE FALL TO WONDERLAND
LEAD:
THE BARNUM MUSEUM
By Steven Millhauser.
237 pp. New York:
Poseidon Press. $18.95.


OUT OF THE KITCHEN
LEAD: In ''Out of the Kitchen'' (Fashion, May 20), Carrie Donovan writes that the clothes associated with ''cooking and cleaning up . . . menial, even demeaning duties'' can kindle ''deliciously romantic visions. . . .''


Mandela and Ruslan
LEAD: The moment Nelson Mandela walked into the room at Gracie Mansion I was sure we had met before and as he talked the feeling grew.


Maintaining Wicker Furniture
LEAD: WICKER porch furniture is durable if maintained, but neglected items can rapidly deteriorate beyond the point of easy repair.


Drug Death Prompts Inquiry
LEAD: Authorities are questioning a United States Border Patrol agent after the death of a man who snorted heroin stolen from the agent's van.
The Border Patrol is investigating whether the agent, Scott M. Vantine, a dog handler, properly secured the drugs in his van and why he did not mention the missing heroin when he reported the van break-in to the police.


Race Tracks Seek Edge On Rivals
LEAD: NEW JERSEY is the only state to have all three of the most popular forms of legalized gambling found around the country - horse racing, casino gambling and a state lottery - and at times the competition for the gambling dollar threatens to put one of the industries in the hole.


Alfa Romeo Ads: The Strategy . . .
LEAD: We had a creative challenge.
The world was hardly waiting for another luxury car, even a high-performance luxury car, and we had one to sell.
We knew this: If a product is going into an already crowded market, you had better do everything you can to set it apart.


The World;   Central Asia Rediscovers Its Identity
LEAD: THERE wasn't much publicity.
The subject was not at the top of the news.
But when a distinguished Soviet academician on a diplomatic mission was persuaded recently to give an informal talk on Central Asia, there was standing room only in the hotel banquet hall that a local scholar booked.


Bridge
LEAD: Four years ago a young woman arrived in Santa Cruz, Calif., to begin a doctoral course in mathematics and promptly called her mother for advice.


His Widow Reveals Much Of Who B. Traven Really Was
LEAD: Who was the man who wrote under the pseudonym B. Traven?
One of the most intriguing literary mysteries of the century may at last have been solved, and a new puzzle opened, because of the willingness of the widow of the secretive author of ''The Treasure of the Sierra Madre'' finally to reveal what her husband had told her of his past.


An Eagle Shows Some Panache
LEAD: THERE are a couple of points of view about those feathered, furry, or otherwise costumed characters who cavort on the sidelines of sports events.


New Duo Opens for Greg Osby
LEAD: Greg Osby, an alto saxophonist, and his quintet, Sound Theater, played a strangely bifurcated set on Saturday afternoon at the Equitable Auditorium as part of the JVC Jazz Festival.
About half of the compositions were attempts at pop-jazz - breezy, midtempo funk vamps akin to the music of Kenny G.


Woman's Death Brings Queries From the Police
LEAD: Debra Torney lived alone with her books and letters on the top floor of a six-story walk-up along the Avenue of the Americas.
She was a familiar face in the neighborhood, where SoHo and the old Italian sections of the West Village overlap.
And those who knew her were horrified to learn how she died, sometime on


Metro Datelines;   Jumper Talked Down From Raritan Bridge
LEAD: A man threatened to jump off the Driscoll Bridge over the Raritan River on the Garden State Parkway in Woodbridge last night as hundreds of commuters tried to return from weekends at the New Jersey Shore.
The State Police shut down the northbound lanes of the parkway, backing up traffic for nine miles, a parkway official said.


Outdoors: Surf Fishing Gear Needn't Be Complex
LEAD: ALTHOUGH the incredible variety of tackle used by surf fishermen might well confuse a would-be participant in the sport, choosing a basic outfit needn't be too complicated.


Ilya M. Frank Is Dead; A Soviet Physicist, 81
LEAD: Dr.
Ilya M. Frank, who won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1958 for his work in neutron physics, has died, the Soviet television reported today.
He was 81 years old.


Georgia-Pacific-Nekoosa
LEAD: Shareholders of the Great Northern Nekoosa Corporation gave formal approval last week to a $5 billion takeover by the Georgia-Pacific Corporation, creating the nation's largest paper and forest products company.
Shareholders of Great Northern, based in Norwalk, Conn., cast the votes at a special meeting.


Market Place;   Salant Struggles After Acquisition
LEAD: BY buying a much larger apparel company and wading into the treacherous world of national brand marketing, the Salant Corporation seemed to be asking for financial problems.
Since the company bought Manhattan Industries in April 1988, it has been hobbled by a large amount of debt and turmoil in the retailing industry.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day last Wednesday about the savings and loan failures misstated the political setting in which Congress increased deposit insurance for each account to $100,000, from $40,000.
The change was made in 1980, when both houses of Congress were controlled by Democrats, not just the House of Representatives.


Tribal Homeland Calls For Vote on Its Future
LEAD: The nominally independent black homeland of Transkei published plans today for a referendum that could end its nominal independence from South Africa.


Mr. Bush vs. the Charlatans
LEAD: Early in his Administration, President Bush moved boldly to confront the savings-and-loan mess that Ronald Reagan had swept under the rug.
But Mr.
Bush's pursuit of the crooks and looters has been woefully slow.
Now he's back in his bold mode, ready to double the funding for investigators and prosecutors.


Irwin Is Planning To Take a Break
LEAD: There will be no more euphoria for Hale Irwin until at least the British Open, in four weeks.
After two victories six days apart, including the United States Open, Irwin said today that golf would be secondary to ''more pressing interests.''


Metro Datelines;   2d Arrest in Bombing Of Anti-Drug Family
LEAD: A second man arrested in a New Haven firebombing that was an effort to silence a family that spoke out against drug dealers is wanted in a drug-related killing in New York, the police said.


Sherman Takes Us Back to the Gilded Era
LEAD: To the Editor:


ISRAEL WON'T SEND SOVIET IMMIGRANTS TO THE WEST BANK
LEAD: In a move to allay foreign concern, the Israeli Government announced tonight that it would not as a matter of policy settle Soviet immigrants in the West Bank or the Gaza Strip.


Upset Victory for Mistaurian
LEAD: A shorter distance and a drier track allowed Mistaurian to reverse a recent defeat to Fantastic Find and score a 7 1/4-length upset victory yesterday in the $83,400 Vagrancy Handicap at Belmont Park.


Bell's Two Homers Leave Yanks in Rut
LEAD: A good trip?
A bad trip?
It was a little of both.
In the late afternoon today, the Yankees gathered their belongings and returned home, satisfied that they had won four of seven games on the road but unsettled by the last two dizzying days, which left them with losses and with the familiarity of their position in the cellar.


Gunmen Line Up and Kill 19 Outside Medellin Nightclub
LEAD: Hooded gunmen shot 19 people to death outside a nightclub near Medellin, the Colombian police said today.


Flag Vote: The Effects Back Home
LEAD: On the floor of Congress two days earlier, Representative Peter Hoagland had voted against an amendment to the Constitution that would outlaw burning the American flag.


Worth A Mention?
LEAD: When the Great Scorer comes to write your name, as everybody knows, it doesn't matter whether you won or lost, ''it's how you played the game.'' Or so Americans like to delude themselves.


Janet Schindel Is Married
LEAD: Janet B. Schindel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew M. Schindel of Centerport, N.Y., was married yesterday to Kenneth F. Bernstein, the son of Bruce Bernstein and Sheila Bernstein, both of New York.
Rabbi Arthur Schwartz performed the ceremony at the Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
Mrs.
Bernstein, 27 years old, is an associate in the New York office of Hunton &amp; Williams law firm of Richmond, Va., and graduated cum laude from Duke University.


After Stray Bullets Hit 2 Girls, Police Find Few Willing to Talk About It
LEAD: ''Anybody here yesterday?
Anybody see anything?
A little 10-year-old girl was shot and killed here and we need some help.''


German Unity Revives Hopes on War Claims
LEAD: German reunification has raised the hopes of thousands of people who have claims against East Germany arising from crimes of the Nazi era and the confiscation of property during the four decades of Communist rule.


Phil Lansdale; Tire Retailer, 83
LEAD: Phil Lansdale, an advertising executive best known as the force behind the successful 4day Tire Stores chain, died of cancer Friday at Hoag Memorial Hospital Presbyterian.
He was 83.


Peter A. Binney Weds Miss Jacobs
LEAD: Nehama Jacobs, a duaghter of Sidney J. Jacobs of Culver City, Calif., and the late Helen Jacobs Goosey of Dalton, Pa., was married Friday to Peter Appleton Binney, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Binney of Brookline, mass.
The cremony was performed at the Harvard Club in New York by Justice Theodore R.


Small Towns Losing Their Leaders
LEAD: In March, after 18 years as a selectman in this small town on the Canadian border, Carl Hackett resigned his office.


Irwin Takes the Honors For 2d Straight Week
LEAD: Hale Irwin overcame fatigue and the whirlwind of winning the United States Open last Monday to capture the Buick Classic in style today with a bogey-free round at Westchester Country Club.


Miss Steiger Wed To Steven Gerber
LEAD: Sue Ellen Steiger, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman Steiger of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married yesterday to Steven K. Gerber, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David S. Gerber of Merion, Pa.
Rabbi Jeffrey Segelman performed the ceremony at the Beach Point Club in Mamaroneck.


Cable Bill Turns Some Foes Into (for Now) Best Friends
LEAD: A PROPOSED bill to re-regulate the cable television industry is making for ''awfully peculiar bedfellows,'' as one cable industry executive put it.


Catholic Politicians Confront Public and Private Conscience
LEAD: John Cardinal O'Connor's essay on abortion, raising the possibility of excommunication for Roman Catholic politicians who support abortion rights, has reverberated throughout political circles in recent days, generating private pain and public soul-searching.


Jeers at AIDS Gathering Drown Out Health Chief
LEAD: Drowned out by a deafening roar of shouts, whistles and air horn blasts from more than 500 protestors, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, stood before the closing session of the Sixth International Conference on AIDS today for 15 minutes, giving a speech that no one could hear.


Miss Brown Weds Robert L. Garner
LEAD: Tracy Ann Brown, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas H. Brown of East Amherst, N.Y., was married yesterday to Robert Lawrence Garner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney N. Garner of Monmouth Beach, N.J.
Justice Leo J. Fallon of State Supreme Court in Buffalo officiated at the Country Club of Buffalo in Williamsville, N


Review/Music;   Nature Bows to Beethoven at Caramoor
LEAD: Running an outdoor summer festival must be harder on the nerves than indoor arts administration.
Besides the usual worries about ticket sales and artistic success, one must helplessly grapple with forces beyond mortal control.


2 More Earthquakes Rock Iran; Rescue Efforts Stall as Toll Rises
LEAD: Two more large earthquakes struck Iran today even as rescue workers continued combing through the rubble left by last week's violent temblor along the Caspian Sea.


SOUTHWEST TO GET ECONOMIC BENEFITS IN SAVINGS BAILOUT
LEAD: The Federal cleanup of the savings and loan disaster will result in a significant transfer of wealth from the Northeast and Middle West to Texas and other states in the Southwest, many economists and politicians have concluded.


Man and Two Sons Rescued After Five Days Lost in Cave
LEAD: An amateur cave explorer and his two sons, lost in a West Virginia cave for five days without food, water or light, were rescued on Saturday, officials said.


The Mandela Visit;   Mandela Assails U.S. Aid to Savimbi
LEAD: On the eve of his meeting with President Bush, Nelson Mandela condemned one of the President's African policies, support for Jonas Savimbi's rightist rebels in Angola.


Metro Matters;   15 'Mega-Cities' Joining to Learn From Each Other
LEAD: If you can make it here, the song says, you can make it anywhere.


Books of The Times;   Recounting a Battle Against Death's Harbingers
LEAD:
Wrestling With the Angel
A Memoir of My Triumph Over Illness
By Max Lerner
210 pages. W. W. Norton. $18.95.


Aggressive Discounting Pays Off for Crown Books
LEAD: Crown Books' policy of discounting every book has long made the retailer a burr under the saddle of its rivals.
But the book chain especially aggravated them recently when it announced a 40 percent discount on hardcover best sellers.


Sweden's New Breed Of Corporate Raider
LEAD: Sven-Olof Johansson is a hero and a villain in Sweden.
He is a villain to the Swedes who think that aspiring to be rich is a sin - and there are many in this welfare state.
And he is a hero to many young Swedes who like the idea of having money and the Ferraris that often go with it.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Matthew Ward, 39, Translator of Camus
LEAD: Matthew Ward, the winner of the 1989 PEN-Book-of-the-Month Club prize for the first translation by an American of Albert Camus's ''The Stranger,'' died on Saturday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 39 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Ethno-Centrifugal Force
LEAD: The federation that is Canada is pulling itself apart before our eyes.


Biggest Source of Big Shots Is (Yes) CUNY
LEAD: In what may rank as the educational equivalent of a photo finish, a new survey found that the City University of New York has more undergraduate alumni in top-ranking executive jobs than any other school in the country.
Thirty more big shots, to be precise.


Throngs Cheer at Gay and Lesbian March
LEAD: Tens of thousands of people marched down a lavender-striped Fifth Avenue yesterday in the 21st annual Gay and Lesbian Pride March, a parade distinguished by its diversity, its broad sense of style and its lack of marching bands.
It has never needed majorettes to generate festivity.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing on Friday of major 20th-century earthquakes carried an outdated magnitude figure for the California earthquake last October.
Originally placed at 6.9 on the Richter scale, it was later revised to 7.1.


Bonn's Cash Is Sent East
LEAD: East German bank vaults are bulging with billions of West German marks in advance of the treaty merging the two countries' economies, an official of the West German central bank said last week.


Don't Confuse 2 Live Crew With Black Culture
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pirates Top Expos, Regain First Place
LEAD: Stan Belinda escaped a bases-loaded no-out jam in the ninth inning for his first major league save as the Pittsburgh Pirates beat Montreal, 5-3, today to end a five-game losing streak and reclaim first place in the National League East from the Expos.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
The Federal cleanup of the savings and loan disaster will result in a significant transfer of wealth from the Northeast and Middle West to Texas and other states in the Southwest, many economists and politicians say.
As a consequence, the economy in the Southwest, where most of the cost of the savings and loan failures was incurred, is likely to be stronger in the years ahead.


Hunters Point, Now or Maybe Never
LEAD: On Wednesday, New York City's present Planning Commission will conduct its last public hearing before it dies, to be replaced, under the new City Charter, by a very different commission.
The outgoing commissioners must, among their last acts, evaluate the Hunters Point redevelopment plan on the Queens side of the East River.


Evolution in Europe;   Europeans Meeting Today on Unity
LEAD: When they gather in Dublin on Monday to discuss European political and economic union, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's 11 European Community colleagues will find her ready to talk, but as skeptical as ever about both ideas.


Arthur J. Crockett; Editor, 69
LEAD: Arthur J. Crockett, a writer and crime magazine editor, died on Friday at Jamaica Hospital.
He was 69 years old and lived in Richmond Hill, Queens.


Tougher Math To Be Sought By Fernandez
LEAD: New York City's Schools Chancellor will recommend today that the schools completely revamp their mathematics education, requiring all students to take algebra, geometry and trigonometry, requiring teachers to take brush-up courses and offering lessons to parents so they can help their children.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Science Times on Tuesday about wave research referred incorrectly to Dr.
Joan Oltman-Shay.
In 1986, when a project was conducted on the North Carolina coast, she had completed her doctorate and was a principal researcher, not a graduate student.


Teufel's Turn to Supply Heroics
LEAD: On the day after Dwight Gooden supplied another performance that perhaps heralded a return to his untouchable, intimidating days, the Mets put together an inspiring effort against Philadelphia yesterday that brought jubilant locker room exclamations that the magic was indeed back.


Militant Muslims Grow Stronger As Algeria's Economy Weakens
LEAD: Shifting his feet nervously, Nasreddin stands in a busy alley, scanning the crowd for a plainclothes policeman who might arrest him or a customer who might buy the decrepit portable cassette player that he is peddling.


Man Who Headed Crock-Pot Concern Is Beaten to Death
LEAD: I. H. (Hack) Miller, who brought the name crock pot to millions of households, was killed in his home Friday, and a grandson was charged in the slaying, the police in Kansas City, Mo., reported yesterday.
He was 83 years old.


Inventory in Texas Case Turns Up New Works
LEAD: A court-ordered inventory of the contents of safe deposit boxes belonging to the heirs of an Army officer who is believed to have stolen artworks from Quedlinburg, Germany, has turned up other art objects apparently taken from France and Germany during the final months of World War II.


Review/Television;   3 Women in a High-Security Prison
LEAD: A case can be made that the three women celebrated in ''Through the Wire'' received excessive sentences - ranging from 35 to 58 years - for the crimes of which they were convicted and that they were subjected to undue punishment in the unusual prison to which they were consigned.
That case has, in fact, been made with fitful success by the American Civil Liberties Union, Amnesty International and the Center for Constitutional Rights.


Airbus Curb in India
LEAD: Indian Airlines cannot lease out the A320 airbuses it grounded after a crash in February or sell other planes scheduled for delivery without the manufacturer's consent, an Airbus Industrie spokesman said last week.
The spokesman, Robert Alizart, said that under a clause in any Airbus sale contract buyers could not reassign an aircraft still under warranty, like the 14 that have been grounded and the 4 on order, without Airbus's approval.


What Secrets?
LEAD: EAST GERMANY'S decision to hold what amounts to a clearance sale of the secret technology behind the nation's stunning athletic achievements has American Olympic officials rubbing their hands and reaching for their checkbooks.


Heileman Consolidates Account at Della Femina
LEAD: The G. Heileman Brewing Company has consolidated its $30 advertising account at Della Femina McNamee in New York.
The brands include LaCroix sparkling water and Colt 45 malt liquor, as well as regional beers like Lone Star, Rainier and Iron City.


Wounded Haitian Aide Dies on Way to U.S.
LEAD: A member of the Council of State who was shot last week when gunmen attacked a meeting of the group died today on the way to a Miami hospital, a radio station reported.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Audits and Surveys Inc., New York, a marketing research company, promoted William Liebman to senior vice president and senior administrative officer, and Anthony Timiraos to senior vice president for finance, chief financial officer and head of the company's legal matters.


Iranian Town, Once a Jewel, Lies Entombed
LEAD: Three days ago, this city of 90,000 lay like a jewel in a lush green valley beside a sparkling lake on the skirts of the Elborz Mountains.
Today, it is rubble: mile after mile of smashed buildings, mass graves and a pervasive stench of death.


A 'School' for Math, Prose and Character
LEAD: Abram J. Shorin, the inventor of the modern baseball card, died recently in Miami Beach at the age of 91.
His passing generated little ink on the obituary pages.
He deserved better, for I, like many men of my generation, owe a huge scholastic debt to him and his cardboard creation.


New Jersey Rodeo Protested
LEAD: Shouting ''real men don't rope babies,'' animal rights supporters protested a rodeo in this Gloucester County town for what they said was cruelty to calves and other livestock.
A shouting match erupted Saturday during the one-hour Festival Day rodeo at Malaga Lake sponsored by the Franklin Township Businessmen's Association.


Face to Face With a Split
LEAD: As Canada assessed the collapse of the Meech Lake accord, its leaders' attempts to soothe anxieties ran into an accumulation of concerns today: Have the strains with Quebec finally gone too far?
Has Canada moved beyond the point of no return?
And has Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's leadership been destroyed?


Washington at Work;   Combative New Hampshire Senator Evokes Colleagues' Fear and Respect
LEAD: Warren B. Rudman has heard all the indictments: He is a prosecutor in Senator's clothing.
He is cold, always siding with facts over emotions.
He always thinks he is right.
And he is so combative that where he really belongs is back in the boxing ring.


A.T.&amp;T. Making Comeback in Chips
LEAD: After several costly false starts, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company is enjoying its first real successes in its bid to become a world-class semiconductor maker.


Pianist's Way With Options
LEAD: The pianist Randy Weston's performance on Saturday afternoon at Weill Recital Hall, as part of the JVC Jazz Festival, was about using options.
Mr.
Weston let all 10 fingers glide into the lower register of the piano, eliciting rumbles.
Dense and loud passages suddenly gave way to a single hard-hit notes, whose overtones rang out with shivering clarity.


AIDS Protesters Drown Out Health Secretary


Lace Factory And Artistry Of Old World Quietly Fade
LEAD: About three years ago, Peter J. DeCarli noted a minor milestone.
The youngest worker on the shop floor of his small lace-manufacturing plant here had turned 60 years old, and the average age was pushing well past 65 -not quite as old as the company's clattering World War I vintage lace-looms, but clearly closing the gap.


Evolution in Europe;   Moscow Summer: Mood Is Ominous As Communists Brace for Congress
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev's vision of the Communist Party as a great, reborn and unifying force leading the Soviet Union into the future has never seemed more improbable than it does right now.


Washington Talk;   High Court Saves Toughest for Last
LEAD: The Supreme Court embarks this week on one of its time-honored traditions: the bone-crunching finale.


Jennifer Kosowsky Is Wed
LEAD: Jennifer S. Kosowsky, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard D. Kosowsky of Brookline, Mass., was married yesterday to Marc Dror Michaelson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Michaelson of Jerusalem.
Rabbi Yitzchak Twersky performed the ceremony at the Marriott Long Wharf in Boston.
Mrs.
Michaelson, 23 years old, graduated cum laude from Princeton University and will begin studies in September in the Ph.D.


In Canada, An Appeal For Calm
LEAD: As anxiety spread among Canadians about a possible push for independence by Quebec, Finance Minister Michael H. Wilson of Canada today appealed to investors in the United States and elsewhere to recognize the ''basic strength'' of the country's economy and not to overreact to the political concerns of the moment.


Savings Unit Sold in Texas
LEAD: Lewis Ranieri, the New York investor, has broadened his holdings in the Texas savings industry by acquiring the deposits and a portion of the assets of the insolvent Metropolitan Financial Federal Savings and Loan Association.


Elizabeth Ann Steyer Is Married to Fred Graver
LEAD: Elizabeth Ann Steyer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Steyer of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married at the Pierre yesterday to Fred Graver, the son of Jeanne Graver of Chicago, and the late Fred Graver.
Rabbi Richard Chapin officiated.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Mandela in Washington
Nelson Mandela arrived in Washington for meetings today with President Bush and other officials.
He is expected to meet resistance to his call for maintaining or increasing sanctions against South Africa.
Page B8.
Gorbachev's Headache
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's vision of the Communist Party as a reborn and unifying force leading the Soviet Union into the future has never seemed more improbable than it does now.


Alcala Says Tour Is Within Reach
LEAD: ''NO more mananas,'' said Raul Alcala. ''No more eighth place, like last year.
This time I hope to win the Tour de France.
Why not?
I feel pretty good, I have a lot of motivation.
Sure, why not?''


Ms. Mitgang Wed To D.S. Goodman
LEAD: Laura Mitgang, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Mitgang of New York, was married yesterday at the Lotos Club in New York to David Solomon Goodman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Murray Goodman of La Jolla, Calif.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman officiated.


The Korean War, 40 Years Later;   The Right Decision
LEAD: Today marks the 40th anniversary of Kim Il Sung's attack on South Korea, after which the cold war turned hot for Americans.


Gail A. Levitt Is Wed To Andrew J. Gershon
LEAD: Gail Amy Levitt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel H. Levitt of Pacific Palisades, Calif., was married yesterday in Pound Ridge, N.Y., to Andrew Jon Gershon, a son of Nancy L. Gershon of Westport, Conn., and Richard J. Gershon of New York.
Rabbi Miriam Shapero performed the ceremony at the home of Mr.


A Party, A Binge, A Void
LEAD: FOR four consecutive seasons, 1981-82 through 1984-85, the Nets posted winning records and seemed poised to join the ranks of the National Basketball Association's top clubs.
By Christmas Day of 1985, they had a 19-12 mark for the season and had won 9 of their last 10 games.
The optimism of players and fans was mounting.


A Debate In Japan on Its Surplus
LEAD: In negotiations that begin here on Monday, Japan and the United States will square off on one of the thorniest issues blocking conclusion of a key trade agreement - how much the Japanese Government will invest at home on sewerage plants, airports, bridges and other projects to use up savings that have been buying foreign assets, from factories to


College Fund Goes Back To Its Roots
LEAD: WHEN executives at Young &amp; Rubicam suggested to the United Negro College Fund 18 years ago that the organization focus its first public-service campaign around the line, ''A mind is a terrible thing to waste,'' the fund's leaders initially balked.


Napo Journal;   In Thailand's Driest Corner, Poverty With Grace
LEAD: In the little village of Napo in the poorest part of Thailand - the drought-prone Esarn, or northeast - the benefits and strains of the country's extraordinary development are easily seen.


G.M. Chief Defends Record As His Retirement Nears
LEAD: Should Roger B. Smith be blamed for the General Motors Corporation's woes of the 1980's or should he be praised for a strategic vision?


Drug-Test Plan Rejected
LEAD: Tennis players have rejected an attempt to introduce independent drug testing at Wimbledon, which starts Monday, The Sunday Times of London reported today.


Criminal Type Beats Sunday Silence
LEAD: Sustaining a stretchlong drive to beat Sunday Silence by a head, Criminal Type won the $1 million Hollywood Gold Cup today at Hollywood Park, gaining his third upset victory in a row.


Closing Statements Set in Marcos Theft Trial
LEAD: Closing statements are to begin today in the Federal racketeering trial of Imelda Marcos, with the jury expected to get the case by Thursday.


White Sox Sweep Athletics
LEAD: Chicago completed a a three-game sweep of the Oakland Athletics and pulled within a game of the American League West lead today, winning by 3-2 on a 10th-inning homer by Dan Pasqua.


Evolution in Europe;   Solidarity, Divided Over Walesa, May Drop Its Guiding Committee
LEAD: After weeks of trading salvos, the competing wings of the Solidarity movement called today for the dissolution of the 150-member Civic Committee, the organization set up by Lech Walesa as the intellectual and political soul of the movement.


The Jazz-Fusion Night of a Drummer
LEAD: It isn't often that a drum solo becomes a jazz concert's most memorable moment.
But toward the end of the JVC Jazz Festival's Saturday evening concert at Avery Fisher Hall featuring musicians signed to the jazz label GRP Records, Sonny Emory, a young percussionist, more or less stole the show.


World Follows Bishops on a Retreat
LEAD: The nation's Roman Catholic bishops gathered in this city founded by Christian missionaries for a few days of spiritual reflection, prayer and recreation.
But the real world kept intruding.


Dr. Bonnie Bermas Marries
LEAD: Dr.
Bonnie L. Bermas, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Mitchell Bermas of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Capt.
Mark S. Link, U.S.A.F., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Link of Sioux Falls, S.D.
The interfaith ceremony was performed by Rev.
Theodore G. Hoskins, a United Church of Christ minister, at the Birchwood Country Club in Westport, Conn.


Business and the Law;   Bankruptcy Work Is Getting Respect
LEAD: FOR decades, the largest and most established law firms in the nation avoided bankruptcy work because it was disdained by highbrow partners as lower than divorce and criminal law and too distasteful for their practices.
That attitude has changed.


Contact Lenses Give Better View
LEAD: MORE than half the population of the United States has a vision problem severe enough to warrant correction.
Watching sports events, one might think that most professional athletes are blessed with superior vision.
Almost none of them wear eyeglasses.
But some wear contact lenses.  ''For a lot of professional athletes, wearing contact lenses is a well-guarded secret,'' said Dr.


Jordan Names Envoy to Libya
LEAD: Jordan today announced the appointment of Hashim Muheisen as Ambassador to Libya, formally ending a six-year diplomatic rift with the Government of Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi.
Mr.
Muheisen led a Jordanian delegation to Tripoli in April to reopen the embassy, which Jordan closed in 1984 after Libyan students attacked the building.


Steelmakers' Foreign Push Hurt by Decline in Exports
LEAD: American steel exports, which increased sharply last year, are receding, partly because of fluctuating currency rates and heavy international price competition.


Miss Bernstein Becomes Bride
LEAD: Constance P. Bernstein, the daughter of Cecile F. Bernstein of Mount Vernon, N.Y., and Dr.
Robert S. Bachner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Bachner of Delray Beach, Fla., were married yesterday.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbis Howard Graber and Solomon Gordon.


Hollywood Takes More Cues From Overseas
LEAD: The rapid growth of foreign markets is affecting the way Hollywood produces and distributes its films, influencing which movies get made and who stars in them.


The Mandela Visit;   Washington, About to Receive Mandela, Is Worried About de Klerk
LEAD: When Nelson Mandela meets with President Bush and other officials on Monday, he will receive a warm welcome but polite resistance to his call for maintaining or increasing sanctions against South Africa, officials say.


Barbara E. Goldfarb Weds Robert Portnoff
LEAD: Barbara E. Goldfarb, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Goldfarb of Edison, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert C. Portnoff, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert Portnoff, also of Edison.
Rabbis Alfred Landsberg and Herbert Rose performed the ceremony at the Chanticler in Short Hills, N.J.


Dr. Monica Burton Is Wed To William R. Sneed 3d
LEAD: Dr.
Monica L. Burton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard H. Burton of Manhasset Hills, L.I., was married yesterday to William R. Sneed 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William R. Sneed Jr. of Rockford, Ill.
Rabbi Patrice Heller officiated at the Wharton Sinkler Estate in Wyndmoor, Pa.


Trading Hits Summer Doldrums
LEAD: As the second quarter comes to a close, summer languor is beginning to envelop the credit markets.


Robin Fishkind and Keith Lehman Wed
LEAD: Robin Deanne Fishkind, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mike Fishkind of Harrison, N.Y., was married yesterday to Keith Lehman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Hugh Lehman of Ontario.
Rabbi Maurice Davis officiated at the ceremony at Le Chateau in South Salem, N.Y.


Mussel Alert
LEAD: New York State has issued an official warning to boat owners and operators to take steps to prevent the zebra mussel, an environmental menace, from hitchhiking in or on boats to new areas of infection.


Don't Confuse 2 Live Crew With Black Culture;   Words of Color
LEAD: To the Editor:


Czyz Knocks Out Maynard in the 7th
LEAD: Bobby Czyz was supposed to be a steppingstone for the undefeated Andrew Maynard, the 1988 Olympic gold medalist, on the way to Maynard's shot at a world title.


Drug Sellers' Eviction Blocked
LEAD: A ruling by a Federal District judge has put in doubt plans by the Department of Housing and Urban Development to make a number of surprise raids on public housing units on Monday and Tuesday to evict drug traffickers.


Rebel Recalled In Stately Style
LEAD: A day after he would have celebrated his 80th birthday, and right on the eve of Wimbledon, the tournament with which he waged a tempestuous lifelong love affair, Ted Tinling was honored in a memorial service just before teatime this afternoon as notables of the tennis world gathered at St.
James's


Umpire's View
LEAD: FROM behind the plate Dave Pallone's job as an umpire was to call balls and strikes.
Based on the former umpire's new autobiography, ''Behind the Mask,'' however, his life, at times, felt like a wild pitch.


3 Weeks Later, A Victim Shot By 'Zodiac' Dies
LEAD: The gunman who calls himself Zodiac became responsible for his first death yesterday morning when his third shooting victim, a 78-year-old man, died at Jamaica Hospital, the police said.


Excalibur Halts Production
LEAD: The Excalibur Automobile Corporation, manufacturer of neoclassic automobiles, suspended production last week after being rocked by layoffs, lawsuits, bounced paychecks and allegations of mileage tampering.


Let's Not Add to East European Pollution
LEAD: To the Editor:


Evolution in Europe;   Soviet Jews in East Berlin Tell of Intolerance
LEAD: In a guest house at the northern edge of the capital that was until recently occupied by the secret police, nearly 200 newly arrived Soviet Jews are awaiting word that East Germany will grant them political asylum.


New Bianchi Pact Helps Knicks a Bit
LEAD: As the Knicks prepare for Wednesday night's draft, it seems as if everybody else has an idea about how to make the team better.


Autonomy's Cry Revived in Quebec
LEAD: Sitting placidly on a bench along an empty parade route, Jean-Maurice Guenette wore a slogan T-shirt that has not been seen on the streets of Quebec in 10 years.
In blue letters, it said ''Oui,'' an echo of the motto of the Quebec separatists whose dreams of independence were narrowly dashed in a 1980 referendum.


Bank of New England Hires Nationwide Aide
LEAD: The Bank of New England Corporation has named D. Bruce Wheeler president of its main subsidiary, the Bank of New England N.A.


Question Box
LEAD:
Yank Home Homers
Q.
This season, Don Mattingly became the 11th Yankee player to hit 100 or more home runs at Yankee Stadium in his career.
Who are the other 10, from top to bottom?
A.
The leader among Yankees in the House That Ruth Built is not Babe Ruth.
It's Mickey Mantle, and therein hangs a tale.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Below are the major economic indicators to be released this week.
Monday
None
Tuesday
None
Wednesday
Leading Indicators
May
Thursday
None
Friday
Farm Prices
June
New Home Sales
May


American Agencies Get 5 Gold Lions at Cannes
LEAD: American advertising agencies won five Gold Lions at the International Advertising Film Festival in Cannes, France, over the weekend, six fewer than last year.
A surprise winner was Steve &amp; Warren's Excellent Adventure, for an ad for the Portland International Film Festival.
Steve is Steve Sandoz, a copywriter at Wieden &amp; Kennedy, and Warren is Warren


Corrections
LEAD: An article on May 30 about the 24th commencement of Baruch College in New York misstated the role of an honorary-degree recipient, Harriet R. Michel, with the New York Foundation.
She was executive director of the foundation until 1977; the executive director since 1978 has been Madeline Lee.


Review/Music;   From Pianos Tiny to Tinier, Noise From Loud to Louder
LEAD: The composer and conceptual artist Wendy Chambers tends to think big, filling the great spaces of Manhattan with arresting sounds and images.
In the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, she has mustered 100 timpani as part of a much larger ensemble, and on another occasion 30 harps.
She has massed 10 pianos on the Lincoln Center Plaza.


A Met Has Moment to Savor
LEAD: To call Tim Teufel the Mets' forgotten man this season would be a laughable understatement.
Lost man is more like it.


Jazz Festival;   Steve Reich And World Saxophone Quartet
LEAD: Saturday night's show at Carnegie Hall, part of the JVC Jazz Festival and featuring the World Saxophone Quartet and Steve Reich's ensemble, operated on the premise that enough open-minded people exist in New York to bring together two vanguard acts from the Afro-American and Euro-American traditions to justify renting the hall.


Marianne Kulla Is Bride Of Michael R. Strauss
LEAD: Marianne F. Kulla, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Kulla of Miami, was married yesterday to Michael R. Strauss, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen N. Strauss of Belle Terre, L.I.
Rabbi Reuven Siegel performed the ceremony at the East 55th Street Conservative Synogogue in New York.


Loggers Protest Owl Decision
LEAD: Hundreds of logging trucks adorned with yellow ribbons rolled through the heart of Oregon's timber country Saturday, honking horns to protest limits on Federal logging aimed at protecting endangered owls.
Joe Trimble of Roseburg, who joined a line of 434 rigs, said, ''For a lot of us, this might be our last show.


Lilli Siegel Wed To Jonathan Roth
LEAD: Lilli Siegel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton Siegel of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Jonathan Roth, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Roth of Canaan, N.Y.
Rabbi Alan Silverstein and Cantor Bette Cohen performed the ceremony in the garden at the Siegel home.


Exercise Bar
LEAD: A new design in exercise bars, the U.S.A.-U-Bar, has a padded yoke to use as a leverage point in working out.
Four hand grips, two at each end, allow you to vary the way you grasp the bar.
If the U-Bar yoke is around your neck in preparation for a situp, you may find the inner grips more useful.
If you are doing side bends, you may want to grasp the outer grips.


Bridge Loan for Trump Expected
LEAD: With the deadline for Donald J. Trump to make a payment on a ''junk bond'' issue at midnight tomorrow, a group of banks is preparing a $20 million bridge loan as it presses to win final approval for a larger loan package to rescue the developer, bankers involved in the talks said yesterday.


Karen Lee Kluglein Marries James David Baron
LEAD: Karen Lee Kluglein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Helmuth Kluglein of Sag Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to James David Baron, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard C. Baron of New York and Water Mill, L.I.
Judge Edward Sharretts, a Southampton town justice, performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's parents.


Penguins Stampede and Die
LEAD: Thousands of king penguins at a rookery on Macquarie Island stampeded, leaving 7,000 penguins dead, and officials said today that they were investigating the mysterious occurrence. ''We don't know at this stage why they stampeded,'' a spokesman for the Australian State Parks Wildlife and Heritage Ministry said.


Vento Trial Jury Expected to Get The Case Today
LEAD: For the jury that is to begin deliberation today in the trial of John S. Vento, one of eight youths charged in the Bensonhurst racial attack that left 16-year-old Yusuf K. Hawkins dead, the case is likely to pivot on the legal concept of acting in concert.


Let's Not Add to East European Pollution;   Unsavory Exclusion
LEAD: To the Editor:


Seoul Stressing Inflation Fight
LEAD: South Korean planners, who just two months ago warned of an economic slowdown, say they are now trying to cool down an overheating economy.


For Some, No Escape From L.I. Jet Crash
LEAD: As life goes on for the 85 survivors of Avianca Airlines Flight 52, the return to normalcy comes in fits and starts.
One passenger has carried her pregnancy to full term since the flight crashed on Long Island five months ago.
And another, a 14-month-old girl, struggled to her feet recently to walk for the first time.


Elizabeth F. Otey, A Lawyer, Weds
LEAD: Elizabeth Frances Otey, a daughter of Sara-Marie Otey and Charles Otey, both of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Vicente Ernesto Garces, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Garces of Los Angeles, at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The ceremony was performed by Judge Gerard Rosenberg of the Brooklyn Civil Court.


N.B.A. Draft Aspirants Look Back
LEAD: Once they gathered with other youngsters to watch the older ones play.
On neighborhood playgrounds, in recreation centers and in schoolyards, they watched in awe.
But now they themselves have become the dazzlers.


Concern Rises in Congress as More Newspapers Combine
LEAD: Opponents of a Federal law that allows competing newspapers to merge their business operations are mounting a campaign to have it abolished or significantly amended.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-11


Romanians Observe 50th Anniversary of Soviet Annexation of Moldavia


Happy 80th Birthday, Milt Hinton
LEAD: Every jazz group in town must have been playing without a bassist on Saturday evening.
Fourteen of the jazz world's finest string bassists -13 standing beside their instruments while the 14th, Rufus Reid, conducted - were crowded onto the stage at Town Hall as part of a JVC Jazz Festival program celebrating the 80th birthday of their most senior colleague, Milt Hinton, who took a very active part in performances throughout the evening.


Review/Ballet;   Of Tudor and Balanchine, Drama and Plotlessness
LEAD: By presenting George Balanchine's ''Stravinsky Violin Concerto'' and Antony Tudor's ''Jardin aux Lilas'' on Friday night at the Metropolitan Opera House, American Ballet Theater honored two great choreographers who significantly affected the development of ballet in this country.


Metro Datelines;   Soviet Doctor Killed By Mugger in Queens
LEAD: A Soviet cardiologist who was visiting the United States with his wife was shot and killed by a mugger in Queens yesterday, the police said.


Smith Feeling Cardinals' Burdens
LEAD: OZZIE SMITH sat at his locker stall hours before one of the Cardinals' games against the Mets last week.
Neatly dressed in his uniform, Smith, entertained one inquisitor after another, impeccable in his manner as well as appearance.


A. J. Montgomery, 77, Retired Army General
LEAD: Austin J. Montgomery, a retired brigadier general who commanded Army cargo traffic and terminals in the Atlantic in the 1960's, died on Wednesday at the Hospice of Northern Virginia in Arlington.
He was 77 years old and lived in Alexandria, Va.
His death resulted from lung cancer, family members said.


Treasury to Sell Notes and Bills This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to bills and notes, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, followed tomorrow and Wednesday by auctions of two- and four-year notes and an auction of one-year bills on Thursday.


Review/Music;   3 Philip Glass Operas Become A Sort of Modern 'Ring' Cycle
LEAD: In the course of the 1980's, the Stuttgart Opera built up a unique stock of productions by the director Achim Freyer of the three major operas of Philip Glass - starting with ''Satyagraha'' in 1981 and continuing with the world premiere of ''Akhnaten'' (which the company commissioned) in 1984 and ''Einstein on the


West Germans Eliminate Dutch
LEAD: West Germany removed a major obstacle from its path toward a third consecutive appearance in the World Cup final by defeating the Netherlands tonight in a game that reflected the enmity between the teams.


Review/Pop;   Billy Joel Plays New York in a Feisty State of Mind
LEAD: ''It was 52 years ago on June 22 in this stadium that Joe Louis knocked out Max Schmeling!'' Billy Joel announced on Friday evening, early in the first of his two sold-out concerts at Yankee Stadium.


And Maradona Was Waiting
LEAD: HE wore the fabled yellow jersey of Brazil like a trophy from a primitive war.
He waved it at the stands as if brandishing the pelt of a vanquished enemy.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of June 25, 1990:
MONDAY
Ameron Inc Del
General Mls
Bellsouth Corp
Standard Prods Co
Boeing Co
TUESDAY
Bell Atlantic Corp
Montana Pwr Co
Centerior Energy
Nipsco Inds
Delmarva Pwr &amp; Lt
Public Svc Co Colo
Disney Walt Co
Quick &amp; Reilly Group
Elcor Corp
Rubbermaid Inc
Hydraulic Co
Signet Banking
Kerr Glass MFG
Union Camp Corp


Metro Datelines;   Tanker in Oil Spill Leaves for Europe
LEAD: A tanker that spilled about 260,000 gallons of oil into a waterway near Bayonne has left New Jersey and will sail to Europe for repairs, officials said.


Corrections
LEAD: A map on Thursday with an article about two explosions aboard the aircraft carrier Midway off Japan showed the location of Tokyo Bay incorrectly.
It is adjacent to Tokyo.
The body of water south of Tokyo Bay is Sagami Bay.


The Emerging Subway-Fare Thief: Frustrated, Irritated or in a Hurry
LEAD: As Elizabeth C. Thomas, a 39-year-old investment banker, entered the IRT subway station at 96th and Lexington on her way to work last week, she discovered that all the turnstiles were broken and that a No. 6 train was pulling into the station.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''All of my children died, and my wife and brothers and their children.
I saw how the earth was trembling, like nature kicking the cradle.
I saw the mountain slide toward the village and said, 'Allah akbar!
I am ready to die.' But I lived, and all the younger ones were taken from me, all because of this rock.


Free Band Concerts
LEAD: The Goldman Memorial Band has begun its 73d season of free concerts.
It will play on Sunday and on July 15 and 29 and Aug. 11 in the Guggenheim Band Shell in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center; in Washington Square Park in Manhattan on Aug. 14; at Asser Levy/ Seaside Park in Brooklyn on Saturday and July 14; at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx on July 22, and in Central Park on Aug.


Fall of Great Fortunes Is an American Story
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Title and Record for Sheehan: Patty Sheehan rallied with six birdies on the back nine in a round of 67 yesterday and won the Ladies Professional Golf Association Rochester International tournament in Pittsford, N.Y., for the second consecutive year.
She finished with a record total of 17-under-par 271.


Canadians Assessing Strains With Quebec
LEAD: As Canada assessed the collapse of its latest effort to redefine the status of of Quebec, its leaders' attempts to soothe anxieties ran into concerns including whether the strains with Quebec have finally gone too far.


India Taking Measures To Reduce Oil Imports
LEAD: The Indian Government has announced a set of measures intended to reduce its large oil import bill and curb gasoline consumption.
One measure orders gasoline stations to close every Sunday.


Help the Koreas In From the Cold
LEAD: Forty years after the cold war turned hot, North and South Korea are about to engage again -at the conference table.
New warmth between the U.S. and the Soviet Union is thawing relations between the Koreas.
That's a hopeful development.
It could, among other benefits, allow the U.S. to bring more troops home.


Metro Datelines;   Man Is Shot to Death On Subway Platform
LEAD: A 28-year-old man was shot twice in the back of the head and killed yesterday as he stood on a subway platform in the Bronx, the police said.


Italian Footnote: A Perfect Game
LEAD: While baseball players in the United States can be assured that many sports fans ignore news of World Cup soccer in favor of the baseball box scores, one American player here is in an opposite situation.


Lawyer Told Senator Payments Were Risky
LEAD: Documents from a Senate hearing indicate Senator Dave Durenberger was cautioned by his lawyer in 1986 about accepting Government reimbursement for stays in a Minneapolis condominium, despite his contention this month that he had no reason to doubt the propriety of the plan.


Law Enforcement and Education Both Lose in Police Corps Plan
LEAD: To the Editor:


An Escape By Perez
LEAD: Pascual Perez, the Yankee pitcher who has been out with an injured shoulder, escaped unhurt but his 1990 BMW sustained about $5,000 worth of damage early Saturday morning in Queens when a man attacked the car as Perez waited at a traffic light, the police said.


3,000 Papers at AIDS Gathering Point to Gains and Frustration
LEAD: In 3,000 papers presented at the Sixth International AIDS Conference that ended here Sunday, researchers reported substantial progress in learning about AIDS, but also a sense that the disease continues to outrun gains in knowledge as the epidemic continues to spread.


Substitutions Help Italy Advance
LEAD: Azeglio Vicini kept tinkering with the lineup tonight with immediate and gratifying results for the host country as Italy beat Uruguay, 2-0, to advance to the quarterfinals of the World Cup.


Knicks Give Bianchi Contract Extension
LEAD: The Knicks announced today that Al Bianchi, the team's general manager, had been given ''a contract extension to take the Knicks to the next level.''


Congress Was Right
LEAD: Congress gets so much abuse these days that we owe it a cheer when we see that it steered American policy in the right direction.
Nelson Mandela's visit to the United States is an occasion for such recognition.


Cheney Says Western Aid to Moscow Is a Mistake
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said today that it would be a mistake for Western nations to provide major economic assistance to Moscow because such aid would subsidize the Soviet military.


California Savings Notes Are Offered
LEAD: World Savings &amp; Loan, a California-based savings institution, yesterday offered $100 million worth of 10-year subordinated notes through an underwriting syndicate led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


European Watershed
LEAD: The European Community is off and running, after nearly a generation of ''stagnation,'' to use Mikhail Gorbachev's word for an unproductive era.


Freed Chinese to Stay in Britain
LEAD: The Foreign Office said today that Fang Lizhi and Li Shuxian would stay in Britain to do scientific work for six months, ''which could be extended.''


FAI Withdrew Offer for Foremost
LEAD: The FAI Traders Insurance Company of Australia disclosed that it had made an offer to acquire the Foremost Corporation of America for $32 a share, or $385 million, but that the offer was since withdrawn.
FAI Traders made the original proposal in a letter on June 14, but in a letter six days later it withdrew the proposal because, in part, its board ''did not wish to be placed in a position where we had to make a decision without more thought.


Jazz Festival;   How Music Has Followed Jim Hall Through Life
LEAD: The guitarist Jim Hall ignores the conventions.
Mr.
Hall, who is to be the host of the Jim Hall Invitational at Town Hall tonight as part of the JVC Jazz Festival, is deliberate in an era of speed and intimate in a medium given to grand statements.
An intricate Hall solo, constructed with the same attention to form as a sonnet, demands careful attention.


Jazz Festival;   Shorter and Nascimento: Joy in Sharing
LEAD: For the jazz saxophonist and composer Wayne Shorter, his 1975 album ''Native Dancer'' will always be associated with his affection for his wife, Ana Maria, who urged him to work with the Brazilian singer and composer Milton Nascimento and even made the collaboration easier by translating to and from Portuguese.


Siebe Takeover Offer Accepted by Foxboro
LEAD: The Foxboro Company, a Massachusetts-based industrial controls company that has received inquiries from a number of suitors in recent weeks, agreed yesterday to be acquired by Siebe P.L.C., a British safety products and engineering company, for $52 a share, or $655 million.


MacHelp With Writing
LEAD: MOST writers need all the help they can get.
If a recently published study is to be believed, those who write on a Macintosh computer may need even more.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-10
China allowed a dissident to leave.
Fang Lizhi was permitted to leave his refuge in the U.S.
Embassy in Beijing and board an American transport plane for a new life in England.
Page A1


Criminal Type Must Now Be Considered the Best
LEAD: When Criminal Type won the Pimlico Special on May 12, it was easy to say that all he had proved was that he could beat anyone not named Sunday Silence or Easy Goer.
He benefited from a speed-favoring track and hadn't beaten very much.


Fuel Additive Faces a Rough Road
LEAD: In the most recent round of its 12-year quest to sell a controversial gasoline additive, the Ethyl Corporation is once again colliding with a formidable adversary, the American automobile industry.


Sony Digital Sales Good
LEAD: The Sony Corporation's digital audio tape deck made its debut over the weekend, and many stores said today that they had sold out of the item.


Becker Off to an Uncertain Start at Wimbledon
LEAD: The skies actually turned sunny this morning, a novelty for opening day at Wimbledon, but the grass courts didn't easily surrender the slick and sodden character they had assumed after absorbing four days of intermittent British showers.


Ms. Nelson Weds Akira Yoshimura
LEAD: Sara Nelson, a freelance writer and adjunct professor of journalism at Columbia University, and Akira Yoshimura, the production designer of NBC's ''Saturday Night Live,'' were married yesterday by Judge Richard C. Failla in his chambers at the State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


Texas Says U.S. Imperils Home Sales
LEAD: The Texas Housing Agency has been prepared for months to raise $140 million to lend to low- and moderate-income purchasers to buy 3,500 foreclosed homes from the Federal Government.


Blast Rocks Club for Tories in London, Injuring 7
LEAD: An explosion followed by a fire tonight devastated a club in central London that is frequented by members of Britain's governing Conservative Party, the police said.
At least seven people were injured, one seriously.


Asbestos Debate Re-emerges in Dispute Over Building Hazard
LEAD: A SPIRITED argument among scientists over the health risks of asbestos has reopened an important environmental health issue once thought settled, sowing doubt and confusion about how to deal with asbestos in schools and other buildings.


Fernandez Declines to Reinstate 9 Suspended in Patronage Inquiry
LEAD: The New York City Schools Chancellor said yesterday that he would not reinstate the nine members of a Queens community school board who were suspended last fall amid allegations of patronage abuses, estimated to have cost the school system $1 million.


FRUITLESS DEBATE ON FLAG IN SENATE
LEAD: The Senate reluctantly slogged through a debate today on a constitutional amendment barring desecration of the American flag, knowing that whatever the final vote, the proposal was already dead.


Irwin Panken; Lawyer, 82
LEAD: Irwin Panken, a lawyer in Manhattan for more than 50 years, died on Sunday at his home in Plainfield, N.J.
He was 82 years old.


States May Require Girl to Notify Parents Before Having Abortion
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that states may require a teen-age girl to notify both parents before obtaining an abortion, as long as the law provides the alternative of a judicial hearing for pregnant girls who do not want to inform their parents of their decision.


A Man Struck by a Van Dies
LEAD: An unidentified man in his 20's was killed yesterday in the East New York section of Brooklyn when he was struck by a van, the police said.
The driver, who fled the scene, was arrested yesterday evening.
He was identified as Trevor Decre, 29 years old, of 171 East 96th Street in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Decre was charged with leaving the scene of an accident and driving with a suspended license.


Patterns
LEAD:
Landlubbers Are Back


Unocal Planning Thai Expansion
LEAD: Thailand's largest natural gas producer and biggest foreign investor, Unocal, plans to expand its operations here, Unocal Thailand's president, Graydon Laughbaum, said in an interview.
Unocal Thailand, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Los Angeles-based Unocal Corporation, produces all of Thailand's natural gas and condensates from its offshore fields in the Gulf of


Network Executives Plan Strategy for the Summer
LEAD: Television viewing plummets in the summer months, but television programming executives continue to devise new strategies for attracting viewers who have better things to do on a hot night than watch reruns.
The executives are also concerned about getting the audience back in the fall.


Motives Are Debated as Vento Case Goes to Jury
LEAD: The jury in the trial of John S. Vento, one of the eight young men charged in the shooting death of Yusuf K. Hawkins in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn, began deliberations yesterday after closing statements from the defense and the prosecution.


Mets Get Run in 9th to Defeat Cardinals
LEAD: On and on they roll, the Mets bowling through June, surviving John Tudor and Lee Smith in the same game tonight, clipping the St.
Louis Cardinals in the ninth inning by 3-2, winning for the seventh straight time and extending their best rampage in two years.


John Paul Meets the Bishops Of Ukraine Catholic Church
LEAD: Pope John Paul II met today for the first time with bishops of the Ukrainian Catholic Church, which was forced by Stalin in 1946 to merge with the Russian Orthodox Church.


Dayton Hudson Is Laying Off 850
LEAD: The Dayton Hudson Corporation said it planned to dismiss 850 of Marshall Field's 1,550 central office employees here in a move to consolidate operations at Dayton Hudson's headquarters in Minneapolis.
Such a move has been expected since April, when the Minneapolis retailer's $1.04 billion offer prevailed in a bidding war to acquire Marshall Field &amp; Company, the Chicago-based department store chain, from B.A.T.


Limelight Nothing New For Sheriff in Rap Case
LEAD: The rest of the country may have first heard of Sheriff Nick Navarro when he set off a national debate on obscenity laws and freedom of speech by pressing a case against the music of the rap group 2 Live Crew.


4 Inmates Stabbed in Fight In a Rikers Island Cellblock
LEAD: A brief fight at Rikers Island last night left four inmates stabbed, one seriously, and two corrections officers slightly injured, the authorities said.


Chronicle
LEAD: STEVEN SPIELBERG and ANDREW LLOYD WEBBER will join talents to create an animated feature film of the hit musical ''Cats.'' Unlike the theater production, the full-length film version will have a plot, said ALAN SUTTON, a spokesman for Universal Pictures, the distributor. ''This will be an adaptation of


Inmate Is Guilty In the Slayings Of 2 Detectives
LEAD: After deliberating for less than an hour, a Queens jury yesterday convicted a 26-year-old Rikers Island inmate of killing two police detectives on the Grand Central Parkway last year.


Excerpts From Court Opinions on Missouri Right-to-Die Case
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's ruling today in the Missouri right-to-die case.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote the 5-to-4 majority opinion.
Justices Sandra Day O'Connor and Antonin Scalia wrote concurring opinions.
Justices William j.
Brennan Jr. and John Paul Stevens filed dissenting opinions.


Jazz Festival;   Unpredictable Ray Charles Still Is
LEAD: For the most part, Ray Charles was in jubilant spirits during the first of two Sunday evening JVC Jazz Festival concerts at Avery Fisher Hall, where he appeared with his 17-piece orchestra.
His good mood, marred only by his snarling instructions to an overbearing drummer, infused the auditorium with a buzz of gratitude.


Suit Filed Over Shaw
LEAD: Attorneys for the Italian basketball team Il Messaggero filed a lawsuit in Federal court in Boston yesterday against the Celtics over the services of Brian Shaw.


Dollar Mixed as Gold Rises; Mark Is Put Under Pressure
LEAD: The dollar was mixed yesterday as dealers directed their attention to trading other major currencies.


Founder of Century Joins Citizens Utilities
LEAD: The Citizens Utilities Company said yesterday that Leonard Tow had been named chairman and chief executive.


Rig Count Up in Week
LEAD: The number of rigs exploring for oil and natural gas in the United States jumped by 22 last week, to a total of 1,021, Baker Hughes Inc. announced today.
A year ago, the count was 810.


Michelin Planning To Cut 2,260 Jobs
LEAD: Michelin S.A., the world's largest tire company, said it plans to cut 2,260 jobs from its work force to hold down costs and meet foreign competition.
The plan, presented today to employee representatives, eliminates jobs at five plants in Clermont-Ferrand, where Michelin's work force is about 20,500, and at various distribution centers across


Unilever Is Buying Margarine Maker
LEAD: Unilever, the giant consumer products company, said it planned to buy the 50 percent of a Swedish margarine maker that it does not already own for $35.8 million.
Unilever, which is based in London and Rotterdam, the Netherlands, said it would buy the stake in Margarinbolaget A.B. from the Aritmos Group.


House Sales Off 1.2% in May
LEAD: Sales of existing houses slipped 1.2 percent in May, a real estate trade group reported today.


Eddie Cotton Is Dead; Former Boxer Was 64
LEAD: Eddie Cotton, a light-heavyweight boxer for 20 years who lost close decisions in his two championship fights, died on Sunday at the University of Washington Medical Center in Seattle.
He was 64 years old.
He died from an infection in his blood and lungs that developed two days after a second liver transplant, performed on


A Neo-Stalinist Yearns for Old Times
LEAD: An afternoon at home with Nina Andreyeva is an experience of cozy domesticity often interrupted by jarring moments of anachronism.


Chronicle
LEAD: MELINA MERCOURI, the Greek actress and politician, has been chosen to run for Mayor of Athens in the October elections by the Panhellenic Socialist Movement.
Miss Mercouri served as Minister of Culture from 1981 to 1989.
If she is elected, she will follow in the footsteps of her grandfather, Spyros Mercouris, who was Mayor of Athens for 30 years.


U.S. Seizing Leases Of People Suspected In Illegal Drug Deals
LEAD: Federal authorities moved today to begin seizing the leases of suspected drug dealers living in public housing units, but a judge's order prevented the immediate eviction of tenants.


Chronicle
LEAD: The hottest show in Moscow is medieval art from the Metropolitan Museum and the Art Institute of Chicago, which has people lining up for blocks around the Pushkin State Museum.
It is the first in a round of art exchanges totaling four major exhibitions over five years.
The exhibitions were organized by PHILIPPE DE MONTEBELLO at the Met, JAMES WOOD at the Art Institute, IRINA ANTONOVA at the Pushkin and BORIS PIOTROVSKY at the Hermitage Museum in


Philip L. Bondy, 80, Former Cigar Executive
LEAD: Philip L. Bondy, retired vice chairman of the Culbro Corporation, a diversified concern based in Manhattan, died on Saturday at his home in Carefree, Ariz.
He was 80 years old.


Ruling Near On Savings Fraud Data
LEAD: The nation's top savings regulator said today that he would decide within a week whether to make information about investigations into savings and loan fraud available to the public before formal civil charges are filed in court against individuals.


AIDS Epidemic Puts An Unusual Microbe Under New Scrutiny
LEAD: THEY are the smallest free-living organisms, these mycoplasmas, which fall between bacteria and viruses.
Mycoplasmas fascinate scientists because the simplicity of these organisms may reveal secrets of the minimal requirements of life.


Some Foreigners Ousted in Quake Area
LEAD: International relief workers and Western diplomats reported confusion and some instances of chaos today in the rescue effort after the devastating earthquake in northwestern Iran.


Ireland Tops Romania, Ending 0-0 Game on Final Penalty Kick
LEAD: Were it not for the rule that requires tied matches be settled by penalty kicks in the second round of the World Cup finals and beyond, Ireland might still be playing Romania.


Salinas Seeks Australia Trade
LEAD: President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico has urged improved trade links with Australia.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


With a Designing Eye to Resort Time
LEAD: The name is actually irrelevant.
The American designers and merchants, who invented the fashion season, call it ''resort,'' referring to the predilection of well-heeled northerners to head for southern playgrounds in the winter.
The Europeans, who have hopped on the bandwagon each of the last few years, tend to call it ''cruise,'' referring as much to the era of ocean liners as to private yachts.


Quick: Who'd Have Trouble Living on $450,000 a Month?
LEAD: Donald J. Trump, who has lectured America about architecture, foreign policy and, most of all, how to do deals, may be about to learn a lesson of his own: how to live in Manhattan on $450,000 a month.


Accord Averts Debate on Rights Bill
LEAD: The White House and Senate supporters of major civil rights legislation today agreed to postpone a showdown on a bill that was scheduled to coincide with Nelson Mandela's address to a joint meeting of Congress on Tuesday.


Behind the Scenes: Diplomatic Poker
LEAD: The departure of Fang Lizhi, the leading dissident, and his wife, Li Shuxian, from China today culminated two weeks of intense secret diplomacy between the Chinese authorities and the American Ambassador to China.
The Ambassador, James R. Lilley, acted as an intermediary between the Beijing Government and the couple.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Mosquitoes and Frogs
Q.Do frogs get mosquito bites?
A.''They do,'' said Durland Fish, an entomologist with the New York Medical College medical entomology laboratory in Valhalla, N.Y. ''Not only that, but one species of mosquito feeds only on cold-blood animals and even transmits a disease to frogs called filariasis, related to heart worms.


Correction
LEAD: An article in the Long Island Weekly on Sunday misstated the date of a concert Wayne Newton is giving at the Bald Hill Cultural Park in Farmingville, L.I.
It will be tonight at 8 P.M.


Central Americans Seek Aid on War Refugees
LEAD: The governments of Central America will ask Western countries at a meeting here this week for $161 million in aid for nearly half a million people made homeless by civil wars.


Prosecutor Uses Fiery Statement At Marcos Trial
LEAD: Methodically, even solemnly, over three months, the prosecutors have offered a narrative of how Imelda Marcos brazenly stole hundreds of millions of dollars from her people, and they presented it as if it were the driest story to be told.


Zahringer Misses Cut At The Ike
LEAD: When George Zahringer 3d, who has won more titles than any amateur golfer in the New York metropolitan area in the last decade, fails to be near the top when he plays in tournaments, he creates more news than when he wins.


Review/Dance;   Several Major Debuts On Ballet Theater Bill
LEAD: American Ballet Theater presented two sets of major debuts on Saturday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Alessandra Ferri and Ethan Brown made Clark Tippet's 1989 duet ''Some Assembly Required'' look very different from the way it was danced at its premiere by Amanda McKerrow and John Gardner, yet it remained true to the choreographer's study of a guy and his girl.


The Outlook on Arts Grants
LEAD: Signs are strong that despite the best efforts of supporters of the National Endowment for the Arts, Congress will impose new restrictions of some degree on the endowment and on Federal support for the arts in general.


Police Sketch the Man Who May Be the Zodiac Killer
LEAD: A composite sketch of a man who may be the so-called Zodiac gunman was released yesterday by the police.


JUSTICES FIND A RIGHT TO DIE, BUT THE MAJORITY SEES NEED FOR CLEAR PROOF OF INTENT
LEAD: Eight members of the Supreme Court, venturing for the first time into the sensitive ''right to die'' issue, said in a ruling today that a person whose wishes are clearly known has a constitutional right to the discontinuance of life-sustaining treatment.


Small Plane Found in Maine With Two Dead in Wreckage
LEAD: The bodies of an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and a Massachusetts state trooper have been found in the wreckage of a small plane on a mountain ridge in western Maine.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Saatchi Selling Peterson Unit
LEAD: Continuing to divest itself of its consulting businesses, the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company P.L.C. agreed yesterday to sell Peterson &amp; Company, Chicago, to its management.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.32
8.19
9.51
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.82
7.76
8.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.73
7.63
7.93
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.60
8.52
8.22
30-YR.


Provincetown Journal;   In a Cradle Of Liberty, A Berth Is In Dispute
LEAD: In the quiet waters of the Provincetown Harbor, near where the Mayflower first landed in 1620, another group of weary travelers has dropped anchor looking for a better life.


Invasion of the Suburbs
LEAD: THE International Business Machines Corporation is re-entering the home computer market today with a new personal computer intended for home office, family and general household applications.
The new I.B.M.
PS/1 computer will come in four models, ranging from a simple monochrome system that has a list price of $999 to a color machine equipped with a hard disk drive, for $1,999.


AIDS and Misdirected Rage
LEAD: No one heard a word of the 15-minute speech given on Sunday by Dr.
Louis Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, at the San Francisco AIDS conference.
Before he had even begun to speak, AIDS activists unfurled a banner saying, ''He talks, we die.'' The secretary's address was drowned out from beginning to end by a roar of shouts and whistles.


Freedom for Two Chinese
LEAD: Yes, the stories are true enough about Middle Kingdom feelings of superiority and indifference to the outside world.
But China's leaders worry plenty about the ostracism they brought on themselves last year by ordering the army to fire on students demonstrating for democracy.
And worry they should.


EUROPE HASTENING INTEGRATION PACE
LEAD: Leaders of the European Community agreed today to set the 12-nation organization on a path toward what they call political union, but they left it to coming negotiations to determine just how much sovereignty each country will have to surrender.


Measuring the Brain at Work
LEAD: PAYING attention dramatically increases activity in different parts of the brain, researchers have found.


Harry M. Poppick, 73, New Jersey Physician
LEAD: Dr.
Harry M. Poppick, who maintained a general medical practice at his home in Keyport, N.J., for 35 years until he retired in 1987, died on Sunday at Bayshore Community Hospital in Holmdel, N.J.
He was 73 years old.


Corn and Soybean Prices Up On Fears of a Heat Wave
LEAD: Forecasts for a Midwestern heat wave helped push corn and soybean futures prices up sharply yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade amid fears of damage from an extended dry spell.


Better News From Israel
LEAD: ''We do not divert and we do not send any Russian immigrants or any Jew who comes from Russia to Samaria, to Judea, to Gaza, because we understand the seriousness of the situation.'' Those welcome words of restraint come from none other than Ariel Sharon, the Housing Minister in Israel's new right-wing Government and the man whose political trademark has been to press for


Books of The Times;   The War of the Analysts: Ids Raging, Egos Bruised
LEAD:
Separate Hours
By Jonathan Baumbach
204 pages. Fiction Collective Two. $18.95.


Gasoline Prices Decline
LEAD: Gasoline prices dropped slightly in the last two weeks as retailers passed along a decline in wholesale prices, a nationwide survey of retailers has found.
The average price for a gallon of gasoline, including all taxes, was 117.68 cents on June 22, down 0.42 cents from June 8, the Lundberg Survey said on Sunday.


Mollie Moon, 82, Founding Head Of the Urban League Guild, Dies
LEAD: Mollie Moon, the founder and full-time volunteer president of the National Urban League Guild, died on Sunday at her home in Long Island City, Queens.
Her death, at the age of 82, apparently resulted from a heart attack, a family spokesman said.


Reform Judaism Votes to Accept Active Homosexuals in Rabbinate
LEAD: Reform Judaism voted today for the first time to admit acknowledged, sexually active homosexuals into its rabbinate.


Chronicle
LEAD: As though he doesn't have enough to do, PRESTON ROBERT TISCH today becomes the chairman of the New York City Partnership.
He was elected chairman of the New York Chamber of Commerce and Industry on June 14.
The two groups merged three years ago; the partnership brings together businessmen and academics to help solve city problems.


6th-Grade Graduation: Tears and Dreams
LEAD: At 9:15 A.M., Robert Pelka's 34 sixth graders, 19 boys and 15 girls, began gathering in the sweltering cafeteria of Public School 94 for graduation.


Japan Plans Rules on Cash
LEAD: The Japanese Finance Ministry plans to issue guidelines to help local financial institutions stop attempts to launder illegal drug profits, officials said today.


Liberian Rebels Scorn Talks And Vow Assault on Capital
LEAD: Liberian rebels said today that they had lost patience with peace talks and vowed to oust President Samuel K. Doe with an assault on Monrovia.


Jazz Festival;   Mixing Splash and Quiet on the Piano
LEAD: Sunday night's concert at Carnegie Hall made seconds stretch into hours.
By the end of the three-hour show, what had started as a concert with mild promise, featuring the pianists Michel Camilo and McCoy Tyner and the guitarist George Benson, had degenerated into a quagmire of dated pop-funk.


Campanella Ailing
LEAD: Roy Campanella, who has a respiratory ailment, is in Northridge Hospital Medical Center in Los Angeles for tests.
The Hall of Fame catcher was listed in stable condition yesterday.
Campanella, 68, was hospitalized for four months, earlier this year because of complications from diabetes.
He has been partly paralyzed since a car accident in 1958 that ended his career.


Family Values And Gay Rights
LEAD: In the hierarchy of traditional American values, fair play and parental love are ordinarily ranked right up there with apple pie.
But now, by endorsing those virtues, Barbara Bush has subjected the White House to political attack from the Republican right.


Preparing a Living Will
LEAD: Two groups that promote living wills, Concern for Dying and the Society for the Right to Die, which are merging into the National Council on Death and Dying, have prepared forms for living wills.
State laws differ on the documents, which instruct doctors and family members on how and when to end life-sustaining treatment; there is a form for each state.


Finally, Jays Lose At Fenway
LEAD: The Boston Red Sox ended Toronto's 15-game winning streak at Fenway Park, beating the Blue Jays, 10-8, tonight, and moving into first place in the American League East, a half-game ahead of Toronto.


By Design;   The United States of Orange
LEAD: This summer orange is top banana.
Look around the streets of New York or in cities around the country and you will spot orange jackets, skirts, tops and dresses as well as orange-based prints and all sorts of accessories - shoes, handbags, watchbands, sunglass frames and lenses.
Orange lipstick is hot, too.


Excerpts From Court's Ruling on Minnesota's Abortion Law
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's ruling today on Minnesota's abortion law.
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote the decision striking down the state's requirement that teen-agers notify both parents.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote a concurring opinion that had provided a fifth vote for ruling that the alternative of a judicial hearing saved the law from unconstitutionality.


Black Men: Are They Imperiled?
LEAD: One by one they took the microphone yesterday.
Men and women, academicians and politicians, entrepreneurs and former convicts, they told the Harlem audience the same thing: black men are an endangered species.


Typhoon Batters China
LEAD: A typhoon has battered China's eastern coast, killing 10 people, capsizing 1,600 boats and destroying thousands of homes, the official news agency said today.
At least 47 people died when the typhoon ripped through the Philippines and Taiwan over the weekend.
The storm, designated Ofelia, was the worst to hit eastern Taiwan in 30 years.


Quebec Official Tells Americans Investment in the Province Is Safe
LEAD: The Quebec provincial Government made a special effort yesterday to reassure American investors that the French-speaking province is a safe place for their money, despite the new uncertainty over Quebec's status in the Canadian federation.


Family Yet Hopes 'to Set Her Free'
LEAD: The Cruzan family's lawyer said today that he had not given up hope of finding a solution that would permit removal of the feeding tube that keeps Nancy Cruzan alive.


Settlement In ARCO Explosion
LEAD: The Southern Natural Gas Company today agreed to pay the ARCO Oil and Gas Company $300.5 million for damages from an explosion on an ARCO drilling platform in the Gulf of Mexico last year.


Careers;   Minority Opportunity Programs
LEAD: THE New York City Human Resources Administration held a graduation ceremony on Friday for nine women moving from public assistance to private employment with wages of $13,000 to $19,000 a year.
They completed a five-month course that taught them the computer, telephone and clerical skills needed to work in debt collection.


Kimble No. 1 In One-on-One
LEAD: Bo Kimble of Loyola Marymount outshot and outmuscled Gary Payton of Oregon State to win the first One-on-One Challenge tonight.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''For the life of me, I cannot see how homosexual rabbis can be the role models our people need and want.''
- Rabbi Philmore Berger, attacking the ideaof accepting openly homosexual rabbis. [A21:1.]


Daryl Davis Furno; Executive, 51
LEAD: Daryl Davis Furno, executive vice president of Halbrecht Associates of Stamford, Conn., an executive-search firm in the field of artificial intelligence, died on Friday at her home in Cos Cob, Conn.
She was 51 years old.
The cause of death was ovarian cancer, her family said.


Chairman of Blount Inc. Gives Up Post of Chief
LEAD: R. William Van Sant, president of Blount Inc., has been appointed to the additional post of chief executive.
He will succeed Winton M. (Red) Blount, the longtime leader of the manufacturing and construction company, who will continue as chairman.


Our Towns;   A Bumpy Road And Open Hearts For Young Love
LEAD: Garrit and Lelia Lydecker tried everything to stop their bright 17-year-old Rachel from marrying so young, but the high school junior would not bend and on Dec. 30, 1988, before a town justice, Rachel wed Rick Quick, 19, a hospital van driver.


Big Lessor Of Aircraft To Be Sold
LEAD: The International Lease Finance Corporation, one of the largest airplane leasing companies, said today that it had agreed to be acquired by the American International Group Inc., an insurance company, in a $1.3 billion deal.


Billups Pleads Guilty
LEAD: Lewis Billups, a Cincinnati Bengals defensive back, pleaded guilty yesterday to three misdemeanor charges stemming from his January arrest for allegedly waving a handgun at two undercover Cincinnati police officers.
Judge Ralph Winkler released Billups on bond and scheduled sentencing for July 31.(


Rushdie Plans to Give $8,650 for Iran Aid
LEAD: Salman Rushdie, the British-based author forced into hiding by Iranian death threats, has pledged $8,650 to help Iranian earthquake victims, The Independent newspaper said today.


Keep Mideast Talking
LEAD: To the Editor:


Otto Rudolf Trautz; Biochemist, 90
LEAD: Otto Rudolf Trautz, a biochemist and a retired New York University professor, died on Sunday at Central Vermont Hospital in Berlin.
He was 90 years old and lived in Cabot, Vt.


Mid-June Vehicle Sales Dropped 3.9%
LEAD: Sales of domestically produced cars and light trucks fell 3.9 percent in mid-June, as demand for new vehicles failed to break out of the sluggish pattern that began last fall.


Science Fiction Nears Reality: Pocket Phone for Global Calls
LEAD: The small and portable telephone that can be used anywhere on earth has been a staple of science fiction and a Holy Grail of telephone engineers for several decades.
Today Motorola Inc. will become the first company in the world to announce plans to build and operate such a phone system.


In Horn of Africa, Minorities Rule
LEAD: To the Editor:


Prices of U.S. Securities Tumble
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities fell sharply in light trading yesterday, as dealers sold securities in advance of a heavy schedule of new debt offerings this week.


Dave Brubeck Quartet Is to Perform in a Series
LEAD: The Dave Brubeck Quartet is to perform a free jazz concert at 12:15 P.M. on Thursday at the World Financial Center Plaza, West Street south of Vesey Street.


Argentine Officials Open Bids on Phone System
LEAD: Taking their first big step in the long-debated privatization of state-owned companies, Argentine officials opened bids today from American, Italian and Spanish concerns for the sale of a controlling interest in the national telephone company, Entel.


SPORTS PEOPLE: BASEBALL;


Brutality of Rape Detailed as Jogger Trial Opens
LEAD: A Manhattan prosecutor described in graphic detail yesterday how a group of youths attacked a woman jogging last year in Central Park and ''brutally beat and raped her, and then left her to die naked and stripped in the dark and empty woods.''


The Court's Major Abortion Decisions Since Roe V. Wade
LEAD:
JAN. 22, 1973: In Roe v.
Wade, the Court for the first time legalized abortion nationwide, basing its ruling on a woman's constitutional right to privacy.
The vote was 7 to 2.
The Court said a woman's decision to have an abortion in the first three months of pregnancy must be left to her and her doctor.


Witness Tells About Sexual Encounter With Barry
LEAD: Weeping, her voice hardly a whisper, a prosecution witness in the drug trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. testified today that she had struggled for more than 10 minutes with Mr.
Barry in a Virgin Islands hotel room in an unsuccessful attempt to fight off his sexual advances.


States Are a Patchwork Of Life-and-Death Laws
LEAD: Like the overwhelming majority of Americans, Nancy Cruzan had not prepared a document with instructions on what medical treatment she wanted if she could not speak for herself.


Vincent Hears Charge
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent held a formal hearing yesterday into tampering charges against the Yankees and promised a decision ''reasonably soon'' on the allegations brought by the California Angels.


Man Arrested in Death Of a 10-Year-Old Girl
LEAD: A 21-year-old Brooklyn man was arrested last night and charged with the death of a 10-year-old girl struck by a stray bullet while she was shopping with her mother on Flatbush Avenue on Saturday, the police said.


Armco Anticipates A Loss for Quarter
LEAD: Armco Inc., the nation's sixth-largest steel producer, said it would record second-quarter charges of $70 million and, as a result, it expects to report a net loss for the quarter.
Armco added that because of the charges and the provisions of certain debt arrangements, it might not pay common stock dividends.


The Men Who Would Be Elvis
LEAD: Peter Singh, an Indian whose Sikh religion requires him to wear a turban, recalled how Elvis Presley came to him in a dream in 1980 to say, ''You're the next one.''


Gabriel Mace; French Editor, 72
LEAD: Gabriel Mace, editor in chief of Le Canard Enchaine, the satirical weekly, died of heart disease on Saturday, the newspaper said today.
He was 72 years old.


Talking Business; with LeBaron of Batterymarch Financial;   All-Night Trading Called Beneficial
LEAD: The three leading American financial exchanges have announced plans for all-night trading of stocks and options, starting in 1992, as a way to keep the United States competitive as overseas equity markets grow and global trading increases.


Douglas-King Case Put Off Until Monday
LEAD: A court case pitting the heavyweight champion, James (Buster) Douglas, against his promoter, Don King, has been postponed until next Monday in Manhattan.
Douglas is seeking to free himself from a pact with King, saying King's conduct immediately after Douglas knocked out Mike Tyson last February in


Arkansas Executes Killer of 16; Texas Kills Inmate by Injection
LEAD: A man convicted of murdering 16 people, including 14 relatives, in 1987 was put to death last night in Arkansas, two years after he pleaded in court for a swift execution to ''let the torture and suffering in me end.''


You Can't Expect a Space Station to Be Cheap
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Collision in Space
LEAD: Astronomers have discovered two chunks of rock, either touching or orbiting each other closely, that form the first solid double object observed in space.
The object is the smallest astronomical body of which an image has been made.


Chase Seeks to Reduce Its Costs by $300 Million
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Corporation, which last week named new executives to its top two executive positions, yesterday told employees it intends to reduce costs by $300 million.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Rescuers in a Hurry To Find Quake Survivors
These are the desperate hours for rescuers looking for survivors of last week's severe earthquake in Iran.
If any people are alive under the rubble, they must be found at once.
Page A10.
Bombing at London Club
An explosion followed by a fire devastated a London club frequented by politicians.


In Marks of Ancient Bit, Clues to Earliest Riders
LEAD: STRAIGHT from the horse's mouth, archeologists have learned that humans probably became equestrians at least 6,000 years ago, much earlier than previously thought.
The finding could mean that horseback riding, not the invention of the wheel as most scholars have thought, was the first significant innovation in human land transport.


Southern Settles Contract Dispute
LEAD: The Southern Company said today it had reached a tentative agreement worth $300 million to settle a dispute over an energy sales contract with the Gulf States Utilities Company.
The agreement, which is subject to Federal regulatory approval, would end all litigation between Atlanta-based Southern and Gulf States, which is based in Beaumont,


A Pleased Steinbrenner Joins Youth Movement
LEAD: George Steinbrenner conceded yesterday that he might have been wrong all these years.
Youth, he said, is the way of the future for the Yankees, not the long parade of free agents he has been bringing in with little or no result.


Alfred Rosengarten; Executive, 80
LEAD: Alfred Rosengarten, a retired garment district executive, died on Saturday at Peninsula Hospital Center in Queens.
He was 80 years old and lived in Belle Harbor, Queens.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Mr.
Rosengarten, a native of Brooklyn, was founder and president of the Budget Dress Corporation in the early 1940's.


MANDELA DECLINES TO RULE OUT FORCE
LEAD: Nelson Mandela told President Bush today that he could not completely renounce the use of violence and armed struggles to achieve racial equality in South Africa.
But he said the African National Congress would cease hostilities once the South African Government accepted all conditions for talks on a new constitution.


Disposal of Mild Radioactive Waste To be Less Restricted in New Policy
LEAD: Mildly radioactive waste could be disposed of in municipal dumps or ordinary incinerators or even recycled into consumer products, under a new policy that the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, plans to announce tomorrow.


Judge Halts Publication of Pamphlet
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday stopped further publication of a pamphlet used by a conservative religious organization to press its case that the National Endowment for the Arts is supporting pornography.


East Falls Under Spell Of West German Mark
LEAD: West German banks in temporary housing compete with one another and a host of black-market money changers.
Street traders from many countries offer their wares.
Hawkers sell best-selling brands of cigarettes from the West, which are not yet available here.
And a rash of brand-name signs have sprouted in shop windows and on walls.


Nets Trade '93 and '95 Draft Picks For Theus
LEAD: After trading for a veteran guard yesterday, the Nets appear to be in stronger position to draft Derrick Coleman tomorrow.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Cox Newspapers has acquired the Buckler Broadcast Group and formed a new company, Cox In-Store Advertising.


Grace M. Carhart; Professor, 90
LEAD: Grace M. Carhart, an assistant professor of geology and geography at Hunter College for 50 years, died on Wednesday at the Cortlandt Nursing Home in Peekskill, N.Y.
She was 90 years old.


More Threats to a Woman's Liberty
LEAD: The Supreme Court has strayed again.
As in the Webster case a year ago, a majority has done what it could, short of overruling Roe v.
Wade, to undermine that landmark 1973 decision and force the abortion issue into the political arena.


Scientists Pinpoint Brain Irregularities In Drug Addicts
LEAD: A RADICALLY new approach to fighting drug abuse is emerging from discoveries of brain irregularities that make certain people much quicker to become addicted than others, and much harder to cure.


I.R.S. in Arrears, Postal Audit Says
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service is being audited and may owe $2 million or more.


New Tremor Crushes a Wisp of Hope
LEAD: It was a faint, barely perceptible knock, yet it meant that somehow, someone had managed to survive.


Tokyo Journal;   She's Shy and Not So Shy, Japan's Princess Bride
LEAD: The student dining hall at Gakushuin University was bubbling with lunchtime chatter the other day when a student in a simple print dress dropped in to pour herself some tea.
As she smiled shyly to a few friends, a hush spread through the room until a young woman, abandoning years of training in Japanese decorum, gasped, ''It's Kiko-san!


THE MANDELA VISIT
LEAD:
9 A.M.: Nelson Mandela has breakfast with the Congressional Black Caucus at the Cannon House Office Building.
11 A.M.: Mr. Mandela addresses a joint meeting of Congress.
3:30 P.M.: Meeting with Senate and House leaders, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the House Foreign Affairs Committ.


Deals


Police in Zambia Open Fire On Student Demonstrators
LEAD: Policemen opened fire today on hundreds of stone-throwing university students who were protesting a doubling of the price of corn meal, Zambia's staple.


A Poll Shows Less Pessimism Among Blacks
LEAD: Six months after David N. Dinkins was inaugurated as Mayor, black New Yorkers are sharply less pessimistic than white or Hispanic New Yorkers about their city's future, according to a New York Times/ WCBS-TV News Poll.


Fewer Subways Found on Time At Peak of Rush
LEAD: On-time performance of many subway lines during the morning rush is worse than previously reported by the New York City Transit Authority and is declining during the peak half-hour when most people take the subway to work, the inspector general of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has found.


Norwegian Oil
LEAD: Accusing OPEC members of exceeding their oil production quotas, Norway said today that it was scrapping curbs on its North Sea oil output that were intended to help to stabilize prices.
Norway, which is not a member of OPEC but is Western Europe's biggest oil producer after Britain, imposed the curbs voluntarily four years ago when oil prices tumbled to an average of $14 a barrel.


Ford Is Denied Wiper Retrial
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company, which has been found by a Federal jury to have infringed on an inventor's design for windshield wipers, was denied a request today for a new trial.


President Gets Amtrak Bill Without Takeover Provision
LEAD: Congress today approved and sent to the White House new legislation placing a limit on Federal subsidies for Amtrak but lacking a provision requiring Federal approval of some railroad takeovers that drew a veto from President Bush.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Companies


Tax Rise Near for New York City
LEAD: New York City residents can expect to pay higher income taxes as a result of a tentative agreement announced today by the state's legislative leaders.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Abraham &amp; Straus, New York, a unit of Campeau Corp., promoted Rita Steffee to senior vice president for visual merchandising presentation.


Suchard Checked On Insider Trades
LEAD: Swiss authorities have begun a preliminary investigation to determine whether news of the $3.8 billion takeover of the Swiss chocolate and coffee group Jacobs Suchard A.G. by the Philip Morris Companies may have been leaked.
The Zurich District Attorney, Rudolf Unterrassner, said ''intensive clarification'' is under way to see whether media reports hinting at possible insider trading of Jacobs Suchard shares can be corroborated.


The Struggle to Revise Hospital Reimbursements
LEAD: Few people in Albany truly understand, or want to understand, the complex formula that regulates the financing of New York's struggling hospitals.


Charles G. Taylor; Executive, 90
LEAD: Charles G. Taylor, a retired vice president and former general merchandising manager for the Associated Merchandising Corporation, died on Friday at the Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 90 years old and lived in Rye, N.Y.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   British Agency Likes U.S.
LEAD: MICHAEL GREENLEES, the co-chairman and chief executive of London-based Gold Greenlees Trott, is one British agency executive who is still hungry for acquisitions.


Diversification Benefits Pension Funds and New York Taxpayers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Motorola And Hitachi In Accord
LEAD: Motorola Inc. and Hitachi Ltd. said today that they had reached an agreement in principle that should lead to a settlement of their disputes over computer chip patents.


Flutie Signs in Canada
LEAD: Doug Flutie signed a contract last night with the British Columbia Lions of the Canadian Football League.


A Maverick Scientist Gets an I.B.M. Tribute
LEAD: John Cocke does not fit the stereotype of an I.B.M. scientist.
Over the last 35 years, he has articulated his ideas on computer design far more often on bar napkins in the wee hours than in articles for scientific journals.
He is a man so consumed by his work that he sometimes leaves unlaundered shirts stuffed in his filing cabinet, and a team cleaning his office once found $4,000 worth of his stock certificates in the trash can.


Stinginess on Baby Food Will Cost Dearly;   Heartless Indeed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quebec and Ottawa Forage for a New Relationship
LEAD: With the collapse of a deal that would have given special constitutional status to Quebec, the national Government and its provincial counterpart in Quebec City have begun to develop a new working relationship, although no one in either capital is prepared to say where it may lead.


Stinginess on Baby Food Will Cost Dearly
LEAD: To the Editor:


T.W.A. May Cut Domestic Flights
LEAD: The chairman of Trans World Airlines Inc., Carl C. Icahn, threatened to eliminate service to seven cities and sell or store 15 aircraft by October under an aggressive plan to reduce the carrier's size and return it to profitability.
Mr.
Icahn said a 7 percent reduction in T.W.A.'s flight hours would be imposed because he had been unsuccessful in obtaining concessions from the airline's 3,500 pilots.


Canada and Quebec Ratings On Debt Are Reaffirmed
LEAD: The collapse over the weekend of Canada's Meech Lake Accord creates an uncertain outlook, but has had no immediate impact on the credit ratings of the Government of Canada or the Province of Quebec, two major ratings agencies said yesterday.


Bridge
LEAD: In bridge as in other areas, political events have severed most international contacts with China.
Since May 1989 no Western bridge groups have visited China and no Chinese experts have competed in tournaments outside their borders.
A bridge column of American authorship has ceased to appear in the country's largest newspaper, People's


Service for Kezia Keeble
LEAD: A service for Kezia Keeble, a former editor of Vogue who became a public-relations executive in the fashion industry, will be held on Friday at 10 A.M. at the All Souls Unitarian Church, Lexington Avenue at 79th Street.
Mrs.
Keeble died on June 15 at the age of 48.





Chronicle
LEAD: LAURA UNGARO, wife of the French fashion designer EMANUEL UNGARO, is a mother.
COSIMA UNGARO was born at the American Hospital in Neuilly, a Paris suburb, but her parents won't say when.


Market Place;   Drop in Risk Seen By Hungary Fund
LEAD: WHEN the Hungarian stock market officially opened last week, Ibusz, the former state-owned travel agency, became the first privatized company to be traded.
The buyers are thrilled.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Southeast Toyota Distributors Inc., Deerfield Beach, Fla., to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS/Pacific, with a budget of $20 million.


Pat on the Back Stretches Across the Hudson
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he would encourage people to talk about Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jesey as a potential Presidential candidate.


Second Key Gene of Immune System is Found
LEAD: SCIENTISTS have found a second key gene of the immune system, a finding that helps explain how the body can rally a swift defense against millions of different viruses, bacteria, parasites and other hostile interlopers.


Two Votes Show Public Is Wary of Tax Increases
LEAD: When voters in California approved higher taxes on gasoline earlier this month, some political analysts said that the vote in the home state of the tax revolt signaled a shift in the national mood toward a new willingness to pay more for services.


Statements by Chinese Dissidents and Beijing
LEAD: Following are the text of a statement by the Chinese dissidents Fang Lizhi and Li Shuxian, as made public by the State Department yesterday and reported by Reuters, and the official New China News Agency's report on their release, as distributed in translation by the press agency:
Statement by


Chess
LEAD: It is natural, though unfair, for the achievements of the middle-aged player to be taken for granted.
His strength is known through hundreds, even thousands of games and first prizes won, whereas the talented young player is a continual surprise because he has not found his level and no one can be sure how high he will go.


Melville Buying Peoples Drug
LEAD: The Melville Corporation, parent of the CVS drugstore chain, said yesterday that it would buy Peoples Drug Stores Inc. for about $330 million in cash, creating one of the biggest drug retailers in the country.


Groups Taking Aid Donations
LEAD:
Adventist Development and Relief International, 12501 Old Columbia Pike, Silver Spring, Md. 20904.
American Jewish World Service, 1290 Avenue of the Americas, 11th Floor, New York, N.Y. 10104.
American Red Cross, Iran Earthquake Disaster, P. O. Box 37243, Washington, D.C. 20013
Americares Foundation, 161 Cherry Street, New Canaan, Conn.


You Can't Expect a Space Station to Be Cheap;   Together to Mars
LEAD: To the Editor:


Slovenia Plans New Charter
LEAD: The Yugoslav federation's republic of Slovenia said today that it would begin work on a new constitution to give it independence, a move bringing the northern republic close to secession, the official press agency Tanyug said. ''This will be the constitution of a sovereign state of Slovenia and not of a federal unit,'' said the Slovene President, Milan Kucan.


China Lets Dissident Leave Haven In U.S. Embassy to Fly to England
LEAD: China allowed its most prominent dissident, Fang Lizhi, to leave his refuge in the United States Embassy in Beijing today and board an American military transport plane for a new life in England.


Stocks Continue Slide; Dow Declines 12.13
LEAD: Stocks slid again yesterday in slow trading, continuing the decline that clipped 78.71 points off the Dow Jones industrial average last week.


Record Earnings Expected at USX
LEAD: The chairman of the USX Corporation, Charles A. Corry, said USX's operating earnings would again be at record levels this year, despite the distraction of the shareholder proxy battle with Carl C. Icahn.
The executive said he expected USX's operating profits this year to be higher than the record $1.6 billion of 1989, fueled by expected strong performances in both the energy and steel businesses.


Japan Eyes Space With Uncertainty, And Confusion
LEAD: TWENTY years after its first tentative steps into space, Japan has formulated ambitious plans but remains mired in confusion over whether it wants to seek a world leadership role in space.


Medication Is Tainted; 4 Die in Same Hospital
LEAD: Four of 24 patients who had heart surgery at a hospital here have died after being exposed to a tainted solution, the authorities say.


15 States Rally Behind Calls for Constitutional Amendment to Add to Their Power
LEAD: With the strong support of the Bush Administration, 15 state legislatures have approved resolutions calling for amending the United States Constitution to give the states more authority in relation to the Federal Government.


Caterpillar Expects Profits to Plunge
LEAD: Caterpillar Inc., the world's largest maker of earth-moving equipment, said today that it expected earnings to plunge because of poor results at its Brazilian unit and high costs from its revamping program and its upgrading of factories.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Airbus Industrie, Paris, the European aircraft consortium, said Iraqi Airways would buy five of its A310-300 jets and would take options on five additional planes, for an undisclosed price.


House Panel, in New York, Debates Voter Eligibility for Puerto Rican Plebiscite


In a Frenzy, Math Enters Age of Electronic Mail
LEAD: IN what can only be described as a feeding frenzy, a mathematical advance went from promising concept to completed result in a matter of weeks through an informal worldwide competition conducted by electronic mail.


Margot Austin; Children's Author, 81
LEAD: Margot Austin, an author and illustrator of children's books, died yesterday at her home in New Fairfield, Conn.
She was 81 years old.


Licensers Accused of Last-Ditch Impropriety
LEAD: The Board of Examiners, the agency that tests New York City's teachers and other educational employees for their licenses, is being torn apart by charges that it rushed through a test to assure job security for some of its supervisors just as the agency was about to go out of business.


Nets Continue to Deal, Trading Hopson to Bulls
LEAD: As they prepared for the National Basketball Association draft tonight, the Nets found time to make another deal yesterday.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-9


Waldron Herzberg, 84, Surrogate and Lawyer
LEAD: Robert Waldron Herzberg, the surrogate in Columbia County, N.Y., from 1963 to 1971 who ruled in an important adoption case, died on Thursday at Monterey Peninsula Hospital in Carmel, Calif.
He was 84 years old and lived in Carmel.


U.S. Is by Far the Homicide Capital of the Industrialized Nations
LEAD: The homicide rate among young men in the United States is 4 to 73 times the rate in other industrialized nations, Federal researchers have reported.
They said firearms were used in three-fourths of the killings in this country and in only one-fourth of those overseas.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Centerbank, Waterbury, Conn., a savings bank, appointed Robert T. Kenney president.


Louisiana Lawmakers Adopt Toughest Anti-Abortion Law in U.S.
LEAD: The Louisiana Legislature today adopted the strictest state abortion law in the nation, prohibiting all abortions except those necessary to save the life of the mother.


Assassin of Robert Kennedy Denied Parole
LEAD: The man who shot Senator Robert F. Kennedy to death 22 years ago was denied parole today for the 13th time.


BUSH NOW CONCEDES A NEED FOR 'TAX REVENUE INCREASES' TO REDUCE DEFICIT IN BUDGET
LEAD: With negotiations on cutting the budget deficit stalled, President Bush today broke with his vow to oppose new taxes and said any agreement with Congress would require ''tax revenue increases.''


Bush's Latest On the Budget
LEAD: Following is the statement issued by President Bush today on deficit-reduction efforts:


Jazz Festival;   Pearl Bailey Elevates Her Philosophical Side
LEAD: ''I'm more of a philosopher than a jazz singer,'' Pearl Bailey reflected the other day. ''When people say, 'Pearl, where did you get your style?' I tell them: 'I have no style.
I just sing songs.' ''


Softening Stand on Spotted Owl, Administration Delays Protection
LEAD: Just four days after the Federal Government declared that the northern spotted owl was a threatened species, the Bush Administration announced today that it was delaying action on a broad plan for protecting the birds and the ancient forests that are their home.


William P. Wright Jr., A Textile Executive, 78
LEAD: William Pelton Wright Jr., a retired textile executive and former chairman of the textile section of the New York Board of Trade, died on Saturday at a nursing home in Suffolk, England.
He was 78 years old and lived in Princeton, N.J.


Eating Well
LEAD: REFLECTING the concerns of many readers who responded to the May 9 Eating Well column on the hazards of salmonella in raw eggs, one reader said he could ''live without chicken sashimi,'' but added plaintively, ''no chocolate mousse, hollandaise, mayonnaise?''


Results Plus
LEAD:
GOLF
Courville Jr. Takes the Ike


Doing Justice to Life;   How to Put Life in the Right to Die
LEAD: ''Today we decide only that one state's practice does not violate the Constitution,'' wrote Justice Sandra Day O'Connor in her concurring opinion in the Cruzan case. ''The more challenging task of crafting appropriate procedures for safeguarding incompetents' liberty interests is entrusted to the 'laboratory' of the states.


Wine Talk
LEAD: IT was just a simple Italian dinner: roast eel, a little ravioli, a nice rack of lamb, cheese, dessert - and 70 wines.
A dozen with the eel, 11 with the ravioli, a dozen more with the lamb and . . . well, you get the picture.


Measure Aids Swap Market
LEAD: Banks and other companies active in the trillion-dollar market for interest rate and currency swaps benefited on Monday when President Bush signed legislation amending bankruptcy laws.
The measure requires bankruptcy courts to recognize the validity of certain agreements used in the swap market.


Republicans Fear a Kiss of Death As Bush Moves His Lips on Taxes
LEAD: In the eyes of many Republicans, President Bush abandoned much more today than his campaign pledge not to raise taxes.
With just a few words, he holstered his party's best tactical weapon in Congressional campaigns this year, a weapon that the Republicans had used to distinguish themselves since the dawn of the


Brazil Plans To Cut Tariffs
LEAD: In a sharp break with its protectionist past, the Brazilian Government announced today that it would open its market to imports, slashing tariffs and cutting subsidies for inefficient domestic industries.


Adobe Systems Profit Up 4%
LEAD: Adobe Systems Inc., whose shares dropped sharply last month when it announced that earnings would be less than expected, today reported second-quarter results that were essentially flat compared with last year.
Adobe, based in Mountain View, Calif., supplies software that controls laser printers.


Zapata Nears Deal To Sell 12 Oil Rigs
LEAD: The Zapata Corporation, an oil services company, said it was close to a deal to sell its 12 offshore drilling rigs.
Zapata's chairman, R. C. Lassiter, said he was optimistic Zapata could complete the sale in four to six weeks, possibly to Norwegian investors whose identities were not disclosed.
He made the comments after the company's annual meeting.


Corrections
LEAD: The Patterns column on the Fashion page yesterday misstated the information telephone number for shopping bargains.
It is (212) 949-SALE.


The Mandel Visit;   Excerpts From Mandela Speech to Joint Meeting of Congress
LEAD: Following are excerpts from Nelson Mandela's speech to a joint meeting of Congress yesterday in Washington, as recorded by The New York Times:


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.31
8.32
9.55
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.80
7.82
8.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.70
7.73
7.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.55
8.60
8.14
30-YR.


Sharpton Defense Declines to Call Witnesses
LEAD: The Rev.
Al Sharpton abruptly rested his case yesterday without calling a single witness in his trial on charges of fraud and grand larceny.


The Stylists Trim, Clients Cut Deals
LEAD: WHEN Maitreya Kadre, a writer, visits the Vidal Sassoon salon in Chicago, she takes along her laptop computer.


Clinging to Unity in Canada
LEAD: Sadly, Canada has failed to resolve the status of Quebec, and in the emotions of the moment there's no telling what may happen next.
Quebec is more likely to seek looser ties with the rest of the country than complete independence.
From the U.S. point of view, some form of continued confederation is greatly preferable to a divorce.


Mets Win in 11th for 8th Victory in a Row
LEAD: When you're going good, you even catch Vince Coleman stealing second base.
And the Mets did that tonight after the sprinting star of the St.
Louis Cardinals had stolen 57 bases in six years without being caught by them.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: For MARC BOHAN, there is life after Dior, and it is in London.
He will become artistic director and designer at the House of Hartnell in September.


First National Has 8.4% of Ultimate
LEAD: The First National International Corporation, a venture-capital holding company based in Midvale, Utah, has acquired an 8.4 percent stake in the Ultimate Corporation and said in a Federal filing that it may seek control of the computer-services concern.
Norman Elowitz, a New York fashion executive who also controls 8.4 percent of Ultimate's shares, said earlier that he was considering seeking control of the company, which is based in East Hanover, N


Minorities Lead in Work Force but Lag in Pay
LEAD: Blacks and members of other minorities now account for more than half of New York City's resident labor force, but they continue to lag behind whites in higher paying jobs, a Labor Department report released yesterday showed.


Movement on the Budget But a Big Gulf to Cross
LEAD: President Bush's statement today backing away from his ''no new taxes'' pledge may have been the political icebreaker needed to get the budget talks with Congress moving.


New Leader Chosen For Lehman College
LEAD: The trustees of the City University of New York on Monday named Dr.
Ricardo R. Fernandez, an assistant vice chancellor at the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee, to be the new president of Herbert H. Lehman College in the Bronx.


Dai-Ichi Seeks 9.6% of Lincoln
LEAD: The Dai-Ichi Mutual Life Insurance Company will acquire a 9.6 percent stake in the Lincoln National Corporation in the biggest investment yet by a Japanese insurer in a United States insurance company, Lincoln announced today.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: WITH produce markets bountiful with local fruits and vegetables, a cook's imagination can run wild.
You can make your own version of pasta primavera using almost any combination of vegetables.


BellSouth License For New Zealand
LEAD: The BellSouth Corporation said it had been awarded one of three licenses to provide cellular telephone service in New Zealand.
Two consortiums identified as Ready Form No. 43 Ltd. and Write or Wrong Ltd. won the other licenses.


E.P.A. Moves to List Smoke As a Cancer-Causing Agent
LEAD: The Federal Environmental Protection Agency says exhaled tobacco smoke should be officially listed as a known cancer-causing agent.


Henry Hocart Wiggins, Publishing Executive, 78
LEAD: Henry Hocart Wiggins, a former assistant director of Columbia University Press, died on Saturday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Medical Center.
He was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.


For Trump, Seeds of a Comeback
LEAD: Donald J. Trump has lost his aura, and a substantial amount of management freedom.
But he has maintained his ownership of 100 percent of his empire.
And in that small victory could lie the seeds of a comeback for the battered developer.


Antitrusts Break for Insurers Helps Consumers;   Industry Is Sound
LEAD: To the Editor:


Market Place;   Lindner Promise: A Delicate Game
LEAD: NEARLY three years ago, when the Cincinnati financier Carl H. Lindner took control of the old Taft Broadcasting Company, $125 million of bonds were sold with the promise that holders would be able to get their money back, plus interest, in 1990.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
June 22
June 15
June 23
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
2.9
Gasoline stocks
216.2
216.6
218.8
Distillate stocks
109.8
107.4
99.1
Crude imports, daily
6.5
7.0
6.3
Product imports, daily
3.0
2.3
1.8
Crude stocks
383.9
384.4
342.4
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
87.6
88.1
90.1


Gerard Appy, 69, Dies; A Public-TV Executive
LEAD: Gerard Appy, for nearly two decades an executive at WNET, the major New York public television station, died on Sunday at his home in Lake Oswego, outside Portland, Ore.
He was 69 years old.


Family-School Partnership Has Been Working in New York City;   Examples of Readiness
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Mandela Visit;   Europe Keeps The Sanctions
LEAD: The European Community decided today not to lift sanctions against South Africa, despite pressure from Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain to relax them.


About New York;   Social Intrigues Of Baby Sitters Shape the Future
LEAD: Hilda is from Barbados and Julia from St.
Vincent, and they met when the children they watch, Jessie and Max, started playing together in Central Park's 85th Street playground.
The baby sitters heard each other's accent and knew they were from kindred islands.


I.R.A. Says It Bombed Tory Club in London
LEAD: The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility today for a bomb that heavily damaged an exclusive London club used by members of Britain's Conservative Party.


Review/Film;   Tom Cruise and Cars, and a Lot of Them
LEAD: For weeks it has been practically impossible to ride a bus or read a billboard without being made aware that Tom Cruise would be doing something of apparently great import today.
The ubiquitous ads for ''Days of Thunder,'' Mr.
Cruise's new car-racing film, have flatly declared that Mr.
Cruise would be ''like thunder,'' as if he didn't even need a verb.


Yanks Beat Brewers, 8-2


Research Grants Overrated on Campus
LEAD: To the Editor:


Radius Combines TV and Computer
LEAD: Radius Inc., a San Jose, Calif., company that makes high-resolution screens for personal computers, introduced a system that will allow Apple Computer Inc.'s Macintosh computer to display and process television signals.
Called RadiusTV, the system includes a video processor board that mounts inside any Macintosh


The Mandela Visit;   Mandela Invokes Struggles Of U.S., Rousing Congress
LEAD: Frequently interrupted by applause, Nelson Mandela invoked the names of American heroes as his revolutionary inspiration at a joint meeting of Congress today, warning that South Africa ''continues to bleed and suffer pain'' under apartheid.


Theodore Mander, 64, Insurance Executive
LEAD: Theodore Lionel Mander, an insurance company officer who was active in British-American affairs, died on Sunday.
He was 64 years old and lived in Pine Plains, N.Y.


BUSH CUTS BACK AREAS OFF COASTS OPEN FOR DRILLING
LEAD: Seeking to break a long deadlock with Congress over offshore oil and gas drilling, President Bush today sharply reduced the offshore acreage available to the industry for at least the next decade.


Dollar in a Broad Decline; Gold Prices Down in U.S.
LEAD: The dollar declined against all leading currencies yesterday after the markets became pessimistic about Congress reaching a budget accord, traders said.


$775 Million Bond Offering From Dormitory Authority
LEAD: The Dormitory Authority of the State of New York offered $775 million of bonds for the City University of New York yesterday.


Open Positions on Short Sales Rose 4.5%, Nasdaq Reports
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers yesterday reported a 4.5 percent increase in the short interest in actively traded over-the-counter securities in its national market system for the four weeks that ended in mid-June.


Food Notes
LEAD:
A Spice Mountain


U.S. Judge Assails School Officials for Neglect of Handicapped
LEAD: A Federal judge castigated New York City school officials yesterday for their ''stubborn failure'' to provide appropriate education for handicapped children.


Senate Roll-Call Vote on Flag Burning
LEAD: Following is the 58-to-42 roll-call vote by which the Senate failed today to garner the necessary two-thirds vote to pass a constitutional amendment to outlaw flag desecration.
A ''yes'' vote was a vote to amend the Constitution and a ''no'' vote was a vote to leave it intact.
Voting ''yes'' were 20 Democrats and 38 Republicans.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in the Sports section on Sunday about the New York Rangers' trade of Chris Nilan linked him erroneously to the injury to Pat LaFontaine of the New York Islanders during the Stanley Cup hockey playoffs.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page headline yesterday about the Supreme Court's ''right to die'' decision described the majority opinion imprecisely.
The Court ruled that a state could require clear proof of a patient's intent; it did not itself impose such a requirement.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Dr.
KARL A. MENNINGER, one of the founders of modern psychiatry, is being treated for abdominal cancer.
Dr.
Menninger, whose 97th birthday is July 22, was in fair condition yesterday at Stormont-Vail Regional Medical Center in Topeka, Kan.


Fernandez Bars a Choice To Run District
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday rejected one of three candidates to be superintendent of District 19 in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Fernandez based his decision on what he said was the official's flawed leadership as a principal and his personal conduct.


3 Teen-Agers Are Shot in Brooklyn During Wait for School Yearbooks
LEAD: Three teen-agers were shot yesterday in a dispute outside a Brooklyn intermediate school, the police said.
The dispute appeared to begin as eighth graders at the school were waiting to receive their yearbooks.


Japan G.N.P. Forecasts Up
LEAD: Several of Japan's most prestigious private research institutes have raised their forecasts for the country's economic growth for the year that ends on March 31, 1991.


Putting Computer Chips in a New Light
LEAD: Computer chips are indispensable for controlling everything from chemical processes at refineries to the rudders and flaps of the newest aircraft, but they must be powered by electricity carried in wires.
The wires sometimes create sparks, an explosion hazard, or pick up radio-frequency interference that disrupts the microchip.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD:
SUMMER CAMP
The dock has survived
last December's windy chill.
The sun has gone down
three hundred more times
on the cabins on the hill.
Once more the turn has come
for lunch call, story hour,
swimming and craft skills;
routines endlessly repeated,
endlessly practiced
that yet retain their thrill.


Evolution in Europe;   European Leaders Back Kohl's Plea to Aid Soviets
LEAD: Leaders of the European Community, under pressure from Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany to help speed German unification, agreed today on steps that he requested to reassure the Soviet Union.


Senior Open Is for Shot-Makers and Par-Breakers
LEAD: Now that Hale Irwin has proved that a 45-year-old can win the United States Open, then turn around and beat most of the same youngsters again the very next week, perhaps the feats of those 50 and older should be better appreciated.


Liberty to Reject Life
LEAD: The framers of the Constitution, who prohibited the Government from depriving a person of ''life'' or ''liberty'' without due process of law, had little reason to envision a day when the very act of sustaining life might itself be a deprivation of liberty.


Evolution in Europe;   Lithuanian in Moscow For Gorbachev Meeting
LEAD: President Vytautas Landsbergis of Lithuania met President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today, hours before Lithuania's Parliament was due to consider freezing the rebel republic's independence declaration.


Banks Approve Loans for Trump, But Take Control of His Finances
LEAD: Wrapping up a hard-fought deal with bankers yesterday, Donald J. Trump narrowly avoided missing a payment deadline that could have led to personal bankruptcy.


Senate and Administration Agree on Housing Bill
LEAD: Senate and Administration negotiators said today that they had reached agreement on a bill that would revive the Federal role in housing by changing provisions that had prompted the threat of a veto by President Bush.


Treasuries Rally on Tax Vow
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities moved higher and interest rates fell in nervous trading yesterday, as dealers juggled a promise from President Bush and the onset of a flood of new Treasury issues.


A.M.A. Assails Nation's Export Policy on Tobacco
LEAD: A dramatic increase in smoking worldwide has been fostered by American trade policies that ignore the health problems associated with tobacco, the American Medical Association has asserted.


Eleanor Clark French, 81, Editor And a Democratic Party Official
LEAD: Eleanor Clark French, a writer, editor and former vice chairwoman of the New York State Democratic Committee, died on Monday in Paoli, Pa.
She was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Many in Poll See Worsening in Race Relations
LEAD: New Yorkers say race relations in their city are bad and getting worse, according to a New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.


Town Blames Avarice for Earthquake Deaths
LEAD: In this center of farming and light industry along the Caspian Sea, not everyone is persuaded that the country's ordeal is the ''divine test'' that many Iranians believe has been visited on them by the earthquake that struck here Thursday.


Matching Those Who Need Guidance With Those Who Have Been There
LEAD: For at least part of a day, Tacuma Russell will escape the somber shambles of his struggling neighborhood in the Roxbury section of Boston.
Today, to celebrate the boy's 14th birthday, a Boston University sophomore will drive him two hours along Interstate 90 to an amusement park, where the two plan to enjoy roller coaster rides and blue clouds of cotton candy.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Atari Games Corp., Milpitas, Calif., a privately held video game company, said it would repurchase its stock currently held by Namco America Inc., a manufacturer of video games.


Farley Behind on Pepperell Debt Payments
LEAD: William Farley, the Chicago entrepreneur who used debt to build an industrial empire, could lose control of his prize, West Point-Pepperell Inc., the Georgia textile company said.


Adm. Robert B. Carney, 95, Dies; Former Chief of Naval Operations
LEAD: Adm.
Robert B. Carney, a retired Chief of Naval Operations and former commander in chief of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization forces in Southern Europe, died on Monday at his home in Washington.
He was 95 years old.


Let's Outlaw C.I.A.-Style Covert Action Before It Destroys Us
LEAD: To the Editor:


Syria Rejects Shamir's Call On Peace Talks in Jerusalem
LEAD: Syria has rejected an invitation from Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel to President Hafez al-Assad to go to Jerusalem for peace talks, calling the gesture 'a trick.'


Pirates Defeat Phillies On Bell's Single in 8th
LEAD: Bob Patterson and two Pittsburgh relievers ran Philadelphia's scoreless streak to 22 innings tonight, and Jay Bell's eighth-inning single drove in the only run as the Pirates beat the Phillies, 1-0.


Fixing The 'Ring'
LEAD: Dear Herr Wagner: We have studied your so-called ''Ring'' cycle of four operas, all 17 hours of it, and propose the following changes to make it suitable viewing for Americans: 1.
Rewrite opening to eliminate the insensitive treatment of dwarfs embodied in the character of the dwarf Alberich.
The Rhine Maidens' calling him ugly and toadlike is offensive to dwarfs, as is the suggestion that a dwarf cannot be sexually interesting to mermaids.


McEnroe Makes an Early Exit at Wimbledon
LEAD: Frail, pale and stale, John McEnroe reverted to a formlessness he hadn't shown at Wimbledon since 1978 as he was eliminated today in the first round for only the second time in a career he is stubbornly refusing to identify as endangered.


Japan's Military Machine
LEAD: The flap over the illegal transfer of ''Star Wars''-related software to four Japanese companies, all of them tied into the Japanese aerospace sector, underscores the growing pressures on the longstanding U.S.-Japanese security relationship.


Man Arrested in Death Of a 10-Year-Old Girl
LEAD: A 21-year-old from Brooklyn was arrested on Monday and charged in the death of a 10-year-old struck by a stray bullet while she was shopping with her mother on Flatbush Avenue on Saturday, the police said.


Guards at 16 Stations To Check on Fares
LEAD: The Transit Authority said yesterday that beginning today it would assign guards at 16 subway stations to discourage people from boarding trains without paying and from vandalizing turnstiles in an effort to steal tokens.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
Sundays in New York


Turner Broadcasting
LEAD: Turner Broadcasting System Inc. said yesterday that it had asked shareholders to approve an increase in its authorized common stock to 75 million class A shares, from 25 million, and to 300 million class B shares, from 150 million.
John Reidy, an analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham, said authorizing the new shares would increase the stock's marketability.


Not Near Enough
LEAD: To The Living Section:


England Scores in Overtime to Advance to Quarterfinals
LEAD: The goal finally came not quite 30 minutes from the time the squadrons of police moved into the aisles of Dall'Ara stadium tonight.
Barely 20 seconds remained in the half-hour overtime when Steve Platt scored to put England into the quarterfinals of the World Cup.


Harry C. Grumpelt, Accountant, 82
LEAD: Harry Crockett Grumpelt, a former partner in the accounting firm of Arthur Young, died on Monday at his home in Salisbury, Conn.
He was 82 years old.


Stock of Motorola Off on Phone Plan
LEAD: The stock of Motorola Inc. dropped sharply after the company announced plans to build a $2.3 billion world cellular telephone network using satellites.
Shares in Motorola fell $3.125 each in New York Stock Exchange trading, to close at $81.
Tony G. Langham, an electronics industry analyst at County NatWest U.S.A., a New


Successful Operation
LEAD: Dr.
James Andrews, who performed arthroscopic surgery on Charles Barkley's right shoulder Monday, found more damage than had been expected, but pronounced the operation a success and said the Philadelphia 76er forward should recover fully.
Dr.
Andrews removed a bone spur during the two-hour operation in Birmingham, Ala., and also repaired ligaments.


Company Takeover, Tokyo Style
LEAD: If Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd., the maker of Subaru automobiles, were an American company it would probably be a prime takeover target these days, a slowly dying auto maker forced to merge or eventually face bankruptcy.


Abortion Ruling Likely to Spur Judicial Hearings
LEAD: Monday's Supreme Court decisions on parental notification for teen-age girls seeking abortions are likely to lead to thousands of court hearings every year in which girls under 18 ask permission from a judge to have an abortion rather than tell their parents.


At the Nations Table
LEAD: THE Peacham Store, a classic-looking general store in this classic Vermont village, offers a menu of takeout foods steeped in tradition: Transylvanian goulash, juliette soup and stuffed peppers, to name a few.
The tradition is Hungarian, and it was brought to this small town in Vermont's Northeast Kingdom by Desi and Kati Kegl-Bognar.


Rabbi Wolfe Kelman, 66, Leader In Judaism's Conservative Branch
LEAD: Rabbi Wolfe Kelman, a major leader of Conservative Judaism for four decades who helped professionalize the American rabbinate and pave the way for the ordination of women as rabbis, died yesterday at the New York University Medical Center.
He was 66 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Robert Bower, Social Scientist, 81
LEAD: Robert Bower, founder of the Washington-based Bureau of Social Science Research, died on Friday at his home in Washington.
He was 71 years old.


Doing Justice to Life;   For the Cruzans, Pain; for Principle, a Triumph
LEAD: The right to live free includes the right to die.
That's the bold yet prudent finding from the Supreme Court.
Constitutional liberty includes a right to refuse medical attention even when that could prolong or save one's life.


2 Tell of Gang Terror Before Rape of Jogger
LEAD: Two bicycle riders described their terror as they were confronted in Central Park by a gang of youths who the police say minutes later raped and viciously beat a jogger.


The Mandela Visit;   Far Rightists Meet de Klerk in Pretoria and Come Away Dissatisfied
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk confronted a delegation from the far right of white South Africa's political spectrum today and left its angry representatives convinced that he was determined to share some power with the African National Congress.


Son, 27, Is Arrested In Parents' Deaths
LEAD: A Staten Island couple were slain in their home and dismembered yesterday, and their 27-year-old son was arrested shortly after the bodies were found, the police said.


Saatchi Acts To Change Its Culture
LEAD: AFTER a year as president and chief operating officer of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York, Michael Keeshan says he is happy with some of the changes he has made, although the agency ''still has a long way to go.''


Woman, 44, Is Killed In an Apartment Fire
LEAD: A 44-year-old woman was killed yesterday in a fire in her Harlem apartment, the police said.


Antitrust Break for Insurers Helps Consumers;   Mutual Life Elections
LEAD: To the Editor:


Yanks Turn On Power To Rout the Brewers
LEAD: The Yankees, who have experienced some power shortages at the plate this season, waited out a 16-minute light failure at Yankee Stadium last night, then went on to provide some impressive power in a five-run eighth inning and score an 8-2 victory over the Milwaukee Brewers.


F.D.A. Approves Heart Drug Made by Soviets
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration has approved a drug developed in the Soviet Union to treat potentially fatal irregular heart rhythms, and experts said today that the medicine was likely to become a primary treatment for the condition because of its low rate of adverse effects.


Accounting Merger Deal
LEAD: Price Waterhouse, a large accounting firm that recently picked up the Toronto affiliate of Laventhol &amp; Horwath, a midsized rival, said yesterday it is also in merger talks with Laventhol's Vancouver affiliate.


Evolution in Europe;   Soviet Communists Weigh Delaying Congress to Stem Conservatives
LEAD: The Soviet Communist Party is debating whether to delay its important nationwide congress next week, in an attempt to hold back a conservative uprising that is already driving disenchanted liberals from the party.


English Fans Expelled
LEAD: The Italian police rounded up 246 English soccer fans and expelled them from the country today after riots shook this seaside resort.
The fans were sent to London on an airliner chartered by the Italian Government.


Curfew in Zambian Capital
LEAD: The Zambian Government, struggling to quell food riots in the capital, imposed a curfew today as the death toll from two days of disturbances rose to 14.
Thousands of policemen and soldiers patrolled Lusaka all day after four people were killed in rioting on Monday.


Recording Academy To Protest Restraints
LEAD: The National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, the organization that gives the Grammy Awards, is planning a concert and march in Washington this summer to protest Government restraints on free expression.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: CHEYENNE BRANDO has fled to Tahiti to avoid testifying against her half-brother CHRISTIAN BRANDO, who the police said shot and killed her boyfriend last month at the home of their father, MARLON BRANDO.
STEVEN BARSHOP, a Deputy District Attorney, told a Los Angeles judge on Monday that he would try to use a new California law to introduce previous statements from Miss Brando at a preliminary hearing on


Mandela Addresses Joint Meeting of Congress


INSIDE
LEAD:
Some Iranians Balking At Aid From Enemies
Debate raged within the Iranian Government over the propriety of accepting earthquake relief aid from what are seen as Teheran's enemies, like the United States, Iraq and the novelist Salman Rushdie.
Page A3.
What Happened at the Met?
Executives and employees of the Metropolitan Opera said that Hugh Southern's resignation as general manager last week was in fact a dismissal.


Europe Prices Up 0.4%
LEAD: Consumer prices in the European Community rose an average of four-tenths of a percent last month from April, Eurostat, the European statistics office, said on Monday.
Despite the increase, the annual inflation rate in the 12-nation community held steady in May at a provisional 5.4 percent.
The highest jump from April to May, 3 percent, was in Greece, where the annual inflation rate rose to 21 percent - the highest in the community - from 17.9 percent a month earlier.


The Azzurri Make Italy Shut Down
LEAD: It is literally etched on stone walls that Trattoria Luigi always closes on Monday and Trattoria Pesole always closes on Tuesday.


Continental Bank Plans Staff Cuts
LEAD: The Continental Bank Corporation announced today that it planned to reduce its staff by 900 employees.
It said it would establish a $50 million reserve to cover the costs and would have a loss for the second quarter as a result.





To Eat Broccoli, Be Cunning
LEAD: The broccoli issue continues to follow President Bush, judging from some culinary advice he has gotten in the mail.


Antitrust Break for Insurers Helps Consumers
LEAD: To the Editor:


HELP FOR WOMAN IN COMA IS ASKED
LEAD: Missouri's Attorney General today urged state lawmakers to try again to pass a bill that could resolve the case of Nancy Cruzan, the comatose woman whose life-sustaining treatment was upheld by the Supreme Court on Monday.


Book Notes
LEAD:
'Zodiac' Sales


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We could not have known of your Declaration of Independence and not elected to join in the struggle to guarantee the people's life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.''
- Nelson Mandela.
[A11:2.]


Right-to-Die Bill Blocked in New York State
LEAD: The Supreme Court's decision in its first ''right to die'' case reinforces the need for a New York State law allowing adults to designate a surrogate to make health-care choices for them if they become incompetent, according to supporters of such legislation.


Board of Estimate Votes Lower Fresh Kills Fees
LEAD: The Board of Estimate, reversing New York City's commitment to prolong the life of the Fresh Kills landfill, has moved to attract more garbage to the huge dump on Staten Island.


Nuggets Interest Daly
LEAD: Although Chuck Daly, the Detroit Piston coach, had previously showed little interest in becoming the general manager of the Denver Nuggets, he now says he would like to be considered for the job.


Books of The Times;   Havel Discusses Writers and Politics
LEAD:
Disturbing the Peace
A Conversation with Karel Hvizdala
By Vaclav Havel
Translated and with an introduction by Paul Wilson. 228 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Steinbrenner Report to Stay Private
LEAD: George Steinbrenner has not nor will he have access to a report compiled by the baseball commissioner's investigator, John Dowd.
But the owner of the Yankees should not have any surprises awaiting him when the findings are presented in a formal hearing on July 5.


Investors Skeptical On Lease Finance
LEAD: Investors of the American International Group Inc. reacted with skepticism to the planned acquisition of the International Lease Finance Corporation, but analysts have not changed their strong ratings on American International's stock. ''We had been recommending purchase of A.I.G. stock before the merger and we continue to do so,' said Denis Callaghan, an analyst with Alex.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Life Without Parole Urged by Cuomo
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo called yesterday for the State Senate's Republican majority to agree to life-without-parole prison sentences for drug dealers who kill.


Corrections
LEAD: The Peripherals column in Science Times yesterday misstated the telephone number of Lexpertise Linguistic Software, publisher of a text-checking program called MacProof.


Marcos Was Not a Thief, Defense Says in Summation
LEAD: Imelda Marcos ''has committed no crime except the crime of loving a man for 35 years, of raising his children, of being his First Lady, of being his ardent supporter, of taking his lavish gifts,'' Mrs.
Marcos's lawyer told the jury in his closing statement at her racketeering trial yesterday.


$400 Million Issue By Dayton Hudson
LEAD: The Dayton Hudson Corporation yesterday offered a total of $400 million worth of securities in two parts.
Half of the issue matures on July 1, 2002.
The 9 3/4 percent 12-year notes were priced at 100, which is 1.25 percentage points over the prevailing yield on the 8 7/8 percent 10-year notes at the time of pricing.


Princeton to Receive $21 Million From Laurance Rockefeller
LEAD: Laurance S. Rockefeller has pledged $21 million to Princeton University for the creation of a Center for Human Values, which will convene a range of specialists to study broad ethical questions, university officials announced yesterday.


George Nakashima Service
LEAD: A service for George Nakashima, the woodworker and designer, will be held tomorrow at 11 A.M. in the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street.
Mr.
Nakashima died on June 15 at the age of 85.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Goya Foods Inc., to Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, for its English-language advertising, with an estimated budget of $3 million.


Review/Television;   A Script, Some Actors And Sounds, Soulfully
LEAD: Here's one handy recipe for a made-for-cable movie.
First, you get a wailing saxophone, the kind that can make any situation seem hauntingly soulful.
Then you find a serviceable script requiring only three or four principal roles and not much in the way of production values.
Finally, hire actors who while far from being big stars have modest reputations.


How Distinct Is Quebec? French, and That's That
LEAD: The stop signs here all say ''arret.'' French Canadians have their own national holidays, their own music videos, their own literature.
They drink wine at lunch and still smoke with abandon in cafes, offices and public elevators.


COOKS ON THE MAP - This Month: Leah Chase, New Orleans;   A Lover of Food Who Nurtured a New Orleans Institution
LEAD: AT 67, an age when many of her peers have gone contentedly out to pasture, or at least to the golf course, Leah Chase is still happiest in the kitchen of Dooky Chase's Restaurant on the edge of the Treme section of this city.
There she continues to turn out memorable platters of traditional Creole food, as she has since the early 1950's.


Evolution in Europe;   Warily, East Germany Stores Itself Away
LEAD: The current task of Teterow's biggest employer is to work itself out of a job.
But then that's what most of East Germany is doing these days.


Dow Falls 2.72, to 2,842.33, After a Surge
LEAD: President Bush's willingness to consider a tax increase to help cut the deficit gave stocks a brief shot in the arm yesterday, but the market fell late in the day as investors decided to wait for further developments.


'Scene' Restaurants Trade Their Hype for Longevity
LEAD: TEN waiters, six busboys and three hosts huddled near the front door of the Tribeca Grill.
The chef gave them a pep talk about the night's specials; the waiters scribbled notes.
A host issued a reservations reconnaissance report; the waiters nodded, checking their pens, their corkscrews, their fingernails, their watches.


CUNY Teacher Tells of Shooting Bronx Neighbor
LEAD: Sobbing uncontrollably, a Puerto Rican art professor testified yesterday that he shot his Italian-American neighbor last year while struggling for a gun he drew after the man attacked him and used an ethnic slur.


Savings-Unit Indictments
LEAD: The former chairman and three top executives of Midwest Federal Savings and Loan were indicted today on Federal fraud and conspiracy charges involving financial losses at the failed institution.


Bandoneon and Piano in a Quintet
LEAD: The Knitting Factory Goes Uptown series at the Equitable Auditorium offered modest pleasures on Monday afternoon - puckish, affable duets by Karl Berger on vibraphone and Cameron Browne on bass, and the ardent tone of the Argentine bandoneon (accordion) in a quintet led by the pianist Evan Lurie.


Tape of Barry Is Used to Rebut Defense
LEAD: Prosecutors in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug trial put the defendant on the stand today via a tape-recording in an effort to prove the most serious charges against him: that he lied to a grand jury about drug use.


Fertilizer Fumes Kill 2
LEAD: A farm owner and a worker died on Monday after being overcome by fertilizer fumes in a tank on a truck in Salem County, the state police said.
The owner, James Manganaro, 31 years old, of Woodstown, and the worker, Stephen Hitchner, 29, of Williamstown, were found unconscious at 6:15 P.M., the police said.


Met Officials Say Southern Was Dismissed
LEAD: Hugh Southern's resignation as general manager of the Metropolitan Opera, announced on Friday and effective this Sunday, was in fact a dismissal, executives and employees of the company say.


The Vatican Warns Catholic Theologians Over Public Dissent
LEAD: In its strongest and most comprehensive statement on the topic, the Vatican told Roman Catholic theologians yesterday that they had no right to dissent publicly from official church teachings, even those not considered infallible or explicitly based on divine revelation.


Israel Not So Clear Now on Settling of Soviet Jews
LEAD: A disagreement appeared to break out today among the leaders of Israel's new Government over whether Soviet Jewish immigrants would be settled in the occupied territories.
The dispute adds further confusion to Housing Minister Ariel Sharon's statement on Sunday night that the migrants would not be settled in occupied land.


Temperature in Phoenix Reaches 122 as Southwest Heat Wave Continues


Chrysler, in Shift, to Buy Dollar Car Rental
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation agreed today to buy Dollar Rent A Car Systems Inc., one of the last large rental-car companies not already owned by an auto maker.


Johnson's Status in Limbo
LEAD: Ben Johnson's status remained in limbo today after the release of a report by the Canadian Government's inquiry into drugs in sport.


Cable System Seeks Link With CBS
LEAD: On the eve of renewed debate on a House bill to re-regulate cable television, Continental Cablevision Inc., a cable company based in Boston, said yesterday that it had requested CBS network affiliation for its cable system in Concord, N.H.


New York Acts to Take Over Co-op
LEAD: New York City housing officials have moved to take over a publicly subsidized, middle-income housing cooperative on Manhattan's Upper West Side, where auditors accused the co-op's board of engaging in ''irresponsible behavior.''


Reward Is Offered In 'Zodiac' Attacks
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday announced a $10,000 reward for information leading to the arrest of a man who calls himself Zodiac and who the police say has shot four people this year, killing one of them.


Bridge
LEAD: Some of the most dramatic hands in the game arise when a partnership reaches a hopeless contract by overbidding and brings it home.


Citibank Visa Offers Long-Distance Calls
LEAD: A bitter struggle for credit card customers between the nation's largest telephone company and the nation's biggest bank took a new turn yesterday, when Citibank announced that it would offer long-distance telephone service to its 14.5 million Visa cardholders.


Hewlett's P.C. Boss Takes Post at Apple
LEAD: Robert Puette, the head of the Hewlett-Packard Company's personal computer operations, has been named president of Apple Computer Inc.'s U.S.A. division, filling a key vacancy at the Cupertino, Calif., personal computer company.


Killing the Rights of the Condemned
LEAD: Congress, which is on the verge of drastically curtailing Federal appeals by death row inmates, might first want to consider the strange case of a condemned killer, Warren McCleskey - if it cares at all about fairness.


G.M. Plans Project In Czechoslovakia
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it was developing plans to make up to 250,000 automobile transmissions a year in Czechoslovakia.
A statement said that the company was working on the project with the Czechoslovak Government and that the transmissions would be exported to G.M. plants elsewhere in


Museum Company Chief Mixes Art and Finance
LEAD: Floyd Hall made one of the last great fortunes from the leveraged-buyout craze when he and some investors borrowed $750 million to buy Grand Union, the supermarket chain that Mr.
Hall was running, and sold the company one year later for a $350 million pretax profit.


Toxic Waste: Bacteria to the Rescue
LEAD: In H. G. Wells's ''The War of the Worlds,'' invaders from Mars crushed the most powerful weapons the panicked human race could throw at them and were on the brink of total conquest when they were wiped out by the humblest of earthly organisms - bacteria.
Now, bacteria are being embraced as potentially potent allies in a more realistic battle against a growing number of hazardous wastes in soil and water.


Kurri May Play in Italy
LEAD: Jari Kurri of the Edmonton Oilers, who holds the National Hockey League record for most playoff goals with 92 in 146 games, announced yesterday that he was close to signing a multiyear contract to play hockey in Italy next season.
The deal with the Milan Devils would reportedly make Kurri Europe's highest-paid player.


Iran Debates Accepting Quake Relief From Enemies
LEAD: Debate raged today within the Iranian Government and in newspapers over the propriety of accepting earthquake relief aid from what are seen as this nation's enemies, including the United States, Iraq and the novelist Salman Rushdie.


Killers Are Executed in 2 States
LEAD: A killer who disdained the efforts of ''do-gooders'' who tried to save him was put to death in Texas early yesterday, hours after Arkansas executed a mass murderer.


Frey, Zimmer Extended
LEAD: The Chicago Cubs may be in last place in the National League East, but there is good news for General Manager Jim Frey and Manager Don Zimmer.
The club has extended Frey's contract through 1992 and has picked up the option on Zimmer's pact through 1991.


Family-School Partnership Has Been Working in New York City
LEAD: To the Editor:


Senate Rejects New Move to Outlaw Flag Burning
LEAD: The Senate rejected a constitutional amendment against flag burning today with critics arguing that it was already dead and being debated largely as ammunition for use against them at election time.


Moscow Denies It Is Moving Nuclear Arms From Regions
LEAD: The Soviet Union denied today that it was removing nuclear weapons from the Baltic republics and other sensitive regions.


Hungarians Would Quit Bloc
LEAD: Legislators instructed Hungary's first post-Communist Government today to negotiate the country's withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact.
By 232 to 0, with 4 abstentions, Parliament backed moves begun by the Government at a meeting of the Soviet-led alliance in Moscow on June 7 and 8.
Defense Minister Lajos Fur said then that Hungary would not take part in Warsaw Pact maneuvers this year and wanted to leave the organization by late 1991.


Manila Looks Into Airline
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino of the Philippines ordered an investigation today into the operations of Philippine Airlines following accusations that the state-run company might have lost millions of dollars because of irregularities by its officials.


Scot Haller, Magazine Writer, 35
LEAD: Scot Haller, a senior editor of People magazine and chief of its Los Angeles bureau, died Sunday at the Sherman Oaks Community Hospital in California.
He was 35 years old and lived in Los Angeles.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JOHN SHERMAN COOPER was the honored guest Monday night at the American Film Institute in Washington for a screening of ''Gentleman From Kentucky,'' a Kentucky Educational Television documentary profiling the 50-year career of the 89-year-old former United States Senator, Ambassador and Presidential adviser.


Evolution in Europe;   Hard Times Discounted
LEAD: The West German Finance Minister warned in a speech here today against predictions of a wave of bankruptcies and mass unemployment after the introduction of the West German currency on Sunday and the formal end of this country's 45-year-old centrally planned economy.


Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts Loan to RJR Renegotiated
LEAD: As part of the proposed revamping of RJR Nabisco Inc., partners of Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company have renegotiated how they will be repaid a $500 million bridge loan they made to the company when their firm took RJR private in 1989.


Sanchez Vicario Falls; Graf Wins With Poise
LEAD: In contrast to the men's portion of the opening Wimbledon proceedings, where seeded players made their worst showing since 1927, the plethora of women's first-round matches played today produced just one major upset, that of Arantxa Sanchez Vicario.
There was also a minor one that quickened the local pulse as Sarah Gomer of England knocked off eighth-seeded Manuela


Canseco Set to Become Highest-Paid Player
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics will announce today that Jose Canseco has signed a five-year contract that makes the star outfielder the highest-paid player in baseball, his agent said yesterday.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
COMPANIES
Donald Trump narrowly avoided missing a payment deadline that could have led to personal bankruptcy.
But the hard-fought deal with bankers comes at a humbling cost: He has been forced to cede management control over his multibillion-dollar empire, at least temporarily, to the bankers who came to his rescue.


Caterpillar's Stock In Another Plunge
LEAD: The stock of Caterpillar Inc. plunged again after the the world's largest construction equipment manufacturer announced on Monday that its second-quarter earnings would drop at least 50 percent from the first quarter.
Caterpillar's stock fell $6 a share today, to $52.50, on the New York Stock Exchange after a fall of $5 on Monday.


Weather Forecast Lowers Corn and Soybean Prices
LEAD: Corn and soybean futures prices fell modestly yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade, giving up some of the previous session's sharp gains as fears of an extended Midwestern heat wave faded.
Wheat futures advanced slightly.
In other commodity markets, cocoa futures surged and energy futures retreated.


Money Fund Yields Drop
LEAD: Bank yields on short-term certificates of deposit and money market accounts fell in the week ended yesterday.
It was the fourth consecutive weekly drop.
And banks in the New York area again showed larger declines in yields than those nationally.


White House Moves to Limit Cuts in Salvador Military Aid
LEAD: To avert even deeper cuts in military aid to El Salvador, the Bush Administration is quietly telling Congress that it would accept a 15 to 30 percent reduction in the $85 million requested for next year.


S.&amp;P. Downgrades Ratings for Chase
LEAD: The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said yesterday that it had downgraded its ratings on several kinds of debt of the Chase Manhattan Bank.
The move follows similar action by Moody's Investors Service Inc. two weeks ago.


Prague Journal;   Ghosts of Old Heroes Inhabit a New Czech Paper
LEAD: Of the barrage of new newspapers and magazines, from religious to erotic, that the revolution of last November has unloosed in Czechoslovakia, one daily stands apart.
Instead of being raw with newness and struggling for a place in a bewildering spectrum of newly liberated opinion, it wears the patina of tradition and carries the weight of exceptional respectability.


Economic Scene;   Broader Medicaid: Who Would Pay?
LEAD: A RECENT Supreme Court decision is expected to add to growing pressure for changes in Medicaid.
The Court ruled on June 14 that hospitals and nursing homes can file lawsuits to demand ''reasonable and adequate reimbursement'' for their services to Medicaid patients.


New Jersey Talks Taxes
LEAD: Everywhere New Jerseyans gather, they discuss the state's new $2.8 billion tax package, the largest rise in the state's history.
Page B1.


Saudis Expand Market For Development Bonds
LEAD: Saudi Arabia has offered its state bonds to foreign investors in a policy turnaround aimed at widening its secondary market for the securities, bankers said today.


Broadway Adopts A Plan to Cut Costs And Ticket Prices
LEAD: Broadway producers, theater owners, craft guilds and unions announced final agreement yesterday on a plan to cut costs and ticket prices to encourage the production of more plays and to develop new audiences.


New Jersey Talks Taxes And Anxiety
LEAD: At train stations, barber shops, pizza parlors and on street corners, wherever New Jerseyans gather, the talk has turned to taxes, and the largest tax increase in the state's history.


Beer Without the Tears
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Harley-Davidson
LEAD: Harley-Davidson Inc., one of the last United States motorcycle manufacturers, is focusing on the overseas market to increase sales.
Harley's chairman, Vaughn L. Beals Jr., said the Milwaukee-based company had adopted the manufacturing methods of its Japanese competitors and had now found its biggest export market in Japan.


Princeton to Get Center


Cadwell Davis
LEAD: The latest product to take an environmental advertising approach is the tampon.
Next week Cadwell Davis Partners will begin a campaign for O.B.
Tampons, made by Johnson &amp; Johnson, that highlights what the tampon does not have: an applicator. ''No applicator to throw away means no waste,'' the commercial says.


Corrections
LEAD: The chart of major financial indicators at the top of the Business Digest on Monday misstated the previous week's activity.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 2,857.18, down 78.71 points for the week; the dollar ended at 154.90 yen, up 1 yen; gold closed at $350.40 an ounce, up 90 cents, and the 30-year Treasury bond ended at 8.47 percent, up five-hundredths of 1 percent.


Recalling Mickey Katz
LEAD: The show on Sunday afternoon at the Equitable Center, as part of the Knitting Factory Goes Uptown section of the JVC Jazz Festival, highlighted the clarinetist Don Byron playing the music of Mickey Katz, a composer and Catskills entertainer who crossed klezmer music with vaudeville turns.


West Germans Get Ready to Scrub The East's Tarnished Environment
LEAD: In the halls of Bonn, where the sculptors of a new Germany are at work, one issue taking on urgency is how the orderly and scrubbed half of the country can help clean up the disheveled and polluted half.


China Exile Starts Life in Britain
LEAD: Fang Lizhi, China's most prominent dissident, said today that he and his wife were looking forward to ''a chance to rest and recuperate and to have some medical tests'' as they started a new life in Britain.


Trial Set in Booby Trap Death
LEAD: A district court judge has ordered a warehouse owner to stand trial for rigging a shotgun booby trap that killed a teen-age intruder.


People
LEAD: *
George Constantinoff, director of medical and scientific affairs at Klemtner Advertising, has been promoted to executive vice president, as has Robert Brilliant, the company's chief financial and administrative officer.


Review/Ballet;   10 Dancers Win Prizes at New York Competition
LEAD: Ten dancers from seven nations received awards at the third New York International Ballet Competition on Monday night at Alice Tully Hall.
The naming of the winners prompted delight, confusion and consternation.
The decisions were made by an 11-member panel of dancers and teachers who judged 30 participants between the ages of 17 and 23 in 4 rounds of competitive events.


Review/Rock;   60's Moods, 90's Methods
LEAD: Genesis P-Orridge, the singer and ringleader of the English band Psychic TV, has some of the trappings of an unrepentant hippie.
He writes essays about ''magick,'' and his voice can take on the throaty tone of Jim Morrison and the eccentric vibrato of Marc Bolan.
He also sings about ''intoxication: wow, wow, wow'' as if the antidrug fervor of recent years was still to come.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Predawn Shopping: Fish and Bonhomie
LEAD: IT is 4 A.M. A light rain falls. The city sleeps.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
International


A.T.&amp;T. Expects Profit Drop
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company announced yesterday that its second-quarter earnings were likely to be lower than last year's, and that the company might have difficulty meeting its own targets for earnings growth this year.


Currents;   Postcards Don't Tell the Truth
LEAD: IT started when Donald Levy, a postcard collector, and Peter Breese, an architect, started experimenting with postcards by enlarging them on a color laser copier.
The result was PostFolio, a series of oversize images that fold and can be sent like a letter or hung on the wall like a poster.
Each image is $5.95.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
Meets at 10 A.M.
NORTH AMERICAN REGIONAL NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION SYMPOSIUM ON THE QUESTION OF PALESTINE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
CONFERENCE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT - Group of experts on island developing countries - 11 A.M. and 3 P.M.
U.N. COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW - 10 A.M.


O'Connor Puts Rumors to Rest
LEAD: The approaching end of a Supreme Court term frequently brings with it rumors that one or another Justice is about to resign.
The term that ended today was no exception.


Re-creating Black Vaudeville, Without Removing the Warts
LEAD: ''Doing what those legendary old performers did, I have new respect for their stamina,'' said Vernel Bagneris, talking of the singers, dancers and comedians of black vaudeville in the 1920's. ''Only I do it 8 times a week, and they did it 20 and 30 times a week.''


Louisiana Measure To Block Abortions Is Sent to Governor
LEAD: The Legislature gave final approval tonight to the strictest state abortion bill in the nation and passed it along to Gov.
Buddy Roemer, who has promised a veto.


Evolution in Europe;   Deutsche Bank Plans Venture in East
LEAD: In a sign of the growing business links between the two Germanys, Deutsche Bank announced today that it had completed a joint venture agreement with a state-owned East German bank, giving it the biggest role of any Western bank in East Germany.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: WHEN 11-year-old Tyler Neer signed up for a community basketball team in Rochester, N.Y., another player suggested that he talk to his father about becoming the team's coach.
Despite his father's qualifications for the volunteer job, the two decided that it would be bad for their overall relationship.


Maan's Relief Society Drops Estimate of Earthquake Dead to 40,000
LEAD: The president of Iran's Red Crescent Society today lowered the estimate of the death toll in the earthquake that struck the country last week, saying that deaths would end up closer to 40,000 than to the 50,000 that had been feared.


Currents;   Medieval Faces Done In Mosaics
LEAD: WHILE living in Rome the past 12 years, Vanessa Somers had the opportunity to work with Odoardo Anselmi, a mosaic artist in the studios at the Vatican.


France's Main Parties Move to Counteract Le Pen
LEAD: With France's Socialist Government pledging a new fight against social inequality and two conservative parties burying their differences to form an electoral alliance of their own, the far-rightist National Front suddenly appears to be setting this country's political agenda.


Market Place;   Less Euphoria On East Germany
LEAD: Christian Picot, the chief of equities trading at Banque Paribas in New York, spent several days last week visiting factories in East Berlin and East Germany, talking to workers and managers. ''You have to be there to see what is going to happen,'' he said.
His conclusion: not much for now.


Hepatitis Outbreak Fought in Upstate New York


Sports Daily's Growth Plans
LEAD: The National plans to have 16 printing sites in 13 markets by the end of March 1991, the publisher of the daily sports newspaper said this week.


Bush's Shift on Taxes Brings Better Mood to Budget Talks
LEAD: Prodded into action by President Bush's change of tune on taxes, budget negotiators from the White House and Congress resumed talks today after a five-day hiatus with a discussion of possible savings in popular social programs like Social Security, Medicare and farm subsidies.


Home Improvement
LEAD: ASPHALT roof shingles normally last 15 to 25 years before needing replacement.
But they should be inspected annually for wear and repaired promptly if damaged.


Prices of Treasuries Rise Slightly
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities rose and interest rates fell slightly in sluggish trading yesterday.
The session's highlight was an auction of $8.25 billion of new four-year notes, which sold at an average yield of 8.50 percent, down slightly from the 8.58 percent average yield at the last auction of four-year notes on


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about a poll of attitudes about race relations in New York City misidentified a research institute.
Irving M. Levine is director of the Institute for American Pluralism at the American Jewish Committee, not the American Jewish Congress.


TLC Beatrice Continues Realigning Top Posts
LEAD: TLC Beatrice International Holdings Inc., a privately owned multinational food company, named Dumas M. Simeus its president and chief operating officer yesterday.


Seoul's Growth Plan
LEAD: South Korea has increased its target for economic growth for this year to 8 percent or 9 percent, up sharply from 6.5 percent previously, a Government plan said today.
The new target compares with actual growth of 6.7 percent last year when exports, the engine of South Korea's economic growth, were sluggish.


Iraq Seeks Bigger Role In OPEC
LEAD: In a clear challenge to Saudi Arabian leadership in setting oil policy, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq has warned Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates that they must curb their excess oil production.
He has asserted that the two small nations are harming Iraq's vital interests, as well as those of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting


U.S.-Japan Talks Go On
LEAD: American and Japanese officials entered an unexpected fourth day of negotiations today as they sought ways to remove trade barriers between the two nations.


Warrant Is Issued for Officer Accused in Killing of Jesuits
LEAD: An arrest warrant was issued today for an army officer accused of destroying evidence in the massacre in November of six Jesuit priests, their cook and her teen-age daughter.


Evolution in Europe;   U.S. Said to Mute Opposition To European Aid to Soviets
LEAD: Under pressure from some NATO allies, the Bush Administration appears to be softening its opposition to Western European financial support for the Soviet Union and is considering expanding its own technical aid to Moscow.


Anniversary With Little to Celebrate
LEAD: Ed Walker doesn't get out to an Atlanta Braves game very often, but when he does, he invariably leaves with a sense of deja vu.


Contras Yield Arms in Ceremony
LEAD: Nicaraguan rebel commanders today surrendered their weapons to President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro in a ceremony hailing the end of a nine-year war that left 30,000 people dead.


'Cemetery Club' Closing
LEAD: ''The Cemetery Club,'' a comedy by Ivan Menchell, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Brooks Atkinson Theater, 256 West 47th Street.
The play, directed by Pamela Berlin, will have run for 10 previews and 56 regular performances.


Avon Calls Off Adviser Talks
LEAD: Avon Products Inc. said it was no longer negotiating with John P. Rochon, who had been chosen by an investor group that owns about 17 percent of Avon to study the cosmetic company's operations.
Earlier this year, Avon avoided a proxy fight with the investor group, Chartwell Associates, by agreeing to form a special committee of its board that would hire Mr.


RJR Plan Is Oversubscribed
LEAD: Bankers involved in the proposed refinancing of RJR Nabisco Inc. said yesterday that potential participants were willing to lend the company as much as $4.2 billion.
It is seeking $2.2 billion.


Hoboken to Lose a Symbol of Industrial Era
LEAD: Once this city was a place where factories outnumbered telephone booths, longshoremen walked to work, and people sitting on stoops knew it would rain when they smelled the coffee brewing at the Maxwell House factory on the Hudson waterfront.


Turner's Pay Up 66%
LEAD: The total pay of Ted Turner, chairman of the Turner Broadcasting System, increased 66 percent last year, to $729,952.
It was raised in part under an incentive plan adopted by the company's board in 1989, according to a proxy statement released on Tuesday by the company.
Mr.
Turner, who owns about $1.5 billion worth of the company's stock, earned a $197,513 bonus in 1989.


High Court Upholds Prohibition On Soliciting on Post Office Land
LEAD: On the final day of the Supreme Court's term yesterday, the Justices ruled on cases involving the First Amendment and the death penalty.


G.E.-Fiat Talks
LEAD: The General Electric Company said it was ''in very active discussions'' with Fiat S.p.A. on a contract for the Italian company to share in construction of a new high-thrust engine.
Rick Kennedy, spokesman for the company's aircraft engines division, said G.E. already has an agreement with the French engine maker Snecma and is in discussions with several Japanese concerns to make the engine, the GE 90, for the Boeing Company's future 767X twin jet.


Zodiac Detectives Turn To Computers and Stars
LEAD: The hunt for the so-called Zodiac gunman involves techniques as new as computerized data analysis and as old as astrologers' calculations, police officials said yesterday.


Site for Tyson Bout
LEAD: A September doubleheader featuring Mike Tyson and George Foreman will probably take place at the Atlantic City Convention Center on Sept. 22, where the site promoter will be the Trump Plaza hotel-casino.
Tyson will fight Alex Stewart and Foreman might fight Francesco Damiani of Italy.
Bob Arum said there was an ''agreement in principle'' with the Trump organization on the fights.


Revenues, Not Taxes
LEAD: If anything can, President Bush's flip-flop on taxes, plus two others on spotted owls and off-shore oil drilling, ought to bring his approval rating down from the unreal 70-plus percent he's been enjoying.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.32
8.31
9.64
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.78
7.80
8.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.67
7.70
7.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.53
8.55
8.20
30-YR.


Oil Concerns Criticize Offshore-Curb Plan
LEAD: Oil companies that have spent millions of dollars to acquire and analyze drilling sites in waters near the Florida Keys today criticized an Administration plan to repurchase their lease rights and indicated that they might ask Federal courts to block such a move.


House Panel Approves Some Cable Laws
LEAD: A House subcommittee today unanimously approved a bill that would reimpose some regulations on the cable television industry.


Lewis's Confession
LEAD: In his recently published book, ''Inside Track, My Professional Life in Amateur Track and Field,'' Carl Lewis makes many disclosures.
Perhaps the most interesting is that the holder of the world record in the 100-meter dash was given money by Nike Inc. while he was competing for the University of Houston in a violation of National Collegiate Athletic Association rules.


Health;   Patients Frustrated in Research Projects
LEAD: Many hospital patients who participate in research are unaware of its purpose and say they are inadequately informed, a study by Johns Hopkins University has found.


Festival Latino to Double Film Fare
LEAD: Joseph Papp's 14th annual Festival Latino, running throughout August at the Public Theater and other sites, will be unusually bounteous.
Some 150 films are scheduled - more than twice the number of last year - with actors including Norma Aleandro, Dean Stockwell, Jose Ferrer, Geraldine Chaplin and Kris


Cavaliers' Williams Loses Free-Agency Bid
LEAD: John Williams, the Cleveland Cavaliers power forward, yesterday lost his bid to become an unrestricted free agent.
Daniel Collins, a New York University law professor who heard the case on June 21, ruled that under the 1987 Bridgeman antitrust settlement, which set the standards for free agency in the National Basketball Association, Williams will become a restricted free agent Sunday.


And Now the Father's Side of the Divorce Story;   Few Good Guys or Bad
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ozone Fading Fast, Thatcher Tells World Experts
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher warned representatives of more than 100 nations today that destruction of the earth's ozone layer was proceeding even faster than scientists had feared.


The Mandela's Schedule
LEAD:
Today: Nelson Mandela will give a speech to a convention of American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees at the Miami Beach Convention Center in Miami.
The Mandelas will depart for Detroit, where they will visit a Ford assembly plant and attend a rally at Tiger Stadium.
Friday: Mr.


After 2 Steps Forward, One Back for 'Ulysses'
LEAD: Four years after it was replaced by a new edition that claimed to be an improvement over the classic text of ''Ulysses,'' James Joyce's celebrated novel, the earlier version is being reissued by Vintage Books, an imprint of Random House.


Chief of Operations Appointed by Laidlaw
LEAD: Laidlaw Inc., the largest provider of school bus transportation and the third largest waste-services company in North America, has given Donald K. Jackson full responsibility for the company's operations.
Michael G. DeGroote, founder and chief executive, plans to step down, though he will remain as chairman.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Tax Battle on Capitol Hill
The President's abandonment of his stance against taxes brought a Republican revolt but also improved the mood of the budget talks.
Page A20.
Books or Bats, It's a Living
Jose Canseco, the Oakland A's outfielder, signed a contract worth $4.7 million a year.
Page D23.


Stock Market Bills Backed
LEAD: The House Energy and Commerce Committee today approved two pieces of stock market legislation by voice vote and sent them on to the House floor, where passage is expected.


Appeals Panel Rules Against WPIX-TV
LEAD: A three-judge appeals panel has ruled that WPIX-TV, a station in New York City owned by the Tribune Company of Chicago, committed a deliberate violation of Federal labor law when it broke off contract talks in 1987 with 67 unionized employees of its news department.


Parker's 2,500th Hit Powers the Brewers
LEAD: Dave Parker, anticipating a milestone in his major league career, brought his wife, Kellye, to New York for the Milwaukee Brewers' series against the Yankees.


Moscow Journal;   matchmaker's Dream: From Russia With Love
LEAD: Alla R. Tambovtseva says she was impressed by the frequent smiles and ''positive emotions'' of the American tourists she used to meet before she lost her administrative job at an Intourist hotel here.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Underwear can be expensive, depending on who's been in it.
At a benefit auction on Tuesday evening, a slip worn by KATHLEEN TURNER in ''Cat on a Hot Tin Roof'' fetched $1,200.


A Year of Struggles, Successes and Dreams at P.S. 94
LEAD: It was the last day of the year at Public School 94 in the north Bronx yesterday, and Randee Sacher's second graders began the final entries in their journals.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Closing Arguments for Khashoggi
LEAD: The lawyer for Adnan Khashoggi conceded yesterday that his client had signed a backdated document in 1986 in connection with the ownership of four buildings in Manhattan, but he said Mr.
Khashoggi was unaware of a court injunction barring the transfer of the buildings.


Modie J. Spiegel, 89, Mail Order Executive
LEAD: Modie J. Spiegel, retired chief executive of Spiegel Inc., the Chicago-based mail order company, died on Saturday at Weiss Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
He was 89 years old and lived in Chicago.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Mr.
Spiegel joined the family-owned mail order company after graduating from Dartmouth College in 1922.


The S &amp; L Bailout in Perspective
LEAD: Some estimates of the cost of the savings and loan bailout range up to $500,000,000,000 - five hundred billion dollars - if interest payments are included.
There is something engaging about the number five hundred billion, even more so if you put it in perspective.


Cuomo Rules Out Action For Adirondack Park
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who warned last year that the Adirondacks appeared threatened by overdevelopment and ''unbridled land speculation,'' today ruled out taking any action this year on the proposals of his study panel.


Eight Entries In Liberty Cup
LEAD: Eight world-class sailors, three of whom are scheduled to skipper boats in the 1992 America's Cup match in San Diego, have gathered in New York for the start today of the seventh annual Liberty Cup Regatta.


Council Approves Speeding Up $1 Billion in Taxes
LEAD: Asserting that New York City faces one of its most serious cash-flow problems in years, the Dinkins administration last night won City Council approval to speed the collection of $1.1 billion in property taxes from the city's 400 largest taxpayers.


Health;   Study Reports That Short Women Have Higher Risk of Heart Attacks
LEAD: Short women have a higher risk of heart attacks than do women of average stature, while tall women seem blessed by a slight resistance to cardiac problems, according to a new study.


A Studio Where Manhattan Is the Star
LEAD: AS an architecture student in Los Angeles, Ken Leung worked for the postmodern architect Charles Moore.
As a fledgling architect in Manhattan, he works at Beyer Blinder Belle, a firm specializing in historic preservation.


Wide Areas of California Imperiled by Fires
LEAD: Brush and grass fires, some attributed to arson, burned at least 32 homes and blackened thousands of acres yesterday as Southern California's heat wave continued.


Southwest Slows to Crawl As the Temperatures Soar
LEAD: A summer solstice heat wave has driven temperatures here in the Southwest to record highs in the 120's and brought life to a slowdown as distant mountains shimmer in the harsh light.


First Altman's, Now Garfinckel's
LEAD: Garfinckel's, which for decades was the department store of choice for wealthy shoppers in the nation's capital, today started its ''going out of business'' sale.


Corrections
LEAD: The Washington Talk column on June 13 about Congressional debate of a proposed Constitutional amendment on the flag referred incompletely to procedures for amending the Constitution.
Amendments can be proposed by two-thirds majorities in both houses of Congress, or by a convention requested by two-thirds of the states.


Close to Home
LEAD: IN her luggage was a gray sweater that belonged to her father, a blue sweater that belonged to her grandmother and a green scarf that belonged to me.
Every time she wore one of them, she would be wearing one of us, our essences knitted or woven into the wool.
We would be her companions over there.


Current;   Ghosts Of Bygone Glory
LEAD: THEY have been there since 1912, 16 lunette-shaped tile murals hanging in a subterranean grotto, the last witnesses to the grandeur that was the Marine Grill restaurant.


Metro Datelines;   S.I. Man Arraigned In Parents' Slayings
LEAD: A Staten Island man with a history of mental illness was arraigned yesterday on murder charges after the decapitated, dismembered bodies of his mother and father were found in the blood-spattered basement of the family's house.


Harold Robbins, 69, Ex-Fordham Professor
LEAD: Harold W. Robbins, who retired last year as an associate professor at Fordham University's Graduate School of Social Service, died on Monday at Presbyterian Hospital in Albuquerque, N.M.
He was 69 years old and lived in Albuquerque.


Events: Quilts, Boxes And Pottery Classes
LEAD: Outdoor Crafts, Lincoln Center Plaza, Columbus Avenue at 64th Street; 212-677-4627.


Metro Datelines;   Republican Quits Race for Governor
LEAD: Joel Schiavone, a flamboyant executive and musician from New Haven, withdrew from the gubernatorial race yesterday.
He said, however, that he would stay in politics and run for comptroller.


Canseco Gets His Pitch: $23.5 Million From A's
LEAD: Jose Canseco signed a five-year contract worth $23.5 million with the Oakland Athletics today, making the 25-year-old outfielder the highest-paid player in baseball history.
He will turn 26 on Monday.


Under Threat, Peace Corps Is Leaving Philippines
LEAD: The Peace Corps has ordered its 261 volunteers out of the Philippines after intelligence reports indicated that they had become targets of Communist insurgents, American officials and Peace Corps staff members said today.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-16
A terrorist was harbored in Hungary in 1979, according to letters and documents produced by Hungary's new Interior Minister.
The international terrorist known as Carlos reportedly received asylum from Janos Kadar, the long-time Communist leader.


Prague Installs Government To Build Democratic Society
LEAD: Czechoslovakia swore in a new coalition Government on Wednesday, dominated by Civic Forum, the pro-democracy movement that swept free elections three weeks ago.


Mandlikova Is Beaten For an Early Finale
LEAD: It was business as usual for everything and everyone except Derrick Rostagno and possibly the weather today at Wimbledon.


President Announces Plan For More Latin Debt Relief
LEAD: Under pressure from Latin American countries who fear that Eastern Europe is draining Western aid programs, President Bush today announced an expansion of Washington's debt-relief program for the region and proposed the creation of a free-trade zone for the hemisphere.


Currents;   A Bit Of Country In the City
LEAD: FOR 19 years, Judith and James Milne have sold American folk art and antiques, dealing mainly as wholesalers.
But now they are selling to the public.


Richard A. Atkins, 82, Ex-New York Official
LEAD: Dr.
Richard A. Atkins, a former first deputy commissioner of local government in New York, died on Sunday at the Albany Medical Center Hospital.
He was 82 years old and lived in Delmar, N.Y.


Jazz Festival;   Piano by Marty Napoleon
LEAD: Marty Napoleon is a pianist whose driving, propulsive playing has an enlivening effect on the small jazz groups with which he usually plays.
As an unaccompanied soloist, however, he has limitations.


Equimark Predicts 2d-Quarter Loss
LEAD: The Equimark Corporation said it would lose between $12 million and $17 million in the second quarter on top of a $15.4 million loss in the first quarter.


Jazz Festival;   Jim Hall, His Guitar And a Lot Of Friends
LEAD: The Jim Hall Invitational concert at Town Hall on Tuesday night, part of the JVC Jazz Festival, was the sort of show that gave the audience a new story every two or three songs.
Mr.
Hall, a guitarist, had his friends come up and play, and after a couple of pieces another musician would appear to produce yet another jewel of a performance.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Monkey Business, the 83-foot yacht that sank the political career of GARY HART, is for sale at an asking price of $1.225 million.
The yacht and its passengers made headlines in 1987 when Mr.
Hart, a former Senator who was then seeking the Democratic nomination for President, was found to have taken a sail on it with DONNA RI


Jazz Festival;   Nascimento and Shorter Play Host and Guest
LEAD: Milton Nascimento was in extraordinary voice on Tuesday night at Avery Fisher Hall for a concert that was a full-blown occasion.
In one of the jazz festival's best bookings, Mr.
Nascimento had as a guest soloist the saxophonist Wayne Shorter, whose 1975 album ''Native Dancer'' introduced Mr.
Nascimento to the audience outside his native Brazil.


Zambian Leader Vows to Maintain Control
LEAD: Vigilantes with automatic rifles patrolled the capital today and protests spread to smaller cities.
At least 23 people were reported killed in the three days of unrest.


Jazz Festival;   In Mulgrew Miller's Hands
LEAD: Mulgrew Miller doesn't want to be a typicalmodern jazz pianist with an articulate right hand occasionally prodded by chords from the left.
He can play in that virtually one-handed style, but his recital on Tuesday afternoon at Weill Recital Hall was more concerned with the possibilities of two-handed, thick-chorded harmonies.


Review/Architecture;   A Restored Grand Army Plaza, With a New Coat for the General
LEAD: It's the gilding that has everyone talking: the dazzling coat of gold that makes Augustus Saint-Gaudens's statue of William Tecumseh Sherman so bright it looks as if it could light up all of Grand Army Plaza, the pre-eminent formal public space in Manhattan.
It is a startling change in New York's most famous equestrian statue, which once blended in with the dark limousines of Fifth


Republic Offers 10-Year Notes
LEAD: The Republic New York Corporation yesterday offered $100 million of 10-year subordinated notes through an underwriting syndicate led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Currents;   Coffee And Tea But No Snooping
LEAD: CEILING fans whir slowly and factory lights dangle over an airy new white-brick restaurant in SoHo.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Newton F. McKeon, Professor, 85
LEAD: Newton Felch McKeon, a retired professor of English and former director of the Robert Frost Library at Amherst College, died Tuesday at his home in Lexington, Mass.
He was 85 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Mr.
McKeon joined the faculty at Amherst in 1931 and, except for a year at Cambridge University in England on a research fellowship, spent his career there.


Some Donations Cost Charities Too Much
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Controls for Trump
LEAD: With its cash crisis resolved for now, the Trump Organization is concentrating on developing a comprehensive business plan for each of Donald J. Trump's assets and grafting a more traditional corporate structure onto the organization, people involved in the talks between the developer and his bankers said yesterday.


Aide Says Hungary Gave Refuge in '79 To Terrorist Carlos
LEAD: The international terrorist known as Carlos was given refuge in Hungary in 1979, according to letters and documents made public today by Hungary's new Interior Minister.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Cook's magazine and its parent company, Pennington Publishing, have shut down.
Conde Nast Publications, a unit of Advance Publications, has bought the subscription list of Cook's and will send subscribers Gourmet magazine, starting with the September issue.


WORLD CUP '90: Notebook;   Adulation For Italian; Big Money For a Czech
LEAD: With Italy now a quarterfinalist in the World Cup, it has become rather difficult to turn around without the presence of Toto in one form or another.
He's everywhere: in the newspapers, on television, as the focal point of so many conversations among soccer-mad Italians now firmly convinced their team will defeat Ireland on


Pesky at the Helm
LEAD: Johnny Pesky's long connection to the Boston Red Sox began when Pesky was a rookie shortstop in 1942 and broke into major league baseball with 205 hits.
After his playing career ended in 1954, he worked for the Red Sox at various times as coach, manager, radio-television announcer, advertising salesman and special assistant to Lou Gorman, the general manager.


Dr. John Knox Sr., 89, An Expert on the Bible
LEAD: Dr.
John Knox Sr., a biblical scholar and an educator, died on Monday at his home in Medford, N.J.
He was 89 years old.


G.E. Capital Prices Australian Offering
LEAD: The General Electric Capital Corporation priced a $100 million (Australian) offering through an underwriting syndicate led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


Vernon Figure Pleads Innocent
LEAD: The former owner of the Vernon Savings and Loan Association, Don Dixon, who is accused of illegally trying to raise money for former House Speaker Jim Wright and others, pleaded not guilty today to 38 Federal charges in the collapse of his savings institution three years ago.
United States District


Rodman in Venture With Vienna Bank
LEAD: Rodman Renshaw Inc. signed a letter of intent with Creditanstalt-Bankverein of Vienna to form a joint company to provide financial and commodities futures brokerage services to corporate and institutional investors in Austria, the Soviet Union and other Eastern and Central European nations.


U.S. to Lift Curb on Brazil
LEAD: The United States will lift sanctions on Brazilian exports worth $39 million a year because of Brazil's decision to strengthen patent protection for United States pharmaceuticals, the American trade representative, Carla A. Hills, said today.


Baruch College Is Reaccredited; Pledges Reforms
LEAD: Bernard M. Baruch College was fully reaccredited this week after its plan for hiring additional minority faculty members and retaining minority students was approved by a major accrediting agency, the president of the college said yesterday.


Insurers Planning Computer Link
LEAD: A group of the nation's largest insurers has called a news conference for Thursday at which it is expected to announce that the insurers are developing a computer system that would enable independent agents to communicate with the home offices of several insurance companies simultaneously.


Amre Inquiry
LEAD: Amre Inc. disclosed that the Securities and Exchange Commission had begun an investigation of the company's accounting policies.
Amre is a home-improvement concern based in Irving, Tex.
In April, an Amre management group said that it would not make a planned $8.75-a-share bid to acquire all of the Amre shares that it did not already control.


School Board Gives Up Power To Investigate
LEAD: The Board of Education voted yesterday to give up its power to investigate corruption in New York City's schools and hand it over to a new office that will be created in the city's Department of Investigation.


Jazz Festival;   Torme and Laine, Scat-Singing in Counterpoint
LEAD: An almost annual event of the JVC Jazz Festival, going back to the days when it was known as the Newport Jazz Festival, has been Mel Torme's explorations of the American songbook, a loose, catchall approach that basically allows him to sing whatever he wants.
Usually he has shared the bill with one or another notable female singer.


A Gamble Against Keynesian Theory
LEAD: President Bush's new proposal to raise taxes and cut spending is a huge gamble that he can devise a deficit-cutting plan convincing enough to revive the sluggish United States economy.


California Suit Names Keating
LEAD: John Van de Kamp, California's Attorney General, said today that the state had filed a $250 million lawsuit against Charles H. Keating Jr. and other officers of the American Continental Corporation.


Cable TV Rates Likely to Rise In Manhattan With New Pact
LEAD: In a deal that will almost certainly mean a rate increase for cable television customers in Manhattan, the Board of Estimate yesterday renewed franchises until the year 2003 for the two cable companies serving the borough.


Indicators Rose 0.8% Last Month
LEAD: The Government's economic forecasting index climbed eight-tenths of 1 percent in May, continuing its bumpy pattern of recent months and confirming, analysts said, expectations that the economy will eke out gains in coming months and avoid a recession.


Chinese Leader Has Surgery; Reported in Good Condition
LEAD: President Yang Shangkun, who is 83 years old, has undergone an operation for acute appendicitis but is now in good condition, the Government reported today.


Mulheren Summation
LEAD: A prosecutor said yesterday at the fraud and conspiracy trail of John A. Mulheren Jr. that the case against the stock speculator was a question of who is lying - the defendant or his chief accuser, the admitted inside trader Ivan F. Boesky. ''Who has the motive to lie?'' The assistant United States Attorney, Alfred Pavlis, said in closing arguments to a Federal jury.


Officer Charged With Murder
LEAD: A Brooklyn police officer was charged with second-degree murder yesterday in the shooting of a correction officer on June 3 in an argument over loud music at a party when both of them were off duty.
The police officer, Noel Barnett, a 10-year police veteran, was suspended without pay.
He pleaded not guilty and was released without bail.


Last Chances in Albany
LEAD: There's still time for New York lawmakers to retrieve some honor from Albany's abysmal legislative session.
They cannot undo the damage they inflicted on local governments by passing the budget seven weeks late.
But they can use the closing days of their session to approve several significant bills.


10th Death in Office Shooting
LEAD: A worker who was wounded last week when a gunman opened fire in a loan office died today, raising the death toll to 10.
Jewell Belote, a 50-year-old stenographer at the General Motors Acceptance Corporation office, died at University Medical Center, a hospital spokesman said.
The 10 dead include the gunman, James Edward Pough, who killed himself after the June 18 rampage.


Squeeze Apartheid, Not Mr. de Klerk
LEAD: Nelson Mandela is a politician as well as a hero.
He earned an ovation in Congress by stressing themes that unite his anti-apartheid campaign with America's own struggles to broaden democracy.
He praised Washington, Jefferson and Lincoln and called the roll of the African-American champions of freedom.


House Approves More Assistance for East Europe
LEAD: The House of Representatives approved a $15.6 billion foreign aid package today that would reduce United States military assistance to its allies for the 1991 fiscal year and would increase spending on the emerging democracies in Eastern Europe.


Abducting Suspects Breaks All the Laws
LEAD: To the Editor:


Astaphan Accused
LEAD: Ben Johnson's former personal physician and another Toronto doctor accused of giving steroids to Canadian athletes were charged with professional misconduct yesterday in Toronto by the Ontario College of Physicians and Surgeons.
Dr.
George M. (Jamie) Astaphan, Johnson's doctor until the 1988 Seoul Olympics scandal, and Dr.


Union Head Wins Alabama Race
LEAD: A teachers' union leader, Paul Hubbert, won the Democratic nomination for governor on Tuesday in a caustic runoff campaign against Attorney General Don Siegelman, and will face Gov.
Guy Hunt in November.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Hiram Walker-Allied Vintners, to Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws Advertising, Chicago, for Beefeater gin, from MacNamara, Clapp &amp; Klein, which also lost the company's B&amp;B liqueur and Denaka vodka accounts.


Excerpts From High Court's Opinions on Child Abuse Cases
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's ruling today in two cases involving the issue of testimony in cases of alleged child sex abuse.


Kemper Marley Sr. Is Dead at 83; Name Arose in '76 Slaying Inquiry
LEAD: Kemper Marley Sr., a millionaire Arizona rancher and liquor distributor whose name arose in the investigation of a newspaper reporter's death in a 1976 bombing, died on Monday at a beach home in La Jolla, Calif.
He was 83 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Mr.
Marley, one of Arizona's wealthiest men, was the son of an early pioneer fami.


Swiss Reconsider McDonnell Order
LEAD: Switzerland has put off a decision on a planned order for as many as 34 F/ A-18C fighter jets from the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, the St.
Louis-based aerospace company, and will re-evaluate buying the less expensive Mirage 2000-5 made by Avions Marcel Dassault-Breguet Aviation of France, the Swiss Defense


Security Pacific Wins Gibraltar Savings Bid
LEAD: The Security Pacific Corporation, the nation's fifth-largest banking company, said today that it had won the bidding for a failed savings and loan company in California in one of the largest sales yet by the Government of an insolvent savings institution.


Metro Matters;   Assessing a Poll: Hints of Flight By Middle Class?
LEAD: On and off for 15 years, Sarah Edmunds has lived on the same block near Washington Square Park.
Now she is thinking of leaving not only her neighborhood in lower Manhattan, but also New York City.


U.S.-Soviet Exchange
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange said this week that it had been invited by the Soviet Union to organize a seminar in Moscow in October on the development of securities exchanges and capital markets.
A delegation of United States financial experts is expected to participate in the seminar.


Short of Earth? Gardens Bloom In Jars and Pots
LEAD: NO dutiful gardener ever officially recorded the first potted plant, but tomb paintings indicate that plants in containers were around in ancient Egypt and excavations show they were used in early Greece and ancient Rome.


Braniff Will Not Repay Creditors
LEAD: Braniff Inc., the financially troubled airline, said liquidation will not include any repayment to its creditors or distribution to its shareholders.
David Murchison, Braniff's chief executive, confirmed that $100 million in Braniff junk bonds will not be repaid.


Salant Files For Chapter 11
LEAD: The Salant Corporation filed for bankruptcy protection yesterday.
It was the second filing under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code for the New York clothing company.


Iranian May See Quake As Opening to the West
LEAD: President Hashemi Rafsanjani views the relief effort after last week's devastating earthquake as an important opportunity to improve Iran's long-strained relations with the United States and other Western nations, several diplomats said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on June 19 about the New York International Ballet Competition misidentified a dancer, Leticia Guerrero.
She is a member of the Metropolitan Ballet of Caracas, not Ballet Michigan.


Dr. Helen Miller, 93, An Obstetrician, Dies
LEAD: Dr.
Helen L. Miller, an obstetrician and a gynecologist in New York and New Jersey, died on June 18 at her home in Kinnelon, N.J.
She was 93 years old.


Health;   Court Rejects Disability Pay Policy
LEAD: A Federal appeals court in Manhattan ruled yesterday that the Government should not have denied disability payments to hundreds of thousands of people in New York State who are suffering from a form of heart disease called ischemia.


Leaders of Lithuania Meet With Gorbachev
LEAD: The President and the Prime Minister of Lithuania flew to Moscow today to meet with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union on the deadlock over the Baltic republic's declaration of independence.


4 Testify on Terror on Night of Jogger's Rape
LEAD: Four people accosted in Central Park by a group of youths last year described in court yesterday their terror and outrage when the youths descended on them.


CUNY Teacher Admits He Lied in Gun Testimony
LEAD: Rafael Rivera Garcia, the Puerto Rican artist and professor who is on trial in the Bronx for attempted murder, acknowledged under cross-examination yesterday that he had lied to a grand jury about why he had the pistol with which he shot his next-door neighbor last year.


350,000 U.S. Census Forms In Mail Again in New York
LEAD: In an unusual action, the Census Bureau has decided to mail out 350,000 census questionnaires for a second time in New York City.


Judge Orders Ruling Enforced on Picketing
LEAD: A judge ordered the New York City Police Department yesterday to enforce his injunction to keep demonstrators at least 50 feet away from two Korean food stores in Brooklyn that have been picketed by blacks for more than five months.


GERMAN IS JAILED IN SALE TO LIBYA
LEAD: The West German businessman who arranged the construction of a chemical plant in Libya reportedly intended to produce poison gas was sentenced today to five years in prison.


And Now the Father's Side of the Divorce Story
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hispanic District in Los Angeles
LEAD: The Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors voted 3 to 2 today to reshape one of the county's five districts into a territory in which Hispanic voters would be in the majority.


Divorcing Realism From Photography
LEAD: SOMETHING about cameras makes people nervous.
I don't mean the feeling of facing the lens, wondering what embarrassing expression this maker of memories will preserve.
I mean the feeling of facing the camera from the other side, fearing that at the instant the index finger descends to stop time's flow, it will come out all wrong, one moment will be forever lost and another that nobody wants forever preserved.


De Klerk, Addressing Blacks, Speaks of a New Constitution
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk promised black South Africans today that he is prepared to negotiate a new constitution that would eliminate remaining legal bulwarks of apartheid.


Motif and Pace Set by Snail At the Chelsea
LEAD: THE two-tone Victorian Gothic-style exterior looks just about the same, if a bit more spiffed up, thanks to a $500,000 renovation.


Klezmer Concert Tonight
LEAD: ''Klezfest '90,'' a concert of klezmer music, will take place tonight at Symphony Space, Broadway at 95th Street, at 8 P.M.
The concert will feature two American klezmer groups, the Klezmatics of New York and Shirim from Boston.
Tickets are $15.
Information: 683-7816.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article on Tuesday about a free concert today by the Dave Brubeck Quartet at the World Financial Center Plaza, West Street south of Vesey Street, misstated the time.
The concert is at 7 P.M., not 12:15.


Evolution in Europe;   Forget the Missing Medieval Artworks! East Germans Treasure the Marks
LEAD: If they didn't have so much to cheer at and worry about, perhaps the 30,000 people of this townwould be rejoicing that some of its greatest treasures have been found in Texas.


CHILD ABUSE TRIALS CAN USE TELEVISION
LEAD: The Supreme Court ruled today that states may shield victims of child abuse by permitting them to testify on closed-circuit television rather than face in the courtroom those accused of abusing them.


Class Dismissed at School That Fought the Odds


When Your Bicycle Needs a Tuneup
LEAD: WE put people's bikes back together and give them a little moral support,'' said Nathan Dean, the manager of Bicycle Habitat in SoHo.
His customers include children, recreational cyclists, commuters, racers and messengers. ''We fix anything with two wheels,'' Mr.
Dean said.
That includes 3-speed bikes, 10-speeds, all-terrain bikes and children's bicycles.


Metro Datelines;   Hasidic Rabbi Beaten By Hasidic Youths
LEAD: A 41-year-old Hasidic rabbi was severely beaten by a group of Hasidic men late Tuesday, the police said, and authorities are investigating whether the attack is related to a schism within the Satmar community that has already resulted in several acts of violence.


Viola and Strawberry Lead Mets to Ninth Straight
LEAD: The Mets kept streaking in all directions tonight as they swept the St.
Louis Cardinals, 5-2, won for the ninth straight time and advanced to within half a game of second place in the National League's East.


G.O.P., in Revolt on Taxes, Steps Up Criticism of Bush
LEAD: The White House struggled today to contain the most serious Republican Congressional revolt of George Bush's Presidency, brought on by his decision to renounce his 1988 campaign pledge against higher taxes.


Review/Pop;   A Shy Tracy Chapman, Now Joined by a Band
LEAD: Among the handful of significant new performing songwriters to emerge in the last five years, Tracy Chapman may be the most compelling.
But she also seems the most paradoxical.


Fund Yields Rise Slightly
LEAD: Yields on tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were slightly higher in the week ended yesterday.


Task Force Will Investigate Savings Units' 'Junk' Losses
LEAD: Federal bank regulators announced today that they had set up a task force to investigate whether high-yield ''junk bonds'' sold by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and Michael R. Milken, led to huge losses at dozens of collapsed savings and loans.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Air Products and Chemicals Inc., Allentown, Pa., a supplier of industrial gases and related equipment, said it had acquired a 49 percent interest in Sapio Industrie, Italy, an industrial gas company with annual revenue of about $100 million, for undisclosed terms.


California Districting Hobbles Republicans
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chronicle
LEAD: STORMIE JONES, the first person to receive both a heart and a liver in a transplant operation, was in serious condition yesterday at Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, battling an infection in her second transplanted liver.


Dow Up 19.80 Despite Selling in A.T.&amp;T.
LEAD: Despite a big selloff in A.T.&amp;T., stocks advanced yesterday as investors apparently reasoned that President Bush's endorsement of a tax increase to cut the deficit might help stock prices.


Sale by Occidental
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Corporation said its domestic oil and gas subsidiary had completed the sale of its Appalachian oil and gas properties to Ashland Exploration Inc. in a deal worth about $107 million.
Ashland Exploration is a subsidiary of Ashland Oil Inc.


For Mandela, Echoes of Past Struggles
LEAD: His face wreathed in smiles, Nelson Mandela went to a black church in this cradle of the civil rights movement today to listen to the rhythmic preaching that helped fuel that now-long-ago struggle.


New Venture Gear
LEAD: New Venture Gear Inc., the first joint manufacturing effort between leading United States auto makers, signed a four-year deal to supply parts for the British Rover Group's new diesel model.
New Venture was formed earlier this year by Acustar, a division of the Chrysler Corporation, and the General Motors Corporation.


JUSTICES BOLSTER RACE PREFERENCES AT FEDERAL LEVEL
LEAD: Affirming the power of Congress to enact programs that favor blacks and other minorities, the Supreme Court today upheld two Federal affirmative action programs aimed at increasing minority ownership of broadcast licenses.


Political Violence on the Rise Again in Guatemala, Tarnishing Civilian Rule
LEAD: Five months before elections, this country is being swept by growing waves of political violence and human rights abuses.


It's Farewell For Planners On a Panel
LEAD: In a swift, unsentimental session that belied its importance, the New York City Planning Commission ended its 52-year life yesterday, approving land-use changes for a raft of projects, from a huge development along the Queens waterfront to a major biomedical laboratory in upper Manhattan.


People
LEAD: *
Laurel Cutler has been promoted to worldwide director of marketing planning at FCB/Leber Katz Partners, a unit of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications, and she will remain vice chairman.
Geoffrey Frost has been promoted to director of marketing planning, and he remains a senior executive vice president.


Evolution in Europe;   NEGOTIATORS FIX CURBS ON ARMIES
LEAD: NATO and Warsaw Pact negotiators agreed today on definitions and limits for tanks and other armored combat vehicles, renewing hopes that a treaty on conventional arms in Europe could still be signed this year, diplomats here said.


Let's Start Modernizing New York's Elections
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I'm part of the Republican leadership.
But if we come up and find ourselves with a big tax increase, I'm going to jump off.''
- Senator Don Nickles of Oklahoma.
[A20:2.]


New Haven's Bond Rating Is Downgraded by Moody's
LEAD: Citing the rapid weakening of the city's financial position over the last two years, Moody's Investors Service today lowered its rating of New Haven's bonds.


Leonard M. Elstad, Educator, 91
LEAD: Leonard M. Elstad, president of Gallaudet College in Washington from 1945 to 1969, died yesterday at a nursing home in Mauston, Wis., where he lived.
He was 91 years old.
The family said the cause of death had not been determined.


The Deficit, Without Pretense
LEAD: Grudgingly, belatedly and even now minimally, President Bush at last admits the obvious: Tax revenues have to rise.
But that declaration, however cramped, is momentous.
By disavowing his misguided pledge to block any new taxes, he frees Congressional Democrats and Republicans to get on with serious budget negotiations.


Dollar Edges Mostly Higher; Gold Firms in Thin Trading
LEAD: The dollar edged higher against most major currencies in quiet trading yesterday as the markets ignored a report that showed the economy may be strengthening, traders said.


A Tough Big Man for the Nets
LEAD: Wearing a double-breasted suit, a million-dollar smile, and a Nets cap on his head, Derrick Coleman looked very much like a winner last night.
And if Coleman can help turn the Nets into a winner, then the 1990 draft will be remembered as a turning point for the franchise.


Military Newspapers Flourish
LEAD: At a time when many newspapers are facing a slump in advertising, Army Times and its sister publications, Navy Times and Air Force Times, are doing well.


And Now the Father's Side of the Divorce Story;   A Man's Pain and Grief
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bridge
LEAD: Wild leaps to slam always surprise the other three players and sometimes astonish them.
The auction shown in the diagram, with a raise from the one-level to the six-level, is theoretically inconceivable: If North is not worth a forcing opening, how can a slam effort be justified after a response which could be based on just six high-card points?


Dell Pays Ken Follett $12.3 Million for 2 Books
LEAD: In moves that have stunned the publishing industry, the Dell Publishing Company has bought two books by Ken Follett, the best-selling English thriller writer, for $12.3 million, and one American house has bid $20 million for the next three books of Jeffrey Archer, another popular English author.


Books of The Times;   Gifted Young Minds, and How to Cultivate Them
LEAD:
Child Prodigies and Exceptional Early Achievers
By John Radford
255 pages. The Free Press. $22.95.


Health;   Personal Health
LEAD: Summer is fraught with hazards to the health of our most prized sensory organ: our eyes.
The threats range from annoying allergies and sunburn to severe vision-threatening injuries incurred during sports and other activities.


Sugar Prices Rise Sharply; Grain and Soybeans Mixed
LEAD: Sugar futures prices bounced sharply higher yesterday on New York's Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange after the Agriculture Department predicted world sugar consumption would outstrip production for the sixth straight year.


Shearson's Severance For Cohen
LEAD: Peter A. Cohen, the former chairman and chief executive of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., has been granted a severance package worth about $10 million, including cash and stock from the firm and its parent, the American Express Company.


Troops in Liberia Open Fire On Anti-Doe Demonstrators
LEAD: Soldiers fired at protesters calling for the resignation of President Samuel K. Doe today and then went on a shooting rampage through Monrovia.
Doctors said at least five people were seriously wounded.


Investor Reduces Stake in Harley
LEAD: The Rochester investor Malcolm I. Glazer disclosed he had sold 1.2 million shares of Harley-Davidson Inc. for $5.625 a share, or a total sale price of $30.75 million.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Glazer said the sale reduced his holding in the Milwaukee-based motorcycle manufacturer to less than 1 percent, from 7.29 percent.


Exerpts From Court Ruling Upholding Two Affirmative Action Programs
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's 5-to-4 opinion today upholding Federal affirmative action programs.
Justice William J. Brennan Jr. wrote the majority opinion.
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a concurring opinion.
Justices Sandra Day O'Connor and Anthony M. Kennedy filed dissenting opinions.


Knicks Select Mustaf, 20, of Maryland
LEAD: Jerrod Mustaf, a 6-foot-10-inch forward from Maryland and the youngest player in the National Basketball Association draft is headed to the Knicks as the No. 17 pick in the first round.


An Eager Texas Buyer Of Failed Savings Units
LEAD: As the Government sells off hundreds of failed savings and loan associations, its biggest customer is right here in Texas, where so many of the problems began.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Barclays de Zoete Wedd Investment Management, a unit of Barclays Bank P.L.C., London, named Michael R. Horsburgh a managing director and head of its investment fund management business in the United States.


Trevino and Caddie Having Good Years
LEAD: Lee Trevino may or may not outpace the field in his first United States Senior Open this week at the Ridgewood Country Club, but it's a near certainty that on most holes, he will leave the large man carrying his golf bag behind.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Friday about Louis A. Moskowitz, an official of the Republic National Bank, misstated his background and the status of the bank's ownership.
He was never a lawyer and had no affiliation with the firm of Kronish, Lieb, Shainswit, Weiner &amp; Hellman.
Edmond J. Safra no longer controls Trade Development Holdings of Luxembourg, which once controlled the bank.


France Limits Ads
LEAD: As expected, the National Assembly of France approved a bill that would ban tobacco advertising and most alcohol advertising by 1993.
The ban on tobacco extends to such indirect advertising as sponsorship of cultural and sporting events.
But France being France, most wines were excluded from the ban.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Loose Wall Covering


Ex-Model Testifies To Wide Drug Use With Mayor Barry
LEAD: The prosecution's star witness in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug trial took the stand today to spin a tale of an adulterous two-year relationship with the Mayor in which she said that she used drugs with him more than 100 times and that he sometimes lapsed into paranoia about being caught.


Mike Jones, Boxing Manager, 55
LEAD: Mike Jones, a boxing manager since the mid-1970's, died Tuesday at his home in West Hempstead, L.I.
He was 55 years old.


Academy of Design Names New Director
LEAD: Edward P. Gallagher has been appointed director of the National Academy of Design.
Mr.
Gallagher, who will assume his post on Aug. 1, has been director of membership at the Museum of Modern Art since 1983.
His appointment was announced by the office of the academy's president, Richard McDermott Miller.


WHITE SOX WIN 7TH IN A ROW AND MOVE INTO FIRST PLACE
LEAD: Chicago moved into first place ahead of Oakland in the American League West today as Ron Kittle hit two home runs to help the White Sox beat the California Angels, 5-2, for their seventh consecutive victory.


U.S. AGENCY SEEKS UNIFORM LABELING
LEAD: In a reversal that creates a political dispute within the Bush Administration, the Health and Human Services Secretary now favors uniform Federal standards for food labeling that would pre-empt state and local laws.


Abortions Harder to Get In Rural Areas of Nation
LEAD: Abortions are becoming increasingly inaccessible in the nation's rural areas, says a new survey by a nonprofit organization concerned with reproductive health.


Meyer's Knowing Touch With Color and Shape
LEAD: Gene Meyer is on his way.
With his second couture collection, he showed an extraordinary color sense and a flair for young styling.


HUBBLE TELESCOPE LOSES LARGE PART OF OPTICAL ABILITY
LEAD: Engineers have found a major flaw in the main light-gathering mirrors of the $1.5 billion Hubble Space Telescope that is likely to cripple its ability to view the depths of the universe for several years, the space agency said today.


Strawberry Wants To Stay With Mets
LEAD: On the day when Jose Canseco signed a record five-year contract with the Oakland Athletics for $23.5 million, Darryl Strawberry said he no longer wanted to leave the Mets because ''I like what I see here now, and I'd like to be part of it.''


A Child's World, Bettered by Design
LEAD: The Rocky Mountains were summertime green, except for snow on the highest peaks.
The sky was bright blue.
And the visibility, as the weather forecaster said day after day, was unlimited.


Designs for Europe;   Germany in NATO? Not Important
LEAD: A unified Germany will probably be in NATO -but will the United States?
The question may seem odd since the Atlantic alliance is, after all, our property.
We created it, pay for most of it, and provide the nuclear umbrella that makes it credible.
NATO without the U.S. is like the Holy Roman Empire without the Romans.


Using Housing Projects for Welfare Angers Tenants
LEAD: Two years ago, when the public was scandalized by reports of governments spending $1,800 a month to put children in tawdry welfare hotels, New York City vowed to end the practice and set a deadline.
The deadline is this Saturday, and, to many people's surprise, the city is close to meeting it.


Summer Adventures in Naturalism
LEAD: Among the activities offered by the Appalachian Mountain Club in New Hampshire this summer is an exploration of a wilderness lake, a field seminar in fresh water ecology, beginning backpacking and camping and an introduction to the plants of the state's White Mountains.


Chemistry, Chinese Food And No. 1
LEAD: In sports, it's hardly a new word.
But for the Knicks and the Nets, it's now a password.
Al Bianchi, the Knicks' general manager, and Bill Fitch, the Nets' coach, are using the word chemistry so often it's as if they were dealing with energy.
And in a way they are.
For those two teams, last night's National Basketball Association draft was a search for the energy that will turn the Knicks into contenders and the


James Moss Dies at 70; Ex-Adelphi Professor
LEAD: James A. Moss, University Professor of Social Science Emeritus at Adelphi University on Long Island, died on June 20 at New York Hospital.
He was 70 years old and lived in Manhattan.


NETS MAKE COLEMAN NO. 1 PICK IN N.B.A. DRAFT
LEAD: After weeks of watching tapes, speaking with coaches and trying to trade the selection, the Nets, with the first choice in last night's National Basketball Association draft, went for the favorite, Derrick Coleman of Syracuse.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on June 20 about the factoring of a 155-digit number - its division into three smaller numbers that cannot be further divided - misidentified the site of a computer used on the problem.
It was Florida State University, not the University of Florida.


Law;   Friends of Free Speech Now Consider Its Limits
LEAD: The American doctrine of freedom of expression is undergoing a profound re-examination on several fronts, legal scholars say, prompted by troubling and diverse questions like whether universities should punish students for making racist remarks and whether communities may ban sexually explicit rap music.


Geer Hires Ammirati Executive
LEAD: Peter Geer, the chairman of Geer DuBois Inc., announced yesterday that John Hayes, formerly an executive vice president at Ammirati &amp; Puris, had been appointed president of the agency and would eventually succeed him in running Geer DuBois.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
DECOLONIZATION SUBCOMMITTEE ON PETITIONS - 3 P.M.
NORTH AMERICAN REGIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON THE QUESTION OF PALESTINE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
CONFERENCE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT - GROUP OF EXPERTS ON ISLAND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Robert Bierman, 59, Electrical Contractor Who Led Company
LEAD: Robert Bierman, president of the Jandus Electric Construction Corporation of Long Island City, Queens, died on Wednesday after suffering a heart attack while driving on the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway near Pelham, N.Y., his brother-in-law, Seth Bartner, said yesterday.
He was 59 years old and lived in


Get Tough With Cuomo Is Bush Advice to Rinfret
LEAD: Pierre A. Rinfret, New York's Republican candidate for Governor, said President Bush told him today to hit Mario M. Cuomo and ''hit him hard'' in this fall's election campaign.


In Europe With John Lewis
LEAD: For his solo concert on Wednesday afternoon at Weill Recital Hall as part of the JVC Jazz Festival, the pianist John Lewis chose to play a whimsical European travelogue.
Instead of trotting out his most popular compositions for the Modern Jazz Quartet, the program included four compositions with titles about Paris; one called ''Milano''; two adaptations of Bach, and there were also three American pieces, including his own ''Brother Blues.


Dinkins Nears Pact to Raise Property Taxes
LEAD: To narrow the city's budget gap, the Dinkins administration and the City Council appeared close to an agreement late yesterday that would result in $260 million in higher property taxes, officials said.


Frohnmayer Said to See Peril to Theater Grants
LEAD: In a private meeting with a dozen art professionals in Seattle on Wednesday, John E. Frohnmayer, the chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, is reported to have said that ''certain political realities'' made it unlikely that some theater grants recommended by the endowment's peer panels would receive the endowment's support.


Surrender, Then Massacre At a Fort in Connecticut
LEAD: In Groton, Conn., Fourth of July fireworks and festivities are mixed with a touch of local history.
The town is the site of the remains of Fort Griswold, where the Battle of Groton Heights and a little-known Revolutionary War massacre took place.


TREASURY ISSUES CONTINUE TO GAIN
LEAD: The credit market rally continued yesterday, as prices of Treasury securities rose and interest rates dipped in moderately active trading.
For the first time this week, dealers said, retail customers were significant buyers of securities.


Tobacco Sales Off in California
LEAD: Cigarette sales have dropped 14 percent and state tobacco tax revenues have more than tripled since voters approved a tobacco tax increase in 1988, the American Lung Association said on Wednesday.


Washington Talk;   For Freshman Senator, A Unifying Budget Role
LEAD: For students of Congress, the role assigned to Senator Wyche Fowler Jr. of Georgia in the budget deliberations with the White House is an object lesson in how senators climb from junior member to insider.


World Cup '90;   Support for Maradona From an Opponent
LEAD: In the four games Argentina has played to reach the quarterfinals of the World Cup, Diego Maradona has become the most abused player in the tournament.
Opponents have fouled him at the appalling rate of almost 10 times a game, or once every nine minutes.


Profits Rise at Conagra and General Mills
LEAD: The food giant Conagra Inc. said yesterday that its earnings for the quarter rose 12.4 percent to a record, while General Mills Inc. said its earnings more than doubled in the quarter from year-earlier results, which were depressed by losses from discontinued operations.


IRAN AIDE DOUBTS HELP ON HOSTAGES
LEAD: An Iranian official involved in diplomatic affairs said today that Iran was unlikely to provide further help to the United States in obtaining the freedom of American hostages in Lebanon and that ''the level of hostilities'' was rising.


Plus on Drilling, Minus on Milling;   Suddenly, Fouled Beaches Are Less Likely
LEAD: Ever since the Exxon Valdez, Americans have been asking their leaders to strike a prudent balance between the environment and energy.
They received good pieces of news this week.
The first is President Bush's 10-year moratorium on new drilling for oil and gas in much of the coastal waters.
The second is an agreement by House and


At the Movies
LEAD:
Gielgud as a Girl


Conscience and the Court
LEAD: For seven years Nancy Cruzan has lain in a Missouri hospital in a vegetative state, insensible to her surroundings, kept alive by artificial feeding tubes.
This week the Supreme Court rejected her parents' plea to have the tubes disconnected and let her die in dignity.


A Pickens Drama, Far From Texas
LEAD: Those who believed that the battle between T. Boone Pickens and the Koito Manufacturing Company could not grow more chaotic were proved wrong today, as the latest encounter ended with the American raider staging a walkout at the company's annual meeting into a jostling pack of reporters and camera crews, where he declared the event a ''farce.


Jet Pilot Accidentally Fired Live Missile, Air Force Says
LEAD: The pilot of an F-15 fighter jet did not know he had a live missile aboard until he fired it at another plane during a practice dogfight, causing nearly $1 million damage, the Air Force said today.


Books of The Times;   Who Was Dian Fossey, And What Killed Her?
LEAD:
The Dark Romance of Dian Fossey
By Harold T. P. Hayes
351 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.95.


John Taft Weds Christine Jordan
LEAD: Christine Rinehart Jordan, a legal historian at the Supreme Court of the United States, and John Thomas Taft, a television producer in Washington, were married yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church in the Georgetown section of Washington by the Rev.
Sanford Garner Jr.
Mrs.
Taft is the daughter of Mr.


Consumer Group Is Naming Punished Medical Professionals
LEAD: A consumer advocacy group today released a nationwide compendium that identifies nearly 7,000 medical professionals who have been disciplined by state and Federal agencies.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, the Eating Well column in The Living Section on Wednesday misstated the opinion of Cathy McCharen, vice president of the Egg Nutrition Center, about the freshness of eggs.
Ms.
McCharen said Grade AA eggs with the United States Department of Agriculture seal on the carton were the most likely to be fresh, especially if produced locally.


Beware The Condor
LEAD: A charge was made in this space a month ago that the Defense Ministry of France was turning a blind eye to the shipment of Sagem inertial missile guidance systems to Iraq.


BUSINESS DIGEST: Friday, June 29, 1990
LEAD:
International


Rinfret Comes Out Swinging


U.S. Voices Overseas: Antiquated Weapons?
LEAD: In a corollary to the debate over what is to become of this country's defense establishment as the cold war recedes, a debate has begun over what to do with the worldwide information and broadcasting operations of the United States.


Federated Is Said to Be In Tax Case
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service is said to be considering a tax claim of more than $1 billion against Federated Stores Inc.
The basis for the claim is said to be that the Campeau Corporation misallocated the ''good will'' of Federated when it acquired the retail chain in 1988.


Tennis;   Chang Breezes Onward Despite 'Bomb' Distraction
LEAD: Michael Chang, awaiting the call to go to the tennis court for his second-round match today, was distracted from his usual pre-competition meditation by a drama that unfolded just beyond the stately bronze statue of Fred Perry that guards the gates.


Teen-Ager Cleared as Accessory To Friend's Killing of Her Mother
LEAD: Nineteen-year-old Karin Aparo, who was charged with engineering the murder of her mother nearly three years ago in an affluent Hartford suburb, was cleared today of the most serious charge against her - that she was an accessory in the killing.


Economic Scene;   How to Read Bush's Lips
LEAD: Did President Bush break his pledge of ''no new taxes,'' or, with his carefully phrased, succinct but ambiguous acknowledgement of the need for ''tax revenue increases,'' did he not?


People
LEAD: *
Mathew G. Crisci will join Backer Spielvogel Bates as executive vice president for the agency's Miller Brewing Company business.


Chronicle
LEAD: The Grammy winner K. D. LANG has been banned by KRVN, a radio station in Lexington, Neb., that broadcasts country music and farm and market reports to Nebraska, Kansas and Iowa.
It was formed by farm groups in the late 1940's.


Stocks Continue Rise as Dow Gains 16.58
LEAD: Stocks advanced yesterday for the second day in a row, but volume continued sluggish and is expected to stay light until after next week's Fourth of July festivities.


Sports People: HOCKEY;   Rangers Trade Nilan
LEAD: The Rangers traded Chris Nilan, a right wing, to the Boston Bruins yesterday for the rights to Greg Johnston, a right wing, and future considerations.
The Rangers then traded Johnston to the Toronto Maple Leafs for Tahir Domi, a forward, and Mark LaForest, a goalie.


Canadian Voices: Crisis Over Quebec Arouses More Chagrin Than Alarm
LEAD: Anybody watching television here in recent days might have thought Canada was preparing for its own funeral.


A.M.A. Supports Testing of French Abortion Pill
LEAD: The French abortion pill has won the backing of the American Medical Association, the nation's largest doctors' organization.


U.S. Schools Mishandle Math and Science Study;   Hit the Trenches First
LEAD: To the Editor:


Newton F. McKeon, Professor, 85
LEAD: Newton Felch McKeon, a retired professor of English and former director of the Robert Frost Library at Amherst College, died Tuesday at his home in Lexington, Mass.
He was 85 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Mr.
McKeon joined the faculty at Amherst in 1931 and, except for a year at Cambridge University in England on a research fellowship, spent his career there.


Albany Leaders Agree on Hospital Aid Increase
LEAD: Legislative leaders agreed tonight on a major revision of the state's system of health-care financing that would bail out distressed hospitals.
The pact would also provide substantial incentives for expanding the availability of primary care, although not by as much as Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo had requested.


Steven R. Gordon, 45, Pianist in Duo, Is Dead
LEAD: Steven Robert Gordon, a concert pianist best known as half of the piano duo he formed with his wife, Nadya, died on Saturday in Los Angeles.
He was 45 years old and had homes in Los Angeles and New York.


Basketball;   The Making of a Deal: How the Magic Got Scott
LEAD: The Orlando Magic, with the fourth choice in the National Basketball Association draft Wednesday night, wanted Dennis Scott of Georgia Tech.
The Nets, who had the first pick, were undecided about whether to take Derrick Coleman of Syracuse or Scott, the best perimeter shooter in the draft.


400 Homes in California Destroyed by Brush Fires
LEAD: As brush fires exploded across California, driven by heat, drought and suspected arson, firefighters raced today to keep abreast of sheets of flame that have destroyed more than 400 homes.


In the Hudson Valley, a Slice of Life as It Was in 1776
LEAD: On this pre-Fourth of July weekend, the Hudson Valley offers a chance to watch a re-enactment of life as it was lived in 1776, when the Declaration of Independence was adopted.


Restored Asser Levy Bathhouse Reopens


Ex-Police Chief Sentenced
LEAD: A former police chief was sentenced to 7 to 10 years in prison after pleading guilty to stealing cocaine from his department's evidence room.
The former chief, Richard J. Sproules, also received a concurrent 7-to-10-year term for embezzling city money and 3 to 5 years on two counts of intimidation of a witness and one count of attempting to procure another to commit perjury.


What Hungary Lost at Czechoslovakia's Birth
LEAD: To the Editor:


Senate Again Votes to Ban Assault Weapons for 3 Years
LEAD: The Senate today narrowly reaffirmed its decision to impose a three-year ban on certain types of semiautomatic assault weapons.


Pathe's Bid Is Set Back
LEAD: The Pathe Communications Corporation's attempt to acquire the MGM/ UA Communications Company was dealt another setback today as Pathe said it had reached an impasse in negotiations over Time Warner Inc.'s participation in the deal.


Pentagon Will Cut Generals and Admirals
LEAD: The U.S. military will cut 78 generals and admirals from its current total of 1,073 over the next four years as part of an expected major reduction in military spending, the Pentagon said Thursday.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Amoco Oil Co., Chicago, appointed David L. Lemmon president of its pipeline transportation subsidiary, Amoco Pipeline Co.


Five U.S. Chip Makers To Work With Toyota
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation said yesterday that it had chosen five United States semiconductor manufacturers to work with it to develop 23 specialized parts for future automobiles.


Fernandez to Run Drug Programs
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez took control of drug education programs in a Bronx school district yesterday, charging that the local board had failed to spend state and Federal money provided to hire counselors.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Broadway Street Fair, the east side of Broadway will be closed tomorrow from 66th to 71st Streets from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section on Wednesday about a coffee exhibit at the Colombian Center in Manhattan misstated its address.
It is 140 East 57th Street, not West 57th.


The Cost of Soviet Disintegration . . .
LEAD: The Soviet empire, heir to the Great Russian Empire, is finished -psychologically, politically, ideologically and socially.
It remains for the Soviet Government and the many nations it encompasses to work out the details.


Lawyer Cited in Insider Case
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission today charged Henry A. Singer, a partner in the New York law firm of Morrison, Cohen, Singer &amp; Weinstein, with insider trading in the stock of Wearever-Proctor- Silex Inc.


Results Plus;   Liberty Cup Winner


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-8
A pact to rectify trade imbalances was reached by the U.S. and Japan.
The accord is intended to trim America's spending excesses and to transform the Japanese economy, making it easier for foreigners to do business.
Page A1


Auctions
LEAD:
18th-Century Cabinet


Jonathan B. Suna Weds Ms. Hecht
LEAD: Cynthia L. Hecht, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Hecht of Grand Rapids, Mich., and Jonathan B. Suna, a son of Perle Suna of New York and the late Kenneth Suna, were married last evening.
Rabbi Richard S. Chapin performed the ceremony at the New York Academy of Art.


For Children
LEAD: Shows, Nature, Museums
''A YEAR WITH CHILDREN,'' a selection of painting, sculpture, poetry and essays by children in the New York City and New Jersey public schools, in the Learning Through Art/ Guggenheim Museum Children's program, 8 A.M. to midnight daily, at the Fifth Avenue gallery windows of the Empire State Building, 350 Fifth Avenue, at 34th Street.


Track and Field;   T.A.C. Official Defends Group's Drug Policies
LEAD: Ollan Cassell, executive director of The Athletics Congress, defended himself against allegations that the organization's officials had selectively enforced drug violations and pressured members of the drug appeals committee to overturn positive results.


Chronicle
LEAD: As a 90th birthday present, HELEN HAYES will have a $5 million theater and arts complex named for her in Nyack, N.Y., where she lives in a house overlooking the Hudson.
On Wednesday night, the Associated Press reported, she welcomed 100 friends and colleagues including DOUGLAS FAIRBANKS JR., LAURANCE ROCKEFELLER, COLLEEN DEWHURST and JOSE FERR


Corestates Acquisition
LEAD: The Corestates Financial Corporation, parent of the Philadelphia National Bank, said on Wednesday that it had acquired the Amherst Group for undisclosed terms.
Amherst, based in Cambridge, Mass., operates point-of-sale and bank-draft capture networks and processed about 40 million transactions annually for 116 financial institutions.


The Contra War, 1981 - 1990
LEAD: The man flourishing the gun is a contra leader who had just surrendered an arsenal of U.S.-made weapons to a United Nations force.
The woman in white is Nicaragua's President, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, presiding Wednesday over a monumental moment: the end of the contra war, promoted by Washington against Soviet-backed


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


In New Jersey, the Battles That Won a War
LEAD: In one of New Jersey's most beautiful state forests, the Wharton tract, west of Atlantic City, visitors this weekend will witness a re-creation of several Civil War battles by 600 people portraying members of Union and Confederate infantry, cavalry and artillery units.


Evolution in Europe;   Model East German Business Looks to Even Better Days Ahead
LEAD: When the sink-or-swim economic era dawns in East Germany on July 2, Planeta, a manufacturer of printing presses, will be a shoo-in not only to swim, but to leave everyone else in its wake.


Jazz Festival;   The Music Of Bobby McFerrin and Chick Corea
LEAD: Midway through Chick Corea and Bobby McFerrin's JVC Jazz Festival concert of improvisations at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday, what had begun as an evening of spontaneous musical doodlings suddenly turned into performance art.


Fernandez Is to Expand Use Of School Metal Detectors
LEAD: The use of weapons detectors in 15 New York City high schools has been so successful that Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez will seek to extend the program to 20 more high schools, his office said yesterday.


4 Projects Honored For Design
LEAD: The Albert S. Bard Awards, presented since 1963 by the City Club of New York to outstanding works of architecture and urban design in the city, were given yesterday to four New York projects and four New York public officials.
The awards to officials, one of whom is former Mayor John V. Lindsay, represent something of a departure for the Bard


Norway Salmon Dispute
LEAD: The Norweigan Government said today that it might fight an extra import duty the United States is scheduled to begin imposing on Friday on Norwegian farmed salmon.
The United States Government established the temporary 2.45 percent additional tariff in response to appeals by American fish farmers.


Avon Loses Suit On Rights Plan
LEAD: Avon Products Inc. said the United States District Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit had affirmed an earlier court ruling that invalidated an amendment to its share rights plan that had been challenged by Chartwell Associates, an unfriendly investor group that owns about 12.5 percent of Avon.


3 Little Words: How Bush Dropped His Tax Pledge
LEAD: When President Bush announced this week that ''tax revenue increases'' were essential to reduce the budget deficit, White House aides were hoping that the wording was vague enough for them to argue that Mr.
Bush had not explicitly abandoned his campaign pledge of ''no new taxes.''


Horse Racing: Notebook;   Handicappers to Gain A Line on Medication
LEAD: One of the most overdue and welcome aids to horseplayers takes effect Sunday when The Daily Racing Form will finally begin adding medication information to its charts and past-performance lines.


Our Towns;   Watch the Birds; They Divebomb On This Island
LEAD: Bonk!
That's the sound of a tern, a small gull-like bird, bouncing off Joel Helander's hard hat.


Supermarket Videos Planned by 2 Concerns
LEAD: Shoppers' Video, New York, an in-store advertising network, said it had reached an agreement with Nynex Computer Services to put its equipment into 4,000 supermarkets by 1992.
The companies said the installation cost will be $200 million.
For shoppers who prefer some programming with their advertising, Actmedia and Turner Broadcasting System announced yesterday that Checkout Channel, a news and information television broadcast, would start in six cities, including New York and Los Angeles, in August.


Cuomo Gives 12 Awards For Arts Achievement
LEAD: Twelve individuals and arts organizations have received this year's New York State Governor's Arts Awards.
The awards, bronze sculptures by Joel Fisher, were presented last night by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his wife, Matilda, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Mandela Travels to Miami Amid Protests Over Castro
LEAD: Nelson Mandela brought his anti-apartheid message to South Florida today, where his refusal to disavow Fidel Castro has earned him the enmity of many in the politically powerful Cuban-American community.


Bart T. Heffernan, Cardiologist, 65
LEAD: Dr.
Bart T. Heffernan, a cardiologist who was an early leader in the anti-abortion movement, died on Tuesday at Holy Cross Hospital in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 65 years old and lived in Sea Ranch Lakes, Fla.
His family said the cause of death was heart failure.


American's Big Plans For New Latin Routes
LEAD: If European and Asian routes are the highways of international aviation, Latin America has long been merely a side street.
Until now, Pan American World Airways and Eastern Airlines have been the only major United States carriers to fly these southern routes.


Court Issues Conflicting Rulings On Arizona's Death Penalty Law
LEAD: One day after it upheld Arizona's death penalty law, the Supreme Court today let stand a lower court ruling that had the effect of overturning most death sentences in Arizona, Idaho and Montana.


A Livery-Cab Driver Is Fatally Shot in Brooklyn


Capital Gains Mean Real Dollar Profits
LEAD: To the Editor:


Evolution in Europe;   As Cold War Recedes, Radio Services Face Cuts
LEAD: The worldwide information and broadcasting operations of the United States are facing reductions as the cold war era recedes and the Government budget shrinks, with the most painful cuts occurring at the United States Information Agency.


Biaggi Leaves Halfway House
LEAD: Former Representative Mario Biaggi has been released from a Brooklyn halfway house after serving less than half of a two-and-a-half-year sentence for accepting illegal gratuities, a probation official said yesterday.
Mr.
Biaggi, the Democratic Congressman from the Bronx for almost 20 years, checked out of the Esmore Halfway House on Myrtle Avenue on Wednesday, said Ralph Kistner, chief United States probation officer in Brooklyn.


40 Sightseers Hurt in Crash Of Alaska Excursion Train
LEAD: A locomotive crashed into a train of passenger cars carrying sightseers on a tour of the Klondike gold-rush trail on Wednesday, injuring 40 people, officials said.


Short Census Form Is to Be Included In New York Papers
LEAD: The census form, which has been mailed, hand delivered and yet ignored by thousands of residents, will now arrive with the newspaper.


Jazz Festival;   The Voice Unamplified, And Not by Choice
LEAD: The title of a JVC Jazz Festival program at Town Hall on Wednesday evening, ''An Evening of American Song,'' seemed to suggest that it would focus on singers.
As it turned out, it involved two instrumental groups - the Gerry Mulligan Quartet and the piano-cornet duo of Dick Hyman and Ruby Braff - and only one singer, Barbara Lea.


At Jogger Trial, A Rescuer Tells Of Gang Attack
LEAD: A New York City school teacher testified yesterday that a gang of youths beat him unconscious last year when he paused while jogging along the Central Park reservoir to help a man he said the youths had thrown to the ground and were attacking.


Leonard M. Elstad, Educator, 91
LEAD: Leonard M. Elstad, president of Gallaudet College in Washington from 1945 to 1969, died Wednesday at a nursing home in Mauston, Wis., where he lived.
He was 91 years old.
The family said the cause of death had not been determined.


Trooper Versus Trooper At a Trial on Brutality
LEAD: In the more than two weeks since the trial of five state troopers began here, the accusations and insults leveled by members of the force have made it seem as if the law-enforcement agency itself is among the defendants.


U.S. Schools Mishandle Math and Science Study
LEAD: To the Editor:


Israeli Held in Massacre Says He Sought Revenge for Rape
LEAD: The Israeli who confessed to killing seven Palestinian workers last month, touching off a chain of rioting, death and terrorism, now says the massacre was a premeditated act of personal revenge for a gang rape he suffered at the age of 12.


Chronicle
LEAD: MIKHAIL BARYSHNIKOV will dance again this year - on a national tour of works by MARK MORRIS.
The tour, the White Oak Dance Project, includes two new works by Mr.Morris.


Agreement Allows Minolta To Market Polaroid Camera
LEAD: In an arrangement that could lead to closer links between two major photography companies, the Polaroid Corporation and the Minolta Camera Company announced yesterday that Minolta would sell a Polaroid instant camera under its own name.


Plus on Drilling, Minus on Milling;   Yet Mr. Bush Writes Off Ancient Forests
LEAD: President Bush says he's an environmentalist and pronounces on plans to plant a billion trees.
But given the chance of saving the last remnant of the majestic old-growth forests of the Pacific Northwest, he ducks.


Senator Urges Military Resources Be Turned to Environmental Battle
LEAD: Calling environmental destruction ''a growing national security threat,'' Senator Sam Nunn, the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, today proposed shifting substantial Defense Department and intelligence resources to address ecological problems.


Sports People: PRO BASKETBALL;   Figures on Ferry
LEAD: Danny Ferry's contract with the Cleveland Cavaliers will pay him at least $14 million over the next five years and it could ultimately become a 10-year, $34 million deal, The Akron Beacon Journal reported yesterday.


Panel Backs Fraud Funds
LEAD: Legislation that would triple Federal spending to pursue savings and loan fraud won unanimous endorsement today from members of a House banking panel.


Golf;   No-Cart Rule Finding Supporters and Critics
LEAD: Riding golf carts is common practice in Senior PGA Tour events, and, to the horror of traditionalists, has become almost as common among weekend players.
But here at the United States Senior Open, everybody has to walk.


Dole Foods President Goes to Leading Rival
LEAD: In a major food industry shuffle, Robert W. Fisher, president of Castle &amp; Cooke Inc.'s Dole Food Company, is leaving to join a rival, the PPI Del Monte Tropical Fruit Company.


Sports People: Track and Field;   Ben Johnson to Race?
LEAD: Ben Johnson could be on Canada's Olympic team for the 1992 Games in Barcelona, Spain, the head of the Canadian Olympic Association said yesterday. ''If Ben is prepared right now to come back clean and he's determined to run as one of our athletes, then he's welcome once the sanctions are lifted,'' the association president, Carol Anne Letheren, said at a news conference in


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.32
8.32
9.69
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.75
7.78
7.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.73
7.67
7.74
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.47
8.53
8.15
30-YR.


Trump Effect Seen At Banks
LEAD: The cost of Donald J. Trump's debt problems is beginning to show up on the financial statements of the banks he has dealt with.


Child-Abuse Protection Approved in Albany
LEAD: Child-abuse cases would become easier to prosecute under a measure approved on Wednesday by the Legislature.


Shamir Again Opposes U.S. On Plans for Mideast Talks
LEAD: In the Israeli Government's first official response to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d's request for movement in negotiations, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir has again refused to accept the two American compromises that many Palestinians had accepted as a way of getting talks started.


Women Have (Not Often) Played Falstaff
LEAD: To the Editor:


L.I. Teen-Ager Guilty Of Killing His Parents
LEAD: A Long Island teen-ager accused of killing his parents because they restricted his use of a family car and boat was convicted today of two counts of murder.


Agency Says It Met a Bailout Goal
LEAD: Working against a self-imposed deadline of June 30, the Resolution Trust Corporation, established to manage the savings and loan bailout, said it had all but cleared its first major hurdle by completing the sale of 140 insolvent savings institutions over the past three months to banks and other private investors.


U.N. to Ask Morocco and Sahara To Meet on Extending Cease-Fire
LEAD: Javier Perez de Cuellar, the United Nations Secretary General, will ask representatives of Morocco and Saharan guerrillas to meet in Geneva next week to extend indefinitely a temporary cease-fire they accepted earlier this year, effectively ending the 15-year-old war for control of Western Sahara.


Lotus Wins Copyright Decision
LEAD: The Lotus Development Corporation gained a significant victory yesterday when a Federal judge in Boston ruled that its copyright had been infringed by competitors whose software imitates the command structure of Lotus's 1-2-3 spreadsheet program.


Review/Film;   When a Comedian Becomes an Institution
LEAD: There once was a time when Bill Cosby was a very funny man, but television, like the devil, must be given its due.
After seven years of starring in the weekly ''Cosby Show,'' much of that time as one of the most popular entertainers in America, Mr.
Cosby has become a very different sort of performing personality.


Pop/Jazz;   A Gathering Of Greats, Rare Even In New York
LEAD: Ella Fitzgerald, Stan Getz, Alva Rogers, Joe Arroyo, Buddy Guy, Oscar D'Leon, Graham Haynes and Milton Cardona may have many things in common, but the most obvious is that they are all in New York City this weekend to perform.


Money for Food Program Voted
LEAD: Thousands of poor women and children being cut from a popular Federal nutrition program because of a financial shortage would be reinstated under legislation approved by the House today.


Savings Unit Donations Criticized
LEAD: Common Cause, the political advocacy group that has been pushing for campaign finance reform, said today that savings and loan interests contributed more than $11 million to members of Congress during the 1980's and that lawmakers on the House and Senate Banking Committees got the bulk of the contributions.


Steady Course Is Seen For World Economies
LEAD: The economies of the industrialized world remain on a steady course at the start of the 1990's, but governments should not ease up in the fight against inflation, the head of the economics department of a leading international organization said today.


Mike Jones, Boxing Manager, 55
LEAD: Mike Jones, a boxing manager since the mid-1970's, died Tuesday at his home in West Hempstead, L.I.
He was 55 years old.


Marcos Jury Is Told to Weigh Whether She Avoided 'Truth'
LEAD: The fate of Imelda Marcos will depend not only on what she knew but also on what she avoided knowing, the judge at Mrs.
Marcos's racketeering trial told the jurors yesterday.
Then, minutes later, the 12 members of the jury left the courtroom to begin the challenging task of trying to figure out what had been happening inside Mrs.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
Friday
ASIA AND FILM


Melted Coins And Rubble Above a City
LEAD: Ron and June Guadagno picked through the smoldering remains of their house today, just two victims of a brush fire that destroyed 560 structures, most of them homes, as it continued to rage through the parched hills above this affluent city.


Charles Jensen, 76, A Retired Executive Of CIT Corp., Dies
LEAD: Charles S. Jensen, a retired executive of the CIT Corporation, died on Tuesday at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
He was 76 years old and lived in Manhasset, L.I.


SCIENTISTS ASSESS THE HUBBLE LOSS
LEAD: The discouraging words had raced through the world of astronomy for many days: the Hubble Space Telescope could not be properly focused, and this problem was not likely to go away through some sleight-of-hand with computer software modifications.


Women have (Not Often) played Falstaff;   'A Shame to Her Sex!'
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Chapter for Shoreham: New York Files to Take Plant
LEAD: New York State formally asked the Federal Government today for permission to take over the Shoreham Nuclear Power Station so it can be dismantled.
The request came as Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, seeking to show that the fight over Shoreham had entered a new chapter, toured the idle plant for the first time.


U.S. Schools Mishandle Math and Science Study;   Finding the Talented
LEAD: To the Editor:


Vento Jury Struggling to Reach Consensus
LEAD: The jury deciding the murder case against John S. Vento, once a major witness in the Bensonhurst murder investigation, said yesterday that it was unable to reach a verdict on some charges.


Money Fund Assets Off
LEAD: The assests of the nation's 513 money market mutual funds decreased by $444.90 million, to $384.99 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assests of the 161 institutional funds decreased by $116.20 million to $91.83 billion.
The assets of the 250 general-purpose funds were up by $27.70 million, to $133.99 billion.


Britain Accepts Rover Ruling
LEAD: Britain said today that it had accepted a judgment by the European Community's Executive Commission against the Government's aid to British Aerospace P.L.C. in the sale of the state-owned Rover automobile group.
Trade Secretary Nicholas


Alcoa in Contract On Recycled Cans
LEAD: Browning-Ferris Industries announced an agreement to sell more than one billion used aluminum cans yearly to the Alcoa Recycling Company.
Browning-Ferris, based in Houston, is one of the world's largest waste handling companies.
It collects cans through organized recycling efforts in 170 programs nationwide.


Bomb Kills 14 at Police Station in Medellin
LEAD: A car bomb exploded today on a crowded street outside a police station in Medellin, killing 14 people and wounding 30, the authorities said.


'You Are Playing With J. Nicklaus'
LEAD: When 56-year-old Dean Sheetz got a message from his wife, Barbara, last Monday morning that Mike Butz in the United States Senior Open office had phoned, the retired insurance executive in Charlotte, N.C., immediately dialed the number.


Chairman at D.M.B.&amp;B.
LEAD: As expected, D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles has named its chief executive, Roy Bostock, to the additional post of chairman.
He replaces the retiring John S. Bowen, who becomes chairman emeritus.


Yale's President Orders the Closing of Its Review
LEAD: The president of Yale University, Benno C. Schmidt Jr., has decided to terminate The Yale Review, a 79-year-old literary quarterly that has introduced works by William Butler Yeats, Eudora Welty, Robert Frost, Robert Penn Warren and others.


U.S. AND JAPAN SET ACCORD TO RECTIFY TRADE IMBALANCES
LEAD: After a year of wide-ranging critiques of each other's economies, the United States and Japan reached an unusual agreement today intended to trim America's spending excesses and to transform the Japanese economy, making it easier for foreigners to do business here.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I am very outraged at what has happended to Hubble.
I think it has seriously hurt the credibility of NASA when they've had so much time and enough money to get it right.''
- Senator Barbara Mikulski, Maryland Democrat.
[A16:3.]


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the 14th annual Festival Latino to be held in August at the Public Theater in Manhattan and at other sites credited the revue ''Mondo Mambo'' incorrectly.
It is by Adal Maldonado and Pedro


Msgr. Joseph C. Krug, Retired Principal, 90
LEAD: Msgr.
Joseph C. Krug, a Roman Catholic priest who was the first principal of Stepinac High School in White Plains, died on Monday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 90 years old and lived in the Bronx.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Airbus Industrie, a consortium of companies in France, West Germany Britain and Spain said Olympic Airways of Greece had ordered two Airbus A300-600R airliners and placed options for two more.
No financial details were available.


Chronicle
LEAD: In a polo match yesterday near Highgrove Manor, his country home, PRINCE CHARLES fell from his pony and broke his right arm.
He was taken to the nearby Cirencester Memorial Hospital in Gloustershire.
PRINCESS DIANA was in London, 70 miles to the east, when the accident occurred.


Continental Seeks Overseas Routes
LEAD: Continental Airlines Holdings Inc. filed applications with the United States Department of Transportation to fly direct routes from Newark to Moscow, Berlin, Rome and Milan. ''These applications are part of Continental Airlines strategic growth plans internationally and for this area,'' Continental's president, Mickey Foret, said.


Court Sees Tape Of Mayor Barry Talking of Drugs
LEAD: The prosecution in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug trial put its key piece of evidence on display today: a fuzzy videotape of him making sexual advances toward a longtime friend in a hotel room, arguing with her about whether to obtain and smoke crack and, finally, lighting a pipe himself.


Sports People: BASEBALL;   Rose Sentencing Report To Reach Judge Soon
LEAD: The pre-sentencing report on Pete Rose should soon be in the hands of the judge who will decide his fate, but Rose may not know for some time whether he will be imprisoned.


Raymond J. McDonough, Union Official, 61
LEAD: Raymond J. McDonough, a former vice president of LOcal 32-E of the Building Service Employees International Union, died Wednesday at the Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
Mr.
McDonough, who was 61 years old an lived in Mahopac N.Y., died of heart failure, his son said.


Evolution in Europe;   Baker Says NATO Might Pursue Individual Pacts in Eastern Europe
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d indicated today that NATO leaders might agree at their summit meeting next week to invite individual members of the Warsaw Pact to enter into nonaggression agreements with NATO to give the Eastern European countries a greater sense of belonging to the new Europe.


CONFEREES AGREE ON BILL TO COVER COST OF OIL SPILLS
LEAD: House and Senate conferees today resolved the main dispute that had blocked passage of comprehensive legislation on oil spills, and Congressional leaders said they now expected the bill to pass in July.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Quatorze Bis


Military Tests Could Have Found Defect in Telescope, Experts Say
LEAD: The space agency considered and rejected the use of top-secret military testing equipment that industry experts say would probably have detected the serious problem in the mirrors of the Hubble Space Telescope before it was launched.


3 van Goghs Stolen From Dutch Museum
LEAD: Three early oil paintings by Vincent van Gogh were stolen early today from the North Brabant Museum, 55 miles south of Amsterdam, a museum official said.


Review/Art;   Hartley's Later Works Show a Talent Distilled
LEAD: Marsden Hartley's vibrant, heraldic abstractions of 1913 and 1914, usually known as the ''German officer paintings,'' are uncanny blends of German Expressionism, Wassily Kandinsky's turbulent energy and Synthetic Cubism with more than a touch of the American primitive.
They have rightly earned him a permanent place in the history of modern art.


Boxing: Notebook;   Trump's Price Is Right for Tyson-Foreman Doubleheader
LEAD: When someone jokingly offered last weekend to lend Gary Selesner, the acting president of Trump Plaza, ''a couple hundred bucks'' for his financially beleaguered boss, Selesner, usually a congenial man, was not amused.


Corrections
LEAD: A caption yesterday in a picture grouping with an article about the apathy of young people toward public affairs misattributed a quotation in some copies, about news coverage of the Ohio flash flood.
The statement was not made by John Karras; he was quoting another young man.


Jazz Festival;   Pearl Bailey's Pop and the Blues of Wynton Marsalis
LEAD: Seriousness and shtick shared the stage of Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday night in one of those peculiar jazz festival double bills: the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis opening for the singer Pearl Bailey.
For her adoring audience, the 72-year-old Miss Bailey did a slightly elevated lounge act, with pop songs, standards and selections from ''Hello, Dolly!


Trading Is Focused on Yen; Dollar Ends Mostly Higher
LEAD: The dollar finished mostly higher yesterday in relatively quiet trading on world currency markets.


Slow Day at the Spy Shop in Teheran: Is It a Sign?
LEAD: Business was only fair today at the spy shop.


Discovering Traces of the Times When America Was New
LEAD: IT may not seem possible in today's line of sight, but they fought a war in New York and within commuting distance of the big city.
That was more than 200 years ago and it was called the American Revolution.
With the Fourth of July in the offing, it is time to tell the story again, and the most vivid way to learn it is to visit places that recall it.


Fraud Trial Nearing Its End
LEAD: Ivan F. Boesky is ''a pile of human garbage'' who lied repeatedly on the witness stand about dealings with his former friend and colleague, John A. Mulheren Jr., Mr.
Mulheren's lawyer said yesterday.


Evolution in Europe;   Walesa Sees a Need to Split Solidarity to Insure Reforms
LEAD: Lech Walesa said today that his Solidarity labor movement, rocked by a power struggle, must split to insure the success of Poland's reforms.


Golf;   5-Birdie Blast Gives Trevino Seniors Lead
LEAD: Just as he has for nearly his entire rookie year on the Senior Tour, Lee Trevino separated himself from the field yesterday in his first United States Senior Open.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Domecq Importers, to Deutsch, for Presidente brandy and Sauza tequila, with a budget between $2.5 million and $3 million.


School Board Gets 2 New Hispanic Members
LEAD: A city official and an education advocate, both of whom are Hispanic, were named yesterday to the New York City Board of Education, leaving only one seat to be filled on the seven-member board that takes over next month.


Baseball;   With 2 Out in the 9th, Geren Comes Through
LEAD: The Yankees were encouraged yesterday when they won the deciding game, 3-2, of a three-game series with the Milwaukee Brewers on Bob Geren's run-scoring two-out single in the ninth inning at the Stadium.


Law: At The Bar;   The Wanderings of a Probate Lawyer Illustrate the Shakiness in the World of Firms.
LEAD: Harry (Suitcase) Simpson is a familiar figure in baseball lore, a journeyman outfielder who earned his nickname by the frequency with which he changed teams.
But in his own peripatetic way, a New York lawyer named Herbert Bockstein makes Mr.
Simpson seem positively static.


Ribi Investment By SmithKline
LEAD: Ribi Immunochem Research Inc., a company engaged in the research and development of biomedical agents to activate the immune system to combat diseases, said it had received $1 million in equity financing from S.R.
One Ltd., the venture capital fund of SmithKline Beecham P.L.C., the big pharmaceutical concern.


U.S. Schools Mishandle Math and Science Study;   Helping Hands
LEAD: To the Editor:


Engelhard, Aiding Shift, Names No. 2 Executive
LEAD: The Engelhard Corporation, which is changing its emphasis from metals refining to specialty chemicals, has named L. Donald LaTorre as its No. 2 executive.


Copper Up on Strike Threat; Orange Juice Prices Surge
LEAD: Prices of copper futures rose sharply yesterday on the Commodity Exchange in New York amid speculation of a strike at an Arizona copper mine and supply disruptions from Zambia, the world's sixth-largest copper producer.


Long-Call Rate Cuts By A.T.&amp;T.
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company announced yesterday that it plans to reduce its long-distance telephone rates by $300 million a year, beginning July 1.


Sports People: HOCKEY;   New Pact for Holmgren
LEAD: The Philadelphia Flyers yesterday extended the contract of Coach Paul Holmgren, reportedly for two years.
The Flyers did not disclose terms.
Holmgren, 34 years old, took over the Flyers' job June 1, 1988, after the dismissal of Mike Keenan, at the time the coach with the most N.H.L. victories.
Keenan was dismissed because management thought he was too much of a disciplinarian.(


Throughout Westchester, Relics of a Revolutionary Past
LEAD: Westchester County achieved an interesting distinction during the American Revolution: it suffered probably more than any other area of the young nation because for the duration of the war it was caught between British and American lines.


Surrogate Defends Herself on Lawyer Fees
LEAD: Marie M. Lambert, a judge in the powerful Manhattan Surrogate's Court, is defending herself against claims that she abused her powers by awarding excessive fees to lawyers and by failing to disclose her friendships with lawyers in cases before her.


Review/Dance;   'A Mass,' a Surprise City Ballet Premiere
LEAD: The New York City Ballet came up with a surprise.
On Wednesday night at the New York State Theater, it offered the premiere of a work that had not been announced in any of its original schedules: ''A Mass (Missa Sicca),'' a 35-minute piece for a cast of 100 dancers drawn from the company and its affiliated School of American


Tracking Crimes of Prejudice: A Hunt for the Elusive Truth
LEAD: Sgt.
Edgar DeLeon of the New York Police Department's Bias Investigation Unit glanced through the case folder with a sheaf of pink typewritten reports, absorbing the details of an attack by four black men on two Hispanic men in the Bronx.
His fingers shuffled through Polaroid photographs, pausing at one of a seven-inch purple gash across a victim's head.


To Keep the Likes of 'The 11th Hour' on the Air
LEAD: To the Editor:


2 Army Reservists Killed
LEAD: Two Army reservists from New York State were killed Tuesday when the armored vehicle in which they were riding overturned.
The men, who were participating in annual training here, were identified as Sgt.
Herbert V. Revill of Grand Island, N.Y., and Sgt.
Philip Struebel of Kenmore, N.Y.
The accident also injured another New York reservist, Sgt.


Argentine Phone Deals
LEAD: Two groups, one led by an American bank and the other by a Spanish telephone company, were each awarded a majority stake today in a portion of Entel, Argentina's state telephone monopoly, according to a decree signed by President Carlos Saul Menem.
The American group, led by the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation and including the Bell Atlantic Corporation, was awarded a 60 percent stake in a new regional telephone company to serve northern Argentina and half of Buenos Aires.


Investor Raises Stake in Ecogen
LEAD: Ecogen Inc., a maker of biological pesticides, said the New York investor David Blech had signed a letter of intent to increase his investment in the company by $6.5 million, raising his stake to 36 percent, from 9 percent.
The company said that as a result of Mr.
Blech's new investment, it was no longer seeking a buyer.


U.S. Broadens Inquiry Into Airline Fares
LEAD: The Justice Department, expanding its inquiry into pricing and competition in the airline industry, has asked airlines for detailed information about their computerized system of publishing fares, according to Government and industry officials.


Lighting Up the Skies Over 3 States
LEAD:
New York City


INSIDE
LEAD:
Paying for Health Care
New York legislative leaders agreed on major changes in the state's health-care finance system, to bail out distressed hospitals.
Page B1.
Protest Over Arts Grants
The arts endowment chairman reportedly told a private meeting that some recommended grants are unlikely to win final approval.


Renovation to Delay L.I.R.R. Commuters
LEAD: Long Island Rail Road commuters face delays on all trains going into or out of Pennsylvania Station starting tonight and continuing through Labor Day because of renovations along a two-mile stretch of track in Long Island City, Queens.


ANOTHER TOP AIDE QUITS JUSTICE POST
LEAD: The head of the Justice Department's criminal division announced his resignation today, leaving a high-level vacancy at an agency battered by personnel upheavals in recent months.


Videotaped Evidence Introduced at Barry Trial


Market Place;   Stock Rush Slows At Mutual Funds
LEAD: Mutual fund investors have slowed their headlong rush into stock funds, managers said yesterday, but are still not taking money out of the funds despite June's choppy equity market.
The managers added that ''junk bond'' funds, after nearly a year of seeing money pour out, are finally attracting new cash.


Evolution in Europe;   As Marxism Vanishes, Hungarians Argue Over Role of Religion in School
LEAD: As the last traces of Communist ideology disappear from Hungarian life, a new debate has broken out in this predominantly Roman Catholic country over the role of religion in public education.


2 Drummers, One Soviet
LEAD: The drummer Andrew Cyrille brought the Soviet drummer Vladimir Tarasov with him to the stage of the Equitable Center on Tuesday afternoon.
The show, part of a double bill including a group led by the guitarist Brandon Ross, was part of the Knitting Factory Goes Uptown series of the JVC Jazz Festival.


Results Plus
LEAD:
GOLF
Johnston Tops L.P.G.A.
Cathy Johnston shot an eight-under-par 65 yesterday and took a two-stroke lead over Patti Rizzo after one round of the du Maurier Classic in Kitchener, Ontario.
Rizzo, who began her round over the hilly par-73 Westmount Golf and Country Club on the 10th hole, fired a 30 over the back nine.


When America Was New
LEAD: The Revolutionary battlegrounds of New York, submerged beneath the city's shell of iron and concrete and contemporary belligerency, sometimes seem as irretrievably lost as an Atlantis.
At this time of year, the story of independence that must be told each Fourth of July has a chapter that describes the fate of the city and its surroundings when they were the scene of events that helped determine whether the frail new nation might withstand the might of empire.


Leningrad Journal;   Party, Facing Clings to Its Properties
LEAD: The Tauride Palace was built in the 18th century for Prince Potemkin as a gift from Catherine the Great, but in living memory it has belonged to a more contemporary royalty - the Communist Party.


4 Options Exchanges Agree On a New Trading System
LEAD: Four of the nation's five exchanges that trade stock options have agreed upon a new computer system for options trading, and officials of the Securities and Exchange Commission said it could be in place by the end of the year.


Review/Dance;   Who Does What to Whom, Or, a Kinetic Wit at Play
LEAD: Mark Morris and his Brussels-based company, Monnaie Dance Group/Mark Morris, are performing through tomorrow night at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival, which opened its 58th season on Tuesday night.


Evolution in Europe;   Lithuanians Debating a Freeze on Independence
LEAD: Lithuania's legislators began debating a freeze of their declaration of independence today, and some questioned whether President Mikhail S. Gorbachev had the credibility or staying power to stick to a compromise.


Doctor Guilty in Insider Case
LEAD: A psychiatrist pleaded guilty yesterday to charges of trading on confidential information about the BankAmerica Corporation that he learned from a patient, Joan Weill, the wife of the financier Sanford Weill.


On Stage
LEAD:
Launching a New Market Ploy


Restaurants
LEAD: It's an unlikely place to find a Caribbean-theme restaurant, in the landlocked, windowless, bustling lobby of the Pan Am building, just a seashell's toss from Grand Central Terminal.
In converting the former Charley Brown's to the new Tropica Bar and Seafood House, Restaurant Associates has done such a tasteful job that you easily forget where you are - except, perhaps, for a video monitor in the bar announcing train departures.


Fluor Is Awarded Big Saudi Contract
LEAD: A contract to oversee the near-doubling of Saudi Arabia's oil production capacity is the biggest project for the Fluor Corporation, the engineering and construction giant, in a decade.
Officials at the Irvine-based company and Saudi Arabia's state-owned Aramco did not put an exact value on the contract, which was awarded on Wednesday.


Chronicle
LEAD: SIDNEY POITIER will play THURGOOD MARSHALL in a two-part television film, ''Separate but Equal,'' to be broadcast next April on ABC.
The program is about Justice Marshall's role in arguing in the Supreme Court Brown v.
Board of Education, the 1954 decision that outlawed segregation in public schools.


Corrections
LEAD: A Company News report in Business Day yesterday misstated the price per share received by the Rochester investor Malcolm I. Glazer from the sale of 1.2 million shares of Harley-Davidson Inc.
It was $25.625.


Review/Theater;   What Has AIDS Done To Land of 'Falsettos'?
LEAD: Nearly 10 years after its debut, the electric opening number of William Finn's breakthrough musical, ''March of the Falsettos,'' remains emblazoned in memory: A handful of leapfrogging young performers, backed by a jazzy band, charged forward on a red stage at Playwrights Horizons to sing merrily about the neurotic plight of ''Four Jews in a Room Bitching.


Baton Rouge Journal;   A Dash of Flamboyance In the Lawmaking Stew
LEAD: The Louisiana Legislature, which holds forth in the 34-story Art Deco monument Huey P. Long built during the Depression, is the kind of body that leads to profound musings about the nature of democracy.


Mandela Mania: Inner-City Children Find Hero of Their Own
LEAD: In a sun-dappled schoolyard here, a dozen children lost themselves in the furious foot-stomping of an African dance.
They flailed their arms and twirled and swooned, and chided the few who got out of step because everything had to be perfect.


Sports People: Track and Field;   Waitz Enters Marathon
LEAD: Grete Waitz, who has been the world's top female marathon runner for more than a decade, was in New York yesterday to act as official starter of the Manufacturers Hanover Corporate Challenge race in Central Park last night.


Looking Out, Blearily: The Mirrors of Hubble
LEAD: By ground-based standards, the Hubble Space Telescope is an instrument of relatively modest size and conventional design.
Its power, astronomers hoped, would lie in its orbit high above the earth's murky atmosphere and in the extreme precision of the two mirrors that are its heart.


TV Weekend;   The Urge to Gamble, and How to Fight It
LEAD: Gambling as an addiction, as severe and destructive as an addiction to alcohol or any other drug, is the subject of ''Lucky Number,'' a feisty documentary tomorrow at 8 P.M. on Channel 13.
Presented by Maryland Public Television, the hourlong essay was made by the same team that did ''Other Faces of AIDS.


Baseball;   Red Sox Extend Lead As Clemens Wins 12th
LEAD: Roger Clemens gained his 12th victory tonight as the Boston Red Sox defeated the Toronto Blue Jays, 4-3, to complete a four-game sweep.


Baseball;   Streak Reaches 10 as Mets Beat Reds and Slip Into 2d Place
LEAD: By any name, it was a confrontation, a shootout, maybe a preview of next October's playoff for the National League pennant: The Cincinnati Reds, the team with the best record in baseball, against the Mets, the hottest team in baseball.
And the Mets did not fluster or faint.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in Business Day on Wednesday and another on June 16, listing Donald J. Trump's holdings, described one property incorrectly.
Mr. Trump bought the Foundling


It's Getting to Be a Habit: No-Hitters for Stewart and Valenzuela
LEAD: Fernando Valenzuela of the Dodgers joined Dave Stewart of the Athletics in the record book tonight, pitching the second no-hitter of the day and baseball's fourth in June as Los Angeles beat the St.
Louis Cardinals by 6-0.
A few hours earlier, Stewart pitched a no-hitter at the Skydome in defeating the Toronto Blue


William E. Davies, 72, Of Geological Survey
LEAD: William E. Davies, a retired official of the United States Geological Survey, died on Wednesday at his home in Falls Church, Va.
He was 72 years old.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Beneficial Bugs
LEAD: Not all bugs are bad.
A good many deserve to be left alone so they can destroy other insects that feed on plants.
Here is what they look like and what they prey on.
Ground Beetle: Feeds at night on caterpillars and soft-bodied larvae
Lacewing: Whiteflies, thrips, leafhoppers, mites


Peter W. Bove, Civic Leader, 82
LEAD: Peter W. Bove, a retired telephone company supervisor who was active in community affairs, died on Tuesday at his home in Upper Montclair, N.J.
He was 82 years old.


Searchers End Attempt To Find Flood Victims
LEAD: Two week s after the flood that devastated the nearby eastern Ohio village of Shadyside and killed at least 24 people, the search for victims has ended with nine people still listed as missing.


Signal Power Failure Knocks Out Trains In Northeast Corridor
LEAD: A signal power failure disrupted train traffic along the Northeast corridor between Philadelphia and New York yesterday, leaving thousands of passengers stranded as they tried to get out of town for the 4th of July holiday week.


Newsprint Recycling Becomes Law for Papers in Suffolk
LEAD: The Suffolk County Executive today signed the most restrictive local newsprint-recycling law in the nation.
It requires newspapers with weekly circulations of 20,000 or more that are printed or sold in the county to publish only on recycled paper by the end of 1996.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Parental-Leave Bill Vetoed


93 NATIONS MOVE TO BAN CHEMICALS THAT HARM OZONE
LEAD: In a landmark agreement, most of the world's nations vowed today that by the end of the century they would halt the production of chemicals that destroy the atmosphere's protective ozone layer.


Stolen Treasure: Three Stories
LEAD: Joe T. Meador, the American Army officer believed to have carried off one of the biggest art thefts of the century in the waning days of World War II, simply mailed his treasures home to Whitewright, Tex., via the Army Post Office, a longtime friend and two former soldiers who served with him in Europe say.


Pirates Fall a Rung, Losing to Giants
LEAD: Will Clark had a home run among his three hits and drove in three runs today night to lift the San Francisco Giants to a 7-3 victory over Pittsburgh, knocking the Pirates out of first place in the National League East.


Evolution in Europe;   In East German Town, Shoddy Wares Are Already a Memory
LEAD: Last fall, the East Germans withdrew their confidence from the Communist Government, and it fell.
Now, in the last days before their currency also sinks into oblivion, they are consigning to the past the consumer goods that Communism produced.


Disney Is Forming Children's Book Unit
LEAD: The Walt Disney Company, which for years has licensed its Disney characters to publishers, said today that it was forming a children's book publishing company to capitalize on its assets.


Lawn Care Concern Says It Will Limit Safety Claims
LEAD: The largest chemical lawn-care service in the United States has agreed to refrain from making broad safety claims for its products.


Liberian Group Requests Temporary Sanctuary for Refugees


Government Bans Mercury in Interior Latex Paints
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency announced yesterday that it was banning the use of mercury in interior latex paint, saying the toxic chemical posed an unacceptable health risk.


Barry's Defense Seeks to Depict Arrest as Illegal
LEAD: The defense went on the offensive today in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug trial, aggressively seeking to portray the Mayor's arrest in a videotaped undercover drug operation as overzealous conduct by the police.


Dissident Physicist Takes Post at Cambridge


Jerome K. Ohrbach, 82, Ex-Head Of Well-Known Apparel Chain
LEAD: Jerome K. Ohrbach, president of Ohrbach's apparel stores before the chain was sold to Europeans in 1962, died on Thursday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 82 years old.


A Correction
LEAD: Lines were omitted from a letter June 26 by Elizabeth Holtzman, New York City Comptroller, on diversification of pension investments, which should have been characterized as follows: ''It is the way a fund minimizes its risk of loss while maximizing the return on its investments.''


Evolution in Europe;   Edgily, East Germans Await Economic Union
LEAD: Grocery stores across East Germany stood bare and people outside banks stood for hours today as the country braced for the surrender of its forlorn economy to the West.
For most, the suspense and uncertainty were tempered by anticipation of a promising new life, but there were also those for whom the transition was deeply troubling.


Trump Ousts President of Shuttle Airline
LEAD: Donald J. Trump replaced the head of his Northeast shuttle yesterday, ousting Bruce Nobles as president.
Mr.
Trump had said earlier that he was upset with the airline's management.


Repairing the Census
LEAD: Challenged to correct the census for chronic undercounting distortions in major cities, the Commerce Department resists.
Its first line of defense, that miscounting would be minimized by ''the best census ever,'' has become a national joke.


Patents;   Now It's Sex, Tomatoes And Software
LEAD: Drawing on the principles of sexual reproduction and Charles Darwin's theory of natural selection, a computer scientist at Stanford University has patented a method for ''breeding'' computer programs as if they were tomatoes.


Naval Intelligence and Fallibility Contemplated;   Taking Responsibility
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Palace Woods, a Japanese Wedding
LEAD: Japan glanced up from its robotized factories and its paper-cluttered offices today for a scene that seemed like a delayed broadcast from 1,200 years ago: the wedding of Emperor Akihito's second son, Prince Aya, to a commoner named Kiko.


Gee-Whiz Numbers
LEAD: To the Editor:


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.13
8.32
9.79
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.74
7.75
8.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.61
7.73
7.73
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.44
8.47
8.09
30-YR.


Herky-Jerky Bang-Bang
LEAD: They say young people don't read the papers anymore.
There are scientific studies to prove it.
Magnificently calibrated polls.
Incredibly accurate laboratory simulations.
Everything absolutely sure, statistic-wise.
Young people numb.


Bush Tries to Push Shamir to Peace Talks
LEAD: President Bush warned today that if he was ''stiff-armed'' by Israel in his effort to help put Israel's own peace plan into effect, he would consider other approaches, ''because we're not going to sit here and do nothing.''


Patents;   Keeping the Pool Clean Without Using Chlorine
LEAD: Leonard L. Brown, an inventor in Greenville, S.C., obtained a patent this week on a method for keeping swimming pools clear of algae and bacteria without using chlorine.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TRACK AND FIELD
Powell Jumps 28-5
Mike Powell soared 28 feet 5 inches last night to become the fifth-best long-jump performer ever and Leroy Burrell ran a 1990 world best of 9.96 seconds in the 100-meter dash at the BNP Grand Prix meet in Villeneuve D'Ascq, France.
Powell trails just Bob Beamon, the world record holder at 29-2 1/2, Robert Emmian of the Soviet Union (29-1), Carl Lewis (28-10 1/4), and Larry Myricks (28-8 1/4) on the all-time list.


Home Sales Rose 0.4% During May
LEAD: Sales of new single-family homes rose four-tenths of 1 percent in May, for the first gain in six months, the Commerce Department said today, but high interest rates and buyer wariness continued to plague the housing industry.


A New Home for the Homeless Opens in the Bronx


Colombian Rebels Release U.S. Miner
LEAD: Colombian guerrillas today freed Scott Heimdal, the American gold miner who was kidnapped two months ago, an spokesman for the Ecuadorean Government said.


Wider Loss for Campeau
LEAD: The corporate parent of the Federated and Allied department store companies yesterday reported a loss of $80 million for the first quarter, worse than a $67 million shortfall a year earlier.


Naval Intelligence and Fallibility Contemplated
LEAD: To the Editor:


Books of The Times;   When the Peter Principle Was Fatal to Millions
LEAD:
The Ends of Greatness
Haig, Petain, Rathenau and Eden:


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bairnco Corp., a holding company, said it expects to spin off its wholly owned Keene Corp. subsidiary, a maker of industrial products, in early July.


Arsonist's Lone Match Emerges as Clue in Santa Barbara Fire
LEAD: Brush fires that have burned across Southern California since Wednesday took their first two lives today.
And officials said the worst of the blazes, a fire that destroyed hundreds of homes in Santa Barbara, was caused by a match thrown by an arsonist.


Review/Dance;   A Square Dance From Russia
LEAD: When Cecil Sharp, England's most celebrated collector of folk songs and dances, sent his disciples into the Appalachians in the 1920's, they discovered dances that had long disappeared from the British Isles.


Dinkins Reduces Task Force On Safety of Social Clubs
LEAD: Thirteen weeks after vowing to crack down on unsafe social clubs in the wake of an arson fire that took 87 lives at a Bronx club, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday cut the task force investigating such establishments in half.


All We Croatians Want Is Democracy
LEAD: Last month the Croatian people, sick and tired of Communist oppression, joined the peoples of Eastern Europe in looking away from Communism and toward a democratic future.
We have set the goal of a Croatian society that, like the United States, is based on political and economic freedom, respect for human rights, the protection of individual liberties, an independent judiciary and a government that is truly ''of the people, by the people, and for the people.


Remark About Blacks Draws Club's Apology
LEAD: The founder of the all-white country club in Birmingham, Ala., that will be the host of the P.G.A.
Championship in August has apologized for remarks he made about the lack of black members, and has promised that the club will not discriminate in its membership policies.


Cadillac Rebates
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said its Cadillac Motor Car division had extended its buyer incentives on selected 1990 models through Sept. 26.
The program was scheduled to end on Saturday.
Buyers of Cadillac de Villes, Fleetwoods and Broughams are eligible for rebates of $1,500.
Buyers of Eldorado and Seville models are eligible for $2,000 rebates.


Bush Vetoes Bill on Family Leave
LEAD: President Bush today vetoed a bill that would have guaranteed workers unpaid time off for births, adoptions or medical emergencies of family members.


Placer Dome to Sell Canada Oil Assets
LEAD: Placer Dome Inc., a leading North American gold producer, agreed to sell the Canadian oil and gas operations of its Placer CEGO Petroleum Holdings Ltd. subsidiary to the Opus Acquisition Corporation for about $305 million Canadian ($262 million in United States currency).
Opus is jointly owned by Poco Petroleums Ltd.


Dollar Falls on Anticipation Of Lower U.S. Interest Rates
LEAD: The dollar fell yesterday in quiet trading on world currency markets.


Garcias' Extortion Convictions Are Reversed by Appeals Panel
LEAD: A Federal appeals court in New York yesterday overturned the extortion conviction of former Bronx Congressman Robert Garcia and sent the case back for a possible new trial.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Drugs were seized at the home of CHUCK BERRY, the authorities told reporters - and Mr.
Berry, who made a surprise appearance at a news conference Thursday in St.
Charles, Mo.


40 Stopped in Zodiac Hunt But None Are Now Suspects
LEAD: Investigators have questioned at least 40 people in the hunt for the Zodiac gunman who has shot and wounded three men and killed another, but none of those questioned are now considered suspects, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said yesterday.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


Zambian Is Arrested After Reporting Coup
LEAD: A man who described himself as a Zambian Army lieutenant was seized by soldiers early today after he announced on state radio that President Kenneth D. Kaunda had been toppled from power after five days of violent unrest over increases in food prices.


In Los Angeles, Mandela Is Getting the Million-Dollar Treatment
LEAD: Nelson Mandela arrived here today to begin the final, California leg of his American tour and to attend a celebrity-studded dinner and a concert that were expected to raise more than $1 million for the African National Congress.


No Charges for 3 Capitals
LEAD: A Superior Court grand jury today declined to file charges against three Washington Capitals hockey players who had been accused of sexually assaulting a 17-year-old woman in a limousine.


Capriati Advances To a Match With Graf
LEAD: She's tired of eating room service and a little homesick for her dog's company and eager to take in London's sights and shopping, but 14-year-old Jennifer Capriati's primary Wimbledon mission has been accomplished.


Evolution in Europe;   35 Nations End Conference With Declaration on Rights
LEAD: Thirty-five nations ended a conference today after committing themselves to multiparty democracy and the rule of law in a declaration hailed as a landmark for human rights.


Jurors Get Mulheren Case
LEAD: Jury deliberations began yesterday in the conspiracy and fraud case against John A. Mulheren Jr., the former stock speculator accused of engaging in sham securities transactions with Ivan F. Boesky.


Bush Defends Reversal on Taxes, Citing Nation's Economic Needs
LEAD: Coming very close to admitting that he had abandoned a campaign promise, President Bush defended his reversal on taxes today by painting a bleak economic picture and saying he trusted Americans to understand why he was prepared to accept higher taxes in the 1991 fiscal year.


Your Money;   In the Long Run Stocks Are Better
LEAD: ''It is heartbreaking to sit down with people 63 to 65 years old and to have to tell them: You can't afford to maintain your life style now; how are you going to retire with a 40 to 50 percent cut?'' Joel S. Isaacson said at a meeting of the Greater New York Chapter of the International Society for Retirement


Trevino Breaks the 36-Hole Record
LEAD: Lee Trevino continued a nearly flawless assault on par today and maintained a one-shot lead after two rounds of the United States Senior Open at the Ridgewood Country Club.


Richard English, 81, Of All-Black Battalion
LEAD: Richard Walter English, a World War II veteran who worked for three decades to have his all-black battalion become the first honored by a United States President, died on Tuesday at his home in New Orleans at the age of 81.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


In Albany, Any 2 Chairs Quickly Tilt at Each Other
LEAD: It started as a routine news conference the other day, when the chairmen of the two labor committees in the State Legislature met to discuss compensation for injured workers.


Nasty? Try New York
LEAD: Recently, my 11-year-old daughter, a student at the Greenwich Village Public School, had a discussion about 2 Live Crew's album ''As Nasty as They Wanna Be'' in her class.
She has never heard the songs, which were ruled obscene by a Federal judge, but she knows the problem.
She's deeply convinced that nobody has the right to tell artists what to think or what not to think.


Mortgage Rate Declines
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgages are averaging 10.15 percent, down 1 basis point from the 10.16 percent rate of last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.45 percent this week, down from 8.50 percent the week before.


SPORTS OF THE TIMES No Hefty Lunch for Beefy Gregg
LEAD: Eric Gregg, the ample umpire, sat down to a diet lunch Thursday.
Gregg, of the National League, had gained nearly 200 pounds in the last 15 years and was up to 390 pounds in April.
That's a goodly amount, even for someone who, like Gregg, stands 6 feet 3 inches.


Universe Yields Secrets To Us Only Grudgingly
LEAD: To the Editor:


Religion Notes
LEAD: Women Turn to Humor The invitation that came in the mail the other day was for an event on June 31, 1990, a day that does not exist. ''The Women's Ordination Conference,'' the invitation reads, ''cordially invites you not to attend the First Annual Non-Ordination.''


I.R.A.'s Doherty Wins Right to Ask Asylum
LEAD: Joe Doherty, whose struggle to escape a lifelong prison sentence in Britain for murder became a political cause celebre in New York City, was granted the right to apply for asylum yesterday by a Federal Appeals Court in Manhattan.


Mets Win 11th in a Row and Move Into First
LEAD: Streaking from one milestone to another, the Mets rolled over the Cincinnati Reds again last night, 4-2, matched the club record by winning for the 11th consecutive time and marched into first place in the National League East for the first time this season.


It Sells Pins, Toys and Lunch But Maybe Not Much Longer
LEAD: When rumors started circulating here that the 60-year-old Woolworth's might close at the end of the year, many in this properous community on Long Island Sound took notice.


L.I.R.R. Begins Reconstruction Project on a Bad Day


Florida Freeze Damage
LEAD: Last winter's bitter cold spell cost Florida's commercial foliage industry about $175 million, industry officials said this week.
Dade County alone suffered damages of about $100 million to tender tropical plants, trees and shrubs, said the Florida Nurserymen and Growers Association.


Patents;   Protecting Spacecraft From Debris in Orbit
LEAD: Engineers at the General Research Corporation, a scientific consulting firm in Vienna, Va., obtained a patent this week for what amounts to a garbage collector in space.
Its purpose: to protect spacecraft from collisions with orbiting debris.


About New York;   Alphabet Soup: Telling an IRT From a BMT
LEAD: ''Can you tell me what train I take to Myrtle Avenue in Brooklyn?'' a woman asked a passer-by near the Fulton Street subway station in lower Manhattan.


All Are One at the African Street Festival


Many Disabled Teachers Leave Their Profession
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Savard-Chelios Trade
LEAD: The Chicago Blackhawks traded their high-scoring center Denis Savard to the Montreal Canadiens last night for Chris Chelios, a defenseman, and future considerations.
The Canadiens also sent Chicago a 1991 second-round draft pick.


Evolution in Europe: Deir Hanna Journal;   When Poetry Is Seared In the Fire of the Mideast
LEAD: Shafik Habib, an Arab citizen of Israel, is under house arrest, forbidden even to step onto his front step.
It's all because of a poem.


NASA Is Assailed on Quality Control
LEAD: Senator Al Gore, the chairman of a Senate panel on science and space, asserted today that defects in the Hubble Space Telescope were the latest example of the space agency's lack of attention to quality control.


Naval Intelligence and Fallibility Contemplated;   Offended by Trudeau
LEAD: To the Editor:


President's News Conference on Domestic and Foreign Issues
LEAD: Following is a transcript of President Bush's news conference here today, as provided by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:
OPENING STATEMENT


Review/Film;   Rap Track About Sex In Suburbs
LEAD: Rap music may have been born on urban streets, but in ''The Big Dis'' it moves to suburban Long Island.
Suburban rap doesn't have much grit, of course, but it doesn't always have the processed, Wonder Bread texture of New Kids on the Block either.
In exuberant movies like the Hudlin brothers' ''House Party'' and now in the modest, unpolished but very funny ''Big


Peggy Glanville-Hicks Dies at 77; Opera Composer and Music Critic
LEAD: Peggy Glanville-Hicks, an Australian-born composer who lived in the United States between 1942 and 1959, died on Monday in St.
Vincent's Hospital in Sydney.
She was 77 years old and died of a heart attack, said James Murdoch, the executor of her estate.


Congress Goes Home, Still for Sale
LEAD: This is supposed to be the year that Congress cleans up the way its election campaigns are financed.
Yet the members are heading home for the Independence Day recess having so far failed.
They remain tainted by their reliance on contributions from special interests.


Chairman of Perrier Leaves; Post Goes to Vice Chairman
LEAD: The chairman and founder of Source Perrier, Gustave Leven, stepped down yesterday and was replaced by the company's vice chairman, Jacques Vincent.


Lee Grape, Volunteer, 73
LEAD: Lee Grape, who was active in educational and recreational programs in Fairfield, Conn., died on Wednesday at her home there.
She was 73 years old.


ARCO to Pay $800 Million In Tax Case
LEAD: ARCO said today that it had settled a long-standing dispute with the Internal Revenue Service by paying $800 million in back taxes and interest owed on Alaskan oil production.


Italy Warming Up to an 'Outsider'
LEAD: The first words he heard upon joining the national team last March were, ''You're late.''


Texas Reporter Jailed For Concealing Names
LEAD: A television reporter in San Antonio has been in jail since Wednesday for refusing to name three people who he says helped him get an interview with a jailed murder suspect.
Prosecutors and defense lawyers say they need to know the names before they can determine whether statements made in the interview are admissible as evidence in the murder trial.


Towed Van Yields Cocaine
LEAD: When a police officer encountered a disabled van left unoccupied on a bridge in Queens, he did what he'd do with any other vehicle: He made sure it was towed away.


Bankruptcy Filings Up
LEAD: Personal bankruptcy filings in the United States rose 15 percent in the first three months of the year, led by sharp increases in the Northeast, a financial industry group reported on Thursday.
There were 166,694 personal bankruptcy filings in the first quarter, compared with 144,725 a year earlier, said the group, the American Financial Services Association.


Here's a New York Site for Homeless Housing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Almost Everybody's Playing Stomp-the-Trump
LEAD: Adrian Alberti stood not 50 feet from a giant poster of Donald J. Trump himself, the man who put his name on hotels and casinos and books and board games and - to the consternation of bankers on several continents - bonds and loan agreements.


News Summary
LEAD: International
2-5
Lithuania approved a moratorium on its declaration of independence.
The republic agreed to suspend the declaration for 100 days in exchange for negotiations with Moscow and the lifting of economic sanctions.
Page 1
New issue in Moscow: Televise the Congress?


Apple Changing Software Setup
LEAD: The Claris Corporation, the software operation of Apple Computer Inc., will become a wholly owned independent subsidiary of the personal computer maker, Apple's chairman, John Sculley, announced.
Claris, which develops and markets software for Apple's popular Macintosh and Apple II computers, has been a majority-owned subsidiary of Apple since April 1987, when Apple spun off its applications-software operations to form


Schayes Talks Affirmed
LEAD: The Denver Nuggets confirmed yesterday that they had discussed trading Danny Schayes to the Milwaukee Bucks for Terry Mills, the Bucks' first-round draft pick.


Mandela Must Judge Again
LEAD: The ecstatic hero's welcome given Nelson Mandela in the U.S. should not mislead his colleagues and compatriots.
It is a tribute to a man of great stamina, courage and dignity, and to a cause - but not just the cause of opposing apartheid.


LeMond Riding On Confidence
LEAD: With what sounded almost like a growl, Greg LeMond confirmed today what those closest to him have been saying. ''I feel great, really strong,'' he said a day before the start of the Tour de France.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: To get the Internal Revenue Service off his back, WILLIE NELSON must come up with $6.5 million for taxes and penalties under a settlement approved by United States Tax Court Judge MARY ANN COHEN.


Sundstrand Bid For Milton Roy
LEAD: The Sundstrand Corporation, an electronic company trying to recover from Federal contract scandals, said today that it had acquired 14.99 percent of the common stock of the Milton Roy Company of St.
Petersburg, Fla.


Jazz Festival;   A Singer's Improvisations Probe Emotion
LEAD: Regina Belle's show at Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday night, part of the JVC Jazz Festival, overflowed with her generosity.
Ms.
Belle radiates good will and loves performing, and combined with the desire to make the house come together as a unit, she rocked the hall.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I think that the arrows have been flying, front, back, sideways, but that's what I get paid for.''
- President Bush, on the reaction to his reversal on a tax increase. [8:1.]


Treasuries Climb on Bush Tax Talk
LEAD: Interest rates declined yesterday as prices of short- and long-term Treasury securities advanced.
Dealers attributed the latest spurt in the prices of Treasury and other fixed-income debt issues to President Bush's reiteration early yesterday of his willingness to tolerate a rise in tax revenues as a means of reducing the swelling


Corrections
LEAD: The radio program listings yesterday were published in error.
They were intended for the issue of July 5 and will be reprinted then.


Patient Is Injected With AIDS-Tainted Blood
LEAD: A veterans' hospital on Wednesday mistakenly injected the blood of a person suffering from AIDS into another patient in the same ward who had the same surname.


Back Pain Idles Stillwell
LEAD: Kurt Stillwell, the Kansas City Royals' starting shortstop, remained in a Seattle hospital yesterday in too much pain to travel home for an examination by team doctors to determine if he needs back surgery.


Pulling the Plug in a Savings Failure
LEAD: After a century in business, Otero Savings closed its doors for good last month, another casualty in the collapse of the nation's savings industry.


J. M. Klein Wed To Juliet Naylor
LEAD: The marriage of Juliet Ginevra Anne Naylor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund Naylor of Bentley Heath, Hertfordshire, England, to Jonathan Michael Klein, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Klein of Tenafly, N.J., took place yesterday at the Kensington-Chelsea Registry in London.


Prices Paid To Farmers Drop 1.3%
LEAD: Prices farmers get for raw products declined 1.3 percent in June, but were still about 2.7 percent above a year earlier, the Agriculture Department said today.


Moody's Cuts Chrysler Rating
LEAD: Moody's Investors Service said yesterday that it had downgraded the debt of the Chrysler Corporation and its Chrysler Financial Corporation subsidiary, in the second such move this month against the No. 3 auto maker.


Arts Agency Denies 4 Grants Suggested by Advisory Panel
LEAD: The National Endowment for the Arts today rejected 4 of 18 grants recommended by the agency's theater panel.
Each of the four who were denied grants is a performance artist whose act includes strong sexual content, and each had received grants in the past.


Sanders Likely to Join Farm Team


Kimberly and Times Co. Selling Paper Mill
LEAD: The Kimberly-Clark Corporation and The New York Times Company announced yesterday that they had reached an agreement in principle to sell their joint interests in the Spruce Falls Power and Paper Company, a Canadian paper mill, to Kruger Inc., a Montreal-based private company that owns and operates pulp and paper mills.


Evolution in Europe;   New Issue in Moscow: Televise the Congress?
LEAD: With all the uncertainties about its future, the Communist Party added another today: whether to televise the critical party congress that is expected to display Communism's turmoil over its declining fortunes.


Sentencing Deferred In Attack on Actress
LEAD: A judge deferred sentencing for at least a year after a teen-ager pleaded guilty to slashing the actress Viveca Lindfors in Greenwich Village in January.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Pet Portraiture
LEAD: Those lucky enough to have judged photography contests know that there is no shortage of pictures of pets.
Dogs dressed up in sailor caps, cats in crinoline - the ingenuity of contest entrants knows no bounds.
But such artifices seldom do justice to the pets, much less to their owners.


Marcos Jury Adjourns for Day
LEAD: The jurors in the trial of Imelda Marcos finished their first full day of deliberations last night and returned to their hotel.
They will continue deliberating at the United States Court House in Manhattan today and through the weekend if necessary.


Bank Revamping In New England
LEAD: The Bank of New England Corporation announced plans to sell or consolidate more than 95 branch offices to help streamline the financially troubled company.
A spokesman, James Dorsey, declined to disclose the value of the assets involved or the amount the company hopes to make from the sales.
He said about 450 employees would be affected.


Kittle Provides Big Blast For Surprising White Sox
LEAD: The things that are happening here almost seem too unlikely to believe.
The Chicago White Sox were not supposed to be in first place; they were not even supposed to be in the first division.
But it is the end of June, the start of summer, and they are leading the American League West, if only by percentage points.


U.S. Sells Centrust for $86 Million
LEAD: The Government today sold the largest failed savings institution under its control, the Centrust Savings Bank of Miami, to the Great Western Financial Corporation, the nation's second-largest savings and loan company.


Bridge
LEAD: In the last three decades, thousands of players have benefited from group classes taught in New York State and Florida by Bill Root, who has a good claim to be considered the world's premier bridge teacher as well as a player of the highest rank.
The rather greater number who have not had that advantage can get much the same effect by buying his latest book, ''How to Play a Bridge Hand,'' published by


Richard F. Ferris, Consultant, 61
LEAD: Richard Foth Ferris, a management consultant, died on Monday at his home in Darien, Conn.
He was 61 years old.


U.S. SPACE AGENCY GROUNDS SHUTTLES OVER A FUEL LEAK
LEAD: The space agency announced yesterday that it was indefinitely grounding its fleet of space shuttles until engineers can find and fix an elusive fuel leak that has struck two of the nation's three winged spaceships.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing headed ''On the Air'' in Sports Pages yesterday, carrying television schedules for World Cup soccer, misstated the days for the quarterfinal games.
They will be played today and tomorrow; broadcast information appears today on page 43.


British Press Is Warned To Curb Its Excesses
LEAD: Amid growing public criticism of the press, the Government has warned that Britain's newspapers must curb excesses or face tough regulation.


Give Gorbachev Credit, With Credits
LEAD: Wisely, Chancellor Kohl of Germany and President Mitterrand of France want the West to pump $15 billion of short-term credits and long-term aid into the Soviet economy - before it collapses and brings down Mikhail Gorbachev.
With the backing of the European Community, they'll seek a contribution from President Bush at the economic summit meeting in Houston on


Brooklyn's Exceptional Preacher
LEAD: Since 1863, the Concord Baptist Church of Christ in Brooklyn has had only four pastors, an average tenure of nearly 32 years.
The most recent, the Rev.
Dr.
Gardner Taylor, retires today after 42 years in the pulpit of one of the largest black congregations in New York.
That Dr.
Taylor surpasses this average, or any other, hardly surprises those who know him as an exceptional man.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday headed ''Baton Rouge Journal'' misidentified David Duke, a former Ku Klux Klan leader.
He is a Louisiana State Representative, not a State Senator.


Bensonhurst Jury Gets Warning on Questions
LEAD: Justice Thaddeus E. Owens yesterday angrily admonished the jury deliberating the fate of a defendant in the Bensonhurst case for repeatedly asking the court for guidance.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: DR.
BERNARD LOYD, a graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the former chairman of the Black Graduate Student Association, was recently elected to the institute's board of trustees.
As one of 12 new members of the 75-member M.I.T.
Corporation, he was elected for a five-year term in a slot specifically for recent graduates.


Food Assistance To Poor Women Gets a Reprieve
LEAD: Congress gave final approval today to a bill that would restore food allotments for many of the poor women and children who have been cut from a Federal nutrition program.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Broadway Street Fair, the east side of Broadway will be closed today from 66th to 71st Street from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Campbell to Shed Its Fresh-Foods Group
LEAD: In a further move to cut excess capacity and raise profits, the Campbell Soup Company said it planned to sell small North American operations with total annual sales of more than $300 million.


Thon Suspended
LEAD: The National League suspended Dickie Thon, the Philadelphia Phillies' shortstop, for three games yesterday and fined him an undisclosed amount for bumping an umpire.


Underwriting Fees Still Dropping
LEAD: Corporate America continued to find Wall Street's soil fertile for raising new capital through the first half of 1990, but for the third straight quarter the underwriting revenue earned by Wall Street firms remained low.


In Pakistan, Democracy Is in New Danger
LEAD: To the Editor:


LITHUANIA AGREES TO 100-DAY DELAY ON INDEPENDENCE
LEAD: Lithuania agreed today to suspend its declaration of independence for 100 days in exchange for negotiations with Moscow and the lifting of economic sanctions.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JUNE 30, 1990
LEAD:
Companies


Bishop Excommunicates 2 In Texas for Abortion Stance
LEAD: The director of a Texas abortion clinic and an obstetrician have been excommunicated from the Roman Catholic Church by their bishop.


Pain vs. Gain in Jersey Tax Increases
LEAD: The tax overhaul that begins to take effect in New Jersey on Sunday is as sweeping a change as any state has tried in recent years, but economists, policy makers and business executives disagree on whether the new taxes will help or hurt the state's economic performance.


Pathe's Bid Is Set Back
LEAD: The Pathe Communications Corporation's attempt to acquire the MGM/ UA Communications Company continues to languish as Pathe said on Thursday that it had reached an impasse in negotiations over Time Warner Inc.'s participation in the deal.


Julius Leventhal, Clothier, 91
LEAD: Julius Leventhal, founder and chairman of Leventhal Brothers &amp; Company, clothing manufacturers in Manhasset, L.I., died on Wednesday at his home in Manhasset.
He was 91 years old.


His Case Won, Justice Announces Retirement
LEAD: A 71-year-old Vermont Supreme Court justice who successfully fought the state law on mandatory retirement at the age of 70 will step down from the bench later this year.


Council Gains Budget Pact With Dinkins
LEAD: After two final days of intense negotiations, the Dinkins administration and leaders of the City Council agreed on a $28 billion budget yesterday that would lead to the largest annual tax increase in city history, the hiring of 3,200 police officers and spending cuts that will affect services like parks and education.


Evolution in Europe;   Polish Police Break Sit-In at Farm Ministry
LEAD: The police used a sledgehammer to break into the Agriculture Ministry today and ended a three-day sit-in by hundreds of farmers demanding guaranteed prices for their products.


Evolution in Europe;   Old Political Rifts Surface in Poland Now That the Communists Are Out
LEAD: As the Solidarity movement fractures, the political debate in Poland is beginning to reflect a broad spectrum of interests and antagonisms dividing this nation of 39 million people.


Gilberto Roman, 29, Ex-Boxing Champion
LEAD: Gilberto Roman, a former superflyweight world champion, died in a car accident on Wednesday night, the World Boxing Council said today.
He was 29 years old.


Court Upholds The Use of RICO To Sue Utilities
LEAD: In a case involving the Shoreham nuclear power plant, a Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that utilities can be sued under the Federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act.


Jubilation, With Dignity
LEAD: For his solo concert Thursday afternoon as part of the JVC Jazz Festival, the South African expatriate pianist Abdullah Ibrahim played an uninterrupted hour of music - Ellingtonian jazz ballads, hymns, boppish melodies, rolling Cape Town-style vamps, full-chorded gospel.
It was music filled with invention and power, and utterly personalized.


Seoul Relaxing North Border
LEAD: President Roh Tae Woo announced today that South Korea would open its borders to goods and transportation from North Korea and predicted reunification in 10 years.
He said at a meeting with South Korean citizens broadcast live on television that the North, which is Communist, and the South should build an economic system that would help lead to unity.


New Trial on Ford's Wiper
LEAD: A second trial to decide how much the Ford Motor Company should pay for infringing on patents for intermittent windshield wipers began on Thursday, with the patent holder asking less than half the $325 million he first sought.


Share Price Falls For Multimedia
LEAD: Multimedia Inc., a New York-based newspaper and broadcasting company, attributed a steep drop in the price of its shares to disappointment among speculators who had hoped the company would announce a recapitalization plan or sale of the company.
Instead, the company announced a refinancing plan yesterday.


Dow Up 1.98; Trading Remains Sluggish
LEAD: Stocks edged up yesterday for the third straight session, carrying the Dow Jones industrial average to 2,880.69.
But trading continued sluggish and the Dow advanced by only 1.98 points for the day and by 23.51 for the week.


Windowless Air-Conditioners: What They Do (And Don't Do)
LEAD: And now, the stealth air-conditioner.


As Mandela Stumps for Sanctions, South Africa Debates Them
LEAD: Nelson Mandela's plea for Western countries to maintain economic sanctions against South Africa has galvanized the debate over their effectiveness in hastening the end of apartheid.


Texas Reporter Is Jailed For Withholding Names
LEAD: A local television reporter here has been jailed and faces the prospect of months beind bars for refusing to reveal the names of three people who helped him get an interview with a jailed murder suspect.


U.S. Sees Broad Effects In A Division of Canada
LEAD: The State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency have concluded that any loosening of Canada's federal makeup as a result of the nation's constitutional crisis would affect a broad range of security, trade and environmental ties between Washington and Ottawa.


Evolution in Europe;   The Lithuanian Resolution
LEAD: Following is the text of the Lithuanian resolution today freezing the republic's declaration of independence, as translated and distributed by the information bureau of the Lithuanian Parliament:


Irving Wallace, Whose 33 Books Sold in the Millions, Is Dead at 74
LEAD: Irving Wallace, whose popular novels over the past 30 years made him one of the best-read and best-selling 20th-century American authors, died yesterday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 74 years old and lived in Brentwood, a Los Angeles suburb.


Gold Prices Rise Sharply On Fears of Mining Strikes
LEAD: Gold posted its strongest one-day advance in nearly three months yesterday on the Commodity Exchange in New York, on the threat of mining strikes in South Africa and the Soviet Union.


Washing a Flag: Treat It 'Like Lingerie'
LEAD: The Fourth of July is coming, perhaps the most popular holiday for flag flying.


