Tough Talk From U.S. Commanders in Saudi Arabia


News Summary
LEAD: International
2-6
Israel will get $1 billion in weapons from Washington to buttress its defenses against Iraq and to offset arms sales to Saudi Arabi.
Officials said the move was a clear signal that the United States is standing by its strongest Middle East ally.
Page 1
Israelis say Jordanian planes fly reconnaissance for Iraq


Rev. Wellman Warner, A Retired Educator, 93
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr.
Wellman Joel Warner, a retired social psychologist and an educator, died on Thursday at Griffin Hospital in Derby, Conn.
He was 93 years old and lived in Shelton, Conn.


Ms. Schub Weds Michael DeCarlo
LEAD: Elizabeth Schub, the daughter of Stephanie Rose of New York and Michael A. Schub of Garrison, N.Y., was married yesterday to Michael Peter DeCarlo, a son of Sandra Bratti and Libero DeCarlo, both of Toronto.
Judge Richard M. Palmer of Family Court in Brooklyn performed the ceremony at the Anthology Film Archives in New York.


Manila Delays Tariff Changes
LEAD: President Corazon Aquino announced on Thursday that she would postpone for six months the imposition of significant changes in tariffs.


Dr. Lot Page, 67, Dies; Led Program on Aging
LEAD: Dr.
Lot B. Page, a physician associated with the National Institute on Aging who also served as chief of medicine at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Manchester, N.H., died on Wednesday at his home in Lincoln, Mass.
He was 67 years old.


Bristol-Myers Squibb Makes Deal in France
LEAD: Moving to broaden its business base in Europe, the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company agreed yesterday to acquire a minority stake in UPSA Group and to develop the French company's nonprescription drug operations worldwide.


U.S. READY TO SEND ISRAELIS NEW ARMS AS SIGNAL TO IRAQ
LEAD: The Bush Administration is preparing to transfer as much as $1 billion worth of advanced weapons to Israel to buttress the country's defenses against Iraq and address Israeli concerns about recent arms sales to Saudi Arabia, Administration officials said today.


Managua Journal;   Low-Tech Limbs for a Poor Land's War-Maimed
LEAD: At a shady hilltop complex overlooking Lake Managua, Francisco Franco Espinoza went for a walk this week.


Paris Film House Loses Its 58th Street Home
LEAD: The Paris Theater, one of America's most venerable theaters for French and other foreign films, went out of existence yesterday after nearly 42 years at 58th Street near Fifth Avenue.


Call Columbus the First American Immigrant;   Don't Blame Discoverer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rebels in Liberia Are Said To Have Killed 200 Civilians
LEAD: Rebels have killed about 200 foreigners in Liberia whose governments contributed soldiers to a West African force sent to end the nation's civil war, the Ghana News Agency reported today.


Bigger or Stronger Europe?
LEAD: The two Germanys have signed their treaty of unification, the last major act of the German Democratic Republic before it disappears into a single Germany on Oct. 3.
The question of its role in Europe, indeed the role of nation-states in Europe, becomes increasingly urgent as the countries to the East move on from the euphoria of freedom to the agony of transformation.


Samuel H. Mayes, 73; Was Principal Cellist
LEAD: Samuel Houston Mayes, the principal cellist of the Boston Symphony Orchestra and the Philadelphia Orchestra for many years, died on Aug. 24 at his home in Mesa, Ariz.
He was 73 years old.


Cablevision's TV Subscribers on L.I. Are Furious, That's Who
LEAD: To the Editor:


Marinovich Leads U.S.C. in Classic
LEAD: The carefully planned brilliance of Todd Marinovich is no surprise anymore.
The varied gifts and surprising calm of Marvin Graves were kept on a practice field in Syracuse before tonight.


Johnson's Hit Beats Giants as Mets Get 3 in 9th
LEAD: A couple of minor trades had left the dugout shaken up.
One major comeback left it nearly torn apart.


Utility's Rates Tied to Saving Of Electricity
LEAD: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT


The Tubes Of War
LEAD: Saddam Hussein challenged President Bush and Prime Minister Thatcher to a television debate.
Mr.
Bush said this would be ridiculous.
Mrs.
Thatcher said it would be a warm January in London before she stooped to debating such creatures as Mr.
Hussein.


No War Unless Iraq Strikes, U.S. Gulf Commander Says
LEAD: The commander of American forces in Saudi Arabia said today that there would be no fighting here unless Iraq launched an attack.


De Klerk Asks Ruling Party To Open Rolls to All Races
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk urged today that people of all races be admitted to the governing National Party, which won power more than four decades ago as the racially exclusive guarantor of Afrikaner supremacy.


Inside Rikers Island: A Bloody Struggle for Control
LEAD: Busy smokestacks reach above the sprawling squat buildings of red brick and not-yet-rusty metal on Rikers Island, testament to a decade of frantic building that has more than doubled the size of the nation's largest penal colony.
Except for street names like E-1 and the endless loops of razor wire lining every fence, some blocks look from the outside like any industrial swath of Queens.


Arrests Are Made in Killing of Bronx Prosecutor


Edmund G. Love, an Author, 78; Wrote 'Subways Are for Sleeping'
LEAD: Edmund G. Love, a writer whose book ''Subways Are for Sleeping'' was the basis for the Broadway musical of the same name, died Thursday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Flint, Mich.
He was 78 years old.


Dead Hostage in Iraq Identified as Banker From New York State
LEAD: The American businessman who died, apparently of a heart attack, while being held hostage in Iraq was identified yesterday as James L. Worthington Jr. of Woodstock, N.Y.


Letter: On Garbage;   Let the Free Market Tackle Solid Waste
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article and a picture caption on the Health page on Aug. 2 about electroshock therapy referred incorrectly to the deputy chief of biological psychiatry at the New York State Psychiatric Institute.
He is Dr.
Harold Sackeim, a psychologist.


Brazil-I.M.F. Accord Near
LEAD: Brazil's Economy Minister, Zelia Cardoso de Mello, said today that she expected Brazil to reach a preliminary agreement with the International Monetary Fund on an economic adjustment program and standby loan within a week.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: B'nai B'rith has a new two-year term president.
On Wednesday, KENT E. SCHINER of Baltimore defeated RICHARD HEIDEMAN of Washington in close balloting at the group's convention in Dallas.


SPORTS PEOPLE: Football;   Bears' Back Cleared
LEAD: Johnny Bailey, a rookie running back with the Chicago Bears, rushed for 65 yards on 11 carries in a victory over Buffalo on Thursday night.
Yesterday he found himself in the clear again when a judge in Houston released him from the final 10 months of a probation imposed on him in 1986.


Patents;   Saving Fingernails On Flip-Top Cans
LEAD: Two inventors in Southern California obtained a patent this week on a flip top for aluminum cans that they said is resealable and can be opened without damaging fingernails.


Agassi Is Hit With a $3,000 Fine
LEAD: Yesterday was a bad day for Andre Agassi, the men's fourth-seeded player, and he didn't even play.


Special Phone Services Facing Curb
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission is proposing rules aimed at eliminating overcharges and other abuses by companies that connect callers at hotels, motels, hospitals and similar public places to long-distance carriers.
Some consumer advocates say the rules do not go far enough.


Harry Starr, 71, Dies; A Trucking Executive
LEAD: Harry A. Starr, an executive in New York's garment trucking industry, died on Aug. 17 at his home in Montclair, N.J.
He was 71 years old.


At a Bahrain Hotel, a News Wire Has Become the Center of Attention


Bridge
LEAD: The World Bridge Championships beginning here on Sunday will be by far the biggest ever staged, thanks to the efforts of Jimmy Ortiz-Patino, former president of the World Bridge Federation, Jose Damiani, president of the European Bridge League, and many others.
For the first time, almost all players can compete regardless of experience.


Gasoline Up As Supplies Stay Tight
LEAD: Wholesale gasoline prices jumped again yesterday, but crude oil prices rose more modestly.
Demand for gasoline remains strong, because of shortages of refinery capacity, traders said.


Inmate Penalties Called 'Draconian'
LEAD: The New York Civil Liberties Union and the Legal Aid Society sent a letter yesterday to the Correction Commissioner, Allyn R. Sielaff, imploring him to stop ''unfair disciplinary proceedings'' against inmates stemming from the Aug. 14 disturbance at Rikers Island.


Shearson and 2 Ex-Workers Face Fraud Charges in Ohio
LEAD: Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. and two former employees in Ohio have been accused of fraud in the sale of securities, Ohio officials said today.


For Elderly Just Hanging On, An Oasis of Jobs Is Shrinking
LEAD: ''I'm what you call a displaced homemaker,'' said Doris Gibson, who is 66 years old and by any measure poor.
She traces her poverty to the day 13 years ago when her husband walked out on her, and her survival to a Federal paycheck that will be harder and harder for future Doris Gibsons to get.


Bruins Sign Bourque
LEAD: The All-Star defenseman Ray Bourque signed a new four-year contract with the Boston Bruins yesterday.


Hope and Fear in South Africa
LEAD: The spiraling violence in black townships around Johannesburg is a grievous setback to hopes for a peaceful transition to democratic rule in South Africa.
More than 500 people have already been killed in battles between supporters of Nelson Mandela and the African National Congress and the Inkatha movement of Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi.


Bikes Just Lack 'Curb Appeal'
LEAD: The folks who run the World Trade Center stole my friend Jon's bicycle.
They smashed the lock, then demanded $30 to give the bike back.


Genentech Tie To Roche Near
LEAD: The previously announced merger between Genentech Inc. and Roche Holding Ltd. is on track to be completed by the end of next week, the companies said today.


Tisch Family Invests in 3 Banks
LEAD: Laurence A. Tisch and members of his family have acquired sizable stakes in three bank holding companies whose stocks have fallen on hard times recently: Continental Bank, Baybanks and Equimark.


Gorbachev Says 6 Months Is Needed to Prepare for Market Economy
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that his country would need a six-month stabilization period to control inflation and resolve emergency consumer shortages before embarking on the transition to a market economy.


U.S. Says Gulf Moves' Cost Will Far Exceed $25 Billion
LEAD: The worldwide burden-sharing program for the Persian Gulf operation will require tens of billions of dollars in financial aid to third-world countries, repayment for trade lost in the embargo against Iraq, donations of fuel to American military forces and other contributions, Administration officials said today.


Astros' Two-Out Rally Stuns Pirates
LEAD: Glenn Wilson's single capped a three-run, two-out rally in the ninth inning tonight as the Houston Astros defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates, 3-2.


2 Held in Slaying of a Bronx Prosecutor
LEAD: A 21-year-old school janitor and his teen-age friend were charged yesterday in the fatal shooting of a Bronx prosecutor who accidentally stepped into what the police called a turf war over drugs a block from the county courthouse.


Rivera Slam Sinks Yankees
LEAD: There is only a month or so left, but there is no race for the Yankees in Fenway Park.
Not this summer.


Pearl Sacerdote Artist, 68
LEAD: Pearl Sacerdote, an artist whose works in oils, acrylics, collage and mixed media were exhibited widely in the last two decades, died Wednesday at Montefiore Hospital in the Bronx.
She was 68 years old, and lived in the Riverdale section of the Bronx and in East Hampton, L.I.
Her family said she died of an immune-system disorder.


Judges Too Often Perpetuate Child Abuse
LEAD: To the Editor:


Beliefs
LEAD: For practical purposes the incident began on page 22B of the July 6 issue of The Jewish Press.
There, under the headline ''Congressman Barney Frank Excommunicated,'' was a 173-word item.
It reported that on June 27 the Beth Din Zedek, identified as a ''High Rabbinic Ecclesiastical Court,'' had formally excommunicated Mr.


Chamber Group's Schedule
LEAD: The New York Chamber Symphony will open its season at the 92d Street Y with a program on Oct. 6 and 9 at 8 P.M. and Oct. 7 at 3 P.M.
Gerard Schwarz will conduct David Diamond's ''Music for Romeo and Juliet,'' Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, and the original 1924 arrangement of Gershwin's ''Rhapsody in Blue,'' with Misha Dichter as the piano soloist.


Call Columbus the First American Immigrant;   Proud and Thankful
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dow Up 21.04 on Slowest Day of the Year
LEAD: Stock trading slowed yesterday to the lowest point of the year, and the Dow Jones industrial average chalked up a modest advance, ending with its first weekly gain since mid-July.


Ford Shutdowns
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it plans to close two assembly plants for one week beginning Sept. 10 because of a shortage of dealer orders for the Ford Tempo and Mercury Topaz cars made at the plants.
Sales of the Topaz are off 21.9 percent so far this year compared with 1989, while sales of the nearly identical Tempo have fallen 1.5 percent in 1990.


Disney Sues an Executive
LEAD: The Walt Disney Company sued a former top movie executive on Thursday and accused him of trying to lure away other Disney employees and projects after the company released him from a contract.


A Clink Heard Round the Valley
LEAD: Normally the introduction of a new chardonnay by a Napa Valley winery causes no great interest here, especially at harvest time when winemakers are working seven days a week and keeping a wary eye on the weather.
But when the winery is Sutter Home, which starts selling its first chardonnay today, vintners from Modesto to


Cardiac Trouble Tied To Pollution
LEAD: Levels of carbon monoxide sometimes experienced by urban dwellers can induce potentially fatal disturbances of heart rhythms in cardiac patients during exercise, a new study has shown.


Prices of Long-Term Bonds Continue to Fall
LEAD: Prices of long-term Treasury bonds continued to decline yesterday in an abbreviated pre-holiday session, largely on fears that rising oil prices would stimulate inflation.
But prices of Treasury bills and short-term notes continued to rise on hopes that the Federal Reserve would have to lower interest rates soon to stimulate the economy.


Israelis Say Jordanian Planes Fly Reconnaissance for Iraq
LEAD: Israeli intelligence says American-made Jordanian warplanes, working on behalf of the Iraqi Government, are flying reconnaissance missions along the Saudi border and passing information on American troop deployments to Baghdad, officials here said today.


Deluge of Gulf Satellite Data
LEAD: Intelligence analysts can barely handle the deluge of photographs pouring into the Central Intelligence Agency from spy satellites monitoring Iraqi forces in the Persian Gulf, Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine reported.
The respected industry journal will report in its Monday edition that experts at the C.I.A.


I.B.M. Price Rise
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said it would raise prices on many of its products sold in the United States by 4 percent, effective Jan. 1.
The price change will not affect any products with price changes announced after June 1, I.B.M. said.
Among the items excluded from the increase are I.B.M.


Richard Ekstract Is Wed To Eileen B. Jaffe on L.I.
LEAD: Eileen B. Jaffe, a daughter of Mildred Goodman of Margate, N.J., and the late Morris Jaffe, was married yesterday to Richard Ekstract, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mack Ekstract of North Miami Beach, Fla.
Rabbi David Greenberg officiated at the bridegroom's home in East Hampton, L.I.


Call Columbus the First American Immigrant
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dr. John P. Hagen, 82, Director Of First Major U.S. Space Effort
LEAD: Dr.
John P. Hagen, a solar radio astronomer who in the late 1950's directed the United States' first major space effort, died last Sunday at a convalescent home in Las Vegas, Nev.
He was 82 years old and lived in Las Vegas.


New Jersey's Wealthy School Districts Gird for Battle on Aid
LEAD: Superintendents of New Jersey's wealthy suburban school districts are mounting a counterattack to the state's new school-financing formula, which by the mid-90's will strip their districts of the millions in state aid they now receive.


No Decision on Jets Quarterback
LEAD: With nine days to go before the football games in his rookie season as Jets head coach begin to count in the standing, Bruce Coslet still hasn't decided on a starting quarterback.
Ken O'Brien?
Tony Eason?


No Headline


New Zealand Bank Takeover
LEAD: The high- profile merchant bank Fay, Richwhite &amp; Company, founded by the backer of New Zealand's America's Cup yachting challenge, Sir Michael Fay, was taken over on Wednesday by Capital Markets for $140 million.


Richard Greenebaum, Ex-Business Editor, 78
LEAD: Richard W. Greenebaum, a former business editor who in the 1950's managed the Brazilian operations of IBEC, a Rockefeller Brothers housing venture in Latin America, died on Sunday at Central Suffolk Hospital in Riverhead, L.I.
He was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan and in Remsenburg, L.I.


Balancing Act Is Expected of Florio's New Chief of Staff
LEAD: Faced with an angry outcry over tax increases, Gov.
Jim Florio today appointed a new chief of staff and in doing so signaled a turn both toward more openness and a closer coordination of politics and government.


SOLDIER ACQUITTED IN PANAMA SLAYING
LEAD: An Army paratrooper was acquitted today of charges that he murdered an unarmed Panamanian man at a roadblock during the United States invasion of Panama last year.


Canadiens Sign Savard To Three-Year Contract
LEAD: He spent 10 superb seasons with the Chicago Blackhawks, and when they traded him two months ago, Denis Savard looked forward to several more good ones with his next organization, the Montreal Canadiens.
Yesterday, veteran player and new team took a step in that direction by agreeing on a three-year contract.


Despite Complaints, Solicitation by Phone or Mail Is Growing
LEAD: Your name, address and telephone number are no longer yours to give out only as you choose.
Direct marketers all over the nation have them and are using them with increasing intensity to sell products and services.


U.P.S. Awarded Japanese Route
LEAD: The United States Transportation Department selected the United Parcel Service Company to operate a new all-cargo route to Japan.
A U.P.S. spokesman, Ken Sternad, said the company had not yet placed a value on the route but said the award was ''significant.'' Emery Worldwide Airlines was awarded backup authority.


Patents;   A System To Keep Car From Rolling
LEAD: Two Florida inventors have patented a ''creep control'' system to prevent cars with automatic transmissions that are stopped in traffic from rolling forward when the driver inadvertently eases pressure on the brake.


McGee in N.L. Race
LEAD: Willie McGee, with a .335 average set in statistical stone, could win the National League batting title while finishing the season with the Oakland Athletics.


Patents;   Improving Chip Making By X-Ray Lithography
LEAD: Herbert A. Waggener, a researcher at Lepton Inc. in Murray Hill, N.J., has patented a new kind of mask that makes it easier to produce computer chips through the still-experimental process of X-ray lithography.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: While there is a plethora of people spending August's final weekend at their shoreside homes, SPIKE LEE, the movie producer, will have to wait a bit for his.
Mr.
Lee is having a retreat built near the Farm Neck Golf Club in Oak Bluffs on Martha's Vineyard.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''They're all in hiding because they know what the Iraqis are going to do to them.
They're going to round them up in their houses.
They knock on the door at midnight and take people away.
We never hear from them again and they are interned.''
- Barbara Badine of the U.S. Embassy in Kuwait, referring to Americans there.


Sandinista Salon: Ortega Woos Publishers
LEAD: Even for these post-Cold War days, it was an unlikely scene.
Former Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega Saavedra, the ideological enemy of the Reagan years, comfortably ensconced in an Upper East Side mansion, seated in an armchair upholstered in golden silk, talking to American corporate officers about a six-figure deal.


No Need Seen to Tap Oil Reserve
LEAD: Saying that oil supplies remained nearly in balance with demand despite the embargo against Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil, the International Energy Agency, which represents 21 industrial nations, decided today not to recommend that members begin drawing down emergency reserves.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American International Group Inc., New York an insurance company, said it completed the acquisition of International Lease Finance Corp., Beverly Hills, Calif., a jet-aircraft leasing company.
Each outstanding common share of International Lease was converted into the right to receive $32.50.


Mideast Crisis Puts New Spotlight On an Idle Oil Plant in California
LEAD: After standing unused and mothballed for nearly three years on a desolate bluff over the central coast of California, the Gaviota Oil and Gas Plant here is emerging as a key element in the American response to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.


Grain and Soybeans Lower; Orange Juice Prices Down
LEAD: Grain and soybean futures prices were lower yesterday in quiet trading on the Chicago Board of Trade.


Lawrence J. Kenney; Military Vicar Was 60
LEAD: The Most Rev.
Lawrence J. Kenney, Auxiliary Bishop of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese for the Military Services, died Thursday at the residence of John Cardinal O'Connor in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old and lived in Washington.


Arizona Pact By Pacificorp
LEAD: Pacificorp, the utility based in Portland, Ore., that last year bid $2.08 billion to acquire the Arizona Public Service Company, agreed today to several long-term transactions with the Arizona utility worth a total of $222 million.


In Moscow, Gulf Crisis Ranks Second
LEAD: Although Iraq is closer to the Soviet border than New York is to Boston, the gulf crisis that has fixated the rest of the world seems almost peripheral to residents of this capital of competing crises.


Space Shuttle Faces Up to Week's Delay Over Electrical Snag
LEAD: Space agency officials said today that the launching of the space shuttle Columbia might be delayed up to a week so that a failed electrical device on the payload can be fixed.


Japanese Finance Ministry In Actions Against 4 Firms
LEAD: In another in a string of recent cases involving abuses in the stock market, the Ministry of Finance today ordered suspensions for four securities firms, including a unit of Citicorp, for aiding a speculator's manipulation of a stock last April.


Cult Leader Convicted of 5 Killings in Ohio
LEAD: The leader of a religious cult has been convicted of killing a family of five last year and burying them on a farm where his group lived.


Bush's Son Files Request
LEAD: President Bush's son Neil has asked an administrative law judge to dismiss the Government's case against him, which charges him with conflict of interest as a director of a failed savings and loan, according to documents made available today.


Premed, Prelaw, Pretennis
LEAD: Todd Martin sat in the players' lounge at the United States Open the other day, soaking up the glitz and glamour of a world in which he finished his debut about 45 minutes earlier.
The 1990 Big Ten tennis player of the year had played the first match of his professional career and lost in straight sets, 7-6, 6-3, 7-6, to Jean-Philippe


Patents;   A 'Tea Bag' for Brewing Coffee in Microwave
LEAD: Gideon P. Serbu, a retired astrophysicist for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, has invented what resembles a tea bag for brewing fresh coffee one cup at a time in a microwave oven.


Giants and Marshall Settle But Talks on Taylor Stall
LEAD: Leonard Marshall, one of the two holdout Giants, signed a three-year contract extension today worth $2.6 million.
The signing came only hours after negotiations broke off between the Giants and the other absent defensive star, Lawrence Taylor.


Getting Your Money Faster
LEAD: New Federal rules go into effect today that reduce the maximum time banks, savings and loan associations and credit unions can hold most deposited checks before crediting them to your account.
Local checks cannot be held now for more than two business days, and nonlocal checks for more than five business days.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Wednesday about American acquisitions in Europe included an incorrect report from Translink's European Deal Review about a transaction between the GTE Corporation and Thorn Lighting in Britain.
While GTE is discussing the acquisition of Thorn Lighting, no agreement has been reached.


Key Witness Against Barry Gets Term of Probation
LEAD: A Federal district judge has sentenced a key witness in the trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. of Washington to five years' probation on drug charges.


Economic Cooperation for East Europe
LEAD: Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland are now vigorously competing to be the first to throw off their remaining Communist shackles and free their markets.
In time, these steps will benefit them economically.
More immediately, they'll help attract Western capital and assistance.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Soldier Acquitted in Killing


Toyota Is Raising Prices On Lexus
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation's Lexus car division said prices of 1991 Lexus models would increase an average of 3.3 percent, or about $1,150 after adjusting for additional standard equipment on the LS400 model.
Lexus, whose LS400 and ES250 models were introduced nearly a year ago, said the increase in price of 1991 models reflects the continuing growth of its operations and product development costs.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Weekend on Friday about Bargemusic Ltd. referred incorrectly to a flutist who appears there.
He is Ransom Wilson.


In the Saudi Desert: Heat, Sand and Restlessness
LEAD: In the baking heat of eastern Saudi Arabia, Marine tank emplacements dot the desert sand.
Four-man crews sit under camouflage nets with their M-60 tanks, which lie dug into the earth to make them less visible against the horizon.


Federated Stores
LEAD: The Federated and Allied department store chains said they intended to negotiate claims filed by the Internal Revenue Service for payment of more than $500 million in additional taxes.
Federated Stores Inc., the retailers' parent company, said the claims were based on an I.R.S. audit of the company for 1984 to 1988.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TRACK AND FIELD&gt;
Britain Wins 8th Gold: Colin Jackson needed a strong finish to win the 110-meter high hurdles in 13.18 seconds, giving Britain its eighth gold medal at the European championships yesterday in Split, Yugoslavia. (AP)
VOLLEYBALL&gt;
United States Falls: China trounced the United States, 15-7, 15-8, 15-7, in just one hour and the Soviet Union beat Cuba, 17-15, 15-7, 15-8 yesterday in the semifinals of the women's world championship in Beijing.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher; Pound Drops Substantially
LEAD: The dollar advanced against most major currencies except the Japanese yen yesterday as buyers added to their dollar holdings ahead of a long holiday weekend in the United States.


Slain College Students Mourned


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about threats against Arab-Americans referred incorrectly to the editor of an Arabic-language newspaper in Detroit.
He is Osama Siblani.


ECONOMISTS FAULT POPULATION FIGURE FOR NEW YORK CITY
LEAD: Could a city that enjoyed its greatest economic boom since World War II, experienced a dizzying rise in housing prices, attracted the largest wave of immigration since the days of Ellis Island and seemed to grow more crowded in every conceivable way actually be smaller now than it was in 1980?


First Union Selling Bank Branches
LEAD: The First Union Corporation said it would sell 100 bank branches to an affiliate of the Pitney Bowes Credit Corporation for $116 million and lease the branches back under a long-term lease agreement.


Fuhr Used Cocaine, Paper Says
LEAD: The Edmonton Oilers goaltender Grant Fuhr used cocaine for about seven years, but says he has been drug free since spending two weeks in a substance-abuse center last summer, according to a published report.


Transactions
LEAD: BASEBALL BOSTON (AL) - Acquired Larry Andersen, pitcher, from Houston for Jeff Bagwell, third baseman.
Optioned Daryl Irvine, pitcher, to Pawtucket of the International League.


Books of The Times;   Christopher Columbus In Magical Realism
LEAD:
The Harp and the Shadow
By Alejo Carpentier
Translated by Thomas Christensen and Carol Christensen. 159 pages.
Mercury House. $16.95.


Recycling Juice Boxes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Iraq Sets New Limits On Freeing Captives And Relocates Some
LEAD: The Iraqi Government put new conditions today on the departure of others in a group of 237 foreign women and children, including 14 Americans, that Iraq has said would be allowed to leave the country.


Review/Film;   Cat Lover With a Problem: Asthma
LEAD: Between the time ''The Lemon Sisters'' was scheduled to open, a year ago, and its actual opening yesterday, a story surfaced that this much worked-over film would be renamed so no one would make cheap remarks like, ''It's a lemon.'' Relax; you won't hear any bad lemon jokes here.
Just imagine Diane Keaton at her most hysterical, as an asthmatic cat lover who returns from a stay in the hospital to find that her two best friends have thrown her a cat-free welcome-home party.


Hawaii Has to Find Energy Where It Can
LEAD: To the Editor:


Retired Officer Sought in Death Of Ex-Senator
LEAD: The police are searching for a retired correction officer and college classmate of Vander L. Beatty in connection with the fatal shooting of the former State Senator in his campaign headquarters in Brooklyn on Thursday.


U.N. Secretary General Meets With Iraqi Official
LEAD: A new diplomatic effort to persuade Iraq to pull out of Kuwait began here today with five hours of talks between Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations, and Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz of Iraq.


G.M. Unit Agrees To Buy Insurer
LEAD: A unit of the General Motors Corporation agreed to buy the Navco Corporation insurance holding company from Crum &amp; Forster, a unit of the Xerox Corporation, for an undisclosed price.
The General Motors Acceptance Corporation subsidiary said Navco specializes in personal lines of insurance and has a record of strong growth and profitability.


Job Buyout At Chrysler
LEAD: Hundreds of union workers at the Chrysler Corporation punched out today for the last time, after accepting buyouts from the auto maker intended to reduce the need for layoffs.


Life in Emptied Kuwait City: Diplomats Long for Comforts
LEAD: The broad, sweeping boulevards of Kuwait's capital were all but deserted today except for clusters of Iraqi troops.


Beef Cattle Price Rises To Record
LEAD: The price of beef cattle rose to a record high of $75.40 for a hundred pounds in August because of strong summer demand and a reduced number of cattle slaughtered, the Agriculture Department said today.
The previous record price was $74.60 set in April, a department official said.


Your Money;   Ways to Protect Disabled Heirs
LEAD: Families who have disabled or impaired children need to take particular care in estate planning.
Generally, this means putting assets in trust for those who cannot handle their own financial affairs, but coming to grips with the matter within the family, setting up the trust and choosing the right trustee can be nettlesome.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Executive Changes column of Business Day on Thursday misidentified the new position of Samuel A. Schulhof at the General Electric Research and Development Center.
He is director of the center's new environmental research unit, not of the center itself.


U.S. Says Hospital Statistics Show Use of Cocaine May Have Peaked
LEAD: In what Federal researchers called a strong indication that the nation's cocaine epidemic may have peaked, Government figures released today show that cocaine-related visits to hospital emergency rooms dropped 4 percent in the first quarter of the year.


U S West Cable In Joint Venture
LEAD: U S West Cable Communications and United International Holdings have committed $100 million to a joint venture to acquire and develop overseas cable television systems, the companies announced.
The new venture, called United Communications International, will initially acquire an 86 percent interest in Norkabel, the second-largest cable television operator in Norway, and a 25 percent interest in Swedish Cable and Dish, the second largest operator in


Downturn in Canada
LEAD: Canada's economy shrank at an annual rate of 1.6 percent from April to June, the Government said today.
The gross domestic product, adjusted for inflation, showed the decline, after growing at a 2.2 percent rate in the first quarter, the Canadian statistics agency said.
Housing construction and new-car sales were both sharply lower.


Stretching Food in Iraq: Rationing and Feed-Grain Bread
LEAD: Iraq is beginning to take severe measures to stretch food supplies.
They include issuing coupons and setting up food distribution centers in preparation for the imposition of rationing today and encouraging urban dwellers to join their relatives in the countryside.


Cambodia Gives Partial Backing To U.N. Plan for Ending the War
LEAD: The Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government today gave its qualified endorsement to a new United Nations peace plan under which it would share power with the three guerrilla groups it has been fighting for 11 years.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.06
8.00
8.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.37
7.44
7.84
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.37
7.40
7.76
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.73
8.74
8.20
30-YR.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in Business Day yesterday headed ''Filling the Void'' misstated the amount of oil that may be drawn by India and Malaysia from reserves to help offset world oil shortages.
It is 600,000 barrels a day, not 400,000.


Seles Upset on Center Court in 1-6, 6-1, 7-6 Loss to Italian
LEAD: The first time Linda Ferrando stood across the court from Monica Seles, in practice earlier this year in Chicago, she made so little impression that Seles failed to remember it ever happened.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With the Choices in Headphones
LEAD: Picking the right headphones isn't easy.
You have to consider not just how they sound, but how they feel and how you're going to use them.


MEDICARE FEE PLAN SENT TO CONGRESS
LEAD: In what health officials called a major step toward overhauling Medicare's chaotic reimbursement system, the Secretary of Health and Human Services yesterday gave Congress a model national fee schedule for 1,400 commonly performed medical procedures.


Reds Acquire Doran
LEAD: Bill Doran, after turning down a trade to the Mets, was sent by the Houston Astros to the Cincinnati Reds yesterday for three players to be named.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: It may not actually be the last weekend of summer, but for the vast majority of people Labor Day means the end of the season.


Muslims in India Protest American Presence in Middle East


Norway Oil Reserves
LEAD: Norway may be able to maintain its current annual oil output for another 40 years, double previous estimates, the state-funded Petroleum Directorate said today.
A directorate spokesman, Jan Hagland, disclosed the new projections but declined to give further details.


100 Years of the Starling
LEAD: The year was 1890 when an eccentric drug manufacturer named Eugene Schieffelin entered New York City's Central Park and released some 60 European starlings he had imported from England.
In 1891 he loosed 40 more.
Schieffelin's motives were as romantic as they were ill fated: he hoped to introduce into North America every bird mentioned by


T.W.A. in 'Frequent Flier' Ruling
LEAD: A Federal appeals court ruled on Thursday that Trans World Airlines could prohibit broker sales and other transfers of ''frequent flier'' discount coupons.
But the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit at least temporarily set back T.W.A.'s attempt to enforce the ban through an injunction and lawsuit seeking damages against a company that buys unused coupons and sells them at cut rates.


U.S. Guidelines Address Meatpacking Injuries
LEAD: The Labor Department is establishing a test program in the meatpacking industry to protect workers from painful and crippling injuries caused by repetitive motions.


E.M.S. Consents To End Jail Escorts
LEAD: Barely two weeks after the Dinkins administration began requiring a police escort for Emergency Medical Service workers entering the Rikers Island jail, the city and the workers' union agreed yesterday to end the plan.


Connecticut Governor Orders Spending Cut
LEAD: Gov.
William A. O'Neill today ordered state agencies to cut spending by 5 percent to help offset a $379.4 million deficit that has accumulated in the budget year that began just two months ago.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 1, 1990
LEAD:
Oil and the Mideast


Aid for Trapped Mideast Workers
LEAD: One month after Iraq overran Kuwait, American companies are struggling to maintain increasingly tenuous communications links with employees trapped in the two countries and are reluctant to say much about their efforts for fear of endangering those workers.


State Senator James Donovan, 66, Leader on Education Policy, Dies
LEAD: James H. Donovan, a longtime State Senator who played an important role in shaping state policy on education and transportation during the last 25 years, died today at his home in Chadwicks, near Utica.
He was 66 years old.


Quebec Renews Effort To End Indian Protest
LEAD: The work to remove the barricades set up by Mohawk Indians across the Mercier Bridge resumed today, after being halted on Thursday in the seven-week-old standoff between the Canadian Government and Mohawk Indians.


Nynex Discloses Settlement
LEAD: The Nynex Corporation, the parent of the New York Telephone Company, released more documents yesterday about lewd parties in Florida each year from 1984 to 1988 that were attended by a dozen of Nynex's purchasing managers and some suppliers' employees.


William C. Schraft Jr., Pathologist, 69
LEAD: William C. Schraft Jr., a pathologist and president of the Westchester County Board of Health, died on Thursday while vacationing with his family in Stonington, Conn.
He was 69 years old and lived in New Rochelle.


Holiday on Monday
LEAD: Monday is Labor Day. Here are holiday schedules:


A Jazz Musician Turns Homeward
LEAD: Abdullah Ibrahim, the South African pianist, tells a story about a man who collected birds, among them a rare bird from Africa.
When the collector planned a trip to Africa, he asked the bird if there was anything he could bring back. ''The best thing to do is to let me out of this cage,'' the bird said, but the man refused.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Endangered Bulbs
LEAD: Spring flowers - next spring's - should be on the minds of gardeners now.
It's time to make planting plans and to order bulbs.
All bulbs, including the three showiest, trumpet daffodils, tulips and hyacinths, must be planted over the next two months.
Although most small-flowered species are grown in nursery fields, some bulbs are being dug from the Mediterranean region, which threatens their survival.


The Queen Who Sets Up the Curses
LEAD: The rains of August had been taking their toll on ''Richard III,'' the New York Shakespeare Festival's production in Central Park, canceling or halting performances and making forecasts the topic of moment.


Missouri Executes Man Convicted of Killing 5
LEAD: A man convicted of five murders was put to death by injection early today for killing an elderly woman 11 years ago.


Tyson Cut Badly in Training, and Bout Is Put Off
LEAD: Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion, suffered a severe cut above his right eye yesterday when he and a sparring partner, Greg Page, struck heads in a workout at Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino in Atlantic City.
Tyson was taken directly to the Margate, N.J., office of Dr.
Ira Trocki, who used 48 stitches to close the cut.


About New York;   A Shrine Is Born In the Incubator Of the 'Wretched'
LEAD: To the side of a blacktop city park at First Avenue and East First Street, a bronze plaque affixed to a fiberglass rock has been drawing a varied stream of pilgrims all summer.


A Sharp McEnroe Overcomes Chesnokov
LEAD: John McEnroe, a fallen but not forgotten star, played one of the best matches of his latest comeback attempt last night to gain the round of 16 of the United States Open, a tournament he has won four times but not since 1984.


GERMANYS CODIFY DETAILS OF UNION
LEAD: After weeks of intense political maneuvering, representatives of the two Germanys signed a treaty of almost 1,000 pages today detailing the mechanics of reunification, now only 33 days away.


Study of Three Mile Island Accident Finds Negligible Increase In Cancer
LEAD: Scientists said yesterday that they had found no convincing evidence that the accident at the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant in Pennsylvania in 1979 had caused a rise in cancer rates.


Tyson Bout Postponed
LEAD: Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion, suffered a severe cut above his right eye when he and a sparring partner hit heads yesterday during a workout at Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino in Atlantic City.
Forty-eight stitches were required to close the cut.
Because of his injury, Tyson's bout against Alex Stewart, which had been scheduled for Sept.


Comatose Woman's Lawyer Seeks to Reopen Death Issue
LEAD: A lawyer for a comatose woman who was the central figure in a major Supreme Court ruling this summer has asked a state court to allow removal of her life-support system, citing new evidence that she would not want to continue living in her condition.


U.S. Is Said to Quietly Encourage A Kuwaiti Resistance Movement
LEAD: A growing armed resistance to Iraq's occupation of Kuwait, managed from an air base in the Saudi Arabian desert, has won American encouragement and advice, United States officials said this week.
But the officials insisted that neither the Central Intelligence Agency nor the American military is directly supporting the movement.


Belt Buckles, a k a Jewelry
LEAD: Belts for fall have been designed to embellish the monochromatic tones and softer shapes of today's fashions, from wool crepe suits to clingy cat suits.
Buckles are more important than they have been in years, say retailers, and the renewed interest in ornate fasteners is attracting the attention of jewelry designers.


The Arena Theater in Washington Gets Ready for a Change of Cast
LEAD: Arena Stage, the prestigious resident theater that was born in a 247-seat converted movie house on skid row, is about to celebrate its 40th year and its last season under the artistic direction of its founder and producing director.
The transition comes at a time when Arena is embarking on a concentrated effort to build a multiracial company and reach out to a multicultural audience.


The Pull of Emptiness
LEAD:
THE TELLING DISTANCE
Conversations With the American Desert.
By Bruce Berger.
Illustrated by Johnson Charley.
243 pp. Portland, Ore.:
Breitenbush Books. $19.95.


Sarah E. Hardesty, a Vice President Of Education Council, Weds in Capital
LEAD: The wedding of SARAH E. HARDESTY, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
H.
Hardesty Jr. of St.
Michaels, Md., to WILLIAM P. BRAY, a son of Dr.
Daniel Bray of Algona, Iowa, and the late Phyllis Bray, took place yesterday at St.
Patrick's Episcopal Church in Washington.
The Rev.
S.
James Steen officiated.


Pitt's New Coach Off to Good Start
LEAD: Curvin Richards ran for 119 yards and a touchdown and Pittsburgh scored on four of its five first-half possessions to beat Ohio University, 35-3, today in Coach Paul Hackett's regular-season debut.


Herr Helps Quickly
LEAD: There were debuts both smashing and encouraging and debacles both achingly endured and narrowly averted.
There were innings of inspiration and innings of anxiety, all of which added up to a game of profound importance and satisfaction for the Mets yesterday.


DRIVING THROUGH DETROIT
LEAD: As a nearly lifelong resident of Detroit and a member of the ''black intelligentsia,'' I feel that Chafets ignores the positive aspects of the city.
Unlike many other cities in the United States, Detroit has a real African-American middle class: doctors, lawyers and scholars (unconnected to the administration of Coleman A.


SOVIET AGREEMENT REPORTED ON PLAN FOR FREE MARKETS
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Boris N. Yeltsin, whose rivalry has sometimes seemed to threaten the integrity of the Soviet Union, have agreed on a plan to dismantle central economic controls and move to free markets in 500 days, leaders of the Russian republic said today.


Data Update
LEAD:
MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
July 90
June 90
July 89
Nation
$98,400
$97,500
$95,200
Northeast
143,300
148,300
146,500
Midwest
76,300
75,900
73,400
South
88,900
87,500
85,800
West
141,500
138,100
145,700
*4*(Source: National Association of Realtors)


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
Cash Machine Users to Get More Outlets


In Quest of That Singular Quality Known as Style
LEAD: Speaking informally with students at the American Dance Festival in Durham, N.C., earlier this summer, Twyla Tharp offered some comments on style.
She praised the New York City Ballet for having a style of its own.
And when asked how a young choreographer could develop a personal style, she replied that this necessarily involves ''spending thousands of hours in a studio by yourself.


In Defense of Left-Handedness
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Ends Breeding Program For Monkeys After 14 Died
LEAD: The Federal Centers for Disease Control has discontinued the breeding program for research monkeys in nearby Lawrenceville after 14 died there.


Belinda Hughes: Coat Designer
LEAD: It happens every year: parents frantically seek the right coat for children.
Casual or dressy or for all occasions?
How much should they spend when the child will outgrow the coat in a year?


Soviets and Czechs Sign Pact On Trade in Hard Currencies
LEAD: Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union today signed the first agreement between members of the former Soviet bloc to conduct their trade in convertible currencies and use world prices.
The accord is to take effect in January.  ''I consider this document a very important step in our two countries' transition to a market economy,'' Foreign Trade Minister Konstantin F.


Married to the Beats
LEAD:
OFF THE ROAD: My Years With Cassady, Kerouac, and Ginsberg.
By Carolyn Cassady. (Morrow, $22.95.) In August 1947, 24-year-old Carolyn Robinson found her boyfriend, Neal Cassady, naked in bed with his estranged wife and his friend Allen Ginsberg.
The next year - on April Fool's Day - she married Cassady, and she spent the next 20 years amid the neurotic heroes of the Beat Generation.


W. J. Beckett Wed To Stacy Stephens
LEAD: STACY ELIZABETH STEPHENS, the daughter of James C. Stephens of Houston and Mrs.
Arthur E. Palmer of Topeka, Kan., was married yesterday to WILLIAM JOSEPH BECKETT, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Beckett of Ardsley, N.Y.
The Rev.
James Elliott Lindsley performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Tivoli, N


Lincoln Square
LEAD: To the Editor:


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
LABOR DAY HORSE SHOW


A Perfect Trail in Nova Scotia
LEAD: On our second trip to Nova Scotia - the first was in July 1987 -we hoped to learn from our scattershot adventures during the first go.
Our idea, insofar as we can be said to have had one, was to view to maximum advantage the astonishing landscape of the Cabot Trail, a circular tour, part of which goes through Cape Breton Highlands National Park.


Admiral Praises Lesbians But Urges Their Dismissal
LEAD: The commander of the Navy's surface Atlantic fleet has characterized lesbian sailors as ''among the command's top performers'' but told his officers that homosexual women must be vigorously rooted out of the service.


When Your Home Videos Are Rated B (for Boring)
LEAD: Professional film makers and editors are turning home movies and videotapes into modern mini-series of family life.
Reels of Little League games or the family picnic are being chopped into short sequences and set to music like action shots on MTV.


World Markets;   Ominous News From Japan
LEAD: The Bank of Japan's increase of its discount rate to 6 percent from 5.25 percent has raised new questions about how much higher world interest rates will go and how many more investors will be drained from weak world equity markets.


49ers Heading for a Third Straight Super Bowl Title . . .
LEAD: The following National Conference preview was prepared and written by Frank Litsky.
Teams are listed in the predicted order of finish, with San Francisco picked to win the Super Bowl.
EAST
Giants
Style: An old-fashioned, hammer-it-out offense and a defense to match, although not an overwhelming defense anymore.


Broad Teacher Dissatisfaction Is Pointed Up in National Poll
LEAD: Despite a national education movement intended partly to give teachers more control over their classrooms and curriculums, teachers are increasingly unhappy with their lack of authority, with their working conditions and with the movement for better schools itself, according to a sweeping survey by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.


This Courtroom Is a Long Way From 'L.A. Law'
LEAD: It took only a brief stint as a juror in Manhattan to convince Andy Wolk that when it came to criminal justice in New York, reality is the best story of all.
But as Mr.
Wolk or any other writer can attest, reality is never easy to simulate, particularly the reality of a system under siege, and particularly in a made-for-


Magazine in Uruguay Wins a Wide Audience
LEAD: Cesar Aguiar, a prominent Uruguayan pollster and sociologist, considers it a sufficient measure of the virtues of Busqueda, a weekly news magazine, to note that Citibank and the Communist Party both advertise in its pages.


Melissa Cleveland Weds Roy Salameh
LEAD: At the Plaza hotel in New York yesterday, MELISSA CAROL CLEVELAND, a daughter of Dr.
Richard J. Cleveland of Wellesley, Mass., and the late Marjorie Hanna Cleveland, was married to ROY JOSEPH SALAMEH, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Salameh of Beirut, Lebanon.
Acting Justice Diane S. Lebedeff of State Supreme Court in


Alarms Are Sounding About Rabid Raccoons
LEAD: THE screen door banged, puncturing the quiet of the summer night and announcing a clumsy break-in attempt by a masked intruder.
Throwing his book to the floor, the homeowner grabbed his handy water pistol and fired, thoroughly dousing a large and hungry raccoon and driving it back out the door.


Commercial Property: Grand Central's Air Rights;   M.T.A. Assembles a Madison Avenue Receiving Site
LEAD: Somewhere in the air over Grand Central Terminal - floating like an invisible, enormous, amorphous and very valuable mass - are somewhere between 1.6 million and 1.9 million square feet of unused development rights.
Just where these rights can descend to earth has been a matter of the most critical civic controversy since the late 1960's.


McGee May Be Gone but Is Still Running Strong in the Race
LEAD: The trading flurry that occurred the last few days was created by teams seeking to bolster their chances for championships ranging from the division level to the World Series.
The trades, however, also created these circumstances or possible ramifications:


DRIVING THROUGH DETROIT
LEAD: The people of Detroit are doing what the rest of us wish we could do: they're burning it down and starting over.
Unfortunately, the burning down is always easier than the starting over.


700 Women and Children Freed; Thousands of Westerners Remain
LEAD: More than 700 foreign women and children who had been detained in Iraq as human shields against an American military attack headed for home in the United States, Europe and Asia early today after being released by the Iraqi Government.


Spain
LEAD: To the Editor: On July 29 you ran an interesting article on the Galicia region of Spain and the edible barnacles called percebes.
But the caption about a ''Basque fisherman selling the shellfish'' must have been a guess.
Maybe a fisherman; probably a merchant.
The Gallegos are not Basques, who live hundreds of miles to the east.


'Shirley Valentine' At Westport Playhouse
LEAD: SHIRLEY BRADSHAW, 48, self-described ''Saint Joan of the Kitchen Sink'' and ''Automother,'' is fixing yet another tedious supper, dicing potatoes, frying eggs and tippling wine (from the glass).
Talking wistfully of once being in touch with happiness, and wishfully of having orgasms and going to Greece, wondering whatever happened to her life and concluding that, actually, nothing happened, Shirley turns, every now and again, to the kitchen wall for acknowledgment (''Don't I, Wall?


Lydia Fitler Plans to Wed Daniel Kimball in October
LEAD: The engagement of LYDIA CLOTHIER FITLER to DANIEL MARTIN KIMBALL, the son of Mrs.
Loren E. Kimball of Northeast Harbor, Me. and the late Mr.
Kimball, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mrs.
John S. C. Harvey 3d and William W. Fitler 3d, both of Haverford, Pa.
An October wedding is planned.


In Rush to Save What's Left, Historic Districts Spread
LEAD: IN the Southport section of Fairfield, preservationists are considering an effort to expand the historic district to take in parts of Spruce Street and Southport Center.
The change could prevent the conversion into offices of the 19th-century houses overlooking Southport Harbor.


Judy Kreston and David Fields Lahm Are Married
LEAD: JUDY KRESTON, the daughter of the late Gitta Gradova and the late Dr.
Maurice H. Cottle of Chicago, was married yesterday to DAVID FIELDS LAHM, the son of the late Dorothy Fields, the lyricist, and the late Eli Lahm of New York.
Rabbi Charles Davidson officiated at the couple's home in Chelsea.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on page 15 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the movie ''Postcards From the Edge'' misstates the opening date.
It is Sept. 12.


PASTIMES: Camera
LEAD: Are fledgling photographers awash in a sea of film-speed confusion?
That's the message Polaroid keeps sending out in its ads for its color-negative film called OneFilm.
If you believe what you hear in these radio and television ads, snapshooters are as befuddled by ISO speeds as they used to be by f/stops.


Within Regulations
LEAD: Of the hundreds of Panamanians who were killed in the United States invasion, the Army contended that one was murdered and that Sgt.
Roberto Bryan committed the crime.
During Sergeant Bryan's trial last week in Fort Bragg, N.C., his lawyer maintained that the soldier had simply been doing his job when he shot a wounded Panamanian who had been part of a group from which a grenade was tossed, injuring 10 American soldiers.


Yachting;   2 World Regattas Set for U.S. Waters
LEAD: It is only now and then that world championship events in yachting touch base in the United States.
But this season, two of the sport's most competitive Olympic classes, the Star and the Flying Dutchman, are organizing world regattas in waters off Newport, R.I., and Cleveland.


Canadian Army Moves In to End a Smoldering Standoff With the Mohawks
LEAD: Canadian Army troops moved in to dismantle barricades today in an Indian community outside Montreal, seeking to end a seven-week standoff between armed Mohawk Indians and Canadian authorities.


Denigrating Taiwanese
LEAD: The Sports Editor:


BUSINESS DIARY: August 26-31
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
OPEC Decides to Give the Desired Response
One doesn't just order a cab driver in the Arab world to head across town.
One respectfully inquires if he is going in that direction.
On Wednesday, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries announced that it is, indeed, going where the United States would like.


Northeast Notebook: Presque Isle, Me.;  $30 Million Mall In a Tiny Town
LEAD: Some may consider John J. Capenos unrealistic in spending $30 million to build a 500,000-square-foot enclosed shopping mall here in the far reaches of northern Maine.


In Hussein, the Palestinians Have an Ally and a Curse
LEAD: THE veteran Israeli politician Abba Eban is widely credited with coining an aphorism about Palestinian diplomacy that has stuck for many years: The Palestinians never miss an opportunity to miss an opportunity.
Now some Israelis might modify that: The Palestinians never give up a chance to hurt their chances.


PASTIMES: Bridge
LEAD: Several hundred American bridge players will take part in the World Championships beginning today in Geneva.
They will find that the average age of their group is much higher than that of the non-Americans.


Restrictions on Waterfowl Hunting
LEAD: The Fish and Wildlife Service will continue its restrictive waterfowl hunting regulations for the forthcoming fall and winter seasons.


The Special Volatility of August 1990
LEAD: Conventional wisdom holds that Wall Street in August is populated chiefly by tourists who missed the subway stops for Chinatown and the South Street Seaport.
This year, the August market was certainly more exciting than usual, thanks to the Iraq crisis.
But was it busier?


Why Moscow Must Walk the Tightrope in Iraq
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dr. Judith Hurley Wed To Charles G. De Leo
LEAD: DR.
JUDITH HURLEY, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Horace W. Hurley of New York, was married yesterday to CHARLES GULLETTE DE LEO, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred V. De Leo of Miami.
The Rev.
Mark M. Kenna, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the home of the bridegroom's parents.


Saudi Minister Says U.S. Force Is Only Defensive
LEAD: Saudi Arabia's Defense Minister said today that his country could not be used as a staging ground by the American military for rescuing hostages under Iraqi control or for beginning offensive attacks against Iraq.


15 Wounded at 2 Nightclubs When Gunmen Open Fire in Disputes
LEAD: Fifteen people were wounded in two shootings at nightclubs in Harlem and Brooklyn early yesterday, one a Jamaican social club and the other a dance hall frequented by West Indians for parties, the police said.


Baseball Fights From Behind the Plate
LEAD: In the late 1960's I umpired a game between the Mets and the Philadelphia Phillies at Shea Stadium.
The Mets' pitcher - I forget who it was - hit one of the Phillie batters with a pitch.
The next inning, the first batter for the Mets was hit.
No fuss.
No one charged the mound.
I turned around and brushed off home plate, and as I did I told the catcher: 'Go out to the mound and tell your pitcher that's enough.


Ancient Burial Cave Is Found in Aleutian Islands
LEAD: An ancient burial cave containing the mummified remains of more than 30 people has been found in the Aleutian Islands.
The discovery is being called one of the most important in Alaska in years.


Summer Vegetables for Tarts and Pizzas
LEAD: MIXED salads, vegetable tarts and pizzas can be so good at this time of year that the absence of meat or fish in a meal goes unnoticed.
I like to mix the best of the produce from the local farmer's stand to make a vegetable antipasto that would give any good Italian restaurant a run for its money.


Cutting Down On Trash
LEAD: SOURCE reduction, the first step in reducing the solid-waste stream, has been forgotten or neglected as an option by our policy makers.


Mutual Funds;   Those Often-Garbled Statements
LEAD: If you have a hard time deciphering your mutual fund's account statement, you're in good company.
A panel of five industry experts, asked to evalulate 10 statements for this column, gave most of them poor marks.


Jews at U. of Wisconsin Are Victims of Bias Acts
LEAD: Jewish students returning this week to the University of Wisconsin for the fall semester were the latest victims in a wave of anti-Semitic acts that began here in mid-July.


Why Moscow Must Walk the Tightrope in Iraq;   The Long Way There
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, the Stamps column last Sunday omitted a reproduction of a revenue stamp affixed to the back of a Civil War photograph.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the column may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Why Moscow Must Walk the Tightrope in Iraq;   Earlier Invasions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''You never knew what was going to happen next.
One time you thought you'd be attacked, the next time you thought you'd be here for six months.
It was up and down, up and down.
We all think it's going to be quite hard explaining back home what made it so dreadful.''
- Kirsty Norman,
a 34-year-old
British art expert,
while waiting to
leave Baghdad.


New Stamp on a New Season
LEAD: As the San Francisco 49ers bid for their third consecutive world championship and Paul Tagliabue enters his first full season as commissioner of the National Football League, the league is far removed from the circuitous, seven-month search and bickering and bantering among owners that marked Tagliabue's selection last


Coping With Dull Cutting Tools
LEAD: DULL cutting tools are not just ineffective.
They are also dangerous because they require more effort to use than sharp tools and so are more difficult to control.
Sharpening chisels, planes and knives is relatively easy; other tools like saws and scissors should be sharpened professionally.


The S.&amp; L. Bailout Flouts the Tenets of Capitalism
LEAD: To the Editor:


'Hair' Helps Recall Love And Anarchy of the 60's
LEAD: SEEING ''Hair,'' the 60's rock musical by Jerome Ragni, James Rado and Galt MacDermot currently being revived at the Gateway Playhouse in Bellport through next Sunday, will be a nostalgia trip for some.


A Balanced Budget Would Finish Us Off
LEAD: To the Editor:


Florie Seery Plans to Wed in October
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Seery of Huntington Station, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter FLORENCE R. SEERY to MARC BRYAN-BROWN, a son of Dr.
Christopher W. Bryan-Brown of New York and Deirdre Bryan-Brown of Shillingford, England.
An October wedding is planned.


Anything but Simple: Geometric Abstraction at Yale
LEAD: HAVING gained a foothold in the United States during the 1930's, geometric abstraction has yet to lose it.
Clean, spare and inexpressive (although astringent in its effect), the mode never engulfed the scene like Abstract Expressionism but, rather, persisted in the face of that movement as well as Surrealism, Pop and various ''returns to the figure,'' including Neo


Now a Word From the Cliburn
LEAD: Back in my room in the same vast, modern Worthington Hotel whose Grand Ballroom holds the gala closing reception six floors below, I command a television, two radios, two telephones, 24-hour room service and a panoramic view of the sleeping city to the north.
My bed could comfortably accommodate four.


Berlin Wall Souvenir Is Lethal
LEAD: A concrete slab of the Berlin wall tipped over and crushed a 14-year-old boy to death as he was trying to chip souvenir pieces from it, the police said today. ''The segment came loose and fell over on the boy like a guillotine,'' a West Berlin police spokesman said of the accident on Friday night.


Korean Divers Search for 20
LEAD: Police divers searched today for at least 20 passengers reported missing after a bus slid off a highway bridge into a river, a South Korean news agency, Yonhap, reported.
Four people managed to escape through windows after the bus plunged about 60 feet into the river near Yochon, about 35 miles southeast of Seoul.


In East Europe, The Police Have Gone the Way Of the Police State
LEAD: BULGARIA and Romania are offering Eastern Europe's most vivid illustrations of what happens when a Communist police state collapses: the police collapse too, and so does public order.


Question Of the Week;   Why Are Baseball Brawls So Common?
LEAD: The reason for all the brawls is quite simple.
Baseball players are too sensitive.
Any ball that hits a player regardless of how unintentional it may have been is taken as an assault for which there must be immediate retaliation.


Livery-Cab Driver Shot In Attempted Robbery
LEAD: A livery-cab driver was shot during a failed robbery attempt in the Bronx yesterday, the said.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Ossining, N.Y.
$310,000
18 Ryder Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 62-year-old Norman Tudor; eat-in kitchen, w/b stove, den, fireplace, 0.5 acre; taxes $5,913.
Port Chester, N.Y.
$255,000
243 North Regent Street
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, den, 2-car detached garage; taxes $4,500.


Danielle Lamm Wed to Kevin Granath in Illinois
LEAD: DANIELLE CAROL LAMM, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roderick W. Lamm of Lake Forest, Ill., was married there yesterday to KEVIN MICHAEL GRANATH, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. Granath of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
John Bellingham officiated at the First Presbyterian Church.


Schools Preparing For Changes In Financing
LEAD: AS the 1990-91 school year opens this week, the dominant topic of conversation is the Quality Education Act, Gov.
Jim Florio's effort to make educational opportunity more equal by increasing and redistributing state aid to education.


COCAINE EPIDEMIC MAY HAVE PEAKED
LEAD: In what Federal researchers called a strong indication that the nation's cocaine epidemic may have peaked, Government figures released Friday show that cocaine-related visits to hospital emergency rooms dropped 4 percent in the first quarter of the year.


The Body As Provocateur And Victim
LEAD: ''Figuring the Body,'' at The Museum of Fine Arts, through Oct. 28, is an important and timely exhibition, although in no sense is it the last word on the subject of contemporary art and the human form.
It is, finally, diffuse and preachy, as if the museum's curators - Kathy Halbreich (appointed this week as the new director of the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis) and Trevor


'Black Votes Count'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Father-Son Night
LEAD: THEY used to play baseball together as father and son in their backyard.
Now Ken Griffey Sr. and Ken Griffey Jr. are playing together in a bigger venue.
The Griffeys became the first father and son to play on the same team in the majors Friday night, helping the Seattle Mariners to a 5-2 victory over the Kansas City Royals.


Muslims in Sri Lanka Flee Violence of Civil War
LEAD: Barely 7 percent of Sri Lanka's 16 million people are Muslims, the descendants of Arab traders who sailed here centuries ago.
They have lived largely undisturbed on this abundant island, through Portuguese, Dutch and British colonization and 42 years of Sri Lankan independence, running businesses, farms and fishing boats.


ACRONYM POWER
LEAD: As an English teacher and sometime acronym enthusiast, I agree with Jack Rosenthal that ''the most obvious reason to coin an acronym is mnemonic, to make a term easy to remember.'' My students and I decided last year that our favorite acronym is IACOCCA.
Lee Iacocca should have no trouble remembering his position, because he can say with certainty, ''I Am Chairman of Chrysler Corporation of America.


Valerie Artzt Wed To Mark P. Coles
LEAD: VALERIE JAN ARTZT, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald E. Artzt of Stroudsburg, Pa., was married last evening to MARK PETER COLES, a son of Patricia Coles of Canberra, Australia, and the late Noel Coles.
Rabbi Charles Davidson and the Rev.
Louis Gioia, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Lotos Club in New


Edwin Reischauer, Diplomat and Scholar, Dies at 79
LEAD: Edwin O. Reischauer, a scholar who specialized in East Asian affairs and who served as United States Ambassador to Japan from 1961 to 1966, died yesterday at Green Hospital of the Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation La Jolla, Calif.
He was 79 years old and lived in Belmont, Mass., and La Jolla.


On the Air In a Museum In Chicago
LEAD: Buttoning a blue blazer over his white T-shirt, the Chicago teen-ager settled nervously behind the brightly lighted anchor desk, looking a bit like a deer frozen by a spotlight.
Then, on signal, he squinted into the camera and began haltingly to read the words crawling across the teleprompter:


We Still Need Affirmative Action
LEAD: To the Editor:


Trump Fights Back
LEAD:
TRUMP
Surviving at the Top.
By Donald J. Trump with Charles Leerhsen.
Illustrated. 236 pp. New York:
Random House. $21.95.


Jane E. Frieder To Wed in Fall
LEAD: The engagement of JANE ELIZABETH FRIEDER to MARK WILF, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Wilf of Hillside, N.J., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Philip R. Frieder of Rydal, Pa.
An October wedding is planned.


Citizens Are Starting to Shout Over Savings and Loan Costs
LEAD: When a group of citizens held a raucous town meeting here on Wednesday as part of a campaign against the Federal bailout of the savings and loan industry, the only empty seats were those reserved for the state's Congressional delegation.


Sheet Music Nestles in a Haven in Maine
LEAD: Cartons of old sheet music are for some families among the first antique treasures relegated to the attic.
Fritz Jahoda, former conductor of the Vienna State Opera and the retired chairman of the City College of New York's music department, who now lives in Brooksville, Me., says he often thinks about that as he drives through the countryside here.


Berlin: This Spy Gets the Credit
LEAD:
SPY SINKER
By Len Deighton.
374 pp. New York:
A Cornelia and Michael Bessie Book/
HarperCollins Publishers. $21.95.


W. H. Boettcher Weds Ms. Robinson
LEAD: JOANNE M. ROBINSON, a daughter of the late Dr.
John Woodruff Robinson and the late May Morgan Robinson of New York, was married yesterday to WOLFGANG H. BOETTCHER, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Emil Boettcher of Neumunster, West Germany.
The Rev.
Alger L. Adams, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at his home in Hastings-on-Hudson, N


Corrections
LEAD: A map and chart last Sunday with an article about nuclear waste included a site identified erroneously by an Energy Department report.


Riskless Hormone
LEAD: Bovine growth hormone is the first of many genetically engineered products that promise to enhance agricultural efficiency.
But the hormone is meeting strong resistance, based in part on the stirring of unfounded fears.
A recent study by the Food and Drug Administration confirms that the hormone presents no risk to human health.


A Summer's Day, A Mower's Roar
LEAD: In response to Irving Kamil's article, ''Will You Turn That Mower Off?'' (Opinion page, July 15):


CBS Postpones Plan to Scramble N.F.L. Games
LEAD: When CBS Sports decided on Friday to postpone a plan to scramble the satellite signal of National Football League games when the regular season opens next Sunday, it represented at least a temporary victory for the thousands of sports bars, restaurants and home satellite users that capture N.F.L. games transmissions on their satellite dishes.


Postings: Helping the Homeless;   Brokers' Benefit
LEAD: The Youth Service Opportunities Project has been encouraging high school and college students to volunteer at soup kitchens and drop-in centers for the homeless since 1983.


Nursing Home Memories
LEAD: MISSING PIECES.
By Stanislaw Benski.
Translated by Walter Arndt. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) These spare, poetic stories were written during the 25 years that Stanislaw Benski was director of a Warsaw nursing home whose elderly residents included some of the last of Poland's Jews.


Susan Marie Hart, a Lawyer, Married To Richard White, a Science Teacher
LEAD: SUSAN MARIE HART, an associate in the New York law firm of Donovan Leisure Newton &amp; Irvine, was married in Hartsdale, N.Y., yesterday to RICHARD T. WHITE, a science teacher at the Brearley School.
The Rev.
Patrick J. Dunne performed the ceremony at Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church.


Seed-Grown Annuals for the Future
LEAD: SINCE a supposedly relaxing weekend is here, when summer playtime and vacations end and school begins, gardeners may like to plan what they should or should not be doing in the back 40.


Wife of, Mother of, Daughter of
LEAD:
A FULL MOON OF WOMEN
29 Word Portraits of Notable Women From Different Times and Places +
1 Void of Course.
By Ursule Molinaro.
149 pp. New York:
E. P. Dutton.
$17.95.


Dr. Tobin Weds Dr. David Ritterband
LEAD: DR.
CORINNE TOBIN, a resident in radiology at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, and DR.
DAVID CARL RITTERBAND, an intern at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan, were married last evening at the Park Avenue Synagogue.
Rabbi Philip Graubart performed the ceremony.
Dr.


Theology Awaits The Vatican's Word on Evils Lesser and Greater
LEAD: BECAUSE of the secrecy surrounding Vatican documents, predicting the contents of a major papal statement is like predicting the outcome of a Supreme Court decision - but without even knowing what case is on the docket.


DRIVING THROUGH DETROIT
LEAD: When I read Ze'ev Chafets's article ''The Tragedy of Detroit'' (July 29) and saw the photographs, I was reminded of how in the 1960's The Detroit News published maps of the Detroit freeways, identifying ''safe'' routes into and out of the city for suburbanites.
As a former resident of Detroit who is black,


POLLS SHOW CHILES LEADING IN FLORIDA
LEAD: Lawton Chiles, the popular former Senator, appears to be taking a solid lead into Tuesday's Democratic primary for governor after weathering a campaign of slashing personal attacks by his rival, Representative Bill Nelson.


To Cut School Costs, Try Regionalization
LEAD: The new formula for school financing in New Jersey resulting from the Abbott vs.
Burke decision presents a challenge.
The challenge is to substantially improve education in the urban poorer districts without diminishing the quality of education throughout the rest of the state.


Upsets Abound at Open
LEAD: Serenity prevailed only along the skyline yesterday at the United States Open.


Ann C. Neilan Marries
LEAD: ANN CORNELIA NEILAN, an investment adviser for State Street Bank and Trust in Quincy, Mass., was married yesterday in Milford, Mass., to First Lieut.
JAMES LEONARD ROTH, an Army lawyer.
The Rev.
Michael Roy officiated at St.
Mary of the Assumption Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Roth, the daughter of Cornelia Neilan of Milford and the late Robert E.


Data Bank/September 2, 1990
LEAD:
$
Personal Income
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
0.6
0.5
0.3
Personal Spending
Monthly percent change
0.5
1.0
0.0
Index of Leading Economic Indicators
Monthly percent change
0.0
0.1
0.6
New Home Sales
Monthly percent change
-2.3
4.7
0.6
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
1.6
-1.9
2.2
Money Supply Growth
3 mos.


Can Rikers Island Become Anything But Worse?
LEAD: NEW York's Rikers Island, the nation's most populous penal complex, undergoes a daily battle for control between guards and inmates, corrections experts say.
Violence occurs every day, inmates come and go continually and, sometimes, only a thin line separates the guards from the men they are supposed to keep in line.


Jillian B. Kurtz To Wed in Fall
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Kurtz of Englewood, N.J., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, JILLIAN BETH KURTZ, and JEREMY HUGH TEMKIN, the son of Victor Temkin of Los Angeles and Susan Baer of Scarsdale, N.Y.


Curiously, a Dictator Forces the Middle East to Ponder Democracy
LEAD: DEMOCRACY has had many strange midwives.


New Rochelle Company Offers Festival of Opera
LEAD: FUll flower for the concert season is a month or more away, but some early blooms arrive next weekend.


Del Monte Recalls 843 Cases Of French-Style Green Beans
LEAD: Del Monte Foods is recalling 843 cases of French-style green beans because about 50 of them contained cans of vegetables that had not been cooked.


Lavagetto Error
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Liberian Exiles Struggle to Survive
LEAD: Foussene Drame was a prosperous trader who did not mix in politics but lost two children and everything he owned in the bloody civil war that is tearing his country apart.


Shoal Creek Is No Surprise
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


A Superpower Goes Begging For Bucks
LEAD: As the superpower amassed its tanks and planes in the Middle East last week, its top diplomat got out his tin cup and prepared to seek a way to pay for the expeditionary force.


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Cold Spring Harbor
$520,000
2 Seaward Court
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 15-year-old ranch; dining room, fireplace, family room, 5 acres, 2-car garage; taxes $7,600.
Farmingdale
$145,000
29 Miller Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,300.


AIDS Is Not the Only Political Disease
LEAD: To the Editor:


PASTIMES: Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Time out. Enjoy the three-day weekend.
Hardy Kiwi


Ireland
LEAD: To the Editor: I could not resist writing in regard to Nancy Sharkey's article (''By Horse Through Ireland's West,'' Travel, July 15).
She wrote about a stone hunting lodge, Screebe Lodge, where she spent two nights, and mentioned that the owner spun tales of Lady Dudley's ghost.


Q and A
LEAD:
Tax on Home Sale
Question: I am nearing 55 and would like to sell my house and move into a rental unit.
I had planned to take advantage of the one-time $125,000 exclusion on the gain after sale that is allowed by the Internal Revenue Service.
However, I have always rented half of my house and have been told that this will limit my right to the exclusion.


Autumn Wedding For Cathy Mazer
LEAD: Lois Mazer Seymour of Harrison, N.Y., and Richard H. Mazer of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter CATHERINE LYNN MAZER to KENNETH MARK GURNY, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Gurny of White Plains.
An October wedding is planned.


Venezuela Isn't Exactly Wild for Another Boom
LEAD: A DECADE ago, Venezuela was often called South America's Saudi Arabia.
Floating on the largest cushion of oil outside the Middle East, Venezuela's economy boomed, spawning superhighways, shopping sprees in Miami and a subway system linking the high-rises sprouting across this capital.


Summer Vegetables for Tarts and Pizzas
LEAD: MIXED salads, vegetable tarts and pizzas can be so good at this time of year that the absence of meat or fish in a meal goes unnoticed.
I like to mix the best of the produce from the local farmer's stand to make a vegetable antipasto that would give any good Italian restaurant a run for its money.


Dateline Kuwait
LEAD: Caryle Murphy was perhaps the only Westerner in Kuwait who considered herself to be in the right place at the right time when Iraqi tanks first rolled across the border.
Ms.
Murphy, a reporter for The Washington Post and the only American journalist known to have been in Kuwait from the start of Saddam Hussein's invasion, spent the next 25 days dodging Iraqi patrols and filing front-page stories for her newspaper.


Wine Country
LEAD: As Californians know, when seeking out lush fall foliage in their state one must look not to the trees but to the grape vines as they turn from green to gold and russet in late September and early October.
The beauty of the vineyards in fall adds to the excitement of the season in Napa and Sonoma counties as rounds of private parties and public celebrations mark another grape harvest.


B'nai B'rith to Have Women as Full Members
LEAD: B'nai B'rith International, the 147-year-old fraternal order of Jewish men that says it is the world's largest Jewish organization, has voted to admit women as full members.


Cruise Packages
LEAD: To the Editor: Travelers should comparison shop for pre- and post-cruise hotel packages.
My wife and I booked a three-day post-cruise package following a sailing out of Papeete.
The package price was $320 a day.
On arriving in Sydney we discovered that the hotel's rate for a direct booking was $219.


Sub Base Added to Cleanup List
LEAD: THE United States Naval Submarine Base in Groton and an industrial site in Cheshire have been added to the Environmental Protection Agency's national priority list for Superfund cleanups.


Doreen A.C. Bottini and John H. Rivell Married
LEAD: DOREEN A. C. BOTTINI, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Guy Bottini of Colts Neck, N.J., was married yesterday to JOHN H. RIVELL, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Rivell of Oldwick, N.J.
The Rev.
Kevin Keelan performed the ceremony at St.
Gabriel's Roman Catholic Church in Marlboro, N.J.


For a Season And Beyond, Some Hopes
LEAD: The Labor Day weekend signals the onset of a new season.
What better time to muse idly about a few of our leading classical-music institutions and artists?
And more than just muse: to offer, in the spirit of constructive criticism, a pre-Christmas wish list for an idiosyncratically selected assortment of individuals and organizations.


Gauging Next Move by Hussein: Uneasy Wait in a Tense Standoff
LEAD: ''I can't predict what he's going to do,'' said President Bush about his current nemesis, President Saddam Hussein, at a news conference on Thursday. ''The unpredictable nature'' of the Iraqi leader, Mr.
Bush argued, makes it impossible to say if war lies ahead.


Jane Silbermann to Marry Next Year
LEAD: JANE SILBERMANN and DOUGLAS BENNETT, medical students at the State University Health Science Center at Syracuse, plan to marry next August.
She is the daughter of Judge Jacqueline W. Silbermann and Albert A. Silbermann, both of New York.
He is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John Bennett of Rochester.


A Plea to Help Villages With 'Special' Problems
LEAD: COUNTY LEGISLATORS last week received a proposal to establish a special fund to help communities that are coping with national or regional problems.
The proposal, by County Legislator Paul J. Feiner, would set up a committee to review applications for one-time county grants in ''special circumstances.


Condos Pushing for Municipal Services
LEAD: Ten years ago, when the vast Turtle Bay condominium community was proposed here on an overgrown strawberry field in this town's Short Beach section, local officials approved permits for the complex with the proviso that the developers and the members of future owner associations provide for their own garbage service, road maintenance and police patrols.


Thigpen's 46th Save Ties Record
LEAD: Bobby Thigpen tied a major league record with his 46th save and Scott Fletcher and Ozzie Guillen each had three runs batted in today, leading the Chicago White Sox past the California Angels, 9-5.


ACRONYM POWER
LEAD: I began reading Jack Rosenthal's ''Acronym Power'' (On Language, Aug. 5), Hoping Against Hope (HAH) that it would not be a collection of Tiresome Anecdotes Invariably Proving Absolutely Nothing (TAI-PAN).


A Fall Wedding For Jill Marans
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Victor Marans of New York have announced October wedding plans for their daughter JILL MARANS and MITCHELL ROBERT LUBIN, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen H. Lubin of Rochester.


Postings: Preservation-Plus;   A Forum On Issues Of Urgency
LEAD: The landmarks preservation movement has profound implications for the maintenance of schools, churches and synagogues, libraries, fire houses, post offices, streets and roadways.
It also bears a relation to environmental protection generally.
So it seems appropriate that the New York Landmarks Preservation Foundation has organized a forum on Sept.


When Teachers Are Special People
LEAD: IT'S that time again.
Ads furiously pitch it, stores actively promote it, and the Automobile Club dramatically announces it on black and yellow stickers every September: School's Open.


Canada's Atlantic Side
LEAD: Windswept Signal Hill, which overlooks the mile-long placid oval of the St.
John's harbor in Newfoundland, was the perfect place for Guglielmo Marconi to await, in 1901, the first wireless signal from Europe.
Its green and red sandstone cliffs, containing no iron to interfere with an electromagnetic current, drop dauntingly enough to induce vertigo in the most stalwart of souls.


2 Suspects Arraigned in Prosecutor's Death
LEAD: Two suspects were held without bail yesterday after pleading not guilty in the murder of a Bronx prosecutor gunned down by accident in what the police say was a drug turf war.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: It happens quite often: the something planned, counted on, almost considered definite, that doesn't work out.
The immediate reaction is, ''disaster.'' How could it have?
Why did it happen, or perhaps not happen.
And why you?
And anyway, wouldn't you know it?


New Free-Market Crime
LEAD: If someone hadn't stolen his car radio last November, Reinhard Klunder might still be a security research assistant in a nuclear power plant instead of a founder of one of one of the most successful new businesses in East Berlin.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:
CLASSICAL
Poulenc: Piano Concerto, 'Concert Champetre,' Organ Concerto
Jean-Bernard Pommier, piano; Maggie Cole, harpsichord; Gillian Weir, organ; City of London Sinfonia conducted by Richard Hickox.
Virgin Classics VC 7 90799; CD and cassette.
Three charmers here. The Poulenc Piano Concerto is short, peppy and witty.


Democrats Dismiss Official Over Savings and Loan Tie
LEAD: A Washington lawyer who spent more than a decade in the inner councils of the Democratic Party has been dismissed from an influential party post as part of the fallout from the savings and loan scandals.


Corrections
LEAD: The caption of a photograph with the Streetscapes column on Aug. 5 about the Central Park Loch contained an incorrect photo credit.
The photo should have been credited to Herbert Mitchell.


India Air Pass: Waiting For Enlightenment
LEAD: Twelve years ago, when we had last gone to India for an extended sabbatical, we had bought an Indian Airlines' special tourist air pass, obtainable only from outside the country. ''Discover the real India,'' the advertisements read. ''Unlimited air mileage for two weeks, just $99 per person!'' It sounded too good to be true.


Tennis Prodigies Are Exploited
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Art and Vulgar Objects
LEAD: To the Editor:


Redone Ellis Island: Burnished but Not Brash
LEAD: When the newly repaired Statue of Liberty was unveiled in 1986, the accompanying Liberty Weekend celebration became an apotheosis of the 1980's, a four-day, multimillion-dollar extravaganza of fireworks, patriotic kitsch and corporate boosterism.


A New Bergdorf's And a Yacht Party
LEAD: Luminaries of the Women's International Tennis Association moved from the playing courts of Flushing Meadow to the Grand Ballroom of the Plaza hotel on Monday for their awards dinner to benefit the Greater New York March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation.


Mass of Misinformation About Parent Training
LEAD: This is in response to Liz Madigan's letter (Aug. 19) about parenting workshops.
The need for parent training certainly exists.
The fears I have concern the mass of misinformation in circulation regarding the psychological aspects of various kinds of parenting philosophies.
She mentioned a couple of buzzwords - self-esteem and good disciplining - that raised my antennae and triggered this letter.


Wall Street;   Redemption on the Jersey Turnpike?
LEAD: By rights, these should have been disastrous weeks for the bonds of the New Jersey Turnpike Authority.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Menu;   A Quick Sauce for The Pasta
LEAD: Now is the time for the coolness of a fresh uncooked tomato sauce, flavored with basil, atop a steaming mound of pasta.
The meal is especially inviting with some ears of corn, just picked if possible.
It can be a quick, undemanding supper.
Fresh Tomato Sauce With Rotini
4 cloves garlic
2 pounds red ripe tomatoes
2 tablespoons fresh oregano leaves, chopped coarse
1/4 cup fresh parsley, chopped coarse
2/3 cup tightly packed fresh basil leaves
2 tablespoons richly flavored extra-virgin olive oil
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
1 1/2 pounds rotini


Aspiring Jazz Musicians May Soon Have an Alternative to Smoky Cabarets
LEAD: Since its beginnings nearly a century ago, jazz has often been passed from one generation to the next through a chain of chord progressions, rhythmic patterns and melodic lines delivered in smoky clubs.
Within a few years, aspiring young jazz musicians may be able to study their craft in a conservatory in Durham, N


We, the Rich
LEAD:
THE BORDERLESS WORLD
Power and Strategy in the Interlinked Economy.
By Kenichi Ohmae.
223 pp. New York:
Harper Business/HarperCollins Publishers. $21.95.


Madelaine Lynch Plans to Marry
LEAD: Late September wedding plans for MADELAINE CHAUNCEY LYNCH and RICHARD JOHN MAKIN JR., a son of Mrs.
Richard J. Makin of Gloucester, Mass., and the late Mr.
Makin, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
George P. Lynch Jr. of West Hartford, Conn.


Reds' Mahler Stops the cubs, 8-1
LEAD: Rick Mahler gave Cincinnati's pitching staff a big lift today with a four-hitter as the Reds beat the Chicago Cubs, 8-1.


Jets' Quarterback Decision Goes to Wire
LEAD: Besides the fact that he has still not named a clear-cut winner in the battle between Kenny O'Brien and Tony Eason for the Jets' starting quarterback job, Coach Bruce Coslet has some other thorny decisions to make just one week before his regular-season debut.


DRIVING THROUGH DETROIT
LEAD: I happen to live in a very solid house in a very safe, stable, racially mixed neighborhood on Detroit's East Side.
It isn't an affluent neighborhood, and it isn't a slum.
It is just one of many middle- or working-class neighborhoods found throughout the city, and it's certainly not the exception.


Chinatown Leaders Are Indicted in Gambling Ring
LEAD: Two former presidents of the Chinatown Merchants Association and the man who the authorities say was the leader of organized crime in Chinatown before he disappeared in 1984 were among 29 people indicted by a Federal grand jury last week on charges of operating a nationwide illegal gambling operation.


Who Did It? And What Does It All Mean?
LEAD:
A BED BY THE WINDOW
A Novel of Mystery and Redemption.
By M. Scott Peck.
306 pp. New York:
Bantam Books. $18.95.


Sarah McPhee, Student, Is Wed
LEAD: SARAH McPHEE and ALEXANDER STILLE were married yesterday at the Princeton University Chapel.
The Rev.
Patrick Connor, a Roman Catholic priest, and the Rev.
Sue Anne Morrow, a United Methodist minister who is the associate dean of the chapel, officiated.


How New England Loved Real Estate and Lost
LEAD: THE image of New England that was beamed out to the larger world in the 1980's was that of an economy in fighting form, brawny and booming, with high technology and high finance leading the march toward some glorious new era for the country's original industrial heartland.


Design;   Fit for a Princess, (Of Course She Knew the Pea Was There!)
LEAD: You don't have to be a princess to be particular about sheets. there are those who sleep only on white; others can't rest on anything but florals. whatever your sheet obsession, this fall's patterns are designed to make everyone feel sleepy.


Excerpts From President's News Conference on Meeting With Gorbachev
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference today in Kennebunkport, Me.:
OPENING STATEMENT


Q and A
LEAD:
Finding a Travel Partner


Westchester Show To Wrap Up Series
LEAD: Eighty-five years ago, the first Westchester Kennel Club dog show was held in White Plains.
The event lasted three days and attracted 330 dogs.


Cola Parker Is a Bride
LEAD: COLA GODDEN PARKER and HAROLD WILLIAM ANDERSON 3D were married yesterday in a Quaker ceremony at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Sumner Parker of Easton, Md.
Miss Parker, 27 years old, is a graduate of Dartmouth College and is studying for a master's degree in architecture at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


Works in Progress;   Going With the Flow
LEAD: The volcano Kilauea, which has been erupting since 1983 on the island of Hawaii, is by now producing a continuous lava flow that has ravaged the coastal town of Kalapana, destroying more than 160 homes.
Among the people still there is R. C. Leimana Pelton, a sculptor who has recently moved his workshop to Kalapana expressly to facilitate his art.


Editorial Notebook;   The Lost Spoils of Hitler's War
LEAD: The inquisitive visitor to Quedlinburg in soon-to-vanish East Germany will be puzzled by what he doesn't find.
Here occurred one of the century's great art thefts, yet Quedlinburgers profess disinterest.
Their main concern is how unification will change a cobbled city abutting the frontier that has divided the Harz


Theft Abroad
LEAD: To the Editor: I keep reading about tourists in France and Italy being robbed on the streets by immigrants from Eastern Europe.
Indeed, in Paris, my wife was robbed of credit cards, money, and the like, by a woman and her children who had distracted her.


See How They Run and Shoot
LEAD: ''They were so-ooo bad,'' said Mouse Davis, as he frowned, tugged at his cap, bent it and then squashed it onto his head.
Davis was reflecting on the Detroit Lions offense he inherited 13 games into the 1988 season, a plodding and groping offense in an ugly 4-12 year.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions;   Of Consulates, Stores and Town Houses
LEAD: This is another in a series of columns answering readers' questions about New York's changing streetscapes.
Polish Consulate


Noted With Pleasure
LEAD:
Poet in Full Rig


R. A. Martinelli Weds Miss Gorski
LEAD: Christ the King Church in Snyder, N.Y., was the setting yesterday for the marriageof CATHERINE CURREY GORSKI, a daughter of Justice and Mrs.
Jerome C. Gorski of Williamsville, N.Y., to RAYMOND ANTHONY MARTINELLI, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Martinelli of South Windsor, Conn.
The Rev.
Donald W. Trautman, the Roman Catholic Bishop of Erie, Pa., performed the ceremony.


Seed-Grown Annuals for the Future
LEAD: SINCE a supposedly relaxing weekend is here, when summer playtime and vacations end and school begins, gardeners may like to plan what they should or should not be doing in the back 40.


Kathleen McLaughlin, Ex-Times Reporter, 92
LEAD: Kathleen McLaughlin, a newspaper reporter for 44 years who won recognition as a political correspondent in the 1940's and 50's, died on Friday at a nursing home in Park Ridge, Ill.
She was 92 years old.


Motor Homes
LEAD: To the Editor: When my wife and I toured France and West Germany last year, we rented a 23-foot motor home that I would recommend to travelers thinking of renting a van or smaller motor home.
During the low season, the rate was $1,097 a week, which included unlimited mileage and insurance.
We have toured Europe four times by motor home and car with trailer and find the service provided by German Motorhome Travel to be one of the best.


Shakespeare Cartoons
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Man Who Held the Cubists Together
LEAD:
AN ARTFUL LIFE
A Biography of D. H. Kahnweiler, 1884-1979.
By Pierre Assouline.
Translated by Charles Ruas.
Illustrated. 411 pp. New York:
Grove Weidenfeld. $24.95.


Miss Rodeno Wed To Lloyd Bloom
LEAD: CHRISTINE ISABELLE RODENO, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Rodeno of Paris, was married there last evening to LLOYD MICHAEL BLOOM, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Bloom of New York and Lenox, Mass.
Rabbis Michael Williams and Irving Koslowe performed the ceremony at Pavillon Dauphine, a reception hall.


TEACHING ON AIDS TO BE INCREASED
LEAD: New York City school officials plan to increase their efforts to teach students about AIDS when the school year begins on Thursday.


Jews, Blacks and Trouble in Hollywood
LEAD: Perhaps it was one of those unspoken issues that keep smoldering until something finally ignites it.
For years, blacks had rightfully complained about their unconscionably small numbers in positions of power in Hollywood, but in July during a panel discussion on blacks in the entertainment industry at the convention of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People in Los


In One Small Town, the Weight of the World
LEAD:
ANIMAL DREAMS
By Barbara Kingsolver.
342 pp. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers. $21.95.


Michaela Murphy Marries Jay Hoag
LEAD: MICHAELA MARGARET MURPHY and JAY CRANDALL HOAG were married yesterday at St.
Brigid's Roman Catholic Church in Peapack, N.J., by Archbishop Theodore McCarrick of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Newark.


Klan Observes Victory Over Law to Ban Hoods
LEAD: Because of a court ruling favorable to them, members of the Ku Klux Klan today donned hoods for their annual Labor Day rally in Georgia.
It was the first opportunity since 1951 that they could do so without the threat of police intervention.


Can Java's Court Dancers Cast Their Spell Abroad?
LEAD: ''In their places now before the King, they who will dance seem to shine, their clothes glittering with jewels.''


About Men;   When Father Doesn't Know Best
LEAD: On Nov. 25, 1983, the prizefighter Marvis Frazier, 23 and inexperienced, was knocked out by the heavyweight champion of the world, Larry Holmes, after 2 minutes and 57 seconds of the first round.
Frazier was sucker-punched.
Holmes faked a left jab and Frazier went for it, leaving himself open for the decisive punch, a right.


Pact for Bourque
LEAD: HOCKEY'S $1 million a year club has added Ray Bourque, the Boston Bruins' All-Star defenseman.
Bourque agreed to a new five-year contract that will pay him a base salary of $1.1 million per year, plus deferred payments of $140,000 a year for five years.


Will You Listen for a Minute?
LEAD:
IN THE ROOM WE SHARE
By Louis Simpson.
155 pp. New York: Paragon House. $18.95.
ARARAT
By Louise Gluck.
68 pp. New York: The Ecco Press. $17.95.
TRANSPARENT GESTURES
By Rodney Jones.
68 pp. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company. Cloth, $15.95. Paper, $8.95.


First-Wave Reading
LEAD: To the Editor:


'Making of a Legend' Inspires Memories
LEAD: The article ''Making of a Legend'' by Lynne Gilson (July 22) brought my own thespian dreams to mind.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, the Bridge column last Sunday was printed out of sequence.
The first and second columns should have been reversed.


More Oil from more PLaces Could Loosen Gulf's Grip
LEAD: TO many Americans, it's clear enough why Saddam Hussein must be stopped: Such a man cannot be permitted to control the oil lifeline to the world's industrialized nations.
But even if Mr.
Hussein were to retire to Switzerland tomorrow, the West's dependence on the Persian Gulf - and thus its vulnerability to conflict in the Middle


L. M. Band Wed To Janet Nezhad
LEAD: JANET F. NEZHAD, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael F. Nezhad of Middlebury, Conn., was married there yesterday to LAURENCE MERRILL BAND, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Raymond I. Band of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
John D. Regan performed the ceremony at St.
John of the Cross Roman Catholic Church.


U.S.-Vietnam Search For Remains Winds Up
LEAD: American-Vietnamese teams have finished their longest joint search ever for the remains of missing American servicemen, the official Vietnam News Agency said today.


Phantom Breeze Wins Manhattan
LEAD: Phantom Breeze, who had made a summer of getting caught by better horses, snapped an 11-race losing streak with a front-running six-length victory yesterday in the $86,850 Manhattan Handicap at Belmont Park.


A Village Among the Vineyards
LEAD: A sign hanging in the Williams Selyem Winery outside Healdsburg, Calif., reads, ''Wine is God's proof that He loves us and likes to see us happy.'' As Bert Williams, one of the owners, poured his pinot noir for my friends and me to taste, it was a slogan easy for us to believe.
Bert's partner, Ed Selyem, joined us and we took our glasses outside and sat on a low wall overlooking the vineyard.


First It Was Drugs, And Now It's Mother
LEAD: Like countless other Americans, Carrie Fisher comes from a broken home, is divorced and has had problems with drug abuse.
Nothing unusual.


Accepting the Risk in Forecasting
LEAD: Tens of billions of dollars were wasted in the 1980's by investing in the wrong future.
More will be lost in the decades to come.
One of the costliest examples was the collapse of the synthetic fuels industry.
Energy companies and the United States Government first spent billions of dollars on the false assumption that oil prices would endlessly rise only to cancel their efforts when prices fell.


Coping With Dull Cutting Tools
LEAD: DULL cutting tools are not just ineffective.
They are also dangerous because they require more effort to use than sharp tools and so are more difficult to control.
Sharpening chisels, planes and knives is relatively easy; other tools like saws and scissors should be sharpened professionally.


Why Moscow Must Walk the Tightrope in Iraq;   Soldiers Exist to Fight
LEAD: To the Editor:


Coping With Dull Cutting Tools
LEAD: DULL cutting tools are not just ineffective.
They are also dangerous because they require more effort to use than sharp tools and so are more difficult to control.
Sharpening chisels, planes and knives is relatively easy; other tools like saws and scissors should be sharpened professionally.


CAMPUS LIFE: Vassar;   Freshmen Find First Campus Visit No Bed of Roses
LEAD: The hard rubber floors of a gymnasium might seem like a strange place to spend the first night of college, but that's where more than half of Vassar College's freshmen class found themselves last weekend.


Tech Notes;   Making Lightning Like Nature's Own
LEAD: Lightning flashes are a significant threat to aircraft, missiles and nuclear weapons.
Designing devices to withstand such blows has always been compromised by the inability of man-made tools to mimic natural electric fields, which have as much as 100 million volts.
Now the Sandia National Laboratory in Albuquerque, N.M., has developed a lightning simulator that can simulate an extremely severe cloud-to-ground direct strike.


Christine Anne Joost, a Horse Trainer, Weds Peter Andrews Bicks, a Lawyer
LEAD: CHRISTINE ANNE JOOST, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur M. Joost of Bucksport, Me., was married yesterday to PETER ANDREWS BICKS, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Bicks of New York.
The Rev.
Elaine H. Tobak performed the ceremony at the Union Congregational Church in Hancock, Me.


PASTIMES: Chess
LEAD: ''The knockout system put drama into the United States Championship,'' said the New York grandmaster Larry Christiansen, who was the runner-up to Lev Alburt in the Jacksonville, Fla., tournament, which ended Aug. 16.
Joel Benjamin, a third New York grandmaster entrant, added: ''The old round-robins were producing too many draws and bored the players and spectators.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
IRISH LOVE STORY


Nancy Wallis to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
George R. Wallis of Portland, Me., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter, NANCY EASTLAND WALLIS, and CHRISTOPHER JOHN KITTREDGE, the son of John Kittredge of Dalton, Mass., and the late Martha Jane Furey Kittredge.
Miss Wallis, 26 years old, graduated from Dickinson College.


If You're Thinking of Living in: East End Avenue


Sweetwater Clifton, 65, Is Dead; Was Star on 50's Knicks Teams
LEAD: Nat (Sweetwater) Clifton, one of the first black players in the National Basketball Association and a popular star with the New York Knick teams of the 1950's, died Friday in Chicago, apparently of a heart attack.
He was 65 years old.


Bilingual Music Is Breaking Down Cultural Barriers
LEAD: In a world tense with competing cultures, the product of conquests or immigration, distinct new ethnic identities can emerge.
Lingering traditions - fragments of a language, a way of thinking - become integrated into the dominant culture.
But the mainstream, which tends to be suspicious of such creolized cultures, defines them as foreign.


Some Portents of Trends in Autumn Fashions
LEAD: Retailers admit that business is not good, what with the high price of clothing and the anxiety over the Middle East.
But even in the worst of times, some women take comfort in shopping.


BEST SELLERS: September 2, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
Fiction
1
3
2
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $21.95.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a cunning, vengeful Greek tycoon.
2
1
12
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.


Tom Herr Adjusts to Playing for 'Them'
LEAD: Tom Herr had no time to think about it. He had to react.


Primaries in New York City Include Challenges to Incumbent Legislators
LEAD: In an unusual departure from the power of incumbency, at least a half-dozen Democratic state legislators in New York City face stiff challenges in the Sept. 11 primary, which is usually tantamount to election in the predominantly Democratic city.


3D TRIAL TO START ON HOWARD BEACH
LEAD: Nearly four years after a group of young whites set upon three black men in Howard Beach, Queens, still-bitter recollections of the fatal confrontation are expected to sound again in court on Tuesday.


Dorian R. Deglin To Marry in Fall
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore L. Deglin of New York have announced October wedding plans for their daughter DORIAN REED DEGLIN and JAMES HOWK SCAMMON, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence W. Scammon Jr. of Hopkinton, N.H.


Joy Amid the Pain
LEAD:
CARNAL ACTS
Essays.
By Nancy Mairs.
161 pp. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers. $19.95.


Manly Versus Grotesque
LEAD: To the Editor:


Heather Celia Henson Weds Timothy Ungs
LEAD: HEATHER CELIA HENSON, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eben Charles Henson of Danville, Ky., was married yesterday to TIMOTHY GERALD UNGS, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Francis Ungs of Minneapolis, by the Rev.
John Hagley at the First Christian Church in Danville.


On Language;   Foreign Guests And Hostages
LEAD: At the beginning of the Persian Gulf crisis, reporters noted that President Bush was careful not to use the word hostages to describe foreign nationals not permitted to leave Iraq. ''Do you believe the Iraqis are using those Americans as a shield?'' was the way the question was put to Mr.
Bush at a news conference.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
OVERTAPPED OASIS: Reform or Revolution for Western Water.
By Marc Reisner and Sarah Bates. (Island Press, Cloth, $31.95; Paper, $17.95.) Four years ago, in his book ''Cadillac Desert,'' Marc Reisner recounted with verve how the West was plumbed.
In ''Overtapped Oasis,'' he wades into the morass of water policy.


CAMPUS LIFE: San Francisco State;   Canceling Classes Prompts Lines To Alter Schedules
LEAD: The sudden cancellation of 200 classes at San Francisco State University on Tuesday forced students to wait in registration lines for as long as eight hours for a chance to rearrange their schedules.


Gynn Reed Press Weds Thomas Michael Kocz
LEAD: GWYNN REED PRESS, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour (Red) Press of Forest Hills, Queens, was married yesterday to THOMAS MICHAEL KOCZ, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley W. Kocz of Buffalo.
Marlena Mallner, an interfaith minister, performed the ceremony at the Halloran House in New York.


Contract Dispute
LEAD: THE Phoenix Suns are burning mad and Jayson Williams, the former St.
John's basketball star, is the reason.


Question Of the Week;   Why Are Baseball Brawls So Common?
LEAD: Baseball brawls are so common because the Commissioner's office, umpires, major league baseball and the fans tolerate it.
We all let it go on and on, and accept it as part of the game.


Hawaii
LEAD: To the Editor: Oh!
No!
Not Lanai! (Travel, June 3).
Returning from a two-month around-the-world-on-our-own tour in 1983, my husband and I spent four delicious, relaxing, noncommercial days on Lanai.
The small and only hotel with its Spartan accommodations, the town simplicity (latest postcard 1921), jeep drives over barren moonlike territory, secluded beaches, narrow mountain ridge drives with breathtaking views of the island, sea and distant Maui, the endless pineapple fields and all that penetrating red dust - the last quiet, uncrowded uncluttered spot.


Ms. Nelkin, Hotel Official, To Wed C. J. Israel, Lawyer
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Myron Nelkin of Old Westbury, L.I., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter CATHERINE L. NELKIN and CHARLES J. ISRAEL, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ira M. Israel of Old Westbury.


A Summer's Day, A Mower's Roar
LEAD: I'm applauding that precise piece on punitive power mowers, ''Will You Turn That Mower Off?'' Noise and air pollution combine for a hubbub in all suburbs now.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-23


Settling Up
LEAD: In the weeks, months and, finally, years after Michael Stewart died following his arrest by the transit police, the New York City Medical Examiner waffled on the question of whether foul play was involved and the police insisted that they had done no wrong.
But the fact remained that after Mr.
Stewart was arrested in 1983 for writing subway graffiti, he was delivered hogtied and bruised to Bellevue Hospital, where he died 13 days later.


The Executive Computer;   Unsure What Program to Buy? Sample Some
LEAD: ''Shareware'' has become increasingly popular with businesses, government agencies and educational institutions.
Shareware is commercial software that differs from the more conventional programs primarily in the way it is distributed and priced.
The underlying philosophies of shareware are that good software need not be expensive and that users should be able to try software before buying it.


Kuwait Exiles Rallying To Back Royal Rulers
LEAD: Before the Iraqi invasion, Kuwait was not a nation in turmoil, but there were festering divisions over its halting steps toward full democracy.


Lyric Among the Demagogues
LEAD:
BORIS PASTERNAK
The Poet and His Politics.
By Lazar Fleishman.
Illustrated. 359 pp. Cambridge, Mass:
Harvard University Press. $37.50.
BORIS PASTERNAK
A Literary Biography.
Volume One: 1890-1928.
By Christopher Barnes.
Illustrated. 507 pp. New York:
Cambridge University Press.


2 States Investigating a G.O.P. Fund-Raising Campaign
LEAD: The fine print in a Republican fund-raising campaign that has sent $25 checks to 700,000 people nationwide is under investigation by attorneys general in at least two states.


A Reconfigured Times Sq. Station Has a Blueprint
LEAD: The Times Square subway station, congested, often forbidding and one of the most dangerous stations in the city, will be transformed under renovation plans completed recently after six years of study.


Budget Cuts Are Hitting Home As Schools Open
LEAD: RECESSION or not, hard times have already begun for school systems across the state.


Behind the Scenes at the Miss America Pageant
LEAD: A WEEK before Bert Parks's return to the Miss America Pageant was to have been announced last month, panic gripped the Miss America Organization.
Word of a possible deal with Mr.
Parks, the show's former longtime host, had got out, and staff members were scrambling to keep the public from finding out prematurely.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My house has a brick chimney that runs up the outside, with an ash pit at the basement level.
The chimney has two flues, one for the furnace and one for the fireplace.
Last winter, after several rainy and snowy days, some water ran down the inside of the flues and into the fireplace and ash pit.


An Unexciting Continental Newcomer
LEAD: AS Yogi Berra said, ''It's deja vu all over again.'' Another continental restaurant has opened in Glen Cove.
A decade ago, a tidal wave of Italian and continental restaurants hit this area.
Most are still afloat.
Alongside these established giants, a newcomer, La Crique, makes few waves.


Gorbachev Steps Into the Gulf Lineup
LEAD: In the briefest possible announcement, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev informed the Soviet nation tonight that he had elected to become a far more visible world player in the critical standoff over Iraq's invasion and seizure of Kuwait.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on July 29 about the Berkshires misstated the price of lawn tickets at Tanglewood.
They are $7 to $12.
The concert season ends today.


Bhutto Is to Go on Trial, Pakistan Announces
LEAD: Pakistan's caretaker Government said today that it planned to try former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto on multiple counts of power abuse and corruption.


Dominican 'Toll'
LEAD: To the Editor: The toll at the Santo Domingo entrance to the autopista linking the capital city of the Dominican Republic with Puerto Plata and the famed beaches of the north is 50 centavos, about 8 cents.
Some 22 miles farther along that road, however, is an unofficial ''toll'' so exorbitant that ''highway robbery'' would be a more appropriate term.


Northeast Notebook: Middlebury, Vt.;   Inns Facing Tougher Times
LEAD: For Martin and Marcia Schuppert, buying the 180-year-old Waybury Inn last month - the one shown on the long-running Bob Newhart television show - was something of a dream come true.


A 'Shirley Valentine' of Substance
LEAD: SHIRLEY BRADSHAW, 48, self-described ''Saint Joan of the Kitchen Sink'' and ''Automother,'' is fixing yet another tedious supper, dicing potatoes, frying eggs and tippling wine (from the glass).
Talking wistfully of once being in touch with happiness and wishfully of having orgasms and going to Greece, wondering whatever happened to her life and concluding that, actually, nothing happened, Shirley turns, every now and again, to the kitchen wall for acknowledgment (''Don't I, Wall?


5 Arts Awards Announced
LEAD: Four academicians and a documentary film maker have each been awarded a $5,000 Charles Frankel Prize by the National Endowment for the Humanities, for ''bringing history, literature, philosophy and other humanities topics to the general public.''


Summer Vegetables for Tarts and Pizzas
LEAD: MIXED salads, vegetable tarts and pizzas can be so good at this time of year that the absence of meat or fish in a meal goes unnoticed.
I like to mix the best of the produce from the local farmer's stand to make a vegetable antipasto that would give any good Italian restaurant a run for its money.


Seaver Awaits Call
LEAD: The talks never moved much beyond the exploratory stage, but Tom Seaver said his brush with the vacancy in the Yankee front office last month left him both intrigued and interested.
If another team calls, he will listen.


Colombian Guerrillas Forsake the Gun for Politics
LEAD: It is Friday night, and the guerrillas have put down their AK-47's and gone dancing in the local saloons.
Ten miles away, Government soldiers are playing cards by the soft wash of the Caribbean coast or standing a loose watch behind sandbagged gun positions.


A Month of Crisis in the Persian Gulf
LEAD: Aug. 2 Iraq invades Kuwait hours after talks broke down between the two nations over oil production and debt repayment.
Iraqi troops seize vast petroleum reserves and Kuwait's capital, plunging the Persian Gulf region into crisis.
Witnesses report hundreds of casualties.
The Kuwaiti ruler flees.
President Bush calls the invasion ''naked aggression.


What America Did After the War: A Tale Told by the Census
LEAD: THOUGH foggy as a steamed-up bathroom mirror, the early 1990 census figures released last week offered the country its first look at itself as it emerged from the 1980's: the sagging cities, spreading suburbs, and the southern coasts and the Southwestern states bulging with economic and political muscle.


Ryan Wants Taylor; Giants Didn't in 1989
LEAD: Coach Buddy Ryan of the Philadelphia Eagles says he is intrigued by the prospect of getting Lawrence Taylor.
But a source close to the Giants' hierarchy said today that a trade of the Giants' holdout linebacker to the Eagles or any other team was very unlikely.


The Peacock Factor
LEAD: To the Editor:


POLICE TAKING AIM AT SLOT MACHINES
LEAD: The days when the police in New York City wielded sledgehammers against slot machines have returned.


Technology;   Superconductors Enter the Marketplace, Modestly
LEAD: Four years after the scientific world was thrown into a frenzy by the discovery of new superconducting materials, the first products made from these materials are beginning to creep toward the market.


Syrians and Lebanon Allies Deploy Against Aoun
LEAD: Syrian troops and Lebanese soldiers loyal to President Elias Hrawi were deployed today around the gateways into the capital area's Christian enclave amid reports that an offensive to crush the rival Christian leader, Gen.
Michel Aoun, was imminent.


Tap Germany's Expertise With Synfuels
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Rules On Oil Tanks Intensify Fuel Battle
LEAD: NEW state regulations governing underground fuel tanks and the rising concern over the cost and supply of oil have thrust homeowners into the middle of an intensified feud between home heating oil suppliers and distributors of natural gas.


Coping With Dull Cutting Tools
LEAD: DULL cutting tools are not just ineffective.
They are also dangerous because they require more effort to use than sharp tools and so are more difficult to control.
Sharpening chisels, planes and knives is relatively easy; other tools like saws and scissors should be sharpened professionally.


Specialty Magazines Covering New Jersey
LEAD: Re: ''Specialty Magazines Whose Specialty Is New Jersey,'' July 15:


Scared but Safe
LEAD:
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT
By Stephen King.
763 pp. New York:
Viking. $22.95.


Mercedes Gets Smoother by the Mile
LEAD: AT first glance, the car in the driveway looks like a new Mercedes.
At second glance, it still looks that way.
But this silver sedan has been a real nomad since it rolled out of a Florida dealer's showroom back in October 1984.


Presto! Science Joins the Birthday Party
LEAD: THE good-natured shouts, teasing and playful behavior of the nine boys at Toby Roberts's birthday party in Mamaroneck were typical for 9-year-olds.
So, too, was the idea of entertainment, without which no suburban party seems to be complete.


Susan Kendrick Wed to B.P. Kaufman
LEAD: SUSAN C. KENDRICK, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas B. E. Kendrick of Columbus, Ind., was married there yesterday to BENJAMIN P. KAUFMAN, a son of Mrs.
Robert C. Rosenberg of New York and Harold Kaufman of San Francisco.
The Rev.
Allan Wilson performed the interfaith ceremony at the First United Methodist Church.


The Legacy No One Wants
LEAD:
MAPPING OUR GENES
The Genome Project and the Future of Medicine.
By Lois Wingerson.
Illustrated. 338 pp. New York:
E. P. Dutton. $19.95.


Feminist on a Woman's Errand
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lauren E. Bober Weds Paul Young
LEAD: LAUREN ELISE BOBER, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur H. Bober of New Vernon, N.J., was married yesterday evening to PAUL BRETT YOUNG, a son of Brian P. Young of Johannesburg and Joan Young of Paris.
Rabbi David Levy officiated at the home of the bride's parents.


The Arts Catch Up With a Society in Disarray
LEAD: The words come from the 19th century, and you have to wonder if they could be said today.
Henrik Ibsen, the author of ''A Doll's House,'' was being honored for his contribution to women's rights. ''I thank you for the toast but must disclaim the honor of having consciously worked for the women's rights movement,'' the playwright said.


Gina H. Sockolow Is to Be Married
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Sockolow of Tenafly, N.J., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter GINA HENRIETTA SOCKOLOW and WILLIAM BRIAN BURGESS, a son of Gwendolyn Russell Burgess of Tampa, Fla., and Donald Eugene Burgess of Homewood, Ala.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on page 6 of the Arts and Leisure section today about a Balinese dancer misstates the performance date for a troupe of Balinese children at Montclair (N.J.) State College.
It is Friday, Sept. 14, not this Friday.


PASTIMES: Coins
LEAD: Bowers and Merena, Inc. of Wolfeboro, N.H. will hold an auction of the Robert W. Rusbar collection on Sept. 10-12 at the Vista International Hotel, 3 World Trade Center, New York.
Several from the early days of Canada are among the many fine examples of the rare and excellent coins.


Creating a Giant Computer Highway
LEAD: Traced in the phosphors glowing on the screen of his computer, Robert E. Kahn sees the 21st century:


Riding the Napa Valley Wine Train
LEAD: Each weekday morning at 11:30 a locomotive horn blasts five times and the nation's first wine train chugs off into enemy territory.
On board are some 300 happy tourists, blissfully unaware that they are riding what may one of the more controversial forms of transportation since the Hindenburg.


New Sunday Duty
LEAD: HE spent 11 seasons playing football for the Cleveland Browns, but now Cody Riesien has found a more peaceful way to spend his Sunday afternoons.


Mary S. Humes To Wed in Fall
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James Calhoun Humes of Philadelphia have announced October wedding plans for their daughter MARY STUART HUMES and CECIL DYER QUILLEN 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Quillen Jr. of Rochester.


U.S. Guidelines Address Meatpacking Injuries
LEAD: The Labor Department is establishing a test program in the meatpacking industry to protect workers from painful and crippling injuries caused by repetitive motions.


The Reluctant Terrorist
LEAD:
LIES OF SILENCE
By Brian Moore.
197 pp. New York:
Nan A. Talese/
Doubleday. $18.95.


Why Moscow Must Walk the Tightrope in Iraq;   Inside a Feudal Regime
LEAD: To the Editor:


CAMPUS LIFE: U. of Texas at Dallas;   Something Brand New On Campus: Freshmen
LEAD: The University of Texas at Dallas began the 1990-91 school year on Thursday with a major addition to its campus - freshmen.


The Failure of Traditional Law Schools
LEAD: The popular assumptions that legal education transfers specialized information about the practice of law and teaches law students how to do legal work are misconceived.
Likewise, the imagined stereotype of the masterful law professor transferring nuggets of wisdom through an intellectually rigorous


Below the Surface On Fathers' Rights
LEAD: The following statement is in response to the ''Westchester Q&amp;A'' on Aug. 12 with Walter I. Lipow, president of Equal Rights for Fathers.


Holiday Tomorrow
LEAD: Monday is Labor Day. Here are holiday schedules:


County Seeks to Protect The Environment
LEAD: Tom Wickham's letter (Aug. 5) states that the Suffolk County Department of Health Services, in the administration of Article 12 (the tank program), is more concerned with receiving revenue than with protecting the environment.
Nothing could be further from the truth.


Fashion;   If the Suit Fits......Wear It
LEAD: THE CAT SUIT USUALLY CONJURES UP A VISION OF Emma Peel, zipped into a stretchy second skin, sleuthing her way through ''The Avengers.'' This born-again fashion (a tighter version of other body-hugging suits) began coming on strong several seasons ago, and like most tenacious trends, it survives by appealing to some people's raciest fantasies.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball ATLANTA (NL) - Called up Paul Marak and Marvin Freeman, pitchers; Jimmy Kremers and Kelly Mann, catchers; and Mike Bell, first baseman, from Richmond of the International League.


PRACTICAL TRAVELER For Students, the Grand Tour at Budget Prices
LEAD: Where did the young people travel this summer?
Mostly to Europe, as always, according to those who deal in wholesale student and youth tickets.
Where in Europe?
Wherever it's cheap, said the owner of a courier-booking service.


Seed-Grown Annuals for the Future
LEAD: SINCE a supposedly relaxing weekend is here, when summer playtime and vacations end and school begins, gardeners may like to plan what they should or should not be doing in the back 40.


Vivi Stevenson Wed to Kirk Pickering
LEAD: GERTRUDE GOUVERNEUR STEVENSON, the daughter of James Hazlet Stevenson 3d of Princeton, N.J., and Mrs.
Philip Chadwick Foster Smith of Bath, Me., was married in Nashville yesterday to KIRK ROBERT PICKERING, the son of the late Silas and Carol Pickering of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
Dr.
Kay Gray, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Old Hermitage Meeting


Can House Music Follow In Disco's Dance Steps?
LEAD: For years, dance-club regulars have been expecting the boom-chucka-boom beat of house music to conquer pop.
Meanwhile, outsiders have been waiting for songs that can hold up away from the dance floor.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Brunch;   From Bustling Deli to Elegant Cafe
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Carnegie Delicatessen


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
CLASSICAL


49ers Heading for a Third Straight Supper Bowl Title ... but Broncos Hope to Find Way to Win Their First
LEAD: The following American Conference preview was prepared and written by Gerald Eskenazi.
Teams are listed in the predicted order of finish, with Denver picked to go to the Super Bowl.
EAST
Buffalo
Style : The attack is back in the Bills' defense.
With a healthy unit, the Bills will return to the aggressive, domineering mode that until last December had left opponents strewn about the field.


Turning Humble Materials Into Salable Arts and Crafts
LEAD: CORN husks and orange peels salvaged from a Central American market do not look like promising materials for art works, nor do piles of camel bones bleached by the Somali desert sun.
But an organization in Farmington is helping thousands of weavers, potters, woodworkers and jewelers in third world countries to fashion such humble materials into high-quality, marketable merchandise for export.


Debra Glickenhaus Wed in Great Neck
LEAD: DEBRA BETH GLICKENHAUS, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Glickenhaus of Kings Point, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
JEFFREY L. RUBIN, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Benjamin M. Rubin of Old Westbury, L.I.
Rabbi Robert Widom and Cantor Henry Weintraub officiated at Temple Beth-El in Great Neck, L.I.


Alicia M. Rioseco Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
George L. Rioseco of Purchase, N.Y., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter, ALICIA MARIE RIOSECO, and THOMAS ANTHONY COASH, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas R. Coash of Rye, N.Y.


Dodge City Believed in Strict Gun Control
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Month That Shook the World
LEAD: In a month that weighed like a year, the crisis in the Persian Gulf has unsettled the conventional axioms of a generation.
Until Saddam Hussein seized Kuwait, few imagined that the United Nations could truly unite, that sanctions might really bite, or that Russians and Arabs could join in a collective response skillfully led by President


A Procrustean Bed For Our Times
LEAD: To the Editor:


PASTIMES: Gardening;   Tulips: A History of Success
LEAD: There was a time when three tulip bulbs could be sold to pay for a house.
That was in the Netherlands in 1636 at the height of Tulipmania, a wacky period in European history when a frenzy for greed held sway.


With Hugs and Sighs, Fresh Air Summer Ends
LEAD: About 40 men and women were in line at Area X in the Port Authority bus terminal on Eighth Avenue in Manhattan.
A black rope held them back from the door their eyes were locked on.
They joked, smoked, traded small talk, but each time the door cracked open they were silent, expectant.


What S. &amp; L.'s? What Contributions?
LEAD: DESPITE the massive savings and loan industry losses due to mis-management, double-dealing and out-and-out looting, there is still a lot left to steal.
So last week, as a Government report showed that even the healthiest segment of the industry is growing weaker, the Resolution Trust Corporation announced that it would fight corruption in the bailout process by setting up a new department of, yes, S.


Failures Delay a Test
LEAD: The Department of Motor Vehicles, fearing a statewide shortage of school bus drivers, has postponed the implementation of a new, more comprehensive test for bus drivers that proved so difficult that most drivers failed it.


Miss Peterson Wed to K.J. Quaranta
LEAD: At St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New York, JUDITH E. PETERSON a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Peterson of Virginia Beach, Va., was married yesterday to KEVIN J. QUARANTA, the son of Dr.
Mary Ann Quaranta of Blauvelt, N.Y., and the late Dr.
John V. Quaranta.
The Rev.
Robert O'Connor officiated.


Talking: Office Suites;   For Co-ops, Selling Is Easier
LEAD: Suites of offices occupied by doctors or other professionals are regular features at the street level of hundreds of New York City cooperatives.
Most are normally rented on long-term commercial leases from the co-op corporation.


Pope, in Tanzania to Start Africa Visit, Asks More Effort on AIDS
LEAD: Pope John Paul II arrived today on his first trip to this East African nation, his seventh to the continent, and immediately tackled one of the most severe but least discussed problems afflicting Africa: AIDS.


Pretoria Condemns Shootings of Protesters
LEAD: Amid a fierce dispute over police behavior in South Africa's segregated black townships, an official report released today castigated officers for opening fire on protesters in March without justification or orders to do so.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
SOMEBODY SING.
By Tom Leopold. (Dutton, $17.95.) Imagine being the star of a so-so cable television sitcom that's taped in the same studio where ''The Honeymooners'' was shot back in the 1950's.
To Sandy Bayard, the narrator of Tom Leopold's second novel, ''that's like doing spin art in Picasso's house.


Images From Southern Points
LEAD: AT the Noyes Museum is ''Southern Visions,'' the third in a series of shows taking stock of photography at the lower end of the state.
Its curator, Sid Sachs, seems uncertain as to the nature of a southern vision, nor does he define the region's boundaries, or ''parameters'' as he calls them.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My house has a brick chimney that runs up the outside, with an ash pit at the basement level.
The chimney has two flues, one for the furnace and one for the fireplace.
Last winter, after several rainy and snowy days, some water ran down the inside of the flues and into the fireplace and ash pit.


CAMPUS LIFE: Iowa;   Judge Finds University Liable In Harassment
LEAD: The University of Iowa and the Iowa Board of Regents were found liable by a Federal judge in Des Moines last week for harassment of a member of the university's faculty.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
The New Road Gang


A 'World of Miracles' Copes With New Realities
LEAD: ELIZABETH BOHONNON, rested in a softly lighted room at Yale-New Haven Hospital's labor and delivery unit and waited.
Sun-tanned and smiling, she sat propped up by pillows and chatted with her husband, David, about names for their second child.
She said she hoped to deliver the baby naturally, as she did her 2 1/2-year-old daughter, Emma, who, ''was born before I barely knew what was happening.


Burt Hunton: Dress Form Designer
LEAD: When Donna Karan, Bill Blass, Calvin Klein and other designers fit their clothes on pale linen-covered forms in the human shape, many of the forms are made by Wolf Forms, a Manhattan company in business since 1905.


In a First for Israel, 2 Players in Round of 16
LEAD: Play has progressed to the round of 16 at the United States Open, and things are not as expected.
No Swedes are left in the men's draw, but two Israelis remain.
The two players, 41st-ranked Amos Mansdorf and 82d-ranked Gilad Bloom, both known for their fighting spirit on the court, broke through to become the first Israelis to reach the fourth round at the


Medical and Racial Debate Follow a Drug Hailed as an AIDS Cure
LEAD: A drug that Kenyan scientists say is a cheap cure for AIDS - a claim questioned by other researchers - has set off a debate not only over its effectiveness but also over the charges of some New York blacks that racism has slowed acceptance of the drug.


60 Minutes, More or Less, Add Up to a Fine Time
LEAD: WHO says White Plains lacks charm?
The city wears its best face during summer lunch hour, when the downtown area comes to life.
Sidewalk tables, cascading fountains and sculpture parks lend a European air to the scene.


Mexico
LEAD: To the Editor: I recently returned from a visit to Mexico that included a round trip by train between Mexico City and San Miguel de Allende.
The fare charged by the tour operator was $40 a person.
The Mexican tickets listed the price as 33,300 pesos.
At the rate of exchange at the time - 2,660 pesos to $1 - the actual price was $12.52; the markup was more than 200 percent.


The Age of 40 Seems Very Young
LEAD: Celeste Piano Wenzel sounds like a very nice person (''Birthdays Remind Me of What I Miss,'' Aug. 19), but 40 is much too early an age to be contemplating what she'll miss when gone.
When she does attain old age, she might more gainfully consider what she won't miss: man's continuing inhumanity to man, sickness, accidents and natural disasters, to name only a few of many calamities in the modern world.


The Rules of the Game: Inertia and Force
LEAD: THE borders of the Arab countries of the Middle East were drawn largely by Britain and France after World War I when the League of Nations allowed them to carve up the Ottoman domains there.
In Syria and Lebanon, France tried to establish republics; in Jordan and Iraq, Britain set up monarchies and installed members of the family that had led the Arab revolt against Turkey; in Egypt, central Arabia and Kuwait, London backed other traditional rulers with whom it had long friendships.


Who Decides Who Works At Jobs Imperiling Fetuses?
LEAD: The unobtrusive factory, tucked behind a hillside shopping center in this little college town, runs all day and all night seven days a week.
The 280 production workers make lead automobile batteries for Sears, Goodyear and other big customers.
Only 12 workers are women, and none of them can have children.


U.N.-Iraq Talks Break Off
LEAD: Talks between the Secretary General of the United Nations and Iraq's Foreign Minister, aimed at persuading Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait, broke off inconclusively.
Page 19.


Hall of Fame Is Discriminatory
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


AIDS Is Not the Only Political Disease
LEAD: To the Editor:


Celiane Levy Is Wed
LEAD: CELIANE LEVY, a daughter of Paulette Levy of Kew Gardens, Queens, and the late Samuel Levy, was married last evening to JAY E. REINER, the son of Marilyn Reiner of Belmont, Calif., and Richard Reiner of Fresh Meadows, Queens.
Rabbi Asher Murciano officiated at Temple Beth-El of Manhattan Beach in Brooklyn.


Blacks Return To Homeland Pretoria Took
LEAD: The blue-gum trees are the same, and so is the wind that kneads them.
And some people are the same, too, seeking shade and shadow below the trees in the first stirrings of an African summer.


SALVADOR JESUITS CLAIM ARMY FIRING
LEAD: Two Jesuit priests said they were pinned down here for two hours and nearly killed by an army sniper in what church officials are denouncing as the most recent in a series of attacks on rural civilians.


Seen Any Warbleers Lately
LEAD: Chandler S. Robbins, a senior U.S.
Fish and Wildlife biologist at the Patuxent Wildlife Research Center, is rattling through the refuge in Laurel, Md., when he brakes his Chevy on a one-lane bridge spanning a creek that is swollen with spring rain.
From a drooping branch hangs a nest, and in it sits an olive-brown mite of a bird he quickly identifies as an


Is Courtesy an Endangered Species?
LEAD: Alan Miller's (''White-Haired, Energetic and Shunted Aside,'' Aug. 26) ''What kind of society are we becoming if we shunt aside those who want to contribute because their hair is white?'' can be answered with another question.
Is instinctive grace/courtesy an endangered species?


BUSH WILL MEET GORBACHEV ON SUNDAY, GULF ON AGENDA; IRAQIS LET SOME HOSTAGES GO
LEAD: President Bush announced today that he and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev will meet in Helsinki on Sept. 9.
Administration officials said the meeting was intended to display superpower solidarity at a time when Washington is eager to hold together the alliance against Iraq.


Question Of the Week;   Why Are Baseball Brawls So Common?
LEAD: Baseball brawls are an outgrowth of the violence and masochism that pervade many American sports and our society as a whole.
Champion boxers are among the richest men in sports; boxing and wrestling are aired on television virtually every day.
Boxing, though artful, is inherently brutal, and mainstream wrestling is a charade of chaotic violence.


Fashion: On the Street;   Only Days Dwindle, Not Hems
LEAD: For one of summer's last flings, it's the romantic look.


Just Stop the Arguing Between Parents
LEAD: As the child of parents who had a bitter divorce followed two years later by an equally miserable change of custody proceeding, I am angered by Dr.
Lipow's self-serving remarks.


Aide Abets
LEAD: When Mikhail S. Gorbachev dropped by the White House for a bit of summitry three months ago, he let it drop that he could use some help in organizing his own new Western-type presidency.
Who gets a windowed corner office and who gets a basement cubby?
Who gets to see the top man anytime and who has to write for an appointment?


Praise for Ending Kindergarten Screening
LEAD: This is written in praise and support of the Katonah-Lewisboro school system's decision to discontinue entrance screening for kindergartners.[''Relaxing the Test to Enter Kindergarten,'' July 15]  and for its adoption of a more developmentally appropriate curriculum for the kindergarten year.


J. R. Sharman 3d Weds Miss Cahill
LEAD: At the Episcopal Church of the Epiphany in Washington, ELIZABETH BENEDICT CAHILL and JACKSON ROGER SHARMAN 3D were married yesterday.
The Right Rev.
Milton L. Wood officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Christopher Sherrill, an Episcopal priest, and the Rev.
Kenneth Roeltgen, a Roman Catholic priest.


Pro Football: N.F.L./Friday Games;   Ware's Debut Is Rough
LEAD: Andre Ware hardly looked like a Heisman Trophy winner in his pro debut.


Just a Nickel-and-Dime Fare Increase? Hardly
LEAD: Ever since the $1.15 fare started, New York's subways have been afflicted by long lines and a sharp rise in the underground guerrilla warfare known as fare-beating.
Now there is a new and growing problem: People are paying with pennies.


Grace Fowler to Wed J. G. Wrightson
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Jack D. Fowler of Red Bank, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter GRACE VALENTINE FOWLER to JEFFREY GORDON WRIGHTSON, the son of Mrs.
William G. Wrightson Jr. of Rumson, N.J., and the late Mr.
Wrightson.
A June 1991 wedding is planned.


What Happened to Guerrilla Bands?
LEAD: Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces: 7,000 members; pro-Soviet from formation in 1964 until advent of perestroika.
At war with Government; death on Aug. 10 of long-time leader Jacobo Arenas.
May open group to peace talks; 6 of 43 fighting units have expressed interest in demobilization.


Miss Papendorp Wed in Capital
LEAD: MONICA PAPENDORP, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Theodore Papendorp of Washington, was married yesterday to EDWARD KEVIN LENCI, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reno P. Lenci of Yonkers.
The Rev.
James D. Watkins Jr. officiated at St.
Ann's Roman Catholic Church in Washington.


Surf's Up Again: On Screen On Canvas, on the Radio
LEAD: Over 20 years ago, Tom Wolfe hung around with a group of California surfers and described them in ''The Pump House Gang,'' an essay frequently cited by rookie historians. ''Pretty soon,'' wrote the wannabe trend-buster, ''the California littoral will be littered with these guys, stroked out on the beach like beached white whales, and girls, too, who can't give up the mystique, the mysterioso mystique.


Feminist Satire?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Voices of Promise Find Modest Fulfillment
LEAD: It is all too true that ours is not an age of prevalent excellence in classical singing, but by combing carefully through cast lists and record releases, keeping track of promising young singers and bearing disappointments patiently, one can still find a good deal to enjoy in the work of artists not yet to be described as ''legendary,'' ''historical'' or ''veteran.


Chinese Exiles Fight for Change and Attention
LEAD: Hu Ping is a veteran in the struggle for democracy in China, but in his tiny office in Queens, where he presides over the oldest Chinese dissident organization in America, Mr.
Hu finds that there is one thing worse than being denounced: being ignored.


Strange, Even for Hollywood
LEAD:
A GRAVEYARD FOR LUNATICS
Another Tale of Two Cities.
By Ray Bradbury.
285 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf.
$18.95.


To the Rescue
LEAD: To the Editor: While in Glacier National Park in Montana in July, my daughter lost her thyroid medication.
It was late Friday afternoon and we were to hike to Sperry Chalet on Sunday.
To get to the chalet, we would have to climb 3,400 feet, with some of the terrain covered by snow.


Known by the Clothes He Wears - or Steals
LEAD:
THE SUITCASE
By Sergei Dovlatov.
Translated by Antonina W. Bouis.
128 pp. New York: Grove Weidenfeld. $16.95.


Miss Fredd Plans To Marry in Fall
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen Fredd of Potomac, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter, NATALIE HEATHER FREDD, to SCOTT BALIAN KULDELL, a son of Mrs.
Philip D. Kuldell of Potomac and the late Mr.
Kuldell.
A November wedding is planned.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD: SOME CAN WHISTLE, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket Books, $5.95.) Late in life a rich, successful Danny Deck, the fictional novelist introduced in ''All My Friends Are Going to Be Strangers,'' gets a surprise visit from the 22-year-old daughter he has never seen.
Last year our reviewer, Barbara Kingsolver, praised Larry McMurtry's ''extraordinary way with women.


Pre-Game Shows Have Some New Players
LEAD: ''The N.F.L.
Today'' without Brent Musburger is like ''Bonanza'' without Ben Cartwright, ''All in the Family'' without Archie Bunker or ''The Simpsons'' without Homer.
How do you replace a patriarch in a medium in which father always knows best?


Marshall Tightens Defense
LEAD: Now that Leonard Marshall has signed a contract extension and has reported 40 days late, almost all of the pieces are in place for the Giants' defense.


Typhoon Kills 48 in China
LEAD: Forty-eight people have been killed and 250 injured by a typhoon, the New China News Agency reported today.
The typhoon, code-named Abe, was the sixth major storm to batter China's southeastern coast this summer.
It struck Zhejiang Province on Friday morning, leaving more than 40,000 people homeless.


England
LEAD: To the Editor: ''A Walk Across England'' by Scott Burris (Travel, May 20) brought back memories of my own walk the length of Britain more than 60 years ago before the highways were infested by cars and ''England's green and pleasant land'' had been trampled flat by hordes of trippers.


Managing;   Business Takes on a Green Hue


Corrections
LEAD: The Streetscapes column on Aug. 12 about the boundaries of historic districts misstated the Landmarks Commission's legal powers to designate partial zoning lots.
The commission prefers to designate full zoning lots but has the authority to designate partial lots.


Recession: Are the Questions How Deep and How Long?
LEAD: The economic news was gloomy even before Iraq's invasion of Kuwait: half a year of lackluster growth, rising inflation and a softening employment picture.
Now, as oil prices rise and consumer confidence tumbles to its lowest level in seven years, the battered economy is sure to take another beating.


PASTIMES: Stamps
LEAD: The United States Postal Service will participate in two joint issues this fall, the first with two former trust territories (Micronesia and the Marshall Islands), the second with a former enemy (the Soviet Union).


Why Moscow Must Walk the Tightrope in Iraq;   Jordan's Emergence
LEAD: To the Editor:


Trouble in 'Flatland,' or The War Against Confusion
LEAD: Often the presentation of information obscures its meaning.
To Edward R. Tufte, the correction of this scandal lies in design.
He has made it his mission to turn statistical tables, scientific observations, schedules, maps, timetables and much more into ''bright and splendid visions'' reflecting the ''crystalline qualities of information display.


Beauty;   The Next Step
LEAD: You'd think that after the last batch of high-concept fitness fads - the high- and low-impact aerobics, and their strange cousin , the multi-impact - there couldn't be much else for a body to do.
But impact is out and verticality is the buzzword of the moment.
This is not to say that rock climbing and hang gliding have hit the mainstream.


Yanks and Hawkins Rocked at Fenway
LEAD: Long after the day was over, Andy Hawkins sat quietly in the Yankee clubhouse and stared, it seemed, into nothingness.


LIFE STYLE: Sunday Outing;   Off Urban Beaten Paths, Miniature Golf Beckons
LEAD: Although New York City has never been known as a mecca for golfers, it has, in fact, 13 public golf courses.
Rarer, however, are miniature golf courses, those toy-sized attractions that seem as much a part of suburbia as their larger, greener cousins.


Gas Lines Form in Poland to Beat Rising Price
LEAD: While Poland's elite gathered this week in Gdansk to celebrate Solidarity's glorious past, the nation's drivers were treated to an uneasy glimpse of what may become this country's future: gas lines.


CAMPUS LIFE: Roosevelt;   Economics Course Beckons Scholars From Eastern Bloc
LEAD: The first two of Roosevelt University's ''Scholars for Freedom'' from Eastern Europe stepped off the plane at O'Hare International Airport last week, ready for a yearlong course in free-market economics.


ABOUT LONG ISLAND: BALL RETRIEVERS
LEAD: MONICA SELES was still in the dressing room when cheers and boos erupted from the upper tier of the stadium.
At the United States Open tennis tournament in Flushing Meadows, drama is not only on the court, but also up in the stands.


Crist Falls On Steeplechase
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


AIDS Is Not the Only Political Disease
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week;   Why Are Baseball Brawls So Common?
LEAD: Obviously, the players are bored.
Why else would they feel a need to create some ''action'' on the playing field?
GERALYN SAKAC
Oakland, N.J.


GULF CRISIS CLOUDS ELECTION OUTLOOK IN U.S. CAMPAIGNS
LEAD: Taking to the stump this Labor Day weekend for the traditional start of the fall campaigns, politicians are confronted with a terrain in which the two most powerful forces shaping any election, peace and prosperity, could shift from under them like Arabian sands.


CAMPUS LIFE: Missouri;   Fraternity Party Turns Violent; Ban Is Adopted
LEAD: The University of Missouri's Inter-Fraternity Council has voted to end the annual Bid Day Bash after at least 35 people were injured in violent incidents at the party last weekend.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
ONE NATION UNDER TELEVISION: The Rise and Decline of Network TV.
By J. Fred MacDonald. (Pantheon, $24.95.) In 1939, David Sarnoff of RCA, a pioneer in the development of the television industry, hailed the infant medium as ''a new art so important in its implications that it is bound to affect all society.


'Birthdays' Article Provided an Antidote
LEAD: We are very grateful that you chose to print one of the most beautiful essays we have read in a long time - ''Birthdays Remind Me of What I Miss'' by Celeste Piano Wenzel.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My house has a brick chimney that runs up the outside, with an ash pit at the basement level.
The chimney has two flues, one for the furnace and one for the fireplace.
Last winter, after several rainy and snowy days, some water ran down the inside of the flues and into the fireplace and ash pit.


The Executive Life;   Where's the Barbarian? Where's the Gate?
LEAD: Several months ago, one Harvard Business School student near the top of his class accepted a summer internship with a prominent Wall Street investment bank.
Before arriving in New York, he devoured ''Barbarians at the Gate'' and ''Liar's Poker,'' the twin bibles of Wall Street's corporate culture.


New Director Plans to Diversify At Harms Center
LEAD: THEODORE RAWLINS remembers how he and Alan J. DeZon talked about ''our theaters doing something together, and we tried to figure out just what that something would be.'' Then, Mr.
Rawlins said, ''Alan got a job offer he couldn't refuse.'' And Mr.
Rawlins got Mr.
DeZon's job.
As the newly appointed executive director of the John Harms Center for the Arts, Mr.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Do the Mets Have What It Takes to Win It All?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Ms. McDonnell Weds J. F. McAuliff Jr.
LEAD: MARY BYRNE McDONNELL, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Chilton H. McDonnell of Warrenton, Va., was married yesterday to JOHN FRANCIS McAULIFF JR., a son of Mrs.
McAuliff of Indianapolis and the late Mr.
McAuliff.
Stephanie Nichols, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the home of William and Catherine Rieser in Perkasie,


A Needed Addition
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about crime waves in New York misstated the year in which the ratio of police officers to citizens dropped to 1 per 540.
The year was 1896, not 1986.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Edwin Reischauer Dies


U.N. Chief's Talk With Iraqi Breaks Off Inconclusively
LEAD: Talks aimed at persuading Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait broke off inconclusively tonight when Iraq's Foreign Minister, Tariq Aziz, flew back to Baghdad after six and a half hours of discussions over two days with Javier Perez de Cuellar, the Secretary General of the United Nations.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 2, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
40
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and lawyers.
2
7
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights Colombian drug lords.


Blake, Krystle and Alexis Settle In on Polish TV
LEAD: ''Dynastia'' is Polish for ''dynasty.'' But nowadays it is more chic to say ''DIE-nas-tee,'' the American way.
This new fashion started two months ago, when the initial installment of the United States-produced series was telecast on Poland's Channel 1.
Since then, 10 times a week - twice daily from Monday to Friday - Poles are treated to the carryings-on of the enormously rich Carrington family of


A Collective Effort
LEAD: ''The Japanese have a hell of a stake in this,'' said Senator Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey, a liberal Democrat, after a briefing by President Bush on the Middle East crisis, ''and ought to pay a hell of a share.''


Postings: Greenwich Hotel Facelift;   A Plan to Re-Rig the Showboat
LEAD: If the town approves, one of the most visible commercial buildings in Greenwich, Conn., will get a major facelift.
The Lexington Development Group, based in Greenwich, has submitted a plan to the Greenwich Planning and Zoning Commission to renovate the Showboat Hotel and Restaurant.
Since the 1960's the Showboat has been known for its reproduction of a Mississippi riverboat docked next to its property, which runs down to the shore of Greenwich Harbor just off Exit 3 of the New England


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended Aug. 18
MANHATTAN
Carnegie Hill
$400,000
1065 Park Avenue (87th St.)
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, conciege, dining room; maintenance $1,428, 62% tax-deductible (Broker: Carnegie Hill Properties)
Chelsea


Wedding Plans For Meg Grogan
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Grogan of New Rochelle, N.Y., and Point Lookout, L.I., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter MARGARET ANNE GROGAN and THOMAS FRANCIS GALVIN, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald M. Galvin of Forest Hills, Queens, and Point Lookout.


A 200th Birthday Plus a Peek At October
LEAD: JUST a few concerts are on the agenda this week: the Franciscan Quartet plays Beethoven, Bartok and Brahms at the Music Mountain Finale this afternoon at 3 (496-2596); Columbus Brass promises us ''five centuries of musical styles'' 8:30 P.M.
Saturday at the Merryall Center in New Milford (868-9300), and a free concert (plus fireworks) featuring the United States Coast Guard Band officially closes out the nationwide celebrations of the Coast Guard's 200th birthday, 8 P.M.


Miss Lindenbaum To Marry in Fall
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel H. Lindenbaum of New York have announced November wedding plans for their daughter LAURIE ELLEN LINDENBAUM and ROBERT ALAN HORNE, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred M. Horne of Wheeling, W.Va.


Julia Peretsman Weds Peter Levy
LEAD: JULIA R. PERETSMAN, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Peretsman of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening to PETER J. LEVY, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard P. Levy of Woodbury, L.I.
Rabbi Stuart Geller officiated at the Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Clark
$218,300
8 Avon Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 23-year-old split level; large foyer, 2-car garage; taxes $4,294.
Howell
$175,000
29 Melissa Lane
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2-year-old colonial; den, 2-car garage, eat-in kitchen, full basement; taxes $3,841.


A Lively Menu Touches Many Bases
LEAD: What was once Boodles is now Bretts, but the decor in the handsome old house in Greenwich is much as it was.
The ground floor is broken into several cozy dining areas; the best by far is the glass-enclosed sun porch.
It is positively dazzling on a sunny day, with window boxes full of yellow chrysanthemums and light streaming throgh the stained-glass panel in the rear.


Currency;   Three Havens That Weren't
LEAD: Ouch.
For those who fled to the British pound and the Australian and Canadian dollars as a safe harbor during the Persian Gulf crisis, the end of last week was rough.
As some tension eased and as some traders began to take profits, the three curencies, especially the pound, fell sharply.
The Australian dollar was off 1.6 percent for the week on Thursday but rebounded on Friday.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. My house has a brick chimney that runs up the outside, with an ash pit at the basement level.
The chimney has two flues, one for the furnace and one for the fireplace.
Last winter, after several rainy and snowy days, some water ran down the inside of the flues and into the fireplace and ash pit.


Tax Those Big Gas Guzzlers by Engine Size
LEAD: To the Editor:


Summer Vegetables for Tarts and Pizzas
LEAD: MIXED salads, vegetable tarts and pizzas can be so good at this time of year that the absence of meat or fish in a meal goes unnoticed.
I like to mix the best of the produce from the local farmer's stand to make a vegetable antipasto that would give any good Italian restaurant a run for its money.


CAMPUS LIFE: Clarkson University;   Computer Helps Professors Match Names and Faces
LEAD: On the first day of class, a professor, perhaps seeking to drive away those who had gotten the impression that his course was a piece of cake, poses an almost ludicrously difficult hypothetical question.


Does Top Dollar Buy Top Audio?
LEAD: The cooled-off economy has predictably dampened the audio trade.
Dealers grumble about the slump but add smilingly that the really expensive stuff is selling as well as ever.


Allen's Return to Coaching Is Painful
LEAD: George Allen knew his comeback to college football at age 72 would be a tough one.
Ken Hatfield was making a debut, too, as head coach at Clemson, but Long Beach State was hardly considered to be in the same class as the Tigers.


'Black Votes Count'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Money Talks, Top 40 Listens
LEAD: Amid its antic tales of malfeasance and egomania in the record business, Fredric Dannen's new book ''Hit Men'' (Times Books/Random House) details a sobering statistic: from the late 1970's through much of the 1980's, record companies laid out as much as $50 million to $80 million each year on independent promotion.


Three Good Arguments for Less Self-Indulgence
LEAD: At first the pairing of exhibitions at the Museum of Contemporary Art here comes across as an astute institutional balancing act inspired by these issue-sensitive, multicultural times.
However fortuitous, the scheduling implies a rationale: if you're going to exhibit the drawings of Julian Schnabel, that enfant terrible of the early 1980's and epitome of white male artistic success, equal time should go to work from a completely different part of the art realm.


Summit Meetings With Gorbachev
LEAD: November 1985: President Ronald Reagan and Mikhail s.
Gorbachev meet in Geneva for wide-ranging talks on arms controland other subjects.
They agree to revive cultural exchanges and to increase air safety, but no arms-control agreements are achieved.


Pope Criticizes Iraq; Warns Against War
LEAD: Pope John Paul II rebuked Iraq today for its occupation of Kuwait, but said that military action by American-led forces could bring ''more evil'' to the Persian Gulf.


Joan D. O'Grady Is Engaged
LEAD: Mrs.
John P. O'Grady of New York has announced the engagement of her daughter JOAN DEIRDRE O'GRADY to ANDREW HENRY BARADA, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew S. Barada 3d of New Canaan, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.
The prospective bride, also a daughter of the late Mr.
O'Grady, graduated from Georgetown University and is a nurse epidemiologist at New York Hospital.


Corrections
LEAD: An answer in the Q&amp;A column on Aug. 19 about calling cruise ships misstated the telephone number for Comsat, a satellite communications company.
It is (800) 627-4728.


Even for J. Crew, the Mail-Order Boom Days Are Over
LEAD: Fourteen times a year it shows up, sandwiched between electric bills and sweepstakes come-ons, prompting a flash of recognition.
There are more than 100 pages decorated with exultant models in rugby shirts, twill trousers and espadrilles, presented in meticulously shot photographs - the culmination of 8,000 rolls of film a year.


Why Management Needs the Labor Movement
LEAD: To the Editor:


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: Labor Day.
Financial markets, government offices and many businesses are closed.
TUESDAY: Construction spending for July.
Purchasing managers index for August.
Second-quarter productivity.
The scheduled trial on charges of bank fraud for Edwin T. McBirney 3d, former chairman of the Sunbelt Savings Association.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Track and Field
Relay Record Falls: The French team set a world record of 37.79 seconds for the men's 400-meter relay yesterday at the European championships in Split, Yugoslavia.
The French team, powered by Daniel Sangouma in the second leg and anchored by Bruno Marie Rose, broke the mark of 37.83 set by a United States team led by Carl Lewis at the 1984 Olympics.


In Wake of Fine, Agassi Coasts
LEAD: For this match, he was a vision in fluorescent chartreuse, one of this season's hottest colors.
The rest was pretty much standard - the Spandex tights under regular tennis shorts, the ear ring, the long blond hair, the headband.


At College Stores, Colors Are Cooler, But Sales ($5.5 Billion) Remain Hot
LEAD: ''We're getting a back-to-basics group this year,'' said Deborah Rizzo-Puccio, who runs the campus bookstore at the State University of New York at New Paltz. ''They'll be more traditional in dress and more serious about issues.''


After Years Of Declines, School Rolls Stabilize
LEAD: WITH the Island's 124 public-school districts ready to open this week, Long Island's school population appears to have stabilized.
After a sharp drop in enrollment from the late 70's to the mid-80's, numbers have leveled off and are likely to remain steady for several years.


Question Of the Week;   Why Are Baseball Brawls So Common?
LEAD: When someone throws a hard ball at you at 90-plus miles per hour it tends to make you quite angry.
MARK SAMUELS
New York


Combing the Past for Clues on Souter
LEAD: As senators and various interest groups explore the views of David H. Souter, President Bush's nominee to the Supreme Court, many have turned their attention to his actions as New Hampshire Attorney General from 1976 to 1978.


U.S. Mistakenly Sold a Prosecutor's Secret Data
LEAD: A United States Attorney's secret computer files, including electronic copies of sealed indictments and information about pending F.B.I. inquiries, were mistakenly sold by the Government a month ago to a businessman who paid $45 for what he thought was only broken computer equipment.


California Lawmakers Defeat Plan for Early Presidential Primary
LEAD: A plan to give California one of the nation's earliest Presidential primaries has been defeated, with lawmakers unable to agree whether to prohibit referendums from any Presidential ballot.


'I Have Never Been Able to Tell a Story'
LEAD: Denis Donoghue, the literary critic and scholar, grew up in the small town of Warrenpoint in Northern Ireland, at the end of an inlet of the Irish Sea called Carlingford Lough.
In his new book, named for the town, he combines a memoir of coming of age with meditations on literary and religious influences that helped shape his life and thought.


Change in Enforcement Is Said to Cut Violence Between Police and Public
LEAD: The scenarios are painfully familiar in communities across the country: a police officer shoots someone or someone shoots an officer, investigations are begun, funerals are held, charges are exchanged or perhaps filed, demonstrations are staged.


Nina Yonkman, Model, Engaged
LEAD: Wedding plans for NINA VER MEULEN YONKMAN and HARRY PAYNE TOWER have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mrs.
Raymond B. Rudy of Greenwich, Conn., and Frederick Albers Yonkman of New York.
Mr.
Tower is the son of Mrs.
John Train of Bedford, N.Y., and Whitney Tower of New York and Saratoga Springs, N.Y.


Postings: Stuyvesant Square;   From Clinic To Condos
LEAD: When the New York Infirmary merged with Beekman Downtown Hospital in 1979, the institution pulled up stakes in the Stuyvesant Square area and, except for services housed in three buildings on East 15th Street near Second Avenue, it moved to the financial district.


Life With an Au Pair: Working Out Cultural Differences
LEAD: IT would seem to be the perfect dovetailing of two different desires.
On one side of the ocean, there is the young European girl who wants to see New York and get to know the American culture through the eyes of a local family.
On the other side is the American family, searching for quality child care at a reasonable price.


As Sales Slow, Rental Demand Is Strong
LEAD: WITH the prices of cooperatives and condominiums down by 13 percent from 1988 and sales of single-family homes sluggish, the conversion of existing rental apartments to co-ops has virtually stopped in the county, landlords and real-estate brokers report.


Above Southern France, a Ballet Against Fire
LEAD: The cool wind stirred in the morning, and hit 60 miles an hour by midday.
Comdr.
Robert Bardo, the chief fire-control officer for the 15 departments in Provence, sensed smoke in the air.


Indonesia
LEAD: To the Editor: In any future summary of tours, you might make note of the most enchanting tour I took during my visits to Indonesia:


Tearfully, Romanians Recall a Wartime Partition
LEAD: A village teacher spoke in a flat voice of ''savagery worthy of the Mongol invaders,'' and old peasant women in the large crowd wept copiously.
Then a mixed choir sang a hymn to ''our heroic martyrs,'' and eight Orthodox priests intoned a prayer.


Stocks Firm In Tokyo
LEAD: Tokyo stocks were firmer at midday today in thin trading because of little negative news from the Persian Gulf over the weekend.
Institutional selling clashed with buying bargain-hunting individuals seeking deals after prices fell by 16.3 percent in August, largely because of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.


Baseball;   This Time, Stieb Gets His No-Hitter
LEAD: Dave Stieb finally has his no-hitter.


Capriati Is Ready To Test Graf Again
LEAD: The last time they met, the teen-ager lost but went away crowing: for her, the thrill of competing like an equal against the world's No. 1 woman in tennis was consolation enough.
But Steffi Graf, who has defeated Jennifer Capriati both times they've played, was incensed at the way her loss of a single set to the 14-year-old in an exhibition final was parlayed into state's evidence that she is ripe for dethroning.


Chronicle
LEAD: Want a ''Days of Thunder'' racing suit autographed by TOM CRUISE?
A basketball autographed by MICHAEL JORDAN?
One-of-a-kind memorabilia from DUSTIN HOFFMAN, MARTIN SCORSESE and WHOOPIE GOLDBERG?


Horse Racing;   An Upset in Million, But Not in Maskette
LEAD: Five of last year's most celebrated horses went to the races yesterday, but only one came back a winner: Go for Wand won the Maskette Handicap at Belmont Park, but Golden Pheasant scored an upset victory over the country's top grass horses in the Arlington Million at Arlington Park.


Business and the Law;   Add Legal Costs To S.&amp; L. Bailout
LEAD: WHILE the amounts may seem small compared with the billions of dollars being spent to rescue savings and loan institutions, the meters at hundreds of law firms involved in the rescue effort are ticking at a fast clip.


INSIDE
LEAD:
A Few Mohawks Still Resist
The Canadian Army surrounded about 20 armed Mohawks in Quebec after dismantling most of their barricades without firing a shot.
Page 3.
Khmer Rouge Moves People
The Khmer Rouge has moved at least 60,000 Cambodian refugees under its control over the Thai border into ''liberated zones'' in Cambodia.


Susan Struth Is Married
LEAD: SUSAN STRUTH, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bert Struth of Armonk, N.Y., was married yesterday to ANDREW KANTOR, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Kantor of Plainview, N.Y.
Rabbi Chaim Stern officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Kantor, a graduate of Emory University, is a student at New York Law School.


White May Be Out In Umpire Dispute
LEAD: Unless Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball, can get the National League umpires and Bill White to resolve their widening dispute soon, there may be no way to prevent White from carrying out his threat to resign as president of the National League.


Sports of The Times;   The Line on Tewksbury
LEAD: BASEBALL box scores can be like novels, each game a chapter in itself.
The reader may follow the progress of a team, of course, but also the black, statistical line on individual players, or protagonists - the heroes or the villains.
Sometimes there's a favorite, a guy you like for some reason, whether it's his batting stance, or the way he wears his cap, or his grit, whom you quietly keep an eye on.


The 1990 No-Hit Parade
LEAD: The no-hitters of 1990 so far, with pitcher or pitchers, opponent, score and date:
American League
Mark Langston (7 innings) and Mike Witt (2), California vs. Seattle, 1-0, April 11.
Randy Johnson, Seattle vs. Detroit, 2-0, June 2.
Nolan Ryan, Texas at Oakland, 5-0, June 11.
Dave Stewart, Oakland at Toronto, 5-0, June 29.


Aramco Denies Mass Resignations
LEAD: Saudi Arabia's main oil production company denied last week that nearly 600 of its foreign workers had resigned because of fears of war in the Persian Gulf.


Census Workers Remember Resistance and Lies
LEAD: Preliminary Census Bureau figures saying that New York City shrank during the 1980's may have stunned city officials, but they did not surprise several census workers who spent the summer counting New Yorkers.
The workers readily concede that they missed many people in poor and wealthy neighborhoods alike.


21 Blacks Die in Townships After Week of Relative Calm
LEAD: The South African police found the bodies of 21 blacks today after overnight clashes in townships wracked by fighting among black factions.


In Race for Comptroller, Rivals With Same Foe
LEAD: Carol Bellamy and Andrew J. Spano held what they called a debate a few days ago, but had little bad to say about each other and little, it appeared, to disagree about.
The race for the Democratic nomination for state comptroller has been that kind of campaign.


Polish Arms Makers Adjust to Peace
LEAD: The Pressta metalworks, once a gem of the Polish munitions industry, is prospering as a manufacturer of bright red butane gas canisters destined for Israel, Britain and West Germany.


Washington Nuclear Plant Poses Risk for Indians
LEAD: While an investigation of radioactivity in the Columbia River from the Government's Hanford nuclear weapons plant has indicated that hundreds of people may face serious health risks, it has not yet begun to examine the exposure of those who may be at greatest risk, the Indians who lived and fished along the river's banks.


Gulf Crisis Starts a Costly Fight for Good Press
LEAD: Behind the image war on television - President Bush playing a round of golf, President Saddam Hussein stroking a young hostage's head or answering Dan Rather's questions - there is a less-visible public relations struggle being conducted from some Middle Eastern embassies here.


Expanding Archives: Library of Congress Is Not Just Books
LEAD: The tape they are caught up in, atypically for Washington, is not red but video.
If all goes well they will never catch up on their work, which is collecting old and new movies, television and radio shows and recordings that range from primitive one-sided 78's to the latest one-sided compact disks.


Rebecca Felman Is Wed in Ohio
LEAD: REBECCA ANN FELMAN, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Montie F. Felman of Dayton, Ohio, was married yesterday to DR.
MITCHELL ALAN PFEIFFER, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard S. Pfeiffer of Yonkers.
Rabbi Samuel S. Fox officiated at Beth Jacob Synagogue in Dayton.


A Resurgent CBS Moves To Regain the Edge in News
LEAD: As its ratings have bounced back and Dan Rather has rehabilitated his image as one of television's top journalists, CBS News is moving to challenge ABC News again as the leader in network prestige and profits.


Adele Bove Wed To Roger Lipson
LEAD: The Woman's Club of Ridgewood, N.J., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of ADELE JUNE BOVE, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Louis Bove of Ridgewood, to ROGER O. LIPSON, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Lipson of New York.
The Rev.
Richard D. Sloan, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Burt Aaron


A Summit Respite
LEAD: The symbolism and timing of the Sov iet-American summit meeting next Sunday seems more important than any prospects the conference may hold for a solution to the Persian Gulf crisis.


Gandhi Leading in Indian Poll
LEAD: Prime Minister V. P. Singh trails former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi as the favorite for India's top post, according to an opinion poll published today.
Mr.
Singh, who ousted Mr.
Gandhi in elections last year, was preferred by 36 percent of the respondents, compared with 44 percent who favored Mr.


Lisa Karen Phildius Wed to Andrew Dow Pierce
LEAD: LISA KAREN PHILDIUS, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Phildius of Weston, Mass., was married yesterday to ANDREW DOW PIERCE, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elisha G. Pierce 3d of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
David Van Dusen performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in Weston.


Holiday Blends Summer Into Fall, but Who's Ready?
LEAD: Armed with oversized beach umbrellas and tiny shovels, a crush of humanity sprawled itself immodestly across this milelong spit of sand on the Jersey Shore for the bittersweet crescendo of summer that is Labor Day weekend.


Myrtle G. Hirsch, 72, Active in Philanthropy
LEAD: Myrtle G. Hirsch, a philanthropist, board member of the United Jewish Appeal Federation and a recipient of the federation's highest honor, the Distinguished Service Award, died on Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
Her death, at the age of 72, resulted from cancer, a family spokesman said.


'Micro Bankers' Help The Poor Make Money
LEAD: Several nonprofit ''micro banks'' have flourished in North America, using an approach that most banks would consider absurd: they make small loans to potential business owners who live in poverty.


Mead Buyback Offer
LEAD: The Mead Corporation, a paper and wood products company, said last week that it had authorized the purchase of up to an additional five million common shares under its common stock buyback program.
Under prior authorization to buy back up to two million common shares, Mead has bought back more than 1.6 million shares.


Outdoors: Fishing For Some Answers
LEAD: WE had been fishing over the southwestern edge of the Mud Hole 20 miles off the Jersey coast for two long days and the sandwiches, beer and jokes were getting a little stale.


Motorcyclists Find South Dakota Warm
LEAD: To the Editor:


C. Dale Badgeley, 91, World's Fair Designer
LEAD: C. Dale Badgeley, an architect who designed the overall scheme for the 1939-40 New York World's Fair, died last Monday at his home in Old Field, L.I.
His death, at the age of 91, resulted from a heart attack, a family spokesman said.


Canadian Troops Surround 20 Heavily Armed Mohawks
LEAD: The standoff between about 20 heavily armed Mohawk Indians and the Canadian Army continued with the militants surrounded in a detoxification center on Indian land after about 400 soldiers seized most of the Indian community of Kanesatake here today.


Strikebreakers and Other Threats
LEAD: Labor Day is a time to celebrate American workers.
It it also a time to take stock of what ails labor.
Two threats are especially severe.
Weak productivity in American companies is dragging down wages.
And weak enforcement of the nation's labor laws is dragging down unions.


Preserve Water Quality, and Options
LEAD: Though New Yorkers' memories of recent droughts were washed away by 1990's bounteous rain, the city's Environmental Protection Commissioner, Albert Appleton, now warns that a decline in water quality is as critical as future shortages.
He urges spending $1 billion to buy land to prevent polluting development in the


Giants Entering The Trade Market
LEAD: The Giants were talking about trades today with other National Football League teams.


Jets Decide To Drop Shuler
LEAD: On a day when the training camp at Hofstra University was closed tight and one day before they were required to lop off a baker's dozen names to get down from 60 players to 47, the Jets dropped a bombshell yesterday by waiving their veteran tight end, Mickey Shuler.


Ms. Hawkins Weds M. I. G. Lewanda
LEAD: PAMELA LEIGH HAWKINS, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Taylor Hawkins of Lake Wylie, S.C., was married yesterday to MAREK ISSAR GEORGE LEWANDA, a son of Mrs.
Donald B. Lewanda of Albany and the late Mr.
Lewanda.
Rabbi Steven M. Rosman officiated at The Homestead Inn in Greenwich, Conn.


A Focused Maleeva Upsets Navratilova
LEAD: The loss did not exactly make Martina Navratilova opt for retirement, but it prodded her to consider it.


Renee Smith Is Married
LEAD: RENEE SMITH, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerson Smith of Margate, N.J., was married yesterday to ALLAN JEFFREY BORKOW, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen E. Borkow of Hewlett Harbor, L.I.
Rabbi Stanley Platek performed the ceremony at the Ram's Head Inn in Absecon, N.J.
Mrs.
Borkow, 27 years old, graduated from Carnegie Mellon University and received a master's degree in fine arts from Columbia University.


Making a Racket For a Good Cause
LEAD: NEITHER Dave Austin nor Phil Ehart have more than a glimmer of an idea why tennis players are so into rock music (recall John McEnroe, or that the hottest ticket at Wimbledon this year was supposedly to the jam session at the Hard Rock Cafe).
Nor do they know why rock musicians are so interested in tennis, even though Austin plays rock and Ehart is a tennis player.


Deborah Lock and Zachary Stalberg Are Married
LEAD: DEBORAH J. LOCK, the art director of Phillysport magazine, was married yesterday to ZACHARY STALBERG, the editor of The Philadelphia Daily News and the executive vice president of Philadelphia Newspapers Inc.
Judge Thomas McCormick of the Philadelphia Common Pleas Court officated at the Philadelphia Art


Isabelle Pinzler Is Married
LEAD: ISABELLE KATZ PINZLER, the director of the Women's Rights Project of the American Civil Liberties Union in New York, was married yesterday to JAMES BROOK, a professor at New York Law School.
Rabbi Susan Einbinder performed the ceremony at James House in North Tarrytown, N.Y.


Tracy Sivitz Marries Barton Gellman
LEAD: TRACY ELLEN SIVITZ, a staff lawyer with the Washington Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, was married yesterday in White Plains to BARTON DAVID GELLMAN, a metropolitan staff reporter for The Washington Post.
Rabbi Robert Fine officiated at Stouffer's Westchester Hotel.


CAMBODIAN CITES LIMITS ON U.N. PLAN
LEAD: The Cambodian President and Communist Party general secretary, Heng Samrin, has confirmed that his Government is willing to discuss the United Nations plan for a Cambodian peace settlement this month in Jakarta, Indonesia.


Metro Matters;   Labor Is Hoping Dinkins Support Pays Off Soon
LEAD: After less than nine months in office, Mayor David N. Dinkins is starting to suffer labor pains.
Like expectant fathers, New York City's municipal unions, which helped elect him, are anxiously waiting to see what he will deliver.


Hilary Weston, Consultant, Wed
LEAD: HILARY ANN WESTON, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Josh S. Weston of Montclair, N.J., was married yesterday to Capt.
ALEXANDER WALTER JOEL, U.S.A., the son of Sunja Joel of Arlington, Va. and Dr.
Clark Joel of Washington.
Cantor Elliot Levine performed the ceremony at the Grand Summit Hotel in Summit, N


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Publishing;   As Many Books Reach Print, The Interest Fizzles
LEAD: FOR many authors, writing books turns out to be a case of ''the calm before the calm.''


Anti-Gay Attacks Increase And Some Fight Back
LEAD: Late one night in July, Heidi Dorow was embracing another woman on the corner of Bleecker and Carmine Streets in the West Village when a teen-ager began to taunt them.
As they shoved past him, Ms.
Dorow said, ''he swung around and punched me in the head.''


Navy Honors Hijack Victim
LEAD: The Navy is naming a guided missile destroyer for the diver who was shot and killed in the 1985 hijacking of a jetliner.
The U.S.S.
Stethem will honor Robert Dean Stethem, who was shot in the head by one of the terrorists who hijacked Trans World Airlines Flight 847.
His body was thrown onto the tarmac of the Beirut airport after the terrorists took over the plane at Athens on June 14, 1985.


Robert Holmes a Court, 53, Dies; Australian Built Business Empire
LEAD: Robert Holmes a Court, a South African immigrant who became one of Australia's most successful entrepreneurs and corporate raiders, died of a heart attack early this morning at his horse farm near Perth in Western Australia.
He was 53 years old.
Mr.
Holmes a Court, an accomplished corporate strategist who built his empire quickly from a tiny woolen mill, was once Australia's richest man.


Red Sox Sweep Yankees
LEAD: The night began and ended as so many others this season: a hit, a run, a sudden deficit, then a loss.
It has become painfully routine, something the Yankees have lived with since the early days of April.


Merger Near for Smart
LEAD: The publisher of Smart magazine said last week that he was close to reaching a final agreement to merge his men's publication with a men's magazine that is being readied for introduction next year.
The publisher, Owen Lipstein, said he had agreed to buy Men magazine and would incorporate some of the ideas being considered for Men into Smart.


An Ad Maker That Aspires To Art for the Public's Sake
LEAD: Sandwiched between high-gloss music videos are images of cities strewn with endless piles of trash.
The mountains of garbage are so high that when an empty cup is tossed at them, it falls and hits the ground with a resounding boom.


Iraq Is Said to Order Foreign Reporters Out
LEAD: A French television crew has been ordered out of Iraq, and other foreign correspondents have been told to leave, a spokeswoman for the French channel Antenne 2 said today.


Mutt And Jeff And Me
LEAD: To enliven a column on the split between tall Boris Yeltsin and shorter Mikhail Gorbachev, I evoked the image of Mutt and Jeff, the tall and short comic-strip creations of Bud Fisher.
Gorby was Mutt, the short one.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''You cannot say 'quiet diplomacy,' and then spend months and years dealing with the problem.
The situation is extremely serious.
We cannot wait indefinitely for the crisis to be solved step by step.''
- Secretary General
Javier Perez de Cuellar
of the U.N.
after talks
with Tariq Aziz,
Foreign Minister of Iraq.


A Chapter Is Closing as N.H.L. Teams' Training Camps Open
LEAD: Late summer is a confusing and contradictory time on the sports calendar.
Baseball players are still picking up their bats and gloves after bench-clearing brawls.
Football players are sending each other to hospitals with legal collisions in practice games.
And hockey, that ''violent'' team sport, is opening training camp in the artificial winter of indoor ice, with exhibition games scheduled this month in megalopoli like Moscow, Miami and


Right in Your Own Backyard: Horseshoes
LEAD: MIKHAIL GORBACHEV made a ringer with the first horseshoe he threw, according to the President of the United States, who witnessed this feat at Camp David last June.
There's no indication that Gorbachev took this old American holiday diversion back to the Soviet Union with him, but if he did, he would have been joining millions of others in the boomlet that horsehoe pitching has experienced since President Bush took up the sport about five years ago.


Labor Day
LEAD:
NEW YORK
Parade: Begins at 11 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street and heads north to 72d Street.
Government offices: Federal, state and municipal offices closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed.


Pirates Set Sights Ahead and Behind
LEAD: IN the early to mid-1970's, the Los Angeles Dodgers had a habit of getting good jumps on the Cincinnati Reds but then having to endure long summers of listening not only to the footsteps but also to the chirping of certain members of the rival Big Red Machine.


Throughout the Middle East, Iraq's Challenge Redraws the Political Lines
LEAD: One month ago, Saddam Hussein sought to change the map of the Middle East by sending Iraq's tanks and troops among the office towers, villas and oil wells of Kuwait.
He succeeded better than some experts might have believed he had bargained for.


More and More, Pennies Become Pariah of Coins
LEAD: To the Editor:


Service Break
LEAD: IMAGINE a major league pitcher firing in a pitch and the batter reaching out to catch the ball while hollering, ''Wait!''


Safety on the Waterways
LEAD: Even with the passing of the Labor Day weekend, the traditional end of summer, water safety officials remain concerned about the weekend lure of water scooters, or jetskis as they are known, wherever the weather is warm.
Because jetskis seem so easy to operate, they often foster a cavalier approach from inexperienced helmsmen and women.


Ruth Friedman, Professor, Is Married
LEAD: RUTH LYNN FRIEDMAN and BARRY L. WASSERMAN were married yesterday at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Rabbi Emily Korzenik officiated.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Friedman of Irvington, N.Y.
Her husband's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Wasserman of Laguna Hills, Calif.


Sherri E. Berger Weds Alan Rothstein
LEAD: SHERRI ELLEN BERGER, a daughter of Mrs.
Irwin B. Berger of Dix Hills, L.I., and the late Mr.
Berger, was married yesterday to Dr.
ALAN ROTHSTEIN, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Rothstein of Utopia, Queens.
Rabbi Mordecai V. Efron performed the ceremony, assisted by Cantor Paul Zim, at the Terrace Restaurant in New


The Oilfield Lying Below the Iraq-Kuwait Dispute
LEAD: At the heart of Iraq's dispute with Kuwait over oil, money and boundaries lies a huge banana-shaped oil forma tion some 10,200 feet below the desert sands.


Critic's Notebook;   Striding Past Dragon Lady and No. 1 Son
LEAD: The conflict over the casting of Jonathan Pryce as a Eurasian character in the musical ''Miss Saigon'' has focused rare attention on Asian-American actors and their presence in the theater, in movies and on television.


Editorial Notebook;   Who Was Countess Annie Leary? Readers Were Happy To Supply the Answer
LEAD: In a recent Editorial Notebook on Pierre Toussaint, a candidate for canonization soon to be exhumed from a graveyard in Manhattan's Little Italy, I mentioned having noticed the name Countess Annie Leary on a vault in the catacombs of Old St.
Patrick's Cathedral, which adjoins Mr.
Toussaint's burial place.


Self-Promotion, on the Taxpayer
LEAD: Most newsletters lawmakers send to constituents are little more than shameless electioneering, with taxpayers footing the bill.
That bill grows every election year, to outrageous proportions.


4 Home Runs Help Put Dodgers Ahead
LEAD: Kal Daniels snapped an 0 for 16 slump with two two-run homers and Lenny Harris and Mike Sharperson also hit home runs, powering the Los Angeles Dodgers to a 12-5 victory today over the Montreal Expos.


McEnroe Outlasts Sanchez In 5 Sets
LEAD: It was a marathon, the sort of test of mind and matter that should have provoked the 31-year-old fading superstar with the underwhelming physique to despair.


Marcy Sandler Wed To James T. Janover
LEAD: MARCY ANN SANDLER, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael R. Sandler of Boston, was married there yesterday to JAMES TROY JANOVER, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan van S. Janover of New York.
Rabbi Ronald Weiss officiated, assisted by Cantor Jodi Sufrin, at the Four Seasons Hotel.


Navigation Made Easier
LEAD: A palm-sized electronic device does the job of a compass, range finder, timepiece and binoculars.
The unit is designed to gauge distances while you are boating, hiking, hunting or bird-watching.


Huge Fraud Case Shaking New Jersey Haven for Aged
LEAD: In the 1960's this 82-square-mile township on the edge of the Pine Barrens attracted wide attention by encouraging the development of retirement communities.
Now it is gaining notoriety for what officials are calling one of the most corrupt administrations in New Jersey history.


Mideast War Fear Does Not Deter Soviet Jews From Going to Israel
LEAD: Even as the threat of war hangs over the region, 17,494 Soviet Jews moved to Israel from the Soviet Union in August, a 14 percent increase over the total in July.
With more than 1,300 immigrants arriving from other places, last month's immigration total was Israel's highest in 39 years.


Surf's Up, but So Is the Summer of '90


World Bank Aid to Poland
LEAD: Praising Poland's economic changes, the World Bank signed a $300 million loan on Friday for the former Communist nation.


Washington Talk;   For Congress, Golfing Is Working on the Green By RICHARD L. BERKE
LEAD: President Bush is getting attention, and getting heat, for managing a military call-up from his golf cart.
The fact is, many lawmakers returning here this week from their August breaks have also worked as much as played on the greens.


Japan Trade Surplus Down
LEAD: The surplus in a main Japanese trade indicator fell 63.3 percent in July from a year earlier, the Finance Ministry said Friday.


Bridge
LEAD: After one day of play here in the biggest world championship ever contested, an American pair leads in the World Mixed Pair Championship.
At the start of today's play, Walt and Kathie Walvick of Alexandria, Va., had a 63-0 score, the best in a field of 572 pairs.


Committing A Vanishing Africa To Pictures
LEAD: A soft beige light reflects across the silver waters of Lake Turkana in northern Kenya as Angela Fisher crouches in the waves taking photographs of three Turkana women, one smothered in in fire-red ocher, another garbed in a beaded leather sheath that flaps noisily in the wind.
This is the best time for taking pictures in


Ms. Hershaft Wed To A. J. Hoffman
LEAD: ELINOR HERSHAFT, the daughter of Rose Klausner of North Miami Beach, Fla., and the late Solomon Klausner, was married yesterday to ALAN J. HOFFMAN, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Jesse Hoffman of New York.
Rabbi Hillel Silverman officated at the bride's home in Greenwich, Conn.


Ex-Hostages Recall Weeks of Fear
LEAD: The Iraqi Government may have called them guests, but for many of the American hostages who returned home today after weeks of captivity, that description of their plight was a cruel hoax.


Johnson &amp; Johnson Looks Abroad
LEAD: Faced with worldwide pressure to lower drug prices and growing competition at home and abroad, American pharmaceutical manufacturers are looking to overseas markets as never before.
And nowhere is the global push more apparent than at Johnson &amp; Johnson.


Miss Illick Wed To P. A. Valette
LEAD: HILARY SELDEN ILLICK and PIERRE ALEXIS VALETTE, Stanford University graduates, were married yesterday at the North Dorchester, N.H., vacation home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher David Illick of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Daphne P. Hawkes, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony.


Nancy Margolis, Banker, Is Wed
LEAD: NANCY LAURA MARGOLIS, a daughter of Ethel Liebowitz of Southfield, Mich., and the late Nathan Margolis, was married yesterday to HOWARD SHIELDS BARON JR., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard S. Baron of Harrison, N.Y.
Rabbi David Nelson performed the ceremony at Congregation Beth Shalom in Oak Park, Mich.


No Headline
LEAD: LISA ANNE EHRLICH, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Ehrlich of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to EMANUEL PEARLMAN, a son of Roberta Pearlman and Leonard Pearlman, both of New York.
Rabbi Ely Pilchick performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.


Joanne Doebler Weds Peter Delendick
LEAD: JOANNE DOEBLER, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Doebler of Brightwaters, L.I., was married yesterday to PETER DELENDICK, a son of Alec Delendick of Hauppauge, L.I., and the late Helen Delendick.
The Rev.
Charles Lennon performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bay Shore, L.I.


Markets Closed For Holiday
LEAD: The nation's stock, bond and commodity markets will be closed today in observance of the Labor Day holiday.
Government offices and most banks will also be closed.


Symbols and Timing, And a Giant Oil Pool
LEAD: The symbolism and timing of the Soviet-American summit conference seem more important than any prospects it may hold for a solution to the Persian Gulf crisis.
News analysis, page 4.
At the heart of Iraq's dispute with Kuwait is a huge banana-shaped oil formation some 10,200 feet below the desert sands.


New Workout Tips For Marathoners
LEAD: AS summer draws to a close, runners entered in the New York City Marathon begin to confront the daunting challenge of high-mileage training.
They set auspicious goals that tend to elevate the risk of illness and injury and can ultimately take the joy out of preparing for what should be a peak experience.


In Impoverished Guyana, Voting Is Sham
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chronicle
LEAD: New Mexico author TONY HILLERMAN said he is disappointed that an Indian was not chosen to play the leading role of a Navajo police officer in a ROBERT REDFORD movie based on Mr.
Hillerman's novel, ''The Dark Wind,'' but there is little he can do about it and he does not fault Mr.
Redford.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Saturday about Kuwait's capital under Iraqi occupation misidentified the deputy chief of mission at the United States Embassy.


Hard-Hit Key West Combats AIDS With Community Effort
LEAD: The memorial service for James Frederick Kopenhoefer in a small church here recently was filled with musical laments, loving remembrances by close friends, a few rueful laughs and many tears.


Scandalous, the Goings-On in the Wren House!
LEAD: To the Editor:


Eyes of Oilers Are Upon Taylor
LEAD: The Houston Oilers have discussed a three-way trade involving their running back Alonzo Highsmith and the linebackers Jesse Solomon of the Dallas Cowboys and Lawrence Taylor of the Giants, The Houston Chronicle reported today.


Uphill Test Is Predicted For the Dollar
LEAD: Autumn has often been the cruelest season for the American dollar.
And some troubling signs exist that it may decline farther this fall than many analysts have predicted.


Official Quits Italian Concern
LEAD: The top executive of the Italian chemicals company Enimont S.p.A. said last week that he was resigning because the company was unmanageable.


Diana Goldberg Weds W.W. Hood 3d
LEAD: DIANA ADA GOLDBERG and WILLIAM WELLS HOOD 3D, 1990 graduates of the University of Virginia School of Law, were married yesterday at the Southern Vermont Art Center in Manchester.
Rabbi James Glazier officiated.
The bride, 25 years old, is keeping her name.
The daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Theodore H. Goldberg of Harrington Park, N.J., she graduated from the Brearley School and Columbia University.


For Less Lucky Families, Hope Must Spring a While Longer
LEAD: While some families across the country were receiving the good news yesterday that their relatives were free from Iraq and Kuwait, many more received bad news in the form of no news at all.


Investment Firm Bankrupt
LEAD: An investment firm that had losses of more than $100 million from bad trading has filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection from creditors.
Hedged-Investments Associates Inc. made the filing last week in the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Denver.
The Aeroturbine Energy Corporation, a subsidiary, also filed for protection from creditors.


Margo Paz and Barry Delman Married
LEAD: MARGARETTE ANN PAZ, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Oded Paz of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., was married yesterday to BARRY CRAIG DELMAN, a son of Dorothy Delman of Island Park, L.I., and Jerry Delman of Springfield, Mo.
Rabbi Shlomo Blickstein officiated at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.


At Bard, Seeing Art for More Than Meets the Eye
LEAD: An arts center that will combine a gallery of late-20th-century art and graduate and postgraduate study programs is being established at Bard College in this Hudson River community.


Gayle Shapiro Weds Larry Wieseneck
LEAD: GAYLE ROSLYN SHAPIRO, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy L. Shapiro of West Orange, N.J., was married last evening to LARRY SCOTT WIESENECK, a son of Mrs.
Milton Levenberg of New Milford, N.J., and the late Norman H. Wieseneck.
Rabbis Merrill Shapiro, an uncle of the bride, and Alan Silverstein officiated, assisted by Cantor Joel Caplan, at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L


Nell Zampa Weds Samuel Hooker
LEAD: NELL ROSE ZAMPA, a daughter of Mrs.
Gino Zampa of West Haven, Conn., and the late Mr.
Zampa, was married yesterday to SAMUEL HOOKER, the son of Dr.
Joan F. Hooker of Brooklyn and the late Arthur B. Hooker.
The Rev.
F.
Goldwaithe Sherrill 2d performed the Episcopal ceremony at Grace Church Brooklyn


Amy Clyde Wed To Peter Kerr
LEAD: AMY ELIZABETH CLYDE, the daughter of John J. Clyde of Oakland, Calif., and Ralda Sullivan of Berkeley, Calif., was married yesterday to PETER KERR, a son of Dr.
Eugene Kerr and Dr.
Josephine Kerr Hodara, both of New York.
Rabbi Gary Tischkoff officiated at the Women's Faculty Club of the University of California at Berkeley, where the bride's mother is a lecturer in writing and speech.


Kazan Journal;   Yeltsin's Response to the Separatists: Feel Free
LEAD: In combating the sundering force of ethnic separatism, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has so far tried troops, economic sanctions, televised appeals and negotiations to hold the Soviet Union together.


Providence Journal;   Return Of a Felon Who Once Was Mayor
LEAD: Elected the first Republican Mayor of Providence since 1940, Vincent A. Cianci Jr. presided over this city for a decade but resigned in 1984 after pleading no contest to assault charges.


No Headline
LEAD: Because of holiday production requirements, The Times is printed today in two sections.


As 700 Hostages Fly to Freedom, There Is Relief but Little Rejoicing
LEAD: With weary relief but abiding fear for the husbands and fathers left behind, 47 Americans arrived here today as part of the release of 700 foreign hostages by Iraq's President Saddam Hussein.


In Brooklyn, Harkening To the Steel-Drum Beat
LEAD: ''A lot of people still think they're garbage cans, but to us they're instruments in an orchestra,'' Ben Flores said as his band members beat out rhythms on a row of steel drums near the Brooklyn Museum.


P.L.O. Militant Reportedly Leaves Syria for Iraq
LEAD: The radical Palestinian leader, Dr.
George Habash, has cut his ties to Syria and moved his base to Baghdad because of Syria's opposition to Iraq in the Persian Gulf crisis, Palestinian informants said today.


Immigration Bill Adds Few Skilled Workers;   Unskilled Also Needed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Oilers Achieve Something Cowboys Can't
LEAD: The two Texas professional football teams are delighted they can start Monday with 0-0 regular season records.


New Jersey Spending Law Alarms Cities
LEAD: A toughened state law restricting local spending has left the mayors and budget officials of New Jersey's cities and suburbs resentful and alarmed about the potential for deep cuts in municipal services.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
W.
R.
Berkley Corp., Greenwich, Conn., an insurance holding company, appointed Gordon A. Ennis senior vice president of insurance services.
He succeeds Barry J. Gilway, who resigned.


As the Need for Harmony Grows, Labor Talks Lose Stridency
LEAD: Managers helping the union prepare for a Labor Day parade.
Contract negotiations that provoke more yawns than threats.


Baseball;   Roger Clemens: He's Just the Same, And He's Better
LEAD: Some things never change: the boyish looks, the quiet manner, the imposing way he stands on the mound, leaning forward and peering toward home and somehow seeming in control of every moment.
In many ways, Roger Clemens is the same now as he has always been, except, perhaps, that he is better.


Hopes Fade as Output Of Oil Lags in China
LEAD: Miles off the coast in the South China Sea, a consortium that includes the Chevron Corporation and Texaco Inc. is preparing to pump up a tiny trickle of China's petroleum reserves this month, the only results of a long-cherished dream that Americans and Chinese would work together to make China a prominent oil producer.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Oil Jolt


West African Force in Liberia Battles Insurgents at Airport
LEAD: A West African peacekeeping force fought pitched battles over the weekend with Liberia's main rebel movement at an airport here as thousands of civilians tried to flee.


Tennessee Has High Hopes
LEAD: After opening with a 31-31 tie against Colorado a week ago, Tennessee of the Southeastern Conference routed Pacific, 55-7, in Knoxville, Tenn.


Dr. Newman Weds Dr. Lawrence Afrin
LEAD: Dr.
JILL NINA NEWMAN, the daughter of Mrs.
Morris Rosenfeld of New City, N.Y., and the late Edward Newman, was married yesterday to Dr.
LAWRENCE BRIAN AFRIN, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Afrin of Hanahan, S.C.
Rabbi William Rosenthall performed the ceremony at Beth Elohim Synagogue in Charleston, S


Julie Farkas Wed To Seth Goldman
LEAD: JULIE FARKAS and SETH GOLDMAN were married yesterday at the Wellesley (Mass.) College Club by Rabbi Ronald Weiss.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ray Farkas of Alexandria, Va.
Mr.
Goldman is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marshall Goldman of Wellesley.
Miss Farkas, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia.


Books of The Times;   The Story of Ted Turner and CNN
LEAD:
The Inside Story.
By Hank Whittemore
308 pages. Little, Brown. $19.95.


Washington's Mood Worries Detroit
LEAD: As fuel prices climb, a jittery auto industry is watching how lawmakers in Washington react.


Phillips Loses Round in Court
LEAD: A Broward County judge temporarily ordered the Phillips Petroleum Company to stop a pricing practice that is said to favor company-owned gasoline stations over independent dealers, the attorney general's office said last week.


IRAQIS ARE LIMITING PURCHASE OF FOOD
LEAD: As a result of economic pressure caused by the United Nations sanctions against Iraq, this country has begun to limit consumer purchases of basic food, a Government official said today.
He added defiantly that Iraq would bow to no power, ''even if we have to eat mud.''


Imbalances in Trade
LEAD: The United States ran up a deficit of $929.1 million in trade with China and Eastern Europe in the first quarter of 1990 in contrast with a surplus in the corresponding period of 1989, the Government said last week.
The deficit resulted from a drop in exports from $3.2 billion to $2.7 billion, mainly because of lower grain shipments, while imports grew from $2.8 billion to $3.7 billion, largely because of an increase in manufactured goods from China, the International Trade Commission said.


Telescope Repaired, Shuttle Is Scheduled To Fly on Thursday
LEAD: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration corrected communications problems with the X-ray telescope aboard the shuttle Columbia today, clearing the way for a third launching attempt on Thursday.


Argentine Oil Leases
LEAD: President Carlos Saul Menem of Argentina has signed contracts leasing secondary oilfields to private companies, newspapers reported on Friday.
The Government accepted 107 offers totaling $260 million from 25 companies.
More than two dozen local and foreign companies bid on the fields, which for decades have been controled by Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales, the state oil company.


Pirates Hang On To Edge Astros
LEAD: John Smiley held the Astros hitless for five and one-third innings and Jeff King hit a three-run homer today as the Pittsburgh Pirates scored a 7-6 victory over Houston.


Question Box
LEAD:
Off With a Blast


Immigration Bill Adds Few Skilled Workers
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Troops Are in the Desert, And in More Ways Than One
LEAD: At an airfield here for Marine Corps helicopters, the marines are trying to pass the time by holding a contest to name the base.


Steel Unit Of USX For Sale
LEAD: Three months after the USX Corporation fended off Carl C. Icahn's efforts to have the company sell its steel business, its chairman is apparently planning to do just that.


Jane E. Lidsky Is Wed to Jeffrey Gray
LEAD: JANE ELIZABETH LIDSKY, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence M. Lidsky of Newton, Mass., was married yesterday to JEFFREY ALLYN GRAY, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth F. Gray of Walpole, Mass.
Rabbi Albert Ginsberg and the Rev.
Nicholas C. Ciccone, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Massachussetts Institute of Technology Chapel in Cambridge, Mass.


Suzanne Lynn Nachman Is Married
LEAD: SUZANNE LYNN NACHMAN, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Nachman Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to DAVID MERCADO, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Mercado of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Melvin Hawthorne, a United Nations chaplain, performed the ceremony at the James Burden Mansion in New York.


Endowment Prepares to Shortchange Artists
LEAD: To the Editor:


Weicker Donates Disputed Funds
LEAD: Lowell P. Weicker, the independent gubernatorial candidate, announced late Saturday that he would donate $11,634 left over from his 1988 Senate campaign to charity.
He acted after a Democratic opponent had charged that it was improper for him to have kept the money.


From Mecca to Minnesota
LEAD: Islam arrived in the United States along with immigrants from the Ottoman Empire at the turn of the century.
But the Muslim population began to increase significantly only with the arrival of large numbers of students from the Muslim countries in the 1960's.


Miss Kalmanson Wed to B.A. Epstein
LEAD: The Civic Center Synagogue in Manhattan was the setting yesterday for the wedding of HELENE M. KALMANSON, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin Kalmanson of West Hempstead, L.I., to BRAD A. EPSTEIN, a son of Dr.
Raymond D. Epstein of Deerfield Beach, Fla., and the late Frances Grashow Epstein.
Rabbi Harold


In Time of Uncertainty, Israel Museum Rejoices
LEAD: Despite the threat of war and an avalanche of cancellations from European and American guests, the Israel Museum is proceeding with celebrations of its 25th anniversary Monday and the opening of the Nathan Cummings 20th-Century Art Building, a new wing that will house special exhibitions and works from the permanent collection.


Police Say Messages Link Florida Slayings
LEAD: Investigators said today that they had found ''messages of some importance'' that would tie all five of the grisly knife slayings here to a single killer.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/2-7


Results Plus
LEAD:
Cycling
Belgian Takes Title: Rudy Dhaenens of Belgium, who finished only 42d in this year's Tour de France, beat some of the best riders in the world - including the Tour de France winner, Greg LeMond - and became the 1990 world cycling champion yesterday.
Dhaenens won the final race of the two-week world championships in Utsunomiya, Japan, held on a circuit that went through hills and rice paddies on the outskirts of the city.


Uninsured Drivers Create Other Kinds of Wreckage
LEAD: Growing numbers of uninsured drivers are causing serious accidents, pushing up insurance rates and walking away from the responsibility to reimburse their victims.


Surging Mets Make It 6 Straight
LEAD: Six straight triumphs.
Thirty-eight runs.
A sweep of four games from the San Francisco Giants for the first time in the organization's 29 seasons of existence.
A leap of more than three games, into first place in the National League East.
For the Mets, the numbers were impressive.
And the question was obvious:


6,000 U.S. Muslims Meet; The Enemy: Stereotypes
LEAD: Over the hum of the crowd comes a loudspeaker's blare with the Arabic greeting ''Ahsalam Aleikum'' and then a message in English: ''Miriam Hijazi, your father needs the keys to the car.
Please meet him at the registration desk.''


West in Action
LEAD: Joe West figured the best way not to be part of a fight was to stop one from breaking out.


Tax Agreement For Newhouses
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service and the Newhouse family reached an agreement last week that ends an 11-year $1 billion dispute, The Star-Ledger in Newark, a Newhouse paper, reported Saturday.
The settlement allows the


U.N. CHIEF SAYS HIS TALKS FAILED AND LOOKS TO U.S.-SOVIET EFFORT
LEAD: The United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, said today that two days of talks here with the Iraqi Foreign Minister had failed to produce any concessions from Baghdad on its occupation of Kuwait or on the policy of holding an estimated 10,000 Westerners as hostages.


In Rising Debate on Poverty, The Question: Who Is Poor?
LEAD: Caroline Carter, a 30-year-old Milwaukee widow with two teen-age children, earns about $13,800 a year.
Is she poor?


Japan Sending Vehicles and Housing for Military Effort in Gulf
LEAD: Japanese officials, moving to counter criticism that the country has been slow to aid the military buildup in the Middle East, said today that hundreds of off-road vehicles, generators, housing units and other items would be shipped shortly for use by armed forces stationed in Saudi Arabia.


Echoes of an Era
LEAD: IN the late 1960's and early 1970's, the Sports Car Club of America's Trans-Am racing series was one of the great collections of talent and machinery.


Police Cancel March by Klan
LEAD: Amid strong counterprotests, the police canceled a march that was planned today in downtown Washington by Ku Klux Klan members.
But 40 Klansmen in robes and hoods were allowed to hold a rally on the Capitol grounds.
One arrest was made for inciting to riot, and several injuries, all among protesters, were reported.


Help Against the Uninsured
LEAD: Drivers can protect themselves in the event of an accident involving an uninsured or underinsured motorist by buying specific insurance for those risks.
Several states, including New York, require motorists to carry such insurance.


Ms. Epstein Wed To M.S. Gloger
LEAD: ELLEN BETH EPSTEIN, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard N. Epstein of Washington Crossing, Pa., was married yesterday to DR.
MARK STEVEN GLOGER, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Gloger of Pikesville, Md.
Rabbi Elliot Strom performed the ceremony, assisted by Cantor Mark Elson, at Glen Foerd on the Delaware in Torresdale,


No Tunnel of Love
LEAD: WHEN Harold Ballard owned the Toronto hockey team, he lived in an apartment inside Maple Leaf Gardens and issued from it edicts of Steinbrennerian ferocity: against coaches, players, reporters, fans, Soviet citizens, just about anyone.


Khmer Rouge Move Their Refugees
LEAD: In the last six months, as they have made advances against the Phnom Penh Government, the Khmer Rouge have moved at least 60,000 Cambodian refugees under its control over the Thai border into malarial ''liberated zones'' in Cambodia, where there are few health services and little food or shelter, United Nations and relief officials say.


Savings Units' Boards Hurt by U.S. Suits
LEAD: A blizzard of negligence lawsuits filed by Federal regulators against the outside directors of failed financial institutions is alarming bankers, who say the trend is inhibiting their recruiting of qualified board members.


Karen Levy Wed To Michael Gooen
LEAD: KAREN J. LEVY, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert I. Levy of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to MICHAEL N. GOOEN, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Gooen of Somerset, N.J.
Rabbi Martin Schlussel officiated at Temple Sharey Tefilo-Israel in South Orange, N.J.


Ms. Dutton Weds Mark Cunneen
LEAD: STACY MARIA DUTTON, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick G. Dutton of Washington, was married yesterday to MARK JAMES CUNNEEN, a son of Robert J. Cunneen of Phoenix and Elizabeth W. Cunneen of Meriden, Conn.
The Rev.
Gordon M. Forbes, a United Church of Christ minister, and the Rev.
Kenneth H. Daugherty, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Westmoreland Congregational Church in


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Lawmakers Touring Persian Gulf Stressing Sanctions Over Combat
LEAD: Members of Congress who toured Saudi Arabia over the weekend said today that they were willing to wait for the economic sanctions against Iraq to have an effect, and they acknowledged that even an ''airtight'' blockade could take months to bring Baghdad's economy to its knees.


Sports People: Hockey;   Coffey Rejects Pact
LEAD: The all-star defenseman, Paul Coffey, has rejected the Pittsburgh Penguins' reported $5 million offer over five years.
Coffey, in the option year of a contract that will pay him $450,000 this season, was advised by his agent, Tom Reich, to report to training camp Friday.


Many Police Forces Rearm To Counter Criminals' Guns
LEAD: Quietly, and with surprisingly little public debate despite some developing doubts, many police departments are stepping up their side of the arms race with criminals, switching their standard weapons from the traditional .38-caliber revolver to the high-capacity 9-millimeter semiautomatic.


New York Leads Way On Solid Waste
LEAD: To the Editor:


Instead of a Dam, a Delaware River Ghost Town
LEAD: In the still of late summer, with thunderclouds slouching over the ridge, a gray fox stepped across Main Street and then stopped, surprised by a sight as rare in Walpack as the fox itself: people.


Action, Cameras in Federal Courts
LEAD: Ever since the sensational coverage of the Lindbergh kidnapping trial in 1935, Federal courtrooms have been off limits to cameras and microphones.
Now a panel of judges recommends an experiment that would open some civil trials to television and radio coverage.
It's a welcome step that merits quick approval.


Light and Sleep
LEAD: Seeing the light may help people who are late to bed and late to rise, researchers say.


S.&amp; L. Crimes Drawing Jail Terms
LEAD: Virtually all those convicted of savings and loan fraud are first-time offenders, but they are getting harsher prison sentences than the typical white-collar criminal, according to Justice Department figures.


A Major Studio Plans to Test the Rating System
LEAD: In the last six months, the Motion Picture Association of America has given X ratings to half a dozen independent or foreign films, sparking a series of protests about the 22-year-old rating system.
Now, a film from a major studio has been thrust into the controversy.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the days that major economic indicators are scheduled to be released this week.
Tuesday
Construction Spending...July
Wednesday
New-Car Sales...Aug
Thursday
None
Friday
Consumer Borrowing...July
Employment...Aug.


Amy Messer Married To Michael Jay Wildes
LEAD: AMY MICHELLE MESSER, a student at the Cardozo Law School, was married yesterday to MICHAEL JAY WILDES, a graduate of the law school who is an assistant United States Attorney in Brooklyn.
Rabbi Joseph Grunblatt officiated at the New York Hilton.


AIDS, She Teaches, Doesn't Discriminate
LEAD: To the Editor:


Penny Collender Weds Ross Kapilian
LEAD: Congregation Beth Torah in Brooklyn was the setting yesterday for the wedding of PENNY LORI COLLENDER, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Collender of New York, to ROSS ANDREW KAPILIAN, a son of Gertrude Kapilian of New York and the late Philip Kapilian.
Rabbi Sidney Lieberman, a cousin of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Some Airlines Start to Shy Away From the Gulf
LEAD: Fearful of being caught in a crossfire should fighting break out in the Persian Gulf, some airlines are rerouting planes and cutting the number of flights to gulf countries.


Baseball;   Winfield Gets Cheers; None Left for Yankees
LEAD: Dave Winfield returned to the Bronx yesterday afternoon like some kind of conquering hero.
The return may not have had much sentimentality to it, but it had emotion.


Talking Business; with Weinberg of Hartmarx;   Merging of Roles Seen in Retailing
LEAD: The Hartmarx Corporation is divesting itself of 65 men's wear stores that it considers marginal, but it remains committed to the concept of dual distribution, in which a manufacturer also owns and operates retail stores.
It will still operate more than 400 stores after the closings.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Back Home After Detention in Iraq


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''They took to the road, with their meager baggage, without knowing where they were going, without realizing that they were to become the prisoners of the desert.''
- Dr.
Xavier Emmanuelli, president of Doctors Without Borders, on Asian refugees from Kuwait.
[A9:2.]


Borrowing Is Resumed By Mexico
LEAD: With an agreement in place that reduces payments on Mexico's old foreign bank debt, the Mexican Government is again borrowing overseas for new projects - becoming once more a nation that foreign investors deem creditworthy.


Terms of Subaru Deal
LEAD: Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd. said last week that Subaru of America Inc. shareholders would receive a payment of $9 in cash for each share as part of the merger that was completed Friday.
The merger will make Subaru of America a wholly owned subsidiary of Fuji, the Japanese manufacturer that builds Subaru cars.


Hugh Owens, 80, Dies; Ex-Member of S.E.C.
LEAD: Hugh F. Owens, a former member of the Securities and Exchange Commission who served for a time as its acting chairman, died Saturday at a nursing home in Oklahoma City.
He was 80 years old.


THE BREAD SHELVES IN MOSCOW SHOPS SUDDENLY GO BARE
LEAD: Moscow consumers today faced a new and ultimate insult, a bread shortage, as the city's bakeries failed before the appetites of residents flooding back into the city from their annual August vacations.


After 4,000 Years, Medical Science Considers Garlic
LEAD: CAN a clove or two of garlic a day keep the doctor away?
After 4,000 years of folklore extolling garlic as a preserver and restorer of health and youth, modern scientists have begun to define the complex condiment's medically important effects and substantiate several of its reputed benefits.


BRIEFS
LEAD: Common Stock


Buttons That Catch The Eye
LEAD: Quick perusal of the fall fashion offerings at New York stores reveals the usual profusion of women's suits and jackets, cut more or less in two styles: curvy at the waist, a la Mugler, Ungaro and Lagerfeld, or boxy and straight, like those of American designers.
The eyes could glaze over if it weren't for little bursts of sparkle.


Beijing Journal;   A Mystical Art, but Can It Make the Lame Walk?
LEAD: There was not much to be seen in the old man's ears except a bit of wax, but Li Hanxiang peered inside and gave the man a diagnosis of his ailments and those of his wife as well.


Body Found at Coney Island
LEAD: The body of an unidentified man in his 50's who appeared to have been beaten in the face with a blunt weapon was found beneath the boardwalk in the Coney Island section of Brooklyn yesterday morning, the police said.
A police spokeswoman, Officer Kim Royster, said the body, found at about 7 A.M. at West 16th Street, appeared to be that of a Hispanic man.


Countdown Begins for Long-Delayed Shuttle
LEAD: NASA's third countdown for the space shuttle Columbia and its astronomy mission proceeded uninterrupted today as its astronauts waited patiently, hoping for a liftoff on Thursday.


Manila Tariff Move Blocked
LEAD: Big business has blocked a Government plan for major tariff changes in the Philippines.


The Clothes of Irie: Stylish but Not Stuffy
LEAD: Hot does not have to be haute.
Aside from the expense involved, wearing the latest designer fashions can be a bit like putting on a sandwich board for a particular look, whether it's Pucci or Chanel.
But there are a few designers, some of them not so well-known, who allow women to look up-to-date without being too fashion-y.


Bridge
LEAD: Two American experts who have won world titles on previous occasions combined to capture the World Mixed Pairs championship here Sunday.
Peter Weichsel of Encinitas, Calif., a Bermuda Bowl winner in 1983, and Juanita Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y., a Venice Trophy winner in 1987, finished strongly.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Tourist Killed in Subway
A Utah man was stabbed to death in a Manhattan subway station fighting off youths who had just robbed and attacked his parents.
Page B1.
Pinch on Social Programs
Social service programs around the country are bearing the brunt of budget tightening as states grapple with a faltering economy.


Baseball;   Mets Stretch Streak to 7 Victories
LEAD: After all the intrigue and the deadline trades and the flood of new arrivals of the last few days, the Mets went out today and won their seventh straight game and did it the old-fashioned way: with Dwight Gooden pitching scoreless ball for seven sizzling innings while the offense was smacking the St.


Washington at Work;   AIDS Advocates Are Angry at U.S. But Its Research Chief Wins Respect
LEAD: One of the striking moments in the politics of AIDS came three months ago in San Francisco, when the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, had his speech to the Sixth International Conference on AIDS drowned out by boos and catcalls.


K.G.B. Veteran Wins Election To Seat in Soviet Parliament
LEAD: A former general of the K.G.B. who was dismissed after accusing the security agency of continued abuses has been elected to the Soviet Parliament, Tass reported today.


Paul J. McCluskey, Publisher, 48
LEAD: Paul J. McCluskey, a vice president of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, who headed the book publisher's school department, died on Thursday at his home in Orlando, Fla., at the age of 48.


Bird Songs Offer Clues To Habitats
LEAD: MONITORING birds and bird songs is a quick and inexpensive way to estimate ecological damage to waterways and surrounding forests, researchers at Pennsylvania State University say.


Another Wake-Up Call: Save Energy
LEAD: When President Bush was asked two weeks ago in Kennebunkport whether he might use the crisis in the Persian Gulf to ask Americans to curb their appetite for oil, he replied: ''I call upon Americans to conserve.'' In case anyone missed the stirring resonance of that remark, he addressed the same question again on Thursday, urging everyone to ''act responsibly.


Umpires and a Lawsuit On Vincent's Daybook
LEAD: While Commissioner Fay Vincent will try today to resolve the dispute between Bill White, the National League president, and the league's umpires, he will also be the target of a lawsuit seeking to block a hearing before him regarding a high-ranking Yankee executive.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   WIDE AIR DEPLOYMENT BY U.S. IS REPORTED IN GULF NATIONS; IRAQ BARS 3 HOSTAGE FLIGHTS
LEAD: The United States has secretly deployed combat aircraft in several Persian Gulf nations to help defend Saudi Arabia, American and Saudi officials say.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Asian Refugees From Kuwait Wait in Jordan Desert Camps
LEAD: A desperate encampment of at least 70,000 Asian refugees from Kuwait has sprung up in the last three weeks here on a bleak desert strip on the Iraqi-Jordanian border.


Results Plus
LEAD:
GOLF
Daniel Takes Rail Classic
Beth Daniel shot a five-under-par 67 yesterday and beat Susan Sanders by three shots in Springfield, Ill., for her second consecutive Rail Charity Classic title and her fourth victory in the last five Ladies Professional Golf Association tournaments.
Daniels's $45,000 share of the $300,000 purse increased her earnings for the year to a record $658,782.


Nancy Sutton, 67, Dies; Retired Ad Executive
LEAD: Nancy Sutton, a retired advertising executive, died on Friday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 67 years old.


Chrysler's Incentives
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation said last week that it would continue its incentive programs for a wide variety of its 1991 cars and light trucks.
The sales incentives, with cash rebates ranging from $500 to $1,000, are available on all domestically produced vehicles except for mini-vans, convertibles, standard-size vans and wagons.


Jennifer G. Bayer Wed To Daniel K. Gamulka
LEAD: JENNIFER GISELLE BAYER, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham Bayer of New York, was married last evening to DANIEL KENNETH GAMULKA, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Gamulka of Montreal.
Rabbi Jacob J. Shachter performed the ceremony at the Park East Synagogue in Manhattan.


Reporter's Notebook;   How a Vacation Helps Even a Crisis President
LEAD: In the end, George Bush actually may have been having fun on his vacation.


Tennis;   Flashily and Briskly, Graf Crushes Capriati, And Arduously, Becker Outgames Cahill
LEAD: The defending champions of the United States Open had nothing in common yesterday as they went about the business of fulfilling expectations both internal and external regarding their continued invincibility here.


Management Shifted At Premark Division
LEAD: In a surprise management change, Premark International Inc., the maker of Tupperware containers, announced on Friday that James M. Ringler, executive vice president, had taken on the additional role of president of the company's food equipment group.
He replaced Robert J. M. Fisher, who left the company to pursue other interests.


Mystery Stories Are Novelist's Route To Moral Questions
LEAD: Crime is the high road to philosophy for Walter Mosley.
In fact, what draws him to write mysteries is the chance to attack moral questions, and the novel that has most affected his writing and his outlook is not a crime story but ''The Stranger'' by the French existentialist Albert Camus.


Review/Television;   A System With Criminals But Not Much Justice
LEAD: For Ted Koppel, it's trouble spot after trouble spot.
Just the other day he was in Baghdad; this week he's at the Port Authority Bus Terminal in New York City and in courtrooms clogged with cases of low-level drug sellers and couriers. ''The Koppel Report: Drugs, Crime and Doing Time,'' at 10 P.M.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Sept. 4, 1990:
TUESDAY
Albertsons Inc.
Cincinnati Bell
Davis Wtr &amp; Waste
Premier Indl Corp.
WEDNESDAY
Browning-Ferris Inds
First UN Real Estate
Handleman Co.
Helmerich &amp; Payne
LG&amp;E Energy Corp.
Louisville Gas &amp; Elec.


A Script-Reader's Digest
LEAD: Some of the script syopses featured in ''The Hollywood Producers Story Directory,'' Volume II.
The author's name follows the synopsis.
Call Me Softly
When handsom Dirk Curtius, a young manipulative aerobic instructor, announces to his primarily middle-aged group that he is going to get married to a wealthy lady and leave the nasty world of working far behind, several of his ardent female fans become very upset.


GTE-Thorn Talks End
LEAD: The GTE Corporation and Thorn EMI P.L.C. said yesterday that they had ended negotiations for GTE to buy Thorn's lighting business.
GTE and the British company were unable to agree on terms for the deal, which would have made GTE the second-largest lighting company in the world, after Phillips of the


Metro Datelines;   S.I. Cabby Is Shot; Motive Is a Mystery
LEAD: A livery-cab driver was shot and critically wounded late Sunday, the first such incident on Staten Island in this year's series of shootings of cabbies.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Gulf Price Tag for Egypt: $2 Billion Loss to Economy
LEAD: The Persian Gulf crisis will cost Egypt's already shaky economy $2 billion in the next year, Government officials here estimate, mostly in the lost wages of Egyptian workers in Iraq and Kuwait who had supported millions of people here.


4 Companies Order $13.45 Billion in Aircraft
LEAD: Four companies, including the parent of Northwest Airlines, today announced separate deals to buy as many as 116 airliners worth as much as $13.45 billion.


Business People;   Son of Ex-Chairman To Take Over at Tultex
LEAD: On Jan. 1, the Tultex Corporation will find a familiar name at the helm.
John M. Franck will become chairman and chief executive of the sporting wear company that William F. Franck, his father, headed from 1953 to 1988.


Pope Urges Africans Not to Give Up Hope


Florida St. to A.C.C.?
LEAD: Florida State might like to become a member of the Atlantic Coast Conference, but first the A.C.C. has to decide whether it wants to expand.


Horse Racing;   Housebuster and Summer Squall Win Easily, but Unbridled Loses
LEAD: Housebuster and Summer Squall furthered their quests for the 3-year-old championship by scoring easy stakes victories yesterday, but Unbridled took a small step backward when he was beaten by his own stablemate as he tried the grass for the first time.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Crown Cork and Seal Co., Philadelphia, appointed Mark W. Hartman president of its international division.
Michael J. McKenna was named president of the North American division.


A Quiz: Choose The Right Answer
LEAD: MULTIPLE-CHOICE questions are probably not the best way to rate a learner's progress.
The person taking the test may be able to recognize the right answer when it's among the choices without being able to come up with it independently.
Still, the difficulty of administering and scoring tests makes multiple-choice quizzes a practical necessity in many situations.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Kuwaiti Tells of Guerrilla Movement
LEAD: Smuggling guns and munitions by camel and by car across the desert from Saudi Arabia, the growing armed resistance to Iraq's occupation of Kuwait has built a lifeline to the outside world, a Kuwaiti who described himself as a guerrilla leader said today.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-10
Combat aircraft have been deployed secretly by the United States in Persian Gulf nations to help defend Saudi Arabia, American and Saudi officials say.
Page A1


Confrontation in the Gulf;   P.L.O., Facing Quandary, Says It Is Reweaving Arab Support
LEAD: Leaders of the Palestine Liberation Organization say that after weeks of being squeezed between their Iraqi supporters and Saudi financiers in the Persian Gulf crisis, they have managed to restitch much of their Arab support.


On Horse Racing;   A Holiday for Baseball, Backyards and Betting
LEAD: To millions of Americans, Labor Day means a ball game, the beach or a backyard barbecue, but for about half a million others, it means betting on a horse race.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. Jet Crashes; No Injuries
LEAD: An Air Force F-16 involved in the American buildup in the Gulf crashed today in the southern Arabian peninsula during a training mission, the Pentagon said.
A spokesman said the pilot ejected and was unhurt in the accident.


Eugene Moskowitz, 78, Rehabilitation Expert
LEAD: Dr.
Eugene Moskowitz, a specialist in physical medicine and rehabilitation, died on Saturday at Sharon Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 78 years old and lived in Salisbury, Conn.


Are Extra Overtime Police Patrols Preventing Crime?
LEAD: He saw the man turn the corner and then he noticed the bulge of a gun.


Markets Closed For Holiday
LEAD: The nation's stock, bond and commodity markets were closed yesterday in observance of the Labor Day holiday.
Government offices and most banks were also closed.


Sculptures Are Changing the Look of Barcelona
LEAD: In the last decade Barcelona has erected nearly 35 monumental public sculptures, and more are going up in what many sculptors, dealers and critics say is the most ambitious program of its kind in the world.


Review/Dance;   Alan Good Explores Space And Time
LEAD: ''I want more,'' one member of the audience said as she left the Merce Cunningham Studio on Friday night after a performance by Alan Good.
Mr.
Good is probably best known as a dancer with the Cunningham company.
But the two pieces he presented suggested considerable potential as a choreographer.


Market Place;   Prime Rate Funds Difficult to Price
LEAD: EXECUTIVES at some of the increasingly popular class of mutual funds known as prime rate funds are struggling to determine daily prices for their portfolios.
These mutual funds invest in senior bank loans that rarely trade in any public market, and calculating their daily value is ''like getting a price on a 'junk bond' that doesn't trade,'' said Christopher L.


A Louder, Fiercer Connecticut Battle for Governor Forms
LEAD: United States Representative Bruce A. Morrison bounded down the middle of Route 25 in a pair of very white Footjoy tennis shoes, smiling and shouting to the people in their lawn chairs whenever the thunderous marching band ahead of him paused for breath.
That was not too often, but it was that sort of day.


Mobile Ice Mountains May Have Touched Off Ancient Climate Shifts
LEAD: IN a finding that could force a revision of ideas about how theearth's ancient climate system worked, scientists have concluded that the great North American ice sheets of the last 120,000 years behaved much more dynamically than has been thought, with towering mountains of ice migrating 600 miles or more across eastern Canada.


A. Reynolds Crane, Pathologist, 81
LEAD: A. Reynolds Crane, a pathologist and former president of the Philadelphia and Pennsylvania Medical Societies, died Wednesday at his home in Radnor, Pa.
He was 81 years old.
His family said he died of cancer.
Dr.
Crane was a senior member emeritus of the scientific staff of the Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia, which he joined in 1974 after serving as director of the Pennsylvania Hospital's Ayer Clinical


A. James Casner, 83, Harvard Law Professor
LEAD: A. James Casner, the Austin Wakeman Scott emeritus professor of law at Harvard Law School, died Friday.
He was 83 years old and lived in Nonquitt, South Dartmouth, and Cambridge, Mass.


Learning About Earth
LEAD: ALL too rarely a new program comes across our desk that lifts the standards for educational software to a higher level.
The latest to do so is Earthquest, for Apple Machintosh computers, at $79.95 from Earthquest Inc., Palo Alto, Calif., (415) 321-5838.


Careers;   Dual Majors Are Gaining Popularity
LEAD: IN an increasingly complex world, more students are considering whether to seek double majors at the undergraduate level.
These double degrees not only enhance their chances of getting a job but also serve as a springboard to double majors in graduate school.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
DNA in Baby Hair


Richer Nations Are Asked To Double Their Aid to Poor
LEAD: To combat the decline in living standards in the world's poorest nations, some third world and Western officials today called on the industrialized world to double its aid to poor nations.
The plea was made as a United Nations conference on helping the 41 least developed nations began.


Tennis;   Graf Gives Capriati a Quick Lesson on Playing at the Top
LEAD: Steffi Graf was playing in the sunny Stadium Court at the National Tennis Center to an empty house of some 20,000 seats, as if in a dream.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   15-Second Spots: Help or Hindrance?
LEAD: AS the use of 15-second commercials becomes more prevalant - they now represent about 40 percent of all television ads - many advertisers and agency executives have questioned the effectiveness of using so many short spots.
Some have also worried that the use of 15-second commercials could spiral out of control, creating a hopelessly glutted television advertising environment.


Korean Talks Starting With Expectations Low
LEAD: After more than a year of delays, recriminations and false starts, the Prime Minister of North Korea arrived here today with a group of delegates for the highest-level meeting with South Korea since the end of the Korean War in 1953.


Indians Hold Annual Gathering of Nations
LEAD: Thousands of Indians, including some from Mexico and Guatemala, gathered near here for a long weekend of dance, song and traditional rites at the American Indian Movement's 22d Annual Gathering of Nations.


Congress Returning to Its Tasks With No Sign of Budget Accord
LEAD: Lawmakers returning this week and next from a monthlong recess for the final stretch of the 101st Congress face an overwhelming agenda complicated by the Persian Gulf crisis and fears of a recession, which threaten to undermine efforts to reach an agreement on trimming the budget deficit.


Beauty Salon Videos on Hold
LEAD: Because of the weak advertising market, Murdoch Magazines has suspended indefinitely its plans to begin a commercially sponsored video service for hair salons, an executive overseeing the project said last week.


Chronicle
LEAD: Soviet missiles are to land in Brooklyn this morning.
The estimated time of arrival is 9 A.M. at the Red Hook Terminal.
To counter the six SS-20 missiles, two American Pershing missiles will be on hand.
And to neutralize the weapons, there will be St.
George on a horse, spearing the missiles.
Missiles, saint and horse are the elements of a 40-ton bronze sculpture, ''Good Defeats Evil,'' by ZURAB TSERETELI, winner of the Lenin Prize, the Soviet


Football;   Giants Release Morris
LEAD: He is their leading career rusher, a veteran of their Super Bowl triumph and proof that a little man can succeed in a big man's game.
He had a good training camp, and three weeks short of his 30th birthday he seems ready to play his ninth season of pro football.
He may, but not for the Giants.
Today, they dropped 13 players, and one of them was the 5-foot-7-inch Joe Morris.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Live Broadcast For Nail Polish
LEAD: A former Miss America, Kylene Barker Brandon, will polish her nails in front of millions of viewers during a rare live broadcast of a commercial.


Alexander's Refocuses on Retailing
LEAD: Alexander's Inc., the troubled 65-year-old department store chain, has been valued by its main owners in recent years more for the potential of its real estate than for its retailing business.


Grace Breslauer, Aviator Since 1930's
LEAD: Grace Koehler Breslauer, one of this country's first women aviators, died Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 85 years old.


Metro Datelines;   Stray Bullet Wounds Brooklyn Boy in Arm
LEAD: A 10-year-old Brooklyn boy was struck in the right shoulder by a stray bullet last night as he played near his Brownsville home, the police said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - ADDENDA;   People
LEAD: *
Phil Asche has been named director of advertising headquarters for Young &amp; Rubicam Inc.
He will be based in New York.


Big Science; Is It Worth the Price?;   Small-Scale Science Feels the Pinch From Big Projects
LEAD: WHILE big, flashy science projects get the bulk of public attention, small-scale science and the structure needed to support it have fallen into serious disrepair, prompting cries of alarm from researchers.
WHILE big, flashy science projects get the bulk of public attention, small-scale science and the structure needed to support it have fallen into serious disrepair, prompting cries of alarm from researchers.
Despite its name, small-scale basic research is the largest and most important part of the American scientific enterprise.
Financed largely by the Federal Government, it is done across the country by ranks of scientists, usually working alone or in small groups at universities, Federal laboratories and private research centers rather than by large teams working with giant machines and instruments.
More so than big science, its discoveries lie at the heart of the scientific adventure, nourishing the nation's intellectual life and economy.
Now, experts say, it is besieged by budgetary declines in some areas, increasing red tape, a general rise in the cost of doing research and growing fiscal competition with big projects.


Study Finds Wage Erosion
LEAD: American workers are earning less after inflation than they did a decade ago, while the gap between rich and poor has grown wider, according to a new study.


STRIKE PARALYZES YUGOSLAV REGION
LEAD: More than 100,000 striking ethnic Albanian workers shut down factories, offices, stores and schools throughout the Kosovo region of Yugoslavia today.


Global Warming Research Is Backed
LEAD: About $300 million a year in existing Federal energy research money should be diverted to projects that could help fight global warming, a panel of scientists says.


Immigrants Look Outside New York for Better Life
LEAD: For much of this century, blacks from the Caribbean have flocked to New York, creating a strong middle class and invigorating the city through their politics and culture.


Powerful Light Beam
LEAD: USING a relatively simple optical device, physicists at the University of Chicago say they have funneled sunlight striking Earth into the most highly intense beam of light ever recorded, even exceeding those found on the surface of the Sun.


Growing Fiscal Problems Put Squeeze on Social Programs in Many States
LEAD: Social service programs in states around the country are under growing financial stress as the states try to cope with their worst fiscal problems since the recession of the early 1980's.


Price of Oil Rises Abroad
LEAD: Oil prices rose today in London and Singapore as traders' hopes of a peaceful solution to the Persian Gulf crisis faded, oil traders said.


Baseball;   Thigpen Sets Record With 47th
LEAD: Bobby Thigpen set a major league record with his 47th save of the season as the Chicago White Sox beat the Kansas City Royals tonight, 4-2.
And Carlton Fisk extended his major league record for home runs by a catcher to 330 with a tie-breaking shot in the sixth inning.


Mexico's Ruling Party Acts to Curb the Power Brokers
LEAD: Facing growing pressure to loosen their party's tight authoritarian structure, delegates of the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party approved a series of measures today that are intended to weaken traditional party power brokers and increase democracy in the selection of party leaders and candidates.


Armed Mohawks Dig In and Vow to Resist Troops
LEAD: Mohawk Indians holed up around a drug and alcohol rehabilitation center and surrounded by some 400 Canadian Army soldiers spent today fortifying their positions and vowing to fight if the troops move toward them.


Kansas City Journal;   Coyotes Don't Know It, But Airport Isn't Prairie
LEAD: The numbers are small, perhaps only a family or two, but the coyotes that were in residence this summer on the vast grounds of Kansas City International Airport have stirred a big ruckus, heard from City Hall to Washington.


Lufthansa Sets Berlin Flights
LEAD: Barred since World War II from flying to Berlin, Lufthansa A.G., the West German airline, will resume flights next month, taking over routes from the Pan Am Corporation.


Martha J. Bell and George S. Shapiro Are Married
LEAD: MARTHA J. BELL, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fredric M. Bell of Bayonne, N.J., was married yesterday to GEORGE S. SHAPIRO, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Elliott S. Shapiro of New York.
Rabbi Michael Ehrlich, assisted by Cantor Robert Cohen, officiated at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center on Staten Island.


Viva l'Italia, Still Loving and Generous
LEAD: To the Editor:


Paperback Supermarket of Screenwriting
LEAD: Every month, thousands of unsolicited scripts land on the desks of movie and television studios and production companies here, sent by would-be screenwriters with visions of Hollywood gold and glory.
The quest for the Great American Novel, it would appear, has given way to dreams of the Great American


Plebiscite Is for Mainland Puerto Ricans Too
LEAD: To the Editor:


Unlocking the Secrets of a Microbe
LEAD: NO one knows where this particular microbe lurks in nature, how it is transmitted to humans or why it causes illness only in people with a faulty immune system.


Why Protect These 'Grandfathers'?
LEAD: It's only 1990, but many observers are already predicting an unusually high turnover in the House of Representatives in 1992.
The reason has nothing to do with great issues or emerging political trends.
It has to do with greed, and a scandalous little item called the ''grandfather clause.''


Hitachi in Pact With I.B.M.
LEAD: Hitachi Ltd. and the International Business Machines Corporation will jointly develop computer software for financial management and marketing, Hitachi announced here today.


Dollar Rises; Gold Is Up
LEAD: The dollar rose today against most leading foreign currencies, while gold prices were higher in thin trading.


Chronicle
LEAD: PRINCE CHARLES is recuperating from a second operation to repair the arm he broke in a fall at a polo match on June 28.
Because of the operation at the Queen's Medical Center in Nottingham on Saturday, he won't be able to attend the opening of a show of his lithographs and watercolor sketches in Salisbury, a historic town about 80 miles southwest of


Confrontation in the Gulf;   SOVIETS SAY CRISIS WON'T MAR U.S. TIE
LEAD: The Gorbachev Government insisted today that its improved relations with the United States were in no way undermined by the Bush Aministration's growing military buildup in the Persian Gulf.


Queries First, Aid Later For a County's Homeless
LEAD: Not long ago, people without a place to live in Westchester County could walk into a social-services office and, with little trouble, get a key and a ride to a modest motel.
Few questions were asked; little more aid was provided.
The homeless - 4,464 at last count -stayed in the motels for years at an annual cost of tens of millions of dollars.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - ADDENDA;   Miscellany
LEAD: *
A creative team from Wells, Rich, Greene, New York, won the grand prize in the Gannett outdoor group's ''Creative Challange.'' The company invited New York creative people to design billboards, and 120 groups from 8 agencies participated.
For their winning entry, a billboard for Oil of Olay, an art director, Ralph Yznaga, and a copywriter, Alison Grant, will receive trips to London.


Cambodia Agrees to Go to U.N. Peace Talks
LEAD: The Phnom Penh Government has formally agreed to attend talks on a United Nations plan for a Cambodian peace settlement scheduled to start Wednesday in Jakarta, Indonesia.
But in a bit of diplomatic gamesmanship, Prime Minister Hun Sen said in a letter this weekend that he would attend only if Prince Norodom


Football;   Highsmith Traded From Oilers to Cowboys
LEAD: Alonzo Highsmith went to Dallas and Joe Morris, Eric Wright, Keena Turner, Gary Hogeboom, Matt Bahr, Donald Igwebuike and Cris Carter went into limbo yesterday as National Football League teams cut down to the 47-man roster limit.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Evacuation of Hostages Is Stalled As Iraqis Prohibit Foreign Flights
LEAD: A handful of Western women and children detained in Iraq or Kuwait for weeks flew out of here today, but plans to evacuate hundreds more were complicated by the Iraqi Government's refusal to grant landing rights to planes from other nations.


Woman Recants Rape Charge
LEAD: A woman who falsely accused a man of rape apologized Sunday in court-ordered radio advertisements.
Elizabeth Irene Richardson, 24 years old, was ordered to buy radio and newspaper advertisements throughout Dawson County as part of her sentence for perjury after she was proved to have falsely accused Gary Nitsch, 44.


S.L. McCain Wed to Miss Dockray
LEAD: At the Church of the Presentation of the Blessed Virgin Mary in North Providence, R.I., KRISTEN ELLEN DOCKRAY, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Eugene Dockray of North Providence, was married yesterday to SCOTT LAMAR McCAIN, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Williamson McCain Jr. of Fairfield, Conn.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


Parading Into Fall to the Tempo of the Day
LEAD: Nothing was going to loosen his grip on his corner of the flag, not the blare of the trombones in front of him or the bullhorns behind.
Deadly serious business, this marching in the Labor Day Parade, and it was likely that Sal D'Anna, a member of the Iron Workers Union Local 361, hardly noticed the baby strollers and ice-cream vendors on Fifth


Iran-Contra Trial of Former C.I.A. Official to Begin
LEAD: Thomas G. Clines, a former official of the Central Intelligence Agency, goes on trial Tuesday in Federal court in Baltimore for his role in the Iran-contra affair.
He is charged with failing to report income he received from helping to ship arms to the Nicaraguan rebels.


U.S. to Sell Bills Today
LEAD: Treasury financings in this holiday-shortened week are confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.


Stanley Fafinski, 56, Engineer for the Army
LEAD: Stanley Fafinski, former chief of the Army engineering division in the New York District of the Army Corps of Engineers, died on Friday at Somerset Hospital in New Jersey.
He was 56 years old and lived in Basking Ridge, N.J., where he moved last year after having lived in Queens many years.


Stocks Quiet On Markets Overseas
LEAD: Trading was light in the world's leading stock markets yesterday and in Tokyo today.
Markets in the United States were closed in observance of the Labor Day holiday, and there was little sentiment to buy in other markets after weekend talks between the United Nations Secretary General and Iraq's Foreign Minister ended without progress toward resolving the Persian


Chess
LEAD: Can a practicing grandmaster simultaneously function as an administrator?
We will have the answer soon because Maxim Dlugy, a grandmaster from Englewood, N.J., was elected president of the United States Chess Federation at the organization's annual meeting, held this year in Jacksonville, Fla., Aug.


Books of The Times Encounters Odd and Normal at Once
LEAD:
A Relative Stranger
By Charles Baxter
223 pages. W. W. Norton. $17.95.


Tennessee's Top Runner Out With Knee Injury
LEAD: The University of Tennessee paid an expensive price for a 55-7 victory over the University of the Pacific: a knee injury to Chuck Webb, the star running back.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Arab League's Top Officer Quits Over Crisis
LEAD: Chedli Klibi, the Secretary General of the Arab League for more than 10 years, resigned today because of the Persian Gulf crisis, Arab diplomats said.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Americans Released Seem to Be Healthy, A U.S. Official Says
LEAD: All of the American hostages from the Middle East who arrived in West Germany on Sunday are in satisfactory health, a United States official said today.


Football;   Coslet Chooses O'Brien To Start as Jet Quarterback
LEAD: In a flurry of activity on the final cutdown day, the Jets' coach, Bruce Coslet, named Ken O'Brien as his starting quarterback over Tony Eason while Roger Vick, last year's starting fullback, was traded to the Philadelphia Eagles.
Why was O'Brien chosen as No. 1?  ''There are too many factors to go into it right now,'' said Coslet.


Arlene Harris for Manhattan Surrogate
LEAD: Rich in staff, patronage and politics, the Manhattan Surrogate's Court oversees the disposition of millions of dollars in estates and trusts every year.
This is to the considerable financial benefit of those lawyers appointed by the surrogates who serve as guardians and estate administrators.


25 Arrested at Pennsylvania Pigeon Shoot


Sweetwater: The Nobility Of Simplicity
LEAD: For most people living in Chicago during the 1950's and 60's, probably even for many who live there now, Sweetwater Clifton is a name that was embroidered into the fabric of the city.


Virginia Beach a Year Later: Roadblocks and Calm
LEAD: Whatever else it was, Laborfest '90 at this Atlantic resort was peaceful.


Credit Markets;   Move by Fed To Cut Rates Is Expected
LEAD: Credit market analysts say the Federal Reserve Board is likely to take the long-expected step of easing monetary policy in the next 10 days to two weeks.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - ADDENDA;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Turner Broadcasting System Inc., Atlanta, to Levine, Huntley, Schmidt &amp; Beaver, New York, for the Cable News Network account.
The TBS Superstation account went to Tracy-Locke Inc., Dallas.
Advertising had previously been done in house.
Billings were not disclosed.


Chile Cool to Argentina's Plan on Economic Ties
LEAD: A recent visit to Chile by President Carlos Saul Menem of Argentina to promote the idea of a regional common market highlighted the difficulty of opening markets between and among South American countries.


Chronicle
LEAD: The artistic Americanization of MSTISLAV ROSTROPOVICH will reach a high point next week when Columbia University awards the Russian-born conductor and cellist the 1990 Ditson Conductor's Award for contributions to the advancement of American music.
MICHAEL I. SOVERN, Columbia's president, announced yesterday that the award is to be presented on Sept.


Business Digest
LEAD:
The Oil Jolt


Metro Datelines;   Tombstones Toppled At Jewish Cemeteries
LEAD: More than 30 tombstones were found toppled over at the Beth Israel and Adas Israel Cemeteries yesterday, and the police were trying to determine whether it was simply vandalism or an anti-Semitic act in light of the coming Jewish holidays.


Metro Datelines;   Sharpton Among 23 Arrested in Protest
LEAD: The police arrested 23 protesters yesterday afternoon after they tried to block traffic entering the city from the Atlantic City Expressway, a main highway from the mainland, the authorities said.


Martha Hochberger Weds
LEAD: MARTHA HOCHBERGER, the daughter of Sol Hochberger of Bayside, Queens, and the late Adeline Hochberger, was married yesterday to MICHAEL DRESSLER, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Dressler of Belmont, Mass., by Rabbi Gerald Weider at the Sans Souci restaurant in Sea Cliff, L.I.


On Housing, We Still Have Far to Go
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gene Mutation Linked to Outlook in Lung Cancer Cases
LEAD: FOR the first time, scientists have found a strong link between a specific genetic mutation and the prognosis of patients with a common type of cancer.


Officers on Overtime Bolster Police Force in High-Crime Areas


Correction
LEAD: A headline in some copies yesterday about Mickey Shuler of the New York Jets misstated his status.
He was placed on waivers, not traded.


Patterns
LEAD:
The Gulf Crisis and Fashion


By Any Measure, Pol Pot Engaged in Genocide
LEAD: To the Editor:


By Design;   Mousse Alert
LEAD: Men use mousse for all kinds of reasons: to tame a wild forelock, to look sleek and efficient or to affect a Ray Milland-ish chic.


Tourist Slain In a Subway In Manhattan
LEAD: A 22-year-old former tennis instructor from Utah who came to New York to see the U.S.
Open was fatally stabbed in a midtown subway station Sunday night as he tried to defend his family from a gang that robbed his father and attacked his mother, the police said.


Our Towns;   A Week of Green In the Gray Lives Of AIDS Children
LEAD: ''Don't use the camp's name,'' said Phyllis Susser, an AIDS specialist. ''Please don't even mention the county where it's located.''


Battle Scene on Egyptian Temple May Be Earliest View of Israelites
LEAD: SCHOLARS poring over every jot and tittle in the Bible and archeologists picking over stone ruins have long disputed the origins of the early Israelites.
Were they conquerors sweeping through the fortified countryside of Canaan, as suggested by the story of Joshua?
Sheep-herding nomads from the east?


New I.B.M. Mainframes Due
LEAD: Responding to technological innovations that threaten the superiority of the high-power mainframe computers at the heart of its empire, the International Business Machines Corporation tomorrow will introduce its first new generation of mainframes in more than five years.


Presto! They Vanish
LEAD: Troubles get boring.
They wear out their welcome.
The savings and loan crisis had reached that stage.
So had homelessness.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Iraq Pledges to Forward Mail
LEAD: Iraq has started a mail service for letters to foreigners trapped in the country since its army invaded Kuwait last month, the Baghdad radio said today.
A broadcast monitored in Nicosia said the Iraqi Parliament wanted ''all families and friends of foreign guests in Iraq'' to know that three post office boxes in Baghdad had been allocated for the service.


Brazilian Investigators Discover a Mass Grave
LEAD: Investigators acting on a tip from a cemetery director discovered a mass grave today that could contain as many as 1,700 bodies, Brazilian television reported.


Obituary;   Lawrence Cremin, 64, Educator And a Prize-Winning Historian
LEAD: Lawrence A. Cremin, a former president of Teachers College of Columbia University and a noted historian who won a Pulitzer Prize for history a decade ago, died yesterday morning shortly after he arrived at the college, where he had resumed teaching six years ago after giving up the presidency.
He was 64 years old and lived in


Metro Matters;   Not a Solution To Politics' Ills, Only One Step
LEAD: ''It was an important step in electoral reform,'' the Rev.
Joseph A. O'Hare, chairman of the city's new Campaign Finance Board, said yesterday. ''But it is not the solution to all our political problems.''


Poor Loans Imperil Banks
LEAD: Troubled loans for real estate and leveraged buyouts are adding to the burdens of the nation's largest banks and are hindering recovery from past mistakes in lending to developing nations, Moody's Investors Service Inc. said yesterday.


Virus Found That May Be Linked To a Debilitating Fatigue Ailment
LEAD: Scientists yesterday reported finding a possible link between a virus and chronic fatigue syndrome, a debilitating illness that can cause extreme weakness and other symptoms lasting for months or even years.


Purchasers Report Slip in Economy
LEAD: Although the findings were skewed by the Middle East crisis, the National Association of Purchasing Managers reported yesterday that the American economy had weakened in August but still remained free of recession.


L.P.G.A. Dismisses Its Commissioner
LEAD: William A. Blue, who was appointed commissioner of the Ladies Professional Golf Association less than two years ago, was dismissed yesterday by the tour's board of directors.


U.S. Reports 0.4% July Gain In Construction Spending
LEAD: Construction spending edged up four-tenths of a percent in July for its first gain in four months, the Government said today.
But analysts expect the industry to be weak the rest of the year.


Payola Case Dismissed
LEAD: A Federal judge today dismissed all charges against the record promoter Joseph Isgro and two other defendants, bringing an early end to the biggest music payola trial in 30 years.


Pirates Rally and Retake First
LEAD: Bobby Bonilla broke the game open with a three-run homer and drove in five runs and Carmelo Martinez victimized his former team with a game-tying two-run shot tonight as the Pittsburgh Pirates rallied from an early five-run deficit and beat the Philadelphia Phillies, 11-7.


Business Technology;   Making Copies of the Best Milk Cows
LEAD: Another modest but unmistakable milestone in biotechnology's march into mainstream agriculture: One promotional giveaway at the World Dairy Expo in Madison, Wis., next month will be a cloned cow embryo.


U.N. OFFICIALS SEEK MORE REFUGEE AID
LEAD: United Nations officials called today for more money to cope with tens of thousands of people fleeing to Jordan from Iraq and Kuwait.


Obituary;   George Kaufmann, 59, Labor Lawyer, Is Dead
LEAD: George Kaufmann, a labor lawyer who was a partner in the Washington firm of Dickstein, Shapiro &amp; Morin, died Saturday at George Washington University Hospital.
He was 59 years old and lived in Washington.


Ogrondnick and His Agent Are at Odds With Rangers
LEAD: Neil Smith all but hung up on John Ogrodnick's agent.
Ogrodnick, as a result, is not interested in taking phone calls from Smith, the general manager of the Rangers.
Even with the phone lines dead, contract negotiations have still managed to get worse.


Itoh Weighs Soviet Site
LEAD: C. Stoh &amp; Company, the Japanese trading concern, is considering opening a branch office in Khabarovsk in the far eastern part of the Soviet Union by March 1991 to conduct research on trade regulations and market prospects in the region, an Itoh spokesman said today.
The office would be the company's third in the Soviet Union, after ones in Moscow and Leningrad.


Mets Lose To Cards And Fall From First
LEAD: The Mets, with their eyes firmly fixed on the big shootout in Pittsburgh, took a painful tumble in St.
Louis tonight, ended their seven-game winning streak and fell right out of first place on the eve of battle.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The biggest problem in politics is that you help some S.O.B. get what he wants and then he throws you out of the train.''
- Lieut. Gov. Martha Griffiths of Michigan.
[A1:4.]


Chronicle
LEAD: CHRISTIE BRINKLEY and a Congressman have joined forces to stamp out the dreaded deer tick, carrier of the debilitating Lyme Disease.
Ms.
Brinkley says that a solution to the tick problem is her guinea hens, and scientists are giving her theory some serious consideration.


Attempt by Philips To Slow Downturn
LEAD: The troubled Dutch electronics company Philips N.V. said it would discontinue several activities in its unprofitable components division and lay off 4,000 workers, mostly in Europe.
In 1989, Philips' components division had sales of about $6.2 billion and employed a total of 75,000 people.
Of those, 35,000 worked in


Fujitsu Announces Mainframe
LEAD: Beating I.B.M. to the punch by one day, Fujitsu Ltd. announced a series of computers today that steps up the Japanese challenge in building high-end machines.
It is widely expected that on Wednesday, the International Business Machines Corporation will introduce its first new generation of mainframe computers in five years.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Top Official's Resignation Reveals Deepening Split in Arab League
LEAD: The splits in the Arab world over Iraq's takeover of Kuwait deepened today after the resignation of the long-serving Secretary General of the Arab League.


Oil Prices Up Again, Rising 6.6%
LEAD: Oil prices jumped 6.6 percent in New York yesterday, but traders cited no compelling reason, except an attitude of general pessimism about the Persian Gulf, and Monday's price rise in London when the New York market was closed for Labor Day.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.06
8.06
8.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.39
7.37
7.86
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.36
7.37
7.84
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.76
8.73
8.20
30-YR.


Higher Fares On Foreign Flights Due
LEAD: Most of the world's airlines will seek to increase fares on international routes by about 7 percent to 8 percent by Oct. 1 to help cope with the rapid rise in fuel costs in the wake of the Persian Gulf crisis.


36 Killed as Violence Erupts Again in a South African Township
LEAD: Violence erupted again in the restless black township of Sebokeng as President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela today undertook separate tours of communities racked by factional fighting in which more than 550 blacks have been killed in the last month.


Tilt-Rotor Osprey Can Save Lives
LEAD: To the Editor:


Spike Lee Misreads the History of Film
LEAD: To the Editor:


Conservation, Not Nuclear, Will Stop Oil Binge;   Deregulation and Prices
LEAD: To the Editor:


Yetnikoff Stepping Down As Chief of CBS Records
LEAD: Walter Yetnikoff said yesterday that he was stepping down as chief executive of the Sony Corporation's CBS Records unit immediately.


Vice Chairman Named At American Express
LEAD: Harvey Golub, chief executive of IDS Financial Services Inc., was given the additional title yesterday of vice chairman of the American Express Company, IDS's parent.
In this position, which had been vacant since 1983, he will direct strategic planning for American Express and will oversee corporate finance.


The Mark of Edwin Reischauer
LEAD: Few scholars acquire the power to put their ideas into practice.
One who did so with notable success was Edwin Reischauer, who died Sunday.
A professor of Asian studies at Harvard, he was named Ambassador to Tokyo in 1961 by President Kennedy.
During a five-year tour he did much to change the chemistry of U.S.


Unions at Daily News Are Asking Halt in Ads
LEAD: In a negotiating tactic, 9 of the 10 unions at The Daily News sent letters yesterday to the newspaper's advertisers asking them to stop buying space in the paper.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. Officials Begin Tour to Seek Financial Backing for Gulf Force
LEAD: Senior United States officials arrived here today on a mission to seek international financial support for the American military force in the gulf, although most European countries are expected to give priority to aiding Egypt, Jordan and Turkey.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Friday about United States energy policy referred incorrectly to an offshore-oil dispute in California, between Santa Barbara County and oil companies.
It is over means of transporting oil between a Santa Barbara processing plant and Los Angeles refineries, not between an offshore well and the shore.


Rates Fall Sharply At Citicorp's Sale
LEAD: Interest rates at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper fell sharply yesterday, reflecting the increased demand for short-term credit because of the inability or the unwillingness of large lenders to make loans.


Books of The Times;   Making the Civil War Real With Pictures and Essays
LEAD:
The Civil War
An Illustrated History
Narrative by Geoffrey C. Ward, based on a documentary film script by Mr.
Ward, Ric Burns and Ken Burns
426 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $50.


2 INJURED
LEAD: Two Republican candidates for statewide office were seriously injured on Monday, the eve of Nevada's primary election, in an airplane crash that killed the wife of one of them.


Food Notes
LEAD:
What Matters to Diners


Dollar Mixed in New York After Advancing Overseas
LEAD: The dollar was mixed in domestic trading after rising overseas yesterday.


Fantasy and Taste in a New Bridal Salon
LEAD: WHEN Vera Wang opened Bridal House Ltd. in Manhattan last week, she didn't have to worry about where the first customer was coming from.
She had planned a dozen weddings in the six months since she decided to go into business.


MUSCOVITES VIEW BREAD AS SYMBOL
LEAD: Demoralized and suspicious, Moscow shoppers continued their search for scarce bread today, saying that the capital's empty bakery shelves seemed more a symptom of the withering of central Government management than of impending famine.


Regan, in a Split With Leaders, Opposes Environmental Bond Act
LEAD: Putting himself at odds with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, other state leaders and his Democratic opponent in his bid for re-election, State Comptroller Edward V. Regan said today that he would not support the nearly $2 billion environmental bond act that will be on the November ballot.


BAKER FORESEES A LONG STAY FOR U.S. TROOPS IN MIDEAST; URGES A REGIONAL ALLIANCE
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d told Congress today that the Administration intends to maintain a long-term military presence in the Persian Gulf area even if Iraq agrees to withdraw from Kuwait.


Obituary;   Paul D. Lockwood, Broadcaster, 51
LEAD: Paul D. Lockwood, a radio newscaster and producer, died on Saturday at Central Suffolk Hospital in Riverhead, L.I.
He was 51 years old and lived in Southold, L.I.


Slain Prosecutor Recalled as Man of Peace
LEAD: The Bronx Criminal Court Building where 30-year-old Sean Healy worked as a prosecutor closed yesterday morning as his colleagues joined his family and friends at a funeral Mass, where he was eulogized as someone who devoted his life to fighting the kind of violence that killed him.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amdura Corp., Denver, a hardware distributor, said it had received a bid for certain operating assets of its Amdura National Distribution Co. from United Hardware Distributing Co., Plymouth, Minn., a hardware wholesaler, for undisclosed terms.


Texas Embargoes A Cereal
LEAD: The Texas Health Department placed an embargo on the Kellogg Company's Heartwise Tuesday, accusing the company of deceptive labeling of the cereal, which contains the grain psyllium.


Prime Ministers of the Koreas Meet in Seoul


North-South Korea Talks Begin Today
LEAD: Opening the first day of talks with South Korea, Prime Minister Yon Hyong Muk of North Korea today made a sweeping disarmament proposal reiterating long-standing demands for a United States troop withdrawal as a prerequisite for any further efforts at reconciliation on the Korean peninsula.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - ADDENDA;   Accounts
LEAD: *
General Electric to Cramer-Krasselt, Orlando, Fla., for their Simulation and Control Systems Department, which produces computer-generated military training systems in Daytona Beach, Fla.
Billings were not disclosed.


Old-Timer (All of 27) Visits Open
LEAD: The clubhouse attendant wanted to know why the slim young woman was making herself at home among the Grafs and the Sabatinis.
There was a polite request to see some current player credentials.


Chronicle
LEAD: DONNIE WAHLBERG of New Kids on the Block may face charges arising from a scuffle with a fellow airline passenger over a seat.
The 20-year-old pop singer fought with BENJAMIN DATTNER, also 20, of New York on a Delta Air Lines flight after it left Salt Lake City for Atlanta on Sunday, the police and Delta said.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Excerpts From Baker Testimony on U.S. and Gulf
LEAD: Following are excerpts from remarks by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today before the House Foreign Affairs Committee, as provided by the Federal News Service, a transcription service:


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-17


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Yankee Official Sues vincent and Dowd for Damages
LEAD: In the latest chapter of the seemingly endless George Steinbrenner saga, Leonard Kleinman, the Yankees' chief operating officer, sued Commissioner Fay Vincent and John Dowd yesterday, seeking to block a hearing scheduled for tomorrow and to receive $22 million in damages for the blocking of his appointment as the


Prosecutor Opposes Bail For Murderer for I.R.A.
LEAD: In an unusual move, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York personally led the Government's case at a bail hearing yesterday for Joseph Patrick Doherty, the convicted murderer for the I.R.A. who is seeking bail while he awaits an immigration hearing for political asylum.


Smick Medley Adds a Name
LEAD: Manuel H. Johnson, who resigned earlier this year as vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, has joined the consulting firm of Smick Medley International Inc., the firm said yesterday.
The firm plans to call itself


Broadcast of Giants Game Has WPIX-TV Beaming
LEAD: When the Giants' opener against the Philadelphia Eagles is broadcast over WPIX, Channel 11, this Sunday, 30-second commercials for the independent station's first regular-season pro game in a quarter century will sell for about 10 times what they normally would in the same time period on Sunday night.


Stocks in Tokyo Plunge
LEAD: Tokyo stocks plummeted by more than 3 percent today, after being down more than 5 percent in the afternoon.
Brokers bemoaned a complete absence of buying interest because of concern over future developments in the Middle East, which is being viewed in an increasingly pessimistic light. ''The market is basically discounting itself now for a war,'' one trader said.


Critic's Notebook;   World of Hollywood Is Finding Its Way Into Many Novels
LEAD: Hollywood has always looked to novelists for inspiration.
These days, more and more often, the novelist is likely to be looking back.


Precious Metals Shunned After Last Week's Decline
LEAD: Investors burned by last week's gold collapse were reluctant to re-enter the precious metals market yesterday despite surging oil prices and a lower stock market, two factors that typically spur strong gains in gold.


Review/Television;   3 Specials on the ABC's of Improving Education
LEAD: It's back-to-school week on television.
Tonight from 9 to 11, Channel 13 offers ''Learning in America: Schools That Work.'' The theme is sounded again tomorrow night, from 9 to 11, by CBS, in ''America's Toughest Assignment: Solving the Education Crisis.'' And on Friday at 10:30 P.M., Channel 13 is back with ''Why Do These Kids Love School?


Bank Funds, C.D.'s Mixed For Week
LEAD: For the third straight week, yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were mixed, in the week ended yesterday, as the economy and the Persian Gulf crisis continue to tug interest rates in different directions.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   A President Is Named at W. B. Doner
LEAD: IN an unexpected move, Jim Dale, the corporate creative director at W. B. Doner &amp; Company, yesterday was named the agency's president and chief operating officer.


Mideast Humpty Dumpty
LEAD: Whatever the outcome of the Persian Gulf crisis, the Middle East landscape is being rearranged.
The fragile status quo, with its intricate web of feuds, alliances and hedges, has been upset and will not be restored.


2 Hurt in Firebombing At Clinic in Brooklyn
LEAD: An arsonist threw a firebomb into a clinic for the mentally ill in Brooklyn yesterday, seriously injuring two employees, the police said.


Cuomo's Campaign: Crime? Taxes? Look Elsewhere
LEAD: The state's economy is slipping toward recession, dragging down profits and nudging up unemployment.
Its tax rate, one of the highest in the nation, recently increased by $1.8 billion, just as the state's credit rating was dropping to its lowest level ever.
In the state's largest city, a crime wave has claimed at least six children in the last eight weeks, and drug-related violence threatens to overwhelm an already swamped criminal-justice system.


2 Contenders at Hartford Debate Claim an Edge in Ability
LEAD: The two Democratic candidates for governor, in their lone one-on-one debate before the primary on Tuesday, clashed today over who is better qualified to lead the state into what they agreed could be a grim and troubled era for Connecticut and its economy.


Business Digest
LEAD:
The Oil Jolt


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - ADDENDA;   People
LEAD: *
Steve Greenberger is rejoining Campbell-Mithun-Esty, New York, as senior vice president and deputy media director.
Mr.
Greenberger was with the agency for six years before an 11-month stint with the Times-Mirror Company.


Ford Offering Cash Rebates
LEAD: Matching similar moves by its domestic competitors, the Ford Motor Company announced today that it would offer cash rebates on most of its 1991 models.


Slaying Sets Off Anxiety by Tourists
LEAD: After summer violence that haphazardly claimed the lives of at least six children, the slaying of a Utah visitor has struck a somber chord among tourists and once again has New Yorkers talking about the randomness of crime.


The Pop Life
LEAD: An album of a movie-music maker The 2 Live Crew and Eric Bogosian's principles A smaller Diane Schuur, but with even better control.
Music for Movies


Treasuries Mixed in Slow Trading
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday in slow trading and interest rates rose.
A renewed rise in the price of oil helped to push down bond prices.
But the prices of short-term securities were aided by continued belief among market participants that the Federal Reserve Board was on the verge of allowing short-term interest rates to move lower.


Education;   After Months, Divided Boston Board Is No Closer to Hiring School Chief
LEAD: Boston's School Committee, notorious for squabbling and saddled with complaints from the state, will face a glaring reminder of its difficulties when schools open next week.


Doubts Voiced on Congress's Ability To Act on Big Domestic Policy Bills
LEAD: Congressional leaders insist they are optimistic that the lawmakers will finish work on important domestic policy bills from clean air to child care before they are scheduled to adjourn Oct. 5, but their top aides are far less hopeful.


Review/Television;   Jackson on Assignment in Iraq: The Reporter Becomes the Story
LEAD: This morning at 9, on Channel 4, New Yorkers can see the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, journalist, interviewing President Saddam Hussein, television personality.
The program, shown in much of the United States last night, is being carried on ''Inside Edition,'' which will run other excerpts from Mr.
Jackson's recent visit to Baghdad, Iraq, through the week.


New Valid Logic President Wants More Market Share
LEAD: Valid Logic Inc., the second-largest supplier of electronic design automation systems, yesterday named L. George Klaus to the newly created position of president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Klaus, who is 50, will also be a member of Valid's board.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD:
DEAR Diary:


For a City's Picklers, A Font of Recipes: It's the Melting Pot
LEAD: PICKLES may be synonymous with bumper crops, their precise formulation fueling competition for blue ribbons at state fairs and occasional internecine battles in the late-summer kitchen.
But the pickling impulse isn't limited to the great rural outdoors.
City Picklers get the urge, too.
And while their country cousins may be content with variations on the cucumber, City


G.M. Unit Agrees To Westwood Deal
LEAD: The Electronic Data Systems Corporation reached an agreement with an affiliate of the Pritzker family of Chicago to acquire the Westwood Equities Corporation, whose holdings include one of the nation's largest title insurance companies.
No terms were disclosed for E.D.S.'s purchase of Westwood, owner of the Ticor Title Insurance Companies of California, from New Century Enterprises


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: IN the old days in Les Halles, the teeming food market in the center of Paris, butchers who worked through the night would end their shifts with breakfast at a cafe.
The traditional fare was grilled skirt steak, French fries and red wine.


Confrontation in the Games;   Iraq and the Asian Games
LEAD: Less than three weeks before China is to play host to the Asian Games, officials here acknowledged that the Persian Gulf crisis is upsetting some of their plans.
But they said that the sports competition would be held on schedule despite uncertainty about whether Iraq would be allowed to participate.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday with an article about the quality of undergraduate instruction in American universities referred incorrectly to Prof.
Martin Trow.
He remains a professor at the University of California at Berkeley.


Bridge
LEAD: Two events, one more serious than the other, began here on Monday at the world championships.


The Joy of Garlic
LEAD: The jury is still out on garlic.
For 4,000 years it has been hailed as the bud that will cure all ills, but as yet nobody knows for sure.


Rating on $4.7 Billion Debt Of Pacificorp Is Upgraded
LEAD: The rating on about $4.7 billion of Pacificorp debt has been upgraded, the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation announced yesterday.


Conservation, Not Nuclear, Will Stop Oil Binge
LEAD: To the Editor:


Conservation, Not Nuclear, Will Stop Oil Binge;   Try Co-generation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nursing Home Damages Upheld
LEAD: The Federal judge who earlier this year heard cases charging abuse of two residents of a Mississippi nursing home has upheld a jury's $250,000 damage award to the family of one and has ordered a new trial on the other family's claim.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Combined Force in Saudi Arabia Is Light on Arabs
LEAD: At a base camp in northern Saudi Arabia, the commander of Arab forces from the Persian Gulf countries is waiting for more troops to arrive before taking up defensive positions near the Kuwaiti border.


Chiles Wins Democrats' Vote for Florida Governor
LEAD: Lawton Chiles, a former United States Senator, did better than even recent polls had suggested, easily beating Representative Bill Nelson in the Democratic primary today for governor of Florida.


In Shift, Nunn Backs Right To Abortion in Most Cases
LEAD: Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia has relaxed his long-held anti-abortion position and now says he believes the decision on whether to have an abortion should be left ''to the informed conscience of the mother'' in most cases.


Sabatini and Fernandez Gain Semifinals
LEAD: Leaving their quarterfinal opponents in tears, Mary Joe Fernandez and Gabriela Sabatini confirmed their reservations yesterday for a semifinal meeting at the United States Open.


17 Years After Death in Coup, Allende Is Reburied


Ethnic Clubs Revel As Music Takes Off
LEAD: IT is a big room, but the music is bigger.
There are whistles, guitars, synthesizers and underlying it all, the heavy syncopated reverberation of drums shaking the floor like a cocktail, moving up through the body like a sonic boom in the flesh.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Soviets Suggest Conference Combining Issues of Mideast
LEAD: The Soviet Government proposed today that the Kuwait crisis be linked with the Kremlin's longstanding proposal for an international conference on the Israeli-Palestinian struggle and other Middle East problems.


Business Technology;   Intel's Chip Monopoly Challenged
LEAD: One of the most lucrative monopolies in industry is about to come under attack.
Several companies, including Advanced Micro Devices Inc. and Chips and Technologies Inc., are developing chips that duplicate the functions of the Intel Corporation's 80386 microprocessor.


Penny Collender Weds Ross Kapilian
LEAD: Congregation Beth Torah in Brooklyn was the setting Monday for the wedding of PENNY LORI COLLENDER, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Collender of New York, to ROSS ANDREW KAPILIAN, a son of Gertrude Kapilian of New York and the late Philip Kapilian.
Rabbi Sidney Lieberman, a cousin of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony.


Iraqi Chemical Arms: Difficult Target
LEAD: Among the potential targets of American air strikes if war with Iraq should break out are the sites where chemical weapons are manufactured or stored.
But although chemical plants are vulnerable, experts say United States intelligence may not be good enough to pinpoint the hundreds of secret caches where chemical weapons are already stockpiled.


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: THERE may be Cincinnatians who don't like chili, but they're keeping quiet about it, a wise move in a city where neighborhood chili parlors are as much a part of the landscape as the Ohio River.


Hey, America, Lighten Up a Little
LEAD: Considering the alternatives, it has been easy to admire the American way these past few decades.
It was and is demonstrably better at making its average citizens rich and free than rival systems.
Culturally, too, the world has voted for America by seeking everything from jeans to Michael Jackson.


Eating Well
LEAD: WITH the start of school comes the return of the time-honored tradition of after-school snacking and, for most parents, worries over what children are eating once the school day is over.
If you're still at work when the school bell rings, keeping an eye on their snacking habits is especially difficult.


Education;   Making Computers Better Teachers
LEAD: Sophisticated use of computers in the classroom can help teachers cover more complex subjects, devote more individual attention to students and allow students more initiative, a nationwide survey says.


Review/Film;   Loyalties Scalded by Humiliation
LEAD: In 1963, the Senegalese novelist Ousmane Sembene turned to making movies to reach his largely illiterate countrymen, and so became a founder and an acknowledged master of African film.
Though his name is scarcely known in the United States, his vast influence is evident in the stately, detailed, quiet style of African films that have appeared here in recent years, such works as Souleymane Cisse's ''Brightness'' and Idrissa Ouedraogo's ''Yaaba.


Quebec Bridge Mends, but a Town Is Scarred
LEAD: Work to repair the Mercier Bridge, taken over for seven weeks by armed Indian militants, will be finished in a few days.
But the rancor between this town's white residents and their Mohawk Indian neighbors may take longer to heal.


More on the Gulf
LEAD:
OIL PRICES UP AGAIN: Prices were up 6.6 percent in New York amid pessimism over the gulf crisis.
Business Day, page D1.
INSURANCE RELIEF: The Bush Administration has begun providing discount insurance for vessels and airplanes hit by higher war-risk insurance rates.


Productivity Data Revised
LEAD: The productivity of American workers rose a revised 1.5 percent in the second quarter instead of 1.6 percent as was reported early last month, the Labor Department said today.


Fighting Mobocracy in Bulgaria
LEAD: To fight Communists in a People's Republic is one thing; to fight them in a democracy is quite another.
The Bulgarian mob that last week burned and looted the former Communist Party headquarters didn't see the difference.
Fortunately, enlightened politicians of varying views are working to keep Bulgaria's recent gains from going up in flames.


99 Mentally Retarded Adults Saved From Burning Building
LEAD: Firefighters safely evacuated 99 mentally handicapped adults, many of them in wheelchairs, from the third floor of a burning Brooklyn building yesterday.


ARCO to Offer New Fuel Type
LEAD: ARCO, the first oil company with a low-emission gasoline, said today that it would announce another less-polluting fuel this week.


500 Days That Can Shake the World
LEAD: The Communist Revolution of 1917 changed the 20th century.
This week's reported agreement on radical economic reform between the Soviet Union's two pre-eminent leaders could be every bit as momentous for the 21st.


Soviet Army Wives Demonstrate in Germany
LEAD: Soviet military wives staged an unusual two-day demonstration at a garrison here recently to protest their impending transfer back to the Soviet Union.


More Cuts By Chrysler
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation, the most troubled of the Big Three United States auto makers, said today that it would cut another $1 billion in costs beyond the $1.5 billion package announced last year.


Healthco Agrees To Acquisition
LEAD: Healthco International Inc., a Boston dental supply company that has been the object of takeover overtures by several groups, agreed to be acquired for $19.25 a share in cash, or a total of $250 million.
Healthco will be acquired by a company formed by Hicks, Muse &amp; Company, a Dallas-based investment firm, and Ray Davis, who was identified as a former senior executive of Colt


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Hostage Evacuation Flights Resume From Iraqi Capital
LEAD: The large-scale evacuation of foreign women and children stranded in Iraq and Kuwait resumed today after three days of diplomatic efforts to work out acceptable arrangements with the Iraqi authorities.


Rishiri Journal;   In the Fished-Out Sea, a Little Island Founders
LEAD: Having lived, worked and fished here all his life, Shohei Jin likes to joke that he does not usually leave this tiny outpost off the coast of northern Japan. ''I'm protecting this island so that it won't float away while I'm gone,'' he said with a laugh.


New Jersey Taxpayers Don't Want an Explanation, but Relief
LEAD: To the Editor:


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Employee of Libyan Embassy Arrested in Berlin Bombing
LEAD: A Libyan Embassy employee in East Berlin has been arrested for the 1986 bombing of a West Berlin discotheque that led to an American air raid on Libya.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   For Asians, Gulf Is Fickle Godmother
LEAD: The tens of thousands of people from South Asia who are fleeing the Persian Gulf crisis are leaving behind shattered dreams, empty homes and frozen assets.


Obituary;   Irene Dunne, Actress, Dies at 88; Starred in Comedies and Musicals
LEAD: The actress Irene Dunne, a top star in comedy, dramatic and musical films of the 1930's and 40's, died at her home this evening.
She was 88 years old.


Baltimore Bancorp Is Put on Notice
LEAD: T. Rowe Price Associates Inc., the Baltimore-based mutual fund company, said it was considering its investment alternatives in light of Baltimore Bancorp's rejection of a $217 million cash tender offer.
T.
Rowe Price controls 1.2 million Baltimore Bancorp shares, or 9.4 percent of the bank holding company's shares outstanding.


Elderly Woman Is Off Ticket, And Michigan Politics Churns
LEAD: Eleven days ago, Gov.
James J. Blanchard announced that his 78-year-old Lieutenant Governor, Martha W. Griffiths, would be dropped from his re-election ticket.
Since then, the voters of this state have talked of little else.


Genetic Link Suggested In One Form of Arthritis
LEAD: Scientists said today that they had identified a genetic defect that appeared to cause at least some cases of arthritis.


S.E.C. Settles Revco Cases
LEAD: An Ohio investor, the last of 16 people charged with passing or trading on inside information about the leveraged buyout of Revco Drug Stores Inc., has settled civil charges, Federal regulators said today.
Howard Passov of Pepper


Losses Posted at Federated
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation's two United States retail units said today that their stores had lower sales in July than in the month before, posting $50 million in losses.


Obituary;   Robert F. Joyce, Catholic Bishop, 93
LEAD: The Rev.
Robert F. Joyce, the retired Roman Catholic Bishop of Burlington, died Sunday after a long illness.
He was 93 years old.


49ers Are Fined $500,000
LEAD: The San Francisco 49ers were fined $500,000 yesterday for violating the National Football League's corporate-ownership policy, but were spared even harsher penalties that could have included the loss of draft choices.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Ashland Exploration Inc., Houston, a subsidiary of Ashland Oil Inc., Ashland, Ky., named G. Thomas Wilkinson president.
He was also named vice president of the parent company.


Wheaton Seems Unfazed as McEnroe Looms
LEAD: Now that he had advanced to the quarterfinals of the United States Open in singles and the semifinals in doubles, there was this one small item David Wheaton wanted to clear up, the business about ''idolizing'' John McEnroe.


South Africa Discussed
LEAD: He may be more optimistic than some, but Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the International Olympic Committee, believes that apartheid is on the run in South Africa and that the country's athletes may be readmitted to the Olympics as early as the 1992 Games.


Wolf Kills New Jersey Baby
LEAD: A 2-month-old East Orange boy was fatally mauled on Monday by a hybrid wolf belonging to his family, the police said today.
The animal was later destroyed.
The baby, Curtis James Hawkins, had been left alone with the wolf on the third floor of his family's home, the police said.
The baby's mother, Petera, was visiting her in-laws elsewhere in the house, and his father, Curtis, was at work, Police Capt.


Looking Beyond AIDS
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Obituary;   Irving Berezin, 78, Dies; Led a Consulting Firm
LEAD: Irving Berezin, a management-consultant specialist, died on Sunday at New York Hospital.
He was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.


New Jersey Taxpayers Don't Want an Explanation, but Relief;   Tradition of Resistance
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tourist-Slaying Suspects Are Tied To a Gang of Ritualistic Muggers
LEAD: The eight youths arrested in the fatal stabbing of a 22-year-old tourist from Utah in a midtown subway station belonged to a gang with a singular initiation ritual: would-be members had to mug someone to get in, friends of some suspects said yesterday.


New York Post Owner Issues Ultimatum on Costs
LEAD: Peter S. Kalikow, owner of the money-losing New York Post, said yesterday that the paper's 10 unions must agree to $25 million in ''temporary'' savings by Sept. 15 or he would close the newspaper.


White-Umpire Dispute Is Defused by Vincent
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent, with an assist from Fred Wilpon of the Mets, defused a potentially volatile problem between Bill White and the umpires' union yesterday, getting everybody to agree to keep their differences private.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Excerpt From Shevardnadze Speech
LEAD: Following is an excerpt from an address in Vladivostok yesterday by Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union, as translated and transmitted by the official Soviet press agency Tass:


Democratic Chief Upholds Dismissing of Party Official
LEAD: The Democratic national chairman today upheld the dismissal of a Washington lawyer last week as the party's parliamentarian because he had represented a Republican linked to the savings and loan scandals.


Times Executive Named Carnegie Adviser
LEAD: The Carnegie Corporation of New York has announced that Fred M. Hechinger has been named senior adviser to the philanthropic foundation.


In a Tribute, Chile Reburies Allende
LEAD: Nearly 17 years after his death in a military coup, Salvador Allende Gossens was given dignified burial today as newly democratic Chile sought to make peace with its past.


In East, Ivy's a Puzzle Amid 2 Likely Cases
LEAD: As usual, the Ivy League is beyond the scope of prophets.
The Patriot League, formerly the Colonial, may have a new name but the same team, Holy Cross, is the one to beat.
In the Yankee Conference, Connecticut is likely to fly away from eight others on the passing of Matt DeGennaro.


Heating Blood Criticized As Treatment of AIDS
LEAD: After six months of speculation and controversy over experiments to treat AIDS by heating patients' blood, a Federal panel said today that they did not work and should not be tried again on humans for now.


Dreams of Pirouettes and Pas de Deux


A Crisis Builds At Jordan Sites Housing Asians
LEAD: Asian refugees from Kuwait and Iraq continue to pour into Jordan's desert refugee camps at the rate of 10,000 a day, relief officials said today.


A Peace Plan for the Persian Gulf
LEAD: Since the invasion of Kuwait, Saddam Hussein has been called ruthless, barbaric, cruel, despotic, inhuman.
Also diabolical, clever, resourceful, duplicitous, devious and so on.


New Evidence Prompts Stay of Arkansas Execution
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today stayed the execution of a retarded prison inmate after hearing new evidence that Sheriff Tommy F. Robinson, who is now a Congressman, tried to coerce the confessions of other inmates in the rape and murder of an Air Force nurse seven years ago.


Fuji Shifts Management At Subaru of America
LEAD: Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd. realigned the top management of its Subaru of America unit yesterday, replacing Harvey H. Lamm, one of the company's founders, as chief executive.
It also transferred more responsibility to Japanese executives of Fuji.


Intelsat Sues Marietta Over Failed Launching
LEAD: Intelsat, the giant consortium that provides most of the world's international satellite services, said today that it was suing the Martin Marietta Corporation to recover more than $400 million in losses stemming from a botched satellite launching in March.


Prosecutor Seeks Rehearing On Appeals from North Case
LEAD: The independent prosecutor for Iran-contra cases asked a Federal appeals court today to reconsider its decision suspending two convictions against Oliver L. North and overturning a third.


National League Receives Bids
LEAD: At least 10 cities submitted bids for the National League's two new expansion teams before yesterday's deadline, as well as a unique proposal for a franchise that would play in four cities.


Economic Scene;   Harder Times, Softer Politics
LEAD: RUNNING harder these days just to stay in place?
Join the crowd, say Lawrence Mishel and David Frankel, authors of a detailed statistical analysis of American living standards, published this week by the Economic Policy Institute in Washington.


Corrections
LEAD: A report yesterday about the marriage of Penny Collender and Ross Kapilian appeared with sections scrambled in some copies.
A corrected version appears today on page B4.


New England Bank Selling Subsidiary
LEAD: Citizens Financial Group of Providence, R.I., a subsidiary of the Royal Bank of Scotland, agreed to buy most of the Bank of New England Corporation's Rhode Island operation for $75 million.
Selling most of the best of the Bank of New England-Old Colony assets is the last big step in the Bank of New


Obituary;   Leon Barbanel, Lawyer, 70
LEAD: Leon Barbanel, a retired Manhattan tax lawyer, died on Monday at the Florida Medical Center in Fort Lauderdale.
He was 70 years old and lived in Tamarac, Fla.


For Assembly: Queens and Brooklyn
LEAD: New York holds its primary elections next Tuesday.
Here are our endorsements in some contested races for the Assembly.
In these overwhelmingly Democratic districts, the primary winners are virtually assured election.


A Rise in Loan Delinquencies
LEAD: The number of consumers 30 days or more behind on bank loan payments increased in the second quarter after falling in the previous two quarters, a trade group said today.


Saudis Widen Military Recruiting And Encourage Women to Work
LEAD: In a sweeping directive apparently intended to mobilize Saudi society for possible war with Iraq, King Fahd has ordered the expansion of the armed forces and has called for wider participation of women in the labor force.


Market Place;   Continuing Slump Dogs Lands' End
LEAD: THE news coming from Lands' End Inc. this year has continued to be disappointingly dim, as the much-admired mail-order catalogue company continues to wrestle with sinking financial results.
Many think the stock is probably undervalued, but analysts have put it on hold until signs of new vigor emerge.


At a Gathering of Top Chefs, The Food Gets Star Billing
LEAD: Faced with a guest list that includes more than 60 chefs and restaurateurs, among them 10 with three stars in the Michelin Guide, what on earth do you serve?


Obituary;   Marcus Cunliffe, 68, Ex-Briton Who Chronicled American Life
LEAD: Marcus Cunliffe, a British-born historian who wrote more than a dozen books on American history and literature, died Sunday at George Washington University Hospital.
He was 68 years old and lived in Washington.


New York Says Census Missed Housing Units
LEAD: New York City officials said yesterday that the Census Bureau may have missed 200,000 housing units in its count of the city for the 1990 census.


Cambodia Talks Endangered as Leaders Balk
LEAD: The search for peace in Cambodia encountered another hurdle today as leaders of the warring factions said they would not attend peace talks scheduled here this week unless certain others did.


Chronicle
LEAD: If it's not the ratings, it's the vicissitudes of life that leave their marks on the ''Today'' show as it competes for morning television viewers.
To give the show a punchier image, NBC gave BRYANT GUMBEL two new co-hosts this year, DEBORAH NORVILLE, who was promoted to replace JANE PAULEY in January, and JOE GARAGIOLA, who started his second stint as co-host in June.


Customs Service Fines K Mart
LEAD: The K Mart Corporation agreed yesterday to pay $6 million in penalties to the United States Customs Service in a dispute over duties paid on inexpensive imported apparel, one of K Mart's most important product lines.


For Amber Waves of . . . Canola?
LEAD: HERE in the nation's heartland, where the plains stretch clear to the horizon and the days are measured by the height of the alfalfa crop, farmers are engaged in a new kind of gamble: oil.


New Chief Is Named In Shift at First Boston
LEAD: The First Boston Corporation yesterday named its third chief executive in nine months.
Archibald Cox Jr., who joined the New York-based investment house four months ago, was named president and chief executive, succeeding John M. Hennessy.


Wine Talk
LEAD: HAVE you had trouble finding your favorite Beaujolais-Villages in the shops?
How about Vouvray?
Have you found some labels hard to find?


U.S. Insurance Offered For Mideast Transport
LEAD: The Bush Administration has begun providing discount insurance to owners of vessels and airplanes that travel in the Middle East.
The unusual move is intended to provide relief for United States shipowners and airlines that pay by sharply higher war-risk insurance rates in the troubled region.


Review/Art;   A New Spirit at the New-York Historical Society
LEAD: Although the physical changes made to the New-York Historical Society during its renovation this summer were mostly cosmetic, the reopening today of the museum and library symbolizes nothing less than a new beginning for the institution on Central Park West, and perhaps for the cultural life of the city, too.


Political Conflict Is Renewed Over Drilling in Arctic Refuge
LEAD: The coastal plain of this vast wilderness area is home to a few hundred Eskimos, herds of caribou and musk oxen, vegetation hardy enough to survive the harsh Arctic climate - and what may be the largest untapped oil reserve in the United States.


Ex-Legislator Pleads Guilty In South Carolina Bribe Case
LEAD: The most influential of five state legislators charged with taking bribes pleaded guilty today to a Federal corruption charge.


L.I.R.R. Ends Track Project And Restores 28 Train Runs
LEAD: The Long Island Rail Road restored 28 rush-hour trains yesterday as it finished a track and signal project.


New Premier in New Zealand; Third One in Just Over a Year
LEAD: Foreign Minister Mike Moore toppled Geoffrey Palmer today to become New Zealand's third Prime Minister in just over a year, but he faces an uphill battle to unite a turbulent Labor Party before a general election next month.


7 Astronauts Prepare for Flight Tomorrow
LEAD: The countdown for the third attempt in the last three months to send the space shuttle Columbia into orbit continued smoothly today as engineers prepared to roll its sister ship, the Discovery, to one of the twin launching pads here.


BAR GROUP GIVES SOUTER TOP RATING
LEAD: The American Bar Association has given Judge David H. Souter its highest possible rating in evaluating his fitness to be a Supreme Court Justice, officials of the group said today.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article by The Associated Press on Thursday about Marilyn Quayle's fall off a raft into the Colorado River described her rescue incorrectly in some copies.
Maureen Oltrogge, a park spokeswoman, said Mrs.
Quayle's rescuer was Mark O'Neill, a park ranger; John Reed, assistant superintendent of the Grand Canyon National Park, was on another raft at the time.


After Risking McNeil, Jets Get to Keep Him
LEAD: The Jets took a calculated risk by exposing Freeman McNeil, their career rushing leader, to waivers on Monday.
They won the gamble yesterday when no other team picked up the 31-year-old running back and they were able to reclaim him.


After Parcells Follows a Lead, Giants Acquire Duerson
LEAD: The acquisition by the Giants of Dave Duerson, a onetime Pro Bowl safety for the Chicago Bears, was described today by Coach Bill Parcells as ''blind luck,'' based on ''coincidence.''


Education;   Teachers and Professors Go on Strike in 5 States
LEAD: Teachers went on strike yesterday in school districts in Michigan, Washington State, Rhode Island and Pennsylvania, and New Orleans teachers voted to strike in two weeks unless their demands are met.


Dallas Holdout Signs
LEAD: No terms were disclosed, but after holding out for 48 days, Emmitt Smith, the former Florida running back, has signed a contract with the Dallas Cowboys.
Smith, the 17th draft pick, set 58 school records before giving up a year of collegiate eligibility to enter the 1990 draft. (AP)


Program Buying Trims Dow's Loss to 0.99
LEAD: Stocks fell early in the day yesterday but later recovered most of their losses in heavy program buying, despite continued concern about the Middle East crisis, a rise in crude oil prices and weak stock markets abroad.


Spike Lee Misreads the History of Film;   The Flatbush Brothers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Apple Extends Adobe License
LEAD: Even though it is developing its own type of font software, Apple Computer Inc. will continue to license PostScript from Adobe Systems Inc., the two companies said today.


Obituary;   Alden Whitman Is Dead at 76; Made an Art of Times Obituaries
LEAD: Alden Whitman, a retired reporter for The New York Times who pioneered the use of interviews of notable people to personalize and energize their obituaries, died yesterday at the Hotel de Paris in Monte Carlo.
He was 76 years old and lived in Southampton, L.I.


Dallas Fed's President
LEAD: Robert D. McTeer Jr. has been named president of the Federal Reserve Bank in Dallas effective in February.
Mr.
McTeer, who is 47 years old, replaces Robert H. Boykin, who is retiring after 37 years with the Dallas reserve bank.
Mr.
McTeer is senior vice president of the Baltimore branch of the Federal Reserve Bank in Richmond.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Majkowski Also Signs
LEAD: Don Majkowski, Green Bay's All-Pro quarterback, who stayed out of training camp for 45 days, reached agreement on a contract yesterday.


Irene Dunne, Actress, Dies at 88; Starred in Comedies and Musicals;   The Screen's Perfect Lady
LEAD: Irene Dunne had a ladylike gentility that made her naughty antics in sophisticated comedies all the more hilarious.
In classic farces like ''The Awful Truth,'' in which she portrayed a worldly divorcee briefly inpersonating a gauche chorine, she delighted audiences and reviewers with her wit and elan.


Amgen in Venture With Regeneron
LEAD: Amgen Inc. entered a multiyear collaborative agreement with Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Tarrytown, N.Y., a privately held biotechnology company specializing in neurobiology.
Under the agreement, Amgen made an equity investment of $15 million in exchange for convertible preferred stock equivalent to 7.25 percent of


Righetti Agent Sees Lengthy Talks Ahead
LEAD: Is Dave Righetti worth $3 million a year for the next five years to the Yankees?


Memories to Be Scaled Back by Diamandis
LEAD: Memories, the magazine devoted to the past, got some bad news about the future yesterday.


Penny-Stock Guilty Plea
LEAD: The former chairman and part-owner of F. D. Roberts Securities Inc. pleaded guilty today to one charge of Federal racketeering in one of the largest penny-stock fraud cases ever.


Soviet Rebuff on Oil Cited
LEAD: East European countries have failed to persuade Moscow to make up for a steep drop in Soviet oil supplies, a Polish official said today.


Natures of Man and Beast
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Chronicle
LEAD: TONI SCHMIEGELOW took over yesterday as the executive director of the New York City Volunteer Corps, a sort of training camp for youngsters headed for working life with with few skills but a measure of determination.


AIDS Infection At Issue in Trial On Racial Case
LEAD: As another trial stemming from the Howard Beach racial attack began yesterday, prosecution and defense lawyers disagreed in private over whether the defense should be permitted to question a victim of the assault about his infection with the AIDS virus.


INSIDE
LEAD:
New Clue to Arthritis


Colombia Offers to Ease Drug Extraditions
LEAD: President Cesar Gaviria, seeking to win the surrender of drug barons, said today that cocaine cartel leaders who turned themselves in would be tried in Colombia and not extradited to the United States.


For Deficit Talks Site, the Price Is Right
LEAD: Andrews Air Force Base has two golf courses, several swimming pools and dozens of tennis and racquetball courts, but it is hardly the place a sane Washingtonian would choose to spend one of the last weekends of the summer.


Woes Continue for Refugees on the Iraq-Jordan Border


Deferred Maintenance, and Murder
LEAD: It's the callousness that inspires the most fear: A teen-age gang mugs a family of tourists on a New York City subway platform.
As a son steps in to defend his mother, a mugger plunges a knife in his chest.
The killers escape with the father's money, then go dancing.


Outdoors;   Shorter Striped Bass Restrictions
LEAD: New York's new striped bass regulations went into effect yesterday and sport fishermen are now allowed to take one bass a day 36 or more inches long, and a limited commercial harvest of smaller fish will be permitted.


French Plaques
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Dow Up 14,85 to 2,628.22, on Light Volume
LEAD: Stocks advanced a bit yesterday in another day of light activity, heavy program trading and growing apprehension over the nation's deepening economic slump.


With Advent of New Heart Drugs, Delay in Seeking Help Is Major Killer
LEAD: As doctors have become more proficient at combating heart attacks, they have run into an unexpected obstacle to treatment: the patient.


Hockey;   Devils Like Lemieux For His Scrappiness
LEAD: Even the casual fan, let alone the experts, could see the Devils lacked an agitator last season, a need that became crucial in the team's elimination by the Washington Capitals in the first round of the playoffs last spring.


Prices of Oil Rise Again Amid Signs of Hoarding
LEAD: Oil prices rose again yesterday on fears of looming shortages and signs of hoarding by distributors and retail consumers of gasoline and home heating oil.


De Klerk Reassures Whites on a New Charter
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk promised white voters today that the South African Government would return to the negotiating table if a new constitution eliminating apartheid was rejected in a popular referendum.


Maine Housing Bonds Are Priced
LEAD: The Maine State Housing Authority tentatively priced $110 million in tax-exempt mortgage purchase bonds yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Review/Music;   Largely New Cast in City Opera's 'Carmen'
LEAD: For its repertory staples, the New York City Opera is shuffling casts this season with greater frequency than usual.
Tuesday evening's performance of Bizet's ''Carmen'' at the New York State Theater offered personnel almost entirely different from the opera's season premiere on Aug. 9.
And some roles have been taken by still other singers in the interim.


B. Dalton, in a Radical Shift, To Open Large Bookstores
LEAD: In a radical departure from its small mall stores specializing in best sellers, B. Dalton Bookseller Inc. will open today what it says is the first of a series of big stores stocking more than 100,000 titles.


Pontiff, in Africa, Celebrates Mass at Foot of Kilimanjaro
LEAD: Pope John Paul II, an avid mountain hiker, came today to the foot of Africa's tallest mountain, Kilimanjaro, to celebrate Mass in the heartland of the Roman Catholic Church in Tanzania.


3-Year Guarantee Offered by Xerox
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation began offering a ''total satisfaction guarantee'' today that promises a free replacement to customers dissatisfied with any of the company's products.
The guarantee covers all Xerox products for three years or for the full term of financing through Xerox, whichever is longer.


Fannie Mae Issues Total $900 Million
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association is offering two debenture issues totaling $900 million.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
A3-21
The White House called for patience.
Administration officials appealed to Congress and the public to stand firm during an expected long standoff with President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.
Page A1
U.S. and Israel say they'll seek ''credible'' peace process


Confrontation in the Gulf;   24 Arrive in Newark After Leaving Iraq and Kuwait


Football;   Taylor Signs and Starts Preparing for the Opener
LEAD: Lawrence Taylor is back with the Giants as the highest-paid defensive player in the history of professional football.


Detroit Desperately Searches For Its Very Lifeblood: People
LEAD: As cities across the country assess preliminary figures from the census, none is scrambling harder than Detroit, which Federal officials say has lost half its population since 1950 - enough people to replace the entire population of Phoenix.


Tennis;   Graf and Sanchez Romp to Reach Semifinals
LEAD: Their work day finished, Steffi Graf and Arantxa Sanchez Vicario each pronounced herself happy with her quarterfinal victory yesterday in the United States Open and confident of continued success tomorrow in the semifinals, when they will play for the ninth time in their careers.


John Lawrence Denny, Priest, 70
LEAD: The Rev.
John Lawrence Denny, a priest in the Episcopal Diocese of Newark and an associate at St.
Anthony of Padua in Hackensack, died on Monday at Hackensack (N.J.) Medical Center.
He was 70 years old and lived in Hackensack and in Southhold, L.I.


Czechoslovak Official Visits Minnesota


Dukakis Orders Further Cuts As State Tax Collections Fall
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis ordered $150 million trimmed from state spending on Tuesday, beyond the $265 million in budget cuts ordered by the Massachusetts Legislature earlier this year when it approved the biggest tax increase in the state's history.


Man Charged in Kidnappings
LEAD: A New Britain man accused of abducting three children was arraigned on Tuesday on charges of kidnapping and attempted murder.
The defendant, Stephen M. Theriault, 31 years old, is accused of taking the children to his home on Friday, tying up one of them and placing a bag over her face, causing the girl to faint.


Seoul Rejects North's Plan to End Hostilities
LEAD: South Korean officials said today that they would reject North Korea's initial proposals to reduce mutual hostilities on the Korean peninsula, but that it was still extremely useful to have both countries lay out their positions at their discussions here this week.


Foes Seen as Desperate to Stop Bhutto
LEAD: A month after the abrupt dismissal of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, politicians, diplomats and voters here are widely agreed that her foes in the transitional Government appear willing to go to any lengths to discredit her so that she cannot be re-elected.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Apple Bancorp Inc. shareholders tendered almost 2.1 million shares to Stanley Stahl through Tuesday under his $38-a-share offer for the company that is now scheduled to expire on Oct. 1.
Counting shares he already owned, Mr.
Stahl holds 76 percent of Apple Bancorp's stock.


Slavery Helps Build a Boomtown in Amazon
LEAD: A gateway to the ranching frontier of the eastern Amazon, this rough and ready town recently topped a census list as Brazil's fastest growing city in the 1980's.


Campbell Soup Posts Loss Of $238.4 Million in Quarter
LEAD: Capping a year of sharp cost-cutting and lagging international performance, the Campbell Soup Company announced a fourth-quarter loss of $238.4 million yesterday, deeper than the loss of $194.7 million a year earlier.


Bridge
LEAD: A minor event concluded here Tuesday at the world bridge championships, while a major one continued.
The minor event was the Pamp par contest in which 20 of the world's best players were tested with a series of difficult playing problems.


6-Day Drop Ends for Wheat On Rumors of Aid to Soviets
LEAD: Prices of wheat futures rebounded strongly yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade, ending a six-day decline amid speculation that the United States will offer food credits to the Soviet Union.


New U.S.-Soviet Air Routes
LEAD: The Transportation Department granted permission today to the Federal Express Corporation and Alaska Airlines Inc. to begin air service between the United States and the Soviet Union.
It was the first of several route decisions expected under an agreement the two nations signed in June.


Family in Fatal Mugging Loved New York
LEAD: On the block where Brian Watkins lived with his family, a cluster of new homes surrounded by peach orchards and shadowed by 12,000-foot Mount Timpanogos, there is no shortage of hatred for New York City.


Sports People: Baseball;   Clemens Is Ailing
LEAD: Roger Clemens of the Boston Red Sox is suffering from a sore right shoulder, the team said yesterday.
The announcment came less than 24 hours after Clemens's eight-game winning streak was ended by Oakland.


Dollar Off in Heavy Selling On Talk of Fed Rate Move
LEAD: The dollar sank against all leading foreign currencies yesterday in trading punctuated by widespread speculation that interest rates in the United States would move lower.


Loews Increases Stake in Champion
LEAD: The Loews Corporation, the New York hotel and tobacco concern headed by Laurence A. Tisch, has raised its stake in the Champion International Corporation to 8.93 percent from 7.92 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Loews said it acquired 933,900 additional Champion shares between Aug.


China Faces Its Longest March
LEAD: To the Editor:


Washington Talk;   Drug War Underlines Fickleness Of Public
LEAD: Zen and the art of politics require a fatalistic acceptance of this fortune-cookie truth: up one day and down the next.
Public opinion is notoriously fickle.


Borland Software
LEAD: Borland International introduced a new version of its Paradox data base software that will allow personal computer users to retrieve data from larger computers.
The program uses a language known as structured query language, or SQL, to request information from data bases on the larger machines.


New President At Newsday
LEAD: Douglas B. Fox, a senior vice president for marketing at Newsday Inc., has been named president and chief operating officer of the daily newspaper, which publishes Long Island and New York editions, Newsday announced yesterday.


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
The Advertising Council is asking television stations to run a campaign sponsored by the National Committee for Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve.
The spot, ''Be a hero, give your employees the freedom to protect ours,'' was created last year by Ross Roy Advertising, Detroit.
It is being encourged for rerun because of the Persian Gulf crisis.


Chronicle
LEAD: GIORGIO PERLASCA has long been honored in Italy and Israel for his courage in helping to save thousands of Jews during World War II.
Tonight, when the 80-year-old Italian national is to be presented the United States Holocaust Memorial Council's Medal of Remembrance by Associate Justice ANTONIN SCALIA of the Supreme Court in


Americans' Sex Knowledge Is Lacking, Poll Says
LEAD: It may be a topic of abiding fascination at cocktail parties and in locker rooms everywhere, but when it comes to knowledge of sex, Americans are woefully ignorant, according to a new survey.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Pepsi-Cola has signed on the rap musician MC Hammer for worldwide sponsorship and advertising.
The company signed a sponsorship agreement with the rapper Young MC last April.


Elaine Penn Is Dead; Opera Coach Was 73
LEAD: Elaine Penn, an opera coach and accompanist who worked with many principal singers at the Metropolitan Opera and the New York City Opera, died at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital on Aug. 28.
She was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.


For Assembly: Manhattan, Bronx
LEAD: New York voters will choose State Assembly nominees in the primary election next Tuesday.
Here are our endorsements in some contested Democratic races.
As is too often the case in one-party New York City, victory in these overwhelmingly Democratic districts spells election.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Painting Over Varnish


Events: Fall Classes And a Garden Sale
LEAD: A Design on Education, Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6868.


Confidence on Israeli Oil
LEAD: The chairman of the Occidental Petroleum Corporation, Armand Hammer, said today that Israel, dependent on imports for all its oil, could eventually find enough to export.
Dr.
Hammer, who heads a consortium drilling for oil off Israel's Mediterranean coast, said he was confident enough oil would be found to make Israel an exporting country.


Child Psychology
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Sunday about the restoration of the Great Hall at Ellis Island misstated the cost of the work in some copies.
It was $156 million, not billion.


Oracle Replaces Division President
LEAD: Oracle Corporation replaced the president of its Oracle U.S.A. division, a week after the company was forced to restate earnings for three previous quarters.
Oracle, a leading producer of data base software, said Michael S. Fields, formerly head of United States field sales and consulting, had been promoted to president of Oracle U.S.A., replacing Gary


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Japanese and Soviets Issue Rare Joint Appeal on Gulf
LEAD: Japan and the Soviet Union issued a statement today charging Iraq with violating the human rights of the foreigners it is detaining, and strongly backed ''collective efforts'' to force Saddam Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
Economic and Social Council
UNICEF EXECUTIVE BOARD SESSION - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Treasury Securities Rise Slightly
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities rose slightly yesterday and interest rates dipped in light trading, as dealers began to position themselves for tomorrow's release of August employment data.


Tokyo Bank To Form U.S. Mergers Unit
LEAD: The Industrial Bank of Japan, one of the world's largest banking institutions, is expected to announce today that it is forming a mergers subsidiary in New York to put together deals between companies in Japan and the United States, people who have been briefed on the plan said last night.


Mexico City Journal;   In the Aztecs' Land, Muted Hurrah for Columbus
LEAD: Nowhere in the Western Hemisphere is the celebration of the 500th Columbus Day, in 1992, bringing on more of a debate about the nation's true heritage than in Mexico.


Gangs That Dance to a Violent Beat
LEAD: For scores of restless young men, Roosevelt Avenue and Main Street in Flushing, Queens, is the center of the world, a place to meet and pass the time before embarking on one of their frequent expeditions to Manhattan's discotheques.


IRAN-CONTRA DATA TERMED FALSIFIED
LEAD: The first witness in the Iran-contra trial of a former intelligence official testified today that financial ledgers figuring prominently in the prosecution's case had been falsified before they were turned over to the Government by the Swiss company that maintained them.


Baseball;   Barfield's Big Homer Ends Yankees' Slide
LEAD: Just when it looked like another shutout, the extension of another losing streak to six games and some more misery in a miserable season, Jesse Barfield resurrected the Yankees with one swing in the eighth inning.


Ford Canada Is Target
LEAD: The Canadian Automobile Workers union today chose the Ford Motor Company of Canada Ltd. as its strike target, which means an eventual contract with Ford will set the standards for the union's labor agreements with the Canadian units of the General Motors Corporation and the Chrysler Corporation.
The current contract expires on Sept.


FLOW OF TOURISTS SHIFTS IN HUNGARY
LEAD: It was a year ago that a tide of East Germans, many of them here on vacation, began moving through Hungary to the West, touching off the revolutions that swept Eastern Europe.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD:
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Aug. 31
Aug. 24
Sept. 1
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.2
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
3.2
Gasoline stocks
210.5
210.9
217.7
Distillate stocks
126.7
124.0
116.8
Crude imports, daily
6.8
6.6
6.4
Product imports, daily
1.9
2.2
1.7
Crude stocks
372.2
376.6
335.8
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
92.0
92.4
91.8


Confrontation in the Gulf;   BAKER WARNS U.S. TO HAVE PATIENCE ON IRAQ EMBARGO
LEAD: The Bush Administration appealed to Congress and the public today to stand firm and demonstrate patience during an expected long standoff with President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.
Government analysts said the worldwide embargo against Iraq could take more than a year to cripple Iraq's economy.


Schools in New Jersey Open Amid Uncertainty
LEAD: The first school year under the Florio administration and its overhaul of school financing started yesterday with teachers' contracts in 101 districts unsettled, two strikes and a pervasive atmosphere of anxiety.


Game Faces, Game Knees, And Pirates
LEAD: It was about three hours before the first game of the doubleheader between the Mets and the Pirates in Three Rivers Stadium yesterday afternoon, the start of a three-game series that has created a certain amount of excitement in the metropolises of the two teams.


Books of The Times;   Kitty Dukakis's Life Of Sad Uncertainties And Self-Made Mists
LEAD:
Now You Know
By Kitty Dukakis with Jane Scovell
Illustrated. 315 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster.
$19.95.


Salomon Unit to Limit Commodities Trading
LEAD: The commodities unit of Salomon Inc. will stop its trading in coffee, sugar and rice as part of significant cutbacks in the division, an internal company memorandum told employees yesterday.


3 Radicals Agree to Plead Guilty in Bombing Case
LEAD: Three radicals will plead guilty to setting off bombs at the nation's Capitol and seven other sites in the early 1980's.
The Government has agreed to drop charges against three other people.


Yes, We Can Retool As Cold War Ends
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tennis;   Sampras, at Age 19, Shows Classic Style
LEAD: Pete Sampras has always seemed tame on a tennis court alongside more flamboyant peers like Andre Agassi, Michael Chang and Jim Courier.


Higher Risk Is Found Among Children of Smokers
LEAD: For the first time, researchers have shown that nonsmoking adults who grew up in households with smokers have an increased risk of lung cancer.


Catholics and Jews Call for Effort To Halt East Europe Anti-Semitism
LEAD: At a high-level meeting in Prague, Vatican representatives and officials of Jewish and Roman Catholic organizations from 16 nations have agreed on the need for an initiative to combat anti-Semitism in Eastern Europe.
The four-day meeting, which is ending today, also provided groundwork for a future Vatican document on the Holocaust and the roots of anti


Nevada Housing Yields 6.55 to 7.85%
LEAD: The Nevada Housing Division is tentatively offering $55 million in single-family program senior bonds with a maximum yield of 7.85 percent for an issue due in 2015 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Sports People: Pro Basketball;   Rewarding Experience For Attending School
LEAD: Today's multiple-choice test question is based on the following facts: 1.
Elementary-school attendance is one of the strongest predictors of high school dropout rates. 2.
In connection with the 1990 National Basketball Association All-Star Game in Miami in February, the N.B.A. sponsored a Stay In School incentive campaign in which any of 60,000 pupils of 50 Dade County schools who did not miss a day of school in January were given their choice of receiving N.B.A.


On Widowhood
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Everybody is talking about how much they hate New York and how this just shows why nobody in their right mind should ever go there.''
- David G. Hansen, a neighbor of the Utah tourist killed in the subway.
[B1:3.]


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Tough New Campaign for U.S. Clothing
LEAD: The Crafted With Pride in U.S.A.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Shuttle Delayed Again
The launching of the space shuttle Columbia was delayed a third time, and the problem was familiar: a fuel leak of the kind that has plagued the shuttle fleet for months.
Page A22.
Slain Man Loved New York
In Provo, Utah, on the block where a tourist killed in a subway station lived, neighbors remember him as someone who touted Manhattan but recognized its dangers.


Metro Matters;   Lindsay Legacy: Talented Aides Who Still Lead
LEAD: ''He is fresh,'' the columnist Murray Kempton wrote of John V. Lindsay in 1965, ''and everyone else is tired.''


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. and Israel Say They'll Seek 'Credible' Mideast Peace Process
LEAD: In the first high-level meeting between Israeli and American officials since the Persian Gulf crisis began, Israel and the United States agreed today to work to establish a ''credible'' Arab-Israeli peace process to demonstrate to the Arab world that there is an alternative to the violent approach advocated by President Saddam Hussein of


Jackie Mason Returning With a TV Talk Show
LEAD: Seemingly undeterred by the cancellation of his network situation comedy, ''Chicken Soup,'' last season, Jackie Mason announced his return to television yesterday.


Keeping House in the Grand Manner
LEAD: THE videotape opens to the strains of classical music and then a voice reading from Psalm 49: ''Their inward thought is that their houses shall continue forever, and their dwelling places to all generations.''


DENTIST WITH AIDS TELLS EX-PATIENTS
LEAD: A dentist believed to have given a patient AIDS while extracting a tooth has sent former patients a warning letter suggesting they get tested for the AIDS virus.


Zapata to Sell Offshore Rigs
LEAD: The Zapata Corporation, an offshore oil drilling company that was co-founded by President Bush in 1953, agreed today to sell most of its assets to a company based in Bermuda.


Chief Executive Is Named At Bantam Doubleday Dell
LEAD: Bertelsmann A.G., the West German media conglomerate, yesterday named Paul D. Neuthaler as chairman and chief executive of the Bantam Doubleday Dell publishing group.


Currents;   Furniture, Swans and Other Birds
LEAD: FOR the past 15 years, Martin Cohen, an artist and collector, has spent a lot of time on Long Island.
But Mr.
Cohen has not been happy.


Going Beyond Lock and Key
LEAD: EVEN in the most peaceful communities, home security often no longer means just a door lock and a key for many people.


White House Opposes Plan for Data Base
LEAD: The Bush Administration said today that it opposed a House Democratic leadership proposal to create a Federal technology data base that would help American companies compete against foreign rivals.
The White House said such a program would be costly and unnecessary.


U.S. Backs Dumping Charge
LEAD: Sweaters from Hong Kong, South Korea and Taiwan that are being sold in the United States at less than fair market value harm American industry and thus are subject to anti-dumping duties, the Government ruled today.


Fiber Art's 'Picasso' Has a Retrospective
LEAD: FOR decades, the textile artist Ed Rossbach used such diverse materials as vinyl tape, silk threads, newspaper, cardboard and plastic, and often threw into question preconceived notions about the preciousness or worthlessness of the created object.
His baskets are made of newspaper, plastic or cloth and his fabrics are woven with cellophane.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Excerpts From Iraqi Statement Declaring War of 'Right Against Wrong'
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a statement issued today by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq and read by a spokesman over Iraqi television, as recorded by the Federal News Service through the facilities of CNN, which provided a simultaneous translation:


Suit Against Keating
LEAD: The Office of Thrift Supervision said today that it had reached an agreement with Charles H. Keating Jr. on an accounting of his finances.
The agreement requires Mr.
Keating to provide an accounting of his assets to the Office of Thrift Supervision.
The agency has begun a $40 million civil lawsuit against Mr.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising - ADDENDA;   G. Gordon Liddy in Ad For Chilean Wines
LEAD: G. Gordon Liddy will join the Watergate rebound team by becoming a spokesman for Concha y Toro wines.
The print ad, which depicts Mr.
Liddy with a bottle under the headline ''G.
Gordon Liddy on Graft,'' will begin in October.


Currents;   Stone River Gods For the Garden
LEAD: MICHAEL GARDEN (his real name and what he calls a twist of fate) likes to call Elizabeth Street, the lower Manhattan shop of which he is the director, ''a facility.''


U.S. to Open Talks With Cambodian Communists
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today that the United States had decided to open direct talks with Cambodia's Communist Government to seek an end to the nation's civil war.


Crisis of Drugs Remains Top Priority, Bush Says
LEAD: President Bush vowed today that the drug war would remain the nation's top priority despite events in the Persian Gulf, even as Congressional critics charged that the Administration's drug policy had largley ignored the nation's drug-ravaged cities.


Will Powell Run With Bush in '92?
LEAD: The only certain thing about the Persian Gulf crisis is that it will trigger many unintended consequences.
One increasingly possible consequence: the replacement of Vice President Dan Quayle on the 1992 Republican ticket by Colin Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Such a historic development could result in the return of black American voters to the Republican Party they abandoned in 1932 to vote for Franklin Roosevelt in the New


Tarrytown Making Do In Schools
LEAD: At Washington Irving Intermediate School, art instruction this year may draw inspiration from Marcel Duchamp, who took everyday objects and declared them works of art.


Sports People: Pro Basketball;   Heavy Penalty
LEAD: The Washington Bullets have not paid John Williams, the injured forward, for six weeks because the team contends he is overweight, the Bullets' general manager, John Nash, said.


Rinfret Proposes Cutting Spending and Taxes to Bridge Gaps
LEAD: Declaring that ''this state is facing imminent bankruptcy,'' Pierre A. Rinfret yesterday proposed deep reductions in New York State's spending and taxes over the next four years to close present and future ''Cuomo budget gaps'' and create ''a healthy state economy.''


Sports People: Pro Basketball;   Aide for Fitch
LEAD: Tom Newell has been hired as an assistant coach under Bill Fitch, the Nets announced yesterday.
Newell, who is 43, spent the last four seasons as an assistant coach with the Seattle SuperSonics.
Newell's father is Pete Newell, the former collegiate coach who is a member of the Basketball Hall of Fame.


Forget About Gulfo
LEAD: A mischievous typesetter in the Carter era, looking at a headline over an editorial that read ''All Must Share the Burden,'' rebelled at the dreary cliche and substituted a headline of embarrassing truth: ''Mush From the Wimp.''


Killing of Brazil Youths Reported
LEAD: Death squads are killing hundreds of street children in Brazil's cities, possibly at the rate of one a day, Amnesty International said today.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Resistance Group Releases Photograph From Occupied Kuwait City


Adrian Phillips, 91, Miss America Official
LEAD: Adrian Phillips, a former hotel executive and former president of the Miss America Pageant, died on Tuesday at his home outside Atlantic City.
He was 91 years old.


Big Board Seat Price
LEAD: A New York Stock Exchange seat was sold on Tuesday for $301,000, equaling the lowest price in the last five and half years.
Prices of seats, which entitle members to trade directly on the stock exchange floor, tend to reflect the level of trading volume on the Big Board, the nation's largest stock exchange.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Analytical Surveys Inc., Colorado Springs, named Sid Corder president and chief operating officer.
He replaces John Thorpe, who will continue as chairman and chief executive.


Vehicle Sales Tumbled 21.4% in Late August
LEAD: Sales of domestic cars and trucks fell 21.4 percent in late August, compared with a year earlier.
Sales in the 1989 period were exceptionally high because of large incentives offered to buyers to clear bloated inventories at the end of the model year.


Giving a Country Charm to Rag Rugs
LEAD: DURING her days as an art student, Margareta Grandin Nettles learned to make traditional Scandinavian rag rugs in her native Sweden.
But she thinks that her years on Nantucket, where she now lives and has a shop, are responsible for the distinctive look, texture and colors of her handmade cotton rugs.


End-of-Year Shortage of Oil Forecast
LEAD: Despite efforts by oil-producing countries to increase their production of crude oil, shortages are likely to develop by the end of the year, causing prices of home heating oil to soar, a Bush Administration official acknowledged today.


Home Improvement
LEAD: AN automatic garage-door opener means not having to unload a car full of groceries in the rain.
It means that on a dark night, you get out of your car inside the locked garage rather than outside.


Oh No! Noble Apache Bites the German Dust
LEAD: This resort town turns into a shrine each summer as hundreds of thousands of people come to admire the most popular hero a German writer has ever produced: a wise and brave Apache chief named Winnetou.


Chronicle
LEAD: After completing his appearance with the Cleveland San Jose Ballet at the Edinburgh Festival last weekend, RUDOLF NUREYEV was criticized by the London press for his performance, in which he danced a scant five minutes of a 90-minute ballet.Mr.
Nureyev was performing in the British premiere of ''The Overcoat,'' a ballet choreographed especially for him by the Danish choreographer FLEMING FLINDT, loosely based on a story by Gogol and set to the music of Shostakovich.


No Silverado House Hearing
LEAD: A Congressional hearing on the failure of the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association was canceled today because the two scheduled witnesses refused to appear voluntarily, the chairman of a House subcommittee said.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Bush Planning Capitol Speech
LEAD: President Bush will address a joint meeting of Congress at 9 P.M.
Eastern time on Tuesday, the White House announced today.
The speech is expected to cover the crisis in the Persian Gulf.


Currents;   3,001 Snow Domes Later, A Book and a Newsletter
LEAD: SIX years ago, when Nancy McMichael worked at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington as the assistant to the chief curator, she went on a trip and searched for a snow dome for the private collection of Ned Rifkin, the curator of contemporary art at the gallery.


Chronicle
LEAD: The conference title could hardly be more timely: ''America's Role in a Changing World.'' The four-day conference of the International Institute for Strategic Studies opens today at the Homestead in Hot Springs, Va.
The first order of business will be the announcement of the election of ROBERT F. ELLSWORTH, a leading


Ripple Effect of Soviet Oil Drop
LEAD: Independent of the Iraq crisis, which has taken some 4.6 million barrels of oil a day off the world market, oil production in the Soviet Union has fallen by more than half a million barrels a day since last year, and it is likely to continue declining, according to analysts in the United States and


Schools Chief May Seek Law On Custodians
LEAD: As he starts his first full year as Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez is considering seeking legislation that would put the entire custodial work force directly under the control of the New York City Board of Education.


Currents;   For Times You Forget The Basics
LEAD: THEY'RE just the things to stick in a handbag, glove compartment or overnight bag.
And they will prove especially useful for those who tend to leave town in a hurry, forgetting their razor, toothbrush and sunglasses.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: THE young couple had always counted on the husband's mother, a widow, to baby-sit for them.
When the mother announced that she was fulfilling a lifelong dream by going off to Santa Fe, N.M., for a few weeks, her children's response surprised her.


Baseball: Notebook;   Dodgers Try to Prove They Are Contenders
LEAD: If the San Francisco Giants hadn't already done it themselves, the Mets unmasked them as pretenders to their own throne last weekend when they swept a four-game series from the defending National League West champions.
This weekend, the Los Angeles Dodgers have a chance to prove that they are contenders and not pretenders.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   The News From Home (But Nothing Offensive)
LEAD: To ease the tedium and sense of isolation for thousands of American troops stationed in the Saudi Arabian desert, the military is sending over radios, newspapers, paperback books and magazines, but nothing that would offend their conservative Muslim hosts.


Finding and Creating Schools That Work
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gun Control Won't Stop Urban Violence
LEAD: To the Editor:


Morgan Plans Sale Of Office Complex
LEAD: J. P. Morgan &amp; Company agreed to sell a majority interest in Morgan Place, the office complex it is building as its London headquarters, for $413 million to the Sumitomo Life Insurance Company of Japan.
The New York-based company said the sale of the 52.5 percent interest would be amortized as a financing cost over its 25-year lease for the complex.


3 Cases Voided In Sex Incident Near St. John's
LEAD: A judge yesterday threw out the indictments of three St.
John's University students charged with sexually assaulting another student at an off-campus residence.


I.B.M. Looks to Future With Faster Machines
LEAD: With today's introduction of what it called its most important new computers in a quarter-century, I.B.M. has apparently pulled off a coup in bringing out its products in a way that will permit its biggest customers to shift painlessly to its new generation of mainframes.


Limits Urged for F.D.I.C.
LEAD: The chairman of the House Banking Committee today proposed limiting the number of accounts that can be insured by the Government and perhaps reducing maximum coverage below $100,000.


Sikorsky Venture With Korean Air
LEAD: Sikorsky Aircraft and Korean Air said they would work together to make Black Hawk helicopters for the Korean Government.
The number of helicopters to be produced and the value of the deal were not released.


Federal Reserve Blocks Bank Expansion Into Insurance
LEAD: The ability of banks to expand into the insurance business was cast into considerable doubt today when the Federal Reserve Board ordered Citicorp to close its insurance operations in Delaware.


Futures Case Jury Selection
LEAD: Jury selection began today in one of two trials of traders indicted in a wide-ranging Government undercover operation at Chicago's futures exchanges.


Gasoline Prices Ease
LEAD: The price of retail gasoline eased by 3.4 cents in the last week, but consumers are still paying an extra 19.8 cents a gallon because of the Persian Gulf crisis, the American Automobile Association said yesterday.
Motorists are being charged an average of $1.27 for a gallon of self-service unleaded gasoline, according to the survey.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   In Baghdad's Bazaars, Fear Is in Good Supply
LEAD: Off to one side of the sparkling glass and marble lobby of a modern hotel overlooking the languid Tigris River, a young woman was talking about the start of school in a few days and her brother's children.


High Court Upholds Ruling To Block Arkansas Execution
LEAD: The Supreme Court today upheld a ruling that blocks the execution of a convicted murderer who says his confession was coerced by a sheriff who is now a member of Congress.


Fund Yields Are Mixed
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed for the week ended yesterday.


Judge Sets Date for Retrial Of Garcias in Wedtech Case
LEAD: A retrial is planned for former Representative Robert Garcia of the Bronx and his wife, Jane, whose extortion convictions were overturned, an assistant United States attorney, Michele Hirshman, said yesterday.
Judge Leonard B. Sand of Federal District Court set a tentative trial date of Dec. 3.


ROMANIAN MINERS DISPUTE CRITICISM
LEAD: The coal miners here, some 35,000 of them, say they have been unfairly judged for intervening forcefully in the chaotic politics of post-Communist Romania this summer.


Tar Heels Extend Streak to 98
LEAD: Mia Hamm scored three goals in the opening 17 minutes as North Carolina defeated Mercer, 9-0, in women's soccer, extending the Tar Heels' National Collegiate Athletic Association-record unbeaten streak to 98 games.


One-Day Teacher Strike Ends
LEAD: A strike by this city's public school teachers ended after one day when the teachers voted this morning to ratify a three-year contract.
The contract gives teachers more say on classroom instruction methods, limits class sizes to 27 to 29 students, pays teachers extra for overloads and includes a no-strike clause, School Superintendent Peter Demyan said.


Football;   Complaint on College TV Contract
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission filed an administrative complaint against the College Football Association and Capital Cities-ABC Inc. today, saying their national television contracts are anticompetitive.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Tunis, Long Friendly to West, Bristles With Hostility to U.S. Gulf Moves
LEAD: When the United States began dispatching forces in the Persian Gulf crisis, Tunisia was one of the Arab countries whose support the United States took virtually for granted, Western diplomats and Tunisian officials here said.


Baseball;   Bid to Block Vincent Hearing Fails
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent, successfully withstanding another legal assault, will hold his second hearing today into the self-described gambler Howard Spira's relationship with high-ranking officials of the Yankees.


How to Aid Gulf Refugees
LEAD:
American Red Cross, Middle East Refugee Crisis, Box 37243, Washington, D.C. 20013.
AmeriCares Foundation, 161 Cherry Street, New Canaan, Conn. 06840.
Church World Service, Box 968, Elkhart, Ind. 46515.
Direct Relief International, Box 30820, Santa Barbara, Calif. 93130-0820.


W. Craig Bennett, 45, Citicorp Vice President
LEAD: W. Craig Bennett, a vice president with Citicorp and a New York City official in the Lindsay administration, died on Monday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 45 years old and lived in Glen Ridge, N.J.


Ivan Mihailoff Dies in Rome at 94; Macedonian Rebel in Futile Fight
LEAD: Ivan Mihailoff, a Macedonian revolutionary who waged a futile lifelong struggle to free his native land on the Balkan Peninsula from domination by Turkey, Bulgaria, Greece and Yugoslavia, died yesterday in Rome, where he had lived since 1947.
He was 94 years old.


Tennis;   Sampras Upsets Lendl; McEnroe Advances
LEAD: One champion perished but the other prevailed yesterday at the United States Open, where the first two men's quarterfinals produced an upset for Ivan Lendl and another halcyon outing for the renovated John McEnroe.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.00
8.06
9.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.38
7.39
7.82
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.31
7.36
7.81
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.70
8.76
8.20
30-YR.


Ozone Losses in Arctic Are Larger Than Expected
LEAD: Scientists have found that in January and February 1989, levels of protective ozone in the stratosphere near the North Pole were 25 percent lower, on the average, than in surrounding regions.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Monday about the Library of Congress misidentified the man transferring film onto videotape.
He was Jim Winther.


Senator's Widow Loses Suit Against Government Doctors
LEAD: A Federal district judge today denied a $3.5 million wrongful-death claim by Senator John P. East's widow, who had contended that Government doctors' failure to diagnose his thyroid disorder had driven him to suicide.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   EAST BLOC TO SELL MASKS TO SAUDIS
LEAD: Warsaw Pact countries have agreed in principle to sell gas masks and other decontamination equipment to protect civilians in Saudi Arabia in the event of an Iraqi chemical-weapons attack, East European Government officials and Western diplomats say.


Art by Czech Students To Be at Cooper Union
LEAD: Posters and photographs by Czechoslovak students documenting political changes in Czechoslovakia during the last two years are to be the subject of an exhibition to begin next Thursday at Cooper Union, at Seventh Street at Third Avenue.


Gun Control Won't Stop Urban Violence;   Get After Imports
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rights Observers Reportedly Ousted in Yugoslavia
LEAD: Three members of a human rights monitoring team were detained by the police today in the troubled Yugoslav province of Kosovo and ordered to leave the country, a member of the group said tonight in a televised interview.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Thunder on the Right: U.S. Role in Gulf Splits Longtime Conservative Allies
LEAD: Amid increasingly bitter invective, a small set of influential conservative newspaper columnists, editorial writers and television commentators has turned away from fighting liberalism and started battling one another over the United States' intervention in the Middle East.


Soviet Oil Output Off, Worsening Shortages
LEAD: Compounding the shortages brought on by the Middle East crisis, Soviet oil production has fallen more than half a million barrels a day since last year.


Irene Dunne, a Versatile Actress Of the 1930's and 40's, Dies at 91
LEAD: Irene Dunne, the patrician star of madcap comedies, sentimental dramas and Jerome Kern musical films of the 1930's and 40's, died on Tuesday at her home in the Holmby Hills section of Los Angeles.
She was 91 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on Monday showing preliminary 1990 census data for New York State referred incorrectly to figures for the five boroughs of New York City.
They were extrapolations based on earlier estimates of the city's population, provided by the office of the New York State Assembly Speaker.
While the Census Bureau has released results for each of the state's counties outside New York City, it has not released borough figures.


More on the Gulf
LEAD:
OIL SHORTAGES SEEN: A Bush Administration official said that despite efforts to increase oil production, shortages are likely by the end of the year, causing prices of heating oil to soar.
Business Day, page D1.
SOVIET OIL WOES: Production in the Soviet Union has fallen by more than half a million barrels a day since last year, and it is likely to continue declining.


Fees Paid to Nynex Unit By Contractors at Issue
LEAD: An unregulated subsidiary of the Nynex Corporation collected large, mostly secret payments from companies providing temporary employees to its regulated subsidiary, the New York Telephone Company, according to documents of the unregulated subsidiary obtained yesterday.


Legion Accepts Shunned Black
LEAD: An American Legion post here that rejected a black Vietnam veteran for membership two months ago because of his race admitted him on a 17-to-1 vote Tuesday night.


New Features Are Planned By Prodigy
LEAD: The Prodigy Services Company, to lure more home computer owners to its information and home shopping service, is expected to announce new features and refinements on Thursday.


SmithKline Beecham Appoints U.S. Chief
LEAD: SmithKline Beecham, the large British-owned pharmaceutical company, has named a French-educated scientist as president of its United States pharmaceuticals business.
Dr.
Jean-Pierre Garnier, 43 years old, will assume the job Monday at the company's Philadelphia headquarters.


Appleton to Buy Boise Cascade Mill
LEAD: The Boise Cascade Corporation has agreed to sell its Vancouver, Wash., paper mill in the first big step toward reducing its Pacific Northwest pulp and paper operations.
Appleton Papers Inc., based in Appleton, Wis., will pay about $60 million for the mill and another $12 million for finished goods inventories.


Where Is the Parks Czar to Restore New York's Green Spaces?
LEAD: To the Editor:


East German Pact For Otis Elevator
LEAD: The Otis Elevator Company has signed an agreement to acquire a majority interest in an East German elevator maker.
The East German company, Berliner Aufzugs-und Fahrtreppenbau, or B.A.F., is a subsidiary of a Government-owned conglomerate and employs 1,000 workers.
The agreement is subject to approval by Government agencies in West Germany and East Germany.


Boat Club: A Haven in a Wave of Condos
LEAD: For nearly a century, the Point Yacht Club has held its ground at the edge of the Bronx, though the ground has shifted.


Baseball;   A's Beat Red Sox, 10-0 and Complete Sweep
LEAD: Bob Welch scattered five hits in eight innings for his major league-leading 23d victory tonight as the Oakland Athletics routed the Boston Red Sox, 10-0, for a sweep of the three-game series between division leaders.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Top Iraqi Aide Sees Gorbachev On Gulf Crisis
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq sent his Foreign Minister to meet today with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev over the Persian Gulf crisis as the Kremlin maintained unequivocal criticism of what its press agency called ''Iraq's unprovoked invasion of Kuwait.''


Australian Company Net
LEAD: Earnings at the Australian international transportation company TNT were pushed down by a seven-month dispute with the pilots of its Australian airlines, its managing director, Sir Peter Abeles, said today.
The company said profits for the year that ended on June 30 fell 36.8 percent, to 140.75 million Australian dollars ($115.4 million), from 222.61 million Australian dollars a year earlier.


Violent Undercurrent in Quiet Queens Neighborhoods


Despite Advice, Few Are Taking Drugs for AIDS
LEAD: A year after Federal authorities recommended potentially life-prolonging drugs for an estimated 600,000 Americans infected with the AIDS virus but not yet sick, few patients are getting treatment.


First Witness Is Heard in Case of Burned Boy
LEAD: Testimony began yesterday in the Family Court trial of a 14-year-old boy accused of setting fire to David Opont, a Brooklyn youngster who was critically burned in a brutal incident that attracted national attention.


Review/Art;   Delacroix's Masterpiece of a Land He Never Saw
LEAD: With the acquisition of ''Les Natchez,'' a major painting by Eugene Delacroix (1798-1863) that goes on public view this morning, the Metropolitan Museum has closed an important gap in its coverage of French 19th-century painting.
Delacroix in the 1820's and 30's was a master of the dying fall in which a small martyrdom was epitomized.


Home Again, a Long Year After Hugo
LEAD: THE porch had always been the heart of Frances Ashley's house.
For 25 years, ever since she and her husband bought the fine white dwelling overlooking a forest of shrimp boats' masts on Jeremy Creek, the house had been a grandchildren's social center.


No End to Rising Subway Crime; It May Get Worse, Chief Asserts
LEAD: The Chief of the New York City transit police said yesterday that the recent surge in subway crime was expected to continue and might become worse because of rampant drug abuse and a weak regional economy.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Maybelline Inc., Memphis, to DDB Needham Worldwide, Chicago, for its Shine Free account, in order to consolidate the business.
The account was previously handled by the Bloom Agency, Dallas, with billings of $3.1 million, according to Leading National Advertisers.


Prices Up 20% In Argentina
LEAD: Argentine shopkeepers have pushed up food and drink prices by as much as 20 percent in the last few days after a fresh round of Government-imposed gasoline and utility increases, according to figures released today.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Hussein Hardens Line, Saying Sanctions Deprive Children of Milk
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein renewed his call today for a holy war against American forces in the Persian Gulf and for the toppling of King Fahd of Saudi Arabia and President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt.


Close to Home
LEAD: A FRIEND is laid up after foot surgery, clumsy on crutches, terrified of falling and bored stiff.
He's been reading a Serbo-Croatian novel that has, he says, ''many epiphanies but no plot.'' And food has lost its savor.
So have his friends.
There is but one bright spot in his life these days.
Marion


MEDICARE'S WOES FOUND WORSENING
LEAD: Having narrowly escaped financial ruin in the mid-1980's, the Federal Medicare program is now being squeezed as never before, and patients and doctors are both complaining.
Some experts say Americans will have to put up more money or expect reductions in coverage, or else the program will become insolvent within the decade.


Computers That Mimic Desks
LEAD: MY desk has some unusual properties.
I can instantly decorate it using any of 11 ''color schemes'' bearing names like Arizona, Bordeaux, Pastel, and Fluorescent.
I can ornament it with patterns titled Quilt, Paisley, Waffle or Weave.
I can even lay a swatch of green over my work space and play solitaire with any of 12 different decks of cards - all while checking the spelling in an essay on one corner of the desk, and shuffling through a pile of papers on another.


Where's Their Fair Share?
LEAD: America's allies in the Persian Gulf crisis had better face up to one overriding truth: They will have to contribute their full and fair share to the common effort to contain Iraq or they will erode American support for the entire enterprise.


Nervous TV Networks Are Trying the Untried
LEAD: No television season has ever seemed as crowded, as competitive and as unpredictable as the one that will begin on Sept. 17.


PANAMA'S COURTS STALLED BY CHAOS
LEAD: The rugged island of Coiba, off the Pacific Coast here, is the kind of grim, isolated penal colony that nations have used throughout history to cage and punish their most hardened convicts.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a report in the Company News columns of Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly to the purchase of the Westwood Equities Corporation.
Westwood is being acquired jointly by the Electronic Data Systems Corporation and New Century Enterprises Inc., an affiliate of the Pritzker family.


For Millions, Allergy Means Roaches
LEAD: An army of architects, immunologists, epidemiologists and medical anthropologists has begun an ambitious attack on a ubiquitous plague: cockroaches.


No Teacher Layoffs For New York City As Attendance Rises
LEAD: Simply because thousands of students did what they were supposed to do last year - go to school five days a week - teachers in New York City schools will not be laid off this year, a schools official said yesterday.


Shuttle Astronomy Mission Is Postponed by Fuel Leak
LEAD: The often-delayed countdown for the space shuttle Columbia was abruptly halted late today because of a fuel leak, and the launching was postponed for a third time.


ACID RAIN REPORT CONFIRMS CONCERN
LEAD: Nearing the end of a 10-year study, a preliminary Federal report today confirmed many scientists' concerns about the environmental damage caused by acid rain, but concluded that the problem is not of crisis proportions.


Review/Pop;   Buddy Holly's Legacy, By Way of McCartney
LEAD: Paul McCartney gave a party at the Lone Star Roadhouse on Tuesday night - not because it was the 28th anniversary of the recording sessions for ''Love Me Do,'' the Beatles' first single, but as a tribute to Buddy Holly, the rock star from Lubbock, Tex., who died in a plane crash in 1959.
Holly would have been 54 years old tomorrow.


Gun Control Won't Stop Urban Violence;   Automatic Weapons
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dinkins Says He'll Show Anger at Violent Crimes
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins, who has spent almost nine months waging a dogged campaign of verbal civility, calmly agreed yesterday to surrender to demands that he show more public anger at violent crimes like the fatal stabbing in the subway of a tourist from Utah.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Crisis Breathes Life Into a Moribund U.N. Panel
LEAD: A little-known and virtually forgotten United Nations body called the Military Staff Committee may achieve new prominence as a result of the crisis in the Persian Gulf.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Market Place;   'Junk Bond' Prices Hit Record Lows in August
LEAD: Almost a year after the problems of the heavily indebted Campeau Corporation unleashed a huge selloff in ''junk bonds,'' the market for these high-risk securities has not improved much.
In fact, in August, these high-yield bonds suffered their worst one-month decline on record, although there was no evidence of panic-selling.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Oil Jolt


$25 Million Campaign For Revlon Fragrance
LEAD: Revlon will introduce Unforgettable, its first big new fragrance in 17 years, with a $25 million print and television campaign that begins on Saturday.


U.S. Is Told To Return Big S.&amp; L.
LEAD: In a stinging rebuke to the management of the savings and loan bailout, a Federal judge in Topeka, Kan., today ordered Federal regulators to return a $9 billion savings institution to its owners by Thursday morning.


Personal Health
LEAD: You're over the worst of it.
Illness or injury laid you flat for weeks, but you are now recovering.
Your physician, family, friends - perhaps even you yourself - expect you to be cheerful, grateful, optimistic and thankful for all everyone and modern medicine have done to mend your body.


Sports People: Pro Football;   Back in the Stable
LEAD: Mark Herrmann is going back home again to Indiana as a backup quarterback for the Indianapolis Colts.
Herrmann, a perennial backup who appeared in just three games with the Los Angeles Rams last season, was picked up by the Colts yesterday after being waived by the Rams on Monday.


Profits Up 3% At Seagram
LEAD: The Seagram Company said yesterday that a strong performance in its business outside North America helped raise its earnings by 3 percent in the second quarter over a year ago.


Rivals Shun Conference
LEAD: More of the principals to scheduled Cambodian peace talks arrived here today, but the heads of the two rival governments to Cambodia, Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Prime Minister Hun Sen, stayed away.


Russell N. DeJong, 83, Professor of Neurology
LEAD: Dr.
Russell Nelson DeJong, a neurologist and educator, died Aug. 20 at his daughter's home in Mount Pleasant, Mich.
He was 83 years old and lived in Mount Pleasant.
A spokesman for the family said he died of cerebral vascular disease.
Dr.
DeJong, a graduate of the University of Michigan Medical School, headed the neurology department at the university from 1950 to 1976.


Budget Negotiators Prepare for a Last-Ditch Effort to Cut the Deficit
LEAD: On Friday morning, in a large room at the officers' club at Andrews Air Force Base about 10 miles southeast of the Capitol, Richard G. Darman, the Bush Administration's budget director, and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House majority leader, will simultaneously drop on the conference table their respective plans for cutting the


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Thatcher Prepares for Costly and Patient Struggle
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's Government appears to be preparing the British public for a long period of what one official today called a ''progressive tightening'' of the stranglehold the United Nations embargo has placed on Iraq.


Chairman Is Named For Emery Worldwide
LEAD: Consolidated Freightways Inc. has named Arthur C. Bass, a veteran air freight executive, to be chairman and chief executive of its troubled Emery Worldwide subsidiary, the company announced yesterday.
Consolidated is based in Menlo Park, Calif.


Samuel O. Shapiro, 87, A Circulation Director
LEAD: Samuel Oliver Shapiro, a retired vice president and former circulation director of Cowles Communications Inc., died on Tuesday at Beth Israel Hospital.
He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
His wife, Toni Mendez Shapiro, said he died of pneumonia.


Football;   McNeil to Start for the Injured Thomas
LEAD: Freeman McNeil, the 31-year-old running back the Jets placed on waivers Monday then recalled on Tuesday, appeared yesterday to have won the job of starting halfback by default.


Baseball;   Pirate Pitchers Cool Mets in Both Ends of Doubleheader
LEAD: The Mets were annihiliated in the opening round of the Battle for First Place tonight when they scored just one run in 18 innings, lost both ends of a doubleheader to the Pittsburgh Pirates and plunged two and a half games behind with only 27 left to play in a collapsing pennant race.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   On Patrol in the Desert, Marines Fight Boredom
LEAD: As night descends in the desert, the vipers, scorpions and beetles come to life.
So does Bravo Company.


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums
CENTRAL PARK ZOO, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday to Friday (until 8 P.M. on Tuesday) and 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. on weekends; gift shop and cafeteria are open the same hours.
Admission: children under 3, free; ages 3 to 12, 25 cents; 65 and older, 50 cents; others, $1.
Information: 861-6030.


Big Japanese Bank Forms U.S. Unit to Handle Mergers
LEAD: The Industrial Bank of Japan, one of the world's largest banking institutions, announced yesterday that it had formed an American subsidiary to focus on the mergers and acquisitions business.


Brazilian Debt Payments
LEAD: Brazil paid its creditors $3.7 billion in the first quarter of 1990, but the country's foreign debt rose by $2.2 billion, the central bank said today.
The Brazilian debt rose to $116.9 billion in March, from $114.7 in December 1989, according to the bank.
Brazil has the largest foreign debt in the third world.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. Approves Export of Rocket Parts to Brazil Despite Fears of Link to Iraq
LEAD: The State Department has decided to allow the export to Brazil of rocket components that some experts contend could assist efforts by Brazilian engineers and Iraq to develop a long-range ballistic missile, Government officials said today.


TV Weekend;   David Lynch's Particular Outlook on Mardi Gras
LEAD: Mardi Gras was made for David Lynch.
In tomorrow night's premiere of his new Fox Broadcasting series, ''American Chronicles,'' at 9:30 on Channel 5, Mr.
Lynch and his ''Twin Peaks'' collaborator Mark Frost visit New Orleans for a tongue-in-cheek, camera-all-over-the-place view of the big spring celebration.


Argentine Line Sale Is Blocked
LEAD: A judge today suspended the sale of the state-owned airline Aerolineas Argentinas because the proposed buyers made the down payment by letter of credit instead of cash.


Market Place;   Thorny Issues in S.&amp; L. Seizure
LEAD: A Federal judge's ruling that the Government acted illegally in seizing the Franklin Savings Association has raised questions about the Government's ability to regulate - and avoid huge losses at - institutions that use highly sophisticated investment strategies.


Jay Lloyd Block, Chemist, 62
LEAD: Jay Lloyd Block, a chemist and designer of ceramic plates, porcelain and crystal, died on Wednesday while jogging near his home in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
He was 62 years old.


New Charge in S.&amp; L. Case
LEAD: The Office of Thrift Supervision announced today that it has expanded its charges against Thomas Spiegel, a former savings and loan executive accused of squandering $19 million.


Killer's Stay of Execution Angers Lawmaker
LEAD: Representative Tommy F. Robinson criticized the legal system on Wednesday after the United States Supreme Court upheld a stay of execution for a convicted murderer who contends that when the Congressman was a sheriff, he beat a confession out of him.


Man Says He Helped Wife Commit Suicide
LEAD: A California man has told the police that he helped his cancer-stricken wife commit suicide by tying a plastic bag over her head to asphyxiate her, fearing that the medicine she had taken to relieve her pain would not kill her.


Dr. Norbert J. Roberts, Specialist In Preventive Medicine, Was 74
LEAD: Norbert J. Roberts, a past president of the New York Academy of Medicine and retired vice president for medicine and environmental health at the Exxon Corporation, died last Saturday at Blake Memorial Hospital in Bradenton, Fla.
He was 74 years old and lived in Holmes Beach, Fla.


Case of Two Brothers Accused of Killing Parents May Test Secrecy Limit in Patient-Therapist Tie
LEAD: The nexus between psychotherapy and the law has never been a comfortable one.
Psychiatrists and psychologists often see patients who are violence-prone, people who either have committed crimes or threaten to.


Business Digest
LEAD:
The Oil Jolt


Mitsubishi Buys Stake in Clothier
LEAD: The Mitsubishi Corporation has acquired 30 percent of the Italian men's clothier F. G. Reporter in a move the two hope will more than double sales in four years.
F.
G.
Reporter's president, Tino Girombelli, said the alliance would increase the production capacity of the company, strengthen its presence in the world market and facilitate development.


Review/Art;   De Kooning: Masterworks From a Master Painter
LEAD: The Willem de Kooning show at the Salander O'Reilly Galleries will get many people thinking again not only about someone who is widely recognized as the greatest postwar American painter, but also about painting itself during a moment when a great deal of attention is being legitimately paid to other media.


Chronicle
LEAD: The U.S.O. is gearing up for a barrage of shows in the desert of Saudi Arabia.
The comedian JAY LENO will be the first performer heading to the Middle East, for two shows around Thanksgiving.


Critic's Choice
LEAD: Allan Moyle's summer film, ''Pump Up the Volume,'' has been called '' 'Talk Radio' for teens'' because its protagonist, a New Yorker transplanted to suburban Arizona, free-associates like a baby Eric Bogosian on the pirate radio station he operates secretly out of his family's basement.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   CRACKS APPEAR IN EMBARGO AS SEVERAL NATIONS DISCUSS RELIEF FOR IRAQ AND KUWAIT
LEAD: The first cracks in the international trade embargo against Iraq emerged today when several nations said they were considering sending emergency food and medical supplies to Iraq and occupied Kuwait.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
No Strangers Here


Football;   Cunningham Still the Key For Eagles' New Offense
LEAD: When the Giants play the Philadelphia Eagles here Sunday night, they will face an old problem in a somewhat new package.


ARCO-Carbide Deal Advances
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission has given initial approval for the Union Carbide Corporation to sell some plants to the ARCO Chemical Company, based in Newtown Square, Pa.
The companies will each pay the Government $1 million under a consent order the F.T.C. issued on Wednesday for the sale of Union Carbide's urethane polyols and propylene glycols plants in West


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Inside, Reliving the Immigrant's Experience
LEAD: It's as unlikely a time machine as one could imagine, an unwheeled and cheerfully painted device that takes perhaps 20 minutes to carry one back to the early years of the century, when, chances are, someone in the family was putting down roots.
It is the boat to Ellis Island, the old immigrant station in Upper New York Bay that opens to the public on


Marshall Bridges, Pitcher, 59
LEAD: Marshall Bridges, a relief pitcher for four major league teams, died of cancer on Monday at the University of Mississippi Medical Center.
He was 59 years old.


Manville Trust Curb Extended
LEAD: A Federal judge has extended until Oct. 6 his ruling that temporarily freezes payments to asbestos victims by the cash-short Manville Personal Injury Settlement Trust.


Chronicle
LEAD: Former Senator JOHN C. STENNIS has moved into a retirement center after winding up part-time teaching duties at his alma mater, Mississippi State University.
Mr.
Stennis, who is 89 years old, has checked into St.
Catherine's Village in Madison, Miss.


New Leader at Witco Is First Non-Wishnick
LEAD: William R. Toller won the competition yesterday to succeed the long-tenured William Wishnick as head of the Witco Corporation, a petroleum and specialty chemicals company with $1.6 billion in annual sales.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Bloomingdale Area Street Fair, the west side of Broadway from 96th to 106th Streets will be closed tomorrow from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Sari Biro, 78, Dies; Hungarian Pianist Moved to U.S. in '39Section D; Page 6; Column 1; Cultural Desk
Sari Biro, a Hungarian pianist who settled in the United States in 1939, died at St.
Mary's Hospital in San Francisco on Sunday.
She was 78 years old and lived in San Francisco.
Her daughter, Maria Warren Watts, said Miss Biro died of pneumonia.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
9.00
8.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.39
7.38
7.80
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.33
7.31
7.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.70
8.70
8.22
30-YR.


The Media Business;   Illinois Newspaper Deal
LEAD: The Peoria Journal Star on Wednesday closed the $15 million purchase of The Register-Mail of Galesburg and two weekly newspapers after 18 months of bitter bidding wars and lawsuits.
The prospective sale has split the family that owned The Register-Mail, a Monday-through-Saturday afternoon publication with a circulation of 18,700.


2 Koreas, Ending Initial Talks, Agree on a Session in the North
LEAD: The Prime Ministers of North and South Korea concluded two days of talks today and agreed to resume their conversations in the North Korean capital in about five weeks.


Pop/Jazz;   An Ethnic Festival With Audience Participation
LEAD: New Yorkers tend to ignore their own backyards, especially when it comes to regional music, but they will trek to festivals in New Orleans or Colombia in search of roots or exoticism.
Tomorrow, however, they need go only as far as Queens.


Santa Fe Subsidiary Offers $218.9 Million in Debentures
LEAD: The Santa Fe Pacific Corporation, the Chicago-based transportation, natural resources and real estate holding company, and its Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline Partners L. P., which operates pipeline distribution of refined petroleum products, jointly announced the offering yesterday of $218.9 million in debentures by SFP Pipeline


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We have to do something to take back the streets.''
- Peter F. Vallone, Speaker of the New York City Council.
[B4:4.]


Finance/New Issues;   Credit Card Issue To Yield 8.97%
LEAD: Valley National Credit Card Trust 1990-A is offering through J. P. Morgan Securities Inc. a $300 million issue of asset-backed securities that are supported by Mastercard and Visa credit card receivables from the Valley National Bank of Arizona.


At Ellis Island, Embracing the Past and the Future
LEAD: FEW buildings have been able to evoke as powerful a sense of both grandeur and intimidation as those of Ellis Island: for 32 years the immigrants' gateway to the United States, the island symbolized this country's majesty but also its willingness to reject the unwanted.


Sari Biro, 78, Dies; Hungarian Pianist Moved to U.S. in '39
LEAD: Sari Biro, a Hungarian pianist who settled in the United States in 1939, died at St.
Mary's Hospital in San Francisco on Sunday.
She was 78 years old and lived in San Francisco.


Met Life Sets Up Firm With CS First Boston
LEAD: Building on their close financial relationship, the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and CS First Boston Inc. announced yesterday that they were forming an international investment advisory firm.


2d Carolina Lawmaker Admits Selling His Vote
LEAD: One of five state legislators who were indicted last month on Federal corruption charges pleaded guilty today at a hearing where prosecutors showed a videotape of him pocketing a $1,000 bribe in a restaurant.


Tokyo Stocks Rebound
LEAD: After falling to new yearly lows in morning trading today, prices on the Tokyo Stock Exchange rebounded in the afternoon to close in positive territory.
The 225-share Nikkei index closed up 150.16 points, or 0.63 percent, to 23,962.07.
Traders said rumors of a change of Government in Iraq created an excuse to buy.


Mary Ellen McAdam Byrn, Banker, 45
LEAD: Mary Ellen McAdam Byrn, a senior banker in the Institutional Recovery Management Unit of Citibank, died on Monday at her home in Red Hook, N.Y.
She was 45 years old and also lived in Manhattan.


Profits Off By 15.9% At Banks
LEAD: Mounting problems with real estate loans along much of the East Coast cut profits of the nation's commercial banks to $5.3 billion in the second quarter, 15.9 percent below those of the first three months of the year, the Government reported today.


Money Fund Assets Off
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 520 money market mutual funds decreased $770 million, to $406.55 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 160 institutional funds decreased by $781.7 million, to $97.9 billion.
The assets of the 255 general-purpose funds were up by $422.6 million, to $143.69 billion.


Irritated Neighbors Are Pressuring Discos
LEAD: A number of nightclubs and discotheques that attract large crowds of teen-agers are neighborhood irritants at best and breeding grounds for crime at worst, according to complaints to city officials.


Ashton Developing Program for Next
LEAD: The Ashton-Tate Corporation said it was in the final stages of testing a new spreadsheet program to run on computers made by Next Inc.
The program, called Powerstep, includes three-dimensional graphics and allows users to make voice annotations.
Ashton-Tate, based in Torrance, Calif., did not announce a price for its program or say when it would be available.


Alaska Air Plans 4.7% Fare Increase
LEAD: The Alaska Air Group announced it will raise fares by 4.7 percent effective Oct. 1 because of increases in fuel prices since Iraq invaded Kuwait last month.
The increase comes after a 5.3 percent increase that the company and other airlines announced last week.


Baseball;   Two Yans' Partners Want to Sell Their Interests
LEAD: Two of the Yankees' 19 minority owners have hired an investment bank to sell their interest in the team and Japanese buyers are among those being courted, the president of the bank said yesterday.


A Qantas Stake
LEAD: Australia has decided to sell at least 49 percent each of Qantas and the domestic carrier Australian Airlines, Prime Minister Robert Hawke said.
Qantas's chairman, Bill Dix, said ''Japan Airlines, American, British Airways and Lufthansa come to mind as carriers we'll be working with closely.'' Qantas, with a heavy debt load, requires a capital injection of about $930 million, Mr.


DEALS
LEAD:
Baseball


U.S. to Help Soviets Lift Oil Output
LEAD: To get more energy onto world markets, the Bush Administration is encouraging the American oil industry to provide technological and other assistance to the Soviet Union to lift petroleum output, Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher said today.


Subroto Would Tap Reserve
LEAD: The Secretary General of OPEC, Subroto of Indonesia, urged consuming nations today to act quickly to release oil from their stockpiles in the wake of OPEC's production increase, the group's news agency, Opecna, said.


Crude Up By $1.66, To $31.43
LEAD: Crude oil jumped to more than $31 a barrel yesterday, nearing its highest price since the Persian Gulf crisis began when Iraq invaded Kuwait in early August.


U.S. Health Goals Outlined
LEAD: Federal health officials today listed goals for improving Americans' health over the next decade, including reducing the infant mortality rate, teen-age pregnancies and the number of people who smoke.


How to Get the Sharpest Memories on Film
LEAD: Bringing back memories of Ellis Island should pose relatively few problems for visitors with cameras.
Most of the large interior spaces are filled with enough sunlight to make pictures possible without flash.
Load up with a fast film of ISO 400 or higher; when using slower-speed films, a steady tripod is advisable.


Football;   Virginia Revamps Cavalier Attitude
LEAD: Herman Moore had come out of a sociology class early one afternoon this week when he discovered that something bizarre had happened to this button-down town.


Editorial Notebook;   Gouges and Giveaways
LEAD: The news vendor on Budapest's central shopping mall refused to hand over a copy of The International Herald-Tribune for the proffered 100-forint note. ''One-fifty,'' he insisted.
His customer protested that the price, 100 forints, was printed at the top of page one. ''In hotel, 100,'' he said with a knowing smile.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Gorbachev to Visit Japan
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is to go to Japan in April on the first visit there by a Soviet leader.
Page A3.
Liberian Leader Told to Quit
West African leaders have told President Samuel K. Doe of Liberia to resign or expect to be removed by force, Liberians said.


Restaurants
LEAD: A fish house that's become more than just the Upper West Side's neighborhood fish house.


E.N.I. Venture
LEAD: The Italian Government gave permission for E.N.I., the state-run energy group, to pull out of the troubled chemical venture Enimont S.p.A.
Ente Nazionale Idrocarburi, and its private-sector partner, Montedison S.p.A., have fought for control of Enimont since it was formed last year.
Each has a 40 percent interest in the venture.


Gold Prices Up for 3d Day; Grain and Soybeans Climb
LEAD: Gold prices rose for a third straight day yesterday, nearing $390 an ounce, as the market continued to recover from its collapse last week.


Soviets and Germans Far Apart on Payment
LEAD: Soviet and West German negotiators ended arduous talks today on sharing the cost of the Soviet military withdrawal from Germany still billions apart on the amount to be paid by the Germans, officials said.


Gorbachev Will Visit Japan Next Year
LEAD: Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu said today that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev would come to Japan in April for the first visit by a Soviet leader.
But he held out little hope of a quick solution to the bitter territorial dispute that has long frozen relations between the two nations.


Review/Art;   In Praise of a Neglected Painter of His Time
LEAD: IT'S a safe bet that a banner now hanging from the facade of the Metropolitan Museum of Art will not prompt any stampede.
It announces an exhibition of works by Joseph Wright of Derby opening today.
Were the banner to read ''Gainsborough'' or even ''Reynolds'' things might be different: nothing as inelegant as a stampede, of course, but maybe a polite queue.


Chronicle
LEAD: Barely five months after the death of GRETA GARBO, people claiming to be her relatives have come forth in droves seeking some of her estimated $20 million estate, according to THEODORE A. KURZ, the estate's lawyer.
The claims ''have been fanciful and even humorous,'' he said in papers that he filed in State Surrogate's Court in Manhattan to oppose the application of a man claiming to be the illegitimate son of Miss


Sounds Around Town
LEAD: Sun Ra for Dancing


Liberian Leader Is Given Ultimatum
LEAD: A group of West African leaders have told President Samuel K. Doe of Liberia to either resign from office or expect to be removed by force, Liberians close to the negotiations said today.


Living Life After Drexel At Brenner Securities
LEAD: After enduring the collapse of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., Howard M. Brenner has returned to Wall Street with his own securities firm.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
A.
L.
Laboratories, Fort Lee, N.J., a pharmaceutical company, said it had secured a commitment from a consortium of 11 European banks for $220 million for acquisitions in the pharmaceutical and animal health businesses.


Police Strategy Speeded Arrests in Tourist Killing
LEAD: The detectives were sure the suspects were on the dance floor.
But so were about 3,000 other young people, gyrating to blaring music in the strobe-lighted darkness of Roseland Ballroom.
The search for the killers of a Utah tourist on Sunday night had become what one detective would later describe as ''the classic needle in the haystack situation.


Poland Lists Privatizations
LEAD: Poland today named seven state-owned companies as the first offerings in its ambitious privatization drive, saying their stock would go on sale within the next two months.


Tank Collapses in New Jersey, Spilling 5,000 Gallons of Oil Into the Arthur Kill


Why Put Artificial Limits on Public Service?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Confrontation in the Gulf;   IRAN HAS INCENTIVE TO OFFER IRAQ AID
LEAD: When Iran hinted today that it might send food and medicine to its former archenemy, Iraq, the Teheran Government moved to seize opportunities created by the crisis in the Persian Gulf, experts on the region say.


Burmese Ruler Would Exile A Captive Opposition Leader
LEAD: The Burmese military ruler said he would free his country's leading opposition figure if she went into foreign exile, a Japanese diplomat said today.


Democrats Slug It Out in Connecticut Race
LEAD: After weeks of stilted debate about taxes and government efficiency, the Democratic primary race for governor turned today into a bare-knuckled contest that threatened to pull the Governor and other leading party members into the fray.


John A. Haeseler, 90, Specialty Film Maker
LEAD: John A. Haeseler, a film maker and a leader in the early days of scientific and educational films, died Tuesday at Physicians' Community Hospital in San Isidro, Calif.
He was 90 years old and lived in Lafayette, Calif.
He died of pneumonia, his son Rob said.
Mr.
Haeseler embarked on a career in motion pictures after graduating from Oxford University in 1924.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Britain Says It Will Send More Forces to the Gulf
LEAD: Britain announced today that it would send additional forces to the Persian Gulf to supplement its airplanes, warships and ground troops already there.


At the Movies
LEAD:
Riding for 'City Slickers'


Mack Trucks to Merge With a Unit of Renault
LEAD: Mack Trucks Inc., the financially ailing company whose name is still widely used to refer to all American 18-wheelers, announced yesterday that it had agreed to be purchased by Renault, the French state-owned auto and truck maker, for $103 million.


Horse Racing: Notebook;   Sewickley Among 6 in Highweight
LEAD: The Fall Highweight Handicap, Belmont Park's annual exercise in making sprinters carry silly imposts of about 15 pounds more than usual, has drawn a field of six for its 78th edition tomorrow.
Sewickley will carry 139 pounds going six furlongs against For Really at 132, Traskwood and Carson City at 131 apiece, Joymaker at 125 and


Utah Family Issues Appeal After Slaying
LEAD: The family of Brian Watkins, who was killed by muggers in a Manhattan subway station Sunday night, appealed today for justice from New York City, saying, ''Please don't let Brian die in vain.''


Insider Case On ABB Bid
LEAD: Federal securities regulators today accused a former director of ABB Asea Brown Boveri Ltd. of taking part in a $2.5 million insider trading scheme involving the Swedish-Swiss company's $1.6 billion acquisition of Combustion Engineering.


Council, Seizing the Crime Issue, Seeks to Expand New York Police
LEAD: Moving to take the lead and the spotlight in New York City's fight against crime, the City Council leadership introduced a bill yesterday to hire 5,000 more police officers in the next 18 months and to set a mandatory level of no fewer than 32,000 officers for the Police Department.


The Media Business: Advertising;   A New Look For Foster's Beer Spots
LEAD: THE Foster's Brewing Company has said ''G'day!'' to Paul Hogan, the Australian actor who had been a popular spokesman for the company since 1985.


Baseball;   Pennant Pressure Finds Pirate Rookie Smiling
LEAD: Before the game against the Mets in Three Rivers Stadium tonight, Jim Leyland, the Pirate manager, was talking about his starting pitcher, Randy Tomlin, whom he described as ''a baby-faced kid.''


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Saudis to Cover U.S. Troop Costs And Help Middle East Countries
LEAD: Saudia Arabia promised the United States today that it would cover virtually all of the hundreds of millions of dollars in monthly operating costs of the American forces based in and near Saudia Arabia, American and Saudi officials said.
They said the Saudis would also contribute several billion dollars in aid to Middle Eastern countries that have joined the coalition against Iraq.


Study of Sound Orders Choice On Pollution
LEAD: Seeking to halt the degradation of Long Island Sound, environmental officials from the Federal Government, New York State and Connecticut are ordering communities along the Sound to make a difficult choice: stop development or pay for costly improvements in sewage-treatment plants.


Tunisia Loan Prospects
LEAD: A senior World Bank official said today that the agency was prepared to grant long-term loans to the Tunisian Government and to the nation's private sector.
Kemal Dervis, head of the bank's North Africa section, made the statement at the end of a four-day visit to Tunis but gave no details of the amounts or purposes of the loans.


Helen Hammett Owen, Librarian, 88
LEAD: Helen Hammett Owen, a retired New York librarian, died on Aug. 26 at her home in Friendship, Me.
She was 88 years old.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Network of Military Hospitals Set Up in Saudi Desert


Sihanouk and Hun Sen Agree To Join Talks on Cambodia
LEAD: Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Prime Minister Hun Sen, the heads of the two rival factions in Cambodia, agreed today to drop their conditions and attend peace talks here, now scheduled to start Saturday night or Sunday.


Man Pleads Guilty To Killing His Wife In Harlem in 1976
LEAD: A man arrested last month and accused of dismembering his wife 14 years ago surprised Manhattan prosecutors yesterday when he agreed to plead guilty to first-degree manslaughter.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   On the Campaign Trail, Bush Invokes Gulf Crisis
LEAD: Evoking homespun images from Dwight D. Eisenhower to the Wizard of Oz, President Bush brought the Persian Gulf crisis to the campaign trail today.
He defended sending troops to Saudi Arabia as a mission to ''raise the flag of peace and justice'' and appealed for public support as he makes what he called ''hard choices'' in the Middle


Mergers Down 10% in August
LEAD: The number of mergers and acquisitions dropped 10 percent in August from the month before, while the dollar value of the deals fell 63 percent, IDD Information Services said yesterday.


Federal Drug Sting Ends at La Guardia in Gunfire
LEAD: A cocaine sting that began yesterday morning in Miami ended last night in a burst of gunfire outside a La Guardia Airport terminal, officials said.


16-Foot Great White Is Caught
LEAD: Two brothers fishing off the Southern California coast on Tuesday caught a great white shark measuring 16 feet 5 inches and weighing about 3,000 pounds.
Pete and John Busalacchi, both of San Diego, were fishing with nets when they caught the great white, about 25 miles west of Point Loma.
Great whites are not uncommon in waters off the California coast, but few that size have been netted and brought ashore.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Wednesday about new mainframe computers from Fujitsu misidentified the employer of Japanese computer executives arrested in 1982 for the theft of information about I.B.M. computers.
They worked for Hitachi, not Fujitsu.


Finance/New Issues;   Mortgage Bonds By California Unit
LEAD: The Southern California Housing Financing Authority is tentatively offering, through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; company, $80.2 million in single-family mortgage revenue bonds with a maximum yield of 7.75 percent for an issue due 2024.


On Stage
LEAD:
From Hartford and Tempe


The Media Business: Advertising - Addenda;   Miscellany
LEAD: *
G.C.I.
Group Inc., a public relations unit of Grey Advertising, New York, has acquired McAvoy Wreford Bayley, a financial consultancy, from the V.P.I.
Group, London.
Additionally, G.C.I. sold a minority share to the management of the aquired company, which will be known as McAvoy Bayley.


New Unleaded Premium Gas From ARCO
LEAD: ARCO, the largest seller of gasoline in Southern California, introduced a new unleaded premium today that it says emits fewer pollutants into the air than other fuels of its type.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Asian Refugees From Kuwait Learn to Live a Beggar's Life
LEAD: For Dawood Ismail, the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait brought a free fall of a kind most people experience only in their nightmares, from an air-conditioned apartment and a salary of $21,500 a year in the oil-producing kingdom to a dog's life in the desert.


Review/Cabaret;   Susan Anton, a Grown-Up Pop-Soul Stylist
LEAD: Just after the second number in the opening-night show of her new cabaret act at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza) on Tuesday evening, Susan Anton explained that next month she would turn 40 and finally become, in her mind, a ''grown-up.'' To celebrate, she said, ''I wanted to sing the songs that bring me joy.


Meeting on Dickerson
LEAD: A Sept. 17 meeting is scheduled in New York to review the impasse between the Indianapolis Colts and the running back Eric Dickerson, the National Football League club said yesterday.


SHUTTLE LIFTOFF DELAYED 11 DAYS
LEAD: The flight of the space shuttle Columbia will be delayed for at least 11 days while troubleshooters try to fix a fuel leak, space agency officials said today.


6 Food Makers Told to Stop Unsupported Health Claims
LEAD: In the first action under the Government's new policy to crack down on the disease-prevention claims made on food labels, the Food and Drug Administration said today that it had warned six food companies to remove health claims from their packages.


Crisis in Iraq Inspires Spate of Books
LEAD: Little known in the United States just a couple of months ago, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq is suddenly a rather grim kind of celebrity, and a stampede has started among book publishers to cash in on his notoriety.


Baseball;   Giants Roll Over Reds
LEAD: Scott Garrelts pitched seven strong innings and Matt Williams hit a two-run double today as the San Francisco Giants defeated the Cincinnati Reds, 6-2.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief front-page summary yesterday about a decline in Soviet oil production referred incorrectly in some editions to the United States' ranking as an oil producer.
It is the world's second-biggest, after the Soviet Union.


Tennis;   Fernandez Overcomes the Pressure
LEAD: It was not that long ago that Mary Joe Fernandez found herself anointed as one of the next great female tennis players of the planet, an honor that normally befalls the most successful American youngsters, whether they like it or not.


OBSCENITY JURORS TO VIEW 5 PHOTOS
LEAD: A judge has ruled that the jury in the obscenity trial of a Cincinnati museum may consider only five of 175 exhibited photographs by the late Robert Mapplethorpe in determining whether the museum and its director broke the law by exhibiting them.


Football: N.F.L. Matchups;   Oilers Will See a Familiar Face Across the Field in the Season Opener
LEAD: ''Ninety-nine percent of my time in Texas was as good as anything that ever happened to me,'' said Jerry Glanville, the Atlanta Falcons' new head coach.
But, oh boy, that 1 percent.
Glanville was the Houston Oilers' head coach for five seasons until his buddy-buddy relationship with the players ran dry last year.


New Space Policy Set by U.S. To Reassure Rocket Industry
LEAD: Satellites owned by the United States Government will continue to be launched only on domestically produced rockets under a new space policy put forth by the White House today.


Brewster Morris, 81, Ambassador to Chad
LEAD: Brewster H. Morris, a career Foreign Service officer who was Ambassador to Chad from 1963 to 1967, died on Monday at his home in Tiburon, Calif.
He was 81 years old.
His brother, Theodore, said he died of Parkinson's disease.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Asian Refugees in Airlift
LEAD: Seventy-two planes have been chartered to transport 19,000 Bangladeshi and Sri Lankan refugees from Iraq and Kuwait who are stranded in Jordan because of the Persian Gulf crisis.
The airlift, which began on Monday, is focusing on refugees from third-world countries whose governments do not have the money to transport their citizens.


Rush Is On to Secure East Europe Trademarks
LEAD: In a television commercial broadcast in the Soviet Union, the camera pans the Parthenon, the Taj Mahal, the Manhattan skyline, the Eiffel Tower and the pyramids before finally settling on a travel agency on the corner of a typical Soviet street.
At the bottom of the screen appears the slogan ''Don't leave home without us.


Budget Negotiators at Crossroads on Energy Taxes
LEAD: Democratic budget negotiators today weighed the political risks of proposing new energy taxes to encourage conservation and thereby decrease America's dependence on foreign oil, while their Republican counterparts suggested that tax breaks for domestic oil producers might be a better course.


Louis F. Thompson, Educator, 66
LEAD: Louis F. Thompson, former chairman of the English department at Bloomsburg University in Pennsylvania, died Monday at the Geisinger Medical Center in Danville, Pa.
He was 66 years old and lived in Bloomsburg.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Mitterand Criticizes Plan
LEAD: President Francois Mitterrand said today that a Soviet proposal for an international conference on the Middle East could contribute to resolving the Persian Gulf crisis only after Iraq has withdrawn from Kuwait.


Brazil Sells State Airline
LEAD: Brazil's much-discussed privatization started this week at the state level with the sale of controlling interest in the country's second-largest airline to a private group and employees.
The state of Sao Paulo sold a 60 percent controlling interest in the airline Vasp to the Canhedo group.


1 of 2 Grocery Boycotts In Brooklyn Is Resolved
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins announced last night that a three-week-old black-led boycott of a Korean-American grocery store in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn had been resolved and that the store would reopen today.


Stocks Slide As Oil Rise Continues
LEAD: Another sharp rise in the price of crude oil sent the stock market tumbling yesterday, but skittish investors sat on their hands most of the day, depressing trading volume for yet another session.


A New Consultant
LEAD: TFranz Beckenbauer, who led West Germany to World Cup victory in July, has agreed in principle to consult and work with the United States Soccer Federation, according to Alan Rothenberg, president of the federation.
Rothenberg announced the agreement after Beckenbauer signed a two-year contract yesterday as technical director with the French league champion, Marseille.


Foundation Bought Neuharth Books
LEAD: The Gannett Foundation, a nonprofit organization that supports journalism education, said yesterday that it used less than $40,000 of its money to buy about 2,000 copies of an autobiography of its flamboyant chairman, Allen H. Neuharth, the former chairman and chief executive officer of the Gannett


New York City Buying Alternative-Fuel Vehicles
LEAD: The Dinkins administration, pessimistic about prospects for a victory in the fight against air pollution in the city, has embarked on a plan to convert thousands of cars, buses and trucks to fuels that burn more cleanly than gasoline and diesel.


Economic Scene;   Uncertain Fallout From Gulf Crisis
LEAD: THE economic outlook is clouded with more uncertainties than you can shake a computer at.


Chronicle
LEAD: The first World Summit for Children will take place at the United Nations on Sept. 29 and 30, and it is expected to be the largest gathering ever of world leaders.
So far, 38 presidents, including PRESIDENT BUSH, 20 prime ministers and 2 kings have confirmed plans to attend.


For State Senate: Queens and Brooklyn
LEAD: Next Tuesday's primary elections in New York include two interesting contests for State Senate in overwhelmingly Democratic districts where the primary winner is virtually guaranteed election.
There's also a Republican write-in campaign that warrants attention.
Here are our recommendations.


The Media Business: Advertising - Addenda;   Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg Wins 4th New Account
LEAD: Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, New York, is on a winning streak.
Yesterday, the agency gained Super Clubs Resorts, a Jamaican resort chain based in Kingston, Jamaica, with billings of $2 million to $3 million.


Second Co-Host Withdraws From Bessie Awards Show
LEAD: Danitra Vance, an actress who recently starred in ''Spunk'' at the Public Theater, has withdrawn as a host and performer at the seventh annual Bessie Awards ceremony on Wednesday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Ms.
Vance was originally to have served as co-host with the performance artist Karen Finley, who withdrew Aug.


With Barry Trial Behind It, Capital Focuses on Primary
LEAD: During the two months that Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. was on trial on charges of using drugs and lying about it, the residents of Washington and much of the rest of the country were mesmerized by the daily charges of wrongdoing leveled against him.
The contest to choose his successor languished and drifted.


San Francisco Journal;   City That Loves Opera Faces a Night to Lament
LEAD: At Mr.
Lee's hair salon, where bluebloods get washed and set, appointments made a year ago for Sept. 7 have been canceled.
At Trader Vic's, most of those booked for a midnight supper have called to say they will be staying home.


Books of The Times;   A Samurai in the South And a Joke on America
LEAD:
East Is East
By T. Coraghessan Boyle
364 pages. Viking. $19.95.


Officer Kills a Cabby In a Street Showdown
LEAD: A New York City deputy police inspector shot and killed a cabdriver Wednesday night in Brooklyn as the driver advanced on him with a tire iron after a minor traffic accident, the police said.


Flat Sales Last Month At Retailers
LEAD: The nation's largest retailers posted mostly mediocre sales for August yesterday, foreshadowing the possibility of a weak autumn and Christmas buying season.


Tennis;   Semifinal Showdown: Agassi and Becker
LEAD: The flamboyant Andre Agassi and the introspective Boris Becker, tennis's version of the odd couple, marched through their quarterfinal matches yesterday to put themselves on a collision course for the semifinal round at the United States Open.


Critic's Notebook;   The Total Sturges, Preserved in Hilarity
LEAD: THE limousine moves serenely through the night streets.
It's in no hurry.
The Boss's chauffeur (Frank Moran), who sounds as if he gargles with a solution of rot-gut whisky and finely ground shot glasses, is telling a story to the Boss's bodyguard, who sits beside him in the front seat:
THE limousine moves serenely through the night streets.
It's in no hurry.
The Boss's chauffeur (Frank Moran), who sounds as if he gargles with a solution of rot-gut whisky and finely ground shot glasses, is telling a story to the Boss's bodyguard, who sits beside him in the front seat:
''Then she says, 'You and who else?' and I says, 'Oh yeah?' and she says, 'Yeah is right,' and I says, 'You and me both,' and she says, 'That goes double for me,' and I says, 'Oh yeah?' and then the operator says, 'Deposit another 25 cents for three minutes,' so I hung up on her.
You let her get an angle on you, you're a goner.'' ''You said it,'' replies the bodyguard. ''You're telling me,'' says the chauffeur.
For any director other than Preston Sturges, dialogue of this grandly circular design would have been the entire point of the scene.
However, in ''The Great McGinty'' (1940), Sturges's uproarious satire of American politics, as well as his first solo effort at being both writer and director, this story of an edgy love relationship is only a kind of frame for the principal action on the screen.
In the back of the car, the Boss (Akim Tamiroff) and his protege, Dan McGinty (Brian Donlevy), are engaged in a furious bare-knuckled fistfight and wrestling match, though all the audience sees is the occasional raised foot or arm, accompanied by desperate grunts.


M.I.T. Assails Panel's Choice Of Florida for Magnet Center
LEAD: Officials of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology asserted yesterday that the Government's decision to build a coveted magnet laboratory at Florida State University, instead of M.I.T., was based on an unbalanced and incomplete analysis of the competing proposals.


Why Punish Military Women?
LEAD: Women in the armed forces, as well as servicemen's wives and daughters, have been second-class citizens since 1988.
That's when the Department of Defense banned all but life-saving abortions in American military hospitals.
It did so despite the fact that no Federal funds had been used for such abortions since 1979.


Baseball;   Spira's Bank Account Is Closed
LEAD: The baseball commissioner's hearing into Leonard Kleinman's involvement in George Steinbrenner's $40,000 payment to Howard Spira is not finished, but the bank account that Kleinman helped Spira open is.


Fair-Weather Allies
LEAD: West Germany, after decades of benefiting from American policies, including military protection, has offered the flimsiest of excuses for shirking a fair share of the costs of the shield American troops are providing in Saudi Arabia for German oil supplies.


Cavaliers Match Offer
LEAD: The Cleveland Cavaliers have matched the Miami Heat's $26.5 million, seven-year offer for the forward John Williams, the Cavaliers announced last night.


Airbus in Deal With Kawasaki
LEAD: Kawasaki Heavy Industries said today that it planned to make fuselage parts for Airbus Industrie in a departure from the Japanese aircraft industry's long-term dealings with the Seattle-based Boeing Company.


Dollar, After Broad Loss, Is at 11-Month Low vs. Yen
LEAD: The dollar finished mostly lower in thin trading on the world's currency markets yesterday as speculation mounted over whether the Federal Reserve would nudge interest rates lower.


Japanese Buy Pebble Beach Golf Course
LEAD: A Japanese company has bought the famed Pebble Beach Golf Links and related properties on the Monterey Peninsula for a price estimated to be as high as $1 billion.


The Media Business: Advertising - Addenda;   People
LEAD: *
Arthur C. Kesteloot has been named management director at J. Walter Thompson U.S.A., Detroit, for its Ford division account.
Mr.
Kesteloot was formerly the manager of advertising and media relations for Chrysler Motors in Detroit.


Auctions
LEAD: From Virgil Thomson's rooms in the Chelsea, the worn and the During the half-century that Virgil Thomson made his home on the ninth floor of the Chelsea Hotel in Manhattan, he reigned in exotic splendor in rooms furnished with the art and antiques he had acquired in his travels or had been given by friends from the worlds of music, art and the theater.


Join a Fuel Co-op and Beat the Price Gougers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Confrontation in the Gulf;   TWO ISRAELI BOYS CAUGHT IN JORDAN
LEAD: Even though Israel and Jordan have both significantly enhanced their border defenses over the last several weeks, two Israeli boys sneaked into Jordan last week and spent two days touring historic sites before they were caught and arrested at a Jordanian police checkpoint.


U.S. IS CHALLENGING COLLEGE FOOTBALL OVER TV CONTRACT
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission today charged Capital Cities/ABC Inc. and the College Football Association with illegally conspiring to limit the number of college football games shown on television.


Vegetarianism Means Concern for Suffering
LEAD: To the Editor:


Malaysia Oil Discovery
LEAD: A subsidiary of the Exxon Corporation has made a new oil and gas discovery in a Malaysian offshore field, a company official said today.
In production tests, oil flowed at more than 3,000 barrels a day, said Dennis Francis, exploration manager of Esso Production Malaysia Ltd.
Mr.
Francis said the discovery was made from a well begun on July 5 in the Larut field, in the South China Sea about 150 miles from the Malaysian town of Kuala Trengganu.


Racketeering Suit Against Carpenters Chief
LEAD: In a civil suit aimed at crippling what Federal prosecutors said is Mafia control over New York City's carpenters union, the Government yesterday charged the president and three top officers of the union with systematically accepting bribes from contractors.


I.B.M. Is Joining Metaphor To Create a New Software
LEAD: I.B.M. announced a new business partnership yesterday with Metaphor Computer Systems, a privately held company in Mountain View, Calif. in which I.B.M. has a minority stake, to create new software that will allow individual programs to run with multiple computer operating systems.


Join a Fuel Co-op and Beat the Price Gougers;   A World Oil Agency
LEAD: To the Editor:


Benetton Parent Buys 80% of Prince
LEAD: The holding company that owns the Benetton Group retail chain bought an 80 percent stake in the Lawrenceville, N.J., racquet maker Prince Manufacturing Inc.
Last year, Prince had net sales of about $158 million, up from $105.2 million the previous year, while its earnings rose to $18 million, from $13.2 million.


Review/Film;   The Lady Has Fangs (And Uses Satin Sheets)
LEAD: It had to happen.
It was only a matter of time.
Troma Inc., the outfit best known (and most wholeheartedly admired) for titles like ''Rabid Grannies,'' ''Zombie Island Massacre'' and ''Class of Nuke 'Em High,'' has gone sufficiently straight to have warranted a recent tribute at the John F. Kennedy Center in


Nan Rosenthal, Curator, Marries
LEAD: Nan Rosenthal, the curator of 20th-century art at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, and Henry B. Cortesi, a partner in the New York law firm of Webster &amp; Sheffield, were married Wednesday in Manhattan.
Judge Pierre N. Leval of Federal District Court performed the ceremony in his chambers in the United States Court House at Foley


Bonds Mixed Despite Jump in Oil
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed yesterday in sluggish trading, as dealers ignored another big jump in oil prices and instead prepared for this morning's release of the August employment data.


The Media Business;   New England Monthly Closes
LEAD: New England Monthly, a six-year-old regional magazine that has won two National Magazine Awards, will cease publication with its September issue.


In Memoirs and Novels, Literary Testimony to How It Was
LEAD: Ellis Island has figured in novels, memoirs and other literary undertakings, sometimes as the center of the story and more often as the element that contributed so much to the evolution of a character from innocent peasant to streetwise immigrant.
In his novella ''Ellis Island,'' Mark Helprin's protagonist, looking toward the city from the island, envisions his goal as a beautiful, fairy-tale sort of land, the stuff that dreams are made of.


Edward L. Bowles, 92, Engineer Who Helped U.S. Develop Radar
LEAD: Edward L. Bowles, an electrical engineer who played an important part in developing radar for the armed forces in World War II, died Wednesday at the Weston Manor nursing home in Weston, Mass.
He was 92.


As Landfill Closings Loom, L.I. Is Told to Recycle, a Lot
LEAD: New York State's environmental Commissioner today released a plan to help Long Island's municipalities meet a 1990 deadline for closing their landfills.
The plan calls for cooperation among towns in disposing of waste and sets an ambitious goal of recycling 60 percent of the Island's garbage by 1997.


Tests for Clemens
LEAD: Roger Clemens of the Boston Red Sox was reported ''much more comfortable'' yesterday as he underwent hospital tests for a painful right shoulder in Boston.


Kurt Weill, Who Dared to Be Popular
LEAD: When Joseph Haydn made the first of two triumphant trips to London in 1791, he arrived not with a trunkful of music but virtually empty handed.
Haydn wanted to ''ascertain the English taste,'' he said.
Having looked around him, he sat down to compose a series of symphonies.
They won him the public he courted; they still stand as probably the most important sustained body of work in this genre written before or since.


Dukakis Accuses No. 2 of Plotting a Coup
LEAD: An angry Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, before leaving on a delayed trade mission to Europe today, accused Lieut.
Gov.
Evelyn Murphy of plotting a palace coup and planning to take over the state government while he was away so she could impose her own plan for solving the Massachusetts budget crisis.


Beaubec-la-Rosiere Journal;   In Pastoral Normandy, the Farmers Wage a War
LEAD: The tall tufts of hay and the black, brown and white cows would make Daniel Beaufils's fields ideal for a Monet study.
But when the ruddy-faced farmer talks, his brooding anger makes him sound less like a peaceful country gentleman than a latter-day sans-culotte.


Wilson S. Johnson, 76; Small-Business Leader
LEAD: Wilson S. Johnson, the chief executive of the National Federation of Independent Business, died Aug. 30 at Mills Hospital in San Mateo, Calif.
He was 76 years old and lived in San Mateo.


O'Connor Won't Meet Reporters After Masses
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York announced yesterday that John Cardinal O'Connor would end his six-year practice of holding news conferences on Sunday mornings after the 10:15 Mass at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.


At the Bar
LEAD: His name got second billing on the firm's letterhead, which changed so often, he says, that it should have been printed on Corrasable bond.
His name came to symbolize the largest law firm bust ever, and not just because it conveniently rhymed with ''tumble'' and ''crumble.'' But while others held forth about the demise of Finley, Kumble, Wagner, Heine, Underberg, Manley, Myerson &amp; Casey, Steven J.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Bonn's Iraq-Embargo Aid
LEAD: Bonn is not likely to agree to any direct financing for the American-led military buildup in Saudi Arabia, but instead plans to offer logistical help and increased aid to Middle Eastern countries affected by the Iraqi crisis, West German officials say.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Data Switch Corp., Shelton, Conn., named Michael Stashower chief financial officer, replacing Rudolph Morin.


Apple Cuts Price On Macintosh PC
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. lowered prices on its Macintosh IICI personal computer by $1,500.
Depending on which disk drive is included, prices now range from $5,969 to $7,269 for the IICI, which is the more compact version of Apple's high-end, separate monitor Macintosh.
The price cut is effective only in the United


Confrontation in the Gulf;   As Forces in Gulf Build, U.S. Weighs Its Options
LEAD: At the Pentagon, they talk about Oct. 15.


McEnroe Cooks Up A Storm
LEAD: No matter what John McEnroe does tomorrow, he has already turned this year's United States Open into Junior's Year, that once-upon-a-time when McEnroe stormed back from the professionally dormant.


Finance/New Issues;   World Bank's Global Issue
LEAD: The World Bank said today that it planned to soon offer its third dollar-denominated global bond issue.
The issue's size would be $1.5 billion to $2 billion, the bank said.
Deutsche Bank and Salomon


Slow Growth Projected in Corporate Spending
LEAD: American businesses plan to increase spending for new plants and equipment by 5.1 percent this year over 1989, the smallest growth in three years, the Commerce Department said today.


Hockey;   Ludwig Adding Stability to the Islanders' Defense
LEAD: Al Arbour, the coach of the Islanders, is a former defenseman who was known for preventing goals, not scoring them.
He scored 12 times in 626 regular-season games from 1953 through 1971.


Tell Iraq: We're United. Against You.
LEAD: The strongest message Presidents Bush and Gorbachev can send from their meeting in Helsinki Sunday is solidarity.
Saddam Hussein still needs to be convinced that he won't be able to escape the global siege of Iraq by exploiting differences between Moscow and Washington.


Results Plus
LEAD:
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
Colorado Beats Stanford, 21-17
Eric Bieniemy, a tailback, scored on a 1-yard dive with 12 seconds left after Colorado eschewed a tie, lifting the sixth-ranked Buffaloes to a 21-17 victory over Stanford last night in Boulder, Colo.
A 27-yard field goal by John Hopkins with 4 minutes 17 seconds left put Stanford ahead by 17-14 before Colorado drove 80 yards in 15 plays for the clincher.


Candidate Plans a Blitz for Primary
LEAD: An advertising blitz whose cost would be impressive for a mayoral or Senate race started this morning for a candidate running for an office that few voters ever hear about.


Iran-Contra Witness Testifies on Bank Account
LEAD: A Government witness in the Iran-contra trial of a former intelligence official testified today that he had arranged for the defendant, Thomas G. Clines, to open a Swiss bank account under an assumed name.


Review/Theater;   Dancing in the Footsteps Of Ludlam's 'Camille'
LEAD: The biggest artistic challenge that the Ridiculous Theatrical Company has had to face since the death of its founding father, Charles Ludlam, may be its revival of ''Camille,'' the playwright, director and actor's drag travesty of Dumas fils's theatrical warhorse.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   IRAQI IS REBUFFED IN MOSCOW TALKS
LEAD: Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz of Iraq departed for home today clearly rebuffed in his mission to ease the Soviet Government's condemnation of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.


Join a Fuel Co-op and Beat the Price Gougers;   Ripped Off, Again
LEAD: To the Editor:


Join a Fuel Co-op and Beat the Price Gougers;   Ease Up on the Pedal
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tennessee Williams Opposed 'White Face'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Japanese Buying Calmat Subsidiary
LEAD: The Calmat Company said its largest shareholder, the Onoda Cement Company of Japan, planned to exercise an option to acquire the California Portland Cement Company from Calmat.


Cable TV Bills Open Door to Competition
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Media Business;   Fox Reaches Accord To Broaden Its Cable
LEAD: Tele-Communications Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to carry the Fox Broadcasting Company in cable markets that do not already carry Fox programming.


Ex-San Diego Mayor Wins New Perjury Trial
LEAD: Nearly five years after he was convicted of perjury for concealing campaign contributions and forced out of office as Mayor of San Diego, Roger Hedgecock was granted a new trial today by the State Supreme Court.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD: International
A3-10


Insider-Case Indictment
LEAD: A former director and vice president of the defunct Wall Street brokerage firm Thomson McKinnon Securities Inc. was indicted today on insider trading charges.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Ronnie Spector's Hits


Probation for Tarpley
LEAD: The Dallas Mavericks' forward Roy Tarpley was put on two years' probation yesterday for drunken driving drunk in Dallas last year - an arrest that led to his third suspension from the N.B.A. team.


The Media Business;   Baltimore Sun's New Publisher
LEAD: Michael J. Davies, publisher of The Hartford Courant, was named publisher and chief executive officer of The Baltimore Sun newspapers yesterday.
He will succeed Reg Murphy, who will become chairman of the board.


Tough Market Will Put Nordstrom to the Test
LEAD: Widely heralded as the American chain with the best customer-service skills, Nordstrom Inc., the West Coast fashion retailer, invades the highly competitive New York area today with a store in a shopping mall in Paramus, N.J., about 15 miles across the Hudson River from Manhattan.


Our Towns;   It's September: Miss Who? I Bet She's Mean!
LEAD: Was some maniac torturing the second graders?
Not only was it the first day, but word was spreading around the Jackson Avenue School playground that they were getting a new, first-year teacher. ''She might be one of the really un-nice teachers,'' said Jessica Vanderbeck, ''like she screams at the class.


Baseball;   A Rooky Lefty Helps Pirates Sweep the Mets
LEAD: The Pittsburgh Pirates completed a remarkable three-game sweep of the Mets tonight and sent them reeling three and a half games down with 26 to play, still searching for the runs and even the hits they did not produce in a series that may have buried them for 1990.


Review/Theater;   'Money Talks,' a Comedy Starring Dolores Gray
LEAD: Some years ago on ''Saturday Night Live,'' a regular skit featured Dan Aykroyd playing a television host whose weekly program ''Bad Theater'' celebrated some of the worst plays ever written. ''Money Talks,'' a comedy by Edwin Schloss at the Promenade Theater, would have been a prime candidate for Mr.


Doug Moe Dismissed As Coach of Nuggets
LEAD: Doug Moe, the coach of the Denver Nuggets for 10 years, was dismissed yesterday after months of speculation about his job status.


2 Theft Suspects Terrorize Couple in Manhattan
LEAD: A motorist who had left a party at Lincoln Center and was returning to his car after a quick stop at a West Side market on Wednesday night was badly beaten by two gunmen who then took his wife on a terrifying seven-block ride, the police said yesterday.


Souter's Views Trouble Groups Opposed to Bork
LEAD: Some interest groups that helped defeat the nomination of Robert H. Bork three years ago delivered their verdict on Judge David H. Souter today, saying his record was troubling and he should not be confirmed to be a Supreme Court Justice unless he provided assurances about his views on a variety of issues.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
Friday
STAMPS FOR APPROVAL


Biology Teaching in U.S. Gets Stinging Criticism
LEAD: Biology, the first science presented to most students, is taught so poorly that the experience ''seems designed to snuff out interest'' in all science education at an early age, an expert panel said today.


Lord Caradon, Britain's Delegate To U.N. in 1960's, Is Dead at 82
LEAD: Lord Caradon, a former chief British representative at the United Nations who earlier helped six colonies gain independence, died Wednesday in a nursing home in Plymouth, England.
The cause of his death, at the age of 82, was not disclosed.


Motorola Stock Plunges by 11%
LEAD: Shares of Motorola Inc. fell 11 percent yesterday after the electronic equipment maker said it expected slower growth in its semiconductor and communications business.


Fitzhugh Green, 72, Ex-U.S.I.A. Official And E.P.A. Leader
LEAD: Fitzhugh Green, an author and former government aide, died Wednesday at Newport Hospital in Rhode Island.
He was 72 years old and lived in Washington.


Workers Enter Shuttle In Search for Fuel Leak
LEAD: Workers entered the rear compartment of the space shuttle Columbia today and prepared to remove a fuel pump that is believed to be the source of an elusive hydrogen leak.


Tennis;   The Old McEnroe Magic Rekindles Spark in Fans
LEAD: In the last two weeks, framed by the skyline of the city whose personality most suits his, and urged on by mesmerized tennis fans who believe they are witness to a miracle, John McEnroe has undergone reincarnation.
For the first time in five years, McEnroe has catapulted himself into the semifinal round of the United States Open today.


Budget Negotiators Go Into Seclusion
LEAD: As Administration officials and Congressional leaders began a last-ditch effort to strike an agreement on reducing the Federal budget deficit, President Bush insisted today that neither the weakened economy nor the military commitments in the Persian Gulf should be used as an excuse for failure to find a compromise.


India Insists on Gulf Refugee Aid While Supporting Embargo
LEAD: India said today that food and medicine must be rushed to Iraq, Kuwait and Jordan in an international aid effort supervised by the United Nations and the Red Cross to avert epidemics and starvation.


Dentist Dies of AIDS, Leaving Florida City Concerned but Calm
LEAD: An AIDS drama that apparently began with a common dental procedure reached a painful turning point today with a public appearance by a young woman suffering from the disease and the report that the dentist who may have transmitted it to her had died.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


A Good Word For Moss
LEAD: The New York Times reports that conservatives and neoconservatives are at each other's throats.
As an old-fashioned mossback, I urge them to go at it and to stay at it until each has destroyed the other.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Three California physicians have been charged by the state with ''unprofessional conduct'' for repeatedly prescribing drugs to ELIZABETH TAYLOR ''in amounts that exceed a legitimate medical purpose'' over a 10-year period.
The three are Dr.
MICHAEL GOTTLIEB, co-discoverer of the first cases of AIDS; Dr.


Prices of Long-Term Bonds Increase
LEAD: Prices of long-term Treasury bonds posted moderate gains yesterday and interest rates fell, while the shorter maturities were essentially unchanged.
Dealers said the long end of the Treasury debt market was buoyed somewhat by a rise in the August jobless rate to a two-year high.
But the same Government report revised downward the number of jobless in the prior two months.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The United States Open concludes tomorrow, and last night, tennis greats past and present attended a banquet at the Waldorf-Astoria to raise money for the International Tennis Hall in Newport, R.I., site of the first U.S.
Open in 1881.


8 Are Indicted In Slaying Of Tourist
LEAD: A grand jury yesterday indicted eight youths on murder and robbery charges in the fatal stabbing of a Utah tourist, Brian Watkins, in a Manhattan subway station on Sunday night.


Reuss To the Rescue
LEAD: The tall, old ballplayer with the striking hair - he calls it, with a smile, ''silver threads among the golden strands'' - walked into the clubhouse of the Pittsburgh Pirates at Three Rivers Stadium on Wednesday afternoon.


Sam C. Digges, 74, Originator of CBS 'Sunrise Semester'
LEAD: Sam Cook Digges, a CBS television and radio executive who in 1957 initiated ''Sunrise Semester,'' the pioneering television course for college credit, died on Monday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 74 years old and lived in Palm Beach.


Peter W. Phelps, 54, Sportsman and Painter
LEAD: Peter Whittenhall Phelps, a sportsman, painter and fishing-tackle specialist who was a partner in the Bedford Sportsman store in Bedford Hills, N.Y., died of cancer Monday at the Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 54 years old and lived in Katonah, N.Y.


Unions Agree to Meet With The Post on Cuts
LEAD: The 10 unions at The New York Post agreed yesterday to negotiate with management next week on temporary financial relief to enable The Post to continue publication.


K. Blair Benson, 71, Engineer at CBS-TV
LEAD: K. Blair Benson, a televison engineer who helped develop a broadcast-quality videotape machine, died on Tuesday while traveling to an engineers' conference in Washington.
He was 71 years old and lived in Norwalk, Conn.
He died of a heart attack, his wife, Dolly, said.


FOREIGN AFFAIRS Old-Think For the Gulf
LEAD: Officials are beginning to move beyond immediacies of the Persian Gulf crisis to think about how to deal with the region once it's over.


Split on How to Save Spotted Owl Is Reported in Bush's Study Group
LEAD: One week after missing a deadline on its plan for saving the northern spotted owl, a Bush Administration study group appears to be badly divided over how to protect the owl's habitat of ancient forest without causing thousands of loggers to lose their jobs.


Deputy Defies Dukakis on Budget Plan
LEAD: Defying Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis, who is out of the country, Lieut.
Gov.
Evelyn Murphy today issued an executive order that would significantly cut the number of state employees, reduce the salaries of top officials and force cabinet officers to balance their books monthly instead of annually.


Series of Noon Readings By Authors at St. Paul's
LEAD: The author Dan Wakefield will give a free reading on Sept. 19 at noon at St.
Paul's Chapel, Broadway and Fulton Street.
Mr.
Wakefield is the author of ''Returning: A Spiritual Journey,'' ''Going All the Way'' and ''Starting Over.''


Nordstrom Opens New Jersey Store
LEAD: Hundreds of shoppers waited outside the Paramus, N.J., store of Nordstrom Inc. yesterday when the company's first store in the metropolitan New York area opened at the Garden State Plaza.
Store employees gathered around the three-level atrium and applauded the first shoppers as they entered. ''It's something that we started when we opened our Tyson Corner store in Virginia a couple of years ago,'' said Cody Kondo, Nordstrom's vice president and general manager.


Credit Reagan for Destroying Social Programs;   It Worked in the 60's
LEAD: To the Editor:


Yoga and the Devil: Issue for Georgia Town
LEAD: Officials in this northeastern Georgia town have canceled a government-sponsored yoga class, bowing to pressure from protesters who contend that yoga invites Devil worship.


Wary Travelers Cancel or Reroute Trips to Avoid Mideast
LEAD: Akram Bhatti says it has been quiet at his travel agency in Chicago this month.
Too quiet.


Watkins Family Criticizes Subway Response
LEAD: Holding hands in their home yesterday, the parents of Brian Watkins talked publicly for the first time since leaving New York about the killing of their son.


Your Money;   Municipal Bonds Grow in Appeal
LEAD: With state and local income taxes on the rise and the stock market on the skids, many people are increasing their holdings of municipal bonds or mutual funds that invest in these tax-exempt securities.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I was very brash in my attitude, so it was difficult for people to easily latch on, but now, being the underdog, and not having been successful over the last few years, it's more easy.
And I'm not going to be around that much more, let's face it.''
- John McEnroe. [1:3.]


Patents;   Liquid Used To Replace Lather Shave
LEAD: In the ageless quest for an easier, smoother and more nick-free shave, researchers at the American Cyanamid Company this week patented a liquid formula that they say makes it possible to shave without lather.


Ryan Happy to Go On
LEAD: The Texas Rangers are ''excited, thrilled and happy'' that Nolan Ryan wants to pitch another year, and picking up the option year on his contract is ''merely a formality.''


Books of The Times;   Familiar Characters And Tricks of Vonnegut
LEAD:
Hocus Pocus
By Kurt Vonnegut
302 pages. G. . Putnam's Sons. $21.95.


Corrections
LEAD: A report yesterday about the wedding of Nan Rosenthal and Henry B. Cortesi misstated the couple's background in some copies and, because of a production error, was omitted from other copies.
Ms.
Rosenthal's previous marriage ended in divorce; Mr.
Cortesi was not previously married.
The report is reprinted today on page 44.


Toyota Price Rise
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation said it would raise prices for its 1991 model cars by an average of 2.3 percent, or about $318, from the final suggested retail prices for the 1990 model year.
The 1991 models include additional new standard equipment.
The company's Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A.
Inc. unit said prices for its best-selling models, Camry and Corolla, would rise 2.3 and 2.1 percent, to $11,948 for the least expensive Camry and $8,998 for the least expensive Corolla, respectively.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary headline yesterday about a specialist in preventive medicine misidentified him in some copies.
He was Dr.
Norbert J. Roberts.


Prices to Rise on Champaign
LEAD: The Champagne Producers Bureau said today that the price of champagne grapes will increase by more than 20 percent this year, leading producers to predict a rise of 10 percent in the price of a bottle of champagne.


Oil Price Falls $1.39 On Rumors
LEAD: Wild rumors helped push the price of oil down yesterday for the first time in six trading days, but the price of a barrel of crude stayed above $30.


Rivals in Comptroller Debate Aim at Cuomo
LEAD: The two Democratic candidates for state comptroller, who have pulled their punches with each other, threw a few at their fellow Democrat, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, and at legislative leaders of both parties yesterday.


171 Americans Arrive In Jordan From Kuwait
LEAD: The first large group of American women and children evacuated from Iraqi-occupied Kuwait arrived here today with tales of Iraqi brutality and five weeks of hiding in terror.


Moon Church Founds Ballet School
LEAD: The Unification Church of the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon has teamed with Oleg Vinogradov, director of the Kirov Ballet of Leningrad, to create a lavish new ballet school here.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a transmission error, an article on Thursday about the role of Romanian miners in street violence in Bucharest in June misstated the date.
It was June 14, not June 24.


The Pinch at Airlines: Costs Up, Traffic Off
LEAD: The sharp rise in jet fuel prices and weakening passenger traffic have caught the largest United States airlines just as they are adding routes and planes in record numbers.
But most carriers say they are sticking to their ambitious expansion plans despite the threat of having surplus planes and workers at a time of high costs and low demand.


Cone Upset as Mets Drop 5th in Row
LEAD: So now the Mets have a five-game losing streak and an angry David Cone.


Reynolds Plans Cheaper Cigarette
LEAD: The R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is using an old name, Sterling, to introduce a new low-cost premium cigarette.
The cigarette will sell about $3 a carton below the price of premium brands and $1 to $2 above savings blends.


Phnom Penh Journal;   A New, Old Hotel Symbolizing Tragedy and Hope
LEAD: In tone and spirit, Karl Marx Quay, the site of this unfortunate city's first new hotel in 30 years, is far from the Place de la Concorde, the Parisian monument to reconciliation that provides a suitable setting for the Hotel Crillon.


SPORTS PEOPLE: SOCCER;


Joseph Prisco, Editor, 76
LEAD: Joseph Prisco, a former assistant to the sports editor of The New York Times, died of a heart attack yesterday at his home in Bayside, Queens.
He was 76 years old.


BUSH WANTS A RISE IN MOSCOW'S FORCE
LEAD: President Bush will ask the Soviet Union to send more military forces to the Persian Gulf region and will seek the withdrawal of Soviet military advisers from Iraq during his talks on Sunday with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Administration officials said today.


Soviets Say Dispute on 4 Islands With Japan Can Be Negotiated
LEAD: Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union said today that his Government was willing to negotiate about its four-decade territorial dispute with Japan.
The change seemed to indicate a new willingness to compromise over borders in return for Japanese investments in the ailing Soviet economy.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ANDREI D. SAKHAROV, the human rights campaigner and Nobel Peace Prize winner who died in Moscow last December at the age of 68, left an estate in New York valued at $50,000 to $100,000.
His will was filed for probate yesterday in Surrogate's Court, Manhattan.


Olsten to Buy Unit of Upjohn
LEAD: The Olsten Corporation plans to buy a health services subsidiary from the Upjohn Company for an undisclosed amount.
The purchase of Upjohn Healthcare Services Inc., which had about $182 million in sales last year and accounted for 6 percent of Upjohn's total sales, will expand Olsten's presence in the home health-care field.


Tyson Bout Dec. 8
LEAD: Mike Tyson will fight Alex Stewart on Dec. 8, officials announced today.
The fight was postponed last Friday when Tyson was injured while sparring with Greg Page.
He required 48 stitches for a cut caused by a head butt.
Tyson, 38-1 with 34 knockouts, and Stewart, 26-1 with 26 knockouts, had been scheduled to meet Sept.


About New York;   Making Struggle More Bearable For AIDS Cases
LEAD: There were colorful balloons, rock and rap from a boom box, hundreds of hot dogs, mountain ranges of potato salad, shimmering sunshine.
It was one of those last-gasp-of-summer picnics before the wind blows colder, then colder still.


ROCKET MOTOR FIRE KILLS AND HURTS 9
LEAD: A section of a proposed new booster engine for the Titan 4 rocket dropped accidentally from a crane and burst into flame today at Edwards Air Force Base, killing one man and injuring nine others, Air Force officials said.


Court Asked to Order Lawyer to Testify on Boston Murder
LEAD: In an effort to solve a widely publicized murder case here, prosecutors asked Massachusetts' highest court today to force Charles Stuart's lawyer to testify before a grand jury investigating the 1989 fatal shooting of Mr.
Stuart's pregnant wife.


Opponents to U.S. Move Have Poverty in Common
LEAD: So far, according to polling data, Mildred Birdsong is a typical opponent of President Bush's military moves in the Middle East.
She is poor, did not graduate from high school and is inattentive to the news.


In Albany, Big Donors Follow Party In Control
LEAD: The closeness of this year's campaign to control the State Senate has not changed one immutable rule of politics: the largest financial contributors continue to give the bulk of their money to the parties in power.


Connecticut Contenders Try to Slip Insider Label
LEAD: When Representative Bruce A. Morrison began his quest for governor last fall, he cast himself as a Democratic guerrilla.
He began a campaign of relentless sniping at his party's leader, Gov.
William A. O'Neill, a two-term conservative whose popularity had fallen sharply after he had approved $900 million in higher taxes.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Dukakis Is Defied


Berlin Turning Into a Mecca for Jazz
LEAD: Jazz, with its inherent call to freedom, is becoming steadily more popular in Eastern Europe, and a subterranean nightclub here has become the region's premier jazz showcase.


Copper Prices Rise Sharply On Fears of Tight Supplies
LEAD: Copper futures prices soared by more than 7 cents a pound yesterday, to their highest levels in nearly a year, reflecting renewed concerns that labor and production problems could lead to further tightening of supplies.


Chaos Set Off By Shutdown At Bridge
LEAD: A long-scheduled overhaul of the George Washington Bridge caused chaos for motorists on the West Side of Manhattan last night, when one of the bridge's three lower-level westbound lanes to New Jersey was shut.


Fernando Valenti, Harpsichordist And Scarlatti Expert, Dies at 63
LEAD: Fernando Valenti, an American harpsichordist whose skill, intelligence and wit helped popularize his instrument, died Thursday at Riverview Hospital in Red Bank, N.J.
He was 63 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a Government challenge to a contract for televising college football games misstated the extent of ABC's control for next year.


De Klerk Will See Bush in U.S. on Sept. 24
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk will visit the United States this month to discuss the political changes under way in South Africa with President Bush, Foreign Minister Roelof F. Botha announced today.


U.S. Foils Entry by 3 Suspected Nazi Guards
LEAD: Justice Department officials said today that since Monday they had thwarted efforts to enter this country by three men suspected of having been Nazi SS guards.


God, Race and the British Stage
LEAD: A decision to cast a black American actor as God in a new West End musical has thrown a spotlight on the issue of casting opportunities for minority actors in Britain.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Chronicle column on Thursday about Rudolf Nureyev misstated the length of his performance in ''The Overcoat'' at the Edinburgh Festival.
He danced and acted for 85 minutes of the 90-minute ballet, not for ''a scant five minutes.''


Polaroid Forming Venture in China
LEAD: The Polaroid Corporation said it would form a joint venture to produce instant cameras, package film and market imaging products in China.
A Polaroid division, Polaroid of Shanghai Ltd., will initially employ 130 people in the joint venture with S.M.P.I.C., formerly the Shanghai Motion Picture Company, Polaroid said.


Religion Notes
LEAD: New Tack on Gulf Crisis While some are pursuing a diplomatic resolution to the Persian Gulf crisis and others are advocating military action, one group sees another way out: prayer.


Coleman Nears Accord
LEAD: Derrick Coleman, the first pick in the National Basketball Association draft, has moved a step closer toward signing with the Nets.


Groups Taking Aid Donations
LEAD: American Red Cross, Middle East Refugee Crisis, Box 37243, Washington, D.C. 20013.
American Near East Refugee Aid, 1522 K Street N.W., Washington, D.C. 20005.
AmeriCares Foundation, 161 Cherry


A Subway Tragedy's Aftermath;   A Family Refuses to Hate
LEAD: The family of Brian Watkins, the 22-year-old tourist killed in a savage knifing in a New York City subway station on Sunday, would be forgiven if they turned against the city they loved to visit.
Their refusal to hate inspires admiration for their character; it is no less a summons to community action.


Credit Reagan for Destroying Social Programs;   Caring for the Rich
LEAD: To the Editor:


Burma Seizes 6 Opponents, Including Election Leaders
LEAD: The Burmese military Government, which ignored May's election landslide for the opposition, announced today that it had arrested the acting opposition leader and five other major dissidents.


Undercover Officers to Pose As Cabbies to Stem Assaults
LEAD: Responding to the killing of 21 cabdrivers and the wounding of 400 this year, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced yesterday that the police would deploy undercover officers posing as cabbies and would randomly stop taxis at checkpoints throughout New York City.


Nan Rosenthal, Curator, Marries
LEAD: Nan Rosenthal, the curator of 20th-century art at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, and Henry B. Cortesi, a partner in the New York law firm of Webster &amp; Sheffield, were married Wednesday in Manhattan.
Judge Pierre N. Leval of Federal District Court performed the ceremony in his chambers in the United States Court House at Foley


China Premier Quits Top Panel
LEAD: The Government said tonight that Li Peng had been replaced as Minister of the State Commission for Restructuring the Economy, but that Mr.
Li continued to serve as Prime Minister.
It was not clear how significant the announcement was.


Artworks Stolen From Cannes Apartment
LEAD: At least 20 artworks worth millions of dollars, including paintings by Picasso, Renoir and Degas, were stolen by thieves who lowered themselves into a fifth-floor apartment by rope, the police said Thursday.


Candidate Pulls Ad for Surrogate In Legal Dispute
LEAD: A decorous Democratic primary campaign for Manhattan Surrogate broke out in a lively squabble yesterday as a candidate agreed to change her advertising after two opponents, both judges, went to court to halt the broadcasting of her television commercials.


U.S. Helping Philadelphia Fight Crime
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bethlehem Steel Improvement Plan
LEAD: The Bethlehem Steel Corporation said it would make $100 million in improvements at its Johnstown production plant if it obtained concessions from the United Steelworkers of America.
Improvements under consideration include a new continuous caster and modernization of an existing bar mill to permit rod production, Bethlehem's chairman, Walter


Terrorist Threats to U.S. Rise After Countermove on Iraq
LEAD: The State Department said today that threats of terrorist attacks against the United States had increased sharply since the United States took action against Iraq in the Persian Gulf.


Oyster Bay Offers Shelter And Worries
LEAD: The Oyster Bay National Wildlife Refuge, spreading over 3,200 acres of water along Nassau County's North Shore, is home or stopping-point to dozens of species of wildlife, from flounder to bufflehead ducks.
Protecting one of Long Island's richest waterways, it was established 22 years ago to thwart the building of a bridge across Long Island


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.93
8.18
8.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.39
7.39
7.77
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.34
7.33
7.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.67
8.70
8.18
30-YR.


Aid to Airbus Called Unfair In U.S. Study
LEAD: The Bush Administration intensified a long-simmering conflict over European aerospace subsidies today by reviving charges that the Airbus consortium gets unfair support from its government backers and poses a significant long-term risk to American competitiveness.


Mortgage Rates Down
LEAD: Fixed-rate mortgages averaged 10.19 percent this week, down from 10.24 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.29 percent, down from 8.30 percent last week.


Public Transit Makes Energy-Saving Sense
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fed Did Not Act on Dollar
LEAD: The Federal Reserve did not try to influence foreign exchange rates in the three months that ended July 31, even as the dollar neared an all-time low against the German mark, officials of the central bank said yesterday.


Encephalitis Viruses Numerous in 5 States
LEAD: Viruses that cause two potentially deadly kinds of encephalitis have reached high levels among virus-carrying mosquitoes in at least five states, including New York and New Jersey, Federal health officials say.


A Subway Tragedy's Aftermath;   Mr. Vallone Stands Up to Crime
LEAD: A surge of public anxiety after the murder of Brian Watkins precipitates a crisis of confidence in Mayor David Dinkins of New York.
In the absence of his firm leadership, City Council Speaker Peter Vallone has outlined a plan to reclaim the streets.
While flawed, it at least opens the way for debate -and action.


Adding a Personal Stamp
LEAD: To counteract the boredom of paying all those bills every month - and to save a little money, too - there is a way to purchase stamps to reflect your personality.


McDonnell Near Sale Of Jet Fighters to Seoul
LEAD: The Government officially notified Congress today that a deal had been worked out for the sale of 120 FA-18 jet fighters to South Korea.


U.S. TO SELL SAUDIS 385 OF BEST TANKS
LEAD: The Bush Administration plans to sell Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates hundreds of advanced tanks, expanding by billions of dollars the value of previously announced arms sales, Administration officials said today.


Edward C. Stephan; Oceanographer, 83, Was Navy Admiral
LEAD: Edward Clark Stephan, a retired Navy rear admiral, died Wednesday at Montgomery General Hospital in Olney, Md.
He was 83 years old.


Clemens to Miss Start
LEAD: Roger Clemens will miss one or two starts because of tendinitis in his right shoulder, but he vowed yesterday not to leave his Boston teammates stranded down the stretch.


New York's Jobless Rate Falls
LEAD: New York City's unemployment rate dropped a full percentage point, to 6.2 percent, in August, but a Federal economist said yesterday that the decline was caused by discouraged young people dropping out of the job market rather than an improvement in the city's faltering economy.


Review/Music;   Mehta Pairs Gershwin and Stravinsky
LEAD: If the New York Philharmonic had wanted to advertise its virtues for 1990-91 listeners - a kind of color brochure in sound - it could have done worse than Thursday's evening of Gershwin and Stravinsky at Avery Fisher Hall.
Zubin Mehta conducted Gershwin's ''Cuban Rhapsody,'' excerpts from ''Porgy and Bess'' with Gregg Baker and Roberta Alexander, and the Symphony in Three Movements of


DEPOSED KUWAITI OFFERS $5 BILLION FOR GULF EFFORT
LEAD: Kuwait's exiled Emir told the United States today that his country would give Washington $2.5 billion this year, which with aid from other Persian Gulf nations should enable the Bush Administration to cover most if not all of the cost of its military deployment in the gulf.


F.C.C. Broadcast Data Show Politicians Pay More for Ads
LEAD: An audit released today by the Federal Communications Commission disclosed that television and radio stations in five cities have recently been charging political candidates significantly more money than other customers to broadcast advertisements.


Manville Plan to Aid Trust Fund
LEAD: The Manville Corporation agreed in principle yesterday to provide up to $520 million in new funds over seven years to the trust set up to compensate victims of its asbestos products.


This Year, A's Have Yankees' Number (10)
LEAD: If ever a baseball team needed to obliterate the notion it was truly in a no-win situation against another team no matter what, it was the Yankees last night.


Error Helps Expos Break Pirates' 6-Game Streak
LEAD: Sid Bream's throwing error allowed two runs to score in the fifth inning tonight as the Montreal Expos defeated Pittsburgh, 4-1, to end the Pirates' winning streak at six games.


Indecision and Mistakes Hamper Relief Efforts at Camps in Jordan
LEAD: When a giant Soviet AN-124 cargo jet landed here at midnight on Thursday, United Nations officials supervised the unloading of 50 tons of American-bought rice that had been flown from Bangladesh to help feed tens of thousands of Asian refugees from Kuwait in Jordan's desert transit camps.


R.T.C. Stance On Assets
LEAD: The Government must strike a balance between its duty to clean up the savings and loan crisis and the need to protect the institutions' assets that have environmental value, Federal officials told a Congressional panel today.


Bogota Says It Will Not Extradite Drug Traffickers Who Surrender
LEAD: President Cesar Gaviria has decided not to extradite drug traffickers who surrender and confess, in the latest of a series of concessions by both sides that appears to be edging Colombia closer to a peaceful solution of its drug war.


Rutgers and Kentucky Hope to Revive Programs
LEAD: The game between Rutgers and Kentucky at Giants Stadium tonight may not rank high on a list of national matchups, but for the schools' two first-year coaches, the result will be an important gauge for the future.


Continental Air Purchase
LEAD: Continental Airlines Holdings Inc. said today that it had agreed to acquire two DC-10-30 aircraft from Eastern Airlines, allowing Continental to expand its international route network.
Terms were not disclosed.
Continental said the wide-body aircraft would supplement its current fleet of 15 DC-10's, most of which are used on transoceanic flights.


Dow Up 23.26 Points; Week's Rise Is 5.19
LEAD: Stocks advanced yesterday in the wake of unemployment data showing a weakening economy as investors concentrated on Middle East developments that could give the market a lift on Monday.


Mexico Seeks Trade Talks
LEAD: President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico has formally asked the United States to open talks on a bilateral free-trade agreement, Mexico's Ambassador, Gustavo Petricioli, said today.


Steroid Use by Teen-Agers Cited
LEAD: More than 250,000 adolescents, mostly boys, have used steroids to build muscles and enhance athletic performance at the risk of physical and psychological harm, Federal health officials said today.


A.J.P. Taylor, British Historian, Dies
LEAD: Alan John Percivale Taylor, the iconoclastic British historian whose more than two dozen books infuriated professional academic historians and delighted a large public, died yesterday at a nursing home in Finchley, North London.
He was 84 years old and had been suffering for some time from Parkinson's disease.


Alan Kapelner, Novelist, 77
LEAD: Alan Kapelner, a novelist and short-story writer, died on Monday in St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 77 years old and lived in Greenwich Village.
His wife, Edith, said he died of lung cancer.
Mr.
Kapelner, a protege of the editor and critic Maxwell Perkins, published two novels.
His first, ''Lonely Boy Blues,'' was published in 1944 and earned acclaim for its evocation of New York City.


USX Steel Assets
LEAD: The chairman of the USX Corporation, Charles Corry, said the company's new $250 million steel slab caster would make the assets of the nation's largest steelmaker ''more attractive'' to any potential buyer.
Mr.
Corry made his remarks at a ground-breaking ceremony here for the slab caster, which is expected to produce 2.6 million tons of steel a year.


Cavanaugh Is Secret Weapon For Giants
LEAD: On Wednesday, the Giants added Matt Cavanaugh, a 33-year-old backup quarterback waived by the Philadelphia Eagles.
On Sunday night, in their season opener, the Giants will play the Eagles.
Coincidence?  ''Yes,'' said Coach Bill Parcells of the Giants. ''We wanted a third quarterback, a veteran.
He's smart, and he had a good preseason.


Time Again for Cattle on Eastern Prairie
LEAD: To the Editor:


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Bloomingdale Area Street Fair, the west side of Broadway from 96th Street to 106th Street will be closed today from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Sniper in Pittsburgh Ends Standoff by Killing Himself
LEAD: A gunman who had held the police at bay for five and a half hours ended the standoff this evening by shooting himself in the head and falling from atop a 16-story building in one of the city's busiest neighborhoods.


Credit Reagan for Destroying Social Programs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Another K.G.B. Officer Is Charging Incompetence and Graft
LEAD: The leadership of the K.G.B. suffered a new embarrassment this week when a Soviet paper published the first interview with an active intelligence officer charging incompetence and corruption in the agency.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 8, 1990
LEAD:
Markets


Shares of UAL Climb by $8
LEAD: The stock of the UAL Corporation jumped by $8 a share yesterday, to $100.25, on the New York Stock Exchange amid a flurry of rumors about the company.


Fee Caps Near for Medicare Patients
LEAD: Physicians across the country who do not accept Medicare allowances as full payment for their services will soon be able to charge only 25 percent more than Medicare allows.


Black Baptists Urge U.S. to Use Diplomacy in Gulf
LEAD: The National Baptist Convention U.S.A., the nation's largest predominantly black denomination, urged the Government today to pursue greater diplomatic efforts to avoid war in the Persian Gulf.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Accor S.A., a French hotel group, said the acquisition of Motel 6 L.P., Dallas would be completed on Sept. 17.


A Symphony in Search of a Home (or Cash)
LEAD: Facing management demands for a wage freeze and other cutbacks, the musicians of the renowned but financially ailing Buffalo Philharmonic Orchestra struck up a capriccio yesterday and offered to relocate en masse, like a nettled baseball club seeking greener pastures.


'The Grapes of Wrath' To Be Taped for TV
LEAD: The Steppenwolf Theater Company's production of ''The Grapes of Wrath,'' this year's Tony Award winner as best play, is to be taped next week for presentation on the ''American Playhouse'' public television series in March.


Murder Trial Is Ordered for Man Who Helped Wife Commit Suicide
LEAD: A judge today ordered a murder trial for a California man who traveled with his cancer-stricken wife to this Detroit suburb last month so that he could help her take her own life in a state that has no law specifically barring assisted suicide.


EUROPEAN NATIONS PROPOSE GULF AID
LEAD: The European Community announced today that it would not contribute directly to the cost of the American military presence in the gulf region and would instead give billions of dollars worth of emergency aid to Egypt, Jordan, Turkey and other countries hurt by the Iraqi crisis.


2 Defective Genes Linked to Heart Disorder
LEAD: Scientists have discovered two defective genes that cause dangerous thickening of the heart, the leading medical cause of sudden death among young athletes.


Who's Making Missiles for Iraq?
LEAD: Saddam Hussein probably gives some of his foreign ''guests'' real hospitality.
They're the Brazilian engineers who have been helping Iraq develop ballistic missiles.
Brazil disclaims any knowledge of their activities and wants them to quit work and leave, to comply with the U.N. trade embargo with Iraq.


Howard Barkell, Executive, 76
LEAD: Howard Barkell, who retired as president of the Phelps Dodge Copper Refining Company in 1978, died on Aug. 28 at his home in Englewood, Fla.
He was 76 years old and had lived in Merrick and Shelter Island, L.I., until a decade ago.
His family said he died of heart failure.


New York's Civil Court Farce
LEAD: Next Tuesday's primary elections for New York City Civil Court judges are an embarrassing reminder of the State Legislature's refusal to enact fundamental court reform.
Voters, meanwhile, have every right to feel insulted by the annual farce of judicial selection.


Graf Cruises While Sabatini Chugs Into Final
LEAD: The match was so one-sided, so easily won by Steffi Graf that Arantxa Sanchez Vicario pronounced herself quite happy to have played as well as she had in losing, which was not very well at all.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a dispute between Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis and his Lieutenant Governor, Evelyn Murphy, described one aspect of the dispute incorrectly in some copies.


Ford Plans to Shut 2 Plants for Week
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it will shut down assembly plants in Atlanta and in Lorain, Ohio, for one week beginning Monday.
Ford attributed the shutdowns to a shortage of dealer orders for the Ford Taurus and Mercury Sable cars assembled in Atlanta, and the Econoline and Club Wagon vans assembled in


Brady Finishes Tour
LEAD: Treasury Secretary Brady completed a whirlwind tour of four European and Asian countries tonight without any firm commitments for billions of dollars in financial aid.


New York Gives Developers Too Good a Deal
LEAD: To the Editor:


Patents;   Tougher Materials For Superconductors
LEAD: Government researchers this week patented a tough new class of superconducting plastic composite materials.
They are designed to overcome the inherent brittleness of recently discovered high-temperature superconductors, which are like ceramics.
In particular, the researchers hope the new composites will make it easier to shape superconductors into rails for powering magnetically levitated trains.


Comptroller Candidates Spar for the Cameras


Ford Chief's Views on Oil
LEAD: The auto industry is better prepared now to withstand the effects of an oil crisis and meet consumer demand for fuel-efficient vehicles than it was during the Middle East oil crisis of the 1970's, Harold Poling, chairman of the Ford Motor Company, said today.
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on


Patents;   Perfect Wave Simulated By Surfing Apparatus
LEAD: Two surfing enthusiasts in Southern California obtained a patent this week on a surfing apparatus that they said simulated the perfect wave -even the so-called pipeline wave that envelopes a surfer.


U.S. Insists Individual Nations Can't Break Blockade of Iraq
LEAD: Individual nations do not have the right to break the international trade blockade of Iraq, senior United States officials said in New York today, explaining their argument with countries seeking to send food and medicine through the sanctions net imposed by the United Nations.


Not All Phones Block 'Dial a Porn' Numbers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Crime and Mayor's Anger;   Dinkins Hopes Reasoned but Tough Stance Will Combat Fears About Rising Violence
LEAD: After vowing in his campaign last year to be ''the toughest Mayor on crime'' that New York City has ever seen, David N. Dinkins has struggled since - and mostly in vain - to persuade the public that he can be.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
2-7
Kuwait will give the U.S. $2.5 billion this year, the country's exiled Emir said.
With aid from other gulf nations, the money should enable the Bush Administration to cover most if not all of the cost of its military deployment in the Persian Gulf.
Page 1


CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: Reporter's Notebook;   For Speed Ball Bush, On to Helsinki
LEAD: Like an Olympic athlete, George Bush gets enormous pleasure out of breaking speed records.


Job Growth Hits a Standstill, While Unemployment Rises
LEAD: Job growth in the United States has come to a virtual halt, and the unemployment rate rose in August to its highest level in two years, the Labor Department reported today.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Reviewing Portfolios
LEAD: The recent downturn in the stock market makes this a good time to review investment portfolios.
Edward M. Kerschner, chairman of the investment policy committee at Paine Webber Inc., says that this may not be the time to change strategy.
For example, when the yield on bonds is higher and money rates are higher and stock prices are lower, as they are now, the best possible return of each has improved and there is very little reason to change.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Mice
LEAD: The mice are coming.
As summer wanes and fall and winter near, they are especially aggressive because they are looking for shelter that has food and water.
And they want to find it in your home or apartment.


Goodyear to Cut Jobs in Europe
LEAD: The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, which has been laying off employees in the United States and Canada, said it expects to eliminate 1,180 jobs in Europe by mid-1992 as well.
It employs 20,000 people there.
It also said it expects to incur after-tax charges of an estimated $51 million against earnings in the third quarter of this year to cover restructuring and environmental cleanup costs linked to production sites closed in 1986.


Westhead Taking Over As Coach of Nuggets
LEAD: The Denver Nuggets introduced Paul Westhead as their new head coach yesterday, and Westhead wasted no time in promising to install a fast-paced offense and defense that will ''knock your socks off.''


Anxiety Under That Fabled Cypress
LEAD: An air of uncertainty underlies the pristine blue sky, turquoise ocean and outward calm here, where golfers pay $175 for 18 holes on one of the world's most famous golf courses.


Johnson Controls
LEAD: Johnson Controls Inc. hired Salomon Inc. to advise it of alternatives to maintaining ownership of the company's battery group.
The company said the options to be considered included forming strategic partnerships to position the battery group better in the global market and selling all or part of the business.


More Talks For Kleinman
LEAD: Leonard Kleinman spent parts of the last two days testifying before Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball, but the Yankees' chief operating officer will return for a third session in about 10 days.


SECRET DOSSIERS AROUSING GERMANS
LEAD: East German civil rights groups are picketing the headquarters of the former Communist secret police to keep files on millions of ordinary citizens from being turned over to the security agencies of a unified Germany.


Knicks Are in Pinch Over Payroll
LEAD: Summer vacation for the Knicks has been nothing to write home about.


New Democratic Party Wins Ontario Election
LEAD: The New Democratic Party ended a five-year Liberal Party rule in Ontario and gained its first Legislative majority in elections in Canada's biggest province on Thursday.


ARAFAT'S FORCES GAIN IN LEBANON
LEAD: Guerrillas loyal to the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman, Yasir Arafat, today evicted followers of a rival leader, Abu Nidal, from the main Palestinian refugee district in southern Lebanon after fierce gun battles in which 30 people were killed and 85 wounded, the police said.


Bridge
LEAD: A few top-ranked teams, including the defending champions headed by Steve Robinson of Arlington, Va., fell by the wayside during the past day, but eight United States teams were involved in the round of 16 this afternoon in the World Team Championships.
These were the results by captain: George Rapee of Manhattan beat Malcolm Brachman of Dallas; Prince Joachim Zu Waldeck from Germany lost to Shen Jialin from China; Peter Weichsel of Encinitas, Calif., lost to Michael Moss of Manhattan; Tilman Seidel from Austria lost to Howard Weinstein of Chicago; Also, Bob Jones of Queens beat Chip


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TRACK AND FIELD
Burrell Beats Lewis
Leroy Burrell completed a perfect I.A.A.F.
Mobil Grand Prix season in the 100-meter dash yesterday in Athens, beating Carl Lewis for the second consecutive time.
Burrell was timed in 10.04 seconds for his eighth victory on the international circuit.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher But Falls Against the Yen
LEAD: The dollar gained against most major currencies except the Japanese yen yesterday in a session traders described as eventless.


Commercial Property: Rockefeller Center;   The Labyrinthian Path to Building a 55-Story Tower
LEAD: Something big stood in the way as the Rockefeller Center Development Corporation planned a transfer of air rights from a low-rise Fifth Avenue block to the Seventh Avenue site on which it planned to build Rockefeller Plaza West.
That something was the Exxon Building.
Because Rockefeller Center sold the Exxon tower in 1986, it broke a direct chain of ownership from the British Empire Building, Maison Francaise, Channel Gardens and Lower Plaza (which generated the air rights), through the G.E.


Air Force One Journal;   200,000 Miles Later, the President Gets His Wings
LEAD: What do you give a travel-loving Commander in Chief who has a high-speed boat, a mobile phone in his golf cart, a Marine Corps helicopter and a bulletproof limousine?


Robert L. Custer, 63, Psychiatrist Who Led Treatment of Gamblers
LEAD: Dr.
Robert L. Custer, a psychiatrist who in 1974 established the nation's first clinic for treatment of compulsive gambling, died Tuesday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 63 years old.


Campus Life: Michigan;   Student President Charges an Effort To Stifle Dissent
LEAD: A dispute has arisen at the University of Michigan over the administration's decision not to invite the president of the student government to speak at a convocation for incoming freshmen.


'Waiting for Armageddon'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gabriella Morizio Married To Robert M. McLaughlin
LEAD: Gabriella Morizio, an associate in New York for the Chicago law firm of Mayer, Brown &amp; Platt, was married in Williston Park, L.I., yesterday to Robert M. McLaughlin, an associate in the New York law firm of Schulte Roth &amp; Zabel.
The Rev.
Thomas Tuite officiated at St.
Aidan's Roman Catholic Church.


Old Gold and Even Older Antiquities Shed Light on Ancient Cultures
LEAD: Exhibitions of ancient gold jewelry, antiquities and American quilts are certain to provide unexpected pleasures for museumgoers in the season ahead.


'Waiting for Armageddon'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Laurie Jane Golden Weds Richard Raught Jeffrey Jr.
LEAD: Laurie Jane Golden, the daughter of Mrs.
John P. Golden of Stamford, Conn., and the late Mr.
Golden, was married yesterday to Richard Raught Jeffrey Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey of Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
Avery C. Manchester presided at the First Church of Round Hill in Greenwich, Conn.


Adrift in Sex
LEAD:
SHUFFLE
By Leonard Michaels.
162 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $18.95.


THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR: FILM
LEAD:
September
September
''POSTCARDS FROM THE EDGE.'' A drugged-out show-biz daughter of a drunken show-biz mom.
Mike Nichols directs and Meryl Streep gets to tell Shirley MacLaine she's old enough to be her mother in Carrie Fisher's adaptation of her novel.
Sometimes a comedy, sometimes ''Terms of Endearment'' on cocaine.
Opens Wednesday.
''LIFE AND NOTHING BUT.'' A romantic drama set in 1920, with Philippe Noiret as a French Army colonel responsible for identifying the dead.
In Bertrand Tavernier's film he becomes involved with two women whose husbands are missing.
Mr.
Tavernier ('' 'Round Midnight'') is known for lush, atmospheric and sometimes surprisingly steely direction.
Friday.
''STATE OF GRACE.'' Gary Oldman is back, this time with Sean Penn and Ed Harris in a story of a Hell's Kitchen gang in 1970's Manhattan.
Mr.
Penn must choose between a new, gentrified life and old loyalties .Directed by Phil Joanou, the Spielberg protege who made ''U2 Rattle and Hum'' and ''Three O'Clock High,'' and who may be ready for a grown-up film.
Friday.


Andre Agassi Settles Down for a Long Stay
LEAD: A man who lived on lower Park Avenue used to say that he woke up every morning, stuck his head out the window, and looked north to see if anybody had taken away the Pan Am Building during the night.


Scare Tactics
LEAD: To the Editor:


All About/Apparel Automation;   Factory Tradition, Fashion Imperative and Foreign Competition
LEAD: Some of the most progressive companies in the American apparel industry are moving from bundles to bits, turning to computer-controlled machinery to stem the flow of jobs to low-wage nations.
To offset lower costs abroad, American apparel makers aim to improve quality and better keep up with ephemeral fashions.


U.S. Files Narrow Defense on Abortion Counseling
LEAD: In a brief filed with the Supreme Court, the Bush Administration has reiterated its position that the Court's 1973 decision legalizing abortion should be overturned.
But in the brief, the Administration stopped short of asking the Justices to do so in two pending cases involving Government-financed family planning clinics in New York


Townsend T. Kieffer, Publicity Man, 51
LEAD: Townsend T. Kieffer, a journalist and publicity man, died on Aug. 28 at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 51 years old and had lived in Greenwich for the last two years after returning from Key West, Fla.
His family said he died of lung and liver cancer.


Good Samaritans Aid Stranded Motorists
LEAD: We beg to vociferously differ with Sally Wendkos Olds (''A Car Transforms a Good Samaritan,'' Aug. 19).


'Waiting for Armageddon'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Virginia Rallies In Third Quarter
LEAD: The streak is over for the University of Virginia.


What's Best for the Nation - Not the Oil Industry
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR: TELEVISION
LEAD: New Series ''AMERICAN CHRONICLES.'' This documentary series from David Lynch/Mark Frost, the makers of ''Twin Peaks,'' will take offbeat looks at such subjects as the New Orleans Mardi Gras and Wayne Gretzky of the Los Angeles Kings.
Saturdays at 9:30, Fox.
New Series ''AMERICAN CHRONICLES.'' This documentary series from David Lynch/Mark Frost, the makers of ''Twin Peaks,'' will take offbeat looks at such subjects as the New Orleans Mardi Gras and Wayne Gretzky of the Los Angeles Kings.
Saturdays at 9:30, Fox.
''AMERICAN DREAMER.'' In this sitcom built on quirkiness, Robert Urich plays a network newscaster who gives up the world beat to write a column about raising his two children.
With Carol Kane as his dizzy research assistant.
The first series from the executive producer Gary David Goldberg since ''Family Ties.'' Saturdays at 10:30, NBC. ''BABES.'' A sitcom about three zaftig sisters sharing a small New York apartment.
Hastily overhauled to keep it from relying too weightily on fat jokes.
Susan Peretz, Wendy Jo Sperber and Lesley Boon are the babes.
Thursdays at 8:30, Fox.
''COP ROCK.'' Steven Bochco, who created ''Hill Street Blues'' and ''L.A.
Law,'' adopts a novel TV form: the weekly drama-musical. ''Cop Rock'' will offer gritty police action (very like ''Hill Street Blues'' in tone) laced with songs.
Wednesdays at 10, ABC.


The Bright Side of the Trade Gap
LEAD: AFTER more than a month of panicky bearishness in the markets, even the most skeptical analysts start to look for silver linings.
Eric T. Miller, chief investment officer for Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, has found one in the latest trade figures.
Mr.
Miller conceded in a recent report that the economic fundamentals are mostly negative.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended Aug. 25
MANHATTAN
Chelsea
$525,000
471 West 22d Street
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,550-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining area, two fireplaces, private garden, high ceilings; maintenance $1,050, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: Kingman Associates)


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
Bermuda Cruise Passenger Slump Brings Discounts


Correction
LEAD: An article on Aug. 12 about Shakespeare's ''Richard III'' misidentified the character Queen Margaret.
She is Henry VI's widow, not his mother.


Austria's Clandestine Workers
LEAD: Jacek Matuszewski of Lodz, Poland, came to Austria a few weeks ago, found a forest outside Vienna and pitched a tent.
Each morning, he drives into the city to a littered street in a poor neighborhood, where he joins scores of other East Europeans waiting to be selected by Austrian employers who cruise the street.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   The Next Step in Developing Stamford?
LEAD: As Stamford slowly digests its building binge of the 80's, a zoning change that would expand its commercial district is being proposed by Peter L. Malkin, a New York developer and chairman of the Grand Central Partnership, a coalition of property owners and businesses near Grand Central Terminal in New


CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: Reporter's Notebook;   Slight Hint of Rebellion In Spelling 'Gorbatchev'
LEAD: This is not Mikhail Gorbachev's week.
He is sinking in the polls.
His people are in a fury over bread shortages.
And now, just before a summit meeting he hoped would burnish his image, the Finns have forgotten how his name is usually spelled.


Campus Life: Columbia;   House System To Make Help Less Remote
LEAD: ''An Experience - Not a House'' proclaimed the red hand-lettered signs greeting several returning undergraduates in Columbia University's Wallach Hall last week.
The signs announced an experimental ''house system,'' a residential arrangement modeled in part on systems at Harvard and Yale universities, where clusters of students share a dean and common services within their dormitories.


With Guns Blazing, the Movies Get Ready For a Fresh Season of Crime
LEAD: Some people think that crime doesn't pay, but none of them live in Hollywood.
Not this season, anyway, when crime - organized, accidental and historical - is the subject of those films that have raised the highest artistic expectations and box-office hopes.


Brooklyn Girl, 11, Wounded by Stray Bullet
LEAD: A stray bullet, fired during a street dispute in Brooklyn, struck an 11-year-old girl as she lay in her bed last night, the police said.


Brazil's Leader Makes the Army Toe the Line
LEAD: President Fernando Collor de Mello seems to enjoy playing soldier.


THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR: DANCE
LEAD:
September


Steeler Rookie Signs
LEAD: He's the last man into the fold, but if the Pittsburgh Steelers' history with rookie holdouts is any precedent, it won't take long to get Eric Green out of the gate and on to the playing field.


The Games Grown-Ups Play: A 30 And Over Hardball League
LEAD: THEY can be seen at the train stations, heading to their jobs as lawyers and advertising executives, or in cars, driving to their work as insurance salesmen and personnel managers.
They work hard, these men of Westchester, supporting families and paying mortgages.


Currency;   The Yen's Turn to Shine
LEAD: Finally, the yen.
Long after the German mark and other European currencies strengthened against the dollar, the yen is making a move.
On Friday, the dollar briefly fell below the 140 level against the yen and ended trading in New York at 140.05.
This is the strongest the yen has been since October.


Michigan Official Resumes Criticism of Boss on TV Show
LEAD: Lieut.
Gov.
Martha W. Griffiths, whom Gov.
James J. Blanchard dropped from the Democratic ticket last month, has resumed her criticism of the Governor by hinting that her replacement on the ticket is unqualified.


Matthew Vossler Wed To Pamela Tower Dey
LEAD: St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church in Newcastle, Me., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Pamela Tower Dey and Matthew John Vossler by the Rev.
John Ineson.


Suzanne E. Thomas Is Wed
LEAD: Suzanne E. Thomas, a daughter of John C. Thomas Jr. of New York and the late Eula M. Thomas, was married yesterday to Francis J. Houghton 3d, a son of Margot D. Houghton and Mr.
Houghton Jr., both of New York.
The Rev.
Charles G. Newbery performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church of Lattingtown in Locust Valley, L.I.


Nancy Ellen Curry Is Married in Rye
LEAD: Nancy Ellen Curry, a daughter of Mrs.
Claude Harmon of Quail Ridge, Fla., and Bernard F. Curry Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Sun Valley, Idaho, was married yesterday to William O'Shaughnessy, a son of Catherine Tucker O'Shaughnessy of Mount Kisco, N.Y., and the late William M. O'Shaughnessy.
Justice Alvin Richard Ruskin of State Supreme Court in White Plains officiated at the Manursing Island Club in Rye, N


Leetch Carries a Burden
LEAD: The cruel irony of the ugly and unfortunate injury was that it would not have been so bad if Brian Leetch had not been quite so good.
As it happened, though, the virtuoso move Leetch made on the night of March 14 was the last one he would make for months without the aid of crutches.


Getting Published on the First Attempt
LEAD: BEATING the odds, Harlan Coben, a 28-year-old executive of a travel club in Union, wrote a mystery novel that found a publisher on its very first try.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 9, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
41
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and lawyers.
2
8
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights Colombian drug lords.


S. K. Vogel Weds Susan Sherrerd
LEAD: Susan Moore Sherrerd, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. F. Sherrerd of Bryn Mawr, Pa., was married there yesterday to Steven Kent Vogel, a son of Suzanne Vogel and Ezra F. Vogel, both of Cambridge, Mass.
The Rev.
David B. Watermulder performed the ceremony at the Bryn Mawr Presbyterian Church, assisted by the Rev.


Texas Surges Past Penn State
LEAD: It was the largest crowd ever to see a Penn State season opener at Beaver Stadium.
It was the first game of Joe Paterno's 25th season as head coach.
It was a chance for the Nittany Lions to strut their talent now that they have decided to join the Big Ten Conference.


Families Pursue Communal Housing
LEAD: A GROUP of modern pioneers scattered around the county have joined an international movement to create a new type of community, one they say would restore old-fashioned values now lost in the county's modern suburban sprawl.


On Acceptance And Rejection
LEAD: On Elaine Nole's essay on rejection Westchester Opinion, Aug. 12] , all I can say is ''Welcome to the real world, Elaine.'' She criticized businesses, magazine editors and men for not having the courage or the courtesy to offer explanations for their rejections.


Art's Cozy Relationship With Business
LEAD: In a development that gives new meaning to the term ''corporate takeover,'' art museums are increasingly promoting the commercial interests of the companies giving them money - not just indirectly, by enhancing a sponsor's public image, but directly, by helping to hawk wares ranging from perfume to vodka to credit cards.


Gregory J. Conklin Wed To Michiko Yoshizawa
LEAD: Michiko Yoshizawa, a vice president at the Ogilvy &amp; Mather advertising agency in New York, was married yesterday in Franklin Lakes, N.J., to Gregory J. Conklin, an associate in the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell.
The Rev.
Carl D. Hinrichsen officiated at the Most Blessed Sacrament Roman Catholic


A Festival Celebrating Poetry
LEAD: JOYCE CAROL OATES has written poems about Mike Tyson, Las Vegas and the New Jersey Turnpike and one that is called ''Love Letters With Static Interference From Einstein's Brain.'' It is set in Princeton.


Question Of the Week;   Do the Mets Have What It Takes to Win It All?
LEAD: What does it take to win it all?
Consistent pitching and hitting over the course of the season; solid defense; speedy, smart base-running; and of course the ability to make the big play when needed.
The Mets have none of these.
I keep asking myself, how in the world are they over .500?
TODD W.


The Blue and the Gray, in Color
LEAD: Geoffrey C. Ward, the former editor of American Heritage magazine, has teamed with the documentary film makers Ric Burns and Ken Burns to produce THE CIVIL WAR: An Illustrated History (Knopf, $50), a thoroughly researched, vividly written and sumptuously illustrated narrative of the terrible war that helped define us as a nation.


Nancy E. Breslow To Wed in Fall
LEAD: Dale R. Claman of New York and Jules W. Breslow of West Bloomfield, Mich., announced November wedding plans for their daughter Nancy E. Breslow and Roger L. Strong Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Strong Sr. of New York.


Thomas Jakobson Weds Amy Slove
LEAD: Amy Beth Slove and Thomas Andrew Jakobson were married last evening at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y., by Rabbi Charles Kroloff.


Simple Desserts Featuring Italian Prune Plums
LEAD: The arrival in the market of small purple Italian prune plums signals that summer is ending.
These fruits are better when used in baking than eaten fresh and therefore more suitable as the weather may cool.


The Golden Door, Re-opened
LEAD: Tomorrow, after eight years of loving restoration, the Ellis Island Museum of Immigration officially welcomes the general public.
The Golden Door will once more become an Open Door.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Where the World Was New
The Ellis Island Immigration Museum will be dedicated today as a memorial to those who came to America, including the millions of immigrants who flowed through Ellis Island from 1892 to 1954.
Several tell their stories.
Page 36.
East German Pollution
Officials say pollution from a chemical complex was deliberate, not simply the result of neglect.


Hostage Situations Demand Forthright Action
LEAD: To the Editor:


Larger Costs of the Crisis
LEAD: While the Bush Administration openly frets over the budgetary burden of confronting Iraq in the Persian Gulf, many economists fear that the military bill will be dwarfed by the indirect costs that result from higher energy prices.


Susan Huang Is Bride of Daniel Mintz
LEAD: Susan S. Huang, a daughter of Drs.
Kun-Yen and Amy H. Huang of McLean, Va., and Tainan, Taiwan, was married last evening to Daniel R. Mintz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton A. Mintz of Chevy Chase, Md.
Rabbi Joshua Haberman officiated at the Congressional Club in Washington.


Question Of the Week;   Do the Mets Have What It Takes to Win It All?
LEAD: By looking at the first five months of the season, it would appear that the Mets don't have the staying power to win it all.
But the die-hard baseball fan will see the depth the Mets have on the bench as well as the newly acquired veterans and youth that will give the Mets that extra edge to capture the pennant.


Clothes Help Immigrants Come Alive on Ellis Island
LEAD: USE your imagination and you won't see a silk robe hanging on a form: you might see the Chinese grandfather himself, resplendent in the clothing of his native land.


PARENT AND CHILD
LEAD:
ENDANGERED MINDS
Why Our Children Don't Think.
By Jane M. Healy.
382 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.95.


Sara G. Field Is Married
LEAD: Sara G. Field, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Nathan D. Field of Elkins Park, Pa., was married last evening to Jeffrey J. Silverman, the son of Barry Silverman and Lynn Silverman, both of South Orange, N.J.
Rabbi Barry Friedman officiated at David's Country Inn in Hackettstown, N.J.
Mrs.
Silverman, 25 years old, graduated from Lehigh University, as did her husband.


U.S. Called Lax in Policing Medical Research
LEAD: After a three-year investigation, a Congressional panel has accused the Federal Government of inadequately policing Government-financed medical research, and warned that continued failure to root out misconduct, fraud and conflicts of interest could threaten the public health.


Hers;   A Second Time Around
LEAD: The call that came from London was a surprise. ''Can you be here at the end of next month?'' said my father. ''Why?
For what?'' ''My bar mitzvah.''


The Region;   For Some Blacks, Justice Is Not Blind To Color
LEAD: In his closing statement to the jury in the Central Park jogger trial last month, Robert Burns, a defense lawyer, suggested that the victim hadn't really been raped, but that ''the racial overtones are so powerful in this case that it is difficult to get at the truth.''


Goodbye Again, Dark Love
LEAD:
AMONGST WOMEN
By John McGahern.
184 pp. New York:
Viking.
$17.95.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Christie's in New York will auction the largest number and greatest variety of early American bank notes ever offered starting on Friday at 10 A.M.
The auction will continue through the afternoon and evening.
The second half of the auction will start at 10 A.M.
Saturday and will continue that afternoon at 2 P


Social Events
LEAD:
Polo in Greenwich


Errors Cited In Lilco Letter
LEAD: Henri Zeichner (Letter, Aug. 5) says that Lilco has runaway management.
He says the C.E.O. of Lilco earns a salary and benefits rivaling a maharaja's.
This is a multi-billion dollar business.
What does he think a proper salary should be?
What does he mean by a ''Corrigan'' (wrong way) reliability record?


Music's Generation Gap Means an Age of Diversity
LEAD: Welcome to pop for the video era, made by a generation of musicians who wield computers the way their elders sling guitars.
It is a generation that is savvy about images, plugged in to the latest electronics, sure of itself on the dance floor, short on memory and in love with rhythm.


J. W. Young Wed To Ms. Grumhaus
LEAD: Audrey Dean Grumhaus, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Dean Grumhaus of Lake Forest, Ill., was married yesterday to Jonathan W. Young, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack M. Young of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
J.
Clark Grew 2d performed the Episcopal ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Jennifer W. Grumhaus, a sister of the bride, at the Church of the Holy Spirit in Lake


He Died to Tell the Tale
LEAD: THE KNIGHT HAS DIED
By Cees Nooteboom.
Translated by Adrienne Dixon.
102 pp. Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press.
$14.95.


Miss Kagan Wed To M.J. Diserio
LEAD: Vanessa Andrea Kagan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vladimir Kagan of New York and Nantucket, Mass., was married yesterday to Matthew J. Diserio, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene A. Diserio of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
Douglas Tompkins performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Nantucket.


Miss Frank Wed To F.X. McGarey
LEAD: Kristin Alison Frank, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Myron W. A. Frank of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Francis Xavier McGarey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis D. McGarey Jr. of New Canaan.
The Rev.
Charles C. Smith officiated at the Congregational Church, assisted by the Rev.
William D.


Putting the Focus On Beauty That's Skin Deep
LEAD: A triumphant ruler - spear in one hand, ax in the other and armored warriors at his sides - is depicted in a silvered bronze plaque as a helmeted hero riding in an oxen-drawn cart.
This scene depicting Merovech, the fifth-century leader of the tribal Franks, is centered above the door of an eight-foot-tall French armoire from 1867, one of the most lavishly embellished pieces of furniture to be exhibited in many years at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Warning: not hardy in the U.S. Her Majesty's Gardens 'Melt Out' in Roslyn
LEAD: IN the winter months, I spend spare hours reading English gardening books.
These contain dazzling photos of splendid, burgeoning gardens, and the authors all have names like Candida, Edwina, and Nigel.


FOOD: (opening Night);   ME AND MY GRILL
LEAD: Everyone wants to know what's for dinner.
Working in the theater just means you have to wait longer to find out.
Like most folks at the end of a workday, show people aren't interested in going anywhere fancy for their midnight meals.
They want a place where the chef cooks like mom and the dining room feels like the den.


Slain Utah Tourist Eulogized as 'a Real-Life Hero'
LEAD: The young man stabbed to death in a New York City subway station last week while defending his mother was laid to rest here today, eulogized by relatives and friends as ''a real-life hero,'' a noble role model ''who loved helping others and died doing just that.''


Headliners;   Into the Sunset
LEAD: Savages don't get much nobler than Winnetou, the brave Apache chief who was the central character in the series of Western novels that made the late Karl May the best-selling German author in history.
The late 19th-century Winnetou novels are virtually unknown in the United States - perhaps because greedy whites were almost always the villains - but their continuing popularity in West Germany enabled Pierre Brice to carve out a 28-year career portraying the wise Indian leader.


To Tour Rome For 60 Cents, Take the Bus
LEAD: Some people can proudly boast that they have never been on a bus in their lives.
I have quite a different record.
I have always depended on the hospitality of public transportation wherever I go, and while I have on occasion been disappointed, confused and even abandoned, I am still a staunch supporter of this most wise means of getting around in the 20th century.


Confessions of a Gentlewoman Fanatic
LEAD: On my living room wall are two large framed photographs.
Both picture boys at camp, lined up in rows and wearing numbered uniforms.
Some grin like goons, some are stone-faced - generic camp snaps.
I adore every one of these guys, know them intimately by face, name, number.
They are my brothers, pals and lovers.


Pamela Gannon Is Married
LEAD: Pamela M. Gannon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis Gannon of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., was married yesterday to David C. Douglas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Douglas of Edgewood, Ky., by the Revs.
Edward Dowling and Robert O'Donnell at Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church in Dobbs Ferry.
Mrs.
Douglas, 28 years old, graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as did her husband, and is studying for a Ph.D.


Whose Law Is It?
LEAD:
THE PROBLEMS OF JURISPRUDENCE
By Richard A. Posner.
485 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press. $29.95.


Portuguese Food Plus European Service
LEAD: PICTURE a restaurant named Cafe Sport.
If you see a corner bar with neon beer signs in the window and a neighborhood crowd inside drinking beer, watching TV and playing darts, you have an accurate view of this Williston Park spot.


Style Makers;   Ed Antczak and Peter Shea, Map Designers
LEAD: Ed Antczak and Peter Shea formed their Vermont contract map design and publishing company, Northern Cartographic, 10 years ago.
But it's their latest product that has suddenly given their company popular appeal.


Nebraska
LEAD: To the Editor: The article by Suzanne Winckler on ''I-80's Exits to History in Nebraska'' (Travel, July 22) was interesting but missed one of the most revealing exits - to Red Cloud, home of Willa Cather, who did so much to show small town life in the Middle West and specifically Nebraska.


Companies Pool Effort on Irish Play
LEAD: THE place is Belfast, and the time is now.
A Catholic widow, 63 years old, and a Protestant widower, 68, fall in love during a month of meetings in a graveyard where their respective sons, both of whom were assassinated, are buried.
And with their newfound romance, they incur the rage of their warring, begrudging offspring.


Academy of Engineers Says U.S. Should Welcome Foreign Investors
LEAD: A new report from the National Academy of Engineering says foreign investment in the United States should be encouraged, not discouraged, if the nation is to remain successful in the new era of global companies and global markets.


Evening Hours;   Cocktails, Couture and Candlelight
LEAD: The Fashion Group International showed Europe's fall haute couture collections on Wednesday at the Plaza after a cocktail reception.
The presentation was directed by the editors of Vogue in Europe and America.
Three of the designers were there: Christian Lacroix, Gianni Versace and Karl Lagerfeld.


Welfare Families Leaving Motels
LEAD: STATE social workers have moved more than 1,000 families out of welfare motels since March, reducing the number of families in the costly and unpopular housing program by 75 percent, a report to the legislature shows.


Simple Desserts Featuring Italian Prune Plums
LEAD: The arrival in the market of small purple Italian prune plums signals that summer is ending.
These fruits are better when used in baking than eaten fresh and therefore more suitable as the weather may cool.


Arbour Says Islanders' Future Is Now
LEAD: Fans who dropped by Cantiague Park's ice rink today saw the Islanders in a spirited double session that was unusually intense for the first day of training-camp drills.


Miss Wight Weds J.F.C. Bostwick Jr.
LEAD: Susan Randall Wight, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward I. Wight of Baltimore, was married yesterday to James Frazier Curtis Bostwick Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bostwick of Brookville, L.I.
The Rev.
William O'Reilly, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Siasconset (Mass.) Union Chapel on Nantucket.


L. Frank Frehill Weds Miss Hohn
LEAD: Nancy La Rosa Hohn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry G. Hohn of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday at St.
Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church in New York to L. Frank Frehill, a son of Mrs.
Clyde Merry of Sherman Station, Me.
The Rev.
Frederick D. Hoesli officiated.


Cynthia Blount Is Married
LEAD: Cynthia A. Blount, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Thomas Blount of Henderson Harbor, N.Y., was married yesterday to Andrew M. Klotz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald L. Klotz of Wilton, Conn.
The Rev.
Janet Gibbs officiated at the Sandy Creek United Methodist Church in Lacona, N.Y.
Mrs.
Klotz graduated from the University of Vermont and is a producer of television commercials in New York.


S.A.T. Scores Are In, and All of Education Is Judged
LEAD: The dismal average scores of students who took the Scholastic Aptitude Test this spring have prompted the usual alarms and recriminations.
Television, video games and teaching quality have all been scolded for contributing to the decline, with greater or lesser justification.


Condom Campaign Begins in Massachusetts
LEAD: Alarmed by a rapid increase in the spread of AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases among adolescents and young adults, Massachusetts has begun one of the most aggressive condom promotion campaigns of any state.


Streetscapes: 249 Central Park West;   An Accidental Restoration in a New Historic District
LEAD: It seems to be the first significant restoration job completed in the newly designated Central Park West Historic District.
The paint has been stripped off, exposing the brick, and the brownstone trim has been repaired, transforming a shabby old building at 249 Central Park West, at the southwest corner of 85th Street, back into a picturesque 1888 rowhouse.


Air Fares
LEAD: To the Editor: No industry in the nation practices massive and systematic price discrimination with greater success than the airlines.


The Underside of the Stones
LEAD:
BLOWN AWAY
The Rolling Stones and the Death of the Sixties.
By A. E. Hotchner.
Illustrated. 349 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.95.


Choosing a Lawn Mower: Push or Ride?
LEAD: HOMEOWNERS can choose from three types of mowers to keep their greensward in trim.
The standard is the noise maker, a power mower, which gobbles fuel to make the whirring cutting blade operate.
Or there is an electric mower that is attached to a long, weatherproof cord.
The cord must be plugged into a source of power in the house or garage.


Sooners Beat U.C.L.A. By 34-14 in Opener
LEAD: Tony Levy recovered two fumbled punts deep in U.C.L.A. territory, setting up a pair of first-half touchdowns today as Oklahoma beat the Bruins, 34-14.


In Jordan, Workers From the Indian Embassy Distribute Food to Refugees


Federal Tenants
LEAD: To the Editor:


Choosing a Lawn Mower: Push or Ride?
LEAD: HOMEOWNERS can choose from three types of mowers to keep their greensward in trim.
The standard is the noise maker, a power mower, which gobbles fuel to make the whirring cutting blade operate.
Or there is an electric mower that is attached to a long, weatherproof cord.
The cord must be plugged into a source of power in the house or garage.


Transactions
LEAD:
Football


Probation for 2 Who Attacked Congressman
LEAD: Two Maryland teen-agers have been sentenced to probation and community service work in the beating of Representative Gerry E. Studds.


Guide for Home Buyers, Sellers and Renters;   Sifting Through the Boilerplate For Essentials in a Prospectus
LEAD: There are few documents as intimidating to an apartment buyer as the ''black book,'' the prospectus that describes the terms of a co-op or condominium offering.
Even the best-intentioned perusal can dissolve quickly into despair, as impenetrable legalese and excruciatingly technical prose numb the brain.


Manhattan Perspectives
LEAD: Fortunate tourist, you who are seeing New York for the first time.
If you are making the right approach, you will experience love at first sight, that passion so often later recognized as flawed vision, in the exhilarating upthrust of metal and masonry from the lowlying bedrock of Manhattan.
Architecture speaks of people and purpose and New


Guide for Home Buyers, Sellers and Renters;   A Cornucopia of Incentives For Buyers
LEAD: As buyers in the New York region have grown more cautious, sellers have responded with a host of promotions, giveaways and aggressive sales techniques to attract attention.
So far, some of the inducements have helped sell homes, but many have not.


Wall Street;   Some Progress on Broker Disclosure
LEAD: After more than eight months of quiet negotiations, state and Federal regulators are beginning to resolve their long-simmering dispute about whether brokerage firms and individual dealers should be required to disclose pending investigations and litigation.
But the success of their talks may hinge as much on technology as on diplomacy.


THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR: ANTIQUES
LEAD: September ''FIVE YEARS OF 19TH-CENTURY ACQUISITIONS.'' About 60 additions of sculpture and furnishings in the neo-classical, romantic and historical revival styles, including several masterworks in furniture and ceramics never before shown at the museum.
Tuesday-Jan. 27, 1991, Metropolitan Museum.


Airlift From Connecticut Carries Supplies to Refugees in Jordan


Reportage Is Out and Opinions Are In As the Camera Redefines Itself
LEAD: At first glance, the photography world seems to be recovering from last season's spree of commemorative shows devoted to the 150th anniversary of the medium.
But a closer look, both in New York and nationwide, suggests that curators and dealers have not folded their tents.
Pictures that address social issues are one trend, and they are as likely to be overtly opinionated as they are reportorial.


PAINFUL DECISIONS
LEAD: The case of the elderly woman who wanted ''everything to be done in the event something went wrong'' cries out for further scrutiny.


Stephen Smith Weds Miss MacKenzie
LEAD: Phoebe E. MacKenzie, the daughter of Phoebe Connor MacKenzie of Darien, Conn., and Warren G. MacKenzie of Rowayton, Conn., was married yesterday to Stephen A. Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Smith of St.
Louis.
The Rev.
Harold E. Schmidt, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Old Courthouse in St.


Campus Life: Colby-Sawyer;   After 62 Years, Men Join Scene On the Campus
LEAD: The young men and women held blue and white balloons, ate hamburgers and chatted enthusiastically about their first few days at college.
It was a typical fall semester scene at virtually any New England college.
But for the previous 62 years the players had been women only.
This month 67 men - 55 freshmen and a dozen transfer students - arrived to change the cast as Colby


Guide for Home Buyers, Sellers and Renters;   Some Caveats on Buying a Town House
LEAD: Rare is the New Yorker who has strolled past a row of stately town houses and not fantasized about living in one.
But even rarer is the apartment-dweller not made uneasy by stories of leaking roofs, burglaries, broken boilers and the large sums of money such houses consume.


More United States Troops Arrive in Saudi Arabia


Corrections
LEAD: A dance listing in the Annotated Calendar on page 48 of the Arts and Leisure section today misstates the schedule for the Classical Dance Company of Cambodia.
It will appear on Oct. 9-14 at the Joyce Theater in Manhattan.


BUSINESS DIARY/September 2-7
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
The Soviets' 500-Day Plan
It might take more than 500 days for the Soviet economy to recover from seven decades of five-year plans and minutely detailed ministerial directives - all monitored with statistics worth little more than the nation's currency.
Last week, distribution systems broke down so badly that, despite record harvests, bread vanished from Moscow's shelves.


The Nation;   Opponents Find Judge Souter Is a Hard Choice to Oppose
LEAD: Three years ago this week, the Senate Judiciary Committee's hearings on the nomination of Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court opened in the supercharged atmosphere of a battle already fully joined.


Nouveau Right Winger
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hussein's Summit Message: Gulf Crisis Is an Arab Issue
LEAD: As President Bush and Mikhail S. Gorbachev prepared for their summit meeting on Sunday in Helsinki, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq sent the two leaders an open message today, reaffirming his intention to hold on to Kuwait and avowing that the crisis was one for the Arab nations, not the superpowers, to resolve.


VCR's That Delete Ads Stir a Fight in Japan
LEAD: At first, it seemed like a television viewer's dream: a $600 videocassette recorder that in the latest twist of Japanese electronic wizardry automatically edits out commercials when it tapes most movies broadcast on television.


Democrats Offer Contrasts, but Have the Voters Noticed?
LEAD: WHEN the state's Democrats go to the polls for Tuesday's primary election, they will be faced with an unfamiliar chore: choosing a candidate for governor.
For the first time since the mid-1970's, the state's largest political party has no incumbent seeking another term.
Instead, it has two hopefuls, each with a distinct vision of the state's needs for the 1990's.


PRETTY WOMAN
LEAD: Daphne Merkin is entitled, I suppose, to her retro fantasy about the prostitute and her rich john in the film ''Pretty Woman'' (Hers: ''Prince Charming Comes Back,'' July 15).
I prefer one about a neurosurgeon who graduates at the top of her class and defies conventional wisdom to pursue research that earns her a Nobel Prize and saves the lives of thousands, all the while finding sexual fulfillment with a contented Czech body builder.


THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR: PHOTOGRAPHY
LEAD: September ''MAN RAY / BAZAAR YEARS: A FASHION RETROSPECTIVE.'' The experimental Surrealist artist's fashion photographs, most of them published in Harper's Bazaar in the 1930's, have been gathered together for the first time.
This weekend-Nov. 25, International Center of Photography Midtown, 1133 Avenue of the Americas, at 43d St., N


Miss Marsland Wed in Chicago
LEAD: Heather Anne Marsland, the daughter of Susan Little Marsland of Chicago, was married there yesterday to Denison Reed Webster, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James G. Webster 3d of Englewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert L. Howell performed the ceremony at St.
Chrysostom's Episcopal Church.


Energy Tax: Still on the Table
LEAD: Until this weekend, the budget summit between the White House and Congress has been a high-stakes game of political hide-and-seek, with each party trying to avoid blame for the tough choices that must be made.
Now the eleventh hour has arrived.


In Subway Case, Bystander Was the Key
LEAD: The quick roundup of suspects in the subway killing of a visitor from Utah last week was a result of information provided by a bystander who spoke to the youths moments before the killing and learned they were planning a robbery and bound for Roseland Ballroom, investigators said yesterday.


Tiina M. Bougas and Warren C. Smith Jr. Are Wed
LEAD: Tiina M. Bougas, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James A. Bougas of Chestnut Hill, Mass., was married yesterday to Warren C. Smith Jr., the son of Mr.
Smith and Mrs.
John B. Marks, both of Portland, Ore.
The Rev.
Stephen J. White performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Redeemer in Chestnut Hill.


Elena Ford-Niarchos to Marry in '91
LEAD: The engagement of Elena Ford-Niarchos to Stanley J. Olender, a son of Sophia Olender Kozak of Southampton, L.I., and the late Jozef Olender, has been announced by her mother and stepfather, Mr. and Mrs.
Edward R. Downe Jr. of New York and Southampton.
An October 1991 wedding is planned.


Of Parenthood And Adulthood
LEAD: The author of ''Children Mean You'll Never . . .'' [Opinion Page, Aug. 12]  is shortsighted and the piece he wrote presents a distorted picture of parenthood and marriage.


Rich in Japan
LEAD:
CRESTED KIMONO
Power and Love in the
Japanese Business Family.
By Matthews Masayuki Hamabata.
Illustrated. 191 pp.
Ithaca, N.Y.:
Cornell University Press.
$17.95.


Charles E. Hertan Is Wed To Jayme A. Shorin
LEAD: Jayme A. Shorin and Charles E. Hertan were married last evening at the Endicott Estate in Dedham, Mass., by Rabbi David Kudan.


Miss Kruesi Wed To Kenneth Tarr
LEAD: Charlotte K. Kruesi, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Oscar R. Kruesi of Bernardsville, N.J., was married yesterday to Kenneth J. Tarr, the son of Mrs.
Julius Tarr of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Mr.
Tarr.


Long Beach Island Journal;   When Summer Ends, Residents Take Back Their Way of Life
LEAD: EVERY year about this time, a rite takes place at the vacation home of Bonnie and Art Gorman.
The couple size up their three-bedroom ranch on Long Beach Island and jot down what renovations they plan in the off-season - to build new closets, paint or wallpaper.


Question Of the Week;   Do the Mets Have What It Takes to Win It All?
LEAD: Win it all?
No way.
Tom Herr, the only fielder on the team, four good starters, and only one relief pitcher may be enough to beat the Pirates, but no way does this team beat Cincinnati.
And if they did, there would still be Boston or Oakland left.
F'gedabodit!
JEREMY NERST
Brooklyn


Indiana Jones Blows His Mind
LEAD:
THE FOUR WINDS
A Shaman's Odyssey Into the Amazon.
By Alberto Villoldo and Erik Jendresen.
Illustrated. 265 pp. San Francisco:
HarperCollins Publishers. $18.95.


Susan Kaiser Wed To Seth Greenland
LEAD: Susan Kaiser and Seth Greenland were married last evening at the home of the bridegroom's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Greenland, in Bedford Village, N.Y.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk officiated.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: An unusual horde of philatelic material is being auctioned this week, providing collectors a chance to acquire items that are rarely offered to the public.


Simple Desserts Featuring Italian Prune Plums
LEAD: The arrival in the market of small purple Italian prune plums signals that summer is ending.
These fruits are better when used in baking than eaten fresh and therefore more suitable as the weather may cool.


Arab-Americans and Ugly Americans
LEAD: A Detroit radio station thought it hilarious to invite listeners to call in ''bad Iraqi jokes.'' Some of the entries were so crudely provocative that the station apologized to local Arab-Americans.
In Toledo, an Arab-American businessman was beaten by a white-supremacy mob.
In Santa Ana, Calif., a Star of David was spray-painted on a car owned by an American of Syrian origin.


Special Hasidic Ballot Leads to Brooklyn Suit
LEAD: A judge is expected to decide tomorrow whether a group of Hasidic voters may cast absentee ballots in an Assembly primary race rather than go to their polling site, a Catholic school that they refuse to enter for religious reasons.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
BEETHOVEN FESTIVAL


BEST SELLERS: September 9, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $21.95.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a cunning, vengeful Greek tycoon.
2
2
13
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.


Sandra Lane, Student, Weds J. A. Ballan, Lawyer
LEAD: Sandra A. Lane, the daughter of Dr.
Stanley L. Lane of New York and the late Sylvia Lane, was married last evening to Jonathan A. Ballan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Ballan of Fair Lawn, N.J., by Rabbi Martin Zion at the Harmonie Club in New York.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Are Umpires Getting Too Aggressive?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Using Case Studies To Train Teachers
LEAD: WHEN Dr.
Rita Silverman teaches her educational psychology class at Pace University this fall, she will have her students read the six-page story of Ellen Norton.
The name is fictitious, assigned to this case study to protect the identity of a 25-year-old Westchester high school teacher who strongly suspected that one of her students was being abused at home.


Style Makers;   Sarah Schulte, Painter
LEAD: One thing Sarah Schulte loves about her work is the research.
When she paints people, she gets to know almost everything, at least everything paintable, about their lives.
When she paints cities, she gets to know the city in a way few tourists or natives know it.


The Executive Life;   Puckish Humor, Pranksters and Pratfalls
LEAD: Sheryl Spanier usually arrives early for staff meetings in the conference room at Lee-Hecht Harrison &amp; Associates, a New York career placement firm where she is a senior consultant.
She's rather petite -just shy of five feet tall - and likes to raise the seat of her chair before the others trickle into the room.


Faulty Translations
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


New Name And a New Director For Chorus
LEAD: THOSE who not only enjoy listening to music but appreciate the joy and fulfillment that come from creating it, are advised to consider the many excellent local choirs welcoming new members.


As Defaults Keep Rising, A Market Dies
LEAD: The American economy may yet manage to avert a recession, although the odds of that sink each day that the Mideast crisis keeps oil prices high.
But even as the economy stumbles along, the death of the ''junk bond'' market becomes clearer.


Blossom Heller, Justice, 63
LEAD: Blossom Heller, a justice of the New York State Supreme Court, died on Friday at her home in Brooklyn.


Fran Black Wed to Joseph Markowitz
LEAD: Fran Margery Black, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham Black of East Sandwich, Mass., was married last evening to Joseph Caleb Markowitz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Irving Markowitz of Little Silver, N.J.
Rabbi David Posner officiated at the Georgian Suite in New York.


Suzan Onel, an Attorney, Marries in Mamaroneck
LEAD: Suzan Onel, the daughter of Miriam Onel of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Joseph Onel, was married yesterday to Keith B. Bickel, the son of Dolores Schauffele de Pillot of St.
Croix, Virgin Islands.
Town Justice David Klein officiated at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.


Carolyn J. Hirschhorn Weds Curtis Schenker
LEAD: Carolyn J. Hirschhorn, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Hirschhorn of Longmeadow, Mass., was married in New York last evening to Curtis J. Schenker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Schenker of New York.
Rabbi Harvey Tattelbaum performed the ceremony at the Pierre.


Drop Shots Vs. Education
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Playing the Post-Iraqi Markets
LEAD: Since mid-July, when stock market averages began drooping, investors have been worriedly watching and wondering what the professionals think about the major markets.
Then came Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
Now, the questions for institutional portfolio managers, the driving force behind the markets in this country, are obviously much more urgent.


A Newcomer Roils a Lake Community
LEAD: When the television producer Bruce Paltrow, known for the St.
Elsewhere series, and his wife, the actress Blythe Danner, bought almost 40 acres of property on Lake Waccabuc in the Westchester town of Lewisboro two years ago, their neighbors in this tight-knit community were thrilled.
And not because of their celebrity status.


Comments From Gorbachev
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the statement by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union on his arrival here today for a summit meeting with President Bush:


Campus Life: Lehigh;   When a College Drops Required Languages
LEAD: As colleges press students to learn foreign languages to prepare them for international affairs, Lehigh University has eliminated its language requirements for undergraduates.


Yankees Let Victory Fall to the Wayside
LEAD: They have fallen so far and lost so frequently this summer that one bad night looks like all the others to the Yankees.
But in their final weeks, they somehow still find new lows.


Miss America 1991


Europeans Splurge on Vacations in Mauritius
LEAD: Americans may have spent less and stayed closer to home this vacation season, but if this tropical island tousled by breezes from the Indian Ocean is any indication, Europeans, flush with strong currencies, are splurging on the exotic.


'Sloop John B' Joins Forces With French Challenger
LEAD: Beach Boys USA, one of four America's Cup defense syndicates licensed for the 1992 trial race series in San Diego, has joined a French challenger in a collaborative move that is unprecedented in America's Cup history.


Agassi, Sampras in Final
LEAD: The rejected racquets fanned out next to John McEnroe's chair like a deck of cards.
Slumped on that courtside chair was the 31-year-old New Yorker, who had stalled just one round short of playing the role of the consummate renaissance man at the United States Open, a tournament through which he had pulsed like a heartbeat, in full comeback form.


The Scandal Is the Lack of Funding for Medical Research
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ohio State Beats Texas Tech, 17-10
LEAD: Jeff Graham returned a punt 50 yards for the go-ahead touchdown, and the freshman tailback Robert Smith led a comeback that carried No. 18 Ohio State over Texas Tech, 17-10, today.


Inside the Nation's Best-Run S.&amp;L.
LEAD: Herbert M. and Marion O. Sandler, the husband-and-wife team that runs the Golden West Financial Corporation, have had the good sense never to invest company funds in ''junk bonds,'' windmill farms or any of the other far-fetched ventures that have sunk so many savings and loans.


Postings: $650,000 Plus;   Church Repairs
LEAD: With its south transept wall out of plumb, its stonework deteriorating and other architectural features in need of replacement, the Park Avenue Christian Church realized two years ago that a critical moment was at hand. ''We decided it was time to stop doing things piecemeal,'' said the senior minister, the Rev.


Q and A
LEAD:
Opening Your Own Inn


Hard on Christians
LEAD: To the Editor:


Loretta Anne Foster Wed In Maryland to John Mertz
LEAD: Loretta Anne Foster, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James J. Foster of Kensington, Md., was married there yesterday to John Charles Mertz, a son of the Rev.
Charles E. Mertz of Reading, Pa., and the late Jean A. Mertz.
Msgr.
Edward C. Foster and the bridegroom's father, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at Holy Redeemer Roman Catholic Church.


The Hospital Is Full - the Doctor Is Alone
LEAD:
OTHER WOMEN'S CHILDREN
By Perri Klass.
284 pp. New York:
Random House. $19.95.


THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR: CLASSICAL MUSIC
LEAD:
September


Umpire Controversy Still a Source of Unhappiness for White
LEAD: The controversy ignited by the recent on-field actions of Joe West, a National League umpire, seemed to subside last week with high-level meetings and a conciliatory statement.
But the episode could resurface this week and could still fuel the resignation of Bill White as National League president.


Why Mozart Has Become an Icon for Today
LEAD: The walls, it is said, have ears; and during the coming pair of seasons, encompassing the bicentennial year of Mozart's death, the walls of Lincoln Center are slated to absorb every one of the composer's works, from the little Andante ''pour le clavecin'' in sister Nannerl's notebook, composed just after his fifth birthday (if Papa Leopold, who inscribed the little harpsichord piece, is to be believed), to the
The walls, it is said, have ears; and during the coming pair of seasons, encompassing the bicentennial year of Mozart's death, the walls of Lincoln Center are slated to absorb every one of the composer's works, from the little Andante ''pour le clavecin'' in sister Nannerl's notebook, composed just after his fifth birthday (if Papa Leopold, who inscribed the little harpsichord piece, is to be believed), to the Requiem, on which he was working when he died, just 30 years, 10 months and 1 week later.
In that short span Mozart managed to compose such a quantity of music that it takes a book of a thousand pages just to list it adequately (the ''Chronological-Thematic Catalogue'' by Ludwig Kochel, now in its sixth revised edition).
And that quantity is of such a quality that the best of it is still our standard of perfection in music, never to be surpassed (since perfection, as a standard, has long since gone out of style).
Mozart is the very earliest composer by whom works in practically every genre he cultivated have been maintained in an unbroken public performing tradition to our own time; except for Handel's oratorios, nothing earlier has lasted in this way.
Haydn, Mozart's great contemporary, has survived only in part; his operas, for example, have perished irrevocably, as periodic attempts to revive them unfailingly prove.
Bach returned only after a time underground.


Companies That Thrive on Uncertainty
LEAD: When Clayton &amp; Dubilier Inc. completes its acquisition of the International Business Machines Corporation's typewriter and printer division later this month, B. Charles Ames, a partner in the leveraged-buyout firm, is expected to work closely with the management of the company.
Mr.
Ames, who was chairman and chief executive of the Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Company, is co-author of ''Market Driven Management: Prescriptions for Survival in a Turbulent World.


Grenades Force Evacuation
LEAD: Dirt-encrusted hand grenades spilled from a broken box in a Postal Service bulk mail center today, forcing a three-hour evacuation, the authorities said.
Police officers took the 19 grenades and an artillery shell, believed to be of World War I vintage, to a disposal site and detonated them.
The box had been mailed from France to an address in Chambersburg, the police said.


A Public Breakdown
LEAD: When you are working your first job as somebody's assistant, and sleeping on a convertible couch in a studio apartment, there are blocks in this city on which you dream of living.
This is one of them, one of those blocks of brownstones in Greenwich Village with bright window boxes and heavy double doors and always a hint, behind the curtains, of history and luxury.


Letter Omits Critique Of Museum Mission
LEAD: Theodore M. Black Sr.'s petulant letter (Aug. 26) defending the Nassau County Museum of Fine Art fails to adequately address the problem of suitability and location of a building dedicated to enriching the cultural life of Nassau County taxpayers.


'Homoerotics' We Have Known
LEAD: To the Editor:


Buyers Now Looking Just for a Home
LEAD: If there is one thing recent home buyers in the New York region seem to have in common, it is the attitude adopted by Tom Watkins, a Wall Street broker who sold his family's three-bedroom Long Island house in July and bought a bigger one nearby in August.


European Community Financial Leaders Meet in Italy


Neutral States of Europe Start Shedding Their Postwar Shell
LEAD: Neutrality just isn't what it used to be anymore.


Campus Life: Tufts;   Play Dramatizes Need for Action Against Date Rape
LEAD: The play begins with a man named Pat awkwardly asking Mara, a woman classmate, for a date after they had both just failed a college examination.
They go to a party and, then, to Pat's dormitory room, where the scene ends with Mara protesting his aggressive moves.
The final scene has an emotional, determined Mara confronting Pat, ending with her exclamation, ''Pat, you raped me.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD: MAKING TRACKS: An American Rail Odyssey.
By Terry Pindell. (Grove Weidenfeld, $22.95.) Amiability may be the main consideration in picking a seatmate for a long train ride, but in a travel writer you want something a little punchier.
Terry Pindell seems like a good fellow, and he's put a lot of work into his first book, ''Making Tracks,'' an account of a 30,000-mile journey around the United States via Amtrak.


Dawn Kesselman Is Wed
LEAD: Dawn E. Kesselman, an associate with Anderson, Kill, Olick &amp; Oshinsky, and Barry S. Wisset, an associate with Chadbourne &amp; Parke, both New York law firms, were married yesterday in Rochester.
Rabbi Judea Miller performed the ceremony at Temple B'rith Kodesh.
The couple's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Kesselman of Rochester and Mr.


Yet Again, Some Once-in-a-Lifetime Exhibitions, This Time Of Titian and Van Dyck. Plus, the Unseen Malevich
LEAD: In addition to the Museum of Modern Art's high-low art exhibition, this season's foremost museum offerings include retrospectives of four painters whose names shine with distinctly different lusters.
Yet ''Kasimir Malevich, 1878-1935'' (opening next Sunday at the National Gallery of Art in Washington and Feb.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
MUGGIE MAGGIE
By Beverly Cleary.
Illustrated by Kay Life.
70 pp. New York:
Morrow Junior Books. $11.95. (Ages 8 to 12)


Oversight, Phase I: Keeping Records of Doctors With Records
LEAD: The mutually protective relationship that has long existed between doctors and hospitals began to grow less cozy this month when the National Practitioner Data Bank - more popularly known as ''docs in a box'' - began collecting information on medical malpractice.


Postings: Affordability Exhibition;   Bronx Designs
LEAD: ''The era of fires is over,'' the Bronx Museum of the Arts wrote, referring to the wave of arson that swept through the South Bronx a decade and more ago.
Now is the time of rebuilding, the museum says in a brochure for a new exhibition of designs for affordable housing, part of an educational program on the history and current practice of affordablility in the borough.


Fear in the Subway: Riders Adopt Tactics To Ward Off Danger
LEAD: Before she enters the subway, Victoria Rodriguez, a 47-year-old nurse from Queens, turns her rings upside down, tucks her gold chains inside her blouse and pulls out what she thinks is the most effective weapon against subway crime - her Bible.


ONE TRIAL SOUGHT FOR 12 DEFENDANTS
LEAD: Federal prosecutors have urged a judge to hold one large trial for several reputed Mafia leaders, including Vincent (Chin) Gigante, all charged with a huge scheme to control window contracts in New York City.


Bush and Gorbachev, in Helsinki, Face the Gulf Crisis
LEAD: President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev arrived in Finland today for a snap summit meeting aimed at shoring up their collaboration against Iraq and coordinating their divergent approaches to the Persian Gulf crisis.


Ferry Takes Passengers to an Ellis Island Preview


If You're Thinking of Living in: Valhalla
LEAD: Known for its sprawling Kensico Dam Plaza, where Westchester County sponsors free jazz and ethnic music concerts on Friday nights throughout the summer, Valhalla is the geographical, entertainment and burial center of the county.


3 Women Plead Guilty In Bombing of Capitol
LEAD: Three women pleaded guilty Friday to bombing the Capitol and conspiring to set off explosions at eight locations in a two-year campaign to protest Government policies.


Lowell Kern Wed To Jill Rothleder
LEAD: Jill Ilene Rothleder and Lowell Douglas Kern were married last evening at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J., by Rabbi Irving Spielman.
Mrs.
Kern, 26 years old, is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen Rothleder of Parsippany, N.J.
Her husband, 26, is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jack S. Kern of Kings Point, L


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: The social player is only concerned with one hand at a time.
Matters are more complex for tournament participants.
They must often take into account their standing in the event and the likely developments at other tables.


Miss Griffin Is Wed To James F. Pocock
LEAD: Laurie Ann Griffin, the daughter of William Griffin of Laoise, Ireland, and the late Judith Griffin, was married yesterday to James Frederick Pocock, a son of Margaret Pocock of New York and A. J. Pocock of Lake Hopatcong, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert Anderson performed the ceremony at the Radisson South Hotel in Bloomington,


Guide for Home Buyers, Sellers and Renters;   An American Verity: Long-Term Ownership Pays
LEAD: Most Americans want to own their shelter, not rent it.
And the main motivations have little to do with how much money they will make when they decide to sell their homes.


FROM THE SIDELINES
LEAD: While the Persian Gulf crisis appears to be redrawing the map of the Middle East, in Israel officials are watching with no small amount of satisfaction, convinced that the dramatic developments of the last month have only reaffirmed the correctness of their longstanding, hard-line foreign policy.


Miss Rosenblum Weds Oren Cohen
LEAD: Claire Helen Rosenblum, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William L. Rosenblum of Richmond, was married there last evening to Oren Cohen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sidney M. Cohen of New York.
Rabbi Aaron Koplin officiated at Congregation Or Ami.


New York's Out-of-Town Reviews
LEAD: New Yorkers think they know what fascinates outsiders about New York.
Theater, assuredly.
Crime, probably.
Fancy restaurants and hotels, most certainly.
But articles about New York in the newspapers of Seattle, San Francisco, Washington, Boston and other major cities in the last two years barely mention these mainstays.


SMALL-FRY SWEARING
LEAD: From the time my son was 1 year old until he was 15, we lived on the edge of a rough neighborhood.
Swearing by small fry was a common, daily occurrence.
We allowed our son to swear at home but discouraged him from cursing in public.
That took the shock value out of those words.
If he banged his finger with a hammer, we would hear some well-chosen expletives.


Practical Traveler
LEAD: TO get the best deal on a rental car, it's becoming increasingly important to book more than a week in advance.
In Michigan last January, I learned that lesson the hard way.
My flight from Detroit to Kalamazoo was grounded in fog, so rather than waiting, I rented a car on the spot for the two-hour drive.


Das Kapital;   From Moscow, A Plan to Junk Communism in 500 Days
LEAD: For 25 days last month, some of the more frustrated free-market enthusiasts of the Kremlin inner sanctum went off quietly to a secluded old aristocratic dacha on the edge of the city to compose a national economic recovery plan that is about to roar surreally to the top of the nation's agenda.
By all the whimsy of history, the bold plan deserves to be called the Capitalist Manifesto, so completely would it undo Marx and Engels with its reverential establishment of private property and free enterprise and its terse dismissal of


Hostage Situations Demand Forthright Action;   Democracy in Jordan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Opening Night: Fashion;   MY FAIR LADIES
LEAD: Sure, acting is real rough stuff.
But rougher still is that grand public relations horror, opening night.
It's not easy to grin for the paparazzi when one senses the review hounds sniffing about.
And for certain reluctant actresses, dressing up is the hardest part.
It's all extremely problematic for Joie Lee because she just doesn't shop.


ROMANIA: THE DREAMS CAN COME TRUE AGAIN
LEAD: I was born in Brasov, Transylvania, which boasts another famous townsman in the form of Vlad Tepes, alias Count Dracula.
Ask any Romanian about him, and he will tell you that he was a Romanian king, a legend with a draconic temper, with little resemblance to a vampire, but it makes a better story the other way.


Headliners;   Stringing Along
LEAD: If violin melodies could be lip-synched, Blumita Singer might have had it made.
Ms.
Singer, a resident of Sao Paulo, Brazil, was one of more than 200 candidates who sent audition tapes to the International Violin Competition in Indianapolis, and, on the basis of her dazzling recording and a resume that mentioned Juilliard, she was selected as one of 53 invited to compete in person.


Cheryl I. Sands Is Wed
LEAD: Cheryl I. Sands, an account supervisor at Wells, Rich, Greene, and Michael J. Kaplan, an account executive at Wunderman Worldwide, both New York advertising agencies, were married last evening at Temple Emanuel of Great Neck in Kings Point, L.I.
Rabbi Robert Jacobs officiated, assisted by Cantor Henry Weintraub.


What Hill &amp; Knowlton Can Do for You, (And What It Couldn't Do for Itself)
LEAD: Six men are huddling around a desk at Hill &amp; Knowlton's corporate headquarters in New York.
They're all suited, serious, intense, talking quietly to one another the way people do in a crisis, but with an edge of panic in their eyes.
They have just learned that the New York Attorney General has filed suit against the Mobil Corporation, one of Hill &amp; Knowlton's clients, accusing the company's chemical unit of making false claims about the environmental benefits of its Hefty trash bags.
Six men are huddling around a desk at Hill &amp; Knowlton's corporate headquarters in New York.
They're all suited, serious, intense, talking quietly to one another the way people do in a crisis, but with an edge of panic in their eyes.
They have just learned that the New York Attorney General has filed suit against the Mobil Corporation, one of Hill &amp; Knowlton's clients, accusing the company's chemical unit of making false claims about the environmental benefits of its Hefty trash bags.
He is seeking a court order to bar Mobil from selling, distributing or marketing the trash bags in New York State.
Mobil executives want the suit dropped, or at least stalled.
Jack Bergen, president of Hill &amp; Knowlton U.S.A., is a West Point graduate, a man who prides himself on his grace under pressure.
He whispers his commands: ''You, get on the phone to Washington. . . .
You, get up to Albany. . . .''


Miss Bone Wed To M.A. Bolinger
LEAD: Katherine Macqueen Bone, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Bone of Baltimore, was married there yesterday to Dr.
Mark Allen Bolinger, a son of the Rev.
Canon and Mrs.
Allen Slawson Bolinger of Haddonfield, N.J.
The Rev.
Roger Gench officated at Brown Memorial Presbyterian Church, assisted by the bridegroom's father, the rector of Grace Episcopal Church in


Durga Strohl Is Married
LEAD: Dr.
Durga Strohl, a resident in ophthalmology at the Tufts-New England Medical Center in Boston, and Michael J. Larkin, a doctoral candidate in applied mathematics at Brown University, were married yesterday at Hammersmith Farm in Newport, R.I.
John H. McGann, a justice of the peace, officiated.
The bride, 30 years old, is a daughter of Dr.


In Jazz, the Old and New Vanguard, Thanks to Bands Big and Small
LEAD: Jazz's finest moments usually come in clubs, where the intimacy between audience and musician draws out special performances and where nuance can be as important as the explicit musical statement.
Manhattan clubs promise such moments this season: Betty Carter, one of jazz's most controlled singers, performs at Fat Tuesday's, Dec.


Coffey Wants More
LEAD: He reported to the Pittsburgh Penguins' training camp, but don't get the idea that Paul Coffey is happy to be there.
The all-star defenseman, who is in the last year of a contract that paid him $450,000 last season, is still pushing for a renegotiation that would make him a member of the National Hockey League's million-dollar club, along with fellow defensemen Scott Stevens of the St.


Question Of the Week;   Do the Mets Have What It Takes to Win It All?
LEAD: A more legitimate question would be: Can the Mets play better than the Pirates for the rest of the season and capture their division?
FRANK L. FLETCHER
New York


Guide for Home Buyers, Sellers and Renters;   In Jersey and Connecticut, Less Protection for Tenants
LEAD: Both New Jersey and Connecticut have local agencies that try to offer protections to tenants but neither state has a system as broad in its scope as New York's.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Mom and Dad always wanted Brian to go on a mission.
Well, Mom and Dad, Brian has gone on a mission and he's already touched more lives than most missionaries in a lifetime.''
- Todd Watkins,
at his brother's funeral
in Provo, Utah.
[42:1.]


'Waiting for Armageddon'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pinochet Irks Bonn With Potshots at Army
LEAD: Gen.
Augusto Pinochet set off a diplomatic commotion with the West German Government this week by asserting that the reorganization of the German military after World War II had produced an army of ''drug addicts, long hairs, gays and union members.''


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bernardsville
$2.7 million
46-3 Post Kennel Road
5-bedroom, 5-bath, 2-half-bath, year-old contemporary; indoor pool, 3 fireplaces, Japanese garden; taxes $20,158.
Bridgewater
$558,000
13 Totten Drive
5-bedroom, 3.5-bath, 1-year-old colonial; 3-car garage, spiral staircase, sprinkler system; taxes $7,420.


Choosing a Lawn Mower: Push or Ride?
LEAD: HOMEOWNERS can choose from three types of mowers to keep their greensward in trim.
The standard is the noise maker, a power mower, which gobbles fuel to make the whirring cutting blade operate.
Or there is an electric mower that is attached to a long, weatherproof cord.
The cord must be plugged into a source of power in the house or garage.


Robert Tucker Weds Caroline Brokaw
LEAD: Caroline J. Brokaw, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Caleb Brokaw of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Robert S. Tucker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Tucker of Montpelier, Vt.
The Rev.
Michael A. Pearson officiated at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Tucker graduated from Princeton University, and she and her husband received M.B.A.


Wasp Fears Discounted
LEAD: A BIG, nasty-looking wasp called the cicada killer is booming in Connecticut backyards, alarming many residents.
But officials at the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station, in Windsor, say there is nothing to fear.


John Drott Mackin Is Wed To Caroleen Mary Hughes
LEAD: Our Lady of Victory Roman Catholic Church in Centerville, Mass., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Caroleen Mary Hughes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul M. Hughes of New Canaan, Conn., to John Drott Mackin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John P. Mackin of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The Rev.
John J.


Style Makers;   Leslie Merritt, Textile Designer
LEAD: Most textile designers go to libraries and museums to study old panels of wallpaper or tapestry as inspiration for their designs.
Leslie Merritt draws only from life. ''The flowers are alive because I sit with 10,000 mosquitoes in a rain forest,'' said Ms.
Merritt, 38 years old. ''I want to work with plants that we don't see.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Golf
Two Share PGA Lead: Willie Wood took a double-bogey on the 18th hole, his first over-par score in two rounds, and fell into a tie with Bob Tway for the lead yesterday at the Hardee's Classic in Coal Valley, Ill.
Wood was just one hole away from his second straight bogey-free round, but hit his tee-shot out of bounds for a 6.


Attaching Paneling to Walls
LEAD: ATTACHING paneling to basement walls or joining outdoor decking to a house's foundation are projects usually complicated by the difficulty of fastening lumber to concrete or other masonry.
There are several ways to do this, based on the type of masonry involved and the amount of load the fasteners must support.


For Stronger Dykstra, The Mission Is Possible
LEAD: Some refer to the concentration, the dedication, the work ethic.
Others point to the consistency, the natural maturation process, the increased responsibility and stamina.
Larry Bowa perhaps hit on it best when trying to sum up what has been the incredible baseball season of Philadelphia's Lenny Dykstra.


New Audio Equipment In Time for Autumn Nights
LEAD: Autumn draws the imagination indoors.
That first nip in the air hints at long evenings at home.
Music seems part of such cozy expectations, which is why nearly all new sound equipment makes its debut in the fall.


Review/Pop;   Marc Ribot Homogenizes Opposites
LEAD: For the last five years or so the musical wing of the downtown scene has been struggling to reconcile seemingly antithetical ideas.
With free improvisation having run its course, composers and musicians have tried to frame free improvisation's power and give it some coherence by adding compositional structure.


Figuring Returns - and Risk Levels
LEAD: When measuring mutual fund performance, investors typically rely on a fund's total return - income plus change in asset value - as the best gauge of success.
But this approach as a guide for where to invest can prove dangerous if the risk that a fund takes to earn its return is ignored. ''Total return taken out of context is very misleading,'' said Don Phillips, vice president of Morningstar Inc., mutual fund consultants based in


Paula Glanzman Wed in Indiana
LEAD: Paula Sue Glanzman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald J. Glanzman of Indianapolis, was married there last evening to Adam Bruce Goldberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey L. Goldberg of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Dennis Sasso officiated at the Indiana Roof Ballroom.
Mrs.
Goldberg, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan in 1987, as did her husband, and the Brooklyn Law School.


Family Leave: Wide Effects Are Seen For Employers
LEAD: A NEW law that gives New Jersey workers the right to take time off to care for a newborn baby or sick family member could bring about sweeping changes in relations between employers and employees, business organizations and families, leave advocates say.


Texas Black Bass Derby Offers Possible $500,000 First Prize
LEAD: If you believe that you are an accomplished black bass angler, you might wish to sign up for the Big Sam-Big Bass Super Derby on Lake Sam Rayburn in east Texas Oct. 6 and 7.


Veronica Lee and Stanley E. Thomas 3d Are Wed
LEAD: Veronica J. Lee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter S. Lee of Woodside, Queens, was married yesterday to Stanley E. Thomas 3d, the son of Mrs.
Henry A. Wood of Boston and Mr.
Thomas Jr. of Annisquam, Mass.
The Rev.
Everett H. Greene, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the summer home of the bridegroom's mother and stepfather in Jamestown, R.I.


Adirondacks
LEAD: Everyone who visits the Adirondacks comes away with his or her own mental map of the region.
Climbers remember peaks; canoeists, miles of shorelines broken only by huge granite boulders, and vacationing families think of excursions from lakeside cottages into Lake Placid, with its crowded ersatz Swiss main street, and Saranac Lake, a


The Sound Is Music, on Broadway and Off, With Bows to Encoring Authors
LEAD: The cliffhanging concern about ''Miss Saigon'' obscures the fact that this would appear to be a lively season for musicals.
Stephen Sondheim takes on provocative material in ''Assassins,'' a musical about those who have tried to kill American Presidents. ''Assassins,'' directed by Jerry Zaks, with a book by John Weidman, is scheduled to begin previews in December at Playwrights Horizons, which is moving two of last season's musical successes into extended engagements - William Finn's ''Falsettoland,'' the last in his ''Marvin'' trilogy, and the Caribbean folk musical ''Once on This Island.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Point and Counterpoint to the Taste of Lamb
LEAD: This meal in a dish derives its interest from the sharp flavors of the mustard and cornichons.
But cornichons may not be available on every block.
Try capers, a smaller amount, if you cannot find the cornichons, which are gherkins in vinegar, French style.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Every year there seem to be more of them, and whether it's true or not really doesn't matter.
Perception is what counts and perception has it that the number of single people is multiplying faster than the national debt.


Headliners;   Old Story
LEAD: Gov.
James J. Blanchard of Michigan evidently thought that Lieut.
Gov.
Martha W. Griffiths would go gentle into the twilight of her political career.
Silly him.
Ever since Mr.
Blanchard said a few weeks ago that the 78-year-old Mrs.
Griffiths would be dropped from his re-election ticket because of her age and increasing frailty, he has been under a steady hail of criticism from two of his most loyal constituencies, the women and the elderly whose votes helped him win his first term in office.


Autumn, It's No Garden Party
LEAD: With the harvest moon, which arrives this year on Oct. 4, the garden steps over into that sweet, melancholy season when ripe abundance mingles with auguries of the end anyone can read.
Except, perhaps, some of the tropical annuals, which seem to bloom only more madly the closer frost comes.
Mindless of winter's approach and the protocols of dormancy, the dahlia and marigold, the tomato and basil make no provision for frost, which here in northwestern Connecticut might be a month away, or a day.
With the harvest moon, which arrives this year on Oct. 4, the garden steps over into that sweet, melancholy season when ripe abundance mingles with auguries of the end anyone can read.
Except, perhaps, some of the tropical annuals, which seem to bloom only more madly the closer frost comes.
Mindless of winter's approach and the protocols of dormancy, the dahlia and marigold, the tomato and basil make no provision for frost, which here in northwestern Connecticut might be a month away, or a day.
The annuals in September practice none of the inward turning of the hardy perennials, which you can see slowing down, taking no chances, turning their attention from blossom and leaf to root and stashed starch.
But instead of battening down the hatches, saving something for another day, the annuals throw themselves at the thinning sun, open-armed and ingenuous.
On those early autumn days when frost hangs in the air like a sword of Damocles, evident as sunlight to the lowest creature, is there anything much more poignant than a dahlia's blithe, foolhardy bloom?
When the mildest frost, one of those tentative breaths of winter September often brings, could blast it black overnight?


Men, Women and Golf: More Views
LEAD: Loretta McCue, in her letter to the New Jersey editor on Aug. 5, claims that I have a ''lack of knowledge of modern-day golf'' because I used the term ''ladies' tees'' instead of ''forward tees,'' which she says are for newcomers to the game.


Around Squalid South African Hostel, a Battleground in Factional Fighting
LEAD: Even by the drab standards of Soweto's monotonous matchbox housing, the single men's hostel in the Mapetla district of South Africa's largest black township is an eyesore.


New Taint on East German Pollution
LEAD: Caked with coal dust, Bitterfeld has grown used to foul air and to the knowledge that it is slowly being strangled by a huge chemical complex here, the largest in East Germany and one of the biggest in Eastern Europe.


Talking: Co-Signing;   Fallout From a Good Deed
LEAD: Many parents who want to help a child buy a first home offer to co-sign the mortgage loan.
This also is done occasionally by other relatives, friends or an employer.


130 More Americans Fly From Kuwait to Jordan
LEAD: An Iraqi Airways charter flight carrying about 130 Americans from occupied Kuwait arrived late Saturday in Amman, Jordan, after a stopover in Baghdad.
It was the second flight to evacuate Americans via the Iraqi capital in two days.


Class Act
LEAD: Irene Dunne, who died last week at 91, hadn't made a movie in years.
Furthermore, she was a very private person who led a very private life.


Katherine Royes Is Wed
LEAD: Katherine Downey Royes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Royes Jr. of Scotch Plains, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert Shepherd Boyd, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen R. Boyd of West Falmouth, Mass.
The Rev.
Blaine Taylor, assisted by the Rev.
William Harvey, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the United Methodist Church in Osterville, Mass.


The Insider's Insider
LEAD:
DANGEROUS CAPABILITIES
Paul Nitze and the Cold War.
By David Callahan.
Illustrated. 571 pp. New York:
An Edward Burlingame Book/
HarperCollins Publishers. $24.95.


In Europe, Faint Support Seen for a Military Strike
LEAD: As British and French political leaders and strategic experts see the military options open to the United States and its allies in the Persian Gulf, the only attractive one is making the economic embargo against Iraq so effective that President Saddam Hussein pulls out of Kuwait without a fight.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Big Boats
LEAD: The driver pressed a set of small levers, and his windows glided up and shut with scarcely a sound.
He tapped a button, and a rush of cold air drove out the heat.
He toggled a third switch, and his seat slid back from the steering wheel.
In the cool of his leather-bound interior, he idled on the blazing roadway, one car among many, waiting for the drawbridge to come down.


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   Some Familiar Places With Unfamiliar Faces
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Here are some new restaurants to try.
Cafe Rakel


Reischauer's Band Hastened Japan's Downfall
LEAD: To the Editor:


Disabled Boy's Dog Provokes School Dispute
LEAD: A new dog in most families can be expected to cause disruptions, but the dog that 11-year-old Michael Gaudiello got last spring is turning his world topsy-turvy.


Technology;   The Internationalization of the Cash Machine
LEAD: American Express traveler's checks?
Just leave home without them.
In a development that could render traveler's checks obsolete and spell doom for street-corner money changers, automated teller machines are rapidly going global.
Already, for example, a tourist from Buffalo can walk up to at least a few automated tellers in Tokyo and withdraw cash, in yen, from his or her bank back home.


Guys You Can Count On
LEAD:
STAYING THE COURSE
The Emotional and Social Lives of
Men Who Do Well at Work.
By Robert S. Weiss.
314 pp. New York:
Free Press. $24.95.


Sihanouk Makes Concession on Cambodian Talks
LEAD: With Chinese prompting, Cambodia's exile leader, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, said today that he would compromise on the composition of an interim ruling council and, in a major concession, allow the Phnom Penh Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen half the seats.


As One Grocery Boycott Ends, One Drags On
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins visited a Korean-American grocery store in Brooklyn yesterday to celebrate the end of a three-week-old black-led boycott that his office helped negotiate.


PRETTY WOMAN
LEAD: ''Pretty Woman II'' really should be ''An Unmarried Woman II.'' She divorces him for being too patronizing, for promoting the idea of marriage as glorified prostitution - and she takes him for all he's worth.
MARTHA MENDELSOHN
New York, N.Y.


Iraq Appears to Be Digging In for Long-Range Defense, Egypt Says
LEAD: A senior Egyptian military officer says intelligence from satellites and reports from the thousands of Egyptian workers returning from Iraq indicate that while foreign forces are deploying against Iraq, the army of President Saddam Hussein is digging into defensive positions like those that were a hallmark of Iraq's eight-year war with


The Baymen's Friend
LEAD: HIS compact frame perched atop an overturned plastic milk carton container, Billy Joel sat on the dock of a bay, watching the tide roll away.


Susan Nicolais Wed to R.N. Weaver
LEAD: Susan R. Nicolais, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael A. Nicolais of Chatham, N.J., was married yesterday at the Central Presbyterian Church in New York to Robert N. Weaver, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Weaver of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
William H. Pindar performed the ceremony.


Reporter's Notebook;   Compromise, and Seats, At Budget Negotiations
LEAD: Some people scoffed at moving the stalemated budget negotiations from the Capitol to this sprawling military installation 10 miles away, but there is nothing like a change of scenery to promote the spirit of political compromise.


Guide for Home Buyers, Sellers and Renters;   Rent Rules Cover More Than a Million Apartments
LEAD: Seventy percent of New York City residents are renters rather than owners of their homes, and that makes them distinctly different from residents of other American cities, where home ownership is the norm rather than the exception.


Nome or Bust
LEAD:
TRACKS ACROSS ALASKAA Dog Sled Journey.
By Alastair Scott.
Illustrated. 247 pp. New York:
Atlantic Monthly. $19.95.


ALEPPO'S ALLURE
LEAD: In the Food column ''Aleppo's Allure'' (July 15), Paula Wolfert writes: ''You won't read many articles about Syria in American travel magazines.
Turmoil in nearby Lebanon and a reputation as an 'outlaw state' have effectively kept Americans away.
But I found Syria to be a safe and fascinating country .


John W. O'Beirne, Former F.B.I. Official, 72
LEAD: John W. O'Beirne, a retired special agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation who was once a special assistant to the bureau's Director, died on Wednesday at Holy Cross Hospital in Washington.
He was 72 years old and lived in Silver Spring, Md.
His family said he died after a heart attack.


Deirdre O'Connor Weds Patrick Quinn
LEAD: Deirdre O'Connor, who is to become an associate next month at White &amp; Case, and Patrick Terence Quinn, an associate at Cadwalader, Wickersham &amp; Taft, both New York law firms, were married yesterday in Garden City, L.I.
Msgr.
Laurence J. McAlister officiated at St.
Joseph's Church.


S. Mississippi Tops Alabama
LEAD: Jim Taylor kicked a 52-yard field goal with 3:35 left as Southern Mississippi defeated No. 13 Alabama by 27-24 today and spoiled Gene Stallings's debut as the Crimson Tide's coach.


A Long-Shot Victory for Carson City
LEAD: Carson City, who had not won a stakes race for more than a year, led every step of the way as the longest shot in the field yesterday and won the $85,050 Fall Highweight Handicap at Belmont Park.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
DANCE BRAZIL


Reducing Stress to Increase Productivity
LEAD: HAPPINESS and health in the workplace are largely questions of how people adapt to the positive and negative situations that confront them, says Patricia Rottmann, the president of Interact, a consulting concern in Ridgefield.
Learning to control reactions to a difficult supervisor or workload will not only reduce stress, it may also help improve productivity.


A Modest Proposal: Kill County Government
LEAD: THE purpose of this is to write myself out of a job.
For seven years I have served as a member of the County Board of Legislators.
If members of that Board, and of the State Legislature, get inspired by this article, I won't be a legislator after my term of office expires at the end of 1991.
My 16 colleagues on the Board will also be out of their jobs.


Coslet Not Focusing on Matchup of Wits
LEAD: Even though much ado has been made of Bruce Coslet's return to Cincinnati and of the battle of wits between Coslet and his former boss, Sam Wyche, the Jets' rookie head coach doesn't consider the battle a significant one.


JUNK MAIL'S TOP DOGS
LEAD: I met Bill Jayme once or twice, briefly, but I heard a lot about his inventive work from his former boss Frank Johnson, who employed me as a copywriter at American Heritage a decade after he had hired Jayme at Time Inc. (''Junk Mail's Top Dogs,'' by Randall Rothenberg, Aug. 5).


Campus Life: Manhattan;   Lofty Resident: The President As Neighbor
LEAD: At Manhattan College, undergraduates living in the new East Hill Student Residence are sharing a roof with a middle-aged man who goes to bed early, hates blaring stereos and loves to hold long discussions about your problems.


Guide for Home Buyers, Sellers and Renters;   The Crucial Factors in Expediting a Home's Resale
LEAD: Selling a home can be one of life's most stressful events.
For most families, the house or apartment upon which they have lavished love, labor and money is also their most valuable asset, and it is of high importance for them to get good value for it.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: Consumer credit for August.
Fraud trial in Chicago for 13 soybean traders.
The Senate Banking Committee discusses new accounting rules for banks and savings and loans.
TUESDAY: H.J. Heinz annual meeting.
WEDNESDAY: Eight Eastern Airlines managers charged with falsifying records are scheduled to appear in court.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD: A WINDOW ON PROVENCE: One Summer's Sojourn Into the Simple Life.
By Bo Niles. (Viking, $18.95.) Bo Niles, an editor at Country Living magazine, has done what many of us long to do - take time off from work, and in her case from her husband and two sons, to spend a month in the south of France. ''A Window on Provence'' describes how she joined her parents, who had rented a house in Provence, in a hamlet of about a dozen dwellings near the hilltop village of Gordes (which has been called one of France's most beautiful villages).


Attaching Paneling to Walls
LEAD: ATTACHING paneling to basement walls or joining outdoor decking to a house's foundation are projects usually complicated by the difficulty of fastening lumber to concrete or other masonry.
There are several ways to do this, based on the type of masonry involved and the amount of load the fasteners must support.


Corrections
LEAD: A map accompanying an article on Aug. 26 about radioactive waste included an incorrectly placed symbol for the Tatum Dome atomic test site.


Still Asking the Embarassing Questions
LEAD:
HOCUS POCUS
By Kurt Vonnegut.
302 pp. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $21.95.


Opening Night: Men's Style;   A FEW GOOD MEN
LEAD: At 6 feet 6 1/2 inches, Tommy Tune can't afford to be bashful. ''When I go out, people stare,'' says the famously stately dancer-director-choreographer, acknowledging, ''I learned a long time ago that I'd have to give up my anonymity.''


Text of Bush's Remarks in Helsinki
LEAD: Following are President Bush's remarks today upon arriving for his summit meeting with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union: The city of Helsinki has often been a meeting place for nations seeking to advance the cause of peace.
My thanks to the people of Finland first for hosting this meeting and for setting an example for all the world in your resolute commitment to liberty and independence.


Saying Luther's Goal Was One Church, Noted Lutheran Turns to Catholicism
LEAD: Saying he was being faithful to Martin Luther's 16th-century revolt against Rome, a nationally prominent Lutheran theologian became a Roman Catholic yesterday and said he would seek ordination as a Catholic priest.


The Region;   What Real Estate Developers Make of New York's Future
LEAD: Based on the present, New York City's future would appear gloomy.
Real estate prices and construction are off, as are retail sales and employment.
The homeless are ubiquitous, and crime is up sharply.


Something's Gone Terribly Wrong in New York
LEAD:
THE CLOSEST OF STRANGERS
Liberalism and the Politics of Race in New York.
By Jim Sleeper.
345 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $21.95.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
By the Beautiful Sea


Sabatini Defeats Graf at U.S. Open, 6-2, 7-6


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our two upstairs bathrooms are in need of more ventilation, and so I plan to replace the ceiling lights with a combination ceiling fan/light to carry the moist air outside.
We do not want to break through the slate roof or the thick brick walls, so we plan to run ducts into the attic, then connect each to a single duct that will continue out through the soffit.


In Home Video, a Lot to Rent and Even More to Buy
LEAD: In video the seasons come and go as they do everywhere, if not always in sync with seasons in other entertainments with which video competes for time and attention.
Early autumn, for example, with a new TV season unfolding, is usually a slower period in video stores.
From November through the holidays the activity is brisk, only to slacken in spring.


Fashion: On the Street;   Gee, Mom, What Were the 60's Like?
LEAD: Last week, members of the East Village Wigstock generation communed in Tompkins Square Park for their annual homage to the days of flower power.
There were lots of tie-dyed clothing, peace signs, platform shoes and crazy sunglasses. (On the whole, this was a group not all that accustomed to broad daylight.) Bewigged residents of the neighborhood came out in full regalia to watch bewigged nightclub performers in full regalia spoof the 60's.


Fashion;   Casual, for the Car Pool (or Whatever)
LEAD: ''In Texas they call it car-pool couture,'' said Michael Kors, referring to a pinstripe navy wool gabardine jacket worn over a cotton tank top and washed-satin pajama pants. ''They all want something pretty to wear for the car pool.''


Dana E. Buckley Married on L.I.
LEAD: Dana Ellen Buckley and Spencer Tomkins were married yesterday at St.
Ann's Episcopal Church in Bridgehampton, L.I., by the Rev.
Frederick W. Rapp.
Mrs.
Tomkins is a daughter of Mrs.
Richard Dimes Buckley of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Mr.
Buckley.
Her husband is the son of Mrs.
Lloyd F. Tomkins and Calvin Tomkins, both of New


Charge and Rebuttal: California Campaign Ads
LEAD: California's candidates for governor have used television to trade allegations about each other's association with the savings and loan crisis.
Here are scripts and photographs from two 30-second commercials.
The general election will be Nov. 6.
PETE WILSON


Lainey Gurwitz Is Married
LEAD: Elaine D. Gurwitz, a daughter of Dr.
Arnold Gurwitz of Worcester, Mass., and the late Rhoda Rogosin Gurwitz, was married last evening to Dr.
Ian Atlas, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey H. Atlas of Commack, L.I., at Temple Emanuel in Worcester, Mass., by Rabbi Joseph Klein.
The bride, who is 27 years old and known as Lainey, is a buyer for the Ann Taylor women's clothing stores in New York.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Deep River, Conn.
$150,000
41 Winter Drive
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 45-year-old brick Cape Cod; family room w/fireplace, patio, 0.33 acre; taxes $1,465.
Old Lyme, Conn.
$124,900
124 Boston Post Road
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old ranch; new kitchen, h/w floors, 1-car attached garage, 0.33 acre; taxes $969.


At Water's Edge in Old Saybrook
LEAD: ANOTHER restaurant that offers diners a view of the water may be added to the small but growing list: Saybrook Point Inn at water's edge in Old Saybrook.
The restaurant is part of a spiffy new inn, conference center, spa and marina.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: The streets bordering Washington Square Park in Greenwich Village will be closed today from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Washington Square Outdoor Art Exhibit.
Because of the Third Avenue


Living on the Edge of Conflict
LEAD:
August 2, 1990
August 2, 1990
The storm broke this morning.
Everyone agreed there would be a war here this summer.
It was a foregone conclusion in the streets and in the embassy the day I arrived, except that all the predictions were that Israel would be the aggressor.
Ironically, the marching troops have nothing to do with Israeli occupation of Arab land.
Arab troops are occupying Arab land.
You would think Jordanians might be angry.
But they're not.
Jordanians are celebrating Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
The liberation of Kuwait from Western influence is the first step toward the liberation of Palestine. ''We Palestinians are so desperate for a victory, any victory,'' a Jordanian woman said. ''If our team wins a football match, we scream and carry on like we'd won back Palestine.''
It's chilling to listen to Jordanians and Palestinians talk about the invasion.
Not a word of sympathy for the Kuwaitis.
The comments I've heard around town are revealing:
''We suffered while the Kuwaitis got rich and fat. Now it's their turn to suffer.''


Bonnie A. Blake Wed To John Kubick on L.I.
LEAD: Bonnie A. Blake, the daughter of Donald M. Blake of Oyster Bay, L.I., and the late Aileen M. Blake, was married yesterday to John J. Kubick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Kubick Jr. of Tenafly, N.J.
The Rev.
Charles A. Ribaudo, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Dominic Church in Oyster Bay.


A Single Shining Muscle of a Girl
LEAD:
BODY
By Harry Crews.
240 pp. New York:
Poseidon Press. $18.95.


Joys of a New Team
LEAD: In his years as head football coach at Indiana, Northwestern, Yale and Miami of Ohio, John Pont learned a thing or two about dealing with hard-bitten alumni and college administrators.


Will Hospitals Buy Yet Another Costly Technology?
LEAD: Andrea Fyie was wracked by 30 to 40 seizures a day when her parents brought her to the medical center of the University of California at Los Angeles three years ago.
But nothing abnormal was picked up when the 11-month-old girl underwent sophisticated diagnostic tests employing computerized tomography (CT scans) and magnetic resonance imaging.


Hong Kong Increases Emigration Estimate
LEAD: Even though it seeks to play down the mass flight from this British colony as the 1997 Chinese takeover approaches, the Hong Kong Government conceded this week that a record 62,000 people were expected to emigrate this year.


Kara Kennedy Wed to Michael Allen
LEAD: Kara Anne Kennedy, the daughter of Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Hyannisport, Mass., and Joan Bennett Kennedy of Boston, was married yesterday to Michael Allen, a son of Mrs.
Max Greathouse Allen of Jamestown, R.I., and the late Mr.
Allen.
The Revs.
James English and William O'Neill performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Victory Roman Catholic Church in Centerville,


THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR: POP &amp; JAZZ
LEAD: September GEORGE MICHAEL. ''Listen Without Prejudice, Volume 1'' (Columbia), which will be released on Tuesday, has already yielded an impressive first single in the gloomy ''Praying for Time,'' a bleak photo-negative answer to John Lennon's ''Imagine.''


'Waiting for Armageddon'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gregory M. Stair Is Wed To Laura Andre Campbell
LEAD: Laura Andre Campbell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Noel V. Campbell of Copiague, L.I., was married yesterday to Gregory M. Stair, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Stair of Freeport, L.I.
The Rev.
Mariah Britton, a Baptist minister, officiated at Riverside Church in Manhattan.


On Language;   Face Time
LEAD: A White House aide thrust into the limelight by Persian Gulf war preparations was described to Maureen Dowd of The New York Times as one who was ''getting a lot of face time on national television.''


When It's Time To Take a Stand, Every Player Has His Own
LEAD: Brian Downing has changed his several times, once so radically it looked for a couple of seasons as if he were batting against the shortstop instead of the pitcher.
He's been a major leaguer for 18 years.


Tyson to Fight Dec. 8
LEAD: The Mike Tyson-Alex Stewart heavyweight fight has been rescheduled for Dec. 8 as a result of the head-butting incident last month that left Tyson with a deep cut over his right eye.
The bout, which will be held at the Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino in Atlantic City, had orgiinally been scheduled for Sept.


Other Animals Don't Strive to Be Like Us
LEAD: To the Editor:


Canada's Dance Packs Its Cultural Luggage
LEAD: ''Culture has something vegetable about it, something that increasingly needs to grow from roots, something that demands a small region and a restricted locale.'' And if, in voicing this observation, the literary critic Northrop Frye was not thinking of dance, he might well have been.


Marcia Cleveland Weds M.T. Green
LEAD: Marcia E. Cleveland and Mark T. Green were married yesterday at the First Presbyterian Church in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Charlotte Sommers officiated.


Virginia's Festivals Of the Apple Harvest
LEAD: In a trip to the Virginia countryside at this time of year, the air is redolent with earthy smells of fresh-cut hay, roadside flowers and ripening fruits and berries.
Even before the summer foliage changes color, the advent of fall is evident in the fields of ripening pumpkins, odd-shaped winter squashes and multicolored Indian corn.


Mid-Priced Perches
LEAD: From the writings of Kay Thompson, who immortalized the Plaza and Eloise, its resident little girl, to the pages of Fodor's, thousands of words have been written about the hotels of New York.
Affordable is rarely among them.
Manhattan has more than 57,000 hotel rooms, according to the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau, many crammed into the densely packed blocks between 30th Street and 60th Street.
From the writings of Kay Thompson, who immortalized the Plaza and Eloise, its resident little girl, to the pages of Fodor's, thousands of words have been written about the hotels of New York.
Affordable is rarely among them.
Manhattan has more than 57,000 hotel rooms, according to the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau, many crammed into the densely packed blocks between 30th Street and 60th Street.
The finest are splendid for a sensational view, an elegant meal or a weekend's escape.
But the holiday ends abruptly with the bill.
This fall, double rooms at the Carlyle start at $275 a night.
The Pierre charges $310 for its smallest double rooms.
And at the Plaza a deluxe double room with a Central Park view costs $485.
That's without the little extras, like room service, tips, video rentals, minibar charges and, most painfully, city and state taxes.
Autumn is arguably New York's most agreeable season, as most Manhattan hotels acknowledge by raising their prices and scaling back discounts until the dark days of midwinter.
This year visitors looking for comfort but not luxury should prepare to pay $125 to $210 for a basic double room at a middle-range hotel with a good location.
And that's before taxes, which include a 13.25 percent New York State tax, a 5 percent New York City tax and a $2 occupancy tax.


Miss Winans Weds in Bedford
LEAD: Elizabeth Harrison Winans, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter E. Winans of Bedford, N.Y., was married there yesterday at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church to James Edward Rossman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Rossman of Cleveland.
The Rev.
Dr.
William E. Foley officiated.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Sept. 2 about manufactured housing in Sullivan County omitted the percentage of population in 1980 between the ages of 20 and 34.
It was 28 percent.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a producer's schedule change, an article on page 39 of the Arts and Leisure section today and a listing in the annotated calendar on page 50 give an outdated release date for Paul Simon's new record, ''The Rhythm of the Saints.'' It is to be released in October.


Mozart's Birthday and Carnegie Hall's Produce a Plummy Line-up
LEAD: The 1990-91 classical-music season will be dominated by a composer and an institution.
The composer is Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, who died in 1791 and who will be celebrated worldwide in 1991.
Events will include Lincoln Center's monumental project, whether visionary or compulsive, of performing every note he ever wrote, starting on his birthday, Jan.


Banks Faces Job Realities
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Anita Flax Marries Charles Moore 3d
LEAD: Anita E. Flax and Charles A. Moore 3d were married yesterday at the Hope Valley, R.I., home of the bridegroom's father, Charles A. Moore.
Judge Thomas H. Needham of Rhode Island Superior Court officiated.


Ms. Kaplan Wed To A. R. Peikon
LEAD: Andrea R. Kaplan and Andrew R. Peikon were married last evening at the Water Club in New York by Rabbi Joseph Weiss.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Kaplan of Lawrence, L.I.
Her husband is a son of June Sturz of Bayonne, N.J., and the late Isaac Peikon.


More Options Mean More Competition - And More Experimentation
LEAD: A new TV season always brings new programs; the difference this year is that there are more than ever.
That's partly because there are more networks - or networklike entities - than ever.
The most prominent additional source of programs is the burgeoning Fox Broadcasting Company, which will offer five nights of series this fall.


Attaching Paneling to Walls
LEAD: ATTACHING paneling to basement walls or joining outdoor decking to a house's foundation are projects usually complicated by the difficulty of fastening lumber to concrete or other masonry.
There are several ways to do this, based on the type of masonry involved and the amount of load the fasteners must support.


Behind the Scenes;   A Dozen Bright Talents Who Are Helping To Shape the Season Ahead
LEAD:
HANK SHOCKLEE
Rap's Renaissance Man


Lifestyle;   Nowadays, Man's (Yes, Man's) Best Friend Is Likely to Be a Cat (or a Houseful of Cats)
LEAD: At the Beasty Feast store in the Chelsea section of Manhattan, the twice-monthly visits of Peter Obletz to lay in provisions for Mama and the four boys, as he calls his cats, do not go unnoticed.


Barbara M. Page Is Married
LEAD: Barbara M. Page, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Craven B. Page of Bermuda Run, N.C., was married yesterday to Harold I. Buri Jr., the son of Gloria C. Buri of Chester, Pa., and the late Mr.
Buri.
The Rev.
Dr.
Richard L. Jeske officiated at the Holy Trinity Lutheran Church in New York.
Mrs.
Buri, 34 years old, is an assistant vice president of the Harris &amp; Harris Group, a financial services company in New York.


Men, Women and Golf: More Views
LEAD: Regarding ''equality for women on the golf course'' in recent letters to the New Jersey editor, Skip Ungar said he would be delighted to have women join him on the golf course on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays with equal starting times.
His idea of equality, however, is that women should be willing to play from the white tees.


Miss Madden Weds P.H. McDonough
LEAD: Lynne Marie Madden, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Madden of Ross, Calif., was married there yesterday to Paul Harrington McDonough, a son of Joyce H. Thompson of Brooklyn and William J. McDonough of Chicago.
The Revs.
Peter McDonald and Peter Sidler officiated at St.
Anselm's Roman Catholic


PAINFUL DECISIONS
LEAD: I am glad to see doctors taking the ethical implications of their work seriously, although I am disturbed that at times their discussions seem to degenerate into mere intellectualizing over ethical conundrums.


Videodisks Make a Push For a Larger Audience
LEAD: The most notable development in video this fall is likely to be an upswing of interest in laserdisks.
Not that disks are about to threaten the predominance of cassettes.
But there will be more emphasis on disks as the preferred video medium for prerecorded programs wherever picture quality is a major consideration.


Headliners;   Sex, Bunk and Mythology
LEAD: WHEN Americans talk about sex, very often they don't know what they're talking about, according to a survey released last week by the Kinsey Institute and the Roper Organization.


ALEPPO'S ALLURE
LEAD: While your article about Middle Eastern cuisine was lying, still unread, on the front seat of my car, parked along Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn, I was down the block buying tahini, pita and the pomegranate molasses used in your recipe for mhammara.
I also could have made these purchases in shops along Kings Highway, also in


World Markets;   Taking the Country-Fund Plunge
LEAD: The old saw about the stock market is buy low and sell high.
But when it comes to country funds, investors have stood that truism on its head.


Pastimes: Gardening;   Restoration of Old-Fashioned Plants Is the Goal
LEAD: The Thomas Jefferson Center for Historic Plants at Monticello, near Charlottesville, Va., is a unique national institution.
Its mission is to collect, preserve and distribute historic plant varieties and to promote public appreciation for the origins and evolution of garden plants.


Opening Night: Spirits;   I'LL TAKE MANHATTANS
LEAD: There are truck stops out in the plains where habitues knock back a combination of beer and tomato juice.
Now, would you call that a cocktail?
No, probably not.
And what about that remarkable marriage of Guinness stout and Champagne, known as a black velvet and said to make fox hunting bearable in Ireland?


ADDITIONAL TROOPS PROMISED BY EGYPT
LEAD: President Hosni Mubarak promised Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today that he would soon be sending more troops to bolster Saudi Arabia.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
A Boy's First Utopia


Accidents Rise as Surfboarding Soars
LEAD: LIKE most Long Island surfers, Jamie Viola of Long Beach lives from wave to wave.
Because the ocean is shallow, and the continental shelf slows down the waves, the surf along the Island is temperamental.


The World;   Shocks From Kuwait Hit the Third World
LEAD: The human and economic costs of the Persian Gulf crisis are coming home to the third world, whose poor nations sent hundreds of thousands of workers to clean the floors, build the offices, service the cars and doctor the sick in lands where streets seemed paved with gold.


Question Of the Week;   Do the Mets Have What It Takes to Win It All?
LEAD: The problem lies in their pitching.
Unlike hitting, where hot streaks and cold streaks offset each other, the Mets' pitching staff has been inconsistent this year.
Sure, a pitcher is allowed to hit a cold streak - but this year Gooden, Viola, Fernandez and Cone each have strung together some horrible games.


Celebrating 50 Years of Bugs Bunny
LEAD: BUGS BUNNY turned 50 this year and without so much as a line on his face to show for it.
All the same, a label in the Bugs Bunny retrospective at the Museum of Cartoon Art here discloses that in 1989 Warner Brothers Animation decided on a ''new look'' for the strip, one that ''recaptures the spirit'' of its classic 1940's cartoons.


In the 'Jungle' Of Another Language
LEAD: I read with admiration and sympathy about the American tutor and her Asian student who are bravely hacking through the thickets of ring-rang-rung, sing-sang-sung and bring-brought-brought (''Struggling in the Jungle of English,'' Opinion page, July 29).
English is a language of head-cracking perversity.


Devils Open Camp
LEAD: The trade of Bob Brooke to the Winnipeg Jets for Laurie Boschman has given the Devils depth at center and eliminated the only contract problem as the team officially opened training camp with all its players today.


'Remembrance': Love And Politics in Ireland
LEAD: THE place is Belfast, and the time is now.
A Catholic widow, 63 years old, and a Protestant widower, 68, fall in love during a month of meetings in a graveyard where their respective sons, both of whom were assassinated, are buried.
And with their newfound romance, they incur the rage of their warring, begrudging offspring.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our two upstairs bathrooms are in need of more ventilation, and so I plan to replace the ceiling lights with a combination ceiling fan/light to carry the moist air outside.
We do not want to break through the slate roof or the thick brick walls, so we plan to run ducts into the attic, then connect each to a single duct that will continue out through the soffit.


William Silent Hughes, 84 Stock Exchange Governor
LEAD: William Silent Hughes, an investment banker and former governor of stock exchanges on the East and West Coasts, died last Sunday at his home in San Marino, Calif.
He was 84 years old.


Review/Opera;   'Street Scene,' Kurt Weill's Personal American Dream
LEAD: In his program notes for the original-cast recording of ''Street Scene,'' Kurt Weill wrote that his dream, ever since his arrival in the United States in 1935, was to write an American opera that used certain traditional European forms but that also had roots in the Broadway musical theater.
He believed he had achieved that with ''Street Scene,'' his 1947 work based on Elmer Rice's 1929 play, with a libretto by Rice and lyrics by Langston


Yvette Teofan and Randy Hazelton Are Married
LEAD: Yvette Teofan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vernon Teofan of Dallas, was married last evening to Randy Hazelton, a son of Roberta Hazelton-Leyba of Pensacola, Fla., and John W. Hazelton 2d of Durango, Colo.
The Rev.
Jack Deeves officiated at St.
Rita Roman Catholic Church in Dallas.
The bride, who is 27 years old and is keeping her name, and her husband, also 27, graduated from Stanford University in 1985.


Hostage Situations Demand Forthright Action;   Embassy Ground
LEAD: To the Editor:


Three Johnsons Depict Fantasy
LEAD: CORPORATIONS expand like yeast, but that is not the reason for the show called ''Johnson, Johnson and Johnson,'' at the Paris-New York-Kent Gallery, in Kent.
Ben, Joyce and Lester, these are not pharmaceutical Johnsons but unrelated painters sharing the same name and a preoccupation with fantasy.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International


Guide for Home Buyers, Sellers and Renters;   Don't Stint on Spending For Necessary Repairs
LEAD: The carpenter has arrived to fix the rot on the sides of the deck.
The plumber is due tomorrow to plug the leak under the kitchen sink.
And by the end of the week, the painters should be finished scraping and repainting the trim.


Postings: Advice for Owners;   A Seminar on Defaults
LEAD: Nearly a year after serious financial problems among sponsors of cooperative and condominium conversions in the New York area began to surface, the fallout continues. ''All of the problems we hoped would be resolved by this time seem to be persisting,'' said Mary Ann Rothman, executive director of the Council of New York


Groups Taking Aid Donations
LEAD: The following organizations are accepting contributions to aid people displaced by the unrest in the Middle East.
Adventist Development and Relief


Funeral for Slain Utah Tourist
LEAD: Brian Watkins, killed in a Manhattan subway station, was eulogized as a ''real-life hero.'' Page 42.


Honoring, and Unearthing, Indian Place Names
LEAD: A century after its creation, the United States Board on Geographic Names has decided to put more American Indian names on the map.
The project is complicated by many factors, including the reluctance of Indians, for religious or privacy reasons, to reveal the names of some places.


The English Revolution in America
LEAD:
FACES OF REVOLUTION
Personalities and Themes in the
Struggle for American Independence.
By Bernard Bailyn.
Illustrated. 296 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $29.95.


In First Class
LEAD: To the Editor: The chart on first-class inflight services between New York and Tokyo (Travel Advisory, Aug. 5) should have included Japan Airlines's luncheon menu - not dinner - for comparative purposes.


Guide for Home Buyers, Sellers and Renters;   Co-ops and Condominiums: What's the Difference?
LEAD: The three most significant words in a prospectus can be found at the top of the cover: ''Cooperative Offering Plan'' or ''Condominium Offering Plan.''


Iraq Rejects Red Cross Offer On Food Aid and Foreigners
LEAD: Iraq said today that it did not accept Red Cross proposals that could have brought Iraq food in exchange for access to trapped foreigners because the deal would have assumed that Baghdad was at war with its Western foes.


DISTANT PROSPECT FOR KOREAN UNITY
LEAD: The last time that Gen.
Kim Kwang Jin of North Korea visited this city, he arrived in a tank.
Forty years later, he said this week, ''I have come to reunify the nation, not by a rifle or tank gun, but through dialogue.''


Fashion;   Bergdorf Men: Tradition, Fashion, Intimacy
LEAD: The new Bergdorf Goodman men's store opened with the kind of hoopla and elegant aura that might give some men pause.
But when all is said and done, the trousers still go on one leg at a time.


In Liberia, the Regime Makes Journalism a Very Risky Business
LEAD: To the Editor:


Data Update
LEAD:
$
INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
July
June
July 89
Rents
163.4
4.1
8.6
Homeowner's costs
165.5
1.1
6.9
Fuel and utilities
101.3
-0.9
0.8
*4*(Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics)
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk,


JUNK MAIL'S TOP DOGS
LEAD: It's hard to know whether it is Randall Rothenberg or Bill Jayme who is being flippant when Jayme is quoted in your article as preferring the term ''junk mail'' to ''direct marketing.'' I find it hard to believe that a journalist who has so often been a proponent of direct marketing's effectiveness in today's fragmented marketplace could perpetuate the disparaging term ''junk mail.


Sabatini Stuns Graf and Herself in Final
LEAD: She had more victories than most 20-year-old players could ever hope for, more endorsements, enough career earnings to last a lifetime or two, a shiny new Porsche, even a perfume named after her.


A Mohawk and Two Soldiers Are Injured in Quebec Clash
LEAD: A Mohawk Indian and two soldiers were injured today in a scuffle on the Kahnesatake settlement west of here, where Canadian troops are locked in a standoff with a group of armed Indians.


Choosing a Lawn Mower: Push or Ride?
LEAD: HOMEOWNERS can choose from three types of mowers to keep their greensward in trim.
The standard is the noise maker, a power mower, which gobbles fuel to make the whirring cutting blade operate.
Or there is an electric mower that is attached to a long, weatherproof cord.
The cord must be plugged into a source of power in the house or garage.


Guide for Home Buyers, Sellers and Renters;   Choices Rise, Rents Fall As Free Market Adds Units
LEAD: Free-market apartments - those in which landlords and tenants set the rents and services through private negotiations - are growing in number in New York City.
As a result, apartment-hunters are finding more choices and slightly lower rents than the city's housing market has afforded in many years.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD: 19TH-CENTURY VILLAGE


S. T. Limpe Weds Tracy Lynn Tang
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Tracy Lynn Tang, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Oscar L. Tang of New York and Vail, Colo., and Stephen Timothy Limpe, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Limpe of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
William J. Bergen officiated.


Jennifer McClellan Weds in Greenwich
LEAD: Jennifer Joan McClellan and Richard Roy Pivirotto Jr. were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Michael the Archangel in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Mark A. Connolly officiated, assisted by the Rev.
John W. Bishop, an Episcopal priest.
Mrs.
Pivirotto is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George W.


Above It All
LEAD: One thousand feet above the noisy, crowded, fast-paced world that is street-level New York, the city is transformed into a serene, toylike configuration of buildings, streets, parks and waterways.
Although such vistas are normally restricted to high-flying birds, New Yorkers and visitors can find their own sky-high perches at observation decks atop several skyscrapers and other buildings, or soar above the city by helicopter.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD: BARBARIAN SENTIMENTS: How the American Century Ends, by William Pfaff. (Noonday/Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $8.95.) Even after disasters like Vietnam and Iran, William Pfaff argues, the United States still hasn't learned the folly of trying to make over the world in its own image. ''He cements his reputation .


A Huge Architecture Show in Times Square
LEAD: Architecture doesn't bother with seasons or even, for the most part, with openings.
Buildings are done when they are done, and except for museums and concert halls, which these days inaugurate themselves with more splash than Hollywood, the opening is when the first tenants move in.


Robin T. Rivers Weds Scott W. Keller in Louisiana
LEAD: Robin T. Rivers, a daughter of Loretta Rivers and Jack Rivers of Monroe, La., was married yesterday to Scott W. Keller, the son of Dorothy Keller of Washington and William Keller of Alexandria, Va., by the Rev.
William Blakely at the First United Methodist Church in Monroe.
Mrs.
Keller, 25 years old, graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles and is an assistant trader at Deltec Securities in New York.


Final Season of Official's Official
LEAD: As the 1990 National Football League season kicks off today and as teams start to scrap toward Super Bowl XXV on Jan. 27 in Tampa, Fla., so do the league's officials.
Each week, they will be graded on their performances, with those gaining the highest cumulative scores being honored with Super Bowl assignments.


Question Of the Week;   Do the Mets Have What It Takes to Win It All?
LEAD: The Tom Herr trade solidifies the infield and gives the Mets a lot of options.
The Mets' first four starting pitchers, Viola, Cone, Gooden and Fernandez, are all pitching well again.
Ron Darling and Bob Ojeda make a good middle relief tandem.
The bullpen is headed by the best stopper in the league, John


Queens and Nassau Vie For New F.A.A. Base
LEAD: THE summer doldrums brought a lull in the border war between Queens and Nassau Counties over which will be designated the home base for the Federal Aviation Administration, but the dispute is likely to erupt again now that Congress is back in session.


The Executive Computer;   Can Invaders Be Stopped but Civil Liberties Upheld?
LEAD: Increasing efforts by law enforcement agencies to crack down on unauthorized access to computer systems have raised troubling questions about constitutional protections for electronic data and computer users.
Computer technology has advanced much faster than the legal code, and laws to protect traditional publishing are proving inadequate or too vague to deal with desktop publishing, electronic mail and computer communications across telephone lines.


Laura Eastman and Donald Malcolm Wed on L.I.
LEAD: At the First Presbyterian Church in East Hampton, L.I., Laura Eastman, a daughter of Lee V. Eastman of New York and the late Louise L. Eastman, was married yesterday to Donald J. Malcolm, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Orlin Malcolm of Paradise Valley, Mont.
The Rev.
B.
J.
Weber performed the ceremony.


Data Bank/September 9, 1990
LEAD:
$
Construction Spending
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
0.4
-0.9
-0.9
Economic Activity
Aug.
July
June
Purchasing Managers' Index
47.0
47.4
51.1
Employment
In thousands
117,658
117,953
118,389
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
7,003(5.6)
6,814(5.5)
6,447(5.2)
New Car Sales
Aug.


THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR: THEATER
LEAD:
September
September
''THROUGH THE LEAVES.'' In Franz Xaver Kroetz's bleak and brutal kitchen-sink drama about man's inhumanity to woman, Ruth Maleczech and Frederick Neumann co-star as a butcher and her lover.
JoAnne Akalaitis, Joseph Papp's new artistic associate, restages her 1984 production of the play by the German playwright.
Previews begin Thursday at the Public Theater. (Early next year Ms. Akalaitis will stage ''Henry IV, Parts I and II'' for the New York Shakespeare Festival.) ''FALSETTOLAND.'' The third musical in William Finn's ''Marvin'' trilogy faces the two-way streets of sexuality and identity.
Directed by James Lapine, the show moves Friday from a successful run at Playwrights Horizons to the Lucille Lortel Theater, 121 Christopher St., N.Y., 924-8782.
''RICHARD III.'' Stacy Keach, who once played ''Hamlet'' for the New York Shakespeare Festival ,returns to Shakespeare as the infamous king recently portrayed in New York by Denzel Washington and in London by Ian McKellen.
The production is under the direction of Michael Kahn.
Opening the season Sept. 17 at the Shakespeare Theater at the Folger in Washington.


Machine See, Machine Do
LEAD:
THE AGE OF INTELLIGENT MACHINES
By Raymond Kurzweil.
Illustrated. 565 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press. $29.95; $39.95 after Dec. 31.


Behind the Scenes;   A Dozen Bright Talents Who Are Helping To Shape the Season Ahead


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Prune back overgrowth of hedges and shrubs that is blocking the views to streets, paths, walks and drives.
Plant hardy spring-flowering bulbs as soon as they arrive.
Cut to the ground any browned stalks of perennials that have bloomed.
Start to move summering house plants indoors.


Miss Dillon Weds William Bird Jr.
LEAD: Mary Price Dillon and William Lawrence Bird Jr. were married yesterday in Siasconset, Mass.
The Rev.
John Wing, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Union Chapel.


Nature on TV And in Reality
LEAD: In ''In the Natural State'' (July 29), Pete Dunne expressed so well a feeling that has long disturbed me about nature documentaries.


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Brentwood
$130,000
161 Wittberg Street
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 28-year-old high ranch; dining room, porch, patio, 2-car garage, c/a; taxes $3,100.
East Islip
$130,000
85 Jefferson Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 34-year-old ranch; dining room, finished basement, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Finding Thrills Aloft in Parachutes Built for Two
LEAD: Faced with an open airplane door and a drop of as much as two miles, hundreds of first-time sky divers have discovered a new way to relieve their terror: let someone else worry about working the parachute and just go along for the ride.


Government Retrieves Files Accidentally Sold as Surplus
LEAD: The Justice Department has recovered the computer equipment containing secret data inadvertently sold as surplus from a United States Attorney's Office in Kentucky, a spokesman said Friday.


Soviet-Iraqi Ties: Long and Strained
LEAD: When President Mikhail S. Gorbachev meets with President Bush in Helsinki on Sunday he will be carrying the baggage of a long, complicated, often torturous relationship with Iraq.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our two upstairs bathrooms are in need of more ventilation, and so I plan to replace the ceiling lights with a combination ceiling fan/light to carry the moist air outside.
We do not want to break through the slate roof or the thick brick walls, so we plan to run ducts into the attic, then connect each to a single duct that will continue out through the soffit.


ABU NIDAL FACTION AND P.L.O. BATTLE
LEAD: Rival Palestinian guerrilla factions in southern Lebanon today exchanged artillery and rocket fire for the second day, and the police said 60 people had been killed and 170 wounded.


Miss Falvey Weds David W. Kenna
LEAD: Maureen McGrath Falvey was married yesterday to David William Kenna at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Saviour in New York.
The Rev.
John D. Alexander officiated.
Mrs.
Kenna, 26 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Falvey of New York.
Her husband, 26, is a son of Mrs.
William Kenna of Garden City, L.I., and the late Mr.


Jenkin R. Hockert, Judge, 95
LEAD: Jenkin R. Hockert, a judge who served for many years in Queens before he retired in 1964, died on Friday at his home in Boca Raton, Fla.
He would have celebrated his 96th birthday today.
His family said he died of heart failure.


'Waiting for Armageddon'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jan Harmen Reitsma Wed To Carol Condit Meeker
LEAD: The wedding of Carol Condit Meeker to Jan Harmen Reitsma took place yesterday at Habitat in Belmont, Mass.
Anne Wilson, a justice of the peace, officiated.


Mets Explode Out of Their Losing Streak
LEAD: Bud Harrelson said it was ''the driest five days I can remember.'' Ron Darling said it was ''the lowest point.'' Bob Ojeda called it ''a funk.'' And to Dave Magadan, it was the time when the Mets stopped hitting left-handers or right-handers with equal futility.


Vikings Pick Kicker
LEAD: The Minnesota Vikings have decided to let an expensive insurance policy lapse rather than keep two place-kickers on the squad.
The team, which has decided to go with Donald Igwebuike as its kicker, said it had given its previous kicker, Rick Karlis, permission to seek offers from other teams.


PAINFUL DECISIONS
LEAD: Katherine Bouton's article ''Painful Decisions: The Role of the Medical Ethicist'' (Aug. 5) conveys the complexity and drama of these ethical dilemmas in modern medicine.
We must be cautious, however, not to establish medical-ethics consultation services, as we have other hospital consultative services.


The Book on Giants-Eagles
LEAD: Giants-Eagles games have been brutal and dramatic.
One of the most important clashes came late last year, when the teams were battling for the division title.
A book about the week leading to that game, ''No Medals for Trying,'' will be published tomorrow.
The author is Jerry Izenberg and the publisher is Macmillan.


Inger A. Pols Married To Christopher Brewer
LEAD: Inger Antonette Pols, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henk A. Pols of Cape Elizabeth, Me., was married yesterday in Portland, Me., to Christopher Mallory Brewer, a son of Peggy Wood of Houston and Dr.
Luther Brewer of Temple, Tex.
The Rev.
Gerald A. Levesque officiated at Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church.


Dayna C. Klein Is Wed
LEAD: Dayna C. Klein and Andrew Kaplan were married last evening at the Rye Town Hilton in Rye Brook, N.Y., by Rabbi Jeffrey Summit.
Mrs.
Kaplan, 27 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Klein of Little Neck, Queens.
A cum laude graduate of Tufts University, she is an account executive at Liz Claiborne in New York.


Goodbye, You Rotten Place
LEAD:
TROPICAL GANGSTERS
By Robert Klitgaard.
281 pp. New York:
Basic Books.
$22.95.


Republicans Gain in Florio's Former District
LEAD: Jubilant Republicans said today that a poll showed their candidate running almost even with the favored Democrat in the heavily Democratic First Congressional District, but they made clear that the man they are really campaigning against is not on the ballot: Gov.
Jim Florio.


Reluctantly, an Obscure Agency Gets Its Day in the Sun
LEAD: For years, executives at the Insurance Services Office Inc. chafed that hardly anyone had heard of their organization, which helps insurance companies set premium levels and develop common language for insurance policies.
But officials of the New York-based organization are now discovering the merits of being anonymous.


Giants To Open Against Eagles
LEAD: Somebody up there is either looking for high television ratings or doesn't like the Giants.
Whatever the reason, the Giants always seem to open their season against the National Football League's best or near-best team and they are about to do it again.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our two upstairs bathrooms are in need of more ventilation, and so I plan to replace the ceiling lights with a combination ceiling fan/light to carry the moist air outside.
We do not want to break through the slate roof or the thick brick walls, so we plan to run ducts into the attic, then connect each to a single duct that will continue out through the soffit.


Guide for Home Buyers, Sellers and Renters;   Two Ways to Set a Price: Consult Brokers or an Appraiser
LEAD: There are two primary ways to establish a suitable price for a home and both involve consulting professionals.


Maryland Edges W. Virginia
LEAD: Scott Zolak threw a 59-yard touchdown pass to Gene Thomas with 2 minutes 27 seconds left today, and Maryland beat No. 25 West Virginia, 14-10.


Attaching Paneling to Walls
LEAD: ATTACHING paneling to basement walls or joining outdoor decking to a house's foundation are projects usually complicated by the difficulty of fastening lumber to concrete or other masonry.
There are several ways to do this, based on the type of masonry involved and the amount of load the fasteners must support.


Miss Steller Wed To John Grace 3d
LEAD: At St.
Catherine of Sienna Roman Catholic Church in Riverside, Conn., Patricia Ann Steller, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Steller of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to John Joseph Grace 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Grace 2d of San Clemente, Calif.
The Rev.
Gilbert D'Souza performed the ceremony.


'The Perfect Incubator For Smaller Companies'
LEAD: WHEN Tom Megna was looking for someone to manufacture an inflatable aquarium for the Aqua Life educational kit his company produces, United States companies wanted a $10,000 fee just to set up for it.
A Taiwanese manufacturer wanted only $1,500, but then Mr.
Megna's company, Just Wood Manufacturing of


Symphony Is Offering 'Music in Gothic Space'


Catherine DeBois Is Wed
LEAD: At the Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church in Bay Head, N.J., Catherine C. DeBois, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. DeBois of Bay Head, was married yesterday to Thomas M. O'Hara.
He is a son of Thomas N. O'Hara of New Windsor, N.Y., and Mary Jane O'Hara of Monroe, N.Y.
Msgr.
William E. Maguire and the Rev.


Elderly Worry About School Tax Revisions
LEAD: FAR-REACHING changes in the way the state provides aid to public schools may have a detrimental effect on tens of thousands of the state's older citizens, representatives of their organizations say.


Tara Sherman Wed to Anthony Weiss
LEAD: Dr.
Tara Lynn Sherman, a psychiatry resident in White Plains at the Westchester division of the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, was married last evening to Dr.
Anthony Alan Weiss, a resident in internal medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel officiated at the Rainbow at Rockefeller


To Our Readers
LEAD: Starting next week, the suggested Sunday newsstand price of The Times in New York City, within 75 miles and on all of Long Island will be increased to $1.50 from $1.25.
The weekday price, and the Sunday price outside the New York area, will be unchanged.


Cruising by Moonlight Along the Tiber
LEAD: It's a tranquil, car-free thoroughfare through the heart of chaotic Rome, but few Romans take it.
It's lined with reminders of Rome's ancient life - the city and a civilization began there - but for many tourists it's only something to cross to get from one monument to another.
Neglected and mistreated for decades, the Tiber is coming alive again.


Q and A
LEAD:
Work on Landmarks .7
Question: We have been restoring a residence in the West 80's for 11 years and were getting ready to file plans for a small extension in the back when the Landmarks Preservation Commission voted to designate the Upper West Side a historic district.
Will we have to go through the landmarks hearing process?


90's Politics Seem Rough as Ever Despite Criticism of Negative Ads
LEAD: Negative political advertising on television may be more controversial and under closer scrutiny than ever before, but the tenor of this year's campaigns in some of the biggest states seems at least as rough as ever.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD: LITTLE BITS OF BABY.
By Patrick Gale. (Dutton, $18.95.) ''Out there it's just sex, money, achievement and influence.
Nothing else counts.
Nothing else works.
Love and sacrifice don't work.'' The words are those of Robin Maitland, a young man frantically trying to talk his way back into a monastery he has only recently left, after an eight-year residence.


Dear Comrade Editor...
LEAD: For most of the years since its founding in 1923, Ogonyok, which means ''a small fire,'' was an undistinguished weekly photo-feature magazine, a pallid Soviet version of Life.
Since the Soviet Union began loosening restraints on the press in 1985, Ogonyok has become the hottest mass-circulation magazine in the Soviet Union.


American Broadens Its Deployments
LEAD: Last week United States officials acknowledged an increasingly apparent truth: in becoming involved in the defense of Saudi Arabia they were involving themselves in the entire Arab Middle East, with all its complexities.


Tales From the Dark Side
LEAD: I believe in my own obsessions, in the beauty of the car crash, in the peace of the submerged forest, in the excitements of the deserted holiday beach, in the elegance of automobile graveyards, in the mystery of multi-storey car parks, in the poetry of abandoned hotels.''
I believe in my own obsessions, in the beauty of the car crash, in the peace of the submerged forest, in the excitements of the deserted holiday beach, in the elegance of automobile graveyards, in the mystery of multi-storey car parks, in the poetry of abandoned hotels.''
The man who wrote those words is not at all what one might expect - he's altogether healthier, jollier, more optimistic and more progress-minded than either the haggard prophet of doom or the consumptive dandy they might conjure up.
James Graham Ballard, 59, looks a bit like a vacationing Oxbridge don with his long, thinning hair and a shirt whose open collar gives the impression of just having been released from the grip of a necktie.
From his first book, ''The Wind from Nowhere ''(1962), to his latest, ''Running Wild'' (1988), through such significant titles as ''The Drowned World'' (1962), ''The Crystal World'' (1966), ''Crash'' (1973) and ''High Rise'' (1975), Ballard has been depicting the dark underside of civilization, a darkness that seems to increase in the human psyche in inverse proportion to what we call progress.
His novels are complex, obsessive, frequently poetic and always disquieting chronicles of nature rebelling against humans, of the survival of barbarism in a world of mechanical efficiency, of entropy, anomie, breakdown, ruin.
Yet his focus is always on the human - there are no extraterrestrials in his fiction - and the blasted landscapes that his characters inhabit are both external settings and states of mind.


Senators Accuse Inspectors Of 'Pattern of Wrongdoing'
LEAD: Senate investigators today reported ''a disturbing pattern of wrongdoing'' by inspectors general responsible for rooting out waste, fraud and abuse in Government agencies.


Headliners;   Short Reign
LEAD: Lieut.
Gov.
Evelyn Murphy, running third in a three-person battle to succeed Michael S. Dukakis as Governor of financially strapped Massachusetts, had visions of stepping into glory when Mr.
Dukakis stepped out last week.
But the sky fell when it was reported that she was waiting for him to leave on a trade mission to Europe so that, as acting Governor, she could implement her own secret emergency fiscal program.


Hostage Situations Demand Forthright Action;   Emphasize Air Power
LEAD: To the Editor:


Laos
LEAD: To the Editor: Nicholas D. Kristof's article on travel in Laos (''A Glimpse Behind the Bamboo Curtain,'' Travel, March 11), which came to my attention recently when I returned from an extended trip, paints a rather unattractive image of Laos.


SMALL-FRY SWEARING
LEAD: As the recovering, once-frazzled mother of three children (now grown), I have gained a different perspective on swearing by small fry (Hers: ''Small-Fry Swearing,'' by Susan Ferraro, July 29).
I feel that it simply expresses anxieties - in this case, about sex in general.
Further, girls in a ''pack,'' like boys in a pack, exhibit extreme and ridiculous behaviors.


Corrections
LEAD: An article last Sunday about the 1990 census misstated the 1950 population of Texas.
It was 7.7 million, not 1.59 million.


Schmidt Is Urged to Keep Yale Review Alive
LEAD: Fifty-six noted writers, editors and professors have signed a letter urging Yale University's president, Benno C. Schmidt Jr., to find a way to keep The Yale Review alive.


PAINFUL DECISIONS
LEAD: Your author refers to the case of an elderly woman with a degenerative disease who was kept alive for a year on a respirator in a hospital, at its customary daily charges and, presumably, at the expense of Medicare or another third-party payer.
The patient (who was unable to talk) had indicated in writing that she wanted ''everything to be done in the event something went wrong,'' and so ''everything was done.


On the Horizon, Troupes From Many Points On the Choreographic Compass
LEAD: Dance in New York will take on a decidedly international tone this season, with 17 foreign dance festivals or performers representing a dozen countries.
The most ambitious program is the Festival of Indonesia, a 15-month celebration throughout the United States of Indonesian dance, music, theater and art.


Amy D. Aronoff and Mark Blumkin Are Married
LEAD: Amy D. Aronoff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gene R. Aronoff of Lyndonville, Vt., was married last evening to Mark S. Blumkin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Blumkin of Valley Stream, L.I., Rabbi Max B. Wall officiated at the Inn at Essex in Essex Junction, Vt.


Postings: 600 Acres, 540 Homes;   Developing F.D.R. Jr.'s Estate
LEAD: The former Dutchess County homestead of Franklin D. Roosevelt Jr., a son of the 32d President who served as a Congressman from New York, is being turned into a residential community where up to 540 homes are to be built.


Review/Dance;   Program of Recent Works Opens Out-of-Towners Festival
LEAD: ''Excerpts From Route 142 and Other Excursions,'' a program of new and recent dances by the Chicago-based choreographer Bob Eisen, opened Dance Theater Workshop's annual Out-of-Towners festival on a brisk, nicely astringent note Thursday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater. ''Playing by the Rule,'' set to a similarly invigorating score by Richard Woodbury full of industrial clatter and breathy tooting, had four men walking quickly about the stage in geometric patterns.


'Waiting for Armageddon'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Alligator Victim Wins Suit
LEAD: The Federal Government has been ordered to pay more than $770,000 in damages to Kermit H. George Jr., a 46-year-old man whose arm was bitten off by a 500-pound, 11 1/2-foot alligator in a national forest.
Federal District Judge Robert E. Varner, made the ruling on Thursday.
Earlier the judge ruled in the case that the United States Forest Service had failed to post signs warning of alligators in the Conecuh National Forest, not far from Mr.


Trading Safety for Better Car Mileage
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pact for 2 Mavericks
LEAD: The Dallas Maverick guards Rolando Blackman and Derek Harper have signed contracts that were renegotiated at the club's initiative.
The extent of their pay increases were not revealed.
Blackman is under contract through 1994 and Harper through 1996.


Putting Pop on Broadway, Truth in Gospel And Brazil's Rhythm in Rock
LEAD: Paul Simon's follow-up to ''Graceland,'' Whitney Houston's first album in more than three years and Harry Connick Jr.'s Broadway debut are bound to be among the most discussed pop events of the crowded fall season.


Question Of the Week;   Do the Mets Have What It Takes to Win It All?
LEAD: No, of course they don't. They will have the excuses.
PATRICK BANCHY
New York


Lorena Crisfield Is Wed
LEAD: Lorena H. Crisfield, a daughter of Lucile S. Proctor of Princeton, N.J., and James P. Crisfield of Youngstown, N.Y., was married yesterday to Richard P. Callanan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Edward Callanan Jr. of Auburndale, Mass.
The Right Rev.
Michael Marshall, an Episcopal priest, and the Rev.
Patrick Connor, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church in


WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE
LEAD:
Heaven and Hell


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: ''After his opening innovation, I was lost,'' said the Oakland, Calif., grandmaster Nick De Firmian, referring to the critical move in his second and deciding match game on Aug. 11 in the United States Invitational Championship in Jacksonville, Fla. against the new titleholder, Lev Alburt, a New York grandmaster.


President of Turkey Advises Preparing for Military Role
LEAD: President Turgut Ozal, who has thrown Turkey's weight behind the United Nations sanctions against Iraq, prepared his people today for a possible military role in the Persian Gulf crisis.


Drabek Earns 19th Victory as Pirates Top Expos
LEAD: Doug Drabek became Pittsburgh's first 19-game winner in 11 seasons and Andy Van Slyke hit a two-run homer tonight as the Pittsburgh Pirates beat the Montreal Expos, 6-1.


Guide for Home Buyers, Sellers and Renters;   Most Buyers Are Choosing Fixed-Rate Mortgages
LEAD: It used to be that home buyers only needed to worry about how much the house cost - basically, how much the monthly mortgage payments would be.
But nowadays buyers have a wide choice of mortgages as well as of houses, and which one is right depends on a number of variables.
The main choice is between a fixed- or adjustable-rate mortgage.


Drinking in the View
LEAD: When you get down to it, New York is all about up.
It's a vertical city.
First-time visitors craning their necks to get a look at the place have it right: eye-level New York isn't really New York.
Like canaries editing out the wide world beyond the cage, residents learn to ignore that awkward fact.


The World;   Increasingly Isolated, North Korea Starts Talking
LEAD: For decades, North Korea has lived up to its reputation as a police state specializing in terrorism, intimidation and bizarre versions of history.


Politics and the Gulf
LEAD: President Bush is walking a fine line in regaling Republican political rallies with denunciations of Iraq's ''brazen blackmail'' and such self-justifying rhetoric as ''every use of force is an invitation to further aggression.''


Recalling Kissinger's Visit, and Parades That End Abruptly
LEAD: What a difference 17 years make.


Simple Desserts Featuring Italian Prune Plums
LEAD: The arrival in the market of small purple Italian prune plums signals that summer is ending.
These fruits are better when used in baking than eaten fresh and therefore more suitable as the weather may cool.


Giants Possess What the Jets Need
LEAD: In pro football, you know you've got it even though you can't run with it, pass it or kick it.
You can't tackle it or block it.
But you can fumble it.
And when you do, recovering it is never easy.


The Great Sturges
LEAD: PRESTON STURGES.
By Preston Sturges.
Adapted and edited by Sandy Sturges. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) ''Preston Sturges'' introduces us to the most engaging character this writer and director of Hollywood comedies ever dreamed up: himself.
For Sturges (1898-1959), a man who spun out new personas as quickly and enthusiastically as he changed jobs and married women, autobiography is less a revelation of self than a kind of endless talk show in which he gets to play not only the host but most of the guests.


Hospitals Defending Increases in Budgets
LEAD: HOSPITALS in the state are bracing for a new round of budget battles this month, as they prepare to defend their requests for revenue increases of as much as 31 percent.
The hospitals say they need the increases to pay for new technology as well as to cover shortfalls in Medicare and Medicaid payments and to care for indigent patients.


Miss Straughn Weds Kevin Roy
LEAD: Amy-Beth L. Straughn, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles T. Straughn 2d of Middletown, N.J., was married yesterday to Kevin J. Roy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Roy of Danielson, Conn.
The Rev.
Frieda Malcolm officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Middletown.





Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: Is there a rule that says the more simple things get, the more complicated they are?
It sounds contradictory, I know, but it corresponds with my feelings about recent developments in camera electronics.


A Bidding War for Hungary's Newly Freed Press
LEAD: In Hungary, the Government and journalists all agree they want a free and independent press.
The fight is over who should own it.


Political Memo;   For G.O.P. Arsenal, 133 Words to Fire
LEAD: What's in a name?
When it comes to winning elections, it could be everything.
In fact, here is some choice advice for candidates about names to call your campaign opponents, and yourselves.


U.S. Cases Rise in New York Circuit as Drug Trials Dominate
LEAD: The backlog of cases in the Federal courts in New York, Connecticut and Vermont increased substantially over the last year, crowded by a surge of criminal prosecutions, bankruptcies and appeals, official records show.


Guide for Home Buyers, Sellers and Renters;   Why Rates For Loans Stay High
LEAD: One of the great pleasures aging Americans can enjoy these days is to chat idly, within earshot of the younger set, about their 6 to 8 percent home mortgages.


Why We Love the Mafia in the Movies
LEAD: Talk about great expectations!
They are everywhere, the trailers trumpeting the arrival of ''Godfather III'' this December at a theater ''near you.''


Ritchey Banker Weds D.Y. Howe
LEAD: Ritchey Cheek Banker, the daughter of Ritchey F. Goodwin of New York and Vincent C. Banker of Locust Valley, L.I., was married yesterday in Southampton, L.I., to David Yeager Howe, a son of Jean Y. Howe and Stephen W. Howe, both of Marblehead, Mass.
The Rev.
Edwin S. S. Sunderland officiated at St.


Nina Burnaford Weds Robert Pali in Pennsylvania
LEAD: Nina Burnaford, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Burnaford of New York, was married yesterday to Robert Pali, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Pali of Bethlehem, Pa.
The Rev.
Calder Gibson, a Lutheran minister, officiated at Happy Hollow Farm in Wynnewood, Pa.
The bride, a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of William Smith College, has a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania and is an associate at Clark, Ladner, Fortenbaugh &amp; Young in Philadelphia.


Works in Progress;   Greening the Desert
LEAD: The Indira Gandhi Canal, the vast public-works project launched in 1958 to bring life-sustaining water to the province of Rajasthan in northwestern India, is by now helping to irrigate more than 1.5 million acres of once-arid land.
Extending some 412 miles southwest from the confluence of the Beas and Satluj Rivers in Punjab, more or less parallel to the Pakistani border, the main canal was completed in 1987.


Capri: Convertible From Down Under
LEAD: Like Mazda's Miata, America's newest doff-top car attracts a tremendous amount of attention.
Drive it and you'd better be ready with some answers, or at least some chitchat for the curious.


Sharkey Sparks St. John's Victory
LEAD: Saint Columba, the college's patron saint, did not do enough for Iona and its quarterback, Bill Hyland, today against St.
John's when a victory for the Gaels would have been so appropriate.


Traveling in a Summer of Discontent
LEAD: SEVEN months ago, Lionel Toll, his wife, Dorothy, and four friends made plans to vacation together in September.


Miss Miller Weds John A. Urbahn
LEAD: Deyanne Miller, a painter and writer, and John Arthur Urbahn, an engineer, were married yesterday at the Siasconset (Mass.) Union Chapel by the Rev.
Edward B. Anderson, a Unitarian minister.


Rutgers Wins in Coach's Debut
LEAD: As Doug Graber, the first-year Rutgers coach, prepared his team for its season-opening game against Kentucky this week, he took pains to point out that he didn't expect to erase 10 years' worth of losses and disappointment in one game.
But Graber did say that he hoped his team would offer excitement, grit and a triumphant spirit.


THE ANNOTATED CALENDAR: ART
LEAD: September ''JOSEPH WRIGHT OF DERBY.'' This 18th-century portraitist, landscapist and history painter, known for his dramatic lighting effects, turned some of the signal scientific events of the Enlightenment into irresistible visual narratives.
This weekend-Dec. 2, Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Catherine van Straalen And V.K. Marshall Wed
LEAD: Catherine Elizabeth van Straalen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Johannes van Straalen of Madison, Conn., was married yesterday to VanKeuren Marshall, a son of Chovine Van Keuren Johnson and J. Quitman Marshall Jr., both of Columbia, S.C.
The Rev.
Ross Wright officiated at St.
Michael's Episcopal Church in Charleston, S


Staff Problems Threaten NASA's Goals, Critics Say
LEAD: A wide range of aerospace leaders and former NASA officials say the space agency has suffered such declines in the quality and competence of its technical staff that it will be hard pressed to achieve important new goals.


Hussein's Summit Message: Iraq Plans to Keep Kuwait
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the statement issued today by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, as read by his spokesman on the Iraqi television and recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:


Assassination: The Ultimate Public Theater
LEAD: There is something different about American assassins.
When compared to the disciplined point men of conspiracies in other parts of the world, ours seem more like a group of confusingly divergent characters.
It is not easy to find much in common among John Wilkes Booth, the prominent actor who murdered Abraham Lincoln; Lee Harvey Oswald, the defector to the Soviet Union who returned to the fringes of American society to kill John F.


Lauren Singer and Mason Salit Are Married on L.I.
LEAD: Lauren Singer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Singer of Dix Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Mason Salit, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm Salit of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Mordechai Waxman officiated at the Huntington (L.I.) Hilton.
Mrs.
Salit, 26 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Finkelstein Borah Schwartz Altschuler &amp; Goldstein.


CRIME
LEAD: A remorseless killer who likes to hurt women almost drives Matt Scudder back to the bottle in Lawrence Block's edgy crime thriller, A TICKET TO THE BONEYARD (Morrow, $18.95).
Fresh out of Dannemora and still enraged with the New York private eye for having framed him a dozen years ago, the psycho starts making good on his promise to get


Conservatives' Vote May Aid Democrat
LEAD: SUFFOLK COUNTY Conservative Party leaders have been feuding and fussing for years, with nobody paying much attention outside their ranks.


Publisher's Progress
LEAD:
THE WORLD'S LAST NIGHT
By William Jovanovich.
303 pp. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $18.95.


Campus Life: Rutgers;   Fraternity Chapter Starts With Focus On Helping Others
LEAD: Billing itself as a fraternity with a difference, Phi Kappa Sigma has been chartered at Rutgers University.
One difference, its founders and members say, is a policy against hazing initiates, a practice that is also banned by state law.


JUNK MAIL'S TOP DOGS
LEAD: Junk mail's top dogs have the right to send me anything they want to, just as I have the right to throw it away.
But every time I toss out unopened, unsolicited junk mail, it angers me that direct-mail advertisers are not required to print their ads on recycled paper.
How many landfills do ''62.78 billion pieces of third-class mail'' fill up every year?


Kenya Raising Oil Prices by as Much as 49%
LEAD: Reflecting the serious economic consequences of the Persian Gulf crisis for the impoverished, importing countries of Africa, Kenya announced oil-price increases today of up to 49 percent.


Seoul Searching
LEAD:
THE SHADOW IN THE SUN
A Korean Year of Love and Sorrow.
By Michael Shapiro.
240 pp. New York:
The Atlantic Monthly Press. $19.95.


The Best-Laid Plans of Architects Are Often Best Seen on Paper
LEAD: he main architecture exhibit is always on the streets, but the museums and galleries are full of architecture, too.
The Avery Library at Columbia University is involved with two exhibitions this season: ''The History of History,'' drawings from the library's collection, opens Sept. 19 at the Ross Architecture Gallery on the Columbia campus, and ''Avery's Choice: 500 Years of Architectural Books,'' some 100 of the best books on architecture, from Alberti to Frank Lloyd Wright, opens Oct.


Trading Safety for Better Car Mileage
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tech Notes;   Giving Good Weight to Plastic
LEAD: Most designers try to make products lighter so they will be easier to ship and handle.
The plastics division at the General Electric Company has done the opposite by developing a new line of plastics that are twice as heavy for a given volume as similar materials.
The reason?
To compete with materials such as ceramics, glass, porcelain and metal in applications where customers equate weight with quality.


Japanese-American Cultural Clash
LEAD: John Artise's frequent tip to Japanese managers - ''Don't ask a job applicant personal questions.'' - is often greeted with surprise.
Without information on employees' religion, upbringing or home life, Japanese managers ask him, ''How are we going to know them and trust them?''


Where the World Was New: Immigrants Recall Ellis Island
LEAD: Today, the Ellis Island Immigration Museum will be dedicated as a memorial to those who came to America, including the more than 12 million immigrants who flowed through Ellis Island during its peak years, 1892 to 1924.
The museum occupies the grand Beaux-Arts building where anxious immigrants waited to learn whether they would be allowed to start new lives in


Samurai on the Run
LEAD:
EAST IS EAST
By T. Coraghessan Boyle.
364 pp. New York:
Viking. $19.95.


Forty Cents
LEAD: A geologist, who had come to New York City from Pennsylvania for a meeting at Columbia University, arrived ahead of time in the neighborhood and stopped at a newsstand to buy The Times.
When she looked in her pocketbook, she found nothing smaller than a $20 bill.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Del Monte Foods, San Francisco, appointed Norman S. Mackenzie executive vice president and chief financial officer.


New Jet Era Starts In Old Losing Style
LEAD: The Cincinnati Bengals' defense welcomed Bruce Coslet, the team's former offensive coordinator home today for his regular-season debut as a head coach, by manhandling his new team's offense in the fourth quarter and sparking a 25-20 come-from-behind victory over the Jets.


Another Loss as Mets End Dreary Trip
LEAD: The Mets ended a week of disasters today with one of their more searing disasters: They took a 2-1 lead over the Philadelphia Phillies in the top of the seventh inning, then promptly lost it in the bottom of the seventh when the Phillies rallied for four runs off Sid Fernandez and went on to win, 6-2.


Critic's Notebook;   Freedom of Fiction, Applied to Biography
LEAD: ''There is no life that can be recaptured wholly, as it was,'' observes the hero of Bernard Malamud's novel ''Dubin's Lives,'' who is a biographer. ''Which is to say that all biography is ultimately fiction.''


S.&amp; L. Judge Excels In Complicated Data
LEAD: In ordering the Government last week to return control of the troubled Franklin Savings Association to its former owners, Federal Judge Dale E. Saffels apparently had little problem deciphering the complex business dealings of Franklin, which is based in Ottawa, Kan., particularly its intricate accounting.


Broadcast to Baghdad
LEAD: Six months ago, the Voice of America - in its finest hour -broadcast an editorial reflecting the official views of the U.S.
Government to the world.


Chronicle
LEAD: Miss Illinois, MARJORIE JUDITH VINCENT, a pianist of Haitian descent who wants to practice international law, was crowned Miss America 1991 early yesterday.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Envoy Reports Hundreds of Thousands of Asians Trapped in Kuwait
LEAD: A European diplomat who just left Kuwait said today that hundreds of thousands of Asian workers were still trapped in the country without food or shelter.
He said the situation dwarfed the problem of the tens of thousands of refugees suffering in squalid desert camps on the border between Iraq and Jordan.


Sampras Crushes Agassi to Claim Title
LEAD: The men's final at the United States Open unfolded like an unrequited love affair yesterday, and by the end of it, one of the players was mightily upset.
Unheralded and underestimated, Pete Sampras produced a barrage of bravura serves, one-way passing shots, and viperish volleys from start to finish while his opponent, the ultra-visible Andre Agassi, backed farther and farther into a corner, his persona and his tennis game reduced to silence, a most unfamiliar predicament.


Oklahoma Executes First Prisoner in 24 Years
LEAD: In Oklahoma's first execution in 24 years, a man who started a religious ministry in prison was put to death by lethal injection early today for killing a man who walked in on a 1979 burglary.


Laugh and Be Merry Holds On in Flower
LEAD: Laugh and Be Merry gained the overdue distinction of being a Grade I stakes-winner yesterday when she held off Foresta by half a length to win the $131,400 Flower Bowl Handicap at Belmont Park.


Abby Gail Satsky Is Wed To Michael E. Oringer
LEAD: At the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club, Abby Gail Satsky, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Monroe Satsky of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Edward Oringer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gary Oringer of North Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Steven Bayer officiated.


New Lotus Spreadsheet
LEAD: The Lotus Development Corporation will begin selling an updated version of its popular 1-2-3 program today, aiming to tighten its grip on the spreadsheet market.


Hitachi's Quest for Super Chips
LEAD: A good place to view the intense pressure to be first, the incredible expense, the dedication and the hyperbole that surround Japanese high technology these days is Hitachi Ltd.'s giant research laboratory here in the suburbs of Tokyo.


Ornette Coleman's Original Quartet Goes Home
LEAD: The Ornette Coleman Quartet, one of the most innovative and influential jazz ensembles of the last three decades, was born and nurtured here.
But the group left town for New York City in 1959, never to return - until this weekend, when it reassembled for what was billed as a rare reunion of four ''local heroes'' whose roots and achievements have become a source of local pride.


Still Searching for Justice Souter
LEAD: Six weeks after President Bush introduced David Souter as his nominee for the Supreme Court, most Americans haven't a clue about his fitness for the highest bench.
Legal scholars of varied philosophy have been poring over some 200 opinions Mr.
Souter wrote for New Hampshire's Supreme Court and other documents for signs of his political leanings, hints of ideology and evidence of judicial temperament.


Spreading the Word on Black Classical Music
LEAD: There are those who believe that blacks have defined what is truly American about American music, whether through composition, performance or (as in the case of white rock-and-roll) influence.
But there is one class of black musician - the classical composer - who sometimes seems frozen out of such recognition.


Police in South Africa Fire on Soweto Crowd
LEAD: The police opened fire today to disperse crowds of blacks in Soweto who had been angered by an overnight attack on a squatter camp that killed at least 10 people.


Tax Issue Takes Center Stage in Connecticut's Primary
LEAD: The Democratic gubernatorial primary has veered closer toward becoming a referendum on whether Connecticut should continue to avoid an income tax on wages, or throw out the old ways entirely and think again.


A Los Angeles Clean-Air Car
LEAD: Two utilities have agreed to develop a mass-production electric car and put 1,000 of them on the streets of the nation's smoggiest city by late 1992.


Far From Home, a Dockside Barbecue


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to the regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills today.
By late Friday, the rate for the three-month bill was 7.39 percent, and the rate was 7.34 percent for the six-month bill.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Hint of Summit Split Divides Lawmakers
LEAD: Some members of Congress praised the meeting today between President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev in Helsinki, but they offered differing views of the significance of the seeming discord between the American and Soviet leaders on the use of military force in the Persian Gulf.


Deal Is Sought By Paramount
LEAD: Paramount Communications Inc. is in the market for a merger or acquisition, but it has already passed on specific chances to invest in the theme park, recorded music and publishing fields, its top executive said Thursday.


Cleveland Cardiologist Selected For a Top Federal Research Post
LEAD: Dr.
Bernadine P. Healy, a Cleveland cardiologist, has been chosen by the Health and Human Services Secretary, Louis W. Sullivan, to be the director of the National Institutes of Health, Federal officials said today.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   High Over Saudi Arabia, a U.S. Watch on Iraqi Jets
LEAD: As crew members on the Air Force Awacs surveillance plane over Saudi Arabia used their radar scopes to peer into Kuwait and southern Iraq, a yellow ''V'' suddenly burst onto the radar scopes and started moving south toward Saudi airspace.


New South Has New Face for Black Tourists
LEAD: Ever since the wounds began to heal after the Civil War, the South has portrayed itself to potential visitors in mist-shrouded images of cotton barons and hoop skirts, mint juleps and white-columned antebellum mansions.


...Or Tax Excess Profits
LEAD: Has the recent rise in oil prices ruled out a hike in energy taxes?
Not necessarily.
While higher prices make it harder to tax consumers - a regressive way to go anyway - there is an alternative that is pro-consumer and appropriate under today's circumstances: the windfall-profits tax.


Reports of Hartford's Death Are Exaggerated
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ellis Island Doors Reopening, This Time as Haven to Tourists
LEAD: Ellis Island, the imposing and often difficult door to America for millions of the country's immigrants, reopened yesterday as a tourist attraction, the Ellis Island Immigration Museum.


Doing It Right
LEAD: There can be no assurance of how it will end.
But so far President Bush has handled the Iraqi crisis with a wisdom, a professionalism and a care for long-term interests rare in recent decades of American leadership.


Miss Jones Is Wed To P.J. MacGuire
LEAD: Rebecca Rice Jones, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert Elliott of Ross, Calif., and Alvin C. Rice of Tiburon, Calif., was married yesterday to Peter Joseph MacGuire, a son of Mrs.
Philip F. MacGuire of Lawrence, L.I., and the late Mr.
MacGuire.
Charles Mehrman, a retired town justice of Lawrence,officiated at the Lawrence Beach Club in Atlantic Beach, L


Confrontation in the Gulf;   IRAQI VISITS IRAN, A FIRST SINCE WAR
LEAD: Iraq's Foreign Minister held talks here today, reportedly using his Government's first official visit since the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq war to try to circumvent the United Nations embargo imposed after the invasion of Kuwait.


POPE TO SANCTIFY MAMMOTH BASILICA
LEAD: From afar, it looks like a gigantic jeweled egg in the heart of the African savannah.


Weekends: A Time for Credit Cards
LEAD: AMERICAN EXPRESS is to begin its first national advertising campaign today for a special credit card program for members and merchants called ''Weekend Privileges.''


Canada Blocks Book by Former Israeli Agent
LEAD: The Israeli Government was reported over the weekend to have won a court order temporarily blocking Canadian publication of a book that purportedly discloses sensitive information about the operations of Mossad, the Israeli intelligence service.


Thomas Shattan, Investment Banker, Married to Kate Dundes, an Architect
LEAD: Kate Dundes, an architect, and Thomas Spencer Shattan, an investment banker, were married yesterday at the Century Country Club in Purchase, N.Y., by Rabbi Mark L. Winer.
Mrs.
Dundes Shattan is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lester Dundes of New York.
Her husband is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Boaz M. Shattan of New


Body of Wesleyan Student Is Found in Park
LEAD: The body of a Wesleyan University student was found near a hiking trail in a Middlefield park on Saturday, a Wesleyan spokesman said.


No Renegotiating
LEAD: M. L. CARR'S wife, Sylvia, has spent a lifetime reminding her husband not to be late for various social functions.
So when a surprise party was thrown last year for Dick Siverson, the former president of the Rolm telephone company, Carr's wife once again warned him, ''You better not be late.''


Confrontation in the Gulf: Decoding the Signals;   The Superpowers Affirm Their Joint Aims But Iraq Could Focus on Their Differences
LEAD: The meeting between President George Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today was intended to send a signal to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.
But the signal that went forth from Helsinki was a mixed one.


Expos Continue To Pester Pirates
LEAD: Andres Galarraga and Mike Fitzgerald homered as the Montreal Expos took an early four-run lead and went on to beat the Pittsburgh Pirates, 9-5, today.


Studio's Tactics on a Film: Lights! Camera! Direct Mail!
LEAD: Geoff Ammer knew it would not be easy to make ''Miller's Crossing'' stand out in the crowd of fall films, so he decided to make a direct pitch to New Yorkers whom he hoped would be moviegoers.


Ladies' Home Journal Takes Russian Tour
LEAD: Never underestimate the power of a woman's magazine to spread the message about never underestimating the power of a woman.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Ousting Iraqis From Games
LEAD: The executive commiteee of the Olympic Council of Asia unanimously recommended today that Iraq be banned from this month's Asian Games and expelled from the council because of its invasion of Kuwait.


Crisis Aids Military Contractors
LEAD: The Persian Gulf crisis could benefit some military contractors by increasing demand from Saudi Arabia and other Middle Eastern countries for certain airplanes, tanks and missiles, Government officials and industry executives say.


3 Plead Guilty to '83 Bombing
LEAD: Three women pleaded guilty Friday to bombing the Capitol and conspiring to set off explosions at eight locations in a two-year campaign to protest Government policies.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Australian Wins European Open: Peter Senior of Australia shot a four-under-par 66 to win the European Open by one stroke over Ian Woosnam of Wales.
Senior finished with a total of 267, 13-under-par, over the 6,607-yard Old Course at Sunningdale, England, in edging Woosnam, who closed with a 67.


No October Dividend For Saatchi &amp; Saatchi
LEAD: The financially troubled Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company P.L.C. said Friday that it would not pay an October dividend.
Recent sales of the consulting firms Peterson &amp; Co. of Chicago, the Hay Group of Philadelphia, and the Gartner Group Inc. of Stamford, Conn., were at prices lower than expected, causing the London-based agency to take a writeoff of about $76 million.


Congressman From Delaware Wins Primary
LEAD: Representative Thomas R. Carper soundly defeated his challenger in Saturday's Democratic primary as he sought a fifth term in Congress.


Dinkins Issues Call to Citizens To Fight Crime
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins, citing violence that ''threatens to tear our city apart,'' appealed to the ordinary citizen yesterday to help ''take back our streets by night as well as by day.''


Donald C. Dow; Engineer, 83
LEAD: Donald C. Dow, an electrical engineer and a retired New York City teacher and guidance counselor, died on Wednesday at his home in South Yarmouth, Mass., at the age of 83.


1,000 With One Goal: Instant Fame
LEAD: The radio and newspaper advertisements during the last week demanded that the ''young men trying out must be muscular and athletic with a knowledge of boxing.'' They asked for girls who were ''pretty, sensual and sexy,'' with ''street-quality toughness.''


Morocco in Debt Effort
LEAD: Morocco is expected to ask Western creditor nations this week for debt forgiveness, similar to that which President Bush is seeking for Egypt, United States Government officials and commercial bankers said Friday.
The North African country is scheduled to meet tomorrow with the so-called Paris Club, an informal group of Government officials representing Western creditor nations.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Transcript of Bush-Gorbachev News Conference at Summit
LEAD: Following is a transcript of the news conference by President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev in Helsinki today, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:
OPENING STATEMENT
Following is a transcript of the news conference by President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev in Helsinki today, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:
OPENING STATEMENT
PRESIDENT BUSH: Well, I've been advised that I'm to take the first question, and if so, I would identify Helen Thomas of the U.P.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Q.
I'd like to ask both Presidents whether we are going to have a war in the Persian Gulf?
And I'd like to follow up.
BUSH: Well, with your permission, Mr.
President, I hope that we can achieve a peaceful solution, and the way to do that is to have Iraq comply with the United Nations resolutions.
And I think that part of our joint statement, two short lines, said it most clearly - nothing short of the complete implementation of United Nations Security Council resolutions is acceptable.
As soon as Saddam Hussein realizes that, then there certainly will be a peaceful resolution to this question.
Q. How about President Gorbachev? What do you think?


Letter: On Drug Abuse;   Hyperbole on Heroin
LEAD: To the Editor:


Deborah Skolnick Marries
LEAD: Deborah Ann Skolnick, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David W. Skolnick of Woodbridge, Conn., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Andrew David Gordon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart J. Gordon of Potomac, Md.
Rabbi Herbert Brockman officiated.
Mrs.
Gordon, 27 years old, graduated from Duke University, as did her husband, and received a J.D.


New Whittle President
LEAD: William Connell was named president and chief operating officer of Whittle Communications on Friday.
The posts at the media company, which is based in Knoxville, Tenn., have been vacant since Nicholas Glover stepped down two years ago.
Mr.
Connell, 50 years old, has operated a venture capital business called Peregrine Capital Partners of Cincinnati, specializing in securing financing for optical businesses and day care centers.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   BUSH AND GORBACHEV SAY IRAQIS MUST OBEY U.N. AND QUIT KUWAIT
LEAD: President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev issued a joint pledge today to act ''individually and in concert'' to reverse Iraq's conquest of Kuwait, even if that cannot be accomplished by peaceful means.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Excerpts: Call For Restoring Public Order
LEAD: Following are excerpts of a speech on crime that Mayor David N. Dinkins made yesterday morning at St.
Patrick's Cathedral:


J.D. Morris WedTo Jennifer Stiles
LEAD: Jennifer Daggett Stiles, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
William Stiles Jr. of Port Jefferson, L.I., was married yesterday to Joseph David Morris, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Max Morris of Cliffside Park, N.J.
Rabbi Simon Glustrom, assisted by Cantor Max Rubin, officiated at the couple's home in Far Hills, N


Rutgers Defense Off to Good Start
LEAD: As the new era began so well for Rutgers on Saturday night at Giants Stadium, the only disappointment was too few witnesses to the 24-8 victory over Kentucky.


Ms. Wilner Weds Richard Hoffman
LEAD: Deborah Sue Wilner, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Milton Wilner of Long Island City, Queens, was married yesterday to Dr.
Richard Michael Hoffman, a son of Lillian Hoffman of Plymouth Meeting, Pa., and the late Jules Hoffman.
Rabbi Dov Gartenberg officiated at the Herbfarm in Fall City, Wash.


Chronicle
LEAD: After 18 years as the executive editor of The Philadelphia Inquirer, during which time the newspaper won 17 Pulitzer Prizes, EUGENE L. ROBERTS will become a tenured professor of journalism at the University of Maryland at College Park.
After a year of travel, mostly in Southeast Asia, Mr.
Roberts, 58 years old, will join the university's public affairs reporting program, which includes faculty-directed student news bureaus in Washington and Annapolis.


Detroit Journal;   Giving Up The Jewels To Salvage The House
LEAD: As Detroit has lost half its people and most of its businesses in the last 40 years, officials here have become much like the nervous owner of a ramshackle house, frantically trying to keep the roof from falling in.


Agassi Ponders Meaning of Defeat
LEAD: Through the final points that would knock Andre Agassi out of his second Grand Slam final of the year, the man who helped create him, Nick Bollettieri, simply stared implacably at his protege from behind wrap-around dark glasses, as if to say, ''There's not much I can do for you now, kid.''


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Our preference is to resolve the crisis peacefully, and we will be united against Iraq's aggression as long as the crisis exists.
However, we are determined to see this aggression end, and if the current steps fail to end it, we are prepared to consider additional ones consistent with the U.N. charter.


Chronicle
LEAD: MOTHER TERESA said yesterday that God's will had prevented her from carrying out her plans to retire.


County vs. State on Bankruptcy Issue
LEAD: Twelve years after Proposition 13 slashed property tax revenues in California, the supervisors of Butte County face a wrenching decision in the coming week: whether to make theirs the first county in the nation to declare bankruptcy.


Brazil Escalating War on Inflation
LEAD: What do diapers, pizza, specialty steel, automobile pistons and a jolting cup of black Brazilian coffee have in commmon?
Brazil's anti-inflation fighters respond: prices fixed by cartels.


McMillan's Pact Extended by Jets
LEAD: The Jets said today that Erik McMillan's contract had been extended through the 1991 season.
No details of the extension given the Pro Bowl free safety were announced except the length.


Yanks Are Floored By Ultimate Sweep
LEAD: A cool wind blew suddenly and wildly in the ninth inning yesterday.
It blew so hard - and so unpredictably - that when Willie McGee's casual fly ball fell beyond the reach of Mell Hall in right field, the afternoon seemed to sweep away with it.


Dr. Gold Weds Ian Nyden
LEAD: Dr.
Lisa H. Gold, an attending psychiatrist at Malden (Mass.) Hospital, was married yesterday in Gloucester, Mass., to Dr.
Ian Jeffrey Nyden, a research engineer for Kaman Engineering in Burlington, Mass.
Rabbi Harry Roth officiated at Stillington Hall.
The bride, 30 years old, is the daughter of Susan Gold of Englewood, N.J., and Dr.


Shoulder to Shoulder Against Iraq
LEAD: Saddam Hussein can take no comfort from the U.S.-Soviet summit meeting.
Presidents Bush and Gorbachev served notice in their joint communique that the Iraqi outlaw won't get away with his aggression in Kuwait: ''Nothing short of the complete implementation of the United Nations Security Council resolutions is acceptable.


3 Injured While Leaving a Burning Plane
LEAD: Three passengers were injured last night during an emergency evacuation of a T.W.A. jetliner after it landed at La Guardia Airport with flames shooting from its undercarriage, Port Authority officials said.


Question Box
LEAD:
Last 30-Game Winner
Q.
When Denny McLain of the Detroit Tigers became the most recent pitcher to win 30 games in a season, he did so in 1968, under a 162-game schedule, not the longtime 154-game schedule under which previous 30-game winners pitched.
Did McLain win number 30 before his team's 154th game that season?


Miscellany
LEAD: *
A group of the nation's largest black-owned advertising and communications companies has formed the African-American Marketing and Media Association, intended to promote the black consumer market.
The association, which will be based in Chicago, will be open to black-owned companies specializing in communications, marketing and public relations.


Books Star on TV, but Only in France
LEAD: ''America is basically anti-intellectual,'' said William Styron, the novelist. ''My own feeling is that Americans in general have so little regard for serious literature that a TV book show could never achieve truly wide popularity.''


Clash of Deer and Man Tests Public Ingenuity
LEAD: Just as fighter pilots rely on electronic countermeasures to confuse enemy planes, more and more motorists are counting on whistles, mirrors and other measures to help dodge a growing traffic menace: deer.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE OIL JOLT
Bush and Gorbachev reaffirmed their commitment to reverse Iraq's conquest of Kuwait but reported no agreement on specific new measures to accomplish that aim.
Some differences emerged at the summit meeting in Helsinki. [Page A1.]
The Persian Gulf crisis could benefit some military contractors by increasing demand from Saudi Arabia and other Middle Eastern countries for certain airplanes, tanks and missiles.


Packers Win With Dilweg
LEAD: Who could blame Anthony Dilweg for having an attack of nerves today?


Latest U.S. Import: a Japanese View of Japan's Economy
LEAD: While there has been no lack of coverage of Japan's economy in American newspapers and magazines, what has been lacking is the Japanese point of view.
Or so say the editors at Asahi Shimbun, Japan's leading newspaper.


Tokyo Stocks Up; Dollar Off
LEAD: Stock prices in Tokyo climbed more than 4 percent in early afternoon trading today on a stronger yen and gains on Wall Street on Friday.
Buying on improved market fundamentals and on optimism over the summit meeting between the United States and the Soviet Union on Sunday accounted for the morning's sharp gains in very thin trading, brokers said.


Outdoors: Retrieving at a Click of a Reel
LEAD: WE were some 30 miles south-southwest of Nomans Land Island trolling two plastic jigs 150 feet astern when I was aroused from a nap in one of the vessel's fighting chairs by Brutus.


Some Analysts Express Optimism
LEAD: Many economists and credit market analysts say that the recession they assumed was just around the corner when Iraq invaded Kuwait is still just around the corner, more than a month later.
Some analysts even suggest that with a little luck -no additional disruption in oil production and no extended war in the Middle


Hundreds Rally Against Florio And New Taxes
LEAD: A growing grass-roots tax revolt spread into northern New Jersey today, as an estimated 1,500 people turned out for a rally denouncing Gov.
Jim Florio and the $2.8 billion in higher income and sales taxes he pushed through the Legislature in June.


Mary Whitcomb, Actress, Married
LEAD: Mary Bryant Whitcomb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur B. Whitcomb of Pawling, N.Y., was married yesterday at her parents' home to John James Paribello, a son of Mrs.
Charles Redman of Mount Vernon, N.Y., and John Paribello of Peekskill, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert Taylor, a Presbyterian minister, officiated.


Metro Matters;   Dinkins's Style And the Pressure To Sound Tough
LEAD: After only eight months in office, Mayor David N. Dinkins is suffering from largely the same liability that undermined his predecessor, Edward I. Koch: the style that helped elect him is obscuring his substance.


Lauren Amy Levy Is Wed
LEAD: Lauren Amy Levy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley J. Levy of Great Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to Jeffrey B. Wertheim, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Wertheim of Louisville, Ky.
Rabbi David Benedict officiated at Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
Mrs.
Wertheim, an instructional designer for Applied Science Associates, a training development firm in Landover, Pa., is a graduate of Duke University and has a master's in design from the University of North Carolina.


Cambodian Rivals Said to Accept U.N. Peace Plan
LEAD: After two years of difficult negotiations, the four Cambodian factions agreed today on a United Nations framework for a comprehensive peace settlement, the Indonesian Foreign Minister said here tonight.


Israelis Weigh Putting 9 Policemen on Trial
LEAD: Police investigators recommend putting nine police officers on trial on charges of torturing Palestinian inmates, but high-ranking officials have requested a review of the evidence, Israeli newspapers reported today.


Sectarian Schools Gain Most From Choice Plan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Consensus Behind Oratory of Iraq's Arab Foes: Crush Hussein With Military Strike
LEAD: Moderate Arab governments aligned against Iraq are increasingly speaking in private of what they see as the need for military action to eliminate President Saddam Hussein and destroy his powerful arsenal.


Liberian President Captured by Rebels In a Fierce Gunfight
LEAD: President Samuel K. Doe of Liberia was captured by rebel forces today, reportedly after being wounded in a gun battle in the capital, Monrovia.


Business Scene;   How Fast to Shift To Free Markets
LEAD: WHEN the Eastern European countries emerged from Communism last fall, there was much theorizing about how quickly they should make the transition to free markets.
Many economists, in the East and the West, argued for a go-slow strategy to reduce the pain of unemployment and other social hardships.


Either Force Oil Prices Down . . .
LEAD: With oil prices pushing past $32 a barrel, the economy either in recession or on the brink and with growing predictions of shortages of home heating oil in November, the case for tapping the Strategic Petroleum Reserve is becoming very strong.
Unfortunately, the Bush Administration continues to resist the idea, preferring to hold the 600 million barrels exclusively for ''physical'' shortages.


Television;   With Cable as Partner, Fox Dances in Ratings
LEAD: FOX BROADCASTING continues to change the rules of the network television game.


What's the Weather? Don't Ask the Service
LEAD: After a century of serving as the public's eyes and ears about the weather, the National Weather Service is changing its mission.
The service will still carefully watch the skies, but it will not be taking as many calls.


Lowering Korea's Wall
LEAD: Korea's version of the Berlin wall still stands, but last week's unprecedented meeting between the Prime Ministers of the North and the South at least opened a few gates.
Reunification won't come before radical political changes transform the Communist North.
Still, Seoul is right to encourage a step-by-step reduction of tensions.


People
LEAD: *
Howard Nass has joined Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications, New York, as senior vice president and corporate director of local broadcasting.


NEW YORK SCHOOLS OPEN, FACING TEST: DO MORE WITH LESS
LEAD: New York City's schools open their doors today to fresh swarms of students brimming with yearning and resolve, but who are in general poorer and, with the first influx of babies born to crack-addicted mothers, perhaps more troubled than ever before.


Candidate Owing Back Taxes Won't Quit Race
LEAD: Eleanor Holmes Norton, the leading candidate for District of Columbia Congressional delegate, has no plans to drop out of the campaign even though it was disclosed that she and her husband failed to file local income tax returns for eight years, an aide said today.


'Stay Intense but Not Overdo It'
LEAD: AS the contract dispute between the Giants and Lawrence Taylor dragged into the start of last week, Bill Parcells was asked how late the 31-year-old linebacker could report and still have enough time to be ready for last night's 8 o'clock opener against the Philadelphia Eagles. ''About 7:56,'' the Giants' coach joked.


Texas Jail Reconsiders Policy on Gay Inmates
LEAD: A Fort Worth jail has promised to reconsider its requirement that homosexual inmates wear colored wristbands in a policy likened by a critic to ''throwing meat to the dogs.''


Islanders Spilling Their Own Blood
LEAD: Brad Dalgarno - his lower lip swollen, his jaw wired, his resolve unshaken - returned to the Islanders' training camp in street clothes today after Dean Chynoweth hit him in the mouth with his stick during a scrimmage Saturday.


Deirdre Neligan, Consultant, Marries Richard Marshall Mock, Executive
LEAD: Deirdre Anne Neligan was married yesterday to Richard Marshall Mock at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Ridgefield, Conn.
The Rev.
Canon Charles W. Stubbs officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Patrick J. Sheehan.
Mrs.
Mock is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Patrick Neligan of Ridgefield.
Her husband is the son of Mr.


Chronicle
LEAD: The philanthropist MARY WOODWARD LASKER, who with her husband, the advertising executive Albert Lasker, promoted medical research through the Albert and Mary Lasker Foundation, will be inducted with five others into the Health Care Hall of Fame in ceremonies on Wednesday at Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia.


To Chinese These Days, 'Comrade' Is Gauche
LEAD: Young women here may listen to the stern propaganda about the revolutionary virtues of simple living, but when they put on their lipstick and Hong Kong-style dresses for a night at the disco, they are unlikely to respond to a pickup line that begins: ''Comrade . . .''


Hemophiliacs Lose Drug Company Lawsuits
LEAD: Three young hemophiliac brothers, who doctors say were infected with AIDS through contaminated blood products, have lost their legal fight against two drug companies that made such products.


Kathryn D. Li Weds Daniel S. Dessau
LEAD: Kathryn Dairoh Li, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Tingye Li of Rumson, N.J., was married yesterday to Daniel Stephen Dessau, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold R. Dessau of Huntsville, Ala.
Rabbi Joseph Goldman officiated at Shadowbrook restaurant in Shrewsbury, N.J.


Confrontation in the Gulf: Reporter's Notebook;   The Two New Friends Come Smiling Through
LEAD: It was hard to believe, watching the two Presidents boast here today about their new cooperation at the United Nations and at their three summit meetings, that it was less than two years ago that the Soviet Union still had an aura of evil for the Presidential candidate George Bush, who was darkly repeating Andrei Gromyko's assessment that Mikhail S.


Japanese Show Pocket TV Sets
LEAD: Three Japanese companies introduced new pocket-sized color television sets last week.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Kohl Says He'll Seek to End Curb on Army's Role
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl said today that he was ''firmly resolved'' to revise the Constitution after German unification to permit the use of Germans in United Nations peacekeeping forces.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Sept. 9, 1990:
MONDAY
Jamesway Corp
United Indl Corp
Rykoff Sexton
TUESDAY
Apache Corp
Heinz H. J. Co
Consolidated Nat Gas
Int. Flavors &amp; Fragrances
Cummins Engine
Kerr Glass Mfg
Fieldcrest Cannon
Oklahoma Gas &amp; Elec
Fleetwood Enterprises
Portland Gen
Fluor Corp
Tri Contl Corp


Miss Schoenholtz Weds O. P. Macina
LEAD: The marriage of Rebecca Schoenholtz to Ousmane Papa Macina, a son of Fatimata Demba and Mamoudou Nouhum Macina of Nioro du Sahel,Mali, took place yesterday in Mamaroneck, N.Y., at the home of the bride's father and stepmother, Dr. and Mrs.
Jack C. Schoenholtz.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel performed the ceremony.


Time for Federal Law On Power of Attorney
LEAD: To the Editor:


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Text of Joint Statement: Aggression 'Will Not Pay'
LEAD: Following is the text of the joint statement issued by Presidents Bush and Mikhail S. Gorbachev at the end of their summit meeting here today:


Eagle-Picher Is Endangered
LEAD: Eagle-Picher Industries has been financially devastated by liability for asbestos disease claims and faces insolvency by the end of 1992, a court-ordered report released on Friday said.


Natalie Flatow Marries
LEAD: Natalie Flatow, a public-relations consultant, and Capt.
Ralph L. Vasa, U.S.N., retired, were married yesterday in New York.
Rabbi Deborah Hirsch officiated at the East End Temple.
Mrs.
Vasa, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Flatow of Rockaway Beach, Queens, graduated from Barnard College.


For Victims of Chernobyl, a Respite at Camp
LEAD: Skipping across the stage in her bright green Ukrainian costume, Natalya Zelinskaia, known tonight as Little Red Riding Hood, had little time to think about her illness: She is suffering from Hodgkin's disease because of her exposure to radiation from the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident four years ago.


African Heritage Is Celebrated


Champagne Prices Head Up
LEAD: High prices for Champagne lie ahead as farmers prepare to begin the annual grape harvest on Tuesday.
A dispute between growers and Champagne producers ended in April with the collapse of a 30-year system that fixed an overall price for grapes each season.
The price has since risen by 20 percent, to about $3 a pound.


Bridge
LEAD: The semifinal stage of the World Team Championship began here today with two American teams opposed in one match and Canada facing Germany in the other.


Savings Unit Is Acquired
LEAD: The BankAmerica Corporation said Friday that it had acquired the failed Benjamin Franklin Savings and Loan Association in Portland, Ore., from the Resolution Trust Corporation.


Dr. Ratner Weds Kenneth S. Geller
LEAD: Dr.
Judith B. Ratner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton B. Ratner of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday in Washington to Kenneth S. Geller, a son of Mrs.
Edward Geller of Rego Park, Queens, and the late Mr.
Geller.
Rabbi David Wice officated at the Grand Hotel.


A Voyage to Benefit a Favorite Island
LEAD: New York Harbor's sun-reflected sparkle had keen competition from flashing sequins, glistening beads and glittering doodads.
Even with the formal attire, sunglasses were definitely de rigueur.
The black-tie occasion was an invitation-only dinner to celebrate as well as to benefit the reopening of Ellis


Miss Scharer Wed To W. G. Alwang
LEAD: Melissa Keen Scharer, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Scharer of New York, was married yesterday at her parents' home to Wesley Gilbert Alwang, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter G. Alwang of Meriden, Conn.
Rabbi Eugene J. Lipsey officiated.


Board of Peat Said to Back A New Head
LEAD: The board of KPMG Peat Marwick, the world's largest accounting firm, voted over the weekend to support Jon C. Madonna, a 47-year-old auditor who heads the San Francisco region, as the firm's next chairman, a director who insisted on anonymity said yesterday.


Government Retrieves Files Accidentally Sold as Surplus
LEAD: The Justice Department has recovered the computer equipment containing secret data inadvertently sold as surplus from a United States Attorney's Office in Kentucky, a spokesman said Friday.


Two Early Upsets With Major Impact
LEAD: Brigham Young and Virginia made powerful statements with upsets Saturday.
And because the two teams both have relatively easy schedules ahead of them, they catapulted into being serious contenders for a national championship.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   India, Shaken by Iraqi Move, Seeks a Role for the Nonaligned
LEAD: The Indian Government, stunned by the collapse of what it thought was an Iraqi agreement to allow Indian citizens to leave Baghdad and Kuwait without hindrance, is hoping to revive the dormant movement of nations espousing nonalignment and find a role for it in defusing tensions in the Persian Gulf.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   What the Russians Saw
LEAD: The summit meeting in Helsinki received hopeful, positive coverage on Government television this evening with the working closeness of President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev stressed more than the complexities of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.


Fares Cut by Northwest
LEAD: Northwest Airlines said it had reduced fares to all five of its European destinations to as little as $358 round-trip.
The fares are for fall and winter travel to London, Paris, Frankfurt, Glasgow and Amsterdam.


Browns Capture Opener at Home
LEAD: Anthony Blaylock, a cornerback filling in for Frank Minnifield, scooped up a fumble and ran 30 yards for his first career touchdown today as the Cleveland Browns beat the Pittsburgh Steelers, 13-3.


Jody R. Krisiloff Married To Jeffrey R. Zuckerman
LEAD: Jody R. Krisiloff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Krisiloff of Jamaica, Queens, was married yesterday to Jeffrey R. Zuckerman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Zuckerman of New York.
Rabbi Gary Bretton-Granatoor officiated on the yacht Riveranda in New York Harbor.


Fast-Growth Oracle Systems Confronts First Downturn
LEAD: Just as it is about to cross the billion-dollar revenue milestone, the fast-growing Oracle Systems Corporation has stumbled.
The software company said last week that it would report its first loss ever in the quarter that ended on Aug. 31.


Sectarian Schools Gain Most From Choice Plan;   Direction Is Needed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sectarian Schools Gain Most From Choice Plan;   Decentralization's Sins
LEAD: To the Editor:


Europe Money Plan Stalled
LEAD: The finance ministers of the European Community failed to set a timetable for European currency union at a meeting here this weekend in what may be a victory for Britain.


Democrats in Michigan Select a New No. 2
LEAD: Michigan Democrats chose their new candidate for lieutenant governor today and sought to put behind them the bitterness of Lieut.
Gov.
Martha Griffiths's removal from the ticket.


Giants Open In Style
LEAD: For the first half of their season opener against the Philadelphia Eagles tonight, the Giants were sloppy and sluggish, with a first-class case of the blahs.
In the second half, they awakened, exploded with big plays and big hits and rolled to a 27-20 victory over perhaps their toughest division rival.


C.I.A. Plays Drug Role Off Screen, Too
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ellis Island Is Officially Reopened as Immigration Museum


Confrontation in the Gulf;   U.S. Must Get Saudi Permission In Most Cases to Fire on Iraqi Jets
LEAD: American fighter planes patrolling the skies of Saudi Arabia need permission from Saudi officials to fire on intruding Iraqi planes in almost all cases, American military officials said today.


Returning Your Serve
LEAD: A new tennis ball retrieval system is designed to gather balls you have hit into the opposite court during a practice or teaching session.
The device directs the balls into a ground-level gutter, which funnels them back into a ball machine or basket.


Liberals Regrouping in South Africa
LEAD: The white liberal Democratic Party, which has watched its platform of eliminating apartheid gradually taken over by President F. W. de Klerk and his governing National Party, is reshaping itself to avoid being rendered irrelevant by the political changes under way in South Africa.


Laura Harbeson Weds M.N. Lazrus
LEAD: Laura W. Harbeson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul C. Harbeson of Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Michael N. Lazrus, the son of Mrs.
Jay K. Lazrus of New York and the late Mr.
Lazrus.
The Rev.
David McInnes Gracie, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Mayer Selekman officiated at Appleford in Villanova,


Equimark Starts Search To Replace Chairman
LEAD: The Equimark Corporation, a banking company based in Pittsburgh, is looking for a new chairman and chief executive after the resignation of Alan S. Fellheimer, the brusque lawyer-turned-banker who salvaged the company only to see it fall on hard financial times again.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday
Consumer Credit
July
Tuesday
None
Wednesday
None
Thursday
None
Friday
Capacity Utilization
Aug.
Industrial Production
Aug.


Joan Kaplan Is Married To Fred V. Rubenstein
LEAD: Joan Kaplan, the president of Joan Kaplan Fine Art, an art advisory concern in New York, and Fred V. Rubenstein, formerly executive vice president of Institutional Investor Inc., a New York financial publishing company, where he is now a consultant, were married yesterday at their home in Washington, Conn.


Mauritius Thrives as Textiles Boom
LEAD: From the busy workrooms of the Bonair textile factory, where new computerized knitting machines from Japan turn out high-fashion sweaters for Europeans, the new Mauritius and the old are immediately evident.


Lawn-Mowing Sheep Called Nuisances in Urban Setting
LEAD: A flock of sheep used as lawn mowers by a doctor here have angered his neighbors, who say the animals' wanderlust is a public nuisance.


Coal-Plant Proposal Upsets New York's Neighbors
LEAD: It used to be that the fight against acid rain united New York and other Northeastern states like allies in wartime.
Together they railed against dirty Midwestern power plants, filed lawsuits against the Federal Government and mourned the fate of their slowly dying lakes.


Shot for Sheppard, Chance for Rangers
LEAD: Last year, Ray Sheppard sat and stared at the television as word of Aleksandr Mogilny's defection from the Soviet Union was broadcast on the evening news.
It was a major story - for the National Hockey League and for the Buffalo Sabres - and the report detailed its ramifications.
There was, however, no mention of


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Groups Taking Aid Donations
LEAD: The following organizations are accepting contributions to aid people displaced by the unrest in the Middle East:


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Syria Reports Wave of Blasts In Iraq Town Near Its Border
LEAD: Syria's official press agency today reported 46 explosions at a town on Iraq's western border with Syria and said mosques in the town had broadcast appeals for blood.


Navratilova Tandem Foils Grand Slam Bid
LEAD: Martina Navratilova and Gigi Fernandez yesterday ended the quest of Helena Sukova and Jana Novotna to gain a doubles Grand Slam with a 6-2, 6-4 victory at the United States Open.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-17


A Jet Set, But No Glamor
LEAD: IF a jet plane flies overhead and no tennis stars hear it, does it make any noise?


Moscow Giants?
LEAD: THIRTY-FOUR years after Nikita Khrushchev vowed that the Soviet Union would bury the West, Soviet society seems to have reached the brink of total capitulation.


Airlines Scramble to Serve Berlin
LEAD: With the reunification of Germany only weeks away, airlines are lining up to provide service to an undivided Berlin that is quickly re-establishing itself as one of Europe's pre-eminent centers for business and government.
And no carrier stands to gain more than Lufthansa A.G., the state-controlled West German airline that has been barred from flying here for 45 years.


Contacts Need to Know About AIDS Fatalities
LEAD: To the Editor:


Confrontation in the Gulf;   At Jordan Desert Camp, No End to the Refugees
LEAD: Kjell Madsen looked out across the stony desert toward Iraq, and pondered for a moment the two questions that hang like storm clouds over the effort to assist Asian refugees fleeing to Jordan from Kuwait: How many are of the Asians are yet to come, and how long will they have to remain here, in conditions that even nomads would not envy?


Local Contests Dominate New York Primary Elections
LEAD: Aside from a statewide Democratic contest for the comptroller nomination, the primary elections tomorrow are largely local contests that drew little public attention during the summer, when beaches seemed to draw more interest than ballots.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Poor Nation's Costly Church
Pope John Paul II is to consecrate the largest Christian church in the world, scorned by many as extravagant, in the Ivory Coast.
Page A3.
Steering Clear of Deer
Drivers and highway engineers are developing an array of alarms and diversions to avoid a growing menace to traffic: deer.


Sectarian Schools Gain Most From Choice Plan;   Home-Based Education
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: A report in the Fashion pages yesterday about Michael Kors's new line of casual clothing misstated the date of their showing.
The clothes will be introduced in a video at a private party tonight at Sticky Mike's Frog Bar in the East Village.


Sports of The Times;   Getting the Results at the Mall
LEAD: THE father tried it for one set but he couldn't manage it, sitting in front of the television out in California, watching his son play for the United States Open.


Amy Markowitz Married To Gary Michael Rosen
LEAD: Amy Grace Markowitz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Alfred M. Markowitz of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Gary Michael Rosen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Rosen of Brookline, Mass.
Rabbis Jack Stern and Arnold Turetksy officiated at the Harrison (N.Y.) Jewish Center.


Glorious Start for Glanville
LEAD: The Houston Oilers knew what to expect from a Jerry Glanville-coached team: plenty of hard hits, for sure; lots of mouthing and a penchant for big plays.


Vessel to Try Retrieving Jetliner Door
LEAD: A tiny Navy submarine is to dive nearly three miles to the floor of the Pacific Ocean next week to retrieve the cargo door that blew off a United Airlines jumbo jet last year, an incident that killed nine passengers.


Angela Taylor Is Married To Dr. Scott J. Zashin
LEAD: Angela Taylor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles C. Taylor of Peru, N.Y., was married yesterday in Dallas to Dr.
Scott J. Zashin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter P. Zashin of Short Hills, N.J.
Rabbi Bard Schachtel officiated at the Adolphus Hotel.


New Facts and Lawsuits In the Tale of Art Thefts From German Church
LEAD: A West German foundation that paid $3 million in April for the return of a ninth-century manuscript stolen from a church in Quedlinburg, Germany, shortly before the Nazi surrender in 1945 is suing to get the money back.
It is doing so, a spokesman declared, because it is now established that neither the


Arafat's Fighters Rout Foes in Lebanon
LEAD: After three days of fierce gun battles, fighters loyal to Yasir Arafat, the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman, today overran the last stronghold of a breakaway Palestinian faction led by Abu Nidal in southern Lebanon, security officials said.


Dr. Nathan Sugarman, Atomic Scientist, 73
LEAD: Dr.
Nathan Sugarman, a nuclear chemist who was a professor at the University of Chicago until he retired in 1987, died Thursday at the age of 73.
His family said he died in an accident at his home in the Hyde Park section of Chicago.


Salim Fakhri, 69, Dies; An Iraqi Foe of Hussein
LEAD: Salim Fakhri, a prominent exiled opponent of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, died on Thursday.
He was 69 years old.


Warsaw Journal;   Fighting Crime Just Doesn't Pay. Ask a Policeman.
LEAD: A few weeks ago, the police here went to war against one of the roving gangs of pickpockets that prowl the cavernous main train station.


Dr. Ribner Weds Mark Fish, Lawyer
LEAD: Dr.
Dena Ribner, a clinical psychologist, and Mark Fish, a lawyer, both in New York, were married yesterday at Congregation Knesseth Israel in Far Rockaway, Queens.
Rabbi David Ribner, a cousin of the bride, and Dr.
Herbert Ribner, the bride's father, officiated.


Brady Urges Lower Rates
LEAD: Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady renewed his call for the Federal Reserve Board to sanction a cut in interest rates and said the dollar's fall was not precipitous.


Sampras Wins Open


James D. Seamen, Psychologist, 46
LEAD: James D. Seamen, a clinical psychologist who was an official of the Community Research Initiative at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital, died on Wednesday at the hospital.
He was 46 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Claims Delay Stotler Breakup
LEAD: The dissolution of Stotler &amp; Company, the futures brokerage, will be delayed by millions of dollars worth of claims from former brokers and customers, people involved in the bankruptcy said Friday.


Books of The Times;   The Clubs That Would Have Him as a Member
LEAD: The Final Club
By Geoffrey Wolff
370 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Bridge-Repair Gridlock Leaves Officials Puzzled
LEAD: Closing part of the George Washington Bridge for repairs during rush hour on Friday night, when traffic backed up for hours, may have been a mistake, Port Authority officials said yesterday - although they still are not sure why the tie-ups were so bad.


Martin Jury Selected
LEAD: A jury was selected yesterday at Port Crane, N.Y., in the trial of William Reedy, a Detroit bar owner, who is charged with drunken driving in the crash that killed Billy Martin last Christmas Day.
Reedy, 53 years old, was a longtime friend of the five-time Yankee manager.
Opening arguments will begin today.


I.B.M. Outlook On Revenues
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said today that most of its revenues in 1991 would be derived from sales of new products introduced in 1990 and 1991.


Stake Is Increased In Semiconductor
LEAD: An investment group led by the New York money manager Michael Steinhardt has raised its stake in the National Semiconductor Corporation to 6.85 percent from 5.16 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Steinhardt group said that it made net purchases of 1,831,300 National Semiconductor shares between July 2 and last Friday for an average price of $5.20.


Rhone-Poulenc Sets Divestitures
LEAD: The French chemicals and pharmaceuticals company Rhone-Poulenc S.A. will continue to divest itself of peripheral assets to help defray the cost of its $2 billion acquisition of Rorer Inc., the company said.
Assets sales for all of 1990 could bring between 1 billion and 1.5 billion francs, or about $192 million to $288 million, Rhone-Poulenc's chairman, Jean-Rene Fourtou, said.


The Pre-Frost Line on Coats: Short
LEAD: Despite their dependence on air-conditioners and reluctance to go out in the noonday sun, women have been checking out winter coats in the stores during the last sultry weeks of summer.
They have bought enough to give retailers and manufacturers a sure handle on trends for the season.


Our Towns;   Historic Register Is a Tough Fight, Even for a Tree
LEAD: Antonia Booth wanted some historic trees in the worst way. ''I was driving around for weeks looking,'' said the town historian.
It wasn't easy.
The British cut down many big trees here for fuel during the Revolutionary War.


Trade Violations Are Called Too Small to Prop Up Iraq
LEAD: Truck convoys from Jordan and Iran have punched some holes in the worldwide embargo on trade with Iraq, United States officials said today, but the violations so far are too small to prop up the nation's slowing economy or to affect growing shortages of food and mechanical goods.


Investor Increases Stake in Henley
LEAD: Libra Investment Ltd., a Swiss investment firm controlled by the Lebanese investor Toufic Aboukhater, has raised its stake in the Henley Group Inc. to 12.8 percent from 11.27 percent.
Mr.
Aboukhater has been acquiring Henley shares steadily since early last month.
He has received clearance from Federal antitrust regulators to increase his holdings in the Hampton, N


Amendment Ratified
LEAD: Representatives of the National Basketball Association's players' union yesterday ratified an amendment to the collective bargaining agreement that may limit free agency by lowering the salary cap.


Immigrant Celebration: Is the Experience Still Relevant?
LEAD: The speeches have been delivered now and the covering cloths pulled off the gleaming copper Wall of Remembrance, but as Ellis Island formally opened to the public yesterday, a question about the meaning of it all hung in the air.


Boston Journal;   Lunch Ban Stirs Hue And Crying Over Beer
LEAD: Scooping grease out of sewers, crawling around water mains and drilling through concrete is hot, nasty work, the kind that some city workers say might well merit a noontime beer.


Bertrand Tavernier Films Small Romances Amid Wide-Scale History
LEAD: With long gray hair tumbling over his forehead, a suggestion of belly peeping out of his denim shirt and baggy jeans hanging precariously from his hips, Bertrand Tavernier hardly looks the part of a stylish in-vogue French movie director.


Iraq Offers Free Oil to Nations That Run Embargo
LEAD: In a gesture aimed at breaking the trade embargo, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq offered today to give oil to developing countries free of charge.


Primary Day
LEAD: Amid signs of growing public anger toward politicians, 10 states, including New York and Connecticut, hold primaries today.
From Rhode Island to Arizona, candidates are vying to be seen as enemies of negative campaigning.
Page B10.


Award Granted In Film Suit
LEAD: A lawyer representing producers of the film ''Communion'' said last week that the district court in Bexar County, Tex., had awarded a $113 million default judgment against Virgin Vision Inc. and its parent company, the Management Company Entertainment Group, for failing to pay the producers minimum fees originally agreed upon.


Beijing Journal;   A Scholar's Sin: He Learned Party Line Too Well
LEAD: Fei Xiaotong has always learned about sociology the hard way, ever since he took his new wife to the wilds of southwestern China in 1935 on an expedition to study village customs.
He fell into a pit intended to catch wild animals, and she drowned in a river while trying to summon help.


San Francisco Opera In Tentative Settlement
LEAD: Opening night at the San Francisco Opera was rescheduled for Saturday after the opera's management and its orchestra union reached a tentative contract agreement, a spokesman said today.


Brown Chief Has National Ambitions
LEAD: JEB BROWN, the chief executive of Earle Palmer Brown, one of the nation's fastest-growing advertising networks, has been visiting New York recently from his headquarters in Bethesda, Md., shopping for a small agency to add to his company's roster of regional agencies.


Pirates Win, 3-2, on Sacrifice Fly in 9th


Orange Bowl To Stay Put
LEAD: The Orange Bowl Committee today rejected an offer to move to Joe Robbie Stadium and decided to keep the New Year's night game in its namesake home of the last 55 years.


Robert D. Leeper, 65, A Cancer Specialist
LEAD: Dr.
Robert D. Leeper, a specialist in the treatment of thyroid cancer, died yesterday at the Penobscot Bay Medical Center in Rockport, Me.
He was 65 years old and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y., and Camden, Me.


To Lure Better Teachers, New York City Must Offer Better Pay
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:
The Withering Small Towns
In the Iowa countryside is the reality of what the 1990 census just measured: The American small town is becoming a museum piece.
Page A20.
Medicine and Art
When doctors look at art, they may see pathology in subject or artist.
Van Gogh alone has had 152 posthumous diagnoses.


Lawsuits Can Chill Drug Research
LEAD: To the Editor:


Life in Space Is a NASA-Size Job
LEAD: To the Editor:


OKLAHOMA KILLER IS PUT TO DEATH
LEAD: An inmate convicted in the shotgun slaying of a man who walked in on a burglary was put to death by injection early today in Oklahoma's first execution in 24 years.


Suspension for Cordero
LEAD: For a ride aboard Naberto on Saturday that the stewards deemed ''careless,'' Angel Cordero Jr. yesterday was suspended from riding at Belmont Park for seven days.
The ban will begin on Thursday and expire after the racing card of Sept. 19.


Swiss Set Bank Curbs
LEAD: The Swiss Government ordered the abolition today of four cartel-like agreements in the country's banking system.


Heinz Net Rises 13.1%
LEAD: The H. J. Heinz Company's first-quarter earnings increased 13.1 percent because of higher food prices and favorable exchange rates for foreign currency, the food maker said today.
Heinz posted earnings of $143.2 million, or 54 cents a share, in the quarter ended Aug. 1, up from $126.6 million, or 48 cents a share, in the corresponding period of 1989.


Can Mets Come From Behind?
LEAD: Now is the time for all good Mets to come to the aid of their team.
Or at least to the aid of their agents who, whether the Mets win or lose, surely will demand more millions for their unappreciated and underachieving clients.
But the real question is: are there enough good Mets?
In their not too relentless pursuit of the Pittsburgh Pirates this season, the Mets keep saying, ''There's still a lot of time.


U.S. Blocks Columbia 'Junk' Sale
LEAD: Saying the Columbia Savings and Loan Association had failed to get the best value for its portfolio of high-yield ''junk bonds,'' Federal regulators today blocked a $3 billion proposed sale of the bonds to a Canadian investment company.


Jane Mapes, 73, Dies; A Marketing Executive
LEAD: Jane Stewart Mapes, a retired public relations executive, died on Friday at her home in Litchfield Park, Ariz.
She was 73 years old and lived in Litchfield Park.


Prices Encourage Search for Oil, but Labor Is Short
LEAD: With crude oil shortages looming for the first time in 11 years, one hope of Americans -consumers and officials alike - is for greater domestic production.
And with prices surging past $30 a barrel, the stage would seem to be set for the comeback of the declining domestic oil industry.


Sallie Mae Offers New Notes at Par
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, yesterday priced $650 million in short-term floating-rate notes due March 14, 1991, through various securities dealers.
The Government agency generally offers new floating-rate notes each month.


Soviet Pizza Huts Have Local Flavor
LEAD: When Pizza Hut opens its first restaurants in the Soviet Union today, it will be pursuing a markedly different approach from that of the American icon of fast food, McDonald's.


Augusta National Admits First Black Member
LEAD: Augusta National Golf Club, the prestigious home of the Mastersand one of the most exclusive clubs in America, has accepted its first black member, according to a person close to the club.


115 Nations Consider A Water Supply Crisis
LEAD: Experts from 115 nations met here today to confront an impending crisis in the supply of safe water, which is losing the race with population growth and urbanization in the world's poorest nations.


Roger (Doc) Cramer; Baseball Player, 85
LEAD: Roger (Doc) Cramer, who had 2,705 hits over a 20-year major league baseball career, died Sunday at his home in Manahawkin, N.J.
He was 85 years old.


U.S. Regulators Assert Right to Curb Neil Bush
LEAD: Government regulators said today that they could order Neil Bush, the President's son, to cease and desist from violating Federal banking laws even though he is in no position ''to harm further the institution he has already put at risk,'' the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association of Denver.


A Walker in This City
LEAD: On a day when there seemed little good to say about this city, a New Yorker took a farewell walk through midtown.
The farewell was for only a few weeks, but she wanted a few fresh images of the familiar old scenes to take along on the trip.
Images, and the kind of lunch - falafel from a street cart - that says New York as loudly as a Yellow Cab or the Empire State


Crews Continue Work on Shuttle
LEAD: Work crews sought today to install a new set of fuel pumps on the space shuttle Columbia in an attempt to eliminate hydrogen leaks so the spacecraft can be launched next week.


Liberian Insurgents Kill President, Diplomats and Broadcasts Report
LEAD: President Samuel K. Doe of Liberia, who for months clung to the shreds of office in the face of mounting rebellion, was killed by rebel forces that captured him in a battle on Sunday, according to diplomats and radio reports in that West African nation today.


From Mexico, Dance, Theater, Music and 30 Centuries of Art
LEAD: Mexico: A Work of Art may be as big as all Mexico, but it's going to be jammed inside a shoebox called New York City.
This four-month-long festival, a citywide celebration of the cultural heritage of Mexico past and present, will be inhabiting a dazzling array of spaces.
They include the Metropolitan Museum of Art, The Museum of Modern Art, the Delacorte Theater of the New York Shakespeare Festival, Carnegie Hall, Lincoln Center, Town Hall, the International Center of Photography, Madison Square Garden, the World Financial


12 Nations Meet on Trade
LEAD: Senior ministers from 12 nations that trade across the Pacific Ocean opened talks here today to try to settle several complex issues and lay the groundwork for a sweeping reform of the world's trading system.


Parole Hearing for Ex-Judge
LEAD: Federal parole officers recommended today that Walter L. Nixon, who was stripped of his Federal judgeship last year, be sent back to prison for breaking parole by carrying firearms on a turkey hunt.
The recommendation came after Chester Diaz, a state wildlife investigator testified about Mr.
Nixon's arrest April 25 on hunting violations.


Another Toyota Plant in U.S.; Location Will Be Set Later
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation, which has been projecting robust sales growth in the United States, said today that it would announce the site of a new assembly plant within two months.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-18
Soviet involvement in peace efforts in the Middle East was supported for the first time by President Bush during his meeting with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Administration officials confirmed.
Page A1


Theft Charges Cost A Taxi Group Loss Of Election Business
LEAD: The New York City Board of Elections yesterday cut back on a transportation contract with a consortium of private taxicab companies after City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman pointed out that the group's director has been charged with grand larceny in Queens.


House Passes a Bill to Regulate Cable TV, in Part
LEAD: The House of Representatives unanimously approved legislation today that would impose new price regulation and competition on the nation's cable television industry.


Tandem Expects Its Growth to Slow
LEAD: Tandem Computers Inc. said today that it expected to report slower growth than anticipated by Wall Street analysts.
Tandem released its report after the market's close today before a presentation on Tuesday at the Cowen Mini-Microcomputer Conference in Boston.
Tandem shares closed today at $13.625, up 12.5 cents, on the New York Stock


Stock Rally Is Cut Short; Dow Off by 3.96
LEAD: Rising oil prices, continuing concern over the Middle East and new signs of skepticism over trimming the budget cut short a stock market rally yesterday.


Review/Music;   Japanese Tale of Longing
LEAD: ''Legend of the Water Flame'' is an ambitious hourlong performance piece that brings together several of Japan's leading artists.
It received its world premiere in Tokyo in April, its United States premiere in Los Angeles early this month and its New York premiere on Thursday night - the first of three performances - at the Japan Society, 333 East 47th Street.


Its Cash and Tempers Short, Philadelphia Seeks Solvency
LEAD: Faced with a growing budget gap and a political standoff involving the Mayor, city officials and the Pennsylvania Legislature, Philadelphia is desperately trying to arrange a short-term loan this week to stave off what many say is the prospect of insolvency.


South African Prelates Blame Whites for Violence
LEAD: Allegations that whites have been stirring up factional clashes between blacks to scuttle the dismantling of apartheid were raised today by a church group headed by Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu.


G.M. in New Moves To Halt Slide of Olds
LEAD: In the galaxy of headaches plaguing the General Motors Corporation, few have been as intractable as the five-year slide of Oldsmobile.


KING OF NEPAL GETS NEW CONSTITUTION
LEAD: King Birendra was officially presented today with the draft of a new national constitution that would preserve his status as chief of state but establish a multiparty democracy, separation of powers and human rights as fundamental elements of Nepal's political system.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The image of the all-American small town is deeply implanted in our national psyche.


William Bales, Dancer, Is Dead; Choreographer and Educator, 80
LEAD: William Bales, a modern dancer, choreographer and educator, died on Saturday at St.
Clare's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old.


Chess
LEAD: Anatoly Karpov made his last tournament appearance in early August in Biel, Switzerland, before playing Gary Kasparov for the world championship, starting Oct. 8 at the Macklowe Hotel in New York.
And just as Kasparov had easily defeated Lev Psakhis in his last training match, in Murcia, Spain, in mid-July, Karpov handily won the 23d running of the Biel International.


Metro Datelines;   Two Plead Guilty In Sexual Assault
LEAD: Two men admitted yesterday that they raped and sodomized a 40-year-old woman and then tossed her off the roof of a four-story apartment house in Brooklyn in May 1989, prosecutors said.


Don't Put Income Ceiling on Child Care
LEAD: To the Editor:


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
7.93
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.41
7.39
7.66
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.34
7.34
7.63
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.71
8.67
8.17
30-YR.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Political Worries Spur U.S. Chamber's Effort
LEAD: The United States Chamber of Commerce began its first image campaign today, to get business executives involved in political issues affecting the economy.


Souter No Cardozo
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pension Shift by McDonnell
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said today that it would gain $234 million in the third quarter from a change it is making in an overfunded pension plan for retired workers.


Eiland's Effort Is Wasted
LEAD: All around him, there seemed to be the kind of unhappiness and upheaval that swirls through the Yankee clubhouse even in the best of times.
But Dave Eiland simply pulled up a chair in front of his locker and thumbed casually through the pages of a magazine, apparently oblivious to the developing controversy.


Consumer Credit Rose 7.4% in July
LEAD: Americans took out a seasonally adjusted $4.47 billion more in consumer credit than they paid off in July, the biggest increase in debt in eight months, the Government said today.


Phone Proposal in Australia
LEAD: Australia's Labor Government said today that it planned to end the state monopoly in telecommunications by inviting overseas companies to compete in the domestic telephone market.


Business and Health;   Hospitals Increase Use of Computers
LEAD: HOSPITALS - long important users of computerized information systems - are considering new products like bedside terminals and increasing their use of existing equipment in the hope of increasing efficiency, reducing costs and improving patient care.
Computer makers and health-care consultants say the machines can save time and make life easier for nurses, who are in short supply in many urban areas.


Books of The Times;   The Human Behind the Heroic Pose
LEAD:
The General in His Labyrinth
By Gabriel Garcia Marquez
Translated by Edith Grossman. 285 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Campeau Is Named in a Suit To Be Filed by Allied Group
LEAD: A suit seeking at least $700 million will be filed by Oct. 9 by the bondholders' committee of Allied Stores against Campeau; its American subsidiary, Federated Stores, and two banks charging ''fraudulent conveyance'' of funds under various state laws, according to a letter disclosed yesterday.


Free Mail for the Troops
LEAD: Eager to show support for the American military personnel stationed in the Persian Gulf region, the Senate approved a measure today that would permit the troops free mailing privileges.


Shakespeare in Tongues He Surely Never Heard
LEAD: It's hard to think of an ethnic twist that would be novel to a city like New York.
But tonight through Sunday, an unusual theatrical innovation will put six dozen Mexican actors on the stage of the Delacorte Theater in Central Park to perform a version of ''Romeo and Juliet'' in which the Capulets speak Mayan and the Montagues


Baker Will Go to Syria For Help Against Iraqis
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today that he would go to Syria on Thursday to discuss with President Hafez al-Assad how their countries could cooperate on isolating President Saddam Hussein of Iraq and rolling back his invasion of Kuwait.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: The Oil Jolt


TV News: Children's Scary Window on New York
LEAD: For children, the local television news is the widest window on the world just beyond their home, their street and their school.
And when they peer through that window, they shudder at a landscape of violence and danger.


John H. Ohly, 79, Dies; Retired U.S. Official
LEAD: John Hallowell Ohly, a retired government official, died Sunday at the North Adams Regional Hospital in North Adams, Mass.
He was 79 years old and lived in Williamstown, Mass.


Hillock Named to Post
LEAD: Jay Hillock, who had been an assistant to Paul Westhead, was named yesterday as head basketball coach at Loyola Marymount of Los Angeles.
Westhead was hired last week as coach of the Denver Nuggets, replacing Doug Moe.


Coach Recommended
LEAD: Theresa Grentz, who has coached the Rutgers women's team for the past 14 seasons, was recommended yesterday by the Women's Games Committee to serve as coach of the United States women's basketball team at the 1992 Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain.


In 10 State Primaries, Candidates Scurry Not to Look Like Politicians
LEAD: Public anger at politicians and public skepticism toward anything that smacks of politics as usual is shaping primary elections on Tuesday from Rhode Island to Arizona.


Ending Talks, All Cambodia Parties Commit Themselves to U.N. Peace Plan
LEAD: In a breakthrough, the four warring Cambodian factions agreed tonight on the formation and composition of an all-party national leadership and formally committed themselves to a United Nations framework for a comprehensive peace settlement in Cambodia.


Careers;   Measuring The Quality Of a Company
LEAD: THE Commerce Department recently sent out a news release seeking applications for examiners to help select corporate winners for the 1991 Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award program.
The deadline: Nov. 21.
Their job will be to help pick American companies in three categories ''that demonstrate the highest levels of total quality management.


By Design;   The Three-Handkerchief Men
LEAD: The new etiquette for men's handkerchiefs is one for blow, one for show and one to wear on top of your head.


New York Says Konnichi Wa to a Hit Salsa Band
LEAD: The band is swinging.
The timbals and conga players snap away at rhythms, while the horns wail and shudder.
The lead singer, short and excited, sings, ''Si no me queres'' (''If you don't love me''), while her two backup singers answer her with, ''Ya no te quiero'' (''Now I won't love you'').
The music, classic mid-1970's salsa, elegant and urbane, is built for dancing, which the audience at M.


Cuomo's Crime Remedy: 'Produce the Police, Period'
LEAD: Addressing for the first time the growing fear that crime in New York City is spiraling out of control, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that more police officers were urgently needed in the city.


Concurrent Computer Appoints Top Officers
LEAD: The Concurrent Computer Corporation said yesterday that Denis R. Brown had been named the company's president, chief executive and vice chairman of the board.
Dean W. Freed, a director, will assume the role of chairman for the company, which is based in Tinton Falls, N.J.


Population Decline in Rural America: A Product of Advances in Technology
LEAD: Inside the Scranton Cafe, the clock seems to have stopped on a happier hour in rural America.


Price of Oil Surges 6% In Minutes
LEAD: In a stampede that not even floor traders could explain, the price of oil rose nearly 6 percent yesterday in the last 10 minutes of trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.


Howard Beach: The Third Trial Opens Quietly
LEAD: Opening statements were delivered yesterday in the third Howard Beach trial, with the prosecutor insisting that the three defendants had engaged in a riot almost four years ago and the defense lawyers equally insistent that the evidence was not there to prove it.


A Foe to Be Feared: Prince Yormie Johnson
LEAD: The chilling photograph was published in newspapers around the world last month: an unarmed Liberian man, wearing a Red Cross emblem and manacled to a Roman Catholic relief worker, was shown just before being shot and killed by a rebel leader, Prince Johnson, supposedly for selling rice that was meant to be free.


68% in Poll See Drop In the Quality of Life
LEAD: An overwhelming percentage of about 1,000 New York City residents who were questioned about the quality of life in the city said they believed that it had become worse ''in the last few years,'' according to the results of a poll commissioned by Time magazine and the Cable News Network that were released yesterday.


NATO Members to Weigh Adding Troops to Gulf Force
LEAD: The NATO allies agreed today to consider a new American proposal that they commit more ground forces to the multinational army confronting Iraq.
Several allies also promised to provide cargo ships and airplanes immediately to help transport more Arab troops to the Persian Gulf and to bring refugees home.


Survey Sees Weak Hiring
LEAD: Hiring nationwide is expected to continue to decline in the fourth quarter, but the softening job market may not mean the economy is slipping into recession, according to a survey released today.


Samuel Doe: 10-Year Reign In the Shadow of Brutality
LEAD: Samuel Kanyon Doe, whose death was reported yesterday, was a 28-year-old master sergeant in the Liberian National Guard in 1980 when he seized power by storming the executive mansion in Monrovia at the head of a band of noncommissioned officers, His coup d'etat, he declared, marked the triumph of the masses over the descendants of freed American slaves who founded the independent West


The U.N.'s Biggest Deadbeat
LEAD: Nobody seriously questions that a united United Nations has performed impressively in the Persian Gulf crisis.
Its unanimous resolutions have provided legal and political armor for a collective response to Iraq's aggressions.
By working with the U.N., President Bush has been able to mobilize Soviet and Arab support for sanctions, and Security Council approval for use of force to seal the embargo.


Ms. O'Keefe Wed To Brian O'Neill
LEAD: Gina O'Keefe, the daughter of Mrs.
Robert H. Pines and William E. O'Keefe, both of New York, was married yesterday at St.
Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church in New York to Brian Gerald O'Neill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph O'Neill of Coalisland, County Tyrone, Northern Ireland.
The Rev.
Damian Myett performed the ceremony.


Foxboro to Idle 1,600 Workers
LEAD: The Foxboro Company, which was recently acquired by a British concern, Siebe P.L.C., announced today that it would lay off 1,600 employees.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing of candidates yesterday for the local primary elections today omitted one of three Democrats running for Civil Court judge in the Ninth District in Manhattan.
He is Eugene F. Prosnitz; his opponents are Anthony J. Fiorella Jr. and Dianne Shapiro Gasworth.


A Printer Sidesteps A Choice
LEAD: IN shopping for a computer printer, the PC user is usually forced to choose between dot-matrix printers, which offer low print quality at a low price, and laser printers, which offer high print quality at a high price.


Cities Begin Taking Action on Environment
LEAD: Expressing impatience with the slowness of national governments, municipal leaders from around the world agreed today that local governments must take action on their own to address global warming and other broad environmental threats.


HOCKEY: Reporters' Notebook;   Rangers Look at Acquiring Brown
LEAD: The violent image still lingers in James Patrick's consciousness and still troubles his heart: Dave Brown blind-siding Tomas Sandstrom, his stick crashing across Sandstrom's neck in an ugly attack that left the former forward for the Rangers slumped on the ice at Madison Square Garden early in the 1987-88 season.


Treasury Issues Fall in Slow Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities moved lower in light trading yesterday, pushed down by a sharp turnaround in oil prices, and interest rates rose.


G.E. Capital Prices $250 Million Issue
LEAD: The General Electric Capital Corporation, a unit of the General Electric Company, priced $250 million in notes due 1993 through competitive bidding yesterday.


Soviet Reporters Getting a Closer Look at U.S. in Saudi Arabia


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Top-Seeded Muster Advances
Top-seeded Thomas Muster of Austria beat Tom Nijssen of the Netherlands, 6-2, 6-2, yesterday in the first round of the A.T.P. tournament in Bordeaux, France.
The tournament may be Muster's last until November if he loses an appeal to the A.T.P.
Tour committee.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Legs and Workouts
Q.
If a person with long legs and one with short legs work out on identical treadmills set at the same speed, does the one with short legs work harder?
A. ''Other things being equal, the person with shorter legs would be moving their legs faster and probably be doing more work, if they weighed exactly the same,'' said Dr.


Bhutto Is Formally Charged With Abuse of Power
LEAD: Benazir Bhutto, who was ousted as Prime Minister last month, was formally charged today with abuse of power.


Seeq Technology
LEAD: Seeq Technology Inc., a semiconductor company, said it would stop manufacturing its own computer chips and would instead have them manufactured by other companies.
The move will mean the dismissal of about 95 workers, about a fifth of the company's work force, and a one-time charge of $8 million to $10 million in the fourth quarter, which ends this month.


Fernandez Urges Higher Teacher Salaries
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez warned yesterday that teachers' salaries must be raised if New York City is to avoid losing its most talented staff members to surrounding communities.


In Its Latest Recycling Effort, S.I. Targets Plastic
LEAD: Staten Island residents yesterday began separating most kinds of plastic from their garbage, in the latest expansion of New York City's mandatory recycling program.


Attack Crime at Root, Dinkins Urges
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins took his anticrime campaign on the road today as he lobbied here for stricter national gun-control laws and an all-out effort against ''the root causes of crime,'' including poverty, homelessness, drug addiction and growing despair.


Hearst Reported to Seek Nabisco's 20% of ESPN
LEAD: The Hearst Corporation has been negotiating the possible acquisition of the 20 percent stake in ESPN now owned by RJR Nabisco, according to an executive of Capital Cities/ABC Inc., which owns the rest of the cable sports service.


Chronicle
LEAD: He was one of basketball's top scorers, but after he retired in 1977, BOB LOVE could not get a job because he stuttered.


Though Views Differ on Progress, Budget Talks Are Called on Track
LEAD: Still far from an agreement on how to slash $50 billion from the deficit for the 1991 fiscal year, Administration and Congressional budget negotiators sought today to narrow their differences on how the cut would be apportioned between military and domestic programs.


Metro Datelines;   No Foul Play Seen In Death of Student
LEAD: An autopsy on a Wesleyan University student found dead at a state park turned up no evidence of foul play, but the medical examiner's office said yesterday that laboratory tests would be needed to determine the cause of the young man's death.


Round-the-Clock Talks Planned To Avert Closing of New York Post
LEAD: Leaders of unions at The New York Post are scheduled to begin round-the-clock negotiations today with the newspaper's management in an effort to beat the Sept. 15 deadline for cutting costs $17 million to keep it open.


SUNY-Buffalo Students Protest Campus Bus Fare


What Congress Can't Ignore
LEAD: Congress is scheduled to adjourn in four weeks.
Don't bet on it.
Members may feel it's urgent that they quit to campaign for re-election, and that the budget and the Middle East crisis will absorb all their time and energy before they go.
But it would be a grievous copout if those issues became the excuse for not enacting other important legislation that's close to being ready.


Chronicle
LEAD: MARK ELDER, director of the English National Opera, was dismissed by the British Broadcasting Corporation as conductor of the Last Night of the Proms concert.
This musical plum, the finale of a summer of light classics at the Royal Albert Hall in London, has been broadcast worldwide by the BBC since 1927.


Tokyo Stocks Close Lower
LEAD: Stock prices fell today in Tokyo on profit-taking, with the 225-issue Nikkei stock average falling 476.24 points, or 1.9 percent, to close at 24,604.66.


Junior Partner No More, Gorbachev Raises Role to Major Player in Crisis
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev went into the Helsinki summit meeting a junior partner in an international alliance against Iraq, an alliance based on strength and unmistakably led by President Bush.


Coslet Lauds Jet Effort Despite Loss in Opener
LEAD: The morning after his rude welcome to the ranks of National Football League head coaches, Bruce Coslet was sorry that he did not win, but he supported the effort of his Jets by saying, as he did Sunday night: ''They played their guts out.''


Futures Trial In Chicago
LEAD: Jury selection began today in the Federal fraud and racketeering trial of 10 soybean traders from the Chicago Board of Trade after an 11th defendant pleaded guilty to reduced charges.


Grandmother, 77, Is Imprisoned In Rhode Island Custody Dispute
LEAD: A 77-year-old woman was imprisoned today for contempt of court because she would not tell a judge in a child custody case where her daughter had taken her two young granddaughters.


Cyanamid Completes Shulton Sale
LEAD: The American Cyanamid Company today completed the plan for selling its Shulton Group of consumer products by agreeing to sell its Breck hair care products line to the Greyhound Dial Corporation.


Gene for Key Brain Protein Isolated
LEAD: THREE groups of molecular biologists have independently isolated a gene for a brain protein that is thought to play a crucial role in a variety of neurological disorders, including schizophrenia, Parkinson's disease and cocaine addiction.
The work is expected to lead to the development of new drugs to treat these disorders.


Bernard Nadel, 81, An Ex-New York Judge
LEAD: Bernard Nadel, a retired New York State Supreme Court Justice, died on Sunday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Viola and Strawberry Put Punch Back Into Mets
LEAD: The Mets stumbled on the road and tumbled into second place, but they came home last night to friendly Shea Stadium, put themselves back together for nine innings and gave indications that September could still be a month they will want to remember.


Oil Price Rise Effect in Japan
LEAD: Higher oil prices because of the Middle East crisis will have a small impact on Japan's economic growth in the fiscal year ending March 31 because the Japanese economy is less vulnerable to oil shocks than in the past, two Japanese research institutes said today.
The oil price rise will cut


A Defendant Pleads Guilty in Slaying of Chilean
LEAD: A Cuban-American pleaded guilty in Federal District Court today to a charge that he plotted to detonate the car bomb that killed Orlando Letelier, a Chilean exile leader, in 1976.


3 Ways to See Housebuster Run
LEAD: If you owned Housebuster, where would you run him next?


Realty Trust In Chapter 11
LEAD: Mortgage and Realty Trust said today that it had filed a bankruptcy reorganization plan that called for creditors to be repaid in full with interest.


Parents and Students Protest Teacher Strike


The 1990 U.S. Open Provided Everything but a Predicted Outcome
LEAD: Call it unpredictable, call its Flushing Meadows facility impractical, and on the subject of top-seeded players and defending champions, throw in unreliable, too.


As the Iraqis Search for Support, They Will Restore Full Iran Ties
LEAD: Iran and Iraq have announced after two days of high-level talks that they are resuming diplomatic relations, the official Iranian press agency reported today.


Out of Oil's Frying Pan Into Wood-Based Fire
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wrong Once, Expert Keep Quiet On Volcanic Activity in California
LEAD: SWARMS of tiny earthquakes and a swelling dome of underground lava that prompted geologists to issue a volcano alert here in 1982 are occurring again, but this time geologists have decided not to alert the public.


French Pharmaceutical Heir Keeps Bru Family in Control
LEAD: When she agreed to sell a one-third stake in her pharmaceutical company to the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Dr.
Nicole Bru, the 51-year-old president, chief executive and controlling shareholder of UPSA, could at last rest assured that she had kept her word.
The company she inherited from her husband, Dr.


Corrections
LEAD: A report on Sunday about the wedding of Dawn E. Kesselman and Barry S. Wisset referred to the couple incorrectly.
They are known as Mr. and Mrs.
Wisset.


Romania Seeks Lines of Credit
LEAD: Romania intends to send the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund a clear signal that it is committed to fast economic reform when the two institutions hold their annual meeting in Washington later this month, the national bank governor, Mugur Isarescu, said today.


Romania Police Chief on Trial
LEAD: The head of the secret police under Nicolae Ceausescu, the ousted Romanian dictator, went on trial before three military judges today on a charge of complicity in mass murder.
A 28-page indictment read at the opening of the court session charged that 52-year-old Iulian Vlad, as head of the Securitate, had ''assisted genocide in his position as head of the security department.


Dollar Posts Broad Gains But Eases Against the Yen
LEAD: The dollar rose against most major currencies yesterday, but it was the Japanese yen, which strengthened against the dollar, that dominated foreign exchange trading.


Shift at Ford Jersey Plant
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said today that it had begun making trucks at its Edison, N.J., plant, where cars were assembled for more than 40 years.
The plant began producing a light truck, the Ranger, after a three-month retooling, which cost nearly $300 million.
The factory is the ninth Ford plant in North America that is building light trucks.


49ers Foil the Saints in the Final Seconds
LEAD: One more time.


To Lure Better Teachers, New York City Must Offer Better Pay;   How About Dignity?
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Plan Wing Design Greatly Cuts Drag To Save Fuel
LEAD: SCIENTISTS have long known that if a thin layer of air could be shaved away from the surface of an airplane wing in flight, the drag impeding the craft's forward motion would be greatly reduced.
But for the first time, this principle was recently demonstrated on a full-size airliner, proving that it is possible to build commercial aircraft much more sparing of fuel than those now in service.


Declines for Precious Metals Reflect Early Oil Weakness
LEAD: Prices of precious metal futures tumbled yesterday, reflecting a stronger dollar and pronounced weakness in the oil market for most of the day.


Review/Television;   An Unlikely Friendship In an Unfriendly South
LEAD: Made-for-cable movies are discovering the old South, meaning any time before 1950.
Ted Turner's TNT scored nicely with the turn-of-the-century tale ''Cold Sassy Tree,'' the Olive Ann Burns tale adapted and directed by Joan Tewkesbury, who is perhaps best known for her writing credits with the film director Robert Altman (''Nashville,'' ''Thieves Like Us'').


Dukakis Antagonist Abandons Primary Race
LEAD: Lieut.
Gov.
Evelyn Murphy, who rebelled against Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis last week in what was widely seen as an attempt to bolster her sagging chances in the Democratic primary for governor, announced today that she was withdrawing from the race.


Badly Divided Arab League Votes To Return Headquarters to Cairo
LEAD: A bare majority of the Arab League crystallized the split in the Arab world tonight by voting to move the League's headquarters from Tunis back to Cairo.


Chronicle
LEAD: ''Tune in Tomorrow. . . .,'' starring PETER FALK and ELIZABETH McGOVERN, was picked as the favorite movie at the 16th annual Festival du Film Americain in Deauville, France.
The film, directed by JON AMIEL and based on the novel ''Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter'' by MARIO VARGAS LLOSA, has not opened in commercial theaters.


Review/Music;   From India: 2 Singers, 2 Traditions
LEAD: The Institute of Indian Culture presented singers from the two principal Indian traditions - the Carnatic style, from the south, and the Hindustani style, from the north - in an unusual recital at Alice Tully Hall on Saturday evening.


5 Digits Were Not the Rule at First
LEAD: NATURALISTS have long assumed that the same process of evolution that produced four-footed vertabrates, or tetrapods, gave them feet normally equipped with five digits each.
But new evidence suggests that the tetrapod line, which includes mankind, started out without any fixed number of fingers or toes and that the norm of five evolved only later on.


Brooklynite in Painting Fraud Fails to Show for Sentencing
LEAD: A 63-year-old Brooklyn man found guilty of defrauding people in a scheme to paint subway pillars failed to appear for sentencing in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn yesterday, and an arrest warrant was issued, officials said.


Saul Meisels; Cantors' Leader, 82
LEAD: Saul Meisels, a cantor who served at a Conservative synagogue in Cleveland for 37 years and was a former national president of the Cantors Assembly, died Friday at Miami Jewish Hospital.
He was 82 years old and had lived in retirement in Miami for the last 11 years.


Undecided Vote Makes Race In Capital Too Tight to Call
LEAD: Melinda Harris stood in the hot noonday sun, listening.


Market Place;   Silver Screen's Tie With Disney
LEAD: WHEN The Walt Disney Company releases ''Scenes From a Mall,'' with Woody Allen and Bette Midler next winter, Silver Screen IV is likely to be among its keenest viewers.
While the initial Silver Screen partnership, formed in 1983, invested in films by Home Box Office, the three partnerships in the series that have followed have raised nearly $1.1 billion to invest in films from Disney.


Edward M. Sewell; Pediatrician, 67
LEAD: Dr.
Edward M. Sewell, a Philadelphia pediatrician who specialized in tuberculosis in children, died last Wednesday at the University of Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 67 years old and lived in Philadelphia.
His family said he died of pneumonia resulting from lymphoma.


Netframe Reaches Pact With Olivetti
LEAD: Netframe Systems Inc., a company based in Milpitas, Calif., that specializes in high-performance computers for use on networks, said Ing.
C.
Olivetti &amp; Company S.p.A. of Ivrea, Italy, would resell the company's computer systems to customers throughout Europe, Canada and Australia.
The value of the agreement is estimated at $200 million over the next three years,


Warring Cambodian Factions Agree to Form a Coalition


People
LEAD: *
Robert G. Kirkpatrick, a media director at the Leo Burnett Company, Chicago, has been named senior vice president.


Sunday Silence Heading to Japan
LEAD: Sunday Silence, last year's Horse of the Year, has been sold to Japan's leading horse breeder and will begin his career at stud on the Japanese island of Hokkaido next year.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Calmat Co., Los Angeles, a maker of cements and concretes, named Paul Stanford vice president, general counsel and secretary, succeeding Scott J. Wilcott, who becomes executive vice president of law and property.


Bush &amp; Gorbachev Inc.
LEAD: It turned out to be the sleeper summit, a meeting with much more significance than either President Bush or President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union let on in Helsinki.


Johnson Sets a January Date For His Return to Competition
LEAD: Ben Johnson, the Canadian sprinter who was disqualified from the 1988 Olympics for drug use, said yesterday that he plans to return to competition in January, for the start of the indoor track and field season.


Mickey Mouse Program
LEAD: THE Animation Studio, from Walt Disney Computer Software, contains everything necessary to create professional-looking animated sequences on an Amiga computer.
Everything, that is, except the talent to draw in the first place.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


BUSH, REVERSING U.S. POLICY, WON'T OPPOSE A SOVIET ROLE IN MIDDLE EAST PEACE TALKS
LEAD: President Bush dropped the longstanding American opposition to Soviet involvement in Middle East peace efforts during his meeting with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev on Sunday, Administration officials confirmed today.


ACT Scores of Minorities Rise
LEAD: Average scores on the ACT, the predominant college-entrance exam used in 28 states, were unchanged in the last school year, but members of minority groups continued to improve, the test's publishers reported today.


Probing School Success Of Asian-Americans
LEAD: AS researchers seek to explain dazzling academic performances by Asian-American students, they are uncovering diverse forces at work: a drive to escape discrimination, a cultural belief in the unique value of education as a path to upward mobility, family pressures to succeed and just plain hard work.


Metro Datelines;   Trial Set for Oct. 11 For 2 in Jogger Case
LEAD: Two of the three remaining defendants charged with attempted murder and rape in the Central Park jogger case will be tried together beginning Oct. 11, while the third will be tried early next year, Justice Thomas B. Galligan ruled yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


Giants Emphasize Backs' Quickness
LEAD: In the Super Bowl season of 1986, the Giants used a finesse offense.
Last year, with a bigger offensive line, they turned to power running.
Now they seem to be embarking on a new style of offense utilizing the quickness and escape ability of Rodney Hampton, a rookie, and Dave Meggett, in his second pro season.


Revitalized Chiquita Seeks Growth
LEAD: Riding the wave of popularity for bananas that brought it back from the brink of bankruptcy, Chiquita Brands International Inc. has started an ambitious expansion program that includes scouting for acquisitions.


Primary Day Choices
LEAD: Today's off-year primary contests haven't generated much excitement, but that doesn't mean they aren't important.
They are.


Pope Consecrates Giant Basilica in Africa    It has been derided as a scandalous extravagance in a continent of economic decay, but President Felix Houphouet-Boigny views it as a pilgrimage center for Africa's 100 million Catholics. (Reuters)


FIGHTING BY NIGHT IS ARMY WAR PLAN
LEAD: The commander of the United States Army's mechanized forces here said today that if war broke out with Iraq, the United States would try to gain an advantage quickly by fighting at night.


ECONOMIC REFORM: A KREMLIN INTRIGUE
LEAD: The Kremlin added a touch of mystery to the misery of the economic crisis today, announcing that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, after considerable hesitation, had finally decided to choose a single plan for economic reform but that he would not present it himself to Parliament.


Patterns
LEAD:
Couture Meets Pugilism


No Headline
LEAD: A 32-year-old firefighter playing hide-and-seek with children at a family barbecue was killed when he fell from the tree where he was hiding, the police said today.
Kevin Howley of Oceanside, a member of the New York City Fire Department, fell on Sunday evening when a branch broke in his hiding place, the police said.


Trump Now Reported Near Bond-Swap Offer
LEAD: The Trump Organization is preparing to offer bondholders of its Taj Mahal casino an initial proposal for a debt-for-equity swap that would allow Donald J. Trump to meet a bond payment due in November, people familiar with the talks said.


Temple U. Students Demand End of Faculty Strike


That Fearsome Frown
LEAD: How are New York City's louts, hoodlums and low-lifers taking the news that Mayor Dinkins will change the way he reacts to their depredations?


Slowly, Refugees in Jordan Begin the Trip Home


Chip-Sales Ratio Continues Lower
LEAD: The dollar value of computer chips ordered and shipped increased in August, but the semiconductor industry's leading indicator of demand continued the downward slide begun in June, a trade group reported today.


Chronicle
LEAD: JOHN CHANCELLOR is scheduled to be back on the news tonight for the first time since his heart surgery in June.
He will appear once a week on ''NBC Nightly News'' until the end of September.





Board Backs Air Terminal In Westchester
LEAD: The Westchester County Board of Legislators voted today to build a new terminal at the county airport to replace a World War II Quonset hut and other outdated buildings, but the board left it to the voters to provide final approval in a $21 million bond referendum.


Edward Montgomery, Marine General, 82
LEAD: Edward A. Montgomery, a retired Marine Corps brigadier general, died Saturday at St.
Joseph Hospital in Augusta, Ga.
He was 82 years old and lived in Augusta.


Banking Officials Unable To Set a Capital Level
LEAD: In a dispute that has significant implications for the nation's banking industry and its lending practices, Federal regulators said today that they had been unable to agree upon the level of capital that banks must maintain against total assets to protect against losses.


School Opens And Teacher And Students Find Rapport
LEAD: They taught Linda A. Friedman never to crack a smile on the first day of school, but yesterday she had her fifth-grade students shaking with laughter with games of Simple Simon in which she tricked most of them into bowing out.


Hearns to Fight Benn
LEAD: Nigel Benn of Britain, the World Boxing Organization middleweight champion, will fight Thomas Hearns, the W.B.O. super-middleweight title holder, in Atlantic City on Jan. 4, Benn's agent, Ambrose Mendy, said yesterday.
It has yet to be decided which title will be at stake. (Reuters)


Baumgartner Re-signed
LEAD: Ken Baumgartner, a defenseman who was about to enter the option year of his contract with the Islanders, was re-signed yesterday to a multiyear contract.
Terms were not announced.
Baumgartner, 24, joined the Islanders, along with Hubie McDonough, from the Los Angeles Kings in exchange for Mikko Makela last November.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amdura Corp., Denver, a hardware distribution company, said Hardware Distribution Co. was the high bidder for certain operating assets of its Amdura National Distribution Co. unit, but the bid was not disclosed.


Bridge
LEAD: A close battle between Canada and Germany here last night continued this morning away from the table and in anger.
When play ended the German team appeared to have won their semifinal match in the World Team championship by 4 international match points, but the Canadians later discovered that the deal shown in the diagram had been mis-scored.


Texas Instruments Is Sued by Tandy
LEAD: The Tandy Corporation and its subsidiary, Grid Systems Corporation, have filed an antitrust lawsuit against Texas Instruments Inc.
The suit, filed in Federal District Court in San Francisco, accuses Texas Instruments of forcing personal computer manufacturers like Tandy and Grid to make excessive license payments for invalid patents.


Lockheed Unit Has Japan Air Contract
LEAD: The Lockheed Corporation said its new maintenance subsidiary had won a contract to maintain the Boeing 747 jetliners flown by the Japan Air Lines Company, the largest such fleet in the world.
The tentative agreement between Lockheed and the Japanese airline also calls for J.A.L. to invest in Lockheed's newly formed aircraft maintenance operation, Lockheed Commercial Aircraft Center


New York Joins Mobil Schedule
LEAD: The New York Games, an artistic if not financial success for the past two years, has been added to the 1991 Mobil Grand Prix outdoor track and field schedule, giving the United States two Grand Prix meets for the first time.
The Bruce Jenner jClassic at San Jose, Calif., has been on the circuit since 1985.


Review/Television;   How the Iraqis Built Their Arsenal
LEAD: ''The Arming of Iraq,'' tonight's ''Frontline'' special, ends with pictures of American troops taking positions in the desert and looking into the camera, presumably toward Iraq.
If an attack should come, the viewer is being told, these men and women will be on the receiving end of weapons that Saddam Hussein has amassed over the last decade from countries around the world, including the United


New York Can Be Made to Work
LEAD: There is no status quo in public life; either things get better or they get worse.
In New York right now, they are getting worse.
For things to get better, the city will have to make fundamental changes in the way it goes about its business.


Privatization In Hungary
LEAD: More than half of Hungary's predominantly state-owned economy will be in private hands in three to four years, its Prime Minister, Jozsef Antall, said today.


4 Men Are Indicted in Arson at Apartment House
LEAD: Four men believed to be members of a Harlem drug gang were indicted yesterday on charges that they crashed a car into an apartment house lobby and then set it on fire with gasoline in retaliation against residents who complained of the gang's drug dealing.


Corrections
LEAD: A news analysis article on Saturday about Mayor David N. Dinkins's responses to recent crimes misstated his margin of victory over Edward I. Koch in the Democratic primary last year.
It was 9 percentage points, not 12.


Visitors' Stories Flow on Ellis Island
LEAD: Gabriel Silver recalled the long-ago violence in Poland that led his grandmother to flee, escaping eventually to Ellis Island.


N.I.H. Starts Women's Health Office
LEAD: Responding to criticism that women have been routinely excluded from its research, the National Institutes of Health announced today that it had created an Office of Research on Women's Health.


Fires and Climate
LEAD: Specific climatic changes in the tropical Pacific appear to influence the occurence of forest fires in the American Southwest, researchers are discovering.


Constable's 'Lock' to Be Auctioned
LEAD: John Constable's ''Lock,'' from 1824, one of six large canvases he painted of the River Stour in Suffolk and the only one in private hands, is to be auctioned on Nov. 14 at Sotheby's in London.


Agreement on Soviet Withdrawal Brings German Settlement Closer
LEAD: Moscow and Bonn announced today that they had finally agreed on how to share the cost of the Soviet military withdrawal from a united Germany, clearing one of the last obstacles to a final settlement between Germany and its World War II conquerors.


English Military Site Bombed
LEAD: A bomb ripped through the roof of a military recruiting center in the main shopping precinct of this city in northwest England today, badly damaging an adjacent building, the police reported.
No one was seriously wounded in the explosion, the police said.
A woman was taken to a hospital suffering from shock.


Saudis Gave U.S. Help In Mozambique War
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An art review in the Westchester Weekly on Sept. 2 about the ''First Impressions'' show at the Neuberger Museum in Purchase, N.Y., misstated the closing date.
The show continues through Sept. 23; it does not close this Sunday.


Cuts Planned At Nordstrom
LEAD: Nordstrom Inc., the 61-store fashion chain noted for customer service, said yesterday that it planned to reduce expenses by 3 to 12 percent in its stores, except for those most recently opened.


Cuomo Attacks U.S. Priorities
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo took his stinging critique of Republican Federal policy today to Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of Government, the intellectual incubator for the failed Presidential campaign of Michael S. Dukakis.


Studying Art With the Eye Of a Physician
LEAD: WHETHER in life or after death, Vincent van Gogh has never been an artist of moderation.
He painted ferociously, drank great quantities of the potent liquor absinthe, went for days without eating, slashed off his left ear lobe and committed suicide at the age of 37.
He sold only one painting in his lifetime, but today his works command tens of millions of dollars.


Dr. Jane Cary Peck, 58, Educator and Author
LEAD: Dr.
Jane Cary Peck, an educator, author and a vice president of the National Council of Churches, died Monday at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
She was 58 years old and lived in Williamstown, Mass.


Trade or No Trade?
LEAD: The defensive end Eric Williams said he has been traded from the Detroit Lions, less than a week after the free agent agreed to a one-year contract.
Williams, who agreed on Thursday to the contract with Detroit, told reporters yesterday that he was traded to the Washington Redskins.
Williams said he was traded to Washington for the running back James Wilder and a fourth-round draft pick, but a Lions spokesman said he could not confirm that.


Topics of The Times;   A Grand American Slam
LEAD: For the first time in what seems like ages, but was really only a few years, Americans are hot in men's tennis again.
Pete Sampras, at the age of 19, soared to sudden fame last weekend by demolishing almost-as-young Andre Agassi in the finals of the U.S.
Open.
Sampras is the youngest ever to take the championship - and marvelously modest about it, too.


Big Days For 'Small' Hofstra
LEAD: The Flying Dutchmen of Hofstra are flying quite high.
In their first two games this season, Joe Gardi, the new coach, saw his team trounce Fordham and Bucknell, Division I-AA opponents, as the fresh run-and-shoot offense scored 77 points.


Mandela Meets de Klerk on Violence
LEAD: Nelson Mandela and President F. W. de Klerk of South Africa held intensive discussions today on the factional violence among blacks, and Mr.
Mandela warned later that the multiracial negotiations proposed by Mr. de Klerk on the country's future were in jeopardy unless the Government did more to stop the fighting.


Eating Well
LEAD: FINALLY.
The people who live to eat rather than those who just eat to live are writing cookbooks with healthful recipes.
More cooks, caterers and chefs have joined the search for recipes that skimp on fat and calories but not on taste.
For the most part they have been successful, far more so than dietitians who often provided low-fat recipes that convinced everyone eating heathful meals was no fun.


Gettysburg, via Videodisk
LEAD: Colleges and universities are also exploring the potential of educational videodisks.


Strawberry Home Run Wins It In the 9th
LEAD: A September pennant race, a tie game in the ninth inning and the cleanup batter facing the ace reliever.
That was the scenario at Shea Stadium last night.
What time was it?


Plaid Lunch Box? Oh, How Gauche
LEAD: WHEN a child goes back to school, having the right lunch box can be as important as having the right brand of sneakers or a stylish haircut.


Philip Morris Names Tobacco Unit Leader
LEAD: Philip Morris Industries, the world's largest consumer-products company, said yesterday that it had named a new president for Philip Morris USA, its primary tobacco subsidiary and the maker of Marlboro cigarettes.


Illinois Executes Murderer of 2
LEAD: A man who murdered a young couple during a 1983 holdup that netted him $40 for beer was put to death by injection early today.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
Sept. 7
Aug. 31
Sept. 8
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.1
3.1
Gasoline stocks
211.1
210.5
218.4
Distillate stocks
131.7
126.7
119.8
Crude imports, daily
6.9
6.8
6.5
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.9
2.1
Crude stocks
374.3
372.2
338.6
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
93.5
92.0
92.0


Videodisk Joining the Book in Class
LEAD: Laser videodisks may not be competitors to videocassettes at home, but they are emerging as a potentially important aid in the classroom, where teachers view the technology with a mixture of excitement and caution.


Prices Rise on Treasury Issues
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved higher in light trading yesterday, as market participants cautiously bought securities after reports circulated among traders that Washington budget talks were close to an agreement to cut the Federal budget deficit.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Belgrade Journal;   Double-Headed Eagle Cries to Serbs for Revenge
LEAD: On sunny days, a nationalist bazaar sets up shop on the rim of one of Belgrade's downtown fountains, where young people hawk magazines with maps of Greater Serbia on the cover, T-shirts with the white double-headed Serbian eagle across the front, cassettes of Serbian marching songs and other patriotic knickknacks.


Kuwaiti Bank Serves An Economy in Exile
LEAD: Five weeks after the Iraqis invaded Kuwait, the National Bank of Kuwait is up and running from its transplanted headquarters here, the only one of the occupied emirate's big banks that is back in business.


Yields Mixed for the Week On C.D.'s and Bank Funds
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were mixed for the week ended yesterday, as interest rates continued to be propped up by the unresolved Middle East crisis.


Nynex Deal Is Criticized By Abrams
LEAD: New York State's Attorney General, Robert Abrams, announced yesterday that an unregulated affiliate of the New York Telephone Company had made profits of nearly 400 percent under a contract with the telephone company.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Bound for the Middle East


GOVERNOR VICTOR IN MINNESOTA VOTE
LEAD: Two Democratic officeholders whom politicians viewed as vulnerable just weeks ago - the Governor of Minnesota and a Representative from Maryland - survived tough primary challenges today.


2 Out of 3 Women in Military Study Report Sexual Harassment Incidents
LEAD: In the first major study of sexual harassment in the military, the Pentagon said today that more than a third of the women surveyed experienced some form of serious harassment, including touching, pressure for sexual favors and rape.


Small Rise In Trade Gap
LEAD: The deficit in the current account, the broadest measure of the nation's trade performance, rose slightly in the second quarter but still hovered near a five-year low, the Commerce Department said today.


Pennsylvania Proposes Plan for Business Court
LEAD: In an attempt to make Pennsylvania more attractive to business, a measure to establish a special chancery court that specializes in business matters - similar to the Delaware Court of Chancery - will be considered by the Pennsylvania Legislature this fall.


New York City Acts to Protect Water
LEAD: After years of inaction, New York City today proposed strong environmental measures to protect the quality of its drinking water.


Tokyo Stocks Rise Sharply
LEAD: Japanese stock prices moved sharply higher today.
The Nikkei index of 225 stocks rose 611.48 points, or 2.49 percent, to close 25,216.14.
The gain more than offset


Barnes Denies Report
LEAD: Randy Barnes, the world-record holder in the shot-put, yesterday described as ''fishy'' a report from L'Equipe, a national daily sports newspaper in France, that he had tested positive for drugs at a meet in Malmo, Sweden, on Aug. 7.
In Charleston, W.


Gaze Is Hospitalized With Blood Clot
LEAD: Andrew Gaze, the Australian player whose one standout season at Seton Hall helped the Pirates reach the 1989 final of the National Collegiate tournament before losing to Michigan, was hospitalized yesterday in Melbourne with a blood clot in his right shoulder.


Dollar Posts Modest Gains; Many Traders Focus on Yen
LEAD: The dollar rose yesterday, but the Japanese yen continued to take center stage on world foreign exchange markets.


Aquino Orders Limited Truce
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino today ordered a limited truce with Communist rebels in metropolitan Manila and in areas leveled by an earthquake in July.
Mrs.
Aquino said the decision was in reaction to widespread calls for peace.
The statement gave no timetable and avoided the word ''cease-fire.'' Mrs.


Violence Grips Hong Kong and Triads Are Blamed
LEAD: Six people were killed and 23 injured today in an attack on a crowded neighborhood mah-jongg club that has shocked the people of Hong Kong and focused new attention on a surge in crime and violence here.


Gorbachev Endorses a Proposal For Free Enterprise in 500 Days
LEAD: On a day of disarray in the Kremlin, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev finally endorsed a national economic reform plan today but was quickly upstaged as the Parliament of the Russian republic rushed the plan to approval to prod the central Government to more decisive action.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Deskbound in U.S., the Envoy to Iraq Is Called Scapegoat for a Failed Policy
LEAD: Forty days after Iraqi tanks rolled across the Kuwaiti border, April C. Glaspie, the American Ambassador to Iraq, is stuck behind a desk at the State Department, playing only a minor role in the Administration management of the Persian Gulf crisis and longing to go back to Baghdad.
Her only direct contact with


News Summary
LEAD:
International
A3-21
Iraq must withdraw from Kuwait, President Bush said in a speech, reaffirming his determination to drive Iraq out.
He came closer than ever to saying military force could be used if economic sanctions fail.
Page A1
News analysis: President Bush spoke to two constituencies that matter greatly to him at the moment - one vast, the other composed of a single man, far away.


Dow Retreats by 2.97 Points, to 2,612.62
LEAD: Investors turned pessimistic yesterday in the wake of inaction on the budget deficit and stalemate in the Middle East, and stock prices fell slightly.


Electric Boat Cuts
LEAD: The Electric Boat division of the General Dynamics Corporation plans to lay off about 1,000 of its 8,000 salaried workers before Dec. 1, the company said in an employee bulletin.
The layoffs will be spread among Electric Boat operations in several states, said Neil D. Ruenzel, a spokesman for the submarine builder.


Kimberly-Times Sale Of Paper Mill Called Off
LEAD: The Kimberly-Clark Corporation and The New York Times Company said yesterday that negotiations to sell the Spruce Falls Power and Paper Company to Kruger Inc. had been unsuccessful.


Ringling Brothers Plans Retail Chain
LEAD: The Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus said it would start a national chain of retail stores with a circus theme this fall.
The company, owned by Irwin Feld and Kenneth Feld Productions, Vienna, Va., said it would open six stores a year, with the first scheduled for late October in the Fair Oaks Mall in Fairfax, Va.


Review/Film;   Down and Out at the Top in Hollywood
LEAD: At first glance the casting of Shirley MacLaine and Meryl Streep as mother and daughter does not seem entirely plausible.
It's not only the generational thing (though, technically anyway, they could be mother and daughter).
It's also because the two actresses seem to come from the two different poles of the tiny show-business planet.


DOMINICANS FEAR ECONOMIC TURMOIL
LEAD: When President Joaquin Balaguer was inaugurated last month after a narrow victory in a bitterly contested election, many Dominicans proclaimed another step in the maturation of democracy here.


In New York, Walking the Beat Isn't Enough
LEAD: To the Editor:


John Berga, 61, Dies; Colonel and Engineer
LEAD: John O. Berga, a retired Air Force colonel and a nuclear engineer, died Saturday at a Washington-area hospital.
He was 61 years old and lived in Falls Church, Va.


Nederlander to Meet With Owners Today
LEAD: Robert Nederlander, the theater entrepreneur who has been designated as George Steinbrenner's successor as managing partner of the Yankees, is scheduled to appear before baseball's ownership committee Wednesday to answer questions about his impending role.


Book Notes
LEAD:
At the Top, Surviving


Dr. Earle Harris, 84, Health Plan Founder
LEAD: Earle H. Harris, a physician and a founding director of the Health Insurance Plan of Greater New York, died on Sunday at his home in Forest Hills, Queens, at the age of 84.
He had been suffering from Parkinson's disease, his family said.


Hearns Severing Ties With Steward
LEAD: When Thomas Hearns was introduced from ringside recently at a bout headlined by a stablemate, Michael Moorer, in Auburn Hills, Mich., it was construed by some as a sign that Hearns was no longer thinking of defecting from Emanuel Steward, the only manager and trainer he has had as a professional.


White House and Congress Closer In Effort to Cut the Budget Deficit
LEAD: White House officials and Congressional leaders today narrowed their differences over reducing the Federal budget deficit, and many involved in the talks said an agreement was likely within days.


Wheeling Accord Backed
LEAD: Members of the United Steelworkers union overwhelmingly approved a new contract with the Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corporation today, clearing a big hurdle in the company's attempt to reorganize.


11 Reported Injured in a Riot In 2d-Largest Burmese City
LEAD: About 1,000 protesters, including students and Buddhist monks, destroyed a fire station in Mandalay, then stoned security personnel, injuring 11 of them, a Burmese military official said today.


Rangers Have Candidate for Doer of Dirty Work
LEAD: ''Fair is for losers.''


Bellamy Is Easy Winner In Race for Comptroller
LEAD: Carol Bellamy, the former New York City Council President, won the Democratic nomination for state comptroller by an overwhelminge margin yesterday and will oppose the only state Republican incumbent, Comptroller Edward V. Regan, in the general election in November.


Court Backs Bumped Fliers
LEAD: Airline passengers bumped from overbooked flights can turn down the free tickets and refunds they are offered and sue for damages, a Federal appeals court ruled today.


As the Space Shuttle Columbia Waits, Discovery Gets Ready


Confrontation in the Gulf;   From Congress, Praise and Muted Criticism
LEAD: Democratic and Republican members of Congress tonight warmly praised President Bush for providing Americans and the world a forceful case for the United States military presence in the Persian Gulf.


Settlement By Salomon
LEAD: Salomon Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to pay the Energy Department $83.75 million to settle claims of purported violations committed by the Phibro Corporation, a commodities brokeage, before it merged with Salomon.


Bonds Priced For Charlotte
LEAD: The City of Charlotte, N.C., yesterday priced $81.2 million in general obligation bonds through competitive bidding won by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


Resolution Trust Corp. Sells $70 Million in 'Junk Bonds'
LEAD: Crippled by sluggish trading volume and the lowest prices on record, the market for ''junk bonds'' was hit with more selling yesterday.


A Giant Sympathy Card
LEAD: As it did many New Yorkers, the stabbing death of Brian Watkins as he tried to defend his mother from muggers in the subway greatly troubled Susan Bird.
So last Friday Ms.
Bird, who runs a real-estate marketing concern, erected a 24-by-36-inch pad outside Grand Central Terminal for people to express their feelings to Mr.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Transcript of President's Address to Joint Session of Congress
LEAD: Following is the transcript of President Bush's address before a joint session of Congress tonight, as recorded by The New York Times:
Following is the transcript of President Bush's address before a joint session of Congress tonight, as recorded by The New York Times:
Mr.
President, Mr.
Speaker and members of the United States Congress, and distinguished guests, fellow Americans, thank you very much for that warm welcome.
We gather tonight, witness to events in the Persian Gulf as significant as they are tragic.
In the early morning hours of August 2d, following negotiations and promises by Iraq's dictator, Saddam Hussein, not to use force, a powerful Iraqi army invaded its trusting and much weaker neighbor, Kuwait.
Within three days, 120,000 Iraqi troops with 850 tanks had poured into Kuwait, and moved south to threaten Saudi Arabia.
It was then that I decided to act to check that aggression.
At this moment, our brave servicemen and women stand watch in that distant desert and on distant seas, side by side with the forces of more than 20 other nations.


At Least 45 Die as Torrential Rains Soak South Korea


3 Youths Get 5 to 10 Years In Jogger Rape
LEAD: Saying they had helped turn Central Park into a ''torture chamber of mindless marauding'' last year, a state judge yesterday sentenced three teen-agers to 5 to 10 years, the maximum term, for their part in the rape of a jogger there.


Pact on European Armies May Skip Troop Limits to Speed Accord
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union may forgo setting limits on either troops or aircraft in Europe in the conventional arms treaty now being negotiated in order to finish the agreement in time for a 35-nation meeting set for Nov. 19, Western officials said today.


Bridge
LEAD: A German foursome that had lived under a lucky star for a week won the Louis Vuitton World Team Championship here Monday night.
Bernhard Ludewig and Jochen Bittschene, both of Heidelberg, Georg Nippgen of Karlsruhe and Roland Rohowsky of West Berlin trailed into the last 16 deals by 30 international match points, but they surged to a victory by 13 points as a crowd of more than 700 enthusiasts watched intently in the


Wine Talk
LEAD: THE breathtaking beauty of the Napa Valley, its delicious wines, handsome wineries, fine restaurants and delightful people have been celebrated so completely and so often, could there be anything more to say?


A New Township for Bhopal Disaster Victims
LEAD: A small, clean new township has sprung up for victims of the 1984 gas disaster at Bhopal about one mile north of the Union Carbide pesticide plant that leaked.
It is flanked by fields smelling of fresh rain.


DEALS
LEAD: BASEBALL
YANKEES (AL) - Activated Don Mattingly, first baseman, from the 21-day disabled list.
Bought the contract of Rich Monteleone, pitcher, from Columbus of the International League.
FOOTBALL
DALLAS (NFC) - Released Timmy Smith, running back.
JETS (AFC) - Placed A.B. Brown, running back, on injured reserve.


Soybean Prices Rise Again On Fears of Damaged Crop
LEAD: Soybean futures prices rose strongly yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade, extending a rally prompted by the worsening condition of the new crop as harvest time approaches.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: BECAUSE of its exceptionally firm flesh, monkfish is well suited to grilling and broiling.
It holds together well under a hot flame even if it is skewered, as in this recipe.
And in France, where the fish is called lotte or baudroie, it is one of the traditional ingredients in the classic bouillabaisse of the Marseilles region.


Correction
LEAD: A recipe in this column on Aug. 29 for pasta with zucchini, prosciutto and tomatoes omitted an ingredient and a step.
A corrected version appears today on page C12.


Peruvian Plane Carrying 18 Crashes Off Newfoundland
LEAD: A Peruvian Boeing 727, believed to have 18 people on board, crashed in the sea 180 miles southeast of Newfoundland today, officials said, but a rescue plane found no wreckage in the area.


Bronx Man Is Stabbed to Death
LEAD: An 18-year-old Bronx man was stabbed to death Monday night on his way home from a video arcade after he refused to give a dollar to a panhandler, the police said.


Correction: Summer Ziti
LEAD: This recipe appeared in the ''60-Minute Gourmet'' column on Aug. 29, but it omitted an ingredient.
The corrected version follows:
Pasta With Zucchini, Prosciutto and Tomatoes
1 pound ripe plum tomatoes, cored
4 small zucchini, about 1 pound
4 quarts water
Salt to taste
1 pound imported ziti
1/4 cup olive oil
1 tablespoon chopped garlic
1/4 pound prosciutto, sliced very thin, cut into 1 1/2-inch strips
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
1/8 teaspoon hot red pepper flakes
1 cup crushed tomatoes
1/2 cup chopped fresh basil
1 cup freshly grated


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Desert Refugees Flee Pain for Poverty
LEAD: When a giant Soviet cargo jet lumbered slowly into the air and headed out into the haze above the Jordanian desert this afternoon, it marked the end of one chapter of misery for Abdul Hai Majomder.


Nissan Adds New Model Of Infiniti Car
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Company, whose Infiniti luxury division has had a rocky start in the United States, introduced its 1991 lineup today, including a new midsized sedan in the $20,000 range -below the price of competing luxury cars like the smallest Mercedes-Benz and BMW models.


Head of Lear Siegler Seeks A Brighter Ironing Board
LEAD: Norman R. Proulx has been named president and chief executive of the Lear Siegler Seymour Corporation, the leading seller of ironing boards, and he plans to use a marketing strategy he learned in the shaving business to increase sales.


Food Notes
LEAD:
For Future Holidays


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
BEI Holdings Ltd, Atlanta, named Charles C. Ray Jr. chief financial officer.
He replaces Douglas A. Bangert Jr., who resigned.


Fernandez's Slam Powers Blue Jays
LEAD: Tony Fernandez hit his second career grand slam tonight to power Toronto past the Kansas City Royals, 8-4, and move the Blue Jays within three games of first-place Boston in the American League East.


Hearings Near, White House Makes It Clear: Souter Is No Bork
LEAD: The Bush Administration is doing everything it can to demonstrate that David H. Souter is no Robert H. Bork, and one difference between the mild-mannered Supreme Court nominee from New Hampshire and the combative Mr.
Bork is already apparent to his White House coaches.


No Parole for Nurses' Killer
LEAD: Illinois prison officials denied parole for the seventh time Monday to Richard Speck, who has spent half his life in prison for killing eight student nurses in 1966.
The Illinois Prisoner Review Board said the 48-year-old killer would continue serving his sentence of up to 1,200 years at Stateville Correctional Center near Joliet.


CHILE MAY SUE U.S. OVER GRAPE BAN
LEAD: Eighteen months after the United States briefly prohibited the import of Chilean fruit when cyanide was found in two grapes, angry farmers, exporters and politicians here are trying to build a case to demand at least $333 million in damages.


Topics of The Times;   Trying to Change Seasons
LEAD: Summer gathers itself for its end with great clumps of white Queen Anne's lace and yellow butter and eggs and families of speckled young robins feeding on the lawn.
But autumn edges in with a single cricket singing under the porch, wild asters opening a few petals in a roadside tangle and a swallow sitting alone on a telephone line.


Review/Dance;   A Dreamer's Unconscious
LEAD: Theresa Reeves and Kevin Jones made a charming, often witty excursion out of a voyage through the unconscious in ''Method of Passing,'' performed on Friday night at the Dia Foundation theater in SoHo.


Love Conquers All in Hollywood Summer Season
LEAD: It was supposed to have been the summer of the action-adventure blockbuster.
But with classes resuming, barbecues being packed away and Hollywood tallying final box-office figures for the season, the surprise smash hit turns out to be a sentimental fantasy-suspense comedy that plays down shootouts and car chases in favor of unadorned romance.


Not the Only Crisis
LEAD: If Henry Kissinger were not very much alive he would be rolling over in his grave at President Bush's decision to let the Soviet Union involve itself in Middle East peace efforts - a possibility that in cold war days Dr.
Kissinger opposed with theological intensity.


Mercedes Sales
LEAD: Mercedes-Benz said it expects to sell about 75,000 cars in the United States in 1990, down slightly from last year's 75,714.
United States sales for Daimler-Benz A.G., the West German company that builds the Mercedes, have fallen gradually each year from a peak of 99,000 cars in 1986. ''We seem to be on target for sales of 75,000 cars for calendar year 1990,'' said Albert Weiss, general manager of marketing communications for Mercedes-Benz of North America, Montvale, N.J.


Citicorp Announces the End Of Weekly Paper Auctions
LEAD: Citicorp announced yesterday that it planned to discontinue the weekly auctions of commercial paper it has held for 12 years.


'Motor-Voter' Bill: Good for Democracy
LEAD: Will non-voters outnumber voters in this year's Congressional elections?
That was the dismaying result in the nation's last midterm election, in 1986.
Turnout in the 1988 Presidential election wasn't much better; barely half the voting-age population showed up at the polls.
Uninspired campaigns don't help.


U.S. Returns to 1820's in Care Of Mentally Ill, Study Asserts
LEAD: The United States has taken a leap backward in mental health care and more people with serious mental illness are in prisons and street shelters than in hospitals, according to a report released today.


Owens-Illinois President Gets Chief's Post, Too
LEAD: Owens-Illinois Inc., the big glass-packaging company, has named its president and chief operating officer, Joseph H. Lemieux, to the additional post of chief executive.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Airborne Refueling For Combat Planes Over the Persian Gulf


In S.&amp; L. Bailout, U.S. Is Moving to Evict 8 Rent-Regulated Tenants
LEAD: In a dispute that brings the nation's savings and loan bailout in direct conflict with a keystone of New York City housing - strict laws protecting renters - Federal regulators are threatening to evict rent-regulated tenants from buildings converted to condominiums and cooperatives.


PRIMARY WINNERS
LEAD:
CONNECTICUT and NEW YORK
Morrison Wins, As Does Bellamy
Connecticut Democrats nominated Congressman Bruce A. Morrison for governor.
Carol Bellamy won New York State's Democratic primary for comptroller.
Pages B1 and B4.
NATIONAL
Sharon Pratt Dixon Win Washington Race
The candidate who promised to clean out City Hall ''with a shovel not a broom'' is the victor in the Democratic mayoral primary in the nation's capital.


Measles Carries Risks For Mothers and Babies
LEAD: To the Editor:


About New York;   A Small Crime, But Everybody Wants a Piece
LEAD: Nicole Geller has always considered herself a real New Yorker, even if she was born in New Jersey.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   BUSH VOWS TO THWART IRAQ DESPITE FEAR FOR HOSTAGES; U.S. WON'T BE 'BLACKMAILED'
LEAD: President Bush today reaffirmed his determination to drive Iraq from Kuwait, coming closer than ever to saying military force might be used if economic sanctions fail.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Iraqis to Free Arab-Born Men
LEAD: Iraq has informed United States officials that American men living in Iraq and Kuwait who were born in Arab countries will be allowed to return to the United States, the State Department said today.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Saudis Complain of Troops' Visits in Towns
LEAD: The Saudi Government has complained to the United States military about the growing number of American troops visiting Saudi towns while carrying weapons, officials said today.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.68
8.00
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.40
7.41
7.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.35
7.34
7.59
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.66
8.71
8.14
30-YR.


Mackey Avoids Prison
LEAD: Kevin Mackey, the dismissed Cleveland State basketball coach, avoided a prison sentence yesterday when a judge ordered him confined for 60 days in a drug and alcohol rehabilitation center.
Mackey, 45 years old, pleaded no contest to charges of cocaine abuse and driving under the influence of alcohol.


For Losers, New Faces and Even New Colors
LEAD: In an imperfect pro football world, imperfect teams are taking different routes to winning seasons.
And the three teams who were the National Football League's worst last year may have started the healing process.


Oil Prices Decline Slightly
LEAD: Crude oil prices retreated slightly yesterday but remained above $30 a barrel in futures trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.


Books of The Times;   Benedict Arnold, the Great American Traitor
LEAD:
Benedict Arnold
Patriot and Traitor
By Willard Sterne Randall
Illustrated. 667 pages. William Morrow &amp; Company. $27.95.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Astec Industries, Chattanooga, Tenn., an asphalt concern, said it would sell all the operating assets of its Barber-Greene Co. subsidiary to Ingersoll-Rand Co., Woodcliff Lake, N.J., for $25 million in cash.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: It's back to school, with a difference, for LIONEL TIGER, the new Charles Darwin Professor of Anthropology at Rutgers University.
The chair was created for Professor Tiger, who has taught at the school since 1972.


Oryx and Charitable Trusts In $968 Million Stock Deal
LEAD: The Oryx Energy Company, the nation's largest independent oil producer, said today that it had purchased 17 percent of its common shares from several charitable trusts for $968 million and set the stage for the trusts to sell an additional 7 percent to the public.


Congressional Panel Opposes Legislation To Limit Arts Grants
LEAD: A bipartisan independent commission, created by Congress to review the grant-making procedures of the National Endowment for the Arts, recommended today that no legislative restrictions be placed on the kind of art that can receive money from the endowment.
But the 12-member panel called for broad changes in the agency's grant-making procedures.


Taiwan Doesn't Back Drift Nets in Atlantic
LEAD: To the Editor:


James R. Eiszner, 63; Led CPC International
LEAD: James R. Eiszner, the chief executive of CPC International, one of the nation's largest food companies, died yesterday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 63 years old and lived in Cresskill, N.J.


We're on the Wrong Side in El Salvador
LEAD: To the Editor:


From the Watkins Family
LEAD: While visiting New York City with his family, Brian Watkins was knifed to death in a subway station on Sept. 2.
Following is a letter from his family, written by his brother, Todd.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
Love and 'Ragged Glory'


John Corson 3d Dies; Business Consultant And a U.S. Aide, 84
LEAD: John Jay Corson 3d, a former Government official, educator and management consultant, died Sept. 2 at Arlington Hospital in Virginia.
He was 84 years old and lived in Fairfax, Va.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Groups Taking Refugee Aid
LEAD: Adventist Development and Relief Agency, 12501 Columbia Pike, Silver Spring, Md. 20904.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about Philadelphia's financial problems misstated Boston's fiscal record.
The city of Boston did not default on its bonds in 1980; its bond rating was lowered in July 1981 by Moody's Investor Service to Ba, a rating reserved for speculative investments.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the meaning of the Ellis Island memorial omitted attribution in some copies for a statement that ''there are worries that the stress on 'multiculturalism' will erode the 'transformative' qualities of America and create, instead of unity out of diversity, a new Tower of Babel.


African Force Is Protecting Doe's Tribe
LEAD: Troops of the West African peacekeeping force in Liberia were ordered today to intervene to protect members of former President Samuel K. Doe's ethnic group, the Krahn, from being massacred.


A New Antifreeze Is Called Less Toxic
LEAD: Just in time for the cold-weather driving season, a Dallas-based auto parts company, Chief Auto Parts, has introduced an antifreeze that it says is less toxic and therefore more environmentally friendly than the standard fare.


Lewis Ends Holdout
LEAD: Albert Lewis, the three-time All-Pro cornerback for the Kansas City Chiefs, ended his 51-day holdout yesterday.
Lewis did not report to training camp and missed the entire preseason schedule.
Lewis said the holdout was caused by differences he had with Carl Petersen, the Chiefs' president and general manager.(


Head of Census Defends Urban Tallies
LEAD: The director of the Census Bureau responded sharply today to officials of New York City and other cities and towns around the country who have widely criticized the preliminary census figures that they contend severely undercounted their populations.


6 MORE LAWMAKERS TIED TO BRIBE CASE
LEAD: Federal prosecutors have identified six more present or former members of the South Carolina Legislature as ''known conspirators'' in a bribery investigation, and a third lawmaker has pleaded guilty to taking a bribe from a lobbyist working under cover for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


A Critic of Academia Wins Applause on Campus
LEAD: Two years ago Parker J. Palmer was a middle-aged refugee from academia, just embarked on a career as a freelance teacher-lecturer and wondering whether he could do well enough to pay the bills.


Raise for Hornacek
LEAD: Although he joined the Phoenix Suns in 1986 as the 46th pick ovr all in the college draft, Jeff Hornacek yesterday signed a seven-year contract worth a reported $10 million, indicating the remarkable progress the 6-foot-4-inch guard from Iowa State has made in National Basketball Association competition.


Some Uncertainties Remain In Cable Reregulation Bills
LEAD: If enacted into law, the legislation now moving rapidly through Congress to reregulate the cable television industry would impose modest new price regulation and may make it more difficult for cable companies to lock up popular programming through exclusive licensing agreements.


Sex Education Declines, Teen-Age Births Rise;   Plight in New York
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ex-Bush Aide Tells of New U.S. Inquiry
LEAD: A former Bush aide, whose role in the Government sale of several troubled banks and savings institutions in the Southwest is being investigated, told Congress today that a firm in which he is a partner was the subject of a separate Federal inquiry.


S.I. Naval Base Wins a Reprieve
LEAD: The House of Representatives yesterday rejected a plan that would have canceled financing for the home port Naval Base on Staten Island.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: SANFORD I. WEILL has worn many hats, as former chairman of Shearson Lehman, chairman and chief executive of Primerica Corporation and a co-chairman of the committee that raised $50 million to restore Carnegie Hall.
On Sunday, he and his wife, JOAN WEILL, will be named the Child Care Action Campaign's Fabulous Family.


3 Companies Speed Artificial Skin
LEAD: Three new companies are proceeding to market with products that provide an artificial equivalent of human skin.
The products, based on advances in the technology of growing cells in culture, could be used in grafts, as in the treatment of burn patients, or as a substitute for animals in laboratory tests of drugs, cosmetics and chemicals for toxicity or irritation.


2 Companies Agree to Use Product From Rain Forest
LEAD: Patagonia Inc., known for its outdoor clothing, and Smith &amp; Hawken, which sells gardening tools, and outdoor furniture and clothing, today announced an agreement with an international conservation group under which the companies will buy millions of buttons made from the ivory-like nut of the tagua palm, a tree that grows in the rain forest of northwest


Boy Set on Fire Points to Defendant in Court
LEAD: David Opont pointed directly at a 14-year-old boy sitting in Family Court yesterday and identified him as the boy who ''set fire to my shirt.''


Stock of Tandem Plunges by 15.6%
LEAD: The stock of Tandem Computers Inc. tumbled 15.6 percent yesterday, and several Wall Street analysts cut their earnings estimates after the company said late Monday that the United States economic slump could impede its growth.
Tandem shares fell $2.125 each, to $11.50, on the New York Stock Exchange, where the percentage drop was the day's largest.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Senators Question Control of Gulf Aid
LEAD: Members of the Senate Armed Services Committee questioned today whether the Administration had the right to control the billions of dollars that foreign countries have pledged to help pay for American military operations in the Persian Gulf.
The lawmakers also said the contributions from Japan and West


Philadelphia Gets Aid From Swiss on Loans
LEAD: A Swiss bank will guarantee part of the $375 million that the City of Philadelphia is seeking to avoid insolvency.


Woman Nominated for Capital Mayor
LEAD: Sharon Pratt Dixon, the candidate who promised to clean out City Hall ''with a shovel instead of a broom,'' won the Democratic mayoral primary here today, a victory that all but assures she will succeed Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. and lead the nation's capital into a new political era.


Market Place;   A Dire Forecast On Oil Supplies
LEAD: NOT all oil is created equal, and that fact could prove to be a key factor in the problems world economies will face if the stalemate in the Middle East lasts through the winter.


Eastern to Expand First Class Cabins
LEAD: Eastern Airlines, which is operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings, said it was doubling the size of its first class cabins and introducing new fares for business fliers.
Eastern's court-appointed trustee, Martin R. Shugrue Jr., said in a statement that the new rates would be 15 percent and 35 percent lower than full coach rates on other airlines.


Hormel Acquires Importer of Foods
LEAD: Geo.
A.
Hormel &amp; Company, a meat and food processing company based in Austin, purchased for undisclosed terms the name, inventory and certain other assets of Gourmet America Inc., an importer of specialty foods based in Hingham, Mass.


Judge Backs Allied And Federated
LEAD: Federal Bankrutpcy Judge J. Vincent Aug approved a request by Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation to extend the deadline for submission of their financial reorganization plan until Feb. 28, 1991.
The companies, which filed for voluntary bankruptcy on Jan. 15, said they planned to submit a business plan, on which the reorganization will be partly based, on Oct.


INSIDE
LEAD:
3 Sentenced in Jogger Rape
Saying they turned Central Park into a ''torture chamber'' when they raped a jogger, a judge sentenced 3 youths to 5 to 10 years each.
Page B1.
Military Sex Harassment
In a survey raising questions about the integration of women in the military, two-thirds report they have been sexually harassed.


Chrysler Eases Attack On Japanese
LEAD: THE Chrysler Corporation has softened its attack on Japanese auto makers in a new advertising campaign, beginning next week, to introduce its 1991 models.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Ivanisevic Advances Past Aparisi
Goran Ivanisevic of Yugoslavia, seeded second, came back from a first-set loss yesterday and defeated Jose Luis Aparisi, 6-7, 6-1, 6-3, in the first round of a men's tournament in Bordeaux, France.
Jordi Arrese of Spain, seeded sixth, was eliminated by Marcelo Ingaramo of Argentina, 6-7, 6-2, 6-4.


Memorial for B. Kliban
LEAD: A memorial service for B. Kliban, the cartoonist whose subjects included hordes of comical cats, will be held on Dec. 15 at 3 P.M. at his vacation home in Hana, Hawaii.
Mr.
Kliban died on Aug. 12 in a San Francisco hospital at the age of 55.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Citing Disunity, Arab League U.N. Observer Quits
LEAD: Clovis Maksoud, the Arab League's observer at the United Nations and its chief representative to the United States, resigned today, citing bitter divisions in the Arab world since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.


People
LEAD: *
Christine Cacace, Steven Friedman and Susan Scherl have been promoted to senior vice presidents and executive producers of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York.
Bobbi John and Gene Johnson, who are senior vice presidents and creative directors, have been appointed to the agency's operating committee.


Jet Nearly Crashed While Inspector Did Nothing
LEAD: Federal investigators have concluded that a USAir jetliner nearly crashed last year in Kansas City, Mo., after the crew wandered from the assigned route and mistook lights at a parking lot for the runway.
All the while, a Federal Aviation Administration inspector who was in the cockpit to check their performance that night did nothing.


Raiders Sign 20-Year Deal To Remain in Los Angeles
LEAD: The Raiders, after flirting with offers from at least three other cities, signed a long-term contract today to continue to play at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum.


Mets Focus On Pirate Showdown
LEAD: A small blue sign hangs in John Franco's locker in the Mets' clubhouse and it bears a simple message: ''There's still time.'' With a pennant race percolating in New York and Pittsburgh, visitors do not need an explanation for its presence.


Yanks Activate Mattingly, End 5-Game Slide
LEAD: Stump Merrill walked quickly through the tunnel leading from the Yankee clubhouse to the field, where his team was already taking batting practice under the fading afternoon sunlight.
There was no expression on his face, no emotion in his voice when he spoke.


2 Colombian Drug Suspects Extradited to U.S. by Bogota
LEAD: Two Colombians charged with being drug traffickers were extradited to the United States today, the first such extraditions since President Cesar Gaviria took office last month.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Attempts Have Been Made to Break Trade Embargo Against Iraq, U.S. Officials Say
LEAD: Several nations, including Cuba, have accepted shiploads of Iraqi oil since the United Nations imposed a worldwide ban on trade with Iraq, but those ships left Iraqi pipeline terminals before the sanctions were imposed on Aug. 6, United States officials said today.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD:
DEAR Diary:


Confrontation in the Gulf;   Bush's Two Audiences
LEAD: Presidents have many audiences, and tonight George Bush spoke to two that matter greatly to him at the moment -one vast, the other composed of a single man, far away.
In forceful terms, Mr.
Bush sought to prepare the whole American nation for the prospect of bloodshed in the Persian Gulf, vowing in categorical language not to allow President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to blackmail the United States by holding American citizens hostage and pledging that if sanctions did not drive Mr.


Police Officer Is Wounded and Suspect Is Slain in Queens Domestic Dispute


Big Board Approves Late Trades
LEAD: In its initial steps toward a 24-hour trading system, the board of the New York Stock Exchange yesterday approved the first forms of after-hours trading in the Big Board's almost 200-year history.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
OIL AND THE MIDEAST
Crude oil prices retreated slightly but remained above $30 a barrel.
Light sweet crude for October delivery fell 54 cents, to $30.76.
Gasoline and heating oil also fell. [Page D1.]
The National Bank of Kuwait is up and running in London, the only one of the emirate's big banks that is in business.


Confrontation in the Gulf;   4 Nations Order Diplomats To Shut Missions in Kuwait
LEAD: Austria, Bangladesh, Greece and Switzerland ordered their diplomats today to pull out of Iraqi-occupied Kuwait.


Wolves Get Rowsom
LEAD: The Minnesota Timberewolves announced yesterday they acquired Brian Rowsom, a power forward, on waivers from the Charlotte Hornets.
The 6-foot-10-inch, 235-pound veteran of three N.B.A. seasons, has averaged 5.6 points in 82 games for the Indiana Pacers and Charlotte since 1987.
Last season he missed the final 12 games for Charlotte after falling to the floor and suffering a cervical cord concussion on March 29.(


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about a survey of Americans' knowledge about sexuality misstated the result for a question about women's interest in sex after menopause.
Thirty percent of those surveyed responded incorrectly (not correctly) that after menopause women lose interest in sex.


Study Finds Uninsured Receive Less Hospital Care
LEAD: Documenting what has long been suspected, researchers have found that patients who lack health insurance or who are covered by Medicaid are far less likely to be given common hospital procedures than are patients with private medical coverage.


Debt Plan by Bond Corp.
LEAD: The beleaguered Bond Corporation is hoping it can stave off liquidation by offering its creditors a debt-for-equity swap plan, its executive director, Peter Lucas, said today.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: That high-flying, bicoastal couple, BARBARA WALTERS and MERV ADELSON, have decided to separate.
He lives in Los Angeles, she in New York, and commuting did not mix with marriage.


20 Killed in Shootout in Kashmir
LEAD: At least 20 people were killed in Kashmir today when their bus exploded after Indian security forces fired at suspected militants traveling in the vehicle, the authorities said.


Morrison Is Democrats' Pick For Governor of Connecticut
LEAD: United States Representative Bruce A. Morrison, who began his battle to be the Democratic nominee for governor almost a year ago, claimed his victory tonight in a lopsided primary race against a little-known state lawmaker, William J. Cibes Jr.
With 99 percent of the vote counted, Mr.
Morrison had 65 percent and Mr.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Iraq will not be permitted to annex Kuwait.
And that's not a threat, not a boast.
It's just the way it's going to be.''
- President Bush.
[A1:6.]


Sex Education Declines, Teen-Age Births Rise
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hurry to Cut Nukes
LEAD: The Soviet Union is disintegrating faster than is generally realized.
A downward spiral has set in, not only accelerating economic decline and revealing environmental deterioration that is truly frightening, but literally unraveling the country.


Review/Television;   A Hymn In the Hearts Of So Many For So Long
LEAD: Despite the awkward title, ''Amazing Grace With Bill Moyers'' is a graceful search by the sometime seminary student for the meaning of an abiding hymn of the nation.
At 8 tonight on Channel 13, you can hear it sung by Judy Collins, Jessye Norman, Johnny Cash, Jean Ritchie and the Boys Choir of Harlem.


Economic Scene;   See Who's Dying For Regulation
LEAD: DO you want babies to die in airplane crashes?
Neither does the National Transportation


B. Rodney Marriott, Theater Director, 52
LEAD: B. Rodney Marriott, a former associate artistic director of the Circle Repertory Company, died Sunday in the Woodlands Nursing Home in Calcutta, India.
He was 52 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Sandy Shook Hands With Miss America
LEAD: To the Editor:


Spanish-Cuban Asylum Battle Ends, Bitterly
LEAD: An angry diplomatic standoff between Spain and Cuba has ended with an apparent victory for Fidel Castro after the last of 18 Cuban asylum-seekers left the Spanish Embassy in Havana last week in exchange for promises that they would not be punished.


Arrest Order for Australian
LEAD: A judge today ordered the arrest of a former Australian millionaire, Christopher Skase, whose dreams of acquiring a leading Hollywood studio crumbled last year.


The Bloom Is Off Organic Produce Sales
LEAD: A ONE-POUND package of organically grown carrots was 99 cents last week at a D'Agostino supermarket on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
A pound of ordinary carrots sold for about 55 cents.


Czech Illustrating Power of Devils' Patience
LEAD: The case of Zdeno Ciger of Czechoslovakia clearly demonstrates that the days of the New Jersey Devils rushing young players into National Hockey League action are in the past.


Dinkins Rebuts City's Portrayal In Time Article
LEAD: The Dinkins administration tried to prove yesterday that the bad news in a Time magazine cover article on New York City was misleading, because the news weekly did not publish all the answers to a poll it used to show that New Yorkers think the Big Apple is the pits.


Review/Music;   Evoking the Holocaust
LEAD: How do we remember?
Taste and smell are powerful triggers for the individual, but groups need something man-made, something created to be shared. ''Bread and Candy: Songs of the Holocaust'' at the Jewish Museum on Sunday afternoon was the attempt of five singers and actors - mostly young - to recall the Jewish experience under the


Saints' Defense Can't Overcome an Inept Offense
LEAD: For 58 minutes 30 seconds in the Louisiana Superdome on Monday night, the New Orleans Saints' defense choked the San Francisco 49ers' glittering offense, allowing only a field goal, a touchdown pass and only one Jerry Rice catch of 16 yards.
It had sacked Joe Montana six times.


Summer's Still Warm at Greenmarkets
LEAD: LISTENING to the news on television over the Labor Day weekend was depressing, but not for the usual reasons: Iraq, recession, S.&amp;L.'s.
What was really depressing was the constant repetition of that tired old refrain, ''Summer's over.''


Cuomo, Upstaging Dinkins, Says City Police Will Add 'Thousands'
LEAD: Seizing the initiative from Mayor David N. Dinkins on the politically vital issue of crime, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said yesterday that he and the Mayor had agreed that the city's police force would be increased by ''thousands'' of officers as quickly as possible.


Compaq Cuts Prices On Some Computers
LEAD: The Compaq Computer Corporation said today that it had cut prices up to 20 percent on several of its most advanced personal computers, including two models introduced last spring.


Rod Laver, Lou Gehrig: Still Vital
LEAD: How refreshing it was to hear Pete Sampras, the winner of the United States Open, talk about studying old tapes of Rod Laver.
The kid is only 19 years old, but he acknowledges that his sport and his own style have roots in ancient history, a few decades back.


Nesha Bass Springer, Author, 60
LEAD: Nesha Bass Springer, the co-author of a 1978 guidebook on day care, died on Saturday at Newton-Wellesley Hospital in Newton, Mass.
She was 60 years old and lived in Sunapee, N.H.
She died of cancer, said her son Stephen.


ASK Computer To Buy Ingres
LEAD: ASK Computer Systems Inc., a supplier of manufacturing-automation software, said it would acquire the Ingres Corporation, a software producer, for $9.25 a share in cash, or a total of about $110 million.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page news analysis article yesterday about the Helsinki summit meeting referred incorrectly to the Israeli politician Ezer Weizman.
He is a former Science Minister, not the current one.


Pepsico to Buy Chicken Units
LEAD: Collins Foods International Inc. agreed today to sell 209 Kentucky Fried Chicken franchised restaurants to Pepsico Inc., the fast-food chain's owner, in a tax-free stock deal worth about $122 million.


Microwave Cooking
LEAD: AT the high point of the fishing season it is good to remember how quickly and with how little heat the microwave oven cooks your catch, or a friend's or the fish market's.
Fish cooks better in a microwave oven than any other way, except perhaps on an outdoor grill or in an iron skillet by the side of a stream.


Washington at Work;   What Might Have Been: Emotions Under Wraps, A Senator Looks Back
LEAD: For Senator Richard G. Lugar, the Persian Gulf crisis has brought a bittersweet reminder of what was and what might have been.


Harry K. Weiss, Realty Executive, 83
LEAD: Harry K. Weiss, a retired vice president of Helmsley-Spear Inc., the real-estate concern, died on Monday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 83 years old and also lived in Delray Beach, Fla.
His family said he died of lymphoma.


Report Cites Flaws in Regulation of Trade Schools
LEAD: A Senate investigation has concluded that the regulation of private, profit-seeking trade schools is so flawed that it ''is like putting the prisoners in charge of running the prison.''


Parolee Who Set Fire To Son Is Back in Jail
LEAD: Charles Rothenberg, who was imprisoned for setting fire to his son in 1983, is back in prison as a parole violator eight months after being paroled.


ABOUT EDUCATION
LEAD: A standard question at any social gathering seems to be, ''Is there any hope for the public schools?'' Since the questioner has usually not bargained for a speech, the short, honest answer - ''If there's no hope for the schools, then there's no hope for the country'' - may sound like an evasion and a cliche.


Work With China, Without Illusions
LEAD: China's arm-twisting contributed mightily to Khmer Rouge acceptance this week of the new United Nations peace plan for Cambodia.
And China's cooperation made possible last month's unanimous Security Council resolutions condemning Iraqi aggression.
Because China is a permanent member of the Security Council, with veto power, and a major arms supplier to both Saddam Hussein and the Khmer Rouge, its cooperation on both issues is a requirement for success.


Accusations of Police Brutality Strain Relations in Bronx Neighborhood


Confrontation in the Gulf;   With Simple Arms and Derring-Do, Guerrillas in Kuwait Vex the Iraqis
LEAD: The Iraqi-occupied land of Kuwait, economically stalled and abandoned by hundreds of thousands of people, has become a skirmishing ground as Kuwaiti guerrillas try to drive out the invading army, fleeing residents and Western diplomats say.


Frustrated Chinese Look to U.S. as a Haven
LEAD: The ditties Chinese schoolchildren chant used to smolder with resentment against the United States, with one from the 1950's even subjecting President Harry S. Truman to misfortunes like drinking the pesticide DDT and being devoured by a tiger.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JACK NICHOLSON received the ribbon of a Commandeur des Arts et Lettres, the highest arts award of the French Government.
JACK LANG, the Culture Minister, presented the honor on Monday, noting, ''Your angular eyebrows, your ironic smile, your taste for exaggeration have etched out characters who are memorable, sometimes satanic.


5,000 More Cops for New York City
LEAD: Gov.
Mario Cuomo and Mayor David Dinkins now firmly acknowledge that New York City needs more police, and more cops on the street, to contain the rise in violent crimes.
Unfortunately, in his speech yesterday the Governor made no mention of how he'd help pay for them.
To Mr.
Dinkins's credit, he seems finally committed to finding more than $300 million to get the job done.


Bronx Clash With Police Angers Citizens' Patrol
LEAD: For the last year, residents of Morris Avenue between 182d and 183d Street in the Bronx have answered the city's call to get involved in the fight against crime and fear.


A Bleaker Forecast Made for U.S. Fund That Insures Banks
LEAD: Looking through a longer lens at the health of the Federal fund that insures bank deposits, the head of the General Accounting Office said today that while the fund was not technically insolvent, it faced payments over the next few years that by a ''realistic standard'' of accounting would deplete its current balance.


Illinois Executes Slayer of Couple, Its First Death Penalty in 28 Years
LEAD: A man who said he would rather die than remain behind bars for murdering a young couple in a $40 robbery was put to death by injection early today in the first execution in Illinois in 28 years.


Swissair and Aoki Cancel Hotel Sale
LEAD: Swissair, Switzerland's national airline, said the planned sale of its Swissotel hotel interests to the Aoki Corporation of Japan had been canceled.
The airline cited the uncertainty in world financial markets and the recent strength of the Swiss franc for the joint decision.
The sale price, which has not been disclosed, had been in Swiss francs.


Toll Rises to 77 in South Korean Flooding


Japan's One-Way Lobbying
LEAD: Is Japan's lobbying effort in the United States too powerful?
That's the question raised by Pat Choate, a former vice president of TRW, in a Harvard Business Review article and a forthcoming book.
Mr.
Choate's opponents accuse him of xenophobia and McCarthyism, but it's more useful to consider his arguments on their merits.


Norwalk Show to Display 800 Boats
LEAD: Nearly 800 craft valued at more than $100 million will be on display at the Norwalk (Conn.) In-water Power Boat Show, which opens today and runs through Sunday.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.68
7.68
8.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.37
7.40
7.50
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.30
7.35
7.58
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.68
8.66
8.13
30-YR.


Federal Courts Moving to Permit Trial Coverage by Radio and TV
LEAD: The judges who make policy for the Federal courts took the first steps today toward opening their courtrooms to coverage by radio and television, banned from Federal trials for more than 40 years.


Leo Mirkovic, 86, Dies; A Cantor in New York
LEAD: Leo Mirkovic, an opera singer in Europe before World War II, who became a well-known cantor in New York and Washington, died on Friday in Miami.
He was 86 years old and had moved to Miami in 1974.


Top Legislator Attacks Boycott Of Korean Store
LEAD: As the boycott of a Korean-owned market in Brooklyn dragged bitterly toward its ninth month yesterday, Assembly Speaker Mel Miller told a City Council committee that the boycott ''should be condemned universally.''


Diabetes Enzyme Found Identical to One in Brain
LEAD: Researchers have discovered that an enzyme that plays a principal role in the development of the most severe form of diabetes is the same enzyme as one found in the brain.


U.S. Doesn't Have to Go to War With Iraq on Hussein's Terms
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dallas Police Chief Is Fired After Indictment
LEAD: The Police Chief was fired today after he was indicted on charges of lying to a panel investigating his dismissal of an officer.


New York Fails to Deter Vans Used As Buses
LEAD: For years, thousands of private vans have cruised city bus routes in Brooklyn and Queens and on Staten Island, poaching passengers and fares from the Transit Authority and other bus companies licensed to operate in New York City.


Ecolab and Henkel In European Venture
LEAD: In a bid to establish a sizable presence in the European cleaning business, Ecolab Inc. of St.
Paul has agreed to swap 19 percent of its equity and pay $74 million to Henkel, a West German manufacturer of detergents and cosmetics based in Dusseldorf.


U.S. Doesn't Have to Go to War With Iraq on Hussein's Terms; Credit to Vegetius
LEAD: To the Editor:


An Autumn Fandango at Bloomingdale's
LEAD: TO the design lexicons of American country, English country and French country, consider adding Spanish country furniture, which is among the objects featured in ''Spain: Europe's Rising Star,'' the storewide promotional celebration at Bloomingdale's this fall.


Bertelsmann Net Up 26.9%
LEAD: Bertelsmann A.G. said today that its profit rose 26.9 percent in the year that ended on June 30.


Ex-Lord &amp; Taylor Head To Run Texas Retailer
LEAD: Frank C. Watson, who resigned in 1988 as president and chief operating officer of Lord &amp; Taylor, has joined Scarbroughs, an Austin, Tex., fashion specialty chain, as its president, chief operating officer and principal.


In Surrogate Race, a Well-Solicited 13% Voted
LEAD: Only 13 percent of the 500,000 Democrats in Manhattan voted in their party's primary for surrogate on Tuesday, but rarely has such a small audience been so bombarded by mailings, television, radio and print advertising, telephone calls and palm cards.


Reviews/Music;   A Choir of Men and Boys Evoking the Renaissance
LEAD: George Guest, a Welsh chorus master and organist, has enjoyed a notable career that has extended beyond Britain with his many recordings.
Since 1951, he has led the Choir of St.
John's College at Cambridge University, and on Tuesday night he brought that ensemble to St.
Thomas Church for their last New


On Wood, Fantasies In Finishing
LEAD: WOOD, whether on a chair, bureau or fan, has been turned into fake ivory, marble or ebony at an exhibition of student work at the Isabel O'Neil Foundation's Studio Workshop, which opens tomorrow at 177 East 87th Street in Manhattan.


A 2d Suitor Makes Offer For Corroon
LEAD: The Corroon &amp; Black Corporation, the giant New York-based insurance concern that recently agreed to merge with a big British insurance brokerage, said today that it had received another, larger offer.


Let Us Remember Also Dorothea Dix
LEAD: To the Editor:


AIDS-ONLY CENTERS CALLED A BAD IDEA
LEAD: A panel of experts has concluded that it would be a mistake to establish hospitals solely for AIDS patients, a concept that is promoted by many health authorities and that is part of New York City's official plans.


In Philadelphia, Rebirth of a Hotel
LEAD: IN 1976, after Legionnaires' disease broke out at the Bellevue Stratford Hotel in Philadelphia, the hotel closed.
It reopened in 1979 and closed again in 1986 for renovation.
Last year, as Hotel Atop the Bellevue, it reopened and this August, won an award from the American Society of Interior Designers.


Architect's Inspiration: Forest Folly
LEAD: SOMETIMES good design can be found in the smallest building.
In 1987, Charles Warren, a Manhattan architect, was engaged to renovate a client's guest house in Carmel, N.Y. ''As part of the job, there was a fireplace in the guest house, and it occurred to me it would be fun to make a garden folly out of the woodshed,'' Mr.


Critic's Notebook;   TV Sitcoms Do Little for the Education Crisis
LEAD: When it comes to dealing with education, prime-time television transmits a decidedly ambiguous message: Forget what I say and just watch what I do.





Flatley Signs Contract
LEAD: Patrick Flatley, who overcame knee surgery to become the Islanders' highest-scoring forward last season, has re-signed with the club.


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: MY younger daughter has announced her engagement.
She announced it with tears, laughter, a bottle of German champagne and an extended left hand.
Her ring, she says, is the most beautiful ring in the world.


A Store's Dream of Spain


New Orchestra for Dutoit
LEAD: Charles Dutoit, the music director of the Montreal Symphony Orchestra, has been named music director of the Orchestre National de France.
His responsibility for the musical programming begins immediately, and starting in September 1992 he is to make 12 appearances a year with the French orchestra.


United Bests American In O'Hare Scheduling
LEAD: United Airlines won a critical round yesterday in its battle with American Airlines over schedule changes at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago when the Federal Aviation Administration approved United's fall schedule of flights.


World Bank's 5-Year Bonds Are Priced to Yield 8.74%
LEAD: The World Bank yesterday priced $2 billion in five-year global bonds through a group of 15 international dealers jointly managed by Deutsche Bank Capital Markets and Salomon Brothers Inc.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a report on hospital care provided to people who lack health insurance or are covered by the Government's Medicaid program referred incorrectly to comments by James S. Todd, executive vice president of the American Medical Association.
They were made in an interview, not in his editorial for the A.M.A.


Primary Results Across U.S. Reflect Wide Outcry Against Politics as Usual
LEAD: A public outcry against business-as-usual politics welled up among voters in primary voting around the country on Tuesday, illustrating a mood of anxiety about growth, the economy, the quality of life and the quality of politics.


Review/Dance;   A Gentle Portrayal Of Alienation By Otteco
LEAD: The tone was pleasant and soothing when Otteco presented an evening of modern dance on Saturday night at the 14th Street Dance Center.
But that may not have been what Gerald Otte, a former member of the Nikolais Dance Theater, had in mind since ''The Offering,'' a new work that was the program's centerpiece, seemed to be about loss of identity in the modern world.


Top Currency Trader Joins Capital Holdings
LEAD: Andrew J. Krieger, who earned a formidable reputation as a currency options trader by making $300 million for the Bankers Trust Company in 1987, is re-entering the market after a few years of doing mostly advisory work.


Reagan Reconquers Berlin but Fallen Wall Has the Last Laugh
LEAD: Three years after challenging President Mikhail S. Gorbachev to tear down the Berlin wall, former President Reagan personally took hammer and chisel in hand today and found the concrete barrier tougher to budge than he thought.


The Rugged Land Helps Shape G.I.'s
LEAD: Two weeks in the desert appear to have etched a deepening seriousness onto the men of the Fourth Battalion of the 64th Infantry Regiment deployed in their tanks and armored vehicles across the dunes and occasional gravel of Saudi Arabia.


Giants' Walls Getting Ready to Face Old Teammates
LEAD: For nine years, Everson Walls was a backbone of the Dallas Cowboys' defense, a free-agent cornerback who led the National Football League three years in interceptions.
He was a team leader, a straight arrow, a hometown hero.


Paul Magriel, 84, Collector of Art And Tour Guide at the Met, Dies
LEAD: Paul Magriel, an art collector, connoisseur and former tour guide at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 84 years old.
He died of a heart attack, a spokesman for the family said.
Mr.
Magriel was educated at Columbia University, and in his early years became involved with the dance world.


Four Allies Give Up Rights in Germany
LEAD: The four wartime Allies who defeated Nazi Germany 45 years ago signed a treaty today relinquishing all their occupation rights, leaving the two German nations that emerged after the war finally free to reunite on Oct. 3.


A Tough Coach Is a Tough Act to Follow
LEAD: Gary Moeller's line of work must be one of the very few in which a person can be intensely examined for first impressions at a place where he has spent 18 of his previous 21 years.
But the still brand-new coach at the University of Michigan - he will remain brand-new up to the kickoff of the Wolverine season at South Bend, Ind., on Saturday night - can expect to be scrutinized in areas from the approach to his passing game to whether he has the good sense to keep kickoffs out of the hands of Notre Dame's Raghib


Debt Plan for Morocco
LEAD: Morocco's creditor governments have agreed to allow the North African country to spread repayments on part of its official development aid loans over 20 years and reschedule debt service payments on other credits over a 15-year period, the French Finance Ministry said today.
The ministry gave no indication of the amount of rescheduled debt.


Treasuries Mixed in a Quiet Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in lackluster trading yesterday, and interest rates on the longer maturities rose slightly.


Rig Count Up Sharply
LEAD: The number of rigs exploring for oil in the United States soared by 27 last week, to a total of 1,039, Baker Hughes Inc. reported on Monday. ''It's the highest since Jan. 2, when the count was 1,042,'' said Ike Kerridge, who keeps track of the count for Baker.


Lawyers in Landmark Estimate Board Suit Ask $1 Million
LEAD: Three lawyers in the suit that led to a United States Supreme Court decision that ultimately abolished the New York City Board of Estimate and altered the structure of the city government are claiming a total of more than $1 million from the city for legal work in the landmark case.


Oil Prices Increase 21 Cents; 5th Close Above $30 a Barrel
LEAD: The price of oil rose in choppy trading yesterday, with light sweet crude for October delivery closing 21 cents higher at $30.97 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange.


Brazil to Drop Computer Ban
LEAD: The Brazilian Government said today that it would open its computer market to imports, ending a policy adopted in 1984 to protect its fledgling computer industry.


Drabek No Drysdale, But He May be a 'Cy'


Church's Landmark Status Is Upheld
LEAD: The landmark designation of St.
Bartholomew's Church on Park Avenue was upheld unanimously yesterday by the Federal Court of Appeals against a constitutional challenge by the Episcopal parish, which argued that landmark status interfered with its freedom of religion and its property rights.


At Home, as at School, Child Beating Must Stop
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stake in Henley Raised to 14.89%
LEAD: Libra Investment Ltd., a Swiss firm controlled by the Lebanese investor Toufic Aboukhater, has raised its stake in Henley Group Inc., a Hampton, N.H., holding company, to 14.89 percent, from 12.8 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Aboukhater reiterated that his Henley shares were purchased as an investment.


Calendar: Race to Save Treasures of Past
LEAD:
A Fragile Past, Metropolitan Life Gallery, 24 East 24 Street; (212) 578-2723.


Review/Television;   New Series Has 2 Tiers, The Chase and the Trial
LEAD: Tonight and next Thursday, NBC is using the slot it normally reserved for ''L.A.
Law'' to preview its new series called ''Law and Order.'' Created by Dick Wolf, who is also one of the executive producers, ''Law and Order'' lays claim to a new concept, describing itself as a ''two-tiered crime drama.


Of Lamplit Whimsies (Mind the Dogs)
LEAD: AT Judyth van Amringe's new store in SoHo, lamps wear hats, standard black poodles lounge on a floor that is stenciled with yet more poodles and goldfish swim in ornate wrought-iron bowls.
The pets are not for sale, but everything else is.


Market Place;   Chase Faces Many Doubts on Wall Street
LEAD: Just how bad off are the large New York banks?
Investors are acting as if many of them are in very poor shape.


Truth Is a Casualty of Partisan Yugoslav Press
LEAD: A Belgrade journalist, lamenting the state of his profession in Yugoslavia, described running into a friend on the street. ''I am going home to take my daily poison,'' the friend said, pointing reproachfully to the bundle of newspapers under his arm.


U.S. Wants to Aid 2 Cambodia Factions
LEAD: The Bush Administration urged Congress today to continue providing aid to two non-Communist guerrilla groups in Cambodia, saying that such noncombat assistance would bolster diplomatic efforts to end the 11-year civil war.


West German Named Director of the Philadelphia
LEAD: The West German conductor Wolfgang Sawallisch has been appointed music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra, beginning in the 1993-94 season, the orchestra announced yesterday.
He will succeed Riccardo Muti, who said in March that he would give up the directorship to spend more time in Europe when his current contract ends, in August 1992.


'NATO' in the Gulf: A Certain Disaster
LEAD: An entangling alliance in the Persian Gulf, as outlined by Secretary of State James Baker in testimony before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on Sept. 5, is not in the national interest of the United States.


Glimpses of How Other Half Lived
LEAD: Baltimore will gain an important new museum Sept. 17 when the lavishly appointed Evergreen House officially opens to the public after a three-year restoration costing $4.3 million.


Free The Baltics II
LEAD: A little over a year ago, an incendiary headline appeared in this space: ''Free the Baltics.'' A dispatch from a Baltic capital appeared here later with a provocative dateline: ''RIGA, Soviet-occupied Latvia.''


Ex-Lawyer's Insider Plea
LEAD: A lawyer formerly with a prestigious corporate law firm pleaded guilty yesterday to selling inside information about planned takeovers in a multimillion-dollar trading scheme.


New President At Dynamics
LEAD: The General Dynamics Corporation said yesterday that James R. Mellor had been named president and chief operating officer, effective Jan. 1.


Soweto Journal;   Terror and Death Replace Hope in Squatter Camp
LEAD: The carcass of a burnedt-out automobile lying belly-up in the sun blocks the rutted road into the Tladi squatter camp.
Barrels, boulders and tangled barbed wire have been collected into crude barricades presided over by hard-eyed adolescents stunted from years of malnutrition.


Some Tough Situations but a Successful Evening for Cone
LEAD: David Cone didn't need road signs to figure out which way to the trouble spots in the Pirates' lineup en route to a 2-1 victory.
Bobby Bonilla and Barry Bonds reside there, No. 4 and No. 5 in the batting order, 207 runs batted in, 58 home runs and counting at the start of the game against the Mets last night.


Accountants' Move Favors Airlines
LEAD: After years of debate, an accounting group yesterday abandoned its plan to propose a new way for airlines to treat frequent-flier miles when calculating their profits.
The move is likely to please airline executives, who can report higher earnings using current accounting methods.


Red Sox Beat Brewers On Boddicker's 7-Hitter


Volvo Said to Join Bidding for Skoda
LEAD: The French auto maker Renault said the Swedish auto maker Volvo A.B. had joined its bid for a stake in the Czechoslovak state-run car company, Skoda.


Maxwell Holds Talks on Deals
LEAD: The Maxwell Communication Corporation is in talks to sell some of its nonstrategic businesses, the British publishing company's chairman, Robert Maxwell, said today.


RESIST U.S. IN GULF, TOP IRANIAN CLERIC URGES ALL MUSLIMS
LEAD: Iran's supreme religious leader called on all Muslims today to fight the American deployment of troops in Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf region, the official Iranian press agency reported.


A Chill of Death Lingers As College Life Goes On
LEAD: For the past two weeks Marion Taube, a 20-year-old junior at the University of Florida, has avoided going to the library to study as she usually does.
She has changed the locks at her off-campus apartment, carries a can of Chemical Mace and looks warily at approaching strangers.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Judge Halts Publication of Book By Ex-Israeli Intelligence Agent
LEAD: In response to a lawsuit brought by the Israeli Government, a justice in the State Supreme Court in Manhattan issued an apparently unprecedented order yesterday to temporarily block the United States publication of a book by a former member of Mossad, an Israeli intelligence service.


Dow Up 13.12, to 2,625.74; Trading Sluggish
LEAD: Stocks seesawed wildly most of the morning yesterday but then advanced steadily for the rest of the day, ending slightly higher.


Mariners Close in on a Modest Goal
LEAD: The Mets and the Toronto Blue Jays, the best Eastern Division teams paper can produce, are desperately clinging to their hopes of producing where division championships are decided: on the field.


Investor's Claim Has Marital Twist
LEAD: Like many investors, Stephen L. Lane, the president and chief executive of the Emerson Radio Corporation, lost millions in the market crash of 1987 and has filed a claim against his brokerage firm, the defunct Drexel Burnham Lambert, to recover his money.


More Than 200 Asbestos Cases Are Settled
LEAD: A Federal judge and a state judge called off a trial of 265 asbestos health liability cases yesterday after out-of-court settlements were reached in nearly all the claims.


Acid Leak Forces Evacuation
LEAD: About 3,000 gallons of hydrochloric acid leaked at a chemical plant Tuesday, forcing an evacuation of about 150 people.
The leak in a plastic pipe at the Midwest Ralumac plant was reported about 1:45 A.M. and plugged about 4 A.M., fire officials said.
No serious injuries were reported, and a cloud caused by the spill dissipated late in the morning.


The Mets' Desperate Hours
LEAD: Over 162 games, a baseball season has a slow, smooth pulse.
If your team loses, there's always tomorrow.
Or the day after.
But in a pennant race the pulse quickens and throbs, as it did for the Mets on Tuesday night.
Up on the Shea Stadium scoreboard, the Pirates had won in Philadelphia.
In the Mets' dugout John Franco was yelling: ''I stink!


Gulf States Loses Round
LEAD: Gulf States Utilities will not get a second chance to convince state regulators that its customers should pay an additional $1.4 billion in nuclear plant construction costs, the Texas Supreme Court ruled today.
The utility, which is based in


Wild Debut For a Yank
LEAD: Steve Adkins flirted with history last night when he stepped onto a major league mound for the first time.
By the time he left, he had not given a hit.
The problem was, it only was the second inning, he had walked eight batters, including five in a row, and the Yankees were trailing the Texas Rangers.


Grants Given to Address Campus Race Issues
LEAD: Seeking to address racial strife on college and university campuses, the Ford Foundation yesterday awarded $1.6 million to 19 institutions to help diversify the ethnic and cultural content of their curriculums.


New Airline Phone Service
LEAD: GTE Airfone, a cellular telephone service, and the Communications Satellite Corporation of Washington said yesterday that they had agreed to operate an airline phone service that will be available worldwide in mid-1991.


Philip Donham, 82, Consultant and Author
LEAD: Philip Donham, a management consultant who was the co-author of a book on the inner workings of Congress, died Monday at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
He was 82 years old and lived in North Weymouth, Mass.


Cone Stops Pirates and Gives Mets New Life
LEAD: One week after they were swept out of Pittsburgh, the Mets rose up out of the debris of their pennant race last night and made a run for it as David Cone pitched them past the Pittsburgh Pirates, 2-1, and they drew within two and a half games of the top with only 20 left to play.


4 U.S. Guards Indicted as Part Of Holdup Ring
LEAD: Four Federal detention officers have been indicted as members of a gang that posed as police and narcotics detectives and stole hundreds of thousands of dollars in cash and jewelry from dozens of victims in the last year, District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan said yesterday.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-13
Iran's supreme religious leader called on all Muslims to fight the American deployment of troops in Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf region, the official Iranian press agency reported.
Page A1


Mathematical Error Is Seen Behind Flaw In Hubble Telescope
LEAD: A mathematical error that occurred between the drawing board and the assembly room caused the mirror flaw that is producing blurry images from the $1.5 billion Hubble Space Telescope, investigators say.


A Good Gulf Pep Rally
LEAD: If Saddam Hussein believes the U.S.
Congress is about to walk away from the strong American commitment in the Persian Gulf, he should think again, and again.
President Bush went before Congress and the nation Tuesday night, put his case and cause and received resounding support.


Lasting Visions of the Home
LEAD: POWERFUL contemporary images, arcane artifacts, down-to-earth housing solutions, touching tableaux of a bygone era and programs that could keep the most energetic New Yorker going at a fast clip for months are all part of ''Home: A Place in the World.'' This ambitious multicultural event is a collaboration of five New York City museums and the New School for Social


Aquino Orders Halt to Offensives In Provinces Damaged by Quakes
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino ordered a halt today to military offensives against Communist rebels in Manila and three provinces devastated by a strong earthquake in July.


Yields Mixed Amid Worry
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed for the week ended yesterday.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Business People column yesterday about the appointment of a chief executive officer at the Lear Siegler Seymour Corporation misstated the number of ironing boards the company plans to sell this year in North America.
It is 4 million, not 400 million.


Politics of Police Strength;   New York City's Demands for More Officers Raise Questions About How to Use Them
LEAD: Senior public officials and opinion-makers from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo on down have seized on the number 5,000 as their answer to how many more police officers New York City needs.


Mills Aims for N.B.A.
LEAD: Terry Mills, the first-round draft choice the Denver Nuggets thought they were getting for Danny Schayes, has left the Greek pro team he signed with and will be returning this weekend to negotiate with the Nuggets, his attorney, Bob Woolf, said yesterday.


Information Is Offered On Private Schools
LEAD: The Parents League of New York is sponsoring several programs to help families learn more about private schools in the area, known for their distinct personalities, liberal learning styles and smaller classes.


Connecticut Victory Shows Tax Fears, Morrison Says
LEAD: United States Representative Bruce A. Morrison said today that his overwhelming victory on Tuesday in the Democratic primary for governor sent an unmistakable message: Residents want cuts in state spending, not new taxes, and woe to any politician who doesn't understand that.


Review/Architecture;   For San Francisco, a New Art Museum With Its Own Signature
LEAD: Outflanked and outclassed in the last decade by the explosive growth of museums in Los Angeles, San Francisco on Tuesday had its first look at a bold design for a museum building that will serve as the centerpiece for a new downtown cultural district that public officials and arts executives hope will once again energize the city's cultural scene.


As U.S. Warms to U.N., It Finds Unpaid Debts Embarrassing
LEAD: At a time when President Bush is using the United Nations as the anchor for international sanctions against Iraq, the United States finds itself in the somewhat embarrassing position of being in substantial debt to the organization.


Cram in Fifth Ave. Race
LEAD: Steve Cram, the British middle-distance runner who holds the world record for the mile, has joined an impressive field planning to compete in the 10th Mercedes Mile on Fifth Avenue on Sept. 22.
In addition to Cram, whose record of 3 minutes 46.32, was set five years, the field includes Said Aouita of Morocco, the second-fastest miler ever with a time of 3:46.76; Peter Elliott of England, the defending champion, and Steve Scott, one of the United States's premier middle-distance runners.


People
LEAD: *
Wendy Lapidus-Saltz has joined DDB Needham Worldwide, Chicago, as an associate creative director.


Macho? Yes. Violent? Sure. Hockey? Of Course.
LEAD: In the 1969 film ''Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid,'' the character Butch, played by Paul Newman, is challenged to fight by a big man with a big knife.
His name is Harvey and he is contesting Butch for the leadership of an outlaw gang.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We have drawn a line under World War II and we have started keeping the time of a new age.''
- Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union. [A1:3.]


NEW F.D.A. CHIEF REPORTED CHOSEN
LEAD: Federal officials said today that Dr.
David Kessler, director of medicine at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York, would be named Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration by Dr.
Louis W. Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services.


Rubin R. Dobin; Rabbi, 74
LEAD: Rabbi Rubin R. Dobin, an Orthodox rabbi who was active in congregations in Queens and in Miami Beach, Fla., died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Miami Beach.
He was 74 years old and lived in Miami Beach.


China Is Said to Execute 500 to Reduce Crime
LEAD: China has executed more than 500 people this year in its biggest crackdown on crime since 1983, Amnesty International said today.


Setback for President's Son
LEAD: An administrative law judge in Denver has denied Neil Bush's motion to dismiss charges that he violated conflict-of-interest laws as a director of the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association of Denver.


Primary Results: Setting the Stage for November
LEAD: Primaries held Sept. 11. Percentages are not final.
Arizona
J. Fife Symington (R) 44%
Evan Mecham (R) 24%
Fred Koory (R) 16%
Sam Steiger (R) 13%
Bob Barnes (R) 2%
Terry Goddard (D) 84%
Dave Moss (D) 16%


Souter Hearings On Public TV
LEAD: The Public Broadcasting Service, through its affiliate WETA in Washington, will cover the hearings on the confirmation of Judge David H. Souter and offer the coverage to all public television stations.
In addition to WETA, and WNET in New York, public television stations in Los Angeles, Chicago, Houston and New Hampshire have agreed to carry the PBS coverage.


Jet Denies Tipping Off Former Club
LEAD: According to Doug Wellsandt, it was not his loose lip that sank the Jets' ship on that third-down-and-goal end-around play at the Cincinnati Bengals' 1-yard line on Sunday.
The former Bengal tight end was backed up by the Jets' coach, Bruce Coslet, and his new teammates despite the 25-20 season-opening defeat, Coslet's regular-season debut.


Bonn and Tokyo Are Criticized For Not Bearing More of Gulf Cost
LEAD: A storm of animosity, extraordinary in its extent and intensity, has burst out on Capitol Hill and in the country at large over what critics are portraying as paltry contributions by Japan and West Germany to the international effort to confront Iraqi aggression in Kuwait.


2 Efforts For Simpler VCR Use
LEAD: Fifteen years after the videocassette recorder began transforming the nation's television viewing habits, inventors are still trying to figure out how to make it easier to program the darned machines.


Nissan Motor
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Manufacturing Corporation introduced a redesigned 1991 Sentra that will be aimed at more affluent buyers.
The base cost will be $7,999, up from $7,399.
The introduction of the model at Nissan's Smyrna, Tenn., plant rounds out a new generation of cars and trucks offered by the Japanese manufacturer since 1988.


At Tishman, Fewer Glamorous Jobs
LEAD: The Tishman Realty and Construction Company, which built the World Trade Center, Epcot Center and many other landmark developments, is finding it must expand into projects it once ignored, like prisons, schools and government buildings, in an effort to offset the downturn in the nation's real estate markets.


Dollar Mostly Up in U.S. But Tumbles Against Yen
LEAD: The dollar was mostly higher in New York yesterday after falling in overseas trading and reaching a 13-month low against the Japanese yen in Tokyo.
Gold prices advanced.
Analysts said a variety of factors, including German reunification, helped move the dollar higher in domestic dealings.


Man Shot Trying to Stop Holdup
LEAD: A man who was trying to stop the holdup of a neighbor's newsstand in Richmond Hill, Queens, was shot and seriously wounded yesterday by one of the robbers, the police said.


Investor Is Given Bally Directorship
LEAD: The New Jersey investor Arthur M. Goldberg has acquired a 5.39 percent stake in the Bally Manufacturing Corporation and will receive a seat on the board of the Chicago-based game machine and casino company.
In return, Mr.
Goldberg has agreed not to raise his stake beyond 15 percent, seek control of


Poll Says Young Watch Less TV Than Thought
LEAD: Some young Americans watch far less television than advertisers might hope, according to a survey conducted for Archie Comic Publications Inc. by Mark Clements Inc., an independent research company.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Sports Pages on Tuesday about Ben Johnson's return to track and field competition gave an incorrect time for the 100-meter world record set by the Canadian sprinter at the 1988 Seoul Olympics.
The time, later disallowed because Johnson failed a drug test, was 9.79 seconds.


Chronicle
LEAD: The DALAI LAMA expressed optimism yesterday that the Chinese Government would soften its line on Tibet.
The spiritual and political leader of the region that is ruled by China began a three-week visit to the United States and Canada yesterday with a one-day stop in New York.
While in the city, he announced the International Year of Tibet, in which Tibetan performances and art exhibitions will visit the United States and 27 other countries in 1991.


Elenore Lester, 69, Writer and Editor
LEAD: Elenore Lester, a writer, editor and teacher, died Sunday at New York Hospital.
She was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Asset Sale Sought By Georgia-Pacific
LEAD: The Georgia-Pacific Corporation, in need of cash to help finance its $5 billion takeover of the Great Northern Nekoosa Corporation, is negotiating to sell about $740 million worth of mills and timberlands.
The prospective buyers are the Packaging Corporation of America, a subsidiary of Tenneco Inc., and the General Electric Capital


Energy Proposals Proliferate as Oil Prices Rise
LEAD: Rising oil prices have injected new life into a host of programs that members of Congress from energy-producing states have tried to push for years.


Chronicle
LEAD: Preparing to defend his title in New York Oct. 7, the World Chess Champion, GARY KASPAROV, has renounced Moscow for an isolated house overlooking the ocean on Martha's Vineyard.
He is there with his wife, his mother and four trainers.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Procter &amp; Gamble Co., Cincinnati, to Font &amp; Vaamonde Inc., New York, for all Hispanic network television media placement.


Acheson's Co-signer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kits Ease Task of Building a Succah
LEAD: THE Jewish holiday of Succoth, a feast of thanksgiving lasting eight days, begins the evening of Oct. 3 this year.
Those who observe Succoth, which celebrates the Jewish people's travels in the desert after their escape from slavery in Egypt, eat all their meals in succahs, specially constructed outdoor booths with roofs of naturally grown materials that allow the sky to show through.


Israel Welcomes Expansion of Soviet Role in Gulf
LEAD: Foreign Minister David Levy said today that Israel would ''welcome'' an expanded diplomatic role for the Soviet Union in the Middle East, provided it would help insure Israel's security.


It Wasn't Bob Hope, but It Was Fun


I.M.F. Loans Rose in 1989
LEAD: The International Monetary Fund said today that it had pledged loans to developing countries of $15.6 billion last year, more than twice the amount promised in 1988 and the highest level in seven years.


Tiffany's Celebrates Manhattan
LEAD: TO celebrate its 50th anniversary at Fifth Avenue and 57th Street, Tiffany &amp; Company is exhibiting four table settings that depict imaginary moments in a Manhattan where big bands played and the Empire State Building was still the tallest building in the world.


INSIDE
LEAD:
The Outlook on Souter
Senate hearings for the Supreme Court nominee begin today.
Senators expect to vote for him, but not to learn his views on crucial issues.
Page A18.
Cameras in U.S. Courts
In a three-year experiment, a few Federal courtrooms will be opened to coverage by radio and television for the first time in decades.


SENATORS EXPECT ASSENT ON SOUTER
LEAD: On the eve of Judge David H. Souter's confirmation hearings, a majority of the members of the Senate Judiciary Committee said today that they were uncertain whether the Supreme Court nominee would be forthcoming on crucial issues but still expected him to win the panel's support.


Seoul Is Firm on Rice
LEAD: South Korea will not budge from its refusal to open its market to foreign rice and will keep price controls on rice to protect its farmers, an Agriculture Ministry official said today.
He said that Seoul was forced by political pressures to ask for special concessions to keep its rice market closed.


Drug-Testing Kit for Parents Spurs Stormy Debate
LEAD: The recent introduction of a $49.95 spray kit that lets parents test their children's rooms for drugs has touched off a debate about children's rights to privacy and parents' needs to protect them from drug abuse.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Bleaching a Floor
Q.
When we removed the carpet on the floors of the 30-year-old house we recently bought we found that the hardwood flooring was badly darkened in the corners where the family cats had soiled the carpet and the flooring.
What can we do to bleach those dark areas so they will match the rest of the wood flooring?


Bringing Janacek's 'House of the Dead' to Life
LEAD: Leos Janacek's ninth and final opera, ''From the House of the Dead,'' does not have a plot, in the conventional sense.
Based on the Dostoyevsky novel ''Notes From the House of the Dead,'' its dramatic boundaries are the arrival and departure of Aleksandr Petrovich Goryanchikov, a political prisoner.


Thomas J. Davis, 77, Investment Executive
LEAD: Thomas J. Davis, a founder of the Mayfield Fund, a venture-capital investment firm on the West Coast, died Tuesday at the University Convalescent Hospital in Menlo Park, Calif.
He was 77 years old.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: ROOF gutters protect against drainage problems that can seriously damage foundations.
But to do their job, they need to be clean and free of leaks.
Gutters should be cleaned twice a year, in spring and in late fall after leaves have dropped.
But if the gutters leak or drain poorly even when clean, repair them promptly.


Corn Is Expected to Decline After Large Crop Forecast
LEAD: Grain analysts predicted a sharp drop in corn futures prices after the Government released a harvest projection yesterday that exceeded nearly everyone's expectations.


Weavings of Navajo Belief
LEAD: Beginning in 1954, Edwin and Ruth Kennedy amassed a wide assortment of 19th- and 20th-century blankets, rugs and wall hangings representing the various types of Navajo weavings.
They also acquired Navajo and Zuni Pueblo silver and turquoise jewelry: bracelets, pins, necklaces, earrings, crosses, bolo ties and belts.


Ames Posts Deeper Loss
LEAD: Ames Department Stores Inc. today reported a second-quarter loss of $152.5 million, but store officials said the loss before nonrecurring charges was significantly smaller than expected.


HEALTH: Personal Health;   Food poisoning called shigellosis is on the rise, prompting efforts to fight it.
LEAD: As child care and food handling become more centralized, food-borne diseases that spread easily in communal settings can flourish unless a concerted effort is made to prevent them.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Companies


Christopher Cox; Editor, 41
LEAD: Christopher Cox, an author and a senior editor with Ballantine Books, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan at the age of 41.
A spokesman for the publisher said he died of complications from an HIV infection.


Most Generic Drugs Found To Meet F.D.A.'s Standards
LEAD: After testing more than 400 samples, the Food and Drug Administration said today that many drugs meet quality and purity standards.


Savings Units for Sale
LEAD: Federal regulators put 65 more failed savings and loan associations up for sale today as part of the bailout of the troubled industry.
The Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal agency supervising the bailout, said the institutions have a total of about $9.7 billion in deposits.
Of the institutions put up for sale, 22 are in the Midwest; 18 are in the East, including Florida and Georgia; 17 are in the Southwest, and 8 are in the West.


Preventing Genocide in Liberia
LEAD: By offering protection to the Krahn people of Liberia's murdered President Samuel Doe, the five-nation West African peacekeeping force risks being drawn further into the fighting.
It is a risk that needs taking.
If the ethnic hatreds stirred up by the 10-year Doe dictatorship are not restrained, they could turn catastrophe into genocide.


Fujitsu Computer
LEAD: Fujitsu Ltd. said it would enter the market for fault-tolerant computers, which contain backup features to insure constant operation.
Such machines are essential for banking, air traffic control and other fields where failures could cause severe financial or safety problems.


Lawmakers Rushing to Lift Caps on F.D.I.C. Premiums
LEAD: As dire predictions about the future of the Federal fund that insures deposits at banks continued to mount, lawmakers moved quickly today to propose regulatory reforms in an apparent effort to escape the political taint of another taxpayer bailout.


Newsday Buys a Business That Distributes 'Shoppers'
LEAD: Newsday, the Long Island daily newspaper, bought a newspaper distribution business yesterday that delivers several local ''shoppers'' newspapers.
The papers, which are filled with advertisements, are given out free to more than 1.15 million homes.


Event Shifted Over Bias Rule
LEAD: The Western Open, one of the oldest events on the PGA Tour, will move to Cog Hill Golf and Country Club next year in compliance with anti-discrimination guidelines, according to a published report.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Tennis
Nydahl Eliminates Muster: Tomas Nydahl of Sweden eliminated top-seeded Thomas Muster of Austria, 2-6, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday in the second round of a tournament in Bordeaux, France.
Fourth-seeded Guy Forget of France also advanced to the quarterfinals, but withdrew from the tournament after learning that his father had died earlier in the day.


Bridge
LEAD: Players from the United States and Europe dominated the play in the semifinal stages of the world championships here today with an American partnership and a French partnership at the head of the standings.


Pipeline Project Is Endorsed
LEAD: A Federal hearing officer recommended on Tuesday that construction proceed on a long-delayed pipeline that would carry natural gas from Canada to the United States.


Metro Matters;   Cuomo's Seizing Of the Moment On Police Hiring
LEAD: During last year's New York City mayoral campaign, David N. Dinkins bristled every time his restrained, equivocal style was measured against the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's, just because both are black.
Why not, Mr.
Dinkins argued persuasively, compare any of his white opponents to New York's glib Governor, Mario M.


A Historic Moment Slips By, Overtaken by Other Events
LEAD: For an event of such historic dimensions, the signing today of the final settlement between the Germans and the World War II victors seemed almost lost in the tumult of more immediate concerns.


Clean Air Bills Are Likely to Cost More Than Anyone Expected
LEAD: To the Editor:


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: WHEN he was 13 years old, Laurence Steinberg felt cursed by his 20/20 vision. ''It seemed like everyone who was popular wore glasses,'' said Dr.
Steinberg, a professor of psychology at Temple University in Philadelphia and the author of ''You and Your Adolescent'' (Harper &amp; Row, 1990, $19.95).


Summer's Soldiers
LEAD: At the county fair the armored personnel carrier stood between the pony rides and the dart game.
Boys passed through it all afternoon, poring over the controls, running their hands along its camouflage-colored body. ''It is not a tank,'' said a soldier sternly each time a boy raised on G.I.
Joe mislabeled the thing.


FINAL DRIVE NEAR ON BUDGET ACCORD
LEAD: Negotiators working on reducing the Federal budget deficit began today what they hoped would be a final drive toward an accord, but they are still deeply divided over central matters of taxes and spending.


Buildup of U.S. Forces in the Gulf Is a Temporary Move, Assad Says
LEAD: President Hafez al-Assad, who has sent troops to join the United States-led buildup in the Persian Gulf and will meet Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d here on Friday, said today that American forces would leave the region when the crisis is over.


Maryland Coach Fined
LEAD: Gary Williams, the men's basketball coach at the University of Maryland, has been fined $250 and sentenced in Silver Spring, Md., to one year's unsupervised probation after pleading guilty to driving while under the influence of alcohol.
The 45-year-old Williams was arrested on May 13 on the inner loop of Capital Beltway after returning from a late dinner.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi has decided not to sell Siegel &amp; Gale, a corporate-identify firm, back to its management, according to Alan Siegel, chairman and chief executive of Siegel &amp; Gale.
Saatchi acquired the firm in 1985 and was expected to resell the New York-based company last summer.


Senate Panel Backs Extension of Arts Agency
LEAD: The Senate committee that oversees the National Endowment for the Arts today approved a bill calling for a five-year extension of the endowment without restrictions on the kind of art the agency may support.


Chronicle
LEAD: In an election year awash in political fund-raising events comes a new angle - a politician lending his own supporters to raise money for an arts institution.
The National Arts Club in Manhattan is giving its Citation of Merit to ROY M. GOODMAN, who is up for re-election, at a dinner on Tuesday.
Some 300 of the Republican State


Zoltan Rozsnyai, 64, Founder of Orchestra
LEAD: Zoltan Rozsnyai, the founder and conductor of the United States International University Orchestra and the former conductor of the San Diego Symphony, was found dead, apparently of a heart attack, at his home on Monday.
He was 64 years old.


Clean Air Bills Are Likely to Cost More Than Anyone Expected;   The Price of Breathing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cuban Defector Tells of Soviet Cuts
LEAD: A former senior Cuban official involved in recent negotiations with the Soviet Union said today that Moscow's moves toward a market economy and scheduled cuts in Soviet aid to Cuba would cripple the island's economy within a year and a half unless radical policy changes were introduced by President Fidel


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption with the Gardener's World column of The Home Section on Aug. 23 misidentified a plant.
It was White Wild Mallow, not Queen


The Brady Bill and New York Guns
LEAD: In New York City the number of illegal guns in public hands appears to have reached a critical mass as stray bullets fired by feuding neighbors, drug gangsters and others kill or injure luckless bystanders.
Fatalities range from children at play to an Assistant District Attorney shopping for doughnuts.


Girl Killed and Mother Hurt In a Hit-and-Run Accident
LEAD: A 3-year-old girl was killed and her mother was seriously injured in a hit-and-run accident last night on Atlantic Avenue in the East New York section of Brooklyn, the police said.


Kitty Litter Maker Selling Operations
LEAD: Edward Lowe Industries, the maker of Kitty Litter cat box filler, agreed to sell its marketing and manufacturing operations to an investment group.
Terms of the sale were not disclosed.
The buyer is a group led by the Good Capital Company of New York and Knightsbridge Inc. of Chicago.


Hesitation on Soviet Economy
LEAD: Facing what may be the most critical choice of his presidency, Mikhail S. Gorbachev is once again widely seen to be seized by indecision.


Japan's Surplus Rises
LEAD: Japan's trade surplus edged up 3.7 percent in August, to $3.49 billion, from $3.37 billion a year earlier, the Finance Ministry announced today.
It was the third time this year that the surplus had widened compared with a year earlier.
The surplus had declined for 11 consecutive months until March.


After Criticism, U.N. Selects New Chief For Relief Efforts
LEAD: The United Nations acknowledged today that its efforts to help tens of thousands of people fleeing from Iraq and occupied Kuwait are going badly, selecting a new coordinator for relief efforts only a couple weeks after appointing someone else to do the same job.


Aviation Security Force Called Too Small by Half
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration has only about half as many security officials as it needs, and it will take several years to hire and train hundreds more, a draft of a Bush Administration report on aviation security says.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Ambase Corp., an insurance concern, ended talks to sell its United States International Reinsurance Co.


New York City Will Prevail
LEAD: New York City is at war with its criminals, and the city needs help from every quarter.
When I arrived at


American Plans A Fare Increase
LEAD: American Airlines, the nation's largest carrier, plans to raise its fares again because of higher fuel costs, Robert L. Crandall, the chairman of the AMR Corporation, the airline's parent company, said yesterday.


Ogrodnick Accord Near
LEAD: The Rangers and John Ogrodnick said tonight they were on the verge of a deal that could have the free agent left wing practicing with the team by as early as Friday.


Nederlander Gets Owners' Approval
LEAD: The upheaval in the Yankees' hierarchy moved one step closer to resolution today with Robert Nederlander apparently receiving recommendation as successor to George Steinbrenner as the club's managing partner, Following Nederlander's 20-minute appearance before baseball's eight-man ownership committee, Commissioner Fay Vincent said, ''My understanding is the committee will come forward with a recommendation tomorrow to approve him and I would expect he would be approved.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day yesterday misidentified the company to be acquired by Tyco Toys Inc.
It is Playtime Products Inc.


Trial Begins for 10 Accused of Running Drug Ring
LEAD: At the opening of a Federal narcotics trial yesterday, the prosecutor portrayed the 10 defendants as the operators of ''one of the largest, one of the most effective and one of the most violent drug organizations ever to invade the streets of Brooklyn.''


Daniel M. Feins, 73, Ex-Principal in Bronx
LEAD: Daniel M. Feins, a teacher and an administrator in the New York City public schools for almost 40 years and the former principal of Walton High School in the Bronx, died on Monday at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 73 years old and lived in Yonkers.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, two front-page pictures in Business Day yesterday with an article about the National Bank of Kuwait were reversed in some editions.
Sheik Ali al-Khalifa al-Sabah, Kuwait's Finance Minister, was at the left, with glasses, and Ibrahim S. Dabdoub, the bank's chief executive, was at the right.


Lowly Royals Rehire Wathan as Manager
LEAD: The Kansas City Royals have rehired embattled Manager John Wathan for 1991, General Manager John Schuerholz announced yesterday.


Dr. Vivian A. Tenney; Internist, 77
LEAD: Dr.
Vivian Allison Tenney, an internist and a gynecologist in Manhattan for 45 years, died on Monday at Rockingham Memorial Hospital in Harrisonburg, Va.
She was 77 years old and lived in Bridgewater, Va.


Congress and the Crisis: To Intervene or Not?
LEAD: While the President has been mounting the fastest military buildup in modern history, Congress has been sinking deeper into a political quandary over how or whether to assert its role in foreign policy and armed conflict.


Candidate Calls A Victory Party Ahead of Count
LEAD: State Senator Serphin R. Maltese of Queens held a victory party for 600 campaign workers Tuesday evening even though the votes in his write-in campaign for the Republican nomination for the State Senate will not be counted until tomorrow.


New Jersey's Death Penalty: Fair or Fake?
LEAD: Twenty days after New Jersey enacted its death penalty law in 1982, Richard F. Biegenwald shot a teen-age girl to death in Asbury Park.
Soon after, he became one of the first people sentenced under the law to die by lethal injection.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Network Group Inc., Nashville, named Larry D. Sensing vice president and chief financial officer.
He succeeds Al Dupere, who was chief financial officer on a interim basis.


Dark Side to New York's Neon Clubs
LEAD: The four-man police car cruised slowly down a block filled with young men and women laughing, smoking languidly or perfecting their stylized aerobic prancing to the beat of ''house music'' from a nearby nightclub.
The car crept by.
No one broke rhythm.


Merger Is Set With Smart
LEAD: Smart magazine and a new men's magazine that was set for publication early next year by Norris Publishing will merge into Smart: For Men, Owen Lipstein, chairman of the New American Magazine Company, said yesterday.


Houston Raises $75 Million
LEAD: A $75 million issue of prior lien revenue bonds from the Houston water and sewer system was priced in competitive bidding yesterday.


Post at the Brink Again as Owner Seeks Wage Cuts
LEAD: The New York Post, which has lost money for decades, is at death's door for the second time in two and a half years, and union leaders met all day yesterday with representatives of the paper's owner in an effort to hammer out an agreement that would keep it alive.


New Focus on Sperm Brings Fertility Successes
LEAD: Doctors who treat infertile couples are increasingly looking at men, not just women, as potential sources of the problem, and this is resulting in more pregnancies for the childless, specialists report.


Reviews/Music;   Into Juju's Ecstatic Heart
LEAD: In the eight years since the Nigerian juju-music band leader King Sunny Ade released his first album here, starting the World Beat movement in the United States, juju music's prominence has faded.
It has been replaced in the minds of agents, record companies and the audience looking for something different by Zairian and Parisian soukous music.


Savings Bond Sales Up
LEAD: Sales of United States savings bonds rose 5 percent last month for their best August performance in four years, the Treasury Department reported today.
It said sales totaled $653 million last month, up from $622 million a year earlier and the largest for the month since $1.1 billion was posted in 1986.


S.A.S.-Lorenzo Sale Backed
LEAD: The Transportation Department said today that it would allow the Scandinavian Airlines System to buy out most of Frank Lorenzo's interest in Continental Airlines Holdings Inc.


California Justices Block AIDS Testing In Prostitution Cases
LEAD: The California Supreme Court has blocked a city law requiring AIDS tests for convicted prostitutes, acting hours after an appellate court allowed such testing to resume.


A Dog Has His Day, Again
LEAD: THE RCA dog is back.


Pakistan Files More Charges Of Corruption Under Bhutto
LEAD: The army-backed caretaker Government filed more charges of corruption today against Benazir Bhutto, the ousted Prime Minister, in what she sees as a political vendetta against her.


Bush Tapes a Message for Iraqi TV
LEAD: Hoping to broadcast his own message to Iraq, President Bush made a videotape today of a short address from the Oval Office that told Iraqis to blame their own leader if they are suffering from the economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations.


In Fall, It's Spring To Bulb-Planters
LEAD: GOOD gardeners know that spring begins in fall.
The autumnal equinox is a week away, so it is time to stop procrastinating, decide which hardy flower bulbs to buy, and then plant the species that will brighten the scene when winter begins to fade.


Review/Music;   Black Repertory Group in Debut
LEAD: Seven years ago, Columbia College Chicago established a Center for Black Music Research, with the goal of promoting music by black composers in all musical genres.
The center publishes journals, bulletins and monographs, maintains a data base and holds conferences.
It also sponsors the Black Music Repertory Ensemble, which made its New York debut on Monday evening at Alice Tully


Flow of Asians Fleeing Iraq Has Eased, Jordan Reports
LEAD: Jordanian officials said today that the immediate crisis caused by the influx of Asians fleeing Kuwait had begun to recede, with only 46,000 people remaining in transit camps that held more than twice as many a week ago.


Jury Backs Chip Patents
LEAD: In a case that breaks legal ground, the Advanced Micro Devices Inc. has lost a patent infringement suit brought by the Brooktree Corporation, a computer chip company in San Diego.


Black Business Ownership Up
LEAD: The number of businesses owned by black Americans rose modestly from 1982 to 1987, but revenues for the same period more than doubled, according to a new Census Bureau survey released on Tuesday.


CURB ON ABORTION VOTED IN MICHIGAN
LEAD: The Michigan Legislature swiftly approved a measure today requiring girls 17 or younger to get a parent's or a judge's consent for an abortion.


Barry Backlash: Capital Turned Upside Down
LEAD: By becoming the most vocal critic of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr., Sharon Pratt Dixon was able to overcome formidable political odds and in the end easily win Tuesday's Democratic mayoral primary.


Review/Television;   Street Crime as Seen in the Living Room
LEAD: Can't get enough on local news?
Stay tuned.
Tonight brings two hours of prime-time crime. ''Murder U.S.A.,'' the season premiere of ''48 Hours'' at 8 P.M. on CBS, serves up bodies on stretchers, bodies in bags and bodies in coffins.
There are drug raids, gun-running and a case of sexual assault.
There are innocent victims and grieving parents.


Northwest Seeks Australian Route
LEAD: Northwest Airlines has applied to the United States Transportation Department for special authority to enter the Australian market.


Books of The Times;   Astream, Seeking Trout and Wisdom
LEAD:
What the River Knows
An Angler in Midstream
By Wayne Fields
252 pages. Poseidon Press. $18.95.


Congress to Take New Look at Racketeering Law
LEAD: Congress is poised to consider a measure that critics contend would protect many individuals and businesses charged with white-collar crime - including those involved in the savings and loan scandal - from civil suits.


Texas A&amp;M Fined
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association has fined Texas A&amp;M $1,000 and publicly reprimanded the school for not reporting the ineligibility of an athlete before the 1990 track championships.


Clean Air Bill Is Called an Oil Saver
LEAD: The Environmental Protection Agency said today that pending legislation to strengthen the Clean Air Act would substantially reduce the nation's dependence on foreign oil.


Zeckendorf Feels Pinch On 2 Projects
LEAD: William Zeckendorf Jr., who is considered to be one of the most conservative of the city's large developers, is being pinched by New York's troubled real estate market.


Dinkins Assails Bashing of New York
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins lashed out at the ''bashing and trashing'' of cities, and encouraged people to visit New York City in a speech today that was meant to counter the idea that crime in the city has grown out of control.


Hamilton to Drill For North Sea Gas
LEAD: The Hamilton Oil Company and four partners plan to tap a giant natural gas reserve off the coast of Scotland, in a $2.85 billion deal that could create the largest gas project in the British North Sea.
The British Department of Energy agreed to allow Denver-based Hamilton and its partners to drill a series of wells in the Bruce field, 240 miles northeast of Aberdeen,


Coleman Still Unsigned


Nets' Talks With Coleman Are Yielding Little Progress
LEAD: Derrick Coleman will not be signing a contract with the Nets this week.
He may not sign next week.
And with each week that passes, the possibility increases that Coleman will be unsigned when training camp opens next month.


Kohl Vows to Widen Role in Gulf Effort
LEAD: Apparently trying to curb Congressional anger that Bonn is not pulling its weight in the Persian Gulf, Chancellor Helmut Kohl pledged more help today, but was meager with details.


Troops' Message to Powell: When Can We Go Home?
LEAD: Wherever Gen.
Colin L. Powell went today on his tour of American forces here, he was confronted with one question: When can we go home?


Triple Crown Undergoes Change
LEAD: The operators of the Triple Crown races announced changes yesterday in their nomination procedures and bonus systems that went a long way toward correcting some recent problems.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Care to Dance?


Greenspan Urges Cautious Moves To Shore Up the Banking System
LEAD: Warning Congress to move cautiously in trying to cure the ailing banking system, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, said today that increasing the premiums that institutions pay to the declining fund that insures bank deposits could be more harmful than helpful, threatening some banks with insolvency.


400 Shacks Burned in a South African Township
LEAD: Refugees streamed out of a squatter camp in this segregated black township today after a night of terror in which at least 400 shacks were burned by marauders.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-12
The U.N.
Security Council agreed on a plan to set tight limits on any humanitarian food supplies sent to Iraq and occupied Kuwait.
Page A1


Souter Tacks Over Shoals;   Bork's Defeat Echoes as Questioning Starts
LEAD: Even as he refused to give his views on the Supreme Court's abortion precedents, David H. Souter used the opening day of his confirmation hearing to assure senators that they could trust him as a judge of moderate instincts, able to understand and sympathize with the dilemmas of modern life and ordinary people.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: It's official: GAYFRYD STEINBERG has resigned as the chief money-raiser for PEN.
As the prime mover of the annual dinner to benefit the writers' organization, she raised close to $500,000 this year, nearly half of PEN's $1 million budget.


TV Weekend;   A Bitter Indictment of Thatcherism
LEAD: Public television's ''Alive From Off Center'' is primarily a weekly showcase for American video artists, but the series is closing its current season with an acquisition from the BBC. ''Road,'' written by Jim Cartwright and directed by Alan Clarke, is a scorching indictment of the Thatcher era in Britain.


Arrest in Youth's Shooting Turns Up Arsenal
LEAD: Two 16-year-old youths sang and talked as they walked down a Brooklyn street Wednesday night.
A man in a doorway took offense and fired six times, hitting one of the youths once in the leg.


Courts Rethinking Rule Intended to Slow Frivolous Lawsuits
LEAD: A powerful committee of Federal judges and law school professors has decided to re-examine a tough and controversial procedural rule that enables judges to impose heavy sanctions on lawyers who file frivolous lawsuits and motions.


Accounting Panel Postpones Vote on Bank Write-Downs
LEAD: Bowing to pressure from the banking community, a leading rule-making body yesterday postponed voting on a plan to require banks to write down certain losing investments on a quarterly basis.
Instead, the group voted unanimously to require the banks to describe their holdings more fully in the footnotes to their financial statements.


Market Place;   When Companies Conceal the Facts
LEAD: FOR a bondholder, the effect can be devastating: First, a company borrows millions of dollars; then it runs into problems and finds a way to stop reporting how bad things are.


Bessie Awards and Politics
LEAD: The New York Dance and Performance Awards, also known as the Bessies, honor performers, choreographers, composers and designers with cash prizes in a yearly event that also includes performances and a good deal of amusing onstage repartee.
But the Seventh Annual Bessies, held on Wednesday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, took on a new and urgent political tone after the recent resignations of this year's co-hosts, Karen Finley and Danitra


Housing Lag In Newark: After a Year, One House
LEAD: In the year since Newark agreed to stop tearing down its dilapidated public housing projects until new housing could be found, none of the city's battered high-rise projects have been razed, but only one new subsidized town house has been built.


Bleecker St. Cinema Closing? A Mistake, Surely
LEAD: To the Editor:


Memoir Preserves Morley Callaghan's Memory
LEAD: To the Editor:


Multimedia President Departs for Classroom
LEAD: James T. Lynagh has resigned as president and chief operating officer of Multimedia Inc., which owns newspapers, broadcast stations, cable franchies and television programming, including the Phil Donahue show.


Amoco-Soviet Deal
LEAD: The Amoco Corporation said today that a subsidiary, the Amoco Eurasia Petroleum Company, had signed an agreement with the state gas business of the Soviet Union that could lead to the development of petroleum resources in the Soviet Union.
The accord gives Amoco an opportunity to conduct a study of the technical and economic feasibility of developing several fields in western Siberia in cooperation with Soviet organizations, Amoco said.


You Can't Take the Politics Out of the Court;   Griswold v. Connecticut
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fannie Mae Offers $300 Million Issue
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, yesterday priced an off-calendar issue of debentures totaling $300 million through various securities dealers.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.68
7.68
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.36
7.37
7.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.28
7.30
7.57
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.68
8.68
8.11
30-YR.


Proposals for Olympic Squad: N.B.A. Coach and No Tryouts
LEAD: Major changes for selecting the next United States Olympic basketball team were proposed today by the United States Basketball Games subcommittee.


Bush Will Act Faster On Mexico Trade Pact
LEAD: President Bush, acting more swiftly than expected, will ask Congress next week for authority to negotiate a free trade agreement with Mexico, Administration officials said.
Though not the only reason, the Persian Gulf crisis was a factor in the decision, they said.


Samuel S. Stratton, 73, Former Congressman, Dies
LEAD: Samuel S. Stratton, a former Congressman who represented the Albany and Schenectady area for 30 years and was a longtime member of the House Armed Services Committee, died yesterday at Shady Grove Hospital in Gaithersburg, Md.
He was 73 years old and had lived for the last year in the Manor Care nursing home in Potomac,


Shaw Close on Return To Celtics, Report Says
LEAD: Brian Shaw, who signed a contract with the Boston Celtics in January, then told the team he wanted to play a second year in Italy, is reportedly close to completing a deal that would return him to the Celtics this season.


Philippine Trade Gap Up
LEAD: The Philippine trade deficit rose sharply in the first seven months of the year because of higher imports and slower-than-expected growth in exports, the Government's statistics office said on Tuesday.


Red Sox Maintain 4-Game Lead
LEAD: Ivan Calderon, batting leadoff for the first time in his career, doubled to start a tie-breaking three-run third inning and broke the game open with a three-run homer in the fourth tonight, leading the Chicago White Sox to a 9-6 victory over the Boston Red Sox.


Citing Medical Evidence on Smog, California Lowers Threshold for Its Health Alerts
LEAD: Citing cumulative medical evidence that smog can cause serious injury even to healthy, vigorous adults, the California Air Resources Board ordered all local pollution control districts in the state today to issue health alerts at much lower smog levels than before.


U.S. Warns Iraq on Aiding Terrorists
LEAD: The United States warned Iraq this week that it would hold President Saddam Hussein responsible if terrorist groups based in Iraq attacked American forces or interests in the Persian Gulf, a State Department official reported today.


Review/Film;   Eastwood Follows The Trail Of the Elusive, Essential Huston
LEAD: In 1951, while in central Africa to prepare for the filming of ''The African Queen,'' John Huston embarked upon a brief safari with his sound man. ''How often have you been elephant hunting, John?'' the sound man asked during the course of the trip.


Two U.S. Companies Plan to Sell Soviets 34 Billion Cigarettes
LEAD: To ease a worsening Soviet cigarette shortage, America's two largest tobacco companies said yesterday that they would sell 34 billion cigarettes to the Soviet Union, or more than a month's supply.


Athene Seyler, 101, British Comic Actress
LEAD: Athene Seyler, a popular British actress who specialized in satiric comedy and was a Commander of the British Empire, died on Tuesday at her home in the Hammersmith section of London.
She was 101 years old.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: TOMMY TUNE has won the Jean Cocteau International Style Award. ''For his elegant presence, an unparalleled style and innovative force in the theater,'' said TONY CLARK, executive director of the Severin Wunderman Museum in Irvine, Calif., which says it has the largest collection of Cocteau works.


Economic Scene;   Turkey's Stake In Mideast Crisis
LEAD: IN the midst of the Middle Eastern crisis, Turkey is struggling to maintain its strong support for the United States and the United Nations in their opposition to Iraq's aggression against Kuwait.
But the Turkish President, Turgut Ozal, is under heavy pressure from other politicians and Turkish military commanders not to send troops to the Persian Gulf.


The Fine Art of the Disney Deal
LEAD: The Walt Disney Company said today that a top Hollywood production team and a Japanese investment group had agreed to provide several hundred million dollars in financing for Disney films in coming years.


Review/Film;   New Life for an Iranian Boy Seeking Refuge From War
LEAD: Airborne danger hovers over the 10-year-old title character of the Iranian film ''Bashu, the Little Stranger,'' but it changes as radically as the young boy's surroundings do.
He is at the Persian Gulf as the film begins, experiencing the terrors of an Iraqi air raid (the film has silhouetted warplanes flying behind its opening titles) and watching in anguish as the bombing kills his parents and destroys his home.


Illuminating Man Ray As Fashion Photographer
LEAD: Man Ray came out of an era when photographers painted with light.
There is a stillness about his fashion photography: stark, static studio images of models in black lace, organdy silk and embroidered crepe, their arms stretched skyward, their faces lighted from above.
His women never look into the camera.


Without Money or Choices, Philadelphia Plans Big Cuts
LEAD: The city's financial problems assumed grim reality today as a plan for obtaining temporary financing on Wall Street collapsed and officials began discussing drastic cuts in city services.


Her Car Towed, a Woman Learns New York's Lessons
LEAD: Stephanie Gorski of Wyckoff, N.J., drove into midtown Manhattan yesterday on what she thought would be a simple errand.
Instead, the 23-year-old woman became the center of attention on West 45th Street -and learned something about New Yorkers that she had never dreamed possible.


No Starring Role, Nederlander Vows
LEAD: If his initial stated intentions do not change, as his predecessor's did, Robert Nederlander will operate the Yankees in a totally different manner from the way George Steinbrenner did the past 17 years.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Airgas Inc., Radnor, Pa., appointed Britton H. Murdoch vice president of finance, chief financial officer and treasurer.
John P. McNiff was named vice president of corporate development.


TAXES APPROVED BY ISRAELI CABINET
LEAD: The Israeli Cabinet unanimously approved an economic package today that includes harsh new taxes to help pay for the absorption of Soviet Jewish immigrants.


Don't Delay on AIDS Relief
LEAD: The AIDS emergency relief bill that moved so swiftly through the Senate this summer authorized substantial funds for areas where the bulk of the nation's AIDS victims reside.
But the Congressional subcommittee appropriated no funds for new programs this year, replacing the bill's earlier message of hope with one of neglect.


Frank David Kitchin, Doctor, 66
LEAD: Frank David Kitchin, the director of the department of Occupational Health at New York Hospital, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 66 years old.


Cuomo Says 'No New Taxes' Is Not an 'Absolute' Promise
LEAD: Issuing one of the more elastic versions of a ''no new taxes'' pledge, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he planned to hold the line on tax increases next year but could not make an ''absolute'' promise because of uncertainty over the state's economy and the Federal budget.


Let Donor Interests Prevail in Transplant
LEAD: To the Editor:


Milacron Selling Robotics Division
LEAD: ABB Robotics Inc. has signed a letter of intent to buy the industrial robot business of Cincinnati Milacron Inc.
The division includes a plant in Greenwood, S.C., and its 200 employees.
The companies declined to disclose the sale price.


A Top Official At Newsday Is Promoted
LEAD: The associate publisher of Newsday, Steven L. Isenberg, who played a key role in developing New York Newsday, has been appointed executive vice president for marketing for The Los Angeles Times.


CBS News in Tokyo Pact
LEAD: CBS News announced an agreement yesterday to share resources and technology with the Tokyo Broadcasting System, creating what CBS called the largest satellite news-gathering service in the world.
The agreement, which will take effect in April, is the first between an American and a Japanese network.


Oil Deal With Iraq Denied in Iran, But Private Executives Confirm It
LEAD: An Iranian daily newspaper known to reflect the views of the Iranian Foreign Ministry today denied reports that Iran had agreed to take oil from Iraq to use in its own refineries.


Mehta, Rostropovich And a Study in Synergy
LEAD: One of Zubin Mehta's strengths as a conductor is his ability to take fire from a soloist whose playing throws off inspirational sparks.
The New York Philharmonic's music director had just such a congenial partner on Wednesday evening at Avery Fisher Hall, where he and the cellist Mstislav Rostropovich made an incendiary combination.


Spanish Truck Maker Sells Stake to Fiat Unit
LEAD: Fiat's Iveco truck subsidiary agreed today to buy a 60 percent stake in the state-owned Spanish truck maker Empresa Nacional de Autocamiones S.A., also known as Enasa.


Tell Us What It Takes To Make New York Safe
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Film;   Love and Pain Among the Gentry in Ireland
LEAD: Pat O'Connor's ''Fools of Fortune,'' which opens today at the Carnegie Hall Cinema, wears a solemn expression that is appropriate for a sad romantic melodrama set against the background of Ireland's fight for independence.
The approach is serious, the performances are sincere and the physical production is impressive.


Florida Governor Warily Fights Chiles Mystique
LEAD: Gov.
Bob Martinez has the advantage of incumbency.
He has a formidable campaign war chest.
He has both President Bush and former President Ronald Reagan coming to Florida to campaign for him.


Michael Cooke, 56, Literature Professor At Yale and Author
LEAD: Michael G. Cooke, a professor of English at Yale University and an authority on the English Romantic Movement and African and Caribbean literature, died on Tuesday at St.
Raphael's Hospital in New Haven.
He had turned 56 years old on Tuesday and lived in Bethany, Conn.


260 Arrive From Kuwait, Fearful for Those Left
LEAD: More than 260 American citizens who recently left Kuwait arrived here today to the greetings of delighted relatives.


School Days Test Parents' Ties to New York
LEAD: This is the season of the return to school - the crucible that tests many New Yorkers' commitment to their city.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Anglo American, Johannesburg, will go ahead with its mining project in the Moab area, 100 miles southwest of Johannesburg.


U.S. Says It May Tap Oil Reserve
LEAD: The Bush Administration, confronting what it believes will be the maximum risk of an oil shortage over the next several weeks, seemed less confident today that it could avoid drawing on the nation's strategic reserve, a move that would almost certainly push prices down as the additional oil is auctioned into the market.


Robert L. Nikirk, 51, Club Librarian, Dies
LEAD: Robert L. Nikirk, librarian of the Grolier Club for the last two decades and a specialist in antiquarian books, died on Sept. 5 at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 51 years old and lived in Manhattan.
A family friend said he died of AIDS-related pneumonia.
Mr.
Nikirk was involved in preparing exhibitions, lectures and publications for the century-old research library and gathering place for those interested in the history and collecting of books and manuscripts.


Excerpts From First Senate Session on the Souter Nomination
LEAD: Following are excerpts from today's opening session of Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on the nomination of David H. Souter to the Supreme Court, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:
OPENING STATEMENTS
Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr.


Gathers Event Canceled
LEAD: A golf tournament to raise money for the family of the late college basketball star Hank Gathers was canceled yesterday because sponsors could not get enough celebrity athletes to play.


Restaurants
LEAD: A French bistro reopens with a more international menu and without its Surrealist gallery.


At the Movies
LEAD:
Keeping Up


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Feast of San Gennaro, which began yesterday and runs through Sept. 23, Mulberry Street between Canal and Prince Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 11:30 P.M. daily.


DYING MAY REFUSE FOOD, COURT RULES
LEAD: Florida's Supreme Court ruled today that dying people had a right to refuse food and that guardians could make the decision for people who were incompetent to act on their own.


Jordan Port Falls Still And Its Leaders Seethe
LEAD: The streets seem virtually deserted, the hotels are empty, most of the port structures lie still and more than 80 percent of the 11,000-strong tractor-trailor fleet sits parked and silent.


Money System Fails, Kremlin Is Warned
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's chief economic adviser, reflecting the inner tensions of the Kremlin, warned today that the Soviet monetary system was ''disintegrating'' because of ''scorched earth'' measures of opposition within the Government to a transition to a free-market economy.


Strawberry Carries Mets With Bat and Arm
LEAD: ''If this is the end for me here,'' Darryl Strawberry was saying before the final shootout, ''I want to go out big.''


Union Sees Layoffs At Rhone-Poulenc
LEAD: Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc., the recently formed French-American company, plans to lay off 400 workers in France through a combination of early retirement and payroll cutbacks, a union said.
The company declined to comment but said its governing board will meet on Friday in Paris.
It plans a news conference next week.


Newport to Newport, The Long, Long Way
LEAD: In a world where exploration has left few unknowns, adventure has taken on new meaning.
It may no longer be a search for a new land, but it can still be a trip that offers a degree of fear, drama, solitude and, ultimately, satisfaction.


Southland's Offer Extended
LEAD: The Southland Corporation, owner of the 7-Eleven convenience chain, extended its deadline today for an offer to exchange $1.8 billion in publicly held debt for a new package of securities.


Precious Days for Civil Rights
LEAD: As the days dwindle down on the 101st Congress, President Bush's threatened veto hovers over legislation that would restore and strengthen job discrimination laws weakened by the Supreme Court.
If Mr.
Bush can't lead the civil rights parade, he can save both precious time and anguish by getting out of the way in recognition of the simple justice of the bill.


E. Ralph Lacey, 78; Designed Submarines
LEAD: E. Ralph Lacey, a naval architect and marine engineer who in a 41-year career with the Navy specialized in the preliminary design of submarines, died on Friday at the Saybrook Convalescent Home in Old Saybrook, Conn.
He was 78 years old and lived in Lyme, Conn.


Sears Announces Sales Promotion
LEAD: Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company Wednesday announced a frequent-buyer program aimed at increasing retail sales by rewarding shoppers who charge merchandise on their Sears credit cards.
The Sears Charge Bonus Club, which will begin Saturday, is Sears's first significant promotional effort since its chief executive, Edward A.


PROBABLE MISTAKE IN HUBBLE IS FOUND
LEAD: A design defect in a measuring device, probably compounded by human error during assembly, caused the mirror flaw in the $1.5 billion Hubble Space Telescope, a Federal panel said yesterday.


Pirates Seem To Take Defeat in Stride
LEAD: The Pittsburgh Pirates put on their best possible face.


Bridge
LEAD: Two Brazilians made a strong bid here today at the world bridge championships to win their second world title within a year.
Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco, who were members of the winning team in the 1989 Bermuda Bowl in Perth, Australia, last November, had a big lead over their closest rivals in the world pairs championship final with two of the five sessions completed.


2 Nations May Leave Liberian Peace Force
LEAD: West African troops evacuated 1,000 people today from the mansion of the country's slain President, but two members of the five-nation peacekeeping force said they were reconsidering their role.


Florida St. Invited To Join A.C.C.
LEAD: The Atlantic Coast Conference voted today to invite Florida State to join the eight-team league.


Early-Month Vehicle Sales Up by 2.5%
LEAD: Large rebates on many models drew buyers and lifted car sales above the trend for the year, as sales of domestically produced cars and light trucks increased 2.5 percent in early September over relatively weak sales a year ago.
But sales of light trucks fell, a sign to some analysts that higher gasoline prices were beginning to take their toll.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: When PETER MAX established the Global Works Foundation in the late 1960's to support environmental causes, the whole-earth concept was dawning.
Since then, he has given money and art to about 50 different groups.
Now, he has designed a T-shirt and he says he hopes its sales will raise $25,000 to $50,000 for the Earth Communications Office, a Los Angeles-based not-for-profit group that publishes environmental information and produces public service messages for broadcast.


Start of Globex Is Delayed
LEAD: Partners in a proposed 24-hour electronic system for trading financial futures and options said today that they had pushed back the starting date to the spring of 1991.


SERBIA DISSIDENTS VOTE CONSTITUTION
LEAD: Ethnic Albanian members of the dissolved Parliament of the Yugoslav region of Kosovo met clandestinely last week and adopted an alternative constitution for the region, the Yugoslav press agency reported today.


Yankees Overcome Blunders And Tigers
LEAD: On a warmish evening in this cozy old downtown ball yard, the Yankees played about the way a last-place team is expected to play in the last month of a lost season.


Judge Dismisses An Indictment Against Officer
LEAD: A judge yesterday dismissed the indictment of a Brooklyn police officer who had been charged with manslaughter in the fatal shooting of an unarmed 14-year-old robbery suspect.


A Theater With a Past Is Growing Off Broadway
LEAD: The Variety Photo Plays Theater, a former nickelodeon that was closed two years ago for showing pornographic films, is undergoing a $1.5 million renovation to become a 499-seat theater for plays and musicals.
The theater, at Third Avenue and 14th Street, will be renamed the Variety Arts, and will be the largest Off Broadway house in New York


Forgive Them Not
LEAD: ''There are only two groups that are beating the drums for war in the Middle East - the Israeli Defense Ministry and its amen corner in the United States.''


Signet Prices $500 Million in Certificates
LEAD: A total of $500 million in senior and subordinated asset-backed certificates were priced yesterday through Signet Credit Card Trust 1990-1, with Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company as underwriter.


Review/Art;   In Singleminded Pursuit of a Geometric Vision
LEAD: In its own quiet way, the Burgoyne Diller retrospective that opens today at the Whitney Museum of American Art is a revelation.
Including paintings, drawings, wood reliefs and a few sculptures that span more than 30 years, it illuminates in full an achievement that has previously been known only in part, primarily by the stripped-down abstract canvases that


Foes of Mubarak Question U.S. Aims and Are Barred From Peace Journey
LEAD: As the magnitude of American military involvement in the Persian Gulf becomes increasingly clear to them, opposition politicians in Egypt have begun to question Washington's long-term intentions in the region and Cairo's close association with them.


Leyland Not Turning Any Tables
LEAD: If a cup of milk can be said to be confident, then this cup of milk was confident.
It perched serenely on the desk of Jim Leyland, knowing it would not be splattered all over the visiting clubhouse.


The Mileage Debate;   Some Say a Tax Increase Is Cheaper Than Putting Cars on a Stricter Diet
LEAD: With the Middle East conflict pushing gasoline prices higher, the Senate is debating today a bill that would require a 40 percent improvement during the next decade in the fuel efficiency of cars sold in America.
To its supporters, the issue is simple: if oil from the Persian Gulf is worth the risk of


Failed S.&amp;L.'s Cost Disputed
LEAD: A study prepared for the House Banking Committee suggests that the Government will end up paying $4.37 billion to bail out a failed California savings and loan association, more than double original estimate of $1.7 billion, the Fort Worth Star-Telegram reported today.


Guitar-Piano Duets
LEAD: The Schanzer-Speach Duo - Jeffrey Schanzer, guitarist, and Bernadette Speach, pianist - will perform new collaborative compositions and improvisations at Roulette, 228 West Broadway, at White Street, tomorrow evening at 8.
Thomas Buckner, a baritone, and Barbara Held, a flutist, will perform with the ensemble.


Mehta and Mahler's 3d
LEAD: Zubin Mehta will conduct the New York Philharmonic, the Westminster Symphonic Choir and the American Boychoir in the Mahler Symphony No. 3 at Avery Fisher Hall tonight at 8.
The mezzo-soprano Florence Quivar is to be the soloist.
The program will be repeated tomorrow evening at 8.
Tickets are $10 to $43.


The Damascus Road
LEAD: Secretary of State Baker's visit to Damascus points to an important political byproduct of the Persian Gulf crisis.
Syria is emerging from isolation to become a key diplomatic player in the region.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Beech-Nut Nutrition Corp., Fort Washington, Pa., a subsidiary of the Ralston Purina Co., to DDB Needham Worldwide, Chicago, for its baby food products.
Billings were not disclosed.
DDB Needham handles several other Ralston Purina accounts.


Souter Hearing On Public TV
LEAD: The Public Broadcasting Service, through its affiliate WETA in Washington, will resume coverage of the hearing on the confirmation of Judge David H. Souter at 10 A.M. today.
In addition to WETA, and WNET in New York, public television stations in Los Angeles, Chicago, Houston and New Hampshire have agreed to carry the PBS coverage.


Review/Art;   Focusing on Televisions As Objects, Not Media
LEAD: It is found in 98 percent of American homes.
It is on an average of 7.2 hours a day and is already 50 years old.
Yet the humble television set has rarely been considered a candidate for display in an art museum.
That it now is suggests that it is on its way to becoming an artifact of 20th-century life, much like the typewriter and home movie camera.


Roger G. Barker, 87, Psychology Educator
LEAD: Roger Garlock Barker, an educator and psychologist, died Monday at his home in Oskaloosa, Kan.
He was 87 years old.


Lethal Harvest
LEAD: One FIE .38 caliber Derringer . . . one Mossberg 12-gauge sawed-off shotgun . . . one Winchester 12-gauge shotgun . . . one Taurus .357 Magnum handgun . . . one Colt .45 handgun . . . one Smith &amp; Wesson .38 caliber revolver . . . one .30 caliber carbine, sawed off . . . one AMT .380 caliber semiautomatic.


I.M.F. Loan Bid by Brazil
LEAD: Brazil signed a letter of intent today for a $2 billion loan from the International Monetary Fund but said it would not pay interest on its bank debt until it reached a new agreement with commercial lenders, the Economy Minister, Zelia Cardoso de Mello, said.


Review/Film;   A Search for a Fictive Father
LEAD: It is a sad indication of the insularity of American cinema that Theo Angelopoulos, a Greek director with international stature, is virtually unknown in the United States.
The 53-year-old Athens-born film maker, whose 1988 epic ''Landscape in the Mist'' opens today at the Public Theater, belongs to a stately modernist tradition that embraces figures as divergent as Michelangelo Antonioni, Robert Bresson and Wim


Divorced Couple Is Awarded Joint Custody of 7 Embryos
LEAD: The Tennessee Court of Appeals today granted joint custody of seven frozen embryos to a divorced couple, overturning a ruling that had granted custody to the former wife.


Corn and Wheat Prices Fall After Bigger Crop Forecast
LEAD: As expected, corn and wheat futures prices dropped yesterday after the Government predicted increased supplies of those grains, but a drop in the soybean market surprised some observers.


Review/Film;   Ghost Tales in Cowboy Lands
LEAD: What is an actor of the stature of James Earl Jones doing in a film like ''Grim Prairie Tales,'' a quartet of limp ghost stories set in the Wild West?


On Stage
LEAD:
'Shogun' Slimming Down


Top Research Partner To Quit Goldman, Sachs
LEAD: Michael Armellino, partner in charge of research at Goldman, Sachs and a top-ranked airline analyst, plans to step down Dec. 1, he said yesterday.


Rat Immune System Is Taught to Accept Transplant, Researchers Say
LEAD: Researchers have found a surprising new way to trick the immune system of rats into accepting transplanted cells.


Outlook at Book Fair: Global and Historical
LEAD: Like ducks and geese winging across the Long Island marshes, writers and editors are flocking back to their winter roosts.
But the sure signal that the book industry has resumed after the summer doldrums will come this Sunday when marketing managers and publicity agents get down to the serious job of selling.


Post for Bob Boone
LEAD: A National League expansion franchise is still just a dream in Orlando, Fla., but the team's manager became a reality yesterday.
Orlando Pro Baseball Inc. named the 43-year-old Kansas City Royal catcher, Bob Boone, a 19-year major league veteran, to run its team, if the group is awarded one.
The group also named a former major league infielder, Denny Doyle, as director of baseball operations and his brother, Brian, as director of development.(


Historic Pews Returned to Synagogue


More Syrian Anti-Iraq Aid Reported
LEAD: Western diplomats here said today that Syria had agreed to send 10,000 more men and 300 tanks to join the American-led force being built up in Saudi Arabia to confront Iraq.


New Curator Named at the Modern
LEAD: In a long-awaited move, the Museum of Modern Art has named Robert Storr, a critic and painter, as curator in the department of painting and sculpture, with primary responsibility for contemporary art.
He replaces Linda Shearer, who left in June 1989 to become director of the Williams College Museum of


You Can't Take the Politics Out of the Court
LEAD: To the Editor:


Navy Finds No Wrongdoing By I.B.M. in Procurements
LEAD: The Navy Department said in a report released today that it had found no evidence that the International Business Machines Corporation violated Federal contracting laws in procuring Navy contracts.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Book on Spying Cleared
A New York court overturned a judicial ban on the American publication of a book by a former member of Israeli intelligence.
Page C29.
Tax Battle in Israel
The Israeli Cabinet approved a proposal for harsh new taxes to help pay for housing and services for new Soviet immigrants.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Font &amp; Vaamonde Inc., New York, the Hispanic agency partner of Grey Advertising, has opened a public relations office in New York.
It will be called FoVa Public Relations.


Judge Orders Teachers To Go to School or Jail
LEAD: A Superior Court judge ordered striking South Orange-Maplewood teachers today to report to classes Friday morning or face a weekend in jail for each day of work that they miss, union officials said.


Dow Drops by 43.07, To 2,582.67
LEAD: Stock prices fell sharply yesterday in repeated waves of computerized program selling, with the Dow Jones industrial average sliding 43.07, or 1.64 percent, to 2,582.67.


Casillas Ends Holdout
LEAD: Tony Casillas, the Atlanta Falcons' nose tackle, signed a two-year contract yesterday, ending a holdout that kept him away from the team for the entire preseason.


Bid for Allegheny Close to Approval
LEAD: A bankruptcy judge said today that he expected to sign an order clearing the way for Japonica Partners, an investment group, to take control of Allegheny International Inc., an appliance manufacturer.
Judge Joseph Cosetti said he planned to sign the order by Friday.


Guard Hurt Saving Student
LEAD: A 74-year-old school crossing guard was seriously injured Wednesday when he tried to shield a student from a car, the police said today.
The guard, Michael De Marco, was in an intersection six blocks from Leonard V. Moore School when he unsuccessfully tried to keep Henry Manesis, 12, from being hit.


You Can't Take the Politics Out of the Court;   George Bush's Lawyer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Labor Talks Are Stalled As Post Deadline Nears
LEAD: The New York Post's negotiations with its three principal unions were stalled yesterday, and only hours remain before the deadline set by the paper's owner for closing it.


Ferruzzi Move In Futures Case
LEAD: An Italian company accused of trying to corner the soybean futures market is seeking a court order to block a disciplinary hearing scheduled by the Chicago Board of Trade.
The company, the Ferruzzi


Ideas Compete On Paying For Officers
LEAD: Now that Mayor David N. Dinkins has pledged to hire unspecified thousands of additional police officers, he is besieged with conflicting advice from his own aides, the New York City Council, state officials, citizens groups and business leaders on how to pay for them.


People
LEAD: *
Joe Busse, director of agency and client accounting at Leo Burnett, Chicago, has been appointed vice president.


Printer System From Kodak
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company introduced a printing system today that will let personal computer users hook up with high-speed printers previously reserved for mainframes.


SOUTER DEFLECTS SENATORS' QUERIES ON ABORTION VIEWS
LEAD: Judge David H. Souter, President Bush's nominee to a Supreme Court seat that could prove decisive on a variety of issues including abortion, told the Senate Judiciary Committee today that he would not provide even an indirect hint of his views on the constitutional right to an abortion.


'Miss Saigon' Decision Is Postponed by Equity
LEAD: The council of Actors' Equity met yesterday to discuss a tentative agreement for the hit London musical ''Miss Saigon'' to move to Broadway but adjourned until Monday without reaching a decision.
The tentative accord, details of which were not revealed, requires council approval to take effect.
It came out of talks this week between Cameron Mackintosh, the show's producer, and Alan Eisenberg,


Ban on Mossad Book Is Overturned
LEAD: The Appellate Division of New York State Supreme Court, overturning a ruling made Wednesday by a State Supreme Court justice, lifted a ban on the United States publication of a book by a former member of Mossad, an Israeli intelligence service.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about the German unification treaty's place in history mistranslated the Russian word perestroika.
It means restructuring; the word for openness is glasnost.


Rights-Group Report Asserts Syria Tortures and Kills Political Foes
LEAD: Middle East Watch, an independent human-rights group, has issued a report asserting that Syria systematically kills and tortures political opponents and persecutes ethnic and religious minorities.


Francis A. Goodhue Jr., Lawyer, 74
LEAD: Francis A. Goodhue Jr., a Manhattan tax lawyer for 50 years, died yesterday at Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 74 years old and lived in Mount Kisco.


Fannie Gelb, Dress Designer, 94
LEAD: Fannie Gelb, a children's dress designer, died on Wednesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 94 years old and was a resident of the Jewish Home and Hospital in the Bronx.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
PHILADELPHIA (NL) - Traded Dennis Cook, pitcher, to the Los Angeles Dodgers for Darrin Fletcher, catcher.
FOOTBALL
ATLANTA (NFC) - Signed Tony Casillas, nose tackle, to a two-year contract.
Signed William Evers, defensive back.
HOCKEY
RANGERS (NHL) - Agreed to terms with John Ogrodnick, left wing.


Mexican Free Trade Pact Pushed
LEAD: President Bush, acting more swiftly than expected, will ask Congress next week for authority to negotiate a comprehensive free trade agreement with Mexico, Administration officials said today.
Though not the only reason, the Persian Gulf crisis was a factor in the decision, they said.


Price of Oil Rises Amid Nervousness
LEAD: Persistent nervousness over the Middle East crisis and its effect on energy supplies pushed oil prices slightly higher yesterday.


Auctions
LEAD:
Indian Pottery


Moscow and Bonn in a 'Good Neighbor' Pact
LEAD: The Soviet Union and West Germany today initialed a broad ''treaty on good-neighborliness, partnership and cooperation'' setting a framework for relations between Moscow and a united Germany.


Islanders' Roster Poses Unanswered Questions
LEAD: As their nine-game preseason schedule begins Friday night against the Boston Bruins in the Nassau Coliseum, the Islanders have enough question marks on their club to fill a punctuation guide.


Crisis Spurs Campaign To Save Oil
LEAD: IN response to the crisis in the Middle East, the Federal Government began a yearlong public service campaign yesterday that urges Americans to ''Do Your Part, Drive Smart.''


Review/Film;   Gleaning a Killing Ground
LEAD: ''Life and Nothing But'' was shown as part of the 1989 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 3, 1989.
The film, in French with English subtitles, opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema, Broadway and 63d Street.


Kuwait Urges Exiled Citizens To Register in Armed Forces
LEAD: The Kuwaiti Government today urged its nationals who have fled to other Persian Gulf countries to join the armed forces so they could help drive out the Iraqis occupying their country.


Daniel T. Brigham, Foreign Correspondent, 81
LEAD: Daniel T. Brigham, a former correspondent for The New York Times who reported on World War II from Switzerland, died on July 28 in the Bay Area Hospital in Coos Bay, Ore.
He was 81 years old and lived in Coos Bay.


Packers and Bears Renew Bitter Rivalry
LEAD: While leaping beyond respectability and becoming a playoff contender in 1989, the Green Bay Packers made a habit of close finishes.
Green Bay won four games by a single point, a National Football League record,and among the most thrilling was a 14-13 victory over the Chicago Bears on a Don Majkowski 14-yard touchdown pass to Sterling Sharpe with 32 seconds remaining at Lambeau


G.M. Seen as Nearing Agreement With Auto Workers on New Pact
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation and the United Automobile Workers appear close to a three-year labor agreement that could improve job security benefits for the company's 300,000 hourly employees.


Hilton Expecting 50% Drop in Net
LEAD: The Hilton Hotels Corporation said that, based on its results for July and August, it expects its third-quarter net income from operations to fall about 50 percent from a year ago.
In the 1989 third quarter, Hilton earned $30.5 million, or 63 cents a share, from operations.
Hilton's stock fell $2.25 a share today, to $29.25, on the New York Stock


Opponent for Foreman
LEAD: Terry Anderson of Tampa, Fla., was named the new opponent for George Foreman, the former world champion, on Sept. 25 in London.
Anderson, who has a 19-2 record, replaces Walter Masseroni of Argentina, who withdrew from the fight, the promoter, Frank Warren, said yesterday in London.(AP)


You Can't Take the Politics Out of the Court;   The Ninth Amendment
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Bangladeshi Refugees, Something to Cheer About


Troop Limits Off Table In Arms Treaty Talks
LEAD: To complete a conventional-arms reduction treaty in time for the November 35-nation European summit in Paris, American and Soviet negotiators have decided to remove troop limits from the proposed agreements, an Administration official said today.


MCI Is Seeking Ideas From Several Agencies
LEAD: The MCI Communications Corporation has put its account, estimated at $50 million, up for review.
Pam Small, a spokeswoman for the Washington-based telecommunications company, said MCI had approached a small group of agencies, which she would not name, for ideas for a new strategy involving new programs for residential customers.


A Witness Describes Fighting in Kuwait


Pop/Jazz;   With Words and Music, A Union is Forged
LEAD: Rock-and-roll, jazz and poetry will come a little closer together tonight at Tramps when the guitarist Marc Ribot performs with his group Rootless Cosmopolitans on a bill with the poet Allen Ginsberg.
Both are celebrating album releases: Mr.
Ribot's autonomous debut album with the Rootless Cosmopolitans is just out on the Antilles label, while Island Records is rereleasing Mr.


Weekender Guide
LEAD:
Friday
10 FROM 'PLAYHOUSE'


Pact for Meola
LEAD: Tony Meola, the goalkeeper on the first United States team to play in the World Cup finals for 40 years, has signed with Watford of the English Second Division, the United States Soccer Federation announced yesterday. (Reuters)


Deputy Mayor's Son Arrested
LEAD: The 20-year-old son of Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch was arrested on a disorderly conduct charge in a park near his home in Harlem last week, apparently when he refused to obey a police officer's order to move on and got into a verbal dispute with the officer, the police said yesterday.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Daniel Shares Lead
Beth Daniel, the defending champion, shot a three-under-par 69 yesterday to share the first-round lead with Patty Sheehan and Dale Eggeling in the Ladies Professional Golf Association Safeco Classic at Kent, Wash. (AP)
TENNIS
Sampras Beaten by Berger


U.S. Panel Is Subpoenaed Over Rocky Flats
LEAD: A Federal grand jury investigating allegations of misconduct at the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant has issued a subpoena for records or testimony from a committee formed two years ago in the Department of Energy to look into problems in the plant.


K Mart to Acquire Stake in Officemax
LEAD: The K Mart Corporation has agreed to buy a 22 percent stake in Officemax, a chain of office supply stores.
Terms were not disclosed.
Officemax, a privately held chain based in Cleveland, also agreed to acquire the Office Square business of a K Mart subsidiary.
Under the cash deal, K Mart also has the right to increase its stake in


Treasury Issues Narrowly Mixed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in generally sluggish trading yesterday, despite a big drop in the value of the dollar, and interest rates for longer maturities rose slightly.


Critic's Choice
LEAD: The World Music Institute presents traditional, classical and folk music from every part of the world, and in this reviewer's experience, the organization's instincts are as sure as they are broad.
Most weekends from September through June - and sometimes during the week - the organization offers two or three concerts featuring performers who are renowned in their own cultures, and in many cases have been heard about (if not actually heard) in the United


Iran's Dangerous Game
LEAD: Beneath its spiritual leader's call for a holy war against a permanent American presence in the Persian Gulf, Iran is playing power politics, crude and simple.
Eyeing the conflict between Iraq and the United States, Teheran's two bitterest enemies, Iranian leaders may be wishing for it to last as long as possible.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 522 money market mutual funds increased $474.2 million, to $407.01 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 162 institutional funds decreased by $252 million, to $97.64 billion.
The assets of the 255 general-purpose funds were up by $118 million, to $143.8 billion.


Review/Film;   Bach in Hell's Kitchen, and the Gang's all There
LEAD: Every gangster story needs its loose cannon, the individual scary and erratic enough to take the possibility of danger way beyond the theoretical.
Better still if that character, like Sonny Corleone of ''The Godfather'' or Robert De Niro's Johnny Boy in ''Mean Streets,'' is also vastly sympathetic, despite his own least enlightened or charitable instincts.


JAPAN DEFENDS AID IN MIDEAST EFFORT
LEAD: Jolted by mounting criticism of Japan in Washington, Government officials asserted today that Japan had done more than any other country outside the gulf region to aid the American buildup in the Middle East and pledged another $3 billion in assistance to the region.


Capital Gains Issue Blocks Budget Talks
LEAD: Under mounting pressure to conclude an agreement on cutting $50 billion from next year's Federal deficit, White House and Congressional budget negotiators remained at loggerheads today over the issue that has dogged them for the past four months: reducing the tax rate for capital gains.


A World of Good Reading Comes to Fifth Avenue
LEAD: The longest bookshelf in town, maybe in the world, will be installed along nine blocks of Fifth Avenue on Sunday.
Not only will the 12th annual New York Is Book Country street fair speak volumes, as it usually does; this year it will revel in the gift of tongues.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


'Dear Joe . . .' Mail by Fax
LEAD: United States troops in the Persian Gulf will soon be able to get mail from home by fax.
Herb Linnen, a spokesman for


Sri Lankan Troops Break a 3-Month Siege of Fort
LEAD: Government troops broke the Tamil rebels' three-month siege of a strategic northern fort today in a surprise attack that left 100 rebels and 12 soldiers dead, the military said.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If you believe, and the Senate of the United States believes, that it is right to confirm my nomination, then I will accept those responsibilities as obligations to all of the people of the United States whose lives will be affected by my stewardship of the Constitution.''
- Judge David H.


Lahore Journal;   After the Big Cleanup, a City Worthy of Its Poets
LEAD: Above the cacophony of the bazaars and byways in this lively old city, new sounds are being heard these days: the rumble and clank of bulldozers on a rescue mission.


Corrections
LEAD: The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday, about bank stocks, misattributed a quotation from an analyst forecasting that J. P. Morgan &amp; Company would raise its common stock dividend and that some other banks would lower their dividends.
The speaker was George Salem, an analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities.


When defense counsel and judge go to the mat, can justice end up as the victor?
LEAD: While appearing as an assigned defense counsel before Acting Supreme Court Justice Gerald L. Sheindlin of the Bronx last year, Richard L. Giampa told the judge that he was ''acting like a wild lunatic.'' And that was one of his kinder comments.


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums CENTRAL PARK ZOO, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday to Friday (until 8 P.M. on Tuesday) and 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. on weekends; gift shop and cafeteria are open the same hours.
Admission: children under 3, free; ages 3 to 12, 25 cents; 65 and older, 50 cents; others, $1.
Information: 861-6030.


Search Starts Around Florida Suspect's Apartment


Review/Film;   Mauled, Even Eaten, By Junk
LEAD: ''Hardware'' is a sci-fi-horror film of such dopiness that it seems certain to become a cult classic somewhere.
Movies that are so insistently silly often have the effect of seeming to expand the mind after midnight, which may have something to do with metabolism if not with controlled substances.


Split, Catholic Bishops Defer Proposals on Women's Issues
LEAD: A final decision on a seven-year effort by the nation's Roman Catholic bishops to set church policy on issues of concern to women, from abortion to sexual discrimination to ordination, was postponed indefinitely yesterday under the weight of criticism from both liberals and conservatives in the church.


Books of the Times;   Toward the Holocaust, Unknowing
LEAD:
The Healer
By Aharon Appelfeld
Translated by Jeffrey M. Green. 220 pages. Grove Weidenfeld. $16.95.


Attack Leader In Racial Case Is State Witness
LEAD: A leader of the racial attack in Howard Beach, Queens, in 1986 returned to court yesterday for another appearance as an important prosecution witness - the role that enabled him to have a murder charge reduced to assault.


Rochester Station to Produce White House Series on TV
LEAD: In a move that stunned the management of WETA, the major public television station in Washington, a public television station in Rochester has been chosen to produce future programs for the series ''In Performance at the White House,'' the White House said yesterday.


The Dollar Declines Broadly On Fears of Lower Rates
LEAD: The dollar sank against all major foreign currencies yesterday in a slide prompted by widespread speculation that United States interest rates were headed lower.
Trading volume was heavy. ''The dollar came under intense pressure,'' said John McCarthy, chief currency dealer at the Amsterdam-Rotterdam Bank's office in New York.


Evanston Journal;   Lesson In Finance That's Not In Syllabus
LEAD: Immersed in the pages of philosophy, literature and history, the young scholars at Northwestern University here do not have much interest in the mundane matters of municipal finance.


John E. Reeves, Executive, 77
LEAD: John E. Reeves, former chairman of Reeves Brothers, Inc., a Manhattan textile manufacturer, died on Tuesday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 77 years old and lived in Summit.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
OIL AND THE MIDEAST
Drawing on the nation's strategic oil reserve seemed more likely in the wake of comments by an Administration official.
Such a move would almost certainly push prices down as the additional oil is auctioned into the market. [Page D1.]
A bill to require greater auto fuel efficiency is seen by many economists as dismaying evidence of Washington's predilection for regulation over market-based incentives.


Man Sentenced in Bias Attack
LEAD: A Brooklyn man who slashed the face of a teen-ager during an anti-gay attack in Greenwich Village was sentenced to up to six years in prison, the Manhattan District Attorney's office announced yesterday.
The man, Ronald Canaby, 24 years old, of 240 Wortman Avenue in the New Lots section, pleaded guilty last month to assault in the slashing of the 17-year-old dance instructor.


John Bowlby, Psychiatric Pioneer On Mother-Child Bond, Dies at 83
LEAD: Dr.
John Bowlby, the British psychiatrist whose work on the bond between mother and child profoundly influenced psychotherapy and child psychology, died Sept. 2 at his vacation home on the Isle of Skye.
He was 83 years old.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Sentimental Lizards


Thomas J. Reynolds, Professor, 78
LEAD: Thomas J. Reynolds, professor emeritus of economics at Rutgers University, died on Monday at St.
Mary's Hospital in Newtown, Pa.
He was 78 years old and lived in Newtown.


For Homeless, Short Bus Ride To Stove and Bed
LEAD: After living in motels for two years, Deidre Thompson hoped the No. 1 bus from Elmsford to Yonkers would deliver her from homelessness.
She had an appointment to discuss permanent housing.
If she could just show the social worker she was the right kind of homeless, she might get a place.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An obituary on Aug. 29 about Martha Dodd Stern, an expatriate American author in Prague, recalled that she and her late husband, Alfred K. Stern, had been accused of being Soviet spies.


Police Report Killing 2 Gunmen In Street Incidents in 2 Boroughs
LEAD: Two men with guns were shot and killed by New York City police officers in separate incidents Wednesday night and yesterday morning, the police said.


Miss Hurley Wed To D. P. Bennett
LEAD: Susan Hurley and Douglas Philip Bennett were married yesterday at the Congressional Country Club in Bethesda, Md., by the Rev.
Dr.
James D. Ford, a Lutheran minister who is the chaplain of the United States House of Representatives.


U.N. Council Votes Strict Limits On Food Aid to Iraq and Kuwait
LEAD: The Security Council voted overwhelmingly tonight to adopt a plan setting tight limits on humanitarian food supplies sent to Iraq and occupied Kuwait.


No Jail Term Expected for Professor in Slaying


Iraq Swings Wild, and Low
LEAD: With two desperate moves, Saddam Hussein has thrown fresh tinder into an already combustible Persian Gulf crisis.
Iraqi soldiers in Kuwait have forced their way into the diplomatic compounds of France, Canada, Belgium and the Netherlands.
This follows a meaner, lower blow: his threat to starve hundreds of thousands of foreign workers and travelers trapped in Kuwait and Iraq unless the United


Disputed '60 Election Embroiled the House
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chronicle
LEAD: Quitting his post as professor of nutrition at the University of North Carolina, JOSEPH EDOZIEN will take a very different job - as King of Asaba, a township in Nigeria.
He plans to leave the Chapel Hill campus next month for Asaba, where he was born 65 years ago.


Renault-Avia Pact
LEAD: Renault, the state-owned French car company, will lend 500 million francs (about $94 million) to the Prague-based vehicle manufacturer Avia to help it produce a new range of light trucks, the state news agency C.T.K. reported.
It said the deal was completed by Renault's president, Raymond Levy, during the visit of the French President, Francois Mitterrand, to Czechoslovakia on Thursday and today.


Irvin Husin, Lawyer, 84
LEAD: Irvin Husin, a Manhattan lawyer and former president of the New York Federation of Reform Synagogues, an influential Jewish congregational group, died on Thursday at his home in Queens.
He was 84 years old.


Mortgage Rates Down
LEAD: Fixed-rate mortgages averaged 10.13 percent this week, down from 10.19 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.26 percent, down from 8.29 percent last week.


Tom Fogerty, Guitarist, 48
LEAD: Tom Fogerty, rhythm guitarist for the popular 1960's band Creedence Clearwater Revival, died Sept. 6.
He was 48 years old.


Lida Brodenova, Singer, 88
LEAD: Lida Brodenova, a singer, producer and teacher of Czechoslovak opera, died on Monday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
She was 88 years old.
Mrs.
Brodenova died of a stroke, the hospital said.
Since moving from New York to the Washington area in 1954, she staged performances of 17 operas, 12 of them Czechoslovak.


Kids: TV's Captive Audience
LEAD: Television may be a vast wasteland to adults, but to children it's a relentless commercial.
Children's shows are invariably loaded with advertising.
Some programs, featuring characters based on a sponsor's toy, like G.I.
Joe and He-Man, are known in the trade as ''program-length commercials.'' Now Congress is pressing ahead with sensible and welcome legislation to encourage more educational programs and fewer commercials in television aimed at children.


Neglect of Seaplanes Typifies Military Muddle
LEAD: To the Editor:


Happy Staff Scrambles To Print the Glad News
LEAD: When the word finally came down last night that The New York Post had been saved from oblivion, at least for the moment, the anxious reporters and editors who had waited for hours in the city room didn't hear the news from their chief editor or their union representatives.
They got it from television.


Mourners' Rage Muted At Slain Youth's Funeral
LEAD: The rage was muted, the recriminations few, the questions about rising crime in New York City postponed yesterday, as the community around St.
Brendan's Church in the Bronx bid farewell to 18-year-old Hugh Harley, who was killed Monday night by a panhandler who had asked him for $1.


Beliefs
LEAD: Rabbi A. James Rudin is fond of saying that the Roman Catholic-Jewish dialogue of the last 25 years is one of the great - and one of the few -success stories of the 20th century.
But it is also a story in which a new and potentially explosive chapter is unfolding.


Major Changes Made In Sears Retail Group
LEAD: Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company announced today that it had eliminated a layer of management in its troubled retailing group and that it was combining several corporate and merchandise group staff units to reduce expenses.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Aug. 29 about Bush Administration actions in the Persian Gulf crisis referred incorrectly in some editions to an emergency arms sale to Saudi Arabia.
The sale -which does not require Congressional approval because President Bush declared an emergency - was valued at $2.2 billion, not $6 billion.


'60 Minutes,' a Success Story and Still Counting
LEAD: The CBS newsmagazine program, ''60 Minutes,'' is not only the longest-running prime-time program on television, it is also, says Don Hewitt, the program's creator and executive producer, the most successful television program of any kind in the medium's history.


Details of Japanese Aid
LEAD: Government officials, offering new details about Japan's $4 billion Middle East initiative, said today that Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu would soon seek legislation to enable thousands of Japanese to serve in noncombat roles in the region.


Verse and a Bit of Jive Garner Some Cheers
LEAD: Matsuo Basho, the 17th-century Japanese master of haiku, was being read aloud all day - little fragments of evocation like: ''Winter desolation; in a world of one color, the sound of the wind.''


U.A.W. and General Motors Extend Pact Past a Deadline
LEAD: The United Automobile Workers and the General Motors Corporation have agreed to extend their national labor contract past a midnight deadline, the union said tonight.


Florida Journal;   What Price Millions? $27,000 Maybe?
LEAD: Buying tickets at a rate of 600 a second, Floridians were overcome this week with a lottery frenzy, some staking a life's savings on the chance to win the state's record $100 million Lotto jackpot.


Officer Kills an Unarmed Man
LEAD: A police officer answering a report of an armed man on the Upper West Side of Manhattan yesterday morning shot and killed a man who fit the report's description, the police said.


Industrial Production Declines 0.2%
LEAD: Industrial production fell two-tenths of 1 percent in August, its worst performance in four months, the Government said today in a report that analysts characterized as another indication of continued lethargy in the manufacturing economy.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief report on Thursday about Charles Dutoit's appointment as music director of the Orchestre National de France misstated the amount of time he has committed.
He is to spend 12 weeks a year with the French orchestra, not make 12 appearances.


Cost of S.&amp;L. Deals In '88 Put at Double The Initial Estimate
LEAD: A Congressional review has found that the Government's sale of nearly 100 failing savings institutions in 1988 to private investors will cost taxpayers $71 billion, almost double the amount originally projected by regulators two years ago.


Filling In The Blanks
LEAD: Robert H. Bork's opponents succeeded three years ago in framing two questions that proved fatal to his Supreme Court nomination: whether he would ''turn back the clock'' on civil rights and other pressing social issues, and whether he was ''out of the mainstream'' of modern legal thought.


Iran Frees U.S. Prisoner Amid Conciliation Signs
LEAD: The State Department announced today that Iran had released an American citizen who had been held in an Iranian prison since October 1984.


All Oil Exporters Gain, With Saudis at the Top
LEAD: Higher oil prices are helping all of the world's oil exporters, but the biggest beneficiary is Saudi Arabia, which is using the additional income to subsidize countries taking economic and military measures against Iraq and to pay for a large military buildup of its own.


Officers Wound Three Men In Drug Raid in Manhattan
LEAD: Three men were shot by police officers in an apartment on 135th Street after one of them fired at the officers during a drug raid, the police said.


No, No!! Not a Kudo!!!
LEAD: I've always wanted to be the kind of newspaper columnist who passes out kudos.
You know the kind of column:


INSIDE
LEAD:
Mounting Signs Of a Weak Economy


Long Wait for Flights Home From Jordan


Queens Senate Write-In Primary Aids the G.O.P.
LEAD: The odds that the Democrats will take control of the State Senate were downgraded today when Senator Serphin R. Maltese was declared the winner of an unusual write-in primary for the Republican nomination in his Queens district.


Deterioration Of Bridges Is Far Worse Than Feared
LEAD: New York City's long-neglected bridges are in far worse shape than engineers had feared, and could require an additional $500 million on top of the $2.7 billion already budgeted for making them sound again.


An Olympics of Drills and Lathes
LEAD: A platoon of young men, the cream of a new generation of machinists, have spent several days drilling, cutting and grinding metal in the nation's oddest machine shop - a carpeted hallway in the cavernous McCormick Center here.
They were competing in the midst of the nation's largest manufacturing trade show for the right to represent the United States in industry's equivalent of the Olympics.


Rangers Sign Ogrodnick To Two-Year Contract
LEAD: John Ogrodnick held a pen in his hand here this afternoon and as a result will have a stick in his hands for the Rangers when the National Hockey League season starts Oct. 4 in Chicago.


Priscilla May Liebman, School Aide, 58
LEAD: Priscilla May Liebman, the director of annual giving at the Rye (N.Y.) Country Day School, died on Thursday at her home in Rye.
She was 58 years old and died of cancer, said her husband, Walter.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Renting Cars to Young Drivers
LEAD: For years, car rental companies across the nation have refused to rent vehicles to drivers who did not have a major credit card or who were younger than 25 years old.
Now, consumer advocates are urging young drivers to fight back.


Samuel S. Stratton, 73; Lawmaker Represented Albany in Congress
LEAD: Samuel S. Stratton, a former Congressman who represented the Albany and Schenectady area for 30 years and was a longtime member of the House Armed Services Committee, died on Thursday at Shady Grove Hospital in Gaithersburg, Md.
He was 73 years old and had lived for the last year in the Manor Care nursing home in Potomac,


Ann T. Pskowski, Sales Aide, Weds
LEAD: Ann Theodora Pskowski and Roy Nicholas Brunett Jr. were married yesterday at St.
Philip the Apostle Roman Catholic Church in Clifton, N.J.
The Rev.
John B. Wehrlen officiated, assisted by the Revs.
Kenneth Herbster and James D. McGrory, an uncle of the bride.


Digital's Stock Declines Sharply
LEAD: The stock of the Digital Equipment Corporation, the nation's No. 2 computer company, fell sharply yesterday as Wall Street grew increasingly skittish about the minicomputer maker's outlook.


Third-and-15 Academically For 2 Irish
LEAD: The view from Kate Halischak's office, in the Main Building beneath the Golden Dome at the University of Notre Dame, is so clear that she can pinpoint the spot in the academic year without the assistance of a calendar.


U.S. to Sell Saudis $20 Billion in Arms; Weapons Deal Is Largest in History
LEAD: In the single largest arms sale ever, the United States has agreed to sell Saudi Arabia about $20 billion in advanced weapons and technical support over several years, the Pentagon said today.


Violent Crimes Rise Sharply in New York
LEAD: The New York City Police Department reported yesterday that murders and robberies rose sharply in the first six months of 1990.
The figures appeared to reinforce a public perception that violent crime has confronted the city with a public-safety crisis.
Page 25.


Guidepost;   Winter Preserves
LEAD: Now is the time to start preserving fruits and vegetables.
The two canning methods recommended by experts are the boiling water bath, which requires a large pot but no other special equipment, and the pressure canner.
Many foods, but not all, are safely preserved using a boiling water bath.
Those low in acid - all vegetables - should be canned only in a pressure canner, which can also be used for high-acid foods.


District Attorney in Brooklyn Wants Officer's Case Dropped
LEAD: In an unusual move, the Brooklyn District Attorney yesterday asked a judge to throw out a murder indictment against a police officer charged with shooting a man while the officer was on patrol.


Bonn, Heeding Critics in U.S., Will Provide Planes and Ships for Gulf Effort
LEAD: West Germany will offer transport planes and ships for the use of American forces in an effort to deflect criticism that it has contributed too little to the international military buildup in the Persian Gulf, Government officials said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Thursday about Rabbi Rubin R. Dobin omitted references to two survivors.
They are his sisters Esther Propis Yormack and Rose Rivkin, both of North Miami Beach, Fla.


Biggest Since Wartime
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher ordered 5,000 troops and 120 tanks to Saudi Arabia today in Britain's largest use of heavy armored forces since World War II.


Books of The Times;   The Racist Sins of Those Who Spread 'the Word'
LEAD:
The Arrogance of Faith
Christianity and Race in America From the Colonial Era to the Twentieth Century
By Forrest G. Wood
517 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $29.95.


CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: Ripples From the Gulf/A Special Report;   Crisis in the Gulf Hits Home: 'Everything is Different'
LEAD: Business is all but nonexistent at the three tattoo parlors in this desert town, which is home to the nation's largest Marine base.
The dry-cleaner nearest the base has laid off 15 workers and cut its hours in half.


Insurers, in Break With Past, Say U.S. Rules Are Needed
LEAD: In a marked departure from their historical stand, insurance executives told Congress today that they welcomed Government regulation to protect the solvency of the industry.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
C.
R.
Bard Inc., Murray Hill, N.J., agreed to sell its Shield Healthcare Centers unit, which sells medical supplies for home patient care, to Kobayashi Pharmaceutical Co. of Japan.
The sale price was not disclosed, but Bard said it expected a gain of several million dollars after taxes.


In Lyons, an American Dance Deluge for the Love of It
LEAD: Lyons became the capital of American dance when the Lyons Dance Biennial opened Thursday for three weeks, turning every cranny of the French city into a theater or ballroom.
Called ''An American Story: A Century of Dance in the United States,'' this fourth biennial will present dance that ranges from commissioned works by Trisha Brown and Bill T.


Bridge
LEAD: With one session remaining to be played on Saturday, Brazil seems guaranteed to win the world open pairs title here, and a Dutch pair has a slender lead in the world women's pairs.


Gorbachev Meets 2 Israelis; Highest Exchange Since '67
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev held talks today with two Israeli Government ministers, the Soviet television reported, in the first such meeting since the Kremlin severed ties with Israel in 1967.


Funeral Held for Youth Killed by Panhandler


Little Work at Jordanian Port


Larry Forde, Theatrical Director, 57
LEAD: Larry Forde, a theatrical director and production stage manager, died on Aug. 23 at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 57 years old and lived in Manhattan.
His family said he had died of liver failure.
Mr.
Forde directed the Off Broadway musical ''Oil City Symphony.'' He directed Mark Connelly's ''Stitch in Time'' on Broadway and the national companies of ''Agnes of God.


Bright Lights, Big College Money
LEAD: College athletic departments have abandoned any pretense of representing cap and gown, and now they rove the country in naked pursuit of hundreds of millions of television dollars.
The most recent evidence comes from the Federal Trade Commission, which charges the College Football Association and Capital Cities/ABC Inc.


Mentally Ill Have Support of Fair Housing Law
LEAD: To the Editor:


David Tufts, Consultant, 75
LEAD: David Tufts, a New York shipping consultant, died on Thursday at a nursing home in Stamford, Conn.
He was 75 years old and lived in Old Greenwich.


Ben Smathers, 61, Of Grand Ole Opry
LEAD: Ben Smathers, whose agile legs and fast feet helped spread the popularity of clog dancing during a 32-year career on the Grand Ole Opry, died Thursday.
He was 61 years old.


No Truth to Mary Todd Lincoln Spy Story
LEAD: To the Editor:


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.75
7.93
9.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.36
7.36
7.53
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.27
7.28
7.55
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.72
8.68
8.08
30-YR.


Conference for Regulators
LEAD: Richard C. Breeden, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, announced today that he would hold talks for two days next week with top securities regulators of Britain and Japan.


2d Australian TV Failure
LEAD: In another setback for Australia's troubled television industry, the Channel 10 network was placed in receivership today.


Canada Sets Oil Project
LEAD: Canada's largest offshore oil drilling project has been approved, and construction is expected to begin almost immediately, Energy Minister Jake Epp announced today.


No Special Favors on Medicare
LEAD: Reports this week that Congressional budget negotiators were considering cuts in Medicare costs were greeted with howls of protest from senior citizens.
The summiteers were said to react by scaling back a key component of their reform plan: to charge upper-income retirees higher premiums.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of construction, one of the three Lincoln Tunnel tubes will be closed from 12 A.M.
Saturday to 6 A.M.
Monday.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


Percy Buchanan, Banker, 95
LEAD: Percy Buchanan, a retired investment banker and the former director of the research department at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company died on Sept. 8 at St.
Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J.
He was 95 years old and lived in Maplewood, N.J.


At Belmont, 2 Colts and Division Titles in Mind
LEAD: Criminal Type and Deposit Ticket will try to increase their hold on divisional titles in a pair of Grade I stakes races today at Belmont Park.


Jason Honigman, 85, Ex-Michigan Lawyer
LEAD: Jason L. Honigman, a corporate lawyer and the founder of one of Michigan's most powerful law firms, died Wednesday at his home in Beverly Hills, Mich.
He was 85 years old.


Newell Is Seeking More of Lancaster
LEAD: The Newell Company, a home-furnishing concern based in Freeport, Ill., filed for clearance from Federal antitrust regulators to raise its stake in the Lancaster Colony Corporation to as much as 15 percent from 5.6 percent.
Lancaster is a Columbus, Ohio, houseware and glass products concern.


Linda Grebe Wed To Mark Meech
LEAD: Linda Jean Grebe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Grebe of Peekskill, N.Y., was married yesterday to Mark David Meech, a son of William H. Meech Jr. of Glendale Heights, Ill., and Betty J. Meech of Chicago.
The Rev.
Charles R. Barton performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church of Yorktown in Yorktown Heights, N


Miss Richard Married to Luke Yang
LEAD: Dominique Andree Richard, the daughter of Francis D. Richard and Alice F. Mason, both of New York, was married yesterday to Luke John Yang, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George C. C. Yang of Hyattsville, Md.
The Rev.
Stuart Kenworthy performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York.


Toyota Unit Plans Parts Plant in U.S.
LEAD: A Toyota-owned company, Bodine Aluminum, announced it would build a $50 million parts plant in Troy, Mo.
The new plant, the company's first of its type in the United States, will build intake manifolds and cylinder heads, Bodine's president, Robert Lloyd, said.
The parts are now imported from Japan.


Safety Standards Being Tightened For Garage Doors
LEAD: As deaths and injuries continue in accidents involving automatic garage doors, the Federal Government, states and manufacturers are moving to tighten safety standards.
Forty-five children and 3 adults are known to have died in door accidents since 1982, and 27 children and 6 adults were hurt.


In Combating Crime, Veterans Find a Home
LEAD: In October 1967, when a United States Army patrol was pinned down by enemy fire at Loc Ninh, Pfc.
Otis Caldwell volunteered to repel the attack, allowing the wounded to be evacuated and winning a Bronze Star in the process.
Now he relies on some of the same instincts honed in distant jungles to try to reclaim the streets and subways that many New Yorkers think have become a war zone.


Scientists Link Hormone Similar to Poison to High Blood Pressure
LEAD: Researchers have reported the discovery of a hormone in the body that they believe plays a major role in the development of high blood pressure, which affects 60 million Americans.


Tentative Agreement Is Reached In Talks to Keep The Post Alive
LEAD: Peter S. Kalikow, the owner of The New York Post, said last night that he had reached a tentative settlement with the paper's unions that would keep the paper alive.
But Mr.
Kalikow said the pact was contingent on the Newspaper Guild's approving its part of the deal in a vote of the union's members.


A.T.&amp;T. in Deal With Telefonica
LEAD: Telefonica de Espana S.A. of Spain reached an agreement to take a 6 percent stake in the American Telephone and Telegraph Company's main European holding company in exchange for its 20 percent share in a Spanish chip company.
In a joint statement, the state-controlled Telefonica said it was swapping its 20 percent share in AT&amp;T Microelectronica S.A.


Iberia Is Cleared On Viva Air Stake
LEAD: The Spanish Cabinet authorized the state-owned Iberia Airlines to buy the 48 percent stake in charter airline Viva Air currently held by West Germany's Lufthansa.
The Government said in a news release that the purchase by Iberia would raise the flag carrier's control of shares in Viva Air, whose formal name is Vuelos Internacionales de Vacaciones S


Model for Space Taxi Unveiled in North Carolina


Ending Aid to Family Planning, Large Retailer Is Caught in Storm
LEAD: With a decision to end 22 years of support for Planned Parenthood, the Dayton Hudson Corporation, a large Minneapolis-based retailer, has become the latest battlefield on abortion rights.


Mileage Bill Gets a Lift In Senate
LEAD: With a vote that suggested strong support for requiring that cars be made much more fuel-efficient, the Senate opened debate today on legislation that would force auto makers to raise sharply the gas mileage of cars they sell.


Fury on Disclosures Mars Budget Talks
LEAD: Furious over disclosures to the press about their deficit-cutting proposals, Republican budget negotiators today accused Democrats of unfairly casting Republicans as champions of the wealthy and deliberately trying to sabotage the bargaining.


Retail Sales Fell 0.6% Last Month
LEAD: The nation's shoppers, a main source of the economy's drive, grew increasingly cautious in August, pulling retail sales down six-tenths of 1 percent amid worries about job security and the soaring oil prices resulting from the confrontation with Iraq in the Persian Gulf.


Months Later, Friends Tell How Boy Fell to His Death
LEAD: The body of a 10-year-old boy was discovered in a grain silo on Thursday after playmates who had witnessed his accidental fall revealed the secret they had kept for months.


Reedy Says He Lied To Protect Martin
LEAD: William Reedy testified yesterday that he didn't drive the pickup truck in which Billy Martin was killed on Christmas Day last year.
He said that ''to protect Billy'' he had lied to the authorities and a priest and said he was the driver.


TV Critic's Notebook;   The Judge's Image Grew and Grew
LEAD: The confirmation hearings of Judge David H. Souter this week demonstrated yet again that every appearance before the television cameras, however weighty, takes on the trappings of a show.


War Room for Saudi Operations


Phillies Keep Mets From Gaining on Pirates
LEAD: The Mets said it wasn't a letdown, but it looked like a letdown.
And Shea Stadium was emptier and quieter and certainly gloomier as the evening grew longer and the Mets' chances shorter.


Florida State Accepts A.C.C. Offer
LEAD: Florida State University officially joined the Atlantic Coast Conference today after receiving unanimous approval from the Florida Board of Regents.


Ready or Not, Ivy League Quarterbacks Open Season
LEAD: When the Ivy League's 35th season begins today, four of the eight quarterbacks will be neophytes, with little or no varsity game experience, and only one coach has confidence in what his new choice can do.


Prime Motor Inns in Trouble
LEAD: Prime Motor Inns Inc., which at one time was the world's second-largest hotel chain in number of rooms managed, said yesterday that it might have to file for bankruptcy protection unless it could restructure its $550 million debt.


Arizona Utility Plans Job Cuts
LEAD: Following up on a midyear announcement that it hoped to cut capital expenditures and trim its budget, the Arizona Public Service Company said it would eliminate 675 full-time positions.
Executives at Arizona Public Service, the state's largest utility, said the cuts were needed to keep rates at a reasonable level and match competition in the utility industry.


A News Report For the Troops
LEAD: A facsimile news report based on The New York Times is being transmitted each day to United States forces in Saudi Arabia.


G.M. Is Challenged Over Seat Belts
LEAD: Safety advocates and insurance experts are raising questions about the effectiveness of the automatic seat belts that General Motors has been installing in millions of cars since September 1986.
The belts are to be phased out by the fall of 1995, not nearly soon enough to satisfy its critics.


Stocks Drift Lower Again; Dow Falls 18.56
LEAD: Stock prices drifted lower again yesterday in continued slow trading as unsettling news from the Middle East drove up the price of oil another notch.


Brooklyn Teen-Ager Is Killed Resisting Robbery of Chain
LEAD: A 16-year-old youth was shot and killed last night on a Brooklyn street when he resisted a man who was trying to steal his gold chain, the police said.


New York Sees Sharp Rise In Murders and Robberies
LEAD: The Police Department reported yesterday that murders and robberies in New York City rose sharply - to near-record levels - during the first six months of 1990.
The report appears to reinforce a public perception that violent crime has confronted the city with a public-safety crisis.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher After Middle East Flare-Up
LEAD: The dollar finished modestly higher against most major foreign currencies in United States trading yesterday after news of a flare-up in the Middle East conflict abruptly reversed an earlier slide.


Girl, 4, Becomes First Human To Receive Engineered Genes
LEAD: With a simple 30-minute blood infusion, a plump, somber-faced 4-year-old girl today became the first person in history to receive human gene therapy, a revolutionary approach for treating disease by giving patients copies of critical genes they lack.


Mandela Says De Klerk Concedes 'Hidden Hand' in Recent Killings
LEAD: After a massacre of black railway commuters, Nelson Mandela met today with President F. W. de Klerk and said the leader conceded that a ''hidden hand'' appeared to be at work in the violence that has killed nearly 800 South African blacks here and in surrounding black townships in recent weeks.


Auction Won By Icahn
LEAD: The corporate raider Carl C. Icahn has won an auction for a division of Integrated Resources Inc.


Chronicle
LEAD: DAVID CORNELSEN set a record by cycling across the country, using only his hands and a specially built three-wheeler, in 18 days, 16 hours and 52 minutes.
He also raised about $25,000 for the American Paralysis Association for research.


Man Is Still in Jail After Dispute Over Towing
LEAD: A passer-by arrested when he tried to help a woman whose car was being towed in midtown Manhattan Thursday remained in jail last night, charged with felonious assault.
A court official said he might not be arraigned until sometime tonight.


Teachers Return to Classes
LEAD: Striking South Orange and Maplewood teachers, threatened with weekends in jail, returned to classes today after approving contract terms reached in an all-night negotiating session.
Union officials said the tentative agreement with school officials was settled at 5 A.M.
Teachers and staff members headed back to work pending a ratification vote, which has not been scheduled.


Neglect of Seaplanes Typifies Military Muddle;   Mine Sweeping's Rigors
LEAD: To the Editor:


Slain Soviet Priest: Victim of Martyr?
LEAD: The old woman at the grave knew everything about the slain priest, each detail, even that it was the blade of the ax and not its heel that struck him down.


President Nominates Physicist to Be Chief Of Science Agency
LEAD: Dr.
Walter E. Massey, a physicist and educator who is vice president for research at the University of Chicago, has been nominated by President Bush to become the director of the National Science Foundation, the White House announced today.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER, 15, 1990
LEAD:
Oil and the Mideast


Four Airlines Raise Fares 4.2% in U.S.
LEAD: Citing higher jet-fuel prices, several big airlines announced a 4.2 percent fare increase yesterday on their domestic flights.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Thursday about fees for lawyers who brought a suit that changed New York City's form of government misstated the relationship of the Corporation Counsel, Victor Kovner, with the law firm he helped establish.
He was a founding partner of Lankenau Kovner &amp; Bickford but resigned on Dec.


Philadelphia Crisis Deepens As Bond Ratings Fall Again
LEAD: As elected officials and civic leaders laid plans to grapple with Philadelphia's looming insolvency, bad news continued to stream in today from the financial markets.


AMERICAN WARSHIP FIRES A WARNING AT IRAQI TANKER
LEAD: American and Australian warships fired warning shots before boarding an Iraqi tanker in the Gulf of Oman today in a coordinated action to enforce the trade embargo against Iraq, Administration officials said.


About New York;   After 44 Years, Couple's Nuptials Are 'Right Away'
LEAD: Ralph and Natalie Vasa have been married a week and already they are finishing each other's sentences.


What About the Sexism In Spike Lee's Movies?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Manpower to Sell Some British Units
LEAD: Manpower P.L.C. said it had agreed to sell some of its British operations to a new company organized by affiliates of Prudential Venture Managers, Charterhouse P.L.C. and the Chase Manhattan Bank and including the executive directors of Manpower's Brook Street unit.


France Says Iraq Seized Four At Envoy's Home in Kuwait
LEAD: France said today that Iraqi troops had entered its Ambassador's residence in Iraqi-occupied Kuwait, forcibly removing four French citizens, including the embassy's military attache, who was released later in the day.


To Fight Crime, Get Involved
LEAD: We Need 10,000 'Greedy, Heartless' New Yorkers to Work for 5 Years for Free.''


Channel 5 Drops 'Newsline'
LEAD: Channel 5 yesterday canceled ''Newsline New York,'' a late-night public affairs program that had its premiere on Jan. 22.
Ted Faraone, a spokesman for the station, said that while ''Newsline'' had contributed to local news programming, it had not achieved the ratings necessary to make it competitive in its time periods, and would be replaced by ''The Love


UAL Unions Drop Pact With Coniston
LEAD: The union group that is bidding to buy the UAL Corporation said yesterday that it had ended an agreement with the company's biggest shareholder, Coniston Partners, enabling the group to explore ways to buy the company without having to make constant disclosures to the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Charles Rahn Fry, Pochoir Collector, 47
LEAD: Charles Rahn Fry, a bibliophile and collector of pochoir, a colored stenciling process that flourished in France at the turn of the century, died on Wednesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 47 years old and lived in Manhattan.
A spokesman for the center said Mr.
Fry had died of leukemia.


Prices Climb in Japan
LEAD: Japan's wholesale prices, an underlying measure of inflation, rose three-tenths of 1 percent in August from a month earlier largely because of unusually hot summer weather that caused higher vegetable and livestock prices, the Bank of Japan said today.
The rise compared with a fall of one-tenth of a percent in July.


Blue jays Rally in 9th, Pull Within 3 of Boston
LEAD: Rance Mulliniks tied the score with a two-run pinch-hit single, and John Olerud drove in the decisive run with a single as the Toronto Blue Jays scored three runs in the ninth inning tonight for an 8-7 victory over the Baltimore Orioles.


Iraq Tightens Its Food Rationing, Cutting Allowances Another 50%
LEAD: Less than two weeks after Iraq imposed food rationing to combat the United Nations trade embargo, President Saddam Hussein's Government announced today that it was cutting up to 50 percent of previous allowances for scarce foods and further restricting daily bread rations, reports here said.


Not Aiming to Expand
LEAD: The National Basketball Association has no immediate plans for expansion, despite its present prosperity, Commissioner David Stern said yesterday in Boca Raton, Fla., at the annual league meetings.


More Charges for Spira?
LEAD: The prosecutor in the Howard Spira case said in Federal court yesterday that Spira may face additional charges before he goes on trial. ''There's a distinct possibility of going back to the grand jury for additional charges,'' Gregory Kehoe, an assistant United States Attorney from Tampa, Fla., told Judge Louis Stanton at a conference in United States District Court in





Early Gold Climb Trimmed; Corn and Wheat Fall Again
LEAD: The gold market remains sensitive to Mideast developments but to a lesser extent than in the early days of the conflict, analysts said yesterday after gold posted modest gains amid unsettling news from the region.


Giancarlo Pajetta, 79, An Italian Communist
LEAD: Giancarlo Pajetta, a longtime member of the Italian Communist Party leadership and a member of the nation's Parliament, died on Wednesday at his home in Rome.
He was 79 years old.


Sydney Journal;   Immigrant Spice in a Once-Bland Australian Diet
LEAD: Near the heart of this city, the bustling streets of Chinatown sparkle with the glassy look of Hong Kong, and in some fashionable restaurants these days, Australians are eating spicy Indian chicken on pizza.


3 Candidates Trade Barbs In Stamford
LEAD: Connecticut's three candidates for governor clashed here today in a spirited debate that highlighted their past and present differences on a range of issues, including a state income tax, the disclosure of personal finances and abortion rights.


Excerpts From Senate's Hearings on the Souter Nomination
LEAD: Following are excerpts from today's session of Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on David H. Souter's nomination to the Supreme Court, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:
Judges' Personal Views


Uncovering of Spies Jolts East Germany
LEAD: New charges and countercharges about East German officials' links with the former secret police have jolted East Germany's Government and caused deep turmoil in advance of German reunification.


Assad Assures Baker of Support in Gulf
LEAD: President Hafez al-Assad assured Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today that Syria was prepared to keep sending forces to protect Saudi Arabia from Iraq.
But he urged Washington to continue to seek a political rather than a military solution in the Persian Gulf.


Prices of Treasury Bonds Decline
LEAD: Prices of long-term Treasury securities tumbled yesterday, while the shorter maturities held firm.


Candidate for Governor Calls City an 'Urban Battleground'


Your Money;   Locating Business For Tax Benefits
LEAD: State and local taxes can play an important role in whether a business has an anemic profit margin or a hefty one.
So people who own small businesses should choose their locations carefully.
Although some say that things like a strong work force are more important, others say it sometimes pays to relocate.


Seattle Tunnel to Open
LEAD: A $459 million bus tunnel is scheduled to open Saturday after four years of ripped-up streets and traffic nightmares, offering to speed commuters through congested downtown in about one-third the time it takes on the surface.
The two-lane tunnel is expected to reduce downtown bus traffic 25 percent by next fall and 40 percent by the end of the decade.


An Emergency Phone for the Very Young
LEAD: Playskool Electronics is introducing a big-button telephone that looks like a toy.
But the phone, the Little Operator, allows young children to directly dial emergency numbers.


MAttingly Hits Double in Yanks 5-2 Victory
LEAD: In the Yankees' clubhouse, before the lineup was posted for tonight's game, Don Mattingly paced about, bat in hand.
Although he had been activated on Tuesday, he said he didn't expect to get in a game until this four-game sereis began here Thursday.


Patents;   Chip Makers Combine To Fight Suits
LEAD: Aiming to combat what they term predatory lawsuits, eight of Silicon Valley's smaller chip makers have joined forces to fight patent-infringement claims brought by their larger rivals.


Where Cookies Are Manna and Mail Is Gold, Soldiers Ache for a Diversion
LEAD: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Sept. 14 -


Marshall Struggles to Regain Job
LEAD: Lawrence Taylor and Leonard Marshall, two of the Giants' key defensive players, sat out most of the preseason because of contract disputes.
Since then, their fortunes have taken different turns.


Irish Find New Audience
LEAD: Beginning this season, all Notre Dame football games will be televised in Europe, Japan and parts of South and Central America.
The three-year deal was announced today.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF


Marya Mannes, the Writer, Dies; Social Critic and Satirist Was 85
LEAD: Marya Mannes, an author, journalist and critic, died Thursday at Laguna Honda Hospital in San Francisco.
She was 85 years old.


Review/Film;   Mountie Without a Mount
LEAD: ''Death Warrant'' addresses a question that very few people have probably ever asked: how does a member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police go undercover?
The answer: by getting rid of the horse.


Harvey J. Nuland, Accountant, 63
LEAD: Harvey J. Nuland, a certified public accountant and a nationally recognized specialist in the accounting management of union health plans, died on Thursday at his home in New City, N.Y.
He was 63 years old.
He died of intestinal cancer, said his brother, Dr.
Sherwin B. Nuland of Hamden, Conn.


Pirates Stopped by Expos Once Again
LEAD: Barry Bonds could not bear to answer questions tonight, only ask, and when he did, it was a most plaintive inquiry.


Link Between School Enrollment And Population Total Is Disputed
LEAD: A New York City official and an independent expert both say the drop in the city's school enrollment in the 1980's is not an indication that New York's population also dropped.


Forte Enters Guilty Plea
LEAD: Chet Forte, the Emmy Award-winning former producer of ''Monday Night Football,'' pleaded guilty yesterday to Federal mail fraud and tax-evasion charges.
His attorney said obsessive gambling caused his legal problems.
Forte, 55 years old, also pleaded guilty to a one-count indictment charging him with wire fraud.


Like Father, Like Son


Restoring Order to the Streets Now...
LEAD: Public anger over rising mayhem on New York City's streets, plus a week of screaming tabloid headlnes, have finally led to an agreement by Governor Cuomo, Mayor Dinkins and the City Council Speaker, Peter Vallone, to hire as many as 5,000 additional cops.
While a larger police force is a necessary first step, however, it is hardly sufficient to restore shattered public confidence.


Yusuke Suga, 47, Dies; Manhattan Hair Stylist
LEAD: Yusuke Suga, a Japanese hair stylist who was well known in New York fashion circles, died on Thursday in Tokyo.
He was 47 years old and lived in Manhattan.


All Aboard! The Agatha Christie Centennial Is Rolling
LEAD: Mathew Prichard, Agatha Christie's grandson, is remembering an evening he spent with his grandmother in the late 1950's.


SOUTER SEEMS SURE TO WIN APPROVAL, KEY SENATORS SAY
LEAD: As Judge David H. Souter ended his second day of questioning by the Senate Judiciary Committee, some members and their top aides expressed agreement today that he was virtually assured of winning a positive vote from the committee barring some unforeseen development.


Chronicle
LEAD: George Balanchine's first love letter to SUZANNE FARRELL was a poem: ''I can't forget this blessed vision,/In front of me you stood my love,'' it begins.
He was 59 years old, she was 18 and ''very backward,'' she writes in ''Holding On to the Air,'' her autobiography, written with TONI BENTLEY, like Ms.


Amerada Hess In Norway Accord
LEAD: The Norwegian unit of the Amerada Hess Corporation said it had agreed to buy the British Petroleum Company's 4.4 percent stake in Norway's Brage oilfield, which is due to start producing in 1994.
Nils Gulnes, managing director of Amerada Hess Norge A.S., declined to give the terms of the deal, which has to be approved by


Review/Theater;   Shakespeare Caliente Is a Visual Spectacle
LEAD: Shakespeare might not immediately recognize it.
But for sheer theatricality, he would probably have enjoyed the ''Romeo and Juliet'' that Joseph Papp has imported from Mexico for his Festival Latino.


News Summary
LEAD: International
2-7
American and Australian warships fired warning shots before boarding an Iraqi tanker in the Gulf of Oman in a coordinated action to enforce the trade embargo on Iraq, Administration officials said.
Page 1
France says Iraqis capture four at ambassador's residence


Ferruzzi Loses Court Request
LEAD: A Federal judge today refused to grant an Italian company's request to block a Chicago Board of Trade hearing on charges that the company had manipulated the soybean futures market.
Federal District Judge


Greece to Keep Terror Suspect
LEAD: The Greek Government has decided to put a Palestinian terrorism suspect on trial in Greece rather than honor an American request for his extradition, the state-controlled radio and television network reported on Thursday.
The United States says the suspect, Mohammed Rashid, was involved in the bombing of a Pan Am jetliner flying from Tokyo to Honolulu in June 1982 that killed one person and wounded 15.


Producer Prices Up 1.3% in August
LEAD: A surge in oil costs sent wholesale inflation soaring in August, the Government said today, providing the first hard look at how the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait damaged the already weak United States economy.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We feel that gene therapy is potentially a major new medical option.
And the most important thing, with any new therapy, is to get started.
Now we're getting started.''
- Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. [9:1.]


Oil Nears Highest Price Since Invasion by Iraq
LEAD: Oil prices rose further yesterday, and now stand at their second-highest level since the Iraqi invasion.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, light sweet crude for October delivery ended the week at $31.76 a barrel, up 69 cents for the day and $1.72 for the week.


Pakistan's Democracy
LEAD: To the Editor:


FOREIGN AFFAIRS Good News Takes Care
LEAD: It's all done but the parades.
D-day, ''Deutschland-day'' in Eurojargon, is Oct. 3.
United Germany will elect its first postwar government Dec. 2.
There will be no more occupation rights but certain obligations.


Fernandez Replaces Director of Special Education Division
LEAD: New York City's Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, yesterday replaced the executive director in charge of the $1.2 billion program for handicapped and emotionally disturbed youngsters, a program troubled by spiraling costs, long waiting lists and confusion about its aims.


Nan Lautenberg, Sales Representative, Is Wed to Joseph H. Morgart, Banker
LEAD: Nan Beth Lautenberg, a daughter of Lois Lautenberg of Montclair, N.J., and Senator Frank R. Lautenberg of Washington and Secaucus, N.J., was married last evening at the Pierre in New York to Joseph Hartley Morgart, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank H. Morgart of Prescott, Ariz.
Rabbi Harvey S. Goldman officiated.


In Brooklyn, Dinkins Asks for Help in Crime Fight
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins, who has asked New Yorkers to get involved in the fight against crime, carried his request to the streets of East New York yesterday, a section of Brooklyn with one of the highest crime rates in the city.


Artistic Bonds In Southhampton
LEAD: As a serious practicing artist, I wish to convey the following: the article ''Greek Artists Share a Shinnecock Bond'' [July 29]  had some reservations on my part.


Leaving Chicago
LEAD: The Chicago White Sox, surprising contenders in the American League West this season, announced yesterday that by mutual agreement their general manager, Larry Himes, would not return for the 1991 season.


Overrated
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have dark paneling that I would like to paint over in a light color.
Over the years, I have used various spray-on furniture waxes and polishes on this paneling, and I am wondering how to prepare the surface for painting.
Can I use a chemical de-glossing liquid, or do I have to sand the panels?


Deadlock Threatens Future of Nuclear Treaty
LEAD: A dispute between the United States and a group of nonaligned nations has threatened the future of the 20-year-old treaty banning the spread of nuclear weapons, diplomats said today after a monthlong review of progress toward nuclear disarmament ended here in deadlock.


Florio and the Need To Raise Taxes
LEAD: Re: ''Florio's Response to Tax Critics Is Questioned,'' Aug. 5:


THE SPORTSCASTERS
LEAD: A comic-strip cover - what a delightful idea.
I imagine if Charlie Chaplin had drawn cartoons instead of making movies, they might look not unlike these.
CRAIG YOE
Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.


THE WORLD: Powers That Be;   It's a New World, Much Like That Of 50 Years Ago
LEAD: Nine months into 1990, the world as Americans have known it for most of the last half-century has changed utterly.
But in one major respect - the reliance of the free world on American power - it hasn't changed at all.


New Jersey Judge Bars Referendums on Taxes
LEAD: A Superior Court judge today denied a bid by more than 30 county and local governments to hold nonbinding referendums advocating the repeal of Gov.
Jim Florio's $2.8 billion tax program.
Judge Burrell Ives Humphreys said those governments could not use the referendum process to poll popular sentiment because the issues of state taxes and school aid are not within their purview.


Kate J. Weiner Is Married to Robert J. Webber
LEAD: Kate J. Weiner and Robert J. Webber were married yesterday in Schenectady, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas Davis Jr., a Congregational minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the First Reformed Church.


What the Handicapped Learn in School
LEAD: I'd appreciate an opportunity to comment on Linda Saslow's article ''After Years of Declines, School Rolls Stabilize'' [Sept. 2] .


THE SPORTSCASTERS
LEAD: In this age of global stress, American men have lost a vital component of their leisure time. ''The guy you hang out with'' is a vanishing commodity in our lives.
The sportscaster can fill this void (albeit artificially).
He should no more restrict his comments to on-field events than you and your pal would when attending a live game.


Car Injury Suits Are Declining
LEAD: A CHANGE in the automobile insurance law in 1989 is resulting in a drop in personal injury lawsuits, which state officials applaud as a step toward lowering premiums.


Doing the Right Thing With Compost
LEAD: RECYCLING is the right thing to do.
With so much focus, and rightly so, on overstuffed landfills, gardeners are learning that they can do their part if they compost.


A Tradition of Intrusion Collides With Western Rules
LEAD: In the Damascus office of President Hafez al-Assad of Syria is a mural depicting the Battle of Hittin: in 1187, near Tiberias in the Holy Land, Saladin won a crucial victory over the Crusaders.
Seven years ago, while standing in front of that painting, I commented to the Syrian President that this battle was where the Muslims soundly defeated the Christians.


Tentative Accord Reached to Keep Post Publishing
LEAD: Peter S. Kalikow, owner of The New York Post, reached a tentative agreement with the paper's nine unions late Friday on concessions that would keep the paper open.
But leadership of the Newspaper Guild was divided on whether to accept Mr.
Kalikow's demands, and the union's members will settle the issue in a vote tomorrow.


Miss Berenson Weds M.D. Bernstein
LEAD: Cindy E. Berenson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Berenson of Kings Point, L.I., was married last evening to Mitchell D. Bernstein, the son of Richard B. Bernstein of New City, N.Y., and the late Karen Bernstein.
Rabbi David E. Fass officiated at the Pierre in New York.


Pitt Is Smothered By Oklahoma, 52-10
LEAD: Kenyon Rasheed, Ike Lewis and Dewell Brewer all ran for more than 100 yards today as Oklahoma flattened Pitt, 52-10, for the Sooners' second consecutive impressive victory.


Q and A
LEAD:
Car 'Purchase' in Europe


Ms. Dedman Wed To James Gorman
LEAD: Pendleton Dedman, a daughter of Mrs.
Edgar A. King of Fairfield, Conn., and the late Julien Dedman, was married yesterday in Southport, Conn., to James Patrick Gorman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Kevin Gorman of Melbourne, Australia.
The Rev.
Alastair Votaw performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal


Revised Wishbone Helps Power Army
LEAD: Mike Mayweather, the left halfback who holds all the Army rushing records, ran for more than 100 yards today, and that is always a good sign for the Black Knights.


Big Matchup Turns Into Rout
LEAD: The 1990 New York high school football season kicked off Friday night with a game between Union-Endicott High of Endicott, the state's top team last year in a poll of New York State sportswriters, and Bellport of Long Island, which finished 10th in that poll.
The game was believed by the coaches to be the first between a powerhouse from Long


Poignant Drama With a Light Touch
LEAD: THE acronym Nimby, for Not in My Backyard, has become a catchword.
Garbage dumps, prisons, hospices and other projects perceived to be socially unclean or unpleasant are often passed along with the fervent hope that some other person or community will deal with the problem.


Japan, Not Knowing How to Act, Isn't Sure It Wants To
LEAD: The Middle East crisis has plunged Japan into something resembling a full-scale identity crisis.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have dark paneling that I would like to paint over in a light color.
Over the years, I have used various spray-on furniture waxes and polishes on this paneling, and I am wondering how to prepare the surface for painting.
Can I use a chemical de-glossing liquid, or do I have to sand the panels?


Commercial Property: 10 Years of False Starts;   Of Britons, Bahrainis and a Block of Brownstones
LEAD: Although American creativity is at the core of the office tower and museum planned on Manhattan's West 53d Street, it took a development team whose roots are in Bahrain and Britain to put the deal together.


Homer History At Tiger Stadium
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


France's Industrial Shogun
LEAD: Alain Gomez is an unlikely candidate to be the savior of America's consumer electronics industry.


Pre-Civil War Thinking
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss Charyk Wed To C. R. Norris 3d
LEAD: Diane Elizabeth Charyk, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph V. Charyk of Delray Beach, Fla., and Falmouth, Mass., was married yesterday in Falmouth to Charles Rutter Norris 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norris Jr. of Sarasota, Fla.
The Rev.
Perry Haines officiated at the First Congregational Church.


In Budget Talks, Philosophy Is the Sticking Point
LEAD: In eight days of bargaining sessions - some fiery, many tedious, most lasting until late at night - the White House officials and Congressional leaders working on a plan to reduce the Federal budget deficit have resolved the issues that could be settled by splitting the difference.


Campus Life: SUNY, Albany;   Faculty Seeking A Stronger Voice On Sports Issue
LEAD: Despite a desire in many quarters for the State University of New York at Albany to move into big-time athletics, a large number of faculty members served notice last week that they may not be willing to let it happen without a fight.


Emelin to Introduce Classical Guitar Series
LEAD: THE Emelin Theater for the Performing Arts, to give the popular Mamaroneck auditorium its full title, comes of age this season with its 18th year of fine-arts programming.
In addition to a variety of film screenings, plays and lectures, the musical highlights include a new classical guitar series and the return of other cycles devoted to jazz, bluegrass, chamber music and children's entertainment.


Campus Life: Georgia;   Researcher Seeks To Drive Engines On Peanut Power
LEAD: A University of Georgia professor is doing more with peanuts than roasting and eating them: He's using them to produce fuel for diesel engines.


Weill Sampler Offers Fine Singing
LEAD: ONE song contains the lyric ''For once do something bad and you'll survive.'' Another sings of ''faith and trust in mankind.''


Question of the Week;   Are Umpires Getting Too Aggressive?
LEAD: I do not like aggressive umpires, but I also do not like artificial turf, the designated hitter, domed stadiums, arrogant and egocentric team owners and pampered and immature players.
JEFFREY JARRETT
North Kingstown, R.I.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
ORIGINS: The Lives and Worlds of Modern Cosmologists.
By Alan Lightman and Roberta Brawer. (Harvard University, $29.95).
Of all the sciences, cosmology cuts closest to the emotional bone, daring a scientific answer to the kinds of questions children wonder about: How far does the world go?
Does time have a beginning or an end?


Another Approach to Managing a Pension Fund
LEAD: To the Editor:


Social Events
LEAD:
A Broadway Tribute


Preservation's Supreme Authority
LEAD: Mention the name William J. Brennan Jr. to a legal scholar, and you are likely to hear encomiums for the retiring Supreme Court Justice's reputation as one of the century's great defenders of individual liberties.
Justice Brennan was the intellectual anchor of the Warren Court, the activist who merged an idealistic outlook with a rigorous respect for the


Hamptons Wedding for Ms. Seagrave
LEAD: Molly Webb Seagrave, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman P. Seagrave of Darien, Conn., and Cliff Island, Me., was married yesterday to Walter Channing Jr., the son of the late Walter and Eleine Channing of Sherborn, Mass.
The Rev.
Stephen Quinlan officiated at the Presbyterian Church in Bridgehampton, L


Duck Season Split; Bag Limit Is Three
LEAD: Although there was a slight increase in the breeding populations of North American ducks this spring, New York State's waterfowl seasons and bag limits will remain much the same as last year.


In Israel, Fending Off the Zealots)
LEAD:
CONFLICTING VISIONS
Spiritual Possibilities of Modern Israel.
By David Hartman.
292 pp. New York: Schocken Books. $24.95.


Looking at the Big Picture in a Small Way, and Vice Versa
LEAD: Arrangements for piano come in two types - those that risk doing too much and those that risk doing too little.
Using Bela Bartok as his theme, the pianist Gyorgy Sandor will bring specimens of both to Carnegie Hall next Sunday afternoon.


Was Warhol Great?
LEAD: To the Editor:


As It Must to All, Death Comes To Post-Modernism
LEAD: Ten years after it created a sensation in the art world, the tendentious, media-conscious movement known as post-modernism has lost its momentum.
Having gained notoriety by announcing the death of the ideals and practices of modernist art, and having made household words out of such arcane terms as appropriation and deconstruction, post-modernism now shows the very same signs of fatigue that its adherents saw in the art world of the 1970's.


To Endangered List in Gulf, Add Archeology
LEAD: Saddam Hussein, successor to the rulers of ancient Mesopotamia, the likes of Gilgamesh and Hammurabi, has clouded the prospects for explorations into the civilizations that produced the first writing and earliest experiments in agriculture and urban living.


Colleen Hughes and Tony Scherman, Editors, Wed
LEAD: Colleen E. Hughes and Tony Scherman, magazine editors in New York, were married yesterday at the home of the bridegroom's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
David E. Scherman, in Stony Point, N.Y.
The Rev.
Clarke Campbell-Evans, a United Methodist minister, officiated.


Use Product With Caution
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Car-Buying, 1990, Is a Matter of Multiple Choices and Pitfalls
LEAD: It doesn't take long to get a salesman's attention in an auto showroom these days - just seconds in the case of a solitary, pre-lunchtime shopper at Covington Buick, one of 20 franchises owned by six dealers in Auto Sales Park of Montgomery County, which in good times is a hotbed of automotive retailing.


Caroline L. Herter, Saleswoman, Wed To Benjamin W. Winship, a Musician
LEAD: Caroline Lee Herter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Miles Herter of Manchester, Mass., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Benjamin Wistar Winship, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Winship of Lincoln, Mass.
The Rev.
Cynthia Kittredge, an Episcopal priest, officiated.


Salvation Army Is Told To Pay Minimum Wage
LEAD: For more than a century ''three hots and a cot'' has been the Salvation Army's traditional reimbursement to the people it has sheltered and given a chance to work through their problems.
But now the Federal Government says the organization should pay their workers the minimum wage as well.


Cara Silverman Is Married
LEAD: Cara Beth Silverman and Anthony Adam Faske were married last evening at the Ridgeway Country Club in White Plains by Rabbi Norton Shargel.
Mrs.
Faske, 27 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Silverman of Mount Kisco, N.Y.
Mr.
Faske, 28, is a son of Phyllis Faske of Long Beach, L.I., and Leonard Faske of Hewlett, L.I.


SPIES &amp; THRILLERS
LEAD: That old pro Clive Egleton is at it again with IN THE RED (St. Martin's, $17.95).
For about 20 years this British author has been writing espionage novels of the highest category.
Himself a former intelligence officer who served in various countries, he knows the setup as only one who worked in it can.


Giants Will Face Improved Cowboys
LEAD: It is tempting for Giants fans to dismiss today's game against the Dallas Cowboys in Irving, Tex., as a cakewalk.


Cheap Tapes May Be Costly
LEAD: Videophiles have long been aware of the dangers posed by off-brand cassettes, sold under unfamiliar names, which may damage a VCR in the process of playing or recording.
Unhappily, some of these cassettes are now being passed off with the regular VHS logo.


Ms. Harshman Weds Ralph Johnston
LEAD: Cecily Cooper Harshman and Ralph Thomas Johnston were married yesterday at the home of her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Richard R. Harshman, in Neversink, N.Y.
The Rev.
Carla V. Berkedal, an Episcopal priest, officiated.
Her husband is a son of Ralph T. Johnston of Myrtle Beach, S.C., and the late Norma C.


Leftist Palestinian Leaders Rally Arab Support for Iraq
LEAD: They were greeted like rock stars as they strode into the crowded hall.
But the radical Palestinian leaders George Habash and Nayef Hawatmeh today offered a packed convention of supporters little advice that seemed likely to help pull the Palestinian cause out of its current difficulty.


Miss von Henneberg Weds D. A. Gillies
LEAD: Gabrielle Jesman von Henneberg, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert P. Bass Jr. and Jacek von Henneberg, both of Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday to David Archibald Gillies, a son of Joy Gillies of Northport, L.I., and Archibald L. Gillies of New York.
The Rev.
Brendan Griswold performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Ferry House in South Dartmouth,


About Men;   Vasectomy Vets
LEAD: Shortly after our second daughter was born, I found a urologist in the Yellow Pages and made an appointment for a ''pre-vasectomy conference.'' To prevent children, my wife, Shoshana, had undergone eight years of diaphragms, jellies and foams.
To create them, she had undergone four years of episiotomies, palpations, probes and sonograms.


Lifestyle;   Campus Cafes Attract 'Neo-Beatniks'
LEAD: All the superficial signs of beatnik redux are there: the long hair or bob, the goatee and clothes that run from tie-dye T-shirts and salvaged Salvation Army pieces to Guatemalan ethnic and basic black.


'Moses und Aron' And Its Problems Finally Arrive
LEAD: Arnold Schoenberg's ''Moses und Aron'' may well be the most important opera never given a New York staged production.
But that neglect hasn't been for lack of trying.
Christopher Keene, the New York City Opera's general director, who will finally bring the masterpiece to Lincoln Center Saturday night, first proposed that the company mount it eight years ago.


Fashion;   From Paris, a la lingerie
LEAD: Forget about mimicking Madonna - that's the vulgar approach.
If, however, you harbor a longing to flutter out in public in your nightie, slip, bustier or petticoat, this is the way to do it.


Shakespeare On the Potomac: A Reappearing Act
LEAD: His eyeglasses balanced delicately on his balding forehead and a bottle of diet soda gripped firmly in his right hand, Michael Kahn leans forward, focusing intently on the words and actions of the villainous Richard III as the misshapen murderer takes Lord Stanley's son hostage to his sovereign wishes.


Not Bad for a Dog
LEAD: MILLIE'S BOOK
As dictated to Barbara Bush.
Illustrated. 141 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company. $17.95.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: FAST FORWARD
LEAD: Attitudes are changing at the video store.
Julia Roberts is partly to blame and so is Arnold Schwarzenegger.
With the release of ''Pretty Woman'' (Touchstone) next month at $19.99 and ''Total Recall'' (LIVE) on Nov. 1 at $24.99, one of video's most strongly drawn lines of demarcation - that between renting or selling big hits when they first come out - has begun to fade somewhat.


When Life is Toxic
LEAD: The advance instructions for the interview were explicit: Wear well-washed old clothing, no synthetics, nothing recently dry-cleaned, no cologne or after-shave lotion, and bring nothing likely to emit chemicals, like a fresh newspaper.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Flying High
LEAD: The National Hockey League has two more potential million-dollar men, Ron Hextall, the Philadelphia Flyer goalie, and his teammate Rick Tocchet, a right wing.
The two high-flying Flyers signed new long-term contracts Friday with incentive clauses that could bring them each $1 million this season.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: The United Nations issued six crime-prevention stamps on Thursday, but the issue has been dogged by problems, one serious, one slight.


Massachusetts Journal;   State Borrows Trouble With New Library Law
LEAD: The frantic call to the Plymouth Public Library came from a woman who had several overdue books and was frightened that she might be arrested.


Pragmatism Guides Political Gifts, a Study Shows
LEAD: Political action committees base their contributions less on ideological or geographic factors than on whether the recipient sits on a Congressional committee that can help them, a study has found.


The Peep Show As an Art Form
LEAD: To the Editor:


3 Teen-Agers Held in Shooting of Toddler
LEAD: Three teen-age boys were arrested Friday in the wounding of a 2-year-old boy, but the shooting, which prompted outrage here, is not considered deliberate, the authorities said.


Who's Afraid of Industrial Policy?
LEAD: It is not news that the United States and Japan are on a collision course.
In fact, a book entitled ''Nichi-bei Shototsu e no Michi,'' which is roughly translated as ''The Japanese-American Collision Course,'' is a best seller in Tokyo.
What is news is that intellectual vested interests stand in the way of clearly recognizing the differences between the two countries and prevent either side from taking appropriate measures to change course.


Ms. Vermilye Wed To Morgan May
LEAD: Dana Ritchie Vermilye, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter H. Vermilye of Manchester, Mass., was married at their home yesterday to Morgan May, the son of Mollie May of New York and the late Merrill R. May, by Lois Ann Lehn, town justice of Manchester, and Rabbi Allan Press.


Belize
LEAD: To the Editor: The letter by Julian Janowitz (Travel, Feb. 11) concerning Belize and the drive to Tikal, which recently came to my attention, reminded me of a trip in December.
My son and I rented a jeep and explored Belize.
As part of the trip we drove to Tikal, approximately 60 miles from the border.


Betsy Iler Wed To C. S. Burdge
LEAD: Joan E. Iler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander B. Iler of Middletown, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher S. Burdge, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Burdge of Shelter Island, L.I.
The Rev.
John Folchetti officiated at St.
James Roman Catholic Church in Red Bank, N.J.


Reverse Discrimination
LEAD: To the Editor:


New York Hall to Induct Nine
LEAD: Seven players and two coaches will be inducted into the New York City Basketball Hall of Fame in ceremonies on Tuesday at the Tavern on the Green.


Managing;   A Constructive Criticism Primer
LEAD: An engineer presented a plan for developing new software to the vice president of his high-technology company.
With his team, the engineer waited expectantly, hoping for praise and encouragement; the plan was the result of months of work.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Soviet Premier Vows Fight
Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov vowed to fight to keep Soviet economic controls for a year.
Page 9.
Rural Census Complaints
In the small towns of rural Mississippi the numbers are smaller but the complaints are the same about the census: It missed people.


Gottschalk Wed in Illinois
LEAD: Kirsten E. Gottschalk, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William P. Gottschalk of Lake Forest, Ill., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Brian C. Allaire, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul A. Allaire of New Canaan, Conn.
The Rev.
John F. Costello, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


Parents Vow to Protest AIDS Student
LEAD: Parents of about a dozen students at a Brooklyn junior high school are threatening to keep their children out of class tomorrow to protest the presence of an 11-year-old boy who recently revealed that he is infected with the AIDS virus.


Inside The Arsenals
LEAD: For weeks, an endless military caravan has disgorged metal and explosives onto the sands of Saudi Arabia.
No sooner did the American buildup begin than Pentagon commanders started to draw up the so-called order of battle - an ever-shifting account of the forces arrayed on each side.
They calibrated the speed, reach, accuracy and deadliness of weapons, and worked on a strategy to take advantage of their strengths and


Human Differences
LEAD: To the Editor:


Evening Hours;   Sweaters, Flowers And Man Ray's Art
LEAD: A party in honor of the exhibition ''Man Ray/Bazaar Years: A Fashion Retrospective'' drew guests on Monday to the midtown gallery of the International Center of Photography.
The sponsors were the Chase Manhattan Corporation and Hearst Magazines.


Cleanup Plan Approved for the Everglades
LEAD: Sugar growers, the area's water district and the State of Florida have agreed to share the cost of a $120 million plan to clean up the Everglades and Lake Okeechobee.


Review/Concert;   A New-Music Ensemble Celebrates Its 10 Years
LEAD: Music Today has been one of New York's most admirable new-music series, and it was hard to believe at first that Wednesday's program at Merkin Concert Hall marked the beginning of its 10th-anniversary season.
For the occasion, the ensemble engaged Rhonda Kess, a Los Angeles-trained conductor who lives in London but who has appeared in New York on a couple of auspicious occasions in recent years.


Lee Caswell Is Married To Melissa Cary Baten
LEAD: Melissa C. Baten, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Baten of White Plains, was married last evening to Hollis L. Caswell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hollis Caswell of New Canaan, Conn.
Rabbi Bruce Goldman officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Eric Markman, a Presbyterian minister, at the Old Oaks Country Club in Purchase, N.Y.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
THE FAB FOUR


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended Sept. 1
MANHATTAN
Chelsea
$410,000
436 West 23d Street
(Fitzroy Place)
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. co-op; dining area, two fireplaces, terrace, south garden; maintenance $227, no tax deduction (Broker: Wells &amp; Gay-Stribling &amp; Associates)


Man Charged in Towing Fracas Is Released After 2 Days in Jail
LEAD: A man arrested on Thursday when a crowd intervened as a woman's car was being towed in midtown Manhattan was released early yesterday, after being arraigned on a number of charges, including second-degree assault on a uniformed officer.


In Japan, the Private Sector Plays a Role in Foreign Aid
LEAD: To the Editor:


Headliners;   Reagan Hailed for Taking the Evil Out Of The Empire?
LEAD: Historians may continue to debate exactly why Communism fell, but Eastern European leaders last week rained gratitude on Ronald Reagan for giving it a push.


Doing the Right Thing With Compost
LEAD: RECYCLING is the right thing to do.
With so much focus, and rightly so, on overstuffed landfills, gardeners are learning that they can do their part if they compost.


Initiative Amendment: Dissenting Views
LEAD: The intellectual bias contained in Mr.
Hochbaum's article reflects, unfortunately, the bias of our ''elected'' government, and it demonstrates precisely why New Jersey voters should have, nay, even need, initiative and referendum.


We Can Control Starling Glut Without Murder
LEAD: To the Editor:


California, Land of Freeways, Plans to Build Toll Highways
LEAD: California's first planned toll roads were announced Friday, marking the first time that motorists will face fees on anything but bridges.


A Breathless 'Tenor' Races Into New Haven
LEAD: THEATERGOERS who have a habit of darting up the aisles at the final drop of the curtain, just before the actors take their bows, hear this.
At the end of ''Lend Me a Tenor,'' don't.


Lights, Camera, Sex
LEAD:
HARD CORE
Power, Pleasure, and the ''Frenzy of the Visible.''
By Linda Williams.
330 pp. Berkeley:
University of California Press. $18.95.


Traci Reed Wed To William Dippy
LEAD: Traci Reed, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Reed of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to William Bradner Dippy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George B. Dippy 3d of Old Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Philip E. Perkins officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Riverside, Conn.


No Clear Favorite for 1996
LEAD: One of the most intense bidding campaigns in recent years will end Tuesday evening in Tokyo when the International Olympic Committee votes to select the site for the 1996 Summer Olympics.


Taking a New Look at Energy Saving
LEAD: With consumers just beginning to digest higher gasoline prices, experts say a second shock could come this winter as demand rises for the fuel oil that powers everything from boilers to lighting systems in homes, factories and commercial buildings.


F.A.A. Orders Secrecy on New Bomb Detectors
LEAD: The head of the Federal Aviation Administration has classified as secret all new details about the performance of costly bomb detection devices whose capabilities have been widely questioned during a year of tests at several airports.


Stoppard's Film Wins Top Award in Venice
LEAD: The British playwright Tom Stoppard won the Venice film festival's top award, the Golden Lion, today for his first film, ''Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead.''


Who Killed Christopher Marlowe?
LEAD:
ENTERED FROM THE SUN
By George Garrett.
349 pp. New York: Doubleday. $19.95.


In Jordan, Refugees Move From Closed Border Camp


To Our Readers
LEAD: Starting today, the suggested Sunday newsstand price of The Times in New York City, within 75 miles and on all of Long Island is increased to $1.50 from $1.25.
The weekday price is unchanged, as is the Sunday price outside the New York area.


Fashion;   Chenille: From Household to Wardrobe
LEAD: If you think chenille means bedspreads, bathrobes and bathmats, you're in for a surprise this fall.


Changing Malaysian Isle
LEAD: The sleepy island of Langkawi had its last and only moment on the world stage at the turn of the century when it became an unwitting pawn in the rivalry between the British and German empires, a struggle that would ultimately explode into the First World War.
To the officers of the imperial German navy, Langkawi's sheltered bays and its location less than 50 miles off the west coast of the Malay peninsula made it an ideal base.


Arts Foundation Awards $35,000 to 6 Authors
LEAD: Three Americans are among the six authors who were awarded $35,000 each by the Lannan Foundation, a private arts organization based in Los Angeles.


Views on the Gulf: Lawmakers Versed in Vietnam
LEAD: Their lives were touched by the long, hard, painful war in Vietnam.


Fashion;   Designer Clothes at a Lower Price
LEAD: Gordon Henderson doesn't like his nose.
But it didn't seem to bother the admiring women who turned up at Saks Fifth Avenue on Thursday to meet the designer and see his fall clothes.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A table last Sunday listing the performance of world stock markets was out of date.
The data, supplied by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, were for the week ended Aug. 31.
The table for the week ended Sept. 7 appears today on page 20.


Fine Singing in a Weill Sampler
LEAD: ONE song contains the lyric ''For once do something bad and you'll survive.'' Another sings of ''good beyond such ill,'' of ''faith and trust in mankind.''


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Armonk, N.Y.
$407,000
33 Nichols Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, new deck, 1 acre; taxes $4,945.
Rye, N.Y.
$840,000
9 Graham Court
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, year-old colonial; 2 decks, family room, stone fireplace, marble Jacuzzis, 2-car garage; taxes not yet assessed.


Initiative Amendment: Dissenting Views
LEAD: Mr.
Hochbaum argues that because our Legislature in recent years has become more ''open,'' and because it has spawned a growing bureaucracy of specialized committees with larger and larger staffs, it is well equipped to make good decisions for us.
He says that the public's use of referendums would amount to amateur meddling, and that we should patiently wait for the next election if our representatives outrage us.


Show Fairness To Taiwanese
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Squeezing More Data Onto a Disk
LEAD: A TEAM led by Tuan Vo-Dinh at the Department of Energy's Oak Ridge National Laboratory is working with the Internal Revenue Service to vastly increase the storage capacity of optical disks.
The researchers can put 1.5 million times more data on a 12-inch optical disk than on a 5 1/4-inch floppy disk for a personal computer.


Kimberly Tompkins Is Wed
LEAD: Kimberly A. Tompkins, the daughter of Sophia P. Tompkins of Chappaqua, N.Y., and Joseph G. Tompkins Jr. of Tokyo, was married yesterday in Bedford, N.Y., to Ian M. Bickley, a son of Mrs.
Walter L. Bickley of Warwick, Bermuda, and the late Mr.
Bickley.
The Rev.
James T. McGuire officiated at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church.


In Insiders' City, Dixon Clings to Outsider Image
LEAD: Among other things, Sharon Pratt Dixon had been the least known of the candidates in last Tuesday's Democratic mayoral primary.


Juli-Ann Dritz Marries
LEAD: Juli-Ann Dritz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Dritz of Armonk, N.Y., was married last evening to Dr.
Paul R. Cialone, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Tiberio Cialone of New Rochelle, N.Y.
The ceremony was performed by Cantor Raymond Smolover and the Rev.
Sal Humana, a Roman Catholic priest, at the home of the bride's parents.


Jets Planning to Show New Look Today
LEAD: When the Jets show up in Giants Stadium today for Bruce Coslet's regular-season home debut, against the Cleveland Browns, they will be wearing their new-look green jerseys and white pants.
It will be the first time since 1984 that the team has worn dark jerseys at home.
The previous regime stayed with white tops because it thought players looked bigger in them.


The French Collection
LEAD:
CONFESSIONS OF A LITERARY ARCHAEOLOGIST.
By Carlton Lake. (New Directions, $21.95.) The sight of rich, green leather bindings and gold-lettered type scrolled across the spine of a book makes Carlton Lake ecstatic.
He positively gushes if the book also happens to be a first edition of Baudelaire's prose work ''Les Paradis Artificiels,'' which, in one instance, it was.


Union and G.M. Extend Pact And Continue Negotiations
LEAD: The United Auto Workers union and the General Motors Corporation agreed to extend their current contract Friday night, then negotiated through today on a new agreement affecting about 300,000 workers nationwide.


A Slave to His Own Liberation
LEAD:
THE GENERAL IN HIS LABYRINTH
By Gabriel Garcia Marquez.
Translated by Edith Grossman.
285 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Have Elite Yacht Races Become Too Dangerous?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


The Truth of Feeling Joins the Truth of Fact
LEAD: Once or twice in every hundred years there is a draftsman who can do just about anything with graphite, watercolor, gouache and stump.
One such was Adolph Menzel (1815-1905), the long-lived Berliner whose drawings are having their first-ever major exhibition in the United States at the Frick Collection through Nov.


Beyond the Red Sea
LEAD: To the Editor:


Speakers With Hidden Charms
LEAD: Loudspeakers sometimes clash with the decor.
Anyone seeking visual as well as musical harmony for Queen Anne or Chippendale in the living room would have a hard time finding something suitable in a hi-fi store.


Ex-Sergeant's Release Ordered in Stun-Gun Case
LEAD: Overruling parole officials, a judge has ordered the release of a former New York City police sergeant imprisoned after being convicted for torturing suspects with a stun gun at a Queens station house.


Lori Janice Shyer and Steven Ray Glick Marry
LEAD: Lori Janice Shyer and Steven Ray Glick were married last evening at Windows on the World in New York, with Rabbi Arthur Schwartz officiating.
Mrs.
Glick is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Shyer of New York.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanton Glick of Boca Raton, Fla.


Campus Life: Yale;   7 Athletic Teams Are Eliminated To Trim Budget
LEAD: This summer, Jeffrey Wyshner spent three hours a day practicing for a tennis team that no longer exists.


A Juried Show Celebrates Group's 75th Year in Yonkers
LEAD: IN 1924, the Yonkers Museum of Science and Arts was inaugurated by the Yonkers Art Association with an annual group show, its ninth.
Since then, the premises have metamorphosed into the Hudson River Museum and the association has changed its name to Hudson River Contemporary Artists, but the relationship has continued more or less uninterrupted.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
NO MORE MR.
NICE GUY: A Life of Hardball.
By Dick Williams and Bill Plaschke. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) Dick Williams managed six teams for a total of 21 years in the major leagues, winning 1,571 games (13th on the all-time list), taking three different franchises to the World Series and winning the baseball writers' Manager of the Year award three times.


Question of the Week;   Are Umpires Getting Too Aggressive?
LEAD: Yes.
When umpires begin throwing athletes to the ground, it is time they considered moving on to become referees in the World Wrestling Federation.
At least there they probably wouldn't be sued in the event they injure their victim and end a multimillion dollar-career.
ROBERT J. MOORE
Bloomfield, N.J.


Mutual Funds;   Here Comes the S.E.C. on Fees
LEAD: In late August, Richard C. Breeden, head of the Securities and Exchange Commission, and members of his staff shared a birthday cake with members of the Investment Company Institute, the mutual fund industry trade group.
The occasion: the golden anniversary of the Investment Company Act of 1940, the law that regulates mutual funds.


Mining the Greeks' Gold Standard
LEAD: Wreaths of tissue-thin leaves, vase-shaped earrings encrusted with specks of glowing metal, and a hairnet of chains embellished with a bust of Athena are among the dazzling pieces of Greek gold jewelry on view at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum in Manhattan, through Jan. 13.


Tamsy Smith Wed In Rhode Island
LEAD: Tamsy Rowena Smith, the daughter of Col.
Allen D. Smith, U.S.A., retired, and Mrs.
Smith, of Paige, Tex., was married yesterday to George Wild Markham, a son of Susan M. Kirkpatrick of Del Ray Beach, Fla., and Watch Hill, R.I., and the late Dean F. Markham.
The Rev.
Joseph Besse performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Watch Hill


Jill Kaplin Is Bride Of Andrew L. Herz
LEAD: Jill M. Kaplin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Maury I. Kaplin of Toledo, Ohio, was married last evening to Andrew L. Herz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Herz of Larchmont, N.Y.
Rabbi Richard Chapin officiated at the Harmonie Club in New York.


Putting Burden On Capriati
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Q and A
LEAD:
Sponsor-Management Tie
Question: My condominium apartment is in a building managed by a company that appears to be affiliated with the sponsor of the project.
Our management fees seem to be much higher than those in comparable buildings.
I have heard that such sponsor-related contracts are prohibited under the Cooperative-Condominium Abuse Relief Act.


All About/Gambling Equipment;   Hardware Makers Cash In On America's Betting Mania
LEAD: The blackjack tables, the roulette wheels and the dice are still there.
But the companies that make gambling equipment have turned the casinos into high-technology arcades.
Rows of electronically linked slot machines monitor wagering, accept hundred-dollar bets or deliver million-dollar, lottery-style jackpots.


Diana Simonds Is Married
LEAD: Diana Simonds, an elementary and high school teacher in Caracas, Venezuela, and Gorki Mesones, an architect in Caracas, were married yesterday at the Little White Church in Eaton, N.H., by the Rev.
Ronald P. Prinn, an Episcopal priest.
Mrs.
Mesones is a daughter of Joan P. Simonds of Yarmouth, Me., and the late James G.


KREMLIN'S PREMIER CRITICIZES CHANGE
LEAD: Amid growing pressure for his resignation, Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov took to national television tonight and vowed a spirited fight to keep for another year, rather than change, the central Government's existing economic controls.


South Africa Cracks Down in Townships
LEAD: The South African police announced a severe crackdown on township violence today, a day after Nelson Mandela said that the Government believed sinister outsiders were manipulating the fighting between rival black factions.


Campus Life: Brandeis-Holy Cross;   A Joint Program One Could Call Judeo-Catholic
LEAD: Brandeis University, which has a large Jewish enrollment, and the College of the Holy Cross, a Roman Catholic institution in Worcester, are teaming up in a comparative-religion study program that officials hope will promote understanding between students of the two faiths.


Orchestra Gambles To Win The Young
LEAD: WHEN a summer downpour forced the Philharmonia Virtuosi to move its popular free outdoor performance of Vivaldi's ''Four Seasons'' from Kensico Plaza to the cavernous County Center one Tuesday, gloomy orchestra officials predicted that few members of the audience would follow inside.


Church Prods Kenya to Issue Report on Death
LEAD: Stepping up its pressure for political change in Kenya, the Anglican Church called on the Government today to release a highly sensitive British investigative report on the slaying earlier this year of a former Foreign Minister.


Miss Billingsley Weds Journalist
LEAD: Ann Barker Billingsley, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Billingsley of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Aldo Geracioti, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas D. Geracioti of Toledo, Ohio.


Question of the Week;   Are Umpires Getting Too Aggressive?
LEAD: The question is not whether umpires are getting too aggressive, but whether they are responding inappropriately to the lack of respect they receive.
In football, basketball and hockey, officials are authority figures who are given very little ''lip'' by the coaches and athletes.
In baseball, throughout its history, umpires have been verbally abused by managers and players to the delight of the fans.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
ASIAN INFLUENCE ON ART


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have dark paneling that I would like to paint over in a light color.
Over the years, I have used various spray-on furniture waxes and polishes on this paneling, and I am wondering how to prepare the surface for painting.
Can I use a chemical de-glossing liquid, or do I have to sand the panels?


Twice-a-Week Ferry Service Links South Korea and China
LEAD: South Korea began regular ferry service with China today for the first time since the Korean peninsula was divided in 1945.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Chatham
$187,500
43 Hedges Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; rear yard, enclosed porch, chestnut trim built-ins; taxes $2,844.
Parsippany
$250,000
75 Dolly Drive
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 27-year-old contemporary; inground pool, 2 fireplaces, 2 family rooms; taxes $3,809.


Sculpture Show in the Open
LEAD: INAUGURATED last June, the open season for sculpture continues in the form of the Snug Harbor Sculpture Festival.
A visit to this annual event, however, is more akin to bird watching than blood sports.


The Nation;   In Politics, Will 1990 Be a New Beginning?
LEAD: The gulf crisis has become a lens through which Americans are focusing their ideas about a host of issues, foreign and domestic, military and economic, political and cultural.
As the campaigns blah, blah, It has created oportunites for Republicans to revive themes and issues that had flagged, so to speak, but it also is bringing to vivid life the economic nationalism that some Democrats see as the last best hope for their party.


Doing the Right Thing With Compost
LEAD: RECYCLING is the right thing to do.
With so much focus, and rightly so, on overstuffed landfills, gardeners are learning that they can do their part if they compost.


Travel Advisory
LEAD: Duty-Free Limit Is Increased For Caribbean


Miss Jones Wed To R.N. Stillwell
LEAD: Katherine Eastwick Jones, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Horace C. Jones of Philadelphia, was married yesterday in Padanaram, Mass., to Richard Newcomb Stillwell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Stillwell of Charlottesville, Va.
The Rev.
Walter A. Sullivan officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.


Viola and Tabler Come Through for Mets
LEAD: Frank Viola has been doing it all year for the Mets.
Pat Tabler has been doing it for about a week.
Viola has a reputation for throwing changeups that flutter past hitters.
Tabler has a reputation for getting hits when the bases are loaded.


To Lower Gas Prices
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE SPORTSCASTERS
LEAD: You can keep your Vin Scully, Bob Costas and Tim McCarver.
To me, the boys of summer are the New York Mets, minus sound, with a stack of Jimmy Buffett compact disks to accompany the action.
Ain't life grand!
ROBERT ANDERSON
Massapequa, L.I.


Days of Murder Dim the Hopes of South Africa
LEAD: Anyone scheming to scuttle the hopes of those South Africans working to dismantle apartheid could hardly have devised a more destructive scenario than the seemingly random violence that spilled more black blood in and around Johannesburg last week.
The killings, including a gang attack inside a commuter train to Soweto that left at least 26 people dead and well over 100 injured, have become so predictable in their senselessness that it is not hard to understand why some South


S. D. Twente Wed To Allison White
LEAD: Allison Stuart White, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wyndham R. White 3d of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Stephen Douglas Twente, a son of Patricia A. Twente and Dr.
Elmer W. Twente, both of Brooklyn, N.Y.
The Rev P. C. Enniss performed the ceremony at the Reformed Church in Bronxville.


FEARING BACKLASH, BIG OIL COMPANIES WILL TRIM PROFITS
LEAD: Fearful of public and Congressional outcry over the large profits that many oil companies are likely to report for the fiscal quarter that ends in two weeks, industry executives are trying to find ways to hold down those profits.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of construction, one of the three Lincoln Tunnel tubes will be closed until 6 A.M. tomorrow.


Man Is Convicted of Trying to Kill Girlfriend
LEAD: An Old Saybrook clothing store owner has been convicted of trying to hire someone to kill his girlfriend so he could use money from her estate to save his business.


Ms. Rutherfurd Weds in Boston
LEAD: Linda Elizabeth Rutherfurd, a daughter of Mrs.
Winthrop Rutherfurd of New York and the late Mr.
Rutherfurd, was married yesterday to Mark Gideon Borden, a son of Arthur M. Borden of New York and the late Florence Smiley Borden.
The Rev.
Robert VerEecke, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Somerset Club in


Senate Chief Vows Not to Exceed Cuomo's Budget
LEAD: The leader of the Republican-controlled State Senate pledged ''absolutely'' on Friday to spend no more than Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo proposes in his budget next year.


Front and Center for the Blue and Gray
LEAD: ''War is hell'' ranks among our most familiar sayings.
All but unknown, however, is the rest of that quotation, which goes in part: ''I am sick and tired of war. . . .
It is only those who have neither fired a shot nor heard the shrieks and groans of the wounded who cry aloud for blood, more vengeance, more desolation.


Flatbush Brothers
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Change of Course by an Old Standby
LEAD: COMMACK'S La Mascotte is 15 years old, but it is a born-again restaurant.
Andre Guillet and Jean-Claude Denner are still running the show, with Andre in the dining room and Jean-Claude in the kitchen.
But new menus and additional chefs (Giamba Pasquali and Alain Krauss) reflect a change in course by this traditional


Tougher Rules Backed on Pollutants in Smog
LEAD: House and Senate negotiators gave formal approval Friday to a provision of the clean air bill that would require factories and businesses to tighten controls on pollutants that cause smog.


Officer's Last Words Recalled at Murder Trial
LEAD: Six New York City police officers were killed in the line of duty last year, and in a quiet Manhattan courtroom on Friday the agonizing final moments of one of them were recalled without much emotion, or the usual courtroom tears, at the trial of one of the defendants charged with the officer's murder.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   The Creamy Flavor of Pesto But Without All That Fat
LEAD: There is no way to put pesto in the low-fat, low-calorie column.
But it is possible to obtain that rich creamy basil and pine nut flavor, using plenty of fresh basil, low-fat ricotta and yogurt and a little blue cheese.


Slashed Tires
LEAD: To the Editor: Over the years I recall reading about the racket of gas station attendants slashing tires when gas is being bought, for the purpose of building tire sales at the station.
As I recall, the favorite states for this outdoor sport were South Carolina, Georgia and Florida.


Solve Two Problems With a Gas Tax
LEAD: To the Editor:


Festival Completes A Mission
LEAD: AS if in summation of an era, the second and third productions of the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival's 28th summer and Paul Barry's last as artistic director reflect what has come to pass for the company's best work (''Measure for Measure'') and its lamentable worst (''King John'').


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Fort Salonga
$319,000
2 Concord Drive
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 22-year-old farm ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1 acre, 2- car garage; taxes $7,600.
Levittown
$142,000
44 Potter Lane
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $3,600.


Initiative Amendment: Dissenting Views
LEAD: The initiative and referendum article prompts these thoughts.


The Nuns' Story
LEAD: Barbara Ferraro and Patricia Hussey are no longer nuns.


Gertrude Was Not a Dope
LEAD:
HAMLET'S MOTHER
And Other Women.
By Carolyn G. Heilbrun.
266 pp. New York:
Columbia University Press. $29.95.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in The Times Magazine today about Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan refers incorrectly to Senator Bob Dole's position on the Senate Finance Committee.
He is a member; Senator Lloyd Bentsen is chairman.


The Recycling of 'Dump'
LEAD: A city man back from a small-town summer reports that recycling is creating an endangered species.
For years the town dump was called just that, the dump.
Or, whimsically, the Exchange: he would go there to discard a wobbly kitchen table and come home with a gimpy rocking chair.
A few years ago the dump officially became the ''landfill'' - a Nice Nellyism, as if its purpose were to improve land, not get rid of trash.


Provincial Pottery From Thai Kilns
LEAD: When they go north to the province of Chiangmai, the people of Thailand say they are going ''upcountry.'' The mountains extend down from Myanmar (formerly Burma) and Laos, forming a natural barrier to the rest of the land.
Remarkable temples attest to the splendor of what was once the seat of Thai culture and the capital of the separate kingdom of Lanna.


Fashion: On the Street;   Reflecting Reggae And Rap
LEAD: An exotic mix of fabrics, chunky beaded necklaces, distinctive hairstyles and clunky-soled shoes are making a fashion statement that reflects the influences of Reggae and Rap music.
Many young American blacks and youths from the Caribbean are wearing combinations that generally involve a mix of oversized clothes and jackets and a big fabric cap.


Mother Teresa Hopes Nuns In Order Will Go to Albania
LEAD: Mother Teresa said today that she hoped to send her order's nuns to care for the poor and destitute in Albania, Europe's last bastion of old-style Communism.


The Budget, From Comedy to Tragedy
LEAD: Our annual budget comedy is beginning to resemble a Greek tragedy, with well-meaning politicians terrified of doing the right thing and with our children as the hapless victims.
Before the last act - which we hope is not yet written - it is time to rethink just why budget deficits matter and why we must do better than the ''summit'' package nearing completion in Washington.


Prokofiev's 'Nevsky' For Music Video Fans
LEAD: THE Hartford Symphony is offering the ultimate music video next weekend with its New England premiere of the recently restored 1938 Russian film ''Alexander Nevsky.'' Sergei Prokofiev's original score will be performed by a 94-piece orchestra with the Yale Russian Chorus and the Hartford Chorale.


Tenderhearted Men: Lonesome, Sad and Blue
LEAD: There's a certain kind of American story that is characterized by a laconic surface and a tight-lipped speaking voice.
The narrator in this story has been made inarticulate by modern life.
Vulnerable to his own loneliness, he is forced into hard-boiled self-protection.
His inexpressiveness is eloquent: the poetry of strong emotion trapped in confused and disintegrating times.


John B. Evans Weds Miss Kim
LEAD: Deborah Yong Kim, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Raymond Y. Kim of Butler, Pa., was married yesterday to John Berwyn Evans, the son of Emma Evans of Cheshire, England, and the late E. A. B. Evans.
The Rev.
Ann Holt officiated at St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in Sky Manor, N.J.


Florida Rally Sets Back Alabama, 17-13
LEAD: Jimmy Spencer blocked a punt for the deciding score and Will White intercepted three passes as Florida defeated Alabama, 17-13, today in a Southeastern Conference game.


Postings: Central Park Guide;   A Book of Bridges and Arches
LEAD: Among Central Park's abundant esthetic surprises, some of the most charming and evocative are the bridges and arches.
These compositions in cast iron, brick, wood and stone, each one different, span the landscape with delicacy and grace.
Even their names conjure 19th-century romanticism: Denesmouth, Eaglevale, Greyshot, Huddlestone, Mountcliff, Pine Bank, Trefoil,


A Pyrrhic Triumph In Katmandu
LEAD: My last night in Katmandu, a city that does not count cosmopolitan night life among its many charms.
Having spent the daylight hours canvassing Nepal's capital for an article I was researching, a relaxing evening free of open sewers and wandering cows seemed the perfect nepenthe for an American unaccustomed to the unspeakable squalor the average


Redskins Receivers Eager to Meet 49ers
LEAD: When the Washington Redskins round up their posse this afternoon in a marquee clash against the San Francisco 49ers at Candlestick Park, featuring the two teams that won the most games in the last decade, peace and order will be far from the Redskins' minds.


Review/Music;   Martha Thigpen, As Tosca, Leads New City Opera Cast
LEAD: New singers took up the principal roles in Puccini's ''Tosca'' at the New York City Opera on Tuesday evening.
In terms of consistency and power, the performance was a considerable improvement over the one that opened this season's run last month.
And some of the staging problems that afflicted the opener - in particular, the unfortunate tendency to have the singers overplay frailty by flopping around the stage - have been remedied as well.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: While panoramic photography is not yet the craze in this country that it is in Japan, Kodak's Stretch 35 camera apparently has caught on in a big way.
Even the Kodak division that introduced this single-use marvel didn't expect it to attract such a wide following so rapidly.


Bradford Verter Weds Sarah Gardner
LEAD: Sarah Sturges Gardner, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Gardner Jr., of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Bradford J. Michael Verter, a son of Scott J. Schwartz and Mona C. Verter of Brookline, Mass.
Judge Aram H. Tellalian, a retired judge of the Connecticut Probate Court, officiated at the Fairfield Beach


When Going Too Far Is Not Far Enough
LEAD: In these days when demolition is usually a matter of cold-blooded expediency or worse, Charles Ludlam's ''Camille'' qualifies as an act of loving sabotage.


Ms. McAllister Weds C.C. Platt
LEAD: Maureen Jean McAllister and Charles Collier Platt were married yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., by the Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee.


Lifestyle: Sunday Brunch;   A Relaxing Ambiance Helps Start the Week
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Cameos


Briton Who Leaked Army Report Wins Fight
LEAD: A former civilian employee of the British Army who has said he helped wage campaigns of disinformation about the Irish Republican Army and politicians in the 1970's has won compensation for being unfairly dismissed from his job.


Initiative Amendment: Dissenting Views
LEAD: Mr.
Hochbaum's dissertation against New Jersey citizens' having the rights of referendum and recall is far from convincing.
Ask the citizens if they think that initiative, referendum and recall conform to the body of law and tradition we inherited from our forefathers, and most will answer that those rights are as fundamental as those in the Bill of


Jordan and Palestine Remain Separate Entities
LEAD: To the Editor:


33d Annual Steuben Day Parade Winds Down Fifth Avenue


Off the Beaten Track in the Bandas
LEAD: The pilot banked the Twin Otter toward a smoking volcano covered with fresh lava and headed for a white speck in the middle of the sea.
My eyes widened in horror when I saw the tiny runway.
There was a mangled plane at the end of the tarmac that appeared to have been turned into a shrine.


In Ballet and Jazz, Fresh Steps on the Home Front
LEAD: In recent years, American dance has become more and more a virtuosic, intellectual exercise.
As dance seems to be passing through a dry spell epitomized by clever titles for clever and unevocative works, concert presenters are turning increasingly to the less-familiar performing arts of other cultures.


David Eaglesfield Weds Dr. Anne Butler
LEAD: Dr.
Anne Butler, the daughter of Mrs.
James C. Thomson Jr. of Cambridge, Mass., and David Butler of Denver was married yesterday in Brookline, Mass., to David Eaglesfield, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carrol Eaglesfield of Burlington, Wash.
The Rev.
Robert McAfee Brown, a Presbyterian minister and an uncle of the bride, officiated at the home of Dr.


100 Years Ago, the Father of Movies Disappeared
LEAD: Who invented motion pictures?
The Lumiere Brothers in 1895?
Thomas Edison in 1896?
Try again.
A hundred years ago today a French inventor named Augustin Le Prince was scheduled to project his motion pictures at the Jumel Mansion in upper Manhattan and would have, had not an unfortunate incident occurred.


Cities Get the Conductors They Deserve
LEAD: And so it has begun, Zubin Mehta's 13th and final season as music director of the New York Philharmonic.
Not by tradition the luckiest of numbers, but a record-breaker nonetheless; 13 represents the longest incumbency of any chief conductor in the orchestra's history.
Inevitably, attention will center as this season unfolds on Mr.


WHEN PARENTHESES ARE TRANSGRESSIVE
LEAD: Richard Bernstein's On Language column ''When Parentheses Are Transgressive'' (July 29) is a good update of George Orwell's essay, ''Politics and the English Language.''


Recalling a September Afternoon 21 Years Ago
LEAD: Erin B. McCarthy's article, ''The Day the Dorm Stole My Older Sister'' [Sept. 2] , reminded me of the September afternoon 21 years ago when my parents and I took my older sister to her freshman dorm in Safford House at Mount Holyoke College.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
Word Floods and Droughts


Once Considered a Sure Thing, California's Environmental Package Falters
LEAD: When first proposed, a sweeping California ballot measure that promised a ''bold and comprehensive'' plan to protect the environment seemed a sure winner that could deliver a powerful national message about the public's determination to fight pollution.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:
Peter Pan
1953. Disney. $24.99. Laser disk, $29.99. 1 hour, 16 minutes. Closed captioned. G.
The style and extreme technical competence of Disney animation, wrote a Times critic in 1953, eliminate ''the spirit of guileless credulity in fairy magic'' that prevailed in J. M. Barrie's play.


But Who Are The Homeless Of Westchester?
LEAD: THE homeless.
We hear about them every day, from politicians, journalists, even from artists, actors and musicians.
There are benefits to aid the homeless, welfare hotels for the homeless and debate over such homeless issues as affordable housing and health care.


The Purloined Bombshell
LEAD:
CURRENT AFFAIRS
By Barbara Raskin.
270 pp. New York: Random House. $19.95.


A Good Season for Grilled Eggplant
LEAD: GRILLED eggplant, according to the late Waverley Root, became a fad in France in the late 18th century when people wolfed down slices ''in their disorderly gathering place, the gardens of the Palais Royal.'' Louis XIV had introduced the vegetable to France when he grew it in the royal kitchen gardens and served it to surprised guests (not all of whom were exactly thrilled, since it was rumored at the time to cause epilepsy).


Corrections
LEAD: A report last Sunday about the marriage of Jayme A. Shorin to Charles E. Hertan referred to the bride incorrectly and omitted her parents' names.
She is the daughter of Philip P. Shorin of New York and Caryl J. Shorin of Great Neck, L.I., and is keeping her name.


Expos Trip Up Pirates
LEAD: Manager Jim Leyland suggested, after a late-inning loss by the Pirates to the Expos on Friday night that perhaps his young team, in the severe heat of a pennant race, was scared.


Fed Up
LEAD: To the Editor:


Talking: Failed Plans;   The Rights Of Interim Tenants
LEAD: One result of the downturn in the home market has been an increase in failed co-op conversion plans in the New York City area.
Although no exact figures are available, ''we are definitely detecting an increasing number of failed plans,'' said Frederick K. Mehlman, assistant attorney general in charge of the state's Real Estate Financing


Taking Aim At Fear
LEAD: The politics of crime is simple and cynical: only respond to the public's fear of crime.
It costs too much, politically and financially, to do anything about crime itself; at least it probably would cost too much if anyone actually knew what should be done about crime.


Kyoto's Fragrant Green Teas
LEAD: The inner surface of the small, blush glazed cup is netted with dark cracks, their pattern visible through the nearly transparent, jade green liquid that fills the cup, warm but not hot to the touch.
A fresh green fragrance escapes from the cup.
The first sip is astringent, yet has a sweetness that is not that of sugar but of the scent of green things.


Data Update
LEAD:
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
July 90
July 89
Change
Starts
1,148
1,424
-19.4%
Completions
1,280
1,375
-6.9%
Sales
548
741
-26.0%
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)


Italy
LEAD: To the Editor: The article about Italian gelato ''Ice Cream for La Dolce Vita'' (Travel, Aug. 19) brought back fond memories.
I wonder if you can still buy gelato on the roof of the Duomo in Milan.
Or even if you can still go up and walk around on the roof.
It was wonderful to sit at the peak admiring the view, dripping ice cream and thinking with awe of that huge open area under us.


Dispersal Surprises in Woodward
LEAD: Confusion in the handicap ranks and a new leader of the 2-year-olds emerged from a pair of upsets yesterday at Belmont Park, after Dispersal won the $590,000 Woodward Handicap and Eastern Echo took the $115,600 Futurity Stakes.


Finding Perfect Privacy on Phuket
LEAD: Intrepid backpacking travelers of the 60's and early 70's deserve credit for discovering the beauties of Phuket, in the Andaman Sea off Thailand's southern coast.
The best beaches were isolated at the time by formidable limestone mountains and required determination as well as stamina to reach; once there, the only accommodations on most were a few ramshackle bungalows of bamboo and thatch with primitive sanitary facilities.


Nature and Design in Subtle Harmonies
LEAD: THREE immense bronze bells are suspended in wooden supports on one side of Toshiko Takaezu's yard.
Silhouetted against an ashen sky, they resemble austere ancient torii shrines.


Fitting a New Sink Into a Counter Top
LEAD: FITTING a new kitchen sink into a counter top - professional installers call it cutting in - is mostly a case of planning and careful workmanship.
Planning begins by making sure that the sink will fit the counter top and base cabinet supporting it.
In most cases, the horizontal framing spanning the rear of any base cabinet can be cut away to make room for the sink without much loss of support.


Data Bank/September 16, 1990
LEAD:
$
Consumer Borrowing
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
7.4
0.2
6.1
Procucer Price Index
Aug.
July
June
Monthly percent change
1.3
-0.1
0.2
Sales at Retail Outlets
Monthly percent change
-0.6
0.4
1.1
Industrial Production Index
Monthly percent change
-0.2
0.0
0.5
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
83.1
83.5
83.6
Money Supply Growth
3 mos.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Manhattan Beach
LEAD: May link recalls her first trolley rides to Manhattan Beach with her mother in 1912.
For five cents, they took hour-long trips from working-class Williamsburg to the Brooklyn enclave of millionaires' mansions.


A Resort on the Edge of the Wild
LEAD: The Tanjung Aru Beach Hotel is a luxury seaside resort in the Malaysian state of Sabah, on the northern tip of the grand, green island of Borneo.
The hotel sits on 23 landscaped acres at the edge of the South China Sea, near the base of Mount Kinabalu, 13,455 feet tall.
And while this is a deluxe resort with all the amenities - from a free-form swimming pool to tennis courts and a palm-shaded playground for children - it is surrounded by land and waters that are wild and exotic.


Amsterdam
LEAD: To the Editor: Is it really appropriate to describe Amsterdam (Travel, Aug. 19) without mentioning the Anne Frank House?
BERNARD A. YABLIN, M.D.
Fairport, N.Y.


Reporter's Notebook;   Souter Anecdote: Off the Cuff or From the Script?
LEAD: While David H. Souter seemed to satisfy the Senate Judiciary Committee this week that he was no longer what one Senator called ''the Stealth nominee'' to the Supreme Court, he has not convinced everyone.


Missing The Point
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ramapo Defeats Wagner by 31-14
LEAD: Jim Grant, a junior quarterback, threw three touchdown passes and ran for a fourth as undefeated Ramapo overtook Wagner, 31-14, yesterday afternoon at Fisher Field in Grymes Hill, Staten Island.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on the Forum page last Sunday about corporate support for museum exhibitions misstated the year in which Daimler-Benz A.G. commissioned art from Andy Warhol.
The work was commissioned in 1986 and exhibited at the Guggenheim Museum in 1988.


Julia Hotchkiss, Teacher, Is Wed
LEAD: Julia Anne Hotchkiss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald G. Hotchkiss Jr. of Bedford Hills, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Reed Eaton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kendall C. Eaton of Farmington, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
William Foley officiated at St.
Matthews Episcopal Church in Bedford, N.Y.


Review/Dance;   Jo Lechay's Reflections On Her Art
LEAD: When Jo Lechay stared intently out at the audience on Thursday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater, she could have been gazing far into space deep into her own heart. ''Affamee'' (''Starved''),'' the hourlong solo she offered, was an excursion into both private and public realms.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It's very worrying.
They've been educated, and they have something they can give back to the country.
But just when they reach that point, they depart this life.''
- Dr. Timothy Stamps,
the Health Minister
of Zimbabwe, speaking
of the toll from AIDS.
[14:5.]


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: After an extensive renovation, New Jersey's Newark Museum recently reopened.
It displays one of the most comprehensive public collections of coins and medals in the Northeast.


It's Back to School for Adults, Too
LEAD: DO British crossword puzzles intimidate you?
Perhaps you have secretly harbored a desire to learn the art of belly dancing.
Or maybe the thought of faraway places stirs a latent wanderlust.
Open the cover of an adult education catalogue and a world of course offerings, seminars and special events awaits you.


Miss Rittenhouse to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest J. Rittenhouse of Ridgewood, N.J., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Cynthia Ann Rittenhouse and Daniel E. McIntyre, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel E. McIntyre of Short Hills, N.J.
Miss Rittenhouse graduated from the University of Virginia and until recently was an advertising copy director for Bloomingdale's in New York.


Rock vs. Disco: Who Really Won the War?
LEAD: Electrified popular music of the last 35 years has suffered its share of attacks from without, the opponents being mainly parents or religious extremists.
But it has also been riven by internal polemics, and few of those battles grew fiercer and meaner than the rock-versus-disco wars of the late 1970's.


Iraq's Propaganda May Seem Crude, But It's Effective
LEAD: Without a direct military confrontation between the United States and Iraq, the movement of lips has become almost as important as the movement of troops.
On the verbal battlefield, the goal is not wealth or territory but the shaping of public opinion.
But winning the hearts and minds of the Middle East is not easy, and in the war of words between Washington and Baghdad, President Saddam Hussein of


Tokyo


Shelley Huber Weds James Annarella
LEAD: Shelley Goss Huber was married yesterday at the First Presbyterian Church in Rumson, N.J., to James Vincent Annarella, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
James Annarella of Locust, N.J.
The Rev.
Foster C. Wilson performed the ceremony.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: Challenging Anatoly Karpov of one's own free will to an end game is like taking on a fish in a swimming meet.
But that is just what Tony Miles did in the first round of the Biel International Tournament in Switzerland, which ended in early August.


CHUNNELVISION
LEAD: When the evening is clear in Folkestone, the lights of France throb gently just across the English Channel, as though Europe were creeping westward under cover of darkness.
With a strong throw, a good flat rock, it seems, could skip all the way to Calais.
Among the bright pinpoints strung along the coast, one radiates like a fuzzy headlight.


AHEAD OF THE CROWD
LEAD: There was a time when men were judged by their devotion to a subtlety called form. ''One had only to look at him,'' wrote Edith Wharton of one of her nattiest characters, to sense that ''form must be congenital in any one who knew how to wear . . . good clothes so carelessly . . . .''


The Executive Computer;   Will 3.1 x 1-2-3 Satisfy 10 Million?
LEAD: Release 3.1 of the Lotus Development Corporation's 1-2-3 spreadsheet, which arrived in the stores last week, is a much-needed and significantly improved product.
Indeed, critics say it is the program Lotus should have come up with a year ago, when it introduced Release 3.0.


Works in Progress;   Body of Work
LEAD: ''He's reacting to a vulture flying overhead,'' says Stephen Brois, explaining the startled amazement on the face in the foreground above.
Brois (above right, holding the skull) is one of three exhibit preparators at the American Museum of Natural History in New York City making the mannequins for the museum's new Hall of Human Biology and Evolution, scheduled to open in the fall of 1992.


Soul Searching
LEAD: To the Editor:


NICARAGUA USING A NEW CURRENCY
LEAD: In the bitterest days of the conflict between this country's former Sandinista leaders and American-backed rebels, all Nicaraguans shared one crucial piece of common ground: their reliance on the American dollar.


Michele Monagas Wed to T. J. Turner
LEAD: Michele L. Monagas, the daughter of Lionel J. Monagas of Willow Grove, Pa., and the late Natalie L. Hinderas, was married yesterday to Timothy J. Turner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Turner of Sioux City, Iowa.
The Rev.
Edward Barry performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia


Tailor-Made Yachts: Floating Individuality
LEAD: AS a young man growing up on the North Carolina coast, N. Denis Crowther followed the local tradition of building wooden fishing boats.
Today he is president of a boat-building business in Mystic, a town once known for building wooden clipper ships.


What's Iraq's Best Case?
LEAD: Iraq's brutal invasion and pillage of Kuwait cannot be justified.
Its violation of several Western embassies in Kuwait last week is inexcusable.
But for the sake of any possible negotiated settlement, it's important at least to understand Iraq's grievances.
If Saddam Hussein were disposed to solve problems peacefully, here are the arguments he might raise - and their answers.


Always Off Balance and Always Secure
LEAD:
HOLDING ON TO THE AIR
An Autobiography.
By Suzanne Farrell with Toni Bentley.
Illustrated. 322 pp. New York:
Summit Books. $19.95.


Beset in Mount Vernon
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question of the Week;   Are Umpires Getting Too Aggressive?
LEAD: Now Joe West and the baseball umpires are on trial.
What an outrage.
Anyone who saw the disgraceful display by the Mets and Phillies that dreadful evening can testify to the total breakdown of order.
Had the umpires done nothing, it is certain that they would have been criticized for not taking action.


Lisa H. Steiman Marries
LEAD: Lisa H. Steiman, the daughter of Esther Steiman of Black Rock, Conn., and the late Wolf Steiman, was married last evening to John B. Alters, the son of Maxine Alters and Gerald Alters, both of New York.
Rabbi Robert J. Orkand officiated at Waveny House in New Haven.
Mrs.
Alters, 29, who graduated from New York University, is a producer of television commercials at BBDO advertising in New York.


N.F.L. Planning Drug Advice Line
LEAD: The National Football League is planning to offer a toll-free telephone line so players can talk confidentially with a drug adviser.


Dr. Beverly Granger, Dentist, Is Wed To Dr. Aloysius Cuyjet, Physician
LEAD: Dr.
Beverly M. Granger, the daughter of Dr.
Dorothy Reed Granger of Sag Harbor, L.I., and the late Dr.
Richard A. Granger, was married yesterday to Dr.
Aloysius Baxter Cuyjet, a son of Barbara L. Cuyjet of Bayonne, N.J., and Dr.
Aloysius Bishop Cuyjet of Lake Huntington, N.Y.
Justice Robert J. Mangum, a retired justice of the State Court of Claims, officiated in the ceremony at the bride's home in Glen Cove, L


Currency;   A Little Rally That Went Poof
LEAD: The dollar put on a little rally last week against the German mark, inching up above 1.59 marks.
But Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, ended the rally quickly on Thursday.
He told the House Banking Committee that the Fed would ease interest rates if the White House and Congress came up with a credible agreement to cut the budget deficit.


Ohio St. Stops Boston College
LEAD: Bobby Olive caught two scoring passes today and Ohio State's improved defense kept Boston College without an offensive touchdown this season in a 31-10 victory.


What Makes The 2 Sexes So Vulnerable To Epidemic
LEAD: A host of medical, cultural and economic factors make Africa especially vulnerable to the heterosexual spread of AIDS, which is believed to account for more than 80 percent of adult cases there.


Men, Women and Armageddon
LEAD: To the Editor:


DIFFERENCE OF OPINION


Headliners;   Too Thrilling
LEAD: Bungee jumping, something of a passion in Australia, lost a lot of its appeal last week.
The sport, which involves jumping from great heights while attached to elastic cords, was banned in Sydney when one cord broke for a beauty queen, who plunged 130 feet and fractured her collarbone.
Natalie McCurry, whose reign as Miss Australia ended Monday, had successfully executed a solo and then jumped in tandem with a member of the Bungee Bats, a group that arranged public jumps.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
THE FINAL CLUB
By Geoffrey Wolff.
370 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Ms. Dixon Wed To C.R. Owens
LEAD: Sandra E. Dixon and Christopher R. Owens were married yesterday in Chilmark, Mass.
The Rev.
Edward Goode, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at the home of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard Taylor.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Dixon of New Haven.
Her husband is the son of Ethel Werfel Owens and Representative Major R.


Ms. Auchincloss Weds S. B. Reynolds
LEAD: Elizabeth Buck Auchincloss, a daughter of Eva Seed Auchincloss of San Francisco and the late J. Stuart Auchincloss, was married yesterday to Stephen Bradley Reynolds, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic Clinton Reynolds Jr. of New Vernon, N.J.
The Rev.
Mary Moore Gaines officiated at St.
Joseph's Episcopal Chapel in Kent,


Review/Stage;   Skelton's 1-Man Band Of Comical Characters
LEAD: A fellow named Lou went into a synagogue one day and asked the Lord to make him a lottery winner.


Liane Pei and William F. Kracklauer, Lawyers in New York, Are Married
LEAD: Liane Pei, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
I.
M.
Pei of New York, was married yesterday to William Frederick Kracklauer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick W. Kracklauer of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
Damian Myett officiated at St.
Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church in New York.


Boris Yeltsin: At Least He Has a Plan
LEAD: Given his problems at home, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev undoubtedly regarded last week's summit meeting with George Bush as a welcome relief.
By contrast, it was his Aug. 30 ''summit'' with Boris N. Yeltsin that was the ordeal.
Mr.
Yeltsin used his post as President of the Russian Republic to issue a 500-day plan for economic reform.


Beauty/Fashion: New York;   Face to Face With Four Cities
LEAD: Manhattan is a total crap shoot when it comes to looks.
What with the lunching ladies uptown, the SoHo-TriBeCa downtown contingent and the harried midtown business crowd, it's not easy to coalesce the visual shticks into one city image.
Or into clear-cut buying patterns.
While market research shows that women in the Midwest, for example, purchase more blue eye shadow than any other makeup, the New York City group falls into that hazy territory known as ''Metropolitan


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Where the Apples Are (Yours for the Picking)
LEAD: As the harvest season begins, the mid-Hudson Valley is filling up with ripe, red apples, waiting to be picked.
Favorable weather in eastern New York during the growing season has left trees laden with fruit in orchards on both sides of the Hudson River.


It's Countdown Time for Macao
LEAD: Knowing that both are doomed to extinction - at least in their present form - tiny Portuguese Macao is making a determined bid to take over Hong Kong's luster as a tourist mecca, particularly after the last two remaining foreign-ruled territories in China return to Beijing's rule, before the end of this century.


Easing Interest for Called Up Reservists
LEAD: Armed Forces reservists who are called to trade their split level in suburbia for a tent in Saudi Arabia can take some comfort, at least, from a World War II law that reduces their mortgage interest rate to 6 percent and protects them and their families from mortgage foreclosure while they are on active duty.


Polish Rail Car to Israelis
LEAD: A freight car once used to transport Nazi prisoners to the Auschwitz death camp has been presented by Polish railroad workers to Israel's Holocaust museum.
Aleksander Janiszewski, director general of the Polish State Railways, presented the rail car to the Yad Vashem Holocaust memorial in a ceremony at a Warsaw locomotive shed on Friday.


Roaming Australia On a Bus Pass
LEAD: Outside the cities, roads in Australia narrow to two lanes: one for coming and one for going.
Traffic and towns are scarce.
Dust is abundant.
Occasionally the multitrailer rigs called road trains lumber onto the horizon, then they roar into the past.
At night, the great round moon, the stars and headlights show the way.


No Thanks
LEAD: It looked like the opportunity of a league lifetime, the chance to get a ready-made expansion team virtually guaranteed to be a contender the first season.
But after reviewing a Soviet proposal to establish a team in Milwaukee as a National Hockey League club, John Ziegler, the N.H.L., president, said nyet.


Leaving Welfare Behind by Degrees
LEAD: Every day, Esther Fuller wakes up in a Yonkers housing project crawling with crack dealers, plastered with graffiti and reeking of urine, and every night, she tucks her two children into bed there.
But in between, on the rolling campus of Westchester Community College here, her life is undergoing a great, if gradual, change.


For Single Men, a Place to Share Feelings and Shed a Tear
LEAD: ALL the misconceptions about what ''real men'' don't do get left outside the door three Mondays a month when members of a support group called For Men Only get together to let their hair down, share feelings and sometimes even cry.


Love, Myth and Cold Winters
LEAD:
WONDERMONGER
By Michael Rothschild.
230 pp. New York: Viking. $17.95.


A Good Season for Grilled Eggplant
LEAD: GRILLED eggplant, according to the late Waverley Root, became a fad in France in the late 18th century when people wolfed down slices ''in their disorderly gathering place, the gardens of the Palais Royal.'' Louis XIV had introduced the vegetable to France when he grew it in the royal kitchen gardens and served it to surprised guests (not all of whom were exactly thrilled, since it was rumored at the time to cause epilepsy).


Stanley R. Kay, 44, Schizophrenia Expert
LEAD: Stanley R. Kay, an authority on schizophrenia, died on Monday in Kyoto, Japan where he was attending a medical conference.
He was 44 years old and lived in Mahopac, N.Y.


Miss Crow Weds P.H. Flanagan
LEAD: Leslie Kirven Crow, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel J. Crow of Asheville, N.C., was married there yesterday to Patrick Houghton Flanagan, the son of Mrs.
James L. Emery of Washington and Thomas J. Flanagan of Rochester.
The Rev.
William M. Todd performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church.


Fitting a New Sink Into a Counter Top
LEAD: FITTING a new kitchen sink into a counter top - professional installers call it cutting in - is mostly a case of planning and careful workmanship.
Planning begins by making sure that the sink will fit the counter top and base cabinet supporting it.


Birmingham Marker Honors Girls Killed at Church in '63
LEAD: Twenty-seven years after four black girls attending church died in a racist bombing here, several dozen people gathered at a cemetery where three of the girls are buried to remember them as martyrs for social change.


Correction
LEAD: An article on July 29 about canoeing in Zimbabwe misstated the telephone number of Safariworld.
The tour operator has recently written to point out that the number is (800) 366-0505.


Love Canal Video Criticized as Misleading
LEAD: The state agency trying to sell homes at Love Canal could face a lawsuit if it does not change a ''misleading and incorrect'' videotape, the State Attorney General's office said.


Michigan Upstages Yanks-Tigers
LEAD: The crisp evening temperatures, falling from the low 60's to the high 50's, weren't the only element that lent an air of football to the baseball game here at Tiger Stadium tonight.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article Sept. 2 about school budget cuts misidentified Paul Hinckley, an official of the regional school district in Woodbury and Bethlehem.
He is chairman of the school board.


Alfred Hollender, 87, A New York Executive
LEAD: Alfred L. Hollender, a retired New York businessman and advertising executive and a former producer of popular game shows in the 1950's and early 60's, died on Thursday at his home in Water Mill, L.I.
He was 87 years old and also lived in Palm Beach, Fla.


Chamber Recitals Plus Talks
LEAD: THIRTY-FOUR years ago, Friends of Music began presenting chamber concerts in Connecticut and attempting to break down the barriers between performers and listeners.
Named for the Viennese society founded by Beethoven and his pupil-patron Archduke Rudolph, the group also emulates its forebears by having pre-concert lectures or discussions in private homes as well as post-concert receptions with the performers for the entire audience.


U.S. Company Eluding Assault Rifle Import Ban
LEAD: Assault-style AK-47 rifles are being made for the first time by an American company that is getting around the Government's ban on imports of the weapon by producing some new parts in the United States.


Initiative Amendment: Dissenting Views
LEAD: The arguments against initiative and referendum to counteract Governor Florio's big pocket lightener are antiquated and confused.
At the end of Mr.
Hochbaum's article he calls voting a more effective way to express dissatisfaction.
Well, what else is a referendum - is it not the most democratic form of a vote?


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: Most bridge players go through life without ever having the good fortune of picking up a ''hand of a lifetime.'' This sort of hand offers fair prospects of making 13 tricks opposite a yarborough.


THE SPORTSCASTERS
LEAD: I liked Charles Siebert's article, but his use of the past tense to describe radio's baseball announcers incorrectly assigns a premature death to a quite lively medium.
I'm 24, and I grew up listening to Tiger baseball broadcasters Paul Carey and Ernie Harwell on my crystal radio late at night - Paul with his trained baritone; Ernie with that crackling drawl, saying, ''He stood there like the house by the side of the road and watched that one go by.


Threats and Party Backlash for El Salvador Chief
LEAD: In the 15 months since his inauguration at the head of a rightist Government, President Alfredo Cristiani has moved moved toward the center of the Salvadoran political spectrum, provoking a backlash from the core of his party that threatens his administration, Western diplomats and Salvadoran politicians say.


Headliners;   Baton Poised
LEAD: First prize for Wolfgang Sawallisch turned out to be 15 weeks with the Philadelphia.
The West German conductor is to succeed Riccardo Muti as the music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra in 1993, and his contract requires him to spend at least that much time each season directing the orchestra whose lush string sound was made famous by Leopold Stokowski and Eugene Ormandy.


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article in the Real Estate section on June 17 about California wineries that are moving operations southward to Santa Barbara County quoted the operations director for the Kendall-Jackson Winery as saying the primary reason for the move was that ''land values are so much lower.'' In editing, The Times omitted a further comment from the director, Randall Clifton: ''The quality of Chardonnay grapes in Santa Barbara County is superior to those grown in Napa and Sonoma Counties.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
Fire Island Obstacle


Time of Decision: The LP Collector In the CD Age
LEAD: I suppose i became a certifiable record collector the day I covered up one of my apartment windows with a second CD cabinet.
Fellow collectors understood.
But the others!
You'd have thought I was an ax murderer. ''Can't you get rid of some LP's?'' they'd ask.
Six years later, I have the answer: It all depends.


Schools Draw Up Plans For 47 Emergencies
LEAD: WITH all schools in the state preparing to meet an Oct. 1 deadline for having emergency plans in effect, the director of the county's Office of Disaster and Emergency Services, Edward J. Nullet, said Westchester's schools ''are as well prepared as any county in the state, if not better prepared.''


Focus: The Midwest Market;   Demand is Strong and Prices Are Rising
LEAD: In marked contrast to the housing picture in the rest of the country, the demand for homes throughout the Middle West remains robust, with brisk sales and rising prices signaling the region's emergence as the strongest market in the country.


Jane Elizabeth Krug Weds Jerry Farmer Stone 3d
LEAD: Jane Elizabeth Krug, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Thatcher Krug of Old Bethpage, L.I., was married yesterday to Jerry Farmer Stone 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stone Jr. of Summit, N.J.
The Revs.
Robert Bruschi and Kenneth Swanson officiated at St.
Simon-by-the-Sea Episcopal Church in Mantoloking, N


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-19


Glas(s)nost on 67th St.
LEAD: The Soviet Mission to the United Nations is a squarish, white-brick building that looks like just another squarish, white-brick apartment house on Manhattan's Upper East Side, except for police standing watch at its door day and night.
Until last week, the door at 136 East 67th Street was shrouded by curtains - not iron, but they might as well have been.


Initiative Amendment: Dissenting Views
LEAD: Mr.
Hochbaum says initiative and referendum could ''severely'' weaken our representative form of government.
Baloney!
Our system works best for special interests.
The average taxpayer distrusts large institutions and government for a reason - they don't listen.
Further, no one is accountable for anything.


The Nation;   Behind the Census Numbers, Swirling Tides Of Movement
LEAD: As demographers study the preliminary results of the 1990 census, they are discovering that not everything is as it seems.
There were great internal population shifts, but they did not always reflect Americans' preferences for one part of the country over another.
And places where growth had seemed to be stagnant were actually alive with counterbalancing migrations.


Former Dallas Police Chief Pleads Not Guilty to Perjury
LEAD: The former Dallas police chief, Mack Vines, pleaded not guilty on Friday to a perjury charge that resulted in his dismissal earlier in the week.


California Faces Test On the Environment
LEAD: The economic and political realities of protecting the environment are being tested in California.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: There is at least one person in New York who never, well almost never, buys potatoes.
This person has nothing against potatoes, in point of fact she considers that potatoes have everything going for them including, unfortunately, her appetite.
This appetite is apparently insatiable when confronted with mashed, fried, scalloped, baked or roasted spuds and although these and other more esoteric versions are ordered when dining out, she knows that potatoes in her kitchen are an open invitation to disaster.


Democrats Straddle a Line in Policy Statement
LEAD: The Democratic National Committee tried to accomplish a difficult task here today: express full support for the American troops in the Persian Gulf while criticizing the Republican Administration that put them there.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDY: Business inventories for July.
Chevorlet previews 1991 models.
TUESDAY: Merchandise trade balance for July.
August consumer prices.
Ford previews 1991 models.
Next Inc. is to introduce an improved work station and new software.
WEDNESDAY: Housing starts for August.
Chrysler show 1991 models.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, an article on page 28 of the Arts and Leisure section today about Augustin Le Prince, an early inventor of motion pictures, includes a garbled passage in some copies.
The last sentence of the fifth column should read, ''This omission in Le Prince's patent registration would later prove disastrous for Edison's competitors as it undermined their attempts to legally establish that other inventors had clearly predated Edison's claim.


Missy Putman, Manager, Wed
LEAD: Jennifer Ritchie Putman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Fenn Putman of Mendham, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher Fink, a son of Barbara J. Cooper of North Massapequa, L.I., and Eugene P. Fink of Boca Raton, Fla.
The Rev.
Alfred Niese officiated at the Episcopal Church of St.
John on the Mountain in Bernardsville, N


V. P. Moravec Jr. Wed to Ms. Lamb
LEAD: Wendy Lamb, the daughter of Carolyn Buchanan Lamb of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church to Vincent Paul Moravec Jr., a son of Janis Howe Moravec of Beaver, Pa., and the late Mr.
Moravec.
The Rev.
Roland M. Jones performed the ceremony, assisted by the Very Rev.


Can Cellular Phone Companies Agree On a New Standard for Transmission?
LEAD: Cellular industry executives now find themselves in a quandary.
They agreed last year on a technique to transmit calls that offers a desperately needed threefold increase in the number that can be handled simultaneously in one city.
Japan and many European countries have already adopted this technique as their standard.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Aug. 19 about career counseling for dancers misidentified a Canadian organization that works with retired dancers and characterized it incorrectly.
The group is the Dancer Transition Center; it is independent and financed by the Canada Employment and Immigration Commission.
The article also referred incorrectly to the center's founder, Joysanne Sidimus.


Hints on Hats
LEAD: A hat on a man can do something for him - or to him.
Knowing the distinction has become even more important this season, when men's-wear styles from Armani to Brooks Brothers have featured the soft, slouchy silhouette that looks best with a hat.
Men of the hour, from Dick Tracy to Gorbachev, have also helped put this accessory back in the news and on the heads of those who might not have considered it before.


On Language;   Right On, Dead-On
LEAD: For a bravura example of deadline reporting,'' reads the citation to Linda Greenhouse, ''and dead-on analysis as the Supreme Court ended its session. . . .'' That's the wording of one of the coveted publisher's awards posted on the bulletin board in the New York Times Washington bureau.


'I'm Kitty Dukakis and I'm ...'
LEAD:
NOW YOU KNOW
By Kitty Dukakis with Jane Scovell.
Illustrated. 315 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Blue Jays' Late Rally Beats Orioles Again
LEAD: The Toronto Blue Jays, getting a three-run homer from Kelly Gruber, overcame a two-run deficit in the ninth inning for the second successive game, beating the Baltimore Orioles, 4-3, today to help themselves in the American League East.


Parents Hellbent on Pleasure
LEAD:
THE LIGHT YEARS
By Elizabeth Jane Howard.
434 pp. New York:
Pocket Books. $18.95.


Turcotte Regaining Form
LEAD: The therapy is required almost every other day.
The trainer's fingers are dug deep into the left foot, reorganizing bones and releasing muscles.
They touch what are officially called ''trigger points,'' but by the end of the standard half-hour of work what they have triggered as well are tears at the corners of Darren Turcotte's eyes.


Wall Street;   Rules for Government Securities?
LEAD: There's something about the term ''government securities'' that resonates with safety and solidity.
In an age of ''junk bonds'' and penny stocks, what could be more conservative and prudent than buying things like Treasury bonds or the securities of federally chartered agencies such as the Federal National Mortgage Association?


Miss Adkins Wed To David Ernst
LEAD: Jennifer Brooks Adkins and David Ernst were married yesterday at the Siasconset (Mass.) Union Chapel by the Revs.
Edward B. Anderson, a Unitarian minister, and Dr.
Leslie John Adkins, a Congregational minister and a grandfather of the bride.


Question of the Week;   Are Umpires Getting Too Aggressive?
LEAD: Umpires are not aggressive enough.
They take too much abuse, which demeans them and diminishes their authority.
Why should they have to accept verbal and physical abuse by managers, coaches and players screaming in their faces?
ANDREA MARCSTERN
New York


Corrections
LEAD: An article last Sunday about the history of relations between the Soviet Union and Iraq misstated the signing date of a friendship treaty between the nations.
It was 1972, not 1982.


New Gardener
LEAD: The new owner of the famed Pebble Beach Golf Links in California may be a Tokyo businessman, but at least Minoru Isutani has the Japanese savy to know the best remedy for an infestation of the dreaded kikuyugrass: some good old American know-how.


Correction
LEAD: The Stamps column on Sept. 2 about joint issues by the United States and other nations misidentified the marketer of stamps from Micronesia.
It is the Inter-Governmental Philatelic Corporation, 480 West 34th Street, New York, N.Y. 10001.


Campus Life: Wisconsin;   Students Accuse A University Of Housing Bias
LEAD: The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development is investigating a discrimination complaint filed by students against the University of Wisconsin's housing division.


'Goodfellas' Looks at the Banality of Mob Life
LEAD: Forget family ties.
Forget the much-vaunted code of honor.
Forget the tragic, eloquent grace of Francis Ford Coppola's ''Godfather'' movies and the cheerful inanity of Jonathan Demme's ''Married to the Mob.'' Martin Scorsese's blood-splattered new film, ''Goodfellas,'' is a splash of ice-cold water in the face of a public grown drunk on romantic myths about the mob.





German Expertise Not Needed to Develop Synfuels
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dar-ryl, Dar-ryl, Dar-ryl, Dar-ryl, Dar-ryl
LEAD: Some people put off going to the dentist.
Some people put off term papers.
Some people put off income taxes.
The Mets put off Darryl.
Now it's going to cost them.
For those who have just tuned in to this melodrama, the tall man in right field with the rather improbable name of Darryl Strawberry went through a month in a rehabilitation center last winter and is probably going to have the best season of his career.


Just Give Me $10 Million, Baby
LEAD: In their disappointment and disgust, some Oakland people burned their Raider jackets and T-shirts.
And in nearby San Leandro, Calif., at Ricky's sports bar and restaurant, where Raider jerseys once worn by Ken Stabler and George Blanda are shrines, the huge white banner announcing ''Welcome Home, Oakland


Postings: Celebration;   Hovels To Homes
LEAD: When Maria Soto first laid eyes on the West 105th Street building she now calls home, it was dank and dirty and smelled of rain-soaked linoleum, discarded furniture and garbage.


Promise Them Everything, Give Them the Streets
LEAD:
OUT OF BEDLAM
The Truth About Deinstitutionalization.
By Ann Braden Johnson.
306 pp. New York: Basic Books. $22.95.
MADNESS IN THE STREETS
How Psychiatry and the Law Abandoned the Mentally Ill.
By Rael Jean Isaac and Virginia C. Armat.
436 pp. New York: The Free Press. $24.95.


Miss Jones Wed To J.L. Stillwell
LEAD: Katherine Eastwick Jones, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Horace E. Jones of Philadelphia, was married yesterday in Padanaram, Mass. to Richard Newcomb Stillwell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Stillwell of Charlottesville, Va.
The Rev.
Walter A. Sullivan officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Chuch.


Ms. Cowgill Wed To D. S. DeCrane
LEAD: Linda Jeanne Cowgill, a daughter of Mildred E. Cowgill of Rosarito Beach, Baja California, Mexico, and the late Lieut.
Col.
Wayne J. Cowgill, U.S.A.F., was married yesterday to David S. DeCrane, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred C. DeCrane Jr. of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
Jonathan Young, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Crotona Institute in Ojai,


All Shakespeare's Fault
LEAD: To the Editor:


Choosing Sides
LEAD: To the Editor:


If Lots of People Feel pain, Is That a Recession?
LEAD: Whatever the statistics say, millions of Americans have concluded in recent weeks that the United States is in a recession.
They are probably overstating the case.
But if the word recession is heard more and more, it certainly reflects the hardship, both actual and anticipated, that is spreading across the country.


Teufel a Man For All Positions
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Gorbachev Presses Israel to Join Forum on Mideast
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, after the first meeting in 20 years between a Kremlin leader and Israeli ministers, was reported today to have restated his insistence that the Soviet Union would recognize Israel only if it dropped its opposition to an international conference on the Middle East.


Walter J. Petry Sr., Y.M.C.A. Director
LEAD: Walter J. Petry Sr., a member of the board of the Harlem Y.M.C.A. for 50 years, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Was van Gogh Dizzy?
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Good Season for Grilled Eggplant
LEAD: GRILLED eggplant, according to the late Waverley Root, became a fad in France in the late 18th century when people wolfed down slices ''in their disorderly gathering place, the gardens of the Palais Royal.'' Louis XIV had introduced the vegetable to France when he grew it in the royal kitchen gardens and served it to surprised guests (not all of whom were exactly thrilled, since it was rumored at the time to cause epilepsy).


Ms. Woolf Is Wed To J.L. Feinberg
LEAD: Stacey Lee Woolf, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Woolf of Chestnut Hill, Mass., was married last evening in Boston to Jeffrey Louis Feinberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence M. Feinberg of Bergenfield, N.J.
Rabbi Alan Turetz officiated at the ceremony at the Copley Plaza hotel.


Ad Hominem
LEAD: To the Editor:


BEST SELLERS: September 16, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
2
1
4
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $21.95.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.


THEY'RE SO VAIN
LEAD: The White House is ordinarily a place where vanity grows wild.
But each Administration takes its cue from the boss, and George Bush has had it baked into his psyche from the time he was a lad in Greenwich, Conn., that it was unseemly to brag, preen or primp.


A Dream Turned Deadly
LEAD: On Thursday July 26, a dark-green garbage bag washed up onto a beach in Long Branch, N.J.


Style Makers;   Michael Mott, Fashion Designer
LEAD: Like practically every fashion retailer, designer or wearer of clothes, Michael Mott begins with a jacket these days.
For fall, the jackets tend to be longer and softer than they used to be.
What sets off Mr.
Mott's styles from a lot of others is that they are realistically priced, at $150 to $300 - and they are made to order.


Airport Proposal Is Going to Voters
LEAD: A DECADE-OLD struggle over the appropriate size of a new terminal at the Westchester County Airport, the keystone of a modernization program, entered what may be its final stretch last week, when the County Board of Legislators made its choice and asked for voter approval in an Election Day bond referendum.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
SAILING FOR GOOD WILL


Hoping for A Friendly Recession
LEAD: American consumers, the bastion of strength in years past, reacted to the Mideast crisis by putting away their wallets.
Now the question is whether those wallets can be pried open.


Yankees Are in Critical Condition as Their New Era Begins
LEAD: They will finish in last place for the first time since 1966, the second time since 1912 and only the fourth time in the 88-year history of the franchise.
They will very likely finish with their worst record since 1913.
They have already suffered the first season-series shutout (to Oakland) in their history.


AIDS in Africa: A Killer Rages On
LEAD: The AIDS epidemic continues to course through Africa, outracing the prevention campaigns that have now been started by every government.


GOING, GOING, GONE
LEAD: For a teen-age boy going bald, ''the first time'' has two meanings.
My first ''first time'' came when I was 17, at midmorning, in the brightly lighted basement of a Massachusetts boys' boarding school.
I was sitting in Mr.
Sambito's barber's chair, receiving his customary five-minute bowl haircut, when he said, ''I got bad news for you, Clarke.


Votes in Congress;   Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
LEAD:
House
1.
Forces in Japan: Vote on an amendment to a $283 billion defense department programs bill requiring Japan to pay all the cost associated with the 50,000 U.S. troops stationed there.
For each year Japan does not cover the costs, 5,000 troops would be withdrawn.
Approved 370 to 53, Sept.


Fitting a New Sink Into a Counter Top
LEAD: FITTING a new kitchen sink into a counter top - professional installers call it cutting in - is mostly a case of planning and careful workmanship.
Planning begins by making sure that the sink will fit the counter top and base cabinet supporting it.
In most cases, the horizontal framing spanning the rear of any base cabinet can be cut away to make room for the sink without much loss of support.


Gabriel Byrne, Bound for 'Miller's Crossing'
LEAD: Since 1980, a tide of films featuring, even starring Gabriel Byrne has washed ashore here.
Playing opposite Jill Clayburgh in Costa Gavras's ''Hanna K.,'' he was an Israeli prosecutor with an accent appropriate to the venue; for ''Gothic,'' a Ken Russell surreal frenzy, he was Lord Byron, with bouffant hair and upper-class inflections; his speech emerged slightly and romantically Italianate in ''Julia and Julia,'' a Kathleen Turner vehicle, and a touch Hispanic in ''Siesta,'' an overnight failure redeemed by the presence of Ellen Barkin, whom he subsequently married.


In Mohegan Lake, a Lubavitch Couple Reach Out
LEAD: WHEN Loretta Ciner, a Reform Jew with little education in her religion, decided to study Judaism at the Chabad of Northern Westchester - also known as the Lakeland Synagogue in Mohegan Lake - her family was horrified.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
THE BANANA WARS: A History of United States Military Intervention in Latin America From the Spanish-American War to the Invasion of Panama.
By Ivan Musicant. (Macmillan, $24.95.) Ivan Musicant's military history of selected United States interventions in Central and South America is awkwardly written but painstakingly researched.


Meg Laidlaw Is Wed to John Nebens
LEAD: Margaret Elizabeth Laidlaw, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald A. Laidlaw of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Mitchell Nebens, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lewis M. Nebens of Millwood, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
Larry L. Bethune officiated at the Bedford (N.Y.) Presbyterian Church.


Museum Researcher And His Wife Die In a Crash in France
LEAD: Dr.
Leonid Tarassuk, an expert on arms and armor at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and his wife, the former Nina Rostovzova, died in an automobile accident on Tuesday in the village of Quimper in the Brittany section of France, officials of the museum reported.


What Builders Really Want
LEAD: If builders had anything worthwhile to say on the subject of the pine barrens, they'd be saying it.


Fitting a New Sink Into a Counter Top
LEAD: FITTING a new kitchen sink into a counter top - professional installers call it cutting in - is mostly a case of planning and careful workmanship.
Planning begins by making sure that the sink will fit the counter top and base cabinet supporting it.
In most cases, the horizontal framing spanning the rear of any base cabinet can be cut away to make room for the sink without much loss of support.


Teacher Strikes End With New Contracts In 2 School Districts
LEAD: The teacher strikes in the South Orange-Maplewood and Deptford school districts are over.


Poor Nations Get Unspecified Pledge of More Aid
LEAD: Rich industrial nations agreed to increase their aid to the world's poorest nations at a United Nations conference that ended here today, but their agreement fell short of the third world's goal of having the industrialized world double its aid.


Supplies Delivered to Kuwait


Doing the Right Thing With Compost
LEAD: RECYCLING is the right thing to do.
With so much focus, and rightly so, on overstuffed landfills, gardeners are learning that they can do their part if they compost.


Catherine Sullivan and William Galvin Married
LEAD: Catherine Ann Sullivan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Sullivan of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married yesterday at Queen of the Most Holy Rosary Roman Catholic Church in Bridgehampton, L.I., to William Paul Galvin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald M. Galvin of Forest Hills, Queens.
The Rev.
John J.


Fire in Northern California Threatens 400 Communities


Japanese Cars Aren't More Fuel Efficient
LEAD: To the Editor:


Foreigners Finding Long Delays at U.S. Airports
LEAD: Short of inspectors, the Immigration and Naturalization Service has been unable to keep pace with the explosive increase of foreign visitors to this country.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
LEAD: Special Today:


On the 2 P.M. From Adelaide To Alice
LEAD: With a camel painted on its face, the sleek green and yellow engine of the Ghan train blasts its horn and slides out of Adelaide's Keswick Station every Thursday at 2 P.M.
Bound for Alice Springs in the red desert heartlands of central Australia, the Ghan heads north, up through South Australia and into the Northern


Penelope Scott Weds Philip Moss
LEAD: Penelope Ann Scott, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward L. Scott Jr. of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Philip Alexander Moss, a son of Mrs.
Roland C. Sherrer Jr. of Oyster Bay, L.I., and Salzburg, Austria, and Peter Bayard Moss of Chestertown, Md.
The Rev.
Dr.
David St.
George officiated at Christ Episocpal Church in Short


Ideas &amp; Trends;   Why Gene Therapy Is Considered Scary But Cell Therapy Isn't
LEAD: It took three years, three months, one week and one hour, but researchers at the National Institutes of Health finally got permission to try gene therapy.
At 10:15 A.M. on Sept. 7, the director of the N.I.H. approved a proposal by Dr.
W.
French Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and his colleagues to try to correct a rare but deadly immune system disorder in children.


Bill Would Again End Benefits to Census Workers
LEAD: About $40 million in unemployment benefits that were stripped from temporary census workers in May and restored in August are threatened again by legislation approved this week by a Senate subcommittee.


Error-Filled Loss for the Lions
LEAD: Three years ago, theirs had been the most promising freshman football class at Columbia in recent memory.
This year was to be their year, with expectations high for these seniors to finally live up to the potential they had shown as undefeated freshmen in 1987.


Campus Life: Oberlin;   Six Housemates Bridge the Gap Of Generations
LEAD: The day may come when all the residents of the Jeanne Beattie Butts House will get together to play a board game on the living-room floor.
But the two elderly residents, ages 77 and 79, three college students and one recent graduate who are sharing a ground-breaking intergenerational house at Oberlin


Judith Jackson Weds B. D. Haims
LEAD: Judith Jackson and Bruce D. Haims were married yesterday at the bridegroom's weekend home in Pawling, N.Y.
The Rev.
M.
Fletcher Davis, an Episcopal priest, performed the nondenominational ceremony.


Headliners;   Finding Fault
LEAD: Stephen L. Lane claims the defunct brokerage firm of Drexel Burnham Lambert is responsible for his $12 million loss in the 1987 market crash because his Drexel broker lacked experience and supervision.
He should know; she was, and is, his wife, Trina Lane.
In a complaint that was filed with the American Arbitration Association two years ago and came to light last week, Mr.


Melissa Pruzan Is a Bride
LEAD: Melissa B. Pruzan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul S. Pruzan of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Jeffrey Fishman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rudolph Fishman of North Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Mark Weiner performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Fishman, a graduate of Wellesley College, is the projects director for the American Marketing Network, a promotion concern in New York.


Uncounted New Yorker Wants to Know Why
LEAD: To the Editor:


&gt;Westport Blessed With Hong Kong Fare
LEAD: Westport should count its blessings - two new Chinese restaurants have opened in recent months featuring Hong Kong cuisine, and both of them are very good.


When the Two Germanys Unite, What Happens to the Bavarian Yodeler?
LEAD: Dec. 17, 1989, Was the day i lost confidence in my television's remote-control device.
It was just after the evening news broadcast on West Germany's ARD network, and Alois Moig, a 200-pounder attired in Alpine dress, appeared on the screen surrounded by a group of Bavarian yodelers and promising 90 minutes of folk music.


Style Makers;   David Urso, Spice-Jewelry Designer
LEAD: David Urso adds a dash of rosemary to his garlic potatoes, some oregano to his ratatouille, a pinch of thyme to his favorite chicken dish and lots of basil tohis pesto.
He also sprinkles herbs from his garden on the jewelry that he designs.


Football Violence Is Minimized
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


THE SPORTSCASTERS
LEAD: I read with delight Charles Siebert's article ''The Sportscasters'' (Aug. 19).
I was a major-league pitcher (of limited success and longevity) and a broadcaster with the Pittsburgh Pirates from 1967 to 1975, where I had the pleasure of working with longtime Pirates broadcaster Bob Prince.
He knew how to play a dramatic moment.


Who's Laughing Now? Women
LEAD: Men who frequent the Improv, beware: next time could be your turn to be serenaded by Katsy Schappell.
Ms.
Schappell, a waiting-to-be-discovered comic, likes to pick a new man from the audience each night, then beckon him to join her onstage.
There he will be seated on a chair while Ms.
Schappell sings to him the haunting hit from ''Dreamgirls.


Embracing Life in a Maelstrom
LEAD:
BEIRUT FRAGMENTS
A War Memoir.
By Jean Said Makdisi.
253 pp. New York: Persea Books. $19.95.


Initiative Amendment: Dissenting Views
LEAD: In his article, ''Initiative and Referendum?
Say No'' (Opinion page, Aug. 19), Martin Hochbaum opposes an initiative and referendum amendment in New Jersey.
He suggests that the visibility of the New Jersey Legislature's deliberative process, together with newspaper commentary, freedom-of-information laws, open public meetings and open-to-the-public legislative committee hearings provide ample opportunity for public testimony.


U.S. Builds Up Power to Attack In a Gulf Clash
LEAD: Five weeks after the first American forces arrived here, the United States is building up its offensive capability against Iraq, according to American officials.


Scarlet Knights Go to 2-0
LEAD: After Rutgers's 24-8 upset victory over Kentucky last Saturday, the new coach, Doug Graber, warned his young team all week about the danger of a letdown against Colgate, the only Division I-AA squad on the Scarlet Knights' schedule.


The X-Factor Delivers a Championship
LEAD: A young tennis player stares at her coach with empty eyes.
Her passionless face tells it all: Why am I here?
Where am I going?
Is there a future for me?


Realty Doctorates
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Good Season for Grilled Eggplant
LEAD: GRILLED eggplant, according to the late Waverley Root, became a fad in France in the late 18th century when people wolfed down slices ''in their disorderly gathering place, the gardens of the Palais Royal.'' Louis XIV had introduced the vegetable to France when he grew it in the royal kitchen gardens and served it to surprised guests (not all of whom were exactly thrilled, since it was rumored at the time to cause epilepsy).


Corrections
LEAD: A music listing on page 52 of the Arts and Leisure section today for the Wretched Refuse String Band gives an outdated performance location, supplied by the band's publicity agent.
The performance is at Brady's Tavern, 67 Murray Street, in Manhattan.


Upper-Class Artists?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Life: Pennsylvania;   Fraternities Lose Grip On Prime Housing Site
LEAD: For at least 20 years, the housing along Locust Walk, the main artery for pedestrians on the University of Pennsylvania campus, has been the exclusive domain of fraternities.
Now it is the focus of a debate as the administration has moved to end the exclusivity.


Clint Eastwood Directs Himself Portraying a Director
LEAD: Moving through the green and sepia tones of the savannah, kicking up dust and stones, an open Land-Rover suddenly pulls to a halt and several intent white men, clad in khaki hunting gear, leap out, rifles in hand.
One of them, tall and lean, his face shaded by the wide awning of his bush hat, has a particular urgency.


Love for the Proper Outlaw
LEAD:
THE WOMAN LIT BY FIREFLIES
By Jim Harrison.
247 pp. Boston: Seymour Lawrence/
Houghton Mifflin Company. $19.95.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Golf
Gardner Leads Canadian Open: On a Canadian Open scoreboard that looked as if it were turned upside down, Buddy Gardner had the lead and Curtis Strange was the anchorman.
Gardner, without a victory in 13 seasons on the PGA Tour, beat cold, windy conditions in Oakville, Ontario, with some magical putting to score a 67.


Kings Sign Mays
LEAD: He's already been credited with helping rebuild one sagging basketball program, and now Travis Mays is set to begin working his magic on another.
Mays, a former Texas Longhorn who is the leading scorer in Southwest Conference history, signed a multiyear contract with the Sacramento Kings on Friday.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 16, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
42
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and lawyers.
2
4
SILENT PARTNER, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $5.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware investigates an apparent suicide.


In Mississippi, They're Counted Out
LEAD: The words are repeated, almost verbatim, from one front stoop to the next, as the residents of the Unita Blackwell housing project come out to answer a question from their Mayor, Unita Blackwell: ''No, ma'am, the census didn't come here.'' ''No, nobody talked to me.''


BUSINESS DIARY/SEPTEMBER 9-14
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Preventing Another Banking Crisis
On one side of the tables sat lawmakers terrified that they would be blamed for another Federal bailout.
On the other sat the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Alan Greenspan, afraid that Congress would hurt the banks more than help them.


A Fair Shake At Cooperstown
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Streetscapes: The Old Grolier Club;   Recycling an 1890's Survivor
LEAD: It has been a midtown puzzle, a curious, neo-Romanesque gem out of place in its surroundings of tall lofts and offices.
Now the building, built for and occupied by the Grolier Club from 1889 to 1917, has reopened as the Grolier, a membership supper club.


Florio and the Need to Raise Taxes
LEAD: We always hear about the lack of vision by our political officials, yet we are experiencing a resurgence of leadership in New Jersey.


No Way to Choose a Judge
LEAD: What qualities count most in choosing judges?
Integrity and independence?
Legal philosophy and judicial temperament?
Not under New York's system of judicial elections.
It puts a premium on fund-raising, slick advertisements and chumminess with clubhouse pols.
Last week's Democratic primary for Manhattan


WHAT'S SO FUNNY ABOUT WASHINGTON?
LEAD: I have long been an admirer of cartoonist Pat Oliphant's insightful observations (''What's So Funny About Washington?'' by Wayne King, Aug. 5).
It was, however, disheartening to learn that this obviously intelligent artist - described as ''the soul of tolerance in private matters'' - is offended by ''small things'' such as the use of the term ''gay'' to identify homosexuals (''Why can't we have 'gay' back, and they can keep 'poofter?


Kirsten Morehouse Is Wed to Matthew A. Kenney
LEAD: Kirsten Morehouse, a daughter of Mrs.
Fredric J. Klink of Norwalk, Conn., and Theodore C. Morehouse of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to Matthew Alden Kenney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert N. Kenney of Searsport, Me.
The Rev.
Fred Bender officiated at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Darien,


Japan
LEAD: To the Editor: In ''A View Too Close for Comfort'' (Travel, Aug. 19), Allen R. Myerson writes that the driver of a bus in Japan ''was curiously positioned on the right side of the bus, even though Japanese drivers are usually on the left.''


STORE STYLE
LEAD:
MACY'S


Howell A. Inghram, 94; Professor at Columbia
LEAD: Howell Arthur Inghram, professor emeritus of accounting at Columbia University, died on Thursday at Walton County Hospital in Monroe, Ga.
He was 94 years old and lived in Monroe.


Chilled by Violence, New Yorkers Are Questioning Life in Their City
LEAD: New York City is looking in the mirror these days and does not like what it is seeing.


Jenifer A. Smith Weds Francis Bacon Gilbert 3d
LEAD: Jenifer Ann Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel J. Smith of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Francis Bacon Gilbert 3d, the son of Mr.
Gilbert Jr. of Wilton, Conn., and the late Sandra Still Gilbert.
The Rev.
Robert F. Grippo performed the ceremony at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Roman Catholic





M. J. O'Connor Weds Kristine Hatzenbuhler
LEAD: Kristine Smith Hatzenbuhler, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Hatzenbuhler of Verona, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael John O'Connor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. O'Connor, also of Verona.
The Rev.
Nicholas T. Cooke 3d officiated at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Montclair, N.J.


Under Blue Skies, Global Race Begins
LEAD: A storm front gave way to blue skies and fair winds today as 24 solo sailors crossed the starting line in the BOC Challenge, the 27,000-mile yacht race around the world.


PARIS ADDING 84,000 TO FORCE IN GULF; BONN'S AID TO RISE
LEAD: Responding to Baghdad's moves against French and other foreign diplomats in Kuwait on Friday, President Francois Mitterrand today ordered 4,000 soldiers and dozens of planes, helicopters and tanks to Saudi Arabia.


A Boy Who Knows His Forks
LEAD:
ARAMINTA'S PAINT BOX
By Karen Ackerman.
Illustrated by Betsy Lewin.
Unpaged. New York: Atheneum. $12.95.
(Ages 5 to 9)


George Michael on Fame and 'Freedom'
LEAD: George Michael's hit single, ''Praying for Time,'' evokes a 1970's anthem by an ex-Beatle but turned emotionally upside down.
Against a funereal beat of the sort George Harrison used to favor in his devotional ballads, the 27-year-old English pop star sermonizes in a voice that deliberately seems to echo the fuzzed vocal texture of John Lennon's ''Imagine.


Postings: Preservation Awards;   A Broader Connecticut Contest
LEAD: Connecticut residents who have spruced up their old homes, sheds, barns or commercial buildings, and who feel the work deserves praise, may have their chance.
For the second year, the Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation will be presenting preservation awards.


VIETNAM AND THE GULF CRISIS
LEAD: Members of the House and Senate whose lives were touched by the Vietnam War see lessons for the Persian Gulf crisis.
Page 18.


New A.C.C. Game Plan
LEAD: Florida State's entry into the Atlantic Coast Conference was sealed with a handshake yesterday, and Gene Corrigan, the A.C.C. commissioner, said the Seminoles would begin competing in all sports except football in the 1991-92 school year.


Germany Pledges $1.87 Billion to Aid Gulf Effort
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany told Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today that his country would fulfill its responsibilities in the multinational effort to confront Iraq by providing military equipment and economic assistance worth $1.87 billion.


Susan Malamed, Lawyer, Marries
LEAD: Susan Jane Malamed and Eric Rieder were married last evening at the Hotel Westbury in New York by Rabbi Thomas Weiner.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of Seymour H. Malamed of New York and the late Doris Malamed.
Her husband is a son of Dolly Rieder of Philadelphia and the late Fredric N.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD: AFFLICTION, by Russell Banks. (Perennial/HarperCollins, $9.95.) In a small town in northern New Hampshire, a man becomes consumed by the mystery of his brother's strange disappearance. ''A novel of obsession is moving - is successful - in direct proportion to its ability to implicate the reader in its own warped and passionate view of the world,'' Elizabeth Tallent said here last year.


Wall Street;   New York Gets a Break in the Bond Market
LEAD: Despite the crime and gunfire that have dominated the New York City headlines, the Big Apple got a better deal from the bond market last week than it did back in June.


Vietnam Is Not the Enemy
LEAD: You thought it was 1990, and the enemy was Iraq.
No.
For some policy makers in the Bush Administration it remains 1975, and the enemy remains Vietnam.
There's no other plausible explanation for the Administration's self-defeating decision to extend the U.S. economic embargo against Vietnam for one more year under the Trading With the Enemy


Downtown Malls
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gulf Crisis Slows Decline at Military Plants
LEAD: THE crisis in the Persian Gulf could soon affect Connecticut's economy, injecting new life into the state's hard-hit military-equipment industry but possibly dealing a blow to the flourishing commercial aerospace business, military and industry analysts say.


Those 'Sexy' Issues on Capitol Hill . . .
LEAD: This summer, I left Capitol Hill after four years, grateful for the opportunity to have worked there, but afraid that good, conscientious government may have become too boring to be popular.
While Washington's establishment - its politicians, reporters and administrators - is whipped into motion by the mere whiff of an emotional issue or scandal, there is no reward in today's


Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Liberal? Conservative? Or Just Pat?
LEAD: Few people relish being right quite so fiercely as Daniel Patrick Moynihan; and just now, New York's senior Senator is taking particular delight in being right at the right time.
He has specialized, in years past, in unseasonable, unpalatable truths - about the breakdown of the black family, about the paralysis of the United Nations - and he has publicly reveled in his martyrdom.


Diana Lands and Michael Nathanson Are Wed
LEAD: Diana Victoria Lands, the daughter of Mona M. Lands of Tarzana, Calif., and Dr.
Victor G. Lands of Beverly Hills, Calif., was married yesterday in Rutherford, Calif., to Michael G. Nathanson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Nathanson of New York.
Judge Donald R. Fretz of Superior Court in Napa, Calif., officiated at the Beaulieu


SAVING FACE
LEAD: The red and white stripes on the old-fashioned barber's pole stood for blood and bandages, representing a time when a barber was just as likely to remove molars as hair.
Although those days are over, the association of shaving with blood and pain is still all too apt for many men.
To those with sensitive skin, trimming the daily growth of 15-thousandths of an inch of whiskers might just as well be pulling teeth.


Playing to a Tie Isn't Baseball
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Kathleen Robinson Is Bride
LEAD: Kathleen M. Robinson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis X. Robinson of Middletown, N.J., was married yesterday to David S. French 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathaniel R. French of Oakwood, Ohio.
The Rev.
Michael J. Corona officiated at St.
James Roman Catholic Church in Red Bank, N.J.
Miss Robinson graduated from Kean College, and her husband from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y.


Brooklyn Man Is Shot to Death
LEAD: A 50-year-old Brooklyn man was shot and killed Friday night as he walked down a dark street on his way to a video store to return some tapes, according to the police, who said that the fatal bullet apparently was intended for someone else.


'A Kind of Race Fatigue'
LEAD:
THE CONTENT OF OUR CHARACTER
A New Vision of Race in America.
By Shelby Steele.
175 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press. $15.95.


Headliners;   On the Shelves
LEAD: Top Israeli intelligence officials may be having a word or two with whoever suggested that the best way to stop publication of a book in the United States was to go to court.
To be sure, one New York judge did buy the Israeli Government's argument that the book, ''By Way of Deception: The Making and Unmaking of a Mossad Officer,'' would endanger Israeli agents.


Campus Life: Notre Dame;   Back to School: Books, Exams And Now Sponges
LEAD: Students at the University of Notre Dame found something new in their dorm rooms when they returned to campus this month: two spray bottles and a sponge.


Question of the Week;   Are Umpires Getting Too Aggressive?
LEAD: Today's game involves big bucks, so with bad rules and bad calls you get big bad fights.
The commissioner's office should change the rules and bring in the replay.
With one exception: don't use the replay on the call for balls and strikes.
JOHN E. SIMMONS
Old Greenwich, Conn.


Trailing By 29-7, B.Y.U. Wins
LEAD: Ty Detmer threw three of his five touchdown passes during a 36-point final quarter today as Brigham Young came from far back to beat Washington State, 50-36.


Question of the Week;   Are Umpires Getting Too Aggressive?
LEAD: After Bob Gibson's microscopic 1.12 earned run average in 1968, rule changes (lowering the mound from 15 to 10 inches) were instituted to put some offense back into the game.
Since 1968 the inside part of the plate has changed ownership.
What once belonged to Gibson and others able to control the inside corner, has become (apparently) the batters' real estate.


The Region;   New York Voices: Are 5,000 Officers the Best Antidote to Rising Crime?
LEAD: As Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor David N. Dinkins struggled last week to one-up each other on whether and how New York City should hire 5,000 more police officers, crime once again showed that it could talk tougher than either of them.


Seeing Far-Off Hong Kong for Rates Within Reach
LEAD: If you have ever considered a quick visit to Hong Kong, now is the time.
There are one-week package trips available of round-trip flights from the West Coast and five nights in a hotel for the price of the air fare - $1,055, or even $899, depending on the tour operator, the airline and the hotel.


Kimberly Grillo Weds David Bernstein
LEAD: Kimberly Ann Grillo, a daughter of Fred E. Grillo of Stonington, Conn., was married yesterday to David Hal Bernstein, the son of Diane Bernstein and Paul Bernstein, both of New York.
Federal District Judge Robert E. Keeton of Boston, for whom the bridegroom recently completed a clerkship, and Assistant Town Judge Ethel Brosnahan of Newfane, Vt., officiated at the Windham County Courthouse in


Medical Research Must Show Results
LEAD: To the Editor:


Peter Smith Wed To Ms. DeVecchi
LEAD: Margaret Lincoln DeVecchi, a psychiatric social worker, and Peter Johnstone Smith, a novelist, were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Holy Spirit in Orleans, Mass., by the Rev.
Gerald F. Gilmore.
Angela DeVecchi was her sister's maid of honor.
Ms.
DeVecchi is a daughter of Florence Sloan DeVecchi of Cambridge, Mass., and Robert P.


Review/Pop;   Ice Cube's Hip-Hop Warms up the Apollo
LEAD: The most enlightened discussions about violence and sexism in hip-hop have focused on how the audience receives it.
Ice Cube, a rap artist from Los Angeles whose undeniably violent and sexist record, ''Amerikkka's Most Wanted,'' has become a hit with virtually no airplay, headlined a hip-hop show at the Apollo Theater on Sept.


Miss Boland Wed To J. I. Krugman
LEAD: Elizabeth Hodge Boland, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Boland Jr. of New York, was married last evening to Jonathan I. Krugman, a son of Nathan Krugman of Peabody, Mass., and the late Ann Krugman.
Judge Phoebe K. Greenbaum of Family Court officiated at the Cosmopolitan Club in New York.


A Bond Strategy for Foreigners
LEAD: With the economy slowing down, or possibly in a recession, and with a steadily weakening dollar, there is little to attract foreign investors to the American stock and bond markets From January through May, foreigners were net sellers of $6.7 billion in American stocks and $5.9 billion in Government securities, according to the most recent data from the Securities Industry Association.


Political Memo;   3 Familiar Faces Vie for the Title Of Mr. Outsider (And Governor)
LEAD: NOW that United States Representative Bruce A. Morrison, of Hamden, has secured the Democratic gubernatorial nomination, several economic concerns remain the major issues for November's election: the state's yawning budget deficit, the possibility of a state income tax and a sluggish economy that is forcing the layoffs of thousands of workers, particularly in the military industry.


2 New Yorkers Win 2d World Bridge Titles
LEAD: Four bridge experts, two from Brazil and two from New York City, won their second world titles in a year this afternoon.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Water all newly planted material, especially divisions of perennials, new evergreens such as rhododendrons, azaleas, pieris, laurels, and if bulbs have been set out, be sure that the soil is moist for proper root growth.
Mow the new lawn if the grass is about three inches tall; keep mowing established lawns and set the mowers to cut at two inches.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I have dark paneling that I would like to paint over in a light color.
Over the years, I have used various spray-on furniture waxes and polishes on this paneling, and I am wondering how to prepare the surface for painting.
Can I use a chemical de-glossing liquid, or do I have to sand the panels?


Miss Chen Weds George Murnaghan
LEAD: Elizabeth Chen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald T. Chen of Boston, was married yesterday to George Andrews Murnaghan, the son of Jane Hughes Murnaghan of Glyndon, Md., and Judge Francis D. Murnaghan Jr. of Baltimore.
The Rev.
Douglas Fox officiated at the Old Otterbein United Methodist Church in


Jail Plan Intensifies Battle For Harlem's Historic Sites
LEAD: For nearly 20 years a row of century-old brownstones facing Mount Morris Park have stood abandoned, their interiors gutted and their facades crumbling while nearby town houses have painstakingly been restored in this central Harlem neighborhood.


U.S. TO POSTPONE DEBATE ON ZIONISM
LEAD: The Bush Administration is postponing plans to seek repeal of a United Nations resolution equating Zionism with racism at this year's General Assembly so as not to imperil Arab support for trade sanctions against Iraq and for America's military buildup in the Persian Gulf, United Nations and American officials say.


Miss Paglia Wed To A. J. Curtin
LEAD: Anne Marie Paglia, a daughter of Dr.
Michael A. Paglia and Dr.
Albina Claps of Grimes Hill, S.I., was married yesterday to Andrew J. Curtin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel E. Curtin of Orchard Park, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joseph A. Jordan performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Good Counsel Roman Catholic Church in Grimes


Trying to Bring Order to Busy Schedules
LEAD: IF it's Friday, it must be Ad Club.
If it's Thursday, it's Sales and Marketing.
In the normal course of business life, most people belong to at least one professional organization.
And if they're in sales, marketing, advertising or communications, they're likely to belong to several.


Airport Compromise Awaits Verdict of Voters
LEAD: A DECADE-OLD struggle over the appropriate size of a new terminal at the Westchester County Airport, the keystone of a modernization program, entered what may be its final stretch last week, when the County Board of Legislators made its choice and asked for voter approval in an Election Day bond referendum.


S.&amp; L. Failures Benefit Seller of Troubled Assets
LEAD: The misfortune of the savings and loan industry has brought good fortune to Joseph E. Robert Jr.
Mr.
Robert is chairman of the J. E. Robert Companies, an organization that was in the right place at the right time when the Government needed to contract for managers to dispose of the assets of failed institutions.


49ers Triumph; Mark for Montana
LEAD: Joe Montana, who became San Francisco's career leader in passing yardage, threw for touchdowns to John Taylor and Jerry Rice as the 49ers beat the Washington Redskins, 26-13, today.


Business and the Law;   An Old Weapon Against Buyouts
LEAD: THE bondholders of Allied Stores said last week that they expected to file a lawsuit next month seeking at least $700 million from the Campeau Corporation, Allied's parent, and a group of banks and investment houses.


Superpowers Seeking an Angola Agreement
LEAD: In another sign of growing superpower cooperation, the United States and the Soviet Union have agreed to work jointly as mediators to revive Angola's stalled peace talks and end civil strife there, American and Soviet officials say.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Oil and the Mideast


Shanahan Gaining With Every Move
LEAD: Brendan Shanahan is one of five invaluable members of the Devils entering their option years, but contracts are the last thing on any of their minds, especially Shanahan's.


Egypt Will Send More Soldiers to the Gulf
LEAD: Responding to United States urging, Egypt is to expand its troop strength in the Persian Gulf with a mechanized division of up to 15,000 soldiers backed by tanks and armored personnel carriers to confront Iraq's occupation of Kuwait, military officials said today.


People
LEAD: *
Keith Evans has been named vice president and art director at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, New York.
Ron Henderson has joined the agency as vice president and copywriter.


Weicker's Lead Is Narrowing In Governor Race, Poll Finds
LEAD: Lowell P. Weicker Jr., the independent gubernatorial candidate, has lost a sizable portion of his support but still holds a commanding lead over the Democratic and Republican candidates in the race, according to a poll released this weekend by Quinnipiac College in Hamden.


Religions and Environment: Focus on a Worldly Concern
LEAD: The Dalai Lama walked out of a steepled church today at the center of this New England college town, strode down a hill to an outdoor altar and broke bread with several hundred students and visitors.


Editorial Notebook;   The 'Tyranny' of 911
LEAD: In New York City's ongoing debate over crime, ''community policing'' often sounds like a buzzword -an impressive label for vague ideas.
In fact, however, ''community policing'' refers to a well developed theory of law enforcement that has been the subject of experiment and research in a number of cities for much of the past decade.


Israelis, Irked by Arms Sale To Saudis, Ask More of U.S.
LEAD: Israeli officials expressed alarm today over American plans to sell more than $20 billion in advanced weapons to Saudi Arabia, and they began making efforts to get more military aid for themselves.


After 2 Weeks' Groping, a New Approach on Crime
LEAD: In late-night phone calls and early-morning meetings, over lunch with business leaders and a swordfish dinner with a public relations czar, Mayor David N. Dinkins and his aides have groped for two weeks to say and do what they think is right on crime in ways that others think is right, too.


Marta Osnos, 83, Dies; Researcher on Cancer
LEAD: Marta Osnos, a retired research associate at Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons, died on Saturday at Roosevelt Hospital.
She was 83 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Jane Simon Is Wed to Stephen Poss
LEAD: Jane Fitz Simon, a daughter of Jane F. Huston of San Diego and Maurice C. Fitzsimons of Salem, Ore., was married yesterday to Stephen Daniel Poss, a son of the late Bernice and Gilbert Poss of Buffalo.
Rabbi Cathy L. Felix performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's sister, Dr.
Ellen Poss, and brother-in-law, Mitchell Kapor, in Brookline,


Chronicle
LEAD: GEORGE SELDES celebrated his 100th birthday yesterday, with about 10 relatives who traveled to his home in Hartland Four Corners, Vt.
His last book, ''Witness to a Century,'' was a best seller and was written when he was 97.


Carter Urges Arab Mediator
LEAD: Former President Jimmy Carter said today that military action against Iraq by American forces may be inevitable, but should be undertaken only if no Arab mediator can be found. ''We need to let Saddam know, and let the Arab community know, that we are willing to have a respected mediator explore every possibility for a peaceful settlement,'' Mr.


Karen Legon Is Married
LEAD: Karen Elisabeth Legon, a daughter of Ruth O. Legon of New York and Allan R. Legon of Tiburon, Calif., was married yesterday to Adam Carl Berkowitz, a son of Lenore Berkowitz of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Norman Berkowitz.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson officiated at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club.


A Surge of Anti-Semitic Crimes Jars Madison's Pride as a Liberal Haven
LEAD: As always around the holidays, Jewish children will be asking their parents many questions this week about the meaning of Rosh ha-Shanah.


Op-Ed Columnists
LEAD: The days on which Op-Ed columnists appear are rotated periodically.


Deficit Threat and Tax Ire Greet Trenton's Fall Session
LEAD: State legislators returned to the capital this week facing the sobering possibility that the slowing economy would create yet another budget deficit, despite their approval of the biggest tax increase in state history in June.


Dinah Martin and Stephen Lefkowitz Are Wed
LEAD: Dinah Martin and Stephen Lefkowitz were married yesterday at the home of the bride's father, Samuel N. Friedman, in New York by Rabbi Amy Ehrlich.


Soviet Violinist, 20, Wins Competition
LEAD: Pavel Berman, a 20-year-old Soviet violinist, won the top prize in the 1990 International Violin Competition of Indianapolis yesterday, contest officials announced.


10.6% Inflation In Britain
LEAD: Britain said Friday that its annual inflation rate broke through the psychologically important 10 percent level in August for the first time in eight years.


Harold S. Carlson, 87, A Psychology Educator
LEAD: Harold S. Carlson, an educator, former chairman of the American Association of State Psychology Boards and former president of the New Jersey Psychology Association, died yesterday in Vassar Brothers Hospital in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
He was 87 years and lived in Amenia, N.Y.


Money Is the Word to Cruciverbalists
LEAD: After two years of preparation, a group of leading crossword-puzzle writers and editors met in New York on Saturday to seek 1 across: what Aretha Franklin wanted the most (r-e-s-p-e-c-t).


On General Mills Agenda, Stock Options as Merit Pay
LEAD: Stockholders of General Mills Inc. will be asked at their annual meeting today to approve a plan that gives top managers the choice of taking merit raises and other pay increases in the form of stock options.


Methodical Bears Roll, 31-13
LEAD: There were few gadget plays and little gimmickry in the Chicago Bears' 31-13 victory over the Green Bay Packers here today before a Lambeau Field record crowd of 58,938 fans.
The Bears scored three touchdowns directly following Packer turnovers.
Their defense, primarily riding a rejuvenated pass rush, pinned the Packers back all afternoon, forcing three fumbles and intercepting Anthony Dilweg and Dan Majkowski once each.


Critic's Notebook;   The Iraq Conflict on American TV
LEAD: For the television audience, the confrontation with Iraq has become a war of the innocents.
The screen is dominated not by warriors but by wives, not men but boys, not armor but infants.
Such images are hardly bugle calls to battle; they remind us night after night of the costs of conflict, as counted in the pains of ordinary people.


Within South Africa, The 'Lost Generation'
LEAD: For many young South African blacks, liberation could yield little without the education they gave up for revolution.


Emmys for Falk, Wettig And 'Murphy Brown'
LEAD: Patricia Wettig, who plays the cancer-stricken young mother on ABC's ''Thirtysomething'' won the award for best actress in a drama series in the 42d Annual Emmy Awards tonight.
Peter Falk won the Emmy for outstanding dramatic actor as ''Columbo.''


Taiwan to Open Investing
LEAD: Taiwan will open its stock market to foreign institutional investors in a bid to curb speculation by local investors, the Securities and Exchange Commission announced Friday.


Border Opened, Kuwaitis Flee Their Country
LEAD: Several thousand Kuwaitis streamed into Saudi Arabia today after Iraqi troops opened a border crossing that had been closed since shortly after the Iraqi invasion last month.


Miss Domershick Wed to K. G. Golub
LEAD: Alyssa Fern Domershick, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Domershick of Malverne, L.I., was married yesterday to Kenneth Gray Golub, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald L. Golub of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Rabbi Chaim Stern officiated at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.


Calling To Account
LEAD: Here are three officials who ought to be looking for new jobs: 1.
The Chief Legal Counsel in the Mossad has just made an oxymoron out of ''Israeli intelligence'' and deserves to be fired.


BUSH TELLS IRAQIS LEADERS PUT THEM ON 'BRINK OF WAR'
LEAD: President Bush warned the Iraqi people today that their leaders had now brought them to ''the brink of war'' with the West and the Arab world.


Postal Bus System Has Worked in West
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bremen Journal;   Why the Kaisers' Heir Is a Very Happy Prussian
LEAD: When he recalls the day the Berlin wall broke open, Prince Louis Ferdinand of Prussia, the man who would be Kaiser if Germany still had a throne, assumes an almost reverential tone.


By the Books
LEAD: WITH the end of the baseball season just around the corner, fans may be wondering what they can do to satisfy their baseball appetite.
How about going to school?
The New School for Social Research in Manhattan is offering two baseball-related courses this fall.
The History of Baseball in America, which begins Sept.


Claudia Gropper Marries Jay Gayner
LEAD: Claudia M. Gropper, the daughter of Ursula M. Gropper of Sausalito, Calif., and Dr.
Marc N. Gropper of San Francisco, was married yesterday to Jay D. Gayner, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Irving C. Gayner of Forest Hills, Queens.
Rabbi Mark Schiftan officated at Lyford House in Tiburon, Calif.


Jets Hold Off Browns
LEAD: With the Jets ahead by 10 points in the fourth quarter for the second straight week, their home opener against Cleveland at Giants Stadium today looked like something Yogi Berra might call ''deja vu all over again.'' But this time New York held on to give Bruce Coslet his first victory as a head coach.


Julie R. Goldblatt Weds F. R. Kern
LEAD: Julie Ruth Goldblatt, a daughter of David Goldblatt of New York and Mary S. Goldblatt of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Franklin Reid Kern, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph W. Kern of Scarsdale.
Rabbi Jack Stern officiated at the Westchester Reform Temple in Scarsdale.
He was assisted by Cantor Peter


Ready for Prime Time or Not, Here They Come
LEAD: The new prime-time television season begins tonight with more than $4 billion worth of advertising committed to network programs, some of which may be seen only fleetingly.


Althea Simmons, 66, N.A.A.C.P. Lobbyist
LEAD: Althea T. L. Simmons, head of the Washington branch of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People since 1979 and the organization's chief lobbyist in the capital, died Thursday at Howard University Hospital in Washington.
She was 66 years old.


Ms. Bernhardt Weds Tony Giovannetti
LEAD: Elise Bernhardt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan Bernhardt of Freeport, L.I., was married yesterday to Tony J. Giovannetti, the son of Eleanor R. Giovannetti of Harrison, N.Y., and the late Anthony J. Giovannetti.
Justice Aaron D. Bernstein of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn officiated aboard the yacht Amberjack V in New York


Irate Voters in Gabon Attack Poll Aides and Ballot Boxes
LEAD: Voters in this West African nation attacked election officials and smashed ballot boxes today, asserting that the country's first multiparty elections in 22 years were rigged in favor of President Omar Bongo.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Magazines;   For Former Staff of 7 Days Eighth Day Dawns Quickly
LEAD: IN the magazine industry, the surest ticket to success is often failure.


For Refugees From Kuwait, a Tent in Turkey at Least Comes With Food and Water
LEAD: For thousands of Asians fleeing Kuwait, misery has pitched a tent at this Turkish outpost on the border with Iraq.


Bridge
LEAD: When the two World Pairs Championships ended here Saturday it was clear that 12 time periods had magic properties.


Roberta Tulman Is Married
LEAD: Roberta Naomi Tulman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Tulman of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Randy Samuels, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Samuels of Bridgewater, N.J.
Rabbi Barry Friedman, assisted by Cantor Bruce Benson, officiated at Temple B'nai Abraham in Livingston, N.J.


Review/Television; John Cage On His Way With Sound


Leftist Journal Concludes Allende Killed Himself
LEAD: Saying that the ''historic truth'' should be known, a Chilean news magazine identified with the left has published a special report concluding that former President Salvador Allende committed suicide 17 years ago.


Washington Talk;   Shuffling Of Cabinet May Be At Hand
LEAD: As off-year elections approach, so, usually, do rumors of musical chairs in the Cabinet.
This week's entries for this year's shuffles involve the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, the Attorney General and the United States trade representative.


Souter Gives Little Comfort to Wary Conservatives
LEAD: In his testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee last week, Judge David H. Souter said he had an open mind on abortion, spoke admiringly of Justice William J. Brennan Jr. and emphasized the need for some affirmative action to redress racial discrimination.
He even resisted an obvious invitation by a conservative member of the committee to inveigh against judicial activism.


Bank Insurance: Proceed With Care
LEAD: Yes, the Federal insurance fund for bank deposits needs fixing.
No, despite some dire talk in Washington, it is not on the verge of collapse.
Members of Congress, badly burned by the savings and loan crisis, now itch to ''do something'' before the banks' problems become even more costly.
Haste could do more harm than good.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Hershey Pasta Group, a unit of Hershey Foods Corp., Hershey, Pa. to Pedone &amp; Partners, New York, for the Ronzoni Brand pastas account, with billings of $3 million.


Use Oil Reserves? When, if Not Now?
LEAD: The U.S. has spent billions of dollars creating the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, 600 million barrels of oil stored in salt domes along the U.S.
Gulf Coast, to protect the economy during emergencies.
Yet the Bush Administration has refused to tap the reserve in the wake of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and the immediate loss of four million barrels of oil exports each day from the region.


Correction
LEAD: A front-page article in some copies yesterday about French steps in the Persian Gulf crisis misstated the procedure that would be permissible if the United Nations expanded the embargo against Iraq to air traffic.


Spaniards Are Divided On Why Boom Is Over
LEAD: Spain has chosen the Persian Gulf crisis as the occasion to acknowledge the end of a four-year economic boom, but many business executives and labor leaders say recent Government policy is more to blame than the sudden jump in oil prices.


Spaniards Protest Presence in Gulf


Sports of The Times;   For the Jets, Proof of Progress
LEAD: DURING last Thursday's practice, Bruce Coslet blew his whistle. ''That's not how we run that play,'' he said.
Quickly but firmly, the Jets' new head coach reminded his players of the blocking assignments on that particular play.
Moments later, the Jets ran it the way it's supposed to be run.
The way Bruce Coslet demands it be run.


Union Announces Tentative Pact With G.M.
LEAD: The United Auto Workers announced a tentative agreement early today with the General Motors Corporation on a new contract covering 300,000 American workers.


Giants Breeze Past Cowboys
LEAD: The heat was oppressive today - 96 degrees in the stands, 104 on the Astroturf field of Texas Stadium.
As far as the Dallas Cowboys were concerned, the Giants were oppressive, too.


Benefits Expected for Japan As the Yen Bounces Back
LEAD: After weakening most of this year while the German mark and the Swiss franc reached record highs against the dollar, the yen is bounciing back.


Results Plus
LEAD:
Golf
Levi on a Roll: ''It's just been an incredible year,'' Wayne Levi said yesterday after his one-stroke victory in the Canadian Open in Oakville, Ontario, his fourth triumph of the season.
No other player has won more than twice this year.


Andrea J. Davidson, a Store Buyer, Marries Jay Evan Scharf, a Lawyer
LEAD: Andrea Jane Davidson, the daughter of Sara G. Stone of New York and Louis A. Davidson of Tulsa, Okla., was married yesterday to Jay Evan Scharf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel R. Scharf of Old Westbury, L.I.
Rabbi David Lincoln officiated at the Rainbow Room in New York.


After a Dry Spell of Six Years, It's Raining Encyclopedias
LEAD: No new comprehensive, one-volume encyclopedia has been published for about six years, but editions of two such books are now on their way to the nation's bookstores and at least two others are waiting in the wings.


Israel Approves Ex-Minister As Envoy to United Nations
LEAD: Israel today approved the nomination of Yoram Aridor, a former Finance Minister, as its representative at the United Nations.


American Spy Was True Hero of Saratoga
LEAD: To the Editor:


Thatcher Visits Prague to Celebrate Collapse of Communism


In the Blood
LEAD: TO say that Dorothy (Dodo) Cheney comes from a tennis-playing family is like saying there is water in the ocean.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Grey Advertising's British agency, Grey Communications Group, London, is acquiring a minority stake in Davies Ireland-Smith, a London-based medical and health-care agency.
The new company, which will be called Davies Ireland-Smith Grey, is the seventh health-care agency in the Grey network.


Experts Tally the Cost Of Rebuilding Kuwait
LEAD: With Iraqi soldiers crushing roads under the weight of their tanks and reportedly mining public utilities and oilfields, how quickly would Kuwait be able to rebuild its economy if it is liberated?


Irene Daria Wed To Cary Wiener
LEAD: Irene Daria, a writer, and Cary Robert Wiener, a lawyer, were married yesterday at their home in Amagansett, L.I.
The Rev.
Gaylord Shimnoski, a Roman Catholic priest, and Cantor David Benedict officiated.


Spain's Leader Feels the Heat From Scandal
LEAD: For most of the time since he became Spain's Prime Minister in 1982, Felipe Gonzalez has been able to concentrate on the affairs of state in the confident knowledge that his chief deputy, Alfonso Guerra, was serving as his political bodyguard.


Chronicle
LEAD: Six-year-old SAM LeBLOND, a grandson of GEORGE and BARBARA BUSH, has begun first grade at a public school in the Washington area, accompanied by two friends wearing dark suits and earphones.
Secret Service agents stay with both Sam and his 3-year-old sister NANCY ELLIS LEBLOND, who attends a private kindergarten.


3 Plead Guilty In Stock Fraud
LEAD: Three former officials of F. D. Roberts Securities Inc. pleaded guilty on Friday to Federal felony charges in one of the largest cases of penny-stock frauds.
Fred Galiardo of Daytona


Fishing Off Queens as Tide Rises, 6 Get Fished to Safety by a Copter
LEAD: Six weekend fishermen were plucked from a breaker-swamped jetty in the Atlantic Ocean off Queens Saturday night in an unusual helicopter rescue by the New York City police.


Easing Local Phone Rules: Fight on Profit
LEAD: A year ago the Government granted the American Telephone and Telegraph Company greater freedom to raise or lower prices while eliminating most controls on its rate of return.
The idea was to encourage better services, cut costs and create savings for consumers and shareholders.


Use Head and Feet For This Hiking
LEAD: IN the sport of orienteering, the two most important elements are the feet and the head.
The feet will get you there.
But you must decide where there is.
So this is an athletic and cerebral sport with little left to chance.


Egypt Raises Its Guard Against Iraqi Terrorism
LEAD: The Egyptian authorities have begun to register concern that the Persian Gulf conflict could spill over here in the form of Iraqi-sponsored terrorism, Western diplomats said today.


Politics Of Hate
LEAD: Edwin O'Connor drew the classic picture of Massachusetts politics in ''The Last Hurrah.'' It was a world of hacks and scoundrels, of lovable rogues and rented dogs.
O'Connor modeled his tainted hero on James Michael Curley, the Mayor, Governor and Congressman who served a term in Federal prison.


Kimberly Richey-Rankin Marries Matthew Rapf
LEAD: Kimberly D. Richey-Rankin, the daughter of Vel Richey-Rankin of New York and Jack R. Rankin of Las Vegas, Nev., was married yesterday to Matthew William Rapf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew W. Rapf of Malibu, Calif.
Rabbi Benjamin performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's parents.


Review/Theater;   'Falsettoland,' a William Finn Sequel, Reopens
LEAD: ''Falsettoland,'' initially produced by Playwrights Horizons, has reopened at the Lucille Lortel Theater, 121 Christopher Street.
Following are excerpts from Frank Rich's review, which appeared in The New York Times on June 29.
Lonny Price has succeeded Chip Zien in the role of Mendel.


In Moscow, a City of Bare Shelves, Consumer Rage Turns on Cabinet
LEAD: Dispirited Muscovites took time out today from their latest consumer trial, a citywide shortage of meat, and rallied by the tens of thousands outside the Kremlin demanding the resignation of the Soviet Cabinet.


Christie Webster Marries Lewis Michael Kefauver
LEAD: Christie Adair Webster, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David F. Webster of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday to Lewis Michael Kefauver, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Alden C. Kefauver Jr. of Washington.
The Rev.
Sheldon Reese, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Strong Mansion at Sugarloaf Mountain in Dickerson,


'Fresh Prince of Bel Air' Puts Rap in Mainstream
LEAD: It took less than a decade for rap music to push its way off the streets of the South Bronx and become a dominant force in the Top 40.
Now, in a programming gamble being watched in network and advertising offices, NBC is about to find out whether the rap, or hip-hop, style can dent the Nielsen ratings.


Soviet Trading In Commodities
LEAD: A newly created Moscow Commodity Exchange is selling seats for about $162,000 and plans to begin trading next week, a Soviet news agency reported Friday.


Can Life After Tennis Be Free of Plane Noise?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jury Selection in Murder Trial
LEAD: Lawyers are expected to begin Monday questioning some of the more than 3,000 potential jurors called for the trial of a paroled killer accused in the serial slayings of 11 women over the last two years.
Arthur J. Shawcross, 45 years old, has been jailed since his arrest in early January, at which time the police said he confessed to the 11 slayings.


Immigration Bill Invests in America's Future
LEAD: To the Editor:


Amy M. Gelman,An Editor, Weds
LEAD: Amy Miriam Gelman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David G. Gelman of New York, was married yesterday to Eric Darth Haugesag, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dentley M. Haugesag of Minneapolis.
Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the ceremony at the Parker Meridien in New York.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Saddam Hussein tells you that this crisis is a struggle between Iraq and America.
In fact, it is Iraq against the world.''
- President Bush on Iraqi TV. [A10:5.]


Ms. Eckman Wed In Westchester
LEAD: Heidi Kim Eckman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Eckman of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Barry Philip Silverstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Silverstein of West Newton, Mass.
Rabbi David Greenberg officiated at the Baldwin Estate in Bedford, N.Y.


Prostitute Quits But Too Late
LEAD: Ann Kanini, 30 years old, still lives in the same Nairobi slum where she worked for five years as a prostitute.
She quit a year ago, knowing it was too late. ''I was already getting sick,'' she said.
Quitting, she knew, would at least stop the steady exposure to other sexually transmitted diseases that might hasten her death.


High-Tech Medicine At High-Rise Costs Is Keeping Pets Fit
LEAD: For 30 minutes, as much time as it takes to place a patient inside the metal doughnut of a CAT scanner and make a cross-sectioned study of his cancerous throat, the fate of Buster hung in the balance.


Ghana Is Said to Strike Liberian Rebels
LEAD: In a move that could signal a new offensive role for the West African peacekeeing force in Liberia, Ghanaian planes reportedly attacked rebel positions in Monrovia.


AIDS Tears Lives of the African Family
LEAD: Sanford Mweupe now looks back wistfully on the uncomplicated days when he had only two wives to worry about.
So do the two wives.
Domestic life has been strained ever since the events delicately referred to in the household as ''the confusion.''


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   How Ayer Views Talks With Dentsu
LEAD: JERRY J. SIANO, the chairman and chief executive of Ayer, wants to set the record straight.


Kroger Picks President And Chief Adds Title
LEAD: The Kroger Company, a major supermarket chain, has named a president and chief operating officer, and its new chief executive has added the title of chairman.


No Double Standard on Primary School Tests
LEAD: To the Editor:


American Jesuit in Sri Lanka Is Missing and Feared Dead
LEAD: An American Jesuit missionary who spent 41 years in Sri Lanka building up a well-known vocational school for boys has been missing since Aug. 15, and may have been killed in fighting between rival ethnic factions in a renewed civil war.


Gulf Crisis Activates Loan Plans
LEAD: The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund plan to make loans more quickly and provide other help to countries jolted by trade losses, higher oil prices, lower remittances from workers overseas and other consequences of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, officials of the lending agencies say.


Impressive Victory For Meadow Star
LEAD: Could the most impressive 2-year-old in the country this year be a filly?


More on the Gulf
LEAD:
FASTER LOAN RELIEF Big global lending agencies plan to make loans more quickly and provide other help to countries suffering the consequences of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
Business Day, page D1.
PLANS TO REBUILD KUWAIT If Kuwait is liberated, the speed at which its economy could be rebuilt would depend largely on when foreigners would feel safe to return.


Tourists Are Wary in Wake of Utah Man's Slaying


Review/Art;   Malevich's Search for a New Reality
LEAD: The Kasimir Malevich retrospective that opened Sunday at the National Gallery of Art is more than a landmark exhibition.
It is an exceptionally moving event.
For the first time the American public is being given a thorough look at the greatest 20th-century Soviet painter, one of the select few who helped shape the modernist imagination.


Ms. Steiker Weds Paul V. Holtzman
LEAD: Carol Susan Steiker and Paul Victor Holtzman, lawyers in Washington, were married yesterday at the Andalusia estate in Andalusia, Pa., by Rabbi Myron Fenster.
The bride is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel D. Steiker of Elkins Park, Pa.
Her husband is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Holtzman of Roslyn Heights, L


Jury Award In Hughes Case
LEAD: A jury has awarded a discharged Hughes Aircraft worker $1.9 million after finding the company retaliated against him for uncovering overcharges on Government military contract work.
A Hughes spokesman, Bill


Outdoors: The Feast That Follows the Catch
LEAD: ALTHOUGH there are some anglers, most notably those who fly-fish for trout in no-kill areas, to whom hooking and playing the fish are everything, most of us who angle find pleasure in consuming our prey.
Indeed, to this fisherman at least, the ritual is incomplete unless the feast follows the catch.


Tobacco Industry Sees Boon in Sales to Soviets
LEAD: The recently announced sale of American cigarettes to the Soviet Union will fatten the already rich profits of the tobacco industry in the United States to a larger extent than the numbers involved suggest, Wall Street analysts say.


Review/Opera;   Chicago Season Opens With Gluck's 'Alceste'
LEAD: Christoph Willibald Gluck's ''Alceste,'' with which Lyric Opera of Chicago opened its 1990 season on Friday evening, is known to the musical public for two principal reasons: the aria ''Divinites du Styx'' and the reformist manifesto that the composer published in connection with the first performance in Vienna on Dec.


Irish's Mirer Comes of Age
LEAD: Late Saturday evening, somewhere along the way to Catholics vs.
Convicts III, the football game between Notre Dame and Miami that has already inspired T-shirt sales five weeks before the Oct. 20 kickoff, the inhabitants of Notre Dame Stadium discovered this problem.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Centel Corp., Chicago, a provider of telephone service and electric power, named Patricia E. Simmons vice president of Federal legislative affairs.


Deborah Rose Married to Jan Stolwijk
LEAD: Dr.
Deborah Rose, an epidemiologist at the National Center for Health Statistics in Hyattsville, Md., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jan A. J. Stolwijk, the Susan Dwight Bliss Professor of Epidemiology and Public Health at Yale University.
Rabbi Emily Korzenik officiated at the home of the bride's parents, Mr.


U.N. Seeks Wider Embargo In Vote Assailing Iraqi Acts
LEAD: The Security Council unanimously condemned Baghdad early today for acts of violence against foreign embassies and their personnel in occupied Kuwait and promised new, unspecified steps to tighten the mandatory trade embargo against Iraq.


Nancy Lewson Is Married
LEAD: Nancy Beth Lewson, the chief of staff at the New York City Department of Environmental Protection, was married yesterday to Howard Alan Kurz, a managing director of the Continental Grain Company in New York.
Rabbi David Greenberg, assisted by Cantor Debra Stein-Davidson, officiated at the Jewish Center of the Hamptons in East Hampton, L


Sands Bloom With Growth In Las Vegas
LEAD: Out in the desert suburbs, far from the casinos' bright lights, workers are hurriedly building monuments to the assumption that this city will always come up a winner.


Market Place;   Finding a Buyer For Dole Food
LEAD: SINCE July, when Castle &amp; Cooke Inc. announced that several companies were interested in acquiring its Dole Food Company, the prospect of a high-stakes auction for Dole has generated growing interest on Wall Street.


State Farm Limits Role in Pennsylvania
LEAD: The State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company has told its agents to stop writing new policies in Pennsylvania.


Paine Webber Lays Off 34 Employees
LEAD: Responding to the downturn on Wall Street, Paine Webber Inc. dismissed about 9 percent of its investment banking staff last week.


Kelly Heller Is Married
LEAD: Kelly Ann Heller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin G. Heller of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to David Michael Shelsky, a son of Edith Joseph of Bayside, Queens, and Seymour Shelsky of New York.
Cantor Ted Aronson officiated at the Grand Summit in Summit, N.J.
Mrs.
Shelsky, 24 years old and a University of Michigan graduate, is an account executive at 525 Made in America, a sweater manufacturer in New York.


Post or No Post, Dailies Face Flux
LEAD: The fate of The New York Post, be it life or death, raises the curtain on a period of tremendous flux in the city's already tense and economically distressed newspaper market -particularly for The Daily News, which is embroiled in its own showdown with unions.


New York's Water Rules Worry Catskills
LEAD: Little by little, from Woodstock to Delhi, the reality is sinking in: If New York City is to avoid spending $4 billion to filter the drinking water it draws from these parts, life in the Catskills will never be the same again.


6 Florida Winners to Split $105 Million Prize
LEAD: Owners of six winning tickets will split a record Florida Lotto jackpot of about $105 million, lottery officials said today.


Question Box
LEAD:
Pitchers Left Out


The 'Not Bork' Test;   Senators Know What Judge Souter Isn't, But a Question Remains: Is That Enough?
LEAD: While the cameras and the questions focused on David H. Souter in the opening days of his Supreme Court confirmation hearings last week, the confirmation process itself was also on display.
This first Supreme


Tokyo Stocks Down by 2.14%
LEAD: Stock prices fell in very thin trading today, with the 225-share Nikkei index closing off 2.14 percent.


N.B.A.'s New Foul Plan
LEAD: The National Basketball Association announced plans today to impose stronger penalties against players who commit overly aggressive fouls.


Lawmakers Hopeful on a Budget Deal
LEAD: Congressional leaders from both parties said today that they thought negotiators working on a new Federal budget could resolve differences over tax policy and reach a compromise as early as Monday night to reduce the deficit.


Chronicle
LEAD: These are among the recipients of various honors in recent days:


New Airline In Korea Irks Flag Carrier
LEAD: A plan by a fledgling South Korean carrier, Asiana Airlines, to buy billions of dollars worth of Boeing jets to cash in on an expected Asian travel boom has irritated the long-established flag carrier, Korean Air Lines.


Pebble Beach Glee Is Hard to Hide
LEAD: It would be hard to find a company more ambivalent about the biggest deal in its history than the private Japanese concern that just bought the Pebble Beach Company, making one of America's best-known golf resorts into another prestigious Japanese holding.


Pirates Flee Canada
LEAD: How do you say ''good riddance'' in French?


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Sept. 16:
MONDAY
Alaska Air Group Inc
American Stores Co New
Bunker Hill Income Secs INc
Northeast Utils
TUESDAY
Bankers Tr NY Corp
Brunswick Corp
CPC Intl Inc
Federal Paper Brd Inc
Gallagher Arthur J &amp; Co
General Signal Corp
Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos
Southwest Gas Corp CA
Upjohn Co
Wells Fargo &amp; Co


Crew Is Injured in Tanker Blast in Michigan
LEAD: A fuel tanker exploded and burned today in the Saginaw River, injuring most of the 18 people aboard and spilling gasoline into the water, the authorities said.


For William Hurt, the Art of the Role, Chekhov and Fortune Cookies
LEAD: William Hurt, currently playing a drama student better than a drama student could, says he ''jumped at the chance'' to act the title role in Chekhov's ''Ivanov'' at the Yale Repertory Theater.
The bait was Oleg Yefremov, the director of the Moscow Art Theater, who in Mr.
Hurt's eyes may be just a step below Stanislavsky - or


Cary Injured as Tigers Beat Yankees
LEAD: The medics wheeled Chuck Cary from the shade of the Tiger Stadium corridor to the sunshine of the sidewalk of Michigan Avenue as police officers, security guards and curious fans looked on.


Text of Bush's Television Message to Iraqi People
LEAD: Following is the text of President Bush's address to the people of Iraq, as issued by the White House.
The address, videotaped in Washington and broadcast on Iraqi television, was accompanied by Arabic subtitles and by a voice-over translation into Arabic, both provided by Voice of America.


Books of The Times;   Playing Games and Naming Names
LEAD:
What Happened Was This
By Josh Greenfeld
312 pages. Carroll &amp; Graf. $18.95.


Linda Novak Is Wed To Robert Greenberg
LEAD: Linda Novak, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Adam Novak of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert Michael Greenberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Greenberg of Hillsdale, N.J.
Rabbi Andre Ungar performed the ceremony at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday
Inventory-Sales . . . July
Tuesday
Consumer Price Index . . . Aug.
Balance of Trade . . . July
Wednesday
Housing Starts . . . Aug.
Thursday
None


New School Aid in '91? Toms River Isn't Cheering
LEAD: Come September 1991, and the public school district here will get its first installment of a five-year, $53 million increase in state education aid.
But that first installment, nearly $28 million, has generated little sense of ecstasy in the district.


The Wait Goes On for Refugees


Careful, but Undeterred, Visitors Take New York
LEAD: Within hours of arriving in New York last week, Joe Lucia, a 25-year-old tourist from Sydney, Australia, had to wrest his luggage away from a man in the Port Authority Bus Terminal who had promised to hail a taxi for him, but instead headed down a dingy alley with it.


Dolphins Dazzling in Victory
LEAD: Coach Don Shula said the Miami Dolphins approached perfection today, and as a result they have the only perfect record in the American Football Conference East.


Immigration Bill Invests in America's Future;   Quota Inequities
LEAD: To the Editor:


Saatchi Names New U.S. Chief
LEAD: The embattled Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company named Martin Tucker president and chief executive of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Holdings Inc., its United States holding unit, replacing W. Jonathan T. Hirst, who resigned.


Poland's Jewish Uproar, And With So Few Jews
LEAD: As Poland nears its first fully free election in a generation, this country virtually without Jews finds itself once again grappling with issues about Jews and anti-Semitism.


Writers in China Are Asked to Write, But Not Subversively
LEAD: Literature is like groceries, says Ma Feng, the earthy ''old revolutionary'' who is China's new literary czar: in both cases the government should encourage what is nutritious and ban what is poisonous.


Israeli Exchange Closed
LEAD: The Tel Aviv stock exchange stayed shut today while nervous investors deciphered a Government plan imposing new taxes on corporate profits from trading stocks.
The exchange was scheduled to reopen Monday.
The plan, approved by the Government on Thursday, is intended to help pay for settling the one million Soviet Jews expected to move to Israel during the next five years.


Lead for Red Sox Shrinks to 1 Game
LEAD: The Chicago White Sox completed a four-game sweep of Boston today, beating the stumbling Red Sox by 4-2 as Bobby Thigpen got his 51st save.


Glaser-Engelberg Ceremony Is Held
LEAD: An interfaith wedding ceremony was held yesterday for Gabrielle Christina Glaser, a freelance journalist in Warsaw, and Stephen Paul Engelberg, the Warsaw bureau chief of The New York Times.
Rabbi Harold White and the Rev.
Joseph Russell, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Athenaeum Art Gallery in Alexandria, Va.


Cruising in the Wind
LEAD: Jim Drake, a designer of the windsurfer in 1967, has developed a cruising version of the sailboard.
But instead of one hull, his new craft has three, a configuration that makes capsizing less likely.
The spindly craft has two compartments in the hull for stowing gear like a tent, sleeping bag, food and water, goods that might be needed for long-distance trips.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Fighting in Liberia
Planes of the West African peacekeeping force in Liberia reportedly attacked rebel positions.
Page A3.
A Positive Budget Outlook
Congressional leaders said agreement could be reached by tonight on a deficit-reducing budget.
Page A20.
Money Trouble in Trenton


Hungary Privatizations
LEAD: Hungary said Friday that it would sell 20 state-owned companies with total assets worth $1.1 billion and 1989 profits of $92 million.
The Government expects $385 million to $614 million from the sale.
The biggest of the companies to be sold will be Centrum Stores, which had sales of $300 million and pretax profits of $6.5 million last year.


British Aid Figured in Roosevelt Election
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nonresidents' Rights Backed in Plebiscite
LEAD: The Governor of Puerto Rico joined Puerto Rican politicians from New York and Philadelphia yesterday in urging Congress to guarantee Puerto Ricans who live in the United States a right to vote in the island's upcoming plebiscite on its sovereignty.


Immigration Bill Invests in America's Future;   Burden on Economy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ms. Sorokin Wed To Michael James
LEAD: Sharon Linda Sorokin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton S. Sorokin of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Theodore James, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hamilton R. James of Lincoln, Mass.
Rabbi Charles Davidson and the Rev.
Dwight Juliani, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at St.


U.S. LAGS ON RULES MANDATED IN 1987 FOR NURSING CARE
LEAD: Three years after Congress passed a landmark law to protect patients' rights and improve the quality of care in nursing homes, the Federal Government has not issued regulations needed to carry out the law.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-14
President Bush spoke to Iraq on the nation's national television, and he warned the people that their leaders had brought them to ''the brink of war'' with the West and the rest of the Arab world.
Page A1


Injured Gwynn Back in San Diego
LEAD: Tony Gwynn, the San Diego Padres' right fielder, returned to San Diego today after suffering a fracture in the tip of his right index finger.


Man Shoots Himself After Estranged Wife Is Slain
LEAD: A Manhattan woman was shot and killed Saturday night by a man the police said was her estranged husband.
The man then shot himself in the chest.
The woman, Patrice David, 20 years old, who lived at 1963 Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard, near 118th Street, died after being struck by four bullets fired from a .380-caliber automatic pistol outside 988 Lincoln Place in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, a police spokesman, Officer Scott


Mets Fall Again to DeJesus
LEAD: For a fleeting moment yesterday afternoon, the Mets were tied for first place with the Pirates.
It was about as fleeting as a moment can get.


South African Rally For Township Amity Stirs Hard Feelings
LEAD: A Zulu traditional leader, addressing migrant workers at rallies called to promote tribal peace in South Africa's black townships, said today that ''the killing talk'' must stop between his people and supporters of the African National Congress.


Metro Matters;   Fight City Hall? Nope, Not Even Mother Teresa
LEAD: Mother Teresa, the 80-year-old nun and Nobel Peace Prize winner whose name is synonymous with selflessness, has finally learned for herself what many New Yorkers consider axiomatic: You can't fight City Hall.


I.B.M. Reported in Dispute With Microsoft on Software
LEAD: Executives of the International Business Machines Corporation and the Microsoft Corporation met this weekend to try to clarify the relationship of the companies in developing basic software for personal computers, according to industry officials and a trade publication.


Text of the Resolution Condemning Action by Iraq
LEAD: Following is the text of a resolution adopted unanimously by the Security Council early today to condemn Iraq's violation of diplomatic premises in Kuwait:


In South Africa, a 'Lost Generation'
LEAD: While still in his teens, Lulamile Jojiyasi walked out of school as part of a boycott.
That was in February 1984.
He never went back.


White Says He's No Diplomat And He Makes No Apologies
LEAD: BILL WHITE has long prided himself on being a person who cannot be easily fitted into any mold.
In the early 1960's, when it was safer for one's career as well as health to acquiesce quietly to the nation's Jim Crow laws, White was among a vocal minority of black players who spoke out vociferously against inadequacies at Florida spring-training sites and in minor league cities throughout the


First Signs of Fall: Pig Races, Festivals and Literature
LEAD: Contrary to popular belief and scientific evidence, fall does not always begin with the annual autumnal equinox, that precise moment in mid-to-late September when the sun slides across the equator and delivers a day of equal parts.


Jane Seaberry Wed to C. F. Foote Jr.
LEAD: Jane Anita Seaberry, a reporter for The Washington Post, and Cornelius Francis Foote Jr., the minority-affairs director for the American Society of Newspaper Editors in Reston, Va., were married yesterday at the South Shore Cultural Center in Chicago.
The Rev.
Kenneth B. Smith, a minister of the United Church of


Marines Share Saudi Desert With Traditional Dwellers


French Protest of Sheep Imports Turns Ugly
LEAD: French farmers have stepped up their violent attacks on trucks hauling imported livestock in a protest that has divided France's Government and renewed tensions with Britain.


Patricia Ann Rind, Editor, Is Wed To Michael Stewart Siegel, Lawyer
LEAD: Patricia Ann Rind, the daughter of Ellin S. Rind of New Rochelle, N.Y., and Dr.
Kenneth Rind of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Stewart Siegel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard I. Siegel of New York.
Rabbi Miriam Shapiro officiated at the Water Club in New York.


Steve Condos, 71, a Tap Dancer, Dies After Performance in France
LEAD: Steve Condos, who won widespread acclaim as a tap-dance virtuoso in recent years after a lifelong career in films and vaudeville, died shortly after performing at the Lyons International Dance Biennial in France tonight.
Mr.
Condos was 71 years old and lived in Hollywood, Fla.


Bond Markets Worried by Fall of Dollar
LEAD: The recent decline in the dollar, which has received at least tacit approval from the Federal Reserve Board and the Treasury Department, is a source of growing concern to credit market participants.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill market, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, followed on Thursday by an auction of one-year bills.


Robin P. Levine Is Married
LEAD: Robin Phyllis Levine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
Harvey Levine of Sands Point, L.I., was married yesterday to David Aron Sigman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald A. Sigman of Roslyn Heights, L.I.
Rabbis Lee Friedlander and Joy Levitt officiated at Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.
Mrs.
Sigman, 29 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and is the marketing manager at Parenting magazine in New York.


D'Amato Joins In Proposals To Add Police
LEAD: Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato joined the field of politicians offering plans for solving New York City's crime problems, announcing yesterday that he would introduce legislation that would allow the city to use Federal transit funds to hire 4,400 police officers.


By Design;   Shorn Hair Needs Care, Too
LEAD: No question: a woman's hair shorn and shaped a la Ronald Reagan is this season's shortcut to chic.
It's tailor-made for those with full-bodied hair and for some reason it's particularly good on brunettes.


Amex Plans Expansion to Hawaii
LEAD: The American Stock Exchange announced yesterday that it had reached an agreement with an outside group to plan the development of a securities trading operation in Hawaii.
The move is intended to give the American Exchange extended hours of trading, as well as increase its reach into Japan and the Pacific


Dr. Cushman D. Haagensen, 90; Specialist Advocated Mastectomy
LEAD: Dr.
Cushman D. Haagensen, a leading cancer specialist who advocated radical mastectomies as the best hope for curing breast cancer, died Sunday at his home in Palisades, N.Y.
He was 90 years old.


Cuomo Not Being Blamed for State Ills, Poll Finds
LEAD: A statewide poll released today indicates that New Yorkers have grave concerns about the direction of the state, but that they are neither holding Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to blame nor turning to his Republican opponent for salvation.


George Hardy, 79, Pioneer Leader Of Service Worker Union, Is Dead
LEAD: George Hardy, a forceful, outspoken labor leader who was among the early organizers of janitors, public employees and health care workers for the Service Employees International Union, died Thursday at Children's Hospital in San Francisco.
He was 79 years old and lived in San Francisco.


Corrections
LEAD: An article by The Associated Press on Thursday referred incorrectly to the number of out-of-court settlements reached in the 265 asbestos disease claims by workers at the old Brooklyn Navy Yard.
While some of the 20 defendants in the cases have settled, cases are proceeding against the rest.


Pressure Is Mounting to Tap U.S. Oil Stockpile
LEAD: After weeks of resisting calls to use the nation's Strategic Petroleum Reserve to soften the impact of soaring oil prices, the Administration is feeling growing pressure from both Congress and its own ranks to change its strategy.
And events could conspire to hasten a decision that Republicans could find politically advantageous.


Tokyo Stocks Close Lower
LEAD: Stock prices regained some lost ground in afternoon trading here today, after falling to a new trading low for 1990.


Israeli Defense Chief, in Washington, Seeks $1 Billion Infusion of Arms Aid
LEAD: Israel's Defense Minister, Moshe Arens, told senior Administration officials today that the increase in arms sales to Saudi Arabia and the soaring costs Israel has paid in the Persian Gulf crisis had seriously eroded Israel's military situation.


Japan Would Like Some Say for Its Gulf Aid;   Contain Expansionism
LEAD: To the Editor:


AIR FORCE CHIEF IS DISMISSED FOR REMARKS ON GULF PLAN; CHENEY CITES BAD JUDGMENT
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney abruptly dismissed the Air Force's top-ranking officer today for publicly discussing Pentagon contingency plans for waging a war against Iraq, including specific targets for American air strikes.


Post Survives As Last Union Accepts Pact
LEAD: In an emotional mass meeting, members of the Newspaper Guild at The New York Post overwhelmingly - if bitterly - approved an agreement last night that will keep the paper alive but slash their salaries 20 percent.


Businesses Offer Aid to Dinkins to Combat Crime
LEAD: Offering their support to the Dinkins administration, which is under attack over high crime, the leaders of New York City's business community said yesterday that they would support raising taxes to pay for more police officers.


Books of The Times;   What Was It About France and That Lethal Custom?
LEAD:
The Duel
Its Rise and Fall in Early Modern France
By Francois Billacois
Edited and translated by Trista Selous
252 pages. Yale University Press. $30.


U.S. Talks of Reducing Troops in Philippines
LEAD: United States and Philippine officials opened talks today on the future of American military bases, and the chief negotiator for the United States said the days of its large military presence here ''are coming to an end.''


Politics in Massachusetts: More Division Than Vision
LEAD: With a provocative remark about blacks and then angry attacks on the news media, John R. Silber, a candidate in the Democratic primary for governor,has thrown Tuesday's race into turmoil, apparently leaving Francis X. Bellotti in the lead.


Japan Would Like Some Say for Its Gulf Aid;   Remember Refugees
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bush Unconvinced More AIDS Money Will Curb Epidemic
LEAD: President Bush said today that although he was saddened by the thousands of deaths from AIDS, he was unconvinced that more Federal money would alter the course of the AIDS epidemic in the United States.


David Lester, 74; Rutgers Researcher Studied Alcoholism
LEAD: David Lester, a medical researcher who did extensive studies of alcoholism and a professor emeritus of biochemistry at Rutgers University, died on Saturday at the Medical Center in Princeton, N.J.
He was 74 years old and lived in Princeton.


New Home Front Developing As Women Hear Call to Arms
LEAD: Since the Navy hospital ship Mercy set sail more than a month ago, Eric Laver has been both father and mother to his children, juggling the demands of work and family and sorting through conflicting feelings of anger and pride about a wife who volunteered for duty in the Persian Gulf.


Textile Bill Helps Workers, and Fair Trade
LEAD: To the Editor:


Key Backup Players Keep Giants Fresh
LEAD: The Giants are unbeaten in the National Football League's two-week-old season.
Give some credit to good players who have played well and save some credit for good planning and adjusting.


Rudolph J. Thomas, Y.M.C.A. Director, 86
LEAD: Rudolph J. Thomas, who rose from elevator operator to become head of the Harlem Y.M.C.A., died on Wednesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan.


TRANSACTIONS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
CLEVELAND (AL) - Traded Bud Black, pitcher, to the Toronto Blue Jays for Mauro Gozzo, pitcher, and two players to be announced.
KANSAS CITY (AL) - Purchased the contracts of Jeff Conine, first baseman; Brent Mayne, catcher; and Sean Berry, third baseman, from Memphis of the Southern League.


Officers Not Indicted For Shooting Motorist
LEAD: A grand jury has voted not to file charges against two police officers and a Federal agent in the shooting of a Brooklyn motorist on Dec. 1 of last year, the Brooklyn District Attorney announced yesterday.


Bridge
LEAD: Safety plays, like insurance against earthquakes, usually prove unnecessary.
But one paid off for Edgar Kaplan of Manhattan, editor of The Bridge World, on the diagramed deal from an early round of the 1989 Spingold Knockout Teams in Chicago.


Blue Jays Win 4th Game in a Row
LEAD: The division race that appeared over in August is apparently about to unfold in the final weeks of the season.


5,000 Schoolteachers Strike in New Orleans
LEAD: Nearly 5,000 schoolteachers went on strike today over $400,000 worth of health benefits - the first walkout in New Orleans public schools since 1978.


Review/Dance;   Indonesian Festival's Children Of Bali
LEAD: New York-area theatergoers got a taste of the pleasures to come in the nationwide Festival of Indonesia with a program by the Children of Bali on Friday night at the Memorial Auditorium of Montclair State College.
The festival continues on Wednesday with performances of Court Art of Java at the Brooklyn Academy of


Dumping on David
LEAD: All right, New Yorkers, let's take our minds off the Middle East for a minute and all get together to see how fast we can completely destroy David Dinkins.


Review/Theater;   Linda Lavin Takes Her Turn as Mama Rose
LEAD: Tyne Daly, a television cop with scant musical-theater experience, sounded like a terrible idea for the role of Rose in ''Gypsy.'' Linda Lavin, who has succeeded Ms.
Daly in the revival of the landmark 1959 musical at the St.
James, sounds like a natural.
Early in her career, Ms.
Lavin belted out sprightly numbers in brash New York musicals - ''The Mad Show,'' the Harold Prince ''Superman'' - and only a few seasons ago she gave a memorable serious performance as another resolute, Depression-forged mama of starry-eyed children in Neil Simon's ''Broadway Bound.


Technical Failures Bedevil Star Wars
LEAD: THE Pentagon's Star Wars plan to develop arms to destroy enemy missiles has suffered a series of technical failures this year that threaten to further erode support for the disputed program.


An Old-Timer Bets On a New Line
LEAD: The 106-year-old company best known for making cash registers is gambling that it can remake the computer market.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Steel Hardness


Accounts
LEAD: *
Giorgio Beverly Hills, Santa Monica, Calif., a subsidiary of Avon Products Inc., New York, to Eisamna, Johns &amp; Laws, Los Angeles, for the Red for Men fragrance account.
Advertising for a new fragrance, to have its premiere next year, was awarded to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Los Angeles.
E.J.&amp; L. handles all other Giorgio fragrances.


A Reptile Species Is Found to Be Two
LEAD: THE tuatara, long considered a single reptile species, is in fact two species, and the failure to recognize that has inadvertently pushed one of the species to the verge of extinction, a new study has found.


Dollar Continuing Its Slide Amid Prospects of Fed Move
LEAD: The dollar continued to slide yesterday as traders anticipated a move by the Federal Reserve to push interest rates lower.


Mets Get Involved in Another Race: to Re-sign Strawberry
LEAD: Contrary to some misgivings among their players and fans, the Mets have no intention of letting Darryl Strawberry walk away as a free agent, they expect to approach him directly with a contract proposal before the season ends in two weeks and they have high expectations of keeping him as the marquee star of the 1990's.


Ernest L. Sommer, Accountant, 64
LEAD: Ernest L. Sommer, a partner in the New York City accounting firm of Sommer, Abraham, died on Sunday at his home in Hillsdale, N.J.
He was 64 years old.


German Tire Maker Is Target of Pirelli Bid
LEAD: Pirelli S.p.A., the large Italian tire producer, said yesterday that it was seeking to acquire a controlling interest in Continental A.G., the largest tire company in West Germany.


Chemical Closes Swiss Operation
LEAD: The Chemical Banking Corporation said it was closing its bond trading, foreign exchange and money market operations in Geneva because of insufficient profitability.
Chemical was one of the most active participants in Swiss franc bond trading, but high local interest rates and the collapse of the Tokyo stock market in recent months have hurt the bank's activitites in the


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the growth of Las Vegas misstated the state tax rate on gambling revenues.
It is 6.25 percent, not 6.4 percent


Red Sox Make Timely Turnaround
LEAD: Another chilly September, another pennant race in the American League East and another opportunity for the Red Sox to fold.
What else is new?
Red Sox fans do not have to be reminded of the team's past failures, an ignominious collection of flubs and mishaps that has left Boston without a World Series title since 1918.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
DEBT


Gorbachev Sees Saudi About Restoring Ties
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev met today with the Saudi Foreign Minister, Prince Saud al-Faisal, to discuss the restoration of diplomatic relations.


Officer Quits At Wasserstein
LEAD: Toby S. Myerson, a managing director at Wasserstein, Perella &amp; Company in charge of East Asian operations, announced yesterday that he was rejoining his former law firm.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, the Bridge column on Sept. 3, about the World Mixed Pair Championship, listed an incorrect bidding sequence.


A Mother's Plea to Hussein Frees Her Son
LEAD: Never underestimate a mother's influence.


Equity Council Approves Accord on 'Miss Saigon'
LEAD: The council of Actors' Equity approved an agreement late yesterday with Cameron Mackintosh, the producer of ''Miss Saigon,'' to clear the way for the hit London musical to come to Broadway.
But neither Mr.
Mackintosh nor his spokesmen could be reached for comment, so it was not immediately clear whether the producer would reinstate the show, which was to have begun performances in March at the Broadway


Ancient Diamonds
LEAD: Diamonds and silicon carbide grains older than the solar system have been found in certain meteorites, according to a study by a University of Chicago scientist.
The finding, reported in the current issue of Nature, suggests that meteorites may contain a microcosm of the interstellar grains that existed more than five billion years ago.


Union and G.M. Reach Accord On Pact Enhancing Job Security
LEAD: The United Automobile Workers union and the General Motors Corporation reached a tentative three-year labor contract early today that apparently broke new ground on job security for the company's 300,000 hourly workers.


Academy of Sciences Urges Changes in Meat Inspection
LEAD: The Government must fundamentally reform its beef-inspection system to protect consumers from a growing incidence of food-borne disease, the National Academy of Sciences said today.


Panel Unveils Plan for Park Along Hudson Waterfront
LEAD: Calling its plan a vision for New York City's future, a state panel yesterday recommended that recreation areas and commercial space be built along the Hudson River in Manhattan.


FAG Bearings to Acquire Barden Corp. for $131 Million
LEAD: The FAG Bearings Corporation, the United States-based subsidiary of a large West German bearings and industrial systems manufacturer, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Barden Corporation for $66.50 a share, or $131.1 million.


S.E.C. Urges Voting Rule
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission said today that it hoped stock exchanges would maintain a one-share one-vote rule despite a court ruling earlier this year that struck down the S.E.C. regulation.


Official's Ouster Is Sought at Track
LEAD: R. D. Hubbard, the chairman of AFG Industries, called for the removal of Marjorie L. Everett as chairman and chief operating officer of the Hollywood Park race track.
Mr.
Hubbard, who controls 9.9 percent of Hollywood Park Realty Enterprises Inc. and the Hollywood Park Operating Company, the two companies that control the California race track, made the request in a letter dated last Friday to the board of Hollywood Park.


2-Week Teacher Strike Ends In New Jersey With Pay Rises
LEAD: Teachers and staff members in this Gloucester County town returned to school today after voting to accept a two-year agreement.


People
LEAD: *
Ellen Abramowitz has been appointed director of advertising for Working Woman magazine.


New Kodak System for Showing Photos on TV
LEAD: In a bid to combine traditional picture-taking with electronics, the Eastman Kodak Company plans to sell a system for storing photographs on compact disks and displaying them on television sets and computer screens.


A Boyhood Hero Brings an Author, 71, His First Best Seller
LEAD: In Edward Rice's 71 years, there have been 20 books.
Serious books, long-researched books - ''The Man in the Sycamore Tree,'' a biography of the Trappist monk Thomas Merton; ''Margaret Mead,'' a profile of the anthropologist; ''John Frum, He Come,'' a study of the cargo cults of the South Pacific - but none of them a best seller.


Walter Niebling, 72, Municipal Financier
LEAD: Walter W. Niebling, a New York financier, died on Sunday at his home in South Hero, Vt.
He was 72 years old.


Pennant Drives: Races With No Starting Lines
LEAD: In 1987, the second-place Mets traveled to St.
Louis for a season-ending series with the first-place Cardinals.
The Mets, however, were four games out with three games to play, meaning the race was over.


Their Mushroom Could Be Our Toadstool
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Television;   Man vs. Man vs. Nature in the Amazon Rain Forest
LEAD: Adrian Cowell must have had a premonition.
Two years ago, Mr.
Cowell, a British movie maker who had done BBC documentaries on the Amazon, traveled the new highway into the Brazilian rain forest to begin chronicling the effects of the invasion of homesteaders and others.
By now, the damage has been extensively reported and deplored, yet Mr.


Dora P. Chaplin, 84, Professor at Seminary
LEAD: Dora P. Chaplin, an author and a retired professor of Christian education at the General Theological Seminary in Manhattan, died on Saturday at her home in Yonkers.
She was 84 years old and died of cardiac arrest, a spokesman for the family said.


Court Overturns Agents' Convictions
LEAD: A Federal Appeals Court today overturned the racketeering convictions of two sports agents accused of signing athletes to contracts before their eligibility expired.


Appointment At Whittle
LEAD: Whittle Communications, a specialized media company based in Knoxville, Tenn., said yesterday that it had named Gerry Hogan, the president of Turner Entertainment Networks, as a vice chairman.


Estepona Journal;   The Legacy, a Tale of the Saintly (and the Smart)
LEAD: At first glance, with its white arabesque apartment complexes and its marina crowded with yachts, Estepona could pass for any of a score of overbuilt tourist resorts that have sprung up along the Costa del Sol over the last 30 years.


G.M. Expansion In Europe Planned
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation said it planned to spend $1 billion in Europe over the next five years to expand industrial capacity and research and development for its car parts division.
The investment by the American automobile maker's Automotive Components Group will finance several new plants, said Mark McCabe, the group's


Albany Practices Energy Conservation on State Vehicle Fleet
LEAD: To the Editor:


Belmont Attendance Hurt by Weak Undercards
LEAD: The most noteworthy development at Belmont Park on Saturday was neither Criminal Type's defeat in the Woodward Handicap nor Eastern Echo's victory in the Futurity Stakes.
It was the anemic count of just 13,866 warm bodies through the Belmont turnstiles.


Critic's Notebook;   Once Again, the Emmys Perplex
LEAD: Of all the awards given away on television specials, the medium's own Prime-Time Emmys have a habit of being the most disconcerting.


Summary
LEAD:
New Life for The Post
Newspaper Guild members at The New York Post overwhelmingly approved millions of dollars in concessions to keep the paper open.
Page B1.
Gain for the Sandinistas
Nicaragua put into effect a law granting the Sandinistas, who lost the presidency earlier this year, broad power over the military.


Bush Again Calls on Negotiators to Adopt Cut in Capital Gains Tax
LEAD: As White House and Congressional budget negotiators tried today to put together the final pieces of a deficit-cutting deal, President Bush renewed his call for a cut in the capital gains tax rate, saying a budget agreement that includes a rate reduction would be the best antidote to economic slowdown.


Japan Would Like Some Say for Its Gulf Aid;   'H2O City'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bank of Tokyo Selects Director for Americas
LEAD: The Bank of Tokyo yesterday named Koretsugu Kodama new resident managing director for the Americas and chairman of the Bank of Tokyo Trust Company.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: TONI MORRISON accepted the Chianti Ruffino Antico Fattore literary prize on Sunday in Florence for ''Beloved,'' her acclaimed novel, whichwon a Pulitzer Prize in 1988.
She was chosen from winners of other national literary prizes for the award, given by an Italian wine company.
The book was published in Italian by Giangiacoma Feltrinelli S.p.A.


Barry Will Not Be Retried on 12 Unresolved Charges
LEAD: Saying a new trial would be unlikely to achieve ''substantially more,'' Federal prosecutors announced today that they would not retry Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. on the 12 drug and perjury charges that a jury was unable to resolve last month.


Washington Talk;   Quietest Of Vehicles Gets a Day In the Sun
LEAD: Wearing surgical masks and hospital garments, Tooker Gomberg and a handful of other bicycle advocates took to the streets outside the Transportation Department late last week.
They accosted motorists, handing out what they called ''environmental tickets'' urging them to ride bikes instead of drive.


Watkins Family Endorses A Plan to Hire More Police
LEAD: The family of the slain Utah tourist Brian Watkins returned to New York City yesterday to testify in support of a proposal that would pay for additional police officers in subway stations.


A Takeover Bid For Hotel Investors
LEAD: Hotel Investors Trust and the Hotel Investors Corporation, real estate and hotel management companies that trade as a paired entity, said they had received a takeover offer of $5 a share from the First West Capital Corporation.
They said the offer was subject to regulatory approvals, including approval from Nevada gaming authorities; the cooperation of lenders, and completion of the transaction before the end of the year.


Excerpts From Gorbachev's Remarks on Economic Change
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's remarks at the Soviet Parliament today on the nation's economic crisis, as translated by The New York Times:


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's plan to use Federal transit funds to hire 4,400 police officers in New York City referred imprecisely to his electoral status.
He is up for re-election in 1992.


WILL AVENGE IRAQ, ARAB RADICALS SAY
LEAD: A conference of Arab radicals, headed by two senior Palestine Liberation Organization leaders, resolved as it ended here today to ''strike against American interests everywhere, and by all means, at the same moment'' if the United States attacks Iraq.


Abbott Laboratories Names New President
LEAD: Filling a position that has been vacant for more than a year, Abbott Laboratories yesterday named a new president and chief operating officer, Thomas R. Hodgson.
The move follows a period of uncertainty at the big maker of health care products after the removal of its chairman earlier this year.


Korean Stores Win Restrictions in Boycott
LEAD: A unanimous appellate court ruled yesterday that the New York City Police Department must enforce a court order to keep black-led demonstrators at least 50 feet away from two Korean food stores in a tense eight-month dispute in Brooklyn.


Leon Russianoff, 73, Teacher of Clarinet
LEAD: Leon Russianoff, a clarinetist who taught at the Juilliard School and the Manhattan School of Music, died Sunday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.
Born in Brooklyn in 1916, Mr.
Russianoff began studying the clarinet at the age of 14 and later won a scholarship to study with Simeon Bellison, then the first clarinetist of the New York Philharmonic.


Next to Unveil New Products
LEAD: Two years after Steven Jobs introduced his Next Inc. personal computer at a glittering affair, the computer pioneer is scheduled to return Tuesday to the stage at Davies Symphony Hall to reveal new products he hopes will salvage his fledgling company.


Managua Reveals Law Cementing Sandinista Grip on Army
LEAD: More than six months after the Sandinista Front lost power in national elections, the official Government register has published a new law, dated before the elections, that grants Sandinista commanders broad permanent authority over the structure and operations of Nicaragua's large military forces.


Walesa Declares Presidential Candidacy
LEAD: Lech Walesa, the Solidarity leader, said today that he will run for President of Poland, seeking a job now held by the general who once imprisoned him and sought to crush his union under martial law.


New York State Correctional Bonds
LEAD: The New York State Urban Development Corporation is tentatively offering $228.07 million in tax-exempt Correctional Capital Facilities revenue bonds to build two medium-security jails, in Livingston and St.
Lawrence counties, and four alcohol and substance abuse treatment correctional annexes, in Wayne, Franklin, Fulton and Chautauqua counties.


10 in Soybean Trading Trial
LEAD: A Government prosecutor today depicted 10 soybean traders who are on trial for fraud as an arrogant band of thieves who routinely cheated customers at the world's largest futures exchange.
The traders operated in a


Probation Officer Is Taken As Hostage in a Court Jail
LEAD: A man who was convicted yesterday of raping a nun held a probation officer hostage for seven hours after his trial in a Manhattan courthouse, probation and prison officials said.


Gold Prices Rise Sharply, But Less Than Jump in Oil
LEAD: Gold futures prices rose strongly yesterday on the Commodity Exchange in New York as fears of tightening oil supplies pushed crude oil futures to record highs, spurring some investors to buy gold as a hedge against inflation.


New Choctaw Bid To Acquire Justin
LEAD: Choctaw Securities L.P., an investment group led by the Kansas City executive Perry H. Sutherland and the New York investor Barry S. Rosenstein, has offered to acquire Justin Industries for $18 a share, or $153 million.
An earlier bid by Choctaw of $18.50 a share was rejected by the Fort Worth-based company in


Correction
LEAD: An Op-Ed article on Saturday incorrectly dentified its author, Andrew Stein.
He is president of the New York City Council.


Our Towns;   'Godparents' Of Rare Turtles Protect a Species
LEAD: When a stranger calls about the Blanding's turtles in her backyard, Georgianna Garrison's response is icy. ''I don't know what you're talking about,'' she says. ''Blanding's what?''


Plan to Honor Indians Who Defeated Custer
LEAD: The House voted Monday to erect a monument in honor of the Indian tribes who fought Lieut.
Col.
George Armstrong Custer at the Little Bighorn 114 years ago.


SOUTER COMMENTS IN APPROVING WAY ON ACTIVIST COURT
LEAD: On his last day of Senate testimony, Judge David H. Souter said today that he approved of an innovative and ''pragmatic'' Supreme Court, and when asked if he could think of any instances in which the Court had recently ''improperly created new rights,'' he said he could not.


U.N. Drafts Plan to Tighten Embargo of Iraq
LEAD: The United States, the Soviet Union and the other permanent members of the Security Council agreed tonight on the broad outline of a new proposal to tighten the trade embargo against Iraq and occupied Kuwait, diplomats said.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Here in New York, if you defend yourself you're in trouble.


Apple Bank Won't Fight Takeover Bid
LEAD: Apple Bancorp Inc., one of New York's largest savings and loan associations, announced yesterday that its board of directors had dropped its opposition to a longstanding takeover bid.


Israel Withdraws Suit To Ban Mossad Book
LEAD: The Israeli Government has withdrawn a lawsuit in Canada aimed at preventing the publication there of a book by a former Israeli intelligence agent, opening the way for the book's immediate distribution by the Stoddart Publishing Company.


Treasury Security Prices Retreat
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities dipped in sluggish trading yesterday, pushed lower by another rise in oil prices and worries that a report expected today on consumer prices might be even worse than anticipated.


Dow Advances by 3.22 in Quiet Trading
LEAD: Stocks drifted aimlessly yesterday in quiet trading, with the rising price of crude oil and continued wrangling over the budget keeping many investors out of the market.
The Dow Jones industrial average added 3.22, to 2,567.33.


Cypress Point Drops PGA Tour Event Instead of Changing Its Rules
LEAD: The famed Cypress Point Golf Club has become the third private club to refuse to change its membership policies to conform to the PGA Tour's new anti-discriminatory guidelines for clubs that play host to tour events.


Careers;   Gulf Crisis Stirs Interest In Geology
LEAD: SMALL liberal arts colleges like Wooster, in Wooster, Ohio, report growing student interest in geology as a major, as do engineering schools like the Colorado School of Mines.


Scattered Stones, Enigmas And Fun
LEAD: ISHIDO: THE WAY OF STONES is one of those deceptively simple games, like Go, that gradually reveal their subtleties.


Roberto Celli, Foundation Aide, 52
LEAD: Roberto Celli, director of the Rockefeller Foundation's Bellagio Study and Conference Center in Italy, died Sept. 8 at a hospital in Milan.
He was 52 years old and lived in Bellagio.


Police Proposal Prompts a Call For More Jails
LEAD: To handle what he said would be an increase in prisoners resulting from proposals to add 5,000 new police officers, the New York City Correction Commissioner urged yesterday that the city build as many as 3,100 new prison beds on Rikers Island.


Anderson Takes Charge for Bears
LEAD: No team in the National Football League incorporates its offense around a running back more than the Chicago Bears do with Neal Anderson, who on Sunday, in Chicago's 31-13 victory over Green Bay, continued to show why he is worth the investment.


Battle Called Intense in Monrovia As Doe Supporters Make a Stand
LEAD: Street battles raged in the capital of Liberia today as followers of Samuel K. Doe, the slain President, were reported to be making a desperate stand, burning and destroying parts of the city.


Shuttle Launching Canceled Again
LEAD: The thrice-delayed countdown of the space shuttle Columbia was canceled a fourth time late today when a leak of hydrogen gas appeared in the spaceship's rear engine compartment shortly after the onset of fueling.


John F. Marchand, 78, A Medical Researcher
LEAD: Dr.
John F. Marchand, a physician, educator and researcher, died on Sunday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Supporting the U.S. in the Gulf
LEAD:
WITH MIGHT . . .
The international force confronting Iraq is dominated by more than 140,000 U.S. troops and naval personnel, with about 500 aircraft and mroe than 40 warships.
In recent days other countries, notably Britain, France and Egypt, have announced major new deployments. here is a breakdown of non-American forces committed to the Persian Gulf region to date.


$125.7 Million Issue From Rhode Island
LEAD: A $125.7 million bond issue by the Rhode Island Housing and Mortgage Finance Corporation has been tentatively priced to yield a maximum of 8.10 percent for an issue due in 2022, through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs.


U.S. Reports A 0.7% Surge In Inventories
LEAD: Business inventories rose seven-tenths of a percent in July, the biggest pileup in a year, and sales fell five-tenths of a percent, the Government said today.


Asahi Breweries Sets Elders Link
LEAD: Asahi Breweries of Japan will pay $770 million for 19.9 percent of Elders IXL Ltd., which makes Foster's beer and is Australia's largest company.
A link between Japan's second-largest brewery and Elders, the fourth-ranked beer maker in the world, paves the way for an Asian powerhouse in the brewery business.


Cleanup Crews Quit Alaska But Debate on Spill Goes On
LEAD: Exxon's second summer of cleaning the mess from the nation's worst oil spill ended over the weekend with praise for how much was accomplished but discord over what was not.


Moody's Cuts Sears Ratings; Outlook and Leverage Cited
LEAD: The ratings on about $34.6 billion in Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company debt and the debt of some subsidiaries have either been lowered or placed under review, Moody's Investors Service announced yesterday.


Chess
LEAD: It is often thought that grandmasters rank among the world's great egotists, but generally that isn't so.
To assure yourself of this, all you need do is compliment one about a victory.
Often the luminary's attention will all be on a move that turned out to be wrong.


With Contract Nearing Expiration, Teachers Press Their Case


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
OIL AND THE MIDEAST
Crude oil prices climbed on renewed concerns about a possible war in the Middle East, breaking a seven-year record in futures trading. [Page D1.]
Pressure to tap the Strategic Petroleum Reserve is being felt by the Administration from Congress and from within its own ranks.


I.M.F. Plan on Lending Is Challenged by Banks
LEAD: An organization representing the world's largest commercial banks openly challenged the International Monetary Fund today on one of the most sensitive points of its global debt strategy, the fund's willingness to lend money to countries behind in interest payments to commercial banks.


Europe's Jobless Rate
LEAD: Unemployment in the 12-nation European Community remained steady at 8.6 percent in July, the European statistical office said today.
The rate has not changed since March.
The statistics office said unemployment fell four-tenths of 1 percent in Spain and one-tenth of 1 percent in Portugal.


Falcons' Coach Warned
LEAD: Paul Tagliabue, the National Football League commissioner, has warned the Atlanta Falcons' coach, Jerry Glanville, that he will be fined if he continues criticizing opposing coaches.


JEWS FOUND SPLIT ON MIXED MARRIAGE
LEAD: Conservative and Reform Jews are deeply divided from their rabbis and from traditional beliefs about crucial issues arising from marriages to non-Jews, according to a study made public yesterday.


India Hopes Its Red Cross Can Unload Ship
LEAD: As an Indian ship loaded with food headed across the Arabian Sea toward the Persian Gulf, Prime Minister V. P. Singh said today that he hoped a delegation from the Indian Red Cross aboard the ship would be allowed to supervise unloading of the food for Indians in Iraq or Kuwait.


Europeans Agree to Expel Baghdad Military Attaches
LEAD: Anxious to display a united stance on the Persian Gulf crisis, the 12-nation European Community agreed today to expel Iraq's military attaches from the region in retaliation for ''new and very serious illegal acts'' committed by Iraq in its raid on four Western embassies in Kuwait on Friday.


Expos Hope to Be Detour As Mets' Drive for Pennant
LEAD: The Mets, who had their final day of rest of the regular season yesterday, will resume their pursuit of the Pittsburgh Pirates tonight in the pennant race in the National League's East.
But they will do it against the designated ''spoiler'' in the race, the Montreal Expos, who consternated the odds this season, survived mass defections and bulled their way back into contention by sweeping the


AUSTRALIA'S CHIEF SEES SUPPORT EBB
LEAD: Prime Minister Bob Hawke, who won election to a record fourth term just last March, is now facing tough economic problems and sharply eroding popular support.


Justice Dept. Losses in High-Profile Trials Raising Questions of Fairness
LEAD: A string of recent courtroom reverses suffered by the Justice Department, like the divided verdict in the trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. of Washington, has raised basic questions about the Government's fairness to well-known defendants.


Instant Information
LEAD: PRODIGY, the electronic information service developed jointly by the International Business Machines Corporation and Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, is getting a much-needed overhaul.


Selection of Jury Begins for Trial of Fourth Bensonhurst Defendant
LEAD: Jury selection began yesterday in the trial of the fourth person charged in the 1989 attack by a group of white youths in Bensonhurst on three black teen-agers that resulted in the killing of Yusuf K. Hawkins.


Jets Back on the Track With Same Old O'Neil
LEAD: Although he is seventh in career receptions and is in the top 10 in yards gained receiving for the Jets, Freeman McNeil is usually thought of as a runner.
He is the team career leader in that category and the only man in club history to rush for more than 1,000 yards twice in a season.


Hungary's Chief Begins to Accept Popularity
LEAD: The shock of last year's tumultuous changes has begun to wear off for most Hungarians, but not for Arpad Goncz.
The writer, translator and, for six years, prisoner in a Communist prison still has trouble getting used to the idea of being President of the republic.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Contel Cellular Inc., a partly owned subsidiary of the Contel Corp., Atlanta, appointed Charles M. Parrish senior vice president of operations.


Craft Sends Views of Venus
LEAD: WITH communications fully restored after two mysterious silences, the Magellan spacecraft has begun mapping the surface of Venus with radar - a month late, but flawlessly.
Researchers hope it will provide the most complete and detailed imaging ever of the cloud-enveloped planet.


A Colgate Ad Director Quits
LEAD: Clay Timon, the vice president and director of worldwide advertising at the Colgate-Palmolive Company for five and a half years, resigned abruptly last week.


Microgravity Cuts Output Of a Hormone In Space Rat
LEAD: SCIENTISTS studying rats have determined that the near weightlessness of space flight significantly decreases the release of growth hormone, a finding that could explain the bone loss and muscle weakness many astronauts experience after prolonged stays in space.


Cooperation by Prostitutes in Kenya Prevents Thousands of AIDS Cases
LEAD: A partnership between health workers and prostitutes here has multiplied the women's use of condoms, preventing thousands of AIDS cases.


James Kinnear Jr., 92, Retired Steel Executive
LEAD: James W. Kinnear Jr., retired vice president of steel-producing divisions for the United States Steel Corporation, now the USX Corporation, died yesterday at his home in Birmingham, Ala.
He was 92 years old.
A family spokesman said he died of a heart attack.


Review/Theater;   A Revival of 'Leaves,' Grimmer Than Ever
LEAD: Annette and Victor have returned to Queens and, if anything, they are even more lonely and isolated, and more disturbing, than they were six years ago.


Those 'Lies' Were True . . .
LEAD: During the upcoming session of the United Nations General Assembly a Middle Eastern country will be pronounced guilty of terrorism, aggression, genocide and war crimes.
Sounds like Iraq?
Well, think again.
For despite the extraordinary and unpredictable developments of the last year, the annual fall assault on the state of Israel in the General


Arts Agency Chairman Backs Pledge On Obscenity
LEAD: The chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, John E. Frohnmayer, said today that he had no plans to change the endowment's requirement that grant recipients sign an anti-obscenity pledge.


Oklahoma Vote Tests Effort To Curb Lawmakers' Tenure
LEAD: A movement to limit the terms of legislators in statehouses and on Capitol Hill is gaining strength on a tide of voter frustration, and the first ballot test will come Tuesday in Oklahoma.


China's Use of Forced Labor Questioned by Import Study
LEAD: There is ''circumstantial evidence'' that products made under forced-labor conditions in China have been exported to the United States in violation of American trade law, the General Accounting Office said today.


Japan Would Like Some Say for Its Gulf Aid
LEAD: To the Editor:


Joe Gardi Crossed The Campus
LEAD: The field house where Joe Gardi works is about three touchdowns from the field house where he used to work.


Franklin L. Baumer, Historian, 77
LEAD: Franklin L. Baumer, a historian at Yale University, died on Friday at Griffin Hospital in Derby, Conn.
He was 77 years old and lived in Hamden, Conn.


Broncos Triumph on Final Play
LEAD: John Elway completed a 49-yard, fourth-down pass to set up David Treadwell's 22-yard winning field goal as the Denver Broncos wasted a 12-point fourth-quarter lead but rallied to beat Kansas City, 24-23, tonight.


In an Almost Untouched Jungle, Gold Miners Threaten Indian Ways
LEAD: Gripping bows and long, slender arrows - one for shooting animals and one for shooting birds - the Yanomami hunters emerged from the Amazon underbrush today to warily inspect a Super Puma helicopter that had clattered out of the skies into their village.


Oil Prices Climb on War Fears
LEAD: Crude oil prices climbed yesterday, breaking a seven-year-old record in futures trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Traders cited renewed concerns about a possible war in the Middle East.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: After nearly 20 years of thinking about it, WALTER CRONKITE has sat down to write his memoirs. ''It's definitely not an expose of CBS, although I spent 40 years there,'' Mr.
Cronkite said yesterday from his house on Martha's Vineyard.


Tisch Raises Stake In Bank of Boston
LEAD: Laurence A. Tisch, the president of CBS Inc., and members of his family have raised their stake in the Bank of Boston Corporation to 9.9 percent from 8.9 percent.
They also said in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that they might seek permission from the Federal Reserve Board to buy up to 15 percent of the Boston-based company.


A Besieged Emerson Radio In Alliance With Big Holder
LEAD: The Emerson Radio Corporation announced yesterday that it had formed an intricate alliance with Fidenas Investment Ltd., a foreign investment group that is the company's largest outside shareholder.
The deal calls for the creation of a joint venture to distribute Emerson's products in Europe and gives Fidenas two new seats on


Battle Gets Hot in Floor Coverings
LEAD: THEY are ominously called ''the wet areas,'' and they are worth $2 billion a year in business.


Welfare Rolls Show Increase, First in 7 Years
LEAD: For the first time in seven years, the number of New Yorkers receiving public assistance has increased, another sign of the region's economic downturn, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday in his first annual review of city services.


Veterans Chief Apologizes for Use of Ethnic Slur
LEAD: Veterans Secretary Edward J. Derwinski said today that his use of the term wetbacks for illegal Hispanic immigrants at a campaign rally last week was ''just one of those dumb slips.''


Woman Is Burned to Death
LEAD: A man has been charged with murder in the death on Saturday of his estranged wife, who was doused with a flammable liquid and set on fire while her 7-year-old daughter watched, the police said Sunday.
The suspect, Cyrus W. Moore, 34 years old, is being held without bond in the death of Bobbie Jean Stafford, 31.


E. Allan Lightner Jr., 82, Dies; Ex-Envoy to Libya
LEAD: Edwin Allan Lightner Jr., a former United States Ambassador to Libya and a career Foreign Service officer, died Saturday at his home in Bayside, Me.
He was 82 years old.


New York in 1783
LEAD: To the Editor:


What's Fair for Unions, and the City?
LEAD: The Dinkins administration is moving toward a settlement with the city unions that New York simply cannot afford.
Unless City Hall reconsiders, all New Yorkers - including municipal workers - will suffer the grave and long-range consequences of deepening debt.


Bohan's Plans to Dazzle London Couture
LEAD: Marc Bohan caught the plane from Paris to London on the first Sunday night in September.
He arrived in his new office at 26 Bruton Street at 9:30 A.M. the following day as excited as a schoolboy at the beginning of the school year.
After half a lifetime at Christian Dior in Paris, his new career as the design director of Norman Hartnell, the


Contractor Pleads Guilty in Navy Bribery
LEAD: A Los Angeles man whose speedy ascent into the ranks of major military contractors drew a White House award and a dinner with President Reagan, pleaded guilty in Federal court today to bribing Pentagon purchasing officials.


Nordiques Sign Sundin
LEAD: Mats Sundin, the No. 1 selection in the 1989 National Hockey League entry draft, signed yesterday with the Quebec Nordiques.


Pentagon, Facing Opposition, Suspends Land-Buying Plans
LEAD: Faced with stiff resistance from farmers, cattle ranchers and environmentalists, the Pentagon has indefinitely suspended its biggest land acquisition program since World War II, stalling efforts to add nearly 4.5 million acres to the 25 million acres now managed by the military.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: For the 25th anniversary of the World Monuments Fund, JOHN JULIUS NORWICH, the historian, will head a symposium in London on preservation and European development.
It was the people at the World Monuments Fund who gilded the dome of the Hotel des Invalides in Paris and are restoring its frescoes.
They are also aiding the restoration of the Veronese ceiling of San Sebastiano in


Mr. Moynihan Goads the Senate
LEAD: Before the August recess, as the Senate was completing debate on campaign finance reform, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York offered a puckish amendment: a limit on the amount of ''unearned'' income a senator may pocket from dividends, interest, capital gains and the like.
If enacted, at least a third of the Senate's members would be forced either to resign or divest their holdings.


Times Appoints A Science Editor
LEAD: The appointment of Nicholas Wade as science and health editor of The New York Times was announced yesterday by Max Frankel, the paper's executive editor.


General Mills Net Up 12.7%
LEAD: General Mills Inc. said today that its profits in the first quarter rose 12.7 percent as the food and restaurant company showed growth in sales of baking goods, cereals and snacks.


Pandick Files for Chapter 11
LEAD: Pandick Inc., a printer of prospectuses, proxy materials and other financial documents, filed for reorganization under the protection of Federal bankruptcy court yesterday, another casualty of the slowdown on Wall Street.


Osprey Raise Fledglings in New York Refuge
LEAD: FOR the first time in more than 30 years, nesting osprey have produced fledglings in New York City.


Deposit Fund Bill Advances
LEAD: The House of Representatives voted today to remove the ceiling on premiums the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation charges to insure deposits at banks and savings and loan associations.


Nike Income Rises 31%
LEAD: Nike Inc. reported a 31 percent increase in its earnings today on a 38 percent rise in revenues in the three months that ended on Aug. 31, despite Operation PUSH's call for a boycott.
The Chicago-based civil rights group, People United to Save Humanity, contends that Nike is not doing enough to help blacks.


Business Degrees Arm Physicians to Face Nonmedical Challenges
LEAD: FOR most doctors, the eight years of medical classes and hospital training are long enough.
But many doctors are now spending up to two additional years earning degrees in business, administration and management.


PS Group Amends Shareholder Plan
LEAD: PS Group Inc., a company that distributes fuel to airlines, leases aircraft and runs travel agencies, said its board had amended its shareholders rights plan to allow Berkshire Hathaway Inc. and its chairman, Warren E. Buffett, to acquire up to 22.5 percent of its common stock.
The amendment came in a response to a request by Mr.


Big Dam on Source of the Ganges Proceeds Despite Earthquake Fear
LEAD: ABOUT 50 miles north of this holy city on the Ganges in the foothills of the Himalayas, Indian and Soviet engineers have begun work on one of the world's highest dams.


George W. Schoenhut, Drama Professor, 83
LEAD: George W. Schoenhut, a retired professor of drama at Dartmouth College, died Thursday at Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital in Hanover, N.H.
He was 83 years old and lived in Thetford, Vt.
A family spokesman said he died of a heart attack.


17-Year-Old Indicted In Niagara Falls Deaths
LEAD: A grand jury has indicted a Niagara Falls teen-ager for manslaughter in the Aug. 9 drownings of two girls he is accused of pulling from the safety of a rock into the swift current of the Niagara River.


Players Get $102.5 Million in Collusion Case
LEAD: In what is believed to be the largest such award ever made in sports history, an arbitrator yesterday ruled that baseball club owners must pay players $102.5 million in lost salary for the 1987 and 1988 seasons.


Tight Race in the East


18-Year-Old Held in Slaying Of Man in Mother's Mugging
LEAD: When Victor Lopez, an introverted 18-year-old, heard that his mother had been mugged and molested on her way to work Saturday morning, he ran out of their apartment building barefoot and shirtless to help, his family says.


More Air Fare Increases
LEAD: Trans World, Northwest and United joined other airlines yesterday in imposing an additional 4.2 percent fare increase that will raise domestic tickets by a total of 9.5 percent since Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2.
The higher rates go into effect on Oct. 1 as airlines try to recoup some of the extra money spent on jet fuel, which has risen by about 50 percent since the Aug.


Officials End Dispute Over Bank Capital
LEAD: Federal regulators resolved a dispute today on how much capital banks must hold as a cushion against losses, averting a standoff over the basic standard of soundness for financial institutions.


Street Weighs TV Ad Money and Peace
LEAD: For 15 years, Grove Street and its handsome century-old homes and towering maples have been a favorite backdrop for film companies making television commercials.


Crackdown on Blacks Called 'License to Kill' by Mandela
LEAD: A new police crackdown on black factional fighting amounts to a ''license to kill'' for security forces, Nelson Mandela said today.


Japan Vehicle Export Off
LEAD: Exports of Japanese vehicles fell five-tenths of 1 percent in August from a year earlier, to 444,542 units, the first year-to-year drop in three months, auto industry sources said today.
August exports were also lower than the 489,804 vehicles sent abroad in July.
Japan's total vehicle production in August rose 8 percent from a year earlier, to 961,900 units, the second successive month of gains from the year before, the sources said.


Eastern Air Pension Talks
LEAD: The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation said today that Eastern Airlines, a subsidiary of Continental Airlines Holdings Inc., had missed the deadline for paying about $95 million to its pension plan, but talks over the funding were still going on.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
7.75
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.39
7.36
7.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.30
7.27
7.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.74
8.72
8.08
30-YR.


Korea Shipyard Closing
LEAD: The Hyundai Mipo Dockyard Company, South Korea's largest ship repair concern, will shut down on Tuesday after two weeks of labor disputes, a company spokesman said today. ''The management has notified the union that it will indefinitely close the yard tomorrow as the company cannot bear further production losses,'' a management spokesman said.


Boris Yeltsin, Reconsidered
LEAD: He rode a tide of Establishment-bashing populism to power in the Soviet Union's largest republic.
Now Boris Yeltsin shows an admirable willingness to turn that populism to productive ends.
Under his leadership, the Russian Republic has adopted a 500-day program to transform itself into a market economy, pointing the way to a more workable future for the Soviet Union.


Cutbacks at Oracle
LEAD: The Oracle Corporation said it would undertake cost-cutting moves, including laying off about 10 percent of its United States work force of 4,000.
The cuts, including reorganizations and consolidations, are intended to trim expenses in response to slower revenue growth, the computer software company said.


Excerpts From Senate's Hearings on the Souter Nomination
LEAD: Following are excerpts from today's session of Senate Judiciary Committee hearings on David H. Souter's nomination to the Supreme Court, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:
Opening Statement
SENATOR JOSEPH R. BIDEN Jr. We are convened today to celebrate Judge Souter's birthday.


Corrections
LEAD: The Parent and Child column in The Home Section on Aug. 30 omitted the affiliation of the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, where Dr.
Michael Lewis has studied children and lying.
It is part of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.


Gorbachev Proposes Referendum On Legalizing Land Ownership
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev compounded the confusion over economic changes today by unexpectedly proposing a national referendum on the question of whether the private ownership of land should be legalized.


PATTERNS
LEAD:
Working Hard for Charity


I.B.M. and Microsoft Revise Software Pact
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation and the Microsoft Corporation today redefined the way they will work together in developing basic software for personal computers.


6 Released by Devils
LEAD: The Devils, who meet the Flyers tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in their first preseason home game, gave outright releases to six players on amateur tryouts, reducing their roster to 57.
The released players were George Beauchesne, Stephane Carrier, Ian Ferguson, Mike Haviland, Kevin Knopp and Tom Neziol.


Suit Against Contras Is Dropped
LEAD: A Federal judge today dismisssed a suit that accused the United States-backed Nicaraguan rebels of torturing and executing an American volunteer who was killed in that country's civil war.


IRAQ AIR BLOCKADE IS BACKED BY BUSH
LEAD: President Bush said today that he was prepared to support efforts to extend the United Nations naval blockade of Iraq to halting the air shipments that are now a hole in the international sanctions against President Saddam Hussein.


Head of Equity Department Resigns From First Boston
LEAD: In the First Boston Corporation's first management change since it hired a new chief executive, the New York investment firm announced yesterday that Curtis R. Welling, the head of its equity department, was resigning.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-14


Ads by London Jab at Cuomo And Rinfret as Two of a Kind
LEAD: The Conservative Party candidate for governor of New York, Herbert London, yesterday began a token television advertising campaign that links Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Pierre A. Rinfret, his Republican challenger, as two liberal politicians - ''Tweedledee and Tweedledumber.''


Rig Count Up in Week
LEAD: The number of working oil and natural gas rigs in the United States rose last week by 21, to a total of 1,060, Baker Hughes Inc. said today.
This week's tally includes gains of 17 rigs in New Mexico and 13 in California.
The count a year ago was 965, the company said.
The Houston-based oil toolmaker's rig count, a widely watched index of drilling activity, represents the number of rigs actively exploring for oil, not those producing oil.


Market Place;   Oil Profit Prospects: Dim to Brilliant
LEAD: With crude oil prices surging above $30 a barrel, Amerada Hess could see its profits triple in this quarter, according to Wall Street estimates, while those of Mobil Oil are likely to rise only 13 percent.


Cheney Has Staked Out Authority at Pentagon
LEAD: From the day he walked into the Pentagon a year and half ago, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney has let everyone know just who is in charge.


Carbon Dioxide Rise May Alter Plant Life, Researchers Say
LEAD: EVEN if rising concentrations of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere do not cause the earth's climate to warm, they will probably work dramatic changes in natural and agricultural ecosystems, plant physiologists and ecologists say.


Shaw Says He's Happy To Return to Celtics
LEAD: Brian Shaw said yesterday he's happy to do now what he had endured a bitter court battle and $50,000 in fines to avoid - return to the Boston Celtics for the coming season.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: In France, JACQUES MEDECIN, the rightist Mayor of Nice whose family has run local politics since the late 1920's, resigned unexpectedly Sunday, contending that the Socialist government has hounded him with corruption charges.


Sack the General to Save the Strategy
LEAD: Defense Secretary Cheney was right to dismiss the Air Force Chief of Staff, Michael Dugan.
General Dugan advocated bombing Iraqi cities and targeting Saddam Hussein in particular.
He said he was unconcerned by political constraints on military action.
That was dangerous talk.
Left unchallenged, it might have unraveled the international coalition President Bush has so carefully stitched together to roll back Iraqi aggression.


East German Inflation
LEAD: Inflation slowed considerably in East Germany in August, two months after the country adopted a market economy, Government statistics said today.
The cost of living showed an increase of four-tenths of 1 percent in August from July, after rising 7.5 percent from June to July, the figures showed.
The provisional figures confirmed what most East Germans know: many are buying cheaper goods in West Germany rather than in their own country.


Rijo Pitches Two-Hitter
LEAD: Jose Rijo pitched a two-hitter and Paul O'Neill hit a two-run homer tonight to move Cincinnati a step closer to the National League West title with a 4-0 victory over San Francisco.


Crane Fells I-91 Power Line
LEAD: A crane knocked down a power line over Interstate 91 today, causing a power failure and rush-hour traffic tie-ups throughout Windsor.
The police said nobody was injured and no related motor vehicle accidents were reported.
The construction crane knocked down the line about 6:50 A.M., and electricity was restored an hour later.


With 'Social Marketing,' Condoms Combat AIDS
LEAD: Vangu Tsumbu, a former auto-parts salesman, arrived a recent morning to distribute condoms for one of Africa's most successful AIDS-prevention programs.
He came as part missionary, part capitalist - a promising blend, although one that has been in disrepute around here since Joseph Conrad found the ''Heart of


Fleeing Kuwaiti Men Are Seized By Iraqi Troops at Saudi Border
LEAD: Kuwaitis fleeing their country for Saudi Arabia reacted today with panic and stunned disbelief as Iraqi soldiers began seizing men between the ages of 17 and 35 as they attempted to cross the border.


Witness: Martin Drove
LEAD: A private investigator testified yesterday that Billy Martin was driving when his pickup truck went out of control on Christmas Day 1989 and smashed into a culvert, killing him.


Talking Business with Renninger of Bridgestone/Firestone;   Rubber Plantation Disrupted by War
LEAD: The civil war in Liberia is affecting the market for latex, the liquid tapped from rubber trees from which finished rubber is made.
No company knows this better than Bridgestone/Firestone Inc.
The company, based in Akron, Ohio, had until recently been operating the world's largest rubber plantation, a 200-square-mile farm with eight million rubber trees in the West


Review/Dance;   A Wingding in Lyons a l'Americaine
LEAD: Barely noticed during its first season in 1984, the International Dance Biennial in Lyons has grown into Europe's most ambitious dance festival.


Agency to Destroy Jungle Airstrips
LEAD: A campaign to dynamite rain forest airstrips will resume next week in an effort to force all gold miners out of Yanomami Indian lands by the end of this year, the head of the Brazilian Indian protection service announced.


Just the Fax, Arnold
LEAD: You are in a movie house on the edge of your seat because the Indestructible Thing from Ghastly Galaxy is sneaking up on Arnold Schwarzenegger with a spray gun carrying liquefied muscle-shrinking gas, one drop of which can reduce a weight lifter to a 97-pound weakling faster than you can say Schwarzenegger.


Reagan Visits Moscow, Meets With Gorbachev and University Students


Porsche Alters Course
LEAD: As had long been rumored, Porsche yesterday announced that it would end its Indy-car racing program at the end of this season.
The West German automaker has built engines to compete in the Championship Auto Racing Teams Indy-car circuit and the Indianapolis 500 for three years and has one victory and 29 top-10 finishes in 44 races.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-15
A buildup of Iraqi troops and tanks has taken place in Kuwait and southern Iraq over the past week to 10 days, the Pentagon said.
The Defense Department said the buildup was taking on an increasingly defensive character.
Page A1


A New Business For Marriott Corp.
LEAD: The Marriott Corporation began work on a complex for the elderly in Florida in what an executive says is a new direction for the hotel company.
Retirement housing ''will be a significant part of the Marriott Corporation in the next 10 years,'' said Brian Swinton, a vice president of the Bethesda, Md., company's Senior Living Services division.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Curb on Textile Imports Is Passed by the House
LEAD: The House of Representatives today passed by 271 to 149 a bill already approved in the Senate to restrict imports of apparel and shoes.
But the vote was short of the two-thirds majority needed to override a promised Presidential veto.


Try Pork Chops as End-of-Summer Fare


Embargo May Lead To Hussein's Ouster, C.I.A Director Says
LEAD: The Director of Central Intelligence said last night that intelligence experts expected dissatisfaction with Saddam Hussein's rule to grow among the Iraqi leader's closest associates as a global trade embargo began to crimp that nation's economy seriously.


Iran, Holding Key, Hints at Hostage Release
LEAD: Iraq's invasion of Kuwait may have indirectly improved the chances of freeing American hostages long held in Lebanon, Administration officials said today.


Birthplace of Games Shocked and Angered
LEAD: Greeks reacted with shock and anger today to the vote by the International Olympic Committee to award the 1996 Golden Olympics to Atlanta.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: CORNISH hens are ideal for quick dinners, as they roast in 45 minutes or less.
They are also convenient for families whose members come home at different times.
The hens, each a single serving, can easily be kept warm and served later.
Most commercially raised Cornish hens weigh about a pound.
They have firmer, slightly moister flesh than chickens, so they don't dry out as quickly.


In Budget Move, Pentagon Plans Closings and Cuts for 150 Sites
LEAD: In its latest effort to scale back the military, the Defense Department announced today that it was closing down or cutting back operations at 150 military bases and installations around the world.


Silber Wins Democratic Contest in Massachusetts
LEAD: In a stunning display of voter discontent, John R. Silber, the president of Boston University who peppered his campaign with provocative remarks, scored a major upset tonight over over Francis X. Bellotti, a former State Attorney General in the Democratic primary for governor.


Norman D. Denny, 69, A Banker and Builder
LEAD: Norman D. Denny, a banker and builder, died Friday at the University of Pennsylvania Hospital.
He was 69 years old and lived in Merion, Pa.


Ysebaert's Top Priority Is to Impress Devils
LEAD: A forward with the credentials of Paul Ysebaert will have no trouble making the roster of an average team in the National Hockey League, but the Devils may no longer be an average team.


Did U.S. Overtures Give Wrong Idea to Hussein?
LEAD: In an unusually reflective moment this week, George Bush gave Presidential prominence to questions lurking at the fringes of public debate since American soldiers first landed in Saudi Arabia: How did the United States get into this?
Were the Administration's overtures to Saddam Hussein partly responsible?


Books of The Times;   On the Survival of the Not-So-Fit Risk Takers
LEAD:
Why the Reckless Survive
And Other Secrets of Human Nature
By Melvin Konner
306 pages. Viking. $18.95.


Prices Little Changed in Slow Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were little changed in slow but bumpy trading yesterday.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
Political Explicitness


Is the Peace Dividend Being Engulfed?
LEAD: What implications does Iraq's aggression in Kuwait have for the size and shape of the U.S. defense budget?
And will the peace dividend that can result from the end of the cold war become a casualty of America's commitment in the Persian Gulf?


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept. 14
Sept. 7
Sept. 15
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.3
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
3.0
Gasoline stocks
217.0
211.1
218.6
Distillate stocks
133.3
131.7
121.4
Crude imports, daily
6.0
6.9
6.4
Product imports, daily
2.2
2.0
2.3
Crude stocks
369.8
374.3
329.0
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.2
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
94.0
93.5
89.8


Security Council's Military Panel Reviews Naval Efforts to Enforce Trade Embargo
LEAD: The military arm of the United Nations Security Council met informally today to review naval efforts to enforce the Council's trade embargo against Iraq and Iraqi-occupied Kuwait.


Measure Urges Newspapers To Rely More on Recycling
LEAD: Calling used newspapers the nation's ''No. 1 solid waste problem,'' a Pennsylvania Congressman introduced legislation today to provide economic incentives for recycling newsprint.


U.S. Says It Is Ready to Cut Philippine Force
LEAD: The United States Government is prepared to reduce its military forces in the Philippines, an American official said today as talks on American bases opened.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article on Saturday about the Persian Gulf confrontation's impact on America misstated the reasons for layoffs at Engineered Support Systems of St.
Louis.
It laid off workers earlier in the year because of delays receiving Government money and the prospect of reduced military spending.


Dispute Settled, 'Miss Saigon' Is Broadway Bound
LEAD: Cameron Mackintosh, the producer of ''Miss Saigon,'' announced yesterday that he was reinstating his New York production of the hit London musical, which is to begin performances as previously scheduled in March at the Broadway Theater.


New York to Expand Putting the Homeless Into Welfare Hotels
LEAD: Reversing a two-year effort to move homeless families out of run-down welfare hotels, New York City officials said yesterday that a sharp rise in the number of homeless people would force them to move many more of the homeless into the hotels.


Moody's Reviews Ford Motor Debt
LEAD: The ratings on about $40 billion in debt issued by the Ford Motor Company, Ford Motor Credit Company and their guaranteed subsidiaries arebeing reviewed with negative implications, Moody's Investors Service Inc. said yesterday.


Japan Reverses Policy on Soviet as a Threat
LEAD: In another sign of its thawing relations with the Soviet Union, Japan today officially reversed its longstanding declaration that Soviet forces in the Far East pose a continuing military threat to the country.


Does 'Yogurt' On the Label Make It So?
LEAD: YOGURT has been called everything from the fountain of youth to the world's first junk health food.
There's a kernel of truth in both descriptions, their accuracy depending on how far a variety of yogurt has strayed from its origins.


Don't Get Robbed
LEAD: What's almost - well, not really - as bad as having a teen-ager stick a knife to your wife's throat and scamper with her purse is working with friendly assistant bank managers to reconstruct your life and finances.


Ralston to Close Pennsylvania Plant
LEAD: The Ralston Purina Company said it will close its pet-food plant in Mechanicsburg, Pa., in late November or early December The plant, which was built in 1970, employs about 160 people.


Top State Department Aide Is in Liberia to Meet Rebels
LEAD: A ranking State Department official flew today to the battle-torn capital of Liberia, where he met one of the two feuding rebel leaders.


Prime Seeks Bankruptcy
LEAD: Prime Motor Inns Inc., the Fairfield, N.J., hotel chain, yesterday filed for protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


Review/Film;   Singer Jailed In Poland. Ouch!
LEAD: In ''Interrogation,'' a wildly extroverted blond nightclub singer named Tonia (Krystyna Janda) is imprisoned by the Polish security police and grilled relentlessly about the kinds of crimes that under less charged circumstances might have landed her on a talk show.
In the Stalinist climate of the early 1950's,


Market Place;   Edison Thriving In Retail Slump
LEAD: ON a recent plane trip, Andrew E. Newman found himself sitting next to a friendly investment banker who asked what business he was in. ''I'm with Edison Brothers,'' Mr.
Newman began.
But when he saw the quizzical look on the banker's face and the question forming, ''So how's the electric business?


Charles Arnt Is Dead; Film Actor Was 83
LEAD: Charles Arnt, a character actor in more than 200 films, died on Aug. 6 at his home on Orcas Island, Wash.
He was 83 years old.


Brazil to Close Shaft Suited for Nuclear Test
LEAD: President Fernando Collor de Mello flew to the Amazon jungle today to order the closing of a deep shaft that Government officials conceded this week could be used for nuclear tests.


U.S. Softening on Subsidies
LEAD: Softening its position in global trade talks, the Bush Administration said today that it was prepared to allow some farm subsidies in a new accord to liberalize international trade.


A Top Position Is Filled By Alaska Airlines
LEAD: Alaska Airlines yesterday named Raymond J. Vecci, its chief operating officer, as its president and chief executive.


Carlyle Getting Part Of Ford Aerospace
LEAD: A disgruntled suitor in the recent auction for the Ford Aerospace Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to buy BDM International Inc., one of Ford Aerospace's biggest money makers.


We Need a Corps of Inner-City Youth Workers;   No Jobs, More Crime
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Public Service Ads From Backer Spielvogel
LEAD: Backer Spielvogel Bates, New York has created two public service announcements to encourage people to vote, just in time for November elections.
The ads, which will be released on network television next week, use news footage from around the world.
One depicts a rapid-fire series of missiles, fighter planes and guns, and uses the tagline ''Of all the weapons in the world, in the last 40 years, none has more power than this one.


We Need a Corps of Inner-City Youth Workers;   Help the Children
LEAD: To the Editor:


LAYOFF PROVISIONS BUOY AUTO UNION
LEAD: The subject was unemployment, but the mood of auto workers employed by the General Motors Corporation was anything but bleak.


Jays Move Into Tie for First With Red Sox
LEAD: Even by their own admission, the Toronto Blue Jays did not seem to believe their long summer would bring them here.
But now, with just 13 games to play, they have been thrust back into first place.''


Herbert Spiegelberg, Philosophy Teacher, 86
LEAD: Herbert Spiegelberg, professor emeritus of philosophy at Washington University in St.
Louis, died Sept. 6 at his home in St.
Louis.
He was 86 years old.
A university spokesman said he died of leukemia.


U.S. Becomes TV Studio For World
LEAD: People keep saying the United States is into a recession, and the dollar is down, and we can't manufacture automobiles anymore.


INSIDE
LEAD:
As Budget Talks Stall, Finger-Pointing Starts
Democrats and Republicans blame each other for a budget impasse that has come down to a fight over which party's policies are fairer and have a better chance of averting an economic decline.
Page A26.
Consumer Prices Jump
As oil prices took their toll, the Government index rose 0.8 percent last month, the biggest leap since the exceptional cold of January.


A Bar to Women as Cantors Is Lifted
LEAD: When Cantor Marla Rosenfeld Barugel approaches the pulpit of her congregation tonight in Rumson, N.J., to lead the Rosh ha-Shanah service, there will be an extra spring to her step and lilt to her voice.


Some Things Never Change, And Honey Lovers Are Grateful
LEAD: THIS evening many Jews will dip slices of apple or pieces of hallah into honey, symbolic of hopes for a sweet new year, as Rosh ha-Shanah begins at sundown.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Aug. 23 about appliance makers referred incorrectly to the stacked washer-dryer business of the White-Westinghouse group of White Consolidated Industries.
Although the group has made stacked washers and dryers for many years, they have been small-load models; only this year did it introduce full-load models.


Alienation From Government Grows, Poll Finds
LEAD: Americans express even greater alienation toward their government and politics today than they did three years ago, and virtually all of the increase has been among people from families earning less than $50,000 a year, a new study of public opinion shows.


Medicine and Soothing Talk In the Houses of the Dying
LEAD: On a recent day Maureen Nakimera, a social worker from an AIDS support group, visited several clients in their homes in the countryside.
Her aims, she said, were ''to see how things are going, what their needs are, and if the family is O.K.''


October Oil Contract Falls Slightly
LEAD: Oil for October delivery fell slightly in the futures market yesterday, after breaking a seven-year-old record on Monday.


Excerpts From Solzhenitsyn's Article on Soviets
LEAD: Following are excerpts from an article, ''How to Revitalize Russia,'' by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, published today in Komsomolskaya Pravda, as translated by The New York Times:


Book Notes
LEAD:
Making of a Hot Seller


U.S. Action On Airbus Aid
LEAD: The United States today set a deadline of Sept. 30 for the European Community to work out reductions in subsidies to the Airbus Industrie aerospace consortium or face a complaint filed with a world trade body.


Treatment Helps Addicts Avoid AIDS, but Experts Say Few Are Treated
LEAD: Programs for treating drug abusers can prevent the spread of AIDS, but only a small portion of those who need help are receiving it, experts told a House panel today.


U.S. Syphilis Rate Is at Highest Level in 40 Years
LEAD: The syphilis rate in the United States is at its highest level in 40 years, and the biggest increase in the sexually transmitted disease has been among blacks, a Federal study has found.


Review/Music;   Virtuosos Of Pakistan And India
LEAD: As with most other sophisticated, improvisatory music, Indian and Pakistani classical music has a strong sense of play to it.
As rigorous as it is, the music incorporates conversation-like interplay, including call and response, mimicking and other types of musical elaboration, allowing the players to engage one another and creativity and challenge to be part of the performance.


4th Account Lost by Chiat
LEAD: Chiat/Day/Mojo lost another account yesterday, its fourth major loss this year.


Between-Lines Disaster
LEAD: The Persian Gulf crisis has already directly affected the lives of well over a million people -refugees, hostages, military personnel, residents of occupied Kuwait.
Many hundreds of millions more are or will be indirectly affected even if it doesn't come to open war.


CBS Top Ratings On Opening Night
LEAD: CBS, which has finished in last place in the A. C. Nielsen ratings for three straight years, scored a major surprise in the first night of the new television season. (The accompanying ratings chart reflects the final week of the summer season.) CBS dominated the Monday ratings and achieved a significant victory over NBC in a confrontation between two of the season's new programs.


Saudi, in Moscow, Says Soviet Troops Would Be Welcome
LEAD: Saudi Arabia's Foreign Minister ended a three-day visit here today with diplomatic relations restored between his country and the Soviet Union after a half-century breach.


The Rich Get Poorer: Slices of Life From Kuwaiti Refugees
LEAD: Among the striking images in this small Saudi border town now transformed into a de facto refugee camp is the incongruous sight of Kuwaiti exiles sleeping in the sand next to their Mercedes-Benz and BMW sedans.


Board Examines District Chief
LEAD: The Board of Education is conducting a full-scale audit of Community School District 2 in Manhattan after finding that its superintendent, Anthony J. Alvarado, spent more than $31,000 on a private car service over three years.


Consumer Prices Jump By 0.8%
LEAD: Spurred by the disruption in Persian Gulf oil supplies, the Consumer Price Index jumped eight-tenths of 1 percent in August, the biggest rise since the exceptional cold of January, the Labor Department reported today.


Racial Harmony a Key for Atlanta
LEAD: Atlanta's successful bid to stage the 1996 Olympics represents a triumph of old-fashioned politics, modern technology and a desire to hold a hassle-free summer Games for the first time in 20 years.
When they could have easily let sentiment or other factors influence their voting yesterday in Tokyo, members of the International Olympic


Trade Deficit Climbs to $9.33 Billion
LEAD: The nation's trade deficit jumped in July to $9.33 billion, the second-highest monthly level this year, the Commerce Department reported yesterday.
And the rising cost of imported oil suggests that for the rest of this year the deficit might remain stuck at $8 billion to $9 billion a month.


Injury Puts Gwynn Out of Action for 1990
LEAD: Tony Gwynn, the San Diego Padres outfielder who has won the National League batting championship four times, will undergo an operation today to repair a fractured right index finger.
It means he will end his 1990 season with a .309 average, the lowest of his eight-year career and 23 points below his career average.


WINE TALK
LEAD: WHAT does a wine merchant have in common with a quarterback?
They both look forward to autumn with a mixture of excitement and fear.
If they don't make it in the next three and a half months, they don't make it.


Citicorp Rates Up at Auction
LEAD: At Citicorp's final weekly commercial paper auction yesterday, interest rates were up slightly for the second consecutive week.


Faculty Strike Clouds Future At Bridgeport
LEAD: Strikes are nothing new at the financially troubled University of Bridgeport.
Professors have walked off the job four times in the last 12 years.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:
Peanut Butter Costs Rising


2 GROUPS OPPOSE SOUTER AT HEARING
LEAD: The leaders of two major abortion rights groups urged the Senate Judiciary Committee today to reject the nomination of David H. Souter for the Supreme Court, but several Senators told them that Judge Souter was probably the least hostile nominee they could expect from the Bush Administration.


ACCUSATIONS BEGIN IN BUDGET TALKS
LEAD: Democrats and Republicans spent the day today blaming each other for a budget deadlock that has come down to a fight over which party's policies are fairer and have a better chance of averting a serious decline in the economy.


Hawks Sign Top Choice
LEAD: Rumeal Robinson, the Atlanta Hawks' No. 1 draft choice from the University of Michigan, yesterday signed a four-year contract.
Terms of the agreement were not announced.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Home Products Corp. and Microgenesys Inc. have agreed to develop jointly Microgenesys's anti-AIDS product Vaxsyn HIV-1.
The product is currently being tested.


James F. Whelan, 86, A Trucking Executive
LEAD: James F. Whelan, a Manhattan trucking company executive, died Sunday at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 86 years old and lived in Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J.


Animals and Human Rights
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I've never felt more elated in my entire life.
I felt like an exclamation point has just been laid down in the life of our city.''
- Mayor Maynard Jackson of Atlanta. [A1:5.]


Salvador Peace Talks End in Bitterness
LEAD: Six days of talks between the Salvadoran Government and leftist rebels ended here today with both sides saying there was almost no chance of a cease-fire before elections next March.


Successor to Chief Picked at Fannie Mae
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association said yesterday that its chairman and chief executive, David O. Maxwell, will retire Jan. 31 and that James A. Johnson, currently vice chairman, will take his place.


Bridge
LEAD: Only one pair has ever won the world women's pair title twice, but a New York partnership came very close last week in Geneva.
Kathie Wei and Judi Radin, who won the title in 1978, fell just short of a victory, which would have matched the feat of two British stars, Rixi Markus and Fritzi Gordon, who were successful in 1962 and 1974.


Amazing Things Bees Do (Like Honey)


Silber in Upset


Atlanta Selected Over Athens for 1996 Olympics
LEAD: With a powerful display of personal lobbying and financial clout, Atlanta today won the right to hold the 1996 Summer Olympic Games, turning back a strong sentimental appeal by Athens to become the site for the 100th anniversary of the first modern Olympic Games.


Commerce Dept. Settlement Offers Census Relief for New York
LEAD: To the Editor:


Eastern Pact With Agency Assures Pension Payments
LEAD: Eastern Airlines cleared a critical hurdle yesterday in its attempt to reorganize under bankruptcy laws by reaching an agreement to have the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, a Federal agency that oversees pension plans, take over the payment of the retirement benefits of Eastern employees.


Cubs Rout Smiley; Pirates Stay in First
LEAD: Depending on whether the glass is half full or half empty, Monday was either a day for the Pirates to rest or a time for them to think.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Sept. 11 about Chiquita Brands International misstated the percentage of Chiquita stock controlled by Carl H. Lindner's American Financial Corporation.
It is about 61 percent, not 63 percent.


Jordan Seems to Have Quit Shipping Food to the Iraqis
LEAD: Jordan appears to have stopped its shipments of food and other goods to Iraq, after more than a month of argument and delay.


We Need a Corps of Inner-City Youth Workers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Blackstone Widens Link With Europe
LEAD: Reflecting Europe's increased importance in the mergers business, the Blackstone Group is forming an alliance with the investment banking unit of Banque Indosuez, a leading financial institution in France, the groups said yesterday.


Dollar Rebounds in U.S.; Gold Prices Mostly Lower
LEAD: The dollar rebounded on domestic markets yesterday after falling in response to a disappointing report on the United States trade deficit.
Gold prices were mostly lower.
The dollar dropped after the Government reported the trade deficit climbed to $9.33 billion in July from June's revised $5.34 billion, nearly $2 billion greater than forecast.


Fund for New Plays Announces Grants
LEAD: The Fund for New American Plays announced $492,550 in grants yesterday for nine plays that will have their premieres in eight theaters this season.
The fund, a joint project of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts and the American Express Company, in cooperation with the President's Committee on the Arts and the Humanities, has awarded $1,213,050 in the last 4 years to 26 regional theaters for 29 plays.


Copper Prices Fall Sharply After Expected Rally Fails
LEAD: Copper futures prices fell sharply yesterday on New York's Commodity Exchange after an expected rally linked to the expiration of copper options in London failed to materialize.


Bulgaria Bans Food Exports
LEAD: The Government banned food exports today in an effort to improve domestic supplies in time for winter.
Sugar, cheese, cooking oil and detergents have been rationed since late summer in most parts of Bulgaria as the Government tries to alleviate shortages.
Other foodstuffs and vital consumer goods like soap and toilet paper are in short supply or unavailable.


Limited U.S. Saving Seen in Altering 1988 Bailout Deals
LEAD: A study released today by regulators supervising the bailout of the savings and loan industry shows that the Government would save only $2 billion to $3 billion if it tried to recoup some costs on the 96 expensive sales of failing institutions made at the end of 1988.


Reviews/Music;   Trying To Reflect The World
LEAD: Was it optimism or simply arrogance that separates the music of our great-grandfathers from ours today?
Recent composers indulge in helpless mourning, practice self-hypnotism, float back and forth on the tides of chance or else invent computers that write music of their own.


Underground Ideas
LEAD: A New Yorker who takes a trip on the London Underground or the Paris Metro comes away with the thought, ''Why can't we do this?''


Rostislav Nebolsine, 90, A Civil Engineer, Dies
LEAD: Rostislav Nebolsine, a civil engineer and a leader in the White Russian community on the East Coast, died on Sunday at his home in Bridgehampton, L.I.
He was 90 years old.
He died of a heart attack, a grandson, Paul Klebnikov, said.


Move by Ethics Panel Urged On Senators Tied to Keating
LEAD: The special counsel to the Senate Ethics Committee has recommended that the panel move forward in its inquiry on allegations that five Senators improperly intervened on behalf of Charles H. Keating Jr., Congressional officials said today.


David Opont's Burn Injuries Are Permanent, Doctor Says
LEAD: David Opont is healing well but has permanent and serious injuries from being critically burned on March 7, a doctor testified yesterday in Family Court in Brooklyn.


Home Loan Bank Interest Rates Set
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Bank Board yesterday set the interest rate on $931 million in debentures consisting of one-year and three-year maturities through its regular dealer selling group.


Indiana Housing Agency Prices $96 Million Offering
LEAD: A $96 million tax-exempt bond issue of mortgage revenue bonds for single-family homes from the Indiana Housing Finance Authority was tentatively priced yesterday through a group of underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Commerce Dept. Settlement Offers Census Relief for New York;   Ineffectual Counting
LEAD: To the Editor:


People
LEAD: *
Fern Hope Cohen has joined D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, as a senior vice president and associate creative director.
Mary Ellen Pirozzoli has joined as vice president and executive producer.


Francis Hogan Jr., 77, A Former Underwriter
LEAD: Francis Leo Hogan Jr., a retired underwriter with the John Hancock Insurance Company, died on Sunday at Montefiore Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 77 years old and lived in the Riverdale section.


Massachusetts to Lay Off Mental Health Workers
LEAD: Because of Massachusetts' deepening fiscal crisis, 517 workers at schools for the mentally retarded are being laid off in an effort to cut $24 million from the state budget.


Paychecks: Folded, Spindled, Mutilated
LEAD: REMEMBER take-home pay?
Well, maybe not.
It was an envelope with a check inside, a remnant of some larger fantasy-style number labeled gross pay.
When your co-worker slapped this envelope on your desk, she sometimes said, ''The eagle flies today!'' Then you opened the envelope to see what the various taxing jurisdictions had left you this week, and you put it in your pocket or pocketbook and took it home.


PRETORIA PLANNING A KIDNAPPING TRIAL OF WINNIE MANDELA
LEAD: Winnie Mandela, the wife of the African National Congress leader Nelson Mandela, is to be charged with kidnapping and assault in connection with the abduction in late 1988 of four youths, a prosecutor announced today.


Scenes From Uganda's Struggle


About Couch Potatoes
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Janet Gordon, 75, New York Legislator With Law Practice
LEAD: Janet Hill Gordon, a lawyer and former Republican State Senator from Chenango County, died on Monday at the Upstate Medical Center in Syracuse.
She was 75 years old and lived in Norwich, N.Y.


Baghdad Fails to Allow Visit of U.N. Relief Chief
LEAD: With shortages of food and medicine beginning to pose a serious problem for tens of thousands of people trapped in Iraq and Kuwait, Iraq has stalled on a request that it allow a visit to Baghdad by the United Nations representative named to lead the relief effort.


Protesters Ransack Offices Of K.G.B. in Soviet Georgia
LEAD: Nationalist protesters attacked K.G.B. headquarters in the capital of the republic of Georgia, smashing windows and hurling documents into the street, Soviet press agencies and newspapers reported today.


Munching Down the Avenue
LEAD: Once you've seen three blocks of the Columbus Avenue Fair, or any other street fair for that matter, you've seen them all.
But on a sunny, cool day like Sunday, you forget all that and walk down Columbus and into the fair with anticipation.


Defining Souter, Some;   Undogmatic Middle-of-the-Road Nominee Is Surprise for Liberals and Conservatives
LEAD: In his three days before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Judge David H. Souter defined himself as an undogmatic, middle-of-the-road Supreme Court nominee by what he said and what he chose not to say.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, to J. Walter Thompson, New York, for a worldwide introduction of its new Kodak Photo CD systems.
Billings are reportedly between $20 million and $30 million.
The agency handles other Kodak accounts.


Grandmother, Still Silent, Is Freed After Week in Jail
LEAD: A Superior Court judge reversed himself today and released a 77-year-old woman from prison, conceding that her eight days behind bars failed to force her to disclose the whereabouts of her daughter and granddaughters.


John B. Creegan, Lawyer, 80
LEAD: John B. Creegan, a retired New York lawyer, died on Sunday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 80 years old and lived in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.


Chronicle
LEAD: Angered by the failure of his publisher to advertise ''A Native's Return,'' the third and final volume of his memoirs, WILLIAM L. SHIRER has taken out advertisements himself in book reviews.
His book, published last January by Little, Brown, was well-received by critics.


Alfred Kouzel Dies; Film Cartoonist, 67
LEAD: Alfred Kouzel, a film cartoonist who won a 1961 Academy Award for adapting, illustrating and producing ''Munro,'' based on a Jules Feiffer story about a youngster mistakenly drafted into the Army, died on Sept. 6 at a hospital in Trostberg, West Germany, where he was undergoing treatment for cancer.


Class Action Is Requested By Manville
LEAD: The trust fund set up two years ago by the Manville Corporation to compensate asbestos victims asked a Federal judge in Brooklyn yesterday to treat all of the personal-injury lawsuits filed against it as a single class action.


C.D. and Bank Yields Mixed During Week
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were mixed for the week ended yesterday as interest rates continued to drift in the wake of the unresolved Middle East crisis and the budget talks in Washington, which are currently stalled.


Oliver Butterworth, Children's Writer, 75
LEAD: Oliver Butterworth, an author of children's books and a professor of English at Hartford College for Women for 43 years, died on Monday at his home in West Hartford, Conn.
He was 75 years old.
He died of melanoma, a family spokesman said.
His popular allegorical books include ''The Enormous Egg'' (1956), ''The Trouble With Jenny's Ear'' (1960) and ''The Narrow Passage'' (1973).


U.S. Cancels S.&amp; L. Auction
LEAD: Federal savings and loan bailout officials have canceled the much-promoted international satellite auction of million-dollar properties inherited from bankrupt savings and loan associations.


Mission Resource In Talks on Sale
LEAD: Mission Resource Partners said it was negotiating the possible sale of substantially all of its remaining assets to an independent oil and gas company, which it did not name.
It said the deal could result in the dissolution of Mission.


For Tax on All Oil Use
LEAD: To the Editor:


Curbing U.S. Oil Appetite: Why It's So Hard
LEAD: Oil, like ice cream or french fries, is something Americans enjoy but would be better off consuming less of.
But it is also very hard to get away from, for engineering reasons as well as historical and economic ones.


John W. DeWire, 74, A Nuclear Physicist And Professor, Dies
LEAD: Dr.
John W. DeWire, a high-energy physicist who was a longtime member of the Cornell University faculty, died on Monday at Tompkins Community Hospital in Ithaca, N.Y.
He was 74 years old and lived in Ithaca.
His family said he died of leukemia.


Western Europe Urges Air Embargo Against Iraq
LEAD: Moving toward closer coordination of their military policies, nine Western European nations urged the United Nations Security Council today to extend the trade embargo against Baghdad to include aircraft entering and leaving Iraq and Kuwait.


Long Takeover Battle for UAL Raises Doubts Over Sale
LEAD: A growing number of people following the takeover battle at the UAL Corporation are concluding that the parent of United Airlines will not be sold.


Confronting the Cruel Reality Of Africa's AIDS Epidemic
LEAD: ''It all started as a rumor,'' Dr.
Sam I. Okware, a senior health official, said of hazy reports in 1982 that a new affliction was causing Ugandans to waste away. ''Then we found we were dealing with a disease.''


Textile Bill: Unfair and Unneeded
LEAD: The only good thing to say about the textile bill that passed the House yesterday is that the margin of approval fell short of the two-thirds needed to override an almost certain Presidential veto.


Review/Television;   To Praise or Challenge Castro's Cuba
LEAD: How, you may wonder, did the coupling of documentaries at 8 tonight on Channel 13, under the title, ''Castro's Cuba: Two Views,'' come about?
There is some argument as to the details, but it appears to have happened more or less as follows.


Next Inc. Returns to Center Stage
LEAD: Steven P. Jobs returned to the stage at this city's symphony hall today, hoping to rekindle the sense of anticipation his computer company, Next Inc., had when it introduced its first product in the same place two years ago.


Carnegie Archivist Seeks History While the Hall Is Making It at 100
LEAD: A few years ago, when Carnegie Hall's administration began thinking about ways to celebrate the hall's centennial, someone proposed sending exhibits of memorabilia - photographs, posters, perhaps even an instrument or two - to a few of New York City's museums and historical societies.


Russia Gets Call By Solzhenitsyn For Slavic State
LEAD: Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the exiled master of Russian literature, broke his silence in his homeland today with a call for a separate Slavic state and a scathing indictment of Soviet history, including the ''noisy'' reforms of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


KEATING INDICTED IN SAVINGS FRAUD AND GOES TO JAIL
LEAD: Charles H. Keating Jr., who has been widely portrayed as a symbol of the misconduct and reckless investment style that devastated the savings and loan industry, was indicted on criminal fraud charges today and led to jail after he was unable to post the $5 million bail.


Stocks Plunge in Manila
LEAD: Share prices in Manila sank today to 40-month lows after a bomb exploded on the first day of talks on the future of United States military bases in the Philippines, brokers said.
Manila's composite index slid 10.18 points to close at 615.39, its lowest since recording 610.59 on May 29, 1987.
Depreciation of the Philippine peso to an all-time low of 26 to the dollar, from 15, and violent street protests on Monday by students opposed to the bases weighed down the market at the opening, analysts said.


Others Have Said as Much as Dugan But 'on Background,' Not on Record
LEAD: In the final analysis, the problem wasn't really what Gen.
Michael J. Dugan said that hurt him so much.


Collusion Interest Charge May Add to Owner Costs
LEAD: Arbitrators' awards of $113 million for lost players' salaries in baseball's ongoing collusion case could jump by nearly 40 percent, to the $156 million area, if the arbitrators grant the union's request for interest.


Corroon Directors Reject Aon's Offer
LEAD: The Corroon &amp; Black Corporation said its directors had unanimously rejected an unsolicited cash acquisition bid of $40 a share from the Aon Corporation and reaffirmed its intention to merge with Willis Faber P.L.C. for a lower price.
The company said its merger with Willis Faber, valued at $33.50 a share, offers its shareholders a stake in one of the world's four largest insurance firms.


Chronicle
LEAD: JACKIE MASON inaugurated the Jackie Mason Lectureship in Contemporary Judaism at Oxford on Monday.
Administered by the Oxford Center for Postgraduate Hebrew Studies, whose governors include Sir ISAIAH BERLIN and Sir CLAUS MOSER, the lectureship will be given to an as-yet unselected visiting scholar for the 1991 school year.


The Pick of the U.N.: Guido de Marco
LEAD: When the 45th United Nations General Assembly unanimously chose Guido de Marco, Malta's Minister of Foreign Affairs and Justice, as its President at its opening session today, the delegates were not appointing the man first selected for the position.
That was Malta's


Stocks Swing Widely; Dow Closes Up 3.96
LEAD: Stock prices fluctuated wildly yesterday in slow volume as investors, traders and speculators watched for bargains but mostly watched the clock for the time to go home.


Wingate Deal on Hold
LEAD: The owner of the San Antonio Spurs, Red McCombs, said yesterday that the team was close to reaching a contract with the backup guard David Wingate, and might have had one this week.
But a rape charge filed by a 17-year-old girl in Howard County in Maryland on Monday has held up the negotiations.


Bernard Peter May; Christian Brother, 85
LEAD: Brother Bernard Peter May, a member of the De La Salle Christian Brothers for almost 70 years, died on Monday at the Riverview Medical Center in Red Bank, N.J.
He was 85 years old and had lived at De La Salle Hall in Lincroft, N.J., since he retired in 1981.


2 Rallies Are Held Over Store Boycott, But All Is Peaceful
LEAD: Blacks and Koreans held separate rallies yesterday on the first day after an appeals court ruled that the New York City Police Department must enforce a court order to keep black demonstrators at least 50 feet from two Korean-owned grocery stores in Brooklyn.


Economic Scene;   The Cold War On U.S. Exports
LEAD: LIKE the Berlin wall, barriers to trade in high technology are falling to the riptides of political change in Eastern Europe.
And not a moment too soon, says Robert Kuttner, an economist and journalist, whose study condemning cold war export restrictions was released yesterday by the Economic Policy Institute in Washington.


Morris Gets a Chance
LEAD: Joe Morris, the former Giants running back, worked out for the Washington Redskins yesterday, but the team said there were no plans to sign the veteran free agent.
A team spokesman said Morris was among several players who are brought in each Tuesday to be evaluated in case active players are injured later in the season.(


10 Computers Introduced By Amdahl
LEAD: The Amdahl Corporation today introduced 10 new mainframe computers, even though the machines will not be ready to ship for more than a year.
The announcement follows similar ones made by several competitors in recent weeks.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Companies


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD:
A FRIEND writes:


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
American Express Bank Ltd., a banking subsidiary of the American Express Co., New York, named William J. Blomquist executive vice president and head of its Europe, Middle East and Africa region.


Put a Little Dragonfly in Your Life Today
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Campaign Helps Sleeper Become a Hit
LEAD: PARAMOUNT'S ''Ghost,'' a sleeper released just before the rush of big-budget summer films, has proved to be the clear winner of the season's box office sweepstakes, suggesting how valuable a highly targeted advertising campaign can be in promoting a movie.


Red Sox Lose Lead and a No-Hitter
LEAD: The Red Sox do not want to admit it can happen again.
They do not like to talk about the past because the memories are too harsh, too cold and too realistic.
After what transpired in the seventh inning at Memorial Stadium tonight, it was impossible not to discuss the prospects of another Boston collapse.


Futures Trading Halted
LEAD: Business was disrupted today at the world's largest futures exchange for nearly an hour and a half by a power failure in the building housing the Chicago Board of Trade.
The blackout knocked out screens and price boards on the trading floor.


'Double Bunking' in Prisons Will Go On Through January
LEAD: A New York State panel voted today to let the prison system continue to put inmates in bunk beds until Jan. 31.


Night Has Fallen Once More Over Pakistan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hong Kong Journal;   And Speaking of the World's Wistful Causes . . .
LEAD: Up five flights of chipped cement stairs, in a small living room with only one fan to stir the heavy afternoon heat, a group of old Chinese men and women sit around a table stacked with Japanese yen, each bundle of money carefully wrapped in string or cheap paper ribbon.


Lectures on Dance
LEAD: Ushio Amagatsu, the director of the Butoh dance troupe Sankai Juku, will discuss his work at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, tomorrow at 5:30 P.M. in a lecture series presented by the theater.
The season's other speaker will be Judith Jamison, the director of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, on Nov.


At U.S. Military Bases, Schools Help Children Deal With Gulf
LEAD: For thousands of American children, school began in the midst of a family crisis few other Americans share.


Stivender Memorial
LEAD: There will be a free concert at the Metropolitan Opera in memory of the opera's chorus master, David Stivender, on Friday at 6 P.M.
The Metropolitan Opera Orchestra and Chorus will perform, with the soprano Carol Vaness, the tenor Jerry Hadley and the baritone Thomas Hampson as soloists, under the direction of James Levine.


Prayer on the Front Line


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Aegis Group plc., a London-based media holding company, sold its public relations division, Creamer Dickson International, to a subsidiary of the French communications group Eurocom S.A., for $20.5 million.


Leaders Chosen for 42d St. Theaters' Renewal
LEAD: Continuing to fight perceptions that New York City is deteriorating, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday celebrated the planned reincarnation of a street that has come to symbolize the city's decay.


Roland F. Simons, 85, Health-Care Executive
LEAD: Roland F. Simons, a retired health-care industry executive, died on Saturday at the Naples Community Hospital in Florida.
He was 85 years old and lived in Naples.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.50
8.00
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.38
7.39
7.73
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.29
7.30
7.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.74
8.74
8.09
30-YR.


8 Temple Students, Backing Strikers, Are Arrested
LEAD: As the faculty strike at Temple University entered its third week, student demonstrations became more confrontational this week.
Seven students were arrested Monday for blocking the entrance to the university president's office and another was arrested in the street outside.


Youth Held in Fatal Bronx Stabbing Over $1
LEAD: A 15-year-old youth from Puerto Rico who the police said knew only four words of English - ''Give me a dollar'' - was charged last night with fatally stabbing a Bronx teen-ager last week after the victim refused to give him money on the street, the authorities said.


In the Wilderness And Truly Paradise
LEAD: PLUNK dab in the center of this once prosperous railroad town along a remote stretch of highway here in northwestern Minnesota is a cozy retreat (not much to look at from outside) where day in and day out the coffee is hot and the home-cooking honest.


Youth Charged in Suspect's Killing Is Released
LEAD: Four days after he stabbed and killed a man who he apparently believed had mugged his mother, Victor Lopez returned to his South Bronx street yesterday as his neighbors expressed outrage that the young man, out on $2,500 bail, had been charged with manslaughter.


Panel, Ending Long Inquiry, Urges Legislation on Ethics
LEAD: Winding up one of the most far-ranging inquiries into governmental ethics in New York's history, a state commission called on the Governor and legislative leaders yesterday ''to put government ethics at the top of the legislative agenda.''


We Need a Corps of Inner-City Youth Workers;   Baby Hit Men
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chronicle
LEAD: Filming began yesterday on ''The Dark Wind,'' based on a novel by TONY HILLERMAN, but ROBERT REDFORD's production team is still in the middle of a controversy between officials of the Hopi Tribe and religious tribal leaders of one village.
The tribal government on Friday approved filming on the reservation near


Stotler Settles With S.E.C.
LEAD: Stotler &amp; Company, the bankrupt Chicago-based futures brokerage, today settled Federal charges that it had hidden its financial difficulties from the Securities and Exchange Commission for a seven-month period that culminated with the firm's collapse in late July.


Gas Poured on Ex-Girlfriend
LEAD: A teen-ager and a firefighter tackled a spurned boyfriend who had doused a 23-year-old woman with gasoline intending to set her afire on a crowded Brooklyn street yesterday, the authorities said.
The woman, Michelle Corradino of Brooklyn, was treated and released.
The former boyfriend, Raymond Torres, 26 years old, of 869 Flushing Avenue, Brooklyn, was charged with attempted murder, assault and reckless endangerment, Sergeant Peter Sweeney said.


Expos Still Have A Chance
LEAD: The only fight the Montreal Expos were in two weeks ago was the one against abandoning effort, against going through the motions of a season stuck in neutral and going nowhere.


New York Developers Feel a Chill
LEAD: There is little doubt that the deep slump in demand for offices and high-priced apartments has caught New York City real estate developers off guard, but different developers have been stung in different ways.
While many are struggling with too much space and too few tenants, not all face the gargantuan financial pressures looming over Donald J.


G.M. Is Setting Up Plant in Hungary
LEAD: The Hungarian affiliate of the General Motors Corporation said it planned to build 200,000 engines and 15,000 Opel Kadett cars a year starting in 1992.
G.M. has a joint venture with the Raba Railway Carriage and Machine Factory, which has a plant at Szentgotthard on Hungary's border with Austria.


Giants Set Back Reds, 5-3
LEAD: Will Clark hit two home runs and Kevin Mitchell hit another today as the San Francisco Giants beat Cincinnati, 5-3, to slow the Reds' playoff drive.


Ex-C.I.A. Agent Is Convicted in Iran-Contra Affair
LEAD: Thomas G. Clines, a former intelligence official who became an international arms dealer, was convicted today of four income tax charges stemming from his role in shipping weapons to the Nicaraguan rebels in the Iran-contra affair.


Police Chief Wants to Add More Civilians
LEAD: In his effort to remold the New York City Police Department, Commissioner Lee P. Brown hopes to hire hundreds of civilian workers, not only to free uniformed officers from desk jobs and to save money, but also to bring the department's technical abilities up to date, senior city officials say.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
SKIING
Stemmle and Kobelka Win
Two Canadians, Brian Stemmle and Kendra Kobelka, won opening-day events, both in the downhill, in the first Pan American Winter Games yesterday at Las Lenas, Argentina.
Stemmle finished in 1 minute 38.21 seconds in the men's event.
That was 11 one-hundredths of a second faster than his countryman Rob Boyd.


President of Syria Will Visit Iran to Discuss Crisis in Gulf
LEAD: President Hafez al-Assad of Syria will make his first trip to his ally Iran next week to discuss the Persian Gulf crisis and Western hostages in Lebanon, diplomats said today.


Vote in Senate Alarms Exporters of Garbage
LEAD: The Senate, in a move that alarmed New Jersey and New York, voted 68 to 31 today to permit states to ban imports of garbage.


Martin Driver Guilty
LEAD: A Town of Fenton Court jury in Port Crane, N.Y., yesterday found a Detroit bar owner guilty of driving with a blood-alcohol content above the legal limit for intoxication in the Christmas Day crash that killed the former Yankee manager Billy Martin.


Walter Scott McPherson; Executive, 105
LEAD: Walter Scott McPherson, a retired steamship executive, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was six days short of his 106th birthday.


Pirelli Is Rejected
LEAD: Continental A.G. of West Germany said its supervisory board voted to reject a proposal from Pirelli S.p.A. of Italy to merge the two companies' tire operations under Pirelli's control.
Instead, Continental will draft its own proposal to present to Pirelli, a Continental spokesman, Dieter von Herz, said.


Illinois Journal;   A Legacy Once Scorned Now Adored
LEAD: There was a time in parts of this state when you could hardly give away a piece of furniture designed by Frank Lloyd Wright.
Now the state has dug deep into its pockets to create a shrine to the man.


Chronicle
LEAD: Dr.
PAUL C. LAUTERBUR is $290,000 richer, having won the biggest American science prize for his work in developing a risk-free method for seeing inside the human body.
He won the first Bower Award Monday, given as part of the Benjamin Franklin National Memorial Awards in Philadelphia, for his work in nuclear magnetic resonance imaging technology, which provides high-quality images without using X


Keeping in Touch While Airborne
LEAD: Several companies are developing satellite-based systems that will enable airline passengers to make phone calls or send facsimiles from a plane flying virtually anywhere in the world, spawning what one company calls the ''office in the sky.'' Currently, passengers can make calls only when flying within about 100 miles of the United


CALIFORNIA COUNTY ACCEPTS A BAILOUT
LEAD: Officials in Butte County decided today to accept an $11 million state bailout, thereby declining to become the first county government in the nation to declare bankruptcy.


Jubilant Atlanta Basking in Its Olympic Feat
LEAD: This city, which exudes a gleeful optimism and exhibits a propensity for unabashed self-promotion, proved yet again today that it was the little city that could when it came from nowhere to be designated as the host city for the 1996 Summer Olympics.


Cutting Gains Taxes: The Real Risk
LEAD: Budget negotiators are tied in knots over a Republican proposal to lower the tax on capital gains - the increase in the value of stocks, bonds and real estate from purchase to sale.
Lowering that tax, the Bush Administration argues, will spur new investment.
Until now, the Democrats have sensibly rejected the proposal because it would add to the deficit and primarily benefit rich families.


Intel to Introduce New Chip in 1992
LEAD: The Intel Corporation plans to introduce its next-generation microprocessor, the 80586, in 1992.
Craig Barrett, the Santa Clara, Calif., company's executive vice president, said the new chip would have about four million to five million transistors on a single slice of silicon.


Clerk at Broker Pleads Guilty
LEAD: A senior billing clerk for L. F. Rothschild, Unterberg, Towbin pleaded guilty yesterday in Federal court in Newark to charges of conspiracy and income tax evasion charges.


PENTAGON REPORTS BUILDUP BY IRAQIS ON KUWAITI FRONT
LEAD: Baghdad has sharply increased the number of its troops and tanks in Kuwait and southern Iraq over the last week to 10 days, the Pentagon said today.


About New York;   After the Streets: Learning of Life Beyond Today
LEAD: Don M. paused during a conversation about his life, gazing into the middle distance.
What was he thinking about? ''Times I did things and did or didn't get caught,'' he said.


Review/Film;   A Cold-Eyed Look at the Mob's Inner Workings
LEAD: Some guys grow up wanting to design computer games, fly space missions or play for the New York Knicks.
Henry Hill always wanted to be a gangster.
Like Martin Scorsese, who, from any early age, wanted to make movies, Henry Hill realized his grand ambition.


Reviews/Music;   A Violist In a Short Recital Bill
LEAD: Bernard McWilliams, a violist making his New York debut on Saturday evening in Weill Recital Hall, presented a program that though enterprising, with two transcriptions of his own, was ungenerous almost to the point of perfunctoriness, providing less than an hour of music.


Discovery, Not Columbia, Looks Ready
LEAD: With two winged spaceships on launching pads here, NASA officials are guardedly more optimistic about the odds of success with the Discovery than the Columbia, which was indefinitely sidelined late Monday by a new fuel leak.


Court Backs Staten Island's First Step to Secession From City
LEAD: Clearing away the first obstacle to Staten Island's secession, the state's highest court ruled today that a vote on whether the borough should move to separate from the rest of New York City could take place in November as planned.


I.R.S. Seizes Nevada Brothel
LEAD: The Mustang Ranch, a Nevada brothel, has been seized by the Internal Revenue Service.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
11.00
6.50
9.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.38
7.38
7.82
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.31
7.29
7.74
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.74
8.74
8.19
30-YR.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Dow Falls 13.86 in Another Lackluster Day
LEAD: Wall Street suffered through another day of the blahs yesterday, with stocks down only slightly despite several fairly strong declines.


Soviets Open An Exchange
LEAD: About 200 Soviet businessmen began trading today at the first commodities exchange to open in Moscow since the Bolshevik Revolution.


Chase's Share Price Is Lowest in 12 Years
LEAD: The share price of the Chase Manhattan Corportion closed at a 12-year low yesterday, and interest rates on its long-term debt rose - a result of the banking company's weak earnings and unconfirmed rumors of its difficulties in borrowing money, analysts said.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
The Food and Drug Administration told toothpaste and mouthwash manufacturers that they must show that their ingredients are safe and effective if they want to claim on labels that their products prevent plaque.
If safety cannot be substantiated with scientific data, makers will have to remove claims from the labels.


John C. Staton, Executive, 89
LEAD: John C. Staton, a retired Coca-Cola executive who designed the company's first cooler and developed its first fountain dispenser, died Sunday at his home in Atlanta at the age of 89.


Debating Cigarette Ad Curbs
LEAD: THE recent weakening in Congress of a bill that would have severely restricted cigarette advertising is not the end of the issue, backers and opponents of the measure say.


A New Image For Doughboy
LEAD: The Pillsbury Company has revamped the image of its pudgy Doughboy, the animated character that has appeared in the company's ads for 25 years.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: THE Iraqi invasion of Kuwait has affected many families in ways other than having to pay more for gasoline.
Psychologists and psychiatrists are beginning to see changes in children's play and artwork, which are usually good reflections of their unspoken hopes and fears.
Most children first show their concerns through changes in their behavior.


Calendar: Fall Tours, Classes And Shows
LEAD: Village Views, Urban Center Galleries of the Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue, at 51st Street; (212) 935-3960.


Bush Seems to Toughen His Approach to War
LEAD: President Bush said today that he was ''prepared to take additional steps'' if diplomacy failed to resolve the Persian Gulf crisis peacefully.


50 Runners to Compete In Long Island Biathlon
LEAD: A field of 50 runners is expected for the Long Island event of the 1990 Kingsbury Summer Biathlon Series on Sept. 30.


Time Warner Combining Book and Magazine Groups
LEAD: Time Warner Inc. yesterday announced the creation of Time Warner Publishing Inc. to oversee all of the company's book and magazine publishing activities.


Harbor Development Opposed by Nassau
LEAD: The top official in this Nassau County town said today that he and the rest of the town board opposed development of two parcels of land on the shore of Oyster Bay Harbor, and favored acquiring the land for public use.


Experts Call for U.S. to Expand Drug Treatment; Bush Aides Are Receptive
LEAD: Drug treatment programs in the United States have been neglected, eroding steadily for more than a decade, and should be greatly expanded, a panel of prominent medical and drug treatment experts reported today after a two-year study.


Teaching Doesn't Buy the Campus Computers
LEAD: To the Editor:


New York Defends Use Of Hotels for Homeless
LEAD: New York City officials yesterday defended their decision to violate a court order prohibiting the use of welfare hotels for homeless families beyond July 31 and said they were not sure when they would be able to comply with the order.


Bills Are Bickering In Mid-Season Form
LEAD: Until they were bodyslammed and pinned by the Miami Dolphins, 30-7, on Sunday, the Buffalo Bills had the distinction of holding on to at least a piece of first place in the American Conference East for 33 straight weeks.


Greenspan Cools Hope Of Rate Cut
LEAD: The chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, said today that while the Persian Gulf confrontation had ''introduced new and substantial risks'' to the economy, there was still no clear evidence of actual or imminent recession that would force a cut in interest rates now.


Close to Home
LEAD: THEY'RE back, the wives who spent the summer in the country with their children and the husbands who left town on Friday afternoons and returned on the Monday morning train.
I can hear the elevator door clanging and the children asking their eternal questions, and when I go to sleep it is with the knowledge that once more I am living in a hive.


Federal Computer Contract Ran Millions Over Estimate
LEAD: A $7 million computer contract let by the Agriculture Department instead cost almost $62 million because its instructions to the system's designer were vague, according to testimony before Congress on Tuesday.


Pan Am to Eliminate 2,500 Jobs
LEAD: Pan American World Airways Inc. said yesterday that it would eliminate 2,500 jobs, or 8.6 percent of its work force, by next month.
The layoffs, which include managers and other employees, are the most visible sign yet of the weakening condition of the nation's airline industry.


Tennis Court Surface, Not Racquet Size, Dictates Style of Play
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gulf Troops Get $110 More Pay
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney ordered $110 a month in hazardous duty pay today for more than 150,000 American troops and sailors now in the Persian Gulf region, the Pentagon said.


American General Shifts Sale Plan
LEAD: The American General Corporation, which put itself up for sale last May, said today that it would more likely sell only its large insurance unit, which specializes in life and health policies.
If so, it would retain the rest of its operations in consumer finance, real estate and mutual funds.


McKeon Role Unclear
LEAD: The head of the San Diego Padres' new ownership group has scheduled a meeting tomorrow with General Manager Jack McKeon to discuss the club's future direction and McKeon's role in it.


Helen Finn Ruder, Psychotherapist, 64
LEAD: Helen Finn Ruder, a specialist in child psychotherapy in Westchester County, died on Sunday at New Rochelle (N.Y.) Hospital.
She was 64 years old and lived in Larchmont.


Why H.U.D. Ran From Grace
LEAD: Of all the reports produced in the last decade, one stands alone in its potential to make the Government more effective and efficient.


Scientists Say an Acne Drug Can Prevent a Type of Cancer
LEAD: After nearly 20 years of tantalizing hints that vitamins or other food substances might prevent cancer, researchers say they have finally proved that this strategy works.
By giving people a form of a vitamin, they prevented one type of cancer.


Review/Dance;   Butoh Confronts The Egg
LEAD: Sheer visual beauty is not enough in dance.
That became increasingly clear on Tuesday night when Sankai Juku, an experimental Japanese dance company, presented Ushio Amagatsu's '' Egg Stands Out of Curiosity - Unetsu'' at City Center, Almost every moment was visually striking; a photographic record of the work might well be marvelous.


Europe Subsidy Plan Fails
LEAD: The European Community's strategy for world trade talks was thrown into disarray today when its commissioners refused to back a plan for cuts in farm support programs.


Poland's President to Step Down, Clearing Way for Free Elections
LEAD: President Wojciech Jaruzelski notified Parliament today that, as expected, he would step down shortly, paving the way for general elections to choose his successor.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: SHEILA RAUCH KENNEDY and JOSEPH P. KENNEDY 2D filed for divorce Tuesday, the same day he won a primary election in Massachusets.
Mr.
Kennedy, a Democrat, is seeking a third term representing the Eighth Congressional district, which includes parts of Boston and its surrounding suburbs.


Olympia &amp; York Selling Stake in U.S. Holdings
LEAD: Olympia &amp; York, one of North America's largest and most successful developers, is seeking to sell an interest in most of its American holdings in what Wall Street executives described as an effort to raise cash for other projects, including its huge Canary Wharf development in London.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
ABB Asea Brown Boveri, the Swiss-Swedish engineering group, said it had given final approval to a $600 million employee share ownership plan.


Now Atlanta Gets Down to Brass Tacks
LEAD: With the designation of Atlanta as the site of the 1996 Summer Olympics, the boosterism and promotion of the Atlanta Organizing Committee, which led the effort to land the Games, will now give way to the quasipublic Metropolitan Atlanta Olympic Games Authority, which will be the operating authority to raise funds and oversee construction for the


Ohio Company Seized as Iraqi Front
LEAD: The United States Government has quietly seized control of a small Ohio machine tool distributor based on evidence that the company had become a front for exporting strategically sensitive equipment to Iraq.


Bulgarians View Recent Past With Anger;   Socialist Support Wanes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Boyd Named to Post
LEAD: Mike Boyd, an assistant coach at Michigan since 1979, yesterday was named as Cleveland State's new basketball coach, replacing Kevin Mackey, who was dismissed two months ago following his arrest on drunken driving and cocaine abuse charges.


Dr. Arnold P. Friedman, 81, Dies; Authority on Migraine Headaches
LEAD: Dr.
Arnold P. Friedman, an international authority on migraine headaches, died on Monday at the El Dorado Hospital in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 81 years old and lived in Tucson.


Retirement At Northrop
LEAD: The Northrop Corporation said today that Thomas V. Jones, its longtime chairman, had retired and had been succeeded by Kent Kresa, the president and chief executive.


Managua Journal;   The Vice President's Shut Out but Won't Shut Up
LEAD: As this country's second-highest elected official, Vice President Virgilio Godoy Reyes gets his share of fame, ceremonial appearances and portraits in his formal sash.
What he doesn't get is a secretary, or a phone - or a desk, for that matter.


Racial Harm Is Found in School 'Tracking'
LEAD: Black and Hispanic students are falling behind in math and science partly because they are more likely than other students to be put into classes for those with lower abilities, according to a Rand Corporation study released yesterday.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JANET HOLMES A COURT, whose husband, Robert Holmes a Court, an international financier and Australia's largest landowner, died on Sept. 3, is now the richest woman in Australia, says Australian Business magazine.
In its issue out today, it estimated her worth at $623 million.


7 Hours of Talks, No Budget Accord
LEAD: Congressional leaders and Bush Administration officials met for seven hours today in an effort to break the impasse on a deficit-cutting package and to avoid broad automatic spending cuts that will take effect on Oct. 1 if no agreement is reached.


Puccini's Inheritance Part of a Murky Tale That's, Well, Operatic
LEAD: When Giacomo Puccini died in a Brussels clinic in 1924, he left a fortune estimated at more than $100 million at today's value.
His estate would grow further over the years through substantial royalties from ''La Boheme,'' ''Tosca,'' ''Madama Butterfly'' and other operas.


New York Census Missed 254,534 Dwellings
LEAD: New York City officials said yesterday that they had found 254,534 housing units that were not counted by the Census Bureau.
They said their finding bolstered their claim that almost one million New Yorkers were not counted.


TV License In Rare Shift
LEAD: The owners of WSNS-TV in Chicago lost a lengthy license renewal battle today when the Federal Communications Commission, in a rare move, said a competing applicant was more deserving to run the station.


David C. Anchin, Accountant, 86
LEAD: David C. Anchin, a retired managing partner of Anchin, Block &amp; Anchin, a New York accounting firm, died on Tuesday at the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio.
He was 86 years old and lived in Sarasota, Fla.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
With East Germany's economy in shambles, Western companies have balked at investing in its outdated industries. [Page A1.]
Mitsubishi and Daimler-Benz said they were exploring several joint ventures in the beginning of their uneasy alliance.
The impact of rising oil prices on poor countries was a concern at a Commonwealth meeting.


Home Improvement
LEAD: REPLACING an outside door - for appearance, security or energy efficiency - may sound like a daunting task.
But home centers and building-supply stores carry prehung entry doors, already mounted in a frame, that amateurs with some carpentry experience will find quite easy to install.


House Told Bank Insurer Needs Action
LEAD: A senior official of the General Accounting Office said today that Congress should do more to shore up the Government fund that insures bank deposits than simply remove the ceiling on premiums that banks pay into the fund.


Thomas Raleigh, 63, A Senior Executive At Price Waterhouse
LEAD: Thomas L. Raleigh Jr., a former co-chairman of operations and deputy senior partner of Price Waterhouse-U.S., died Sunday at the New England Medical Center in Boston.
He was 63 years old.


Bigotry Is an Enemy To Arabs and Jews
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pirates Walk Edge, but Survive Cubs' Rally
LEAD: If there was ever a moment that could have symbolized the futility of what has become the Race Nobody Wants to Win, this was it.


Princeton Club Told To Admit Women
LEAD: A judge has ordered an all-male eating club at Princeton University to admit women, a ruling that could end an 11-year-old sex discrimination case.


Newspaper Faults Columnist for Remarks on Jews
LEAD: An angry debate between opinion-page columnists took an unusual turn yesterday when The New York Post attacked Patrick J. Buchanan in an editorial next to his column.
The Post said that ''when it comes to Jews as a group,'' Mr.
Buchanan ''betrays an all-too-familiar hostility.''


Prominent Field in Fifth Ave. Mile
LEAD: The 10th running of the Mercedes Mile down Fifth Avenue on Saturday is shaping up as the Fifth Avenue Medical Mile, a race with one of the greatest fields of milers ever assembled from among the lame and the halt.


French Article Says Saudi Radar Can Track U.S. Stealth Fighters
LEAD: A French news magazine has reported that Saudi antiaircraft radar units are able to track United States fighter-bombers that were designed to be virtually invisible to radar.


IRT Station Repairs May Be Accelerated
LEAD: The Transit Authority said yesterday that structural engineers would inspect the crumbling ceiling of the Nevins Street IRT subway station in downtown Brooklyn today and recommend whether an 18-month repair program should begin sooner than planned.


Macy Plans To Buy Back 'Junk Bonds'
LEAD: R. H. Macy &amp; Company, the giant retailer, is planning to purchase a large chunk of its ''junk bonds'' to cut its $600 million in annual interest payments.
The company has some $4.7 billion in long-term debt, and another $1 billion in short-term borrowings that fluctuate seasonally.


Decision on Florida Due
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association is expected to announce its penalties against the University of Florida on Thursday, ending a two-year investigation into the football and basketball programs at the school.


Furniture as Sculpture
LEAD: A chair that looks like a spinal column, a three-layered mirror and a sofa with an attached chaise are three of the 12 offbeat objects on view through Oct. 6 at Art et Industrie, the SoHo gallery at 106 Spring Street (Mercer Street).


Metro Matters;   City as Landlord: Homeless Force Policy Turnabout
LEAD: ''If you build it, they will come,'' a prophesy widely attributed to the disembodied voice in the film ''Field of Dreams,'' was actually said first by Edward I. Koch.


GUATEMALA IS TOLD TO SOLVE SLAYING
LEAD: The Bush Administration has told President Vinicio Cerezo of Guatemala that it will cut military aid if the recent killing of an American innkeeper is not fully investigated and the suspects are not prosecuted, State Department officials say.


Car-Radiator Maker Names Chief
LEAD: Richard T. Savage has been named chief executive of the Modine Manufacturing Company, which prospered during a long hot summer of overheated automobile radiators.


Dollar Mostly Higher in U.S. After Sharp Jump in Europe
LEAD: The dollar finished mostly higher in United States trading yesterday after surging in Europe as currency markets drew encouragement from comments by the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, who seemed to suggest that interest rates were not likely to be cut soon.


Chrysler Expects Market Share Gain
LEAD: The head of the Chrysler Motors division, Ben Bidwell, said he expects the company's market share to rise to 10.5 percent in the fourth quarter from the 8.9 percent level so far this year.
In displaying its lineup of new cars, Chrysler said its Shadow and Sundance America models would be the lowest priced air bag-equipped 1991 models in the United States.


STUNNING PRIMARY IN MASSACHUSETTS
LEAD: The people of Massachusetts launched a political revolt Tuesday, giving smashing victories to Dr.
John R. Silber as the Democratic candidate for governor and William F. Weld as the Republican contender.


Accounts
LEAD: *
ARTnews, New York, an art magazine, to Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


THE 1990 CAMPAIGN: Man in the News;   Outspoken Newcomer: Dr. John Robert Silber
LEAD: John R. Silber is a lot of things. Reticent has never been one of them.


Sour Notes in the Gulf Chorus
LEAD: Once virtually unanimous in support of the Administration's Persian Gulf policies, Congress is breaking ranks on a series of issues.
Page A10.


American Stores Weighs Acme Sale
LEAD: The American Stores Company, the nation's largest grocery and drugstore retailer, said it was exploring the sale of its Acme Markets Inc. unit, which operates 275 supermarkets in the Northeast and had sales of $3.3 billion last year.
The company said proceeds from a sale would be used to reduce debt and to invest in technology, remodeling and new store programs.


Persian Gulf Conflict Makes Argentina and Britain Allies
LEAD: Argentina will send two warships and about 450 military personnel to join the United States-led forces against Iraq, Foreign Minister Domingo Cavallo said today.


Review/Rock;   For a Grateful Dead Party, Bring Your Own Patience
LEAD: Enjoying the Grateful Dead, which pulled into Madison Square Garden on Friday for the first of five sold-out shows, demands faith.
One is either part of the City of Tie-Dye or in the suburbs.
From the outside, the adulation and close scrutiny the band gets from its audience seems intentionally blindered, since most of the musical elements used as selling points by the band's fans can be found in a much better form elsewhere.


An Uneasy Alliance Is Born For Mitsubishi and Daimler
LEAD: Mitsubishi and Daimler-Benz said today that they were exploring several joint ventures, including making cars in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, producing computer chips, jet airplanes, high-speed trains and refrigerators.


Home Building Off 1.7% To Lowest in 8 Years
LEAD: Housing starts fell 1.7 percent in August to the lowest level since the last recession eight years ago, the Government said today.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Vietnamese in Beijing
A high-level Vietnamese official visited Beijing, and both sides said they hoped to normalize ties strained since a border war in 1979.
Page A9.
The F.B.I. and Job Bias
Acknowledging that the bureau still suffers from internal discrimination, its director promoted 11 Hispanic agents who had sued.


Vietnamese Pay a High-Level Visit to China
LEAD: A Vietnamese Deputy Prime Minister arrived today to attend the Asian Games beginning Saturday in the highest-level official visit here by a Vietnamese since Beijing and Hanoi fought a brief border war in 1979.
Both sides said they hoped for a normalization of relations.


Review/Dance;   An Absent Grande Dame Enraptures the French
LEAD: Martha Graham was recently asked if she regarded her dance works as specifically American. ''They are American because I am nothing but an American,'' she replied.


Test of Venture In Shopper TV
LEAD: Supermarket shoppers in seven states watched headline news, features and commercials yesterday while waiting in line at the cash register, as part of a test of a new television service.


Iraqi Tankers' Loading Oil in Gulf May Signal Iranian Help in Breaking Embargo
LEAD: Three Iraqi tankers have recently docked and taken on oil at an Iraqi pipeline terminal in the Persian Gulf, American officials said today, a move that may signal new efforts by President Saddam Hussein to export oil and to enlist Iran into breaking the global trade embargo against his Government.


Grains and Soybeans Drop After Frost Worries Ease
LEAD: Grain and soybean futures prices fell sharply yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade as fears of possible frost this weekend in the Middle West abated.


I.M.F. Sees Growth for U.S. in 1991
LEAD: Despite oil price increases stemming from the Middle East crisis, the United States will avoid a recession next year and experience even faster growth than in 1990, the International Monetary Fund said today.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Baum Takes Met P.G.A.
Mel Baum of Bonnie Briar Country Club in Westchester County overcame a four-shot deficit he had at the beginning of the day, earned a first-place tie after the regulation 54 holes, then captured his second consecutive Izod Met Professional Golfers Association title yesterday at the Meadow Brook Club in Jericho, L.I.


F.B.I. to Promote 11 Hispanic Agents in Bias Case
LEAD: The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation has ordered the immediate promotion of 11 veteran Hispanic agents who joined in a landmark discrimination lawsuit against the bureau.


Teaching Doesn't Buy the Campus Computers;   Raise the Budget
LEAD: To the Editor:


Death and Democracy in Guatemala
LEAD: Tens of thousands of Guatemalan civilians have died violently in recent decades, with few of their killers brought to account.
Now the suspicious death of an American could spur overdue Government action.
The Bush Administration deserves credit for pressing the case.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: EZRA TAFT BENSON, leader of the Mormon Church, underwent surgery for blood clots in the brain yesterday at LDS Hospital in Salt Lake City.
He was admitted to the hospital Tuesday for observation.


Puerto Rico Journal;   A Drive To Make Spanish No. 1 Voice
LEAD: Some legislators in this United States commonwealth of 3.6 million people are seeking to demote the English language and enshrine Spanish as the official tongue of Puerto Rico.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-13


Bulgarians View Recent Past With Anger
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dinkins Talks Of Crime Fear And of Race
LEAD: Reflecting with rare pointedness on the charged issues of crime and fear in New York City, Mayor David N. Dinkins has suggested that some of the recent concern over violence was prompted by well-publicized incidents and attacks outside the poor minority neighborhoods where crime is endemic.


Teaneck Inquiry Under Criticism By Police Chiefs
LEAD: In a rare public split with the leaders of New Jersey's criminal-justice system, the state's police chiefs have urged Gov.
Jim Florio to remove Attorney General Robert J. Del Tufo from the state's new inquiry into the fatal shooting of a black teen-ager by a white police officer here last April.


Where Color and Hospitality Reign
LEAD: ''YOU won't like the Butchart Gardens,'' a friend from Seattle advised me. ''There are too many people there.
And far too many flowers.


Savings Bailout Chief Asks for $100 Billion
LEAD: The head of the Federal bailout of the savings and loan industry asked Congress today for $100 billion to $110 billion for the new fiscal year, which begins next month, to continue the rescue program.


Minnie's Last Hurrah (Well, Maybe)
LEAD: Near the end of a South Side summer, it doesn't seem to matter that the newspapers are printing a tragic number, the total of Oakland Athletics victories and White Sox losses to eliminate Chicago from an unexpected run for a division championship.


Canadian Developer To Cut Stake in U.S.
LEAD: Olympia &amp; York, one of North America's largest and also most secretive developers, is seeking to sell an interest in its American holdings.
The move by the Toronto-based giant was seen on Wall Street as a way for the company to hedge its position in troubled American real estate markets and to raise cash for its huge but unfinished Canary Wharf development in London.


Merc-C.B.O.T. Merger Study
LEAD: The Chicago Board of Trade and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the world's two largest commodities exchanges, said today that they had formed a committee to explore joint ventures that could include a merger.


Fund Yields Stay Mixed
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed for the week ended yesterday, underlining the lack of clear direction that has enveloped the market for nearly two months.


Books of The Times;   New Words and Views On Roots of the Bible
LEAD:
The Book of J
Translated by David Rosenberg
Interpreted by Harold Bloom
340 pages. biGrove Weidenfeld. $21.95.


Big Shift In Phone Regulation
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission today gave the nation's eight big providers of local telephone service greater freedom to raise or lower the prices they charge long-distance carriers for completing interstate calls.
The move signals a fundamental shift in the economic philosophy of American regulation.


John Miller Dickey, Architect, 79, Is Dead
LEAD: John Miller Dickey, an architect who restored historic buildings in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, died yesterday at his home in Westtown, Pa.
He was 79 years old.
He died of liver cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Dickey began his restoration work in the late 1960's, after he and a partner, William Price Jr., based in Media, Pa., had designed many buildings for the Pennsylvania educational system.


Suicide Solution
LEAD: It was two days before Christmas when Jay Vance blew the bottom of his face off with a shotgun still slippery with his best friend's blood.
He went second.
Ray Belknap went first.
Ray died and Jay lived, and people said that when you looked at Jay's face afterward it was hard to tell which of them got the worst of the deal.


In His Own Words: A Silber Sampler
LEAD:
ON IMMIGRANTS


Software Offer From Xerox
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation said today that it would offer its office automation computer software for use on computers made by other manufacturers.


Rinfret, Out of Money, Threatens To Abandon Race for Governor
LEAD: Pierre A. Rinfret lost a campaign manager and a finance chairman today and disclosed that his campaign for governor of New York State was broke.
He threatened to end the campaign unless Republican leaders started supporting him financially and politically.


Editorial Notebook;   Magic Numbers in Government
LEAD: New York politicians are at war over a number - 5,000 new police officers for New York City.
Each politician offers powerful arguments for or against the 5,000.
But all are engaged in the venerable and honorable game of setting the ''magic number.''


U.S. Officials Satisfied With Soviets' Gulf Role
LEAD: Ten days after the summit meeting in Helsinki, Bush Administration officials say they are satisfied with Soviet cooperation in isolating Iraq.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline on the Company News page of Business Day in some editions yesterday about the trust fund set up by the Manville Corporation to compensate asbestos victims misidentified the party that asked the court to make a single class action out of all lawsuits naming Manville.
It was the Manville Personal Injury Settlement Trust, not the corporation.


Jays, With Yanks' Help, Stand Alone in First
LEAD: The night may have turned on a play at the plate in the eighth inning, but it ended like so many others this season.
In the end, the Yankees weren't even the spoilers they had hoped they would be, and as a result, the Toronto Blue Jays took over first place in the American League East.


The Politics of Slash and Burn
LEAD: ''Sick.'' ''Traitors.'' ''Bizarre.'' ''Self-serving.'' ''Shallow.'' ''Corrupt.'' ''Pathetic.'' ''Shame.'' The group that urged political candidates to use these epithets has since regretted suggesting the word ''traitors,'' in response to inquiries from the press.
But the others were allowed to stand; they appear in a glossary that a conservative Republican group recently mailed to


Jackson Rejoins Eagles After a Lost Battle
LEAD: Keith Jackson, the tight end from Oklahoma who made the Pro Bowl in his first two seasons in the National Football League, ended a 50-day holdout yesterday and returned to the Philadelphia Eagles under the same four-year, $2.1 million contract he had been trying to renegotiate.


Personal Health
LEAD: Medical innovations, from contact lenses to bone marrow transplants, that replace or restore body parts and functions generally win wide applause as miraculous solutions to life-limiting or life-threatening problems.


203 Rape Cases Reopened in Oakland As the Police Chief Admits Mistakes
LEAD: The Oakland Police Department has reopened 203 rape cases, many involving prostitutes or women who abuse drugs, after admitting that the cases were dropped without even minimal investigation.


400 Westerners Arrive In London on Iraqi Jet
LEAD: An Iraqi airliner carrying more than 400 Western women and children, mainly Americans fleeing Iraqi-occupied Kuwait, arrived in London this evening.


AIDS Advocates Report Quilt Vandalized
LEAD: The handmade quilt that was put together as a memorial to people who have died of AIDS was vandalized while on display here last week, and organizers said today that it would be restored.


Nets' Draftee Signs
LEAD: Tate George, the 22d pick in the National Basketball Association draft, has agreed to a five-year contract with the Nets.


145 Pounds of Cocaine Seized In U.S. Raid of Banana Boat
LEAD: Federal agents seized 145 pounds of cocaine on Tuesday from a banana boat at Bridgeport Harbor in what the authorities say was the biggest such seizure in Connecticut history.


AMMAN ASKS FUNDS TO HELP IN CRISIS
LEAD: The Jordanian Government made a strong public plea for international financial aid today, warning that unless it is compensated for enforcing the international embargo against Iraq, the nation's economy may collapse.


Optimism On Latin Debt
LEAD: Traders in debt issued by third world countries expect the loans of Latin American nations to rise in value on the debt market next year, a magazine survey said.


A Casualty of Preparedness for War
LEAD: Pfc.
Gustavo Torres of the 82d Airborne Division, second from left, was helped by comrades after being slightly wounded by a piece of shrapnel from an artillery shell in a live-fire exercise yesterday Saudi Arabia. (Associated Press)


Loss Reported by Circle K
LEAD: The Circle K Corporation said today that it lost $10.8 million in the quarter ended July 31, compared with a profit of $7.6 million, or 13 cents a share, in the same quarter last year.


Review/Television;   Hero's Fight For Truth, Justice And Ratings
LEAD: Every television season needs its manufactured hype, and this year's top honors go to the showdown between NBC's ''Cosby Show'' and Fox's ''Simpsons'' on Thursdays at 8 P.M.
With all the huffing and puffing, little attention has been paid to the fact that CBS will be countering at 8 with a new series called ''The Flash,'' based on characters created years ago for D.C.


Jim Jarmusch's First Feature at Archives
Aloysious Christopher Parker (Chris Parker), 16 years old and as skinny as a bean, calls himself Allie in the signatures he occasionally spray-paints on the walls of buildings in downtown Manhattan.
Allie is not a serious graffiti artist.
Mostly he just drifts around, allowing things to happen.
One day he's lounging against a sidewalk post box, smoking and thinking, when two youngish women drive up in an open convertible.
The driver leaps out to do an errand, leaving the motor running.
Her friend asks Allie to put a letter in the post box.
Allie says, ''Do I look like a mailman?''


Court Prohibits Sex Bias In Choosing Trial Juries
LEAD: Prosecutors may not bar women from trial juries because of their sex, a New York appeals court ruled Tuesday in overturning a criminal conviction in a burglary case in the Bronx.


Staggering to Finish, Reds Lose Once More
LEAD: Cincinnati lost tonight for the fourth time in six games as Houston's Mark Portugal gave up just two runs in seven and two-thirds innings in a 5-2 victory over the Reds.


If a Queens Block Could Talk, Would It Say, 'I Have People'?
LEAD: The tenants of the Buckingham, a 130-unit apartment building in Sunnyside, Queens, were counted by the Census Bureau, were not counted, or were counted and forgotten.


Petroleum Prices Rally From Plunge
LEAD: Higher heating oil prices led an afternoon rally in the oil futures market yesterday, after news of bigger stockpiles of gasoline pushed prices down early in the day.


Bernard Silber, 90, Figure in '57 Hearing
LEAD: Bernard Silber, a former Western Union employee who was convicted of contempt of Congress charges, a conviction that was later reversed by the United States Supreme Court, died on Tuesday at a nursing home in Oakland, Calif.
He was 90 years old and moved from Manhattan to Oakland in 1987.


Burke Back on Top After Leg Injury
LEAD: There was tiredness in the arm and thus fatigue in the fastball.
The deadly combination of dullness left Tim Burke repeatedly worn out by opposition lineups, his head hung on any given night as much in exasperation as in exhaustion.


Study Finds No Increased Risk of Cancer Deaths Near Nuclear Sites
LEAD: The National Cancer Institute said today that a nationwide study had found no increased risk of death from cancer for people living near nuclear power plants or other nuclear installations.


Ohio Cult Leader's Son Guilty in 4 Killings
LEAD: The teen-age son of a religious cult leader has been convicted of helping his parents kill a man and his three children.
The 19-year-old defendant, Damon Lundgren, could be sentenced to death.


Washington Goes to Bat
LEAD: Almost two decades after the Senators left Washington for the second time, two groups argued before baseball owners in New York yesterday that the nation's capital should be given a third team.


Gasoline Prices Off a Bit
LEAD: Gasoline prices nationwide fell slightly last week to about $1.29 a gallon, the American Automobile Association said on Tuesday.
The average retail price of a gallon of self-serve regular unleaded was 21.7 cents higher than on Aug. 1, the day before Iraq invaded Kuwait and sent world oil prices skyrocketing, the association said.


Among Hummel Fans, Details Mean So Much
LEAD: Jeanette Ferrante got her first one in 1975 as a 15th anniversary present from her mother.
It was the ''For Father'' figurine, perhaps not the wisest possible choice, but who can understand why mothers do what they do?


U.S. Securities Prices Are Mixed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were mixed in fairly active trading yesterday, as market participants reacted to comments by Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve Board chairman, by selling short-term notes and buying long-term bonds.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Floors in Garages


Speeches Supporting Souter Begin As Soon as Senate Hearings End
LEAD: Minutes after the Senate Judiciary Committee ended its hearings today on the nomination of Judge David H. Souter to the Supreme Court, several senators took to the Senate floor to announce that they would vote to confirm him.


Amid Sea of Difficulties, India's Prime Minister Welcomes a Small Victory
LEAD: As his Indian Air Force jet climbed into a hazy morning sky over the Bay of Bengal, Prime Minister V. P. Singh was relishing a moment of triumph.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the choice of Atlanta for the 1996 Olympic Games misstated the date of the Democratic National Convention there.
It was 1988.


Pregnant Women Warned on Tubs
LEAD: Pregnant women are warned against spending too much time in the hot tub because they might overheat their unborn babies.
But how long is too long?


De Klerk Acts to Halt Battles Among Blacks
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk announced further measures today to curtail fighting between black factions.
The steps include the formation of special teams led by Government lawyers to hasten the investigation of incidents like the massacre of commuters on a Soweto-bound train last Thursday.


A Third of the News Staff at The Post Quits
LEAD: Roughly a third of The New York Post's news staff resigned before 5 P.M. yesterday, the deadline established by the paper's owner for receiving a severance bonus of eight weeks' pay.


Florida Developer In Plea Bargain
LEAD: The General Development Corporation, a Florida developer, will plead guilty to a criminal charge of fraud conspiracy and pay up to $160 million in restitution to more than 10,000 home buyers, a spokeswoman said.
The deal must be approved by a Federal bankruptcy judge and a Federal district judge.


President's Post Filled At a Software Company
LEAD: John F. Burton, who joined the Legent Corporation last year when Legent bought out his software company, yesterday was named president and chief operating officer and a board member of the systems software company.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
Economic and Social Council
COMMITTEE FOR PROGRAM AND COORDINATION - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


U.N. NEAR ACCORD TO ASSURE CUTOFF OF IRAQI AIR LINKS
LEAD: The five permanent members of the Security Council were reported close to final agreement today on a new resolution imposing an air embargo on all passenger and cargo flights to and from Iraq and occupied Kuwait unless the planes are on an approved humanitarian mission.


People
LEAD: *
Janet Robinson has been named group vice president of advertising sales and marketing for The New York Times Company's Magazine Group.
Ms.
Robinson, who was advertising director at Tennis magazine, replaces Harry Myers, who resigned.


Turks, on West's Side, Regain Voice
LEAD: Although the Persian Gulf crisis is adding to this country's already considerable burdens, it has also handed Turks an unexpected gift of reborn confidence.
Turkey's troubles are plain enough.
It stands to lose billions of dollars a year in trade and investment because of the embargo against Iraq, and prices in the last few weeks have skyrocketed for basics like gasoline and bread.


Gangs, Crime, Smut, Violence
LEAD: ''Probably in no city in the civilized world is life so fearfully insecure,'' wrote Isabella Lucy Bird, an English visitor to New York in the early 1850's. ''The practice of carrying concealed arms, in the shape of stilettoes for attack, and swordsticks for defense, if illegal, is perfectly common .


Neil Bush May Face Savings Industry Bar for Life
LEAD: Federal regulators said today that Neil Bush could face a lifetime prohibition against serving on the boards of federally insured banks and savings and loan institutions as a result of next week's public hearing in Denver.


New Craftsman-Era Exhibits in Southern California
LEAD: EARLY this century, when East Coast immigrants were seeking the sunny opportunities of Southern California, they took with them the ideas and furnishings of Gustav Stickley, Albert Hubbard and other philosophizing manufacturers of the Arts and Crafts movement.


5 Arrested Outside 2 Boycotted Stores in Brooklyn
LEAD: Five protesters were arrested yesterday, two days after an appeals court ruled that the Police Department must enforce a 50-foot barrier between demonstrators and two Korean-owned grocery stores in Brooklyn.


THE 1990 CAMPAIGN: Electoral Powder Keg;   In Messages of Dissatisfaction by Voters, Politicians Sense Danger of an Explosion
LEAD: Voters sent an unmistakable message of dissatisfaction to their political leaders Tuesday in two quite different states, Massachusetts and Oklahoma, as a widespread mood of discontent with government and politics began to boil over at the ballot box.


Protesters Arrested Outside Korean Grocery Store in Brooklyn


Archdiocese Orders Play to Vacate Church
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York has demanded that an Off Off Broadway theater company in Manhattan terminate performances of a play being presented in a former parochial school the company leases from the archdiocese.
The archdiocese says the play has language that is against the church's principles and is being performed in violation of terms in the lease between the church and the theater.


Sheffield Discharged
LEAD: Gary Sheffield, the Brewers' starting third baseman, was discharged from Arlington Memorial Hospital in Milwaukee Tuesday night after five days of treatment for an undisclosed ailment.


John Steinle, Lawyer And a Consultant, 73
LEAD: John Gerard Steinle, a lawyer, hospital administrator and health-care consultant, died on Sunday at Holy Name Hospital in Teaneck, N.J.
He was 73 years old and lived in Fort Lee.


'Las Casitas': Oases or Illegal Shacks?
LEAD: Amid brightly colored wooden shanties, Efrain Diaz sweats and coaxes his harvest from the gritty earth, the same way his father and grandfather did in Puerto Rico.
But Mr.
Diaz's farm is on East 119th Street on a different island, Manhattan.


Collecting the Taxes
LEAD: To the Editor:


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
All News Channel, New York, a venture of Viacom Satellite and Conus Communications, named Matthew A. Riklin executive vice president.


Food Rationing Means Long Lines for Iraqis


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The National Endowment for the Humanities celebrated its 25th anniversary Tuesday night with a preview of ''The Civil War.'' The endowment was one of the financial backers of the 11-hour documentary, to be broadcast beginning Sunday on the Public Broadcasting System.


Bridge
LEAD: There are times when it is safe for a defender to neglect an obvious play because it is clear that the declarer will not be able to take advantage of it.


New Discount Frontier: Home
LEAD: THEY live for Loehmann's; a hangtag quickens their pulse.
This fall, New York's more ferocious bargain hunters have a new frontier: the home.


Talking Deals;   Delicate Balance In Eastern Pact
LEAD: THE agreement expected to assure backing for Eastern Airlines' pension plan was put together in months of careful negotiations, with a Government agency putting great pressure on Continental Airlines Holdings Inc., while seeking to avoid pushing the carrier into bankruptcy.


Unplugging A Diverse Bit Of Cable TV
LEAD: In a claustrophobic mid-Manhattan production studio cluttered with videocassette recorders perched on rickety metal shelves, Jim Chladek tried to explain how a cable-television show featuring a pair of $2-a-minute phone-in psychics served ''the communities.''


Top Film Makers Finding Freedom in TV
LEAD: Steven Spielberg has directed or produced some of the most popular and profitable movies in history.
In recent months, though, much of his energy has gone into a new venture called ''Tiny Toon Adventures,'' a syndicated television cartoon series that went on the air this week.


I.R.A. RAID WOUNDS AN EX-BRITISH AIDE
LEAD: A former Governor of Gibraltar who authorized a security operation in which three Irish Republican Army guerrillas were killed was shot and seriously wounded at his home on Tuesday night.
The I.R.A. claimed responsibility today for the attack.


Market Place;   Making Money The Bearish Way
LEAD: ANYBODY who was prescient enough to sell the stock market short before August's steep slide has done pretty well.
But Jim Grant, the founder and editor of Grant's Interest Rate Observer, has done better than most, at least on paper.
And in Mr.
Grant's view the market is likely to remain a short-sellers' bonanza for some time.


Bail Hearing For Keating
LEAD: A judge agreed today to consider reducing the $5 million bail he required of Charles H. Keating Jr. on Tuesday after Mr.
Keating was indicted on criminal fraud charges related to the collapse of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association.


Stations Oppose a Streamlined PBS
LEAD: As if to underscore the sizable changes taking place in American public television, the Public Broadcasting Service will begin its new season on Sunday night with an 11-hour documentary on the Civil War that will be shown, in mini-series style, over five consecutive nights.
It would be an exaggeration to say that a civil war of sorts is also taking place within public television, but several of the most powerful public television stations are leading an insurgency against some of those changes.


Criticism of U.S. Gulf Policy Growing Louder in Congress
LEAD: Congressional criticism of the Bush Administration's policies in the Persian Gulf, nonexistent in the first days after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, then muted, is growing louder on both sides of the aisle as lawmakers openly attack the President on several major points.


Study Links Emotions to Second Heart Attacks
LEAD: A new study of survivors of heart attacks suggests that emotions play an important role in predicting, and possibly even preventing, a second attack.
But the researchers found that the emotions at play differ in men and women.


Ivan Hill, Ethics Center Founder, 83
LEAD: Ivan Hill, an advertising executive and founder of the Ethics Resource Center in Washington, died Tuesday at the Northern Illinois Medical Center in McHenry, Ill.
He was 83 years old and lived in McLean, Va.
A spokesman for the center said he died of cancer.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''A good example of what people are mad about in Oklahoma is that most senators and representatives have two secretaries.
One does all the work and the other just bubbles.
She just sits out front and looks good.
These guys have simply gotten too fat in office.''
- Bill Wynor, 37, a window cleaner at the Oklahoma State Capitol.


Bank Scandal In Mexico
LEAD: Ten people, including three high-ranking bank officials, have been arrested in connection with a multimillion-dollar fraud at a Mexican bank, the Government newspaper, El Nacional, reported today.


Agents Said to Issue Fake Parking Tickets
LEAD: A former investigator for the city's Department of Transportation asserted yesterday that 20 percent of the 12 million parking tickets issued each year in New York City are fake.


Sony Introduces New Tape Player
LEAD: The Sony Corporation introduced a personal digital audio tape player, which offers the sound quality of a compact disk in a machine only slightly bigger than the smallest Walkman on the market.
The company also introduced a version for cars.
The personal tape player, the first machine of its kind, costs $850, while the car player will sell for $1,100.


Judge Dismisses Chevron Lawsuit
LEAD: A Federal judge dismissed a lawsuit by the Chevron Corporation that charged that the Pennzoil Company had illegally purchased nearly 9 percent of Chevron's stock, a Pennzoil lawyer said.


Businessland Cuts Staff 10%
LEAD: Businessland Inc., the nation's biggest computer retailer, said today that it was cutting its worldwide staff by 10 percent and shrinking operations in an effort to turn the ailing company around.


Games Asians Play
LEAD: Six thousand muscular young people, 3,000 foreign journalists and an estimated 700,000 ''watchers'' - Chinese assigned to make sure no unsuitable demonstrations take place - are gathering for next week's Asian Games.


Ed Sadowski, Basketball Star, 73
LEAD: Ed Sadowski, who led Seton Hall to its only undefeated season, in 1940, then became a standout in the early years of the National Basketball Association, died of cancer on Tuesday at his home in Wall, N.J.
He was 73 years old.


McGee's .335 Bothers N.L. Pursuers
LEAD: Obviously, the specter of Willie McGee is too much for Lenny Dykstra and Dave Magadan.
Eddie Murray, however, is a different story.


Takeover Offer Rejected by Justin
LEAD: Justin Industries Inc. has rejected the unsolicited offer of $18 a share, or $153 million, from Choctaw Partners L.P. and warned the New York investment partnership that it was ''prepared to take all appropriate steps'' to ward off an unfriendly offer.
The rejection came in a letter sent today to Perry H.


3 Nations Join GATT
LEAD: Venezuela, Bolivia and Tunisia have joined GATT, increasing the membership of the trade forum to 99 nations, it was announced today.
The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade is a market-oriented forum that sets trade rules and sponsors agreements to liberalize global commerce.
Its members account for more than four-fifths of world trade.


Rainout Forces Mets To Compress Rotation
LEAD: Bud Harrelson, who is running out of fingers when trying to count how many pitchers to squeeze into how many starts in the next five days, doesn't like doubleheaders.


The Second-Best Way to Save Gas
LEAD: There's a potent prescription that at a single stroke would slash America's dependence on foreign oil, trim the trade deficit, roll back smog and avert global warming.
It's to mandate that auto manufacturers produce more fuel-efficient cars.
The Senate is considering a bill by Senator Richard Bryan of Nevada to raise the fuel efficiency of new cars 20 percent by 1995 and 40 percent by the year 2001.


With Wicker, Don't Put Off Repairs
LEAD: TEDIOUS is the word David Alford uses to describe the process of repairing and restoring wicker furniture.
But Mr.
Alford, who started D &amp; H Wicker Repair in 1987 with Harold Peters, also relishes the challenge of turning worn, dried-out wicker into useful, attractive and often valuable furniture that will last for years if properly cared for.


A Mistrial Is Declared As Sundown Nears
LEAD: A Westchester County court judge declared a mistrial today after jurors told him in a note that they were hopelessly deadlocked and concerned that continuing deliberations would prevent some of them from observing the Jewish new year.


East Germany's Economy Far Sicker Than Expected
LEAD: With the union of the two Germanys just weeks away, East Germany's economy lies in shambles and Western companies have balked at investing in its outdated industries.


Canada Calls Off Plane Search
LEAD: The search for a Peruvian airliner that disappeared off Newfoundland Sept. 11 has been called off, Canadian search and rescue officials said today.
None of the 16 people aboard the Boeing 727 are believed to have survived what apparently was a crash into the Atlantic, said the rescue coordination center.


Giants' Collins Sidelined For 4 Weeks With Injury
LEAD: The Giants lost two players today: Mark Collins for four weeks with a sprained right ankle and Dave Meggett for probably one day because he is unhappy with his contract and did not show up for work.


Apple Plans System Delay
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. said yesterday that it would delay by as much as six months the release of its new Macintosh System 7.0 operating system software.
This spring the Cupertino, Calif., computer maker told software developers that it expected to release the program by the end of the year.


Israel Said to Fault U.S. Arms Sales
LEAD: Defense Minister Moshe Arens of Israel was quoted today as expressing disappointment with Washington's initial response to Israeli concerns about a planned $20 billion American arms sale to Saudi Arabia.


Red Sox Stumble Again And Fall a Game Behind
LEAD: If Tony Pena was trying to motivate the Red Sox by calling them ''quitters'' after a loss Tuesday night, the immediate results were not promising.


Commonwealth Nations Sound Alarm on Oil Impact
LEAD: Heads of government and finance ministers from the Commonwealth nations, meeting at an annual conference, expressed alarm today over the impact of sharply increased oil prices on the economies of poor countries.


Soviets Urging U.N. Council To Back Iraq Air Embargo
LEAD: The Soviet Union is asking members of the United Nations Security Council to send their foreign ministers to a Council meeting next week to approve a plan tightening sanctions against Iraq and occupied Kuwait by imposing an embargo on air traffic there and seizing their merchant shipping, diplomats said today.


Review/Photography;   So, What Else Do You Want to Know About Me?
LEAD: The confessional mode has been out of vogue for so long in art that its reappearance in two impressive photography shows this fall is no less than astonishing.
Its rebirth suggests that the art world is turning away from cool and methodical styles and picking up the psychotherapeutic trail where the Beat generation left it years ago.


Safety for Probation Officers
LEAD: A jailhouse incident this week in which a convicted rapist held a probation officer hostage for seven hours has prompted the New York City Department of Probation to adopt several safety measures when officers conduct pre-sentence interviews.
Probation Commissioner Catherine M. Abate said yesterday that offenders must wear handcuffs attached to waist belts, and that a correction officer must be present.


Refugees Scrutinized as They Enter Saudi Arabia


Review/Art;   A Look at Keith Haring, Especially on the Graffiti
LEAD: During much of the last decade, Keith Haring's jazzy hieroglyphics seemed to be on every subway platform, T-shirt, magazine advertisement and wall - whether the one used by handball players along the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive in Harlem or the one that divided Berlin.
Haring was nothing if not a tireless worker, turning out thousands of paintings, sculptures, drawings, prints, murals, buttons and banners until the day of his death from AIDS in


Rochester Teacher Contract Bases Pay on Performance
LEAD: Rochester school administrators and teachers have reached a tentative agreement on a new contract that officials say is among the most innovative of its kind in the nation.


Company Resumes Planned Parenthood Gift
LEAD: The Dayton Hudson Corporation, a Minneapolis retail company, announced yesterday that it was restoring an $18,000 grant to Planned Parenthood, reversing its decision earlier this year to end 22 years of support for education programs intended to prevent pregnancy.


2 Papers Battle Over Page Tint
LEAD: The Financial Times newspaper this week lost the first round of a court battle to stop a London tabloid from publishing a business section on colored paper similar to that of The Financial Times.


Membership for Bush
LEAD: President Bush has become the ninth honorary member of the Royal and Ancient golf club, the club announced yesterday in St.
Andrews, Scotland.


CPC Names Chairman
LEAD: The president and chief executive of CPC International Inc., Charles R. Shoemate, will also serve as chairman, the food company announced on Wednesday.
Mr.
Shoemate, who is 50 years old, succeeds James R. Eiszner, who died Sept. 11.


At the Movies
LEAD:
Avildsen and Authenticity


Jordanians Meet Frustration In Search for 'Arab Solution'
LEAD: As Iraqi troops were storming toward Kuwait City on Aug. 2, King Hussein of Jordan was awakened at 6 A.M. by a phone call from King Fahd of Saudi Arabia.


Expos Join the Race With Winning Week
LEAD: The dizzying assault on expectations has been so sustained and their perception of what can consequently be achieved has been so radically altered, there isn't much left for the Expos to find hard to believe.


Foster Care System Reeling, Despite Law Meant to Help
LEAD: Ten years after the signing of a Federal law meant to reduce the need for foster care by helping troubled families stay together, foster care has grown into a multibillion-dollar system of confusion and misdirection, overwhelmed by the profusion of sick, battered and emotionally scarred children who are becoming the responsibility of the public.


FLAWS IN REACTOR HINT AT NEW DELAY
LEAD: The operator of the Savannah River nuclear arms plant has uncovered as many as 2,000 problems in one of the three reactors and they could delay the year-end deadline for restarting operations, an Energy Department official said.


Farrar, Straus Buys Solzhenitsyn Book
LEAD: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux yesterday acquired world English-language rights to a new book by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the Nobel laureate and exiled Soviet writer who lives in seclusion in Cavendish, Vt.


TV Cameras in Courts, Yes, but Not in Certain Sensitive Cases
LEAD: To the Editor:


Anti-Semitic Vandalism Leads to Holiday Police Protection in Wisconsin


Accounts
LEAD: *
Tyson Foods Inc., Springdale, Ark. to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, for the Holly Farms chicken products business, with billings of $15 million.
The account had previously been handled by Long, Haymes &amp; Carr Inc, Winston-Salem, N.C.
Saatchi has been a Tyson agency since 1987.


TV Weekend;   Self-Proclaimed royalty on the Rise
LEAD: How could prime-time television possibly resist ''Leona Helmsley: The Queen of Mean''?
This is Judith Krantz territory, only here the characters are real, plucked from sensational headlines.
Here is one of the world's richest women publicly humiliating her employees, ridiculously publicizing herself as ''queen'' of the Helmsley Palace Hotel and eventually being convicted of tax fraud.


Germanys Back Treaty on Union
LEAD: Lawmakers of the two Germanys ratified a treaty today that will formally end four decades of division and unite their nations on Oct. 3.
They followed the votes in their two Parliaments with singing, shouting and handshaking.


Rangers Sign Three
LEAD: The Rangers signed the goaltenders Bob Froese and Mark Laforest and the center Kevin Miller to new contracts yesterday.
Terms of the contracts were not revealed.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Bay Street Seeking Computer Factory
LEAD: The Bay Street Group, a two-year-old merchant banking organization here, offered to acquire Computer Factory Inc., a personal computer retail chain based in Elmsford, N.Y., for $4 a share in cash, or about $34.6 million.
Computer Factory's shares jumped $1 each today, to $3.25, on the New York Stock


Japan Shielding Gasoline Buyers From Gulf Crisis
LEAD: Six weeks after Iraq invaded Kuwait, motorists in this completely oil-dependent nation are only now beginning to pay a bit more for gasoline, thanks to a Government that exerts quiet but enormous influence to insulate consumers from the Persian Gulf crisis.


Pretoria Once More Pits Black Against Black
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sheffield Hough, Air Rifle Maker, 85
LEAD: Cass Sheffield Hough, former president of the Daisy Manufacturing Company, the maker of air rifles, died Monday at his home in Naples, Fla.
He was 85 years old.


Even for Texas, the Race For Governor Is Rowdy
LEAD: Ann Richards, a politician known for her sassy tongue, now finds one of her best lines coming back to haunt her in prime time.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Although NIGEL NICOLSON approved of the British Broadcasting Corporation plan to make a series based on his book ''Portrait of a Marriage,'' he is now unhappy with the result.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Advance Ross Corp., Chicago, a maker of metal fabrication products, said its board saw no reason to accept an offer from Natec Resources Inc., Houston, for an exchange of shares under which Advance Ross shareholders would be assured a premium over the recent stock price.


Air France Speeds Cost-Cutting Pace
LEAD: Air France said it would intensify a cost-cutting program in response to a loss estimated at $32 million in the first half of 1990 and worries about fuel price increases in the second half.
The state-owned company said its directors had decided to delay until 1991 all non-aircraft investments planned for the rest of this year.


McDonnell Plans New Jet Transport
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said it plans to begin producing a new long-range jet transport, called the MD-12X, next year.
It said the first deliveries and initial commercial service of the aircraft would start in 1995.
It said it expected to begin talks with at least two other companies for the wing and fuselage work packages and would begin to select partners by early next year.


Andersen Joins Research Group
LEAD: Andersen Consulting, an arm of Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, the accounting firm, said it had joined a research consortium striving to increase American expertise in the computer industry.
Under the agreement, W. James Fischer, Andersen's managing partner of technology services, will serve on the board of the consortium, the Microelectronics and Computer Technology


TEAM CURES CELLS IN CYSTIC FIBROSIS BY GENE INSERTION
LEAD: Scientists have cured cystic fibrosis cells in the laboratory by inserting a healthy version of the gene that causes the disease, an unexpectedly swift advance that left researchers almost giddy with delight.


Soviet and Polish Sites for Cargill
LEAD: Cargill Inc., the giant international commodities concern, said it would open offices in Moscow and Warsaw to pursue increased investment opportunities in the Soviet Union and Poland.
Cargill has had trading relationships with the two countries for more than 25 years, but has had no physical presence there.


Time Is Running Out for Bills on Puerto Rico
LEAD: Legislation permitting a vote by Puerto Ricans on the United States commonwealth's political future could come to the floors of the House and Senate this year, but its supporters said today that time was running out for the bill's final passage.


Transit Authority Accelerates Renovation of a Brooklyn Station


Peter Oldenburg, 74, A Designer of Books
LEAD: Peter Oldenburg, a book and graphic designer long associated with the Metropolitan Museum of Art, died on Wednesday at his home in Ossining, N.Y.
He was 74 years old.
He died of heart failure, his family said.
Since 1959, Mr.
Oldenburg designed the museum's annual engagement calendar.
He also designed hundreds of books and catalogues, and the Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin and its


The Job Is Picking Up Garbage; 100,000 Want It
LEAD: Frank Moos, who was laid off a year ago by a Wall Street brokerage house, postponed his honeymoon for a week just so he can take a written exam tomorrow for a city job.
The job is picking up garbage.


Pirates Tighten Grasp In National League East
LEAD: When the Pirates have the chance to look back upon their 1990 season, they may decide that they were never as vulnerable as they were on a chilly Wednesday afternoon against the Cubs, their National League East lead reduced to half a game, their losing streak up to six, a seven-run lead suddenly down to one, and the possible tying run at second base.


Lost Soldiers Are Identified
LEAD: The Pentagon today disclosed the identities of four American servicemen killed in Laos during the Vietnam War whose remains were recovered last January.
The men, all in the Army, were lost on March 5, 1971, and their remains were found in a joint excavation by the Governments of the United States and Laos last Jan.


J. F. Gates Clarke, Entomologist, 85; Was Moth Expert
LEAD: J. F. Gates Clarke, an entomologist and research associate at the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History, died Monday at his home in Hyattsville, Md.
He was 85 years old.


People
LEAD: *
Lintas USA, New York, has set up an office of the media director, to be headed by Louis M. Schultz, executive vice president and director of media services.
Four new executive vice presidents have also been appointed: Marc Goldstein, who will manage national broadcast media and planning; Carolyn Libby, who is also an executive media director, and Paul Hunt and Bob Gervason, who will assume similiar positions at Lintas Campbell-Ewald, Detroit.


Stocks Decline Sharply, With Dow Tumbling 39.11
LEAD: Stocks fell sharply yesterday in busier-than-expected trading, with the Dow Jones industrial average continuing to slide.


Taking Aim


Manila Seeking Control of U.S. Base by '91
LEAD: The Government wants the United States military to hand over control of Clark Air Base when the security treaty between the two countries expires in September 1991, a spokesman for the Philippine negotiators said today.


One Killed as Jetliner With 3 Aboard Crashes in Arizona


Mexico-Chile Trade Accord
LEAD: Mexico and Chile will sign a free trade agreement next month, advancing President Bush's aim to form a continentwide zone that can compete with European and East Asian trade blocs, senior officials of both countries said yesterday.
President Carlos Salinas de


$1.1 Million Loan Payment Missed by Trump on Shuttle
LEAD: Donald J. Trump missed a $1.1 million interest payment on the Trump Shuttle several days ago and told bankers Wednesday that he would not make the payment, Stephen F. Bollenbach, chief financial officer of the Trump Organization, said yesterday.


Football and Basketball Teams Placed on Probation at Florida
LEAD: The University of Florida football and basketball programs were placed on two years' probation by the National Collegiate Athletic Association today, but escaped more serious penalties that could have shut them down altogether.


2 Men Shot on Bus Following Argument At Construction Site
LEAD: A man riding a bicycle fired five shots yesterday into a bus carrying members of a group that demands construction jobs for minority people, injuring two passengers, one of them seriously, the police said.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 524 money market mutual funds increased $1.72 billion, to $408.76 billion, for the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 163 institutional funds increased by $629.5 million, to $98.30 billion.
The assets of the 256 general-purpose funds were up by $1.05 billion, to $144.85 billion.


Oil Aid Plans By the I.M.F.
LEAD: The head of the International Monetary Fund predicted today that his 152-nation organization would back United States-led efforts to provide financial assistance to countries hurt by the Persian Gulf turmoil.


For Actors, the Role Transcends the Self;   Rewriting History
LEAD: To the Editor:


World Market Leaders Meet
LEAD: Government regulators of the world's three largest securities markets pledged Wednesday to encourage cross-border trading and expand cooperative supervision of it.


Wingate Accused
LEAD: For the second time in three days, the San Antonio Spurs guard David Wingate has been accused of rape.


Policing Japan's Banks Is a Matter of Persuasion
LEAD: The deep problems afflicting the Federal fund that insures deposits at banks and savings and loan associations in the United States may look dire to Americans, but to the Japanese, they are incomprehensible.


Bail Cut Asked for Keating
LEAD: Lawyers for Charles H. Keating Jr. sought to persuade a California judge to lower his $5 million bail today, but the court hearing was not concluded by the end of the day, forcing the former owner of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association to return to jail for a third night.


NASA Takes Columbia Off New Shuttle Schedule
LEAD: The space agency announced a new schedule yesterday for the year's remaining space shuttle flights and a plan for dealing with the baffling fuel leaks that have grounded the shuttle fleet for nearly four months.


Review/Dance;   The Javanese Form is Unfamiliar, but Love Still Conquers Evil
LEAD: Just watch.
That's the first and possibly the best piece of advice that can be given to anyone who plans to see an unfamiliar dance form.
That advice may certainly help audiences who attend the series of performances called ''Court Art of Java From the Kraton of Jogjakarta,'' which opened Wednesday night at the Brooklyn Academy of


Economic Scene;   Recession Ahead? The Views Vary
LEAD: IS the United States entering a recession or isn't it?
The sages, here and abroad, differ.


Review/Art;   Works From the 80's With a Certain Optimism
LEAD: By any other name, ''The Last Decade: American Artists of the 80's,'' on view at the Tony Shafrazi Gallery in SoHo, is a perfectly respectable, even impressive commercial gallery exhibition, full of handsome works by many artists who made their mark in the last 10 years.
The show hardly sums up the decade, but Tricia Collins and Richard Milazzo, the well-known independent curators who organized the exhibition, absolve themselves of responsibility with characteristic post-modern cleverness.


Monument to Free Speech Stops Its Projector
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Theater;   Of Ambition, Melodrama And Youth
LEAD: Of the four writers in the 1990 Young Playwrights Festival, two keep their ambition in check - and tongue in cheek - and demonstrate their promise with comedy.
The two others, tackling more overtly dramatic material, are overcome by their ambition and veer into melodrama.
The festival is at Playwrights Horizons under the sponsorship of the Foundation of the Dramatists


U.S. Rejects Peace Efforts Offered by Jordan's Ruler
LEAD: The United States opposed the latest attempt at Persian Gulf peacemaking by King Hussein of Jordan and has been lobbying among the Arab nations against proposals that would offer any advance concessions to gain Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, a senior Administration official said today.


Pretoria Once More Pits Black Against Black;   Divide and Conquer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Film;   Nuns! Elephants! Must the Show Go On?
LEAD: Andrew Lloyd Webber himself has never matched it, and only Mel Brooks's classic ''Springtime for Hitler'' in ''The Producers'' is more inspired.
The centerpiece of ''The Tall Guy'' is a musical version of ''The Elephant Man,'' complete with a chorus line of men in suits wearing elephant masks, tap-dancing and kicking up their heavy gray hoofs with the precision of the


Counseling to Keep Families Together
LEAD: When children are in danger of harm from family members, society's only way to protect them in many cases is to get them out of their homes.
Too often, experts say, this means moving them in with foster parents who already have more children than they can handle, or into overcrowded group homes or residential treatment centers.


No Headline
LEAD: A VISIT to New York City can often seem surreal.
But those who yearn for the surreal - for real - would do well to spend a night or two at the new Paramount Hotel at 235 West 46th Street.


U.S. Official Sees Peace Hopes Waning in Liberia
LEAD: After visiting Liberia to assess the civil war there, a senior American official has said prospects for a negotiated settlement of the conflict appear to be diminishing.


Quiet New Year In the Desert
LEAD: Rosh ha-Shanah is being celebrated - though very discreetly - by American Jewish soldiers deployed in Saudi Arabia, American and Saudi officials said today.


4 Die in Boardinghouse Fire
LEAD: A fire at a suburban Birmingham boardinghouse Wednesday killed four people whose ailments prevented them from escaping.
Capt.
Richard Davis of the Bessemer Fire Department said a fire was reported at Wilson's, a boardinghouse for the elderly, at 2:24 A.M.
Most of the 15 residents fled the one-story building, but four people died of heat and smoke inhalation.


Critic's Choice
LEAD: For anybody looking for musical empathy, the Modern Jazz Quartet, which is playing at the 92d Street Y tomorrow night, has it.
The group's shows are always extraordinary, like a long four-way conversation between gifted raconteurs.


Shy Man Becomes Mad Max; Wins Girl
Steve Guttenberg looks shockingly bad at the start of ''Don't Tell Her It's Me,'' sick and bloated and virtually bald, with deep dark circles under his eyes.
As Gus Kubicek, a shy cartoonist who has undergone extensive radiation therapy for Hodgkin's disease, he is only now beginning to face life again.
Gus's nosy sister, who is named Lizzie Potts but writes romance novels under a pseudonym, is worried about her brother's will to live.
She decides that the best way to restore his health is to help him land Ms.
Right.
At a romance writers' convention, Lizzie meets a pretty reporter named Emily (Jami Gertz), who has supposedly been sent to blow the lid off this story but doesn't recognize Lizzie even when the author stands next to her own life-size cardboard effigy.
No matter.
Emily is invited home, and she dazzles Gus, who still looks awful.
So Lizzie advises Gus to lose weight, get a tan, change his eye color, grow long hair and master a New Zealand accent, all for the sake of winning Emily over.


Werner Janssen, 91; Led Philharmonic In New York in 30's
LEAD: Werner Janssen, the first American-born conductor to lead the New York Philharmonic and later an active film composer and champion of contemporary music on the West Coast, died on Wednesday at the Stony Brook (L.I.) University Hospital.
He was 91 years old.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
Friday
BRANDO AND BIKERS


Robert Rodale, 60, Dies in Crash; Publisher Backed Organic Farms
LEAD: Robert Rodale, an exponent of organic farming and the head of a publishing empire whose magazines dealt with subjects like garening, health and fitness, died yesterday in an automobile accident in Moscow.
He was 60 years old and lived in Emmaus, Pa.


FINANCING BY U.S. URGED IN BAILOUT
LEAD: The head of the Federal agency overseeing the bailout of the savings and loan industry proposed today that the Government provide financing to purchasers of commercial and residential properties to speed the sale of $50 billion in real estate and other assets.


Even With a Desperately Ill Economy, Gorbachev Balks at Radical Therapy
LEAD: Like a high-wire artist frozen in midstep, Mikhail S. Gorbachev seems neither willing to risk a perilous dash to capitalism nor able to move back to a socialist alternative.
Just days after endorsing the free-market reforms drafted by his principal economic adviser, Stanislav S. Shatalin, the Soviet


Stock Market In Panama
LEAD: A new stock exchange opened here Wednesday.


Symbolic Cleansing Marks the Jewish New Year


Olympic Preview In the Mile
LEAD: If you can't make it to Barcelona for the 1992 Summer Games, stop by Fifth Avenue between 62d and 82d streets about 4 o'clock tomorrow afternoon and catch a sneak preview of the women's Olympic 1,500 meters.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Economy





Vikings' Togetherness Is a Welcome Change
LEAD: After being labeled as a team in crisis, the Minnesota Vikings keep looking for victories by chipping away at that reputation and building team and organization unity block by block and game by game.
The Vikings' next test is the Chicago Bears on Sunday at Soldier Field.
With their well-documented off-season trip to the Pecos River in New Mexico to find team unity behind them, the Vikings still allow time to reflect on their trip.


Quake Risk Estimated In U.S. East of Rockies
LEAD: There is a 40 to 60 percent chance that a damaging earthquake will occur somewhere in the eastern and central United States in the next 30 years, scientists say in a report being published today in the journal Science.


Surging Expos Put Mets' Drive Into Reverse
LEAD: The defiance in Howard Johnson was obvious, and it was much more of a display than what was shown by an entire Mets team earlier in a long afternoon of losing.


Litton Is Pricing $1 Billion In Liquid-Yield Option Notes
LEAD: Liquid-yield option notes due in 2010, with a face value of $1 billion, were priced yesterday by Litton Industries through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
The liquid-yield notes, or Lyons as they are called, are convertible zero-coupon subordinated notes that make no periodic interest rate payments.


Suppliers In Loan to Northwest
LEAD: Northwest Airlines has received a $500 million loan from two of its leading suppliers, Airbus Industrie and the General Electric Company, a spokeswoman for Airbus said yesterday.
The loan was arranged by Airbus, the European aerospace consortium, after Northwest agreed to buy an additional 75 of the company's


Clemens Is Key to Outcome of Red Sox-Toronto Race
LEAD: Forget about those ghosts, ghouls and goblins that have haunted the Boston Red Sox and the Toronto Blue Jays.
This October, they're both afraid of only one thing: Roger Clemens.


Bottler Snags Slow Pepsi's Drive in India
LEAD: Bottling problems have slowed Pepsico Inc.'s drive to have a major impact in India.
Pepsi Foods Private Ltd., a local subsidiary of the giant beverage and fast-food company, has been pushing its product hard with an advertising campaign by Indian pop and movie stars for the last month.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the Vietnamese Deputy Prime Minister's visit to China misidentified him.
He is Gen.
Vo Nguyen Giap.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Home-Style Downtown


Niagara Mohawk Planning Layoffs
LEAD: The Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation announced a layoff and cost-reduction plan to cut expenses up to $64 million in the next two years.
The cuts will be most severe in Niagara Mohawk's nuclear division, where company executives said they want to cut expenses by $55 million by 1992.


What Verdict for Judge Souter?
LEAD: Five days of Senate hearings have established that David Hackett Souter is no William Brennan, the giant of a liberal-principled Justice he has been nominated to replace on the Supreme Court.
But neither is he a Robert Bork, the nominee defeated in 1987 for rattling the foundations of modern American jurisprudence.


Chip Maker Reports Loss
LEAD: After just a one-quarter return to profitability, the National Semiconductor Corporation reported a loss for its first quarter, which ended on Aug. 26.


NEC and China In Joint Ventures
LEAD: The NEC Corporation agreed to joint ventures in China to produce integrated circuits and digital telephone switching systems.
The deal, the first between a Japanese electronics concern and China, was initiated in 1988 but suspended after the Chinese Government's crackdown on demonstrators in June 1989.


Seafirst Names Top Executive
LEAD: The Seafirst Corporation, the Seattle-based subsidiary of the BankAmerica Corporation, said today that Luke S. Helms will become chairman and chief executive of Seafirst Bank on Oct. 15.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: After suspending publication since March, BARBARA ROSE, the editor, and ALEXIS GREGORY, a co-publisher, have brought The Journal of Art back to life with a new look created by MILTON GLASER.


Oil Soars To $34.71 A Barrel
LEAD: Crude oil, gasoline and heating oil prices all leaped in late futures trading yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange.


The Gorbachev Era Ends
LEAD: The Gorbachev era of Soviet history began in the spring of 1985.
It ended the summer of 1990.
Day after day the news from the Soviet Union has been that what Mikhail Gorbachev tried to do has failed and is over.
He tried to reshape the country to make it more efficient and permissive but keep it within the boundaries of the Soviet empire and under the direction of the Communist


French Reportedly Sent Iraq Chemical War Tools
LEAD: A number of French companies have exported machinery and raw material for the manufacture of chemical weapons to Iraq since 1986, a French magazine reported today.


Treasuries Fall in Slow Trading
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities dipped and interest rates rose in sluggish trading yesterday, as credit market participants sold notes and bonds because of a jump in oil prices.


Loser in Primary Calls for Unity In Connecticut
LEAD: State Representative William J. Cibes Jr., who conceded defeat last week in the Democratic primary for governor but refused to endorse the victor, today urged Democrats to unite around their party, ''top to bottom.''


Soldier Dies in Jeep Accident
LEAD: An American soldier was killed and two others injured in a jeep accident in the Saudi Arabian desert today, United States military officials said.
Their identities were withheld pending notification of relatives.
The death brought to 17 the number of fatalities among American personnel since United States military operations in the Persian Gulf began in early August.


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
CALIFORNIA (AL) - Signed Doug Rader, manager, to a two-year contract extension through the 1992 season.
CLEVELAND (AL) - Announced Mark Wiley, Jose Morales, Rich Dauer, Mike Hargrove, Luis Isaac, and Billy Williams, coaches, have been rehired for next season.


Seoul's Stance on Rice
LEAD: South Korea is seeking to have rice and other farm products exempt from import liberalization in trade talks, a senior official said on Wednesday.
The Government is also trying to persuade negotiators to allow it longer adjustment periods for cuts in internal farm subsidies, said Chang Sokan, a trade official.


Oil Price Rise Gives Algeria a $1 Billion Windfall
LEAD: The sharp increase in the price of crude oil has meant a projected windfall of $1 billion for Algeria at a time when the nation is suffering from economic turmoil, social tension and a pressing foreign debt.


Army Is Paring Its Forces Despite Buildup in Gulf
LEAD: When First Lieut.
Ivan Caban joined the Army four years ago, he was prepared to fight for his country.
But as hundreds of his fellow soldiers from Fort Sill, Okla., head to Saudi Arabia, Lieutenant Caban is not among them.


Washington Talk;   Grasping Limelight At Hearing On Souter
LEAD: Sometimes it seems that Congress exists not so much as a legislative body but as a stage set for political campaigns.
This is particularly true after Labor Day of election years, when candidates for re-election advance into overdrive.


Stargell Sets Sights On Playing
LEAD: Tony Stargell, a rookie right cornerback for the Jets, will be playing in his first Monday night game on national television against the Buffalo Bills.


Bribe Charges Backed As Northrop Era Ends
LEAD: Thomas V. Jones survived a foreign bribery scandal at the Northrop Corporation in the 1970's and went on to build the company into one of the nation's largest military contractors.
Now he is retiring as chairman amid allegations that he may have presided over the payment of bribes by Northrop in the 1980's in an effort to sell a fighter jet in South


Restaurants
LEAD: Recovering from service-and-cuisine lag after the long journey from Venice.
When Bellini by Cipriani, an American version of the renowned Harry's Bar in Venice, opened in early 1987 on Seventh Avenue, it had little of the class associated with the original.
The menu was reminiscent of Harry's Bar, as was the setting.


Bulgaria Crawls From Crisis to Crisis
LEAD: It has been three months since Bulgaria, following the lead of its Eastern European neighbors, held its first free elections in more than four decades.
Today, the country is still waiting for a new strategy to deal with an economic crisis that is fast spinning out of control.


3 in Guatemala Sought In Killing of American
LEAD: The Guatemalan authorities have ordered the arrest of three suspects in the killing in June of an American who ran a resort here, President Vinicio Cerezo was quoted today as saying.


Mets Have A Destiny - But What?
LEAD: Big day at New York arenas: The Grateful Dead were finishing up at Madison Square Garden, and at Shea Stadium there was the specter of the nearly dead.


Suit Over Death Benefits Asks, What Is a Family?
LEAD: In what is apparently the first Federal lawsuit of its kind, the surviving lesbian partner of a deceased A.T.&amp;T. employee has charged the company with discrimination for refusing to pay her the same death benefits it would have paid to a husband.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Harper Brothers


Corrections
LEAD: A diagram with an article in Science Times on Sept. 11 about the isolation of a gene for a key brain protein mislabeled the outer layer of a human brain cell.
A human cell has a membrane, not a cell wall.


Were Missed Dwellings Just Misplaced?
LEAD: A Census Bureau official said yesterday that many of the housing units New York City contends were overlooked by the agency may merely have been misplaced.


P.&amp;G. Heir Leads Effort For Salvadoran Boycott
LEAD: James Gamble, 27, is a research technician studying low-pesticide apple orchards for the state agriculture agency in Massachusetts.
He is also an heir to the Procter &amp; Gamble fortune and namesake of the cofounder of P.&amp;G. and is leading a fight to stop the company from buying Salvadoran coffee beans for its


Bailing Out of the Bailouts
LEAD: In the closing weeks of 1988, when the Reagan Administration and Congress were still pretending there was no savings and loan crisis, Federal regulators sold off 96 bankrupt S.&amp; L.'s.
It was a great deal for most of the new owners, who risked little.
But the deals were costly for the taxpayer.
The Government can still act now to save at least $2 billion - possibly twice as much - over the next 10 years by refinancing some of those deals.


2 Named to Succeed Top SCEcorp Officer
LEAD: SCEcorp, the parent of the Southern California Edison Company, yesterday named two successors to fill the shoes of Howard P. Allen, who is retiring as chairman, chief executive and president after 10 years at the helm of one of the nation's largest utilities.


George Houston Bass, Theater Professor, 52
LEAD: George Houston Bass, a professor of theater arts and African-American studies at Brown University and the literary executor and trustee of the Langston Hughes estate, died on Tuesday at Miriam Hospital in Providence, R.I.
He was 52 years old and lived in Cranston, R.I.
He died after a heart attack, his wife, Ramona, said.


Iraq Voted Out of Asian Games
LEAD: Asian countries voted overwhelmingly tonight to exclude Iraqi athletic teams from the 11th Asian Games, a regional mini-Olympics scheduled to begin in Beijing on Saturday.


Gold and Energy Move Up On Iraqi Chief's Comments
LEAD: Gold futures rose yesterday, following the lead of energy futures after President Saddam Hussein of Iraq told a newspaper that Iraq could fight for years and ''could hurt'' America.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Breaking Into Rage


Caracas Asks U.S. to Help On Oil Output
LEAD: The President of Venezuela, citing an ''inevitability of confrontation'' in the Middle East, is urging the United States to invest in increased oil production in this South American nation, which holds the largest proven oil reserves outside the Middle East.


Apple Bancorp
LEAD: Apple Bancorp Inc. said its board had voted to terminate two trusts, created last week, on the condition that Stanley Stahl, a New York developer who has made a bid for the bank company, accept all shares tendered at a price not lower than $38 a share.
Mr.
Stahl said he welcomed the termination of the trusts, which had blocked his $38-a-share offer.


Respecting the Court
LEAD: Judge David Souter has already made a large contribution to public understanding of the Supreme Court.
In his nomination hearings he demonstrated that the right-wing attack on the Court over recent years is the work of extremists outside the American constitutional tradition.
They will surely be taken less seriously from now on.


United Schedule At O'Hare Backed
LEAD: A Federal appeals court cleared the way for United Airlines to revamp its schedule at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport after Oct. 1.
The change, which was challenged by American Airlines, had been approved by the Federal Aviation Administration as a means of smoothing out evening arrivals and departures and easing congestion.


Transit Authority Is Offering Bonds
LEAD: The Metropolitan Transportation Authority in New York offered $165.9 million in service contract bonds with a maximum yield of 8.125 percent for an 7.875 percent issue due in 2016 that is priced at about $97.298.


AN ISRAELI OFFICER IS FATALLY BURNED
LEAD: Palestinian youths burned an Israeli army officer to death in his car in the Gaza Strip today, Palestinian witnesses and the army said.


The New Crunch for Welfare Hotels
LEAD: After a dramatic decline, the number of families in New York City's infamous welfare hotels has begin to climb, forcing a new crisis on Mayor David Dinkins.
Given his good-faith efforts so far, he deserves help in Albany and Washington.


Bhutto Gaining as Charges Remain Unproved
LEAD: As election campaigning begins in Pakistan in a highly charged atmosphere of bitterness and uncertainty, Benazir Bhutto appears to be gaining in strength at the expense of the politicians who ousted her in a hail of charges they cannot now prove.


On Stage
LEAD:
New From Neil Simon


Rinfret Is Said to Be Sitting on Own Funds He Donated to Campaign
LEAD: While telling Republican leaders that his campaign is broke, Pierre A. Rinfret has not spent the $540,000 of his own money that he contributed to the campaign, top Republicans said yesterday.


Sallie Mae Selling Fixed-Rate Notes
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, is offering $250 million in fixed-rate notes due in 1992 through various securities dealers.


Michael J. Kelly, 73, Newspaper Ad Official
LEAD: Michael J. Kelly, a former vice president of the Newspaper Advertising Bureau, died on Wednesday at his home in Three Lakes, Wis.
He was 73 years old and also lived in Boca Raton, Fla.


Judging Jaruzelski;   A Soviet Stooge or a Polish Patriot? The Answer May Be Long in Coming
LEAD: In a few months, Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski, the last Communist holdover serving as a head of state in Eastern Europe, will step down as President, but the debate over his place in history is likely to persist for years.


For an Odd City's Individualists, Oddball Dining
LEAD: AT a time when New York City's suitability as a place to live is being harshly re-examined, those who tough it out here are making mental checklists to justify their decisions.
Is it the job?
The $700-a-month rent-controlled apartment?
The teeming cultural scene?
The endless gastronomic possibilities?


Spanish Leader Stirs a Storm By Sending Warships to Gulf
LEAD: The dispatch of three Spanish warships may have done little to tip the strategic balance in the Persian Gulf, but it has stirred a stormy debate in Spain over whether this long-isolated country should become more involved in world affairs.


Indonesia's Classical Music: Elegant, Dreamy
LEAD: Not so long ago, American pop-music taste was satisfied by American and English pop-music performers.
But in recent years, at least some pop fans have grown increasingly sophisticated in their samplings of world music.
Most of the exotica heard here has been electrified pop music, colored pungently by native traditions but still audibly aspiring to the mass impact of modern rock.


Review/Art;   Wide Sculptural World Of Saint Clair Cemin
LEAD: Saint Clair Cemin is a 39-year-old Brazilian-born sculptor living in New York City who has received quite a bit of attention in the last three years.
He refuses to be identified with one style.
He refuses to focus on one material or on one sculptural approach.
His objects refer as much to applied art (furniture) and to popular culture (toys, for example) as they do to the history of sculpture (you name it, he has pointed toward it in his work).


Books of The Times;   Obituary for Literature, Victim of TV and Critics
LEAD:
The Death of Literature
By Alvin Kernan
230 pages. Yale University Press. $22.50.


Citing a Default, Saudis Stop Sending Jordan Oil
LEAD: Saudi Arabia today stopped all its oil deliveries to Jordan, which have long constituted about half of Jordan's daily consumption of oil, Arab oil industry executives said.


Up by 6-1, Yankees Manage to Drift Into Defeat
LEAD: Nothing is going to save the season for the Yankees, but in the final dreary days until it ends, they have this: an opportunity to dash the fading, fatalistic hopes of the Boston Red Sox.


Zulu and Mandela Groups Begin Talks
LEAD: The African National Congress said tonight that it would invite Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, the president of the Zulu-based political movement Inkatha, to a conference to work out a common strategy for stopping fighting between the two groups that has caused nearly 5,000 deaths in the last four years.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about a study that found that drug treatment programs in the United States had been neglected omitted the name of the sponsor.
It was the Institute of Medicine, a division of the National Academy of Sciences.


Report of Nonexistence Is Greatly Exaggerated
LEAD: A litter-strewn housing project in Bedford-Stuyvesant, a middle-income project a few miles away in Starrett City and three blocks of small homes in Woodside, Queens, are building blocks of New York City's case against the census.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Rinfret Withholds Money
Pierre A. Rinfret has not spent any of his own money on his Republican campaign for New York Governor as he had promised.
Page B1.
Brooklyn Gunmen Kill 4
Two gunmen entered a tire store in Bushwick and shot four employees in the head at point-blank range.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Our national tragedy is that the word 'we' has been put above the 'I,' and life has turned upside down.
The stronger personal 'I' means a stronger 'we,' something the West understands.''
- Stanislav S. Shatalin, a Kremlin economic strategist. [A6:3.]


Harvard Art Museums To Have New Director
LEAD: Harvard University is announcing today the appointment of James Cuno as Elizabeth and John Moors Cabot Director of the Harvard University Art Museums, which include the Fogg Art Museum, the Busch-Reisinger Museum and the Arthur M. Sackler Museum.


Weekend Traffic Jams Likely On the West Side Near Bridge
LEAD: The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey warned yesterday that construction work on the George Washington Bridge this weekend could cause major traffic tie-ups on the West Side of Manhattan.


4 Shot Dead In Tire Store In Brooklyn
LEAD: Four employees of a newly opened tire store in Brooklyn were shot and killed execution-style yesterday by two men who barged into the store, the police said.


British Equity Blocks Casting Of 2 Japanese
LEAD: The British Actors' Equity Association has agreed to the casting of the black American actor Ken Page as God in a new West End musical, ''Children of Eden,'' based on the Book of Genesis.
But the union has rekindled the dispute over foreign casting by refusing to allow two Japanese actresses to play and understudy the role of


Stage Set in Congress for Fight on Size and Shape of Military Budget
LEAD: Congressional aides said today that a military budget bill passed by the House on Wednesday set the stage for a long and bitter fight between the House and Senate over the size and shape of the military budget.


Ellis Island Changed Some People Forever
LEAD: To the Editor:


Colombia Kidnappings Linked to a Drug Ring
LEAD: A caller who said he represented Colombian drug traffickers claimed responsibility on their behalf today for kidnapping two top journalists and a relative of a former Government official, employees of the newspaper said.


New Rift Is Created in Budget Talks
LEAD: Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader, and the Bush Administration's chief economic policymakers disagreed today over how to proceed with an agreement to reduce the Federal budget deficit once one is reached.


Who Should Pay for the S.&amp; L. Bailout?
LEAD: Though pushed for now from the front pages of the newspapers, the cost of the savings and loan bailout is mounting.
A year ago, President Bush said the price tag wouldn't top $50 billion.
Today we know that the bailout fund will be bankrupt before Election Day, with scarcely one-third of all bankrupt and brain-dead savings institutions laid to rest.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: DAVID J. OPPENHEIM, who has been dean of the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University since 1969, is to retire next June.
Mr.
Oppenheim, 68 years old, has performed as a clarinetist with such conductors as Toscanini and with LEONARD BERNSTEIN, has headed the classical music division of Columbia Records and has worked as a television producer in both entertainment and news.


Interpublic Is Taking Over The Lowe Group of London
LEAD: THE Interpublic Group of Companies, which already owns about 35 percent of the Lowe Group, said yesterday that it would acquire the rest of the London-based agency network.


Washington at Work;   Eclipsed in the Reagan Decade, Ralph Nader Again Feels Glare of the Public
LEAD: As sightseers strolled past the Capitol a few days ago, this is what they saw: a gleaming blue sky, a majestic spill of shining white steps and a lanky man in a somber suit leaning over a nicked lectern accusing Congress of hypocrisy.


Harris Planning Plant in England
LEAD: The Harris Corporation will build a semiconductor manufacturing plant in Plymouth, England, to increase its European presence.
Under the first phase of the plan, which will cost $25 million, Harris will build an assembly and testing operation at a plant that is being expanded to 30,000 square feet.


It's Simple to Launder Money, Agents Report
LEAD: Undercover agents said today that a nine-city investigation found it was ridiculously easy to disguise the source of illegal money by paying cash for cars, jewelry and other luxuries from stores that ignore laws requiring that such large transactions be reported.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher In Volatile but Thin Trading
LEAD: The dollar mostly gained ground yesterday in light but volatile trading on world currency markets.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Aug. 18 about preparations for the mobilization of the 105th Military Airlift Group of the National Guard at Stewart International Airport in Newburgh, N.Y., misstated the number of Air National Guard units equipped with C-5A Galaxy transports.
There is one, the 105th.


Saudi Arms Sale May Be Pruned to Please Critics
LEAD: In an effort to head off a battle with critics in Congress, the Bush Administration is considering modifying a plan to sell $21 billion in arms to Saudi Arabia.


Penn State Aiming to Go on the Run
LEAD: How much does Penn State miss Blair Thomas, the running back now performing so well for the Jets?
Joe Paterno, the coach of the Nittany Lions, would know best after opening the season with two defeats.


Canberra Journal;   Can This Prickly Australian Grasp the Top Prize?
LEAD: Paul Keating, Australia's firebrand Treasurer, is a man whose charm and dignity seem carefully shielded by a veil of coarse, sometimes crude, parliamentary quips, a man who stuns an audience with his stretch of language and ever-twisting verbal gymnastics that have inspired respect, envy and hatred among his compatriots.


Auctions
LEAD:
Works by Rockwell


Billy Graham, Not Joel, Takes Long Island
LEAD: Some things made a particular impression on the people organizing the Rev.
Billy Graham's crusade here.
Long Island was very crowded.
Traffic was always backed up.
People were often anxious and distracted.
On this sprawling island with its mix of races, ethnic groups and religions, it was particularly challenging to get organized.


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums
CENTRAL PARK ZOO, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday to Friday (until 8 P.M. on Tuesday) and 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. on weekends; gift shop and cafeteria are open the same hours.
Admission: children under 3, free; ages 3 to 12, 25 cents; 65 and older, 50 cents; others, $1.
Information: 861-6030.


For Kremlin's Economist, Always a Plan
LEAD: Stanislav S. Shatalin resembles a care-worn sprite more than the Kremlin's anointed genius of free-enterprise planning as he moves unnoticed along the pocked sidewalks of this melancholy capital past the near perpetual lines of cranky Soviet shoppers.


Hermes Pan, 79, Creator of Classic Dances for Film
LEAD: Hermes Pan, the Academy Award-winning choreographer who, with Fred Astaire, created some of the most elegant, spirited and amusing dances in film history, died Wednesday at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 79 years old.


Commodities Merger Talks
LEAD: The New York Mercantile Exchange and the Commodity Exchange have made some progress in their negotiations to merge the world's biggest metals exchange and the top-ranking energy exchange, a Commodity Exchange official said yesterday.


Democrats Ask for Ethics Inquiry Over Congressman's S.&amp; L. Role
LEAD: In the first public ethics complaint filed against a member of the House concerning the savings and loan crisis, a group of Democrats said today they are asking for an inquiry into the activities of Representative Denny Smith, an Oregon Republican.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-11
Moscow's expert on free enterprise, Stanislav S. Shatalin, has drafted a grand plan for national renewal.
The proposal may finally reach the initial voting stage in Parliament today.
Page A1


Meggett Shows Up for Practice
LEAD: Dave Meggett, the mercurial big-play performer for the Giants, was back with the team today after being absent without leave Wednesday, an important practice day.
The explanations have varied.


An Overture in Africa


REGULATORY SHIFT ALLOWS U.S. BANKS TO TRADE STOCKS
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board approved an application yesterday by J. P. Morgan &amp; Company to trade corporate stocks, breaking down the Depression-era regulation that separated the banking and securities businesses.


Eastern Echo's Fans Appear Carried Away
LEAD: It is impossible to say anything discouraging about Eastern Echo.
Unbeaten in three starts including the Futurity Stakes at Belmont last Saturday, the colt has an impeccable pedigree (by Damascus and the Northern Dancer mare Glowing Tribute), a superior trainer in MacKenzie Miller, and a style that says he will get better with age and distance.


When the Public Interest Becomes the Interest of The Corporate World
LEAD: A few weeks ago, law school deans in New York received invitations to attend a ''Constitution Day'' banquet at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.
It was held Monday and the featured attraction was Associate Justice Anthony M. Kennedy of the United States Supreme Court, giving the first annual Gauer Distinguished Lecture in Law and Public


Traffic Alert
LEAD: George Washington Bridge: New Jersey-bound traffic will be disrupted through Sunday.
Article, Page B3.


Review/Film Festival;   In 'Miller's Crossing,' Silly Gangsters And a Tough Moll
LEAD: CHOOSING the right movie to open Lincoln Center's annual New York Film Festival is never easy.
The first-night audience inevitably includes a lot of people who don't often go to movies but who know what they like.
When they support the Art of Film, they don't want to be hit over the head by Art.


Trump Hires New Ad Team
LEAD: The financially troubled Trump Shuttle has switched its account from Scali, McCabe, Sloves to another New York agency, Great Scott Advertising, according to a spokeswoman for the airline.


TV Cameras in Courts, Yes, but Not in Certain Sensitive Cases;   A Federal Precedent
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Actors, the Role Transcends the Self
LEAD: To the Editor:


Spike Lee Film Project Guarded After a Threat
LEAD: The Police Department is providing security for a Spike Lee film project in Brooklyn after the white owner of a store being used as a filming location received a racist threat and the shop was vandalized, the police said.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
HARNESS RACING
Little Brown Jug to Beach Towel
Beach Towel backed up his pre-race billing as the top 3-year-old in the field to post a wire-to-wire 1 1/2-length victory to win the 45th Little Brown Jug at the Delaware (Ohio) County Fairgrounds yesterday.
Starting from the third post position, the driver, Ray Remmen, pushed Beach Towel to the rail at the start of the championship heat and was never headed, winning the third of pacing's triple crown events in 1:53 3/5.


Dinkins Tells of a Thief Who Made Good
LEAD: The Mayor of New York City digressed during a speech to a group of ministers and children in an East Harlem church yesterday to tell a parable of a petty thief who reformed, grew up and made good, thanks to a tough but caring policeman and a stern but loving mother and grandmother.


Review/Film;   Strangeness On a Train
LEAD: ''Narrow Margin'' is yet another film in which Gene Hackman is immeasurably better than his material.
This time he is caught in an action thriller about a mild-mannered deputy district attorney and a beautiful murder witness stalked on a train by two hit men.
Though the story evokes old movie formulas - from ''Strangers on a Train'' to the 1952 film ''The Narrow Margin,'' which inspired it - this film does not reinvent them.


Market Place;   An Unusual Deal for Child World
LEAD: Child World Inc., the troubled No. 2 American toy retailer, is scheduled to be sold in a highly unusual transaction in which little cash is put down and the principal holder gets a worse deal than public investors.
But stock traders appear to doubt the deal will be completed.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the front-page ''Inside'' listing yesterday about the Federal Bureau of Investigation misattributed an acknowledgment that the bureau still suffered from discrimination against Hispanic agents.
The comments were made by aides to William S. Sessions, the Director of the F.B.I, not by Mr.


Egypt's Threadbare Economy Worn Further by Gulf Crisis
LEAD: An Egyptian recording company owner named Hani Sabet was pondering the other day on how fortunes large or small may be won or lost in these days of crisis in the Persian Gulf.
Mr.
Sabet said his fortune was lost even before it was found.


Lions' Cornerback Banned for Life
LEAD: Terry Taylor, a cornerback for the Detroit Lions, became the seventh National Football League player to be banned from the league for life yesterday when the league banished him after he tested positive for illegal substances for a third time.


Review/Film;   Cuteness In the Face Of Adversity
LEAD: When an audience finds itself taking undue notice of an actor's dimples, somebody's doing too much smiling.
Certainly that's the case in ''Funny About Love,'' a grin-filled, star-crossed romance in which Gene Wilder and Christine Lahti work their way sweetly through a series of domestic disasters.


Our Towns;   Using Blue Laws To Keep Spouses From Scarlet Life
LEAD: Virginia Wasik is not a hard woman.
She does not, for example, think that her husband, Richard, should go to jail.
She just thinks he should be a little more considerate.
That, she says, is why she recently had him arrested on charges of adultery.


Philips Ends Tie to A.T.&amp; T.


Shares of Polly Peck Tumble in London
LEAD: The stock of Polly Peck International P.L.C. lost more than half its value on London's Stock Exchange today before the conglomerate asked the exchange to suspend trading.


Pinch-Hitter Lifts Astros Over Reds
LEAD: Carl Nichols, a pinch-hitter, singled home the tying and winning runs with two out in the ninth inning tonight, giving the Houston Astros a 3-2 victory over the Cincinnati Reds.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.06
11.00
8.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.39
7.38
7.83
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.32
7.31
7.75
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.75
8.74
8.22
30-YR.


Menem Firm Despite Protest On Argentina's Role in Gulf
LEAD: President Carlos Saul Menem said today that a growing storm of protest at home would not stop him from sending Argentine warships and officers to join the Persian Gulf blockade of Iraq.


Angels Re-sign Rader
LEAD: Manager Doug Rader signed a two-year contract extension with the California Angels yesterday, the team announced at a news conference.
Financial details weren't announced.
Rader is finishing his second year as the Angels' manager.
He worked on one-year contracts both seasons.
The extension puts him under contract through the 1992 season.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Ameritrust Corp., Cleveland, made three executive appointments in its credit policy and risk management group: Peter R. Butcher to executive vice president and senior credit policy officer, Kevin M. Blakely to senior vice president and Karl G. Grunawalt to senior vice president.


Hostages in Iraq and Kuwait Will Be Spared I.R.S. Audits
LEAD: The Internal Revenue Service said today that it would suspend audits and collection actions against Americans being held in Iraq and occupied Kuwait, but that it could not act until it heard from family members of the hostages.


New Visions of Familiar Movie Genres
LEAD: They are movie genres so hallowed and, alas, so overfamiliar, that they glow with the phosphorescence of cliche.
They include the film-noir love triangle, the gangster movie, the historical drama, the Nazi occupation thriller and the artist's biography.
Is it still possible to jump-start these tired vehicles in the age of the sequel, when previously owned movies seem to be the mother of invention?


Play to Go On Despite Church Order
LEAD: The RAPP Theater Company announced yesterday that it would present performances this weekend of ''The Cardinal Detoxes,'' by Thomas M. Disch, even though the company's landlord, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, has demanded that the company end the run of the play, which is being presented in a former parochial school the company leases from the archdiocese.


STUDY ALTERS VIEW ABOUT PARKINSON'S
LEAD: In an unexpected turnabout, researchers report that the symptoms of Parkinson's disease may be caused by nerve cell overactivity rather than a lack of nerve cells.


Suit Started Over Harrods
LEAD: The British businessman Roland (Tiny) Rowland started legal action today to try to wrest control of Harrods, the venerable London department store, from the Egyptian brothers who foiled his takeover attempts five years ago.


Carl M. Marcy, 77, Long Chief of Staff Of Key Senate Panel
LEAD: Carl M. Marcy, who served as chief of staff of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee for almost 20 years, died Wednesday at Anne Arundel General Hospital in Annapolis, Md.
He was 77 years old and lived in Annapolis.


Wilfred Wilson, Lawyer, 68
LEAD: Wilfred Wilson, a lawyer and retired senior vice president of a national teachers' pension fund, died on Aug. 26 at Sydney City Hospital in Sydney, Nova Scotia.
He was 68 years old and lived in Port Washington, L.I.


Crude Oil Prices Rise Sharply
LEAD: Crude oil prices climbed sharply yesterday, following big jumps for both heating oil and gasoline.


Loan for Shanghai VW
LEAD: Hit hard by China's austerity measures, Shanghai Volkswagen has signed an agreement with the Chinese Bank of Industry and Commerce to borrow $27 million to complete its 1990 production plan, the Shanghai newspaper Liberation Daily reported on Thursday.
Shanghai Volkswagen, a joint venture of the Shanghai Automobile and Tractor Industries Corporation and Volkswagen A.G.


Mandela, in a Conciliatory Mood, Agrees to Meet With Zulu Leader
LEAD: Prospects for an end to violence in black townships grew today when Nelson Mandela, the African National Congress leader, made a surprisingly warm overture to Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, the leader of the Zulu-based organization vying with the congress for influence.


Agassi a Winnner But Chang Beaten
LEAD: On a day of few surprises on the red clay court of Prater Stadium, the United States and Austria stood even at one match each after the first-day singles in the Davis Cup semifinals.


Keep Developers Out of Our Water Sources;   System Needs Study
LEAD: To the Editor:


Liberian Rebel Leader Declares a Cease-Fire
LEAD: Charles Taylor, the leader of Liberia's main rebel group, today announced a unilateral cease-fire and said he hoped that all warring parties would comply, according to a news report.


Bush to Revise Proposal to Sell Arms to Saudis
LEAD: Bowing to Congressional pressure, the White House today modified its plans to sell $21 billion in arms to Saudi Arabia and said it would present the package to Congress in stages, with the largest part deferred until next year.


GORBACHEV SEEKS SWEEPING POWERS TO MEET A 'CRISIS'
LEAD: Citing a ''serious crisis in executive power,'' President Mikhail S. Gorbachev urged the national Parliament today to grant him sweeping powers to halt the country's slide toward social and economic collapse.


When Chips Are Down, A Surprising Bunt Isn't
LEAD: Tim Teufel's idea, as things turned out, had no direct impact on the winning or losing of a game.
It had everything to do with the state of mind the Mets have created for themselves, a line of thought that became a little harder to eliminate this afternoon, after their fifth consecutive defeat, and the sixth in seven games, in what is left of a race for first place.


'Air America' Movie Doesn't Say U.S. Fought for Drugs in Laos
LEAD: To the Editor:


Minoso Is Out
LEAD: Minnie Minoso has struck out in his bid to become the first major league baseball player to appear in six decades.
Commissioner Fay Vincent directed the Chicago White Sox not to activate the 68-year-old Minoso in the final days of the season, the team said yesterday.


Mortgage Rates Rise
LEAD: Fixed-rate mortgages averaged 10.16 percent this week, up from 10.13 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.30 percent, up from 8.26 percent last week.


Minister in Exile Asserts Oilfields In Kuwait Were Mined by Iraqis
LEAD: Iraqi military forces have mined Kuwaiti oil installations, Kuwait's exiled Minister of Finance said today.


The Fed's Sensible Bank Experiment
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board has been nibbling away at the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933, which prevents commercial banks from selling stocks and bonds.
This week the Fed took a major bite, approving an application by J. P. Morgan &amp; Company to sell a limited amount of stock through a subsidiary.


Joseph Schwartzman , Pediatrician, 84
LEAD: Dr.
Joseph Schwartzman, professor emeritus of pediatrics at New York Medical College, died on Wednesday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 84 years old.


2 New AIDS Infections Deepen Florida Mystery
LEAD: Two additional patients of a Florida dentist who may have transmitted the AIDS virus to a patient have also been found to be infected, Florida health officials said yesterday.


Prices of Treasury Securities Drop
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities declined yesterday, with the longer maturities registering the largest losses.
The benchmark 30-year bond fell nearly a point, and its yield rose to 9.12 percent, its highest level since June 1988.


2 Shot and a Robber Is Slain
LEAD: Customers of a social club in Brooklyn pounced on one of two men who tried to rob them on Thursday night, and in the struggle the robber was stabbed to death, the police said yesterday.
The two men had interrupted a card game in a private room at the Red Spot Social Club at 538 Nostrand Avenue in the Flatbush section shortly after 10 P.M., the police said.


Giants Undecided
LEAD: When the Giants play the Miami Dolphins tomorrow for the first time since 1972, Mark Collins will be on injured reserve.
So who will be the starters at cornerback: Reyna Thompson, Everson Walls or Perry Williams?


Surrogate Is Denied Custody
LEAD: A Superior Court judge today awarded temporary custody of a baby to a couple who hired a woman to be a surrogate mother and were then sued by her for custody.


Political Memo;   For Cuomo, Albany Road Runs Past Washington
LEAD: While campaigning for a third term as Governor, Mario M. Cuomo has been doing many of the things that statewide candidates traditionally do.
He has worked crowds at upstate fairs, has debated commuters in Times Square and has broadcast upbeat commercials about the state's good works.


Review/Music;   Tribal Life Evoked in 'Potawatomi'
LEAD: When the University of Wisconsin at Parkside commissioned Otto Luening in 1979 to write music for its 10th anniversary, the Milwaukee native responded with ''Potawatomi Legends,'' a piece with both personal and local connections.
At the end of his 1980 autobiography, ''The Odyssey of an American Composer'' (Scribner's), Mr.


'M. Butterfly' Tour Starting
LEAD: Stuart Ostrow and David Geffen, co-producers of ''M.
Butterfly,'' have resolved their differences over the national tour of the show, which is to begin performances today in Boston as scheduled, with Mr.
Ostrow directing, Mr.
Ostrow announced yesterday.
John Breglio, a partner in Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison in New York, had applied for a preliminary injunction on Mr.


ABC News in Acquisition
LEAD: ABC News said yesterday that it would buy a majority interest in Worldwide Television News, a London-based television news agency with 1,000 clients including CBS News and Cable News Network.


Administration Offers Plan To Limit Northwest Logging
LEAD: After spending three months trying to come up with a way to save both owls and logging jobs in the Pacific Northwest, the Bush Administration acknowledged today that ''no perfect solution exists.'' It proposed a series of measures, harshly criticized by both sides of the issue, that are given little chance of passing


American Soccer Final Tonight
LEAD: The championship of the American Professional Soccer League will be decided here Saturday night between the Baltimore Bays of the American Soccer League Conference and the San Francisco Bay Blackhawks of the Western Soccer League Conference.


Lake Shikotsu Journal;   Japan Into the Woods: Are Golf Courses Nature?
LEAD: Some of the out-of-town visitors who come here to crowd the rocky shores of one of Japan's last unspoiled lakes came up with what they thought was a splendid idea a few years ago -creating an elaborate sanctuary for swans and other rare species of water fowl from around the world.


Arthur L. Amundsen, A.S.P.C.A. Official, 85
LEAD: Arthur L. Amundsen, former director of operations for the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, died on Thursday at a friend's home, where he was staying as part of the Good Samaritan Hospice Program in Bay Shore, L.I.
He was 85 years old and lived in Valley Stream, L.I.


Lease Is Signed In Washington For Trade Center
LEAD: Plans for the construction of an International Cultural and Trade Center on Pennsylvania Avenue appeared to be back on track today with the signing of a 30-year master lease agreement by the General Services Administration.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Disputes Over Fees
LEAD: Dealing with overcharges by lawyers and accountants can be daunting.
But consumers are speaking out to professional societies and, in some instances, provoking change.


Harry Palevsky, 71, An A-Bomb Developer
LEAD: Harry Palevsky, one of the early researchers in nuclear physics who helped to develop the atomic bomb, died Monday at Community Memorial Hospital in Ventura, Calif.
He was 71 years old and lived in Ojai, Calif.


Suspect in 10 Sexual Murders Is Portrayed as Unremorseful
LEAD: A man accused of being a serial murderer was easily provoked to kill and felt little remorse for his victims, according to his confessions, which were released today.


U.S. and Austria Split


Review/Piano;   A Soviet Teen-Ager Makes His American Debut
LEAD: To paraphrase T. S. Eliot, I have been to hear the latest Russian transmit Chopin through his fingertips.
This time the transmitter in question is named Yevgeny Kissin, an 18-year-old pianist from Moscow who made his American debut on Thursday evening as soloist in Chopin's Concerto No. 1 in E minor with the New York Philharmonic.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about the faculty strike at Temple University misstated a faculty union offer.
The union did not propose reducing the salaries of new faculty members.


Loretta Tupper, 84, A Radio Entertainer
LEAD: Loretta Clemens Tupper, a radio entertainer of the 1930's and 1940's who appeared more recently in television commercials, died Tuesday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
She was 84 years old and lived in Queens.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: George Washington Bridge: New Jersey-bound traffic will be disrupted through 6 A.M.
Monday.
Tie-ups are also expected on the West Side of Manhattan.


Alaska G.O.P. Nominee Abandons the Ticket
LEAD: The Alaska Republican Party has been thrown into disarray by the defection of its nominee for lieutenant governor to a third-party ticket led by former Gov.
Walter J. Hickel.


New Bush Tone on Capital Gains Hints at a Budget Compromise
LEAD: As Congressional and Administration budget negotiators wrestled with an impasse over cutting the capital gains tax rate, President Bush pointedly avoided criticizing a suggestion by the Senate Republican leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, that the tax cut be severed from the budget package.


F.D.I.C. Sues Neil Bush And Others at Silverado
LEAD: Federal regulators today sued Neil M. Bush, the President's son, and other directors, officers and lawyers of a defunct Denver savings and loan association, saying their ''gross negligence'' had led to a collapse that could cost taxpayers more than $1 billion.


Can Heads Be Counted in a Dynamic City?
LEAD: When New York City officials said the Census Bureau had failed to count hundreds of thousands of housing units in the five boroughs - and, they implied, the people living in them - they were challenging more than the Federal agency's arithmetic.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The 1991 Jefferson Lecturer in the humanities is GERTRUDE HIMMELFARB, professor emeritus of history at the graduate school of the City University of New York.
Established by the National Endowment for the Humanities, the Jefferson Lecture recognizes distinguished achievement.
Professor Himmelfarb, the author of many books on Victorian England, is the 20th lecturer and will collect $10,000 for the honor when she speaks in Washington on May 1, 1991.


Post-Communist Blues
LEAD: Poland's trenchant writer Adam Michnik now says, ''We have a strange feeling that we are losing.'' It is an important message from Eastern Europe, somewhat overlooked in the preoccupation with the Persian Gulf crisis, which also hurts Eastern economies.


Spurs to Drop Wingate
LEAD: San Antonio Spurs officials said yesterday that the guard David Wingate would not be back with the team after his indictment on rape charges in Maryland.


Guam to Appeal Striking Down of Abortion Curbs
LEAD: The government of the Pacific island of Guam said today that it would appeal a Federal court decision striking down a law that prohibits abortion in nearly all circumstances.


After a Few Steps Tpward a New Life, an Untimely End
LEAD: With his long hair and beard and old woolen coats, Thomas Ebbers looked like so many of the homeless men who roam New York City's streets and subways.
But friends said he was special, a former recluse struggling not only to put his own life back together but to help other homeless people do the same.


Books of The Times;   How Two Ballerinas See The Trees and the Forest
LEAD:
Holding On to the Air
By Suzanne Farrell, with Toni Bentley
322 pages. Summit Books. $19.95.
The Shape of Love.
By Gelsey Kirkland and Greg Lawrence
237 pages. Doubleday. $19.95.


William G. Andrews, Executive, 83
LEAD: Willliam G. Andrews, a former vice president of Grand Union Food Stores, died on Saturday at his home in Winter Haven, Fla., where he had lived since he retired in 1971.
He was 83 years old.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 22, 1990
LEAD:
Companies


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''Self-styled leaders of the Republican Party turned their backs on New York and turned their backs on me.''
- Pierre A. Rinfret, the Republican nominee for Governor. [26:1.]


Richard E. Goodman, Ad Executive, 62
LEAD: Richard E. Goodman, an advertising executive, died on Tuesday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 62 years old and lived in Chatham Township, N.J.


Court Rules Abortion Opponent Won Illinois Legislative Primary
LEAD: The Illinois Supreme Court today declared State Representative Penny Pullen winner of a hotly contested legislative contest that was seen as a test of the importance of the abortion issue with voters.


Tibet After Martial Law: Whispers of Protest
LEAD: Five months after martial law was lifted here, a sullen calm has returned to the narrow lanes of this holy city.
But Chinese marksmen are still perched on the roofs of buildings overlooking the central square, and many Tibetans suspect that their guns have not been silenced for long.


Football and Politics Square Off at Michigan State
LEAD: When George Perles coaches Michigan State against Notre Dame here Saturday, one of the 76,000 fans attending the Spartans' home opener will be John DiBiaggio, the university's president.
He has been a regular spectator for his six years on the job and does not plan to change that habit.


What of the Other Lost Spoils of Hitler's War?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mets' Collapse Deepens With 5th Loss in Row
LEAD: The Mets steepened their headlong rush toward oblivion today when they managed only four hits, lost to the Chicago Cubs by 4-3, and ran their losing streak to five games with only 12 to play in a collapsing pennant race.


Big Apple in 1909
LEAD: To the Editor:


Florida Executes Convict for Killing Store Owner
LEAD: A 61-year-old inmate was executed in Florida's electric chair this morning for killing the owner of a lingerie shop in Jacksonville six years ago.


Leaders Bluntly Prime Iraq For 'Mother of All Battles'
LEAD: Iraq's leaders today issued their most bellicose statement of the Persian Gulf crisis, urging citizens to prepare for ''the mother of all battles,'' and backed it up with the retaliatory expulsion from Baghdad of diplomats from the United States, Western Europe and Egypt.


Xu Xiangqian, a Long March Veteran, Dies at 88
LEAD: Gen.
Xu Xiangqian, a scion of a landowner's family who joined the Communist underground in the 1920's and came to be one of China's most venerable military leaders, died this morning.
He was 88 years old.


Dead Soldier Identified
LEAD: The Army today identified the American soldier killed Thursday in a vehicle accident in Saudi Arabia as Specialist Robert Allan Noonan, 21 years old.
He was a Cincinnati native and an anti-armor weapons specialist in Company D, 1st Battalion, 505th Parachute Infantry Regiment of the 82d Airborne Division.


SAUDIS TWIST ARMS MUCH HARDER NOW
LEAD: An influential Saudi Government official describes the new attitude as ''No more Mr.
Nice Guy.''


Irving N. Hinnau, Executive, 66
LEAD: Irving N. Hinnau, a retired executive of the International Business Machines Corporation, died on Tuesday at his home in Stamford, Conn.
He was 66 years old.
His family said he died of melanoma.
Mr.
Hinnau graduated from the University of Cincinnati and held a master's degree in business administration from Columbia.


Defenders and Detractors View Banks' New Powers
LEAD: Bank regulators and Bush Administration officials said today that the Federal Reserve's decision to further relax restrictions that had prevented commercial banks from trading corporate securities would probably not lead to the speculative stock trading and underwriting problems that caused the ban to be written into the Glass-Steagall


Philadelphia Stalls Bankruptcy
LEAD: Mayor W. Wilson Goode announced a series of steps today to stall the city's bankruptcy until Dec. 1.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JAMES B. HUNT JR., a former Governor of North Carolina, had a run-in with a cow last weekend.
The cow won.


Suffolk Chief Offers Layoffs, Not Tax Rise
LEAD: Faced with a slowing economy and continued resistance to taxes, the Suffolk County Executive today proposed a 1991 budget that would lay off 295 county employees and reduce services but not require an increase in county property taxes.


Shock for a Celtic
LEAD: Dee Brown of the Boston Celtics said he was held at gunpoint yesterday by several Wellesley, Mass., police officers who thought he was a bank-robbery suspect.


Indians Drop Blue Jays Into a Tie
LEAD: Sandy Alomar's bases-empty home run in the top of the 13th inning gave the Cleveland Indians a 2-1 victory over Toronto tonight, dropping the Blue Jays back into a first-place tie in the American League East.


Brokers Play Down New Threat
LEAD: Securities industry executives said yesterday that J. P. Morgan &amp; Company's newly granted ability to underwrite stocks was not much of a near-term threat.
But, they said, it could lead to fundamental changes in their industry and bring new riskiness into the nation's banking system if other banks get similar authority.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bayer A.G., Leverkusen, West Germany, said it had received permission from all necessary regulatory agencies to acquire the polysar rubber division of Nova Corp., Calgary, Alberta, a petrochemicals company.
Terms were not disclosed.


Filipinos Protest Continued Presence of U.S. Bases


CHRONICLE
LEAD: EDWARD DWIGHT is to be the sculptor for a memorial to the black soldiers of the American Revolution.
The memorial, for which Congress has given a two-acre site on the Mall in Washington, is being designed by a team of architects, headed by MARSHALL E. PURNELL.
The project was conceived by MAURICE A.


Film Festival/Two Portraits: One of Romance in France, One of Crime in New York;   Drug Lord Reigns Supreme Amid Urban Decadence
LEAD: When confronted by three muggers in a deserted subway car, Frank White (Christopher Walken) stares at them coldly, adjusts his belt so that the gun at his waist is clearly visible, casually tosses a large wad of cash in their direction and suggests that they look him up at the Plaza Hotel if they're ever interested in a better line of work.


Hell No More
LEAD: One of the breakfast shows used television magic the other day to reunite an Army mother in Saudi Arabia for a few minutes with her husband and small son back home in North Carolina.


Review/Film Festival;   A Cannes Winner From the U.S.S.R.
LEAD: In the Far Eastern Soviet city of Suchan, as depicted in Vitaly Kanevski's austere and haunting ''Freeze-Die-Come to Life,'' an unexpected story unfolds.
The loosening of constraints upon the imaginations of Soviet film makers has meant the collapse of countless stereotypes regarding Soviet life, and those governing depictions of life in the gulag have been among the first to go.


Life-Cycle Studies: Imperfect Science
LEAD: Scientists are struggling to devise a way to help consumers, regulators and others choose among competing products, like those made from paper or plastic, based on their environmental impact.
But researchers say that despite a spate of studies that make such comparisons, a valid method is not likely to be found for years.


Electrolux Seeks Sale of Subsidiary
LEAD: Electrolux A.B., the Swedish appliance maker, said it wanted to sell its commercial services business unit. which had revenue in 1989 of 3.9 billion kronor, the equivalent of about $675 million.
Electrolux said the unit employs 30,000 people in environmental cleaning and janitorial services.


Donald Cawley, Ex-Police Head, Is Dead at 61
LEAD: Donald F. Cawley, who was called an ''innovator'' and ''an enormously able professional'' when he was appointed as the 30th Commissioner of the New York City Police Department in 1973, died yesterday at his home in Massapequa, L.I.


Yankees Oblige Red Sox in a Time of Need
LEAD: Their ugly little season has been reduced to that of spoilers, but the Yankees can't even seem to do that right.
Instead, they are The Cure.
Earlier this week, they helped push the Toronto Blue Jays into first place in the American League East.
Last night at the Stadium, they patched up the cracks in the sinking ship known as the Boston Red


Harley-Davidson
LEAD: Harley-Davidson Inc. said it had laid off 180 of the 1,800 employees at its Holiday Rambler Corporation recreational vehicle subsidiary in response to continued softness in the market and consumer uncertainty brought about by the Persian Gulf crisis.
The company also said it had discontinued Holiday Rambler's Aviator Van Conversions operations here and closed its Woodland, Calif., Utilimaster commercial vehicle manufacturing plant.


More Cigarettes In RJR-Soviet Deal
LEAD: Expanding last week's sale of 14 billion cigarettes to the Soviet Union, RJR Nabisco said it planned to sell an additional 3.2 billion cigarettes.
RJR Nabisco also said that it planned to speed up shipment by air-freighting the first cigarettes, beginning next week.
It expects cigarettes to begin arriving late this month.


Japanese Gain In Beer Output
LEAD: Japan became the world's fourth-largest beer brewer last year, surpassing Britain, the Kirin Brewery Company, Japan's biggest, said on Thursday.


Robert B. Spence, 89, Psychology Professor
LEAD: Robert Beckett Spence, a professor emeritus of psychology at Teachers College at Columbia University, died on Wednesday at his home in a retirement community in Newtown, Pa.
He was 89 years old.


Review/Film Festival;   On Oppression of Women in China
LEAD: The most dazzling element in ''Ju Dou'' is the everyday work of its characters.
In a Chinese village in 1920, a beautiful young woman named Ju Dou is married off to a belligerent older man who owns a factory where fabric is dyed.
Though this weighty film is about the sins of the fathers, the oppression of women and passion challenging tradition, cheerful-looking banners of ruby, sapphire and topaz-colored cloth are hung to dry in the open air.


Bicycle Called a Danger
LEAD: Federal safety officials are being urged by Consumers Union to recall a bicycle because, the group says, its brakes are unsafe.


Jackie Moran, Actor, 67
LEAD: John E. (Jackie) Moran, who was a child actor in films in the 1930's, died on Thursday.
He was 67 years old.


300,000 Lose Water Supply In New Jersey
LEAD: About 300,000 people in Jersey City, Hoboken, and Lyndhurst were left without water for three and a half hours yesterday when an aqueduct ruptured.


Judge Refuses To Cut Bail For Keating
LEAD: A judge refused today to lower the $5 million bail he had set for Charles H. Keating Jr., forcing the former savings and loan executive, who insists he is now virtually penniless, to remain locked up in a county jail.


Aon Halts Its Offer For Corroon &amp; Black
LEAD: The Aon Corporation, a Chicago-based insurance holding company,withdrew its unsolicited $840 million bid yesterday for the Corroon &amp; Black Corporation after its target rejected the cash offer earlier this week.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a book review on Thursday about ''The Book of J'' omitted the name of the publisher.
It is Grove Weidenfeld.


Film Festival/Two Portraits: One of Romance in France, One of Crime in New York;   A 1934 Work Is Half The Legacy Of Jean Vigo
LEAD: The highlight of the current New York Film Festival could well turn out to be the single performance today at 5 P.M. of Jean Vigo's 1934 ''L'Atalante.''


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article on Wednesday about grants made by the Fund for New American Plays incompletely listed the authors of ''Mule Bone,'' which is to be presented by Lincoln Center Theater.
They are Langston Hughes and Zora Neale Hurston.


Thomas McGrath, 74, A Poet and Teacher
LEAD: Thomas McGrath, a poet who was widely published in the last four decades, died on Thursday at the Abbott-Northwestern Hospital in Minneapolis.
He was 74 years old and lived in Minneapolis.


Police Criticized in San Diego Killings
LEAD: Five years after a serial killer, or killers, began attacking prostitutes and other young women here, the San Diego police are still searching for suspects and a special task force has begun investigating the investigation itself.


Girl, 12, Shot in a Playground
LEAD: A 12-year-old girl was shot last night in a Harlem playground, the police said.
The girl, who was not identified because of her age, was in serious but stable condition early today at Harlem Hospital, the police said.
They said she was shot in the right shoulder about 10 P.M.
Friday at 45 West 139th Street.


Milton Hutner, Lawyer, 83
LEAD: Milton Hutner, a New York lawyer who specialized in matrimonial cases before he retired 15 years ago, died on Saturday in the Palm Gardens nursing home in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 83 years old and lived in Palm Beach.


Carolyn Haft Weds
LEAD: Carolyn Anne Haft, a daughter of Robert S. Haft and Pamela W. Haft, both of New York, was married yesterday to Jeff McAdam Muller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mervin E. Muller of Columbus, Ohio.
The Rev.
Ellen Johnson-Fay, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at St.
Clement's Estate in Portland, Conn.


Trading Focuses on Pound As Dollar Finishes Mixed
LEAD: The dollar ended mixed in thin activity yesterday, caught in the crossfire of trading in the British pound.


Dow Declines 5.94 Points as Trading Soars
LEAD: Stock prices dipped a bit yesterday in the first day of heavy trading in a month.


Navy Conducts Inspections in Gulf


Hilton Planning Share Buyback
LEAD: BEVERLY HILLS, Calif., Sept. 21 (Reuters) - The Hilton Hotels Corporation said it plans to buy back up to six million of its common shares from time to time in the open market or through negotiated purchases.
Six million shares represents about 12.5 percent of Hilton's 48.1 million shares outstanding.


Fare Advice to Air Travelers: In Case of Discount Sale, Leap
LEAD: The airline industry is once again planning fare increases that are expected to be followed by restricted, short-term discounts to lure leisure travelers.


Nathan Hale Statue Is Dedicated Anew at City Hall Park


Profit? Loss? A Primer for Soviets
LEAD: Nikolai V. Panteleyev has the unenviable task of creating an accounting profession in a nation unfamiliar with profits and losses, let alone concepts like intangible assets, good will or fair value.
He likens the job to teaching people to ''learn Chinese overnight.''


Polly Peck Backs Chief
LEAD: The directors of Polly Peck International P.L.C. said today that the board ''deplores the recent attacks on the chairman'' of the conglomerate, who has been questioned by Government investigators.


Henry Lax, Physician, 95
LEAD: Henry Lax, an internist and a cardiologist, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 95 years old and died of a stroke, his son Peter said.


About New York;   Key to Survival Lies in Spirit Of Teen-Agers
LEAD: ''You're talking about kids who are eating and sleeping death,'' said Carol A. Beck, principal of Thomas Jefferson High School in the East New York section of Brooklyn. ''The stories that are news stories to you are friends and family to them.''


U.S. PANEL INDICTS 5 MORE LAWMAKERS
LEAD: A Federal grand jury indicted five more legislators today on charges involving bribery and drugs, bringing to 10 the number of lawmakers implicated in a Federal Bureau of Investigation inquiry of vote-buying in the South Carolina Statehouse.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Regulators Sue Neil Bush


Gain in Disaster Response Seen Since Hugo
LEAD: The Government was not as well prepared to deal with a major disaster when a hurricane struck the Caribbean and southeastern United States a year ago as it is now, a Federal emergency official said Thursday.


The Mayor Visits the Red Apple, Finally
LEAD: He waited far too long and sent one mixed signal after another.
But after eight months of procrastination, Mayor David Dinkins marched right into two boycotted Korean grocery stores yesterday -leaving no doubt that when he wants to be the healer and conciliator that so many New Yorkers had hoped for, he knows how to play that role.


Kuwaiti Volunteers at Work on the Political Front


Your Money;   Shielding Children After Remarriage
LEAD: When people who have children get a divorce and remarry, special care needs to be taken in financial and estate planning - particularly if the new spouse also has children from a previous marriage.


The Wrong Way to Clean House
LEAD: Oklahomans voted 2 to 1 on Tuesday to put a 12-year limit on state legislators' terms.
California and Colorado have similar proposals on their November ballots; opinion polls in both states indicate overwhelming public support, and national polls show the same.
Has the time arrived?


Patents;   Clarifying Questions on Technology
LEAD: A broad piece of patent legislation dealing with advances in technology moved closer to approval this week.
The bill is intended to clarify such questions as where a patent should be issued for inventions in outer space or who owes a royalty on offspring of patented animals.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: GILBERT CATES, a producer and director who was responsible for last year's Academy Awards program, has been named dean of the new School of Theater, Film and Television at the University of California at Los Angeles.
But Mr.
Cates, who directed ''I Never Sang for My Father,'' among other films, and was a two-term president of the Directors Guild of America, is not leaving Hollywood permanently for U.C.L.A.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Dried Arrangements
LEAD: Fields, byways and gardens are now filled with end-of-the-season pods, berries, fruits and flowers that can be used for dry arrangements.
Some dry on the plants and are ready for use; some have to be cut and then dried.
Pods cut before frost, after they split open to release seeds, are particularly decorative.


Religion Notes
LEAD: Yom Kippur Plea One week from today is Yom Kippur, the Day of Attonement , on which Jews traditionally undertake a voluntary fast by refraining for 25 hours from all food and drink.
As in past years, a national organization, Mazon, is trying to harness this sacrifice for a good cause.
The organization is asking that American Jews ''help to end the involuntary fast of millions'' by contributing to Mazon the amount of money they would have spent on food had they not fasted on Yom Kippur.


Austrians Seeking Czech Plane Deal
LEAD: An Austrian trading company said it was negotiating to buy Soviet airliners from Czechoslavakia's state airline. ''If the deal comes off, we would be the first people in Western Europe to buy Eastern planes,'' said Herwig Winkler, the manager of Aircom Luftfahrthandels.


Pirates Edge Ahead
LEAD: Zane Smith pitched a five-hitter and Sid Bream broke a scoreless tie with a one-out double in the seventh inning tonight to lead the Pittsburgh Pirates past the St.
Louis Cardinals, 1-0.


Serbs Endanger Displaced Hungarians
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sununu Resumes Talks on Rights Bill
LEAD: John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff, has quietly resumed negotiations with a Democratic lawmaker and a civil rights advocate over an anti-discrimination bill that President Bush has threatened to veto, Congressional aides and Administration officials said today.


ExaminingThe N.F.L.Conscience
LEAD: As soon as Dan Hampton plops onto a trainer's table after a Chicago Bears game, he lights a cigar and yells, ''Gimme a double with cheese.'' But the 6-foot-5-inch, 275-pound defensive tackle is not ordering a burger.
He's ordering two ice bags and two Ace bandages for his knees, which have had arthroscopic surgery 10 times, five on each knee.


U.S. Begins Airlift of Soviet Christians
LEAD: The State Department and a private relief organization said today that they had begun a special airlift to bring nearly 6,000 Soviet Christians to the United States.


DINKINS SUPPORTS SHUNNED GROCERS
LEAD: Taking sides in one of the most divisive disputes of his administration eight months after it began, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday went to two Korean-owned groceries in Brooklyn that have been the object of a bitter black-led boycott and bought about $10 worth of produce.


FUTURES/OPTIONSSoybeans Decline Again; Corn and Wheat Rise a Bit
LEAD: Prices of soybean futures fell yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade, continuing a weeklong trend prompted by a diminished chance of weekend frost.
Corn and wheat rose slightly.


Cleanup Continues After Tanker Leak in Michigan


N.A.A.C.P. Urges Souter's Defeat, Citing Earlier Statements on Race
LEAD: The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the nation's oldest and largest civil rights organization, urged the Senate today to reject the nomination of Judge David H. Souter to the Supreme Court.


Explosives and Guns Are Found In Trunks on the Upper East Side
LEAD: Two steamer trunks containing automatic weapons and explosives were discovered last night in the hallway of an apartment building on the Upper East Side, and the police said that officers later found more explosives inside an apartment there.


Boeing Outlook On Plane Orders
LEAD: Executives at the Boeing Company say some of the aerospace concern's long backlog of jetliner orders could evaporate if conditions continue to deteriorate in the airline industry.
The steady flow of new orders that the company has enjoyed has slowed, the executives said in an interview with the editorial board of The Seattle Post


A. C. Rose Weds Ann S. Copeland
LEAD: Ann Stuart Copeland, the daughter of Ann Bellah Copeland of New York and Locust Valley, L.I., and Gerret van Sweringen Copeland of Greenville, Del., was married yesterday to Andrew Carnegie Rose, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Harden Rose of New York and Bridgehampton, L.I.
The Rev.
Thomas D. Bowers, assisted by Canon Samuel Van Culin, performed the ceremony at St.


Ceausescu's Son Convicted And Sentenced to 20 Years
LEAD: Nicu Ceausescu, the youngest son of the former Romanian dictator, was convicted by a military tribunal today of ''instigation to murder'' and sentenced to 20 years in prison.


Miss Barrios Wed To John C. O'Neill
LEAD: Lauren Claire Barrios, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Digby W. Barrios of Ridgefield, Conn., was married yesterday to John Colin O'Neill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger W. O'Neill of Cedar Grove, N.J.
The Rev.
Canon Charles W. Stubbs officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Ridgefield, Conn.


Lebanese Chief Signs a New Power-Sharing Law
LEAD: President Elias Hrawi signed into law today a package of constitutional amendments setting forth a new political order for power sharing between Muslims and Christians in an attempt to end 15 years of civil war.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about legislation to provide incentives for recycling newspapers misstated the amount of recycled newsprint used by The Asbury Park (N.J.) Press and The Star Ledger in Newark.
The Press uses recycled paper for about 33 percent of its production and The Star Ledger uses it for about 18 percent, said spokesmen for the newspapers.


Stephen F. Kolzak TV Executive, 37
LEAD: Stephen F. Kolzak, former senior vice president of casting and talent at Columbia Pictures Television, died on Wednesday at Sherman Oaks (Calif.) Community Hospital.
He was 37 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
His family said he had died of AIDS.
Mr.
Kolzak, who was born in Hartford and was a graduate of Harvard, was previously manager of West Coast casting for NBC and vice president of casting for Embassy


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about talks between two black organizations in South Africa misidentified the capital of Natal province.
It is Pietermaritzburg, not Durban.


U.S.-Soviet Differences Are Said to Threaten Arms-Cut Pact
LEAD: A senior American official said today that serious differences with the Soviet Union must be ironed out in the coming weeks if a conventional arms-reduction treaty is to be ready for signing at a 35-member meeting scheduled for Nov. 19 in Paris.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in The Home Section on Thursday about discount sources for home furnishings in Lower Manhattan misstated the telephone number for Pearl River Emporium.
The number is (212) 431-4770.


Review/Dance;   Cunningham Is an 'Event' in Lyons
LEAD: In the huge festival devoted to American dance that is being staged here this month by the fourth International Dance Biennial, Merce Cunningham is king.


Zuckerman Talks Reported With Sony on Coliseum Site
LEAD: Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the New York developer, is negotiating with the Sony Corporation to form a venture that might develop the Coliseum site on Columbus Circle in Manhattan, several real estate executives said this week.


An Aden-Bile Showdown
LEAD: Most of the attention at today's Mercedes Mile down Fifth Avenue will be on the talent-packed elite men's and women's races, which begin at 4 P.M.


Rinfret, Denouncing Republican Leaders, Vows to Stay in Race
LEAD: Vowing to continue his campaign for governor of New York but to turn it into a populist struggle, the Republican candidate, Pierre A. Rinfret, yesterday turned on the party leaders who had nominated him and accused them of being interested only in their own political fortunes.


Padres Drop McKeon As General Manager
LEAD: Jack McKeon was dismissed as general manager by the San Diego Padres last night, ending a decadelong stay.


In Jordan, Saddam Hussein Is 'King'
LEAD: First, the masked men on the roof burned Israel's Star of David flag, and the crowd cheered.
Then it was the turn of the Stars and Stripes, and the crowd cheered louder.
Finally, it was the turn of the Soviet Union's hammer and sickle banner, and the cheers rolled on.


Alfonso Cata, 53, A Dancer, Teacher And Ballet Director
LEAD: Alfonso Cata, artistic director of the Ballet du Nord in Roubaix, France, died on Sept. 15 at the Hospital of Tourcoing, near Roubaix.
He was 53 years old.


32 Month-Term in Pentagon Bribery Case
LEAD: William M. Galvin, a leading figure in the sweeping military procurement scandal that came to light in 1988, was sentenced to 32 months in prison today for bribing two senior Pentagon officials to influence the awarding of lucrative contracts.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Victory Over Faldo Puts Beck in Semifinals
Chip Beck survived Nick Faldo's runaway start and beat the defending champion, 2 and 1, yesterday to reach the semifinals of the world match play championship at Wentworth, England.
Beck led by as many as five holes after Faldo, the Masters and British Open champion from


Keep Developers Out of Our Water Sources
LEAD: To the Editor:


Syracuse Is Putting Its Fate in Graves's Hands
LEAD: Marvin Graves, the nifty Syracuse quarterback who practiced with the team last year as a freshman but was ineligible to play, has been upgraded by his coach, Bill MacPherson.


Monopoly Status Led Cable TV to Gouge
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sundstrand Tie To Milton Roy
LEAD: The Sundstrand Corporation, an aerospace contractor, and the Milton Roy Company, an industrial equipment maker, signed a merger agreement that they expect to be put into effect about the end of the year.
Under the agreement, Milton Roy shareholders will receive $28 cash for each outstanding share of the St.


Domino's Pizza In Marriott Pact
LEAD: Domino's Pizza will be on the menu at schools around the nation under an agreement the pizza delivery company signed with the Marriott Corporation.
A subsidiary of Marriott, based in Bethesda, Md., manages school lunch programs at more than 200 United States school districts, serving 120 million meals a year.


Surgery for Salvador
LEAD: The cold war is over, but El Salvador lies trapped in a twilight zone where nothing seems to change.
Peace talks between Government and guerrillas are deadlocked.
Insurgents say they won't lay down their arms until agreement is reached on purging notorious violators of human rights from the army and security forces.


News Summary
LEAD: International
2-6
The Soviet leader asked for power to halt the country's slide towards social and economic collapse.
President Gorbachev's request came as the Supreme Soviet postponed a vote on a plan to shift toward a market-based economy over 500 days.
Page 1
U.S. begins airlift of Soviet Christians


CHASE MANHATTAN TO CUT 5,000 JOBS AND TRIM DIVIDEND
LEAD: In a telling new sign of the problems afflicting the nation's banks, the Chase Manhattan Corporation said yesterday that it would take a $1 billion charge against earnings and reduce its work force by 5,000 employees.
The nation's second-largest bank also took the unusual and humbling step of cutting its stock dividend by more than 50 percent as part of a drive to rebuild its financial strength.


Bridge
LEAD: A common bidding dilemma afflicts the player who has a five-card major suit and a weak balanced hand when his partner has opened one no-trump.
To pass or not to pass, that is the question.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.06
8.06
8.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.37
7.39
7.77
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.35
7.32
7.75
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.83
8.75
8.24
30-YR.


Woman Says Police Officers Bullied and Threatened Her
LEAD: A book editor who had demanded that a group of New York City police officers stop taunting her taxi driver said yesterday that she was yanked from the cab, handcuffed and taken to a midtown jail cell, where officers held her incommunicado for nearly five hours and subjected her to a torrent of threats, lewd insults and anti


Yearlong Leak of Radioactivity Is Reported
LEAD: Radioactive water may have leaked for nearly a year from a plant at the Hanford nuclear reservation before being discovered, the Federal project's manager has disclosed.


George D. Bjurman, Retired Financial Manager, 84
LEAD: George D. Bjurman, a retired investment portfolio manager, died Monday at the Medical Center of the University of California at Los Angeles.
He was 84 years old and lived in Los Angeles.


Police Investigating Bias In Vandalism Linked to Lee Film
LEAD: The police said yesterday that the department's anti-bias unit was investigating vandalism against property owned by a white man who had rented a building to a Spike Lee film production, but the man denied that the incident was racially motivated.


Rugby's Thrill: Mud and Bruises For Gentlemen
LEAD: HIS freckled skin flushed under the late summer sun, Vinny Ryan of Limerick, Ireland, shouted encouragement to his team. ''Fine kick, McRoyne!
Luvly ball, Paddy!''


Dozier's Top Choice
LEAD: Baseball or football?
That is becoming less and less a question for D.J.
Dozier, who has told Minnesota Vikings general manager, Mike Lynn, that he will enter the New York Mets' instructional league.


Evening Hours;   Doing Good By Having A Good Time
LEAD: About 450 New Yorkers, including Jean MacArthur in her first public appearance after a two-year illness, filled the Plaza ballroom Monday to honor Milton Petrie for his generosity to victims of crime.
The evening raised more than $400,000 for the National Victim Center founded by Alexander von Auersperg and his sister Ala Isham.


Fashion: On the Street
LEAD: For a while women tried combining the new longer jackets with skirts that are knee-length or below, but the look never really caught on.
Then, in her spring collection, the designer Donna Karan paired the jackets with short skirts and, it seems, started something.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Recent Sales
LEAD: Chester, Conn.
$594,000
1 Winthrop Road
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 200-year-old, renovated Cape Cod; separate 1,175-square-foot guest house, 7.7 acres; taxes $3,965.
Essex, Conn.
$245,000
105 North Main Street
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 170-year-old farmhouse; country kitchen, screened porch; taxes $1,292.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Poland Bracing for Election
Poland, tired but exhilarated after 14 months of a Solidarity-led Cabinet and Parliament, is bracing for a presidential election campaign that threatens to divide the nation and jeopardize economic and political change.
Page 3.
Grocery Boycott Continues


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. What would you recommend to clean dirty aluminum siding?
If cleaning results are unsatisfactory, can the siding be painted?


School Is Sued Over Forced Volunteer Work
LEAD: A group of parents is suing a school system over its new program requiring students to perform 60 hours of volunteer work.


Taking on the World From 125th Street
LEAD: Kinshasha Conwill has been at the Studio Museum in Harlem 10 years now and its executive director since 1988.
In that time she has become increasingly visible, and her museum has become an ever more important forum, at a time when interest in black artists continues to grow.
The changes in the museum reflect the personality and dynamism of the 39-year-old director, who has been working to expand and expose it while securing the identity it has been building throughout its 23 years.


Man Killed and Powder Is Poured on Body
LEAD: One man was shot and killed and another seriously wounded yesterday in upper Manhattan by men who forced their way inside an apartment in Washington Heights, the police said.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. What would you recommend to clean dirty aluminum siding?
If cleaning results are unsatisfactory, can the siding be painted?


Rent-A-Government
LEAD: Anyone who doubts the urgency of upcoming Congressional negotiations to clean up Federal campaign financing might drop by Vice President Dan Quayle's house in Washington this afternoon.
A select group of wealthy Republican Party contributors, lured by the promise of cozy dinners and ''closed door'' meetings with key Government officials, will be there for a private reception - opening a two-day fund-raising program on behalf of Republican candidates for the


College Football;   Princeton Sparked By Running Game
LEAD: Coming into this season the biggest question mark for the Princeton football team was who would fill the immense void created by the graduation of the all-purpose running back, Judd Garrett, the Ivy League Player of the Year last season.


About Long Island;   A Teacher With AIDS Returns to School
LEAD: THE first day of school, the 46-year-old heart of Thomas J. Bradley beat as fast as a kindergartener's waiting at the school-bus stop with a camera-toting parent.


Penn State Rolls Over Rutgers


Style Makers;   Wendy Stevens, Handbag Designer
LEAD: Wendy Stevens believes ''trucks are beautiful creatures.'' She is also quite taken with suits of armor, the perforated metal in phone booths and the stainless steel in subway cars.


India Sending Army After Unrest in North
LEAD: The Indian Army today was asked to take control of the northern Indian town of Kurukshetra, where mobs of students burned Government offices and attacked officials after a student burned himself to death to protest the Government's job-quota policies.


Henry Adams and His Friends
LEAD: To the Editor:


College Football;   Hatajik's Passing Routs Lions
LEAD: Behind a strong performance by Todd Hatajik, who threw for 224 yards and four touchdowns, Bucknell defeated Columbia, 41-16, today and kept the Lions without victory in their first two games of the season.
The Bison improved to 2-1.
Hatajik's excellent performance, in which he completed 18 of 21 passes, powered the Bison past a Columbia defense that was consistently unable to stop


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
FALL FESTIVALS


Anne K. Albright, Lawyer, to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Anne Korbel Albright to Geoffrey Roland Watson, a son of Elizabeth Robinson Watson of New York and Vals-les-Bains, France, and Edward J. Watson of Bar Harbor, Me., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Madeleine Korbel Albright and Joseph Medill Patterson Albright, both of Washington.


Behind Bars, Keeping Mother and Child Together
LEAD: Elizabeth Mercado gazed pensively at her six- and-a-half-month-old daughter, Glori Lou, who was reaching eagerly toward the bright animal mobiles over her crib. ''Sometimes, I feel sad,'' the 26-year-old mother said. ''They are babies, but they feel everything we feel.
Sometimes, I feel she can recognize these rails.


Elizabeth Cahill, A Banker, Weds
LEAD: Elizabeth Ann Cahill was married yesterday to David Stanley Ruksznis at St.
Elizabeth's Roman Catholic Church in Edgartown, Mass.
The Rev.
George Almeda officiated.
Mrs.
Ruksznis, 31 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Cahill of Vero Beach, Fla.
A graduate of Wheaton College, she is an associate at the Bank of Boston.


BEST SELLERS: September 23, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
2
2
5
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $21.95.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.


Question Of the Week;   Have Elite Yacht Races Become Too Dangerous?
LEAD: Suppose elite yacht races have suddenly become a woefully perilous undertaking.
Who cares?
If Marie Antoinette had complained that because of the sudden loss of her head, she could no longer smell the flowers in her pretend-milkmaid's garden, what do you think the citoyens would have said?
LOUIS ALTMAN
New


Colombia Abductions Signal Escalation of Drug War
LEAD: Next month, Francisco Santos Calderon was to travel to Kansas to address the Inter-American Press Association on press freedom in Colombia.


Fashion;   New Urbanity for Denim and Chambray
LEAD: This fall, chambray and denim fabrics, rugged staples of men's wear, are lighter and more urbane-looking, Denim work shirts by Joseph Abboud are in faded and dark indigo, stone-washed for a soft hand. ''We're stressing versatility - the same shirts with a tie and tweed jacket and with jeans,'' Mr.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Sept. 9 about the Adirondacks misstated room rates for the Point resort on Upper Saranac Lake.
The rates range from $525 to $675 for two people sharing a room, not $525 to $675 each.


China's Great Dissident
LEAD: To the Editor:


Eagerness Pays Off for Jets' Nichols
LEAD: When Gerald Nichols was a seventh-round draft choice out of Florida State in the strike-shortened 1987 National Football League season, he started 5 of the 13 games he played in for the Jets.
But his starts went down from there, two in 1988 and none in 1989, although he played in all 16 games each of those seasons.


The Way Men Live
LEAD:
PRAYING FOR RAIN
Stories.
By Chris Spain.
126 pp. Santa Barbara, Calif.:
Joshua Odell Editions/Capra Press. $16.95.


Leah Zennario Is Wed to C.S. Keeny
LEAD: Leah Zennario, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Zennario of Atlantic Highlands, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher Spear Keeny, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Spurgeon M. Keeny Jr. of Washington.
The Rev.
William Grimble, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Ram's Head Inn on Shelter Island, L


Poland's Elections Threaten to Jeopardize Change
LEAD: Poland, tired but exhilarated after 14 months of a Solidarity Government, is bracing for a presidential election campaign that threatens to divide the nation and jeopardize economic and political change.


College Football: West/Southwest;   3 Scores, 514 Yards By Detmer
LEAD: Ty Detmer threw for 514 yards and connected with Andy Boyce on three touchdown passes to spark No. 4 Brigham Young's 62-34 Western Athletic Conference victory over San Diego State today.


DOCTOR, TALK TO ME
LEAD: I don't think religion or taste in office decor, which Broyard mentions, is a good basis for choosing a physician.
Rather, one should consider checking a physician's plants.
A doctor attentive to the needs of his flora will probably be sensitive to the needs of his patients.
LAWRENCE S. SCHIFFMAN M.D.


Landmarks of Kuala Lumpur
LEAD: For hundreds of years Malaysia, the southernmost tip of mainland Asia, was an important crossroads for the great civilizations of China and India.
A quirk of geography - the country's strategic position just north of the Equator, between the Indian Ocean and the South China Sea - made it a historic meeting place for traders and travelers from West and


Rock's Individualists: Good, Bad and Ugly
LEAD: It would be hard to find two uglier voices in pop music than the ones owned by Neil Young and Bob Dylan.
They wail and whine as if their vocals were produced somewhere behind an irritated adenoid.
There's little traditional pop pleasure here.
But the two rock icons, roughly 25 years into their careers, create something just as important: recognition.


DOCTOR, TALK TO ME
LEAD: Physicians find themselves bound by the intellectual discipline of science, which is to understand and manipulate the natural history of a disease under various management strategies.
The individuality of a particular patient never enters the picture, because scientific reasoning is about something common to individuals, prostatic cancer in this case, not something unique to them, their experience of illness.


A Summit for Children
LEAD: Summit meetings have come to mean a gathering of superpowers to discuss their military and political agendas.
A wholly different but still vitally important summit meeting will be held this week when more than 70 heads of state come together at the United Nations in an effort to save the world's most neglected resource: children.


Tender Outrage and Tough Sympathy
LEAD:
STORIES BY CONTEMPORARY IRISH WOMEN.
Edited by Daniel J. Casey and Linda M. Casey. (Syracuse University, Cloth, $32.95; Paper, $14.95.) ''Are there Irish women writers the like of Yeats and Joyce?
Is there a developing feminist tradition in Ireland worthy of serious critical attention?'' Such interesting questions, posed by Daniel J.


Sheryl A. Porter Is Married
LEAD: Sheryl A. Porter, the daughter of Gene Porter Jr. of Cincinnati and the late Elizabeth A. Porter, was married yesterday to Steven M. Durham, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Durham of McAdenville, N.C., by the Rev.
Steven L. Mowery at Crossnore Presbyterian Church in Crossnore, N.C.
The bride is an assistant vice president of Glenmede Trust Company and her husband is a vice president of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, both in Philadelphia.


Atlanta Seeks to Deliver City It Sold to Olympics
LEAD: The bid for the Olympic Games was one part Rhett and Scarlett and one part the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., both marketed with the entrepreneurial zeal that has been Atlanta's most consistent thread since its founding as a lonely railroad junction in 1842.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:
CLASSICAL
Kecak ('Ramayana Monkey Chant')
Kecak Ganda Sari; I Gusti Putu Putra, director. Bridge BCD 9091. CD.
The striking photograph on the booklet cover of this, the first complete recording of a Balinese monkey chant, shows dozens of loin-clothed dancers in a frenzied state - arms outstretched, palms in the air.


In the Gulf, the Danger of a Diplomatic Solution . . .;   . . . And the Horrors of a Desert War
LEAD: President Bush has not only embarked on his own voyage into the Persian Gulf, that Bermuda Triangle of Presidencies.
Unlike his two immediate predecessors, he has dragged more than a hundred thousand of our troops with him.
And as the President struggles at home, our troops have been learning to cope with a sun that can melt electrical wiring, sand so fine that few filters can keep it out of gear boxes and a growing ennui that seeps through even the most careful monitoring of our press corps.


Pays Basque
LEAD: To the Editor: The article on the Basque region of Spain was of particular interest to me.
Last year you published a letter from a man who toured this area and wrote to report his enthusiasm.
That letter prompted me to contact the tour company, Backroads International, and to take the July 20-Aug.


Tech Notes;   Pardon Me, Your Heroin's Showing
LEAD: Travelers may someday find themselves and their luggage being gently vacuumed by airline personnel before flying, or by border guards before they cross national boundaries.
No, it's not part of an international campaign for spiffiness.
It's the latest in drug and explosives detection technology from Barringer Instruments Inc.


Paganism Was Alive and Well
LEAD: HELLENISM IN LATE ANTIQUITY
Thomas Spencer Jerome Lectures.
By G. W. Bowersock.
Illustrated. 109 pp. Ann Arbor:
The University of Michigan Press. $24.95.


The New Saladin?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sampras Style Recalls Gonzalez
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Bristol's Land-Taking Angers Harwinton
LEAD: Owning property overlooking a lush Connecticut wetland populated with egrets, or a stately reservoir surrounded by forest, may turn out to be less than idyllic as the state keeps developing.


Lisa Garfinkel Is Married
LEAD: Lisa A. Garfinkel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Garfinkel of Plainview, L.I., was married last evening at Temple Emanuel in Kings Point, L.I., to Michael B. Brief, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Brief of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Robert Widom officiated.
Mrs.
Brief, 23 years old and a graduate of Hofstra University, is an account executive at Austin Knight Advertising in New York.


Currency;   Big Trouble for the Pound
LEAD: The British pound dropped sharply last week, hit hard by disappointment over the dimming prospects of a quick entry into the European Monetary System.
Joining the system would make the pound, notoriously volatile, more stable and therefore more attractive to investors.
Karl Otto Pohl, president of the German Bundesbank, knocked the pound down first on Wednesday when he indicated that Britain's inflation rate was too far above the European average to permit the pound to be tied to the Deutsche mark.


When a Man and His Art Become One
LEAD: STROLLING from one bargain table to the next, suburban shoppers at a recent sidewalk sale were diverted by a pewter-colored, life-size statue of a man on the edge of the curb.
Some instinctively reached out to feel the rough metallic texture of its suit.


Bad Science
LEAD: To the Editor:


How to Beat N.F.L. Clock
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Postings: On Park Ave. South;   Crowning Touch
LEAD: The Manhattan skyline will gain an unusual skyscraper crown under a plan announced last week to renovate a 35-story office tower at 475 Park Avenue South, at 32d Street.


Tamera Colletti Is Married
LEAD: Tamera Ann Colletti and Kevin John Leichter were married yesterday at All Souls Unitarian Church in New York by the Rev.
Frank Hall.
Mrs.
Leichter is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles D. Colletti of Westport, Conn.
The bridegroom is a son of Susan L. Leichter of Westhampton Beach, L.I., and Dr.
Stuart Leichter of New York.


Postings: You Gotta Have a Gimmick;   Sale Cookout
LEAD: A Westport, Conn., real estate broker is putting on a mass showing of houses today and throwing in a clown, a cookout and a raffle to draw potential customers.


Campus Life: Chico State;   Campus Searches Of Bags for Alcohol Are Discontinued
LEAD: Searches for alcohol in the bags and backpacks of dormitory residents in the wake of a tougher anti-drinking policy at California State University at Chico were stopped last weekend.
The student government charged that the practice violated students' rights.


Gracious Living From the Gilded Age
LEAD: The first thing that needs to be said about the Grand Hotel, the sprawling monument to Greek Revival architecture that dominates a bluff on Mackinac Island, Mich., is that it is everything modern luxury hotels are not.
Most modern hotels are of steel and glass and concrete; the Grand, one of America's great summer hotels, was built from whitewashed Michigan pine.


Men's Style;   The Flip Side of Jackets
LEAD: Some things are best kept under wraps.
But the sumptuous, handsomely patterned fabrics lining men's clothes this fall clearly aren't among them.
In a season when what a man wears beneath his suit can say as much about him as the suit itself, linings are more than just insulation.
How else to explain the proliferation of crests, crowns, elks, hunting scenes and other upper-crust insignia on the flip side of everything from suits to coats to collars?


Martin White Wed To Phoebe Zerwick
LEAD: Phoebe Zerwick, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
M.
B.
Zerwick of New York, was married yesterday at her family's summer home in Hudson, N.Y., to Martin Brent White, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack White of Winston-Salem, N.C.
Acting Justice Shirley Fingerhood of State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated.


Schooling at Home: Parents and Officials Clash Over Control
LEAD: WHEN people ask them about being educated at home by their parents, Michelle Addorisio and Samantha Hough say, they usually have to straighten out a few misconceptions. ''First I tell them that yes, we do have a social life, and yes, it is legal,'' said Miss Hough, 15 years old, whose home in Clinton also serves as a classroom for her four younger siblings.


Taking Care of Doorbell Problems
LEAD: DOORBELL problems are usually easy to fix.
And because they operate on very low voltage (usually fewer than 18 volts), their components are safe to handle even when connected.


Controlling Litigation Costs with a Neutral Third Party
LEAD: On the wall of his Hartford law office, William Champlin keeps a chart that faintly resembles a giant scorecard.
The ''players'' are more than 100 companies, manufacturers of products ranging from elevators to floor wax.
They are also defendants in a lawsuit growing out of a devastating 1986 fire at the Dupont Plaza Hotel in San Juan, P


As Problems Fester, Voters Send Pink Slips
LEAD: In growing numbers, Americans say they are fed up with politicians.
They look around and see schools that don't teach, streets that aren't safe, doctors they can't afford.
Then they look to Washington, or Sacramento or Albany or City Hall, and they see bickering and feuding and deadlock.


Review/Dance;   Riley Troupe In Sketches And Shocks
LEAD: Words spoke louder than actions on Monday night when Deborah Riley Dance Projects appeared at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.
Five of the six works presented by this troupe from Washington included spoken texts.


New Reatta Is Not Quite Special
LEAD: The special cars are few and far between.
And back in '88, when Buick introduced its Reatta coupe, I was enthused.


LOWERING THE TRADE DEFICIT BY DEGREES
LEAD: WITH CORPORATE AMERICA draws fire from critics at home and abroad for its manifest inefficiencies and lack of competitive verve, the American-style business education, corporate America's guiding light, has more cachet than ever.
All across the nation, growing numbers of foreign students are enrolling in business schools.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: Pre-sentencing hearing for Michael Milken, with sentencing scheduled for Oct. 1.
The Treasury auctions three- and six-month bills.
TUESDAY: Corporate profits and revised gross national product for the second quarter.
President Bush addresses the annual meeting of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.


Campus Life: Williams;   Students Arrested In a Crackdown On Rowdy Parties
LEAD: The start of fall semester at Williams College has in recent years led to an increase in residents' calls to the local police complaining about noise and property damage caused by students partying in off-campus housing.
This year, students returning to campus discovered that Williamstown had had enough.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, a picture last Sunday in Men's Fashions of the Times, part 2 of The Times Magazine, with an article about retail stores, was printed in reverse.
The caption was correct - Ira Neimark, chairman and chief executive of Bergdorf Goodman, was at the left in the photograph as published, and Stephen A.


Looking Homeward
LEAD: The reunification of Germany won't bring the Hohenzollerns back to power, but Prince Louis Ferdinand of Prussia, for one, is resting easier.
The 82-year-old heir to the throne last held by Kaiser Wilhem II during World War I said that when the Berlin wall was breached, he ''had the feeling that a new life was starting.


Hers;   Remembering Jane
LEAD: In The Opening scene of ''The Webster Street War,'' a videotape made in Fort Wayne, Ind., documenting a typical procedure day at the local women's clinic, two women cautiously emerge from a parked car, their eyes trained on the small crowd of ''sidewalk counselors'' waiting for them.
The older woman offers a protective arm to her vulnerable young companion - presumably her daughter - as the hostile group moves in their direction.


Anne S. Balas Is Married
LEAD: Anne S. Balas, the daughter of Mrs.
William Balas of Sebastopol, Calif., and the late Mr.
Balas, was married yesterday to James A DeNaut, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. DeNaut of Flossmoor, Ill., by the Rev.
Richard Jeske at Holy Trinity Lutheran Church in New York.
Mrs.
DeNaut, a University of Southern California graduate, and her husband, a Northwestern University graduate, both received M.B.A.


Data Update
LEAD:
INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Aug.
July
Aug. 89
Rents
167.2
2.3
11.5
Homeowner's costs
167.6
1.3
7.7
Fuel and utilities
102.2
0.9
2.0
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk,


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. What would you recommend to clean dirty aluminum siding?
If cleaning results are unsatisfactory, can the siding be painted?


World Markets;   Prospecting for the Market Bottom
LEAD: Barton Biggs, chief global strategist for Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, is tired of advising clients to stay away from the world's stock markets. ''It is not an inspiring message and repeating it gets endlessly boring,'' he said.


With the Mostest
LEAD: Just let Saddam Hussein try to check into a Helmsley hotel.
Overcome with indignation, Leona Helmsley last week let fly at the Iraqi president in a full page ad in The New York Times, scolding him for holding people against their will while referring to them as guests. ''I know something about how to treat guests,'' the Helmsley Hotels president assured Mr.


Campus Life: Georgetown;   Taking a Break From Lawbooks To Help Others
LEAD: Georgetown University Law Center students pushed aside textbooks and case studies last week to tour the national monuments with homeless children, repair an emergency housing shelter and make 600 peanut-butter-and-jelly sandwiches for a soup kitchen.


OILING THE SKIDS UNDER THE ECONOMY
LEAD: When President Saddam Hussein made his grab for Middle Eastern hegemony, the world's stock markets tumbled.
Traders remembered the oil droughts of the 1970's, when skyrocketing petroleum prices caused economic dislocations around the globe.
With the prospect of a recurrence, Wall Street turned to its economic pundits, whose skills are never so much in demand as when the future seems most unpredictable.


Running the Gulf Coalition Is Tricky Business
LEAD: It would be hard to find another international military operation in which the raising and distribution of money has played so central a role as it has in the Persian Gulf crisis.
Watching American officials traveling the globe in recent weeks collecting pledges of more than $20 billion to support the anti-Iraq coalition makes one wonder whether the United States has military allies in this affair or only limited financial partners.


Susanne Denk Has a Wedding
LEAD: Susanne Romy Thelen Denk and Alan John Romney y de Cardenas were married yesterday at Brick Presbyterian Church in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Herbert B. Anderson performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Thomas C. Blessin, a Roman Catholic priest.
Mrs.
Romney is the daughter of Ruth E. Schreyer Denk of New York and the late Horst G.


United States Evacuates Sri Lankans From Jordan


Pigeon's-Eye View
LEAD:
AN ATLAS OF VENICE
Edited by Edoardo Salzano.
47 pp., plus 186 line and photographic maps.
New York: Commune di Venezia/Princeton Architectural Press. $175.


Molly Cliff Weds Matthew Bersani
LEAD: Mary Farrell Cliff, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter C. Cliff of New York and South Egremont, Mass., was married yesterday to Matthew Donald Bersani, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Frank A. Bersani of Syracuse.
The Rev.
Vincent Walsh, assisted by the Rev.
Frederick Heberle, performed the ceremony at Our Lady of the Valley Roman Catholic Church in Sheffield,


No End of Lessons on Iraq
LEAD: Two enormous miscalculations lie at the root of the Persian Gulf crisis.
The most glaring was Saddam Hussein's rash assumption that the world would do little or nothing if Iraq devoured Kuwait.
But his dirty deed owed something to the world's limp response to Iraq's previous use of poison gas, its grim human rights record and its voracious appetite for mass-killing weaponry.


Environment Problems: Home Rule Is Hurting Search for Solutions
LEAD: THE question is no longer whether to improve the quality of our environment.
The question is how to get the biggest bang for the buck we must spend on it.


Ireland for, Yes, the Food
LEAD: The people of Ireland regard the changes on the national table with the kind of self-satisfied wonder normally reserved for rainbows.


READ THEIR LIPS
LEAD: COULD IT BE A STRAW IN THE WIND?
W.
Michael Blumenthal was clean-shaven when he was Secretary of the Treasury in the 70's.
But in 1989, while C.E.O. of the Unisys Corporation, he caused something of a stir by sprouting a mustache. ''I just decided to grow one,'' Blumenthal, now a limited partner in the investment banking house of Lazard Freres &amp; Company, recalls.


Baseball: American League;   2 Consecutive Homers Life Indians Over Jays
LEAD: Kelly Gruber has heard the whispers and he says they're wrong.


Susan W. Shapiro, 47, Lawyer in New Jersey
LEAD: Susan W. Shapiro, a lawyer and former law secretary to an appellate judge of the New Jersey Superior Court, died on Friday at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 47 years old and lived in Woodcliff Lake, N.J.


Melissa Zelen to Marry David Neier
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Zelen of Princeton, N.J., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Melissa Zelen and David Neier, the son of Mrs. and Mrs.
Aryeh Neier of New York.


When TV Talk Is Intrusive
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Two Passionate Collectors Share Their Love of History
LEAD: When Leon Levy and Shelby White began bidding for antiquities at a New York auction in 1975, they were in awe of them. ''Realizing it was possible to own an ancient bust came as a shock,'' said Mr.
Levy, a New York financier. ''I could raise my hand and in minutes own something that was 2,000 years old.


UNIVERSITY PRESSES/IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
THE CHRIST CHILD GOES TO COURT.
By Wayne R. Swanson. (Temple University, $27.95.) The separation of church and state is an idea that is accepted by most American.
Controversy arises, however, when the boundaries of the separation are asserted in a particular situation.
Wayne Swanson, a professor of government at at connecticut College, has written a case study of one such situation.


Pro Football;   Eagles Take Ryan Under Wing
LEAD: ''Hey, Keith!'' Jerome Brown yelled across the Philadelphia Eagles' locker room to Keith Jackson.
Jackson was being swamped last Thursday by reporters and cameramen on his first day back from a 50-day, two-game contract holdout.


Tribal Labels
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mealtime, Dealtime
LEAD: For as long as the world has known expense accounts, business and fine eating have gone together like bib and tucker.
The tradition continues, despite a contagious obsession with fitness and despite the recession in several major industries.
Granted, money managers in Boston prefer to take lunch at their desks and many old boys in various cities repair to their private clubs.


SCHOOLS TO SHARE GRANT ON TEACHING
LEAD: Thirty universities will share $2.1 million given by the General Electric Foundation to attract more women, blacks, American Indians and Hispanic people to teaching careers in engineering, the physical sciences and business.


Diane Crosson, Lawyer, Is Wed
LEAD: Diane Marie Crosson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Crosson of Bloomfield, Conn., and Quonochontaug, R.I., was married yesterday to Mark Tresham McEnroe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. McEnroe of New York and Cove Neck, L.I.
The Rev.
Joseph Byrns, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Watch Hill (R.I.)


Kelli Ann Hunter Marries Theodore Krebsbach
LEAD: Kelli Ann Hunter and Theodore Anthony Krebsbach were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Joseph in Garden City, L.I., by the Rev.
Richard F. Delaney.


Bus Garage To Incinerator: An Itinerary For Russians
LEAD: THE day's agenda - visiting a bus garage and sewer treatment plant in Yonkers and a garbage incinerator in Peekskill - would not have thrilled most visitors to Westchester County.
But for a delegation of 14 mayors from the Soviet Union who were spending two weeks in the United States, it was close to perfect.


Racial Slur by Japanese Aide Rekindles Anger
LEAD: A new Japanese Cabinet minister has compared prostitutes in Japan to black Americans who move into white neighborhoods and ''ruin the atmosphere.''


Rivoli
LEAD: To the Editor: It puzzles me that neither Olivier Bernier's extensive article on the Baroque splendors of Turin nor the Piedmont essay by Beth Archer Brombert (Travel, July 29) mentions the Castello di Rivoli, that superb edifice in Turin's suburb, ''the 18th-century dream of a Piedmontese Versailles.


U.S. Said to Weigh Multi-Front Attack To Divert Iraq Force
LEAD: Contingency plans drafted by top Army and Marine Corps officers call for a multi-front ground attack against Iraq to prevent the massing of elite Iraqi troops to guard against a possible American invasion of Kuwait, The Washington Post reported in its Sunday editions.


Savoring the Mellow Delicacy of Leeks
LEAD: A BUNCH of leeks brings the cook close to the farm.
The vegetable is sold whole, the white bulb merging gradually into the green, which ends in long trailing leaves.
Rootlets cluster from the bulbs.
Inside and out, this member of the onion family comes caked with the rich black soil that nourished it.


U.S. Gave Iraq Little Reason Not to Mount Kuwait Assault
LEAD: In the two weeks before Iraq's seizure of Kuwait, the Bush Administration on the advice of Arab leaders gave President Saddam Hussein little reason to fear a forceful American response if his troops invaded the country.


Question Of the Week;   Have Elite Yacht Races Become Too Dangerous?
LEAD: Technology and equipment have improved over the years to help minimize the dangers associated with yacht racing.
Granted, we are dealing with elements that can be quite severe, but with weather faxes, satellite navigation, Emergency Position Indicating Radio Beacons, better safety equipment, and superior yacht construction materials, the dangers are minimized although never eliminated.


Tina Dee Eberle Is Married
LEAD: Tina Dee Eberle, an actress, and Marc Alan Salonsky, the executive chef of the Petrossian Paris Restaurant in New York, were married yesterday at Studio 25 in Manhattan.
Rabbi Joel Goor officiated.
The bride, a graduate of Missouri Southern State College and the American Academy of Dramatic Arts, is the granddaughter of Mr.


A Resident Troupe for Westport Playhouse
LEAD: FOR about five years, a modest, enterprising professional theater company has been gaining a foothold as Fairfield County's Off Broadway counterpart.
But there has been a hitch.
In pursuit of offbeat plays, audiences have had to venture off the beaten path, to a recycled school in Fairfield.


Margot Huber Weds Russell Heckler
LEAD: Margot Morehouse Huber, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce B. Huber of Locust, N.J., was married yesterday in Navesink, N.J., to Russell Stine Heckler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard E. Heckler of Hatfield, Pa.
The Rev.
Harry R. Sorensen officiated at All Saints' Memorial Episcopal Church in the Highlands of Navesink.


Horse Racing;   Quick Mischief Wins Ruffian
LEAD: Quick Mischief, the fastest filly in the field but an unknown quantity at the distance, benefited from a sloppy track and the absence of Gorgeous to score a three-length victory yesterday in the $240,800 Ruffian Handicap at Belmont Park.


Elizabeth Miller and James Fallon Wed
LEAD: Elizabeth Custis-Lee Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Lee Miller of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday in Potomac, Md., to James Baldwin Fallon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Fallon of Winchester, Mass.
The Rev.
William C. Metzdorf officiated at Our Lady of Mercy Roman Catholic Church.


Long-Quiet Player Pianos Tinkle Again
LEAD: SEATED at the piano, the woman sways in time to the music, as the old tune ''A Pretty Girl Is Like a Melody'' echoes through the room.
Dressed in lace, with long dangling rhinestone earrings, she appears to be a creature of another era, a flapper, playing her heart out.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: George Washington Bridge:


Log Cabin Luxury
LEAD: Le Chateau Montebello, in Quebec, is quite simply the largest and most splendid log cabin in the world.
It is also a hotel that shows that log cabin living is no longer synonymous with hardship and discomfort.


Jordan's Monarch Appeals On TV to American Public
LEAD: In an address to the American people, King Hussein of Jordan pleaded tonight for understanding of his country's increasingly difficult position in the Persian Gulf crisis but repeated his call for the removal of all American troops from the Middle East.


Why So Little Training for American Judges?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Evolution of Pollution
LEAD:
THE VOYAGE OF THE SANDERLING
By Roger D. Stone.
Illustrated. 302 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


No (Painless) Cure for the Budget Deficit
LEAD: The United States has a huge structural budget deficit and there is no painless way to undo it.
The pain could have been less if the difficult choices had been made at a more favorable time, when economic growth was more robust.
That chance was missed.
But doing nothing will not eliminate the pain.


Nuclear Waste Cleanup
LEAD: To the Editor:


John Be Nimble! John Be Quick. . .
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Carol O'Rourke Is Married
LEAD: Carol Ann O'Rourke, a daughter of Domenic S. Gautieri of Warwick, R.I., and Lucy M. Gautieri of Providence, R.I., was married yesterday to Bruce Alan Colbath, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl M. Colbath of Piscataway, N.J.
The Rev.
Fred Schultz officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in East Hampton, L.I.


Commercial Property: Grand Central Terminal;   A New Look at a 1910 Proposal for Using Air Rights
LEAD: Directly over the main concourse of Grand Central Terminal - sanctum sanctorum of historic preservation in New York - an office tower has been proposed that would rise 22 stories and might contain 1 million square feet of space.


Postings: Avenue B Luxury;   A Rehab Does It
LEAD: A glut of market-rate rental apartments has sent even long-time owners throughout the city scrambling for tenants.
But a couple of newcomers to the development scene managed to lease all 16 apartments in an East Village tenement they renovated only three weeks after completion, in part by bringing a touch of luxury to Avenue B.


Campus Life: Bard;   Students Hope To Be Published In New Magazine
LEAD: Creative-writing students here are harboring new hopes of being published now that Bard College has taken over the literary magazine Conjunctions.


Soothing Sand And Adobe Of Mazatlan
LEAD: From the air Mazatlan is an urban sprawl on the edge of a wide, green, coastal plain - dotted by isolated hills and bordered by the sea.
Far to the east, the Sierra Madre range disappears into an almost constant cloud bank.
To really get the feel of the place, though, come on the fast, overnight train from Nogales on the Arizona border.


Soccer Merger Debated
LEAD: The two conferences of the American Professional Soccer League have been meeting here this weekend to determine which of their teams would become members of a revamped league next season.


In the Gulf, the Danger of a Diplomatic Solution . . .
LEAD: If Saddam Hussein were to withdraw from Kuwait tomorrow, the world would rejoice.
An end to the Iraqi aggression would be universally regarded as a triumph for the United Nations and for President Bush and the broad coalition he has so skillfully assembled to oppose Sadam Hussein.


Sports of the Times;   Lockout Legacy: N.L. Playoff Mix-Up
LEAD: As the pennant races streak and stumble to their conclusion, the baseball labor lockout that delayed opening day a week in April is all but forgotten.
But the legacy of that lockout soon will be as conspicuous as it will be controversial: squeezing and stretching the National League Championship Series.


Saintliness Doesn't Pay
LEAD:
SPEED
By Mark Harris.
285 pp. New York:
Donald I. Fine.
$19.95.


Mutual Funds;   Cleaning Up on the Ground Floor
LEAD: If Donna Dempsey Calder were to crack open a Chinese fortune cookie, the message would probably read, ''Get in on the ground floor.'' That's how she managed her career, and how, as manager of the $55 million Oppenheimer Discovery Fund, she picks her stocks.


The New Crusaders?
LEAD: To the Editor:


McEnroe Belongs With the Best
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Ms. Harned Wed To W. W. Hobert
LEAD: Julie Colwell Harned, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Harned of Boston, was married yesterday to William Wade Hobert, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Hobert of Minneapolis.
The Rev.
Jack Silvey Miller, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Old Lyme,


Talking: Fuel Co-ops;   Shopping Around for Savings
LEAD: Fuel cooperatives are getting new attention these days as a result of the Persian Gulf crisis.
But they are not necessarily for everyone.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD:
Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


Mealtime, Dealtime
LEAD: For as long as the world has known expense accounts, business and fine eating have gone together like bib and tucker.
The tradition continues, despite a contagious obsession with fitness and despite the recession in several major industries.
Granted, money managers in Boston prefer to take lunch at their desks and many old boys in various cities repair to their private clubs.


Japan Deports 258 Chinese Who Entered as Boat People
LEAD: Japan today deported 258 Chinese who had entered the country posing as Vietnamese refugees, officials said.
That brought to 1,520 the number returned involuntarily to China in the last year.


A Scruffy Thingness
LEAD:
LIMBO RIVER
By Rick Hillis.
142 pp. Pittsburgh:
University of Pittsburgh Press. $17.95.


John Pirie Wed To Jane Shotwell
LEAD: Jane Shotwell, a daughter of Tamara Dudley Shotwell of Manchester, Mass., and Edward Carle Shotwell 3d of Wenham, Mass., was married yesterday to John Taylor Pirie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Pirie of Hamilton, Mass.
The Rev.
Barbara P. Hendren officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Beverly Farms,


New York Streamlines an Essential Link: 911
LEAD: They sit in cubicles, glued to outdated computer screens, gleaning information from often frantic callers.
With a constant mantra of ''911, may I help you,'' the 70 operators of the Police Department's 911 telephone emergency system are an essential link between New Yorkers and the police, the Fire Department and the Emergency Medical


The Lies That Bind
LEAD:
THE LIVES OF THE DEAD
By Charlie Smith.
381 pp. New York:
Linden Press/Simon &amp; Schuster.
$19.95.


Miss Ritter Weds Michael Aylward
LEAD: Deborah Bradford Ritter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund Underwood Ritter of Chestnut Hill, Mass., was married there yesterday to Michael Fayerweather Aylward, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Aylward of New Lebanon, N.Y.
The Rev.
Stephen J. White officiated at the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer.


On Street, Rinfret Is a Renaissance Man of Sorts
LEAD: His gubernatorial campaign has been in disarray the last week, but in some ways Pierre A. Rinfret's public image has not suffered.
On the streets of Brooklyn and Queens he is still most commonly thought of not as a political neophyte, not as a maverick underdog, but as a French artist.


College Football: Local Colleges;   Wagner Is Beaten
LEAD: Greg Harris scored two touchdowns in eight minutes of the third quarter yesterday as Wagner registered 16 consecutive points to defeat previously undefeated Montclair State, 22-13, at Irvington, N.J.


Rating Lenders
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tennis;   U.S. Beats Austria in Doubles
LEAD: Rick Leach and Jim Pugh today gave Andre Agassi a chance to be a Davis Cup hero on Sunday.


Question Of the Week;   Have Elite Yacht Races Become Too Dangerous?
LEAD: The basic challenge of man against the sea is much as it has always been.
The risks have always been known.
I have tremendous respect for all who dare to challenge oceans, but I don't know what new dangers one need fear.
LEIGH B. SMITH
Vineyard Haven, Mass.


8 Arrested in Boycott of Brooklyn Store
LEAD: One day after Mayor David N. Dinkins called for a peaceful resolution of the eight-month boycott of two Korean-owned stores in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, scores of shoppers returned to the stores, but eight protesters were arrested for violating the court order that mandated they stay at least 50 feet from them.


Review/Fashion;   Turning a Fresh Eye on the 60's, Updated for the 90's
LEAD: Short skirts, skinny pants, long blazers and sleeveless shifts.
Those were the strongest trends at the Fashion Coterie, last week's trade fair where adventurous retailers scouted out fresh new talent.
Many of those new designers are looking to the past for inspiration, updating the fashions of the 1960's for the 90's generation by, say, combining blazers with bicycle shorts and making minidresses in stretch fabrics.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Sept. 16 about pottery in Thailand misstated the price of a 12-inch Benjadol plate.
It is about $14, not $140.


Draw!
LEAD:
AND DIE IN THE WEST
The Story of the O.K. Corral Gunfight.
By Paula Mitchell Marks.
Illustrated. 480 pp. New York:
A Touchstone Book/Simon &amp; Schuster. Paper, $12.95.


College Football: East;   Louisville's Field Goals Top W. Virginia
LEAD: Klaus Wilmsmeyer kicked three field goals today to lead Louisville to a 9-7 victory over West Virginia.


The Correct Setting
LEAD: To the Editor:


Orchestrating The Birthday Bash
LEAD: In planning the Carnegie Hall centennial, those organizing the season-long celebration found themselves practicing a peculiar brand of musical politics, emphasizing international and historical sweep yet keeping the event very American and very up-to-date.
Page 25.


Muslims Patrol Hempstead Project
LEAD: LIKENING themselves to Wild West posses, groups of frustrated residents in crime-ridden housing projects are turning to private patrols for protection.


A.T.&amp; T. Dance Tour Grants
LEAD: The A.T.&amp; T. Dance Tour program has awarded grants totaling $100,000 for touring to the Paul Taylor Dance Company, the Trisha Brown Company and the Urban Bush Women.


178 Evacuees, on Last Flight From Iraq, Arrive in London
LEAD: An Iraqi Airways jet carrying Western women and children from Iraq and occupied Kuwait arrived today in London, the last in a series of United States-chartered ''freedom flights.''


Irma J. Kanter, Lawyer, to Wed
LEAD: Irma Jean Kanter and Warren Jay Nimetz, lawyers in New York, plan to marry in November.
Miss Kanter is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Kanter of Clifton, N.J.
Mr.
Nimetz is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Nimetz of Forest Hills, Queens.


'Our Daughter Needs a Complete Cure'
LEAD:
THE HEALER
By Aharon Appelfeld.
Translated by Jeffrey M. Green.
220 pp. New York:
Grove Weidenfeld. $16.95.


Ex-Tenant Is Sought in Bomb Case
LEAD: A police and F.B.I. task force on terrorism was looking yesterday for a young woman who had been evicted from an Upper East Side apartment building where two steamer trunks of pipe bombs and automatic weapons were found on Friday night.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. What would you recommend to clean dirty aluminum siding?
If cleaning results are unsatisfactory, can the siding be painted?


Through Rain and Fog, the Regatta Goes On


In Facing Its Future, a Hall Looks Backward
LEAD: When the people who run Carnegie Hall sat down three years ago to plan its 100th birthday, they were, consciously or not, choosing between two alternatives:


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
Mobile Gas and Air


Correction
LEAD: A photograph on the Headliners page last Sunday carried an incorrect caption.
The photograph showed former President Ronald Reagan and Lech Walesa, the Solidarity leader, meeting in Gdansk, Poland.


Style Makers;   Di Willis, Wedding Dress Designer
LEAD: No woman should pay a lot of money for a dress she can only wear once - even a wedding dress, says Di Willis.
And for the last four years, Ms.
Willis has been producing glamorous wedding dresses for women who want to wear them again - to a club, a romantic restaurant or to somebody else's wedding.


In North Carolina's Senate Race, A Divisive TV Fight Over 'Values'
LEAD: Meet Harvey Gantt, the Democratic candidate for Senate, as defined by the television advertising of his opponent, Senator Jesse Helms:


Going To and Fro Is Another Event
LEAD: Robert Sherman's music column ''Orchestras Outline Coming Season'' [Aug. 26]  touched a chord!
How appealing all these events are.
As an erstwhile, but now infrequent member of their audiences, I would like to mention something that may be important.


Question Of the Week;   Have Elite Yacht Races Become Too Dangerous?
LEAD: There are dangers in many sports and activities in which men and women strive to excel.
Sailing competitively around the world is risky but not too dangerous.
Climbing the world's highest mountains is not too dangerous because the achievement is meaningful and civilized.
Boxing is too dangerous, because its real object is violence and the achievement is meaningless and uncivilized.


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   Southwestern Samples (Choice of 2 Arizonas)
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Here are some restaurants that offer a variety of American foods.
Arizona 206


Taking Care of Doorbell Problems
LEAD: DOORBELL problems are usually easy to fix.
And because they operate on very low voltage (usually fewer than 18 volts), their components are safe to handle even when connected.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD: Dover
$135,900
309 Audry Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 25-year-old ranch; fireplace, 2-car garage, deck, patio; taxes $1,514.
Freehold
$169,900
62 Derby Drive
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 18-year-old ranch; w/w carpeting, c/a, fireplace, family room; taxes $2,452.


Syrian Chief Is Said to Urge Iran Not to Violate Embargo
LEAD: President Hafez al-Assad of Syria met today with his Iranian counterpart, President Hashemi Rafsanjani, and reportedly tried to persuade him not to send food and medicine to Iraq in violation of the United Nations embargo.


Thinking About Spring: Anemones
LEAD: HOW about a daisy for spring?
Though most of the spring-blooming bulbs have a typical flower shape, there is one that has daisy flowers: Anemone blanda.


Special Today:
LEAD:
Business World/Magazine Part 2


Why Bochco's Cops Say It With Music
LEAD: ''What's the reason for doing another cop show?'' Steven Bochco asks himself, stretching back on the couch in his elegant Spanish hacienda of an office on the lot of 20th Century Fox studios. ''There is none.''


Sarah Burchfield Wed in Princeton
LEAD: Sarah Elizabeth Burchfield, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William H. Burchfield of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to John Gibson Carey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Carey 3d of Morristown, N.J., and Throckmorton, Tex.
The Rev.
Patrick Connor performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the chapel of St.


College Football;   Notre Dame Needs Another Rally
LEAD: It was a four-letter word used so often today in the Notre Dame locker room you would have thought it obscene.


Amelia P. Burns, Executive, Weds
LEAD: Amelia Petitti Burns, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Petitti of Lavallette, N.J., was married yesterday to James Anthony Quaremba, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony G. Quaremba of Ridgewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Anthony Gulley officiated at Blessed Sacrament Roman Catholic Church in Albany.


A Treasure Trove Just Keeps Growing
LEAD: WANT to peruse 1969 issues of The Berkeley Barb?
Need to study 19th-century Puerto Rican documents or an 18th-century work on Chinese insects?
Perhaps you are interested in the notes of the naturalist Edwin Way Teale or the sketches of the children's book illustrator Richard Scarry.


SOME BOAT PEOPLE WILL BE RETURNED
LEAD: Vietnam, Britain and the United Nations refugee commission have reached an agreement on the repatriation of Vietnamese boat people from camps in Hong Kong.


Portland, Ore.
LEAD: When Portland opened the doors to its performing arts complex three years ago, a tightrope walker headlined the dedication.
The choice was apt.
In this city of 432,000 development has followed a carefully plotted course, executed with flair, hoopla and, often, whimsy.
Funds for large-scale projects have at times been precarious, but that has made each completion more exciting.


Zimbabwe Drops Plan For One-Party Statute
LEAD: In a move seen as a political setback for President Robert Mugabe, the country's governing party decided today to drop its campaign to legalize one-party rule, Mr.
Mugabe had made a single-party state a linchpin of his plans for Zimbabwe, formerly the British colony of Rhodesia.


Savoring the Mellow Delicacy of Leeks
LEAD: A BUNCH of leeks brings the cook close to the farm.
The vegetable is sold whole, the white bulb merging gradually into the green, which ends in long trailing leaves.
Rootlets cluster from the bulbs.
Inside and out, this member of the onion family comes caked with the rich black soil that nourished it.


Lilco and Cuomo Correctly Identified
LEAD: Three cheers!
We hear from the silent minority, the Long Island businessman [''Oil Pendulum Is Swinging Too Far Toward Higher Costs,'' Sept. 9] .


Corrections
LEAD: A map on July 22 with an article about Pueblo pottery in New Mexico placed the Laguna Pueblo incorrectly.
A reader has written to point out that it is north, not south, of Interstate 40.


Bank Scandal Embarrasses Indonesia's Elite
LEAD: A scandal involving Indonesia's second-largest private bank has become a serious political issue here, embarrassing some of President Suharto's closest advisers and illuminating some of the close connections between business transactions and prominent Indonesian families.


Savoring the Mellow Delicacy of Leeks
LEAD: A BUNCH of leeks brings the cook close to the farm.
The vegetable is sold whole, the white bulb merging gradually into the green, which ends in long trailing leaves.
Rootlets cluster from the bulbs.
Inside and out, this member of the onion family comes caked with the rich black soil that nourished it.


Broad Oil Spill Law Is Signed in California
LEAD: Gov.
George Deukmejian signed a sweeping oil spill bill today that taxes oil 25 cents a barrel, creates an official with broad powers to oversee oil safety and regulates tankers in California waters.


Question Of the Week;   Have Elite Yacht Races Become Too Dangerous?
LEAD: How can you even ask a question like that when there are so many more important things to worry about?
How about the breakneck pace of modern polo matches?
Now, there's a problem!
MARK SPIEGEL
New York


Lisa Vail Bush Is Married To Steven Marc Hankin
LEAD: Lisa Vail Bush, a daughter of Dr.
Martin H. Bush of New York and Elinor Seward Hall of Syracuse, was married yesterday to Steven Marc Hankin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Hankin of Baltimore.
H.
Erle Schafer, Circuit Court Clerk of Anne Arundel County, Md., officiated at the William Paca House in Annapolis,


Tap to Open a Series in Greenburgh
LEAD: YOU can usually find out-of-the-ordinary entertainment at the free events sponsored by the Greenburgh Arts and Culture Committee, and the fall lineup is no exception.


Around the Dial, And Around The World
LEAD: World beat is the most fashionable label of the moment in the American music business, attached to everything from concert series to record labels.
This sudden passion for non-American music is a departure for an industry in which the word international used to signify one of three places - London, Sydney or Tokyo.


'Ha Ha Ha Poor Jack'
LEAD:
THE CRIERS AND HAWKERS OF LONDON
Engravings and Drawings by Marcellus Laroon.
Edited by Sean Shesgreen.
252 pp. Standford, Calif.: Standord University Press. $45.


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD: Farmingdale
$145,500
538 Segatogue Avenue
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 1-car garage; taxes $3,200.
Glen Cove$250,000
11 Driftwood Drive
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, basement; taxes $3,200.


Games Offering China a Chance To Polish Image
LEAD: With parachutists, panda balloons, 11,000 pigeons and 20,000 young Chinese dancers and martial arts experts, China opened the 11th Asian Games today as a mini-Olympics intended to win back international respect and domestic support lost during the military crackdown last year.


Maureen McCann Weds K.J. Conery
LEAD: Maureen Ellen McCann, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. McCann of Rumson, N.J., was married there yesterday at Holy Cross Roman Catholic Church to Kevin Joseph Conery, a son of Eleanor Conery of Troy, N.Y., and Mitchell L. Conery of Weehawken, N.J.
Msgr.
Andrew Cusack, a cousin of the bride, officiated.


Noted With Pleasure
LEAD:
Suburban Dreaming


INSURERS REDUCING MALPRACTICE FEES FOR DOCTORS IN U.S.
LEAD: After rising sharply for more than a decade, medical malpractice insurance premiums are now declining in many states around the country.


The Courts Are Again Asked to Redefine Family
LEAD: A woman with two sons and no more husband finds someone who cherishes her and goes through a wedding ceremony.
They live together for 12 years, mingle their finances, buy a house together and raise the boys in it.
Then her mate falls ill with cancer, deteriorates slowly despite her nursing and prayers, and dies in her arms.


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
To Cut Waiting, Airport Checks Abroad Planned


Beth Abrams To Wed in Fall
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald W. Abrams of Louisville, Ky., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter, Elizabeth Sue Abrams, and Robert Edward Mitchell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Mitchell of West Hartford, Conn.


Corrections
LEAD: The table of contents today in The Business World, part 2 of The Times Magazine, misstates the page number for an article about restaurants.


Miss Smith Wed To Clifford Voges
LEAD: The First Presbyterian Church in Greenwich, Conn., was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Kendall Simmons Smith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
C.
Bowen Smith of Greenwich, and Clifford Lowell Voges, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Voges of Greenwich.


Barbara Lettieri Weds Alexander Matturri Jr.
LEAD: Barbara A. Lettieri, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph W. Lettieri of Chatham, N.J., was married yesterday to Alexander J. Matturri Jr., the son of Judge and Mrs.
Alexander J. Matturri of Allenhurst, N.J.
Msgr.
William P. Devine performed the ceremony at the St.
Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church in Short Hills, N


In Stamford, A Rite of Passage Led Straight to Bloomies...
LEAD: I SUPPOSE the ritual originated at the north end of the real Bedford Street - that is, Bedford Park to the Ferguson Library, in Stamford.
The back-to-school frenzy would signify its start, and the elite and would-be elite would swarm the area on any given day, particularly Saturdays.


State Looking at Pay Phone Charges
LEAD: SIX pay telephones line the rear wall of the lobby of the Hudson County Administration Building in Jersey City.
All six are owned by the New Jersey Bell Telephone Company.
All are identical and contain the same dialing instruction cards.


Sports of the Times;   'Young Kid' Gets A Red Sox Tryout
LEAD: ''Who?'' Mike Greenwell asked in the middle of a crowded clubhouse. ''You mean the young kid who pitched a few weeks ago?''


Penn Station Users Deserve Clean Station
LEAD: How I would love to talk to Russell Olwell [''At Penn Station, Commuters See the Ugly Truth,'' Sept. 9]  10 years down the line.
Perhaps by then he will be working for a living and paying taxes and will look at the beggars in Penn Station in a different light.
Perhaps by then he will have come to realize that we get what we work for, and work we must, and that those who use Penn Station and pay the high price of riding the L.I.R.R.


New York City's Kinder Face
LEAD: For New York's ailing public schools, help is on the way in the form of thousands of volunteers willing to tutor students.
The New York City School Volunteers Program begins another year this week.


Israel Has a Unique Deal for U.S. Aid
LEAD: Sometime before Oct. 30, the Treasury will write a check to Israel for $1.2 billion.
The money, almost half of the $3 billion in economic and military aid that the United States gives Israel every year, will be quietly deposited in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and immediately start earning interest at about 8 percent.


Hale House Fights City Hall on Babies' Care
LEAD: Hale House, a narrow brownstone on 122d Street in Harlem that has been home to 800 unwanted babies since 1969, is the city's shrine to good works.
Clara Hale, who began rescuing children off the streets in 1941, has long been a secular saint.


In Boa Vista and Chinwangtao
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss Imura Wed In East Hampton
LEAD: Hisako Imura and Carl Hans Tiedemann 3d were married yesterday at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in East Hampton, L.I., by the Rev.
Francis B. Kramer.
Mrs.
Tiedemann is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Masamichi Imura of Chiba, Japan.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Tiedemann 2d of New York and East


Year Later, St. Croix Is Coming Back, And Trying to Bring Tourists With It
LEAD: A year ago this week, Isabelle M. Pence boarded a plane on St.
Croix as she and hundreds of others fled in a scene of frenzy that she likens to the evacuation of Saigon.
Carrying what little they could salvage, they left frightened and hungry from an island lost to a hurricane that hit like a wrecker's ball.


Thinking About Spring: Anemones
LEAD: HOW about a daisy for spring?
Though most of the spring-blooming bulbs have a typical flower shape, there is one that has daisy flowers: Anemone blanda.


Virginia Is for Stories
LEAD:
ERIC CLAPTON'S LOVER
And Other Stories From
The Virginia Quarterly Review.
Edited by Sheila McMillen
and George Garrett.
355 pp. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia. Cloth, $35;
Paper, $14.95.


On Language;   Those Defining Moments
LEAD: The Iraqi Invasion of Kuwait,'' testified Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, ''is one of the defining moments of a new era. . . .'' Lest anyone miss the import of the phrase, he came back to it a moment later: ''we must respond to the defining moments of this new era. . . .''


At Sea With McPhee
LOOKING FOR A SHIP.
By John McPhee.  242 pp.
New York:  Parrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $ 18.95.


Sandra Maria Pinnavaia Is Married
LEAD: Sandra Marie Pinnavaia was married yesterday to Guy Moszkowski.
The Rev.
Sandra Haines officiated at the Tagart Chapel of the McDonogh School in Owings Mills, Md.


Food;   A Jewish Yen For Chinese
LEAD: Crossing culinary cultures may be the the hottest food trend of the moment, what with Southwest-Asian-Italian-Cajun combinations on menus from coast to coast.
For me, however, such ethnic mixes are old stuff.
My cross-culinary experiences began in Brooklyn in the late 1930's and early 40's, when my mother would try to duplicate the dishes we favored in local


Baseball: Notebook;   Boyd and Tudor Are 2 Pitchers Earning Their '90 Salaries
LEAD: Last winter Dennis (Oil Can) Boyd was a free agent, but he was a risk because he spent four months on the disabled list last season and he had put in more time on the disabled list (332 days) in the previous three seasons than he had on the active roster (214 days).


Review/Dance;   Javanese Cultural Riches Revealed
LEAD: Two forms of Indonesian dance, Bedhaya and Golek Menak, were featured on Thursday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in the second program offered as part of the series called ''Court Art of Java From the Kraton of Jogjakarta.'' Both were quite different.
And neither resembled Wayang Wong, the dance form that had been presented on the opening night of this series by dancers and musicians from the palace (kraton) of Jogjakarta.


THE BOTTOM LINE ON DISPOSABLES
LEAD: Not since the automobile begat the suburb has a product so essential to the American lifestyle become so maligned as a symbol of pollution and waste.
The disposable diaper, which during the 1970's and 80's became as indispensable to working parents as ''Sesame Street'' and strained carrots, is suddenly the environmental bad boy of the 90's.


Review/Theater;   'My Father, My Son,' Homage to a Family Relationship
LEAD: Filial affection and devotion may be admirable qualities, but they are not in themselves ingredients that make engaging theater.


UNIVERSITY PRESSES/IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
RELIABLE LIGHT: STORIES.
By Meredith Steinbach. (Rutgers University, $18.95.) Meredith Steinbach has won both a Pushcart Prize and an O. Henry award for short fiction, and it's easy to see why.
At her best, she gives us what we want from stories; root emotion recognized through someone else's consciousness.


Molly Merthan and Andrew Cornell Are Married
LEAD: Mary Elizabeth Merthan and Andrew Hewlett Cornell were married yesterday at the Solebury, Pa., home of the bridegroom's mother , Mrs.
Mortimer Ryon.
The Rev.
William H. Wood 3d, an Episcopal priest, officiated.


Philippine Talks on U.S. Bases End Without Pact
LEAD: Talks on the American military bases in the Philippines concluded Friday, with no agreement by the two countries on the terms of a reduced American military presence on two large bases.


Stop Grandstanding And Use Shoreham
LEAD: How many oil shocks do we need to realize that our reliance on this finite energy source is faulty?
Nor is it in our interest to rely on a supply of natural gas from Canada.
Of course, we could annex Canada as Saddam Hussein has annexed Kuwait but that would not be nice.


Cogeneration Can Help Reduce Oil Dependency
LEAD: To the Editor:


Authenticity Is For Disk Jockeys
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week;   Have Elite Yacht Races Become Too Dangerous?
LEAD: Let them race, but don't expect me to be waiting for them to return.
I've got a pennant race to worry about and another Super Bowl for the Giants.
JERRY MARCUS
Brooklyn


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
AUSTRALIAN THEATER


Group of Seven Presses to Keep Interest Rates Up
LEAD: Economic policy makers from the United States and its main industrial allies agreed today that the best response to the oil-price shock would be to keep a lid on inflation and refrain from making hasty interest-rate cuts.


Marcel F. Grilli, 83, Music Critic in Japan
LEAD: Marcel F. Grilli, an American music critic and prominent figure in cultural exchanges between Japan and the United States, died in Tokyo on Thursday.
He was 83 years old.


DOCTOR, TALK TO ME
LEAD: Broyard is not asking for the impossible.
He is asking only that his doctor recognize that his illness is not something apart from the person.
In short, he is asking his doctor to take a moment to help him find ways to cope with his situation - to provide information, to encourage him to ask questions.


Q and A
LEAD: Deferring a Rollover
Question: I own a co-op, which is my prime residence, as well as a home in the country.
I am selling the co-op and after the sale I plan to move to the country home and establish prime residency there.
Rather than postponing the tax on the gain in the sale of the co-op, I would like it to be a taxable transaction.


Students Need Better Campus Security
LEAD: To the Editor:


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ending Sept. 8
MANHATTAN
Greenwich Village
$860,000
33 Fifth Avenue (10th St.)
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; manned-elevator, maid's room, dining area, renovated bath and kitchen, c/a, parquet floors; maintenance $1,625, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Halstead Property Co./Kanelba &amp; Robilotti)


When Mothers And Infants Are Addicts
LEAD: A WOMAN from White Plains was nearing the time to deliver her child when doctors monitoring her condition at the Westchester County Medical Center here noticed a sudden drop in the fetal heart rate and performed an emergency Caesarean section.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: When nothing seems to be happening, keep your eye on the bishops - with their great range, a move that appears to be merely a minor adjustment can be cataclysmic.


Drivers on the Move To Find a '91 Team
LEAD: By the end of this week, there should be a solution to the puzzle of which Indy-car driver will be driving for what team in 1991.


Is There a Cheaper Way To Attack Rising Crime?
LEAD: Should firefighters wield guns as well as hoses, and garbage collectors carry nightsticks along with trash?
Should private security patrols get city subsidies, and serious criminals be tried in special courts?
Should the police stop and frisk dozens in sweeps, challenging civil liberties laws?


Nina Timpson Weds Lawrence Hilbert
LEAD: Cornelia Vallon Timpson, a watercolorist and former head teacher at the Park Avenue Christian Church Day School in New York, was married yesterday to Lawrence Patrick Hilbert, the director of racquet sports at the Piping Rock Club in Locust Valley, L.I.
The Rev.
James King officiated at St.
James Episcopal Church in Prouts Neck, Me., assisted by the bridegroom's brother, the Rev.


Linda Frankenbach Wed To Hendrik J. Kranenburg
LEAD: Linda Alice Frankenbach, the daughter of the late Henry G. Frankenbach and the late Dorothy Todd Frankenbach, was married yesterday to Hendrik Johannes Kranenburg 3d, the son of Johanna F. Kranenburg of San Diego and the late Mr.
Kranenburg Jr.
The Rev.
Stephen Quinlan officiated at the Presbyterian Church in Bridgehampton, L.I.


BRITAIN'S IRREPRESSIBLE PUBLIC MAN
LEAD:
THE TIME OF MY LIFE
By Denis Healey.
Illustrated. 607 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $29.95.


Treasured Family Is the Secret Wealth Of 'The Rothschilds'
LEAD: Five hundred and five performances on Broadway in 1970 and 1971 and a vivid ''chamber'' revival in 1990: the Rothschilds are lucky.
That is undeniable.
Anyone will confirm it.
Their name lives as a virtual guarantee of good quality.
Is that why a considerable public is still interested in them?
Is it because now, as always, people revel in success stories or, as some put it, the Frankfurt ghetto of the 19th century prefigures the modern ''Dallas''?


Who'll Take The High Ground?
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Child Is Father to the Mad
LEAD:
SPIDER
By Patrick McGrath.
221 pp. New York. Poseidon Press. $18.95.


Has Dole Found a Way Out of the Budget Impasse?
LEAD: Congressional budget negotiators, taking a break from their formal deliberations until Sunday evening, spent today trying to decide whether Senator Bob Dole of Kansas had found a way out of the current impasse with his proposal to sever capital gains tax cuts from a deficit reduction package.


Why the Body Is Disgusting
LEAD:
SIN AND FEAR
The Emergence of a Western Guilt Culture,
13th-18th Centuries.
By Jean Delumeau.
Translated by Eric Nicholson.
677 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press. $39.95.


Michael Della Femina Is Wed to Laurie Fullerton
LEAD: Laurie Jeanne Fullerton, a movie director's assistant, and Michael Della Femina, an actor and movie producer, both in Los Angeles, were married yesterday at Our Lady of Pompeii Roman Catholic Church in New York.
The Rev.
Tarcisio Bagatin performed the ceremony.


Who Is That Masked Architect?
LEAD:
WRITING ARCHITECTURE
Fantomas Fragments Fictions: An Architectural
Journey Through the 20th Century.
By Roger Connah.
Illustrated. 463 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
The MIT Press. $75.


Review/Music;   A Piano Duo From Canada
LEAD: Renee Morisset and Victor Bouchard, a husband-wife piano duo from Quebec, brought many virtues to their Monday evening performance at Merkin Concert Hall, although it was not immediately apparent that this would be the case.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: If the connection between the National Football League and the Doges of Renaissance Venice seems tenuous, read on.


The Music Business Watches Its Own Step
LEAD: Jane's addiction, a flamboyant Los Angeles hard-rock band, loves attention.
But they may have received more than anticipated when their lead singer, Perry Farrell, submitted the proposed cover for the band's third album to Warner Brothers last spring.
Mr.
Farrell himself had designed it - an elaborate collage with three papier-mache figures, one male and two female, each anatomically correct.


Trial and Tribulation
LEAD:
November 1986.
I learn this morning that a colleague has died.
Suicide, the newspaper reported.
Although I never met him, my sadness at his passing is no less acute than had we been good friends, for George Laszlo and I endured the same misfortune, and nothing binds men together like shared pain.


College Football: Midwest;   Michigan Rushes Past U.C.L.A.
LEAD: Jon Vaughn, the nation's rushing leader, ran for 288 yards and 3 touchdowns today as Michigan trampled U.C.L.A., 38-15.


From Mythology, Welded Metal Masks
LEAD: DEITIES from ancient European and Asian mythologies, regenerated as contemporary welded metal masks, are among the images on exhibit in ''Icons and Archetypes'' at Nardin Fine Arts here.
Suzanne Benton, an internationally known, award-winning artist, also is represented by a group of free-standing floor sculptures and a series of monoprints.


Mr. Entertainment Is Still Playing Vegas
LEAD: So many rhinestones, so little time.
That is the burden of the visitor who steps from the dazzling Las Vegas sun into the equally dazzling spaces of the Liberace Museum in the Liberace Shopping Plaza on Tropicana Avenue and Spencer Street.


The 110-Hour Week For Interns
LEAD: In response to ''Why Must an Intern Work 110-Hour Week?'' by Jennifer Kane (Opinion page, Aug. 26):


BUSINESS DIARY/September 16-21
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Banks Move in on Stocks
J.P.
Morgan &amp; Company has become the first bank since the Depression to win authority to sell and trade corporate stocks.
The Federal Reserve's approval on Thursday was the largest breach in the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933, which divorced commercial from investment banking.


Free Concerts Mark Beginning of Season
LEAD: FREE concerts abound this week at the Hartt School of Music, at the University of Hartford, in West Hartford.
On Tuesday evening at 8 -after a long absence - the ''Basically Baroque'' series returns to the campus calendar.
The opening concert is totally Bach, including several Sinfonias and solo Cantatas sung and played by five Hartt alumni, Nancy LaMarch, Kevin Anderson, Mark Stanton and Bruce Henley, with other student and faculty artists.


THE REGION: Excerpts;   An Ethics Panel Ends Its Work, And It's Angry
LEAD: After working for 40 months and questioning nearly 1,000 witnesses, the New York State Commission on Government Integrity issued its final report on Tuesday.
In a strongly worded letter to Governor Mario M. Cuomo accompanying it, the panel, known as the Feerick Commission, said leaders of both major parties had failed New Yorkers by not insisting on ethics reforms, and asked him to press for changes.


All About/Investing in Agriculture;   Wall Street's Latest Diversification Strategy: Down on the Farm
LEAD: With opulent office towers desperate for tenants and several big-city developers choking on debt, some major investors are heading for the country.
Wall Street is discovering the heartland, where reliable returns often flow from the open fields.


No One Is Sure of Souter, So There's Hope of Harmony
LEAD: Before David H. Souter's Supreme Court confirmation hearing began, when there was only the paper record and the bare biographical facts to go on, the New Hampshire country judge with the tumbledown house and the unmowed lawn looked like a throwback to an earlier age.
So he proved to be, but not quite in the way that skeptics had predicted.


Man Is Held in Slayings on Appalachian Trail
LEAD: A 38-year-old man has been charged in the slayings of two young hikers on the Appalachian Trial.
He was arrested wearing the boots and backpack of one victim.


Music Festivals
LEAD: To the Editor: Regarding the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival (Q &amp; A, July 29): Your readers should know of an interesting tour company called Festival Tours in Santa Monica, Calif., 213-395-2486.
This small operator offers to take you behind-the-scenes of musical festivals such as New Orleans.


Chilean Communists in Turmoil About the Future
LEAD: The Chilean Communist Party, an entrenched part of the political scene since 1922 and traditionally one of the most loyal to Moscow, is going through internal turmoil with ousters, mass resignations and public name calling.


Style Makers;   Uta Brauser, Doll Maker
LEAD: ''He looks exactly like my husband,'' one woman said. ''He looks like my brother,'' another said, so startled at the resemblance that she did a double take.


Change of Heart
LEAD: The Boston Celtics' rookie gaurd, Dee Brown, says he is canceling plans to buy a home in Wellsley, Mass., after he was held at gunpoint on Friday by Wellesley police officers who thought he was a bank robbery suspect.


School Football;   Scheier Spurs Edgemont
LEAD: Before the football season, Brian Connolly, the coach of Edgemont High School in Scarsdale in Westchester, said his team would go only as far as Adam Scheier took it.


U.S. Diplomats Return in Force to Nicaragua
LEAD: On the southern edge of Managua, workers are readying an office building for a tenant that is determined to change the neighborhood.


Environmentalists, in New Twist, Vie for Control of Yosemite Business


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
VAMPIRES, BURIAL, AND DEATH: Folklore and Reality, by Paul Barber. (Yale University, $9.95.) From the days of Dracula to those of Anne Rice, people have been fascinated by legends about the living dead.
In 1988 one reviewer said that in seeking to explain scientifically how the vampire myth began, Paul Barber has produced a ''learned, energetic, creepily absorbing study - definitely not for children.


DOCTOR, TALK TO ME
LEAD: When I first skimmed Broyard's article, I was angered and too tired to keep reading.
Must physicians always be panned for their shortcomings - lack of feeling, and now even the lack of Oriental rugs in their offices?


Measuring Up to the Dead
LEAD:
INSTEAD OF YOU
By Constance Schraft.
206 pp. New York:
Ticknor &amp; Fields. $18.95.


Practical Traveler;   Newsletters For Singles, Golfers and Others
LEAD: In the desktop publishing era, travel newsletters multiply like junk mail.
But while computers create a more presentable publication than a mimeograph, technology is no guarantor of quality, and many newsletters do not last a year, let alone support their creators.


Campus Life: Yale;   Course in Korean Draws 80 Students On Its First Day
LEAD: After eight years of student lobbying, Yale College has begun offering a course in Korean language study, and the response has been overwhelming.


Wild in the West: The Land, the Men, the Tales
LEAD:
RIVER OF TRAPS
A Village Life.
By William deBuys and Alex Harris.
Illustrated. 238 pp. Albuquerque:
University of New Mexico Press. $19.95.


Jane Orloff Is Married
LEAD: Jane Orloff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Orloff of Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Lionel Kaliff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Kaliff of Fairfield, Conn.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Church of All Souls in New York.
The bride graduated from George Washington University, as did her husband.


For Some Heroes, Life Is Just Too Much
LEAD: We all know what Benjamin Braddock, in Mike Nichols's ''Graduate,'' did when it was suggested to him that he might find his professional future in plastics: he barely blinked.
When processing a proposition like that one, disbelief was the only sensible reaction.
Twenty-three years later, Mr.
Nichols's screen heroes and heroines remain as dumbfounded as ever, in understandable response to the duplicity, wrongheadedness and just plain idiocy that rages around them.


Local History Catches Up To the Video Generation
LEAD: IN Greenwich, the hottest video is ''A Place in the Heart.'' Produced by the town, the video commemorates Greenwich's 350th anniversary, celebrated this year.


Watching That Diet? It's a Piece of Cake
LEAD: THE 1990's may rank as the decade of eating right in addition to eating well.
Even fast-food chains have hopped aboard the healthy-food bandwagon.
Nevertheless, dining out is still a land mine of fats, frustration, calories and cholesterol.


Wall Street;   In Hard Times, Stay the Course in Equities
LEAD: There is a substantial penalty for ill-timed panic in the stock market, warns Mark Stumpp, the director of research for PDI Strategies, a unit of the Prudential Insurance Company of America.


Stop Grandstanding and Use Shoreham
LEAD: If Saddam Hussein could have placed his own man in this country to increase: electrical costs, use of OPEC oil, our trade deficit and pollution from fossil fuels, he couldn't have picked a better man than what our own Governor, Mario M. Cuomo, has done for Long Island.


Changing Demographics
LEAD: To the Editor:


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
FREE PRESS


Lisa Bradley Weds
LEAD: Lisa June Bradley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward W. Bradley of Milltown, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Patrick Robertson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Robertson of Parlin, N.J.
The Rev.
David Beckerdite performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's United Church of Christ in Milltown.
The bride is a clinical dietitian at the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J.


De Klerk Hopes to Show Bush the Change Is Real
LEAD: A political cartoon earlier this year depicted President F. W. de Klerk as a solitary surfer precariously balanced on the crest of a breaking wave.
Although his hobby is golf, not surfing, Mr. de Klerk was flattered, telling some subordinates that that was how he felt trying to navigate the dismantling of apartheid to a stable finish.


Review/Theater;   Biblical Tale as a Parable of Marriage
LEAD: Before there was Eve there was Lilith.
In his new play, ''Lilith'' (at the Home for Contemporary Theater and Art), Allan Havis has placed Adam's legendary first wife at the center of a parable about marriage.
Springing Lilith loose in our age, the play is as devious as it is diabolical.


Works in Progress;   Desert Wrap
LEAD: ''We started testing the tank covers when the Iraqi crisis began in the gulf,'' Efraim Forem says. ''We're testing them for the Israeli Defense Forces.
They wanted to know if they'd stand up to the gases.''


Marie Errico Wed To John A. Bicks
LEAD: Marie Elizabeth Errico and John Alexander Bicks were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Mary's of the Lake in Skaneateles, N.Y., by the Most Rev.
Thomas J. Costello, auxiliary bishop of Syracuse, Mrs.
Bicks is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Errico of Ridgewood, N.J., and Skaneateles.


DOCTOR, TALK TO ME
LEAD: Reading Anatole Broyard's article ''Doctor, Talk to Me'' (Aug. 26), I wondered if my old pal knew that in his search for the perfect doctor he had become the perfect patient, the patient who understands himself.
I envisioned 100,000 doctors reading the article along with me and then phoning colleagues to say they must read it, too - here was the wittiest statement they're ever likely to see of what the seriously ill patient thinks and wants.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: Are you ready for the coming ''imaging environment''?
That's the gold-tinged horizon that pundits in the photography industry are anticipating, a land where conventional silver-halide films and electronic pixels co-exist in happy harmony.


Focus: Restrictive Growth;   A California Town Finds Mixed Results
LEAD: Under the shade of giant cypress and elm trees near this Southern California town's main shopping arcade, workers are busy transforming a neo-Spanish convent into 10 tiny ''satellite'' offices that are expected to be ready next month .


Postings: 'Village' Waterfront;   Show and Tell
LEAD: Gritty but richly historic, the Greenwich Village waterfront will be the subject of a month-long exhibition that opens Wednesday at the Urban Center gallery in the former Villard Houses, 457 Madison Avenue, at 51st Street.
The centerpiece of the show will be a 20-foot-long scale model of the waterfront, with photographs, portraits, paintings, maps and text on the walls.


Dana Bullwinkel Marries
LEAD: Dana Jean Bullwinkel, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George A. Bullwinkel of Westport, Conn., was married yesterday to Kent Larcom Campbell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kent Campbell of Chagrin Falls, Ohio, by the Rev.
Jonathan B. Appleyard, an Episcopal priest, at the Bowdoin Chapel in Brunswick, Me.
The bride and her husband are 1985 graduates of Bowdoin College.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-21


Track and Field;   Plumer Wins Mile In Course Record
LEAD: Proving that she runs a better race than she predicts, PattiSue Plumer, a 28-year-old lawyer from Palo Alto, Calif., surged from behind on a rainswept Fifth Avenue course yesterday to win the 10th Mercedes Mile.
In the process, she broke a four-year-old course record and won a $35,000 car from the sponsors.


Review/Film Festival;   Murders Most Foul In France's 'Dr. Petiot'
LEAD: In May 1946, Dr.
Marcel Petiot died on the guillotine in a prison outside Paris.
He had been convicted of the murder of 26 of the more than 60 people he had been accused of killing during the German occupation of France in World War II.


Alabama Bridal For Miss Johnson
LEAD: Margaret Gentry Johnson was married yesterday to John Raymond Torell 4th at the Episcopal Church of St.
Michael and All Angels in Anniston, Ala.
The bride's father, the Rev.
Charles Everest Johnson 3d, the church's rector, officiated.


Ms. Leffert Plans October Wedding
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Leffert of Chestnut Hill, Mass., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Lisa Rae Leffert, and Lee H. Schwamm, a son of Ellen Schwamm Brodkey and Jay Marc Schwamm, both of New York.


Apartheid's Last Vicious Gasps
LEAD:
AGE OF IRON
By J. M. Coetzee.
198 pp. New York:
Random House. $18.95.


Assignment: 90 Days on the Polish Front
LEAD: THERE I SAT ON THE morning of Jan. 5 in a Polonez sedan headed south from Warsaw.
At the age of 63, retired from RCA, I had offered my services as a volunteer consultant to businesses in foreign countries.
Now I found myself about to meet with the management of my first client, Polkolor, a company I was expected to help restructure over the next three months.


Tbilisi Theater Troupe Plans American Debut
LEAD: The Shakespeare Theater at the Folger here is to present the Film Actors' Studio Theater of Tbilisi, U.S.S.R., in its North American premiere this fall.
The Georgian troupe will perform Moliere's ''Don Juan'' and ''Bakula's Pig,'' a traditional Georgian story.


Mealtime, Dealtime
LEAD: For as long as the world has known expense accounts, business and fine eating have gone together like bib and tucker.
The tradition continues, despite a contagious obsession with fitness and despite the recession in several major industries.
Granted, money managers in Boston prefer to take lunch at their desks and many old boys in various cities repair to their private clubs.


Maria Chiong and Jeffrey White Wed
LEAD: St.
Dominic's Roman Catholic Chapel in Oyster Bay, L.I., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Maria Carmencita Chiong, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Marcial M. Chiong of Dix Hills, L.I., to Jeffrey J. White, a son of Mariska Rogers of Los Angeles and the late Theodore White.
The Rev.
Erno Diaz officiated.


Iraq Grants More Visas to U.S. Networks Than Newspapers
LEAD: With the Persian Gulf crisis entering its eighth week, most major American newspapers have been struggling unsuccessfully to obtain visas to provide daily news coverage from Iraq.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   How Should the Yanks Rebuild the Team?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Taking Care of Doorbell Problems
LEAD: DOORBELL problems are usually easy to fix.
And because they operate on very low voltage (usually fewer than 18 volts), their components are safe to handle even when connected.


Speaking Out
LEAD: Since he left the Soviet Union in 1974, Aleksandr Solzhenitzen has been living in a kind of double exile.
Isolated in his home in the hinterlands of Vermont, he as shown a repugnance for Western society, with its ''TV stupor'' and ''intolerable music,'' that is almost as intense as his hatred of Communism.


Thinking About Spring: Anemones
LEAD: HOW about a daisy for spring?
Though most of the spring-blooming bulbs have a typical flower shape, there is one that has daisy flowers: Anemone blanda.


Miss Watters Weds Peter Grubstein
LEAD: Valeska Anne Watters and Peter Sulzberger Herzog Grubstein were married yesterday at St.
Bernard's Episcopal Church in Bernardsville, N.J., by the Rev.
Frederick S. Baldwin.
Mrs.
Grubstein is the daughter of Mrs.
Henry Weeks Trimble Jr. and Wellington Morse Watters, both of New York.
The bridegroom is the son of Mr.


Trapped by a Stuffed Bear
LEAD:
A. A. MILNE.
The Man Behind Winnie-the-Pooh.
By Ann Thwaite.
Illustrated. 554 pp. New York:
Random House. $29.95.


'You Gotta Have Heart'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hermes Pan, Dancer, 79, Is Dead; Choreographer of Astaire Classics
LEAD: Hermes Pan, the Academy Award-winning choreographer who, with Fred Astaire, created some of the most elegant, spirited and amusing dances in film history, died on Wednesday at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He was 79 years old.


Countdown: Three Steps to a Reunited Germany
LEAD: The Berlin wall has been down less than a year, but both Germanys are rushing toward unification.
Since July 1,they have shared one currency - the West German mark - and the final steps will occur in three stages:
Oct. 3 - East Germany formally becomes part of West Germany, and 114 members of the East German parliament join the West German parliament to represent the five new states of East Germany.


Wall Street;   Playing the Bankruptcy 'Endgame'
LEAD: Some people love inefficient markets, those murky bazaars where most investors have no idea what a particular security is worth and where their uncertainty produces vast differences between what buyers will pay and what sellers will demand.
Back in the barbaric 80's, the people who called themselves risk arbitragers made money trading in takeover stocks, hoping to have guessed correctly (or, in a few unseemly cases, to have been accurately informed) about how the deals would turn out.


New Mexico Restoring Its Old Adobe Churches
LEAD: With each winter, more historic adobe churches built by Hispanic settlers 100 or even 200 years ago begin to crumble.


An Arm and the City's Leg
LEAD: In an act of spectacular generosity, a Bronx jury awarded $9.3 million to a man who fell onto the subway tracks - while drunk - and lost an arm.


Becker's Behavior Self-Defeating
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Wishbone Smothers Returning Coach
LEAD: For the second time in four seasons, a former Army offensive coordinator returned to West Point and was haunted by the wishbone offense he helped implement under the Cadets' head coach, Jim Young.


Campus Life: Harvard;   Athletes Invoke Muse To Fight a Stereotype
LEAD: ''Most people have misconceptions about us jocks, with our tiny brains and our sweaty socks,'' proclaimed halfback Mike Agrillo, pacing before the statue of John Harvard in the college's Yard last weekend.


EXECUTIVE READING LIST: COMING UP IN THE FOURTH QUARTER
LEAD:
April Fools: An Insider's Account of the Rise and Collapse of Drexel Burnham
By Dan G. Stone
(Donald I. Fine, $19.95; Nov.)


Design;   Taken by Surprise
LEAD: A mammoth arch resembling a contemporary sculpture - the sort you'd expect to see in an urban park - heralds the entrance to this Manhattan apartment.
Its presence is both a surprise and a conundrum.


Miss Morash Wed To Adam Cohen
LEAD: Kate E. Morash, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Russell Morash of Lexington, Mass., was married yesterday in Nantucket, Mass., to Adam Z. Cohen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hyman R. Cohen of Upper Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
Edward B. Anderson officiated at the Unitarian Universalist Church.


Excerpts From Iraqi Document on Meeting With U.S. Envoy
LEAD: On July 25, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq summoned the United States Ambassador to Baghdad, April Glaspie, to his office in the last high-level contact between the two Governments before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2.
Here are excerpts from a document described by Iraqi Government officials as a transcript of the meeting, which also included the Iraqi Foreign Minister, Tariq Aziz.


MINING THE SILVER LININGS
LEAD: NOTHING SUCCEEDS LIKE failure - at least in the case of the Failure Group, an accident-investigation and -prevention company based in Menlo Park, Calif.
On Aug. 17, just as a bear market was accelerating amid growing concern about Iraq's occupation of Kuwait, the company went public. ''A fitting day for the Failure Group,'' says Roger L.


Eurocheques
LEAD: To the Editor: With reference to Betsy Wade's article ''Getting Cash Abroad'' (Travel, July 15), I would like to mention a credit arrangement popular in Europe called Eurocheques.
I am surprised no U.S. bank or U.S. subsidiary of a European bank offers this service.


In Cos Cob, View Is the Star Performer
LEAD: A ROOM with a view may not be the first criterion one looks for when dining out, but it is unquestionably a bonus.


Capriati Handles Celebrity Well
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Lemon Juice as Punishment
LEAD: A former day-care teacher has been charged with tying up children and forcing them to drink lemon juice as a disciplinary measure, the police said.
Jennie L. Williams, 24 years old, of Gloversville faces one misdemeanor count of endangering the welfare of a child for reportedly restraining two students on April 1, and making them drink the sour juice, the Gloversville Senior Investigator, Robert Spedding, said Friday.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''They think that because they haven't had anything for 40 years they can demand it all now.
They want to have everything in one day if possible.
You just want to say to them, you can't be lazy and stand around here, you have to build up your country and not rely on the West so much.''
- Karin Lutz of
Bad Harzburg, West Germany,
speaking of East Germans.


The Battle of the Columnists: Telling Leaders How to Think
LEAD: In the earliest days of the Reagan Revolution, conservative activists frequently showed their disdain for the technocratic, bipartisan politics they believed prevailed in Washington by proclaiming ''Ideas matter!'' The ideological furor now roiling the conservative movement is reminding politicians and the press that idea-mongers matter too.


Money Has Always Played a Role in the Art World
LEAD: To the Editor:


AIDS Exhibition Pleads Its Case
LEAD: UNVEILED at the Paris Salon of 1819, Theodore Gericault's ''Raft of the Medusa'' was met with mixed reactions, and though it attracted thousands of spectators, the picture brought the artist neither critical nor financial success.
He died five years later, at the age of 33, having been wracked alternately with despair and the desire to produce still more ambitious works.


Japan Without Shouting
LEAD:
THE JAPANESE POWER GAME
What It Means for America.
By William J. Holstein.
339 pp. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons. $22.95.


Power Lines And Health Risks
LEAD: The July 29 article ''Power Lines Stir Concern on Health Risk'' reported on activities in Essex, Ocean and Monmouth Counties by residents protesting the lines.
The article contained unattributed reports and unwarranted conclusions.


Streetscapes: Engine Company 31 Firehouse;   Getting to the Bottom of a Restoration
LEAD: When the restoration, from the ground up, of the old Engine Company 31 firehouse started in 1983, the owners didn't think it would take seven years to reach ground level.


Carl Hahn's East German Homecoming
LEAD: Wednesday will be one of the biggest days in Carl Hahn's life.


GOD SPEAKS THROUGH HIS WOMEN
LEAD: THE BOOK OF J
Translated by David Rosenberg.
Interpreted by Harold Bloom.
340 pp. New York:
Grove Weidenfeld. $21.95.


Giants-Dolphins: Reflecting on '72
LEAD: When the Giants and the Miami Dolphins, today's opponents at Giants Stadium, played for the first and only other time 18 years ago in Yankee Stadium, the name of the game was the same: football.


Notion of One Semitic Race Grew Out of Anti-Jewish Tract
LEAD: To the Editor:


PREGNANT, ADDICTED - AND GUILTY?
LEAD: If we are to arrest men for abusing their wives, and parents for mistreating and neglecting their children, where do we draw the line (''Pregnant, Addicted - And Guilty?'' by Jan Hoffman, Aug. 19)?
Who is to decide whether drug-addicted mothers who are doing harm to their babies should not be subject to the same kinds of child-protection laws?


NEW YORK WANTS CLEANEST AIR ACT
LEAD: New York City officials, faced with continuing violations of Federal smog and carbon monoxide standards, are pressing for adoption of the strongest anti-pollution measures Congress is considering as it tries to agree on amendments to the Clean Air Act.


Yale Investigates Hate Mail Sent to Black Students
LEAD: An anonymous, racist note that a Yale University dean condemned as ''the stuff of Hitler'' has angered students and professors and prompted an investigation at the Yale Law School.


At I.B.M., a Long Tradition in Training
LEAD: DAVID GUEST, a senior lecturer in industrial relations in the London School of Economics, has long studied International Business Machines from afar.
He recently found that the vast computer maker looks different from inside.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Why was Barbara Greenwald so happy?
Because a few days hence she had an appointment with a popular new hairstylist who books 10 weeks in advance.


Families Collide Over Fate of a Son's Killer
LEAD: The family of Robert Wallace Jr., who was convicted in 1988 of killing a man outside a Manhattan bar with a karate kick, prays daily for his release from prison.


PRIESTS AND PREJUDICE
LEAD:
DESEGREGATING THE ALTAR
The Josephites and the Struggle for Black Priests, 1871-1960.
By Stephen J. Ochs.
Illustrated. 500 pp. Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State
University Press. $39.95.


Embargo Makes Turkish Town a Place of Regrets
LEAD: With the very first sneeze of the international embargo against Iraq, Cizre caught a nasty cold.


Keeping Up the Conversation
LEAD:
PUNDITS, POETS, AND WITS
An Omnibus of American Newspaper Columns.
Edited by Karl E. Meyer.
458 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press.
$24.95.


Our War the Way It Was
LEAD: Its theme - the clash of countrymen, of brothers - resounds through world myth.
The battles were terrible, the casualties beyond imagining.
Its heroes live more vividly in national and regional memory than the Founders themselves.
The root cause stirred profound beliefs, and the nation continues to struggle with the consequences.


Words, Words, Words
LEAD: To the Editor:


Off-Duty Officer Is Charged With Robbery and Car Theft
LEAD: An off-duty police officer was charged with jumping into a car and robbing the driver Friday before crashing the vehicle into a wall with a police car in pursuit, the police said.


Review/Music;   Spanish Pieces for Guitar
LEAD: Jose Salazar, a guitarist from New Mexico, played a program at Weill Recital Hall last Sunday evening that was more typical of a turn-of-the-century Spanish salon concert than of a modern recital.
His aims, one gathered, was to point up his educational pedigree and to pay tribute to his teachers and the tradition they represented.


At 100, Carnegie Is Still the Place to Get To
LEAD: As Carnegie Hall prepares to open its centennial season Wednesday night, there may be no better moment to toast not only the health of the dowager queen of American concert halls but the durable values she typifies.
Carnegie was designed according to an ancient and honorable esthetic that increasingly shows signs of returning to fashion: it is primarily a place to listen to specific kinds of music (classical is the inexact but useful word) in a civilized atmosphere.


AIDS Group Office Hit by Arson
LEAD: A fire early yesterday damaged the new offices of Act Up, an advocacy group in Manhattan involved in efforts to combat AIDS, and last night the Fire Department ruled it was arson.


Pays Basque
LEAD: To the Editor: I enjoyed Susan Heller Anderson's ''Two Faces of the Pays Basque'' (Travel, Aug. 12), but I cannot understand why a writer takes liberties with town names.
For example, she writes of a town known as St.
Jean-de-Luz.
Then later the name becomes St.
Jean.
Why?
The name is still St.
Jean-de-Luz.


Rhine Gold Weaves a Spell at the Metropolitan
LEAD: When the Metropolitan Opera opens its 108th year tomorrow night, the ''great golden curtains,'' as the opera announcer Milton Cross used to describe them to radio audiences, will be new.
For many spectators the opera curtain becomes an object of focus only at the moment it rises on an imaginary world.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Keep up with planting.
Keep mowing as long as the grass is growing, but start raking leaves if they are beginning to drop as the grass must be clear to sustain root and top growth.
Finish dividing perennials, especially those that bloom in early spring.
Last call to take the house plants indoors, if they have not been moved inside.


Big Cocaine Cache Seized in Pennsylvania
LEAD: A Canadian man was held on drug charges today after officials seized a DC-3 cargo plane that apparently ran low on fuel before landing with nearly 3,000 pounds of cocaine, the authorities said.


Baseball;   Yankees Defeat Red Sox
LEAD: Two teams with opposite aims spent what seemed like a week at Yankee Stadium yesterday.


Sentenced to Write
LEAD:
INTER/VIEW
Talks with America's Writing Women.
By Mickey Pearlman and Katherine Usher Henderson.
216 pp. Lexington:
The University Press of Kentucky. $25.


Social Events
LEAD:
A Shipboard Party


GOD SPEAKS THROUGH HIS WOMEN
LEAD:
NO TURNING BACK
Two Nuns' Battle With the
Vatican Over Women's Right to Choose.
By Barbara Ferraro and
Patricia Hussey with
Jane O'Reilly.
332 pp. New York:
Poseidon Press. $19.95.


UNIVERSITY PRESSES/IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
A.
PHILIP RANDOLPH, PIONEER OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT.
By Paula F. Pfeffer. (Louisiana State University, $29.95.) The visionary A. Philip Randolph (1889-1979) helped shape this nation.
Before him there was no African-American labor leader.
He organized this country's first black union, the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, and sat as the first black member on the inhospitable American Federation of Labor's executive council.


Corrections
LEAD: Congressional vote tally last Sunday misstated votes taken in the House on Sept. 12 on two measures.


Shhh! Kids and Scholars at Work
LEAD: Margaret Hetley, the head librarian at the Hunts Point branch of the New York Public Library in the South Bronx, is having a typical afternoon.
It's quiet, subdued - a couple of men in leather jackets killing time, reading magazines at a corner table; a woman in a nurse's uniform perusing the library's community service guide; a young mother with an infant in a stroller browsing in the neatly kept stacks - until about 3:30 P.M., when the local schoolkids begin filing in.


A Resident Company For Westport Playhouse
LEAD: FOR about five years, a modest, enterprising professional theater company has been gaining a foothold as Fairfield County's Off Broadway counterpart.
But there has been a hitch.
In pursuit of offbeat plays, audiences have had to venture off the beaten path, to a recycled school in Fairfield.


Pony Up $95 Million? Sure, for a Baseball Team
LEAD: Judging by the numbers, winning one of the two National League baseball expansion franchises that will start playing in 1993 would not seem terribly attractive.
The league is demanding an entrance fee of $95 million from each new team, up dramatically from the $7 million the American League charged for franchises in Seattle and Toronto during baseball's last expansion in 1977.


Lemieux's Status
LEAD: He has has not seen action in any of the Pittsburgh Penguins' exhibition games this month and he is continuing to have back spasms, so the word now is that Mario Lemieux could miss the team's opener on Oct. 5.


Elizabeth Reid Is Wed to David Potts
LEAD: Elizabeth Brooks Reid, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Reid of New Canaan, Conn., and Hawley, Pa., was married yesterday to David A. Potts, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
D.
Gordon Potts of Toronto, Ontario.
District Court Judge William N. Sanquilly of Pike County, Pa., officiated in the ceremony at the Blooming Grove Club in


Plea for Balance In Open Coverage
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Mealtime, Dealtime
LEAD: For as long as the world has known expense accounts, business and fine eating have gone together like bib and tucker.
The tradition continues, despite a contagious obsession with fitness and despite the recession in several major industries.
Granted, money managers in Boston prefer to take lunch at their desks and many old boys in various cities repair to their private clubs.


The Scam Goes On
LEAD: DR.
ENRICO S. MANGO, A LONG ISLAND ORTHOPEDIC surgeon, was growing suspicious of his stockbrokers at Wellshire Securities, a low-budget brokerage house based in New York City.
During the spring of 1989, he had bought penny stocks - shares of companies too small to be listed on a stock exchange - recommended by a Wellshire broker and lost money on them.


Review/Cabaret;   Mel Torme Reminisces
LEAD: Mel Torme's show at Michael's Pub on Sept. 12 had good intentions.
Mr.
Torme, who plays the club every year, varies his programs; this year for his engagement (through Oct. 6), he has decided to celebrate the memory of the band leader and drummer Buddy Rich by taking a big band with him to play selections he recorded with Mr.


Ms. Rexer Weds David M. Monde
LEAD: Marie M. Rexer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Rexer of Huntington, L.I., was married yesterday to David Moss Monde, a son of Mrs.
Norman Zolot of New Haven, Conn.
The Rev.
John Fitzgerald performed the ceremony at Our Lady Queen of Martyrs Roman Catholic Church in Centerport, L.I.


Q and A
LEAD:
Opera Tours


Managing;   Secrets of a Cosmic Cosmetician
LEAD: Anita L. Roddick, co-founder and chief executive of Body Shop International - the fast-growing natural-cosmetics franchiser based in Britain - has been thinking about xylophones.


D.C.'s War on Drugs, Why Bennett Is Losing
LEAD: New York City may have more addicts, Los Angeles more gangs and Miami more big-time traffickers, but no other city, it seems, has been as ravaged by drugs as the nation's capital.


Cambodian Refugees Think of Home With Hope and Dread
LEAD: Cambodia may be sliding toward peace, but the prospect is more than a little daunting to the thousands of Cambodians who have spent the last 11 years in refugee camps like this one along the Thai-Cambodian border.


Memo to Banks: Deep-Six The Dividends
LEAD: ''Every banker knows that if he has to prove that he is worthy of credit, however good may be his arguments, in fact his credit is gone.''


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: Hundreds of Americans who took part in the world championships that ended in Geneva a week ago have brought back three lasting impressions.


Unfair Picture Of Ivy League
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Iran Marks 10th Anniversary of Iraqi Invasion


CD's Cut Down to Size
LEAD: Not all good things come in small enough packages.
By now even the casual CD purchaser must suspect what collectors have long known, that for all of the wondrous compactness made possible by digital audio technology, the standard hard-plastic container may be the most cumbersome and unlovable packaging since turn-of-the-century bathing suits.


Elvis: The Novel
LEAD:
TENDER
By Mark Childress.
566 pp. New York: Harmony Books. $19.95.


Planes Seized in Drug Inquiry
LEAD: Federal agents have seized four DC-3 cargo planes here, saying they were bound for duty with a Colombian drug operation.
United States Attorney John E. Fryatt said the planes were seized Thursday as part of an investigation of purchases of aircraft by the Medellin drug cartel.
Pilots with Air Colombia of Bogota, which had bought the planes, arrived in Oshkosh to take them to Colombia, said J.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   An 18th-Century Estate Along the East River
LEAD: The Abigail Adams Smith Museum, 421 East 61st Street in Manhattan, has virtually no relation to its name.
It does not commemorate the life of the daughter of President John Adams, nor is it a museum about the colonial era.
Truth be told, Mrs.
Smith never lived there.


Great Towns From Little Markets Grew
LEAD:
THE ENGLISH TOWN
A History of Urban Life.
By Mark Girouard.
Illustrated. 330 pp. New Haven: Yale University Press. $39.95.


Taking Care of Doorbell Problems
LEAD: DOORBELL problems are usually easy to fix.
And because they operate on very low voltage (usually fewer than 18 volts), their components are safe to handle even when connected.


College Football;   Pitt Helped by Blocked Kick
LEAD: One of college football's most uncommon scoring plays, a return of a blocked conversion kick attempt for 2 points, helped Pitt to come from behind in the fourth quarter today and tie Syracuse, 20-20, at the Carrier Dome.


Speaking Up
LEAD: New York State Republician leaders were seething last week when their sacrificial lamb in the gubernatorial race, Pierre A. Rinfret, began to put up an embarassing commotion on his way to the slaughter.
Party leaders had expected Mr.
Rinfret, an economist and political unknown, to bear their standard in quiet dignity while Gov.


Outdoors;   The Hunt Can Beat a Trophy
LEAD: There is a growing body of North American writing in which fishing or hunting, or both, is a launching pad for sensitive and evocative explorations into man's relationship with the natural world.


The American Who Is Lobbying the World
LEAD: As the Bush Administration strives to tighten the noose of United Nations sanctions around Saddam Hussein's neck, the man adjusting the rope has been doing his job with an appeal to high moral values and the lessons of history.
For Thomas R. Pickering, America's representative to the United Nations, the world is engaged in the struggle it forgot to wage in the 1930's as it seeks to push Iraq's army out of occupied


Cara Wilson Weds Joseph Burchenal
LEAD: Dr.
Cara Chandler Wilson and Dr.
Joseph E. B. Burchenal, senior residents in internal medicine at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, were married yesterday in Waynesboro, Va.
The Revs.
J.
Whitner Kennedy and T. Guthrie Speers officiated at the First Presbyterian Church.


Superpianist Of the Golden Age
LEAD: About five years ago Danacord issued a six-disk LP album of all the known Ignaz Friedman recordings.
Now, a new Pearl set duplicates that material except for the Beethoven ''Kreutzer'' Sonata in which Friedman played with Bronislaw Huberman (''The Complete Solo Recordings 1923-1936,'' Pearl CD IP 2000, four disks).


Wine;   Once Around the Bloc
LEAD: The wine bars in the lovely Old Town in Prague are far more notable for their beer.
It doesn't matter, because Czechoslovak beer is great.
But for a while, during a recent visit, it seemed as if the city's charms were not going to include anything vinous.


Beverly Y. Lindh to Marry in January
LEAD: Beverly Yost Lindh, an assistant treasurer of the Chase Manhattan Bank, and David John Little, a senior associate at Barclay's Bank, both in New York, plan to marry in January.
Miss Lindh is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David E. P. Lindh of Dallas.
Her fiance is the son of Dr. and Mrs.
John R. Little of New York.


YUGOSLAVIA FINDS ANOTHER STRUGGLE
LEAD: As democracy continues its slow, sometimes unsteady march across Yugoslavia, it poses a question that for more than 40 years lay buried under Communist rule: How can this agglomeration of nations, religions and languages continue as a single country?


The Laurels Are Appropriate, but Is the Sponsor?
LEAD: The Bessie Awards ceremony is an annual gathering of the clan, created by Dance Theater Workshop seven years ago to honor outstanding experimentalist performers, choreographers, designers and composers.
This year it became a circling of wagons, as troubling questions about the sponsorship of the Bessies were raised by the resignation of the ceremony's two hosts just before the Sept.


Irene Dunne: No Oscar, Just Love
LEAD: She was my father's favorite movie star, and my grandfather's too.
Talking with my best friend, he said, ''Irene Dunne, you know, was my all-time favorite.''


Elvis: The Cousin
LEAD:
THE BOY WHO WOULD BE KING.
By Earl Greenwood and Kathleen Tracy. (Dutton, $19.95.) For some Americans, Elvis Presley remains an obsession.
For others, he has turned into a joke.
The authors of ''The Boy Who Would Be King'' offer a different view, depicting a profoundly insecure child who grew up tormented by poverty and emotional abuse.


Anne H. Rodgers and Daniel P. Rice Are Married
LEAD: Anne Helen Rodgers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Rodgers of New York, was married yesterday to Daniel Phillips Rice, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Rice of New Orleans.
Msgr.
George Bardes officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.


Correction
LEAD: A Posting on Sept. 16 about the Day School on the Upper East Side misidentified the architectural firm that is designing the school's expansion into a town house on 89th Street.
It is Paul Segal Associates of Manhattan.
Arthur C. Jackson designed the town house in 1913.


Jane Lugaric Weds
LEAD: Jane M. Lugaric, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Lugaric of Montclair, N.J., was married yesterday to Kurt G. Burkhard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Burkhard of Greenbrae, Calif.
The Rev.
John M. Morley performed the ceremony at the Immaculate Conception Roman Catholic Church in Montclair.


Baseball;   Mets End Slide at 5; Trail by Only 2 1/2
LEAD: The Mets rose up from the ruins of their divisional race today, manhandled the Chicago Cubs, 11-5, and even gained a game on the first-place Pittsburgh Pirates.
But they had no illusions about the mean mathematics.
After losing five straight games before this one, they stood two and a half games out with only 11 left to play.


Jon Nelson Wed To Susan Evans
LEAD: Susan Ann Evans, the daughter of Hugh K. Evans of Cos Cob, Conn., and Rosemary K. Evans of White Plains, was married yesterday to Jon Irving Nelson, a son of John Nelson of Durham, N.H., and Cynthia J. Flagg of Jamestown, R.I.
The Rev.
John Rogers, an Episcopal priest, officiated, assisted by the bridegroom's stepfather, the Rev.


Bottom Line: Perception;   Budget Deal Might Not Do Much at First, But Economists Agree It's Worth Making
LEAD: At a news conference with out-of-town reporters last week, President Bush said an agreement with Congress to reduce the Federal deficit was ''the best antidote to further economic slowdown.''


Pro Hockey;   Islanders Evaluate Goalies
LEAD: When the Islanders ended training camp last year by turning a goaltending trio into a duo, it was Jeff Hackett who received a hearty thank you, a bus ticket to Springfield and the predictable dollop of advice concerning what his fate might be if he just worked hard, trained right, and grew up.


In the Democracy Of Nicaragua, Control Control Is Still From the Top
LEAD: When Violeta Barrios de Chamorro was elected President last February, Nicaragua appeared ready to trade a long tradition of authoritarian leadership for an exuberant, if chaotic, attempt at political pluralism.


Data Bank/September 23, 1990


Unity Approaches, and East Germany Is Looming Smaller


Correction
LEAD: A report on the Business Diary page last Sunday about Philadelphia's finances misidentified the statue on top of City Hall.
It is of William Penn, the city's founder, not of Benjamin Franklin.


Question Of the Week;   Have Elite Yacht Races Become Too Dangerous?
LEAD: Competitive sailing - eight months of deprivation, strong winds, storms, high waves and icebergs - is perilous but not too dangerous.
It is the classic competition of man against the elements.
Completing the 27,000-mile race is a meaningful conquest and an understandable acceptance of risk.
Every participant will be a winner.


3 in Family Charged in Big Cocaine Seizure
LEAD: In the first arrests in the state's largest cocaine seizure, a family has pleaded not guilty to Federal charges of conspiracy to import cocaine.


Review/Dance;   4 Elements Are Theme For Chen
LEAD: The four works that the Nai-Ni Chen Dance Company performed last Sunday night at St.
Mark's Church derived from the Buddhist belief that the physical world is made up of water, earth, fire and wind.
Each dance depicted a mighty elemental power.
Yet the evening lacked excitement.


College Football: South;   Georgia Overcomes Alabama
LEAD: John Kasay's 40-yard field goal with 1 minute 31 seconds remaining today lifted Georgia to a 17-16 victory over Alabama, extending the Crimson Tide's longest losing streak in 34 years to five games.


Columbia Offers Laurels to a Band of Poets
LEAD: Columbia University last week held a dinner to honor 18 poets, all graduates or faculty members of the university, in an effort to increase recognition of their work and their ties to Columbia.


UNIVERSITY PRESSES/IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
EVA THE FUGITIVE.
By Rosamel del Valle.
Translated by Anna Balakian. (University of California, Cloth, $22.50; Paper, $7.95) Written in 1930 and first published posthumously in 1970, this Chilean novel is a fascinating early example of the effects of Surrealism on Latin American letters. ''Eva the Fugitive'' followed Andre Breton's ''Nadja'' by only two years, and in the delirious, multidirectional prose of Rosamel del Valle's novel there are clear echoes of


Lest We Forget
LEAD: To the Editor:


And Now, Can Bob Crandall Have It All?
LEAD: His lean, wiry body encased in camouflage fatigues, a bandanna around his forehead and a toy plastic rifle in hand, Robert L. Crandall burst onto the huge video screen.
In his film debut at the 1987 meeting in Fort Worth, the American Airlines chief appeared as Crando, the terror of the competition, the unstoppable killing machine of the airline wars.


New Tack in Assault on Yosemite Commercialism
LEAD: One hundred years after its founding, this spectacular natural landmark in the Sierras has become the battleground in the environmentalists' war to scale back commercial activities in the nation's parks.


Banning Cigarette Sales In Vending Machines
LEAD: Hooray for East Brunswick (''Ban on Cigarette Vending Machines Encounters Opposition,'' Aug. 5).
There are many reasons why we should end or control cigarette sales by machines:


Small Fortunes Vanishing in Kuwait
LEAD: In the cool of the nearly completed three-story concrete house that has been paid for with money earned in 27 years of teaching in Kuwait, Mohammed Hassan Abdul Baki was still exhausted from his six-day drive across the desert to escape and the sunstroke he experienced at the crowded Jordanian border post.


Baseball;   For a Day, Darling Goes Against Wind and Odds
LEAD: There was too much on Ron Darling's mind early this afternoon for him to consider that he might have been going to a mound as a starting pitcher for the final time as a Met.


Critics Notebook;   Beckett Remembered, In His Own Words


Abandoned for Their Own Good
LEAD:
BODIES OF WATER
By Michelle Cliff.
155 pp. New York:
E.P. Dutton. $17.95.


Boris Yeltsin Taking Power
LEAD: One day last month, Boris N. Yeltsin barreled into a meeting with managers of a mine in Vorkuta, an Arctic coal city.
The weak smiles and wary eyes announced that the guest had been preceded by his reputation: populist demagogue, Communist Party defector, nemesis of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and, not least unsettling to this gathering, hero to legions of restive coal miners.


What Britain Sowed, Iraq and U.S. Now Reap
LEAD: To the Editor:


Perspectives: Land-Use Review;   New Charter Procedure Gets Its First Test
LEAD: Five years ago Peter Schorr made a tactical mistake at a New York City Board of Estimate hearing.
Assured by a clerk that the board would adjourn before it reached his request to demap a paper street in the College Point section of Queens, he left the chamber prematurely.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
LEAD: CITIES and the people who live in them did not find much to cheer about in the preliminary figures released recently by the United States Bureau of the Census.
Around the nation, New York, Chicago, Philadelphia and nearly every other big city lost a lot of their population.
Detroit fell below a million, about half what it was in the 1950's.


PREGNANT, ADDICTED - AND GUILTY?
LEAD: Treatment facilities are available to only 4 percent of the nation's addicts and most programs exclude pregnant women like Lynn Bremer and Kim Hardy.
Thousands of addicted mothers-to-be are turned away from help and turned in for prosecution under statutes prohibiting child abuse, drug distribution to minors and involuntary manslaughter.


Keith Williams Weds Margit Edwards
LEAD: Margit Edwards, a drama student at Hunter College, and Keith David Williams, an actor known as Keith David, were married yesterday at Grace Episcopal Church in Corona, Queens.
The Rev.
Alex Chambers and the Rev.
Louis F. Ferrara officiated.


Yale Research on Genetic Testing Supports Use of DNA Fingerprints
LEAD: A new study of the genetic tests used to identify criminal suspects has found no basis for concern that the same DNA pattern is much more likely to turn up twice among members of the same ethnic group.


Drivers
LEAD: To the Editor: I read with interest the article about driving in Portugal.
I believe that the cavalier attitude of Portuguese drivers owes much to that country's love of bull fighting.
The adrenalin rush after avoiding an oncoming truck while passing on a curve is likely similar to what a forcado gets while attempting to catch a rushing bull by its horns.


Easterners Brace for Future as 'Second Class' Germans
LEAD: Henny Berner still remembers the humiliation of her first business trip to West Germany last spring.


Plan to Curb Lampreys in Vermont to Begin
LEAD: A program to control sea lampreys in Lake Champlain with chemicals will begin Sunday as scheduled, a Federal district judge here ruled today.


Residential Remodeling Making Gains
LEAD: David and Toni small have just spent $50,000 to improve their home in Lake Hopatcong, N.J.
The updated kitchen has new oak cabinets, a new floor of Mexican tiles, new pale yellow countertops and new appliances.
The terrace and stone steps leading from the house to the shore of the lake have been regrouted and the 10-room house is wearing a fresh coat of paint.


No Ands and Buts, But Plenty of Ifs
LEAD: IF MR.
MARKHAM had not found the second page of a love letter, if Mrs.
Markham had not been so accommodating, if Alistair, the interior decorator, had not taught Sylvie, the maid, all about geese - if there had not been all these ifs - there would not be a ''Move Over Mrs.
Markham.''


Tending to the Poets
LEAD: A few university presses have long traditions of publishing poetry.
But in the last couple of decades the number of those issuing new work by poets, and translations of poetry from other languages, has grown rapidly.
University presses are now among the foremost publishers of poetry in this country.


Small Towns Have Big Problems, Too
LEAD: CHARLES J. DUFFY is the executive director of the Council of Small Towns, an organization formed in the late 1970's to lobby for the interests of rural and suburban municipalities in Connecticut.


Redistribute the Burden for the Bailout
LEAD: Asking ordinary taxpayers to cover the costs of a financial debacle they neither caused nor benefited from was bad enough.
But now, the Resolution Trust Corporation - the agency set up by the Government to dispose of the assets of the failed savings and loan institutions - is compounding the misery.


Catherine M. Colavecchio Is Married
LEAD: Catherine Mary Colavecchio was married yesterday to Richard Norman Foster at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
The Rev.
John Hartnett officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Nancy W. Hanna.
Mrs.
Foster is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent Colavecchio of Greenwich, Conn.
The bridegroom is a son of the late Mr.


College Football;   Penn State Routs Rutgers
LEAD: Penn State is a bit like an older brother to Rutgers when it comes to college football.
The Scarlet Knights show up to play the big boys once a year and Penn State beats them up and sends them home.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in The Times Book Review today, with a review of ''The Time of My Life'' by Denis Healey, misidentifies the building Mr.
Healey is shown leaving.
It is the residence of the British Chancellor of the Exchequer, not the Prime Minister's house.


Thinking About Spring: Anemones
LEAD: HOW about a daisy for spring?
Though most of the spring-blooming bulbs have a typical flower shape, there is one that has daisy flowers: Anemone blanda.


Drivers
LEAD: To the Editor: Regarding ''In Portugal, Wheels of Misfortune'' (Travel, July 22): I am European and have been acquainted with the United States for over 30 years.
Repeatedly I have heard Americans criticize European drivers: none of us French, German, Italian and, now, Portuguese are rational or careful drivers.


More Scanner Buffs Eavesdropping on New York's Troubles
LEAD: Since Joe Braganza began listening to a police-band radio in his free time, he has wondered what moves his fellow New Yorkers to commit the acts of brutality that he hears police officers describe every night.


Savoring the Mellow Delicacy of Leeks
LEAD: A BUNCH of leeks brings the cook close to the farm.
The vegetable is sold whole, the white bulb merging gradually into the green, which ends in long trailing leaves.
Rootlets cluster from the bulbs.
Inside and out, this member of the onion family comes caked with the rich black soil that nourished it.


For Israelis, Appeal of Occupied Territories Grows
LEAD: Thousands of Israelis who might not ordinarily choose to be settlers are moving to the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, driven by the housing shortage in Israel brought on by a wave of Soviet immigrants.


After &gt;Loss at Polls, Young Savors Role in Winning the Games
LEAD: About a year and a half ago, when he was still Mayor of Atlanta and considering an attempt to be Georgia's first black Governor, Andrew Young sat in his office and sketched out for a visitor a script of his reaching for a political brass ring and the city's quest for the 1996 Summer Olympics.


After Hurricane Hugo, A Double Repair Task
LEAD: A year after Hurricane Hugo devastated the Virgin Islands, residents are struggling to rebuild not just buildings, but also the vacation site's reputation, which was damaged by lawlessness and looting that followed the storm.


Miss Shaw Weds Brooke W. Ablon
LEAD: Alexandra Sachs Shaw and Brooke Winfred Ablon were married yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
George Zabriskie performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
John Covington.


Jesuit Bend Journal;   Keeping Obstinate River In Line
LEAD: It was too wet even for egrets.
After the storm blew in from the Gulf of Mexico, they disappeared.


SELLING SOFTWARE THE HARD WAY
LEAD: The announcement carried by both the Dow Jones and Reuters wires shortly after 8 o'clock on Thursday morning, July 12, was mysteriously brief. ''Based on analysis of preliminary numbers. . .'' the company statement read in part, ''it appears that revenues will be significantly less than the revenues of last year's comparable quarter and, consequently, earnings may also be lower.


Iran Is the Bad Guy
LEAD:
THE GULF
By David Poyer.
442 pp. New York:
St. Martin's Press. $19.95.


Campus Life: Wesleyan;   Fraternities Face Renewed Pressure To Admit Women
LEAD: Administrators at Wesleyan University plan to announce new steps intended to pressure the campus's four remaining all-male fraternities to admit women as members.


Peru Rebels Kill Ex-Minister And Son in Ambush in Lima
LEAD: Leftist rebels killed a former Labor Minister and one of his sons today and then blew up their bodies with a stick of dynamite, the police said.


Tracey Roberts to Wed Paul Haigney
LEAD: The engagement of Tracey Elizabeth Roberts to Paul Joseph Sean Haigney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Haigney of Larchmont, N.Y., has been announced by her parents, Joanne Van Wart Roberts of Mount Kisco, N.Y., and John A. Roberts Jr. of New York.
A November wedding is planned.


Correction
LEAD: A caption with the Stamps column on Sept. 9 about an auction of rare philatelic items misidentified the illustration.
It showed an artist's model for a proposed commemoration of the centennial of the birth of the Canadian statesman Sir George Etienne Cartier.
It was not a stamp, and it did not commemorate the French explorer Jacques Cartier.


Carla Stanmyre, Executive, Weds
LEAD: Carla E. Stanmyre, the daughter of Frederick W. Stanmyre of Dallas and Hong Kong and Karen P. Stanmyre of Harrison, N.Y., was married last evening to William H. Groner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Groner of Pompano Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Burt Siegel and the Rev.
Louis L. Gioia, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Lotos Club in New


At the News, Both Sides Prepare for a Seige
LEAD: With resolution last week of the most recent face-off between The New York Post and its unions, attention has returned to a struggle that will influence the city's newspaper landscape for years to come: the labor battle at The Daily News.


Technology;   Making a Model, And Doing It Fast
LEAD: Over the past two years, design engineers who have created the specifications for complicated parts on their computer screens have begun to use lasers to build plastic models of those parts in just a few hours.
Scores of companies have used such prototypes to get a quick read on how the new designs will function, whether they can be manufactured efficiently, and whether consumers like them.


The Violent Debate Over Tribal Sovereignty
LEAD: The standoff between some 20 heavily armed Mohawks and the Canadian Army has become the rallying point for many Indians across Canada and the United States who claim vast tracts of government land and who want to establish complete sovereignty over areas they control.


Elizabeth Feingold Marries
LEAD: Elizabeth G. Feingold, a daughter of Seymour H. Feingold of Scotch Plains, N.J., and Susan J. Kaplan of Westfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Louis P. Di Cerbo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis R. Di Cerbo of Schenectady, N.Y.
The bride's uncle, Judge Herbert C. Kaplan of Municipal Court in East Brunswick, N.J., officiated at the Stronghold Mansion in Bernardsville, N.J.


China's Great Dissident
LEAD: In his Shanghai writing days, Lu Xun, never a Marxist but ever a rebel by instinct, radicalized a whole generation of young intellectuals and students and even won the admiration of Mao Zedong, under whose orders Lu Xun Academy of Literature and the Arts was established in Yanan in commemoration of his death in 1936.


Diane Jean-George Marries
LEAD: Diane Jean-George and Demetrios Condeelis were married yesterday at Christ United Methodist Church in New York by the Rev.
Stephen P. Bauman.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Oscar George of Wilmington, Del.
She graduated from John Jay College and is an actress.
The bridegroom is a son of Adalais Condeelis of New York and the late Athanasios Condeelis.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Tennis
Martinez Makes Final: Conchita Martinez of Spain defeated fourth-seeded Julie Halard of France, 6-1, 6-2, yesterday to advance to the final of the $150,000 Paris Women's Open.
Martinez, the No. 1-seeded player, will face Patricia Tarabini of Argentina, who managed a 6-4, 7-5 upset victory over the defending champion, Sandra Cecchini of Italy.(AP)


Wild in the West: The Land, the Men, the Tales
LEAD:
THE FIGHTING HORSE OF THE STANISLAUS
Stories and Essays.
By Dan De Quille.
Edited by Lawrence I. Berkove.
Illustrated. 257 pp. Iowa City:
University of Iowa Press. Cloth, $27.50. Paper, $13.95.


What a Museum Owes Its Public
LEAD: The Israel Museum is not officially a national museum, since it receives only 15 percent of its budget from the Government, but it has been from its inception an institution of symbolic weight in this country.
Strategically situated between the Knesset, or Israeli Parliament, and Hebrew University, the museum was by its very location a statement of priorities on behalf of the politicians and patrons who oversaw the initial stages of its construction 25 years ago, when strong arguments could have been mounted against spending or soliciting money for anything not directly related to defense.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 23, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
43
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and lawyers.
2
5
SILENT PARTNER, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $5.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware investigates an apparent suicide.


A German Divide Fades, But 2 Towns Still Feel It
LEAD: It is once again a pleasant 30-minute drive from Bad Harzburg to Wernigerode through a classic German landscape of wooded mountains and half-timbered villages.
The two towns share a common heritage: people used to speak the same dialect and were reared on the same legends of the Brocken, the nearby mountain where witches dance on Walpurgis Night.


Jazz-Malone Accord
LEAD: The Utah Jazz are close to a contract that will keep the forward, Karl Malone, for another eight years, the team president, Frank Layden, told an audience gathered to honor Malone at Louisiana Tech on Friday night, where Malone's college jersey, No. 32, was retired. . .
The Cleveland Cavaliers on Friday matched an offer sheet to keep Steve Kerr with the team.


Baseball;   Wildness Leads to Loss for Pirates
LEAD: Stan Belinda lost his control, Jim Leyland lost his patience but Ken Hill somehow didn't lose a game in which the bases-loaded walk was the chief offensive weapon.


Metal Alloy Tapes Suit the Task Of Capturing the Range of CD's
LEAD: Belated recognition has come to metal tape cassettes.
These are tapes coated with particles of metal alloy instead of the usual metal oxide particles.
Such tapes languished on the market for more than a decade, but now their advantage is being appreciated.


Constance Harriman Wed to W. Edward Whitfield
LEAD: Constance Bastine Harriman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Howland Harriman of Los Angeles, was married yesterday to W. Edward Whitfield, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward O. Whitfield of Hopkinsville, Ky.
The Rev.
John Harper officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church on Lafayette Square in Washington.


The Conscience of the Campus
LEAD:
UNIVERSITIES AND THE FUTURE OF AMERICA
By Derek Bok.
135 pp. Durham, N.C.:
Duke University Press. $14.95.


Mama Rose in 'Gypsy' Needs Sharp
LEAD: It is often advanced as a rule of life that if you take care of the little things, the big things will take care of themselves.
But that's a rule of the theater, too, isn't it?


Modern Judaica in Riverdale, Science Fiction in Pound Ridge
LEAD: FOR every jeans commercial, television should show a slice of life in an old-age home, just to lend perspective.
The Hebrew Home for the Aged seems a superior example, if only for being a complex of well-tended apartment buildings on 19 acres overlooking the Hudson River from Riverdale.


Lifestyle;   The Yarmulke Is Now a Fashion Item
LEAD: Yarmulkes are not just yarmulkes anymore.
The traditional skullcaps worn by Jewish men during study and prayer are turning up in designer versions on boys age 10 and under, and not just in velvet and gold thread.
Handpainted leather yarmulkes have images of Teen-age Mutant Ninja Turtles, Bart Simpson, Bert and Ernie of ''Sesame


Southern Charm Key To Atlanta Bid
LEAD: The idea was to personalize the campaign as much as possible, and if that meant borrowing a pair of swim trunks to splash around a lake in Bulgaria with Ivan Slavkov, so be it.


Why So Little Training for American Judges?
LEAD: To the Editor:


When Gum Balls Were Happiness
LEAD: Reading ''When Gum Balls Cost a Penny'' [Westchester Opinion, Sept. 2]  brought a smile, chuckle and a flood of happy memories.


Loon over Miami: The On-Target Humor of Dave Barry
LEAD: The humor community of the kinder and gentler 90's is being swept by waves of touchy-feely caution and cloying cuteness.
From network to newsprint, a new timidity abounds.
Calvin and Hobbes and Arsenio Hall rule the earth.


The Executive Computer
LEAD: Shortly before the opening of the Networld computer conference here earlier this month, a forklift snagged on a bundle of cables that linked computers on one floor of the exhibit with those on another floor.
As a result, a model network that was to have been a showcase for Networld's 30,000 visitors was partly knocked out.


Tribal Tribulations
LEAD:
CROSSBLOODS
Bone Courts, Bingo, and Other Reports.
By Gerald Vizenor.
Illustrated. 322 pp. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Cloth, $35; Paper, $14.95.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Shell money was a significant means of exchange among many aboriginal cultures.
Native Americans used beads made from the shell of the quahog clam to barter for goods and this wampum spread far inland.
African slave traders made use of the cowrie shells to purchase slaves and other goods.


Mets Flashback By a Yankee Fan
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Tracking Down Foucault's Pendulum
LEAD: I knew it was in a church.
Or rather, that the museum where it is housed had formerly been a church.
And so, that afternoon, after a friend and I had lunch in an excellent little restaurant in Place des Victoires, we set off on foot toward the Rue St.-Martin and the Conservatoire National des Arts et


If Scientists Were Calling the Shots . . .
LEAD: As president of Sony U.S.A., and the first American to sit on the board of directors of a major Japanese corporation, I have had my share of interviews.
They usually start with a routine question: ''Where did you go to college?'' ''Grinnell College in Grinnell, Iowa.'' ''And where did you get your M.B.A.?


Theresa A. Elvidge Is Wed To J. M. Bistrong in Maine
LEAD: Theresa Ann Elvidge, a social worker at the Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital in Boston, was married yesterday at the Sea Coast Mission in Bar Harbor, Me., to Jeffery Matthew Bistrong, a loan officer at the Bank of Boston.
John Drake, superintendent of the mission, officiated.


Mandatory Auto Insurance Really Raises Rates
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Quick Fix: One-Man Patrol Cars
LEAD: Eventually, expanding the 26,000-member New York City police force will help contain crime.
But recruitment and training take time.
And even increasing the size of the force won't make a dramatic difference unless officers are deployed more efficiently.
Too many are busy at desk jobs, or rushing to emergencies that the Fire


Warring Cambodian Factions Accept Proposal by Sihanouk
LEAD: Leaders of three Cambodian guerrilla factions agreed today to a compromise proposal offered by Prince Norodom Sihanouk in efforts to resume talks that could end the nation's long civil war.


Peddlers Irk Stores In Harlem
LEAD: On a recent afternoon, vendors lined several blocks of West 125th Street practically elbow to elbow, standing by tables or crouching by blankets displaying their goods, which ranged from imitation Louis Vuitton bags to tapes of Malcolm X speeches.


Lord Swann, 70, Former Chief of BBC And Educator, Dies
LEAD: Lord Swann, the governor and chairman of the British Broadcasting Corporation from 1973 to 1980, died on Saturday, the BBC said.
He was 70 years old.


Pirates Get a Breather
LEAD: Suspense has been and long will be an integral part of every pennant race.
It was missing here today.
Some of the fans at Three Rivers Stadium may have been anxious in the late innings, but it was probably because they were worried about getting home in time to watch the Steelers against the Raiders.


Bears Win on a 52-Yard Kick
LEAD: The Chicago Bears and the Minnesota Vikings knocked each other silly today at Soldier Field, with the Bears usually getting the first and the last licks.
Minnesota finally caught up in big hits and on the scoreboard, tying the score at 16-16 with 1 minute 5 seconds left.


Straight Talk on Pakistan
LEAD: Pakistan's democracy is in peril.
Its demise threatens relations with Washington, already strained by Islamabad's pursuit of nuclear weapons.
A half-billion dollars in U.S. aid is at stake.
Under such circumstances, the highest obligation of American diplomacy is to speak plainly.
The grim example of


William Randolph Hearst 3d Is Wed To Margaret Crawford in California
LEAD: The marriage of Margaret Kerr Crawford to William Randolph Hearst 3d took place yesterday at the Ventana Inn in Big Sur, Calif.
The Rev.
Angus Dun Jr., an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Hearst is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Bartholomew Crawford of New York.
A graduate of the National Cathedral School in Washington and Smith College, the bride is the chairwoman of the AIDS Home Care and Hospice Project of the Junior League of San Francisco.


The Accelerating Schedule Of Hardcover Production
LEAD: FOR years, publishers have occasionally rushed ''instant'' paperback books into print to cash in on interest stimulated by the daily headlines.
Now, however, they are increasingly speeding up the deadlines for hardcover books.
Driven by financial and competitive pressures and aided by growing technical sophistication, more and more publishers are trimming the average yearlong interim from completed manuscript to finished book to as little as three or four months.


Review/Opera;   In 'Moses und Aron,' a Debate With the Self
LEAD: Arnold Schoenberg's ''Moses und Aron'' is one of opera's legendary monsters, so rarely seen on the stage that its fearsome nature tends to be exaggerated.
Not that the fears are entirely imaginary.
First sketched out in the early 1920's as an oratorio, ''Moses'' could hardly be more theatrically static.


Dole Hints at Willingness to Alter Income Tax Rate in a Budget Deal
LEAD: In the first public hint that Republican opposition to income tax rate increases may be cracking, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas said today that budget negotiators were looking at ways to raise taxes for wealthy Americans that would ''pierce the so-called bubble.''


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We will never allow anybody, whoever he may be, to strangle the people of Iraq without having himself strangled.''
- A statement by President Saddam Husseinin the name of Iraq's ruling Revolutionary Command Council.
[A1:6.]


Japan Banks in China Loan
LEAD: In the biggest Japanese loan participation to China since Beijing's crackdown on pro-democracy protests last year, 11 leading Tokyo banks have joined in an $82 million syndication loan for a television-tube plant in China, banking officials said Saturday.


Reviews/Television;   Sharon Gless, Helping The Underdogs of Life
LEAD: If you liked ''Cagney and Lacey,'' produced by Barney Rosenzweig, you'll have no trouble cottoning to ''The Trials of Rosie O'Neill,'' also produced by Mr.
Rosenzweig.
There's a new lineup of characters.
And the setting is Los Angeles instead of New York City.
But this is familiar Rosenzweig territory, the liberal terrain of fighting for the underdog and propounding the correct causes, especially feminism.


A Revived U.N. Needs Lively Leaders
LEAD: In the aftermath of the cold war, a resurgence of ethnic and nationalistic drives and a reshaping of the patterns of power and influence have greatly increased the importance of the United Nations.


Cardinal Is Denounced In Rally at St. Patrick's
LEAD: Two hundred chanting demonstrators rallied outside St.
Patrick's Cathedral yesterday morning to denounce John Cardinal O'Connor for his stands against homosexuality and abortion, but they did not disrupt the Mass inside, where he was the celebrant.


Doctor Conducts Rounds at Jordanian Refugee Camp


Net Down at Japan Brokers
LEAD: Japanese brokerages have had to make unusual revisions of their earnings forecasts for April to September because of heavy profit declines from a falling Tokyo Stock Exchange, officials said last week.


Swiss Limit Nuclear Power
LEAD: Swiss citizens have voted to forbid the construction of nuclear power plants for the rest of the century but not to abandon nuclear power altogether.


U.N., as Well, Is Entering the Post-Cold-War Era
LEAD: The first gathering of the United Nations General Assembly in the post-cold-war era moves into its most active phase this week as heads of government and foreign ministers from virtually every country arrive here for two weeks of speeches and meetings that could help to define an emerging new world order.


Commuters Agonize as Road Repairs Spread
LEAD: It is 2 P.M. on the Cross-Bronx Expressway, and for thousands of cars inching toward the George Washington Bridge, the air is heavy with exhaust.
Half a mile ahead, where the highway and the Henry Hudson Parkway feed into the bridge's seven westbound lanes, traffic is stopped.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the dates that major economic indicators are scheduled to be released this week.
Monday
None
Tuesday
Corporate Profits
2d Qtr.
G.N.P.
2d Qtr.
Wednesday
Durable Goods
Aug.
Personal Income
Aug.
Thursday


Panel Examines L.I. Law Firm Of D'Amato Kin
LEAD: A Federal grand jury in Brooklyn is looking into allegations of influence-peddling on military contracts by the Long Island law firm of the brother of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York, investigators said yesterday.


Churches Holding Special Services on AIDS Awareness


Question Box
LEAD:
Shutouts in a Row
Q.
The last time the Red Sox and the Blue Jays played each other, Boston won three straight shutout games in Toronto by scores of 2-0, 1-0, 1-0, with Dana Kiecker, Roger Clemens and Greg Harris getting the victories.
What's the record for most consecutive shutout victories by one team?


Chronicle
LEAD: Two Nobel Peace prize laureates, the Dalai Lama and ARCHBISHOP DESMOND TUTU, embraced a vision of world harmony yesterday as they met, for the first time, at the Newark Museum.


Louis Calta, 77, Dies;Reported on Theater
LEAD: Louis Calta, a former reporter in the drama department of The New York Times, died yesterday at Kingsbrook Jewish Medical Center in Brooklyn.
He was 77 years old.


Foyt Seriously Injured
LEAD: A. J. Foyt, who has won more Indy-car races than any other driver, was in satisfactory condition today after a crash in the Texaco-Havoline 200.
Foyt broke his left knee and heel and dislocated his right foot.


Gallery and a Theater Group Reject Endowment Grants
LEAD: Two New York City arts institutions have joined the organizations and artists who have rejected grants from the National Endowment for the Arts to protest the agency's requirement that recipients certify that they will not produce or exhibit so-called obscene work.


Why Was L. T. Playing?
LEAD: THE question for Bill Parcells: Why was Lawrence Taylor, who had limped off with a pulled hamstring and his arms around the shoulders of two teammates, even out there at linebacker as the final seconds flashed during the final play of the Giants' 20-3 victory?


De Klerk Arrives in the U.S. for Talks With Bush
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk of South Africa, citing the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. as an inspiration for the changes he has begun in his own country, arrived in Washington today for talks with President Bush.


Research Expert Joining Du Pont-Merck Venture
LEAD: Dr.
David W. Martin Jr., who had been senior vice president and chief of research and development at Genentech Inc., says he is looking forward to making a ''new kind of pharmaceutical company for the 21st century'' at the new joint pharmaceutical venture between the Du Pont Company and Merck &amp; Company.


Gooden And Bats Click For Mets
LEAD: With Dwight Gooden pitching and Darryl Strawberry hitting, and with all their flags otherwise flying in the winds of Wrigley Field, the Mets did what they could do today to stay in hot pursuit as they turned into the final full week of their pennant race.


Finance Chiefs Back Money Rein
LEAD: Most of the world's industrial and developing nations decided this weekend not to try to shield consumers from higher energy prices, endorsing a strategy of tight monetary policies that increases the risk of a recession.


Cutty Sark Is Updating Its Image
LEAD: CUTTY SARK, once one of the most popular brands of Scotch, is trying to make a comeback with a $45 million advertising campaign intended to update its image.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
Japanese banks are tightening the flood of money that has been financing the U.S. budget deficit and aiding developing nations.
Experts expect the move to put upward pressure on interest rates in the United States and in the developing world. [Page A1.]
Most nations have decided not to try to shield consumers from higher energy prices.


Kendall W. Goodwyn; Magazine Editor, 79
LEAD: Kendall W. Goodwyn, retired managing editor of Popular Science magazine, died on Sept. 15 at the Rosary Hill Nursing Home in Hawthorne, N.Y.
He was 79 years old and lived in North Tarrytown, N.Y.


Soviet Union Needs Modernized Banking
LEAD: To the Editor:


With Its Huge Banks Weakening, Japan Cuts Lending to the World
LEAD: At Japan's powerful banks, which in recent years have served as financiers to the world, profits are tumbling and a global investment spree is slowing.


Girl Is Killed While Playing In Brooklyn
LEAD: A 12-year-old girl was shot to death yesterday while playing in the courtyard of a Brooklyn housing complex, becoming the third child hit by gunfire since Friday.


Withdrawals Set a Record
LEAD: Customers withdrew $15.1 billion more than they deposited from the nation's savings and loan associations in April, the Government said Friday.
The amount was a record.


Slimmer Perkin-Elmer Names a New Leader
LEAD: Gaynor N. Kelley, who will become president, chairman and chief executive of the Perkin-Elmer Corporation on Dec. 1, will be leading a slimmed-down company that has lost 40 percent of its former bulk in a move to concentrate on the busineses it believes in for the future.


Israeli Reservist's Slaying Leads to Disturbances


Taiwan to Import Sugar
LEAD: Taiwan will import sugar for the first time because of falling domestic production and a rise in consumption, the state-owned Taiwan Sugar Corporation said last week.
Taiwan, traditionally a sugar exporter, will import up to 50,000 metric tons, a company spokesman said.
He declined to give a schedule.


Reviews/Television;   Vanessa Redgrave In Williams's 'Orpheus'
LEAD: Sir Peter Hall first directed his version of Tennessee Williams's ''Orpheus Descending'' starring Vanessa Redgrave for the London stage.
Then, still with Miss Redgrave, it moved to Broadway.
Now that New York production has been adapted for television by Sir Peter, using a location in Jacksonville, Fla., to simulate the nasty small-minded Two River County in Mississippi in 1948.


The Value of Pigs And Other Insights At Mead Film Festival
LEAD: In the short documentary film ''Outrageous Taxi Stories,'' a New York cabby named John looks into the camera and speaks of power. ''You know,'' he says, ''you're driving down Park Avenue on a Sunday afternoon, and there are all these people with their doormen whistling at you, and you're just cruising down Park Avenue not picking up any of them.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Meineke Discount Muffler Shops Inc., Charlotte, N.C., a unit of GFN Ltd., London, to Partners &amp; Shevack, New York.
Media buying and planning will continue to be handled by Corinthian Communications, New York.
The account was previously handled by Garrison Productions in Charlotte.
Meineke will spend $26 million on its entire advertising effort.


Ruling Adds to Uncertainty On Newspaper Sales Taxes
LEAD: In a ruling that adds uncertainty to the question of taxing newspaper and magazine sales, the Iowa Supreme Court unexpectedly upheld a state law last week that taxes the sale of magazines but exempts that of newspapers.


Spectacular, but No Surprise
LEAD: Even though the playing field has been the same - 300 feet by 160 - since 1912, more has become common in college football: more scoring, more passing, more new records.
Because the players are larger and faster, better conditioned and better coached, they do more.


The RICO 'Reformers' Are Back Again
LEAD: It's time once again to watch out for the self-styled ''reformers'' of RICO.
The main beneficiaries of this reform would be the defendants and potential defendants in fraud suits brought under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act.
The 1970 law, initially aimed at garden variety mobsters, also lets victims sue for triple damages for fraud whether or not violence is involved and whether or not the alleged wrongdoers are prosecuted.


Le Pen, Isolated in France, Opposes Gulf Involvement
LEAD: The flags of France and its regions flapped noisily and the music was rousing as the far-right leader, Jean-Marie Le Pen, boomed out his nationalistic message today to about 15,000 supporters from atop a blue pyramid-turned-podium.


Yankees Add to Red Sox Woes
LEAD: On their way out the door, the Boston Red Sox stumbled badly again.
In the last three weeks, they have lost a division lead, lost their best pitcher and, it sometimes has seemed, lost all of their bluster and confidence.
They somehow even figured out how to make the Yankees look good.


Getting Serious About the U.N.
LEAD: In a wondrous sea change, the United Nations has silenced most of its detractors.
A body once scorned as a dithering talk-shop has now mobilized impressively to punish Iraq's aggressions in the Persian Gulf.
Elsewhere, from Afghanistan to Namibia, from Cambodia to Central America, the U.N. has also offered a glimpse of President


Jobless Executives Get Solace and Aid In Support Groups
LEAD: One by one, in a brightly lighted church annex, they introduced themselves: corporate lawyers, controllers, marketing executives, commercial bankers, all from the secure suburbs of Fairfield County and all ''in transition,'' the current euphemism for being out of work.


Shanghai Breezes
LEAD: On a foggy morning about a dozen years ago, passengers on a flying jalopy were told that Beijing was socked in and the pilot had been diverted to Shanghai.
We landed at a deserted airfield; no planes were expected at Shanghai that morning, and nobody on the ground quite knew what to do with a planeload of transients.


Rift on Software Arouses Concerns
LEAD: Like an earthquake that rattles windows and breaks china but leaves the roof intact, the decision last week by the International Business Machines Corporation and the Microsoft Corporation to pursue separate paths in developing software has filled many people in the computer industry with anxiety about the next tremor.


Rinfret Overly Tired? Only of 'Politicians'
LEAD: Pierre A. Rinfret, the Republican candidate for governor of New York, has denied State Senator Roy M. Goodman's characterization, made last week, that Mr.
Rinfret was exhausted and needed a vacation when he broke with party leaders and threatened to quit the campaign.


Chronicle
LEAD: CLAUDE POMPIDOU and 80 friends flew into New York on Friday for the weekend.
The widow of a former French president, Mrs.
Pompidou was beating the drums for her foundation, which aids elderly and disabled people in France.


Tool Orders Rose by 23% Last Month
LEAD: Aided by a sharp increase from domestic manufacturers, new orders for American-made machine tools jumped 23 percent in August from the previous month's level, according to a monthly report being released today by the Association for Manufacturing Technology.
But analysts said the rise was not significant because it was primarily the effect of an industry trade show.


Correction
LEAD: A front-page article Friday about foster care misstated the title of the Federal law that was meant to help troubled families stay together.
The law was the Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act of 1980, not the Juvenile Justice and Deliquency Prevention Act.


8 Wounded in Two Manila Bomb Blasts


Gooden Gives Mets a Show
LEAD: The sight does not yet rank near the checkpoint that Met teams of the past once sought, the dirt upon Tom Seaver's right knee as evidence that his form was sound and their franchise was safe for a day.


10-Day Stretch Run for Contenders
LEAD: Watching the final days of the season pass on baseball's calendar must be like watching sand pour through a partly plugged hour glass for teams like the Reds and the Pirates, the National League division leaders hoping to finish what they started way back in April.
As interminable as the season may seem to the leaders, it probably more resembles quicksilver to the likes of the Mets, the Expos and the


Tuba City Journal;   Returning, Hollywood Lights Up The Desert
LEAD: It is not unusual for Hollywood or Madison Avenue to use the multicolored desert of the Navajo reservation for commercials, but only the older people remember when film companies came to town, usually to shoot a western.


Breech Sets Mark As Bengals Roll
LEAD: Jim Breech got the Cincinnati Bengals' sluggish offense going today and it never stopped.


Review/Dance;   The Lyons Opera Ballet Tangles With Zappa
LEAD: Ballets to music by the rock star Frank Zappa?
Anything is possible.
The Lyons Opera Ballet has just made that point at the International Dance Biennial here by inviting three Americans - Lucinda Childs, Karole Armitage and Ralph Lemon - to choreograph to their countryman's highly undanceable music.


Chronicle
LEAD: CLARA HALE, who began rescuing children off the streets in 1941 and whose Hale House in Harlem has been the home to 800 unwanted babies, was hospitalized over the weekend and is expected to be released today.
She was admitted on Friday to Lenox Hill Hospital complaining of chest pains.
After tests, the attending doctor has given her ''a clean bill of health,'' said Jesse Devore, the spokesman for Hale House, which Mrs.


15th-Century Portrait Is Stolen From Museum
LEAD: A 15th-century painting was stolen from the Correr Museum in St.
Mark's Square on Friday, and art experts quickly demanded more guards and better security systems The painting, Lazzaro Bastiani's 20-by-16-inch portrait of the Venetian doge Fran-cesco Foscari, was removed from its frame in the second-floor gallery of the city-run museum during regular museum hours.


Market Place;   When a Big Bull Is Forced to Sell
LEAD: IT is an old Wall Street story, the kind grizzled veterans tell to rookies.
Now, in the case of the stock of a Kentucky insurance company, the story has come to life.


Business Scene;   Inventory Data Can Be Deceptive
LEAD: THE sluggish American economy is in danger of sliding into a recession.
Few Americans dispute that; yet they are being told by economists to take comfort.
The national economy will muddle through, as long as companies maintain small stockpiles of unsold goods.
The problem with this thesis is that when sales plunge recessions can be born anyway, no matter how small the stockpiles.


Tax Rally Displays Petitions Against Florio
LEAD: About 4,000 tax protesters, half the number who turned up for a similar event three months ago, rallied at the State House here to display what organizers said were nearly a million signatures on anti-tax, anti-government petitions and to denounce Gov.
Jim Florio, the focus of their wrath.


Proposals for a U.S. Energy Policy: Some Possible, Most Not
LEAD: From the day Ronald Reagan arrived in Washington until the day before Saddam Hussein's troops reached Kuwait City, energy policy was a fringe issue in the United States.
Now, the deployment of American troops in the Persian Gulf to assure a steady flow of oil has left many policy makers wondering whether the United


Rangers Win, 4-2; Islanders Now 0-4-1
LEAD: Troy Mallette was gone before the game was over, penalized into exile.
It was a familiar development last season for the young left wing for the Rangers.
It was supposed to be different this season.
His skills with his gloves on are what the Rangers value. ''It ain't the season yet,'' Mallette said.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
Economic and Social Council
COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


In Shift, Fed Puts Emphasis on Inflation
LEAD: After 15 months of gradually lowering interest rates to avoid a recession, the Federal Reserve has shifted strategy and is trying to freeze rates at their present levels, having concluded that inflation is now the greatest threat to the American economy.


Excerpts From Statement by Iraqi President Warning of the Effects of War
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the statement issued today by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq in the name of the Revolutionary Command Council.
Parts of the text were translated from a dispatch by the Iraqi News Agency and a broadcast by the Iraqi radio.
The British Broadcasting Corporation provided other portions in English.


Last Planned Refugee Flight From Iraq Arrives in the U.S.
LEAD: A jet carrying 112 people from Iraqi-occupied Kuwait arrived in the United States today after a flight from Baghdad via London.


SUSPECT ARRESTED IN HIKER SLAYINGS
LEAD: A 38-year-old man has been charged in the slayings of two young hikers on a section of the Appalachian Trail in central Pennsylvania.


Rallying Blue Jays Take 1-Game Lead
LEAD: The Toronto Blue Jays moved back into first place in the American League East today, rallying for a 4-4 tie in the ninth inning and beating the Cleveland Indians, 5-4, in the 10th on Mookie Wilson's single.


INSIDE
LEAD:
A Matter of Marks
For the people of the two Germanys, some burning questions of the coming reunification are: What will it cost, who will pay, and how?
Page A6.
Art and Obscenity
After months of furor, the trial begins today on whether a Cincinnati exhibition of photographs by Robert Mapplethorpe was obscene.


EASY RACES FOR 2 IN HAWAII PRIMARY
LEAD: Senator Daniel K. Akaka, a Democrat, and Representative Patricia Saiki, a Republican, each easily won their primary bids to fill an unexpired Senate term in Hawaii's voting Saturday.


Giants Smother Dolphins
LEAD: Is Dan Marino a dangerous passer?
Usually.
Is Sammie Smith a dangerous runner?
He was in his first two games this season.
But today, Marino and Smith were the ones in danger.


Eagles Finally Win a Game
LEAD: Randall Cunningham threw for two touchdowns and Andrew Toney ran for 103 yards today as the Philadelphia Eagles beat the Los Angeles Rams, 27-21, for their first victory of the season.


MOSCOW PREMIER SAYS NATION FACES POTATO SHORTAGE
LEAD: As the battle for control of the Soviet Union's crippled economy intensifies, Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov warned today that Russia this winter could run short of its most faithful staple: the potato.


Chronicle
LEAD: To coincide with the 40th anniversary of her accession to the throne in 1952, QUEEN ELIZABETH will star in a BBC documentary on her job as head of state of the United Kingdom and her constitutional role in the 15 Commonwealth nations.
Filming will begin next month, when President FRANCESCO COSSIGA of Italy makes a state visit to


Review/Film Festival;   Capturing the Moral Code of an African Village
LEAD: ''I violated tradition by not killing Saga,'' a man says of his own brother, an adulterer whose punishment by death fell to his sibling. ''My conscience bothers me.'' His aged mother tries to soothe him to sleep, saying, ''That is the way of the world.''


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
ASIAN GAMES
Chinese Lifter Takes First Gold: A 97-pound woman, lifting more than twice her weight, won the 1990 Asian Games' first gold medal yesterday to lead a Chinese sweep of the day's medal events in Beijing.
The Chinese picked up three golds in women's weight lifting - including one world record - four in swimming and one in men's team gymnastics.


Reviews/Music;   Javanese Shadow Puppets
LEAD: Wayang kulit, the Indonesian shadow-puppet play that the court performers from the sultan's palace in Jogjakarta presented on Friday night and Saturday afternoon at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, is an often earthily popular art that translates uncomfortably to an American context.


Caracas Journal;   Ex-Rebel in a Muumuu Becomes a Potent Force
LEAD: Argelia Laya's disillusionment with armed struggle came one day in the mid-1960's when a fellow guerrilla commander asked her to send ''nine women guerrillas'' to his battle front.


1 in 7 U.S. Cities and Counties Challenging Count in Census
LEAD: One-seventh of the towns, counties and cities in the country, and all of its 51 largest cities, have challenged the Census Bureau's counts of their housing units in the hope of increasing their population figures.


When Decline Hurts
LEAD: Massachusetts voters turned angrily against incumbents in primaries last week, and many other states report a mood of hostility toward politicians.
Why?
The experts talk of high state taxes, corruption, cynicism.
But a far more profound phenomenon may underlie the discontent.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-13


Bhutto's Opponent Says She Is the Crucial Issue
LEAD: Pakistan's caretaker Prime Minister, Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi, says the national elections on Oct. 24 will be won or lost not on issues of Government policy but on a single political question: was the dismissal of Benazir Bhutto justified?


U.S. Auctioning Bills and Notes This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week include today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, followed by a two-year note auction tomorrow and a four-year note auction on Wednesday.


Ballot Becomes a Burden in California
LEAD: Like millions of California voters, Cyrus Chartres will not only vote for a new governor in November but will also decide whether he wants to create an elected environmental ''advocate'' for the state, limit the terms of state lawmakers, buy unlogged forests and allow the state to put out contracts for prison labor, just to mention a few of the choices on the ballot.


Bombs Found On Store Roof In Brooklyn
LEAD: Nineteen gasoline bombs were discovered during the weekend on the roof of the Family Red Apple, one of two Korean-owned grocery stores that have been the target of an eight-month boycott, the police said yesterday.


Miss Rapp Weds Joseph M. Lodato
LEAD: Linnette Claire Sessan Rapp, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Lennart Rapp of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Joseph Michael Lodato, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ross Lodato of Riverside, Conn.
The Rev.
Leo P. Gorman officiated at St.
Catherine of Siena Roman Catholic Church in Riverside.


Test Case for Obscenity Standards Begins Today in an Ohio Courtroom
LEAD: The passions ignited here last spring over an exhibition of photographs by Robert Mapplethorpe will be revisited in a Cincinnati courtroom Monday when for the first time in this country a museum and its director will stand trial on criminal charges over work it displayed.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Sept. 23:
MONDAY
Ameron Inc
Hartford Steam Boiler
BellSouth Corp
Hormel Geo A &amp; Co
Disney Walt Co
NCH Corp
TUESDAY
Bell Atlantic Corp
Montana Pwr Co
Boise Cascade Corp
Nipsco Inds
Centerior Energy Corp
North Fork Bancorp Inc
Delmarva Pwr &amp; Lt Co
Norwest Corp
Elcor Corp
Park Electrochemical Corp
Harsco Corp
Public Svc Co Colo
Hydraulic Co
Signet Bkg Corp
Metropolitan Finl Corp


After Silence, Japan's Army Pushes for Armed Gulf Role
LEAD: After four decades of silence, Japan's military has openly split with some of the country's political leaders in a bitter debate over whether and how Japan should contribute forces to the Persian Gulf in what may become the military's first excursion abroad since World War II.


Khrushchev Memoir Tells of Castro Plea For Attack on U.S.
LEAD: Fidel Castro urged the Soviet Union to attack the United States in 1962 because he feared an American invasion of Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis, Nikita S. Khrushchev said in portions of his memoirs published today.


Ford and G.M. Closing Plants
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company will close three plants this week and the General Motors Corporation will shut down a Chevrolet Caprice plant for two weeks because of slow sales, the auto makers said Friday.


Reviews/Dance;   Struggles In History And Myth
LEAD: Deep beneath the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine is a striking new space for dance.
Its potential was revealed on Friday night when the Forces of Nature Dance Company presented ''Coming Forth by Day'' in the cathedral's Theater of the Crypt.
The event was the company's third annual benefit and the first dance performance in this theater, which had previously been used only for dramatic productions since it opened in June.


Free Magazines for the Gulf Troops
LEAD: Magazine publishers, rallying to provide reading matter to American troops in the Middle East, have volunteered to donate more than 19,000 magazines a month to the United States Air Force for its desert operation.


A Sermon on AIDS Where It's Rife, in Harlem
LEAD: The churchgoers sang hymns in the sanctuary and prayed in a circle with hands clasped.
They then marched outside holding lighted candles and, finally, launched bunches of black and white balloons into the air over 125th Street.


Bridge
LEAD: A tournament that could claim to be both the world's strongest and the world's smallest was played last week in Zandvoort, the Netherlands, sponsored by Europe's largest options exchange, the EOE Optiebeurs of Amsterdam.
There were only 16 pairs, but almost all of them were of world class.


Sharon Ostow, Publisher, Is Married
LEAD: Sharon E. Ostow, the founder and publisher of The Northeast Equine Journal in Keene, N.H., was married yesterday in New York to James A. Rousmaniere Jr., the editor and president of The Keene Sentinel.
Rabbi Charles D. Lippman officiated at the Water Club.


Reviews/Music;   Billy Idol Moves On, But the Fans Hold Back
LEAD: Billy Idol came up with one of the winning rock formulas of the early 1980's: a drum-machine dance beat plus rock guitar chords plus baritone crooning derived from Jim Morrison and David Bowie.
With his bleached-blond hair and his lips perpetually curled in a sneer, he quickly became a staple of MTV, singing arrogant, slightly ominous songs like ''White Wedding'' and ''Rebel Yell.


Super Derby Won By Home at Last
LEAD: For the second time this month, Unbridled finished second but his trainer went to the winner's circle anyway.


Cricket Is Foreign to Most Americans
LEAD: ON Sundays during the summer and early fall, Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx is a sea of white.
Hundreds play the slips, bowl to the wicket and swing for sixes in the crisp uniform of the signature sport of the British Commonwealth - cricket.


Warmup Unit For Calves
LEAD: A hockey player, Chris Smith, who once hurt his knee during play has developed a device for stretching the calf muscles before and after exercise.
He designed ProStretch, a plastic foot rocker that is made to condition the leg muscles so as to avoid injury.


NATO STRUGGLING TO REDEFINE ITSELF
LEAD: Having concentrated entirely on deterring Soviet aggression over the past 40 years, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is now struggling to find a new role for itself after the collapse of Communism and the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.


El Salvador Chief Lobbying to Stop U.S. Aid Cuts
LEAD: President Alfredo Cristiani of El Salvador begins an intensive three-day lobbying campaign on Capitol Hill on Monday in an effort to thwart legislation that would cut United States military aid to his country by 50 percent next year.


World Bank Stressing Environmental Issues
LEAD: The World Bank, long criticized by conservationists because of the ecological consequences of its programs, today described itself as an enthusiastic and effective convert to the environmental faith.


Cuomo Accused of Abandoning the Adirondacks
LEAD: The executive director of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's Commission on the Adirondacks in the 21st Century, said today that Mr.
Cuomo had ''walked away'' from the panel's recommendations for protecting the six-million-acre park.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Cholestech Corp., Hayward, Calif., appointed Dr.
Eric McAllister vice president of clinical affairs and Dr.
Robert A. Baughman director of preclinical development.


U.S. Spent $21.5 Billion in 1989 To Support Families of Teen-Agers
LEAD: The Federal Government spent more than $21.5 billion last year on welfare programs for families started by teen-agers, said a report released today.


De Klerk, in Washington, Cites Dr. King


Will Changes in Schools Improve Reading and Math Scores?
LEAD: To the Editor:


One Result of Logging Protests: More Antagonism
LEAD: A summer campaign of logging protests has left the communities along California's northern coast more polarized over the issue of saving trees versus saving jobs and may even have caused a schism in the group leading the protests.


2 Debtors' Role in Silverado's Fall
LEAD: They were the highest of the highfliers, pillars of Denver's business and social communities, with dreams of reshaping the city's skyline and suburban shopping habits.


The Breakfast Of a Champion Fan
LEAD: WHEN he wakes up this morning, Paul Kelly, a senior at the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, N.Y., won't go to the dining hall.
He'll be served breakfast in bed by the R.P.I. president, Roland W. Schmitt.


Books of The Times;   After 2 Decades of Silence, a Novel on Alcoholism
LEAD:
Sams in a Dry Season
By Ivan Gold
244 pages. Houghton Mifflin/Seymour Lawrence. $19.95.


New Creative Director For Young &amp; Rubicam
LEAD: After barely a year in the top creative spot at the New York office of Hal Riney &amp; Partners, Helayne Spivak is leaving to become the executive creative director of the New York office of Young &amp; Rubicam.


U.S. Energy Options (and Habits)
LEAD: From the day Ronald Reagan arrived in Washington until just before Saddam Hussein's troops reached Kuwait City, energy policy was a fringe issue in the United States.
Now, the deployment of American troops in the Persian Gulf has left many policy makers wondering whether the United States has options other than force to assure an adequate suppply of energy.


House Candidate in Capital Pays Back Taxes to the City
LEAD: The capital's Democratic nominee for delegate to the House has disclosed that she has paid the city tens of thousands of dollars in back taxes, penalties and interest to settle a tax controversy.


Hoop Trivia
LEAD: IF the new movie ''Goodfellas'' has it right, mobsters are a hardworking lot who spend so much time on the go, keeping one nefarious appointment after another, that they don't have time for athletic endeavors.


Pavarotti and Others To Sing at Tucker Gala
LEAD: Jerry Hadley, Marilyn Horne, Elena Obraztsova, Luciano Pavarotti, Samuel Ramey and Carol Vaness will head the program at the 1990 Richard Tucker Music Foundation gala on Nov. 11 at Avery Fisher Hall.


Spurrier Returns to Revive Alma Mater
LEAD: THE day before the University of Florida football program was scheduled to have its knuckles rapped or its season condemned by yet another National Collegiate Athletic Association investigation, there was Steven Orr Spurrier, the new football coach, twirling around in his office chair talking about happy Gators and the greenest


Mandatory Auto Insurance Really Raises Rates;   On Policyholder's Side
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mandatory Auto Insurance Really Raises Rates;   Supplemental Coverage
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dole Hints at Revising Rates for Income Tax
LEAD: With the deadline for reaching a deficit-cutting budget agreement a week away, Senator Bob Dole gave the first public hint that Republican opposition to tinkering with income tax rates could be cracking.


Metro Matters;   New York City On the Rocks? Don't Bet on It
LEAD: A looming recession, coupled with soaring energy prices, presage the loss of nearly 100,000 jobs in the first year of the new decade and will keep the number of employed New Yorkers from expanding at all in the next 10 years.


On the Sidewalks, Business Is Booming
LEAD: Steven Frost makes his living on the street, selling toy spiders that jump when you squeeze a rubber ball.
They are $3 each, two for $5.


Signs of Tighter Loan Rein Cited
LEAD: Some private analysts say that the credit squeeze, seen earlier this summer as a nettlesome but not serious problem, may be intensifying.


Trinidad's Once-Civil Society Frays Along Racial Lines
LEAD: When he eased his way to the dais with the aid of a sculpted wooden cane to open an international conference this week, a smile briefly played upon the face of Prime Minister Arthur N. R. Robinson as he bathed in expressions of sympathy and admiration.


Success Looms for Maker Of Civil War Film Series
LEAD: Ken Burns, the film maker whose epic documentary, ''The Civil War'' has been called a television masterpiece and the best American film of the year, is ''very guarded'' about how success may change his life.


Outdoors: A 35-Year Flirtation Blossoms
LEAD: ALTHOUGH I began saltwater fly fishing more than 35 years ago, it wasn't until this summer that I became deeply hooked by the sport.


EVOLUTION IN EUROPE: One Germany - Second in a series.;   As Marriage Nears, Germans in the Wealthy West Fear a Cost in Billions
LEAD: For most Germans, the burning questions of unification center on money.
From Chancellor Helmut Kohl down to Otto Normalverbraucher - the average German consumer - they are wondering what will it cost, who is going to pay for it and how?


Accusations On Neil Bush
LEAD: Federal regulators have brought conflict-of-interest accusations against Neil Bush as a director of the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association of Denver on three matters:


Soviet Union Needs Modernized Banking;   Currency Flexibility
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jets Confront Bills With New Outlook
LEAD: The last time the Jets played the Buffalo Bills it was two days before Christmas and the 21,148 diehard fans who showed up last December in Giants Stadium made up the smallest home crowd for a nonreplacement game since Dec. 14, 1963, when the team still played in the Polo Grounds.


Elsie A. Crum, a Lawyer, Is Married To Roger Coy, a Banker, in New York
LEAD: Elsie Alberta Crum, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Albert Crum of Brooklyn, was married yesterday at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University to Roger Ellington Coy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lopez Livingston Coy of Coral Springs, Fla.
Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu of Cape Town, the Anglican Primate of Southern


Art School, Still Needy, Is Thanking Its Champion
LEAD: When he first visited the fledgling New York Studio School 25 years ago, the eminent art historian Meyer Schapiro was ''very moved'' at the sight of students doing carpentry, wiring and painting to turn their seedy premises into a working space.


Reviews/Dance;   Blending Movements And Words
LEAD: Robert Frost once defined poetry as that literary quality that tends to get lost in translation.
On Saturday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater, much theatrical poetry got lost because there was not enough translation.


Vision of Los Angeles Leads to a Magazine: Buzz
LEAD: A year and a half ago, Eden Collinsworth, a young New York book publisher who often came to Los Angeles on business, began to notice profound changes taking place there. ''A cumulative effect had been going on in Los Angeles,'' she said. ''It was becoming far more confident and sophisticated a city.


IRAQIS THREATEN TO ATTACK SAUDIS AND ISRAELIS IF NATION IS 'STRANGLED' BY EMBARGO
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq threatened today to attack oilfields in Saudi Arabia and other Arab countries and to use force against Israel if Iraq was ''strangled'' by the economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Cranston Says He Will Vote Against Souter Confirmation
LEAD: Senator Alan Cranston of California, the second-ranking member of the Senate Democratic leadership, said today that he would vote against confirming Judge David H. Souter, President Bush's nominee for the Supreme Court.


Keeping the War Machines Running


New Air Force Chief Is Chosen
LEAD: President Bush on Friday nominated Gen.
Merrill McPeak to replace the Air Force Chief of Staff dismissed for discussing American military strategy in the Middle East, officials said.
General McPeak, 54 years old, has been commander of Pacific Air Forces since July 1988.
If confirmed by the Senate, General McPeak would succeed Gen.


CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: Strains of Gulf Crisis;   Sharp Questioning by Congress Comes Amid Jockeying Among Bush Officials
LEAD: After seven smooth weeks of handling the Persian Gulf crisis, the White House is fumbling several critical gulf issues on Capitol Hill and finds itself grappling with internal tensions that strain its vaunted air of collegiality.


Victoria Bennett, Film Maker, Wed
LEAD: Victoria Elizabeth Bennett, a daughter of Mrs.
Herbert H. Miller Jr. of Rowayton, Conn., and the late Robert A. Bennett, was married yesterday to David Matthew Fite, a son of Constance Alderson Fite of New York and the late Warner Fite 2d.
The Rev.
Edward R. Danks performed the ceremony at the Noroton Presbyterian Church in Noroton,


Canada Has Created Model Health System
LEAD: To the Editor:


Waiting For Some Weirdness
LEAD: ''Dad, what was that that Tug McGraw said again?
You gotta what?'' There was a time, not all that long ago, when a 4-year-old could hold a sign that said, ''I've Been A Met Fan All My Life,'' and the team was no older than the child.
And the children who were willing to follow, as bad as the expansion team turned out to be, were charmed because they had not been forced to inherit decades of baseball torture.


Rinfret Seeks Volunteer Band Of 'Vigilantes'
LEAD: Pierre A. Rinfret proposed yesterday that the police department arm and train 100,000 volunteer ''vigilantes'' to combat crime in the city.


Freight Train Derails in Ohio
LEAD: A freight train derailed today near the city's downtown, forcing the authorities to close a major highway during morning rush hour because of a potential chemical leak.
Five tanker cars and three box cars of the CSX train derailed about 4:30 A.M.


Oil Price Rise and Stock Fall Help Push Gold Beyond $400
LEAD: Prices of gold futures climbed above $400 an ounce yesterday as soaring energy prices, crumbling stock prices and a slumping dollar renewed investor interest in metals.


Of Astigmatism, Arthritis and the Artist
LEAD: To the Editor:


NEW SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-15
The Soviet leader won new powers to pull the country out of its mounting crisis.
The Parliament granted President Gorbachev the emergency economic powers but put off, at his request, answering the question of how to move to a free market.
Page A1
Khrushchev memoir claims the Rosenbergs were spies


Fan Is Injured in Melee
LEAD: A Pittsburgh Steeler fan who reportedly traded taunts with a crowd of Los Angeles Raiders fans was in critical condition today after being knocked unconscious during a game between the teams at the Los Angeles Coliseum on Sunday.


Khrushchev on Rosenbergs: Stoking Old Embers
LEAD: Nearly four decades after Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were executed for conspiring to pass America's atomic bomb secrets to the Soviet Union, the case that has haunted scholars, historians and partisans of the left and the right has found a new witness: Nikita S. Khrushchev.


Bridge
LEAD: The most successful country in this month's world championships in Geneva was the United States, which won the Charles Solomon Trophy for overall performance, as it has done on all previous occasions.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Markets


S.E.C. Brings Fraud Case
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission charged an Ocean City, N.J., man today with violating the anti-fraud provisions of Federal securities laws in connection with a scheme to drive up the stock price of three companies in 1988.


Two Gunmen Get $150,000    Police officers from the canine unit, above, used a bloodhound in a fruitless search for the gunmen.   Frankie Targia, left, one of the guards, said that the robbers ''put a shotgun to my head. I thought I was dying.'' (Photographs by Steve Berman for The New York Times)


Accounts
LEAD: *
Krystal Co., Chattanooga, Tenn., a fast-food chain, to the Bloom Agency, Dallas, for the creative portion of the account.
Media buying is still handled by Bozell Advertising, Minneapolis.
Total budget is $8 million to $9 million.


Blue Jays Top Brewers And Extend Their Lead
LEAD: The Toronto Blue Jays increased their American League East lead over idle Boston to one and a half games tonight by defeating the Milwaukee Brewers, 9-5, as George Bell broke an 0-for-13 skid by going 5 for 5 with three singles and two doubles.


Chess in Times Square
LEAD: Harry Macklowe bulldozed his way to notoriety one night in January 1985 when a demolition crew destroyed single-room-occupancy hotels on a building site he owned just off Times Square.
Mr.
Macklowe, a big developer, planned to build a luxury hotel there, but would have been stymied by a city moratorium on tearing down S.R.O.


'Civil War' Sets an Audience Record for PBS
LEAD: ''The Civil War'' on Sunday night was the most watched opening episode of a series ever to play on public television.


Edward E. Booher, 79, an Executive in Publishing
LEAD: Edward E. Booher, the former chairman and president of the McGraw-Hill Book Company, died yesterday at the Princeton Medical Center in Princeton, N.J.
He was 79 years old and lived in Princeton.


Reviews/Fashion;   Scaasi Offers a Slinky New Look
LEAD: After 53 couture seasons, Arnold Scaasi's clothes have developed a surprising new look.
The styles have always been flattering in a traditional bouffant-skirt, low-decolletage way.
Now they are skinny, seductive and rather advanced looking.


Spying by Computer: Is It a Trentongate?
LEAD: A scandal that began with a Republican break-in into Democratic computer files is increasingly unnerving legislative leaders here, who now face an investigation of the case by the attorney general and charges by public-interest groups that both parties are covering up information to hide unseemly activities in the State


P.&amp; G. Detergents
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company said it was considering reformulating most of its best-known detergents, including the industry leader Tide, with new versions that require about half the detergent as its current products but that are said to have more cleaning power.
The company said the new versions will require significant retooling of Procter &amp; Gamble's detergent factories, requiring tens of millions of dollars.


'A New Ben Johnson'
LEAD: A two-year ban from competition for testing positive for a banned anabolic steroid at the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul, South Korea, came to an end yesterday for Ben Johnson, the Canadian sprinter.
The 28-year-old athlete, who was stripped of a gold medal after winning the 100-meter dash, told The Canadian Press at a fund-raising event in Toronto: ''The time has come for a new Ben Johnson.


House to Consider Crime Bill That May Limit Use of Death Penalty
LEAD: Facing the threat of a veto, a bill is scheduled to be taken up Tuesday by the House of Representatives that many law-enforcement agencies say could greatly restrict the use of the death penalty.


Market Place;   Bank Stocks Emit Ominous Signals
LEAD: THE sharp drop in bank stocks is signaling a deep recession and possibly some bank failures, several strategists say.
And while the broader market, battered though it is, does not yet fully reflect this, the severe drop in bank issues over the last year suggests that the overall market is likely to sink further in coming months.


Review/Television;   Murder, Manipulation and Racism
LEAD: Still a bit breathless from the effort, CBS can claim to be first on the entertainment scene with a dramatization of the story of Charles and Carol Stuart.
The pregnant Mrs.
Stuart was killed on the night of Oct. 23, 1989.
Her husband, known as Chuck, was also shot and said the assailant, an armed robber, was a black man.


End to Pakistan Aid Is Sought Over Nuclear Issue
LEAD: Asserting that Pakistan has ignored American demands to curtail its program to develop nuclear weapons, a leading member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee has urged President Bush to cut off all military and economic aid to Islamabad.


Good Politics, Bad Economics
LEAD: The Senate minority leader, Bob Dole, is desperately seeking a way out of the impasse over capital gains taxes that plagues negotiations on deficit reduction.
He now floats two ideas: One is to vote separately on a package to cut the deficit by $500 billion over five years and on a controversial package of revenue-losing measures, including a capital gains tax cut.


Bills Show Jets Are Still No Match for Them
LEAD: The Buffalo Bills, knocked out of first place in the American Football Conference East for the first time in 33 weeks last week by the Miami Dolphins, reclaimed a piece of the division lead last night by winning their sixth consecutive game against the Jets, 30-7, before a national television audience and 69,927 fans in Giants


East Germans to Supply Equipment to Gulf Force
LEAD: About half the military aid promised by West Germany for the buildup of forces in the Persian Gulf will be in the form of East German military equipment, the Government spokesman said today.


Rare Viruses May Be Spreading
LEAD: TWO viruses thought to be rare in the United States may be becoming more common and could pose a serious threat to health workers, researchers say.


Of Astigmatism, Arthritis and the Artist
LEAD: To the Editor:


College Paper Article Called Blatant Anti-Semitism
LEAD: The president of City College yesterday denounced as ''blatant anti-Semitism'' an opinion piece printed in a student newspaper and he urged the publication's editors to reject such contributions in the future.


Selection of Jury Begins In Ohio Obscenity Trial
LEAD: Jury selection began today in the Mapplethorpe obscenity trial, with lawyers for the defense and prosecution asking prospective jurors pointed and personal questions about homosexuality, obscenity and art.


Concern Over Quarterback Injuries
LEAD: National Football League officials study tapes of plays on which quarterbacks are injured looking for possible changes in the rules and other ways to help protect the person who handles the football more often than any other player.
This week at the league offices here in Manhattan, there will be plenty of tape to review.


Chronicle
LEAD: A scant two months after DONALD TRUMP bought a Dutch shipyard, which had been building him the world's largest yacht, he sold it.
Shipyard officials in Makkum, the Netherlands, said yesterday that Mr.
Trump was forced to sell the Amels BV shipyard because of his financial woes.


At the U.N., No One Wants to Listen to Iraq and Supporters
LEAD: The Iraqi diplomats and the handful of their supporters - chief among them the Palestine Liberation Organization -have become outcasts here.


Corrections
LEAD: An article and a picture caption on Sunday about foster care at Hale House in New York City referred incorrectly in some editions to the views of Barbara Sabol, the city's Human Resources Administrator.


Koreans See a Gain From Boycott: Unity
LEAD: Members of New York City's Korean-American community say the long, bitter boycott of two Korean-owned stores has produced one unforseen benefit: It has mobilized their community and spurred it to integrate itself into the city's political life.


SOVIET PARLIAMENT GRANTS GORBACHEV EMERGENCY POWER
LEAD: The Soviet Parliament granted President Mikhail S. Gorbachev emergency economic powers today, but put off, at his request, answering the critical question of how to move to a free market.


Lewis Maytag, Airline Official, Is Dead at 64
LEAD: Lewis B. Maytag, an heir to the home appliance fortune who shunned the family business for a career in flying and became chief executive of National Airlines for 18 years, died on Sunday at Penrose Hospital in Colorado Springs.
He was 64 years old.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Asparagus
Q. What causes the characteristic odor in human urine soon after asparagus is consumed?
A. ''Asparagus appears to contain a unique substance, or in uniquely generous amounts, to supply a substrate for some as-yet-unknown inheritable capacity to generate this urinary product,'' said J.


No Ban for Kay
LEAD: The Denver Broncos tight end Clarence Kay, who faced a possible ban from the National Football League for drug and alcohol violations, has been cleared to continue playing by Commissioner Paul Tagliabue.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.06
9.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.32
7.37
7.82
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.33
7.35
7.84
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.88
8.83
8.35
30-YR.


Slaying of Vietnamese Exiles in Washington Renews Refugee Fears
LEAD: An outspoken Vietnamese exile has once again been murdered in the capital, raising new fears among refugees about speaking out in public or print.


Lhasa Journal;   The Not-So-Grand Hotel: A Tibet Horror Story
LEAD: Yaks may roam the streets outside, and pilgrims may crawl and kowtow along the roads to win divine favor, but inside the Lhasa Holiday Inn there is a more mundane concern: Why are 600 teaspoons missing, and how can the hotel get more?


Here's How the 'Tax Bubble' Works
LEAD: One of the Democrats' goals in budget negotiations is to ''pop the tax bubble.'' The bubble is slang for a provision in the 1986 tax law under which the very wealthy pay a lower rate on the top portion of their income than do some taxpayers who are less affluent.


Robert Gibson, 83, Ex-Episcopal Bishop Of Virginia Diocese
LEAD: Bishop Robert Fisher Gibson Jr., former head of the Episcopal Diocese of Virginia, died Friday at Stuart Circle Hospital in Richmond.
He was 83 years old.


Senate Votes Limits on TV Ads for Children
LEAD: The Senate passed a bill today to limit commericals on television programs for children, sending it to the House for final action.


Tourist Killing Case Goes to Judge Known as Tough
LEAD: Top state court officials bypassed prevailing rules yesterday and assigned the murder and robbery case against eight people charged in the death of a Utah tourist to a judge known as being one of the tougher judges on violent crime.


Suit Accuses Maryland Of Bias Against Whites
LEAD: The Justice Department filed a reverse discrimination suit today accusing the Maryland lottery of bias against white men in 1983 when it set aside four top positions for women and minority members.


Court Approves Plan
LEAD: The new National Basketball Association pre-pension plan was given final and permanent approval yesterday in United States District Court in Newark.


Bhutto's Hunted Brother Is Hoping to Return
LEAD: Mir Murtaza Bhutto vanished from Pakistan more than a decade ago, a hunted young man with a famous name, obsessed with revenge.


Viola Frustrated By Losing The Lead
LEAD: Frank Viola was working with a 3-1 lead in the sixth inning of what could have been his 20th victory of the season, but the consequences of his work this afternoon went far beyond that.


Inflation Isn't Our Biggest Problem
LEAD: The world's finance ministers, meeting in Washington this week, have reportedly urged tighter monetary policies to combat the inflation they expect from the recent doubling of oil prices.
While that may make sense for the strong economies in Europe and Japan, it is wrong for the U.S., which is now almost certainly in a recession.


Senate, 94 to 1, Passes Bill to Protect the Benefits of Older Workers
LEAD: The Senate overwhelmingly approved a bill today that would prohibit employers from discriminating on the basis of age in providing benefits to workers.


New York Bids Cable TV Delay Sex Curbs
LEAD: New York City's Department of Telecommunications has asked a cable- television company to postpone enforcing limits on the amount of sexually explicit advertising that can be shown in Manhattan.


Joseph Leavitt, 74, Orchestra Manager
LEAD: Joseph Leavitt, executive vice president and general manager of the Philharmonic Orchestra of Florida, died Friday at a nursing home in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 74 years old and lived in Boca Raton.


Clemens Is Cleared
LEAD: Boston's Roger Clemens, sidelined with a sore right shoulder since Sept. 4, was given medical clearance to pitch on Friday against the Toronto Blue Jays.


ANXIETY TUGS AT GERMANY'S JEWS, BITTERNESS SEARS THE DIE-HARD NATIONALISTS;   Sense of Mourning, Not Elation, For the Disappointed 'Expellees'
LEAD: The national celebration of the reunification of Germany on Oct. 3 looms as a day of mourning for some of the most nationalist Germans, East and West.
Deep resentments are building among them.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Canonie Environmental Services Corp., Porter, Ind., providers of remediation services for sites contaminated by hazardous waste, appointed Paul T. Kaufmann vice president of its West Coast operations.


Review/Television;   When Kennedy and Nixon Faced a Camera
LEAD: Did Richard M. Nixon come off as badly against John F. Kennedy as memory insists in their famous 1960 Presidential television debate?
Judge for yourself tomorrow night at 8, when the Arts &amp; Entertainment cable network carries portions of the encounter in ''As It Happened: The Great Debate 1960'' as part of its series ''Campaign '60.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Saturday about budget negotiations on Capitol Hill misidentified some participants in some copies.
Clockwise from the foreground were John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff; Richard G. Darman, the budget director; Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady (partly obscured); Bob Dole, the Senate minority leader; George J.


Review/Film;   Rohmer's Love, Games and Deja Vu
LEAD: The Paris inhabited by Eric Rohmer's characters never prompts thoughts about architecture, color or light.
No picturesque bistros, no chestnut trees in blossom, no Seine, no landmarks.
It is an endless stretch of those unremarkable neighborhoods one drives through on the way into the city from the airport.


Letters to Judge Disclose New Details on Milken
LEAD: New particulars about the life and criminal investigation of Michael R. Milken have emerged in the mailbag of Federal District Judge Kimba M. Wood, who is scheduled to sentence the former financier next Monday.


Confidential Pact By Kansas Utility
LEAD: The Kansas City Power and Light Company has signed a confidentiality agreement with the Kansas Gas and Electric Company that will allow it to obtain non-public information about Kansas Gas.


A Golden Opportunity Is Tarnished by the Mets
LEAD: One week before they go to Pittsburgh looking to shoot the works, the Mets self-destructed today in more maddening ways than usual, even for a team that has lost 13 of its 24 games in September, when pennant races are run and championships won.


Forgotten Sentinels
LEAD: President Bush has inadvertently slighted the U.S.
Foreign Service.
In his Sept. 11 speech to Congress, Mr.
Bush spoke generously and at length about ''our brave servicemen and women'' in the Persian Gulf.
But he failed even to mention the brave men and women serving as diplomats in Baghdad and Kuwait, the hazardous cockpits of the conflict.


ABC and CBS Plan Late-Night Programs
LEAD: ABC and CBS announced plans yesterday to present new late-night news programs.


Philadelphia's Financial Crisis Turns on Mayor
LEAD: Mayor W. Wilson Goode, a sharecropper's son and self-made man, took office in 1984 amid high hopes that he would put the city on a sound financial footing and help ease the city's racial tensions.


The Dollar Retreats Broadly Except Against the Yen
LEAD: The dollar sank against all major currencies yesterday except the Japanese yen in selling touched off by speculation that industrialized countries might not try to stop the United States currency from sinking further.


Thomas R. Nunan Jr., Sales Executive, 67
LEAD: Thomas R. Nunan Jr., an account executive with the CBS Network sales division, died on Saturday at Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 67 years old and lived in Riverside, Conn.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


Mourners of Brooklyn Girl Rail at Latest Casual Killing
LEAD: They called her Sugar.
She loved to sing and dance.
Yesterday was to have been a rite of passage: her first day in junior high school.


Forum on Mideast Crisis Proposed
LEAD: Based on the so-called Helsinki process that helped ease East-West tensions over the last 15 years, Spain and Italy proposed today that a broad new organization be created to address security and development problems throughout the Mediterranean and the Middle East.


Auto Fuel Efficiencies Lie Within Our Grasp
LEAD: To the Editor:


An 'Arsenal' Found in 2 Trunks Is Linked to Colombia Drug Gang
LEAD: Federal authorities said yesterday that they believed that two steamer trunks filled with submachine guns and explosives and found in the corridor of an East 75th Street apartment building in Manhattan belonged to Colombian drug smugglers.


When Big Money Doesn't Translate Into Quality
LEAD: Every sport has its overpaid athletes, and thoroughbred racing's are the stakes-caliber grass horses.


For Refugees in the Desert, a Precious Resource


Sports News Briefs;   Judge Dismisses Damage Claims
LEAD: A Federal judge has dismissed claims for damages against the promoter Top Rank and Madison Square Garden Inc., in connection with a June 1983 bout in which padding was illegally removed from a fighter's gloves.


Unusual Deal By America West Seen
LEAD: America West Airlines Inc. has arranged an unusual way to finance its $200 million purchase of the Pan Am Shuttle, people familiar with the negotiations said.
Aircraft leasing companies and an engine manufacturer are said to be lending the airline the money in exchange for America West's agreement to purchase or lease more than 100 Airbus Industrie


Imelda Marcos to Testify
LEAD: Imelda Marcos will testify with immunity this week in a Federal investigation of allegations that the Westinghouse Electric Corporation paid a $17.3 million bribe to the Philippine Government, her lawyer said.


Mexico's Hope for Industrial Might
LEAD: From down the highway, the Ford Motor Company plant, which manufactures more than 1,000 car engines a day for the United States, seems at first glance like just another brown hillock on the vast desert plateau that surrounds this boom town.


Convoy Heads to Baghdad With Powdered Milk, but No Exemptions
LEAD: A convoy of more than 40 tractor-trailers loaded with food set out from this capital at dusk today on a 570-mile journey across a desert road to Baghdad.


Chang's Comeback Victory Sends U.S. Into Cup Final
LEAD: Michael Chang became a Davis Cup hero today, taking the United States into its first final since 1984 by securing a 3-2 semifinal victory over Austria.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   H.I.P. Uses Light Touch In Campaign
LEAD: FACED with increasing competition, the Health Insurance Plan of Greater New York has begun its first television campaign in three years, an effort aimed at dispelling what it says are some common misconceptions about health maintenance organizations.


Assessing Iraq's Latest Threat
LEAD: Washington said a threat to attack Israel and Saudi oilfields appeared to be an attempt by Iraq to split its opponents.
Israel said it was ready to ''repay'' any attack.
Page A12.


Hiker Slaying Suspect Tied to Florida Death
LEAD: A man accused in the slayings of two Appalachian Trail hikers in Pennsylvania is wanted on a murder charge under another name in Florida, investigators said today.


Proposal Sparks Outdoor Interests
LEAD: Officials of the United States Soccer Federation are convinced that the formation of a truly professional outdoor league is imperative if the United States is to be successful in the 1994 World Cup.
But there are strong indications that the resources for such a league are limited.


Budget Deficit at Record
LEAD: The Federal budget deficit jumped $52.8 billion, to a record $241.7 billion, in August but could be reduced before the fiscal year ends on Sept. 30, the Treasury Department said today.


Canadian Students Attacked Helping Woman in Brooklyn
LEAD: Two Canadian students visiting New York City were attacked yesterday by a gang of bat-wielding youths on a Brooklyn street after they tried to help an elderly woman, the police said.


Chess
LEAD: The biggest thing you can give away - the queen - naturally makes the biggest splash.
And so it did in the game between the grandmasters Sergei Smagin of the Soviet Union and Dragutin Sahovic of Yugoslavia in the Sport Meisterturnier Open sponsored by the Schweizerische Kreditanstalt in Biel, Switzerland, in early August.


Up-and-Down Town
LEAD: New York is dying again, as it was in 1974 when I moved there from Washington.
Then, as now, many people were saying good riddance. ''Drop Dead'' was The Daily News's famous headline summation of President Ford's advice to the city.


Israelis Plan Retaliation for Killing of Soldier
LEAD: The army prepared today to demolish more than 20 Palestinian houses and shops in a refugee district of the Gaza Strip in retaliation for the killing of an Israeli soldier who was burned to death in his car last week.


Major Study Set Of HIV Infection
LEAD: Federal health officials will collaborate with several hundred physicians in the United States and Canada on a major study of the progression of the human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV, which causes AIDS.


Shift From 911 Will Put Police Back on Beat
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about energy policy choices referred incorrectly to a comment on fuel economy by Thomas H. Hanna, president of the Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association.
He said cars that get 40 miles a gallon or better -not 50 or better - made up less than 3 percent of the market last year.


Anxiety Tugs at Germany's Jews, Bitterness Sears the Die-Hard Nationalists
LEAD: In East and West Germany, Jews are reflecting on what it will mean to live in a country once again united and fully sovereign, as it was in the 12 years in which it wrote a horrific chapter in Jewish history.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the shooting of a former Governor of Gibraltar referred incorrectly to three Irish Republican Army guerrillas who were killed in Gibraltar in 1988.
Two were men; one was a woman.


Australian Mines Set Merger Deal
LEAD: The giant Australian gold mining companies BHP Gold Mines Ltd. and Newmont Australia Ltd. said they planned to merge.
The surprise proposal, which is intended to thwart Poseidon Gold Ltd.'s hostile takeover bid for Newmont, values the three-year old BHP Gold at 475.3 million Australian dollars, or about $396.4 million.


3 St. John's Students Reindicted in Sex Case
LEAD: Three St.
John's University students were reindicted yesterday on charges of sexually assaulting another student, but, in contrast to the original indictment, the new one did not charge that they used force to carry out the assault.


Zambian Leader Assents to Multiparty Vote
LEAD: President Kenneth Kaunda bowed to opposition demands today and said he would clear the way for multiparty elections.
If carried out, his decision will end nearly two decades of one-party rule.


R. L. Thorndike, Psychologist, 79; Developed Scholastic-Ability Tests
LEAD: Robert Ladd Thorndike, Ralph Narch Hoe Professor Emeritus of Education at Teachers College of Columbia University, died on Friday at St.
Peter Hospital in Olympia, Wash.
He was 79 years old and moved to Lacey, Wash., in 1987.


Tooth Decay Cut
LEAD: The nation easily surpassed its 1990 goal for preventing childhood tooth decay, Federal health specialists reported last week.


Chronicle
LEAD: Prof.
NORMAN R. COOMBS has been named New York State Professor of the Year by the Council for Advancement and Support of Education.
Chosen from 537 nominees, Professor Coombs will be among 45 finalists from whom a national winner will be selected.


Long Rates at an 18-Month High
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities fell again yesterday and long-term interest rates rose to their highest levels in 18 months, pushed by a phalanx of negative developments.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Aztec Manufacturing Co., Crowley, Tex., a maker of machine tools, oil tubing and drilling equipment, said it was negotiating to purchase Calvert Co., Jackson, Miss., a maker of bus ducts, which convey electrical current.


Acid Rain Enhancer
LEAD: Ammonia, present in the atmosphere in just a few parts per billion, seems to enhance the harmful effects on trees of sulfur dioxide, the main component of acid rain, researchers in England say.


Of Astigmatism, Arthritis and the Artist
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Chief Is Named At Horn &amp; Hardart
LEAD: The Horn &amp; Hardart Company, which is no longer primarily in the restaurant business, announced a change in leadership yesterday to reflect its move into direct marketing.


Lawmakers Accept PAC Money While Urging Finance Changes
LEAD: Senator Mitch McConnell, a leading Congressional opponent of political action committees, declared in an eloquent floor speech two months ago that the committees ''taint the process'' and should be abolished.


A Tie and Some Hostility For Rangers and Islanders
LEAD: The Islanders and Rangers continued to place a premium on preseason enmity when they met tonight at Nassau Coliseum.


United Nations Receives Statue From Soviet Mission


Vandeweghe Is Optimistic He Can Show Off His Stuff
LEAD: If the Knicks needed him to, Kiki Vandeweghe thinks he could play 48 minutes of basketball tomorrow.
Only time will tell how long that feeling lasts.


February Trial Is Scheduled For Winnie Mandela's Case
LEAD: Winnie Mandela and seven former associates will stand trial in February on charges of kidnapping and assaulting four young men, a magistrate decided today.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Oil Prices Take Off And Stocks Tumble
Iraq's threats of war sent oil prices soaring in one of the biggest single-day increases in years.
Crude for November delivery rose $2.82 a barrel, to $38.25.


Subway Crime Statistics Rise
LEAD: Subway crime, which has been rising since the year began, continued to climb in July, while ridership continued to decline, the New York City Transit Authority said yesterday.
Total felonies were 1,668, up 8.8 percent from the 1,533 in July 1989.
Robberies were up 8.6 percent to 796, from 733.
Total felonies rose 15.6 percent to 10,636, from 9,196, for the first seven months of this year.


Careers;   Gaining New Perspectives On Medicine
LEAD: THE effort to make the medical field better understood and more sensitive to the needs of the modern world has resulted in an increase in medical humanities courses.


All U.S. Hondas to Get Air Bags by Fall of '93
LEAD: The new president of the Honda Motor Company said today that starting in the fall of 1993 all Hondas sold in the United States would be equipped with air bags on both the driver's and front passenger's sides.


The Easier Hard Disk Gets Faster
LEAD: THE Plus Development Corporation, maker of Hardcard hard disk drives that plug into a standard PC expansion slot, is expected to introduce a new generation of Hardcards today that operate much faster and yet cost about the same as conventional hard disk drives.
As with all Hardcards, the new Plus Hardcard II-


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The process in South Africa is, indeed, an irreversible one.''
- President F.W. de Klerk, at the White House with President Bush. [A7:6.]


Dow Falls 59.41 in a Broad Stock Decline
LEAD: New fears of war in the Middle East and a steep rise in the price of oil depressed stocks sharply yesterday, pushing prices to new lows in issues in every important industry and every leading index.


Corrections
LEAD: The Personal Computers column in Science Times last Tuesday misstated the availability of electronic encyclopedias without surcharge from data base retrieval services.


Northrop Part In Marine Jets Wearing Fast
LEAD: The Pentagon has determined that a critical component made by the Northrop Corporation for the AV-8B Harrier fighter-bomber is wearing out faster than it should, forcing the Marine Corps to ground some of the jets, Government officials said today.


Interest Grows in Licensing Shortcut for 2 AIDS Drugs
LEAD: ADVOCATES for people with AIDS are urging the Food and Drug Administration to license two new drugs before clinical trials of their effectiveness are completed, and some leading researchers are expressing interest in their proposal.


East Germany Becomes First to Leave the Warsaw Pact


Our Towns;   A Gulf Question: Don't You Wish You Had Solar?
LEAD: The news Monday sounded about the same as it has for weeks now, just more expensive.
Experts were talking $40 a barrel for oil.
Home heating oil prices hit record highs.
Gasoline prices jumped again.
And the United States rent-an-army spent another day on alert in a faraway desert.


CUNY and SUNY Serve New York Proudly;   Binghamton's Tradition
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chronicle
LEAD: HODDING CARTER 3D, NICHOLAS DANILOFF and KATHERINE FANNING are expected to be on hand in Boston this evening when the Center for Foreign Journalists celebrates the 300th anniversary of the first newspaper published in what is now the United States.
Publick Occurrences appeared on Sept. 25, 1690, in Boston, and lasted only four days, when it was suppressed by the British


Banks Challenging American Express
LEAD: The BankAmerica Corporation and Barclays Bank P.L.C. said they would combine their traveler's check operations, mounting an increased challenge to the American Express Company, the industry leader.
BankAmerica's traveler's check operation will become part of Interpayment Services Ltd., a company set up by the London-based Barclays last year.


Uneasy Doctors Add Race-Consciousness to Diagnostic Tool
LEAD: DOCTORS are showing a cautious resurgence of interest in giving more consideration to their patients' racial or ethnic backgrounds when diagnosing and treating illnesses.


James Lewis Howe Jr., Educator, 93
LEAD: James Lewis Howe Jr., an educator and a former chairman of the chemistry department at Hangchow Christian College in China, died Sunday at Rockingham Memorial Hospital in Harrisonburg, Va.
He was 93 years old and lived in Harrisonburg.


Airlines Announce Plan to Cooperate
LEAD: USAir and Air France announced a joint marketing program for coordination of schedules, marketing and joint facilities.
As part of the deal, each carrier will be able to buy blocks of seats from the other for resale on designated trans-Atlantic flights.
The agreement, which was in the form of a letter of intent, is the first of its kind between Air France and a leading United States carrier.


Chronicle
LEAD: Another political first for women: FRAN REITER has been elected New York State chairwoman of the Liberal Party, the first woman to hold post.
The party has 59,176 enrolled voters.
Democrats, Republicans and Conservatives have never had a state chairwoman in New York, while the Right to Life Party has had several women as leaders.


J.P. Morgan's Pioneering Offspring
LEAD: It is not often that a four-year-old securities firm attracts much attention on Wall Street.
But in the case of J. P. Morgan Securities Inc., the prestige and power of its parent, the J. P. Morgan banking company, provide far more influence than is normal for a newcomer.


Henley Stake Rise
LEAD: Libra Investment Ltd., a Swiss investment firm controlled by the Lebanese investor Toufic Aboukhater has raised its stake in the Henley Group Inc. to 22.88 percent from 14.89 percent.
Mr.
Aboukhater spent $33.4 million on the new stock purchases.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.


New Tool for Finding Meteorites
LEAD: EVEN a disastrous air crash, it seems, can have its uses.


Review/Theater;   A Musical in Which the Insects Sing
LEAD: ''Whatnot'' is a mishmash.


Program Trading Pact Is Reached
LEAD: House and Senate negotiators said today that they had reached an agreement on a compromise stock market measure that would give the Securities and Exchange Commission significant new powers, including the ability to prohibit program trading during periods of excessive market volatility.


Iraqis Are Said to Prepare Chemical Decontamination
LEAD: Iraqi forces have readied chemical decontamination sites in southern Iraq, a preparation for the possible use of poison gas, according to American intelligence reports.


Prescott D. Schutz, Art Dealer, 42
LEAD: Prescott D. Schutz, an art dealer who specialized in 19th- and 20th-century American art, died yesterday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 42 years old and lived in Manhattan.
His family said he died of complications from AIDS.
Mr.
Schutz and his father, Herbert D. Schutz, were partners in Schutz &amp; Co., which they founded in 1983.


White House Objects to Bills on Cleaner Fuel
LEAD: The White House has decided to oppose both the House and Senate versions of plans to make oil companies provide cleaner-burning gasoline.
Those requirements are a centerpiece of proposed revisions to the Clean Air Act.


Books of The Times;   Just 30 Years Later, Updike Has a Quartet
LEAD:
Rabbit at Rest
By John Updike
512 pages. Alfred A. Knopf.$21.95.


Salvadoran Chief, in U.S., Vows to Solve Jesuit Case
LEAD: President Alfredo Cristiani of El Salvador began a four-day visit to Washington today by promising to press the investigation into the killings of six Jesuit priests ''wherever it leads,'' including the High Command of the Salvadoran Army.


A Publishing Maverick, Even for Maverick Land
LEAD: In the increasingly dour world of publishing, Erroll McDonald, the executive editor of Pantheon Books, has a certain cachet.
While other Perrier-sipping publishers discuss budgets, he downs glasses of wine over lunch and holds forth on Gabriel Garcia Marquez.
Unlike his mainly middle-class colleagues, he divided his childhood between the Costa Rican port of Limon and the tough Bedford-Stuyvesant district of Brooklyn.


How to Answer Iraq's Threats
LEAD: The United States and its allies would make a terrible mistake to take all Saddam Hussein's rhetorical flourishes literally.
But they would commit at least equal error in not taking the man and his record of fulfilling past threats seriously.


By Design;   Evening Shades of Chanel
LEAD: Most women are on to the fact that a good-looking jacket is the linchpin of their daytime wardrobe.
Whether it's slouchy Armani, snappy Bill Blass, tweedy Ralph Lauren, sexy Ungaro or stylish Chanel, the jacket pulls everything - old or new - together.
Now the jacket is doing the same thing for evening.


Gang Is Suspected in Woman's Death by Arson
LEAD: A 25-year-old Brooklyn woman died Sunday from burns she suffered when a van she was in was set on fire, and the police said yesterday that they were investigating whether a gang had set the blaze.


Judge in Neil Bush Case Doesn't Relish Spotlight
LEAD: ''This one is going to be a pain,'' predicted Daniel J. Davidson, the administrative law judge who will preside over a public hearing beginning here Tuesday in the savings and loan case involving Neil Bush, the President's son.


Sports News Briefs;   Patriot Is Fined
LEAD: The New England Patriots' general manager, Patrick Sullivan, said today that a player he did not identify was fined in connection with alleged sexual harassment of a reporter for The Boston Herald.


Apartment Doubling-Up Hits the Working Class
LEAD: Willie Avery Jr. is the kind of hard-working, tax-paying citizen who forms the bedrock of any community.
But he cannot afford his own New York City apartment, so he and his wife, Sonja, and their two small daughters live with relatives in a small house in Springfield Gardens, Queens: 10 people jammed into four bedrooms.


Atlantans Celebrate Their Olympic Victory


PRAISING DE KLERK, BUSH OFFERS HELP
LEAD: President Bush told President F. W. de Klerk today that if the South African Government did more to meet conditions set by Congress, he would try to persuade Congress to modify or suspend its sanctions, Administration officials said.


A Literary Program, No Stranger to Fiction
LEAD: WHETHER novelist, screenwriter or playwright, a professional writer of fiction is often asked, ''Where do you get your ideas?'' Some writers, it seems to this reader, never had an idea in their lives and would be thrown off stride if one came along.
Others rely on newspaper articles, chance remarks or incidents from their own lives.


Mitterrand Says Iraqi Withdrawal Could Help End Mideast Disputes
LEAD: President Francois Mitterrand of France said today that an Iraqi pullout from Kuwait could help settle other Middle East disputes, like the Arab-Israeli conflict, and bring about a regional disarmament accord for which diplomats said Iraq might then take credit.


CUNY and SUNY Serve New York Proudly;   Parents Are Taxpayers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bhutto Faces a Second Trial On a New Corruption Charge
LEAD: A special court today ordered the ousted Prime Minister, Benazir Bhutto, to stand trial Oct. 9 on a second corruption charge involving gas contracts and alleged nepotism.
The one-judge court ruled that the army-backed caretaker Government had presented enough evidence for an indictment.


Deion Sanders Placed On Waivers by Yanks
LEAD: Deion Sanders commanded attention in the Yankees' clubhouse.
He had enough gold chains to start a jewelry store, a snazzy wardrobe and a cellular phone in his locker.
He was a personality in pinstripes.


Support Sought By UAL Pilots
LEAD: United Airlines pilots, struggling to complete a proposed $4.4 billion buyout of the carrier, today accused the chairman of the UAL Corporation, Stephen M. Wolf, of trying to undermine their effort.
In a letter to pilots, the


Significant Losses Continue At S.&amp; L.'s Not Held by U.S.
LEAD: Savings and loan institutions not under Government control continued to post significant losses in the second quarter of this year, although the declines were less than for the first three months of the year, regulators said today.


Physicists Can't Find Fifth Force Of Nature
LEAD: PHYSICISTS who four years ago thought they had found a new wrinkle to gravity unknown to Galileo, Newton or Einstein are now having serious second thoughts.
If there is a fifth force that counteracts gravity to some extent, as they suspected, it is so weak as to elude confirmation by their most sensitive experiments.


Toyota Will Maintain Low Price on Tercel
LEAD: Seeking to increase sales to young and low-income car buyers, the Toyota Motor Corporation introduced a redesigned Tercel subcompact for the 1991 model year and kept the price of its basic model at less than $6,500.


Head of Police Assails Media On Job Image
LEAD: Sounding by turns confident, cagey, defensive and irritated, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown yesterday rebuked critics and complained that the public was not doing its share to fight crime.


Tunnel Vision, Reversed
LEAD: David Gunn, the former president of the New York City Transit Authority who cleaned up subway graffiti, took his concern for cleanliness too far when he shut down many subway newsstands.
Fortunately, his successor, Alan Kiepper, sees their value.


Results Plus
LEAD:
ASIAN GAMES
China Continues Dominance
Chinese women scored a perfect 10 in gymnastics, outmuscled all competitors in weight-lifting and starred in the swimming pool to spearhead their country's victory surge yesterday at the Asian Games in Beijing.
The women captured six of China's eight gold medals for the day, but despite their display of power and grace, the Japanese men finally broke a phenomenal winning streak by the games' host.


The Campaign Trail;   Survival in Primary Brings Tough Fall Race for Senator
LEAD: The sole statewide survivor of last week's massacre in Massachusetts, Senator John F. Kerry, now has to worry about the general election.
Every other candidate with ties to the Democratic Party establishment or Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis went down to defeat in last week's primary, and Republicans believe the virulent attitude against incumbents gives them a shot to unseat Mr.


Angola, in a Breakthrough, Yields on Relief Issue
LEAD: In what United States officials are describing as a breakthrough, the Angolan Government has agreed to allow ''the prompt and efficient delivery'' of food supplies to tens of thousands of Angolans who face starvation because of drought.


CUNY and SUNY Serve New York Proudly
LEAD: To the Editor:


Patterns
LEAD:
Manhasset's Miracle Mile


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Saturday about an emeritus professor of psychology at Teachers College, Columbia University, rendered his given name incorrectly.
He was Ralph Beckett Spence.


Kuwaitis Sell Stake in British Hotels
LEAD: The Kuwait Investment Office, which manages much of the $90 billion to $100 billion in foreign assets owned by Kuwait, today sold its 10.1 percent stake in Mount Charlotte Investments P.L.C., generating speculation that the exiled Kuwaiti Government is having to sell stocks to pay for its commitments related to the Middle


Polly Peck Chairman Reacts to Stock Slide
LEAD: Asil Nadir, who built an international conglomerate after arriving in Britain as a Turkish-Cypriot emigrant in the 1960's, is now trying to protect the company from recent punishing attacks on its stock price.


Special Concern to Finance Some Merrill Unit Securities
LEAD: Merrill Lynch Money Markets Inc., the largest dealer of short-term securities on Wall Street, yesterday adopted an increasingly popular kind of commercial paper financing to pay for part of its inventory of short-term securities.


Several Suspects Detained In Death of a Russian Priest
LEAD: Several people have been detained on suspicion of killing a prominent Russian Orthodox priest whose death provoked national outrage, the official press agency Tass reported today.


Man Held in Puerto Rico Is Tied to 30 Robberies
LEAD: A Brooklyn parolee, who the police believe has raped three women and committed more than 30 robberies in Queens since February, was arrested yesterday in Puerto Rico, the police said.


Giants Find Taylor Not Hurt Seriously
LEAD: Lawrence Taylor's hamstring injury does not seem to be as serious as first believed.
But Coach Bill Parcells of the Giants said today he might not know if the All-Pro outside linebacker would play here Sunday against the Dallas Cowboys, and the matter might not be clarified until game day.


Air Fare Rise Is Approved
LEAD: The Transportation Department gave the go-ahead today for airlines to charge 7 percent more for most international flights beginning next week to cover increasing fuel costs.


Melvin Cunniff, Stockbroker, 79
LEAD: Melvin Cunniff, a stockbroker who began his career more than 60 years ago as a page on Wall Street, died on Tuesday at Toms River Community Hospital in New Jersey.
He was 79 years old and lived in Brielle, N.J.


Blackouts Imperil Utility's Future
LEAD: Saying recent power losses that left thousands without electricity have raised doubts about the dependability of the Commonwealth Edison Company, Chicago is raising threats about its franchise agreement with the utility.


Stock Fight By Murdoch
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch's global media and entertainment company, the News Corporation, has threatened to shift its headquarters outside Australia if it is not allowed to change its stock structure, according to newspaper reports today.


Reserve for Primitive Tribe Promised in 6 Months
LEAD: IN a breakthrough for the survival of the Yanomami Indians, Venezuela's President has promised to create a reserve in the Amazon for the threatened Stone Age tribe within six months.


Bush Rejects Delays in Deadline For Automatic Cuts in Spending
LEAD: Tightening the political screws a notch, the White House stressed today that President Bush would reject any measure extending the Oct. 1 deadline for across-the-board spending cuts.


More Strong Hurricanes Predicted for East in Next 2 Decades
LEAD: IF a new analysis of the link between weather patterns in West Africa and the tropical Atlantic is correct, communities along the United States East Coast that experienced relatively few dangerous hurricanes in the 1970's and 1980's may face more frequent killer storms in the next two decades or so.


Gay Annapolis Graduate in Tuition Dispute
LEAD: A 1987 graduate of the United States Naval Academy who says he was forced to quit the Navy because of his homosexuality is refusing demands that he pay for his education.


Williams Rejects Trade to Sonics
LEAD: The agent for John (Hot Rod) Williams said yesterday he had rejected a proposed trade to the Seattle SuperSonics from the Cleveland Cavaliers.


Suit Seeks New Abortion Protection
LEAD: The New York Civil Liberties Union has filed a lawsuit in an effort to guarantee that women in New York State will have a constitutional right to abortion in case the United States Supreme Court overturns its landmark Roe v.
Wade ruling.
The suit, filed Friday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, challenges the constitutionality of a state program that provides some reproductive health care, but not abortion, to women whose earnings exceed the


Ocean Waves Power a Generator
LEAD: ON a rocky headland bashed by the Atlantic Ocean, engineers are finishing a wave power installation that they hope will prove an important stepping stone toward much larger projects in the rush for renewable and clean energy.


Army Women and the Saudis: The Encounter Shocks Both
LEAD: Maj.
Jane S. Fisher hopped into her jeep and drove out to the flight line at a military air base here, where American F-15 jets and C-5 cargo planes kicked into the sky above a Saudi desert now filling with convoys of American troops.


Subscription Drive Paid For Columbus Tribute
LEAD: To the Editor:


Debate Over Logging Means Trouble For Incumbent in Washington State
LEAD: A Congressional district that has the volcanoes of Mount Rainier and Mount St.
Helens on one side and the Pacific Ocean on the other would seem a natural to embrace a politician whose family is well-known among outdoor enthusiasts here.


Chief and Two Associates Are Leaving Hachette Unit
LEAD: Hachette Publications o f France announced the departure yesterday of Peter Diamandis, chairman and chief executive of Diamandis Communications, Hachette's United States magazine group and the publisher of Memories and Woman's Day.
The development is part of a wide-reaching management shakeup at the company.


What Mandela Said
LEAD: The question had been on my mind for a long time.
There I was in the room with the one person in the world who could answer it - Nelson Mandela.
So I asked him, and I keep thinking about what he had to say.


Iraqi Moves Lift Crude To $38.25
LEAD: Oil prices approached $40 a barrel and gasoline and heating oil topped $1 a gallon yesterday in sometimes frenzied futures trading.


Children's TV Ad Curb Gains
LEAD: The Senate passed a bill today that would limit commercials on television programs for children.


As Deadlines Near, Scientists Seek Data From Indian Bones
LEAD: AS tribal leaders press museums and universities to surrender collections of American Indian skeletons, scientists are rushing to extract as much information as possible from the bones before they are cremated or buried.


Author Cancels Trip After Threats in Texas
LEAD: A Pulitzer prize-winning journalist yesterday canceled a book-promotion visit to Odessa, Tex., which is featured in his book on high school football in the state, after reports of telephoned threats against him.


Reviews/Fashion;   From John Anthony, Precisely Focused Chic
LEAD: John Anthony has grown as a designer since he gave up manufacturing on Seventh Avenue a few years ago to concentrate on made-to-order clothes in a small salon at 60 East 66th Street.
Always a minimalist, he learned to eliminate even more details as he switched from mass production to custom work.


Bank Insurance Ceiling Backed
LEAD: A top Treasury Department official urged today that the current ceiling of $100,000 for deposit insurance coverage on individual accounts in banks and savings and loan associations be kept.


Review/Theater;   Dangers of Becoming Lost in a Culture
LEAD: In Suzan-Lori Parks's new play, ''The Death of the Last Black Man in the Whole Entire World,'' the author's admonition is self-evident.
She warns, ''Write that down,'' before it disappears.
Write it down, or we do not exist.
From Ms.
Parks's point of view, the acculturation of blacks in the United States can lead to the obliteration of signs and symbols of character.


Deal Is Sweetened In Corroon Merger
LEAD: The Corroon &amp; Black Corporation and Willis Faber P.L.C. said Corroon &amp; Black's shareholders would be paid a special dividend that effectively sweetens the terms of the insurance brokers' proposed merger.
The extra dividend of $2.50 a share would be payable subject to the completion of the merger after a special Corroon &amp; Black shareholders' meeting on Oct.


June Roth, 64, Dies; Health Book Author
LEAD: June Roth, the author of 36 books and a past president of the American Society of Journalists and Authors, died on Sunday at Englewood (N.J.) Hospital.
She was 64 years old and lived in Teaneck, N.J.
Mrs.
Roth died of breast cancer, said a spokeswoman for the family.
A leading proponent of good nutrition, Mrs.


Plan on Oil Costs Discussed By World Bank and I.M.F.
LEAD: As the International Monetary Fund and World Bank today approved speeding up aid to countries hurt by the Persian Gulf crisis, interest grew in a proposal for producer and consumer nations alike to stabilize oil prices.


U.S. Views Threat by Iraq As Strategy to Split Critics
LEAD: Bush Administration officials said today that Saddam Hussein's threat Sunday to attack Israel and Saudi Arabian oilfields if trade sanctions ''strangled'' Iraq's economy appears to be part of Baghdad's continuing political strategy to split the international coalition opposing Iraq.


Foyt Has Surgery
LEAD: A. J. Foyt, who has won more Indy-car races than any other driver and has won the Indianapolis 500 four times, could be back behind the wheel in four to six months, one of his doctors said yesterday.


Review/Theater;   Early Chekhov in a Cross-Cultural Exercise
LEAD: Most American directors would kill to get the high-powered acting company that the Yale Repertory Theater has handed over to Oleg Yefremov, the artistic director of the Moscow Art Theater, for his first assignment in the United States.
The cast for Mr.
Yefremov's production of Chekhov's ''Ivanov'' here includes William Hurt, Frances Conroy, Zeljko Ivanek, Lee Richardson, Austin Pendleton and Anne Pitoniak.


'Miss Saigon' Auditions
LEAD: Open auditions for Asian singer-actors for the Broadway production of ''Miss Saigon'' will be held Monday and next Tuesday at the Royale Theater, 242 West 45th Street.
Signing up for men ages 18 to 50 and women ages 18 to 30 will begin at 10 A.M. each day, and auditions will be from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Accounting Rules Advance
LEAD: Three of the seven members of the Financial Accounting Standards Board voted last week against a proposal that would give nonprofit institutions some long-awaited guidance on accounting for contributions.


U.S. Investigating Claims Made by Diet Programs
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission announced today that it was investigating advertising and promotional claims about weight loss made by more than a dozen well-known diet programs.


Eleanor D. Blodgett, Professor, 94
LEAD: Eleanor D. Blodgett, the first person appointed to the faculty at Hofstra University when it opened in 1935, died on Friday at her home in Cortland, N.Y.
She was 94 years old.


When Is It a Recession?
LEAD: At a time when many Americans believe that a recession has descended on the country, they are being told by Government officials to put their worries aside for the moment because other economic issues, mainly inflation, have to be dealt with first.


Bank Law Overhaul Proposed
LEAD: The chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation proposed sweeping changes in the nation's banking industry today, including the repeal of the three main Federal regulatory laws, to ease the financial stress on the industry and on the Federal fund that insures deposits.


Lehman Brothers Post To a Mergers Specialist
LEAD: J. Tomilson Hill, who made his mark as a mergers and acquisitions executive in the 1980's, has been named vice chairman and co-chief executive of Lehman Brothers Inc., one of the two operating divisions of Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.


Paramount Film Head
LEAD: David Kirkpatrick was named president of the motion picture group of Paramount Communications Inc. yesterday.
He replaces Sidney Ganis, who entered into an agreement with Paramount to develop and produce motion pictures.
Mr.
Kirkpatrick was previously executive vice president of Paramount's motion picture group.


A Dozen Jordanian Diplomats Are Expelled by Saudi Arabia
LEAD: Saudi Arabia expelled 12 more diplomats from Jordan's consulate and embassy today, and Jordan recalled its ambassador in protest, the Foreign Ministry said.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Financing the Schools
As states move to overhaul public education, a Texas court rejected a school financing plan, and Kentucky is struggling with a sweeping program of its own.
Education, page B8.
Defining Catholic Education
Catholic educators are encouraged by the support for academic freedom in a new pronouncement on Catholic education from the Pope.


Victim Recalls Howard Beach And the Attack
LEAD: Cedric Sandiford, a Brooklyn man who has battled drug and alcohol addictions and is now suffering from AIDS, returned to a Queens court yesterday to describe once again the event that has made his private problems a focus of public attention.


Three Teen-Agers Are Wounded In Separate Shootings in the Bronx
LEAD: Three teen-agers were shot and wounded in separate incidents in the Bronx yesterday, the latest in a growing number of city youths hit by gunfire, the police said.


Stotler Funds To McCormick
LEAD: McCormick Capital Inc. has received court approval to acquire seven commodity funds belonging to the Stotler Group Inc., a recently collapsed futures company.
The transaction, approved on


Eating Well
LEAD: WITH the recent publication of a yearlong study of 41 patients with severe heart disease, Dr.
Dean Ornish of the University of California at San Francisco has presented evidence of what others have suggested for years: a very, very low-fat diet can unplug arteries.


Teachers Union Rejects an Offer From New York
LEAD: Amid threats of a strike if no settlement is reached before its contract expires on Sunday, negotiators for the New York City teachers union yesterday rejected what the union called the city's first serious wage offer.
City officials said the offer amounted to a 4 percent increase, roughly half what the union has suggested it wants.


Business Technology;   Gardening in Space: A Hard Row to Hoe
LEAD: Living plants would be essential aboard any long space flight, like one to Mars, as a means of replenishing oxygen, consuming carbon dioxide, purifying water and providing a renewable food source.
But in a weightless environment, even the simple act of watering presents a formidable challenge.


Food Notes
LEAD:
Takeout as an Art


China, Too, Has a Role to Play in Persian Gulf;   Desert Wear
LEAD: To the Editor:


Historian and Poet Win Writing Prizes
LEAD: Forrest McDonald, an American historian, and Charles Causley, an English poet, were named winners of the 1990 Ingersoll Prizes yesterday.
Each is to receive $20,000 at a dinner at the Drake Hotel in Chicago on Nov. 8.


Prices of Treasury Securities Rise
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities rose and interest rates eased yesterday, as a surprisingly large reduction in the Government's reading of second-quarter economic growth and a decline in oil prices outweighed other factors that could have sent prices lower.


Fans Know When Game Is Over
LEAD: Football fans may take on a collective mixture of violence and numbness, particularly approaching the witching hour of Monday night in a dismal swampland on the outskirts of a major city.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Sept. 5 about Alden Whitman, a retired reporter for The New York Times, referred incompletely to the Federal Government's case against him for refusal to identify other members of the Communist Party at Senate subcommittee hearings in 1956.
After twice being convicted of contempt of Congress, Mr.


The Politics of Anti-Politics
LEAD: In Massachusetts last week, Republican and Democratic voters rejected established politicians in favor of mavericks who had never held elective office.
In Oklahoma, voters repudiated familiar faces and imposed a 12-year limit on the tenure of state legislators.


Pentagon Decides to Lift Ban on Northrop, Drawing Fire
LEAD: The Pentagon said today that it had waived its ban on awarding new contracts to a Northrop Corporation division.
The move drew immediate criticism from members of Congress, who said the case illustrated the limited impact of sanctions against military contractors found to have engaged in fraud or other illegal behavior.


Review/Theater;   Loosely Garcia Lorca, In a Localized Update
LEAD: The purpose of the Cornerstone Theater Company is to bring classic theater to the people.
Like a portable circus, this nomadic troupe moves into a town, casts members of the community in some of the roles and reworks a play to make it more relevant to local concerns.
In this manner, the Cornerstone has taken Shakespeare to Port Gibson, Miss., and performed ''Pier Gynt'' on the


Sears Cuts Jobs At Catalogue Unit
LEAD: Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company has trimmed 213 jobs from its unprofitable catalogue sales division to cut costs.
The cuts represent 20 percent of the company's catalogue headquarters staff and are part of a plan to consolidate hundreds of corporate-level jobs.


U.S. in Court on Homes for Ex-Addicts
LEAD: Using a Federal housing law that protects people with disabilities against discrimination, officials from the Justice Department and drug therapy programs are trying to break through community opposition to group homes for recovering alcoholics and drug abusers.


Correction
LEAD: A report in this column on Aug. 16 about low-cholesterol cheeses included an incorrect cholesterol figure provided by a wholesaler for Arina, a semisoft goat cheese from Holland.
It contains 20 milligrams of cholesterol per ounce, not 2 milligrams.
A retailer reported the error this week after noticing the higher figure on labels of a new shipment.


Marathon Is Adding Goal To Fight Against Cancer
LEAD: It took the intercession of an American industrial legend, the prospect of Federal support and a sense of his own vulnerability to win him over, but Fred Lebow has agreed to allow the 1990 New York City Marathon to serve as a fund-raising vehicle for a charity: Dr.
Armand Hammer's four-year campaign to raise $500 million to fight cancer.


Facing Budget Cuts, CUNY Turns Away Students
LEAD: Faced with a sharp rise in enrollment and deep budget cuts, the City University of New York has tightened enrollment procedures and in the process has turned away students for the first time since it began its open admissions policy 20 years ago.


David H. McConnell 3d, Investment Banker, 64
LEAD: David H. McConnell 3d, an investment banker, died on Sunday at the Manhattan home of his mother, the Baroness Hubert von Pantz.
He was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.


U.S. to Support U.N. on Children, But Money for Programs Is Scant
LEAD: The United States plans to commit itself on Sunday to a United Nations declaration that sets many goals for maternal and child health that the United States itself has difficulty meeting.


2 Law Firms In Merger
LEAD: The national law firm of Winston &amp; Strawn announced yesterday that it had merged with Bishop, Cook, Purcell &amp; Reynolds, based in Washington.


Daniel W. Hofgren, 54, Former Aide to Nixon
LEAD: Daniel W. Hofgren, a former aide to President Richard M. Nixon who contradicted statements by former Attorney General John N. Mitchell at Mr.
Mitchell's conspiracy trial in 1974, died Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 54 years old and died of cancer, said his former wife, Joan T. Howard.


In the New Home Ec, Choices for Life
LEAD: EVERY day more than 3 million teen-agers take their seats in home economics classes across the United States.
Many of their classrooms, unchanged since the 1950's, look like shabby sanctuaries of June and Ward Cleaver's home.
Rows of battered sewing machines and files of well-used clothing patterns seem ready to train yet another generation of resourceful homebodies.


Broncos Lose Braxton
LEAD: Because of a torn ligament in his right knee suffered on Sunday in a 34-31 victory over Seattle, Tyrone Braxton will be lost to the Denver Broncos for the remainder of the season.
Team officials said yesterday that the 25-year-old cornerback, beginning his second season as a starter, would need a six- to-eight-month rehabilitation period.(


That 30-Plus Serendipity Cafe Honors Itself With a Cookbook
LEAD: THERE'S nothing unusual about iced cappuccino, green chili omelet, red spice soup and chocolate pecan pie.
Not today.
But consider this: They were all on the menu at Serendipity some 30 years ago.


Rypien Out 6 Weeks
LEAD: Doctors in Arlington Hospital in Virginia found extensive damage to the ligaments in his left knee during surgery yesterday, and so Mark Rypien, the Washington Redskins' starting quarterback, will be out six to eight weeks during a period in which the Redskins play their chief division rivals - the Eagles and Giants - two games apiece.


Politics, Not Regulation, Made Bank Scandals
LEAD: To the Editor:


Magadan, as Pinch-Hitter, Gives Mets Edge
LEAD: Darryl Strawberry was watching from the bench with a stiff back.
Dave Magadan was watching from the bench with a lazy swing.
Sid Fernandez was led away in the fourth inning with a sore knee.
And collectively, the Mets were three games out of first place with time running out.


About New York;   Take My City, And, Comics Say, Please Cheer Up
LEAD: Stand-Up New York, a comedy club at 236 West 78th Street, was looking for a new gimmick.
Its program for the last couple of weeks, ''What's So Funny About the Persian Gulf?'' was wearing a trifle thin.


U.S. Cites List of Gains From Quitting Smoking
LEAD: The Surgeon General said today that there were ''major and immediate'' benefits from quitting smoking even for older people and that insurers should pay for programs to help people quit.


Washington Public Power Bond Issue
LEAD: The Washington Public Power Supply System yesterday tentatively priced $250 million in refunding revenue bonds for Nuclear Project No. 1 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Drabek Wins No. 21; His HIts Spark Rallies
LEAD: After extinguishing an early Chicago uprising, Doug Drabek ignited a Pittsburgh comeback with his hitting tonight and led the Pirates to a 5-3 victory over the Chicago Cubs.


Space Agency Will Try to Loft Shuttle Discovery on Oct. 6
LEAD: The space agency said today that it would try to launch the shuttle Discovery on Oct. 6 while the search goes on for mysterious hydrogen leaks that have grounded the Columbia shuttle.


Making Computers a Million Times Faster
LEAD: In 1983, the International Business Machines Corporation dropped an ambitious project to develop blazingly fast computers using superconducting circuits, concluding that such machines would never be economically feasible.
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company and the Sperry Corporation scaled back similar research efforts, and


Keating Loses Bail Appeal
LEAD: An appeals court refused today to reduce the $5 million bail for Charles H. Keating Jr., the savings and loan executive accused of fraud in selling junk bonds of the American Continental Corporation.


Midmonth Vehicle Sales Decline by 4.7%
LEAD: Rebates and year-end clearance deals helped sales of cars and light trucks in mid-September, but sales for the period were still 4.7 percent below the unusually strong volume of last year.


Ralph W. Cordier, University Dean, 88
LEAD: Dr.
Ralph W. Cordier, retired dean of academic affairs at Indiana University of Pennsylvania in Indiana, Pa., died Saturday at Indiana Hospital.
He was 88 years old and lived in Indiana.


The Right to Credit
LEAD: Once in a while somebody comes along with an important, straightforward idea and the dedication and energy to put it to work.
Prof.
Muhammad Yunus, a soft-voiced, 50-year-old economist, is one of them.


GORBACHEV REBUKE FOR SOLZHENITSYN
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, commenting on Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's recently published essay on the future of Russia, said the exiled writer was living ''entirely in the past, the Russia of the old days, the czarist monarchy.''


President's Son Backed At Hearing on Conflicts
LEAD: The Government's leadoff witness at the hearing on conflict-of-interest charges against Neil Bush today supported Mr.
Bush's contention that his fellow directors at a Denver savings and loan knew he had an interest in a partnership that was given a $900,000 line of credit.


Book Notes
LEAD:
A Really Total Package


Dollar and Yen Show Gains; German Comments a Factor
LEAD: The dollar advanced in the United States yesterday against all major currencies except the Japanese yen, which took center stage on world foreign exchange markets.


Teachers Reject Performance-Pay Plan
LEAD: School officials expressed hope today that a contract tying pay to performance could be salvaged despite a surprise defeat in a vote by teachers.


Marriott Reduces Spending Plans
LEAD: The Marriott Corporation declared a moratorium on most new construction projects, including hotels and housing for the elderly and said it would cut capital spending in half next year to $650 million because of the sluggish real estate and lodging markets.
Marriott said the moratorium could last 12 to 18 months, but most properties under construction will be completed next year.


Bid Mellows Connecticut Conservative
LEAD: The scene on Saturday at the Veterans Administration Medical Center was vintage John Rowland.
A color guard stood stoically in a drenching rain. ''When Johnny Comes Marching Home Again'' crackled out of a loudspeaker.
Mr.
Rowland, the Republican candidate for governor, helped lay two wreaths honoring


Oil Prices Dip Slightly After 3 Big Increases
LEAD: After three trading days of large increases, the price of oil dipped yesterday, with crude for November delivery off 72 cents a barrel, to $37.53, on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Gasoline and heating oil for October delivery were also down slightly.


BOXING: Notebook;   Douglas Has Old Score to Settle
LEAD: Evander Holyfield, who challenges James (Buster) Douglas for the heavyweight title on Oct. 25 at the Mirage in Las Vegas, Nev., has made no secret of a fight plan that calls for him to pressure the champion, absorbing his best punches while outlasting him for the victory.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about Bush Administration reaction to a budget compromise proposal by Senator Bob Dole referred incorrectly to Social Security checks.
The checks are exempt from automatic spending cuts under the budget-balancing law.


Foreman Knocks Out Anderson In First Round of London Bout
LEAD: George Foreman's quest to regain the heavyweight championship he lost almost 15 years ago took another small step forward tonight when Foreman scored the 24th consecutive victory of his comeback with a first-round knockout of Terry Anderson.


Mama Lu Parks, 61; Actress and Dancer Headed Jazz Troupe
LEAD: Louise (Mama Lu) Parks, an actress and dancer who founded the Mama Lu Parks Jazz Dancers, died on Sunday at the Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
She was 61 years old and lived in the Bronx.


U.S. Says Most Food Passes Pesticide Test
LEAD: Ninety-nine percent of the food produced in the United States and 96 percent of imported food tested last year met Government standards for pesticide residues, the Food and Drug Administration said today.


Economic Scene;   Apparel Makers' Last Stand?
LEAD: THE sighs of relief from the White House were almost audible last week when the House went along with the Senate, voting for sharper restrictions on imports of clothes, textiles and shoes.
While Administration economists view the measure as a horror show of protectionism, to their delight the vote fell short of the two-thirds needed to override President


Countdown to Automatic Cuts
LEAD:
THE PROCESS


U.S. to Allow Low Pay In the Salvation Army
LEAD: After warning the Salvation Army that it must meet minimum wage standards, even at the risk of depleting its social programs, the Federal Labor Department said yesterday that it would find a way to allow the nonsectarian group to continue its century-old practice of paying workers only a token wage while they undergo rehabilitation.


Cuomo to Divert Funds To Pay for Crime War
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo announced yesterday that $40 million in mass-transit funds would be diverted to combat violence in the New York City subway system.


Resales Up In Housing
LEAD: Sales of existing homes rose 2.1 percent in August, continuing a three-month rebound, a real estate trade group said today.
It forecast a slowdown in the fourth quarter because of rising mortgage rates.


Review/Television;   A Veteran Interviewer Becomes the Subject
LEAD: Mike Wallace shows no symptoms of self-consciousness as he celebrates his career tonight at 10 on CBS.
But then, if he were self-conscious, what would there be to celebrate?
He introduces ''Mike Wallace, Then and Now'' with the promise that viewers will be hearing from ''some fascinating people,'' but of course the hour's attraction lies less in those he has interviewed over the last four decades than in the confrontations themselves.


Guinness Case Penalty
LEAD: A multimillionaire 74-year-old financier, Sir Jack Lyons, was fined $:3 million, equivalent to about $5.6 million, today for his part in a scandal resulting from the successful takeover by Guinness P.L.C. of the Distillers Company, but he escaped a jail sentence because of ill health.
The judge, Sir Denis Henry, also announced that the chairman of Guinness, Ernest Saunders, sentenced to five years in the same case, would not have to face a second trial.


New Group to Direct Flow of Crisis Aid
LEAD: President Bush announced today the formation of a steering group of countries to coordinate international economic aid to nations hard hit by oil price increases and other results of the Persian Gulf crisis.


John A. Danaher Is Dead at 91; A Former U.S. Senator and Judge
LEAD: John A. Danaher, a former United States Senator from Connecticut and a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia for 15 years, died on Saturday at a convalescent home in West Hartford, Conn.
He was 91 years old and lived in West Hartford.


Frank H. Johnson, 82, Ex-Princeton Professor
LEAD: Frank Harris Johnson, a retired professor of biology at Princeton University, died on Saturday at Princeton Medical Center in New Jersey.
He was 82 years old and lived in Princeton.


Dow Climbs 32.67, Reversing a 4-Day Slide;   By ROBERT J. COLE
LEAD: After four down days that toppled the market 118 points, or close to 5 percent, stocks headed up yesterday as traders and investors opened the spigot.
Program traders helped spark the rally, but many expect the rise to be short-lived.


Laszlo Ladany, China Expert, 76
LEAD: The Rev.
Laszlo Ladany, a Hungarian-born Jesuit who ran a journal on China from a student hostel at the University of Hong Kong, died on Sunday of lung cancer.
He was 76 years old.


Delta Earnings
LEAD: Delta Air Lines Inc. said its earnings for its first quarter, ending next Monday, will be down sharply because of the increased fuel prices that followed the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2.
Thomas J. Roeck Jr., Delta's senior vice president of finance, said the earnings would be ''significantly worse'' because the airline was paying 64 percent more for fuel than it was before the invasion.


Australian Sales Cleared
LEAD: Australia's ruling Labor Party on Monday abandoned its opposition to selling state-owned businesses and agreed to the sale of two airlines and a satellite telecommunications company.


Pretoria Orders Curfew in 6 Townships
LEAD: The Government imposed a night curfew on six black townships outside Johannesburg tonight as part of President F. W. de Klerk's crackdown on factional black unrest that has left more than 750 people dead in the last two months.


Excess of School Aides Found in Many Districts
LEAD: An internal study by the New York City Board of Education shows that many of the city's 32 school districts are overstaffed with paraprofessionals, school aides and security guards when the city is scouring for ways to cut its budget.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday about a parade celebrating Atlanta's selection for the 1996 Summer Olympics misidentified Andrew Young.
He is a former mayor, not the current one.


President of Amoco To Add 2 Top Posts
LEAD: The Amoco Corporation, one of the world's leading oil companies, yesterday named H. Laurance Fuller, its president, to be chairman and chief executive, effective Feb. 27.


IRAN JOINS SYRIA OPPOSING INVASION
LEAD: The leaders of Syria and Iran today remolded their longstanding alliance, declaring ''full agreement'' in their opposition to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and the subsequent buildup of American and other foreign forces in the region.


Stakes High in Contest For Alabama Governor
LEAD: Senator Howell Heflin put his hands in his pockets, leaned his ample belly into the lectern and gave Lee County Democrats what they came for: a dose of old-time Democratic religion.


White House and Congress Map Strategy for Deep Spending Cuts
LEAD: With time for a budget compromise running short, the White House and Congressional Democrats each prepared doomsday scenarios today to keep the Government running when the new fiscal year begins on Monday and to turn to their advantage automatic spending cuts that would take effect that day.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.25
9.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.37
7.32
7.77
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.41
7.33
7.81
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.86
8.88
8.31
30-YR.


Dodgers Win, 3-1, in 10 And Trim Deficit to 3 1/2
LEAD: Hubie Brooks hit a two-run homer in the 10th inning tonight for the Los Angeles Dodgers, who trimmed agame off their deficit in the National League West by beating the Houston Astros, 3-1.


Chancellor Has Plan to Distribute Condoms to Students in New York
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, with the strong support of Mayor David N. Dinkins, is preparing a plan to distribute condoms to students in New York City schools to help combat the spread of AIDS and unwanted teen-age pregnancies, school officials said yesterday.


That Cooper Beat Karl May to the Draw
LEAD: To the Editor:


Big Slide Continues For Red Sox
LEAD: Expectations for the Boston Red Sox are falling throughout New England like so many autumn leaves.
And the Red Sox, in a fashion that is as predictable as the changing seasons, seem powerless to do anything about it.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bowne &amp; Co., New York, a financial and corporate planning firm, said it would buy the Packard Insurance division of Basix Corp., New York, a holding company.
Terms were not disclosed.


Wine Talk
LEAD: FOR most of us, Pomerol is the mailing address for Chateau Petrus.
It is, in fact, home to some of the finest wines - and smallest vineyards - in all of Bordeaux.
The whole place, all 2,000 acres of it, couldn't provide the grapes for a day's run of white zinfandel, and some of the smaller properties, Petrus among them, wouldn't make a decent parking lot in Napa


76er Coach Rewarded
LEAD: The Philadelphia 76ers extended Coach Jim Lynam's contract by two years yesterday, running it through 1993, and signed their top draft pick, Brian Oliver, a guard from Georgia Tech, to a guaranteed four-year contract at a reported $1.6 million.
Oliver was the 32d pick over all. (AP)


Kentucky Begins Drive to Revitalize Its Schools
LEAD: In the Hardin County School District, a sprawling rural system with 12,300 students, classes have begun with more than the usual opening-day anxieties.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: AMY IRVING is returning to the stage in Los Angeles, where she is rehearsing for the title role in ''The Heidi Chronicles,'' which runs from Oct. 2 through Dec. 23 at the UCLA James A. Doolittle Theater.


Denver Accused of Bias
LEAD: Doug Moe Jr., a former assistant coach to his father with the Denver Nuggets before both were released on Sept. 5, has sued the team, charging that he was let go because he is white.
The lawsuit, filed in Denver District Court on Monday, alleges that the dismissal constituted breach of contract because the younger Moe, whose contract expired in


SECURITY COUNCIL ADDS AIR EMBARGO TO IRAQ SANCTIONS
LEAD: After a blunt warning by the Soviet Union that war is close in the Persian Gulf unless Iraq withdraws from Kuwait, the Security Council voted today to impose an embargo on air traffic that would further tighten its economic blockade against the Baghdad Government.


Du Pont in Plan To Recycle Plastic
LEAD: E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company and the American National Can Company have agreed on a recycling program for plastic.
The companies said they would work to develop a market for recycled syrup and ketchup container and other types of rigid plastic not now being widely recycled.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: THE calendar never stops me from cooking outdoors at my home on eastern Long Island.
I have been known to wade through a few inches of snow to get to my patio barbecue grill.


Once Again, Bills Dominate Jets
LEAD: The day after an embarrassing 30-7 loss at home to the Buffalo Bills, the Jets' players had a day off today.
But their coach, Bruce Coslet, was busy at the team's training quarters scratching out a game plan for Sunday's match with New England as well as scratching his head over the Monday night debacle at Giants


School Financing Proposal Is Upset by Judge in Texas
LEAD: A Texas district court judge today struck down the state's plan to remedy inequalities in the financing of public schools, ruling that the state still failed to insure adequate funds for poor school districts despite a tax increase.


Britain's Deficit Eases
LEAD: The British Government on Monday announced a better-than-expected trade deficit for August.
The deficit on the current account of the balance of payments, measuring merchandise trade and such invisible factors as banking, insurance and tourism, fell to $:1.13 billion (about $2.1 billion) in August from a revised $:1.68 billion in July.


Doe's Survivors on a Rampage in Liberian Capital
LEAD: Followers of the slain Liberian leader, Samuel K. Doe, have carried out a campaign of burning, looting and destruction in the capital in the aftermath of Mr.
Doe's killing, city residents said here today.


Editorial Notebook;   Homeboy With a 'Y'
LEAD: Terry, a 15-year-old cocaine dealer in New Haven, was a young man of means.
When it came time to march in the parade that was an annual ritual in black New Haven, he could have draped himself in gold chains, or ridden a motorcycle bought with drug money, as his comrades in the trade did that day.
Instead Terry went Yale: Yale sweat pants, Yale windbreaker and





Children's AIDS Cases Are Reported to Rise
LEAD: AIDS is striking many more children than previously thought, the World Health Organization said today in issuing figures on its impact on children for the first time.


Emerson Electric Creates a Spinoff
LEAD: The board of the Emerson Electric Company on Monday approved the spinoff of its six military-related subsidiaries into a company called the Esco Electronics Corporation.
Emerson said the spinoff would allow it to focus on faster-growing and more profitable businesses.


Rich Man's Quest for Salmon Is Toast of a Soviet Outpost
LEAD: All summer long this pristine stretch of Marx-forsaken frontier has witnessed the strangest of sights: the Communist Party has been quietly catering to American plutocrats who fly over for a $6,000 week of premier sports fishing for Atlantic salmon.


Columbia Sets A Fund Goal: $1.15 Billion
LEAD: Michael I. Sovern, the president of Columbia University, yesterday announced a five-year campaign to raise $1.15 billion that he said was needed to maintain academic excellence amid skyrocketing costs and cuts in governmental assistance.


Review/Opera;   Freni and Domingo in 'Boheme' as Met Opens
LEAD: Opening night at the Metropolitan Opera is not the time to look or listen for the unexpected.
The overriding idea seems to be to get the gala event on record so that the season proper may begin.
On Monday evening, the chief surprise came before the curtain went up, when the traditional playing of ''The Star-Spangled Banner'' was preceded by the much livelier national anthem of Monaco, in recognition of the presence of Prince Rainier and his son, Prince Albert.


She Broke the Law, So They Towed Her Car
LEAD: To the Editor:


Boycotted Market to Hire a Black
LEAD: A coalition of ministers said yesterday that it would announce today that at least one black person was being hired at a Korean-owned grocery store in Brooklyn that has been the target of an eight-month boycott.


Ruben de Saavedra, 57, Designer of Luxurious Residential Rooms
LEAD: Ruben de Saavedra, an interior decorator with an international reputation, died on Sunday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 57 years old and lived in Manhattan.


As East German Emigres Take Root In the West, Their Prosperity Unfurls
LEAD: Sometimes, whenKerstin Bohland is picking up groceries at the supermarket or wandering down a busy shop-lined street, she is struck by the full meaning of her flight last year from East Germany.


Yanks a Hit, at Least in Record Book
LEAD: Baseball was fun again for the Yankees last night.
Their first eight batters hit safely, they had five homers in the first five innings and they played a laugher in this dreariest of seasons.


Tobacco Trade Surplus
LEAD: The United States tobacco industry recorded a trade surplus of $2.5 billion for the first half of 1990, an increase of $554 million from the corresponding period last year, an industry group said on Monday.
The United States exported $2.95 billion worth of tobacco products and raw leaf in the first six months of 1990, said Thomas Slane, a vice president of the Tobacco Merchants Association.


U.S. Plans to Send Carrier to Gulf To Increase Pressure on Baghdad
LEAD: The Navy is planning to send the aircraft carrier Independence into the Persian Gulf to demonstrate American military prowess, Pentagon officials said today.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
Nothing's Perfect


The Many Faces of a Pennant Race


Andrew S. Witwer, Writer, 70
LEAD: Andrew S. Witwer, an author and playwright, died Saturday at New York University Hospital.
He was 70 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Witwer died of bone cancer, said a friend, K. C. Victor.
Mr.
Witwer was the translator for the eight-hour, Academy Award-winning Soviet film of ''War and Peace,'' made in 1968.


China, Too, Has a Role to Play in Persian Gulf;   Punishment Syndrome
LEAD: To the Editor:


She Broke the Law, So They Towed Her Car;   Look at This Waste
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fight for Housing: Poor vs. Middle Class
LEAD: For 13 months, Antonio Jose has lived in a two-bedroom apartment with no water, no heat and no toilet in an abandoned city-owned building on Home Street in the South Bronx.
He is fighting City Hall to keep it - for himself and the 35 others from the ranks of the poor who have found their last housing refuge in the blighted area that the police call Fort


Walsh of Cowboys Is Traded to Saints
LEAD: Steve Walsh, the quarterback who led the University of Miami to the top national ranking under Coach Jimmy Johnson in 1987, parted company with Coach Johnson and the Dallas Cowboys yesterday when he was traded to the New Orleans Saints for three high draft choices.


In the Oil Trading Pit, Reflexes Must Be Fast
LEAD: At 8:30 yesterday morning, Albert H. Helmig Jr. figured that world crude oil prices were about to head downward.
He had the reasons all worked out, based on his assessment of supply and demand, his experience as a broker and his studies of economics and finance.


Evanston Rebuffs Proposal For Tax on College Tuition
LEAD: The City Council here has refused to revive a proposal to create the nation's first tax on college tuition, but voted to seek other ways of raising money from Northwestern University and three other colleges in this Chicago suburb.


Divorce Case Quandary: Is Fame Property?
LEAD: It sounds like something out of an opera plot.
In Act I, a mezzo-soprano on the cusp of celebrity marries an aspiring bass-baritone she meets in music school.
In Act II, she becomes an internationally renowned star; he acts as her photographer, adviser, voice teacher and companion on the Bois de Boulogne.


Gold Prices Nearly Steady; Other Precious Metals Fall
LEAD: Gold futures prices held nearly steady yesterday, despite a drop in energy prices and similar reversals in other markets that usually are regarded as signposts for the precious metals.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: When IRWIN BAZELON's new composition for piano has its premiere next week, it will carry a familiar name, at least for horse-racing fans. ''Sunday Silence,'' to be played by ALAN MANDEL at the Weill Recital Hall in Carnegie Hall on Monday, is named for last year's winner of the Kentucky Derby and the


Pro-Justice, Not 'Pro-Criminal'
LEAD: Contrary to the Bush Administration, it is not ''pro-criminal'' to seek fair trials and racial justice for capital crimes.
A provision of the House Judiciary Committee's crime legislation would help to secure these rights; it deserves support.


Charts: Annual rate of change in the gross national product (source: Commerce Dept.); Total corporate profits after taxes (source: Commerce Dept.) (pg. D6);   ECONOMIC GROWTH NEAR A STANDSTILL, U.S. FIGURES SHOW
LEAD: The Commerce Department reported today that the American economy nearly came to a standstill in the second quarter of this year, with the meager growth being far worse than previously thought.


China, Too, Has a Role to Play in Persian Gulf;   No Reward for Violence
LEAD: To the Editor:


Layoffs at Peabody
LEAD: About 275 white-collar employees are being dismissed to reduce costs by the Peabody Holding Company, a coal mine operator.
Peabody said it would lay off 70 employees at its 250-worker headquarters and another 70 from its Peabody Coal Company subsidiary in Henderson, Ky.
Other cuts will be in offices in 11 states where Peabody mines coal.


Studies Find Smokers More Prone to Depression Than Nonsmokers
LEAD: Smokers are more likely than nonsmokers to have suffered from depression, and severe depression seems to make it extremely difficult for smokers to quit, according to two studies being reported today.


Deals
LEAD:
Basketball


Sarah Brightman Cast In 'Aspects of Love'
LEAD: The English actress Sarah Brightman will join the cast of Andrew Lloyd Webber's ''Aspects of Love'' in early December for a limited engagement.
Ms.
Brightman, who is separated from Mr.
Lloyd Webber and who starred on Broadway and in London as Christine in ''The Phantom of the Opera,'' will play the role of Rose Vibert in the musical at the Broadhurst


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
American Ref-Fuel Co., Houston, which produces electricity through trash burning, appointed David N. Gutacker vice president of operations.


China, Too, Has a Role to Play in Persian Gulf;   War Powers Clock
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in some copies of Sports Pages yesterday, about the Jets football game on Monday night, misidentified the Bills player wearing No. 41.
He was Jamie Mueller.


Unifying the Gulf Aid Effort
LEAD: President Bush announced the formation of an international council to coordinate aid to countries hard hit by the Persian Gulf crisis.
Page A8.


Review/Piano;   Gyorgy Sandor's Bartok Played for a Few Hundred
LEAD: For a mere few hundred listeners huddled in cavernous Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon, the inspiriting recital of the veteran pianist Gyorgy Sandor offered a depressing angle from which to contemplate the new musical season.
Carnegie's centennial celebration promises many more glamorous affairs, all sure to fill the house, but few will surpass this unexpectedly intimate event in sheer musical substance or personality.


Denis J. Quane, Professor, 54
LEAD: Denis J. Quane, a professor of chemistry at East Texas State University for 25 years, died Friday at R. H. Dedman Hospital in Dallas.
He was 54 years old and lived in Commerce, Tex.


U.S. Judge Voids California Limit On Political Campaign Donations
LEAD: A Federal judge today rejected limits on campaign contributions that were imposed by California voters in a 1988 referendum, ruling that they gave an unfair advantage to incumbents.


Gatorade's Success Attracts New Rivals
LEAD: LOOK over your shoulder, Gatorade.
A cavalcade of upstarts have joined the sports-drink race and have vowed to leave you in the dust.


About Education
LEAD: How do children decide what is right and what is wrong?
This was a key question in a recent survey of 5,000 children in grades 4 through 12.
The answer, the survey found, is that most of them decide by listening to one another and watching what goes on around them.
It also found that most adult authorities, including religious leaders, appear to have lost their power and appeal.


Text of U.N. Resolution on the Iraq Air Embargo
LEAD: Following is the text of United Nations Security Council Resolution 670, approving an embargo on air traffic with Iraq:
THE SECURITY COUNCIL,
REAFFIRMING its Resolutions 660 (1990), 661 (1990), 662 (1990), 664 (1990), 665 (1990), 666 (1990), and 667 (1990);


Karachi Journal;   With the Chips Down, Bhutto's Ace Is Her Father
LEAD: It is election time in Pakistan again, and out come the kaleidoscopic tents, thick carpets, overstuffed sofas, china cups and plates piled with savory pastries and cakes to cater to innumerable political meetings, caucuses and news conferences.


Matsushita In Talks With MCA
LEAD: Underscoring the intense interest of the Japanese in the United States entertainment industry, Matsushita, the giant Japanese electronics maker, confirmed yesterday that it was in talks with MCA Inc. to acquire the Los Angeles-based entertainment company.


Market Place;   Can Banks Survive a Recession?
LEAD: While economists disagree on whether a recession has started, many large American banks are concluding that by some measures their loan portfolios are already in the worst shape since the end of the 1974-75 recession.
That fact has helped to create the gloomiest investment outlook for many of these banks in more than a decade.


State Panel Seeks Ban On Cigarette Machines
LEAD: A New York commission on smoking proposed state legislation yesterday that would ban cigarette vending machines and take other steps to make cigarettes less accessible to children.


De Klerk Says the U.S. Is His Model
LEAD: Seeking to impress lawmakers, President F. W. de Klerk of South Africa told members of Congress today that he was determined to build an American-like constitutional democracy based on the principle of ''one man one vote,'' but combined with guarantees to safeguard the white minority.


Oracle Posts Quarterly Loss
LEAD: The Oracle Systems Corporation, which recently had to restate results for its fiscal year that ended on May 31, today reported a loss for its first quarter.
Oracle, which is based in Redwood City, Calif., is a leading producer of data base management software.


Elmer Grimes, 76, Dies; Surgeon and Executive
LEAD: Dr.
Elmer Louis Grimes, a surgeon and former chairman of the Medical Inter-Insurance Exchange of New Jersey, died last Thursday at Our Lady of Lourdes Medical Center in Camden, N.J.
He was 76 years old and lived in Haddonfield, N.J.
He died of a brain tumor, his family said.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about protests over logging in California identified a founder of the environmental group Earth First incompletely in some copies.
He is David Foreman.


House Committee Rejects Restrictions on Endowment
LEAD: A House panel voted today against temporarily imposing additional restrictions on the National Endowment for the Arts.


Wellesley Journal;   Mistaken Identity Or Case Of Racism?
LEAD: Like any other first-time home buyers, Dee Brown and his fiancee were feeling on top of the world last week.
They had just found a house in this affluent Boston suburb, filled with successful lawyers, doctors and computer company executives.


Moody's Cuts Chase Ratings; Potential Losses Are Cited
LEAD: The debt ratings of the Chase Manhattan Corporation and its Chase Manhattan Bank subsidiary were reduced yesterday by Moody's Investors Service, the rating agency said.


Sit-Down Sampling
LEAD: CERTAINLY the best way to sample and judge energy-reviving drinks is after strenuous exertion.


A's Cinch 3d Straight West Title
LEAD: The post-game celebration had all the excitement of a traffic jam.


Census Bureau Reports That Its Recount of Dwellings Has Found Few Were Missed
LEAD: A Census Bureau effort to recheck millions of homes and apartments around the country has determined that relatively few dwellings were missed in the bureau's initial housing count, according to bureau figures released at a hearing today.


Yields Mixed On C.D.'s and Bank Funds
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were mixed for the sixth consecutive week ended yesterday.
Interest rates remain without direction as the economy leans toward a recession and the Persian Gulf crisis continues to fuel fears of inflation.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: NEW YORK abounds with professional eavesdroppers.
Their ears never go off duty.
Let a news scoop drift their way, let a tip on a stock or a horse float by, let a gossip item whiz high over their heads and their ears will fade back and stretch to make the catch.


Magadan Throws Burke a Curve
LEAD: He came to home plate as the fourth-leading hitter in the National League.
But Dave Magadan also walked into the batter's box at Olympic Stadium as a pinch-hitter, a struggling regular who had been kept out of the lineup for the second time in five days.


Rizzuto's Reign May End
LEAD: As one of his old teammates would remind you, ''It ain't over till it's over,'' but there is some reason to suspect that Phil Rizzuto's 34-year career as a Yankee broadcaster and his 50-year association with the club might have run its course with his final broadcast of the season for WPIX-TV last night.


Swift and Wide Impact Is Expected If Negotiations on U.S. Budget Fail
LEAD: From the control towers overlooking the nation's airports to the guard towers overlooking its prisons, thousands of Federal workers could be laid off on Monday if the Government cannot quickly resolve its budget crisis.


Reviews/Film Festival;   Arms and the Portuguese, Roman Times to Angola
LEAD: ''No, or the Vain Glory of Command'' (Nao, ou a Vao Gloria de Mandar), takes a long view of Portuguese history, recalling great and terrible moments from the second century B.C. through the mid-1970's.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: To help celebrate the 25th anniversary of The Washingtonian magazine, its publisher, PHILIP MERRILL, flew in yesterday from Brussels, where he is the assistant secretary general of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
And while the affair was a modest reception in the magazine's office, many prominent Washingtonions turned up, KATHARINE GRAHAM, MORTIMER ZUCKERMAN and Senator BILL BRADLEY among them.


Rangers Lose to Flyers,But King Is Effective
LEAD: Kris King expected that his child, born barely 24 hours earlier, would be fast asleep at the hospital, and so he decided to return to his house and climb into bed himself.


Women on the Subject of Menopause
There is no self-pity, no wailing over lost youth among the real and fictional women who tackle the usually veiled subject of menopause in Yvonne Rainer's ''Privilege.'' Shrewd, self-accepting and lusty even as they talk about hot flashes, these women are the best news about the film.
The worst is that anyone expecting a lucid, informative take on the issue has to wait for another movie.
''Privilege'' is not a documentary but an art film, and its diffuse artistry - a mix of interviews, dramatized stories, texts that appear on a computer screen and old film clips of doctors giving advice - dulls the edge of its provocative themes.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-11


Review/Art;   From Eton, a Half-Millennium Of Old Boys' Treasured Objects
LEAD: Eton College is in a quiet and almost offhand way one of the most influential of all English institutions.
In existence for exactly 550 years, it was founded by a King of England, Henry VI.
It has the present Queen of England for its next-door neighbor at Windsor Castle.
Of the 80 Prime Ministers whom England has racked up so far, 18 went to


Give Peter Sammartino Ellis Island Credit
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reebok Expects Drop in Earnings
LEAD: Reebok International Ltd., the nation's second-largest footwear company after Nike, said yesterday that it expected its third-quarter earnings to be in the range of 33 cents to 35 cents a share, off from 44 cents in the corresponding period a year earlier.


Gas Concerns To Settle Suit
LEAD: Attorneys General in Missouri and Kansas announced an antitrust settlement today in principle in a $1 billion natural gas price-fixing case.


Papal Document on Education Hailed For Support of Academic Freedom
LEAD: Pope John Paul II issued a long-awaited document on Roman Catholic higher education yesterday, and many Catholic educators promptly expressed satisfaction and relief at the degree to which the Pope recognized the legitimacy of autonomy and academic freedom for their institutions.


Morgan Stanley Debt Group
LEAD: Morgan Stanley Group Inc. has formed a unit that will trade and secure debt for less-developed countries, primarily in Latin America, and will provide financing for the public and private sector in developing countries.
The group will be headed by


Excerpts From Shevardnadze's U.N. Address Calling for Iraq to Quit Kuwait
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the address to the General Assembly today by Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union:


House Speaker Is Criticized on Gun Control
LEAD: Law-enforcement groups sharply criticized the House Speaker, Thomas S. Foley, today for seeking to bar consideration of handgun control legislation as part of a larger anti-crime bill that the House was scheduled to debate this week.


Two Dead as Upper Caste Protests in India Spread
LEAD: Indian paramilitary forces and local police officers fought here today with thousands of students and other demonstrators demanding an end to a new policy reserving more jobs for some lower-caste Indians.


Remember the Bomb?
LEAD: What a difference a year makes: Before the Persian Gulf crisis and the end of the cold war, controlling the nuclear arms race was Topic A. Today, Secretary of State Baker and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union meet in New York to fulfill their Presidents' pledge to conclude a strategic arms reduction treaty by year's end.


Saudi Arabia, Fearing Terrorist Attacks, Tightens Internal Security
LEAD: Reacting to what appear to be direct threats from Iraq, Saudi officials are tightening internal security measures, saying they fear that Iraq and radical Palestinian groups may be planning terrorist attacks here.


Business Digest
LEAD:
The Economy


Iraq Is True Victim, Hussein Tells U.S. In Taped Broadcast
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq told an American television audience today that Iraq was not the invader when it entered Kuwait, but instead was the victim of annexations and conspiracies.


Officer Arrested in Sex Abuse
LEAD: A New York City police officer was arrested yesterday in Rockland County and charged with sexual abuse and endangering the welfare of a child, the police said.
The officer, Robert Ortiz, 41 years old, was suspended without pay, pending the outcome of the charges by the Clarkstown Police Department.


Robert M. Egan, 55, Advertising Executive
LEAD: Robert M. Egan, a former senior vice president and management supervisor at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, died on Monday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 55 years old and lived in Garden City, L.I.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We should remind those who regard aggression as an acceptable form of behavior that the United Nations has the power to suppress acts of aggression.
There is ample evidence that this right can be exercised.
It will be, if the illegal occupation of Kuwait continues.''
- Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Minister.


Review/Film;   Berkeley: Tie-Dye to Just Ties
LEAD: It's hard to believe that the easygoing teacher in the light blue three-piece suit has any connection with the leather-jacketed, beret-wearing figure flashing that cold, malevolent stare.
But Bobby Seale, seated today in front of a blown-up photograph of himself as co-founder of the Black Panthers, underscores the resemblance by telling a story about the Panthers' glory days.


Bill to Raise Cars' Fuel Efficiency Dies With Senate Vote on Debate
LEAD: The Senate failed by three votes to cut off debate today on a bill that would require car makers to improve fuel efficiency significantly.
The vote in effect kills the measure in this session of Congress.


Tass Critical Of Pizza Hut
LEAD: The official Soviet press agency Tass said today that pizza restaurants recently established by an American chain were dirty.


China, Too, Has a Role to Play in Persian Gulf
LEAD: To the Editor:


Full Scope Of Inquiry Into Milken
LEAD: Court documents disclosed yesterday for the first time the full scope of the Government's findings from its four-year inquiry into Michael R. Milken, as well as the former financier's defense against the allegations.


COOKS ON THE MAP - This Month: Yara Roberts, Boston;   Tropical Flavors And Brazilian Flair
LEAD: The setting is a sober brownstone in the staid and respectable Back Bay, but the smells emanating from the top-floor apartment are unmistakably tropical: garlic, peppers and onions, and also the flowery fragrance of coconut and a strange, enticing odor that turns out to be palm oil, an essential ingredient in


Retirement Set At Mobil Oil
LEAD: Richard F. Tucker, the vice chairman of the Mobil Corporation and president of its Mobil Oil Company subsidiary, said yesterday that he will retire in May, seven months short of his 65th birthday.


Pentagon, Disputing Moscow, Says 500 to 1,000 Soviet Advisers Are in Iraq
LEAD: The Soviet Union has from 500 to 1,000 military and civilian advisers in Iraq, and some of the Russians are doing maintenance on Iraqi aircraft, senior Pentagon officials said today.


Alcoa and Kobe in Venture in Japan
LEAD: Kobe Steel Ltd. and Alcoa said today that they would form a venture in Japan to produce aluminum for cans and automobiles in Asian markets.


Tokyo Stocks Fall Nearly 5%
LEAD: Tokyo stocks accelerated their decline today after the Nikkei average tumbled past 23,000, where the market had previously found support.


Books of The Times;   An Excuse Became a Hoax and Kept Growing
LEAD:
Outrage
The Story Behind the Tawana Brawley Hoax
By Robert D. McFadden, Ralph Blumenthal, M. A. Farber, E. R. Shipp, Charles Strum and Craig Wolff
408 pages. Bantam Books. $21.95.


Bridge
LEAD: Most Americans who took part in the world championships this month in Geneva were exhausted by a two-week effort and needed a rest from the game.
But a few were content to play in just one event and were then ready for more action.


South Carolina Joins the S.E.C.
LEAD: South Carolina made it official today, accepting an invitation to join the Southeastern Conference next fall, after the league presidents voted earlier in the day to make the Gamecocks the 12th member of the league.


CONFRONTATION IN THE GULF: Man in the News;   The Exiled Emir: Sheik Jaber al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah
LEAD: One of the first tasks assigned to Iraqi troops when they invaded Kuwait in the early hours of Aug. 2 was to capture or kill Sheik Jaber al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah, the Emir of Kuwait.
Alerted early in the morning about the invasion, the Emir fled in a car to Saudi Arabia, minutes before the first Iraqis soldiers entered the grounds of Dasman


China, Too, Has a Role to Play in Persian Gulf;   Cooper Union Meeting
LEAD: To the Editor:


'Civil War' Ratings Up Slightly on 2d Night
LEAD: The second installment of ''The Civil War,'' an 11-hour documentary being shown this week on public television, drew a slightly larger audience than the first, the Public Broadcasting Service said yesterday.
In the 24 largest cities, where ratings are measured overnight by the A. C. Nielsen Co., the two-and-a-half-hour segment shown on Monday night had an average rating of 9.1 and 13 percent of viewers, one-tenth of a point higher than the opening on Sunday.


SMOKING IS RULED CAUSE OF A DEATH
LEAD: A Mississippi jury has decided that cigarette smoking caused the lung-cancer death of a two-pack-a-day smoker but refused to award damages in a $17 million lawsuit against a tobacco company and its distributor.


Spacecraft's Images Of Venus's Terrain Astonish Scientists
LEAD: To the delight of astonished scientists, glimpses of Venus produced in 10 days of mapping by the Magellan spacecraft show a surprisingly active planet whose volcanoes, fractured landscapes and thin plastic crust are unlike anything seen before in the solar system.


Murl E. Thrush, Coach, 83
LEAD: Murl E. Thrush, a retired New York City physical education teacher who helped establish wrestling programs in the city's schools, died on Sunday at a nursing home in Daytona Beach, Fla.
He was 83 years old and died in his sleep, his daughter-in-law, Lenore Thrush, said.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
ASIAN GAMES
A Good Day for South Koreans
South Koreans wrestled, shot and swam their way into second place in the Asian Games gold medals race at Beijing yesterday but remained well behind China.
After three days, the Chinese had 31 gold medals, South Korea had seven and Japan was third with three.


Columbia Plans to Raise $1.15 Billion


Recheck of the Census: Few Omissions Found
LEAD: Contrary to the claims of thousands of cities around the country, a preliminary check of the 1990 census indicated that relatively few dwellings were missed in the original count, according to Census Bureau figures released at a hearing yesterday.


SOVIETS ARE DEEP IN TROOP RUMORS
LEAD: At 3 A.M. on the night of Sept. 10, detachments from the Ryazan airborne division set off down the road for Moscow 125 miles away.
Later that day, 30 Ilyushin 76 planes landed at the Ryazan airfield, carrying two regiments in battle gear, with equipment.
Closer to Moscow, said an account made public this week, the Dzerzhinsky Division, under the command of the Ministry of Internal


President of Colombia Tours A Drug Center in New York
LEAD: The President of Colombia visited a Queens drug-treatment center yesterday and told the residents that their addiction is taking a terrible toll on his country.


If Hodges Managed These Mets
LEAD: When the Mets return to Shea Stadium tomorrow night, Bud Harrelson will sit at his desk under three photos of Gil Hodges on the walls around him.
One photo shows the onetime Mets' manager with Casey Stengel and George Weiss.
Another is a facial portrait.
The third, above Harrelson's chair, is of Hodges, in a blue-sleeved sweatshirt, sitting thoughtfully at a desk and doing what Harrelson does now: making out a lineup card.


Pitney Bowes Has New Fax Machine
LEAD: Pitney Bowes Inc., the office equipment maker based in Stamford, Conn., introduced a facsimile machine that uses an ink-jet printer and plain paper.
Analysts said it was the first such machine to reach the American market.
The fax will cost between $2,500 and $3,000, depending on memory capacity, and will be available through a leasing plan.


U.S. CARGO FLEET IS FOUND WANTING
LEAD: Nagging problems with the fleet of cargo ships designed to carry American military equipment in emergencies have forced the Navy to charter dozens of foreign vessels to help carry thousands of tons of supplies to Saudi Arabia.


Books of The Times;   The Argument That Japan Guides the U.S. Economy
LEAD:
Agents of Influence
By Pat Choate
Illustrated. 295 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.95.


Japanese Rivalry May Shift to U.S.
LEAD: For years it has been the stuff of Japanese industrial legend: The bitter struggle between the plodding Matsushita Electric Industrial Company and the upstart, innovative Sony Corporation, a fight that began with transistor radios and over the decades spread to the Walkman, the video camera and high-definition television.


NCNB and Meridian Hurt by Bad Loans
LEAD: The NCNB Corporation and Meridian Bancorp yesterday joined a growing list of banking companies admitting that problems with real estate loans would hurt earnings in the third quarter.


BankAmerica Bid For Failed S.&amp; L.
LEAD: The Phoenix Gazette reported that the BankAmerica Corporation had outbid the Security Pacific Corporation to buy Merabank, a Phoenix savings institution seized by the Government.
A spokesman for BankAmerica declined to comment.
Kevin Shields of the Resolution Trust Corporation in Denver said an announcement is expected


Omaha Tales of Sexual Abuse Ruled False
LEAD: A Federal grand jury concluded today that stories of sexual abuse and drug trafficking that swept this city and the state capital after the failure of a credit union here were unfounded.


Soviet Oil Output Declines
LEAD: The Soviet Union's crude oil output, the largest in the world, fell sharply in the first eight months of the year and the decline is accelerating, the First Deputy Prime Minister, Lev Voronin, said today.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
8.25
8.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.31
7.37
7.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.35
7.41
7.46
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.85
8.86
7.87
30-YR.


Accounting Board in Draft Of Nonprofit Group Rules
LEAD: The rule-making body for the accounting profession decided yesterday to issue for public comment proposed rules that would for the first time require nonprofit institutions like museums and churches to put certain contributions, like works of art and volunteer labor, on their books.


Harold King, Journalist, 91
LEAD: Harold King, a Reuters reporter whose letters from Stalin helped to shape the West's perception of the Soviet Union, died on Monday at a private clinic in Nogent-sur-Marne, a suburb of Paris.
He was 91 years old and lived in Paris.


Finding a New Weak Link
LEAD: I always thought the division of Germany after 1945 was unnatural.
The wartime allies, at Teheran and Yalta, were clearly thinking of Germany as a whole, even while demilitarizing and deindustrializing it to make sure that it could not start another war.
In a sense, what is happening on Oct. 3 is what might have happened shortly after the war, if the United States and the Soviet


Chronicle
LEAD: BENJAMIN WARD, New York's former police commissioner, is being sued for not delivering a book last May that was to be published this fall.
According to Law Enforcement News, Mr.
Ward received a $50,000 advance from Carol Publishing Group for his memoirs but submitted only a partial manuscript.


New York City Needs Judges for Family Court
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Markets


USX Appoints Steel Unit Head
LEAD: Thomas J. Usher was promoted from executive vice president of the USX Corporation's heavy products division to president of its steel division, USS.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: DURING a recent visit to an amusement park, a 15-year-old boy looked terrified and steadfastly refused to go on any ride.


Thomas Fichter, 51, A Leading Executive In Publishers' Group
LEAD: Thomas C. Fichter, senior vice president and chief financial officer of the American Newspaper Publishers Association, died yesterday at Fair Oaks Hospital in Fairfax, Va.
He was 51 years old and lived in Oakton, Va.


Dialing The Future In Phones
LEAD: TELESKETCH, a telephone that transmits a drawing as it is being sketched, and the Transcom, which translates one language into another, are among five winning designs by North American students in Sony Design Vision '90, a contest to design futuristic but theoretically possible phones.


McDonnell Is Criticized In U.S. Study
LEAD: A Congressional study of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation's performance in developing the Air Force's new C-17 transport plane has determined that the program has ''disastrous'' management and financial difficulties, Representative John D. Dingell, a Michigan Democrat, said today.


Review/Television;   A Law-and-Order Show With an Unsaintly Hero
LEAD: How do you like your uniformed law enforcers, with or without halos?
Not surprisingly, television tries to whip up something for everybody.
CBS's ''Top Cops,'' for instance, which is broadcast Thursdays at 8 P.M., offers the police as heroes, which is not surprising because each episode features a real cop narrating a dramatized version of a case in which he or she played a significant role.


Bush Presses Conferees to Accept Compromise on Clean Air
LEAD: In what he called an effort to prod lawmakers to enact acceptable clean air legislation this year, President Bush proposed a set of compromise measures today that would lower the costs of the environmental cleanup being considered by Congress.


Without Boggs, Red Sox Close In on First
LEAD: The Red Sox' ranks may be thinning, but their up-and-down hopes for an American League East Division title looked a lot more robust after they mauled the Cleveland Indians, 7-2, tonight.
The victory moved the Red Sox within a half-game of first-place Toronto, which lost to Milwaukee, 6-0.


Durable Goods Orders Down 0.8% in August
LEAD: Durable goods orders to manufacturers slid eight-tenths of 1 percent in August, the Government reported today.
Analysts said the report indicated that there were cutbacks in business investment plans because of Middle East uncertainties.


Bass Power
LEAD: A man who listens to music while he runs replaced his old Walkman with a new one featuring something called ''mega bass.'' Instead of an old-fashioned tone control or a baffling array of equalizer switches, it has a knob that turns up the bass to a powerful throb.


A Magazine for Every Child
LEAD: WHEN John Papanek was an editor and writer at Sports Illustrated, he was well known in certain circles.
But no one ever sent in a T-shirt asking for his autograph.


Earthquake Rattles Missouri, Reminding Residents of a Prediction
LEAD: An earthquake rattled glassware, cracked a police-station floor, knocked bottles off liquor-store shelves and shook nerves today in a tremor-prone section of southeastern Missouri already uneasy over a prediction that a strong quake could strike there in December.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly to Bowne &amp; Company.
It is a financial printing concern.


Preserving a Building By Reinventing It
LEAD: HISTORIC buildings are not always simply renovated; sometimes they are reinvented.
No buses have stopped at the 1940 Greyhound Terminal in Washington since the early 1980's, but next year the moderne-style terminal will become the lobby of a new 12-story office building.


Mohawk Militants Out Of Canadian Building
LEAD: Canadian troops armed with bayonets today escorted Mohawk militants out of a building where they were encamped for nearly a month as part of a surrender plan to end a violent land dispute.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
Meets at 10 A.M. and 3. P.M.
GENERAL COMMITTEE - 9:15 A.M.


Study Urges the Conversion Of Shoreham to Gas Power
LEAD: A study released today said it is technically and economically feasible to convert Shoreham from nuclear power to gas power.


C. Douglas Hoyt, Dentist, 74
LEAD: Dr.
C.
Douglas Hoyt, a dentist who was the first medical officer to go ashore in the invasion of Guadalcanal in World War II, died on Friday at Monmouth Medical Center in Long Branch, N.J.
He was 74 years old and lived in Fair Haven, N.J.


President's Tax Plan: Benefits for the Not-So-Rich
LEAD: The latest White House proposal to break the deadlock in the budget negotiations would be less beneficial to the very rich and help people who are moderately affluent more than would the Bush Administration's initial plan to cut the tax rate on capital gains.


Spending And Income In Slow Rise
LEAD: The incomes and spending of Americans grew at a sluggish pace in August, the Commerce Department said today, adding fresh evidence that consumers pinched by rising energy prices are worried about a slowing economy.


Rinfret Snubs G.O.P. Peace Session
LEAD: The New York State Republican Party rented Alex and Henry's Roman Gardens catering hall today for a political wedding.
They hired a Dixieland jazz band, prepared a slide show, enlisted attractive women with Rinfret for Governor signs and even offered a choice of chicken or steak for the guests.


Chip Sales Are Forecast
LEAD: A trade group predicted today that worldwide semiconductor sales will be essentially flat in 1990 but will return to double-digit growth in 1991 and remain so through 1993.


Pirates Seeing Magic After Smith's Victory
LEAD: Zane Smith's magical number rose to six, and the Pittsburgh Pirates' division-clinching number dropped to five.


WEAPONS PILE UP IN LIBERIAN PORT
LEAD: As thousands of troops and weapons from five West African nations continued to pile up in the port here and with more reinforcements on the way, diplomats and military experts today questioned what purpose the men and arms were to serve.


Venture Ties Acer And Smith Corona
LEAD: The Smith Corona Corporation and the Acer America Corporation formed a joint venture to develop and market personal computers for the consumer, home-office and small-business markets.
The products will be sold under a new Smith Corona/Acer brand name and will operate using the MS-DOS software common to the International Business Machines


Campaign Fund Ruling Adds Fuel To Contest for California Governor
LEAD: The tightly contested race for governor of California was thrown into confusion today after a ruling Tuesday by a Federal judge that invalidated the state's limits on campaign contributions.


FOOTBALL: College Notebook;   Rutgers Wary of Spartan Defense
LEAD: George Perles, whose Michigan State team will play Rutgers at Giants Stadium Saturday night, has been a defensive coach for most of his career.
His reputation was made when he helped the Pittsburgh Steelers win four Super Bowl championships as director of the defensive unit, the Steel Curtain.


Boycotted Store Hires a Black
LEAD: The manager of a Korean grocery in Brooklyn that has been a target of a black-led boycott hired a black worker yesterday.


Hopes of a New European Security Structure
LEAD: The Foreign Ministers of West Germany and Britain told the General Assembly today that a 35-nation conference opening here next week would seek broad agreement on the shape of the new security structure that Europe wants to establish this year to preserve peace and respect for human rights in the post-cold-war era.


New Sign Honors Carnegie Hall


Mets Are Getting Together At Right Place, Right Time
LEAD: Of all the places the Mets could have played in their pursuit of the Pittsburgh Pirates, Olympic Stadium might be the best for their collective sanity.


Metro Matters;   Decades Later, A Pseudonym Is a Man's Armor
LEAD: A woman who has lived on the same block in Queens for six decades was asked this week about the couple who for years owned the innocuous single-famly house across the street.


Review/Dance;   Movement Per Se: Against Current French Taste
LEAD: The Trisha Brown Company has just presented a dance premiere commissioned by the fourth International Dance Biennial in Lyons.
The Miami City Ballet has given the city its first view of George Balanchine's ballets.
Alwin Nikolais and Murray Louis turned up on Monday at a news conference here to explain why their choreography, to be seen this week, does not tell stories.


Gun-Filled Trunks Traced To Cocaine Smuggling Ring
LEAD: Two mysterious steamer trunks filled with submachine guns were traced yesterday to a group of Colombian cocaine smugglers who operated a Queens real-estate agency that acquired apartments in quiet residential sections of Manhattan for stashing drugs, money and weapons, Federal investigators said.


Islanders Finally Prevail Behind Familiar Faces
LEAD: The Islanders produced an exhibition season novelty tonight, a 4-2 victory at the expense of the Philadelphia Flyers, before leaving for the West Coast, where their exhibition season will come to a close and the real thing will begin.


A Mafia Wife Makes Lorraine Bracco a Princess
LEAD: Lorraine Bracco is the kind of actress people are sure they've met before.
After she played Tom Berenger's put-upon wife in ''Someone to Watch Over Me,'' women cornered her on the street with their own similar stories, as if she were a friend who had somehow forgotten to return their call.
And in her role in ''Goodfellas'' as perhaps the ultimate in put-upon wives - a


From Germany's Neighbors, Respect and Then Acceptance
LEAD: A united Germany, for the last 45 years a dream for most Germans, has seemed more like a nightmare to many of their neighbors.


From Frontier Kitchen to SoHo Gallery
LEAD: NOT long ago, most of the rough-hewn objects standing at attention in a white-walled SoHo gallery had less exalted, busier lives.
They dried boots, shucked corn, hunted ducks, dried apples, wound yarn or washed clothes.
Now they are part of ''Abstraction: Folk Art and Utilitarian Objects as Art,'' an exhibit at the American Primitive Gallery.


MCA Stock Jumps on Report of More Sale Talks
LEAD: The stock price of MCA Inc. climbed another $7.25 a share yesterday, to $61.25, fueled by reports that the company's chairman, Lew Wasserman, and president, Sidney Sheinberg, would fly to New York today for negotiations over a sale of MCA to the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company.


To Differ With Israel Isn't Anti-Semitism;   Needed to Be Said
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bush Pushes Mexican Pact
LEAD: President Bush asked Congress today for a streamlined process to negotiate a free trade agreement with Mexico, the nation's third-largest trading partner.


Turkey to Sell Airline
LEAD: Turkey will sell its state-owned THY airline to the public, but privatization is being delayed by market uncertainties caused by the Persian Gulf crisis, a senior official said today.
The official from the Government's agency in charge of privatization said Turkey's Cabinet had approved the sale on Tuesday.


Break-In and Theft Reported At Rinfret's Campaign Office
LEAD: The Manhattan campaign office of Pierre A. Rinfret, the Republican candidate for governor, was broken into Tuesday night or early yesterday, and several items were reported missing, the police said.


Bridge
LEAD: Great defensive generals, like the Duke of Wellington, were always alert for a tactical stroke that could disconcert the attacker.
Such moves are available at the bridge table but usually escape notice.
An exception occurred on the diagramed deal played at the Israel International Bridge Congress in


Restaurant Nutrition Data Are Urged
LEAD: Restaurants should be required to list the nutritional content of their dishes, a panel of health experts told the Government today.


Chronicle
LEAD: PETER TUFO, chairman of the New York State Thruway Authority, former chairman of the New York City Board of Corrections and a well-known lawyer, has evolved yet another life.
He is to join the investment banking firm of Lazard Freres.


Moving Pictures
LEAD: Those of us who make a living describing the world with words tend to disparage television as cheap and dumb.
There are reasons for this.
One is that television often is.
There is nothing quite so insulting to human intelligence as a laugh track.
But a second reason is that we are occasionally envious.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Anheuser-Busch Cos., St.
Louis, said it would build a theme park and resort in Spain if it is able to attract international partners.


S.&amp; P. Lowers Chase's Debt
LEAD: The rating on the Chase Manhattan Corporation's debt was lowered yesterday by Standard &amp; Poor's, a day after Moody's took similar action.
About $5.2 billion in debt and stock is affected.


Gold Prices Rise on Rumors Of Fighting in Middle East
LEAD: Gold futures prices overcame early choppy trading yesterday and settled higher amid unconfirmed rumors of fighting in the Middle East and worries that an already sluggish economy is giving way to inflation.


Dow Falls 25.99 on Signs of Weak Economy
LEAD: Stocks turned around again yesterday and continued to burrow deeper into negative territory as investor sentiment darkened, the price of oil rose another notch and new data showed that the economy was still weakening.


U.S. Ordering 40,000 Troops From Europe
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said today that he had ordered 40,000 troops withdrawn from Europe and their units dissolved in the next 12 months.


Effort to Widen Abortion Counseling Is Blocked in the Senate
LEAD: The Senate dealt a setback to abortion rights advocates today, blocking a move to vote legislation that would have permitted federally supported family-planning clinics to offer abortion counseling.


Review/Music;   The Voices (and Costumes) of a Soprano
LEAD: Hong Yu Chen, a Chinese soprano, made a vivid impression in her program on Saturday evening at Weill Recital Hall - or rather, several of them.
So varied were the impressions, in fact, that it was hard to bring the lively musical personality into focus.


College Tuition Costs Increase at Slower Pace
LEAD: The cost of a year of college in the United States rose in a range of 5 to 8 percent this year, marking a modest slowing of increases in college tuition and fees for the country's 12 million undergraduates, according to a College Board survey that is to be released today.


USAir Dividend Ended After Loss
LEAD: In the lastest in a series of money-saving moves, the USAir Group said it was indefinitely suspending its 3-cent quarterly stock dividend and delaying delivery of new aircraft.
Edward I. Colodny, USAir's chairman and president, said the moves were caused by ''the company's recent financial performance and the poor outlook for the nation's economy and its effect on air travel.


U.S. Reports Poverty Is Down but Inequality Is Up
LEAD: The Census Bureau reported today that there had been a slight decline in the proportion of Americans living in poverty but confirmed, more explicitly than ever before, that inequality in the distribution of income has increased substantially in the last two decades.


Reviews/Opera;   Sweeping 'Rosenkavalier' at the Met
LEAD: ''Der Rosenkavalier'' is one of a handful of operas whose success depends at least as much on the conducting as on the singing.
In the bel canto works of Bellini or Donizetti, say, great singers can often allow one to overlook indifferent work from the orchestra pit.
Not so with Richard Strauss's comedy, whose brilliant orchestration is so tightly integrated with and illustrative of the stage action that anything less than a quasi-symphonic approach cannot begin to make sense of the score's complexities.


Alberto Moravia, Novelist, Is Dead at 82
LEAD: Alberto Moravia, whose many novels explored alienation and other social traumas while focusing almost obsessively on human sexuality, died today at his apartment overlooking the Tiber River here.
He was 82 years old.


Magic Johnson Helps Lakers Out of a Bind
LEAD: In a demonstration of a player's making a true sacrifice for his team, Magic Johnson of the Los Angeles Lakers recently surrendered a portion of his yearly salary so the Lakers could acquire Terry Teagle, a high-scoring swingman, from the Golden State Warriors in exchange for a high draft choice.
The exact amount of money he relinquished was not disclosed.


Bond Quits Top Post
LEAD: The financier Alan Bond resigned today as chairman and director of Bond Corporation Holdings Ltd., which has fallen victim to financial problems stemming from a heavy debt load.


After 45 Years, the War Is Over
LEAD: The date of German unification is a very great date, a historic date.
La guerre est finie.
The war is over.
It is an emotional thing not only for the Germans but for everyone.
I think young people understand that the war is finally over 45 years afterward.
In my view, it has ended on a vision of hope because it is based on agreement by two worlds that used to clash with each other.


Rewarding Note for Cary, Save Record for Righetti
LEAD: It has been a mean season for Chuck Cary and a bittersweet one for Dave Righetti.
Cary had had only one victory in his last 17 starts, dating back to July, nd his future in the rotation is tenuous.
Righetti has piled up saves for a last-place team in what could be his final season with the Yankees.


VW Building Its Plant in East
LEAD: Volkswagen A.G. laid the foundation stones today of a new $3.2 billion car plant in East Germany.


New Plan to Sell Aladdin Hotel
LEAD: A California real estate company has been retained to sell the bankrupt Aladdin Hotel and Casino here after months of private efforts failed to find a buyer.
Representatives of Kennedy-Wilson Inc., based in Santa Monica, Calif., said they would advertise the property in the United States and abroad and would accept sealed bids until Nov.


At the U.N., Many Issues Are Called, but Only One Is Chosen: Persian Gulf
LEAD: The Security Council's backing of an air embargo against Iraq and the current preoccupation in the United Nations with the Persian Gulf crisis have overshadowed the range of other issues and statements that usually get heard during the opening of a General Assembly meeting.


DeSoto to Seek Sale of Assets
LEAD: DeSoto Inc., a maker of chemical coatings and other specialty products, is asking shareholders to approve a plan to sell most of its assets and terminate its pension plans in return for a one-time dividend of $35.50 a share.


New York Told To Hire Advisers On Drug Abuse
LEAD: William Bennett, the nation's chief drug policy official, said yesterday that New York City was not doing enough to combat the cocaine and heroin epidemic.
He recommended that the city hire three or four special consultants.


Market Place;   Debt Service Burden Grows
LEAD: THE margin of financial safety for American corporations, as the nation appears to be entering a recession, has already grown far thinner than in any previous recession as companies are forced to spend a larger proportion of their available cash on debt service.


BASEBALL: Notebook;   Fielder Proves His Value
LEAD: Should Cecil Fielder be the first player from a team with a losing record to be the American League's most valuable player?


John J. Dorsey, Plastic Surgeon, 78
LEAD: Dr.
John J. Dorsey, a plastic surgeon who practiced in Yonkers for many years, died on Tuesday at the Manhattanville Nursing Center in the Bronx.
He was 78 years old and lived in Yonkers.
He died of a stroke, his family said.
Dr.
Dorsey served as a plastic surgeon in the Army in World War II, taking part in the Normandy invasion and the Battle of the Bulge.


Conference at U.N. May Produce Weekend Gridlock in Manhattan
LEAD: In colorful costumes and diplomats' pin stripes, more than 70 world leaders have begun arriving in New York City for the World Summit for Children, jamming V.I.P. suites in hotels and threatening to turn midtown Manhattan into a nightmare of meandering motorcades and world-record gridlock.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Sept. 18 about the hearings on Judge David H. Souter's nomination to the Supreme Court misattributed a phrase from testimony about judicial activism in some copies.
Judge Souter was asked by Senator Charles Grassley, an Iowa Republican, to name any instances in which the Supreme Court recently ''improperly created new rights,'' and he could name none.


Travel Chief to Retire At American Express
LEAD: The American Express Company said yesterday that Aldo Papone, chairman of its flagship subsidiary, the American Express Travel Related Services Company, would retire and be succeeded by two top lieutenants, Edwin M. Cooperman and G. Richard Thoman.


Baker Talks of Threat On Embassy in Iraq
LEAD: The United States has received a warning from the Iraqi authorities threatening the death penalty for anyone harboring foreigners at the American Embassy in Baghdad, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today.


Goetz Confronts Victim in Court In Suit Hearing
LEAD: Bernhard H. Goetz confronted Darrell Cabey in a Bronx courtroom yesterday, six years after he shot Mr.
Cabey and three other young men in what became known as ''the subway gunman'' case.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article by Reuters on Tuesday about proposed changes in the stock structure of the News Corporation, the Australian media company controlled by Rupert Murdoch, misattributed the disclosure.
It was made by The Australian, a News Corporation newspaper, not by The Australian Financial Review.


Calendar: Gardens, Old Prints
LEAD: Circa 1900, New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West at 77th Street; (212) 873-3400.


Tokyo Stock Prices Fall
LEAD: Stock prices fell again today in Tokyo.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 stocks was down 478.71 points, or 2.15 percent, to 21,771.91.
The Nikkei fell 1,108.70 on Wednesday.
Today's was the lowest close since January 1988.


A Confident Mubarak Schedules Referendum
LEAD: In a show of political confidence during the Persian Gulf crisis, President Hosni Mubarak today called a referendum for next month on a senior court's ruling that Parliament be dissolved to make way for new elections.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article on Tuesday about American military women in Saudi Arabia referred to them imprecisely.
Although many are in the Army, women from the other services are also there.


Chronicle
LEAD: Add another all-male preserve to those acceptable to PRESIDENT BUSH.
He has accepted membership in the exclusive Royal &amp; Ancient Golf Club of St.
Andrews, Scotland.


Reds Within Eyeshot Of Taking Division
LEAD: Eric Davis hit a two-run homer and drove in three runs tonight as the Cincinnati Reds reduced their magic number to four with a 5-2 victory over the Atlanta Braves.


Shift to 'Community Courts' Urged for New York City
LEAD: The chief administrator of the New York State courts yesterday proposed a broad decentralization of New York City's criminal courts by creating new ''community courts'' in neighborhoods across the city to handle minor crimes.


Embargo Rules On Iraqi Flights
LEAD: The United Nations Security Council has decided that passenger flights by airlines other than Iraqi Airways to and from Iraq and occupied Kuwait will not be banned under the air embargo imposed on these two countries, several members of the Council said today.


BLACKS IN HOUSE RESPOND TO SLUR
LEAD: Black members of Congress have reacted angrily to a racial slur by Japan's Justice Minister, who drew a parallel between blacks and prostitutes.


Taylor Misses Practice But Says He Will Play
LEAD: Lawrence Taylor, injured hamstring and all, says he will play for the Giants here Sunday against the Dallas Cowboys.
Raul Allegre, strained groin muscle and all, will probably play.


Washington Talk;   Liberal Bloc in Turmoil After Souter Encounter
LEAD: The fight over the nomination of David H. Souter to join the Supreme Court effectively ended the moment he got up from the witness chair last week after three days of gentle intellectual jousting with the Senate Judiciary Committee.
But the battle over the internal loyalties and the future shape of the coalition of liberal interest groups that monitors and frets about such nominations was just beginning.


A G.M. Car With a Japanese Feel
LEAD: The Saturn, the soon-to-be-introduced car that General Motors has for five years heralded as an import fighter, lives up to the company's game plan: It feels and drives very much like a Japanese car.


INSIDE
LEAD:
AIDS Peril in South Africa
AIDS is spreading among South Africa's blacks at an alarming rate.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Soviets Back Law on Religious Freedom
LEAD: Moving to end decades of religious repression, the Soviet legislature gave overwhelming initial approval today to a law on freedom of conscience at a time when the Soviet people are flocking to churches in record numbers.


PREMIER OF INDIA IN APPEAL ON RIOTS
LEAD: Shaken by widespread violence against a decision to reserve more Government jobs for disadvantaged Indians, Prime Minister V. P. Singh appealed to student protesters tonight to open talks with his Government.


E.M.S. Worker Indicted Over Rikers Injury Report
LEAD: A Queens grand jury indicted an employee of the city's Emergency Medical Service yesterday on charges he falsely reported being slashed by a city correction officer during a wildcat strike by correction officers at Rikers Island last month.


Dr. Harold Trigg, 66, Drug Abuse Specialist
LEAD: Harold L. Trigg, one of the first doctors to use methadone in treating heroin addiction, died on Monday at the Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 66 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Lemieux Hospitalized
LEAD: Mario Lemieux was hospitalized in Pittsburgh yesterday as physicians performed tests to determine the source of the Pittsburgh Penguins center's back pain.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Quieting Noisy Heaters
Q.
I recently moved into a three-year-old condominium.
During cold weather some of the electric baseboard heaters make loud snapping and popping noises after the thermostat turns them off.
I'm used to expansion and contraction noises as the heat comes on and goes off, but these heating units are much louder than the others.


Chinese Satellite Planned
LEAD: China will launch a geological survey satellite in mid-October, the official newspaper China Daily reported today.
It will be China's fifth satellite launching this year.
China is also developing a communications satellite that will be able to serve the entire country, the newspaper said.
The newspaper gave no details on when the communications satellite would be ready.


Chile's Chief and Pinochet Make Fragile Peace
LEAD: One recent day, as midday crowds crisscrossed the plaza in front of the presidential palace, Gen.
Augusto Pinochet roared up in a gray Mercedes-Benz accompanied by dozens of bodyguards and a few soldiers in battle gear.


Victim's Wielding of Knife Questioned at Howard Beach Trial


Talking Deals;   Fast Russian Sale By Philip Morris
LEAD: THE planned sale by Philip Morris Companies Inc. of American cigarettes to the Soviet Union - the culmination of a 16-year relationship - could eventually result in the company's winning as much as 20 percent of the Soviet cigarette market, a Philip Morris official says.


Zurich Journal;   A Marketplace for Drugs, a Bazaar of the Bizarre
LEAD: In an oak-shaded park a few hundred yards from Zurich's stately banks and elegant shops, a man named Sylvio carefully worked a hypodermic needle into a vein in his neck, then slowly injected a mixture of heroin and cocaine.


Tobacco Ads Banned
LEAD: The publisher of two newspapers in central Michigan has banned national tobacco advertisements.
Greenville News Inc., which owns The Daily News of Greenville and The Carson City Gazette, a weekly, announced its decision last week in The Daily News, which has a circulation of 8,500.
Thirteen other newspapers nationwide do not accept tobacco advertising, but these are the first in Michigan, according to the Newspaper Advertising Bureau.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This will give parents more useful information so they themselves can decide which films their children can see.''
- Jack Valenti, announcing a new movie rating system. [C18:3.]


Net Income Up 16.7% at Conagra
LEAD: Conagra Inc., the giant food company, has reported that strong performance from its prepared foods segment led to a 16.7 percent increase in earnings in the quarter that ended on Aug. 26.


A Shareholder Advocate Plans More Active Role
LEAD: Robert A. G. Monks, a businessman who has turned into a shareholder advocate, is starting another venture that should put him even more at odds with many corporate executives.


The Korean Will to Democracy Grows Fainter
LEAD: To the Editor:


CALIFORNIA TO GET TOUGHER AIR RULES
LEAD: California, which has long had the nation's toughest air-quality rules, is on the verge of approving an even stricter set of regulations intended to create a new generation of less-polluting fuels and vehicles, including electric cars.


Archdiocese Terminates A Lease of a Theater Troupe
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, saying that it is owed $25,000 in back rent, has terminated the lease of an Off Off Broadway theater company that has continued to present a play the archdiocese says uses language that is against the church's principles.
The archdiocese says the play is being performed in violation of terms in the lease between the church and the theater.


Review/Dance;   Flamenco Group Arrives From Spain
LEAD: Cumbre Flamenca filled the Joyce Theater with choreographic thunder and lightning on Tuesday night when the troupe opened a two-week engagement of ''El Baile,'' a program of flamenco dance and music.
It was an electrifying performance that certainly must have pleased anyone who loves Spanish dance for its sheer excitement.


Harassment Charge Draws N.F.L.'s Attention;   Tagliabue Orders Mowatt to Report to Office
LEAD: An alleged sexual harassment incident involving a female sports reporter for The Boston Herald and some New England Patriots players escalated yesterday as Commissioner Paul Tagliabue ordered one of the players, Zeke Mowatt, to report to the National Football League office in New York by tomorrow.


Newsweek and Times Mirror Set Ad Pact
LEAD: In a new twist on group advertising promotions offered by magazines, Newsweek and Times Mirror Magazines announced yesterday that they would team up to offer special joint advertising discounts and promotional deals for advertisers in their magazines.
It is the first time that two separately owned magazine companies have joined forces in this way.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Automatix Inc., Billerica, Mass., appointed Ofer Gneezy president and chief executive of the company, which manufactures artificial vision systems.


In Jerusalem, a Museum's Treasures Go Unseen
LEAD: On most days it doesn't happen, but on this day a bottle tossed from a crowd on Sultan Suleiman Street smashed against the window of a car as it paused in traffic near the Damascus Gate in East Jerusalem.
This has happened often enough to Tallay Ornan, curator of the Rockefeller Museum, that she shrugged off the attack as part of her job.


Washington Students Criticize Art Decision
LEAD: The Student Government Association at the University of the District of Columbia called this week for the resignation of the trustees who negotiated the acquisition of ''The Dinner Party,'' a sculpture by Judy Chicago.


'Germans Are A Single People.'
LEAD: The Germans are a single people, a single nation.
The division was artificial, and as far as Germans were concerned, imposed by force majeure.
One has to remember that at one period during the war, the objective of the Allies was the complete destruction of Germany as a nation-state.
It's difficult now to understand how politicians thought it would be possible to liquidate a nation-state while leaving its people alive, but some did.


Ex-Chief of Detectives Is Guilty of Conspiracy
LEAD: A former top Suffolk County police official was convicted today of conspiring to portray his son as a police informer so he could avoid jail.


New Sun Printer And Software Out
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc. introduced a low-cost laser printer and new printer software for its computer work stations, advancing in its move into the market for office computing.
The Sparcprinter, which replaces Sun's Laserwriter II, is priced at $2,695, and the Newsprint software is $495.
Shipment of both will begin in the fourth quarter.


Causing the Fidgets, Bart and the Flash
LEAD: Thursday has become television's most competitvely fascinating night.
The reasons are both tangible and intangible: there is new money to be made on Thursday, and there is more prestige attached to the night than to any other night on television.


Praise Mr. de Klerk, and Keep Sanctions
LEAD: It would be foolish to pretend that South Africa has yet taken all the steps needed to abandon apartheid and embrace political and human rights.
But it would be churlish to withhold credit from President F. W. de Klerk for his bold moves toward that goal, not least freeing Nelson Mandela.


To Differ With Israel Isn't Anti-Semitism
LEAD: To the Editor:


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-13
The Soviet Union was praised by Secretary of State Baker and other Western diplomats for its warning to President Hussein of Iraq that a war in the Persian Gulf may be imminent if he does not pull out of Kuwait.
Page A1


The Korean Will to Democracy Grows Fainter;   Family Reunification
LEAD: To the Editor:


Norden Will Close One of L.I. Plants
LEAD: Norden Systems Inc. said it would close its plant in Farmingdale, L.I., and shift radar operations from its other Long Island plant in Melville to Norwalk, Conn.
It said the manufacturing of non-radar systems would be consolidated at Melville and that the moves would result in an undetermined number of layoffs.


Bankers, in Washington, Curb the Lavish Parties
LEAD: When Citibank took over Union Station here last year for a party for hundreds of the world's most powerful bankers, it was a circus - literally.


Study Finds Calcium Helpful to Older Women
LEAD: Women over the age of 55 can keep their bones strong and probably prevent fractures by consuming every day the amount of calcium contained in three glasses of milk, a study has found.


5 of Board's 7 For Condoms In the Schools
LEAD: Five of the seven members of the New York City Board of Education said yesterday that they favored the distribution of condoms to teen-agers in school clinics, a reversal of the position taken by previous boards.


Sorry, I'm No Crime Fighter
LEAD: A day after Mayor Dinkins revealed his strategy to fight crime in New York with the ''city's greatest resource -our pride and collective will'' - I was stopped by a neighbor on my Lower East Side street.


Newest Tanks Are Included In U.S. Arms Sale to Saudis
LEAD: President Bush, in the first phase of a planned $21 billion arms sale to Saudi Arabia, has decided to include the most modern M-1 tanks and other sophisticated weapons worth $7.5 billion as an immediate response to the Iraqi threat, Administration officials said today.


More of Milken's Violations Are Disclosed
LEAD: Michael R. Milken committed more violations of securities laws than those to which he pleaded guilty in April, the former financier's lawyer said in a court document filed yesterday.


Pacifism in the Pacific
LEAD: The cold war was the economic heyday of Japan.
The Soviets spent 24 percent of their national product on armaments and went broke.
The U.S. spent 6 percent of its larger G.N.P. on defense and ran up a debilitating debt.
Japan enjoyed the full protection of our nuclear umbrella while spending a minuscule percentage on defense -and prospered.


Urban Meadow: Mist and Snip
LEAD: THIS year's answer to the topiary - the not-to-be-lived-without accessory - may just be the personal meadow, a mini-expanse of green grass growing ever-so-sweetly out of a gently rusticated plywood box.


'Opportunity Rather Than a Threat'
LEAD: I view German reunification as the realization of the just aspirations of the German nation to live within its own state. . . .


Pasadena Journal;   Beneath Rubble, A Legend Of Sorts
LEAD: Gilley's, the honky-tonk that rose to glory in the rough-and-tumble oilpatch days of the early 1980's and served as the backdrop for the movie ''Urban Cowboy,'' is gone.


Keeping Time on MTV, Regardless of the Beat
LEAD: MTV introduced music videos to the public.
Now the network has its own line of offbeat watches, including one that reads ''I want my MTV'' in sign language.


Soviets Take Step Toward Freedom of Religion


Accord on Reserves
LEAD: A Federal judge yesterday in Washington cleared the way for National Football League teams to sign from three to five ''practice players'' a week for the season, settling part of a suit over last year's reserve squad.


Voter Registration Bill Falls Short in Senate
LEAD: The Senate gave up efforts today on a bill intended to encourage large numbers of Americans to register to vote.


Special Places for Special Friends
LEAD: NOT every dog can reside in a ''Bauwauhaus'' or a ''Pup Tent,'' two of the fanciful canine habitats on view at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum's outdoor exhibition ''The Doghouse'' through Oct. 14.
All that most dogs need is a cozy place offering protection from the elements, says Ross Becker, publisher of ''Good Dog!


Centennialist's Forte
LEAD: To the Editor:


Shutting Off the 'Taco Circuit'
LEAD: By ordering the promotions last week of 11 veteran Hispanic agents who had sued the Federal Bureau of Investigation charging discrimination, Director William Sessions loudly reaffirmed his commitment to end a legacy of bias.


No Accord at Trump Talks
LEAD: The Trump Organization met yesterday with its bank creditors to restructure $245 million of loans for the Trump Shuttle, but the meeting broke up without an agreement, a Trump spokeswoman said.


Heads of Hispanic Groups Seek One Political Voice
LEAD: About 100 officials and leaders of Hispanic organizations have decided at a meeting here to establish a group to speak out on political issues shared by Hispanic citizens in the 1992 Presidential election.


Werner Kuhn, Lawyer, 47
LEAD: Werner Kuhn, a lawyer who served with the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and helped found the California Association of AIDS Agencies, died on Sunday at the U.C.L.A.
Medical Center Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 47 years old and lived in Los Angeles.


Youth Was Shot After Stumbling Into Dispute
LEAD: A 15-year-old Bronx youth who was shot after apparently stumbling into a gang dispute on Tuesday afternoon said yesterday that he hid behind a car when he first heard shots, but that one fleeing gang member spotted him and fired three times.


Foreman Role Solidified
LEAD: As expected, Earl Foreman, the commissioner of the Major Soccer League, was officially named chairman of the committee for the establishment of a national professional outdoor soccer league.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: PLASTER, once the standard material for covering interior walls and ceilings, has a harder surface and resists wear better than wallboard, its successor.
Nevertheless, plaster can be damaged by moisture and accidental impact, and after many years it usually develops cracks from shrinkage and settling.


Deer Overpopulation Suits Hunters Fine
LEAD: To the Editor:


Yields Post Slight Gains
LEAD: Yields on tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were up slightly for the week ended yesterday.


Personal Health
LEAD: The myriad pollens of spring and summer have waned, and fall's cool nights are finally bringing the ragweed season to a close.
For hay fever sufferers, wheezing and sneezing are finally over for the year.
But for 10 to 15 percent of the general population and 40 percent of those who have asthma or multiple allergies, there is no relief.


Florio and Tax Protesters: Battle Could Be a Long One
LEAD: After an anti-tax rally at the State House on Sunday that drew only 4,000 protesters, Gov.
Jim Florio and the leaders of the protest movement appear to have settled into a protracted political war in which time is likely to be on the side of the Governor.


SOVIETS' WARNING TO IRAQIS ON WAR PRAISED BY WEST
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and other Western diplomats praised the Soviet Union today for its warning to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq that a war in the Persian Gulf may be imminent if he does not pull out of Kuwait.


Treasury Urges Restrictions On Bank Deposit Insurance
LEAD: The Bush Administration said today that restrictions should be placed on insurance coverage of deposits at banks and suggested that the insurance premiums paid by the banks be pegged to the risk involved in their investments and loans.


Warm-Up May Not Protect Muscles
LEAD: Stretching, touching the toes, running in place and otherwise warming up before a vigorous workout improve range of motion and makeathletes feel better, but do virtually nothing to prevent muscle injuries, new research suggests.


Rinfret Stands Up Republican Leaders and Demands Recognition


Schering-Plough To Buy Shares
LEAD: The board of the Schering-Plough Corporation authorized a buyback of up to $1 billion of the company's common stock.
Market conditions have made stock in the pharmaceutical and health care company an exceptionally good value, Robert P. Luciano, the company's chairman and chief executive, said in a written statement.


Trading in Dollar Is Mixed After a Lackluster Session
LEAD: The dollar ended mixed yesterday against major currencies in thin and choppy trading.


Cone Keeps Mets Alive and Finishes Expos
LEAD: David Cone kept the Mets alive in the dwindling days of their pennant race tonight when he steered them past the Montreal Expos, 4-0, with eight innings of two-hit pitching that sent the Expos to their sixth straight defeat and eliminated them from the race.


Oil Jumps In Futures Trading
LEAD: The price of crude oil jumped yesterday to within pennies of a record in futures trading, climbing $1.14 a barrel to settle at $38.67 on the New York Mercantile Exchange.


Federal Judge Is Focus of Bribe Inquiry
LEAD: A Federal judge in New Orleans is the focus of a bribery investigation involving allegations that he accepted thousands of dollars in a deal for leniency in sentencing a defendant in a drug case.


Decisions for Captain On Davis Cup Final
LEAD: Tom Gorman, the captain of the United States Davis Cup team, was suffering from jet lag and had not yet unpacked from a whirlwind week in Vienna where his United States squad used a 3-2 decision against Austria to advance to its first Davis Cup final since 1982.
But rest was not on his agenda.


If There Is No Provocation by Iraq, The U.N. May Offer a Route to Unity
LEAD: If Iraq should sanction a major terrorist strike, harm American hostages or attack a United States warship or warplane, President Bush would certainly respond with military action, citing ''provocation'' by President Saddam Hussein to explain his decision.


A 'No Children' Category To Replace the 'X' Rating
LEAD: In the most far-reaching revision of the movie rating system since its introduction in 1968, the Motion Picture Association of America has created a new ''No Children'' category for adult films to replace the ''X'' rating that has become synonomous with pornography and a focus of bitter dispute.


Survey of 9 Million Pupils Finds Lag in Education
LEAD: The Department of Education released a report yesterday that adds to the growing documentation of the mediocrity of American education.


Anyone Can Have a Logo
LEAD: PEOPLE have long commissioned paintings of themselves, usually showing them at home surrounded by children, dogs and cats.
Now there is the corporate portrait: an oil painting of the place where someone works, an homage to labor.


On Flight 170 to Baghdad: The Worn and Fearful, Headed for the Unknown
LEAD: When Iraqi Airways Flight 170 touched down here at 9:30 tonight, Saddam International Airport was eerily deserted.


U.S. Plans Sale Of Reserve's Oil To Lower Prices
LEAD: Complaining that there is ''no justification'' for the recent run-up in oil prices, President Bush announced last night that the United States would sell five million barrels from its Strategic Petroleum Reserve as a test.


4-Year Treasury Notes Sell Well
LEAD: The Treasury held an unexpectedly successful auction of four-year notes yesterday, despite growing concerns about oil-fed inflation, Washington's failure to produce a budget agreement and a Government securities market that was otherwise uncommonly dull with minimal price changes.


A Political Statement That You Can Sneeze At
LEAD: WHEN Americans blow their noses, they can both be chic and help the environment.
What they need is a box of President's Choice Green facial tissues, which are made from 100 percent recycled paper and sold in a faux malachite box.
Seldom has a humble box of tissues looked so fancy.


TALKS ON BUDGET TURN TO INDEXING OF CAPITAL GAINS
LEAD: Under pressure from moderate Republicans in Congress, White House budget negotiators today signaled a willingness to drop their demand for an actual cut in the capital gains tax rate and instead accept a plan that would index capital gains for inflation.


Commitment by Sumitomo For Denver Airport Project
LEAD: The City and County of Denver, which are building the first new large airport in the United States in the last 20 years, closed a $319 million commitment from the Sumitomo Trust and Banking Company yesterday for a tax-exempt variable rate financing to be used for the airport project.


Venezuelan Oil Report
LEAD: Venezuela projected its oil sales at $19 a barrel for 1991 and expects to export an average of 1.9 million barrels a day, newspaper reports said today.
Quoting Marcos Morales, the planning ministry's director of short-term planning, the daily Economia Hoy said average crude sales for 1990 were now projected at 1.85 million barrels a day, up from the originally forcast 1.75 million barrels.


For Muscovites, A Pizza Purge
LEAD: Pizza Hut is struggling with Moscow's bureaucracy to keep its two new restaurants open after inspectors shut them, a company official said today.


Legal Scholars Clash Over Neil Bush Actions
LEAD: Legal scholars clashed today over the standards for business ethics in a proceeding against Neil Bush, the President's son, and disagreed over whether Mr.
Bush had violated conflict-of-interest rules as a director of the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association.


Outcry Grows Over Method of Selling New Drug
LEAD: A controversy over Clozaril, an effective but costly drug for the hardest-to-treat symptoms of schizophrenia, has heated up, with the Food and Drug Administration requesting a labeling change that would stop the exclusive way the drug is sold.
It is now marketed only through one health company, which administers a required weekly blood test.


'I Do Not Fear German Nationalism'
LEAD: It is an unavoidable process because a country with one tradition and one language has the right to find unity for itself.
Nothing can stop such a natural trend.
We have to respect this natural urge, this tendency to be a single nation.


Review/Film Festival;   Dour Judge Is Asking Too Many Questions
LEAD: At the start of the somberly handsome Italian thriller ''Open Doors,'' a calm, neatly dressed man returns to the office from which he has recently been dismissed.
He is armed with a long, sharp knife.
With shocking efficiency, he quickly murders two former colleagues who were instrumental in bringing about his downfall.


The Facts of Life About Teen-Age Sex
LEAD: Joseph Fernandez, the Chancellor of New York City's schools, plans to give junior high and high school students something that many of them will need to graduate: condoms.
The proposal is part of a larger plan, backed by Mayor David Dinkins, to combat AIDS and teen-age pregnancies.
It's a controversial but splendid idea that deserves approval by the Board of


Fuhr Has Hearing
LEAD: Grant Fuhr had a 75-minute hearing yesterday into his admissions of substance abuse, but John Ziegler, the National Hockey League president, said he did not know when a decision on whether to discipline the Edmonton Oilers' goaltender would be announced.


Police-Merger Fight Stalls Dispatch System
LEAD: A five-year-old plan to link the dispatching systems of the New York City police and transit police is more than a year behind schedule and may never be completed because of a dispute over merging the two police forces.


Event in Tompkins Sq. Celebrated Gay Pride
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brazil Coffee Exporter
LEAD: One of Brazil's biggest coffee exporters, Inter-Continental de Cafe S.A., has filed for protection from creditors, its lawyer said today.
The lawyer, Hugo Sigelmann, said the company had been hit by the big drop in world coffee prices after the International Coffee Organization ended its export quota system in July of last year.


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: THE subway stalled twice on the way uptown so I was late meeting my friend at the theater.
That meant we had to sit in the second row, which is perhaps not the best place to be at a film that opens with a knifing followed by a shooting.
Of the same person, I might add.


Results Plus
LEAD:
Asian Games
China's Medal List Grows: Rowers and gymnasts led China to 30 gold medals at the Asian Games in Beijing yesterday.
The Chinese won all 14 of their events in rowing, a sport virtually unknown in the country five years ago, and 7 in gymnastics, putting China more than halfway to its target of 100-plus gold medals.In four days, China has won 61 of the 308 gold medals that will be awarded.


For David Souter, With Hope
LEAD: The Senate Judiciary Committee votes today on the confirmation of David Souter for the Supreme Court.
The nomination seems certain to be approved and sent to the floor, but the senators, having wasted time in speechmaking during the hearings, must now explain their votes.


Brady Urges Aid to Lands Hurt in Crisis
LEAD: Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady urged the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund today to cushion the economic shock of the Persian Gulf crisis for developing countries.


A 3-Year Term for Scuttling Lobster Boat for Insurance
LEAD: The owner of a fishing company was sentenced today to the maximum penalty of three years and one month in prison for planning the scuttling of a lobster boat in 1988 to collect $270,000 in insurance.


AIDS Rising Fast Among Black South Africans
LEAD: Nthato Motlana, a prominent doctor in the black township of Soweto, was visited recently by a young man suffering from a venereal disease.
When Dr.
Motlana proposed that his patient also be tested for signs of AIDS, he recalled, the young man scoffed.


Debt Pact Backed By Businessland
LEAD: Businessland Inc. reached an agreement in principle with its senior noteholders on complying with the covenants of its $50 million in senior debt.
Businessland, a leading retailer of personal computers, said last month that it was in violation of certain of the operating covenants of these notes.


Reviews/Opera;   A Modest 'Boheme' With New Faces
LEAD: The New York City Opera does not usually go out of its way to encourage direct comparison of its productions with those of the more richly endowed Metropolitan Opera.
But in scheduling its first ''La Boheme'' of the season on Tuesday evening - the night after the Met presented its opulent Franco Zeffirelli production as its opening night gala - the company invited, at the very least, a consideration of the different missions of the two houses, and of the variety of ways


Brooklyn Boycott: The Fallout Hurts Others
LEAD: Like the owners of many small businesses, Wequar Azeem spent the last two years cultivating his video-rental store's clientele and postponing profits while counting on this year to be his payoff.
But his third year in business has seen sales plummet 35 percent, so Mr.
Azeem is looking for part-time work to make ends meet and trying to sell his store, Trade Winds


Accounts
LEAD: *
Levine, Huntley, Schmidt &amp; Beaver, New York, resigned as agency of record for the Genesee Brewing Company, a beer maker in Rochester.
They have handled the account since 1987.
The agency said a decrease in spending on advertising to $3 million from $12 million in three years made the company a less attractive client.


Restaurants
LEAD: Chelsea Trattoria Italiana is not only one of the best restaurants in this revitalized part of Manhattan, it is also one of the classiest.
Rarely have I seen a staff work so hard to please customers.
If none of the menu items or daily specials appeal to you, the waiter is likely to say, ''Tell me what you want and we'll make it.


Editorial Notebook;   Capitalism, Soviet Style
LEAD: PEMOHT: It may be the most frequently seen word on Soviet streets.
What the Cyrillic word says is ''remont,'' what it supposedly means is ''under repair'' and what it really means is ''broken.''


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Tex-Mex Style


Medjugorje Journal;   Do 4 Behold the Virgin? Bishop Is Not a Believer
LEAD: The Vatican has warned that church-sponsored pilgrimages to this mountain village are banned, but that has not stopped Roman Catholic pilgrims from crowding into Medjugorje, where the Virgin Mary is said to have been appearing daily to four young people for the last decade.


Benefit on Staten Island
LEAD: A musical benefit for the St.
George Civic Association, featuring six local musicians, is to be held at 4 P.M. on Sunday at Veterans Memorial Hall, Snug Harbor Cultural Center, in Livingston, S.I.
The performers are to be Leslie Sixfin Merwin, a pianist; Lois Lamb, Ann Trinita Sohm and Jacqueline Shotigian, singers, and Joseph Fischetti and Ira Bishop, clarinetists.


When Leaves Fall, Red Sox Do, Too;   Autumn Swoon Pains New Englanders
LEAD: It happens every fall.
Or so it seems in New England, where the Red Sox are virtually a religion and good citizens have come to expect the team to collapse in September.
The Red Sox have not won the World Series since their owner sold Babe Ruth to the Yankees more than 70 years ago to finance a Broadway musical, and this year the pattern seems to be repeating itself.


3 More Killed in India in Clashes Over Official Jobs for Poor
LEAD: Three more people were killed today in intermittent clashes between anti-Government protesters and the police here, as mobs attacked a train near the capital and self-immolation attempts by students were reported here and in other parts of northern India.


MCA 4Acquisition
LEAD: Talks about a possible acquisition of MCA Inc. by the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company of Japan were postponed until later next week or the week after, executives close to the negotiations said yesterday.
The talks had been scheduled to start on Sunday.
No reason was given for the postponement.


Stock Buyback Plan Announced by Carbide
LEAD: The Union Carbide Corporation said today that it would take several steps to strengthen its businesses and increase its flagging share price, including a substantial stock buyback and the sale of some businesses.


Reviews/Film Festival;   Inner Life as Gestures and Formal Images
LEAD: ''The Sting of Death,'' a new Japanese film written and directed by Kohei Oguri, is about Toshio (Ittoku Kishibe) and his wife, Miho (Keiko Matsuzaka), and her mental breakdown after she learns he has a mistress.
The breakdown soon becomes a kind of ordered madness in which she is alternately vindictive and self-effacing to the brink of suicide.


Investment Tax Credit Is Worth Trying Again
LEAD: To the Editor:


Free Fun: Where to See Movies Being Made


In Opposing Souter, Bradley Raises Issue Of Abortion in Race
LEAD: Senator Bill Bradley, by declaring he opposes the nomination of Judge David H. Souter to the United States Supreme Court, has drawn fire from his Republican opponent and brought the abortion issue into the Senate campaign here.


Tribes to Hear Proposal to Revamp Indian Bureau
LEAD: Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. has called American Indian tribal leaders from around the country for a meeting on Friday that he says will point a course toward greater self-determination for the tribes.


Family Ties for Yanks
LEAD: George Steinbrenner will soon relinquish his majority ownership of the Yankees by transferring stock to a family member, his attorneys said in a statement yesterday.


New Housing Authority Chief
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins has named Laura D. Blackburne, a lawyer, mediator and co-chairwoman of the mayoral panel that reviewed the black-led boycott of two Korean-American groceries in Brooklyn, to head the board of the City Housing Authority.
She has been chief executive of the Institute for Mediation and Conflict Resolution.


Dollar Off in Slow Trading Except Against the Yen
LEAD: The dollar weakened yesterday against all leading currencies except the Japanese yen, which remained depressed by rising oil prices and another sharp decline on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.


Economic Scene;   Oil Shock's Blow To Rich and Poor
LEAD: THIS year's annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank have been dominated by worries about the crisis in the Persian Gulf, the soaring price of oil and its threat to the world economy.


Argentine Privatizations
LEAD: The Government of Argentina plans to sell the state-owned gas, electric and water companies and the Buenos Aires subway system, President Carlos Saul Menem said today.


Bush's Move on Stockpile Brings Some Dissent Overseas
LEAD: The world's leading industrial nations will hold a crucial meeting on Friday to consider an American proposal that strategic oil reserves be prepared for immediate use.
But a group of oil-consuming countries, led by West Germany and Japan, are opposed to the American initiative, arguing that reserve stocks should be tapped only in an extreme case, like the outbreak of war.


Down the Salvadoran Drain
LEAD: For the first time in a decade, Congress has a chance to strike a decisive blow for human rights in El Salvador.


Kaifu Outlines His Proposal For Unarmed Japanese in Gulf
LEAD: Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu unveiled a long-awaited proposal today to send unarmed military personnel to the Persian Gulf in a noncombat role.


Review/Dance;   In Boots And Jeans, The French Dos-a-Dos
LEAD: The women came in their ''Gunsmoke'' dresses, hair piled high, and the men wore jeans with the cowboy boots that are all the rage in France.


Iraq Backs Off Its Threat to Execute Diplomats Who Hide Civilians
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein's Government moved today to defuse the latest rise in tensions over Western hostages in Iraq, offering what amounted to a public apology for a diplomatic note five days ago implying that it might execute diplomats who hid civilians in their Baghdad embassies and homes.


Capturing New York Anew From a Camera's Perspective
LEAD: IN photographic terms, New York City is a contrary utopia where glamour rubs shoulders with desolation, sophistication does battle with artlessness and the cliched coexists with the outrageous.
For the peripatetic connoisseur, the city's visible charms rest not so much with its postcard-quality vistas and landmarks as with its unexpected combinations of vast public grandeur and small, often overlooked private spaces.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
OIL AND THE MIDEAST
So far, the oil-price run-up reflects expectations, not reality.
And the anticipation could be worse than the outcome.
No one, of course, knows just what a war would bring. [Page A1.]
Oil prices plowed stubbornly ahead despite Bush's effort to tame them by announcing a test withdrawal from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.


Pirates Scrabble, Then Win
LEAD: The Pittsburgh Pirates would be a natural for ''Sesame Street.'' Bert and Ernie could use the Pirates to teach the show's young viewers about the letter B. The Pirates have Bobby Bonilla and Barry Bonds, and they also have Backman, Bell, Bream, Belliard, Belinda, Bair and Bilardello.


On His Last Day, a Retiring Sergeant Brings In a Large Haul    And when you arrest these people they don't even care.'' (Don Hogan Charles/The New York Times)


What Students Think About Condom Plan
LEAD: The teen-age girls, clustered on a sidewalk yesterday outside Martin Luther King Jr.
High School in Manhattan, wore almost identical gold earrings, giggled in unison over a soap opera star passing by and agreed that the school system's proposal to distribute condoms was a prudent move.


Archibald A. Talmage, Executive, 86
LEAD: Archibald A. Talmage, vice president of the Electric Bond and Share Company, a New York holding company that is now Ebasco Services Inc., died on Tuesday at Sharon (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 86 years old and lived in West Cornwall, Conn.


Films That Are Shooting
LEAD: Because of distractions sometimes created by onlookers, production companies are reluctant to divulge exact locations and times for film and television shoots.
But over the next six weeks, at least seven films or television pilots will be shot at prominent locations around New York City, and observant passers-by may find themselves part of an impromptu audience.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


KUWAITI EMIR ASKS U.N. TO STAND FIRM
LEAD: The Emir of Kuwait came before the United Nations General Assembly today to plead for his country's liberation from Iraq, urging the organization to stand by the sanctions it has imposed on Iraq as he offered poor third-world countries relief on debts to Kuwait.


Asian Actors Lost in a '73 'Miss Saigon' Case
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Payments to Douglas
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said today that the Air Force had suspended payments in July for the company's work on the C-17 transport plane, pending the completion of a review of the program's cost.


Peter Riccio, 92, Dies; Professor of Languages
LEAD: Peter M. Riccio, a professor of Italian who taught at Columbia University for 45 years and who was director emeritus of the university's Casa Italiana, died on Friday at the Pine Brook Nursing Home in Venice, Fla., He was 92 years old and lived in Venice and Hope Valley, R.I.


Cuomo Ponders A War Against U.S. Drug War
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, ridiculing the Federal Government's declared war on drugs, threatened yesterday to flood United States Attorneys offices in New York City and across New York State with arrested drug suspects as a way of getting Washington to shoulder a larger share of the crime burden.


For the Diplomats, Advice from the Mouths of Babes on West 118th Street
LEAD: Jesus Gonzalez, 9 years old, and a few of his friends, from central Harlem, had some advice yesterday for the world leaders who are gathering at the United Nations this weekend for the Summit for Children.


Boston Edison Names New Chief Executive
LEAD: The Boston Edison Company, the city's electric utility, named its president yesterday to be its next chief executive.


WITH ACCORD NEAR, BUDGET TALK FOCUS IS SOCIAL SECURITY
LEAD: White House and Congressional budget negotiatiors, in substantial agreement on most elements of a budget deal, today returned to the politically explosive subject of cuts in Social Security benefits in a search for the final savings needed to meet their deficit reduction goals.


Thomas B. Greenslade, Teacher, 80
LEAD: Thomas B. Greenslade, a science teacher in the New York City public schools for more than 30 years, died on Tuesday at Riverside Hospital in Columbus, Ohio.
He was 80 years old and lived in Gambier, Oh.


Large Cutbacks At Laura Ashley
LEAD: Laura Ashley said it would sell or close most of its factories and cut its work force by one-fifth in an effort to survive.
The retailer of English country-style women's clothing and home furnishings operates nearly 500 stores worldwide, 185 of them in the United States.


Covenant House Cleared in Abrams Inquiry
LEAD: A state investigation has cleared Covenant House of any criminal charges in its handling of charitable contributions, a spokesman for New York State's Attorney General, Robert Abrams, said yesterday.


HORSE RACING: Notebook;   Housebuster Confronts Biggest Test in Vosburgh
LEAD: Housebuster has taken a slight lead in the weekly opinion polls for the Horse of the Year title, and he might also be voted the champion sprinter and champion 3-year-old if the ballots were cast today.
If he loses the Vosburgh Stakes at Belmont tomorrow, though, he will lose the lead for all three titles.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.18
9.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.22
7.31
7.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.21
7.35
7.84
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.73
8.85
8.37
30-YR.


Review/Film;   In 'Texasville,' Nothing's Built to Last
LEAD: AN expensive television satellite dish stands on the broad parched-brown Texas plain.
Not far away, Duane Jackson (Jeff Bridges), wearing a shirt and a cowboy hat, soaks in a hot tub while taking potshots at an untenanted two-story doghouse.


Help for the Everglades
LEAD: Pollution kills an estimated three or four acres of sawgrass every day in Florida's Everglades, threatening its very survival.
Poisonous runoff from sugar cane plantations is a prime culprit.
In a breakthrough agreement, cane growers have now pledged $40 million to help clean up their destructive waste.


Tripling of Oil Drawdown Sought
LEAD: Energy Secretary James D. Watkins asked Congress today for authority to triple the amount of oil to be auctioned from the nation's stockpile.
In doing so, he repeatedly stresssed that in selling oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve the Bush Administration was merely testing the system, not trying to bring prices down or meet shortages.


G.M. and Isuzu Explore Venture
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation and Isuzu Motors Ltd. may participate in a truck manufacturing project in Czechoslovakia, a G.M. spokesman, Jack Harned, said. ''Participation does not mean it will necessarily be a joint venture company,'' he said. ''Specifics of the project have not been determined.


Why It Doesn't Pay U.S. to Twist Japan's Arm;   Relationship Changing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Part of Door From United Jet Is Retrieved From the Pacific
LEAD: Part of the cargo door that blew off a United Airlines jumbo jet last year, bringing death to nine passengers, has been retrieved by a tiny Navy submarine from the Pacific Ocean floor at a depth of almost three miles, the Government said yesterday.


House Panel Backs Bush on Gulf Crisis, but Avoids Endorsing War
LEAD: The House Foreign Affairs Committee approved a resolution today that endorsed President Bush's handling of the Persian Gulf crisis but carefully avoided giving him open-ended support for military action against Iraq.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a computer malfunction, an article on Monday headed ''Tuba City Journal,'' about the making of a movie in the Arizona desert, misidentified a Hopi village snake priest and rendered the pronunciation of his name incorrectly.
He is Radford Quamahongnewa (pronounced ko-MA-hong-ne-wa).


Excerpts From Kuwaiti Emir's Address at U.N.
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a speech by Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah, the Emir of Kuwait, to the United Nations General Assembly, as provided by the Kuwaiti mission:


Free Outdoor Fun: Watching Movies Being Made
LEAD: On a quiet evening in Greenwich Village, a hundred or so people stare, fascinated, as a couple leaves a movie theater on Bleecker Street.
The couple pauses in the doorway.
The man puts his arms around the woman.
She smiles at him.
They stroll away.


5,000 Officers for Street Patrol Included in New Police
LEAD: About 5,000 extra police officers would go on street patrol, with most on community beats in high-crime neighborhoods, under a plan about to be presented to Mayor David N. Dinkins, police and City Hall officials said yesterday.


Charles R. Kaufman, Lawyer, 81
LEAD: Charles R. Kaufman, a founder of the Chicago law firm Vedder, Price, Kaufman &amp; Kramholz, died Wednesday at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
He was 81 years old and lived in Winnetka, Ill.


Economic Watch;   Capital Gains: Plus, Minus or Neither?
LEAD: To President Bush, cutting taxes on capital gains is a matter of common sense: a lower rate, he says, would mean more investment without sacrificing tax revenue.
To most Congressional Democrats, a break in the tax rate on capital gains would amount to a windfall for the rich and a giant step back from the goal of taxing all forms of income equally.


Review/Art;   For Judy Pfaff, Moderation at Last
LEAD: Judy Pfaff's art has always been suspended between painting and sculpture, wall and floor, and high and low culture.
But her latest constructions bridge these gaps with a finesse and efficiency that make them among the best of her 20-year career.
Beautifully engineered and esthetically focused, these new Pfaffs achieve liftoff.


New Taiwan Labor Rule
LEAD: The Taiwan Government removed restrictions today on the employment of foreign workers in Government construction projects.
Under the new rule approved by the Cabinet, contractors can apply to bring in foreign workers for significant Government and special public projects.
Currently, no more than one-third of the work force for such construction projects can be brought in from abroad.


Evacuation of Brazilians Set
LEAD: The United Nations today authorized Brazil to evacuate 256 Brazilians in Iraq on a special flight of an Iraqi commercial plane, Brazil's Foreign Ministry said.
After the United Nations Security Council authorized an air blockade of Iraq on Tuesday, prohibiting planes from entering or leaving Iraq without special permission, a U.N.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Not Just for Children
Elaborate plans for security - and for play - have been drawn up in advance of the United Nations Summit for Children.
Page A9.
Algerian Exile Returns
Former President Ahmed Ben Bella returned home from exile and urged Algerian youths to fight for the Iraqi Army.
Page A7.


Rinfret Says His Feud Is 'Revitalizing' G.O.P.
LEAD: Seeking to transform a debilitating party squabble into a political identity, the Republican candidate for governor, Pierre A. Rinfret, returned to the campaign trail today and declared that his noisy feud with State Senate Republican leaders was ''revitalizing'' the party in New York.


Berkeley Gunman Kills Student Taken Hostage
LEAD: A University of California student was shot to death and seven other people were wounded early this morning by a deranged gunman who held 33 hostages for seven hours in a bar near the campus, terrorizing and sexually degrading some of them.


White Sox Get Sanders
LEAD: Deion Sanders, the Atlanta Falcons' defensive back who was released by the Yankees on Monday, was claimed on waivers yesterday by the Chicago White Sox.
He has until Tuesday to accept or reject the waiver claim.
If he rejects it, he is a free agent and can talk to all teams.


Tradition Falls as Princeton Club Selects First Women in 111 Years
LEAD: A 111-year tradition will end on Friday as the Ivy Club, an eating club for Princeton University upperclassmen, admits women for the first time.


Can De Klerk Deliver?
LEAD: Some American opponents of apartheid have criticized President Bush for giving such a warm welcome to President F. W. de Klerk of South Africa.
Praise is a mistake, they argue, when the basic laws of apartheid are still in place and the hope of an early South African transition to democracy is clouded by violence.


Pact Is Extended
LEAD: The Commonwealth Edison Company agreed this week to a one-year extension of its franchise to provide electricity to Chicago customers.
Edison's old contract will expire on Dec. 31, but a string of power failures have raised questions about the utility's reliability as it has been trying to negotiate its first new franchise with Chicago in 42 years.


2 Latin Nations Pressed on Oil
LEAD: The Bush Administration is urging Venezuela and Mexico to liberalize their investment laws to permit foreign oil companies to expand petroleum production there.


Review/Music;   For a Change, 2 Barber Pieces on a Program
LEAD: On the evening of Jan. 23, 1981, a listener aware of Samuel Barber's serious illness turned on a New York classical radio station to find the composer's Adagio for Strings immediately followed by ''Knoxville: Summer of 1915.'' At a time when classical stations programmed conservatively yet far more meaningfully than today, such a concentrated dose of a contemporary American composer not named Copland or Bernstein could signify only one thing:


Righetti's Saves Mark May Be His Exit Line
LEAD: Dave Righetti peeled off his jersey and the sweatshirt beneath it after the game against the Orioles Wednesday at Yankee Stadium.
He tossed the clothes to the floor and proceeded to peel off names from Yankee history.


On Stage
LEAD:
The Original 'Carnal Knowledge'


Boy Shot and Killed in the Bronx
LEAD: A 13-year-old boy was shot and killed in a Bronx apartment yesterday morning when a gun being handed around among friends fired, apparently by accident, the police said.


4 Performance Artists Sue National Arts Endowment
LEAD: Four performance artists whose requests for grants from the National Endowment for the Arts were denied in June filed a lawsuit against the agency today in Federal District Court here, charging that the action violated their First Amendment rights and demanding that it be overturned.


Grogan Seems Unlikely to Face Jets
LEAD: The prospect of Steve Grogan's making his 20th career start against the Jets on Sunday grew slimmer today when the status of the 37-year-old New England Patriots quarterback was downgraded from probable to questionable because of a neck injury that kept him out of last Sunday's game.


Gorbachev Orders Local Governments to Stop Withholding Goods
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev invoked his new emergency powers today to bolster the centrally planned economy through next year, ordering insurgent republics and local governments to stop disrupting the Kremlin's plan for the delivery of vital consumer goods.


U.S. Urged to Revitalize Work on Nuclear Fusion
LEAD: A Federal panel urged the Government yesterday to revitalize its languishing effort to harness nuclear fusion, saying the budget of the chief fusion research program should double over the next six years.


McElligott to Start Agency in Minneapolis
LEAD: Tom McElligott has resigned as executive creative director of Chiat/ Day/Mojo in New York.
Jay Chiat, chairman and chief executive of the agency, said Mr.
McElligott was leaving to start an agency in Minneapolis.


Auctions
LEAD:
Southeast Asia and India


Mexico Eases Mining Curb on Foreigners
LEAD: In an effort to encourage the development of its large mineral resources, Mexico issued new regulations today that relax restrictions on foreign investment in mining and exploration.


Detroit Keeps Race
LEAD: With assurances from Mayor Coleman A. Young of Detroit that the racing surface through the city's streets would be improved, William Stokkan, chairman of CART, announced yesterday that the Valvoline Detroit Grand Prix had been restored to the 1991 competition schedule.
The event will be held June 14-16 as the sixth of the 17 Indy-car races on the 1991 schedule.


The Scooter Heads Across The Bridge
LEAD: Some very sad words were blurted over the television on Monday.
One of the Mets' broadcasters informed us that ''this is the Cubs' last home game of the season.''


Panel Backs Bill on Puerto Rico Vote
LEAD: Taking another step toward giving Puerto Rico the right to choose statehood, independence or a continuation of its commonwealth status, a House panel approved a bill today to authorize a vote next year.
The bill would also force Congress to decide within six months of the referendum whether to accept its results.


At Children's Summit, Tasting City's Delights
LEAD: The World Summit for Children at the United Nations, which is drawing a record number of world leaders to New York City this weekend, is being described by United Nations officials as all work and no play.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart yesterday showing the 10 most expensive colleges for 1990-91 misidentified the 10th-ranked entry.


Review/Film;   Neophyte Landlords and Their Worst Nightmare
LEAD: John Schlesinger's ''Pacific Heights'' taps into a previously unexplored subject, the source of so much excitement and so many conversational gambits within young urban professional circles.
It is, of course, real estate, and Mr.
Schlesinger has made what is perhaps the first eviction thriller.


Our Towns;   Board Won't Buy A Pig in a Co-op, Even if He's Cute
LEAD: After a long day in customer relations, Nick DiGiaimo is happy to get home to his quiet suburban street.
When he walks into his co-op apartment, the first thing he does is go upstairs to the bedroom and feed the pig. ''Hello, Fideau,'' he said, opening the cage, and the pig raced by, bounded downstairs and went right for the supper dish in the dining room.


New York Sets Stricter Rules On Emissions
LEAD: New York State yesterday adopted new pollution rules for cars and light trucks that put it on a par with California, which has the tightest standards in the nation.


Hewlett-Packard In China Venture
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company entered a joint development agreement to build computer work stations in China.
The joint venture will assemble and market Hewlett-Packard's newest line of work stations, the HP Apollo 9000 Series 400, for the Chinese domestic market.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Atochem North America Inc., Philadelphia, a chemical manufacturing subsidiary of Atochem S.A., Paris, named F. H. Lauchert vice president of marketing and sales of its organic chemicals division.


Union Pacific Unit To Buy Gas Sites
LEAD: Union Pacific Resources, a unit of the Union Pacific Corporation, said it had reached an agreement with the Oryx Energy Company to buy producing natural gas properties in two fields for a total price of about $109 million.
The properties are in East Texas and southern Wyoming.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Parking: Alternate side rules will be suspended Saturday for Yom Kippur.


Darling and Ojeda, Forgotten Men, Leads Mets
LEAD: One more time, step by step, the Mets kept pace in the homestretch tonight with the Pittsburgh Pirates, and they did it with another bravura performance of pitching: Ron Darling and Bob Ojeda, the forgotten men of 1990, came out of the bullpen and played the lead roles in pitching the Mets past the Montreal


Britain and Iran Announce Renewal of Ties Broken Over Rushdie Affair
LEAD: Britain and Iran announced today that they were resuming diplomatic relations, after the British Government indicated that it was satisfied that Teheran's leaders would no longer encourage Muslims to kill the British writer Salman Rushdie.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article by The Associated Press in some copies yesterday about an Iraqi Government warning about harboring foreigners in diplomatic missions misstated its scope.
The warning applied to anyone hiding a foreigner in Iraq or Kuwait; it was not limited to the United States Embassy in Kuwait.


Washington at Work;   Veteran of Rights and Poverty Wars Tastes Bitter Fruit of Many Battles
LEAD: When the Civil Rights Act of 1990 was proposed in Congress, its backers fervently hoped for a Rose Garden signing ceremony, as a triumphant cap for the long career of Representative Augustus F. Hawkins.


Offering by Massachusetts Has Maximum Yield of 8%
LEAD: The Commonwealth of Massachusetts, whose fiscal stability is under siege from a weakening economy, various legal challenges and a tax-cut proposal to be voted on in November, came to market yesterday with a $1.3 billion offering of fixed- and variable-rate securities through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital


Rewording the Word
LEAD: A new Bible translation, using contemporary language and eliminating many male-centered terms, was introduced yesterday for use in the nation's major Protestant churches.
Some comparative passages appear below; an article is on page A10.
THE OLD (1952)
Matthew 4:4
Man does not live by bread alone.


G.O.P. Unit Accused of Illegal Fund Raising
LEAD: Democrats accused the Republican Party today of running another illegal fund-raising scheme to funnel $11 million to G.O.P.
Senate candidates.


Chaplain's Medicine
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lawyers Say Officers Ignore Order on Bystanders
LEAD: Civil liberties lawyers charged yesterday that the New York City Police Department was violating a 13-year-old Federal court order that generally bars police officers from arresting bystanders who criticize them.


Cockroaches Dumped in Court
LEAD: A woman has pleaded no contest to a contempt citation for dumping thousands of cockroaches in a courtroom to protest conditions at her rented house.
The woman, Maria Terwen, 67 years old, entered the plea Tuesday in Morgan County Court but was not fined.
Ms.
Terwen dumped the roaches on the Magistrate Margaret Gordon's desk at a hearing on a complaint by Ms.


Jury-Duty Fear Discourages Voter Registration
LEAD: To the Editor:


Books of The Times;   An Ensemble Piece on Hospital Life
LEAD:
Health and Happiness
By Diane Johnson
260 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Bankers Call for Rescue Of World Trade Talks
LEAD: A conference of more than 150 nations closed here today with a call to rescue the Uruguay Round, the floundering multinational effort to break through global trade barriers.


Review/Film;   Killer Alien In Search Of Hormones
LEAD: What is the murder weapon of choice for drug dealers from outer space?
A killer CD, of course.
A short way into ''I Come in Peace,'' a hulking man with flowing blond hair and milky-white contact lenses throws a specially programmed compact disk into the air like a lethal Frisbee.
As it whizzes through the air, it slices the necks of several merely human drug dealers.


Army Brass


Bank of Boston Is Planning To Cut Jobs and Dividend
LEAD: The Bank of Boston Corporation announced cuts in its stock dividend and work force yesterday in the face of a deteriorating economy and a loss of $200 million to $250 million in its present quarter.


Shareholder Sues Ask Computer
LEAD: ASK Computer Systems Inc. said a lawsuit had been filed against the company in Delaware by James P. Lennane, a holder of about 9.7 percent of ASK's outstanding shares.
The suit seeks to block the proposed sale of $60 million in ASK common stock to the EDS Corporation and the Hewlett-Packard Company without shareholder approval, as well as the proposed acquisition by ASK of the Ingres


Treasury Bonds Soar in Late Rally
LEAD: A late rally sent prices of Treasury bonds soaring yesterday after a further flight from stocks had lifted prices of the shorter maturities earlier in the session.


Giants' Kicking Game Falls Into Disarray
LEAD: Raul Allegre may kick for the Giants on Sunday.
Or Matt Bahr may.
Or Allegre may kick field goals and conversions, leaving Sean Landeta or Gary Reasons to kick off.
Or Allegre and Bahr may share the work.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the price of crude oil misstated the Monday closing price of the New York Mercantile Exchange's contract for November delivery.
It was $38.25 a barrel, a record that was then broken by Wednesday's closing price of $38.67.


Oil Prices Up Despite Bush Move
LEAD: Oil prices plowed stubbornly ahead yesterday despite President Bush's effort to tame them by announcing a test withdrawal from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.


Quebec Mohawks' Standoff With Soldiers Ends in Melee
LEAD: After 11 weeks of armed confrontation near the resort town of Oka, Quebec, the standoff between Government soldiers and a group of Mohawk Indians ended in a melee on Wednesday night.


Braggs's 2-Run Homer Sends Reds' Lead to 5
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds reduced their magic number for winning the National League West to two games tonight by beating the Atlanta Braves, 4-2, on a two-run homer by Glenn Braggs.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in some copies yesterday, listing proposals for political reform in California, was published in error.


Baker-Shevardnadze Talks Gain on Europe Arms Pact
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union took a major step today toward a treaty to cut conventional forces in Europe, clearing away two of the three remaining stumbling blocks, American officials said.


Leak at Massachusetts A-Plant
LEAD: The nation's oldest nuclear power plant was shut down for repairs today by a small leak in the main cooling system, officials said.
Michael Markley, a resident inspector for the Federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission, said there was no release of radiation at the 30-year-old Yankee Rowe plant, which is operated by the Yankee Atomic Electric Company.


Peter J. Ottley, 82, Head of Local In the Hotels and Hospital Union
LEAD: Peter J. Ottley, a former elevator operator who became president of Local 144 of the Hotels, Hospitals, Nursing Home and Allied Services Union for 37 years, representing tens of thousands of workers, died on Wednesday at La Guardia Hospital in Queens.
He was 82 years old and lived in St.
Albans, Queens.


Senate Vote on S.E.C. Bill
LEAD: The Senate approved a measure today to stengthen the powers of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The bill now moves to the House, where passage is expected.


Son Joins His Father At the Top of Figgie
LEAD: Harry E. Figgie 3d, who has been pursuing dual careers as an orthopedist and a corporate executive, has decided on the business world and will join his father at Figgie International Inc. as vice chairman of technology and strategic planning.


Pop Radio Shares Decline by 33.9%
LEAD: Shares of the Pop Radio Corporation lost 33.9 percent of their value in over-the-counter trading today after the Heritage Media Corporation disclosed that it might not complete its $20.50-a-share offer for the New York-based customized music service.
Pop Radio's stock fell $5.125, to $10.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: A lawyer for MARLON BRANDO has been drumming up interest in his autobiography, but so far, there has been no deal.
BELINDA FRIXOU, a London lawyer, was quoted in The Los Angeles Times as saying that Mr.
Brando was writing and that many New York publishers were clamoring for the result.


Unisys to Halt Common Stock Dividend
LEAD: The Unisys Corporation said yesterday that it would suspend its quarterly dividend on its common shares.
The dividend on the company's preferred shares would remain intact.


Arthur G. Poor Jr., Executive, 65
LEAD: Arthur G. Poor Jr., a textile industry executive, died on Friday at his home in Upper Montclair, N.J.
He was 65 years old and died of lung cancer, his son, Arthur 3d, said.


Social Security: A Tinderbox Both Parties Handle Gingerly
LEAD: There are few subjects more perilous for politicians, particularly in an election year, than the suggestion that they might be tampering with Social Security.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Modernizing Traditions


Hair Loss in Chemotherapy Prevented in Laboratory Rats
LEAD: Researchers studying laboratory rats have been able to prevent hair loss caused by chemotherapy, a finding that could eventually lead to drugs to help cancer patients.


Postal Service Felt Wary of Bus Proposal
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ben Gradus Film Producer, 72
LEAD: Ben Gradus, a film producer who worked closely with Harry S. Truman to produce 26 half-hour programs recalling major events in the President's life, died Tuesday at Greater Northern Weschester Hospital in Mt.
Kisco, N.Y.
He was 72 years old and lived in Pound Ridge, N.Y.


Across the Land, Americans Express Wide Support for Reunited Germany
LEAD: For a number of Americans who have been involved with German issues over many years, the formal establishment of a single German state on Oct. 3 is perceived largely as a good thing, although among them are some who acknowledge occasional twinges of unease.


Red Sox Set Up Showdown by Tying Jays for First
LEAD: The Boston Red Sox are back.
They are back in a tie for first place with Toronto and will be back in Boston on Friday night for a showdown with the Blue Jays.


Putting the Oil Reserve to the Test
LEAD: As the Government prepares to sell oil from the nation's emergency petroleum reserve for only the second time, experts across the industry agree that the extra oil should prevent any shortages even if there is a prolonged loss of imports from Iraq and Kuwait.


Market Place;   After Eight Years, the Bear Is Back
LEAD: At first, as the stock market tumbled in early August, the denizens of Wall Street talked of ''an air pocket'' or ''a correction,'' reminding one another that the market had quickly recovered after even sharper declines in 1987 and 1989.


The Unruly Ads That Made an Art Of Smart Alecky
LEAD: TELEVISION viewers had never seen a commercial quite like it - a long line of drably dressed men march through a translucent tube and then seat themselves, mute and motionless, before a giant video screen showing the sinister face of a man indoctrinating them: ''We have one whim, one resolve, one cause.


U.S. Pledges a Vigorous Response If Iraq Attacks Israel, Officials Say
LEAD: United States officials have told Israel and its supporters in recent days that any Iraqi attack on Israel would set off a vigorous American response.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
FRIDAY
HEADLINERS


Poddubny's Right Knee Passes Another Test
LEAD: Walt Poddubny's right knee passed an important test tonight in the Devils' 3-2 exhibition victory over the Rangers.
But Poddubny's fate has not been determined.


Temporary Davis Bid For UAL
LEAD: The long and tumultuous struggle for control of UAL Inc. took a new and surprising turn today when Marvin Davis, the Los Angeles-based billionaire, said he would buy the airline temporarily, then turn it over in two years to the employee group that is attempting a buyout of the carrier.


Anticipation, Not Actuality, Holds Sway Over Oil Prices
LEAD: Brushing aside President Bush's decision on Wednesday to tap the Stategic Petroleum Reserve as a test, traders pushed oil prices up to near $40 a barrel yesterday as worries about the conflict in the Middle East continued to dominate the markets.
But so far, the run-up, which has more than doubled oil prices since the beginning of summer, reflects expectations, not reality.


Jury Selected in Ohio Obscenity Trial
LEAD: Lawyers in the Mapplethorpe obscenity trial completed a delicate chess game of jury selection today after four days of painstaking interrogation, paving the way for opening statements on Friday.


Volvo Stock Swap
LEAD: The Government gave its final approval to a deal between the Swedish car maker Volvo and Renault, the French state-owned automotive concern.
Volvo and Renault will exchange 45 percent of the shares in their truck and bus operations and exchange 25 percent of stock in their car divisions, a news release from Volvo said.


Why It Doesn't Pay U.S. to Twist Japan's Arm
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Television;   From Many Nations, a Single Force
LEAD: ''Blue Helmets: The Story of United Nations Peacekeeping,'' a 90-minute documentary tonight at 9 on Channel 13, was made before the current show of force in the Persian Gulf, but it demonstrates how untypical the latest United Nations effort is.
In the past, the multi-national contingents that have found themselves in trouble spots like Cyprus and


Burton Signs With Heat
LEAD: Willie Burton, the Miami Heat's top draft pick, signed a five-year contract yesterday.
The 6-6 Burton, a guard-forward from Minnesota, was the ninth player taken in the draft.
Financial terms of his contract were undisclosed, but the deal's worth was estimated at $6 million and a bonus of up to $1.5 million.


SENATE COMMITTEE ENDORSES SOUTER
LEAD: Setting the stage for confirmation of President Bush's first nominee to the Supreme Court, the Senate Judiciary Committee today overwhelmingly endorsed the nomination of Judge David H. Souter as an Associate Justice.


Burmese Said to Harass Embassies
LEAD: The Burmese Government is harassing foreign diplomats by sending soldiers into the compounds of Western embassies and by rounding up the missions' Burmese employees for interrogation, a diplomat said today.


WQXR-AM and FM To Offer Same Shows
LEAD: On Monday WQXR, which in 1988 began broadcasting different programming on its AM (1560) and FM (96.3) stations from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M., will return to a policy of presenting the same programs on both stations all day.


National Gains on Capital Gains
LEAD: After weeks of bickering about cutting the capital gains tax, and with Monday's deadline looming, budget negotiators appear within reach of a compromise.
And not just any compromise.
This may be one case in which political posturing is about to produce an economic pot of gold.


Kansas City Journal;   An Airport That Tries To Be Kind To Users
LEAD: Never mind that it's a 35-minute drive from downtown in what passes for the rush hour here.
Never mind that it has been named Kansas City International Airport from the beginning, but has yet to provide international air service.


Paul Grotz, Architect and Editor, 88
LEAD: Paul Grotz, an architect and former art director and managing editor of the magazine Architectural Forum, died on Sept. 15 at Cape Cod Hospital in Hyannis, Mass.
He was 88 years old and lived in Wellfleet, Mass.
He died of a stroke, his son, Stefan, said.
Mr.
Grotz was educated in Stuttgart, Germany, and received his advanced training at the University of Munich.


Correction
LEAD: An article yesterday about New York City's preparations for the World Summit for Children at the United Nations referred incorrectly in some copies to traffic arrangements for midtown Manhattan tomorrow through Monday.
Although motorists are advised to avoid midtown, the area from 42d to 57th Street from First to Eighth Avenue will generally remain open to traffic.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amdura Corp., Denver, said a bankruptcy court had approved the sale of certain assets of its subsidiary, the Amdura National Distributing Co., to the United Hardware Distributing Co., Plymouth, Minn.
The purchase price will depend on asset values as of the date of closing.


Reviews/Music;   Carnegie At 100: Big Night, Big Names
LEAD: It was easy to tell that something important was going on at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday evening.
Outside, a searchlight's beams stabbed through the skies and bounced off buildings while a black-tie audience slowly pushed its way into the historic hall's gridlocked lobby.
Inside, a couple of names in the program book all but settled any question as to the event's significance: Itzhak Perlman and Arturo Toscanini.


De Klerk's Trip Lifts His People's Hopes
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk's trip to the United States this week has encouraged South African whites to believe that his policies may be breaking their country out of the international isolation that came about as a result of apartheid.


For Want of Recognition, Chief Justice Is Ousted
LEAD: The chief justice of Washington State, a widely respected judge who has drawn little controversy in his six years in the post, was thrown off the bench last week by voters who chose instead a 39-year-old lawyer who has never been an elected judge and who did not campaign.


Lindsay Alumni Turned To Public Interest Law
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Tale of the Prodigal Son As Recast by a Punk Icon
LEAD: The name Nick Cave may not be a household word, but the singer and songwriter is the only former punk icon known to have written a musical version of the prodigal-son parable from the Bible, set to melodies and string arrangements in the style of Burt Bacharach's.
Along with his backing group the Bad Seeds, Mr.


Deposit Fund Condition Is Worsening
LEAD: The condition of the fund that insures deposits at banks appeared to be worsening, as regulators today revised their estimates of its losses for the year by 50 percent, to more than $3 billion.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Le Comptoir


Chief of Spies at C.I.A. To Retire at Year's End
LEAD: Richard F. Stolz, a former Central Intelligence Agency officer who was called from retirement to manage the C.I.A.'s undercover operations after the Iran-contra affair, will retire at year's end, the agency said today.


At the Movies
LEAD:
'Paradiso' Story


Bush Son Disputes Accusers; Denies S.&amp; L. Wrongdoing
LEAD: A combative Neil Bush today finally confronted his Federal accusers, and he acknowledged that he stood to gain from financial transactions he had supported between his business partners and the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association.


Harold A. Price, 97, Ex-Judge in New Jersey
LEAD: Harold A. Price, a judge of the New Jersey Superior Court from 1956 to 1963, died on Wednesday at the Kingswood Manor nursing home in Kansas City, Mo., where he had lived for the last two years.
He was 97 years old and had previously lived in Morristown, N.J.


Homestake Case Settled
LEAD: T. Boone Pickens, the Texas oilman and corporate raider, and his company, Mesa Limited Partnership, settled a Federal suit today that contended they issued a false and misleading news release in connection with an unsuccessful takeover attempt of the Homestake Mining Company in February 1988.
As part of the settlement, Mr.


Howard M. Grossman, Lawyer, 68
LEAD: Howard M. Grossman, a lawyer and Democratic leader in Westchester County, died on Tuesday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 68 years old and lived in Hartsdale, N.Y.


Connecticut Pocketbooks Expected to Shape Race
LEAD: When people here go to vote for a new governor in November, local nightmares like the Alamo are likely to follow them right into the booth.
The Alamo is what residents call the pink Southwestern-motif shopping center on Route 111 that belly-flopped in the Northeast's real-estate downturn.
It has sat empty, apparently with no survivors, for the last 18 months.


Clara Beyer, 98, Dies; Key New Deal Official
LEAD: Clara Beyer, an influential New Deal administrator who served as a confidential aide to Frances Perkins during her 12 years as Secretary of Labor, died Tuesday at her home in Washington.
She was 98 years old.


Directors Retiring At Campbell Soup
LEAD: The Campbell Soup Company said that two directors are retiring, including Dorrance H. Hamilton, a major shareholder who leads a faction favoring the sale of Campbell but who will be succeeded by someone who supports her views.
Mrs.
Hamilton, 62, will become a director emeritus on Monday.
She leads a Dorrance family faction that owns about 18 percent of Campbell.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: A collection of letters sent to MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV, along with an introduction by him, is being published in Britain by Canongate Publishing and has been turned into a television show, both to appear in November.
More than half the 260 letters are from Americans, some famous, most not.


Frank P. Sheridan, Buyer, 88
LEAD: Frank P. Sheridan, an antiques and imported furniture buyer for Lord &amp; Taylor in Manhattan for more than 30 years, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 88 years old.


Protest Continues at University in Capital


Judge Fines USX $4.1 Million in Conspiracy Case
LEAD: A Federal District judge here levied the maximum possible fine on the USX Corporation today and gave prison terms to two top union officials who had been found guilty of conspiring with the company to obtain lucrative pensions in exchange for granting concessions in labor negotiations.


Fuhr Is Suspended By N.H.L. for a Year
LEAD: Calling his conduct dishonorable and against the welfare of the league, John Ziegler, the president of the National Hockey League, yesterday suspended the Edmonton goaltender Grant Fuhr for a year for using illegal drugs.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about a defense document in the criminal case against Michael R. Milken described its contents incorrectly in some editions.
The document cited actions by Mr.
Milken that were part of a criminal conspiracy, but it did not specify what laws they might have violated.


Sentencing of Milken Is Delayed by Judge
LEAD: A Federal District Judge postponed the sentencing of Michael R. Milken yesterday to allow for a possible hearing on Government allegations of crimes the former financier has said he did not commit.


Georgia-Pacific In Asset Sale
LEAD: Six months after taking on heavy debt in a $3.8 billion hostile takeover of one of its biggest rivals, the Georgia-Pacific Corporation said yesterday that it was selling some assets in a deal worth $740 million.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The fate of a people, of a nation, is in your hands.
Expecting you to act in good conscience, we are confident that the only measure that will win your endorsement is support for our legitimate right to liberate our land.''
- Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah, the Emir of Kuwait, at the United Nations.


Seymour H. Knox Is Dead at 92; Buffalo Banker Was Art Patron
LEAD: Seymour H. Knox, a banker, internationally known art patron and first chairman of the New York State Council on the Arts, died yesterday at his home in Buffalo.
He was 92 years old.


Results Plus
LEAD:
TENNIS
McEnroe Reaches Quarterfinals
John McEnroe moved to the quarterfinals of the Swiss Indoors tournament in Basel yesterday with a 6-1, 6-2 victory over Niclas Kulti.
In beating the 19-year-old Swede, the No. 1 junior player in the world last year, McEnroe had eight aces in the match, which lasted 1 hour 18 minutes.


Toys 'R' Us Japan
LEAD: Toys ''R'' Us Japan Ltd. said it plans to open a sixth Japanese store in October 1991, despite fierce opposition from local toy retailers.
Since January, the company has announced plans to open five outlets in Japan in the next three years, setting off protests from local merchants and putting the issue of large stores on the agenda of United States-Japan trade negotiations.


New Bible: 'Thee' Goes Way of All Flesh
LEAD: A new translation of the Bible that uses contemporary language and eliminates many male-centered terms and all the archaic thees and thous was officially introduced yesterday for use in the nation's major Protestant churches.


Dinkins Seeks 25% Reduction In 10-Year Plan
LEAD: Squeezed between ambitious plans to build schools, modernize hospitals and improve highways and the fiscal constraints of a faltering economy, Mayor David N. Dinkins has called for a 25 percent cut in the 10-year capital spending plan now being drawn up.


Review/Art;   Ray Parker's Piece of the Abstract Puzzle
LEAD: Ray Parker had talent.
His high-pitched, low-key abstract paintings are pleasurable and occasionally eye-opening.
He was daring in his color, inventive (although not always successful) in his experiments with line, and capable of easy and expansive surfaces that surely bear the memory of the big spaces of South


Iran-Contra Chief Says Inquiry May End Soon
LEAD: Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent prosecutor in the Iran-contra affair, said tonight that he was likely to conclude his investigation by next spring if no new indictments were returned.


Stocks Fall As Oil Sale Impact Fades
LEAD: President Bush's plan to sell a token five million barrels, or less than a day's supply, from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve sent oil prices lower and stock prices higher yesterday -but only briefly.
Oil prices quickly soared and stocks plunged.


On Offense, Steelers Decline With Walton
LEAD: The Pittsburgh Steelers, despite a horrenduous start and the league's worst-ranked offense, finished 9-7 last season and won a first-round playoff game.
Chuck Noll, the Steelers' head coach, went after Joe Walton, the dismissed head coach of the Jets, as a missing link, hoping Walton's offensive ingenuity would make the road easier and longer for


CHRONICLE
LEAD: In Paris, the actor ALAIN DELON has revealed himself as a buyer of Modigliani's ''La Belle Epiciere,'' for which he paid a record $11.5 million for last March.
But to finance his half of the painting, which he bought with FRANCIS BOUYGUES, a construction tycoon, he will put up 32 paintings from his own art collection to be auctioned in Paris on Nov.


New Jersey Court Bars Tax Plan Referendums
LEAD: The State Supreme Court decided today that nonbinding referendums on Gov.
Jim Florio's $2.8 billion tax plan cannot appear on election ballots in five counties.


Promoting New York's Race Tracks
LEAD: BACKER SPIELVOGEL BATES has created one of its most extensive integrated advertising and marketing campaigns for the New York Racing Association to promote its race tracks and the Breeders' Cup, the nation's richest annual horse racing event.


Investigator To Look Into Harassment
LEAD: The National Football League commissioner said yesterday that he would appoint a special counsel to investigate allegations of sexual harassment of a female reporter for The Boston Herald by a group of New England Patriot players.


Gold Joins the Price Slide Of Other Precious Metals
LEAD: Gold prices reversed a three-day trend and fell yesterday, despite modest gains in crude oil prices, as speculators seemed to put aside fears over the Middle East crisis.


Rockets Obtain Smith
LEAD: The Houston Rockets obtained the 6-foot-3-inch guard Kenny Smith from the Atlanta Hawks yesterday in a trade involving three other players.
Also going to Houston was Roy Marble, the forward who was suspended for 30 games last season for drug abuse.
The Hawks acquired John Lucas, a 36-year-old guard, and Tim McCormick, a forward who missed most of last season because of two knee operations.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-9


The Price for Silence
LEAD: Here's a neat little problem in ethics, straight from the classroom of the United Nations.


Barge Founders Off S.I., Spilling No. 6 Fuel Oil
LEAD: A tank barge operating without a valid permit sank in the Kill van Kull yesterday morning, spilling as much as 50,000 gallons of heavy fuel oil, Coast Guard officials said.


The Green Movement Reaches the Law Office as Firms Give Up Yellow Legal Pads.
LEAD: Lawyer, spare that tree!


Critic's Choice
LEAD: Prodigies almost always provoke a set of conflicting responses in audiences that hear them for the first time.
There is the inevitable amazement at their facility.
But there is also the suspicion that such young musicians cannot have delved far beneath the music's surface, and the fear that they might burn themselves out in public performance before they develop the maturity to undertake deeper explorations.


Keating Files New Bail Plea
LEAD: Charles H. Keating Jr., the jailed savings and loan association executive, has appealed to the State Supreme Court for a reduction in his $5 million bail.


Reviews/Film Festival;   Oh, to Banish Temptation From Life
LEAD: The rapturous visual style of Paolo and Vittorio Taviani is brought to bear, in the brothers' new ''Night Sun,'' upon an extremely unlikely subject.
It is ''Father Sergius,'' Tolstoy's posthumously published story of a handsome, tormented aristocrat driven to seek spiritual fulfillment through perfect self-denial.


New York State Adopts Tough Pollution Rules
LEAD: New York State yesterday adopted new pollution rules for cars and light trucks that put it on a par with California, which has the tightest standards in the nation.


Ailing Strawberry Feels the Pressure
LEAD: From the time the Mets made Darryl Strawberry the first draft choice in the nation a decade ago this past June, the demands for greatness have consistently attached the concept of pressure to his baseball career.


Review/Music;   After the Hype, an Elaborate High-Tech Show for the Ninja Turtles Set
LEAD: After the comic books, cartoons, feature film and video game - not to mention the trademarked dolls, key chains, cookies, cereal, pork rinds, towels, socks and toy weapons - it was just about inevitable that the Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles would expand their product line with a pop album and live shows.


16 Convicted in Killing Of Aquino's Husband
LEAD: A Philippine court today convicted 16 people of murdering President Corazon C. Aquino's husband at the Manila airport and acquitted 20 others in the 1983 slaying.


Social Democrats End A Division of 44 Years
LEAD: Forty-four years after Germany's Social Democrats were split by the forced merger of the East German part of the party with the Communists, a national congress of the party today declared the restoration of the movement's unity.


Ex-Algeria Chief Returns From Exile Backing Iraq
LEAD: Former President Ahmed Ben Bella of Algeria ended a decade of exile today, returning home to a tumultuous welcome by about 50,000 Algerians, whom he urged in a speech to support Iraq's cause in the Persian Gulf crisis.


Giants Put Allegre on Injured Reserve
LEAD: The Giants today placed their place-kicker, Raul Allegre, on injured reserve with a strained right groin muscle and signed the veteran Matt Bahr as his replacement for Sunday's game here against the Dallas Cowboys.


News Summary
LEAD: International
2-7
Kuwait's ''systematic destruction'' under Iraqi occupation is shortening the time the United States can wait for economic sanctions to drive President Saddam Hussein's army out, President Bush's national security adviser said.
Page 1
Iraq is said to be looting Kuwait of its identity


Leading Indicators In Big Fall
LEAD: The Government index designed to predict turns in the economy dropped 1.2 percent in August, the biggest fall since just after the 1987 stock market crash, the Commerce Department reported today.


Help for Forgetful Bank-Card Holders
LEAD: CHEMICAL BANK doesn't want its customers to take their money and run, not without their automated teller card and receipt.
So now, said Ken Herz, a Chemical Bank spokesman, the bank is testing a change in the way cash is dispensed from its 359 New York City money machines.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   7- and 15-Month CD's
LEAD:
To attract certificate-of-deposit money during the heavy renewal periods of April and October, some banks are heavily promoting their odd-term certificates, like 7 or 15 months, along with the standard maturities of 6, 12, 24, 30 and 60 months.
The premise is that the longer the maturity, the greater the interest earned.


Plan Limiting Northwest Logging Is Adopted
LEAD: The Forest Service today adopted a plan that would save the northern spotted owl but result in greater reductions in logging than the White House recommended last week.


Hudson River Park Plan Draws Critics
LEAD: As the Hudson River spills past 59th Street and down to the Battery, it is separated from the city by a series of industrial complexes devoted to garbage and electrical power, surrounded by fences festooned with barbed tape and no-trespassing signs.


After a 51-Year Break, Albania Seeks Diplomatic Ties With U.S.
LEAD: The leadership of Albania, one of the last hard-line Communist Governments, has concluded a series of talks with the United States to establish diplomatic relations after a break of 51 years, Albania's chief delegate to the United Nations said today.


Oil Problem Termed 'Manageable'
LEAD: The International Energy Agency said today that while the global oil-supply situation ''is not comfortable,'' it is ''manageable'' enough that there is no need to call on the agency's 21 members to tap their strategic petroleum reserves.
But the agency did say its members should be ready to draw on reserves quickly in an emergency.


Government in Beirut Imposes Siege on Aoun
LEAD: The pro-Syrian Government of President Elias Hrawi today imposed a siege around areas controlled by Gen.
Michel Aoun to force the defiant general to relinquish power in Christian East Beirut.


Airbus Awarded Swissair Contract
LEAD: The Swiss national airline, Swissair, chose the European aircraft maker Airbus Industrie over the McDonnell Douglas Corporation to provide 26 new airliners in an order worth at least 2.3 billion Swiss francs (about $1.8 billion).
The airline, which took options on an additional 26 aircraft, said it would buy seven 133-seat Airbus A320's and 19 170-seat A321's.


Jury Hears Passionate Arguments As Obscenity Trial Opens in Ohio


Grenade Attack in Djibouti
LEAD: Assailants tossed three grenades into a crowded cafe, killing the 9-year-old son of a French soldier and injuring 17 other people, officials said today.
No one claimed responsibility for the attack Thursday night in Djibouti, a small country on the Red Sea that is used as a staging area for French forces sent to the Persian Gulf region.


Earnings Estimates For Teradata Cut
LEAD: Analysts at Prudential-Bache and Salomon Brothers lowered their earnings estimates for the Teradata Corporation after the company said Thursday that it expects a first-quarter loss of about 40 to 50 cents a share.
The company, a supplier of data base computer systems, had earnings of 14 cents a share in last year's first quarter.


Managua Journal;   Uniting the Germanys, in a Latin American Setting
LEAD: If there is an important political upheaval in the world, you can probably find out about it by checking the stack of work in Georg Boomgaarden's in-basket.


Rome Says Goodbye to Moravia With a Quiet but Loving Tribute
LEAD: Rome bade a dry-eyed farewell today to its celebrated native son Alberto Moravia, who remained faithful to his city in life, even if his writings did not always treat it like a lady.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Choosing a Wood Stove
LEAD: Rising fuel costs and concern over the future of oil supplies from the Middle East have aroused renewed interest in wood stoves.


Fran Smith, Theater Director, 69
LEAD: Fran Smith, director of the Westbury (L.I.) Players, an amateur theater group, for 17 years, died on Wednesday at Winthrop University Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
She was 69 years old and lived in Westbury.


Whiteners: New Ways To Brighten A Smile
LEAD: Americans are spending more and more money these days on cosmetic whiteners that they hope will brighten their teeth and improve their smiles.


I.R.A. Plants Bomb in London
LEAD: The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility today for planting a bomb made of plastic explosive at a London conference on terrorism.
The I.R.A., which is fighting to oust Britain from Northern Ireland, said in a statement in Dublin that the incident showed its ability to ''strike at will.'' The four-pound Semtex device, which would have devastated the hall, was discovered and defused only minutes before the conference opened on Thursday.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Who wants to vote for Medicare cuts?
Who wants to vote for Social Security cuts?
Who wants to vote for a gasoline tax?''
- Senator Trent Lott, Republican of Mississippi. [12:1.]


Review/Television;   Love, Treason and Blackmail in Wartime Britain
LEAD: ''Masterpiece Theater'' on public television will begin its 20th season tomorrow - at 9 P.M. on Channel 13 and at 10 P.M. on Channel 49 - with a production that, given its stellar list of credits, fails to fully live up to its promise.


Thomas A. Flinn, Professor, 65
LEAD: Dr.
Thomas A. Flinn, a professor of political science at Cleveland State University for 20 years, died Wednesday at Lakeside Hospital of University Hospitals in Cleveland.
He was 65 years old and lived in Cleveland.


Editorial Notebook;   America's Last Robot?
LEAD: Cincinnati Milacron, the last major American maker of heavy robots, is selling its business to a Swiss company.
That will leave most of the U.S. robot market in the hands of foreigners.
Does it matter that yet another high-tech, American-grown industry is now dominated by foreigners, mostly Japan?


Britain Clears 5 Oil Concerns
LEAD: The British Office of Fair Trading cleared five oil companies today of fixing gasoline pump prices in the face of rising oil prices that followed Iraq's invasion of Kuwait last month.
The office's director general, Gordon Borrie, said the industry's reaction to events in the Persian Gulf followed a ''pattern one would expect in a competitive market.


Fire Strikes California Refinery


Review/Film Festival;   Nature's Splendor and Aphorisms in Godard's Latest
LEAD: ''Nouvelle Vague,'' a phrase that evokes the renaissance of the French cinema in the 1960's, is a good title rather badly used for Jean-Luc Godard's featherweight new film.


BAT Industries
LEAD: BAT Industries P.L.C., the British tobacco and financial services conglomerate, said its Canadian affiliate Imasco Ltd. of Canada would buy the First Federal Savings and Loan Association of Rochester for $150 million.
Imasco's Canada Trust unit is making the purchase.
First Federal has $5.6 billion in assets and 65 offices throughout New York State.


Patents;   New Type of Pince-Nez For Use by Athletes
LEAD: Pince-nez for athletes?
Walter D. Somerville, an inventor in Carmel, Calif., has patented a new version of the antiquarian eyeglasses that are attached by pinching the frame to the bridge of the nose.


Your Money;   Ways to Trim Tax Liabilities
LEAD: Savvy taxpayers will use the last three months of the year to pare their tax liabilities, while strengthening their personal finances.
And there are a number of ways to do this, regardless of uncertainty over what Congress may do on the tax front.


Review/Theater;   Gay Couple Adopts A Baby
LEAD: ''Big, Fat and Ugly With a Mustache,'' a new play by Christopher Widney at the Perry Street Theater, has all the right ingredients for a television movie of the week with an option for a series.


From an Old Iraqi Battlefield, Warnings of New Bloodshed
LEAD: On a journey to Fao, the obliterated landscape resembles nothing so much as a nightmarish vision of hell.
It was here that 173,000 Iraqis and Iranians died in their recent war.


Evolution in Europe: One Germany;   New Germany or Not, in the East It's Same Old Teachers, Same Old Books
LEAD: When Communist rule was toppled last year, and the old order swept away, one of the most abrupt changes in this town of modest villas and vineyards centered on the small building where Elisabeth Aust's children attend elementary school.


City Hall No Longer City's
LEAD: The city of East St.
Louis, which is bankrupt, has had to give up its City Hall to a man who won a lawsuit against the city.


Delegates From World Are Doing The Town
LEAD: The vanguard of the largest gathering of foreign dignitaries ever to meet in New York converged on midtown Manhattan yesterday and, like so many tourists, fanned out to sample the city's dazzling cornucopia of sights, culture, food, celebrities and chaos.


World Bank and Other Agencies Pledge an Increase in Aid to Poor Children
LEAD: As more than 70 world leaders prepared to meet here on the plight of children, development agencies and banks have been promising to increase assistance to children in poor countries, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada said today.


More Police, Eventually
LEAD: Even if Mayor David N. Dinkins agrees next week, as expected, to hire thousands of new police officers for New York City, the process of recruiting and training them is so complex that the last of them would probably not be ready for duty on the streets for two years, with luck.


16 Sentenced to Life for Killing Aquino
LEAD: A Philippine court sentenced a general and 15 other soldiers to life imprisonment today for the slaying seven years ago of Benigno S. Aquino Jr., the nation's opposition leader, whose widow, Corazon, is now President.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JOHN V. KRUTILLA and ALLEN V. KNEESE, economists working in resource and environmental economics, won the Volvo Environment Prize for their work at Resources for the Future, a nonprofit Washington organization for research in environmental quality.
The two men have sought to identify and quantify the consequences of water, noise and solid-waste pollution, and to develop plans to manage such pollution.


LaFontaine Skips Trip
LEAD: The Islanders confirmed yesterday that Pat LaFontaine, the club's leading scorer for the last three seasons, did not accompany the team to California for the completion of its exhibition schedule.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about legislation to permit a referendum on Puerto Rico's political status misidentified the commonwealth's delegate to the United States House of Representatives.
He is Jaime B. Fuster.
Ron de Lugo is the Virgin Islands delegate.


Eleanor C. French Service
LEAD: A memorial service for Eleanor Clark French, a former New York City Commissioner to the United Nations and New York State Democratic Party official, will be held at 6 P.M.
Thursday in the Board of Estimate chamber at City Hall.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Thursday about California's consideration of stricter anti-pollution measures misidentified the road shown.
It was the San Diego Freeway.


500,000 Bicycles for Cubans
LEAD: Cuba will build 500,000 bicycles to help curb effects of a fuel shortage caused by a cutback in oil imports from the Soviet Union, the official Cuban press agency Prensa Latina said today.
The dispatch, monitored in Mexico City, said the first units would go on the market next year.
The agency quoted the newspaper Rebel Youth as saying Cuba would build five factories to make bicycle parts.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: DAVID SHILLING, one of Britain's maddest hatters, whose confections, often startling, are worn by stylish women at the Royal Ascot race meeting, is going on a United Nations mission to Ecuador in October to advise the Government there on strengthening its hat-making industry.


Doctor Fees Found Higher in U.S. Than in Canada
LEAD: Doctors in the United States charge more than twice as much as doctors in Canada for the same work, a study says, adding that this helps explain why this country's health care costs are dramatically higher than Canada's.


Prices of Securities Rise on Budget Hopes
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities continued to advance yesterday, largely on the belief that the Bush Administration and the Congress will hammer out a budget agreement this weekend.


Evolution in Europe;   Senate Takes Up Pact Cutting Role in Berlin
LEAD: The Senate Foreign Relations Committee took up the treaty today that will end the rights and responsibilities the United States acquired 45 years ago in Germany and Berlin as a victorious power in World War II.


How Long Do Smoke Detectors Last?
LEAD: Federal officials estimate that up to 85 percent of all dwellings in the United States have smoke detectors, but that as many as a third of them may not work.


John Ducas, 70, Dies; A Publicity Consultant
LEAD: John J. Ducas, a communications consultant with the Chase Manhattan Bank who in the 1950's and 60's was a principal adviser in the public relations program for the nation's first intercontinental ballistic missiles, died Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
Mr.
Ducas, 70 years old, died of a heart attack, said his son, Paul.


Liberia Cease-Fire Collapses As Battle Erupts in Monrovia
LEAD: Liberia's shaky cease-fire collapsed today when Government troops and rebels battled for several hours in this capital city.


Disaster Zone Is Urged After Soviet Nuclear Blast
LEAD: The Soviet republic of Kazakhstan asked the central Government today to declare an ecological disaster zone around the city of Ust-Kamenogorsk, saying that an explosion at a nuclear fuel plant there had spewed ''extremely harmful'' gas across inhabited areas.


An Odd Sort Of Underdog
LEAD: From the beginning, Pierre A. Rinfret's blustery and combative persona was well suited to his underdog campaign strategy against Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
As an underfinanced and unknown challenger, Mr.
Rinfret knew he would need the ''free media'' to bolster his name recognition, and a little outrageousness goes a long way in winning headlines.


Ethics Committee is Urged to Clear 2 of 5 in Savings Inquiry
LEAD: The special counsel to the Senate Ethics Committee has recommended that the panel clear two of the five Senators under investigation for their links to the savings and loan debacle, Congressional officials said today.


Brooktree Wins on Patent
LEAD: Advanced Micro Devices Inc. said today that a jury had ordered it to pay $25.6 million in damages stemming from an earlier finding that the company had infringed patents held by the Brooktree Corporation and that it intended to appeal the award.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 1990
LEAD:
The Economy


Economic Memo;   Quiet Moves at Bank Talks: A Reshaping of East Europe
LEAD: The Middle East crisis dominated the speeches and news conferences at the annual meeting this week of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
But away from the newsmakers, in hotel rooms outfitted with conference tables, Eastern Europe's emerging free market economies were quietly being shaped.


Polls Still Show Weicker Ahead In Connecticut
LEAD: With 39 days left in Connecticut's gubernatorial race, Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Greenwich, a Republican campaigning as an independent candidate, still holds a large lead over his Democratic and Republican rivals, according to two statewide polls released yesterday.


Tabler's 3-Run Homer Keeps Met Hopes Alive
LEAD: Darryl Strawberry, bundled up against the chill and all but nailed to the bench by his ailing back, smiled gently and extended his hand.
Pat Tabler, the din outside the dugout roaring at full gale, made his way to the end of the bench, grasped the hand and smiled back.


Iran Resents U.S. Base-Building in Gulf
LEAD: To the Editor:


Canada Clears Way For Johnson in Games
LEAD: The Canadian Olympic Association lifted its ban on Ben Johnson yesterday, removing the last barrier to the sprinter's return to Olympic competition in Barcelona, Spain, in 1992.


U.S. JUDGE UPHOLDS RAP GROUP'S SHOW
LEAD: A Federal district judge today forbade the Westerly Town Council to interfere in a concert by the rap music group 2 Live Crew.


Ellis Found Guilty
LEAD: Dale Ellis of the SuperSonics was convicted by a Seattle District Court jury yesterday of drunken driving and reckless driving.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Old Foes Aim to Open Ties


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Parking: Alternate-side rules will be suspended today for Yom Kippur.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ELLEN BURSTYN will pick up an award from the Guttman Breast Diagnostic Institute on Monday on behalf of Actors' Equity Association, which co-sponsors a mobile mammography screening program in the Broadway theater district.
The award, for individuals or organizations that help raise public consciousness about breast cancer, is given in connection with National Breast Cancer Awareness Month, beginning Oct.


'Junk Bond' Prices Drop Further
LEAD: The record-setting decline of ''junk bonds'' in August was a short-lived distinction: In September, prices of junk issues plunged even further, to new lows, amid concerns about the economy and the Middle East.


Ex-Aide to Pierce Rebuffs Questions in Inquiry on Housing Agency
LEAD: The former top aide to Samuel R. Pierce Jr. has refused to answer questions from Congressional investigators about allegations of political favoritism and mismanagement during Mr.
Pierce's tenure as Housing Secretary in Ronald Reagan's Administration.


Political Memo;   Bush Sure-Footed on Trail of Money
LEAD: He hits the road, sometimes he presses the flesh, but President Bush doesn't really campaign, not in the classic sense.
Not like Ronald Reagan or Hubert H. Humphrey or Lyndon B. Johnson.


C. P. Turner, 83; Devised Alternative For School Diploma
LEAD: Cornelius P. Turner, who supervised development of the high school equivalency credential, died Wednesday at Alexandria Hospital in Alexandria, Va.
He was 83 years old and lived in Alexandria.


Store Chain Goes Public in Canada
LEAD: The North West Company, which started life as a single fur trading post in 1668 on the shore of Hudson Bay, went public today after 322 years in business.
The company is listing its shares on the Toronto and Winnipeg stock exchanges.


Congress Resists El Salvador's Chief on Aid Cuts
LEAD: President Alfredo Cristiani of El Salvador impressed several members of Congress during his four-day lobbying visit to Washington this week, but he did not succeed in altering Congressional sentiment on cutting military aid to his country.


Denise Carty-Bennia, Law Professor, 43
LEAD: Denise Carty-Bennia, a lawyer and visiting professor at the City University of New York Law School at Queens College, died on Sept. 11 at her home in Detroit.
She was 43 years old.


Home Port Buoyed By Cold War's End
LEAD: The arguments against a New York home port have always been weak.
Now, given the realities of the post-cold-war world and the difficulties of our community, they're even weaker.


Subtle Changes in Piano Man's World
LEAD: Like most other entertainers, Ronny Whyte, the singer and pianist who has been an enduring presence in the night life of New York City for nearly three decades, has his store of anecdotes.


Barge Owner Investigated In Oil Spill
LEAD: State and Federal law-enforcement officials have begun a criminal investigation of the owner of a barge that sank and spilled as much as 50,000 gallons of oil in the Kill van Kull on Thursday.


Mutual Fund Buyers In a Flight to Safety
LEAD: With many investors apparently growing more worried about financial stability, mutual fund companies are seeing a flight to safety and quality, fund managers said yesterday.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
8.12
8.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.13
7.22
7.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.16
7.21
7.87
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.68
8.73
8.35
30-YR.


Patents;   Tire Pressure Gauge Is Mounted in Hubcap
LEAD: James Jard, a commercial real estate broker in Virginia Beach, Va., has patented a tire pressure gauge mounted into automobile hubcaps.


House Votes Trading Curb
LEAD: The House of Representatives gave final Congressional approval today to market-regulation legislation written in response to the stock market collapse in October 1987.


Review/Opera;   New Don in Title Role of the Met's 'Giovanni'
LEAD: It would be easy to go overboard about Thomas Hampson's performance in ''Don Giovanni'' on Thursday evening.
Let us be cautious and merely say that the young American, taking the title role for the first time at the Metropolitan Opera, sent one home thinking of hallowed names from the past: Cesare Siepi, George London - even, briefly, Ezio Pinza.


Search for Survivors of Sinking
LEAD: A Coast Guard airplane resumed searching today for possible survivors of a vessel whose partially sunken hull was spotted 500 miles southeast of Nova Scotia.
The identity of the vessel and the conditions under which it sank remained unknown, said Petty Officer Lionel Bryant, a Coast Guard spokesman.


When Pain Is Still A Pleasure
LEAD: Lawrence Taylor's hamstring was a major sports issue during the week.
Would that now celebrated tendon, stretched at the end of last Sunday's game, be suitable for action for this Sunday's game, and allow its fearsome proprietor, the Giants linebacker, to once again chase and corner a quarterback like a cat a rat?


Surgery for Molitor
LEAD: Paul Molitor, the Milwaukee Brewers infielder, underwent successful shoulder and forearm surgery yesterday at Sinai Samaritan Medical Center in Milwaukee, team officials said.
Molitor had arthroscopic surgery performed on his right shoulder to relieve an impingement.
The 34-year-old Molitor, who finished the season with a .285 batting average in 103 games, also had a torn muscle in his right forearm sutured.


Time to Retire an Indian Place-Name Hoax;   Debt to Caughnawagas
LEAD: To the Editor:


Low-Demand Subway Service Being Cut
LEAD: The New York City Transit Authority said yesterday that it would curtail late-night and weekend service on nine subway lines beginning tomorrow to cut costs, a move that drew strong opposition from consumer advocacy groups.


Patents;   New Device To Measure Audiences
LEAD: In search of a more accurate way to measure television and radio audiences, a small company in Chicago has patented a pocket-sized device that silently monitors and logs the programs a person listens to.


Lawrence O'Brien, Democrat, Dies at 73
LEAD: Lawrence F. O'Brien Jr., the Democratic Party strategist who organized the successful senatorial and Presidential campaigns of John F. Kennedy, died yesterday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 73 years old.
His family said he died from complications of cancer.


U.S. Gives Details on Oil Auction
LEAD: The Energy Department today announced the details for the auction of five million barrels of oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve next month.


Review/Music;   A Festive Start for Solti's Final Season
LEAD: The advent of autumn is season-opening time all over the world, but the musical season is starting more auspiciously than usual this year in Chicago.
The Lyric Opera is already under way, with a controversial but striking production of Gluck's ''Alceste'' by Robert Wilson and a well-received account of Tchaikovsky's ''Eugene Onegin.


In Shift, Rinfret Agrees to Debate Cuomo and 2 Other Candidates
LEAD: Reversing his position, Pierre A. Rinfret agreed yesterday to participate in two televised debates with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and two other candidates for governor.


S.E.C. Nominee Is Confirmed
LEAD: The Senate confirmed Richard Y. Roberts, the former chief of staff of Senator Richard C. Shelby, Democrat of Alabama, today to fill the vacancy on the Securities and Exchange Commission.


C.I.A. Fears Iraq Could Deploy Biological Arms by Early 1991
LEAD: Iraq has developed biological weapons that will be able to deliver significant quantities of the deadly agents on the battlefield by early next year, according to American intelligence reports.


Review/Film Festival;   In a Satire, Many Are Killed but Few Stay Dead
LEAD: ''What does a real artist do when he sees blood?'' asks a menacing, middle-aged murderer after he has stabbed two almost-innocent bystanders in a college men's room. ''He uses it,'' the killer says as he dips his hand into a pool of bright red goo and starts writing on the wall.
He would seem truly lethal, but the two corpses on the floor are definitely fidgeting.


Slain Youth'sFather Is Held On Charges in Family Dispute
LEAD: Moses Stewart, the father of the black teen-ager slain last year by a group of whites in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn, has been arrested at his wife's request after a domestic dispute, the police said yesterday.


Meeting the Artists
LEAD: The eighth season of Lincoln Center's Off Stage Series, in which guest artists meet with the audience for an hour of informal converstion followed by a light supper reception, will begin on Oct. 11.
Leonard Slatkin, the music director of the Saint Louis Symphony Orchestra, is to be the first guest.


Alvin Broido, 85, Dies; Educator in New York
LEAD: Alvin Broido, a teacher and principal in the New York City public school system for about 45 years, died on Thursday at Scripps Memorial Hospital in Encinitas, Calif.
He was 85 years old and had lived in Rancho La Costa, Calif., since retiring in 1970.


Yom Kippur Observances Begin


Brooklyn Man Convicted in Officer's Killing
LEAD: A Brooklyn man was convicted of murder yesterday for throwing a New York City police officer to his death from the roof of a McDonald's restaurant in Times Square during a robbery.


Review/Music;   Tolling Bells and Dreamy Scoring of a Curtain Raiser
LEAD: A centerpiece of Carnegie Hall's centenary celebration is its commissioning project, which will yield 13 new orchestral, chamber and vocal works this season.
Andre Previn led the Los Angeles Philharmonic in the first of them, Steven Stucky's ''Angelus,'' on Thursday evening.


Those Hisses on the Launching Pad
LEAD: The flight of the space shuttle Columbia has been canceled for the fourth time after another leak from its hydrogen fuel system was detected, and NASA's round-the-clock study team has still not pinpointed the source.


Japan-Europe Car Pact
LEAD: European Community officials said off the record today that the community and Japan were close to a deal under which Japanese car producers would be allowed to increase market share in Europe to almost double by 1999, when all quotas would be scrapped.
The pact, which will set the pace at which the 12-nation bloc liberalizes its partly protected car market, will be an informal arrangement, the officials said.


Off-Duty Officer Is Slashed
LEAD: A police officer on his way to work in midtown Manhattan was slashed across the throat last night by a man wielding a broken bottle, the police said.
The officer, Lawrence McDonnell, 26 years old, was in serious but stable condition at Bellevue Hospital Center, said a police spokesman.
The officer was attacked after exchanging words with a group of 14 men at Eighth Avenue and West 38th Street at 9:40 P.M.


Carl F. Ewig, Executive, 85
LEAD: Carl F. Ewig, a retired steamship company executive, died on Saturday at Phelps Memorial Hospital in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
He was 85 years old and lived in Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.


Corrections
LEAD: An answer in the Q&amp;A column of Science Times on Sept. 18 about the Rockwell scale of hardness misstated the system.
The higher the number, the harder the material.


George R. Ince Jr., Banker, 81
LEAD: George R. Ince Jr., a first vice president of Bankers Trust Company in Manhattan for more than 40 years, died on Thursday at Winthrop University Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
He was 81 years old and lived in Garden City, L.I.


Corrections
LEAD: An article and a picture caption on Tuesday about Korean-Americans seeking political power in New York misstated the role of a group, Korean-Americans for Social Concerns, in a rally at City Hall.
It did not help organize the rally.


Can Choosing Form of Care Become Neglect?
LEAD: When Juliet Cheng was called in to Newington Children's Hospital in July, she thought it was for a final consultation about the health of her 7-year-old daughter, who suffers from severe juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, before they returned to China for medical treatment there.


As Gulf Crisis Solidifies the World Order, Cuba Feels Left Out
LEAD: The exuberance of Soviet and American officials about the new world order being established after the cold war is not universally embraced at the United Nations.


Midway Air Is Cutting Staff
LEAD: In another sign of hard times in the nation's airline industry, Midway Airlines Inc. said today that it was cutting its staff by 10 percent, putting about 500 people out of work.


Japan's Chief Offers Apology For Minister's Racial Remark
LEAD: Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan apologized yesterday for a remark by one of his Cabinet ministers that outraged many American blacks and prompted a call for a boycott of Japanese products.


Washington Talk;   Governing By Veto: Who Is In Control?
LEAD: As Congress begins its final push on major bills before adjourning for the fall elections, a sword hangs over the process.


Soybeans Lose Early Gain; Grain Prices Close Mixed
LEAD: Soybean futures fell and grains were mixed yesterday in a day of thin, quiet trading on the Chicago Board of Trade.


Oil Prices Fall, Then Recoup
LEAD: Crude oil prices dropped sharply in the early afternoon yesterday only to stage a late rally and close little changed in light futures trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.


Tax Compromises Open Way To Pact in Budget Talks
LEAD: White House officials agreed in private budget negotiations tonight to a higher income tax on wealthy Americans in return for a lower capital gains tax, officials from both parties said.


Trial Is Delayed in Sexual Assault Case
LEAD: NEWARK, Sept. 28 -


Washington Students Gain in Protest
LEAD: The 13-year-old University of the District of Columbia has long been a troubled institution, but it took a student takeover of two university buildings two days ago to get the city government to begin to grapple with its problems.


Don't Coerce Quebec With Trade Exclusion
LEAD: To the Editor:


Transactions
LEAD: Basketball DENVER (NBA) - Agreed to terms with T. R. Dunn, guard, on a one-year contract.


Jordan Militants Urging Iraq To Use 'Chemicals' on U.S.
LEAD: Muslim militants urged President Saddam Hussein of Iraq today to turn his chemical weapons on United States troops in the Persian Gulf region.


Japan and North Korea Set Talks on Ties
LEAD: After 45 years of hostility, Japan and North Korea agreed today to open talks to establish diplomatic relations ''as soon as possible.'' The Japanese, in return, promised financial compensation for their occupation of the Korean peninsula in the early decades of this century.


McIlvaine and Padres Talk About General Manager Job
LEAD: Joe McIlvaine, the Mets' vice president for baseball operations, has talked with the San Diego Padres about their general manager's job and would accept the job if it is offered, baseball executives said yesterday.


Adkins Leads Yanks Past Brewers
LEAD: Steve Adkins held Milwaukee hitless for six innings to earn his first major league victory and Jesse Barfield and Randy Velarde hit home runs last night as the Yankees beat the Brewers, 7-2.


Helping Older Women Enter the Job Market
LEAD: To the Editor:


'Civil War' Seems to Have Set a Record
LEAD: Obliterating the long-held notion that public television appeals only to those interested in predators, pageants and pundrity, ''The Civil War'' ended on Thursday night as apparently the most popular noncommercial series ever broadcast.
The documentary, which was shown over five nights, had an average rating of 9 and was seen by 13 percent of the people watching television, according to the A.


Two Soviet Giants, in Dissent
LEAD: It is a salutary measure of Soviet openness that Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn can finally speak directly to a Soviet audience during its great national debate.
Remarkably, his first full statement on the Gorbachev era appears as a special supplement in a journal for young Communists.
Yet nowhere in his 16,000-word essay does Mr.


Bridge
LEAD: Beginners are advised, when playing no-trump, to develop the longest combined suit.
As they advance in the game they discover that there are many exceptions, and one of them is demonstrated by the diagramed deal.


Photo: Beatriz Rodriquez as The Chosen One in Vaslav Nijinsky's ''Sacre du Printemps.'' (Jean Marc Charles Rapho for The New York Times) Contrite Paris Hails Nijinsky's 'Sacre'
LEAD: As if making amends for past insult and injury, French audiences and critics have warmly, indeed almost reverently, welcomed home Vaslav Nijinsky's radical choreography of ''Le Sacre du Printemps'' 77 years after it came close to provoking a riot here.


Chase Reduces Staff 10% at Unit
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Corporation, which last week announced a significant retrenchment, said it had reduced the staff in its North America Corporate Finance unit by 238, or nearly 10 percent.
This was the initial step in Chase's plan to slash 5,000 jobs because of a downturn in the banking business.


Texas Way of Electing Judges Is Upheld
LEAD: A Federal appeals court in New Orleans ruled overwhelmingly yesterday that the 1965 Voting Rights Act did not apply to the election of state judges.


Something Draweth Nigh
LEAD: New York after a long absence:


Auction of Ford Artworks Planned
LEAD: Art and antiques from the collection of Henry Ford 2d, valued at more than $50 million, are to be auctioned in November at Sotheby's in Manhattan, states an internal memorandum circulated this week at Christie's.


President Of Emerson Radio Quits
LEAD: Stephen L. Lane announced yesterday that he would resign immediately as the president and chief executive of the Emerson Radio Corporation in an effort to spare the company further adverse publicity over his financial affairs.


Dollar Traded Up as Hedge Against a Weekend Crisis
LEAD: The dollar gained against all major currencies except its Canadian counterpart in unusually slow United States trading yesterday.


War May Be at Hand, but Bedouins Find Their Desert Peaceful
LEAD: The American troops here swill gallons of water and barely move under the camouflage netting that shelters them from the harsh Saudi sun.
Many a soldier has compared this place to hell.


Books of The Times;   Giving a Nod to Kafka, As a Jew Faces Calamity
LEAD:
Hourglass
By Danilo Kis
Translated by Ralph Manheim. 274 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.95.


UAL Shares Jump On Davis's Offer
LEAD: The UAL Corporation's stock price jumped $6.625 today, to $97.25, on the New York Stock Exchange after the investor Marvin Davis offered late Thursday to join an employee buyout of the company, which runs United Airlines.


Whitman Revamping; Will Spin Off Pet Inc.
LEAD: The Whitman Corporation, a troubled conglomerate, announced a long-awaited revamping today but surprised analysts by including the spinoff of its profitable food division, Pet Inc., its biggest unit.


John B. Goodman, Executive, 78
LEAD: John B. Goodman, retired executive vice president for the Downtown Lower Manhattan Association, a civic group, died on Tuesday at his home in Bellingham, Wash.
He was 78 years old and had lived in Darien, Conn., for many years before moving to Bellingham.


Small Business in Peril From Street Peddlers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cuomo Plans a Weekend Trip to Poland
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who has been known to fly to California for the day, is planning a trip to Poland - for a long weekend.


About New York;   First Problem Is Homelessness; 2d Is Denial


Drug Tests for Fuhr
LEAD: Grant Fuhr of the Edmonton Oilers, who was suspended for a year by the National Hockey League on Thursday for cocaine use, has agreed to submit to random drug tests, a team spokesman said yesterday.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Navratilova Is Upset Fifth-seeded Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere upset top-seeded Martina Navratilova yesterday to advance to the semifinals of the Nichirei International women's tournament in Tokyo.
Maleeva-Fragniere, ranked ninth in the world, beat Navratilova, 7-5, 4-6, 6-3.
After losing her first seven matches against Navratilova, Maleeva-Fragniere has rebounded with a two-match winning streak.


Pirates Increase Pressure With Victory Over Cards
LEAD: Scoreboard watching at Busch Stadium is a timely thing this time of year.
Out-of-town updates are flashed on the electronic board in rotation, a different bunch every 4.8 seconds.


Time to Retire an Indian Place-Name Hoax
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quarterbacks in Spotlight When B.Y.U. Meets Oregon
LEAD: Rarely has there been such anticipation for a college sporting event in Oregon.
When undefeated Brigham Young meets the University of Oregon today before an expected overflow crowd at 41,678-seat Autzen Stadium in Eugene, the excitement will be as much about the opposing quarterbacks as about the Ducks' chances for an upset.


Padres Set BackReds, 2-1
LEAD: Bruce Hurst pitched a four-hitter and Benito Santiago doubled home a ninth-inning run tonight as the San Diego Padres beat Cincinnati, 2-1, to keep the Reds from clinching a tie for the National League West title.


Senators Block Bill to Regulate Cable TV Prices
LEAD: Legislation to regulate cable television prices was set back and probably killed today when objections by three Senators forced supporters of the bill to withdraw it from consideration on the Senate floor.


SACKING OF KUWAIT IS PRESSURING U.S.
LEAD: President Bush's national security adviser said today that the ''systematic destruction'' of Kuwait under Iraqi occupation was shortening the time that the United States can wait for economic sanctions to drive President Saddam Hussein's army out of the Persian Gulf sheikdom.


Illinois Court Rejects Forced Marrow Tests Of Potential Donors
LEAD: The Illinois Supreme Court ruled today that 3-year-old twins cannot be forced to be tested as potential donors of bone marrow to their half-brother, who has leukemia.


Underwriting Fees Decline Sharply
LEAD: The squeeze on Wall Street profits grew tighter in the last quarter, as fees for underwritings of securities fell by more than half, to their lowest levels in six years, and corporate America began to pull back from raising money in the capital markets.


We Have to Pay Attention to Teacher Training
LEAD: To the Editor:


Prices Paid To Farmers Down by 2%
LEAD: The prices that farmers receive for raw products declined by 2 percent from August to September, but the overall commodity index was still 3.5 percent above a year ago, the Agriculture Department said today.


Beliefs
LEAD: ''Sing lustily and with a good courage.
Beware of singing as if you were half dead, or half asleep; but lift up your voice with strength.''


Summit at the U.N.: The World's Children
LEAD: A promise to increase assistance to children in poor countries was made by the World Bank and other agencies as world leaders prepared for a United Nations summit meeting on the plight of children.


Honeywell Backs Spinoff of Unit
LEAD: Honeywell Inc said its board had approved the spinoff of its military and marine systems business, tests instruments division and signal analysis center into an independent company to be named Alliant Techsystems Inc.
Alliant Techsystems started operations today, Honeywell said.
Honeywell said its shareholders of record on Oct.


After Early Drop, Dow Closes Up 25
LEAD: Fed by a broad selloff in Tokyo and unfounded war rumors, prices plunged on the New York Stock Exchange early yesterday but quickly recovered to close with a solid gain.
The Dow Jones industrial average moved ahead 25 points in heavy trading, to 2,452.48, with bank and insurance stocks showing strong increases.


Iraq Seen Looting Kuwait of Identity
LEAD: Having physically denuded Kuwait in nearly two months of military rule, looting computers, amusement-park rides and even street lamps and school blackboards, Iraq has embarked on a systematic effort to strip the nation of its very identity, exiled Kuwaitis and other recent refugees say.


Police to Meet in Montana To Study Coin Shop Killings
LEAD: Law-enforcement officers from several states and Canada are seeking to question a man accused of killing two people in a Billings coin shop, saying he may be a suspect in similar crimes.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief front-page summary yesterday about New York State's decision to toughen pollution rules for cars and trucks misstated New York's ranking as a market for cars.


Plug In To Moscow
LEAD: Assorted hints have come from Moscow that the Soviets are willing to supply intelligence about Iraq.
This could be of critical importance.
Long and intimate involvement with the Iraqi military and police establishments, from the top well on down, gave Moscow information unavailable anywhere else.


COMBAT RESERVES MAY GET CALLED UP
LEAD: Officials in the Defense Department and in Congress are debating whether to call up combat reserve units to join the nearly 27,000 reservists already summoned to perform military support roles in the United States and in the Persian Gulf region.


Evolution in Europe;   Behind Student Attitudes, Legacy of Divided Germany
LEAD: Between this impoverished rural town of 5,000 inhabitants and prosperous Reinfeld, where 7,200 West Germans live, there lies about 15 miles and a frontier that will be formally erased when Germany reunites on Wednesday.


Mortgage Rates Mixed
LEAD: Fixed-rate mortgages averaged 10.22 percent this week, up from 10.16 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
It was the highest rate since Aug. 31.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.28 percent, down from 8.30 percent last week.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about New York City's 10-year capital plan misstated Mayor David N. Dinkins's position on the possibility of cutbacks in spending.


Today's Transit - Won't Do
LEAD: Even before the Arab oil embargo, policy makers and editorial writers were concluding that one part of the solution to the energy crisis, the environmental crisis and the urban crisis is to build mass transit with highway funds and to persuade drivers to walk, ride bicycles or take a train.


WILDMON'S WAR ON THE ARTS
LEAD: I say, go get 'em, Donald; go get 'em, Jesse, and go get 'em, Joe (Joseph Papp) et al.
This is public theater at its best, providing both diversion (from Iraq, the S.&amp; L. mess, homelessness) and catharsis.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
LEAD:
P. D. Q. BACH


Double Standard In the Capital
LEAD: Looking back at Year One of our deliverance, 8 Aug. 1974 looms as less a victory for morality in government than a triumph by one set of politicians over another.
And the conspicuous bond among the victorious seems less love of country than hatred of Richard Milhous Nixon.


Group Seeks to Prevent Nuclear Space Probe
LEAD: An environmental group asked a Federal judge on Friday to stop next week's scheduled launching of the space shuttle Discovery with the nuclear-powered Ulysses probe in its cargo bay.


Failure of Sainthood
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ms. Gitlin Plans March Wedding
LEAD: The engagement of Tina Gitlin to Steven Price, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Price of New York has been announced by her parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Joel S. Gitlin of New York.
A March wedding is planned.


Don't Knock the Soviet Manager
LEAD: Until recently, Americans have had little chance to watch Soviet managers at work in their own environment while interacting with colleagues.
I was afforded this opportunity during a joint research project under the direction of Prof.
Paul Lawrence of the Harvard Business School and Igor Faminsky of the Soviet Institute for External Economic Affairs.


London's Literary Village
LEAD: Hampstead is a village of dreams gazing down loftily on the City of London from its hillside perch, about three miles away to the northeast.
For two centuries the pretty streets, hidden courtyards and tree-lined groves have provided a haven for writers, artists and scholars.


Kelly S. O'Connor Wed in Bermuda
LEAD: Kelly Suzanne O'Connor, the fashion editor of Town &amp; Country magazine, and Gerard Pasciucco, an associate in the investment banking division of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, both in New York, were married yesterday at Christ Church in Warwick, Bermuda.
The Rev.
Frederick J. Marshall performed the Presbyterian ceremony.


Why Schools Belong in Offices
LEAD: The preliminary census results remind us once again that America is not an agrarian society.
Probably less than a quarter of the population lives in rural areas, and even fewer toil in the amber fields of grain.
Why is it, then, that the American educational system continues to be based on an agricultural model?


Corrections
LEAD: An article about the film ''White Hunter, Black Heart'' on Sept. 16 misidentified one of the scriptwriters.
He is James Bridges, not Jeff Bridges.
The article also misidentified the man on whom the character of the producer in the film is based.
He is Sam Spiegel, not Samuel Goldwyn.


Hoboken Gallery Opens With a Flourish
LEAD: IF Staten Island can secede from New York, what is to stop New Jersey from declaring its cultural independence?
According to A. J. Lederman, nothing.
Having just opened A. J. Lederman Fine Art on Court Street, a mews paved with cobblestones, Ms.
Lederman, a doctor of philosophy, has high hopes for the state's art scene.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
ENRICO CARUSO: My Father and My Family.
By Enrico Caruso Jr. and Andrew Farkas. (Amadeus Press, $39.95.) Enrico Caruso Jr. was 17 and his brother, Rudolfo, was 23 when their father, the renowned operatic tenor, died in 1921.
In 1983, at 79, Enrico Caruso Jr. began an extraordinary project.
He recorded his memories of his father, which formed the basis of a highly readable biography, ''Enrico Caruso,'' written with Andrew Farkas, a professor of library science at the University of North Florida and the editor of ''Lawrence Tibbett: Singing Actor.


California Showdown
LEAD: It is 110 degrees in Sacramento on this August afternoon, and probably hotter here on the runway of a local airport, and probably hotter still in the long-sleeved black dress that Dianne Feinstein is wearing as she paces the tarmac near her chartered plane.


California Adopts New Car Emission Rules
LEAD: The California Air Resources Board adopted strict auto emission rules Friday to compel production of a new generation of ultra-clean cars and fuels, toughening the strictest air quality controls in the nation.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: Ilya Gurevich, an 18-year-old from Worcester, Mass., has won the 1990 World Junior Championship held in Varones, Chile, Aug. 16-31.


College Football;   Overmatched Yale Routed by UConn
LEAD: Connecticut's biggest concern coming into today's contest against intrastate rival Yale was Darin Kehler, the all-Ivy quarterback and offensive star of the Eli wishbone attack.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
CHAMBER SYMPHONIES


Australia Wants Asia to Come A-Waltzing
LEAD: For years, this outpost of Europe behaved like a standoffish neighbor to the Asian community it lived in.
Instead of cultivating ties with the community, it relied on its own natural wealth and its political, economic and cultural links to Europe.


Officer Wounded but Shoots Assailants at Brooklyn Party
LEAD: An off-duty state correction officer shot two teen-age brothers on Friday after they took his handbag and shot him at a Brooklyn party.
The officer was then shot again, the police said.


Campus Life: Connecticut;   Summer Reading Includes Parents And Faculty, Too
LEAD: Students, faculty and alumni all came back to Connecticut College last weekend to discuss a summer reading assignment.
President Claire Gaudiani, who initiated the program, wrote in a letter to alumni and parents this summer, ''the college has achieved another first.''


Arab States' Top Priorities
LEAD: President Reagan met with five Arab Ambassadors and assured them he ''appreciated'' their concern about what had just occurred.
Israel, using American-supplied planes, had bombed Iraq's nuclear installation.
Israel claimed the right of pre-emptive self-defense even though it is the only Middle Eastern country to have a nuclear arsenal and not to have signed the Nuclear Nonproliferation


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bedford, N.Y.
$830,000
Pound Ridge Road
5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 149-year-old colonial; 5 fireplaces, library, formal dining room, rec room, 4.3 acres; taxes $6,677.
Goldens Bridge,N.Y.
$457,500
32 Mohawk Trail
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; cathedral ceilings, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, deck, whirlpool, 1 acre; taxes $7,951.


Howard Beach, U.S.A.
LEAD: Although Mayor Koch's intentions in visiting Our Lady of Grace Roman Catholic Church were laudable, the anger with which he was met by its Howard Beach parishioners was totally understandable.
The people there figure they're not very different from those in any other all-white neighborhood and thus should not be singled out for deviating from the national norm.


Campus Life: Catholic University;   Students Protest Decision to Cancel Abortion Debate
LEAD: Students at the Catholic University of America last week protested the decision of the student-run Program Board to cancel a debate on abortion.


Reagan and Iran-Contra
LEAD: The disappointment that accompanied the release of President Reagan's Iran-contra testimony is unwarranted.
If there were no revelations, no smoking guns, no sudden confessions, that's because we have known since the hearings ended in the summer of 1987 all that is knowable about the affair.
What was known was disturbing and ugly enough.


WILDMON'S WAR ON THE ARTS
LEAD: Selcraig highlights certain facts, such as that Donald Wildmon was a Boy Scout, as though they were negatives - the apparent logic being that we should then label and dismiss him as, for example, an obsessive, right-wing former Boy Scout.
However, the ironic fact is that his own article reveals the strong support Wildmon enjoys.


Tot-Rock: A Mini-Boom in Pop Music
LEAD: It was the screams, finally, that signaled the change.
The sound of the audience at a New Kids on the Block concert - a sustained soprano wail - wouldn't have been heard a decade ago, when pop was the province of teenagers and their elders.
Screaming girls have accompanied pop phenomena at least since Frank Sinatra wowed the bobby-soxers, but teen-age hysteria tends to be about half an octave and some decibels lower than the response to the New Kids.


Lighter and Less Expensive
LEAD: THE recession has paid its first dividend to Long Island diners.
Restaurant Zanghi in Glen Cove has lowered its prices and changed its name, menu and outlook.
These changes have not adversely affected the restaurant.
Nicola's measures up and retains Restaurant Zanghi's longtime top rating.


Hofstra Coach Is Slain on Sidewalk
LEAD: An assistant football coach at Hofstra University was shot to death early yesterday outside a restaurant near the school by a man in what appeared to be a bungled robbery attempt, the police said.


His Mrs.'s Voice
LEAD: Should courts divide between two what God has given to one?
In one of the more notable recent tests of the premise that a husband or wife who aids in a spouse's rise to fame is entitled to a share in the value thereof, a New York court last week rejected a claim by Peter Elkus, former husband of the opera star Frederica von Stade.


The Song of High Watt
LEAD:
''Buy the shores of Gitche Gumee,
Buy the shining offshore leases,
Buy the shining mining leases,
Giving me the credit due me,
and you'll be as rich as Croesus,
Richer far than old King Croesus.
Though the Congress may beshrew me,
Pick my policies to pieces,
Reagan's will is working through me,
Not to mention Edwin Meese's.


New Use Planned for California Shuttle Site
LEAD: The $3.5 billion West Coast port for space shuttles, idled after the 1986 Challenger explosion, will be converted into a launching pad for Titan 4-Centaur rockets, the Air Force has decided.


For a Principal, It's Deja Vu
LEAD: Colleen Velez's ''My Last Child Is Starting Kindergarten'' [Sept. 16]  brought a smile and a memory of a recent Christmas, when I left my workplace early and went to P. S. 131 in Jamaica, Queens, to surprise my daughter, Merrill, a third-grade teacher.
I waited on the sidewalk along with the mothers of the schoolchildren as


Oregon Upsets B.Y.U.
LEAD: Oregon intercepted five Ty Detmer passes, three by Daryle Smith, and sacked the Brigham Young quarterback five times as the Ducks beat Brigham Young, 32-16, today.


Lake Champlain
LEAD: To the Editor: In reply to your article ''Champlain's Hideaway Islands'' (Travel, Aug. 5), I wish to add one additional suggestion to an otherwise very inclusive account of what to do on the islands.
As a flatlander who vacations regularly on North Hero, we discovered the Northumbrian Pipers' Convention a few years ago and have made it a must on our Vermont vacation ever since.


Few Old Millionaires
LEAD: To the Editor:


Commercial Property: 57th Street;   A New Glitter Added to a Premier Retail Boulevard
LEAD: While much around it seems to be moribund, 57th Street is showing signs of vitality, with several significant projects nearing completion or under way.
The Japanese are prominent, with other players coming from London, Paris, Munich and - perhaps - Redmond, Wash.


All About/Corporate Jets;   The Ultimate Status Symbol Still Sells
LEAD: People who sell corporate jets can talk a transcontinental streak about the security, convenience and flexibility their products afford.
What they don't need to say is that these particular corporate assets are 600 mile-per-hour odes to success - faster than airliners, with interiors that make first class seem like steerage.


Miss Cox Marries Philip Clippinger
LEAD: Jenner Girard Cox, the daughter of Mrs.
John E. Avery of Princeton, N.J., and D. Michael Cox of New York, was married yesterday to Philip Edward Clippinger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald E. Clippinger of Princeton.
The Rev.
Wallace Alston performed the ceremony at Nassau Presbyterian Church in Princeton.


Budget Battle Spatters Politicians


Insensitivity
LEAD: To the Editor: From what I saw and heard on a visit to Rome, Venice and Florence, American tourists are more admirable than tourists from other countries.
However, there were moments when I wished that some Americans would have stifled it.
Some of their comments were not only derogatory to the country, the culture and the people, they were also quite self-revelatory.


Talking: Rentals;   Can't Sell? A Tenant Could Help
LEAD: Rather than leave a house or apartment vacant for months - and suffer the financial drain of the carrying costs plus the grim prospect of showing an empty home - some sellers are offering their properties as short-term rentals.


Jerusalem, Baghdad
LEAD: Iraq's occupation of Kuwait not only menaces Saudi Arabia and the oil producing emirates but also is likely to change the power balance dramatically in the Arab Middle East.
It will do so by posing a serious challenge to Egypt's ascendancy, threatening the rival Baathist regime in Syria and turning Jordan into an


Traffic Alert
LEAD: World Summit for Children:


Michelle M. Harvey Is Wed to R. M. Taylor
LEAD: The marriage of Michelle Marie Harvey, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Harvey of Hilliard, Fla., to Robert Martineau Taylor, the son of Frank L. Taylor Jr. of Passaic, N.J., and Janet M. MacAusland of Cummington, Mass., took place yesterday at St.
Michael's Roman Catholic Cathedral in Springfield, Mass.


George Harrington, 75, Criminal Court Judge
LEAD: George Walter Harrington, a former New York State assemblyman and New York City Criminal Court judge, died on Thursday at New Hanover Memorial Hospital in Wilmington, N.C.
He was 75 years old.


Data Bank/September 30, 1990
LEAD:
Gross National Product
II Q'90
I Q'90
IV Q'89
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in billions $4,155.1 $4,150.6 $4,133.2
Real G.N.P Growth
Annual rate, 1982 dollars, in percent
0.4
1.7
0.3
Corporate After-Tax Profits
In percent
-0.6
0.5
1.7
New Orders for Durable Goods
Aug.


Maxi-Yacht Series A Stern Challenge
LEAD: It was a shocking sight, even for those who harden themselves against the countless mishaps that can befall a modern racing yacht.
Longobarda, the 80-foot sailboat competing last week in the 1990 maxi-yacht world championship, toppled her mast on a breezy day off Newport, R.I.


Diane Shaffer Is Engaged to Michael A. Gallo Jr.
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Charles D. Shaffer Jr. of Cumberland, Md., and Catlett, Va., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter, Diane Cecelia Shaffer, and Michael A. Gallo Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gallo of Ramsey, N.J., and New York.


Julie McDonald Weds Peter Gilbertson
LEAD: Julie McDonald, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph J. McDonald of Canandaigua, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Peter Andrews Gilbertson, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Francis E. Gilbertson of Rumson, N.J.


If the Written Word Is Really Dying, Who Is Patronizing The 'Superstores?'
LEAD: It has become de rigueur to predict the demise of the American reading public.
In his book ''The Closing of the American Mind,'' which, ironically, became a best seller, Allan Bloom wrote that ''our students have lost the practice and taste for reading.'' In a just published book called ''The Death of Literature,'' Alvin Kernan of Princeton University declares that reading books ''is ceasing to be the primary way of knowing something in our society.


Voters Choose The Best TV Sets
LEAD: The count is in for 1990.
Nine hundred and thirteen video dealers voted for what they considered the best products of the year in the annual poll by Audio/Video International, a leading trade journal.


WORLD SUMMIT FOR CHILDREN: Reporter's Notebook;   A Protocol Nightmare: Silencing World Leaders
LEAD: The biggest problem at the World Summit for Children, quite naturally, came from the adults. ''What do you do,'' an official asked, ''when you have 71 world leaders at the same conference and they all expect time to speak?''


Awkward but Immortal
LEAD:
THEODORE DREISER
An American Journey 1908-1945.
By Richard Lingeman.
Illustrated. 544 pp. New York:
G. P. Putnam's Sons. $39.95.


Court Denies Grandparents Visitation Rights
LEAD: Grandparents do not have a legal right to visit a grandchild over the objection of the child's parents in ordinary circumstances, an appellate court has ruled in a Long Island case.


Hong Kong Unsure of Value of Refugee Pact
LEAD: When a new accord on the return of Vietnamese boat people from Hong Kong's crowded detention camps was announced last weekend, Government officials here hailed it a breakthrough.
But in the past few days, officials have admitted no one is certain if the program will have any effect at all.


In New York, Jews Mark the Holiest of Days
LEAD: On the holiest of days in the Hebrew calendar, Jews across New York City yesterday spent Yom Kippur, their Day of Atonement, in the same fashion as Jews in the troubled Middle East and in more peaceful precincts around the globe.


What's Inside A CD Player? More Pleasure
LEAD: Among the millions of people now owning a CD player, many have only a fuzzy notion of how it works.
With the old LP turntables, it was a lot easier to understand the basic principle of operation.
You could practically tell by looking at it.
The interaction of needle and groove seemed self-evident.


On to Disneyland and Real Unreality
LEAD: I have to go to Disneyland.
For years when my children begged me to take them, I gave them a nice round of ''uh huh'' designed to shut them up.
I couldn't explain to them that I saw Snow White and the Cowardly Lion and the alligators every morning.
That there were no fantasies in California that I had not seen in New


Business Diary/September 23-28
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Traders Unfazed by Sale of Oil in Strategic Reserve
He produced a trickle and then threatened a flood.
Oil traders were immensely unimpressed.
President Bush announced on Wednesday evening that the nation would sell five million barrels from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve as a rebuke to speculators who had pushed oil prices too high.


IN SHOE DEBATE, REMEMBER THE ATHLETE
LEAD: Anyone who has read the sports pages over the past few months is probably aware of the controversy regarding the athletic shoe industry.
Stories about the large sums of money paid to professionals to endorse certain brands of footwear are as commonplace as those about college coaches on shoe company payrolls and universities requiring that athletes wear certain shoes to fulfill shoe contracts.


Cheryl Everts Is Married
LEAD: At St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan, Cheryl Everts was married yesterday to Thomas Barr.
The Rev.
Damian O'Connell officiated.
Mrs.
Barr, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Everts of Lancaster, Pa., graduated from Villanova University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.


Callaway Ludington Marries Michael Zuccarello
LEAD: Callaway Anne Ludington, the daughter of Gail C. Ludington of Boston and William F. Ludington of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Paul Zuccarello, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Louis C. Zuccarello of Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard LaMorte officiated at Our Lady Star of the Sea Roman Catholic Church in


Postings: Advice From Experts;   How to Care for a Brownstone
LEAD: Built-up roofs.
Limestone pointing.
The dread specter of parapet failure.
Who would recognize those terms of the New York housing scene but the brownstone restorer, whose weekends are spent in such close communion with the foibles of old row houses?


Rekindled Interest In the Vietnam War
LEAD: A decade ago, as Communist tanks rolled into Saigon, the U.S. sustained its first defeat in the longest war in its history.
Public interest in the Vietnam experience is now being rekindled.
Vietnam appears to have instilled an ambivalent attitude of pride and prudence.
Humiliated by the setback to the legend of America the invincible, Americans want the U.S.


Jazz Guitarists for the Not So Progressive
LEAD: In most American pop and jazz criticism, orthodoxy is a dirty word, used to smear the virtue of a backsliding musician who ignores the party line.
The party line, derived from a European Romantic ideology that places the artist in opposition to repressive bourgeois babbitts, states that progress and value are synonymous.


Paper Reports 6 Officers May Be Tied to Slaying
LEAD: Detectives looking into the slayings of 43 women here are investigating up to six current and former police officers who may be linked to one of the slayings and the disappearance of a prostitute, according to a newspaper report.


Review/Dance
LEAD: 'Anxious Journey' Told Mostly in Words


Flying Blind in the Kremlin
LEAD: Privatization.
It's a simple enough idea.
Let Soviet citizens, rather than the state, own the factories and farms.
That way they'll have a stake in working hard.
And that way the Soviets can finally break the chains of centralized control and race toward capitalism.


Flowers to Match Autumn's Leaves
LEAD: CHRYSANTHEMUMS are for patient gardeners.
The plants emerge as tiny shoots from their winterlong sleep in early spring, then grow and grow.
They do nothing all summer except take up space.
Most gardeners relegate chrysanthemums to the border.


Margaret Schiffenhaus Wed to Ernest DiPietro
LEAD: Margaret Ann Schiffenhaus, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence C. Schiffenhaus of Montclair, N.J., was married there yesterday at Immaculate Conception Roman Catholic Church to Ernest William DiPietro, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph DiPietro of San Diego.
The Rev.
William J. Dowd officiated.


Lisa Beth Nachtigall, Intern, to Marry
LEAD: Dr.
Lisa Beth Nachtigall, an intern at New York Hospital-Bellevue Medical Center, and Robert Charles Flaumenhaft, a student at the New York University School of Medicine, plan to marry in April.


Applying Imitation Facing Brick
LEAD: BRICK used for decoration - it is called facing or veneer brick - is thinner than ordinary brick, yet requires the same skill and time to apply.


Baseball;   Comiskey: No Field of Dreams, But a Real Park in a Gritty City
LEAD: If you ask anyone on either coast to name the great old ball park of Chicago, 9 out of 10 will say Wrigley Field.
But in Chicago the answer is as likely as not to be Comiskey Park, the home of the White Sox, a park that is actually four years older than Wrigley, and in many ways possesses much more of the character of this great city.


No Headline
LEAD: As an active and concerned cyclist, I commend Assemblymen Cimino and Mecca for advocating helmets for bicyclists.
This effort is long overdue in a state like ours, which has heavy traffic and too many careless and ignorant automobile and truck operators, who pay no attention to the fact that bicyclists have equal right to public road access.


Betsy Brown Is Wed to George Thomas Hornyak
LEAD: Elsbeth Berry Ware Brown was married yesterday in Nantucket, Mass., to George Thomas Hornyak.
The Rev.
Edward B. Anderson officiated at the Unitarian Church.
Mrs.
Hornyak is the daughter of Betty Cobbs Brown of Greenwich, Conn., and Stewart P. Brown of New York.
The bridegroom is a son of Mrs.
Frank M.


Melissa Margetts and R. G. Jaeger Wed
LEAD: Melissa Lawson Margetts, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Thomas Margetts 3d of New Vernon, N.J., was married yesterday to Richard George Jaeger, a son of Patricia Jaeger of Garden City, L.I., and George F. Jaeger of Boca Raton, Fla.
The Rev.
David P. Hegg, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.


Flowers to Match Autumn's Leaves
LEAD: CHRYSANTHEMUMS are for patient gardeners.
The plants emerge as tiny shoots from their winterlong sleep in early spring, then grow and grow.
They do nothing all summer except take up space.
Most gardeners relegate chrysanthemums to the border.


College Football;   Cadets Are Very Good Guests
LEAD: Coaches prefer to schedule likely victims as their opponents on the day their schools celebrate Homecoming.
But surely Wake Forest's Bill Dooley had no idea his Demon Deacons would be in for quite so easy a time this afternoon at Groves Stadium, where they routed Army, 52-14.


Voltaire and the Jews
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bush Is in New York for the U.N. Conference and a Flurry of Gulf Diplomacy
LEAD: Blending humanitarian concerns with military ones, President Bush arrived in New York yesterday to attend an international summit meeting on children and to engage in three days of aerobic diplomacy designed to send President Saddam Hussein of Iraq a signal that the world's patience is running out.


The European Roots of an American Original
LEAD: ''The only American master who interests me is Ryder,'' said Jackson Pollock in 1944, and he was hardly the first artist to express that sentiment.
A ''legend among professional artists'' was the phrase that Marsden Hartley used in 1917. ''There's only Ryder in American painting,'' said Arthur B. Davies, and when Davies and the other organizers of the 1913 Armory Show put together their display of the masters who had paved the way for the development of modernism, they selected Ryder as the only American in a group that included Ingres, Delacroix, Goya, Manet, Puvis de Chavannes,


Data Update
LEAD:
BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Aug. 90
July 90
Aug. 89
New York
3,659
2,702
3,946
New Jersey
1,332
1,337
3,580
Connecticut
647
674
1,244
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


Baseball;   Pirates Sprinting to Finish
LEAD: Like a world-class runner who kicks hard and fast as he sprints to the finish line, the Pittsburgh Pirates are ending the division race impressively.


College Football: Midwest;   199 for Ervins Before It Pours
LEAD: Ricky Ervins rushed for a career-high 199 yards and 2 touchdowns, and No. 18 Southern Cal used an overpowering ground game to beat No. 15 Ohio State, 35-26, today in a game called by officials with 2 minutes 36 seconds remaining.


Nina Yonkman, Model, Is Wed
LEAD: Nina Ver Meulen Yonkman and Harry Payne Tower were married yesterday at the Second Congregational Church in Greenwich, Conn., by the Rev.
Robert S. Hundley.


Flowers to Match Autumn's Leaves
LEAD: CHRYSANTHEMUMS are for patient gardeners.
The plants emerge as tiny shoots from their winterlong sleep in early spring, then grow and grow.
They do nothing all summer except take up space.
Most gardeners relegate chrysanthemums to the border.


P.L.O. Embarks on Biggest Gamble in Many Years by Moving Closer to Iraq
LEAD: As the Persian Gulf crisis drives ever-deeper schisms through Arab ranks, the Palestine Liberation Organization and its chairman, Yasir Arafat, have embarked on a political gamble with stakes as high as any the organization has faced in many years of crisis.


Review/Rock;   Heavy Metal From an Era Before Poses
LEAD: Masters of Reality are a streamlined blast from the past - specifically, from the cusp of the 1960's and 70's, the era of Cream and early Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath, when blues-rock was turning into heavy metal, but before bands learned how to pose.


BEST SELLERS: September 23, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
2
2
5
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $21.95.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.


Dump Quayle in '92? Despite Calls for Change, Probably Not
LEAD: To the Editor:


Concert Will Feature 3 Prokofiev Premieres
LEAD: The American premieres of three works by Sergei Prokofiev will be presented by the Riverside Symphony in its opening concert of the season on Oct. 11 at Alice Tully Hall.
The concert, which commemorates the centennial of Prokofiev's birth and the ensemble's 10th season, will feature the composer's Andante (Op.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 23, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
43
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and lawyers.
2
5
SILENT PARTNER, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $5.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware investigates an apparent suicide.


A New Role for Mother Hale
LEAD: In her pioneering efforts over two decades to care for babies whose mothers are addicted to drugs, Clara Hale, known to all as Mother Hale, has admirably served a special population.
Now, she and the institution she established, Hale House, are embroiled in a dispute with city and state agencies over a change in state foster care policy.


Romantic Views Recall the Berkshires
LEAD: THERE are occasions when revisionism cannot be told from regionalism, and ''Arcadia Revisited'' is one of them.
An export from the Berkshire Museum in, Pittsfield, Mass., to the New Britain Museum of American Art, this is a show of about 50 landscapes painted in the Berkshires between the early 1830's and the late 1890's.


College Football: West;   Colorado Rallies To Win, 20-14
LEAD: Darian Hagan, the Colorado quarterback, ran for two third-quarter touchdowns before leaving the game with a shoulder injury, rallying his team to a 20-14 victory over Washington today.
Hagan scoring runs of 15 and 3 yards helped erase a 7-3 halftime deficit, and the cornerback Deon Figures sealed the triumph with an end-zone interception on fourth down with 59 seconds left after Washington had driven to the Colorado 7-yard line.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on page 1 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the avant-garde misstates the schedule for the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
It begins Tuesday and runs for 10 weeks, not 5.


School Football;   A New Moore at Hempstead
LEAD: If you ask Charles Moore how often he gets to see his older brother play professional football, he would look at you and say, ''He does his thing and I do mine.''


On Language;   Microwave of the Future
LEAD: Jimmy, the most noteworthy item about electronic communication today is the fixation on viewer-avoiding transitions.
This thought hit me upon receipt of a few items of the latest dialect from Lexicographic Irregular T. Brokaw of New York and Riyadh, after a brief sojourn in Montana.


Q and A
LEAD:
Broker's Fees
Question: I put my house up for sale about a year ago on a open listing.
One buyer has seen it three times, coming with different brokers from different realty companies each time.
If he buys the house and I pay a 6 percent commission to the broker making the sale, do I owe a full or partial commission to the others?


Truth of Reputation?
LEAD: In seeking to suppress the Vietnam documents [the Pentagon Papers] , the Government asserted that their continued publication in The New York Times would ''cause irreparable injury to the defense interests'' of the U.S.
If this assertion were true, the case against publication would have been strong indeed.


Review/Rock;   A Nostalgic Mix of Tex-Mex Styles
LEAD: Popular music respects no borders, and Tex-Mex rock is proud of its dual nationality, mixing up Mexican polkas, Texas blues, rhythm-and-blues and rock and roll.
The Texas Tornados, who opened a two-night stand at the Lone Star Roadhouse on Thursday night, bring together four of the most important figures in music from the United


Question Of the Week;   How Should The Yanks Rebuild The Team?
LEAD: The Yankee management must nurture Kelly, Maas, Leyritz and Azocar and develop future star players from its farm system.
Veterans such as Mattingly, Sax and Espinoza must serve as a solid foundation and example for younger players.
Quality pitchers should be sought from current major league rosters and, by all means, the able and stable Stump Merrill should be retained as field manager.


Among the Crocodiles
LEAD: From the paved road leading into Kakadu National Park the landscape is not terribly remarkable.
As my mother, who lives in Memphis, Tenn., observed leaving Darwin, the capital of Australia's Top End and 75 miles from the park's entrance: ''It looks a lot like Arkansas to me.'' (All Tennesseans maintain the provincial belief that Arkansas is a dull state.) But as we neared the park things slowly began to change.


Takacs String Quartet To Open Emelin Series
LEAD: THE Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck opens its Distinguished Guest Artist series Thursday at 8 P.M. with a recital by the Takacs String Quartet, whose members are natives of Hungary now living in the United States.


BUSH DROPS FIGHT FOR A LOWER TAX ON CAPITAL GAINS
LEAD: The White House today dropped its insistence on a tax break for capital gains, opening the way for a compromise with Congress on reducing the Federal budget deficit.


Rice Better Than Evans
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Legislators Agree to Condemn Jay Property
LEAD: A NEW chapter in the long history of the Jay property opened last week when the Board of Legislators voted to condemn the 23-acre site, which adjoins the county-owned Marshlands Conservancy in Rye and has been the focus of a decadelong dispute over development.


Kathleen Dougherty Weds
LEAD: Kathleen Mary Dougherty, a registered nurse at the White Plains Medical Center, and Michael William Troiano, an assistant treasurer at Chase Manhattan Bank in New York, were married yesterday at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bedford, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Kauta officiated.
The couple's parents are Mr.


Sakharov's Answer
LEAD: Mikhail P. Malyarov (First Deputy Prosecutor General) -When you began a few years ago to engage in what you call public activity, we could not possibly ignore it and we paid close attention.
We assumed that you would express your opinion as a Soviet citizen about certain shortcomings and errors, without attacking the Soviet social and political system.


Formulating Impeachment
LEAD: The impeachment process under way poses novel and unusually difficult challenges to lawyers, to men in government, indeed to all of us.
We write upon an almost clean slate.
Little law or political precedent is available to guide the hard decisions.
Yet, regardless of the outcome, the value of the proceeding will depend on whether the process is so conducted that the country perceives it as a fair and legitimate measure for restoring integrity to government.


My Child, On Flight 103
LEAD: Today is the first anniversary of the worst day of my life.
On Dec. 21, 1988, my only child, Theodora (we called her Theo), was on her way home from London, where she had spent a semester studying drama.
Theo never reached home.
She was murdered by Palestinian terrorists: 269 people died with her.


Review/Film Festival;   A Strange Triangle and Its Aftermath
LEAD: Jacques Doillon's ''Vengeance d'une Femme'' (''A Woman's Revenge'') is described as being ''based loosely'' on Dostoyevsky's novella ''The Eternal Husband,'' which is said to be a classic.


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   Chicken Finds Guises: From Kebabs to Grilled
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Here are some restaurants that offer special chicken dishes.
Darbar


Kathleen Ballou, Banker, Engaged
LEAD: October wedding plans for Kathleen Mary Ballou and Kevin Slattery McCarthy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard McCarthy of Longmeadow, Mass., have been announced by her mother, Mrs.
Robert A. Ballou of Sea Girt, N.J.


Plastic Gnomes in Washington
LEAD: Conscious though I am that the American political structure is as different from the British political structure as chalk from cheese, the Watergate inquiry terrifies me when I watch it on my TV here in London.
It confirms all my suspicions that there are too many men in the world, and that this is not a good thing.


Thomas P. Robinson, TV Executive, 85
LEAD: Thomas P. Robinson, a television executive who was involved in the industry since its early days, died on Friday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
He was 85 years old and lived in retirement in Tequesta, Fla.


Question Of the Week;   How Should The Yanks Rebuild The Team?
LEAD: The Yanks should rebuild by acquiring Rickey Henderson, Winfield, McGee, Bonilla, Whitson, Rijo, Drabek and Tewksbury.
They had all of these guys; obviously, their services were superfluous to the dynasty of disaster in the Bronx.
KEN BROWN
Brooklyn


THE SPORTSCASTERS
LEAD: Charles Siebert was too kind to the tennis coverage on television, in his article ''The Sportscasters,'' (Aug. 19).
A few years ago, during Wimbledon, a sportscaster on American television said, ''Here is how English television covers the match.'' There followed four minutes of blissful silence, with the British announcer mentioning only the score.


For a Special Prosecutor
LEAD: Justice rendered and justice perceived are the indispensable first steps in the journey of a thousand miles back from the political espionage and sabotage understatedly characterized as the Watergate affair, to a plateau of national decency and integrity.


Ted &amp; Mary &amp; Archie &amp; Fido
LEAD: I see that a lot of people are going bisexual this year.
This seems to be different from going homosexual, which was last year, in that the homosexuals weren't going, actually.
Usually they were coming out, whereas the bisexuals like to talk about it, as people do about their travels.
They don't talk, actually; they confess.


Food;   Wunderbar!
LEAD: Though my mother claimed she was born to cooking the way a sultan is born to wives, she did, in fact, very little of it.
To be fair, my mother worked, so when she stepped off the train and sped home in her tiny Ford Anglia at night, she was more than kaput.
Yet on Saturday afternoons, unwound and melancholy, she'd put on her high-heeled slippers and get creative in the kitchen.


Barry Levinson Reaches Out to a Lost America
LEAD: From a black screen, the Yiddish-accented words ring out nostalgically. ''I came to America in 1914, by way of Philadelphia,'' a gentle voice recalls. ''That's where I got off the boat.
And then I came to Baltimore.
It was the most beautiful place you've ever seen in your life.''


THE SPORTSCASTERS
LEAD: There are times when a tennis singles match is covered by as many as five broadcasters.
Apply this to football, and there could be as many as 25 broadcasters telling us what is going on.
Broadcast commentary really isn't necessary in tennis.
Viewers are quite capable of watching two people hit a ball over a net.


By RALF DAHRENDORF; Ralf Dahrendorf, Warden of St. Anthony's College, Oxford, is the author of the forthcoming ''Reflections on the Revolution in Europe.''
LEAD:
TWO STATES - ONE NATION?
By Gunter Grass.
Translated by Krishna Winston with A. S. Wensinger.
123 pp. San Diego:
A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $18.95.


Street-Fighting Woman
LEAD: The F.B.I. told us that violent crimes rose again last year and that forcible rape took the biggest jump of all, a whopping 11 percent.
It is not unrelated that at the age of 38 I have solemnly embarked on a dedicated program of self-defense instruction.


Soviets Hint at a Role In U.N. Military Action
LEAD: The Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, has indicated that if the United Nations Security Council authorizes a military force to act in the Persian Gulf crisis, Soviet troops might take part.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: And the winner is . . . supermarket shopping!
You may well ask: the winner of what?
Based on a rather informal, but extremely earnest, survey of two dozen or so local citizens, supermarket shopping turns out to be the champion in the category of Annoying Chores New Yorkers Hate the Most.


Social Events
LEAD:
Dance at the Plaza


French Foreign Legion Troops Arrive In Gulf Area


Votes in Congress;   Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
LEAD:
Senate
1.
Fuel Efficiency: Vote to cut off debate on a bill that would require car makers to improve fuel efficiency significantly.
Failed 57 to 42 (3 votes short of the 60 needed), Sept. 25.
2.
Abortion Counseling: Vote on an amendment to a family-planning bill that would have permitted federally supported family planning clinics to offer abortion counseling.


From TV to Antietam, Musings on the Civil War
LEAD: It is little more than a long depression in the ground now, weathered smooth and benign by time, like the rest of Antietam Battlefield, America's deadliest killing ground.


Disney Sweeps the Dust Off 'Fantasia' at 50
LEAD: To Walt Disney in 1940, it was classical music illustrated for the masses.
To highbrow critics in 1941, it was a vulgarization of taste.
To hippies in 1969, it was a psychedelic freak out.
And to children of the past half century, it was Mickey Mouse versus the multiplying brooms.


Miracles at a Price
LEAD:
THE BABY DOCTORS
Probing the Limits of Fetal Medicine.
By Gina Kolata.
213 pp. New York:
Delacorte Press. $18.95.


Wall Street;   New Jersey Dilemma: Raise Tolls or Call Bonds?
LEAD: The New Jersey Turnpike Authority has hit a budgetary pothole, with the gap between revenues and expenses expected to hit $94.4 million next year.


College Football;   Alabama Ends 0-3 Slide
LEAD: Alabama ended its longest losing streak in more than three decades and Coach Gene Stallings got his first victory in a 59-28 Southeastern Conference rout of Vanderbilt.


Patty Boas to Marry Gary Edward Paladin
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert H. Boas of New York have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Patty Boas and Gary Edward Paladin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rudolph K. Paladin of St.
Louis.


Jeanne Jennings to Marry M. E. Hendrickson 3d
LEAD: Jean Jennings of Huntington, L.I., has announced January wedding plans for her daughter, Jeanne Elizabeth Jennings, and M. Edmund Hendrickson 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Manville F. Hendrickson of Rye, N.Y.


Streetscapes: The Dorilton;   A Blowzy 1902 Broadway Belle
LEAD: In its day it was considered the architectural equivalent of a fist fight, but critics' tempers have cooled off on the subject of the 1902 Dorilton apartment house at the northeast corner of 71st and Broadway.
Over the years large hunks of its blowzy decoration have been removed, leaving it more curiosity than contretemps.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: Purchasing managers report for September.
Hearing in Los Angeles on a suit by MCA stockholders challenging Matsushita's proposed takeover.
TUESDAY: New home sales for August.
Fed's Open Market Committee meets.
Xerox plans to diplay its first digital copier, which is also a combination computer, printer fax machine and electronic scanner.


Sports of the Times;   The Only Issue is Human Decency
LEAD: In the commotion over the allegations of sexual harassment of Lisa Olson, a sportswriter for The Boston Herald, by five New England Patriots players, too many people have tried to reduce the situation to the issue of whether female reporters belong in a men's locker room.
But that's not the issue.


Elizabeth S. Gillan Is Wed
LEAD: Elizabeth Stuart Gillan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Wilson Gillan of Wilbraham, Mass., was married yesterday at the First Church of Christ Congregational in Springfield, Mass., to Peter Joseph Caulo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Edward Caulo of Centerville, Mass.
The Rev.
Thomas C. Carlton and the Rev.


Katherine Lewis Planning to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Katherine Rush Lewis to Adam Weinstein, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harry Weinstein of Scarsdale, N.Y., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Dr.
Alfred B. Lewis and Mary E. Lewis, both of New York.
The couple plan to marry in October.
Miss Lewis, 27 years old, graduated from the Brearley School and Haverford College.


The Beholder's Eye
LEAD: Scientists still debate the definition of life, so who is to say what art is?
In a case that has seized the attention of the art world, the Contemporary Arts Center in Cincinnati and its director, Dennis Barrie, went on trial last week on charges of pandering obscenity and illegal use of a minor.
At issue were seven photographs by Robert Mapplethorpe that were part of a retrospective of the artist's work at the museum last spring.


Beneath Faded Glamour, a Real Maestro
LEAD: The public image and historical memory of the conductor Leopold Stokowski are bound up inexorably with the Walt Disney film ''Fantasia.'' He and the music he conducts are impressed all over that 1941 classic, even though Disney's heirs misguidedly re-recorded the soundtrack digitally a few years ago.


U.S. AND VIETNAM REPORT PROGRESS ON RESTORING TIES
LEAD: In their highest-level discussions in more than a decade, the United States and Vietnam took what appeared to be a significant step toward the resumption of diplomatic relations yesterday.


My Baseball Years
LEAD: In one of his essays, George Orwell writes that though he was not very good at the game, he had a long hopeless love affair with cricket until he was 16.
My relations with baseball were similar.
Between the ages of 9 and 13, I must have put in a 40-hour week during the snowless months over at the neighborhood playfield - softball, hardball and stickball pick-up games - while simultaneously holding down a full-time job as a pupil at the local grammar school; as I remember it, news of two of the most cataclysmic public events of my childhood - the death of President


Technology;   The Lure of Small Satellites


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Mow if the new lawn is at least three inches tall.
Keep up with planting, particularly container-grown perennials and shrubs; wait until leaves fall to transplant large trees.
Start planting hardy bulbs.
Start raking if the leaves are beginning to fall.
Pick and dry herbs, grasses and strawflowers for winter bouquets.


Reunification II: This Time, No Hobnail Boots
LEAD: In 1871, Germany was unified, and a few years later, The Times of London editorialized darkly: ''We feel that an enormous power for good or evil has risen up somewhat suddenly in the midst of us, and we watch with interested attention for signs of its character and intention.''


Lawyers in Celesteville? Babar Is in Court
LEAD: When Babar returns from the Old Lady's house in the town to the great forest, he brings with him many city things, including a dapper green suit, a derby hat and a red roadster.
But there is one part of grown-up life he does not bring back with him.
He does not bring any lawsuits.


Correction
LEAD: The Data Update chart on Sept. 23 misstated the one-year Treasury security rate.
It was 7.75 percent.


I Don't Want to Be in That Number When the 'Saints' Go Marching In
LEAD: As a former semi-flower child, fervent peace marcher and honorable hippie of the 60's, I find it mildly amusing, at best, to observe the various Presidential hopefuls as they jockey for position.
And as they each proceed to package themselves and become dangerous parodies of one another, it is there that my amusement ends.


Cool Water
LEAD: They were the kind of couple you know have been through deco, retro, Armani, Mizrahi, Nautilus, weight training, rap, punk and fusion, who have postmodern furniture in the living room, lava lamps by the bed and a photograph of James Dean over the toilet.
She had hair like Elvis; he had hair like hers.


Ms. Weaver Plans October Wedding
LEAD: Dr.
Jeanne M. Weaver of Birmingham, Ala., has announced October wedding plans for her daughter Julia Anna Weaver and William N. Bernstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin A. Bernstein of East Rockaway, L.I.


George L. Hubbell Jr., Lawyer, 96
LEAD: George L. Hubbell Jr., a retired partner in the New York law firm of Cullen &amp; Dykman, died on Thursday at his home in Garden City, L.I., at the age of 96.
He died of pneumonia, a spokesman for the law firm said.


Happy Families Are Alike
LEAD: In olden days. two lovers, when they died, in honor of the love they had for one another were often buried together.
Nowadays, instead, they marry.
Children, cars and houses stand above them, mark their place, for there they lie, beneath six feet of mortgage and insurance, locked in an eternal institutional embrace, their shrouds the slick white silk of ''shared experience.


Currency;   Another Big Jump for Gold Prices
LEAD:
$
Last
Previous
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
138.50
136.65
139.00
per Dollar
W.German Mark
1.5670
1.5785
1.8710
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1542
1.1533
1.1770
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.8760
1.8435
1.6172
U.S.


Motorist Aids Cyclist in Distress
LEAD: I write in response to the Aug. 19 article [''A Car Transforms a Good Samaritan'']  from the bicyclist who fell in Montauk and received no assistance from motorists who drove by.
I am sorry for her, and for others who are not helped when they're in need.


College Football;   West Virginia Upsets Pitt
LEAD: Greg Jones threw for two touchdowns and Mike Beasley ran for 135 of his 197 yards and a touchdown in the first half as West Virginia, held to 17 points in its previous two games, exploded for 547 yards to upset its rival Pitt, 38-24, today.


How St. George Ended Up at the U.N.
LEAD: A forty-foot metal statue of St.
George brandishing a crucifix as he slays a nuclear dragon has appeared just inside the United Nations gardens near 47th Street, attracting curious looks from strollers along First Avenue.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, the Chess column diagram on Sept. 23 misplaced a black rook.
It should have been on C6, not D6.


Postings: 7 on Wednesday;   Managing Rentals
LEAD: New York City landlords and managers of small rental properties who feel in need of a business refresher or primer can enroll in a seven-session course at the Cornell University Cooperative Extension, 280 Broadway, at Chambers Street.
The two-hour sessions, beginning at 6 P.M. on each of the next seven


Campus Life: Colorado;   After Coors Gift, Arena Renaming Angers Students
LEAD: Student groups that receive money from the student government at the University of Colorado will no longer be allowed to accept support for fund-raisers and other activities from the Coors Brewing Company, student legislators decided last week.


Wrong on the Berlin Wall - And Most Else
LEAD: It has been a long and rocky road for America's foreign policy elite since Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in 1985.


WILDMON'S WAR ON THE ARTS
LEAD: New York politicians contemplating a run against Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato should file away the paragraph describing his Senate-floor performance, tearing up the catalogue of the Serrano exhibit.
Such demagogic buffoonery may be appropriate for a minister from Tupelo, Miss., but it is surely out of place from a Senator who represents a state so heavily invested in the arts - emotionally, philosophically, spiritually and economically - as New York.


Learning to Live When Life Is a Welsher
LEAD: Midway through ''Falsettoland,'' the stirring musical by William Finn at the Lucille Lortel Theater, a beleaguered housewife named Trina sings of the difficulty of ''holding to the ground, as the ground keeps shifting.''


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: Selective Pickers


Sampling Vermont Cheese at the Source
LEAD: The past decade - boom times for Vermont's specialty food producers - has seen a small renaissance in cheesemaking.
Farmhouse cheeses (made from milk from the resident herd), chevre (goat cheese), fromage blanc (a yogurt-like white cheese), cheddar and cheese spreads all made in Vermont are crowding the dairy aisles in specialty markets and gift shops.


Catholic Education
LEAD: A free spirit is important, leaders of Catholic colleges and universities have argued, to insure academic freedom and to avoid jeopardizing government financing.
For the last several years, however, they have feared a Vatican crackdown.
Last week, many of them were relieved when Archbishop Pio Laghi, a former papal ambassador to the United States who is now head of the Vatican's Congregation for Catholic Education, presented a document upholding independence for the schools.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: The ubiquity of United States coil stamps was born of the explosive growth of mass mailings in the past two decades.
But their extensive use today stands in odd contrast to the reluctance of the post office to develop coil stamps in the early years of this century when mailers' demand also surged.


College Football: Local;   A Backup Passer Rolls for Hofstra
LEAD: Tim Lynch, who replaced the ailing Rhory Moss at quarterback, threw four touchdown passes yesterday as undefeated Hofstra crushed Buffalo, 44-0, at Hofstra Stadium in Hempstead, L.I.


Rural Areas Hurt by Landfill Law
LEAD: The enactment of the Long Island landfill law [''Long Island Flounders in Closing Landfills,'' Aug. 29]  was because of concern that toxins from garbage were poisoning drinking water.
The law indiscriminately affects rural areas that are not in the deep-recharge area and do not have toxins leaking from their garbage sites.


If You Want to Know How Dinkins Is Doing, Just Ask Ed Koch
LEAD: EDWARD I. KOCH was voted out of office last fall but his voice lives on to haunt the man who beat him, Mayor David N. Dinkins.
In his new life as a print and broadcast commentator, Mr.
Koch so regularly takes aim at the Mayor that some wonder whether he is really pontificating or merely vindicating his own legacy.


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
U.S.
TouristsShun RussiaAs Crime Rises Put off by reports of street crime and ethnic violence, the number of Americans visiting the Soviet Union has plummeted this year, Soviet tourism officials and American tour operators say.


Why Cars Need the Surge of Speed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Get Moving on AIDS
LEAD: The time has come for the Government to underwrite a nationwide effort to produce an effective vaccine against HTLV III, the virus that causes AIDS.
Though a frightening new disease, AIDS is no longer so novel that such an effort would be premature.


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD: Bayport
$450,000
88 Gillette Avenue
5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 54-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2 fireplaces, basement; taxes $6,700.
Fort Salonga
$386,000
11 Marion's Lane
3-bedroom, 2 1/2- bath, 11-year-old colonial; dining room, den, 2-car garage, 1.1 acres; taxes $8,500.


Hard-Headed Detente
LEAD: The debate over detente has become so charged with emotion that substance gives way to semantics.


Ms. Lynch Is Wed To R. J. Makin Jr.
LEAD: Madelaine Chauncey Lynch, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George P. Lynch Jr. of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday in Bridgehampton, L.I., to Richard John Makin Jr., the son of Mrs.
Makin of Gloucester, Mass., and the late Mr.
Makin.
The Rev.
Ronald G. Abrams and the Rev.
Charles P. Scott officiated at St.


Wall Street;   Stubbing a Toe on Primerica
LEAD: The markets are clearly of two minds about the Primerica Corporation, the financial conglomerate that owns Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, the Commercial Credit Company and the A. L. Williams insurance operation.


Corrections
LEAD: A dance listing in the Annotated Calendar on Sept. 9 misstated the location for the tour opening of the White Oak Dance Project on Oct. 24.
Because of a producer's change in plans, it will be at the Wang Center for Performing Arts, 270 Tremont Street, Boston.
Ticketmaster: (212)-307-7171.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Chatham
$300,000
173 Hillside Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; new kitchen, rec room, full basement; taxes $3,583.
Howell
$189,900
412 Hulses Corner Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 16-year-old ranch; c/a, fireplace, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $2,900.


Pernicious Thinking
LEAD: It is not that there is no truth in many of the things that people say and believe about the Russians; it is rather that what they say and believe involves a great deal of exaggeration and oversimplification.
And this is serious, because there are times when exaggeration and oversimplification, being harder than falsehood to spot, can be fully as pernicious.


The Drug That Works in Pittsburgh
LEAD: Dressed in a red turtleneck with two pens stuck in the collar, Dr.
Thomas Starzl strides through the mobbed liver transplant clinic at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.
Graying, six feet tall and thin on the verge of being gaunt, Starzl, predominantly a surgeon, is best known as perhaps the world's leading transplant pioneer, and the man who has built


Youth Program's Mixed Day: $100,000 Won, $250,000 Lost
LEAD: A Cambridge, Mass., youth training program hailed as a model for the nation got a dose of good news and a jolt of bad news on the same day last week.


200 Years Of Sexism Rampant
LEAD: Maybe women should use 1976 to challenge the American dream, not celebrate it.
After all, 1776 was the year women's powerlessness was first enshrined in the Constitution.


WILDMON'S WAR ON THE ARTS
LEAD: As a longtime member of New York City's gay and arts communities, I find Wildmon, with his newsletter propagandizing and down-home, good-guy act, to be obnoxious and more than a little fascistic.
It is no less appalling to me, however, that avant-garde artists and the curators who show their work have the audacity to expect funding and support from a Government and populace that their art seems to depise.


Rutgers, Confronts A Crossroads
LEAD: ACROSS from Old Queens here, workers are completing a $9.6 million renovation of Winants Hall, a stately 100-year-old building, in preparation for its dedication in November as a new administrative center.
With the building refurbished inside and out and with the lawn freshly sodded, Winants is yet another example of


Israel's Gains In Lebanon
LEAD: What did Israel gain from the military campaign it undertook in Lebanon?


John Grady, Leader Of Cathedral Music Since '70, Dies at 56
LEAD: John Grady, the director of music for St.
Patrick's Cathedral and an organist there and at the Metropolitan Opera, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 56 years old.


Why the Cutting Edge Has Lost Its Bite
LEAD: Imagine Edouard Manet, that founding figure of modernism, accompanied perhaps by Antonin Artaud, the creator of the post-Surrealist Theater of Cruelty, magically together in the United States and wandering through what is sometimes called the cultural ''cutting edge,'' the present-day avant-garde.


Libby Dowd Wed To Andrew Bailey
LEAD: Elizabeth Weston Dowd, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth L. Dowd Jr. of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday at the Congregational Church to Donald Andrew Bailey, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald O. Bailey of Wayne, Pa.
The Rev.
Charles C. Smith officiated.


A Whiff Of Deflation In the Air
LEAD: Around the world, something very close to a debt panic has begun.
After years of expansion, credit now appears to be contracting.
The great fear, as Nancy Reagan might say, is that borrowers will ''just say no'' when it comes time to repay.


New Federal Law Encourages Fire Safety in Hotels
LEAD: The fire safety of American hotels is taking a big step forward.
This month brought the enactment of a law that will eventually require that 90 percent of civilians traveling on Federal Government business in the United States and its territories stay in hotels with sprinklers and smoke alarms if the Government is to pay the hotel bill.


Witness From the Prosecution
LEAD:
ROUGH JUSTICE
Days and Nights of a Young D.A.
By David Heilbroner.
286 pp. New York:
Pantheon Books. $19.95


Hot Wheels
LEAD: We were college chums. few students on campus could afford a car, never mind a sports car, but this friend was an exception.
A member of a wealthy Pennsylvania family, he had developed a taste for fine automobiles, and sophomore year he showed up with a new Triumph TR 250 roadster in British racing green.


1776 and All That
LEAD:
REDCOATS AND REBELS
The American Revolution Through British Eyes.
By Christopher Hibbert.
Illustrated. 375 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $29.95.


Q and A
LEAD:
Parisian Fashion Shows


CRIME
LEAD: There's a type of mystery that begs to be called the Big Boys' Adventure Book.
The central character, who is always male and often middle-aged, has made a pretty penny at some respectable profession like teaching or dentistry, but he craves more excitement in his life.
If he's lucky, some mad-dog killer will stray onto his suburban patch, and before you can say ''Cancel that 2 o'clock root canal, nurse,'' he's oiled his service revolver and is tearing off in his BMW after truth, justice and kicks.


Greece
LEAD: To the Editor: Americans should know what is happening in Greece.
My family spent $10,000 to stay five weeks in a house by the sea, and we couldn't even flush the toilet.
A strike made electricity (and, as a consequence, water) a scarce commodity.
It is a shame that the Government could not guarantee its citizens and visitors a basic necessity.


We Must Change Our Lives
LEAD:
FREEDOM IN EXILE
The Autobiography of the Dalai Lama.
Illustrated. 288 pp. New York:
A Cornelia &amp; Michael Bessie Book/
HarperCollins. $22.95.
MY TIBET
Text by His Holiness
The Fourteenth Dalai Lama of Tibet.
Photographs by Galen Rowell.
162 pp. Berkeley: Mountain Light Press/
University of California Press.


Review/Film Festival;   A Modernist Approach to Biography
LEAD: Biography, once considered a direct and factual form, long ago gave way to interpretive psychobiography.
Several films to be shown today at the New York Film Festival take that modernist approach, still archaically called avant-garde, and apply it to lives as different as those of Andy Warhol and an Indian classical musician named Siddheshwari Devi.


Review/Music;   Manhattan Symphony on a Forgotten Man
LEAD: For anyone who attended Thursday evening's concert by the Manhattan Symphony and took in the current program of the New York Philharmonic either before or after, a skewed sense of deja vu was inevitable.
The Philharmonic is leading off with two works of Barber, including ''Medea's Dance of Vengeance.


Los Angeles County Deputies Accused of Brutality
LEAD: Last February, William Leonard was stopped by police officers who apparently thought he was armed, was ordered to place his hands behind his head and, as he tried to kneel, was killed by 33 bullets fired into almost every part of his body.
His 18-year-old daughter watched.


Pro Football;   Bears' Motto: Back to Basics
LEAD: At the end of a 6-10 season last December that finished with six consecutive losses and a 26-0 beating by the San Francisco 49ers at Candlestick Park, the Chicago Bears packed their gear and licked their wounds.
The Bears had won five straight divisional titles and Super Bowl XX in 1986, but on that afternoon they were a team in disarray.


No Headline
LEAD: Philip H. Geier Jr. has become a kind of corporate psychiatrist treating a case of schizophrenia at the Interpublic Group of Companies, the largest and oldest advertising conglomerate in the United States.
And at least for the present the treatment seems to be working beautifully.


Scientists Seek One-Shot Children's Vaccine
LEAD: The United Nations Children's Fund and the World Health Organization are calling on world leaders to support an intensified effort to produce a single children's vaccine that could in one shot eradicate diseases that kill nearly eight million children each year and cause some 900 million cases of severe illness.


Pro Football;   Mowatt Issues Statement
LEAD: Zeke Mowatt, the New England Patriots' player accused of making lewd remarks to a female reporter in the team's locker room, has denied the charge while offering an apology, and Victor Kiam, the team owner, has purchased newspaper ads both denouncing the incident and apolgizing for initially trivializing it.


Mr. Nixon's Feelings
LEAD: When Democrat caucuses in Congress threaten to cut off funds if a settlement is not reached by a certain date, they are deliberately encouraging Hanoi's representatives at the peace negotiations to hold off agreement on any kind of a settlement until after that date.
I can understand the frustration which is so rampant in Congressional circles because of Hanoi's backing and filling on provisions for arranging a cease-fire.


Just 85 Shopping Days Left Until Christmas
LEAD: IT began in May.
Late May - Memorial Day to be exact - but May nonetheless.
It was then that I saw my first Christmas ad, the first of the very, very many we will be inundated with between now and Dec. 24.


Lifestyle;   Signs Do the Talking: No Sitting, No Menus, No!
LEAD: New Yorkers, considered to be an extremely vocal lot, are increasingly getting their messages across without saying a word.
They just let their signs do the talking.


Fashion;   Unexpected and Eye-Catching Gloves
LEAD: The most stylish gloves this season reflect trends in ready-to-wear fashions: bright hues, eye-catching details, unexpected textures.


College Football;   Arizona St. Is Upset, 30-9
LEAD: Kent Kiefer and Damon Mays, hometown kids who got away from Arizona State, combined on two touchdown pass plays in the second quarter in helping spark Missouri's 30-9 upset of the Sun Devils today.


Out of the Melting Pot - Into?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Milwaukee Creating 2 Schools for Black Boys
LEAD: With more young black men destined to enter jail than college, this city has opted for a radical experiment in education and socialization: public schools designed specifically for black boys.


Results Plus
LEAD:
Tennis


Susan K. Ziegler Marries Albert Saltiel in New Jersey
LEAD: Susan K. Ziegler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John K. Ziegler of Chatham, N.J., was married there yesterday to Albert Saltiel, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alberto Saltiel of Oakbrook, Ill.
The Rev.
James Mahoney performed the ceremony at the Corpus Christi Roman Catholic Church.


Gregory Ruffa Wed to Lisa Gallagher
LEAD: At St.
Elizabeth's Roman Catholic Church in Milton, Mass., Lisa Marie Gallagher was married yesterday to Gregory James Ruffa.
Msgr.
Thomas Finnegan and the Rev.
John Mahoney performed the ceremony.
The bride, 29 years old, will keep her name.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph C. Gallagher of Milton.


Nancy Bowden Marries
LEAD: Nancy Fletcher Bowden, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. Bowden Jr. of Villanova, Pa., was married yesterday to Marc Edwards, a son of John A. Edwards of Shrewsbury, Shropshire, England, and Joan Croker Edwards of Ringwood, Bournemouth, England.
The Rev.
Edward B. Gammons Jr. officiated at All Saints Episcopal Church in Bay Head, N


Question Of the Week;   How Should The Yanks Rebuild The Team?
LEAD: Pay whatever price is needed for a power hitter.
Strawberry would be great, but there are others out there.
On the mound, the Yankees need to look hard and pay a lot for another starting pitcher.


Susan Jones Is Married
LEAD: Susan J. Jones and John J. McKeon were married at Christ Episcopal Church in Short Hills, N.J., yesterday by the Rev.
Dr.
David St.
George.
Mrs.
McKeon is a daughter of Carolyn W. Jones of Convent Station, N.J., and Harry H. Jones of Califon, N.J.
She is a sales manager for the New Jersey Bell Yellow Pages in Somerset, N.J.


Too Many People Believe Myths of Aging
LEAD: While I realize that Barbara Klaus's article ''Are You Out to Lunch on Your Birthday?'' [Sept. 9]  was meant to be humorous, at the core of the article are the aging myths unfortunately believed by many younger people - and some older ones for whom it's a big source of anxiety.


The Troubles of South Asia Take Over on Campus
LEAD: Struggling to exist on meager budgets while fighting perennial battles to stay open through bouts of political turmoil and violence, the universities of South Asia are in trouble.


Sports of the Times;   Mets Turn Off the Television Set
LEAD: This time there was no sense in Bud Harrelson's trying to exercise X-ray vision through the media swarm so he could watch the Pirates and the Cardinals on the tube, the way he did Friday night when there was still a realistic hope.
He had heard the score, and he knew the score.  ''My family is here,'' Harrelson said, ''and we'll go have something to eat.


The Treasures of Tbilisi
LEAD: It is one of the oldest and most important cities in the Soviet Union, but its character and attitudes are emphatically not Russian.
Far from being a land of snow and ice, it basks in a warm southern sun, and its streets bustle with the animation usually found in Mediterranean ports: Tbilisi, the capital of Soviet Georgia, has retained much of the charm it had in the days when, as the capital of an independent kingdom, it was widely known as


Man of Letters
LEAD: In Hollywood, where Archibald Leach became Cary Grant, the ''X'' rating last week had its name changed to ''NC-17.'' The change, announced by Jack Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Association of America, came amid a rising chorus of complaints that the trade association's rating system was outdated and unfair.


So Young!
LEAD:
RABBIT AT REST
By John Updike.
512 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $21.95.


Applying Imitation Facing Brick
LEAD: BRICK used for decoration - it is called facing or veneer brick - is thinner than ordinary brick, yet requires the same skill and time to apply.


They've All Got Automobiles
LEAD: I came up to the big league 58 years ago this fall in Brooklyn, and if you ask me if I'm discouraged by the state of the world these days, I'd have to say I am disappointed by a few things.


Autumn Game With a Touch of Tuscany
LEAD: THE late Alfredo Viazzi had for years a trio of successful restaurants in Greenwich Village, the best of which was Trattoria da Alfredo, where he served Tuscan food.
In the early 70's, when to most New Yorkers Italian cooking still meant eggplant parmigiana and spaghetti with red clam sauce, his food was a revelation.


Too Much Talk From the Booth
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Take Comfort
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week;   How Should The Yanks Rebuild The Team?
LEAD: 1.
Negotiate contract extension for Sax. 2.
Re-sign Leary, Witt, Righetti. 3.
Trade Hall, Balboni, Cerone. 4.
Trade Blowers for Scott Cooper. 5.
Use Azocar as left-handed d.h. 6.
Platoon Meulens and Maas in left. 7.
Sign Strawberry if he becomes free agent.
KAREN TEACHEY
Colonial Heights, Va.


WILDMON'S WAR ON THE ARTS
LEAD: Bruce Selcraig's article ''Reverend Wildmon's War on the Arts'' (Sept. 2) brings up a moral issue of far greater significance than whether or not the National Endowment for the Arts should offer grants to artists whose work might offend the proprieties of some, or even many, Americans.
If Government grants were to be awarded only to those projects that reflect the values of most


A Holiday Quiets India After a Week of Rioting
LEAD: After a week of disturbances marked by the self-immolation of young Indians protesting the extension of an affirmative action plan for the poor, the cities and towns of north India were largely quiet today as people prepared for a major Hindu holiday.


Victoria Thaler Marries Toby Cabot
LEAD: Victoria Louise Jane Thaler, the daughter of Mrs.
Vincent G. O'Gorman of Chestnut Hill, Mass., and the late Dr.
Richard W. Thaler, was married yesterday to Chilton Lyons Cabot, a son of Lynne O. Cabot of Dedham, Mass., and Chilton S. Cabot of Quincy, Mass.
The Rev.
Spencer M. Rice performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Boston.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:
Q &amp; A
1990. HBO. $92.99. Laser disk, $44.95. 2 hours, 12 minutes. Closed captioned. R.
In one of the richest roles of his career, Nick Nolte is a profane and corrupt New York police detective, the ''grand bigoted center'' of Sidney Lumet's film about racism and ethics in an increasingly pluralistic society.


Moynihan's Law
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tech Notes;   Images of an Atom From an Electron Microscope
LEAD: With conventional electron microscopes, the material under study is illuminated with a broad beam of electrons.
The electrons strike the object, are scattered, detected and then converted into an image.
Because the electrons are scattered, image resolution is too poor to see individual atoms.
Now, a team of researchers at the Oak Ridge National Laboratories in Tennessee has developed a microscope based on what they call Z-contrast imaging.


King's Heritage
LEAD: In death, as in life, the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. has been plastered over thickly with labels: Christian martyr, dreamer, Communist, the black Moses, De Lawd, national hero, womanizer and saint, among others.
A multiplicity of names carries great meaning.
It is significant that Dr.
King's formal birth name, Michael, was changed to Martin Luther in 1934, when he was 5 years old, and it is also significant that the name of his people is once more the subject of internal debate - this time whether ''black'' should give way to ''African-American'' as '


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ending Sept. 15
MANHATTAN
Greenwich Village
$860,000
58 Horatio Street
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, 4-story, Greek-Revival town house; dining room, center chimney, 4 fireplaces, south garden, landmark district; 19- by 55-ft. lot; taxes $4,600 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)


Of Convicts, Brutality And the Power of Theater
LEAD: The actors are having a bit of trouble unraveling Timberlake Wertenbaker's play ''Our Country's Good.'' This play-within-a-play, about the first theatrical performance in 18th-century Australia, requires that the actors play not only actors but also opposite sexes, as well as British convicts and officers.


TOP GERMAN COURT REJECTS VOTE RULE
LEAD: West Germany's highest court today struck down the election rules prepared for the first all-German vote in December, saying that they posed unfair obstacles to small political groups.


Don't Bash the Bottom Line
LEAD: To the Editor:


Operatic Winds Blowing Every Which Way
LEAD: Never, in the history of any art form, does all creative activity appear to be heading in the same direction at once.
That easy truism is vividly illustrated by the confused state of operatic staging and design today.
It is as if two warriors were mounted on the same horse facing in opposite directions, both waving swords and crying ''Charge!


Style Makers;   Carol Green, Girdle Designer
LEAD: When Carol Green couldn't find a size-6 girdle in black to wear under an evening dress two years ago, she knew she was onto something.


Suspect Dead Inside Church; Brooklyn Pastor Is Queried
LEAD: A man believed to be a burglar was found shot to death in a Brooklyn church early yesterday, and the police later questioned and then released the pastor, one of a group of ministers who acknowledged last spring that they had taken up arms to protect themselves and their churches from criminals.


College Football;   For Once, Irish Win Easily
LEAD: There was no need for narrow escapes and last-minute heroics by the Fighting Irish this afternoon in their game against Purdue.


Checklist for Car Shoppers
LEAD: Taking a new car home is fun. Shopping for it often isn't.


Kimberly Betz Married To David M. Woodman
LEAD: Kimberly A. Betz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles K. Betz of New Caanan, Conn., was married there yesterday to David M. Woodman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Woodman of Laurel Hollow, L.I.
The Rev.
James J. Benson officiated at the United Methodist Church.
Mrs.
Woodman, 27 years old, is the assistant to the president, and her husband, 31, is the president of the Woodman Construction Company and Punchlist Inc.


What Would We Do Without Evil?
LEAD:
A GOOD BABY
By Leon Rooke.
298 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf.
$19.95.


Sins That Glow in the Dark
LEAD:
MY HARD BARGAIN
Stories.
By Walter Kirn.
145 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95


WILDMON'S WAR ON THE ARTS
LEAD: It seems Wildmon's son, Tim, reports that his father likes to relax at home by watching nature shows on PBS.
The nature specials are featuring more and more mating footage because it genuinely fascinates us.
Does the good reverend change the channel at graphic scenes depicting the wooing of a female Australian fruit bat by her visibly tumescent mate, or does he remain riveted in his comfy armchair?


Henrietta Walsh Weds
LEAD: Henrietta Virlinda Gibson Walsh, a student at the Franklin Pierce Law Center in Concord, N.H., was married yesterday to David John Luneau, a senior engineer at Summa Four, a telecommunications concern in Manchester, N.H.
The Rev.
Thomas Genis officiated at St.
Matthew's Roman Catholic Cathedral in Washington.


Brooklyn Drive-By Shooting Leaves One Dead, 2 Injured
LEAD: One man was killed and two were injured yesterday in a drive-by shooting in Brooklyn, the police said.


Bhutto to Face a Judge in Response to Charges of Corruption
LEAD: Pakistan's ousted Prime Minister, Benazir Bhutto, said today that she would appear before a tribunal that would decide her political future.


Review/Rock;   The Power Of the Waif
LEAD: The Sundays' show at the Ritz on Wednesday cruised along nicely until it hit a reef of coyness, then sank.
The band, from England, has been successful on the college circuit, offering airy, elongated tunes that conjure up paradisaical images.
Major or ambiguous harmonies support pretty melodies sung by Harriet Wheeler, and the whole world seems fine.


Death Row
LEAD: In October 1983, four days before he was to be executed in the electric chair at the Florida state prison at Starke, something took place that enraged Shabaka Sundiata Waglini more than any single event during his nearly 10 years on death row.
They came into his cell and measured him for his burial suit.


Linda Ianieri Wed To W. J. Mosconi
LEAD: St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New York was the setting yesterday for the wedding of Linda Helen Ianieri and William John Mosconi.
The Rev.
Damien O'Connell performed the ceremony.


A Few Pounds Can Make Race
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD: LIAR'S POKER: Rising Through the Wreckage on Wall Street, by Michael Lewis. (Penguin, $4.95.) Long before he was 30, Michael Lewis landed a job at Salomon Brothers, joining a culture of high-stakes gamblers who put moneymaking above everything else.
He is ''as good a writer as he was a bond salesman,'' Richard L.


Helen Whitehead Is Wed
LEAD: Helen Watts Whitehead, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Whitehead of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Peter Crane Kirwan Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kirwan of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert Wellman, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Maryland Club of Baltimore.


The Third World War
LEAD: Very few have noticed, or have had the courage to admit, that World War III has already happened.
It ended this year - with the free world soundly defeated.


Virginia C. Corpening to Marry Henry W. Ijams
LEAD: Virginia T. Corpening and A. Glenn Corpening 3d, both of High Point, N.C., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Virginia Clay Corpening and Henry Wigglesworth Ijams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seton Ijams of Bowdoinham, Me.


Margaret Salisbury Marries Thomas W. Burdick
LEAD: Margaret Walker Salisbury, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gifford R. Salisbury of Buffalo, was married yesterday to Thomas Walton Burdick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walton E. Burdick of Mount Kisco, N.Y.
The Rev. Charles Kavanaugh, a Roman Catholic priest, and the Rev. John


U.S. Explores New Strategies to Limit Weapons of Mass Destruction
LEAD: Iraq's emergence as a regional superpower, bristling with missiles and chemical arms and close to producing nuclear ones, is prodding the Bush Administration to consider new strategies to stem the worldwide spread of mass-destruction weapons, according to Government officials.


It's on That Avenue Called 42d Street
LEAD: SHAKESPEARE wrote that all the world's a stage and all the men and women merely players.
He might have added that most of the players want to be stars.


Morristown Show Is Lure for Collectors
LEAD: CRAFT collecting can be habit forming.
Just ask inveterate collectors; they will be easy to spot among the nearly 15,000 visitors who are expected to turn out for the Morristown Craftmarket next weekend.


The Loneliness of Divorce
LEAD: THEY walked into the room one by one.
A quick glance at those already there, a hesitant smile at eyes that connected, and each person quickly took a seat at the T-shape conference table.
Fourteen women and one man gathered as unknown colleagues venturing into unknown territory.


Crews Get a Third of Oil From Barge Spill
LEAD: Cleanup crews collected 15,000 gallons of oil yesterday from the Kill van Kull, about a third of what spilled into the waterway when an unlicensed barge sank, the Coast Guard said.


Presenting Folk Art's Greatest Hits
LEAD: Five years ago Jean Lipman, the doyenne of folk-art collectors, began discussing the decline in quality of the art with Robert Bishop, the director of New York's Museum of American Folk Art.
Their talks resulted in ''Five-Star Folk Art,'' a museum show and book that present some of the genre's most memorable portraits, weather vanes, quilts, furniture and trade figures.


Official Says Soviet Blast Affected 120,000
LEAD: An explosion at a nuclear fuel processing plant in the Soviet republic of Kazakhstan this month may have contaminated 120,000 people, a local environmental official said today.


Connecticut River Valley Provides Concert's Theme
LEAD: ''HARTFORD, Northhampton and Saybrook'' is the umbrella title that covers a touring concert of music written, published or performed in the Connecticut River Valley before 1825.
The brain child of Neely Bruce and his American Music-Theater Group, the program ''features pieces selected to demonstrate the variety of the material and the geographical spread of music throughout the entire river valley during this period,'' he said.


Deaf Ears
LEAD: To the Editor:


Autumn Game With a Touch of Tuscany
LEAD: THE late Alfredo Viazzi had for years a trio of successful restaurants in Greenwich Village, the best of which was Trattoria da Alfredo, where he served Tuscan food.
In the early 70's, when to most New Yorkers Italian cooking still meant eggplant parmigiana and spaghetti with red clam sauce, his food was a revelation.


China's Doubt On Soviets
LEAD: A few weeks ago, I found myself in Peking for what turned out to be a series of discussions about the triangular relationship among Washington, Moscow and Peking.
What came across was a rather pessimistic view both of Chinese-Soviet and American-Soviet relations, along with greater - if cautious - hope for improved Chinese


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article last week about Volkswagen A.G. referred incorrectly to a sensor used on an experimental car that can park itself electronically.
It is ultrasonic, not supersonic.


Far Beyond the Fringe
LEAD: In April 1961, the fourth man of a comedy revue seemed quiet and less anarchic than his fellow performers.
He and his cohorts - Jonathan Miller, Peter Cook and Dudley Moore - had created a new satirical revue called ''Beyond the Fringe,'' and they were doing a run-through of the show in a theater bar in London for a prospective producer.


Campus Life: Oklahoma;   State Regents Propose 'No Pass No Play' Plan
LEAD: A proposed ''no pass no play'' rule governing sports and other extracurricular activities for Oklahoma college students is causing an uproar on campuses and becoming an issue for political campaigns.
If approved, state education officials say, Oklahoma could be the first to have such a rule on a statewide college basis.


Perspectives: East Side Housing;   Zoning's Potent Impact on Development
LEAD: A new apartment house that may be the last of its kind on a wide cross street on the Upper East Side is on the point of coming on the rental market.
It is called the Lucerne - at 350 East 79th Street, on the southwest corner of First Avenue - and its design points up one of the dilemmas of East Side zoning: How to limit the height of new buildings without creatinng still another blow to housing production.


Kuwaitis Say U.S. Doubts Embargo Will Get Iraq Out
LEAD: Senior Kuwaiti officials say they believe the Bush Administration has concluded that it can no longer rely on the embargo of Iraq to force the Iraqi army out of the Persian Gulf sheikdom.


Lit Wit
LEAD:
HISTORICAL FICTIONS: Essays.
By Hugh Kenner. (North Point, $24.95.) In these book reviews and short essays, Hugh Kenner is like the albatross in Baudelaire's poem: his giant wings prevent him from walking.
His mind hefts too much bulk for these cramped forms, and why shouldn't it?
A professor of English at Johns Hopkins University, the author of 24 books, personal friend to Ezra Pound and Samuel Beckett, Mr.


17-Year-Old Girl Shot As She Walks in Park
LEAD: A 17-year-old girl was wounded yesterday afternoon by a single bullet, apparently fired from a distance, as she was walking with her boyfriend in Inwood Hill Park in the Inwood section of Manhattan, the police said.


THE SPORTSCASTERS
LEAD: Perhaps Bud Collins, on-air at Wimbledon, said it best, ''Let's just watch.''
L. RICHARD FRIED
Carlsbad, Calif.


Environment Bankruptcy
LEAD: The Superfund is a fiasco, and the debate over the terms of its renewal after its expiration Oct. 1 reveals the bankruptcy of the environmental movement.


Julie B. Furman Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Julie Beth Furman's engagement to Edward Michael Rosenthal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerrold P. Rosenthal of East Meadow, L.I., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Furman of New York.
A November wedding is planned.


Evening Hours;   Celebrations And Benefits
LEAD: A fanfare of trumpets in the lobby signaled the opening gala of Carnegie Hall's centennial season Wednesday.
The concert was followed by an opulent dinner dance in the palatial great hall and salons of the Metropolitan Club, which will celebrate its centennial next year.


Maura Kehoe Is Wed to David Collins
LEAD: Maura Ann Kehoe and David Charles Collins were married yesterday at the Seawanhaka Corinthian Yacht Club at Centre Island, L.I., by the Rev.
Eric Markman, a Presbyterian minister.
Mrs.
Collins is the daughter of Kathleen McManus Kehoe of Glen Cove, L.I., and John P. Kehoe of New York.
Mr.
Collins is a son of Elizabeth Booth of Littleton, Colo., and Timothy Collins of


GARBO'S REFUGE
LEAD: The photographs accompanying Gray Horan's article about her great aunt, Greta Garbo, were thrilling, providing a glimpse into a world I never dreamed I would see (''Garbo's Refuge,'' Sept. 2).
The tantalizing view of Garbo's legendary collections offers proof of the exquisite (and shrewd) taste the actress was so long rumored to have had.


A Triathlete at Age 60: Defying the Expected
LEAD: WHEN she is just taking it easy, Ethel Autorino bikes 50 miles a week, runs 30 miles and swims another 7.
But when Ms.
Autorino, who is 60 years old, trains for a major competition, it is another story altogether.
Then the numbers soar.


Board Eligibility
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Thai Politician, a Break From Retirement
LEAD: Now 79 years old, Kukrit Pramoj, one of the most revered figures in Thai political and intellectual life, has embarked on what he agrees is a kind of mad second childhood.


Miss Trivilino Weds
LEAD: Anna Dessy Trivilino, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Alfred B. Trivilino of Jamaica Estates, Queens, was married yesterday to Robert Michael Gargiulo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert M. Gargiulo, also of Jamaica Estates.
The Rev.
Thomas Joyce performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Immaculate Conception in Jamaica Estates.


Ms. Locke Plans A Fall Wedding
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Locke of New York and Waccabuc, N.Y., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter, Katie Locke, and Oren Rod Aviv, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David G. Aviv of New York.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Patricia Hodge Steps Off the Page
LEAD: When British Television and film directors are looking for style and poise with a strong sexual undercurrent, they tend to send for Patricia Hodge.
She played the fiction-writing mistress in the BBC's version of Fay Weldon's ''Life and Loves of a She-Devil''; the languid, classy, dog-toting Monica in ''Hotel du Lac,'' and the deceptive, enigmatic Emma in the film of Harold Pinter's ''Betrayal.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, excerpts last Sunday from a document described by the Iraqi Government as a transcript of a meeting between President Saddam Hussein and the United States Ambassador to Iraq misattributed some remarks.
A corrected version of the passage appears today on page 21.


The Inn Is Old, but the Menu Is Not
LEAD: LIKE the buggy whip, the village of Ivoryton's raison d'etre disappeared long ago.
Once the center of a thriving industry in piano keyboards, in an era when the keys were made of elephant tusks, Ivoryton derived its name from its major industry, and some of the imposing houses along the main street belonged to merchants in the ivory trade.


Old Angers Still Fresh As Indians Meet Lujan
LEAD: At one of the largest gatherings of American Indian tribal leaders in recent years, the meeting itself became the most contentious issue, with some Indians raising the oldest charge of all against the Federal Government: trickery.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International?/21


Should Jews Criticize Israel?
LEAD:
THE FUTURE OF THE JEWS
By David Vital.
161 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press. $18.95.


Question Of the Week;   How Should The Yanks Rebuild The Team?
LEAD: Shop the free-agency market, possibly pick up a bargain being foolishly discarded by the contenders, but don't trade Yankee youth for declining veterans.
Patience.
MARC FITZGERALD
New York


Israel
LEAD: To the Editor: Having just returned from Israel, I was amused by the concern of the Tourism Commissioner for North America for Israel over the various exchange rates for the shekel and the dollar recently quoted in the Travel section (Letters on Travel, Aug. 5).
What Raphael Farber should be doing is informing the tourist that in Israel there is no need to change dollars for shekels.


Insensitive on Palestinians?
LEAD: I have been charged with being rigidly insensitive to the question of the Palestinian Arabs.
I am supposed to have said, ''There are no Palestinians.'' My actual words were: ''There is no Palestinian people.
There are Palestinian refugees.'' The distinction is not semantic.
My statement was based on a lifetime of debates with Arab nationalists who vehemently excluded a separatist Palestinian Arab nationalism from their formulations.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have several hardwood floors that are badly scratched in several places.
There are black marks where a heavy piece of furniture was moved.
Is there any way I can restore the finish in these areas?


Horse Racing;   Sewickley Scores Upset; Housebuster Runs Sixth
LEAD: Sewickley ran his best race of the year to win the $236,800 Vosburgh Stakes at Belmont Park yesterday while Housebuster turned in the worst performance of his career and finished a dismal sixth as the 3-to-10 favorite.


Autumn Game With a Touch of Tuscany
LEAD: THE late Alfredo Viazzi had for years a trio of successful restaurants in Greenwich Village, the best of which was Trattoria da Alfredo, where he served Tuscan food.
In the early 70's, when to most New Yorkers Italian cooking still meant eggplant parmigiana and spaghetti with red clam sauce, his food was a revelation.


Mutual Funds;   Good Health in a Bad Market
LEAD: Celebration and chaos drove the stock market in the third quarter as the Dow Jones industrial average flirted with 3,000 in July only to nosedive after Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2.
Stock funds followed suit, with the average fund losing 15.5 percent for the quarter ended Sept. 27, according to Lipper Analytical Services Inc..


William Stewart Weds Amy Geer
LEAD: Montrey Amy Geer, an investment banking consultant, and William Hadden Stewart, the editor of Eastern Europe Times, a daily business and financial newsletter, both in Washington, were married yesterday at St.
James's Episcopal Church in Monkton, Md., by the Rev.
Heyward H. Macdonald.


'Texasville' Isn't Deja Vu All Over Again
LEAD: The dictionary defines it as ''a literary work continuing the course of a narrative begun in a preceding one,'' but Hollywood sees it differently.
A sequel, most likely, means more of the same.
These days a successful film is no sooner off the drawing board than someone is ready to add a ''II'' to its title and send the same characters jumping, a bit more wearily, through the same hoops.


Behind Iraqi's Oratory, Cautious Game Is Seen
LEAD: In the city's hotels, officials of President Saddam Hussein's Information Ministry have set out, in several foreign languages, an imposing array of speeches and statements that Mr.
Hussein has made since Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2.


'The Whole City Seen the Flames'
LEAD:
PHILADELPHIA FIRE
By John Edgar Wideman.
199 pp. New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $18.95.


About Cars;   Will Saturn Weather Geo's Storm?
LEAD: It will be interesting to see what happens when General Motors finally gives birth to its new baby, the Saturn.
Will buyers flock to ooh and ahh.
To coo, perhaps to buy?


Mass for Children


Bringing a Touch Of Latin Sunniness To Amsterdam
LEAD: It's American night at the Holland Festival.
That means hot dogs and Heineken, red and white marshmallows and Dutch doughnuts made of heavy cake and dripping in sticky syrup.
It means the highly refined Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra has temporarily exchanged the near-perfect sonics of its wondrous hall, the Concertgebouw, for the antiseptic sound of a convention center, where an audience of 4,600 can be accommodated on folding chairs, with plenty of room left for television cameras to capture Riccardo


Ministry For Gays Is Revived
LEAD: After a rocky start, an Episcopal ministry for gay men and lesbians is resuming here with a new director, a renewed church welcome to spiritually isolated homosexuals, and a quieter approach to the sensitive issue of blessing gay and lesbian relationships.


With or Without Art, Performance Perseveres
LEAD: The problem with jazz documentaries is that they rarely get the right balance beween art and music.
THELONIOUS MONK; STRAIGHT, NO CHASER (1990, Warner, $89.95), to be released Oct. 17, goes easy on the art.
Unfortunately, the commentary is rudimentary, and there's virtually no explanation about Monk's importance.


The Executive Computer Is It a Price War? Maybe Not, but Discounts Are Spreading
LEAD: Almost all the major computer makers have sharply cut prices on desk-top machines and memory chips in recent weeks, creating a bonanza for computer buyers.
Analysts stopped short of characterizing the recent moves a price war, but the various camps are maneuvering into position, both offensive and defensive.


C. J. Morley Weds Melissa Slingluff
LEAD: The marriage of Melissa King Slingluff, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Haines Slingluff Jr. of Rumson, N.J., to Christopher John Morley, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas James Morley of Lloyd Neck, L.I., took place yesterday at St.
George's-by-the-River Episcopal Church in Rumson.
The Rev.
George Willis officiated.


Managing;   Corporate Donations Under Attack
LEAD: From Philip Morris to the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, some of America's biggest companies are being attacked by special-interest groups for donating money to causes the critics simply don't like.
As a result, companies are growing more frightened of controversy and are reassessing their donations, turning philanthropy into a image-boosting tool instead.


Baseball;   It's Just About Over as Cubs Beat Mets
LEAD: The afternoon and arguably the season having been wasted, the Mets exited the dugout and stole one final glance at the scoreboard, desperate for a late change in the lopsided score from St.
Louis.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We are ready to defend our country, but we want to be supported and respected for what we're doing.''
- Lieut. Brian Vaughn
of the Army,
in Saudi Arabia.
[1:5.]


Gathers Suits Are Restricted
LEAD: A court has thrown out parts of negligence lawsuits filed in the death of Hank Gathers, ruling that Gathers's aunt and brothers cannot sue for emotional distress inflicted when the college player collapsed on a basketball court and later died.
California's Civil Code requires plaintiffs in such cases to be heirs or parents.


Suzanna Benson Weds
LEAD: Suzanna May Benson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Guy K. Benson of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Kevin Michael Rumon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth A. Rumon of Delmont, Pa.
The Rev.
Joseph H. Gilmore officiated at the South Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Rumon, 27 years old, graduated from Skidmore College and is a consultant to the South Central Connecticut Water Authority in New Haven.


Useless 'Japan-Bashing'
LEAD: There are several possible things to do when you don't know what else to do about a problem: You can rant and rave, kick a door, look for a Communist or - the latest fad - jump on Japan.


Fashion;   For Some Enchanted Evenings
LEAD: Even before the leaves began to turn, the fall social season burst into bloom in New York last week with the opening of the Metropolitan Opera and Carnegie Hall's 100th anniversary gala.
Your own calendar may not list such high-voltage parties, but there are sure to be special evenings that call for special clothes.


Design;   COMING OF AGE
LEAD: Last year, it was the new kid on the block.
This year, the International Antique Dealers Show is seen as the first indicator of the direction that the art market will take.
Although only in its second year, the show has fast eclipsed all the other American antiques events with its seriousness and its outstanding quality of offerings.


Washington Holds the Key
LEAD: While the situation in the occupied territories continues to deteriorate, neither the Palestinians nor the Israelis can or will make the first genuine move toward reconciliation.
Only strong action from Washington can end the violence.


Why I Left America, And Why I Am Returning
LEAD: I am often asked why I want to return to the U.S.
This question never fails to bowl me over, and I find it impossible to answer.
I feel it is an improper question.
Most people who ask are not really interested in that question.
What they want to know is what will I do if they allow me to return.


Sports People;   Kings Sign Simmons
LEAD: THE way Dick Motta, the coach of the Sacramento Kings, sees it there's not much worse than an unsigned rookie. ''It's been my experience,'' he said, ''that two things tend to happen when a rookie holds out.
Both are bad.
One is that the veterans who get started on time get upset when the rookie finally signs and shows up.


Pro Football;   Eason Not Bitter in Return
LEAD: With the Jets traveling to New England to face the Patriots in Foxboro Stadium today, the obvious questions arose for Tony Eason during the week.
Would the Jets' backup quarterback be going up ahead of time and was he eager to get into the game against his former teammates?


Visions of Home;   As Welfare Hotels Return, Children Recall What Life Inside Was Once Like
LEAD: Every Wednesday I have to go to the Barber Shop and have Vincent shape my hair.
He does absolutely nothing but talk and swiggles me around in that chair and hurts my neck with that whiskbroom.
Sometimes I sklonk him in the kneecap.
Vincent says that if I am not careful I am not going to have a hair on my head by the time I'm 7 for Lord's sake.


Headliners;   New York City's Plan to Fight AIDS in School
LEAD: It has been an accepted practice to fight disease in children through public school health programs for most of this century.
Now in New York City it is not just measles, whooping cough, polio - it is also AIDS.


Soviet Shopping: the Lines Worsen
LEAD: In her life's routine of waiting in food shops, Nina Novikova likes to let her mind drift back to the old days, so she can picture the sugar-plum consumables that once were, and imagine she is sated amid the daily hordes of her fellow hunters and gatherers.


Crystal Night: Vienna, '38
LEAD: The day began with a thudding.
Jolts waked me.
It was six in the morning.
We were Jews in Vienna in 1938.
Everything in our lives, including our beds, stood on a cliff.


Amid Socratic Groves, a Place For Thinkers and Dreamers
LEAD: In a museum world that grows more giddy by the hour, an example of quite another sort is being set by the Art Museum here, which reopened early this year after a four years' closure for expansion and renovation.


Works in Progress;   The Scary 64
LEAD: Analysis of a pap smear, the early-detection test for cervical cancer, is still performed manually.
A smear may comprise 100,000 or more cells, as few as half a dozen of which, in an afflicted woman, may be abnormal; the analysis is conducted by a technician - a cytotechnologist - with a microscope, who may examine 100 slides a day.


Tell Me About It, Lucky
LEAD:
LADY BOSS.
By Jackie Collins.
608 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.95.


About Men;   The Puzzle Of '42
LEAD: It was an old cross word puzzle that reminded me of Shakespeare's seven ages and made the point that we are different people in different theaters at each stage.
Recently, while doing research, I was going through old newspapers and found the puzzle in a Sunday New York Times dated March 22, 1942.


Year Later, Dinkins's Friends in the Unions Are Facing Their Contracts' End
LEAD: Most of New York City's municipal unions were marching at David N. Dinkins's side a year ago, campaigning for his election as Mayor.
But with two contracts to expire at midnight tonight, the unions now face him across the table in hard bargaining for raises at a time when the city says it cannot afford them.


Haiti, Easing Uncertainty, Plans Elections Dec. 16
LEAD: After months of political uncertainty deepened by the recent return from exile of two widely feared figures of the deposed Duvalier dictatorship, Haitian electoral officials have announced plans to hold national elections in December.


Flowers to Match Autumn's Leaves
LEAD: CHRYSANTHEMUMS are for patient gardeners.
The plants emerge as tiny shoots from their winterlong sleep in early spring, then grow and grow.
They do nothing all summer except take up space.
Most gardeners relegate chrysanthemums to the border.


Applying Imitation Facing Brick
LEAD: BRICK used for decoration - it is called facing or veneer brick - is thinner than ordinary brick, yet requires the same skill and time to apply.


Less Dumping, More Bluefish
LEAD: When Jim Vrettos recently took his first look at the ocean shortly after sunup from the dunes at Hook Pond Beach, his scientific eye spotted the violent roiling of the waters close to shore that could mean only one thing: bluefish, hundreds of them, indeed whole schools of blues chasing panicky baitfish onto the beaches.


Joi Katz Plans to Wed Peter Baum This Fall
LEAD: November wedding plans for Joi Lisa Katz and Peter David Baum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sumner G. Baum of White Plains, have been made known by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard H. Katz of the Port Liberte section of Jersey City.


WILDMON'S WAR ON THE ARTS
LEAD: Despite the attempt to characterize the N.E.A. controversy as a struggle between artistic freedom and censorship, the real issue is whether art should be publicly subsidized and, if so, with what restrictions as to content.
No one is seriously contending that works of art should be censored, but rather than certain works should not be funded at public expense.


Style Makers;   Ken Goffman and Alison Kennedy, Magazine Editors
LEAD: ''We want to be the Rolling Stone of the information age,'' said Ken Goffman, founder and editor in chief of Mondo 2000, an irreverent, year-old quarterly ''mutazine'' whose readers are likely to view computers as the newest key to an expanded consciousness.


A Different View Of Alzheimer's Disease
LEAD: I could not believe what I was reading.
Surely I had missed the subtle clue that would help me to understand the imaginative article, ''Memory May Be Gone, But Rituals Persist'' (Opinion, July 29).


The Role Slides Play in Judging Art
LEAD: SOONER or later, most contemporary artists confront the need to photograph their work.
Slides have become a fact of life in juried exhibitions, and artists hoping for shows in distant cities have little choice but to send photographs.


Voters Keep Rejecting Their Towns' Budgets
LEAD: OXFORD'S First Selectman, Raymond L. Drapko, will be spending the next several days cutting the budget that the voters sent back to him.


It May Be War, But It's Not In Video Stores
LEAD: ''FOR THIS ONE I WANTED TO CARVE THE territory finely,'' said Ken Burns, producer of ''The Civil War,'' the acclaimed documentary aired on PBS last week.
Mr.
Burns was discussing the video release of his latest work on two separate sets of cassettes - one from PBS Video (for schools, libraries and other institutions) and the other from Time-Life


Mary Jarratt Marries William Dunn
LEAD: Mary Claiborne Jarratt, a food and pharmaceutical marketing consultant, and William Wyly Dunn, chairman of the International Business Law Firm, both in Washington, were married there yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church at Lafayette Square.
The Rev.
Dr.
John C. Harper performed the ceremony.


West End Story: Sondheim Mania Hits London
LEAD: It's been building for years and finally erupted over the last 12 months: a London musical landscape in which almost everything seems to be coming up Sondheim.


Criticizing Sentencing Rules, U.S. Judge Resigns
LEAD: Federal District Judge J. Lawrence Irving, who has presided over a series of highly publicized cases in San Diego, has announced that he is resigning because he believes Federal sentencing guidelines are too harsh.


World Markets;   Shopping for British Stock Bargains
LEAD: To many investors, Paul Walton may sound like a crazy optimist when he gives his opinion on British stocks. ''We're saying buy, buy and buy some more,'' said the equities strategist at James Capel &amp; Company, the brokerage.


New Housing Outlook For New York Is Gloomy
LEAD: Production of new housing in New York City rode a strong economy to a 14-year high last year, but the good news for a housing-starved city will probably not last long.
Developers say that with inventories of market-rate housing high and buyers scarce, the city's private home-building sector will soon be as quiet as a vacant apartment.


Ms. Del Guercio Has a Wedding
LEAD: Maria Victoria Del Guercio, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Louis R. M. Del Guercio of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Gregory Vander Roest Stanton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Stanton Jr. of Rye, N.Y.
The Revs.
Donald T. Driscoll and Michael G. O'Connor performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic


Campus Life: Skidmore;   Myths to Lacrosse: Celebrating American Indians
LEAD: American Indians are a minority of two in a student population of 2,100 at Skidmore College, but their culture was the subject of a campuswide celebration last week.


Airport Security After a Tragedy
LEAD: Re: ''Lockerbie Aftermath: Split Among Families, Aug. 12.''


Corrections
LEAD: An article and a caption about bilingual music on Sept. 2 rendered the name of a bandleader incorrectly.
He is Valerio Longoria.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
THE EAGLE AND THE RAVEN.
By James A. Michener. (State House Press, Box 15247, Austin, Tex. 78761; $19.95.) Waste not, want not.
It's generally good advice, especially in this era of social and environmental responsibility.
And it can usually be applied to writers, since most are pack rats when it comes to their own prose.


Lessons of Watergate
LEAD: Among the casualties strewn in the wake of Watergate is the Presidential claim of uncontrolled discretion to withhold ''confidential'' information from the courts, raised to its highest pitch by Richard M. Nixon.


Ms. Okinaka, Lawyer, Plans a Fall Wedding
LEAD: Leslie Ann Okinaka, an associate at the Richmond law firm of Hunton &amp; Williams, and Dr.
Paul Edward Juan, a pediatrics intern at the Medical College of Virginia in Richmond, plan to marry in November.


The People vs. Pollution
LEAD:
NO SAFE PLACE
Toxic Waste, Leukemia, and Community Action.
By Phil Brown and Edwin J. Mikkelsen.
260 pp. Berkeley:
University of California Press. $24.95.


Review/Jazz;   Avant-Garde Eclecticism, Unpredictable and Witty
LEAD: Avant-garde jazz has been pushed aside lately by more conservative styles, but the Association for the Advancement of Creative Music, a major force in experimental jazz since the late 1960's, is still in business.
Its 25th-anniversary celebration continued Tuesday night at Merkin Hall with a concert by Muhal Richard Abrams, conducting the 13-member A.A.C.M.


If Only the Retired Were Healthy and Wealthy
LEAD: To the Editor:


TODAY'S SECTIONS
LEAD:
Special Today: Op-Ed at 20/Section 4A


Review/Opera;   The Public and Private In 'Rigoletto' at the Met
LEAD: Baritones who sing the title role in Verdi's ''Rigoletto'' usually bring a limp to the portrayal, partly as a function of the hunchbacked jester's deformity, but also, perhaps, to subliminally point up the malevolence he shares with the stage's other great hunchback, Richard III.


Question Of the Week;   How Should The Yanks Rebuild The Team?
LEAD: Above all, the Yankees should resist the temptation to make Maas the designated hitter.
It ruins young players by taking them out of half of the game.
Both Mattingly and Maas should work out in left and Azocar in right.
Barfield should relearn how to go the other way.
Then work out a rotation between the four for positions in the field and designated hitter.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
BECOMING GERSHONA
By Nava Semel.
Translated by Seymour Simckes.
153 pp. New York:
Viking. $12.95. (Ages 10 to 14)


Sale of a Community Hospital Draws Opposition
LEAD: FOR the last few months, the future of Kennedy Memorial Hospital here has hung in the balance while doctors, nurses and residents of the community work to save its life.


Los Angeles Journal;   Counter-Trend: Rights of the Unhip
LEAD: Of all of life's cruel jokes, perhaps none is harsher here in the West Coast capital of trendiness than to be judged in front of one's peers as being hopelessly uncool.
It's enough to make a dude rip off his acid green framed sunglasses, jump into his shocking pink nylon running shorts and go file a lawsuit.


Miss Archibald Is Wed To Stanton Williams
LEAD: Jennifer Gibson Archibald, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Douglas N. Archibald of Pittsfield, Me., was married yesterday to Stanton North Williams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles N. Williams of Berlin, Conn.
The Rev.
Ted Hoskins performed the ceremony at the Union Congregational Church on Isle au Haut,


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: A tournament that ended 10 days ago in Zandvoort, the Netherlands, had several claims to fame.
It was the smallest event of the year with 16 world-class pairs and it was sponsored by Europe's largest options exchange, the EOE-Optiebeurs of Amsterdam.


Don't Call Us Selfish
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jean L. Kirk Is Married To William R. Toupin
LEAD: Jean Lois Kirk, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Kirk Jr. of Rumson, N.J., and Jupiter, Fla., was married yesterday to William R. Toupin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roland G. Toupin of Margate, Fla.
The Rev.
Synesio Lyra Jr. performed the ceremony at the Coral Ridge Presbyterian Church in Fort Lauderdale,


Give Credit To Antley
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
TWO COURSES


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
SAMS IN A DRY SEASON.
By Ivan Gold. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Jason Sams, the blocked novelist and creative-writing professor whose story is told in ''Sams in a Dry Season,'' counsels himself to ''beware romans a clef.'' Ivan Gold himself has clearly not followed this advice.
A writer who has not published fiction since the 1960's, when he produced a short-story collection, ''Nickel Miseries,'' and a novel, ''Sick Friends,'' also about Sams, Mr.


On Egypt And Israel
LEAD: I am by no means unrealistic, even though I am an optimist.
I knew that no single act, or even a combination of acts, could bury the past easily.
But I do believe that great goals are reached through patience and perseverance.
Each step helps.
This process culminated in November 1977 with my sacred mission to


Climate Change and Coal
LEAD: To the Editor:


A New York Firm Sets the Style In Chicago
LEAD: Chicago hasn't seen so presumptuous an architectural invasion from New York since Richard Morris Hunt and Stanford White swept into town to drop their Beaux-Arts extravaganzas into the World's Fair of 1893.
But what else to call the now ubiquitous presence of the New York architectural firm Kohn Pedersen Fox in Chicago?


Review/Theater;   Generals And Troops In the War Of Love
LEAD: The Pipino in the title of Sam Henry Kass's ''Lusting After Pipino's Wife'' at Primary Stages is an immigrant dishwasher who speaks no English and who has made love to his wife every single night of their marriage.
Pipino's wife and the mother of his dozen or so children has never known another man and is so accommodating to


Editorial Notebook;   The Last Jewish Farmer
LEAD: ''Come meet the last Jewish farmer in Lithuania!'' says Emanuelis Zingeris, a restless young scholar and member of Parliament, at the door of the Vilnius Photography Gallery.
He strides over to greet 78-year-old Joshua Matzkin, a genial man with a red nose, bushy eyebrows, two gold teeth and a tight gray beret.


Fashion;   The Right Stuff
LEAD: Gloves, i adore them,'' says Florence de Dampierre, a little breathlessly.
When it comes to essential accessories, de Dampierre, a specialist in antique hand-painted furniture, is giddy for gloves that are rimmed in fur and dense with embroidery.
The more extravagant they are, the more she has to have them.


COUNTERPOINT


Surgeon Operates With a Brush, Too
LEAD: DR.
ROBERT A. FISCHL is a plastic surgeon.
But when he teaches anatomy, his students are not medical hopefuls; they are aspiring artists.


Troops in Gulf Talk of War, And of Vietnam and Respect
LEAD: The uniformed men and women the United States has deployed in the desert of Saudi Arabia may have only vague notions of why they are here, but they seem to have few doubts that it is the right thing to do.


Baseball;   Spiers's Triple Sends Brewers Off on Spree
LEAD: Bill Spiers, Milwaukee's No. 9 hitter, lined a bases-loaded triple in the second inning today to give the Brewers a 3-0 lead and start Milwaukee off to an 8-1 victory over the Yankees.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have several hardwood floors that are badly scratched in several places.
There are black marks where a heavy piece of furniture was moved.
Is there any way I can restore the finish in these areas?


On Unity's Eve, Subdued Mood Replaces Euphoria
LEAD: On the eve of German unity, large crowds have been drawn to a major exhibition in West Berlin devoted to Otto von Bismarck, the original architect of German unity.


Block That Vietnam Myth
LEAD: By the end of 1968, most of the top echelon of the Johnson Administration had concluded that the war was unwinnable.
When Lyndon B. Johnson declined to run for a new term, he left the problem of extrication to his successor.


CONGRESS MAY CUT AFGHAN REBEL AID
LEAD: Congress is moving to cut and place conditions on Bush Administration requests for continued covert military aid to the Afghan rebels.


All the Views That Are Fit to Print
LEAD: On the morning of Sept. 21, 1970, readers of The New York Times who turned to the page opposite the editorials were in for a shock.
For as long as anyone could remember, that page had carried the obituaries.
Suddenly the obituaries had migrated elsewhere, their hallowed ground usurped by W. W. Rostow, a political scientist; Han Suyin, a Chinese novelist, and Gerald W.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have several hardwood floors that are badly scratched in several places.
There are black marks where a heavy piece of furniture was moved.
Is there any way I can restore the finish in these areas?


Will Landlords Desert Their Buildings Again?
LEAD: For much of the 1970's, landlords abandoned thousands of apartment buildings each year in New York City's poorest neighborhoods, producing a real-estate and social disaster of major proportions.
More than 200,000 apartments were lost,and the burned-out shells that marred huge swaths of the South Bronx, Harlem and central


Annex, Expel
LEAD: Will Israel opt for Jewishness and survival or democracy and national suicide?


Passaic Official Indicted in Voter-Registry Fraud
LEAD: Assemblyman Cyril Yannarelli, Democrat of Passaic, has been indicted on charges that he, the Paterson Council President, Vera Ames, and six paid workers falsified as many as 5,000 voter-registration forms.


Sports People;   Charger Speaks Out
LEAD: He suffered a concussion, facial fractures and other injuries that will require surgery and an estimated 10 weeks of rehabilitation, but Joe Phillips, the San Diego Charger nose guard who received the injuries in a confrontation with three men early Wednesday morning, wants the world to know that he wasn't in a fight.


Reds Close In On Title
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds won their first division title in 11 years this afternoon when they clinched the National League West championship during a rain delay as they trailed the San Diego Padres, 3-1.


Autumn Game With a Touch of Tuscany
LEAD: THE late Alfredo Viazzi had for years a trio of successful restaurants in Greenwich Village, the best of which was Trattoria da Alfredo, where he served Tuscan food.
In the early 70's, when to most New Yorkers Italian cooking still meant eggplant parmigiana and spaghetti with red clam sauce, his food was a revelation.


Baseball;   Clemens Returns to Spark Red Sox
LEAD: The crescendo rose from every nook and cranny in which Boston Red Sox fans were crammed into Fenway Park today.


Review/Dance;   Lady Macbeth as a Solo In a Modern Japanese Work
LEAD: For almost as long as there has been a 20th-century art called modern dance, there has been a Japanese modern dance.
The Tandavaha Dance Company of Tokyo, which appeared on Sept. 23 at Gould Hall, was founded in 1925 by Takuma Kaku and is now directed by Yoshie Kaku, his daughter.


Monterey
LEAD: From its window on the Pacific 100 miles south of San Francisco, the Monterey Peninsula has been welcoming newcomers for almost four centuries: first came the explorer Sebastian Vizcaino, who sailed into Monterey Bay in 1602 and claimed all he could survey for Spain.
More than a century and a half later came columns of dark-robed Catholic padres seeking souls on behalf of Rome.


Air Travel
LEAD: To the Editor: It is ironic that James Barron (Travel, Aug. 19) used the term ''stewardess'' in his article on airplane safety.
The word is outdated, and is defined in the dictionary as a ''member of the staff of a ship or airplane who waits on the passengers.'' The correct and current term is ''flight attendant,'' and their primary responsibility is the safety of passengers.


How the Spin Doctors Operate
LEAD:
ROAD SHOW
In America, Anyone Can Become President.
It's One of the Risks We Take.
By Roger Simon.
356 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.95.


South Africa's Melting Pot
LEAD:
UMFAAN'S HEROES
By Jon Elkon.
192 pp. North Pomfret, Vt.:
Andre Deutsch/Trafalgar Square. $19.95.


In Harlem, Children Reflect the Ravages U.N. Seeks to Ease
LEAD: Only a short distance from the polished glass towers of the United Nations, where 71 world leaders have converged this weekend for the first global summit on children, the very symptoms and conditions the leaders would eliminate still fester, in places like central Harlem, where the infant mortality rate is the same as Malaysia's.


Television's Independents: Working on a Slippery Slope
LEAD: Critics and viewers have embraced NBC's new Monday night situation comedy, ''Fresh Prince of Bel Air,'' about a streetwise teen-age rap artist from Philadelphia transplanted to a wealthy section of Los Angeles.
But the show is notable for another reason as well - one that is giving the shakes to independent television producers, and might give pause to viewers, too.


Suddenly Last Autumn
LEAD:
LIGHTING THE NIGHT
Revolution in Eastern Europe.
By William Echikson.
Illustrated. 295 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company. $22.95.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Linguine With a Sauce Of Salmon And Peas
LEAD: This delicate salmon sauce tastes as rich as one made with heavy cream, but here a mixture of ricotta and yogurt perform a similar function.
The biggest difference is that the ricotta mixture cannot be heated.
So take the ricotta and yogurt out of the refrigerator to bring it to room temperature before starting to prepare the meal.


Pro Football;   Dallas to Test Giants' Defense
LEAD: Two weeks ago, when the temperature on the Astroturf field at Texas Stadium reached 122 degrees, the Giants routed the Dallas Cowboys, 28-7.
On Sunday, they will meet again at Giants Stadium, and the Giants figure to dominate again.


On the Reef, a Changing Island
LEAD: ''You won't recognize the place,'' our Australian friend said when I told him we were going back to Lady Elliot Island. ''It might be too civilized for you now.'' My husband and I had been there in 1981, when it was the well-kept secret of a handful of Queenslanders.
Lady Elliot, the most southern of the more than 700 coral islands that comprise the 12,000-mile-long Great Barrier Reef, had been open to tourism since 1969, when a landing strip was pounded right down its middle (it's the only island on the reef to have one).


Down Among the Documents
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:
Reflection for Germans


Mercury 'Living Presence' Comes to Life Again
LEAD: For many record collectors, restorations of favorite recordings from the past constitute one of the most valuable benefits of the compact disk.
While the emphasis in most such cases is on preserving exceptional performances, the Mercury ''Living Presence'' reissues, just released by Philips after more than two years of painstaking preparation, will be every bit as interesting to audiophiles as to music-lovers, even though some of the recordings are more than 30 years old.


Israel Says U.S.S.R. Approves Direct Flights
LEAD: In a major step toward normalizing relations, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has given approval for direct flights between the Soviet Union and Israel, a senior Israeli official said today.


Giving Mud a Good Name
LEAD: To the Western eye there is a surreal, dreamlike quality surrounding the adobe mosques and houses that grace the arid landscapes of West Africa.
The Spanish architect Antonio Gaudi found inspiration for his architectural fantasies in the geometrical oddities of the hand-molded mud structures, which are at once extravagant and astonishingly simple in form.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Who Is the Best Coach In Pro Football?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


Alison Lee Farn Is Married
LEAD: Alison Lee Farn and Charles Wadhams Leigh were married yesterday at the First Congregational Church in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Thomas L. Stiers officiated.
Mrs.
Leigh, 26 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gary Farn of Riverside, Conn.
A graduate of Vanderbilt University, she is an account executive with Liz Claiborne Inc.


The Woman in the Sideshow
LEAD:
THE VENUS HOTTENTOT
By Elizabeth Alexander.
52 pp. Charlottesville:
University Press of Virginia.
Cloth, $15.95. Paper, $8.95.


What It Means To Turn 50
LEAD: When I was in my 30's, a 50-year-old friend told me that you don't know anything until you are 50.
I reach 50, and what does he tell me? ''You really don't know anything until you are 60.''


A Blueprint For U.S. Forces
LEAD: The new Defense Secretary, Dick Cheney, has hardly settled in his seat and already the civilian and uniformed sachems of the military tribe are leaping about him with their hair on fire, urging immediate decisions.
He should refuse - until he has made his most important choice.


College Joins Japanese Conglomerate)
LEAD: IN fall, the campus in Waterbury looks very much like any other small New England college.
Beneath a canopy of red and gold leaves, students hurry along the pathways to their classes.
They talk about schoolwork, cluster around fliers posted in the student center announcing a screening of ''Animal House'' and line up at the bookstore's cash register, buying notebooks for the start of the school year.


Sports People;   Tensions Mount
LEAD: Things got pretty tense this season between the Padres' best hitter, Tony Gywnn, and some of his San Diego teammates.
They accused him of being a selfish player more interested in improving his statistics than in helping the team.
Since Gwynn left the team two weeks ago with a broken finger, feelings against him seem to have gotten worse.


The Value Of Bicycle Helmets
LEAD: ''Bikers, Don't Forget Your Helmets,'' by Assemblymen Anthony Cimino and Joseph Mecca (Opinion page, Aug. 26), was for me a timely article.
Its publication marked the end of over three anxious weeks of watching our 9-year-old daughter heal from facial injuries that were substantially mitigated by her use of a bike helmet.


Politics Overtake Selecting Nuclear Dump Sites
LEAD: By dragging their feet or challenging the Federal Government, several governors have been able to avoid the political pitfalls built into a 10-year-old Federal requirement that they either develop storage sites for nuclear wastes or join with other states that will.


Beauty;   LIVING WITH LABELS
LEAD: ''wiggle.'' kind of a cute, giddy little word, evocative of all sorts of endearing, warm and fuzzy traits.
It's also the color of a lipstick (pink, actually) and one of a slew of uber-cosmetics labels from Ultima II. ''Wiggle'' as a name doesn't say much about the actual color - or the product - but who cares?


Reporter's Notebook;   Faithful Few at Remnant Of Howard Beach Case
LEAD: For the last month, a black woman from the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn and a small group of white men and women from Howard Beach, Queens, have faithfully appeared at an otherwise sparsely attended trial in a Queens court.


Review/Opera;   New Principals in 'Butterfly'
LEAD: New singers took over the principal roles in Puccini's ''Madama Butterfly'' at the New York City Opera on Sept. 23.
And if the cast as a whole cannot be said to have illuminated the New York State Theater stage with either top-flight vocalism or unusually insightful characterizations, the performances were honorably solid.


Question Of the Week;   How Should The Yanks Rebuild The Team?
LEAD: Keep a nucleus: Kelly, Sax, Mattingly, Barfield, Espinoza, Geren, Maas.
Sign Leary and Righetti, to join with Caderet, Cary, Guetterman, Hawkins, Mills, Plunk and Witt.
Sign the free agents Terry Pendleton and Tom Browning.


Sports People;   Health Report
LEAD: The detection of a heart ailment has ended the basketball career of Monty Williams, a 6-7 sophomore at Notre Dame.
Dr.
Stephen Simons, a Notre Dame physician, detected Williams's heart problem during a routine physical exmanination for the school's basketball players Sept. 4.
Dr.
Simons said he heard an extra heart sound during the physical and it made him suspicious.


U.S. Urges Nicaragua to Forgive Legal Claim
LEAD: With hundreds of millions of dollars of American aid hanging in the balance, the Bush Administration has begun exerting sharp new pressure on President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro to abandon a judgment of as much as $17 billion that Nicaragua won against the United States at the International Court of


In Cities, Who Is The Real Mugger?
LEAD: Bernhard Hugo Goetz has become a folk hero.
Respectable citizens have identified with his shooting of four teen-agers who ''harassed'' him on the subway and asked him for $5.
In so dealing with these potential ''muggers,'' Mr.
Goetz personified and aroused the pervasive fears, anger and sense of personal powerlessness of a large segment of the public faced with rising urban crime.


Why Limit Indexing to Capital Gains?
LEAD: As a compromise in the tortuous budget negotiations, the Bush Administration has sensibly suggested the indexing of capital gains, so that we don't pay taxes on gains that are attributable solely to inflation.
Indexing of capital gains probably will stimulate investment, at least moderately.
But why stop there?


Spectaculars That Go Beyond Spectacle
LEAD: Dances can take people's breath away.
That includes the breath of spectators and performers alike.
When movement is allied with elaborate stage designs and atmospheric music, dances may be astonishing spectacles.
The best of such attractions eventually do more than dazzle.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: These days no one thinks twice about getting film processed.
We shoot it, we take it to a lab around the corner, we get prints back in a day or two.
The simplicity of the system and the near omnipresence of processing facilities undoubtedly have helped fuel the boom in 35-millimeter picture taking.


Nuns and Priests Offer Ways of Healing
LEAD: To the Editor:


In the Region: New Jersey;   JUMP Program Aids Low-Cost Rentals By RACHELLE GARBARINE
LEAD: Even during the construction boom of the mid-80's, new rental projects in the state were rare.
Now two New Jersey developers and one from Manhattan are building rental housing under a state program meant to produce urban units for low-income families.


Ignorant Drug Policy
LEAD: The United States' war on drugs has led to the attempted ouster of Panama's leader, the virtual kidnapping of a Honduran, new efforts to burn crops in Bolivia and a proposed Congressional resolution accusing Mexican officials of accepting bribes.
A short time ago, similar actions were directed at Pakistan, Colombia, Peru, Turkey and


Pop, Pre-Pop and Rivers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ms. Despalatovic To Wed in June
LEAD: The engagement of Pavica Catherine Despalatovic to David Sparhawk Kneedler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Franklin Kneedler of Old Lyme, Conn., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Marijan Despalatovic of New London, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.


Jacqueline Ann Notestine, Recruiter, Weds Edward Paige, Managing Editor
LEAD: Jacqueline Ann Notestine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Earl Notestine of West Lafayette, Ind., was married yesterday in Westport, Conn., to Edward Perry Paige, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart Paige of Fairfield, Conn.
The Rev.
Philip A. C. Clarke, a United Methodist minister, officiated at the Fairfield County Hunt


HOME ENTERTAINMENT: AND KEEP IN MIND    Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


Anne C. Thacher and Kenneth B. Tate Jr. Marry
LEAD: Anne Creveling Thacher, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter S. Thacher of Stonington, Conn., and Washington, was married yesterday to Kenneth Burrell Tate Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Burrell Tate of Stonington.
E.
Sims Casey, a justice of the peace, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.


Baseball;   Viola Frustrated By Recent Losses
LEAD: The reality of the bottom line often creeps into Frank Viola's professional conversations, an understanding that there is very little consolation in his business.
Near the end of a 19-victory season, Viola looks at the three most recent bottom lines and does not like what he sees.


Unsung Hero
LEAD: To the Editor:


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
CELEBRATING APPALACHIA


WILDMON'S WAR ON THE ARTS
LEAD: I'm tired of hearing people complain about their hard-earned tax dollars going to smut.


Fashion: On the Street;   Long, Slinky And Feline
LEAD: They'recalled catsuits, and certainly the lithe feline quality is hard to miss.
Long, slinky and one piece, they evolved from the leotards worn by trapeze artists and ballet dancers at practice.
Now, in a couple of versions, they're showing up all over midtown Manhattan, particularly on weekend shoppers along Fifth Avenue.


County Assesses Its Conservation Corps
LEAD: ''FOR every dollar invested in the program, the county received $3 in return,'' said Toni Collarini, who is evaluating the work done this summer in county parks by young members of the County Conservation Corps.


Style Makers;   Charles Nicholas, Hair Dresser
LEAD: Charles Nicholas opened a hair salon recently for the person who does not like going to the hair dresser.
It's not just for women: 40 percent of his clients are men, and of these, 50 percent have their hair colored.


Ms. Falk to Wed In December
LEAD: Mrs.
William J. McDonough of Chicago has announced the engagement of her daughter Melanie Borden Falk to Roderick Ian Vere Nicoll, a son of Mrs.
Douglas Vere Nicoll of Charlottesville, Va., and the late Dr.
Vere Nicoll.
A December wedding is planned.


Single Parents Find Help With Sharing Homes
LEAD: THREE years ago, a financially comfortable 80-year-old widow was finding it hard to manage her house in Bergen County, where she had lived for many years.
She opted to share her home with a single father who had custody of his son and daughter on weekends.
In exchange, he agreed to help her with the maintenance.


Words That Can And Can't Be Said
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mary Ellen Green and Eric Meyer Wed
LEAD: Mary Ellen Green and Eric Channell Stemmler Meyer were married yesterday at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Manhasset, L.I., by the Rev.
Lawrence D. Costello.
Mrs.
Meyer is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Green Jr. of Manhasset.
The bridegroom is the son of Leigh Welles of New York and Boyce W.


Hampstead Hangouts
LEAD: In Hampstead on a given afternoon, the world sits down to coffee.
Polish and Russian, German and French, Hebrew, Arabic, Spanish, and all the Englishes of the world - American, Australian, South African, Indian - blend in the fervor of love or debate.


Iraqi Document: A Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, excerpts last Sunday from a document described by the Iraqi Government as a transcript of a meeting between President Saddam Hussein and the United States Ambassador to Iraq misattributed some remarks.
The following remarks should have been attributed to President Hussein, not to Ambassador April C.


What Punishment Will Fit the Crime?
LEAD: Last April, Michael R. Milken agreed to plead guilty to six felony counts, including conspiracy, securities law violations and tax fraud.
These charges stemmed from his activities as head of the ''junk bond'' division of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
The maximum prison sentence that Mr.
Milken faces is 28 years.


Mary Liboon Wed to J. E. Malaya 3d
LEAD: Mary Ann Liboon, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sofronio A. Liboon of San Francisco, was married there yesterday to J. Eduardo Malaya 3d, the vice consul at the Philippine Consulate in New York.
The Rev.
Eugene Tungol officiated at St.
Anne's Roman Catholic Church.


Gant Is Among the Select Players Eligible for Arbitration
LEAD: The season isn't ending today because the owners locked the players out of training camps in spring and delayed the start of the season.
The owners locked out the players largely because the two sides disagreed on salary arbitration eligibility.


Elizabeth Paradise Married
LEAD: Elizabeth Janeway Paradise and John Matthew Sweeney were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Cathedral of the Sacred Heart in Richmond, Va., by the Rev.
Thomas Miller.
Mrs.
Sweeney, an advertising copywriter with the Martin Agency in Richmond, is the daughter of Joan Paradise of Old Greenwich, Conn., and Robert Paradise of Greenwich, Conn.


G.A.O. Cites Flaws in Anti-Tank Helicopter
LEAD: The Army's Apache anti-tank helicopter needs repairs after an average of two and a half hours in the air in peacetime and may be useless in war, Congressional investigators say.


Postings: Florida Sites;   Sidewalk Sales Pitch
LEAD: Sidewalk vendors have an uncanny ability to discern New Yorkers' needs - witness the sunglass stands that miraculously become umbrella stands at the first drop of rain.
So with all the recent talk about people wanting to flee this area for friendlier climes, it was no real surprise to find a sidewalk vendor hawking land in


What's Needed To Reach Top
LEAD: To The Sports Editor:


World's Leaders Gather at U.N. for Summit Meeting on Children
LEAD: More than 70 world leaders will meet here on Sunday to adopt an ambitious set of goals to improve life for poor children throughout the world.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: The lowly cent has taken quite a beating in the past few years.
Some merchants and others are calling for the end of the least valuable coin.
Even Congress has been asked to look into the possibility of minting a new dollar coin and to stop minting the cent.


Esther Cohen to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Cohen of Brooklyn, have announced January wedding plans for their daughter Esther Deena Cohen and Chaim Shlomo Kahn, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Nachman Kahn of Oak Park, Mich.
Miss Cohen, 22 years old, graduated from the State University Health Science Center in Brooklyn and is serving her affiliation in occupational therapy at the Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn.


What Am I, a Zoo?
LEAD: Perusin' the news, as I have been for a while, I was surprised to find myself dissected, directed and interjected.


France
LEAD: To the Editor: Many Americans lease new French automobiles under special terms available to foreigners.
However, the unique color scheme required for the lessee's license plates creates a novel security problem.


English, Not Spanish
LEAD: Mine is a Spanish-speaking household.
Instilling in my children a sense of ethnic identity is my role; it is not the role of the school system.
The public schools have the responsibility to teach skills needed in public life - among them the use of the English language.
I differ with educators who advocate bilingual education programs whose goal is to preserve the Spanish language and culture among children of Hispanic families.


Baseball;   Are A's a Dynasty In the Making?
LEAD: From deep behind the closed doors, there was only the muffled sound of joy and the sharp aroma of champagne.
At the end of the night, after they had won still another American League West championship, the Oakland Athletics convened in the privacy of a laundry room - among washing machines, dirty uniforms and old boxes - and doused themselves in celebration.


Review/Dance;   The Secret World of Twins
LEAD: Fred Holland guided viewers through a strange private realm in ''What I Like About Us.'' The haunting dance that he presented on Thursday evening at the Ohio Theater was based on a case study of twin sisters who never spoke to each other.
Instead, they developed their own secret gestural language.


Where to Find Aerodynamic Inspiration
LEAD: To the Editor:


Flags for the Children


India Bans a Book
LEAD: Dear Rajiv Gandhi:


Man Thrown From Window Of Apartment in the Bronx
LEAD: A 33-year-old man, his hands bound behind him, was thrown from a sixth-floor window of an apartment building in the Bronx Friday night, the police said.


Running Scared on Abortion
LEAD: I have a very cold feeling in the bottom of my stomach.
Like a naive fool, I suppose, I had believed that the 1973 Supreme Court decision guaranteeing women the right to choose whether to bear children or end unwanted pregnancies through abortion was such a reasonable decision that it would not be tampered with.


Rio de Janeiro's Rich Trove of Gems
LEAD: Smart shoppers in Brazil know that the best buys come in small packages.
When one thinks of Rio de Janeiro, flamboyantly colored, itsy-bitsy bikinis, or fio dentals - dental floss - as they are called, come to mind.
But Brazil is also the source for dazzlingly colored emeralds, aquamarines, amethysts, topazes and tourmalines.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: The Mutual Funds table on Sept. 2 included incorrect performance figures supplied by Lipper Analytical Services Inc. for the RCS Emerging Growth Fund.
The figure for the week ended Aug. 30 was 4.42 percent; for the year to date, 0.96 percent, and for the last 52 weeks, 14.68 percent.


Campus Life: Kenyon College;   Obscenity Clause To Prompt Journal To Refuse Grant
LEAD: The Kenyon Review, one of the nation's leading campus literary journals, will refuse a $7,500 grant from the National Endowment for the Arts because of an obscenity clause that is a condition of acceptance.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Military Museum 'Guards' the Harbor
LEAD: The British were coming - someday. But they never made it to Fort Hamilton.


Arafat's Aide, On Talks
LEAD: The Palestinians want lasting peace and security for themselves and the Israelis because no one can build his own future on the ruins of another's.
The key to a settlement lies in talks between the Palestinians and Israelis.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have several hardwood floors that are badly scratched in several places.
There are black marks where a heavy piece of furniture was moved.
Is there any way I can restore the finish in these areas?


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
The Ear Transformed


Artillery Duels Violate Liberian Truce
LEAD: Rebel armored units fought a fierce artillery and rocket duel today with Government troops trapped inside the executive mansion and the main army barracks here in the capital.


Fielder Ecstatic About Taking a Shot at 50
LEAD: For the most part, this has not been a baseball season full of inspirational developments.


New Season: Audacious, Varied and Vital
LEAD: WHAT are the consequences of the austere economic outlook and the precarious state of the arts for the new season?
Conservative?
Perhaps compromised and curtailed theater fare?
Not so.
Consider the audaciousness, variety, vitality - and sheer bounty - of the theater season just begun in Connecticut's regional playhouses.


Australia's Sunshine State
LEAD: Like most Queenslanders, I'm prepared to admit that there are few city sights more stunning than Sydney viewed from one of the harbor ferries or from the windows of the Opera House restaurant; and I'll even concede that Melbourne (Bleak City, as we denizens of the Sunshine State call it), with its wide boulevards, elegant architecture, cafe society and sidewalk restaurants, has an Edwardian graciousness and Parisian ambiance that


Miss Bliss and William Marshall 3d Are Married in Chestertown, Md.
LEAD: Georgina Bassett Bliss, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Hooker Bliss of Worton, Md., was married yesterday to William Richmond Marshall 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Swan Marshall 3d of Harbour Island, the Bahamas.
The Rev.
Gregory S. Straub performed the Episcopal ceremony at Emmanuel Church in Chestertown,


The Allure of the Raj
LEAD:
THE SUN IN THE MORNING
My Early Years in India and England.
By M. M. Kaye.
Illustrated. 454 pp. New York:
St. Martin's Press. $24.95.


ROMANIA'S LOST CHILDREN
LEAD: We wish to express our most grateful thanks to your generous readers whose moral support and financial contribution will be of great help in the continuation of our work in Romania (''Romania's Lost Children,'' a photo essay by James Nachtwey, with text by Kathleen Hunt).
Unfortunately, we cannot answer all the mail we received following the mention in your columns of our fund for Romanian children.


Transit Authority Faulted on Its Hiring Methods
LEAD: The New York City Transit Authority has hired bus drivers with poor driving records and failed to monitor drivers who may be medically unfit to operate buses, an investigation by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's Inspector General has found.


A Very Fit and Proper 'Me and My Girl'
LEAD: THERE'S a spate of ''Me and My Girls'' going around in the New York metropolitan area.
Why, the show has taken on epidemic proportions in professional theaters, in semiprofessional theaters, in community theaters, in dinner theaters.


U. of Bridgeport Gets Tentative Agreement
LEAD: One of three striking unions at the University of Bridgeport has reached a tentative agreement with the school after a monthlong strike, but two other unions remain deadlocked.


Sports People;   Islander Dispute
LEAD: The general manager of the Islanders, Bill Torrey, confirmed yesterday that the absence of the team's star center, Pat LaFontaine, from the final week of training camp was linked to a contract dispute.
Torrey, who joined the Islanders in California yesterday for an exhibition game against Los Angeles, said he had not yet been able to meet with LaFontaine but has had numerous discussions with the player's agent, Don


Co-Authors Invent an Autobiographer
LEAD: THE epigraph for ''Boone,'' a first novel by Brooks Hansen and Nick Davis, is an old show-business maxim: ''Gospel singers should sing gospel.''


Applying Imitation Facing Brick
LEAD: BRICK used for decoration - it is called facing or veneer brick - is thinner than ordinary brick, yet requires the same skill and time to apply.


How 'TV Babies' Learn
LEAD: Generations that grew up with TV communicate differently than previous generations.
Yet many have not caught on to this phenomenon.
This is a problem because we are losing the younger generation to a host of societal ills.
Despite all our efforts to reach it, we're talking the wrong language.
What is this new mode of communication?


Elizabeth Sabo Wed To Dr. Kevin Pauza
LEAD: Elizabeth Hedwig Sabo and Dr.
Kevin Joseph Pauza were married yesterday at Christ the King Roman Catholic Church in New Vernon, N.J., by Msgr.
John F. Corr.
Mrs.
Pauza is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter R. Sabo of Short Hills, N.J.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William V. Pauza of Hershey, Pa.


Birth Of a Style
LEAD: A new page demanded a new editorial art, and The New York Times, which had rejected traditional, captioned editorial cartoons decades before the Op-Ed page was conceived, sought an unconventional illustration style as the page's visual signature.
The solution was a hybrid form, neither captioned cartoon nor literal illustration - rather an art that used metaphor, allegory, literary allusion and personal iconography, not to slavishly illustrate but to complement a text.


Jordanian Troops Prepare for Night Warfare


