Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   A Vista Both Grand and Patriotic
LEAD: Liberty State Park, with its rows of American flags fluttering in the wind, has something very special to offer: an unrivaled view of lower Manhattan.
The vista of New York Harbor includes Ellis Island and the Statue of Liberty, which stands a mere 1,750 feet away and seems close enough to touch.


Early Opera Is the Latest Rage on Disks
LEAD: Contrary to grim prognostications, opera is alive and well as it approaches the end of its fourth century.
And while it is true that only relatively few modern works have attained repertory status, our generation has turned toward opera's first and second centuries with remarkable industry and concentration.


WHAT WE DON'T KNOW
LEAD: Please inform Christopher Hitchens that the Latin phrase domus parva magni poetae, which appeared in his article ''Why We Don't Know What We Don't Know'' (May 13), should be translated ''the small house - or home - of (not for) a great poet.''


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   At Hotels, Eclectic and International Fare
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Here are some restaurants in hotels that are open for Sunday dining.
The Ambassador


THE TROUBLE WITH HUBBLE
LEAD: In the ancient city of Babel, the descendants of Noah tried to build a tower so high it would reach the heavens.
In retaliation for their daring, the Book of Genesis tells us, God punished the builders, taking the language that had bound them together and fragmenting it into all the world's different tongues.


Women's Colleges Have Much to Offer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lifestyle;   The Vanities, They Were Oh So Tepid
LEAD: The rich of New York are decamping for their summer capital on the South Shore of Long Island and other watering holes, signifying the end of what is quaintly called the spring social season, although the revels spill over into summer.
Some season.  ''Was there a season this year?'' asked Bill Blass, who knows better.


Forecast: Cloudy;   Bush Moves His Lips But Not His Troops
LEAD: BENEATH their public optimism about striking a deal to reduce the budget deficit, the negotiators from the White House and Congress are uneasy.
President Bush's surprising concession last week that higher taxes would be needed to cut the deficit got the budget talks started again.
But even the President's reversal of his ''no new taxes'' pledge will not translate quickly into an agreement on increased taxes and reduced spending.


ANS SOME WORDS FOR THE CHILDREN
LEAD:
THE READING CRISIS
Why Poor Children Fall Behind.
By Jeanne S. Chall, Vicki A. Jacobs and Luke E. Baldwin.
191 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press. $25.
EARLY LITERACY
By Joan Brooks McLane and Gillian Dowley McNamee.
Illustrated. 161 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.


Addressing The Issue
LEAD: To the Editor:


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Chicago;   Towering Changes
LEAD: ONCE a gracious avenue of low-profile, high-end stores in limestone-clad buildings, the Near North Side sector of Michigan Avenue - known as the Magnificent Mile - has been transformed over the last 15 years by huge mixed-use developments.


Ideas &amp; Trends;   Mathematicians Take the Measure Of the Insoluable
LEAD: WHEN physicists talk about large numbers, they speak of things like the number of years since the universe began - about 10,000,000,000 - or the number of atoms in the universe: 1 with 100 zeros after it.
But when mathematicians speak of large numbers, they come up with figures that leave the physicists' in the dust.


World Markets;   Waiting for the Other Shoe in Mexico
LEAD: The Mexican stock market has been one of the best performers in the world recently.
It is up 52.3 percent this year and is the top performer for the last two and one-half years in the Financial Times world market index.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The danger is we get caught up in it like it's a rock concert, like going to see Prince, where it's wonderful, but three days later you don't think about it anymore.
If we allow that to happen, it's a travesty.
If there's no connection between his struggle and ours, then the whole visit is really not the tribute to his life and work that it needs to be.


NO, MEIN FUHRER
LEAD:
LETTERS TO FREYA
1939-1945.
By Helmuth James von Moltke.
Edited and translated by Beate Ruhm von Oppen.
Illustrated. 441 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


A WOMAN'S TROUBLES
LEAD:
STONE HEART
By Luanne Rice.
322 pp. New York:
Viking. $19.95.


No-Hitter Oddity: Fans Get 2-in-1 Deal
LEAD: Two nine-inning no-hitters on the same night 2,500 miles apart made Friday, June 29, 1990, a date that baseball oddity collectors can treasure forever.


Amanda L. Crandall Weds Robert Anthony DeMar 3d
LEAD: Amanda Louise Crandall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Crandall of Boulder, Colo., was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Robert Anthony DeMar 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
DeMar Jr. of Lincolnville, Me.
The Rev.
Cynthia Jarvis officiated at the Nassau Presbyterian Church.


KOHL, THE MAN FOR THE GERMAN MOVEMENT
LEAD: Whenever talk in Bonn turns to Helmut Kohl, someone inevitably recounts how some rival, imagining Mr.
Kohl to be a bumbling provincial politician, challenges the Chancellor head on, only to be left sprawled in the dust.


Welch Gains 13th Victory
LEAD: Bob Welch became the first 13-game winner in the major leagues and Dave Henderson hit two two-run doubles as the Oakland Athletics beat Toronto, 9-4, today.
The loss was the sixth in a row for the Blue Jays.


Style Makers;   Robin Baron and Lauren Hanna; Jewelry Importers
LEAD: Take young Americans who want to go into business together; add a cooperative husband of one of them who has a friend with a Moscow connection.
Voila: In an amazingly short time there's a new New York company called Soviet Source.
A range of jewelry designs, pins, earrings and necklaces fashioned from Soviet military medals and insignia will soon be in a number of stores including Henry Lehr and Henri


Subway Service Disrupted
LEAD: There will be no uptown subway service and limited downtown service on the West Side IRT's Nos. 1, 2 and 3 lines between 42d and 96th Streets until 5 A.M. tomorrow.
The disruptions are due to a switch replacement.


Wall Street Shrugs Off Tax Threat
LEAD: Are higher taxes just what the economy, and the stock market, need?
Wall Street seems to think so.


Borrowing Is Unreasonable Way to Bail Out Savings and Loans
LEAD: I was startled and dismayed by ''The Bailout: No Savagery Required,'' your June 22 editorial supporting Government borrowing as the appropriate way to deal with the bailout of bankrupt savings and loans institutions.
Borrowing may be politically expedient; it is, however, wrong, from both an economic and moral point of view.


Bye, Linden Tree
LEAD: PROGRESS is always a relative thing.
We value the improved quality of life it promises, yet lament when in its name the quality of life is diminished.


'The Loony-Bin Trip'
LEAD: To the Editor:


140,000 Hulks, Every Year
LEAD: New York City remains a dumping ground for abandoned cars.
The dead hulks blight every neighborhood, inviting professional scavengers and showers of broken glass.
The city has new authority to deter the trashing and boost revenues in the process.
Why won't it seize the opportunity?


Climb the Pyramid, Weave the Web
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rajen Dalal Wed To Linda Burch
LEAD: Linda Marie Burch, a daughter of Rosemary Lenrow of Westport Point, Mass., and Robert A. Burch of Wilton, Conn., was married yesterday at her mother's home to Rajen Kantilal Dalal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kantilal Delal of New Dehli.
The Rev.
J.
Patrick Mauney, an Episcopal priest, officiated.


Commercial Property: An Agenda for the 90's;   What the Real Estate Board Is Seeking in Incentives
LEAD: IN what amounts to a platform for the economically troubled 1990's, New York's major owners and developers have asked City Hall for incentives that would make it more profitable to renovate existing office buildings or turn them into apartments, spur construction of back-office or other commercial space and reward landlords or builders who provide space for not-for-profit organizations and local services.


No Headline
LEAD:
'VOTES FOR ALL'


We Left the City, Didn't We?
LEAD: WHEN I was growing up on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, it was a residential backwater where the windows of aging apartment buildings gave off row after row of soft yellow light on winter evenings.
My neighbors were mostly elderly people with theatrical pasts or divorced women raising three children in two-bedroom apartments.


The World;   Islamic Fundamentalism Is Winning Votes
LEAD: ELEVEN years after Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini was swept to power in the Iranian revolution, Islamic forces in Algeria, Egypt and Jordan have peacefully secured footholds on power at the ballot box.
Elsewhere, Islamic fundamentalists are seeking or consolidating power through the use of arms and intimidation.


Political Memo;   Democrats Try Not to Gloat And Begin Planning for 1992
LEAD: Suddenly, Democrats are dusting off their sheet music and learning to sing ''Happy Days Are Here Again.''


Susan C. Najafi Wed in Carolina
LEAD: Susan Christine Najafi, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Hassan Najafi of Northfield, Ill., was married yesterday in Durham, N.C., to Dr.
Andrew Michael Davidoff, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Davidoff of New York.
The Rev.
Donald Fagerberg, a Lutheran minister, and Rabbi Milton Schlager performed the ceremony in the chapel of Duke


MOTHERS ARE A GIRL'S BEST FRIEND
LEAD:
ALTERED LOVES
Mothers and Daughters During Adolescence.
By Terri Apter.
231 pp. New York:
St. Martin's Press. $24.95.


On County's Posture Parkland
LEAD: This is in response to a recent letter by Stephen L. Elkins, Commissioner of Parks, Recreation and Conservation, in which he asserts that County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke has made it a priority of his administration to ''aggressively acquire and preserve public parkland and open spaces.'' The facts belie this.


here Mandela and Jews Agree to Disagree;   Empty Words
LEAD: To the Editor:


A 72 and 15 Stitches for Dent
LEAD: Jim Dent will be going into the final round of the United States Senior Open on Sunday only a shot behind the lead, but his chances of playing at all almost vanished as a result of a hand injury before the third round today.


Reporter's Notebook;   Bumpy Road Ends at Budget for New York City
LEAD: After all the wrangling and wangling, the agreement on New York City's $28 billion budget that is to start today came down to twin prerogatives: $40 million in modest new service initiatives for Mayor David N. Dinkins and $40 million in other services saved from cuts by the City Council.


Dim Views of That First $20,000
LEAD: To the Editor:


Karen Winston WedTo David C. Norman
LEAD: Karen Eve Winston, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jan M. Winston of Westport, Conn., and Boca Raton, Fla., was married last evening to David Charles Norman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alex Norman of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the ceremony at the Mansion at Stouffer Westchester Hotel in White


What's Doing In;   Nairobi
LEAD: For many travelers Nairobi is a necessary stop on the way in and out of the African bush.
While a safari may be the point of the journey to Kenya, Nairobi is a bustling African city that can tell you much about the continent, past and present.


Review/Dance;   'Dr. Midnight' and Other Literate Works
LEAD: The six new and recent dances presented by Beth Leonard and RoseAnne Spradlin on June 23 at the Bessie Schonberg Theater had the air of being company to their choreographers.
There were no games or gimmicks; just blessedly adult and literate dance of consistent interest.


John Kelly Weds Donna A. Shipley
LEAD: Donna Anne Shipley, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter E. Shipley of Gardiner, N.Y., was married yesterday at St.
Patrick's Cathedral to John Matthew Kelly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard J. Kelly of Yonkers.
The Rev.
Brian C. Brennan officiated.
Mrs.
Kelly, 27 years old, is a cum laude graduate of Manhattanville College.


Postings: Park Slope Project;   Co-oping a Milk Wagon Barn
LEAD: It has been decades since most city residents had milk delivered to their homes and longer still since milkmen used horse-drawn wagons.


CHINESE REPLACING REGIONAL OFFICIALS
LEAD: While avoiding any shuffling of leaders in the closely watched central Government, China's leadership has moved stealthily in the last year to appoint new top officials in more than a third of the provinces and six of the nation's seven military regions.


American Blacks Talk of Change As Main Legacy of Mandela Visit
LEAD: With the euphoria of his visit here still dominating her thoughts, Pearl Cleage is thinking about life after Nelson Mandela.


Q and A
LEAD:
Joint Ownership of Co-op
Question: Several years ago my elderly aunt and her husband bought a co-op for cash.
He has since died but his name remains on the share certificates as part owner.
She has no will and the apartment is her only real asset.
I have urged her to make some arrangements to avoid problems in the event of her death or mental incapacity.


Boat People Face New Threat as U.S. Spars With Southeast Asian Nations
LEAD: Nine Vietnamese boat people arrived on Malaysia's southeastern coast in mid-June with a macabre cargo: several barrels containing the remains of 28 bodies and some United States Army dogtags.


Campus Life: U.C.L.A.;   Amid Pressure, Expansion Plan Is Trimmed Again
LEAD: For the second time, the Chancellor of the University of California at Los Angeles has scaled back the university's most ambitious long-range development plan in the face of pressure from community advocates and local politicians.


Miss Drexel Wed To W.J. O'Farrell
LEAD: Noreen E. M. Drexel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Drexel 3d of Newport, R.I., and Palm Beach, Fla., and William John O'Farrell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William James O'Farrell of Brightwaters, L.I., were married yesterday in Sayles Hall, a chapel at Brown University.
The ceremony was performed by Msgr.


Pave It Over
LEAD: To the Editor:


Surprise Messenger
LEAD: Rory Sparrow learned from a stranger that the Miami Heat had traded him to the Sacramento Kings.


'My Fair Lady' Sparkles in Candlewood Staging
LEAD: SINCE Rick Belzer took over as executive producer, artistic director and resident lighting designer seven years ago, the Candlewood Playhouse in New Fairfield has been displaying a sleek technical skill uncommon in professional summer stock theaters.


The Housing Auction is a Market Tool
LEAD: Regarding ''Auctions Find Their Niche in Slow Housing Market'' [June 3] , Martin Ginsburg is quoted as saying, ''the value of the units subjected to the auction are permanently tainted.'' Nothing could be further from the truth, and Mr.
Ginsburg should know better.


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bayville
$255,000
10 Oakpoint Drive
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year- old ranch; dining room, den, new bathrooms, near water, 2-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Elmont
$167,000
16 Robert Avenue
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 48- year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, basement, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $2,700.


Kim Yancey Wed to Christopher Moore
LEAD: Kim Yancey and Christopher Paul Moore were married yesterday at the West End Collegiate Church in New York by the Rev.
Kenneth A. Gorsuch, a minister of the Dutch Reformed Church.
Anna Harris was the maid of honor, and Steven Getzoff was the best man.


Photo: Chaba Fadela performing at the club S.O.B. in Manhattan. (Jack Vartoogian)Review/Disco;   Arabic Funk Sound From Algeria
LEAD: Around the world, traditional music is meeting and transforming Western pop.
In Algeria, the result is rai, the Arabic funk that Cheb Sahraoui and his wife, Chaba Fadela, brought to S.O.B.'s on Wednesday and Thursday nights.
It is music in which the melody lines are unmistakably from the Arab world - fervently sung, intricately inflected - while the backup meshes traditional rhythms with Western dance beats and instruments.


Carolyn Voute and Kevin Murphy Wed
LEAD: Carolyn Patricia Voute, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Voute of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Kevin Lawrence Murphy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene C. Murphy of North Chelmsford, Mass.
Rev.
Mario Costa performed the ceremony at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New York.


Jazz Festival;   New Work By Brubeck Quartet
LEAD: The JVC Jazz Festival brought the pianist Dave Brubeck and his quartet to the World Financial Center plaza on Thursday evening in a free outdoor concert so fortuitously timed that the rain didn't start until the drum solo in the finale, Paul Desmond's ''Take Five.''


Doing Divorces the Way They Were
LEAD: Broken china, broken bones and a grand finale in which Kathleen Turner and Michael Douglas dangle from a rickety chandelier - divorce isn't what it used to be.
THE WAR OF THE ROSES, newly released on videocassette (1989, CBS/Fox, $89.98), is devoted to the idea that love is a minefield.
When the Roses' marriage explodes, it becomes a dark, funny divorce to the death, a battle whose weapons include pate of dog.


Data Update
LEAD:
MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
May 90
Apr. 90
May 89
Nation
$94,800
$95,600
$92,600
Northeast
141,300
140,700
143,800
Midwest
73,100
75,300
70,300
South
85,200
85,900
84,200
West
135,300
137,600
142,100
*4*(Source: National Association of Realtors)


Amazon Cruises
LEAD: To the Editor: Your reply to the lady from Rego Park (Q &amp; A, May 6) inquiring about Amazon river cruises was most informative but, unfortunately, failed to include the company that introduced cruising on the Amazon seven years ago and today operates more cruises there than any other line.


A Plague on Both Their Houses
LEAD: To the Editor:


Biennial Seeds Should Be Planted Now
LEAD: IT is time to sow seed.
As odd as this may sound at this time of year, this is the proper time to plant the seeds of biennials.
The plants have formed the odd-shaped cases that hold seed, called seedpods, and the seed is ripening inside.
If this ripe seed is sown promptly, the seed will sprout quickly, and the roots of young plants will have a chance to take hold by early fall.


Question Of the Week;   How Can The U.S. Improve Its Soccer Team For 1994?
LEAD: 1)Get someone who understands international business and sports marketing. The World Cup is the biggest sporting event in the world, and corporate affiliations can be used to generate funds for the United States program. But the current soccer leadership cannot even decide on a mascot.
2) Dump Robert Gansler as coach.


Deirdre Sheehan and D. A. Ewald Wed
LEAD: Deirdre Marie Sheehan, a daughter of Mrs.
Conrad P. Sheehan of Rye, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Sheehan, and Douglass Alexander Ewald, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
Philip Ewald of Greenwich, Conn., were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.


ARTIFACTS FROM AFRICA SHOW THE SHAPE OF A PEOPLE


Erika Kossmann Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Erika Smyth Kossmann, a daughter of Dr.
Richard John Kossmann of Englewood, N.J., and the late Geralyn Smyth Kossmann, was married yesterday to Brewster Morey Miner, the son of Doris Wells Miner of Manhasset, L.I., and the late James Vincent Miner.
The Rev.
Harry Boyle performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.


NEW PERU LEADER IN ACCORD ON DEBT
LEAD: Peru's President-elect, Alberto Fujimori, has reached a tentative agreement with the International Monetary Fund and other development agencies on a plan to stabilize his country's tottering economy, resume payment on at least some of its external debts and reintegrate Peru into the international financial system.


Biennial Seeds Should Be Planted Now
LEAD: IT is time to sow seed.
As odd as this may sound at this time of year, this is the proper time to plant the seeds of biennials.
The plants have formed the odd-shaped cases that hold seed, called seedpods, and the seed is ripening inside.
If this ripe seed is sown promptly, the seed will sprout quickly, and the roots of young plants will have a chance to take hold by early fall.


Book Club for Blacks Finds Quick Support
LEAD: BOOKSTORES kept making Janus Adams angry.
Wherever she looked, the well-stocked shelves were virtually devoid of books by black authors or about black people and the black experience.


Allison Michelle Miller Is the Bride Of Philip Alexander Buchanan Cooper
LEAD: Allison Michelle Miller, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Miller of New York, was married yesterday to Philip Alexander Buchanan Cooper, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Kirkland Cooper of Pembroke, Bermuda.
The Rev.
Herbert A. Anderson performed the ceremony at the Brick Presbyterian Church in New


Judge Refuses to Prevent Deaths of Monkeys in Federal Laboratory
LEAD: A nine-year battle by animal rights groups to free monkeys used in Government research has been dealt a setback with a Federal district judge's refusal to stop Government plans to put to death three monkeys at the center of the controversy.


Biennial Seeds Should Be Planted Now
LEAD: IT is time to sow seed.
As odd as this may sound at this time of year, this is the proper time to plant the seeds of biennials.
The plants have formed the odd-shaped cases that hold seed, called seedpods, and the seed is ripening inside.
If this ripe seed is sown promptly, the seed will sprout quickly, and the roots of young plants will have a chance to take hold by early fall.


No Headline
LEAD: Guadeloupe To the Editor: We were so happy to wake up to discover the smiling face of Chef Gerard Virginius (Travel, April 22).


A Holistic Approach to Animal Medicine
LEAD: PATIENTS of Dr.
Stephen Tobin never have to worry about crowded waiting rooms.
The Meriden veterinarian prefers to travel to the homes of ailing dogs, cats and other pets.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Brielle
$329,000
600 Oceanview Road
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; c/a, deck, family room, den, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600.
Freehold
$195,000
46 Mulberry Lane
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 21-year-old split level; 1-car garage, family room, patio; taxes $3,280.


No Big Problem
LEAD: It was a kidney stone that felled Kurt Stillwell, not the herniated disk that was first feared, and the Kansas City Royals' shortstop could be back in the lineup today against the Tigers, the Royals said yesterday.


Varied Views On Gun Control
LEAD: With great apprehension, I read the recent article ''Debate Over Gun-Control Bill Intensifies,'' about the proposed banning of ''assault type'' weapons (which was later passed by the Legislature).


A Guidebook to the Soul Of a City in Confusion
LEAD: Tward the end of John Guare's new play, ''Six Degrees of Separation,'' a young man named Rick takes center stage to describe the horrors that have befallen him in New York City.
Rick, played by Paul McCrane, is a struggling actor who had hit town from Utah with visions of stardom.
But now his eyes fight back tears, his mouth weakens with revulsion.


Victoria A. Goss Marries Judge Dennis F. Harrigan
LEAD: Victoria A. Goss, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Woodrow Goss of Ashburn, Ga., and Judge Dennis F. Harrigan, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Harrigan of Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., were married yesterday.
The ecumenical ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Ralph E. Ahlberg of the United Church of Christ at the Round Hill Community Church in Greenwich,


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Managing;   Getting Mad, Then Getting Even
LEAD: It's not fun for anyone.
But more and more executives are bringing high-stakes lawsuits against their former employers, seeking large sums or high-ranking positions, employment lawyers and outplacement counselors say.
Statistics are scarce, but the number of such lawsuits is rising, counselors say, as companies impose layoffs and executives hear reports of large court verdicts.


Moscow Punishes a General For Assailing K.G.B.'s Ways
LEAD: A former K.G.B. general and counterspy chief has been stripped of his rank and awards for saying publicly that Stalinist methods persist in the security and intelligence service.


All About/Yellow Pages;   Changing Shopping Habits Keep Those Fingers Walking
LEAD: Yellow Pages publishers are learning to behave less like utility companies and more like their advertising brethren on Madison Avenue.
In the six years since the breakup of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, Yellow Pages have gone from dowdy and predicatable - almost like the white pages - to venturesome and competitive.


Gorbachev Reinstates Citizenship of 3 Exiles
LEAD: The Soviet Union has restored the citizenship of three emigre dissidents punished on charges of anti-Soviet slander in the 1970's, the official press agency Tass reported today.
It said the decision was made by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev after an inquiry.


Lawsuit Complicates Bid to Buy MGM/UA
LEAD: Time Warner Inc. has sued the Pathe Communications Corporation for $100 million in a dispute arising from Pathe's attempt to buy the MGM/UA Communications Company.


Varied Views on Gun Control
LEAD: It was with shock and horror that I read ''Debate Over Gun-Control Bill Intensifies.'' Why shock and horror?
Because the Governor wants to supersede the United States Constitution.
Mr.
Florio, the states are subordinate to the Federal Government, not vice versa.


The Music That Haunts 'Twin Peaks'
LEAD: Even nonmusic lovers who watched David Lynch's ''Twin Peaks'' this past season must have recognized music's role in its eerie impact.
Music is everywhere in this television soap opera, nattering ominously in otherwise seemingly banal scenes, investing them with dark purpose; bopping jazzily behind macho teenagers at play, rising to ecstatic (if properly soapy) climaxes where one might expect (James and Donna kissing) and where one might not (the discovery of Laura


Lizbeth Mooney WedsPeyton Stallworth Kay
LEAD: Lizbeth Anne Mooney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Barton Mooney of Chester Springs, Pa., and Peyton Stallworth Kay, a son of Mrs.
Sanford Stallworth Kay of Haverford, Pa., and William G. Kay Jr. of South Dartmouth, Mass., were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Bryn Mawr, Pa.


Costlier and More Dangerous Chemicals Foreseen in Saving Ozone
LEAD: Ridding the environment of chlorine-based chemicals is necessary to save the atmosphere's protective ozone, experts say.
But the price may include greater electricity consumption, costlier and less reliable refrigeration and automotive products, and increasing public exposure to toxic substances and explosives.


Patrick Jones Jr. WedTo Katherine Mellon
LEAD: Katherine Hopkins Mellon, a daughter of Mrs.
Charles Henry Mellon 3d of Far Hills, N.J., and Northeast Harbor, Me., and the late Charles Henry Mellon 3d, was married yesterday to Patrick Suydam Jones Jr., the son of Mrs.
J.
Clark Grew of Lake Forest, Ill., and Northeast Harbor and the late Patrick Suydam Jones.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
DAVE BARRY TURNS 40.
By Dave Barry. (Crown, $16.95.) This book will probably be a popular fortysomething birthday present, but it is more like the card that comes with the gift.
You know, one of those ''You're not getting older, you're just getting fatter and losing your hair'' cards.
In fact, reading ''Dave Barry Turns 40,'' a collection of columns by the Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist at The Miami Herald, is like going through the humor section of a greeting card store, except there are more laughs here.


Census Takes to the Streets to Seek the Uncounted
LEAD: It was on 42d Street yesterday that Brian Wilkerson stumbled upon the first 1990 census form he had ever seen.
Ignoring the sign above the Census Bureau's table that said he could ''Be Counted Here in 3 Minutes,'' he plopped down on the sidewalk to examine the form for nearly half an hour.


Food;   By The Charcoal's Red Glare
LEAD: AFTER THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE WAS written in 1776, John Adams declared that America's birthday should be celebrated with ''pomp and parade, with shows, games, sports, guns, bells, bonfires and illuminations, from one end of this continent to the other, from this time forward for evermore.''


Hidden Valley 'Raring to Go' For Fresh Air
LEAD: A sign at the back of the auditorium seemed to say it all: ''We can't wait to see you this summer.''


Gillian Prisk Is Wed
LEAD: Gillian Mary Catherine Prisk and Alastair John Mackenzie Walton were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of San Giorgio in Portofino, Italy, by the Rev.
John di Vito.
The bride, an assistant buyer at Saks Fifth Avenue in New York, is a daughter of Mary Prisk of Timaru, New Zealand, and the late Dr.


U.S. Sees Cut in Nuclear Shells
LEAD: The Bush Administration has proposed to the Western allies the eventual withdrawal of nuclear-tipped artillery shells now deployed by the United States in Western Europe, an Administration official said tonight.


Headliners;   Whose Habitat?
LEAD: Environmentalists, ever wary of President Bush's insistence that he is really one of them, were delighted in mid-June when his Administration declared the spotted owl a threatened species.
The Government was expected to follow the move last week with a sweeping plan to control cutting in the old-growth forests that serve as the owl's habitat.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Finish planting.
Cultivate the ground lightly, weed and mulch to preserve soil moisture.
Spray roses once again to protect them from black spot and mildew diseases.
Use soil drench on primroses, yews and rhododendrons where black vine weevil adults are feeding.
Last call to plant biennial seed.


Federal Cash for Homeless: It's There but Tough to Get
LEAD: Mary Rose Gerdes, lithe and lovely at the age of 63, smiles nervously and says in a fragile voice that this is how she used to be: ''a bag of bones'' and a recovering alcoholic living in a ''perpetual rage cage.'' Other words creep in, like pancreatitis and severe depression, to describe the conditions that caused her to lose her job and then her home.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Downtown
LEAD: TEN years ago, residential Manhattan all but ceased at Chambers Street.
To the northwest lay TriBeCa, to the northeast the Brooklyn Bridge, the government district and the outer fringes of Chinatown.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Golf
Johnston Leads by 4: Cathy Johnston shot a 70 yesterday and held a lead of four shots over Patti Rizzo and Patty Sheehan after three rounds of the du Maurier Classic championship at Kitchener, Ontario.
Johnston, 26 years old, was at 14-under-par 205 in the second of the Ladies Professional Golf


Campus Life: Michigan;   Town Shakes Tax Fist Over New Police Plan
LEAD: Ann Arbor officials have proposed a raft of new taxes to retaliate against a University of Michigan move to form its own armed police force, ending its need for paid protection from the city.


Ms. Blewer Wed To Clayton Young
LEAD: Cecilia Folger Blewer, a daughter of Sondra G. Blewer of New York and John M. Blewer of Salt Lake City, was married yesterday at the Brick Presbyterian Church in New York to Clayton Young, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Lien Young of Great Neck, L.I.
The Rev.
Mary Foulke performed the ceremony.


Bottom-Line Ballet
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lincoln Center Out-of-Doors Festival to Begin on Aug. 1
LEAD: Performances by the Merce Cunningham Dance Company, Gunther Schuller conducting Charles Mingus's ''Epitaphs,'' and a Roots of American Music Festival celebrating blues, gospel and folk music are among the highlights of the 20th-anniversary season of Lincoln Center's Out-of-Doors Festival, which will run from Aug.


Barbara Kelly Wed to Gregory Hack
LEAD: Dr.
Barbara Anne Kelly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Kelly of Tenafly, N.J., and Dr.
Gregory Adrian Hack, the son of Cornelius Q. Hack of North Smithfield, R.I., and the late Ann W. Hack, were married yesterday in the Presbyterian Church in Tenafly.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Dr.


Talking: Escrow;   Tracking Down Abuses
LEAD: VIRTUALLY every homeowner who makes regular mortgage payments is charged a monthly amount that covers not only principal and interest but also the cost of real estate taxes and homeowner insurance.


A Time to Forgive, but Never Forget
LEAD: This year marks the hundredth anniversary of the Dodgers' first season in the National League.
I'm observing the occasion by forgiving the late Dodgers owner, Walter O'Malley, for moving the team from Brooklyn to Los Angeles in 1958.
Don't laugh; this represents a big step in my life.


Miss Clark Weds N.B. Hamersley
LEAD: Laura Ann Clark, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Clark of Milford, Conn., was married yesterday in Albany to Nicholas Bayard Hamersley, a son of L. Gordon Hamersley Jr. of Southhampton, L.I., and the late Elsey Van Kleeck Hamersley.
The Rev.
Andrew C. Hamersley, the bridegroom's brother, officiated at St.


Family Life Education: Needed Now More Than Ever
LEAD: THIS year marks the 10th anniversary of the adoption of the policy requiring family life education in the New Jersey public schools.


On the Highway To Possibility In a 'College Car'
LEAD: THERE was a period of about a week this spring when you could tell that American colleges and universities had let out for the summer.
You didn't have to read about it or know someone attending school.
You simply had to walk through your neighborhood and glance at the cars parked curbside.


Women's Colleges Have Much to Offer;   Equal Opportunity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Q and A
LEAD:
Volunteers at Parks in U.S.


U.S. Cocaine Epidemic Shows Signs of Waning
LEAD: After a decade of escalating cocaine use, researchers around the country say evidence is accumulating that the epidemic may have reached its peak.


Dim Views of That First $20,000
LEAD: To the Editor:


A. G. Sill Is WedTo Muna Shehadi
LEAD: Muna Shehadi, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fadlou Shehadi of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrews G. Sill, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Davis A. Sill of Southport, Conn.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Henry Morris, a Lutheran minister, at the Princeton University Chapel.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International


Can the U.S. Really Handle a World Cup?
LEAD: Sitting around the Termini station the other day, I was observing trains every few minutes, fans carrying banners, the babble of languages, soccer headlines everywhere, and steaming caffe latte.


Dim Views of That First $20,000
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jeffrey Weber Marries Stacey Gillis in Carolina
LEAD: Stacey Gillis, the daughter of Robert Gillis of Lake Wylie, S.C., and Acapulco, Mexico, and Mrs.
Stanley Grey of Atlanta, was married last evening to Jeffrey Andrew Weber, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence F. Weber of New York.
Rabbi Richard K. Rocklin performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Charlotte, N


Perspectives: Water Metering;   Apartment Buildings Face Shock on Bills
LEAD: ''I HAVEN'T heard the word 'abandonment' used in the Bronx since the 70's,'' said David Diamond, a principal in Rosenberg Diamond Development Corporation, based on Pelham Parkway, which manages 3,000 apartments in 50 buildings. ''Now I'm hearing it again.''


Summer Salads With Rice
LEAD: USING rice as a basis for summer salads offers myriad possibilities.
There are many varieties of rice, many of them delicious served at room temperature and they can be enhanced with scores of seasoning combinations.


The Outlook on Taxes
LEAD: BUDGETS for every household and school district in the state will change in coming months as a result of higher income and sales taxes and the new school financing formula that Gov.
Jim Florio pushed through the Legislature in late June with lightning speed.


The World;   Without Yeltsin Is the Party Over?
LEAD: ALTHOUGH he presides over three-fourths of the Soviet land mass and is probably the most popular Communist in the country, Boris N. Yeltsin does not expect a place of honor at his party's quinquennial reunion this week.


Room and Board on Europe's Trains
LEAD: Travel in a European sleeping car on a train with restaurant service has its own special mystique.
A good meal, a bit of fantasy, and a new city to explore in the morning; such are the rewards still to be found.
Here is a series of rides enjoyed this past January.
Sassnitz Express
Stockholm to West


Some Updates Unwelcome in New Encyclopedia
LEAD: It took more than two decades for major league baseball to anoint the Baseball Encyclopedia, the venerable tome published by Macmillan, as ''the complete and official record of major league baseball.''


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: What can - and does - happen to people who own a second home?
Well, to start with, how about the en route hazard of traffic backed up to you-don't-even-want-to-think-where?


About Cars;   It's Sleek, Fun and Mercedes
LEAD: Among automobile stylists, Sergio Pininfarina is something of a hero.
He has designed all those gorgeous Ferraris.
He has blueprinted the very clean Peugeot 505 sedan.
And Cadillac commissioned him to do its Allante sports model.


The Dicey Future at Chase Manhatan
LEAD: The 1980's were a lost decade for the Chase Manhattan Corporation.
It lost status, becoming merely the 32d-largest banking company in the world.
It lost its top credit rating.
And by the end of the decade it was even losing money.


Where Mandela and Jews Agree to Disagree
LEAD: To the Editor:


How Will We Remember Mama?
LEAD: I ONCE read that Johnny Carson added a codicil to his will stating if any of his sons dared write a book telling all, that son would be automatically cut out of his will.
And do you remember what happened to Bette Davis, not to mention Bing Crosby?
And who could forget Patti's book about Ron and Nancy?


ADVICE FORMTHE TEACHERS
LEAD:
TEACHERS AT WORK
Achieving Success in Our Schools.
By Susan Moore Johnson.
395 pp. New York:
Basic Books. $22.95.


Ideas &amp; Trends;   Small Farms Sell Shares in a Way of Life
LEAD: AT the bottom of Long Mountain in South Amherst, Mass., where Hulst Road veers off into forests of maple and pine, one of the country's most promising experiments in food production is now in its fourth season.


Is U.S.-Japan Pact a Fair Trade?
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A new trade agreement promises to bring Japan some of the greatest products of American culture: wide-open, overbuilt roads, discount shopping and maybe even some American merchandise.
Thursday's agreement commits the Japanese to vastly increase their spending on public works, revamp their retailing system and prosecute monopolistic abuses.


Corrections
LEAD: The Evening Hours column last Sunday misidentified the buyer of an $11,000 donation at the New York City Opera Guild benefit auction.
He is Dr.
Robert Levine, not Dr.
Walter Levin.


SCIENCE, SORCERY AND THE TROPICS
LEAD:
LAUGHING DEATH
The Untold Story of Kuru.
By Vincent Zigas.
Illustrated. 315 pp. Clifton, N.J.:
Humana Press. $24.50.


Country Charm and a Celebrated Chef
LEAD: LEN ALLISON, the celebrated chef at Hubert's in Manhattan, is a man on the move: half of the week in the city and half at Shelter Island's Chequit Inn.


Argentina Beats Yugoslavia
LEAD: Argentina's unlikely path in the World Cup took another fortuitous turn today as the defending champion withstood a courageous team from Yugoslavia and stultifying heat to win on penalty kicks and advance to the semifinals Tuesday in Naples.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: What could be more appropriate than for a famous grandmaster to celebrate his 80th birthday with a party in the form of a tournament?
That is what Miguel Najdorf did on April 15 in Buenos Aires and it may well have been the first time in his chess career that he appeared as the impresario rather than as a player.


Romanian Says He Advises Opponents in North Korea
LEAD: A small group of high-ranking officials in North Korea have begun dissident activities against the leadership of the hard-line Marxist country, says a former senior Romanian official, who adds that he has been advising the Koreans.


Varied Views on Gun Control
LEAD: The New Jersey Legislature recently took a first mincing step and passed a gun-control law, long overdue.


The Nation;   Why Patronage is Unlikely to Fade Away
LEAD: POLITICAL patronage has often been pronounced dead, the victim of Civil Service laws, the merit system and modern political marketing that enables political candidates to bypass party leaders and appeal directly to voters.


'These People' Are Ruining Our Lives?
LEAD: THERE'S a ghost haunting Long Island.
Like most, it generally comes out at night, but this one prefers lighted rooms to dark paths, public meeting rooms to lonely beach cottages.


Compact Camcorders Slug It Out
LEAD: It's been a five-year battle in which nobody budged.
At first it seemed that only one of the two contending formats in the compact camcorder field could survive.
But as interest in camcorders rises to its seasonal summer peak, strife continues between the eight-millimeter and the VHS-C camcorder formats.


FORECAST FOR 'TODAY': CLOUDY
LEAD: As a longtime (and now former) ''Today'' show watcher, I can only agree with the conclusions drawn in your profile of host Bryant Gumbel.
His competence has never been in question.
But as long as his abilities continue to be overshadowed by his outsized ego, loyal viewers and distinguished colleagues alike will continue to drift away.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: Nineteen years ago today, on 7/1/71, the Post Office Department became the United States Postal Service and celebrated by issuing a stamp and its own cacheted first-day covers in all 40,000 post offices.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:
She-Devil
1989. Orion. $89.98. Laser disk, $39.95. 1 hour 39 minutes. Closed captioned. PG-13.
As a writer of romance novels, Meryl Streep shows how fine and funny an actress she can be in a comic role that ''lets her fly with intelligence and speed.'' Less fortunate is Roseanne Barr as a suburban wife seeking revenge for the theft of her husband by Ms.


FORECAST FOR 'TODAY': CLOUDY
LEAD: As a ''Today'' show viewer for the past five years, I watch because of Bryant Gumbel, a class act.
He exudes affability and intelligence.
His (in)famous memo was on target.
PAT COSTA VIGLUCCI
Penfield, N.Y.


Fashion;   Summer Heat Cure: the Cool of Silver
LEAD: Silver and summer seem to go together like sand and surf.
There's a lightness about the look of silver jewelry that complements lightweight clothing, especially this year's stark black and white styles.


Headliners;   Japan's Princess Bride
LEAD: Kiko-san!
The wedding Friday of Japan's newest princess, Kiko Kawashima, to Prince Aya, the second son of Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko, culminated a year of gently demonstrated Kiko-mania.
When the 23-year-old commoner, who is the daughter of a university professor, appeared at her first news conference wearing pearls, brokers soon began recommending pearl companies to clients.


A Mexico Trade Pact Will Cost 2 Million Jobs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hers;   Ladies' Compartment
LEAD: BEFORE TRAVELING through India recently, I had asked a friend, an old India hand, how it was for a woman alone. ''As long as you dress modestly, you should have few hassles in India,'' she said. ''I never experienced any real problems.'' I found India a puzzlement in almost every way, but most troubling was the huge cultural gap between the way I am perceived in New York City and the way I was perceived there.


PROFIT KEY WINS
LEAD: Profit Key, the lone front-runner in a field of four, led all the way to win the $171,600 Dwyer Stakes yesterday at Belmont Park, but gave those who backed him at 3-5 some anxious moments.


Maggie Scott Is Married to Michael David Hanna
LEAD: Margaret Louise Scott, a daughter of Mrs.
John Julian Scott of Garden City, L.I., and the late Dr.
Scott, was married yesterday to Michael David Hanna, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian David Hanna of Belfast, Northern Ireland.
The Very Rev.
Robert Vidal Wilshire, Dean of the Cathedral of the Incarnation in Garden City, where the Episcopal ceremony was performed, was assisted by the Canon F.


News Summary
LEAD:
Zambia's Leader Falters
A failed coup attempt against President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia appears to have further weakened his political standing.
Page 3.
Cocaine: Is the Worst Over?
Researchers around the country say evidence is accumulating that the epidemic of cocaine use may have reached its peak.


Free and Clear
LEAD: Before June 5, 1989, Fang Lizhi's fame was generally limited to the scientific community, where he was known as a distinguished Chinese astrophysicist.
But then came the crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing, and Mr.
Fang, who believes Marxism had failed in China, was accused of being an instigator.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: In the obscure corners of the game of bridge can be found some colorful terms.
The geographer can find the Chinese finesse, the Curse of Scotland and the Alcatraz Coup.
The historian uncovers Byzantine Blackwood, the Morton's Fork Coup, the Duke of Cumberland's Hand and the Merrimac Coup.


Question Of the Week;   How Can The U.S. Improve Its Soccer Team For 1994?
LEAD: The United States can improve its soccer team for 1994 by declaring a state of war and drafting all exceptionally talented athletes in the college ranks.
Send them to boot camp for fundamentals.
Then force-feed them pasta and endless films of the Italians' style of play.
Finally, hope for divine intervention.


Alison Beach Is Wed To David A. Jaeger
LEAD: Alison Isdale Beach, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Beach Jr. of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Allen Jaeger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip E. Jaeger of Cedar Grove, N.J.
The Rev.
Vance E. Polley performed the ceremony at the Rye Presbyterian Church.


'The Loony-Bin Trip'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mets Fans by 3-1, Poll Shows
LEAD: Adult Met fans outnumber their Yankee counterparts by almost 3 to 1 in New York City, a New York Times/ WCBS-TV News poll has found.


The Executive Computer;   Does Software Lose Credibility When It's Inexpensive?
LEAD: How much is software worth?
Is a $5,000 accounting program 100 times better than a $50 accounting program?
Those are among the questions raised by Pacioli 2000, a new $49.95 accounting package for personal computers from, or compatible with those from, the International Business Machines Corporation.


Failed Zambia Coup Weakens Leader
LEAD: A failed coup attempt against President Kenneth D. Kaunda early this morning appears to have further weakened his political standing, already shaky after three days of rioting.


Milwaukee Council Censures Alderman Over Violence Threat
LEAD: A black Milwaukee Alderman who has increasingly clashed with other city officials over racial issues has been censured by his colleagues on the Milwaukee Common Council.
The Council criticized the Alderman, Michael R. McGee, because he supported a black political group that he said had tampered with the products of a local sausage manufacturer.


Varied Views on Gun Control
LEAD: I am sure that all the citizens of New Jersey join me in thanking the legislators and the Governor for the enactment of the law banning the possession of ''assault rifles.'' We can all be relieved that the streets of this state are now safe from the indiscriminate slaughter of our population by the owners of these weapons.


Nostalgia Can Choke the Ongoing Stream of Your Life
LEAD: Got any old bourbon bottles around the house?
Empty cigarette packs?
Cheap perfume bottles?
Any junk left over from the 50's and 60's?
Throw it out, quick.
Otherwise somebody is likely to convince you that the detritus of popular culture from these two decades is worth saving, worth cataloguing, worth - I hate even to use the word - collecting.


Sandra Ann Mills Marries
LEAD: Sandra Ann Mills, the daughter of Mrs.
Parks Smith Mills of Matthews, N.C., and the late Mr.
Mills, was married yesterday to Clayton Robert Barker 3d, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Parker Jr. of Palm Bay, Fla.
The bridegroom's father, a Baptist minister, and the Rev.
Frank Mayes, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Covenant Presbyterian Church Chapel in Charlotte, N.C.


Days of Giants, Bummers and Dopes
LEAD: No, it isn't myth, or the nostalgic yearning of elder or eldest codgers.
The Golden Age of sport in New York did exist, not in the 20's, but in the 30's, the late 40's and the 50's, right up to a year on which I still block (when we awoke to discover that sport was only business, albeit the world's oldest business).


METS FINALLY LOSE ONE
LEAD: Two streaks of success came to an end in Shea Stadium yesterday when the Cincinnati Reds rallied to defeat the Mets, 7-4, and simultaneously clipped their winning streak at 11 games and Darryl Strawberry's hitting streak at 18.


Cynthia Ziegler Is Married
LEAD: Cynthia Ann Ziegler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon S. Ziegler Jr. of Muttontown, L.I., was married yesterday at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Glen Cove, L.I., to Daniel Paul Anastasi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Anastasi of Rockville, Md.
The Rev.
William C. Metzdorf officiated.
The bride, 24 years old, and her husband, 25, are alumni of the University of Richmond.


When Life Was Slow and Mellow
LEAD: TRY to remember a time when ''The Fantasticks'' was not a staple part of the American theatrical scene.


Mutual Funds;   When Small Is Beautiful
LEAD: The long-heralded rebound of small-company stocks paid off for mutual fund investors during the first half of 1990.
The 85 small-company stock funds had returned an average of 5.4 percent as of June 28, head and shoulders above the 2.2 percent logged by all stock funds, according to Lipper Analytical Services Inc., in Summit, N


Leyritz Powers Yank Victory
LEAD: Seven runs should have been enough tonight, but remember, this is the Yankees.
In their season of misfortune, they have never done anything easily.
And so, after taking a 7-0 lead in the third inning, they went through a typical struggle.


U.S. Savings Bailout Irks State Officials
LEAD: REPORTS that the Federal cleanup of the savings and loan disaster will result in Connecticut residents paying $1,237 a person more to rescue the failed thrifts than they will receive in bailout benefits has angered state lawmakers and banking officials, and last week several were looking for ways to offset the situation.


Marybeth Longobardi Weds
LEAD: Marybeth Longobardi, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph D. Longobardi of Crestwood, N.Y., was married yesterday at St.
Catherine of Siena Roman Catholic Church in Mountain Lakes, N.J., to Brandon J. Smith, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Ledyard H. Smith of Parsippany, N.J.
The Rev.
Joseph J. Garbarino officiated.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: The Avenue of the Americas will be closed today from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. from 35th to 50th Streets for the Avenue of the Americas Festival.


Summer Salads With Rice
LEAD: USING rice as a basis for summer salads offers myriad possibilities.
There are many varieties of rice, many of them delicious served at room temperature and they can be enhanced with scores of seasoning combinations.


As Protest, Performer Rejects Federal Grant
LEAD: A performer who was to receive a grant from the National Endowment for the Arts said today that she would turn it down because the agency had rejected 4 of 18 grants recommended by its theater peer panel.


Legislators Seek New Compromise On Air Terminal
LEAD: A SHARPLY divided County Board of Legislators was unable to agree last week on the size of a replacement for the Quonset hut that has long served as the Westchester County Airport passenger terminal.
Rejecting two competing versions, it began working on a compromise that would be put to voters as a referendum in


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Clinton, Conn.
$152,000
2 Fairy Dell Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 6-year-old Cape Cod; slate foyer, contemporary kitchen; taxes $1,140.
Guilford, Conn.
$159,000
215 Shore Drive
1-bedroom, 1-bath, 3-year-old contemporary; wraparound deck, living-room cathedral ceiling, large atrium doors; taxes $1,375.


Yachting Cutdown
LEAD: The list of teams endorsed to compete to be defender of the America's Cup has been cut from nine to the final four, the San Diego Yacht Club announced Friday.
All of the groups are based in San Diego.


Troubles Raising Questions About Space Agency
LEAD: As the space agency sets up groups to investigate the technical troubles that struck its two most prominent programs last week, some experts are wondering just what, if anything, has gone wrong with NASA itself.


Ancient Lineage
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Menu of Sharp, Fresh Flavors
LEAD: WHEN the Five-Mile River Grille opened in Rowayton three years ago, it had a trendy feel that suggested, ''Here today, gone tomorrow.'' But the restaurant has demonstrated staying power and improved considerably in the process.


Correction
LEAD: An article last Sunday about the market for Japanese art misstated which branch of an auction house sold two pairs of 17th-century flower screens for $1 million each.
It was Christies in New York.


Debbie Marion Becomes Bride
LEAD: Deborah Mary Marion, a daughter of Mary Anne Marion of New Canaan, Conn., and John L. Marion of New York, was married yesterday to Michael Brearton Murray, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony S. Murray of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Heavenly Rest in New


ANOTHER CHANCE FOR A PRIME PIECE OF REAL ESTATE
LEAD: More than four years have passed since the developer Donald Trump unleashed upon the world his first plan for ''Television City,'' a huge development that would put 7,600 apartments, one of the region's largest shopping malls, and the world's tallest building on the site of the former Penn Central rail yards between 59th and 72d Streets on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Before the European colonists came to the Americas and before the Mint in Philadelphia began striking coins in 1776, natives of thecontinent were using money in their transactions.
Wampum, orshell-money, made from the quahog clam was the most common.
Strings of white and purple shell buttons found their way from the East


Albany Lurches Toward Adjournment
LEAD: Like a jalopy in need of a tune-up, the State Legislature lurched toward adjournment today, resolving some major issues and leaving others mired in partisan politics and confusion.


Biennial Seeds Should Be Planted Now
LEAD: IT is time to sow seed.
As odd as this may sound at this time of year, this is the proper time to plant the seeds of biennials.
The plants have formed the odd-shaped cases that hold seed, called seedpods, and the seed is ripening inside.
If this ripe seed is sown promptly, the seed will sprout quickly, and the roots of young plants will have a chance to take hold by early fall.


Miss Pohs Wed To D. J. Supino
LEAD: Linda Jill Pohs, a daughter of Jack Pohs of New York and the late Lorraine Pohs, was married yesterday to David James Supino, a son of the late Renato J. Supino and the late Muriel Davies Supino of Demarest, N.J.
The ceremony was performed at Cobble Brook Farm, the bridegroom's country home in Kent, Conn., by William C.


Review/Theater;   Jekyll Tale Updated, To Music
LEAD: ''Jekyll and Hyde,'' which opens Theaterworks/USA's second four-week season of free Off-Broadway summer theater for young people, is a musical that wants to entertain while putting over a serious message about the perils of substance abuse.
Until it ends with an abrupt, heavy-handed clunk, the hourlong show at the Promenade


U.S. Gets 100,000 Acres in Largest Gift of Land
LEAD: More than 100,000 acres of wildlife refuges and historic areas, including the site of the bloodiest day of fighting of the Civil War, are to be given to the Federal Government on Tuesday in what officials believe is the largest single gift of land ever made to the nation.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   When an Auction Ends in a Standoff
LEAD: LATE in May, a Sheldon Good &amp; Company real estate auction ended not in a sellout or partial sale, but in a standoff.
People who thought they had bought 40 new condominium units at Millpointe in Wethersfield had their down payments returned within three days because the prices were insufficient to satisfy the mortgage.


Liberian Insurgents Isolating the Capital
LEAD: Guerrillas fighting the Liberian Government have reportedly seized control of the city's main hydroelectric installation and water-treatment plant, cutting water supplies and disrupting power.


Wall Street;   A Little Bad News in Aviation Leasing
LEAD: The unquestioned assumption underlying many real estate investments of the last decade was that assets would always increase in value.
But a friendly takeover announced last week, the $1.3 billion purchase of the International Lease Finance Corporation by the American International Group, highlights another sort of collateral whose unfaltering appreciation has been an article of faith with some investors: airplanes.


A LOST GENERATION OF AMERICANS IS COMING HOME
LEAD: No one could blame David Diamond for being bitter.
During the 1940's, the composer was considered among the most promising of his generation.
He could count his fellow composers Aaron Copland and Leonard Bernstein among his friends, the conductors Serge Koussevitzsky and Dimitri Mitropoulos among his champions and the Boston Symphony Orchestra and New York Philharmonic among his interpreters.


Votes in Congress;   Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
LEAD:
Senate
1.
Flag Amendment: Vote on a proposed amendment to the United States Constitution to prohibit desecration of the American flag.
Failed, with 58 in favor and 42 opposed, which was nine votes short of the two-thirds needed to propose a constitutional amendment, June 26.
2.
Assault Weapons: Vote on an amendment to an omnibus crime bill to reaffirm the Senate's decision to impose a three-year ban on certain types of semiautomatic assault weapons.


FUTURE LOOKS DIM FOR PORSCHE
LEAD: Within the next few weeks, Porsche is expected to decide whether to continue its Indy-car program next year.
Last week, Derrick Walker, the team's general manager, put very little gilding on his prognosis for 1991.


Germans Revel as Economies Unite
LEAD: At the stroke of midnight, East Germany today formally ceded its currency and economy to West Germany.
Thousands of East Germans gathered in the center of the city broke into cheers, firecrackers popped and car horns blared.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


Catherine Carver Wed in Virginia
LEAD: Catherine Ruth Carver and Robert Cuyler McCurrach were married yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church in Alexandria, Va., by the Rev.
Donald E. Bitsberger.
Anne Swartz was the maid of honor, and the bridegroom's father was the best man.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:
In Japan, Tours On Layovers At Narita


The Magic of the Manx
LEAD: Manx people say that the Isle of Man sits in the center of the Irish Sea because two giants, one Irish and one English, were feuding over a woman.
One night the English giant stole the woman away, and the Irish giant, whose name was Finn MacCoul, was so furious that he threw a handful of stone and mud after his enemy's retreating figure.


Lodges in Rugged, Remote Maine
LEAD: IN the autumn of 1880 the author and artist Thomas Sedgwick Steele arrived by canoe at a cluster of buildings on the shores of Chesuncook Lake, deep in the north Maine woods. ''These farm buildings stand alone in a wild, open tract of country,'' he wrote. ''The sight of them strikes you instantly as strange and unaccountable.


Capital Statement
LEAD: On Friday, a Superior Court grand jury in Washington declined to file criminal charges against three members of the Capitals hockey team who had been accused of rape by a 17-year-old girl.
Yesterday, the Capitals released a statement asking forgiveness for the players: Neil Sheehy, a 30-year-old defenseman; Dino Ciccarelli, a 30-year-old right wing, and Geoff


Evening Hours;   Ashore, Afloat, Art Is Enriched By Merriment
LEAD: Brooke Astor and Helen Hayes joined hands in Miss Hayes's rose garden above the Hudson River in Nyack, N.Y., Wednesday night to raise money for the restoration of the Tappan Zee Playhouse.
The evening began with Mrs.
Astor sailing up the Hudson with 105 of her friends and guests aboard the Imperator, Arthur Imperatore's 142-foot yacht, donated for the evening.


The Latest Political Litmus Test
LEAD: President Bush's decision last week to limit offshore drilling demonstrates that hardly any politician can risk being seen as anti-environmental.
The reason for this is the growth of the environmental consciousness among the American people.


Bensonhurst Jurors Irk Judge
LEAD: Justice Thaddeus E. Owens yesterday testily explained for the ninth time the legal definition of riot to the jury deliberating the fate of the Bensonhurst defendant John S. Vento.


Question Of the Week;   How Can The U.S. Improve Its Soccer Team For 1994?
LEAD: If the American players can afford to continue playing, the team will be in its prime in 1994.
More important than improving our team, however, is the need to educate the American public about soccer and the international importance of the World Cup, to which we will be playing host in four years.


Plans to Expand
LEAD: According to Syracuse's athletic director, Jake Crouthamel, the school, which is a member of the Big East Conference in basketball, was one of eight football independents taking part in talks last week involving a possible expansion of the Metro Conference.


BEST SELLERS: July 1, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow.
(Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney
tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death
while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.


Defiance of Kremlin's Control Is Accelerating in Soviet Asia
LEAD: While Moscow tries to find an accommodation with the rebellious Baltic republics, the shift of political authority from the Gorbachev Government to the provinces is accelerating here in the Islamic heartland of Central Asia.


Father, Son and I.B.M.
LEAD: To the Editor:


An Artist and His City: Titian in Venice
LEAD: About the Titian show that is here at the Ducal Palace, through Oct. 7, it should first be said that ''The Venus of Urbino,'' from the Uffizi in Florence, is absent. ''The Rape of Europa'' has not made the trip from the Gardner Museum in Boston, nor have ''Diana and Actaeon'' and ''Diana and Callisto'' moved from the National Gallery in Edinburgh.


Vincent Following Giamatti's Guidelines
LEAD: The hearing Commissioner Fay Vincent will oversee Thursday on baseball's investigation of George Steinbrenner will be based largely on guidelines set last year by A. Bartlett Giamatti for his planned hearing on Pete Rose's gambling activities.


LOVE, DEATH AND 'WHEN DO WE EAT?'
LEAD:
WOODY ALLEN: New Yorker.
By Graham McCann. (Polity/Basil Blackwell, $24.95.) Like all great clowns, Allen Stewart Konigsberg wants to be taken seriously, and Graham McCann has granted his wish.
In ''Woody Allen: New Yorker,'' the comic invention known as Woody Allen is scrupulously analyzed for what it may reveal about the cosmic tensions of our age.


THE VOLTAIRE PROJECT: A COLLECTOR'S OBSESSION
LEAD: I'm sure I must have heard his name a few times as I was growing up, but I don't think I ever actually read anything by Voltaire until the early 1960's when, as a halfhearted graduate student of English literature, carefully husbanding a student deferment during the Vietnam War days, I was assigned an essay comparing ''Candide'' and Samuel Johnson's ''Rasselas.


Comics' Heroes Are Dwarfed By Movies
LEAD: Comic-strip heroes are everywhere in the movies this summer - everywhere, that is, except where you might expect to find them.


Striking Performances Light Up 'Othello'
LEAD: IT may be the same old story, but images appear anew and insights abound.


INNOCENTS UNDONE
LEAD:
ALL GONE
18 Short Stories.
By Stephen Dixon.
151 pp. Baltimore:
The Johns Hopkins University Press. $17.95.


Equipment Drags on A.T.&amp;T.
LEAD: A generation ago, telephones were mostly black and square.
Corporate switchboards were full of tiny gears and wheels like an alarm clock, and the equipment in telephone-company central offices was crammed with copper wiring.
One company made almost all of it: Western Electric, the manufacturing arm of the American Telephone and Telegraph


New&amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
AGENT OF INFLUENCE, by David Aaron. (Avon, $4.95.) A big-time mergers-and-acquisitions specialist discovers that his client, a wealthy Frenchman trying to take over the largest communications empire in the United States, is an agent for the K.G.B.
Last year our reviewer, Donovan Fitzpatrick, called the novel ''an 'econo-thriller,' a frightening journey through the netherworld of corporate raiding, financial espionage, leveraged buyouts, scorched-earth maneuvers, poison pill ploys and Wall Street esoterica.


Sarah Paul WedsA. C. Bentley 2d
LEAD: Sarah Paul, the daughter of Manuela Yona Paul of Brooklyn, N.Y., and the late David Tyler Paul of Chestnut Hill, Pa., was married yesterday to Alden Cody Bentley 2d, a son of Capt. and Mrs.
Paul Cody Bentley 2d of New Hope, Pa., in a Quaker ceremony at Buckingham Friends Meeting in Lahaska, Pa.


New Weapon Against Harbor Oil Spills
LEAD: THE Coast Guard is preparing to install a system of radar and television cameras in New York Harbor that will alert ships' pilots to traffic conditions and emergencies, in an effort to prevent some of the oil spill accidents that have plagued the harbor area and, most recently, the Jersey Shore.


Fashion: On the Street;   A Spot of Shade To Tote Around
LEAD: In summer more than any other season, it's the cooler head that inevitably prevails.
That at least explains the profusion of caps and hats that have accompanied the recent rise in temperature and humidity.
While these hats are utilitarian - with their wide brims and long bills, they deflect the sun quite nicely - they are also just plain fun.


A Writer's Soul
LEAD: To the Editor:


Drorah Setel Marries John O'Donnell
LEAD: Tracey Wren Drorah Setel, the daughter of Susan W. Setel and Eugene M. Setel of Buffalo, was married there last evening at the Buffalo Club to John Joseph O'Donnell, a son of Mrs.
Granville Morse of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Edward F. O'Donnell.
Rabbi Marcia Plumb and Cantor Sue Roemer officiated.


Philadelphia's Credit Rating Lowered by Second Agency
LEAD: Philadelphia's fiscal problems grew worse Friday as a top credit agency lowered the city's municipal bond rating, essentially warning investors that the city's bonds were a speculative investment.


Miss Licht Weds Wallace Turner
LEAD: Betsy Ann Licht, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence W. Licht of Upper Brookville, L.I., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Wallace Richard Turner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Turner of Bay Shore, L.I.
The Rev.
Alan J. Edmiston, an Episcopal priest, and Joseph Suozzi, a former Justice of the Appellate Division of State Supreme


Review/Dance;   Ruzimatov In 'Sleeping Beauty'
LEAD: Faruk Ruzimatov sometimes seems to be dancing in another world from his fellow performers on the stage of the Metropolitan Opera House during this American Ballet Theater season.
But Mr.
Ruzimatov, a star import from the Kirov Ballet of Leningrad, made the proceedings a good deal more colorful in his early moments as Prince Desire, in a role debut on Thursday night in Sir Kenneth MacMillan's staging of ''The Sleeping Beauty.


Review/Opera;   Moore's 'Carry Nation, A Prohibitionist's Story
LEAD: Perhaps the only way for New York opera audiences to get a look at Douglas Moore's ''Carry Nation'' is in the kind of production offered by New York University at the Reimann Opera Theater on Thursday night.
Well-intentioned, half-prepared and often misjudged, it did, however, give the listener an idea of what this 1966 stage piece had in mind and a few sporadic moments of pleasure as well.


Ann Carey Weds In East Hampton
LEAD: At the Most Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in East Hampton, L.I., yesterday, Ann C. Carey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Ward Carey of New York and East Hampton, was married to J. Christophe Loisel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Loisel of Brive-la-Gaillarde, France.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.


Royal T. Guernsey 3d, Restaurateur, 42
LEAD: Royal Thomas Guernsey 3d, a partner in Chez Panisse, the highly successful restaurant in Berkeley, Calif., died of AIDS last Friday at his home in Berkeley.
He was 42 years old.


Eli Whitney Debevoise Dies at 90; Co-Founder of a Top Law Firm
LEAD: Eli Whitney Debevoise, a prominent New York lawyer who served in numerous government posts, died in his sleep early yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 90 years old.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our kitchen cabinets are covered with a walnut-tone plastic laminate that we dislike.
We would like to paint over it, and were wondering what kind of paint to use.
If we do not like the paint after it is applied, will this make it more difficult to remove the old laminate later on if we decide to replace it?


Karen Louise Peterson Weds Gerald L. Sauer
LEAD: The Punahou School Chapel in Honolulu was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Karen Louise Peterson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent Peterson of Kailua, Hawaii, to Gerald Louis Sauer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marion Sauer of St.
Louis.
The Rev.
John Heidel, a Congregational minister and the school's chaplain, performed the ceremony.


The World;   Will Mandela's Triumphs Abroad Enlarge His Power Back Home?
LEAD: WHEN Nelson Mandela's world tour ends on July 18, he will have received the praise of heads of state and badly needed hard cash for his African National Congress.
But he is likely to find that his triumphs abroad will have only limited bearing on the A.N.C.'s fight to replace white minority rule at home.


SUMMER INTHE CITY, OUT AT THE BALL PARK
LEAD: NEW YORK has two baseball teams, in two different leagues, playing in two distinct parts of the city, in two very different parks.


Barbara Goldberg Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Barbara Lynn Goldberg, a reporter for United Press International in New York, and Mark Xavier Mooney, a reporter for The New York Post, were married yesterday at the home of the bride's parents in Washington, Conn.
Maurice Goldstein, a justice of the peace in New Milford, Conn., officiated.


For a Rose Fancier, The Older, the Better
LEAD: THOMAS CHRISTOPHER loves Katharina Zeimet - a rose with origins in 19th-century Japan.
He also likes Harison's Yellow, a rose favored by the pioneers, and Gallicas, roses that grew in France when it was Gaul.


Nan Rosengarten Weds Soeren Jensen
LEAD: Nan Rosengarten, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot Rosengarten of Riverdale, the Bronx, and Soeren Vagn Jensen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ole Vagn Jensen of Holsted, Denmark, were married yesterday.
The civil ceremony was performed at the Copenhagen City Hall.


Summer Salads With Rice
LEAD: USING rice as a basis for summer salads offers myriad possibilities.
There are many varieties of rice, many of them delicious served at room temperature and they can be enhanced with scores of seasoning combinations.


Taking a Broader View Of Drugs in the Suburbs
LEAD: LEE P. BROWN, Commissioner of the New York City Police Department, said in a speech here on Tuesday that it is ''wrong and dangerous'' to regard drug abuse and its criminal consequences as an inner-city scourge threatening the suburbs.


Prints and Drawings By Latin Americans
LEAD: THE Housatonic Museum of Art's collection numbers more than 500 works.
They run from African sculptures to Pop Art, from a Mughal painting to a figurative sculpture by Lee Bontecou, from Giorgio de Chirico to Alfonso Ossorio and from lesser Dutch masters to Leonard Baskin.
It's quite a gamut.


Shedding More Light
LEAD: To the Editor:


Repairing Wobbly Wooden Fences
LEAD: WOBBLY wooden fence posts should be repaired promptly before they cause other fence parts to loosen.
Posts that have been in the ground for less than five years usually wobble because of improper installation; ordinarily, tightening them is fairly easy.
In older fences, decay is more likely the culprit.


More Pitfalls in Life Insurance Investing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jane L. Sarkin Is Bride Of Martin O'Connor 2d
LEAD: Jane Lauren Sarkin, the daughter of Elaine S. Zheutlin of Hillside, N.J., and the late Dr.
Stanley K. Sarkin, was married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Immaculate Conception in Elizabeth, N.J., to Martin Bradley O'Connor 2d, a son of Mary Louise O'Connor of Elizabeth and the late Judge Richard R.


Sailor Tuning Up His Image
LEAD: Mokoto Namba, a champion yachtsman from Japan, went into the Liberty Cup Regatta this weekend more determined to win than ever.
Not only did he have a losing streak in the New York race to improve upon, but also a new and bright yacht-racing image to uphold.


A Rocky Journey For U.S. Cyclist
LEAD: ''So you made it back to the Tour de France?'' an acquaintance asked Andy Bishop. ''It wasn't easy.''


FORECAST FOR 'TODAY': CLOUDY
LEAD: Your article on the future of ''Today'' includes an assessment of Deborah Norville's performance by an NBC executive who is quoted as saying, ''She just doesn't get it.'' However, I believe it is the network executive who ''doesn't get it.'' The article points out that the show is losing a portion of the audience that advertisers are anxious to keep, namely younger women.


Style Makers;   Georgina Godley, Fashion Designer
LEAD: When Georgina Godley says she likes fashion's fast track, she's not talking status: she's talking stadium.
The 35-year-old designer has taken two high-tech fabrics from the world of athletics - Gore-Tex and Lycra - and woven them into a new collection she calls sport couture.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, a picture in the Arts and Leisure section today with an article about the Brancacci Chapel in Florence carries an incorrect caption in some copies.


SNEAKING OUT FOR A BACON BUTTY
LEAD: THE FOLKS THAT LIVE ON THE HILL
By Kingsley Amis.
246 pp. New York: Summit Books. $18.95.


Postings: Bronx Plant;   Turning Garbage Into Fuel
LEAD: Garbage will be turned into fuel, and 27 badly needed jobs will open up where too few are available, under a Swiss recycling company's plans to build a $26 million refuse-treatment plant in the Hunts Point section of the Bronx.


Works in Progress;   Malodorous
LEAD: THE METAPHOR IS TRIED AND true, the villain as stinker.
But it is the literal reality that is exploited by new devices that detect the work of drug traffickers and terrorists. ''The vapors of drugs or explosives get on everything,'' says David H. Fine. ''The equivalent is a foul smell.
If you kill a skunk on the highway, you can smell it on your car for days.


Calamities in Space
LEAD: NASA had a calamitous week.
First it discovered a fundamental flaw in the Hubble space telescope.
Then it had to ground its space shuttle fleet after a second shuttle sprang a mysterious hydrogen leak in pre-launch tests.
These events are a setback for astronomy, a warning for other big science projects and their backers in Congress and the White House, and an untimely black mark for the space agency.


Making Allowances
LEAD: Donald Trump was put on an allowance last week.
As part of a rescue deal from his bankers that enabled the 44-year-old developer to meet an interest payment on a junk bond issue and narrowly avert personal bankruptcy, Mr.
Trump was told that he cannot spend more than $450,000 a month on personal and household expenses for the rest of the year.


Tennis on TV: Too Much Talk
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Correction
LEAD: The Streetscapes column on June 17 about ads in the subway system misstated the route of the IRT on the East Side in 1904.
It ran on Fourth Avenue (now Park Avenue South) as far as 42d Street, not on Lexington Avenue.


Review/Dance;   A Lampoon By Tudor
LEAD: As it grows older in changing times, Antony Tudor's ''Gala Performance'' has come to look more like a frivolous bonbon than the flinty commentary on ballet manners and tradition that it was doubtless meant to be.
But the dancers who performed the Tudor-Prokofiev work on Monday night, when American Ballet Theater presented it at the Metropolitan Opera


What to Say When the Film Is Unrated
LEAD: How does a sexually explicit film with artistic credentials make an entrance in video stores?
In September, Fox/Lorber Home Video will release ''In the Realm of the Senses'' by the Japanese director Nagisa Oshima. ''Beautiful,'' ''stunning,''


In Ruth's House, a Mix of Then and Now
LEAD: ''Buy me some peanuts and Cracker Jack.
I don't care if I ever smoke crack.'' It was sing-along time, the seventh-inning stretch at Yankee Stadium.
A young man with wildly flowing red hair, seated in Row L in the topmost stands behind home plate, was giving a 1990's twist to an old standard.


COCTEAU'S PALETTE
LEAD: Jean Cocteau (1889-1963) lived as many lives as a cat, and most of them at the same time.
Novelist, poet, playwright, film maker, diarist, critic, illustrator, painter and set designer - this Parisian prodigy knew everyone, tried everything and was invariably attracted to whatever he wasn't up to at the moment.


Question Of the Week;   How Can The U.S. Improve Its Soccer Team For 1994?
LEAD: One word: experience.


James S. Wallerstein, Biochemist, 79
LEAD: James Scheuer Wallerstein, a biochemist and the president of the Sarah S. Ollesheimer Fund, a college scholarship foundation in Mount Kisco, N.Y., died on Thursday at his home in Mount Kisco.
He was 79 years old.


Campus Life: Minnesota;   Female Dancers Banned at Games Of Men's Teams
LEAD: The University of Minnesota has banned its dance line of 16 women from men's athletic events because the performances ''sexually stereotyped'' them.
The women said they should decide that for themselves.


ABOUT BOOKS
LEAD: AFTER the fires of controversy cool, an artist too strongly identified with the struggles risks oblivion.
Indeed, it often seems these days to Bernarda Bryson Shahn that not many remember Ben Shahn, her husband and once one of America's most popular painters, who spent the last three decades of his life in


This Alter Ego Helps Scripts Be Psychologically Sound
LEAD: In the opulently appointed Beverly Hills offices of the Larry Thompson Organization, a story meeting is in progress.
Mr.
Thompson, an independent producer of TV movies, is developing an idea about a woman in trouble.
Robert Kosberg, a Thompson protege, is doing most of the talking, while Dr.
Carole Lieberman, a psychiatrist, listens, notepad in hand.


Data Bank/July 1, 1990
LEAD:
$
Index of Leading Indicators
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
0.8
-0.1
1.0
New Home Sales
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
0.4
-5.2
-8.4
Cash Wheat Price
June 15-22
June 8-15
June 1-8
No. 1 K.C., per bushel
$3.30
$3.45
$3.58
Steel Production
Thousands of tons
1,893
1,875
1,930
Electric Power
Milions of Kilowatt Hours
62,244
59,115
57,265
Money Supply Growth
3 mos.


THE FIRST JEFFERSONIAN
LEAD:
EMPIRE OF LIBERTY
The Statecraft of Thomas Jefferson.
By Robert W. Tucker and David C. Hendrickson.
360 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $24.95.


Bruce Willis Looks for the Man Within the Icon
LEAD: Somewhere in Hell's Kitchen, hard by West 49th Street and 10th Avenue in Manhattan, there is an apartment with Bruce Willis's name on it.
A railroad flat where, for $175 a month, he bivouacked as one of New York's small army of aspiring actors, it still remains, and not by accident, in the man's family.


Disturbed Children Focus of Parents' Group
LEAD: SUPPOSE you had a child who threw a television out the window and attempted suicide three times before the age of 8.
Or a teen-ager who ate boxes of raw cake mix and tried to stab you with a knife.
How would you get help?


SOVIETS OPEN LINE FOR LITHUANIA OIL TO HELP END CRISIS
LEAD: The Soviet Union reopened the oil pipeline to rebellious Lithuania today to begin fulfilling its part of a compromise to end the impasse on the republic's move for independence.


A Crying Need For Awareness
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Garcia Said to Be Released From Florida Federal Prison
LEAD: Former United States Representative Robert Garcia was released from a Federal prison in Florida yesterday, a day after his extortion conviction was overturned, his wife's lawyer said.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart last Sunday with an article about Quebec's economy misstated the Canadian province's gross domestic product in 1989.
It was $129 billion, not $120 billion.
A table with the article also misstated the percentage that Quebec contributes to Canada's gross domestic product.
It was 23.6 percent, not 22 percent.


Robert T. Weltchek, Mayor, 65
LEAD: Robert T. Weltchek, a former municipal judge and mayor of Springfield Township, N.J., died on Friday at Overlook Hospital in Summit.
He was 65 years old.


Style Makers;   Marc Friedland, Stationery Designer
LEAD: ''Stationer to the stars.'' Marc Friedland, a 30-year-old Los Angeles artist and designer, likes the sound of that.
As the founder of Artafax, a graphic design company, he has designed invitations to parties given by Pee-wee Herman, Alec Baldwin, Elton John and Dudley Moore.


Carolyn M. Baker Married To Douglas Clark Dorsey
LEAD: Carolyn Manchester Baker, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Baker of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday at St.
Michael's Episcopal Church in Bristol, R.I., to Douglas Clark Dorsey, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Dorsey of Irvington, Va.
The Rev.
Anne B. Kimball performed the ceremony.


An Evening at Shea Is a Stroll in the Park
LEAD: The endlessly blinking scoreboards at Shea Stadium have a naive charm.
The following appeared on the screen together:


U.S. to Make It Easier to Gain Asylum
LEAD: After a decade of debate, the Justice Department has drafted new rules to protect the rights of foreigners who seek asylum in the United States and fear persecution in their homelands.


Dim Views of That First $20,000
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brave New World Seen for Robots Appears Stalled by Quirks and Costs
LEAD: Steve Antenen runs the nation's biggest employment agency for laid-off robots.
He has 70 industrial robots for sale on the fringe of this riverside community between Cincinnati and Dayton.
All look impeccable, most having worked no more than a few thousand hours before their former owners, some of the nation's leading companies, showed them the door.


AFFIRMATIVE ACTION: A NEGATIVE OPINION
LEAD:
PREFERENTIAL POLICIES
An International Perspective.
By Thomas Sowell.
221 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company. $17.95.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
From Jailhouse to Art


Correction
LEAD: The Practical Traveler column on June 17 about maps misstated the address for the 14th Street-Union Square business improvement association.
It is at 124 East 15th Street, New York, N.Y. 10003.


Rating the Orient-Express
LEAD: FOR over a hundred years, the Orient Express, which ran from what is now Istanbul to Paris, was the world's most glamorous train - ''The King of the Rails.'' No other train possessed such an aura of romance, opulence and mystery.
The mention of its name still evokes adventure and intrigue.
It inspired six major films, 19 books and a fox trot, written in 1933.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Who Is Baseball's Best Player Now?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.


Peoria Set to Welcome Its Freed Native Son
LEAD: Scott Heimdal, the 27-year-old American gold miner released Friday after two months in the captivity of Colombian guerrilla kidnappers, could be back in the United States as early as Tuesday, and his reception here promises to be a remarkable one: a homecoming for a man most Peorians have never met, in a town where he has not lived for years.


Cab Driver Is Shot to Death In Brooklyn Robbery Attempt
LEAD: A livery-cab driver was shot and killed during an apparent robbery while driving to work in Brooklyn, the police said.


Let's Stop Selling Cancer to Children
LEAD: Each day the merchants of nicotine lose more than five thousand customers who either die or quit.
To replace these lost consumers, the tobacco industry spends billions to hook kids on cigarettes - since they know that half of all adult smokers started smoking by age 13, and that a full one-quarter started by age 11.


Technology;   The 'Concept Car' Pushes Change
LEAD: This month, the Ford Motor Company will introduce the 1991 Capri, a sporty new car to be built in Australia around a Japanese Mazda drive train.
It will be aimed at the market made popular by Mazda's Miata.
But unlike the Miata, which was conceived quietly at the company's design studios in California, the Capri began life in 1982 in full view as a ''concept car.


Uncertainty for a Village of Chair Makers
LEAD: IN 1826, Lambert Hitchcock opened a chair factory in a little village in northwestern Connecticut that later came to be known as Hitchcocksville.
While the name didn't stick, the fortunes of the Hitchcock Chair Company and the people of the village have remained deeply intertwined.


Seattle's Succulent Clams
LEAD: INSTEAD of being called the Emerald City, for its abundance of parks and surrounding woods, Seattle might as easily and accurately be referred to as the clam city.
Not just for the abundance of the grayish- to white-shelled bivalves that snuggle into the substrate in Elliott Bay, Puget Sound and waters beyond, but because the clams turn up on the tables of restaurants and homes throughout the city.


Summer Salads With Rice
LEAD: USING rice as a basis for summer salads offers myriad possibilities.
There are many varieties of rice, many of them delicious served at room temperature and they can be enhanced with scores of seasoning combinations.


'Fair Lady' Sparkles in Candlewood Staging
LEAD: SINCE Rick Belzer took over as executive producer, artistic director and resident lighting designer seven years ago, the Candlewood Playhouse in New Fairfield, Conn., has been displaying a sleek technical skill uncommon in professional summer-stock theaters.


Michael Robert Sachs Weds Karen E. Ficco
LEAD: Karen Elizabeth Ficco, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Ficco of Franklin, Mass., and Michael Robert Sachs, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brice A. Sachs of Convent Station, N.J., were married yesterday by the Rev.
James O'Leary at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Franklin.


Repairing Wobbly Wooden Fences
LEAD: WOBBLY wooden fence posts should be repaired promptly before they cause other fence parts to loosen.
Posts that have been in the ground for less than five years usually wobble because of improper installation; ordinarily, tightening them is fairly easy.
In older fences, decay is more likely the culprit.


FORECAST FOR 'TODAY': CLOUDY
LEAD: Bill Carter's article ''Forecast for 'Today': Cloudy'' (June 10) was excellent, but it doesn't go far enough.
The emotion isn't there and it really needs to be.
There, in front of millions every morning - most of them women, and mothers - is this outrageous misogynist, Bryant Gumbel.
We watched as Jane Pauley was removed from the show, only to be replaced by the kind of woman many women find most threatening - the eternal plastic blonde - who mindlessly defers to this locker-roomJU bully.


Triple Play;   The Rich Nations Get Richer. And Then?
LEAD: The currencies and economies of the two Germanys become one today, solidifying the German role as leader of a bloc of European states that are themselves rushing toward economic union and a closer political federation.
And next week, the leaders of the seven strongest industrial democracies - the United States, Japan, Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada - gather in Houston for an economic summit meeting to survey the problems and opportunities of a world changed in subtle and not-so-subtle ways.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
BOX AND COX
By Grace Chetwin.
Illustrated by David Small.
Unpaged. New York: Bradbury Press.
$13.95. (Ages 5 to 8)


Failure in Denver Hits Manhattan Co-op
LEAD: Aftershocks from the collapse of the Silverado Savings and Loan Association in Denver are shaking a Manhattan cooperative near Lincoln Center, where residents have become the reluctant partners of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.


Fashion;   New Colors Put Fun Into Jackets
LEAD: This summer, lots of men seem to be shedding their navy blue blazers in favor of newly fashionable coats of crayon green, red or yellow, or slightly toned-down celery, tomato or gold.


Review/Dance;   A Penetrating 'Dark Elegies' In an All-Tudor Program
LEAD: Antony Tudor's ballets have sometimes looked like artifacts that dancers dust off by performing.
The all-Tudor evening presented by American Ballet Theater on Wednesday at the Metropolitan Opera House was an exception.
And it was heartening to hear the cheers that greeted ''Dark Elegies,'' never the most accessible of


D. M. Cross Weds Andrea Krahmer
LEAD: Andrea Clem Krahmer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Johannes R. Krahmer of Wilmington, Del., was married there yesterday to David McNeill Cross, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. A. Cross of Chapel Hill, N.C.
The Rev.
Dr.
Jon Walton performed the ceremony at Westminster Presbyterian Church.


Computers
LEAD: To the Editor: The article ''Tour Shopping With a Computer'' (Practical Traveler, April 22), did not mention the Colorado TravelBank, which has been on-line since 1985 and provides all computer users on-line, real-time, year-round, Colorado and national, travel and recreation information, with reports on weather, roads, lodging, events, dining and entertainment activities, fishing/hunting and skiing.


Review/Dance;   The Gail Conrad Company In a Small-Scale Potpourri
LEAD: Gail Conrad's new group, Dance Motel, squeezed its way onto a tiny stage at Birdland on Thursday night and looked perfectly at home there.
That was just what Ms.
Conrad wanted.
Dance Motel is a company specifically intended for small spaces, and it had no trouble with Birdland's cramped quarters.
One can even imagine it on a coffee table or a postage stamp.


Mandela Ends Tour of U.S. With Oakland Appearance
LEAD: A weary Nelson Mandela ended a grueling eight-city American tour today, transformed into a popular hero hailed by millions who a few months ago were probably giving scant attention to apartheid in South Africa.


Question Of the Week;   How Can The U.S. Improve Its Soccer Team For 1994?
LEAD: The offense, almost nonexistent in Italy, must develop fast wings and one or two center-forward strikers who are able to accept a pass and create a scoring opportunity.
Then when the players have been picked, they must be present in every single exhibition game, so that when the real games start, America will have a cohesive team that has been together.


Social Security Fund for Tuition Is Proposed
LEAD: As many as nine million Americans at all income levels could pay for college and vocational training by borrowing from the Social Security surplus, under a newly proposed educational loan program.


Jane Elizabeth NusbaumWeds Richard M. Feller
LEAD: Jane Elizabeth Nusbaum, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sanford Nusbaum of Buffalo, was married there last evening at the Kleinhans Music Hall to Richard Mark Feller, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Feller of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Steven Mason officiated.


Susan Taylor and Geoffrey Harris, Investment Firm Executives, Marry
LEAD: Susan Lyn Taylor, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Dean Ross Taylor of Glyndon, Md., and Geoffrey Eric Harris, a son of Susanne Harris of Redondo Beach, Calif., and Dr.
Paul Harris of Brooklyn, N.Y., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert W. Lawrence, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at St.


Men's Style;   Cutting It Close
LEAD: A BART, A FLATTOP, A SPIKE OR A FADE - BY any name, it's a crew cut, heralding summer's arrival as surely as clipped lawns and Kool-Aid.
New-mown hair, it seems, is hip.
But that's not all.
Style makers will tell you it is also a bracing, low-upkeep alternative to last year's ubiquitous ponytail. ''Long hair is pretty much a thing of the past,'' says Todd Albright, who owns Total Look, a downtown Manhattan grooming salon.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   New Potatoes, With Broccoli and Corn
LEAD: This is the moment of the just-dug tiny new potatoes, which, like tomatoes in season, should be purchased frequently and eaten with gusto.
If you cannot find wonderfully sweet corn, it is better to use frozen ears than to suffer with the starchy kernels from old ones.
Some crusty Italian country bread completes the meal.


On the Ice Continent
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Nation;   Old Glory: The Saga Of a National Love Affair
LEAD: THE failed attempt in Congress in the last two weeks to enact a Constitutional amendment concludes, at least for now, the latest effort to use the law to protect the American flag from unpopular uses.
But as in the past, more has been at issue than a neutral desire to defend what many have called a unique symbol of our existence as a nation.


Four Other Actors on the German Stage
LEAD:
Oskar Lafontaine
The Social Democratic challenger to Mr.
Kohl in what is expected to be the first all-German election in December . . .
Has emerged as the foremost critic of Mr.
Kohl's haste in presing for unification . . . 46 years old . . .
Premier of the Saar state . . .
Chosen the Social Democrats' candidate after a tough speech in December, he was campaigning in April when he was stabbed in the throat by a deranged woman, but he has since resumed his criticism of Mr.


MISADVENTRUES IN THE SLAVE TRADE
LEAD:
MIDDLE PASSAGE
By Charles Johnson.
209 pp. New York: Atheneum. $17.95.


Miss Norton Wed To C. C. Sprague
LEAD: Catherine Mary Norton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Norton of Wilmington, Del., was married there yesterday to Charles Christopher Sprague, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
B.
Sheldon Sprague of Berkeley Heights, N.J.
The Rev.
James F. Trainor officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.


Maura Jane O'Shea Weds
LEAD: Maura Jane O'Shea, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene K. O'Shea of Bedford Hills, N.Y., was married yesterday to Matthew John Devey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald P. Devey of Katonah, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard Albertine officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Katonah.
Mrs.
Devey, 24 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Catholic University.


POstings: Virginia in Jersey;   New Monticello
LEAD: There are those who believe it would be impossible to improve on Monticello, Thomas Jefferson's sublimely handsome home near Charlottesville, Va.
But Merrick Wilson, a developer and builder based in Pennington, N.J., is not among them.
He points out that Monticello did not have a garage, Jacuzzi or multizone heating and air-conditioning.


R. A. Campanioni, 34, a Philanthropist Aiding Gay Projects
LEAD: Raul A. Campanioni, a stockbroker who ran a firm that served gay clients and donated heavily to gay causes, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 34 years old and lived in Chelsea.


Bonnie Rattner Weds
LEAD: At Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I., Bonnie Hope Rattner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Rattner of Wheatley Heights, L.I., was married last evening to Robert Alan Klugman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Klugman of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Jack Bemporad officiated.
Mrs.
Klugman, 25 years old, graduated from Cornell University and the Benjamin N.


No Headline
LEAD:
AS THOUSANDS CHEER
The Life of Irving Berlin.
By Laurence Bergreen.
Illustrated. 658 pp. New York: Viking. $24.95.


A 2d Threat Slows Play
LEAD: Although the weather this year has been unusually cooperative at Wimbledon, where rain delays are more the rule than the exception, the air of unrest caused by a rash of bomb hoaxes here and the occasional real explosion in London has twice brought the tennis to a grinding halt.


Pops and Fireworks On Campus at Danbury
LEAD: THE Charles Ives Center for the Arts in Danbury is ready to open its summer season, on Saturday, with pops and fireworks.
The former will be provided by Skitch Henderson and the Ives Symphony Orchestra; the latter will light the skies over the campus of Western Connecticut State University.


In Thicket of Environmental Policy, Bush Uses Balance as His Compass
LEAD: President Bush's decisions on knotty environmental problems, like those he made this week on offshore oil drilling and the ancient forests of the Pacific Northwest, show a strong tendency to placate opposing interests and to soften the impact of difficult political calls.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our kitchen cabinets are covered with a walnut-tone plastic laminate that we dislike.
We would like to paint over it, and were wondering what kind of paint to use.
If we do not like the paint after it is applied, will this make it more difficult to remove the old laminate later on if we decide to replace it?


A LESSON FOR THE PRINCIPAL
LEAD:
IMPROVING SCHOOLS FROM WITHIN
Teachers, Parents, and Principals
Can Make the Difference.
By Roland S. Barth.
190 pp. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers. $20.95.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
MUSIC MOVES OUTDOORS


For Diverse Reasons, an Exodus Of County Arts Administrators
LEAD: IT would seem that art professionals in Westchester are dropping like flies.
As of today, Dominique Nahas no longer heads the State University's Neuberger Museum in Purchase; Barbara Bloemink joins the line of Hudson River Museum ex-directors; and Christopher Bruhl concludes his reign over the county's Council for the Arts.


Dim Views of That First $20,000
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Soviet Town, ''Anton Druzhinin' Means Power
LEAD: In this provincial city 50 miles northwest of Moscow, the Communist Party is not a platform, a faith or a movement.
It is essentially Anton F. Druzhinin.


Christina F. Labrie Wed To Malachy F. Cleary 3d
LEAD: Christina Frances Labrie, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Patrick Labrie of Pointe Claire, Quebec, Canada, and Malachy Francis Cleary 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cleary Jr. of New York and New Rochelle, N.Y., were married yesterday by Msgr.
Thomas Leonard at St.
Malachy's Roman Catholic Church in New York.


Nicklaus Grabs Senior Lead
LEAD: Nostalgia's superstars took their places today for what promises to be a classic finish Sunday at the 11th United States Senior Open.


Sports of The Times;   Contagious, Confounding
LEAD: In the hours before the Mets climbed into first place Friday night, Darryl Strawberry turned to Bobby Ojeda, who was sitting at his adjacent locker while waiting to warm up as the starter against the Cincinnati Reds.


PUBLIC &amp; PRIVATE Mom, Dad and Abortion
LEAD: Once I got a fortune cookie that said: to remember is to understand.
I have never forgotten it.


Repairing Wobbly Wooden Fences
LEAD: WOBBLY wooden fence posts should be repaired promptly before they cause other fence parts to loosen.
Posts that have been in the ground for less than five years usually wobble because of improper installation; ordinarily, tightening them is fairly easy.
In older fences, decay is more likely the culprit.


Santa Barbara County Residents Return to Assess Damage


Ex-Gov. Moore Asks to Drop Guilty Pleas
LEAD: Lawyers for former Gov.
Arch A. Moore Jr. have asked a Federal court that he be allowed to withdraw his guilty pleas to five political corruption counts.


Susan Sherrerd Planning to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John J. F. Sherrerd of Bryn Mawr, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Moore Sherrerd to Steven Kent Vogel, a son of Prof.
Ezra F. Vogel and Suzanne Hall Vogel, both of Cambridge, Mass.
A September wedding is planned.


Northeast Notebook: Waterboro, Me.;   After 20 Years, Lake Makes It
LEAD: It has taken 20 years, but a 3,200-lot subdivision encircling 2,600-acre Lake Arrowhead, a manmade body of water in this town of 3,000 people 30 miles west of Portland, has finally caught on.


Just a Working Man
LEAD: The three-day conference was about how Central Europe would handle the problems of democracy.
But after about 70 minutes, it also became a conference on how to handle Lech Walesa.


Popular Films Are Feeding the Series Maw
LEAD: ''Ferris Bueller,'' a new NBC situation comedy based on the theatrical movie, has a most unusual opening scene.
Charlie Schlatter, the young actor cast as the teen-age hero Ferris, walks over to his closet and removes a life-size cardboard likeness of the actor Matthew Broderick, who played Ferris in the 1986 movie.


Tech Notes;   From Sikorsky, to Fly By
LEAD: It looks like a space ship and its job is to snoop.
The RPV Cypher (above) was designed by the Sikorsky helicopter subsidiary of the United Technologies Corporation to be a pilotless surveillance drone.
About six feet in diameter and weighing 300 pounds, the vehicle can take off and land vertically and hover over targets.


Wild Bill Shakespeare in Central Park
LEAD: Ten, fifteen years ago it was still an exception.
Now it seems almost to have become the norm.
Like it or mistrust it, the updating of Shakespeare is no longer an oddity, but a theatrical convention that all but the most squeamish of traditionalists must surely learn to accept.


Postings: Howard Beach Offices;   Out of Retirement to Build Again
LEAD: In an effort to broaden the economic base of Howard Beach, Queens, a local developer has created a sleek, two-story office building on the community's main commercial strip.
The Pan-Bay Office Building, at 156-36 Cross Bay Boulevard, was completed at a cost of $2 million by Attillio W. Panzarella, who came out of retirement in Scottsdale, Ariz., to realize his vision of giving his old neighborhood an economic boost.


The Region;   Lawmaking In Suffolk: The Unusual As Usual
LEAD: THERE they go again, said followers of the Suffolk County Legislature recently when its members passed the toughest local newspaper recycling legislation in the country.
Business groups said the bill was an ill-conceived headline-grabber; environmental groups applauded it as a far-thinking way to help solve the county's garbage crisis.


In Mexico, a Peasant Theater Puts Life on Stage
LEAD: As theaters go, it is humble indeed: a clearing in the forest, some planks nailed together, a sound and light booth halfway up a tree, a few rudimentary props fashioned from wood and cloth.
Making a virtue of necessity, the Peasant and Indigenous People's Theater Laboratory of Tabasco has become one of Latin


Campus Life: Chicago;   Last Semester On Horizon For 'Tornado Man'
LEAD: Come December, students at the University of Chicago will no longer be able to take courses from a professor known as the ''Tornado Man.''


Christina Blossom and Peter Raymond Are Wed
LEAD: Christina Morris Blossom, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John McLean Morris of Woodbridge, Conn., was married to Peter Dana Raymond, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dana M. Raymond of New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
Herbert B. Anderson performed the ceremony at the Brick Presbyterian Church in New York.


Review/Dance;   Darci Kistler as Swan Queen
LEAD: There were unfamiliar dancers in two familiar works at the New York City Ballet's performance on June 23 at the New York State Theater.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD: PYROTECHNIC DISPLAYS


Wine;   The Spanish Acquisition
LEAD: IT'S THE LEAST WE COULD DO. AFTER ALL , their guy discovered us.


Pastimes: Gardening;   Xeriscaping Kelps When the Water Supply is Low
LEAD: Xeriscaping, derived from the Greek ''xeros'' meaning dry, is a comprehensive approach to landscaping for water conservation.
It combines several basic principles including proper planning, land use, mulching, soil preparation, low-flow irrigation, maintenance practices and proper plant selection.


Louise Brewster Wed to Mark Brockett
LEAD: Louise Story Brewster, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dudley Nichols Brewster of Wellesley and Marblehead, Mass., and Mark William Brockett, a son of Prof. and Mrs.
Roger Ware Brockett of Lexington, Mass., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Randall H. Niehoff performed the ceremony at the Old North Congregational Church in Marblehead,


New York State Cherry Crop Predicted Down
LEAD: ''It doesn't look too good,'' said Lee D. Brown, a cherry grower, as he looked out over his trees here on the banks of the Hudson River.


Men vs. Women
LEAD: To the Editor:


Orwelllian Logic Is Rampant At the Brancacci
LEAD: Despite the stunning advances made in the art and science of restoration over the last three decades, no technology can tell restorers whether a 15th-century fresco cycle should take precedence over an 18th-century marble altar.
That problem arose during the restoration of the Brancacci Chapel in the Carmine Church here.


Question Of the Week;   How Can The U.S. Improve Its Soccer Team For 1994?
LEAD: 1) Forget about trying to establish a quality professional league in the soccer-hostile United States.
2) Hire a foreign professional coach.
3) Concentrate on developing our under-age-23 team for the 1992 Olympics and then add five or six seasoned pros who have been playing abroad to that team to form our World Cup team.


V.A. PLANS Change IN MEDICAL GROUP
LEAD: Ever since he jumped out of a grounded airplane during a rocket attack on Da Nang, Vietnam, 23 years ago, Ron Rossani has had recurring back problems.
Bending to brush his teeth, he says, can leave him bedridden for days.


4 Teen-Agers Killed as Train Hits Car in Chicago Suburb
LEAD: An Amtrak train collided with a car Friday evening, killing four teen-agers, officials said.


Jersey Inquiry
LEAD: A New Jersey grand jury is investigating allegations of point-shaving involving a New Jersey businessman and former North Carolina State basketball players, a North Carolina newspaper reported yesterday.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 1, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.)
Chinese-American women and their mothers.
2
2
THE RUSSIA HOUSE, by John le Carre. (Bantam,
$5.95.) Glasnost begins to rust the Iron Curtain.


Roberta Peters Recital
LEAD: The soprano Roberta Peters is to sing works by Bach, Mozart, Strauss, Verdi, Debussy, Poulenc, Rodrigo and Rossini at 5:30 P.M. today in the Spanish Courtyard at Caramoor, on Girdle Ridge Road in Katonah, N.Y.
Warren Jones will be the accompanist.
Tickets are $20.
Information: (914) 232-1252.


Feet on the Ground, They're Flying
LEAD: Seven-year-old Anescah Stewart learned to fly a kite yesterday, and she felt like ''a sea gull or an airplane'' flowing freely in the wind.


Rocco Laterzo 2dWeds Gary Ryan
LEAD: Mina Gary Ryan, a daughter of Mina H. Ryan and John M. Ryan, both of Norfolk, Va., was married there yesterday to Rocco A. Laterzo 2d, a son of Mrs. and Mrs.
Laterzo Sr. of Sherborn, Mass.
Bishop A. Heath Light of the Diocese of Southwestern Virginia performed the ceremony at Christ and St.
Luke's Episcopal


Streetscapes: St. Monica's Church;   An Elegant Romanesque Edifice Ruined by Neglect
LEAD: WHAT will ultimately seal the fate of the 1857 St.
Monica's Church in Jamaica, Queens, is not the decline of the area after World War II, the congregation that left it in 1973, the vandals that have damaged it or even the conflicting city-state jurisdictions that short-circuit its landmark designation.


Holly Drake and Todd Sylvestri Marry
LEAD: Susan Holly Drake, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip M. Drake of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Todd Michael Sylvestri, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rocco J. Sylvestri of Greenwich.
Msgr.
Thomas P. Guinan performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Michael the Archangel.


DEAN RUSK'S PERSONAL TRUCE
LEAD:
AS I SAW IT
By Dean Rusk as told to Richard Rusk.
Edited by Daniel S. Papp.
Illustrated. 672 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $29.95.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: Construction spending for May.
Purchasing managers report for June.
TUESDAY: Factory orders for May.
The Group of 24 developing nations meets with Secretary of State Baker on international monetary matters in Brussels.
The Government is expected to announce a bond issue to finance the savings and loan bailout.


THE ARTIST IS A PEST
LEAD:
THE SORROW OF BELGIUM
By Hugo Claus.
Translated by Arnold J. Pomerans.
608 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $24.95.


Don't Let Japan Open a Pi Gap With U.S.
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lisa L. Boalt Is Married
LEAD: Lisa Lamberton Boalt and William Jeremy Jeffrey were married yesterday at their home in South Salem, N.Y.
The Right Rev.
Robert Appleyard, the retired Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Pittsburgh, officiated.
Mrs.
Jeffrey, the daughter of J. Anthony Boalt of Palm Beach, Fla., and Mrs.
George V. Hook of Giverny, France, graduated from Choate Rosemary Hall and attended Marymount Manhattan College.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our kitchen cabinets are covered with a walnut-tone plastic laminate that we dislike.
We would like to paint over it, and were wondering what kind of paint to use.
If we do not like the paint after it is applied, will this make it more difficult to remove the old laminate later on if we decide to replace it?


SONIC YOUTH MAKES A GIANT NOISE WITH A LITTLE POP
LEAD: Putdowns of Sonic Youth were being sharpened long before the band's new album, ''Goo'' (DGC/Warner Brothers 24297; all three formats), turned up in record stores.
The obvious prejudgment was that Sonic Youth, after a prolific and lauded career on independent labels, was selling out - going pop - because it had moved to a major label, David Geffen's DGC, thus turning its back on all that was feisty and scruffy and true.


Dogs and the Elderly: A Benefit for Both
LEAD: AMONG the many losses nursing-home residents suffer is contact with pets.
That might explain why one 90-year-old woman recently burst into tears when a gentle bull mastiff entered her room.


The Brokerage House That Is Learning to Love Junk
LEAD: The raucous trauma that began one year ago has littered Wall Street with ''junk bond'' victims.
Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. is fast becoming a memory.
First Boston Corporation and Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, saddled with junk bonds and bridge loans they could not sell, had to shift some of their holdings to their well-financed parent companies.


After King, Mandela and 42 Years, a Pastor Retires
LEAD: The Rev.
Gardner C. Taylor admits he is just a bit frightened.
He will not be preaching today.
And he jokes that it may take him a while to find something to do on Sunday mornings.


Currency;   Canada's Dollar Holds Firm
LEAD: So much for Meech Lake.
That accord, meant to be a constitutional bridge tying French-speaking Quebec to English-speaking Canada, disolved last weekend.
But the financial markets have felt nary a ripple.
For the week, the Canadian dollar - still supported by high interest rates - was up 1 percent at 1.1633 to the dollar.


Power Authority to Offer Energy-Saving Plan
LEAD: The state agency that supplies power to downstate government agencies is arranging an energy-conservation program for its customers, picking the equipment, helping to install it and providing full financing for the purchase of efficient lighting equipment.


Wall Street;   Who Is Causing the Selling Pressure at AT&amp;E?
LEAD: Everyone agrees that the next few months will be critical for the AT&amp;E Corporation, the San Francisco company that will finally start marketing its wristwatch paging device in Portland, Ore., in the next few weeks.
Even if the long-promised product works, of course, the company's optimism about sales might not be borne out, but a flop would make disputes over sales projections totally moot.


Patricia Grise Is Wed To Alexander E. Lloyd
LEAD: Patricia Karen Grise, a daughter of Theresa A. Grise of Fairfield, Conn., and John P. Grise of Hartford was married in New York yesterday to Alexander Edward Lloyd, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger H. Lloyd of London.
The Rev.
Eugene G. Connolly performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.


How Much Risk Do Adventure Seekers Assume?
LEAD: ''WHEN you challenge nature, you are a risk seeker,'' Dr.
William Davis of the National Park Service said. ''You want that edge, that happiness, you want those endorphins to run around.
So the approach to safety is different from the approach in a workplace.
We do not keep people away, we don't put a sign out on the Grand Canyon, 'Danger, Large Hole!


On Language;   Drop the Gun, Louie
LEAD: IN THE WASHINGTON bureau of The New York Times hangs a framed poster titled ''Boulevard of Broken Dreams.'' It is a painting by Gottfried Helnwein - inspired by the nostalgia and realism in Edward Hopper's painting ''Nighthawks'' - of four legendary people in a dreary diner at night.


More Marcos Deliberations
LEAD: The jury deliberated for a third day yesterday in the fraud trial of former Philippine First Lady Imelda Marcos.
The panel reheard testimony about the transfer of millions of dollars from the Philippines for the purchase of Manhattan real estate.
The jurors focused on two of four properties - the Herald Center, a retail building, and an office building at 200 Madison Avenue -which Mrs.


Sarah Lamport Becomes Bride
LEAD: Sarah Ware Lamport and Henry Colin Wildman Laurence were married yesterday on the steamboat DeWitt Clinton in New York Harbor by the Rev.
Richard D. Leonard, a Unitarian minister.


Milton Filker, Labor Organizer, 73
LEAD: Milton Filker, retired president of Council 52 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees in Jersey City, died on Thursday at his home in Jersey City.
He was 73 years old.


Outdoors;   Huge Salmon Is Allowed to Get Away
LEAD: The largest Atlantic salmon ever caught in North America was hooked, landed and released by Ken Jamieson of Houston on the evening of June 23.
Jamieson was fly fishing the ledge area of Cross Point Pool on the Ristigouche River in New Brunswick, Canada, about 35 miles upstream from where the river enters the Baie des


A Third Midway Sailor Dies
LEAD: A sailor who suffered critical burns and internal injuries in the June 20 explosion and fire aboard the aircraft carrier Midway has died, bringing to three the toll of those killed by the accident.
The 22-year-old sailor, Robert Shane Kilgore of Simi Valley, Calif., died late Wednesday at Brooke Army Medical Center here.


Kathryn H. Meisle and Marcus B. Giamatti Wed
LEAD: Kathryn Hunt Meisle, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Layton Meisle of Camden, Me., was married yesterday to Marcus Bartlett Giamatti, a son of Mrs.
A.
Bartlett Giamatti of Hamden, Conn., and the late Mr.
Giamatti.
The Rev.
Archie D. McRee performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in


Ms. Flink, Lawyer, Weds George Warga, Dentist
LEAD: Andrea Flink, the daughter of Lois Flink of Hillsdale, N.J., and Richard A. Flink of Califon, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
George Warga, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Warga of Glenview, Ill.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Roy A. Rosenberg and the Rev.
Nevin Kennedy, a Roman Catholic priest, at the Fiddler's Elbow Country Club in Bedminster, N


Repairing Wobbly Wooden Fences
LEAD: WOBBLY wooden fence posts should be repaired promptly before they cause other fence parts to loosen.
Posts that have been in the ground for less than five years usually wobble because of improper installation; ordinarily, tightening them is fairly easy.
In older fences, decay is more likely the culprit.


Amy J. WeinsteinBecomes a Bride
LEAD: Amy Jill Weinstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael L. Weinstein of Melville, L.I., was married to Eric Steven Rosenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Rosenberg, also of Melville.
Rabbi Marc Gellman performed the ceremony at Temple Beth-El in Great Neck, L.I.
Mrs.
Rosenberg, 24 years old and a cum laude graduate of the State University of New York at Albany, is a copywriter at Lord, Geller, Federico, Einstein Inc., a New York advertising agency.


All-American Sounds For Independence Day
LEAD: IF ever there is a best day to celebrate our American musical heritage, it is on Independence Day, and at least three Fourth of July events will be doing just that.


Police Pistol Training Enters Electronic Era
LEAD: NEW police officers in Ridgefield will get their initial handgun training in a classroom rather than at a target range.


Review/Music;   A Flutist In Debut At Carnegie
LEAD: It is probably fair to assume that Linda Eagleson, a flutist, was not at her best in her New York debut recital on June 23 at Weill Recital Hall.
Fully 25 minutes after the concert was to start, the audience was informed that Ms.
Eagleson's pianist, Ron Levy, had just arrived and was changing clothes.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended June 16
MANHATTAN
Chelsea
$530,000
436 West 23d Street
(Fitzroy Place)
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; dining area, den, fireplace, south garden; maintenance $268, no tax-deduction (Broker: Wells &amp; Gay-Stribling &amp; Associates)


Susan Hart Ryan Marries William Craig in Vermont
LEAD: Susan Hart Ryan, a daughter of Jane Curd Foley and Albert Preston Foley, both of Cincinnati, was married yesterday to William Emerson Craig, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
William Emerson Craig of Longmeadow, Mass.
The ceremony was performed at the Community Congregational Church in Quechee, Vt., by the Rev.


Serious, Not Savage, on the Deficit
LEAD: Tax revenue increases.
With those three words, President Bush last week ushered in feverish budget negotiations.
Proposals that were taboo on Monday - like taxes on Social Security benefits or cuts in Medicare - suddenly became possible on Tuesday.
Swinging into action, Congressional leaders promised to cut next year's budget deficit by $55 billion or more.


Campus Life: Boston College;   Social Problems Are the Focus Of a New Program
LEAD: It's summertime and a student's thoughts turn to sun, sand, surf - and social consciousness?


THE PRIME OF PAT SCHROEDER
LEAD: AT THE ASSEMBLY POINT FOR DENVER'S 1990 ST.
PATRICK'S DAY Parade, a tall, slim woman resplendent in a Kelly-green coat and a glittery, green top hat darted through the genial confusion of skirling bagpipes, Irish wolfhounds, green balloons and teen-age beauty queens showing more goose bumps than cleavage.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a network schedule change, a picture caption on the Sunday Highlights page of the Television section today and an evening program listing carry outdated entries for CBS at 9 P.M.
The TV film to be shown is ''Desperate for Love.''


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: In mid-June the Eastman Kodak Company introduced a new line of 35-millimeter cameras, featuring compact size, soft-edged styling and easy-to-use controls.
But what may be the cameras' most unusual selling point is their instruction books.


When an Opera Is Transformed Into a Dance
LEAD: Although operas throughout musical history have contained dance sequences, our own century has seen the emergence of the totally danced opera.
Such a transformation of an opera retains all its arias and choruses; the singers, however, are relegated to the orchestra pit or to the sides of the stage, and the dramatic action is entrusted to dancers.


WHAT'S NEW AT FRISBEE U.
LEAD: I found much to admire in the philosophy of education at Hampshire College (''What's New at Frisbee U.,'' by Chip Brown, June 10).
The Frisbee image is one well abandoned, but the more rigid curriculum is a change to be approached with caution.
America's colleges and universities are doing a fine job of shunting students into the myriad career tracks that have developed in our fin de siecle economy.


The Nation;   A Divided Supreme Court Ends the Term With A Bang
LEAD: THE rrxhSupreme Court ended its term last week with a burst of dramatic and surprising rulings, but also with abundant reminders of the Justices's deep divisions over some of the most important questions on their docket.


Town Houses
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Music;   Works From Quebec By Le Nouvel Ensemble
LEAD: Le Nouvel Ensemble Moderne, a contemporary music group from Montreal, celebrated its first anniversary, slightly belatedly, with a free concert last Sunday evening at Merkin Concert Hall.
The group was formed last May, and made an impressive New York debut earlier this season.
For its second New York City appearance, it presented a two-part program, the first half featuring some of its players in solo works and a duet, the second half offering music for the full ensemble, ably conducted by Lorraine


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
The Kiss of a Father


Diana Fortuna, State Aide in Capital, Is Married to David Yassky, a Lawyer
LEAD: Diana Fortuna, the daughter of Walter H. Fortuna of Lapeer, Mich., and the late Marilyn Fortuna, and David Yassky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lester H. Yassky of New York, were married yesterday at the Harvard Club in New York.
An interfaith ceremony was performed by Cantor Bernard Gruber and the Rev.
Salvatore Umana, a Roman


Italy Reaches Semifinals
LEAD: The Irish fans would not go home tonight, even though the 1-0 loss to Italy was now history.


At NOW Convention, Goal Is Putting More Women in Office
LEAD: Calling these the best of times and the worst of times, 2,000 delegates to the National Organization for Women gathered here this weekend to rage over recent Supreme Court rulings limiting abortion access and to celebrate a record number of women running for high political office this year.


Another Recollection Of Running Away
LEAD: Gertrud Michelson's ''When a Child Walks Away,'' [Opinion Page, June 10]  evoked a sad nostalgia as I recalled a similar experience not many years after the author's.


So Many Weddings, So Few Hands
LEAD: HERE comes the bride, and another, and another.
Saturdays in June the brides are as plentiful at the Adamovichs' in Freeport as the high-performance powerboats that cruise the canal behind their home.


A Changing Mortgage Market in County
LEAD: THREE years ago, during the real estate boom, a professional couple in their 30's sold their ''starter'' house, a small two-bedroom in Harrison, for $150,000.
By stretching their budget to the limits, they bought a three-bedroom split level in Rye for $295,000.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our kitchen cabinets are covered with a walnut-tone plastic laminate that we dislike.
We would like to paint over it, and were wondering what kind of paint to use.
If we do not like the paint after it is applied, will this make it more difficult to remove the old laminate later on if we decide to replace it?


Clarifications on Grief Counseling
LEAD: It has been refreshing to see the diversity of professional and community opinion around the validity and availability of bereavement counseling to assist mourners.
However, the recent article (''One-to-One Counseling Gains,'' May 27) raises a number of issues that require clarification.


Edward A. Spitz, Publisher, 88
LEAD: Edward A. Spitz, founder of Guest Informant, a directory of tourist information distributed in 1,400 hotels across the country, died June 23 at Cedars of Lebanon Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 88 years old and lived in Los Angeles and San Francisco.


Review/City Ballet;   Ib Andersen in a Fitting Farewell as Apollo
LEAD: Ib Andersen gave what was billed as his farewell performance in New York with the New York City Ballet on Friday night amid standing ovations and expressions of warmth and humor onstage from the company that he joined in 1980.


Will the Abortion Fight Ever End?;   A Nation Held Hostage
LEAD: Last week, in a pair of cases from Minnesota and Ohio, the Supreme Court wrote the latest chapter in the abortion story.
It upheld state power to require pregnant minors to consult their parents or obtain a judge's permission before any abortion.
The abortion question thus remains in the political arena, where the Supreme Court tossed it in the


Jazz Festival;   Embracing Tradition
LEAD: Benny Green, the youngest performer this year in the JVC Jazz Festival's solo piano series at Weill Recital Hall, has a traditionalist's pedigree.
The 27-year-old Mr.
Green studied with the be-bop experts Walter Bishop Jr., Walter Davis Jr. and Larry Willis, and has been a member of Art Blakey's Jazz Messengers.


Dr. Beckett Weds Douglas Shenson
LEAD: Dr.
Alexandra Beckett, the daughter of William R. Beckett of New York and Sheffield, Mass., and Hilary Schlessiger of New York was married yesterday to Douglas Shenson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Shenson of Los Angeles, by Cantor David Benedict at the Lotos Club in New York.


Researchers Challenge Ideas on Dinosaur Arms
LEAD: As though the reputation of Tyrannosaurus rex was not already horrific enough, two paleontologists now propose that the carnivorous dinosaur had powerful forelimbs that could easily grasp 400 pounds of writhing prey.


Eastern Funds Released
LEAD: The bankrupt Eastern Airlines received $50 million from its escrow account to finance its operations this summer, an Eastern spokesman said last week.
Eastern, a unit of Continental Airlines Holdings Inc., has been operating with Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection since March 1989.
The bankruptcy judge hearing Eastern's case approved the release of the funds on Thursday.


Jazz Festival;   Merging Downtown With Vanguard
LEAD: Graham Haynes's show at the Equitable Center on Friday afternoon, as part of JVC Jazz Festival's Knitting Factory Goes Uptown series, did a smart thing.
By merging participants in the downtown scene -the harpist and keyboardist Zeena Parkins as well as members of the band Bosho, including Chulo on bass and Yuval Gabay on drums and Kumiko Kimoto on percussion - with members of the jazz vanguard, it drew on the strengths of the two camps.


Books of The Times;   He's a Press Agent, Darn It, Not a PR Man!
LEAD:
The Sporting Life
The Duke and Jackie, Pee Wee, Razor Phil, Ali, Mushky Jackson and Me
By Irving Rudd and Stan Fischler
Illustrated. 288 pages. St. Martin's Press. $17.95.


Juliana Kelly Wed To Jonathan May
LEAD: Juliana Kelly, the daughter of Anna Kelly of Southampton, L.I., and Michael J. Kelly of Woodside, Queens, was married yesterday to Jonathan Paul May, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter W. May of New York and Bridgewater, Conn.
Judge Morton I. Riefberg of the Connecticut Superior Court, performed the ceremony at the


Florida's New Top Judge Faces Opposition
LEAD: Justice Leander Shaw today became the first black to be Chief Justice of the Florida Supreme Court, but his position is threatened by anti-abortion groups that are seeking to remove him from the bench because of his rulings on abortion.


Evolution in Europe;   Bush Urges Conciliatory Gestures for NATO
LEAD: In a letter to Western European leaders, President Bush has proposed accrediting Eastern European and Soviet diplomats to NATO, reducing NATO forces close to the frontiers between the blocs, withdrawing nuclear artillery shells from Europe and declaring that nuclear weapons are to be used in conflict only as a last resort, NATO and


Allison Cocke Is Wed To Brad Scott Lerner
LEAD: The marriage of Allison Cocke, the daughter of Kathryn Peterson Cocke of San Antonio, and Dr.
Joseph Garber Cocke Jr. of Orlando, Fla., to Brad Scott Lerner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Lerner of Plainview, L.I., took place yesterday.
Rabbi Gary Creditor officiated at the Southwest Craft Center in San Antonio, assisted by Cantor Morris Wolk.


J. Walter Thompson Wins Nuprin Account
LEAD: After a short review, J. Walter Thompson's New York office has won the estimated $30 million Nuprin account.


Bronx Street Marks Return Of Firehouse
LEAD: There were cinnamon doughnuts and great rejoicing on one short block of the South Bronx yesterday morning.
The rain was over and gone for the moment.
This year's municipal budget negotiations were complete, and a firehouse was open again on East 150th Street.


New U.S. Arms Initiative
LEAD: President Bush is proposing the withdrawal of NATO's nuclear artillery shells and other measures to build Soviet confidence in the alliance's peaceful intentions.
Page A8.


Brawl in a French Cathedral
LEAD: A fight erupted after Mass today at the cathedral in this northern suburb of Paris as traditionalist Roman Catholics, shoving the vicar aside, tried to move in to celebrate their own service in Latin.
Punches were thrown, the organ sounded and candles went flying down an aisle as about 60 traditionalists tried to take over the main altar at the St.


North Sea Hit by Oil Strike
LEAD: Norway closed oil and gas wells today after the biggest offshore workers' union went on strike in the North Sea.


Jet Makes Emergency Stop
LEAD: A Northwest Airlines jet with 182 people on board made an emergency landing on Saturday at an airport here after the pilot shut down one engine because of an oil leak.
There were no injuries, officials said.


Ms. Pollack Weds Daniel Wollman
LEAD: Debra Ann Pollack, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lowell Pollack of Hartsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Daniel Eric Wollman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mitchell Wollman of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Arnold S. Turetsky performed the ceremony assisted by Cantor Jacob Mendelson at the Temple Israel Center in White


Trinity Church Reopens


Bishop Warns Third Person on Abortion
LEAD: The director of a second abortion clinic in Corpus Christi, Tex., said yesterday that she had received two warnings of excommunication from the same Roman Catholic bishop who recently excommunicated the director of another clinic and an obstetrician.


Political Memo;   About-Face on Taxes Is No Surprise to Public
LEAD: While President Bush conceded last week that he was now vulnerable to charges that he had broken his word, his turnabout on taxes appears to have fulfilled public expectations.


New Dailies Proliferate in Spain as Ads Surge
LEAD: Although newspaper circulation has remained stagnant in Spain since the 1930's, publishers have been rushing to start new dailies in a scramble to tap the booming advertising market here.


Business Scene;   Times Are Tough For U.S. Builders
LEAD: THE big new scare for the already sluggish American economy is coming from the construction industry, particularly home construction.
Building loans are hard to get, customers are scarce and the unemployment rate among the nation's construction workers is 10.3 percent, higher than in any other industry.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
International


Chronicle
LEAD: Senator WYCHE FOWLER Jr., Democrat of Georgia, married DONNA HULSIZER of Washington on Saturday at the Central Presbyterian Church in Atlanta.
It was a private ceremony attended by family members and close friends.


Cuomo Demurs On Presidency; Meets Disbelief
LEAD: A network television appearance by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today highlighted the paradox about the Governor's musings on the Presidency - the more Mr.
Cuomo protests that he is not running, the more people seem to disbelieve him.


Checkpoints Ruling Helps Gnaw at Foundations of Bill of Rights
LEAD: To the Editor:


Abortion Bill in Louisiana May Keep Democrats Away
LEAD: Whatever chance New Orleans had to be the site of the 1992 Democratic National Convention has been seriously undermined by the anti-abortion legislation approved by the Louisiana Legislature last week, top party officials say.


Marquis W. Childs Is Dead at 87; Won a Pulitzer for Commentary
LEAD: Marquis W. Childs, a foreign correspondent, columnist, author and winner of a Pulitzer Prize for distinguished commentary, died Saturday at Children's Hospital of San Francisco.
He was 87 years old.
The St.
Louis Post-Dispatch, where he wrote about Washington and the nation for 47 years, reported that Mr.


Bridge
LEAD: The Upper House, it seems, continues to have the upper hand in England.
By winning the 16th match in the annual series against the House of Commons in April, the House of Lords increased its lead to 10-6.


Detroit Journal;   One Man's Treasure, Another's Junkyard
LEAD: In a rough-and-tumble shell of a neighborhood on Detroit's East Side, motorists lunge for the brakes when they get to Heidelberg Street.


Plant Trees. Then Protect Them.
LEAD: Global warming poses an uncommon threat to life on the planet, but what can ordinary people do about it?
Plant a tree.
This requires a shovel, a stake - in the ground and the future - and a seedling.
If people live in an urban hardscape, they may want to follow the advice of Andy Lipkis, founder of a growing California organization called TreePeople, who has prompted the planting of a million trees in Los


Market Place;   Notes at Harman: Sweet and Sour
LEAD: THE sounds are not very sweet these days at Harman International Industries, maker of such top-of-the-line stereo speakers as Harman-Kardon, JBL and Infinity.
Last week, Sidney Harman, the company's chief executive and a former Deputy Secretary of Commerce, told analysts that earnings for the 1990 fiscal year, to be released in August, would be 5 to 7 percent below last year's record high.


Grand Army Plaza, Redressed
LEAD: Strictly speaking, it's not really the center of Manhattan Island.
And yet it is, this glorious space reigned over by the most unlikely of couples, the goddess Pomona and Gen.
William Tecumseh Sherman.
Especially now.


A 2d-Quarter Rebound for the World's Markets
LEAD: What goes up must come down, and vice versa.
And that is just what happened in the world's stock markets in the second quarter.


'Grapes of Wrath': Raves and a Tony Do Not Breed a Hit
LEAD: Maybe you think you don't need to see ''The Grapes of Wrath'' on Broadway.
You probably read John Steinbeck's book somewhere around 10th grade and caught the movie on a rainy Sunday afternoon.
Or maybe you've decided that you see too many homeless people on the streets to want to see them on a stage.


Horse Racing;   Storm Disrupts Belmont Card
LEAD: A statewide simulcasting blackout of the races from Belmont Park yesterday left off-track bettors in the dark, along with many of the patrons who weathered a stormy and confusing afternoon at the track.


Bauer Is Surprise Leader
LEAD: The Tour de France seemed to be thrown up for grabs today after four major riders, none of them favorites, stormed to the finish more than 10 minutes faster than most of the rest of the 198-man field.


Liberia Rebels Within 5 Miles Of the Capital, Spurring Panic
LEAD: Rebel forces fought a fierce artillery and rocket duel today with Government troops on the northern outskirts of Monrovia, the capital.


No-Hitter, but With No Glory
LEAD: Their season has been part folly and part frustration, but today the Yankees found a new low to their crazy summer.


2 Dates Hawkins Won't Forget
LEAD: Andy Hawkins will likely never forget the no-hitter he pitched today, but to some degree, it will always be one of two dates that will forever mark his 1990 season.


Janine Golding and Neal Ochsner Wed
LEAD: Janine Meyers Golding, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry W. Golding of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Neal Howard Ochsner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Millard Ochsner of Phoenix.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Harold Saperstein.


Reporter's Notebook;   Keeping Emotions Under Control at Jogger Trial
LEAD: For a week, the jury in the case of the Central Park jogger listened as Elizabeth Lederer, the prosecutor, led other victims through their recollections of fright and pain that night almost 15 months ago.


Roll Out the Welcome Mat (and Bagpipes) for a Fire Company's Homecoming


Baseball;   Pirate's 4 Homers Bring 8-5 Victory Over the Giants
LEAD: The Pittsburgh Pirates hit four home runs, including two-run shots by Barry Bonds, Sid Bream and Jay Bell, to beat the Giants, 8-5, today, and retain a one-game lead over the Mets in the National League East.


Swing Isn't Sweet As Player Falters
LEAD: Gary Player had so much trouble with his swing in the final round of the United States Senior Open that he rushed to the driving range shortly after the completion of the tournament today and hit golf balls until dusk.


Yachting;   Liberty Cup Is Halted And Australian Wins
LEAD: Bobby Wilmot of Australia won the Liberty Cup Regatta yesterday afternoon after the event was cut short by a severe thunderstorm that sent most of the traffic in New York Harbor scurrying for shore.


People
LEAD: *
Dale P. Brown has been named president and chief executive of Sive Associates, a Cincinnati marketing communications firm owned by Young &amp; Rubicam.


Report Cites Turnover, Despite Law, in Weapons Programs
LEAD: Defense Department officials who manage the Pentagon's largest acquisition programs stay in their positions less than two years on average, despite a law requiring that they remain at least four years, a Congressional report says.


Review/Television;   Mastering the Movies, for a While
LEAD: ''American Masters'' begins its fifth season at 9 tonight on Channel 13 (and at 10 tonight on Channel 50 and 4 A.M. tomorrow on Channel 13) with ''Preston Sturges: The Rise and Fall of an American Dreamer.'' Sturges was the first Hollywood screenwriter to also establish himself as a celebrated director.


Gregory Vistnes Weds Jessica Primoff
LEAD: Jessica Lynn Primoff, the daughter of Arlene Kelvin of Bayside, Queens, and the late Melvin Primoff, was married yesterday in White Plains to Gregory Scott Vistnes, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lars Vistnes of Los Altos, Calif.
Rabbi Joseph Gelberman and the Rev.
Pamela Blair, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Mansion at the Stouffer Westchester


Results Plus
LEAD:
Golf
Johnston Takes du Maurier Event:
Cathy Johnston beat Patty Sheehan by two strokes yesterday to win the du Maurier Classic, the second of the four major tournaments on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour.
Johnston shot a two-under-par 71 to finish at 276, 16 under for the 6,415-yard course at the Westmount Golf and Country Club in Kitchener, Ontario.


Bernice Hoffman Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Bernice E. Hoffman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Hoffman of Pittsburgh, was married there yesterday to Daniel P. Natelson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reuben Natelson of Elizabeth, N.J.
Rabbis Michael Gold and Stephen Steindel performed the ceremony at Congregation Beth El.


An Inspired Franco
LEAD: John Franco, the Met reliever, did not realize that the Cincinnati Reds, his former team, could be a source of inspiration for pitching harder, but yesterday, they apparently were.


James S. Wallerstein; Biochemist, 79
LEAD: James Scheuer Wallerstein, a biochemist and the president of the Sarah S. Ollesheimer Fund, a college scholarship foundation in Mount Kisco, N.Y., died on Thursday at his home in Mount Kisco.
He was 79 years old.


Jazz Festival;   Earthiness With a Chill
LEAD: Although Nancy Wilson has never been the artistic equal of Ella Fitzgerald, Sarah Vaughan or Billie Holiday, since becoming popular in the early 1960's she has exerted a considerable influence on a younger generation of pop-jazz interpreters.
And on Saturday evening at Avery Fisher Hall, where she headlined a JVC Jazz Festival benefit concert for Jazzmobile, one was struck especially by her impact on Anita Baker.


On Many Farms, a Season of Disaster
LEAD: Stands of wheat that only recently stood golden and glistening in the sun are dry and broken now, dashing Charlie Joe James's hopes for a bountiful return for his year of money and labor. ''That's what the flood left,'' he said.
Mr.
James, who had planted 750 acres of wheat, is one of thousands of farmers from Texas north to Illinois and from Iowa east to


Jazz Festival;   Ella Fitzgerald, Bouncy and Aggressive
LEAD: Ella Fitzgerald's show on Friday night at Avery Fisher Hall, part of the JVC Jazz Festival, started out slowly.
Miss Fitzgerald, who had a cold or sinus problem, had a tough time navigating her tunes, and the upper register of her voice wasn't cooperating; it strayed off pitch and sounded uncharacteristically harsh.


Will the Abortion Fight Ever End?;   Catholics Vs. The Media
LEAD: The liberal media are once again attempting to position themselves as our nation's exclusive moral guardian.


Leading the Enigma Called Xerox
LEAD: An enigmatic person may be provocatively appealing, but unfortunately for the Xerox Corporation's relations with Wall Street, an enigmatic company is usually seen as just plain annoying.


China Counts Its Billion-Plus Noses
LEAD: Millions of census workers combed houses and shacks throughout the nation today as China launched a huge effort to count the largest population in the world and to find out just how big it is.


Jazz Festival;   Stan Getz, Weaving His Moods
LEAD: Stan Getz was very much the center of attention at his JVC Jazz Festival concert on Friday night at Carnegie Hall.
The entire concert was played by his quartet - Kenny Barron on piano; Alex Blake on bass, and Terri Lyne Carrington on drums - or his sextet, which was the quartet with Eddie Del Barrio and Frank Zottoli on synthesizers.


AGB Losing Its TV-Ratings Monopoly in Britain
LEAD: Even as Robert Maxwell plans to challenge the A. C. Nielsen Company in the American television market, his market research company is suffering setbacks in Britain and Australia.


Big Aims, Small Means on Cambodia
LEAD: Time is the most certain enemy of the Bush Administration's Cambodia policy.
The longer the current diplomatic stalemate continues, the closer dreaded Khmer Rouge forces come to battlefield victory, and the worse the prospects grow for free elections and a role for the non-Communist forces led by Prince


IN THE NATION New Taxes for What?
LEAD: Bushspeak is not yet a sufficiently recognized language to explain the President's switch on taxes, which he says was not a switch, or not really a switch.
Here is his concise attempt, faithfully reproduced from his news conference last week, to explain what it was instead:


Critic's Notebook;   Behind the Taped Images In the Marion Barry Case
LEAD: Whether the videotape introduced last week in the trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. on drug and perjury charges demonstrates guilt or entrapment may be left to theologians of the law, but ordinary viewers have been finding it quite a show.
Produced by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and brought to the nation by C-Span, the 90-minute feature, which is to be shown to the jury again today by the Washington Mayor's defense, is a farce with


Tourists Greet Bush's Mother
LEAD: Tourists sang ''Happy Birthday'' to 89-year-old Dorothy Walker Bush today as she emerged from St.
Ann's by the Sea Episcopal Church on the arm of her son, President Bush. ''Thanks for the greeting for my Mom,'' the vacationing President said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Magazines;   Perception Vs. Reality: Just How Bad Is Business?
LEAD: IN the magazine industry these days, is the glass half empty or half full?


Cardinal Leading Us Right to the Reformation;   Where Is True Healing?
LEAD: To the Editor:


England Stops Cameroon
LEAD: In the most extended drama of this World Cup soccer tournament, England rallied to defeat Cameroon, 3-2, in overtime tonight, and the tremors could be felt as far away as Turin.


Congress Doesn't Get Paid Nearly Enough
LEAD: To the Editor:


Manhattan's Cable TV: Is the 'Dinosaur' Really Gone?
LEAD: By 1993, the two cable-television systems in Manhattan - which has perhaps the greatest concentration of producers, network executives and eager-eyed video junkies of any place on the planet - are to carry 70 channels.
That is twice as many as they carry now, but fewer channels than are on cable systems in Columbus, Ohio, or Fairfax County,


A Datamarine Founder Is Ousted From Posts
LEAD: It is not enough to come up with a successful product and build a company around it.
The company must continue to be successful, as many founder-chief executives have learned.


Water-Main Break Halts Most Subways On West Side Lines
LEAD: Subway service came to a halt on much of the West Side of Manhattan last night when water gushed from a broken main and flooded the tracks below Central Park West at West 81st Street.


Evolution in Europe;   For Average East Germans, Wonder and Some Trepidation    East Berlin: 'It's Got to Be Better Than What We Had'
LEAD: For many East Germans, the first day of economic union yesterday stirred expectations of dreams fulfilled and wariness of possible new hardships.
Here are reports from three cities.


Media Critics Are Seeking To Turn Talk Into Print
LEAD: About 18 months ago, J. Anthony Lukas, Ken Auletta, Frances FitzGerald and a clutch of other famous journalists began exploring the possibility of starting a magazine that would rip the hide off the media industry.


R. A. Campanioni, 34, a Philanthropist Aiding Gay Projects
LEAD: Raul A. Campanioni, a stockbroker who ran a firm that served gay clients and donated heavily to gay causes, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 34 years old and lived in Chelsea.


Higuey Journal;   Brief Voyage to a Better Life, or a Watery Death
LEAD: For Jose Castillo and his small band of friends, a shimmering life of comfort and fast money lies just across the narrow, perilous strait that separates this country from Puerto Rico.


Report Says General Knew Of Stealth Fighter's Failure
LEAD: A top Air Force general knew that the Stealth fighter plane had missed its targets in its first combat mission, but he did not tell his superiors at the Pentagon, a classified report says.


Result of a Double Switch: 2 Effective Managers;   Merrill Makes Yankees Believe They Can Win
LEAD: SUCCESS hasn't spoiled Stump Merrill.
He still chews tobacco, still enjoys light beer, still jogs despite his doctor's orders and still manages every game as if he were in West Haven or Albany instead of the Bronx.


Evolution in Europe;   East-West Berlin, a Boomtown in the Making
LEAD: On both sides of the crumbling remnants of the Berlin Wall, signs of an economic boom are everywhere, a direct result of the merger of the East and West German economies.


Result of a Double Switch: 2 Effective Managers;   Harrelson Sows Mets Importance Of Involvement
LEAD: ''YOU can't rehearse for this job,'' Bud Harrelson was saying. ''They give it to you, and there it is.''


Soviet Effort for Patent Law Reform Gaining Momentum
LEAD: Amid efforts by the Soviet Union to liberalize its stagnant economy, a seemingly quixotic movement to adopt a Western-style patent law is gaining momentum.


Fraud Also Invaded Intelligence Theory
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lower Rates Seen for Second Half
LEAD: Credit market participants and analysts say they are optimistic that interest rates can decline further in the final six months of the year.





Cardinal Leading Us Right to the Reformation;   Remember John Jay
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fat Wallets and Fear Of Lean Times Ahead
LEAD: In cities across East Germany, people greeted economic union without giddy celebration, sobered by its significance and a sense that capitalism would mean hardship for many.
But some anticipated fulfilling dreams.


A Genuinely Affirmative Action
LEAD: The Supreme Court ended its term last week with a stunning reaffirmation of Congress's power to keep the Constitution's promise of equality.
For the sake of diversity, and not merely to remedy past discrimination, Congress may help minorities win a greater share of Federal benefits.


Review/Art;   Courtland Collection Settles Into New Home
LEAD: A new museum has taken rank immediately, and on more than one count, among the cardinal amenities of central London.
The recent installation of the Courtauld Institute of Art in Somerset House has signaled the return to life of a long-disinherited palace.


Chronicle
LEAD: Twenty teen-agers are in Moscow, participating in track meets, basketball games and summer camp.
A girls' track team and a boys' basketball team, accompanied by ROBERT M. MORGENTHAU, the Manhattan District Attorney, were picked from Police Athletic League teams from throughout New York City.
P.A.L.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-9


How to Ease Traffic on L.I.? How About by Driving Less?
LEAD: After years of spending money on building and improving Long Island's roads, the State Department of Transportation has concluded that the best way to handle the traffic problems here is to also persuade people to drive less.


Evolution in Europe;   Who's Who at the Party Congress
LEAD:
IVAN K. POLOZKOV
A provincial conservative whose election June 23 as leader of the Russian republic's Communists makes him a standard-bearer for party hard-liners . . .
Backed by the party apparatus, he ran against Boris N. Yeltsin for President of the Russian republic, but pulled out after two rounds of voting .


Correction
LEAD: An article on Saturday about ways in which Canada's constitutional crisis might affect United States-Canadian relations misidentified the Premier of British Columbia.
He is William Vander Zalm.


In North Carolina, the New South Rubs Uneasily With the Old Ways
LEAD: Forty-five minutes down Interstate 85, researchers are pushing at the boundaries of medical science at the Duke University Medical Center, but there has recently been an epochal breakthrough here: nearly all the residents who had been using old pine outhouses have been able to replace them with indoor bathrooms.


Chronicle
LEAD: The sculpture of LOUISE BOURGEOIS can be provocative and emotional.
So can her views.
When Ms.
Bourgeois receives the 1990 Edward MacDowell Medal this summer at the MacDowell Colony in Peterborough, N.H., she plans to talk about art education, candidly.


Reporter's Notebook;   In Mayor's Courtroom, An Impassive Effi Barry
LEAD: For two weeks now, Effi Barry, Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s wife of 12 years, has stoically sat in Courtroom No. 2 at the Federal Courthouse here, a front-row spectator in the riveting drug trial of her husband.


Few Bond Offerings Scheduled
LEAD: Treasury financings this holiday-shortened week are confined to the regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills today.


Tennis;   2 Champions Clash With Egos at Stake
LEAD: The last time these two Wimbledon champions clashed on Centre Court, the one who won did an impersonation of the way the other had missed a volley and then tumbled over the net during their three-set quarterfinal match.
When it ended, the loser wore a strawberry blond fright wig to his news conference.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday
Construction Spending . . . May
Tuesday
Factory Orders . . . May
Wednesday
None
Thursday
New-Car Sales . . . June
Friday
Employment .


Stocks Outperform Expectations
LEAD: The performance of stocks in the second quarter turned out to be less gloomy than many financial analysts had predicted.
In spite of sluggishness in the economy, many financial analysts said the market's performance had exceeded expectations.


The Dawn Brings a Record Tax Rise
LEAD: At 5:45 A.M. yesterday the New York City Council, weary and a little testy, patted itself on the back and adopted a $28 billion city budget.


Insurers Brace for Debate On How Industry Operates
LEAD: In advancing a bill last month that would subject insurance companies to Federal antitrust laws, the House Judiciary Committee has set the stage for a long and bitter debate about the pricing and availability of insurance coverage.


Mandela Arrives in Ireland
LEAD: Nelson Mandela arrived to a rapturous Irish welcome today.
The Irish, staunch supporters of the South African black nationalist leader, thronged Dawson Street in the center of the capital as Mr.
Mandela arrived from the United States.
On Monday, Mr.
Mandela will talk with Prime Minister Charles Haughey and address the Irish Parliament before flying to London.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Silo Inc., Philadelphia, a subsidiary of the electronics retailer Dixons Group P.L.C., to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS/Pacific, with a budget of $5 million.


New Yorkers Prove Elusive, But Census Is 99% Complete
LEAD: The Census Bureau reported yesterday that 99 percent of the households in the United States that did not respond to first mailings of the 1990 census had now been counted, but that several areas, in particular New York State and City, still lagged far behind.


Evolution in Europe;   In a Leap Toward Unity, 2 Germanys Meld Currencies
LEAD: East Germans formed orderly lines across the land today to get their West German currency, irrevocably throwing in their lot with the capitalist world and turning into the home stretch toward reunification.


Evolution in Europe;   Walesa Wins a Test Against Premier
LEAD: Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki of Poland decisively lost a test of strength with Lech Walesa this weekend, exposing his Government's precarious foundation of support and raising questions about whether his Cabinet could survive without changes.


A Sad Place in History
LEAD: Andy Hawkins of the Yankees became the first modern pitcher to lose a no-hit game with an eight-inning complete-game effort when Chicago scored four runs in the bottom of the eighth on two walks and three errors yesterday.


Allison Plesur Is Married
LEAD: Allison Plesur and Robert D. Lipman, associates in the New York law firm of Jackson, Lewis, Schnitzler &amp; Krupman, were married yesterday at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Rabbi Howard Buechler officiated.
The bride, 25 years old, is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard Plesur of Hauppauge, L.I.
Mr.
Lipman, 29, is the son of Mr.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


On Your Own;   Connecting a Fairway
LEAD: EVERY weekend for the last four months, Dan and Donna Doyle picked up debris, cut down trees and cleared paths in a park infested with litter and plagued by vandalism.
Their purpose?
To renovate the Buzzy Creek disk golf course in New Milford, N.J.


Referee Finally Gets Respect
LEAD: AFTER 32 years of officiating in the National Basketball Association, Earl Strom said he finally feels as though he fits in.


Jodi Spiegel Weds Dr. Barry Fisher
LEAD: At Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I., Jodi Beth Spiegel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Spiegel of Atlantic Beach, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Barry Fisher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Fisher of Atlantic Beach.
Rabbi Sol Roth performed the ceremony.


Mets Rally in the 9th To Edge Reds, 3-2
LEAD: The Mets, wasting no time wallowing in regret over the end of their 11-game winning streak, bounced back in the rain and slop in the ninth inning yesterday to edge the Cincinnati Reds, 3-2.


Cardinal Leading Us Right to the Reformation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Evolution in Europe;   For Average East German, Wonder and Some Trepidation    Cottbus: From New Money, New Self-Respect?
LEAD: For many East Germans, the first day of economic union yesterday stirred expectations of dreams fulfilled and wariness of possible new hardships.
Here are reports from three cities.


Oil Price Slide Fails to Register At Gas Pumps
LEAD: Crude oil prices are 20 percent lower than they were at this time last year, but the price of gasoline at the pump has not dropped.


Limits Are Sought On Games, Practice
LEAD: When delegates to the National Collegiate Athletic Association convention voted in January to shorten the college basketball season and reduce spring football practice, college presidents promised that more reductions would follow.


Metro Matters;   Maybe a Picture Can Be Worth 1,000 Votes Too
LEAD: ''One look is worth a thousand words,'' Fred R. Barnard wrote in 1921 in Printers' Ink, a newspaper industry journal.
A few years later, he amended his obscure aphorism.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of July 1:
MONDAY
Carolina Fght Corp
National City Corp (Cleve)
Nevada Pwr Co
THURSDAY
American Wtr Wks Inc
Grace WR &amp; Co
Sun Inc
FRIDAY
Pittston Co


Sharon Given Broad Power on Housing
LEAD: The Israeli Government today approved Housing Minister Ariel Sharon's request for sweeping emergency powers to begin a crash housing construction program for Soviet Jewish immigrants.


On Your Own;   At Last, An End To Lost Locks
LEAD: A mechanical engineer who became exasperated over the frequent loss of bicycle locks and cables belonging to his nine children has created a retractable lock that is fastened to the cycle.


Feeling the Itch
LEAD: WHEN Greg Buttle, who anchored the Jets' linebacker corps, was released in August 1985 after nine seasons, he handed his playbook to the assistant trainer and vowed that he would never play football again.


Construction Fades as Boom Loses Its Vigor
LEAD: So many new towers are rising on the West Side of Manhattan that it is hard to believe the boom is over.
But the construction workers who form lunchtime knots on the sidewalks and gather beneath the scaffolding know better.


James P. Hendrick, 88, Former Federal Official
LEAD: James Pomeroy Hendrick, a lawyer who was an adviser to Eleanor Roosevelt and later became deputy assistant secretary of the Treasury, died yesterday in Conway, Mass.
He was 88 years old and lived in St.
Croix in the Virgin Islands.


The Trevino-Nicklaus Heat
LEAD: FOR nearly 20 years, their rivalry had simmered in the memories of Merion and Muirfield, but now it's boiling again: the wisecracking grandson of a Mexican gravedigger who has ascended to golf's royalty with a goofy swing against the calculating conglomerate who is considered by most aficionados to be the best golfer in history.


Chronicle
LEAD: For the first time in its 143-year history, the New York Academy of Medicine has appointed a full-time president, DR.
JEREMIAH A. BARONDESS, a leading internist and teacher who plans to concentrate on improving medical education and public health.


Trevino Outduels Nicklaus in Stretch
LEAD: In his seven months as a supernova on the Senior PGA Tour, Lee Trevino has done everything a 50-year-old golfer can do except win one of the tour's major championships and beat Jack Nicklaus.


Outdoors: No Sleep, But Lots of Bass
LEAD: I HAVE just had my first decent night's sleep in seven days.
The other six evenings were devoted to the best fly fishing for striped bass I have experienced in more than 35 years.


Soviet Widow Mourns Doctor Slain in Queens
LEAD: On the last evening of his life, Dr.
Arkady Novikov and his wife, Galina, acted like typical New York tourists: They ate dinner with friends, then visited Chinatown, SoHo and Little Italy.


Evolution in Europe;   For Average East Germans, Wonder and Some Trepidation    Potsdam: Vacations for Some, Pink Slips for Others
LEAD: For many East Germans, the first day of economic union yesterday stirred expectations of dreams fulfilled and wariness of possible new hardships.
Here are reports from three cities.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bechtel Group Inc., San Francisco, appointed Mike Komes to direct marketing and strategy operations.
Gary Bechtel was named to succeed him as president of the Becon Construction Co. subsidiary.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Spin Hopes To Challenge Rolling Stone
LEAD: AFTER a turbulent half-decade, executives at Spin magazine say they have fresh hope of challenging Rolling Stone as the pre-eminent magazine of music and youth culture.


New Jersey Tax Increases Take Effect


Cardinal Leading Us Right to the Reformation;   Law of the Land
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jazz Festival;   All-Star Quartet Flouts Category and Decorum
LEAD: The Beacon Theater on Saturday night was no place for anyone who expects live jazz to sound like recordings.
The alphabetically billed quartet of Jack DeJohnette (drums), Herbie Hancock (keyboards), Dave Holland (bass) and Pat Metheny (guitar) tossed out marketing and genre categories along with decorum.


When Will Pretoria Renounce Violence?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Filipino Rebels Hold Member Of Peace Corps, U.S. Reports
LEAD: Communist guerrillas abducted a Peace Corps volunteer on the central Philippine island of Negros more than two weeks ago and continue to hold him, the United States Embassy said today.


World Cup '90;   West Germany in Semifinals
LEAD: With a week remaining in the 1990 World Cup, it seems foolhardy not to expect West Germany in a third consecutive final match when the tournament ends Sunday night in Rome.


Time Warner Accuses Pathe of Double Sales
LEAD: The $100 million lawsuit that Time Warner Inc. has filed against the Pathe Communications Corporation accuses the Italian company of trying to sell the same film distribution and home video rights twice.


Review/Music;   Late Mozart by Andrew Parrott
LEAD: In recent years the Boston Symphony's Tanglewood Festival in the Berkshires has begun a week early.
In other words, in the weekend before the first actual Boston Symphony concert the following Friday night, the festival presents chamber music and other exotica, usually not in the larger shed but in the smaller Theater-Concert


Gorbachev's Last Chance - Democracy
LEAD: For more than five years, Mikhail Gorbachev has preached the gospel of democracy.
Starting today, with the 28th Communist Party Congress, he must begin to practice it or risk losing his remaining power base.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Things over there got better and better.
Here they got worse and worse.
The reason I'm confident is that I've seen the worst.
No matter what comes now with the new money and the economic change, it's got to be better than what we had.''
- Waltraud Feichtinger of East Berlin.
[A6:2.]


Chrysler Raising Prices
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation will raise prices on most of its 1990 passenger cars on Monday.
The nation's No. 3 auto maker said suggested retail price increases start at $60 for Dodge Daytona cars, which will have a base price of $9,805, and most Chrysler LeBarons, which will rise to about $12,555.
The biggest increases are $160 on the Chrysler Fifth Avenue and Chrysler Imperial models, bringing their base prices to $21,020 and $25,655, respectively.


Harold Fulgenzi Wed To Judy A. Frishberg
LEAD: Judy Amy Frishberg, a daughter of Mrs.
Frederick E. Loewus of New York and Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., and the late Samuel Frishberg, was married yesterday to Harold C. Fulgenzi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Fulgenzi of Hobe Sound, Fla.
Judge Laura E. Drager of New York City Criminal Court performed the ceremony at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N


An Iranian Aide Discounts U.S.
LEAD: Iran's Interior Minister said today that the Government had no desire for better relations with the United States and insisted that Iran had done everything it could to free Western hostages held in Lebanon.


Beth Clearfield Is Married
LEAD: Beth Clearfield, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ronald J. Clearfield of Lower Burrell, Pa., was married yesterday at the Westin William Penn Hotel in Pittsburgh to Reubin Simantov, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mayer Simantov of Forest Hills, Queens.
Rabbi Morris Landes officiated.
The bride, 28 years old and a magna cum laude graduate of Yale University, is the director of programming at BBC/Lionheart Television, a distribution company in New York.


Capital Spending Cut by RJR
LEAD: Struggling with billions of dollars of debt after the largest leveraged buyout in history, RJR Nabisco Inc. has slashed capital spending this year as it seeks fresh loans to pay off old ones.


Mexico Acts to Sell Banks
LEAD: President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico sent a measure to the nation's lawmakers last week to sell the state-owned banking industry, which was nationalized in 1982, and permit foreign ownership of up to 30 percent.


Evolution in Europe;   SOVIET COMMUNISTS CONVENING TODAY ON PARTY'S FUTURE
LEAD: The Communist Party of the Soviet Union, divided, demoralized and endangered by democracy, is convening Monday for its 28th congress, where the main issue will be not so much where the party will lead the country but whether it will lead the country at all.


On Your Own;   Go Fly A Kite For Competitive Fun
LEAD: RON REICH barked out instructions to his three teammates as Top of the Line went through its team precision routine.
The double lines of the stunt kites crossed, uncrossed and crossed again as the kites flew in formation, following each other through loops, figure-8's and square turns, and then instantaneously broke ranks, looped in different directions and reformed a new line with a new direction.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Housing Crisis in Israel
After another record month for immigration, Israel's hard-line Housing Minister was given sweeping powers to deal with the flood.
Page A3.
A Setback for New Orleans
The anti-abortion measure approved in Louisiana has hurt New Orleans's bid for the 1992 Democratic convention, party officials say.


Anti-Tax Protesters Demand Florio's Recall, for Starters
LEAD: On the day they began paying new taxes on services and products varying from telephone calls to toilet paper, thousands of angry New Jersey residents took part in a cross-state convoy to the State House.
There they chanted for the recall of Gov.
Jim Florio and threatened to vote out of office all legislators who approved the new taxes last month.


Handling of Winfield Is Key Part Of Inquiry
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent's investigation into George Steinbrenner concentrates less on the Yankee owner's highly publicized payments to Howard Spira than on Steinbrenner's contentious relationship with his former player Dave Winfield.


RIGHT-TO-DIE BILL PASSES IN ALBANY
LEAD: State lawmakers passed landmark legislation today allowing New Yorkers to designate surrogates to make health-care decisions - including decisions that could end life - if they become incompetent to do so themselves.


PC/Computing Growth
LEAD: The Ziff-Davis Publishing Company magazine PC/Computing has acquired the subscriber list of Personal Computing.
The Dutch company VNU will stop publishing Personal Computing after its August issue.


Reading Test Scores Decline For 9th and 10th Graders
LEAD: The spring 1990 reading and mathematics achievement test scores for the New York City public schools show a sharp decline in reading scores among ninth and 10th graders, but otherwise are virtually unchanged from last year.


Question Box
LEAD:
Oh, Brouthers!


Evolution in Europe;   Reviewing Nuclear Aims
LEAD: President Bush's proposal that NATO's nuclear weapons should become an arms system of ''last resort'' maintains the alliance's position that it has a right to use nuclear weapons first in response to a Soviet conventional attack.
But Bush Administration officials say that the ''last resort'' suggestion is more than a simple reiteration of past policy.


Who Won Cold War? Japanese and Germans.
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Editorial Notebook;   Rich Argentines Confront Capitalism
LEAD: There's no visible privation in the Barrio Norte, Buenos Aires's 300- square-block district of European elegance and conspicuous consumption.
But there's plenty of anxious discussion about President Carlos Menem's tough economic policies.


Killings of Palestinians Dipped in June
LEAD: Eight Palestinians were killed last month by Israeli troops in violence related to the uprising, the lowest total since the unrest began 31 months ago.


Wall Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wall Financial Corp.
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,548,919
9,247,657
Net inc
2,464,989
986,155
Share earns
.07
.03
Results are in Canadian funds.


Somerset Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Somerset Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Net loss
3,865,000
b1,649,000
Per share
-
.36
b-Net income
Total loan loss provision was $3,383,000 for the latest quarter compared with $166,000 for the year-ago quarter.


Freed Gold Miner Returns Home to Illinois


Insider Case Repayments
LEAD: Investors defrauded in a 1988 insider trading scheme may be entitled to compensation from $19 million surrendered by one defendant, officials said today.


Comterm Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comterm Inc.
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,828,889
10,398,344
Net loss
2,201,634
b43,815
b-Net income
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Morrison Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morrison Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 2
1990
1989
Revenue
235,558,000
230,555,000
Net inc
7,751,000
c8,544,000
Share earns
.46
.49
Yr rev
900,457,000
829,159,000
Net inc
b27,493,000
c32,046,000
Share earns
1.60
1.81
b-Included a loss of $2.5 million from discontinued operations.


Community Psychiatric Ceners reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Community Psychiatric Ceners (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
102,655,000
89,598,000
Net inc
23,928,000
b23,457,000
Share earns
.52
.51
6mo rev
187,323,000
170,331,000
Net inc
42,739,000
b43,975,000
Share earns
.92
.95


Meridian National reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meridian National
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,965,111
12,069,633
Net inc
92,305
50,930
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
7,558,907
4,107,290


The Marcos Verdict;   Pariah, or Future President? Philippines Reacts to Verdict
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino said today that she was ''disappointed'' by the acquittal of Imelda Marcos, and banned the former First Lady from returning to the Philippines, asserting that Mrs.
Marcos remains a threat to national security.


Toyota Leads Quality Survey
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation's Cressida sedan had the lowest number of problems reported by car owners in an influential survey of quality conducted each year by J. D. Power &amp; Associates.


Geneva Steel reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Geneva Steel (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
133,572,000
137,297,000
Net inc
12,177,000
15,169,000
Share earns
.87
1.14
Shares outst
14,000,000
13,371,000
9mo sales
386,908,000
379,274,000
Net inc
31,310,000
40,436,000
Share earns
2.51
3.03
Shares outst
12,478,000
13,359,000


Business and Health;   Most Want U.S. To Pay the Bill
LEAD: A LARGE number of Americans say they would gladly exchange their health-care system for one in Canada, which is entirely financed by the Government.


Genetic Factor Emerges as Key to Onset of Lyme Arthritis
LEAD: SCIENTISTS have discovered a hereditary factor that greatly increases susceptibility to the chronic arthritis that can change Lyme disease from an almost unnoticeable ailment to an affliction lasting several years.


Careers;   Encouraging Environment Expertise
LEAD: A PROFESSOR at Tufts University, Anthony D. Cortese, thinks he is one of a kind - the first at any university to hold the title of dean of environmental programs.


Tranzonic Cos reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tranzonic Cos (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
26,744,400
22,283,600
Net inc
939,900
b1,658,800
Share earns
.26
.45
Shares outst
3,614,140
3,620,621
b-Included a cumulative effect of change in accounting principle of $701,500, or 19 cents a share.


Hawkins, Unlucky Loser, 'Starting to Feel Better'
LEAD: Andy Hawkins awoke this morning to telephone calls from his family, friends and the Yankees' principal owner.
But his fate had not changed.
He had still pitched a losing no-hitter Sunday in Chicago.


In Rats, More to Admire, More to Fear
LEAD: As expressions like dirty rat, rat's nest, rat race and smell a rat suggest, the rat may be people's least favorite creature.
But the few scientists who are studying it express nothing but admiration for the rat's instincts, ingenuity and tenacity.


Technology Research reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technology Research
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
7,400,042
7,701,000
Net loss
849,670
214,272
Shares outst
9,433,551
6,952,914
The company said military revenues were down approximately $1 million due to the bankruptcy of one customer, a defense department prime contractor, as well as reduction in military product shipments due to a change in electrical generating set design by the Defense Department.


Construction Spending Drops 0.4%
LEAD: The construction industry remained in a slump in May as spending dropped four-tenths of 1 percent for its second straight monthly decline, the Government said today.


Man Is Firing Needles at the Backs of Women
LEAD: A man with a homemade dart-shooter has taken aim at 10 women in midtown Manhattan since last Wednesday, firing needles and pins that struck them in their backs, the police said yesterday.


Faradyne Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Faradyne Electronics
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,197,050
3,085,731
Net inc
b101,734
b303,056
Share earns
.06
.18
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $52,073 for the latest quarter and $16,583 for the year- earlier period.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Sports People: Baseball;   Date Set for Rose
LEAD: A United States District Court judge in Cincinnati yesterday set July 19 as the date for Pete Rose's sentencing on felony tax charges.


Company News;   Maxtor Acquires Miniscribe Assets
LEAD: The Maxtor Corporation, manufacturer of computer disk drives, said it had completed the acquisition of the assets of the Miniscribe Corporation, which has been operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, for $46 million.
In its previously announced offer, Maxtor pledged up to $30 million in working capital for Miniscribe, which will be called the Maxtor Colorado


Baseball;   White Sox Recover In 9th to Stay in First
LEAD: Chicago's vaunted bullpen lost a three-run lead in the eighth inning tonight, but a run-scoring single by Carlton Fisk in the ninth gave the White Sox a 5-4 victory over the Detroit Tigers.
Chicago remained 4 percentage points ahead of Oakland in the American League West.


Helian Health Group reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Helian Health Group
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,710,746
3,416,916
Net inc
394,697
301,018
Share earns
.11
.11
Shares outst
3,743,750
2,844,128
6mo rev
6,818,220
6,245,840
Net inc
560,545
363,134
Share earns
.16
.13
Shares outst
3,474,142
2,843,605


At BAM Opera, Confidence Amid the Crises
LEAD: The Brooklyn Academy of Music ended its second opera season on an upbeat note the other day with the final performance of Mark Morris's admired dance version of Purcell's ''Dido and Aeneas.''


Philips Sees $1 Billion Loss In Reorganizing 2 Divisions
LEAD: The new president of Philips N.V. announced today that the Dutch electronics giant would take a $1.44 billion charge against earnings and eliminate about 10,000 jobs in Europe as part of an effort to revive its loss-ridden computer and electronic-components divisions.


Sports People: Boxing;   A Bout Amid Sadness For Alex Stewart
LEAD: A fight tonight at Kutsher's Country Club in Monticello, N.Y., is supposed to be a tune-up for Alex Stewart, who is scheduled to fight the former heavyweight champion Mike Tyson in September.
It also will be an emotional test.


Soviets Say Blockade of Lithuania Is Lifted
LEAD: The Soviet economic blockade against Lithuania has been completely ended after a breakthrough in the crisis over the republic's declaration of independence, Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov was quoted as saying today.


Summer Renovations Close 2 Museums
LEAD: Museum of the Moving Image and the New-York Historical Society - will be closed for renovations for two or three months beginning today.


Leisure Technology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leisure Technology (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
55,462,000
45,072,000
Net loss
b5,055,000
c853,000
Share earns
-
.06
Yr rev
183,397,000
126,811,000
Net loss
b4,973,000
c1,466,000
Share earns
-
.11
b-Included writedowns and writeoffs of $4,551,000 and $5,144,000 for the quarter and year, respectively.


The Savings Debacle: How Safeguards Failed;   A Blend of Tragedy and Farce
LEAD: Behind the collapse of the nation's savings and loan industry is the story of how the public and private safeguards intended to insure the financial health and integrity of the savings system failed.


Sunni Muslim Militia Battles Israeli Ally in South Lebanon
LEAD: A Lebanese Muslim militia and its Palestinian guerrilla allies fought pitched battles today with Israeli-backed Christian forces in southern Lebanon.
The police said artillery shells slammed into neighboring residential areas.


Coke's Chief in Europe To Head U.S. Division
LEAD: After a year heading the Coca-Cola Company's operations in the European Community, M. Douglas Ivester is becoming president of Coca-Cola USA.
The move was one of a number of management changes announced by the company at its Atlanta headquarters yesterday.


Builders End Club in Japan
LEAD: Top executives of leading Japanese building companies have disbanded a social club in an effort to meet United States demands for an end to bid rigging in the construction industry, company spokesmen said today.
The 32-member club had met monthly since 1983 at breakfasts, golf competitions and other activities.


The Public Must Reject 2 Live Crew's Message;   Clearly Obscene
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Glorious Fourth
LEAD: This year there is special reason to celebrate on the Fourth of July.
The American polity has just passed an unusual test of wisdom and self-confidence.
Americans have shown, tolerably well, that we understand what this country is about: not flags, not jingoism, but freedom.


Yen Trader Is Punished
LEAD: The Chicago Mercantile Exchange said Friday that it had expelled and fined the last of four traders in Japanese yen futures who pleaded guilty to charges stemming from the F.B.I. investigation of illegal trading at Chicago's two futures exchanges.


Attention, Claims Adjusters! Willis Is Back in 'Die Hard 2.'
''John,'' wails Holly McClane (Bonnie Bedelia), at the end of a second Christmastime showdown involving armed-to-the-teeth terrorists, helpless hostages and her husband (Bruce Willis) in the role of a one-man army, ''Why does this keep happening to us?'' The answer isn't hard to see.
John McClane is a streetwise police officer who isn't ashamed to look scared stiff when he feels that way.
He's a devoted family man with a great wisecracking sense of humor.
He's a crazily reckless fighter capable of making the most impossible feats look easy.
And he's a magnetic, cleverly drawn character, a hero neither villains nor audiences seem able to resist.
That, along with lean, edgy direction and a number of astonishing stunts, makes ''Die Hard 2'' the fastest, scariest action film of this trigger-happy summer.


Poor Win Right to Legal Aid To Fight Redistricting Plans
LEAD: A Federal district judge has issued a decision that will help poor people protect their voting rights by using legal aid lawyers to challenge redistricting plans adopted in the next few years.


KV Pharmaceutical Co.  reports earnings for 12mo March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* KV Pharmaceutical Co.  (AMEX)
12mo March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
31,547,860
30,488,847
Net loss
1,049,255
b1,426,629
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Evolution in Europe;   GORBACHEV URGES A FRACTIOUS PARTY TO PULL TOGETHER
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev fought to hold his crisis-ridden Communist Party together today with an uncompromising defense of his economic and foreign policies, but the performance left most of his fractious audience cold.


Ships Spill Oil in Chesapeake Bay
LEAD: Two cargo ships collided in the Chesapeake Bay in a thunderstorm Sunday night, severely damaging the vessels and spilling about 30,000 gallons of heavy fuel oil.


For Satellite Watchers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Company News;   Lockheed to Shut Office in Virginia
LEAD: The Lockheed Missiles and Space Company, a unit of the Lockheed Corporation, said it was phasing out its Fairfax, Va., office in a cost-cutting move involving an undetermined number of layoffs.
Some of the 90 employees working in Fairfax will be transferred to the Lockheed Integrated Solutions Company in Santa Clara, Calif.; some will move to its Formtek office in Pittsburgh, and others will be laid off, said a Lockheed spokesman, Martin


Royal Gold Enterp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royal Gold Enterp
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,300,000
4,700,000
Net loss
b1,948,000
c97,000
Share earns
-
.01
6mo sales
5,500,000
7,600,000
Net loss
b2,336,000
62,000
b-Included a $1,085,000 writedown of goodwill for the quarter and 6 months.


Amrep Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amrep Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
20,417,000
24,144,000
Net loss
1,852,000
b174,000
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
6,617,846
6,608,953
Yr rev
90,679,000
91,051,000
Net loss
2,344,000
b1,243,000
Share earns
-
.19
Shares outst
6,616,214
6,607,384


The Media Business: Advertising;   Shop Seeks To Spread Its Wings
LEAD: BONNEVILLE COMMUNICATIONS has made its mark by spreading the word of God in an award-winning national public service campaign for its owner, the Mormon Church.
Now the Salt Lake City agency is trying to translate its special brand of inspirational advertising into successful campaigns for selling secular products.


No Soccer For NBC
LEAD: NBC said today that it would not bid for the United States television rights for the 1994 World Cup, the first world soccer championship to be played in the United States.


3Com Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* 3Com Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
116,823,000
111,730,000
Net inc
b7,321,000
8,234,000
Share earns
.25
.28
Yr sales
419,086,000
385,857,000
Net inc
b20,499,000
34,310,000
Share earns
.71
1.18
b-Reflected a $2.5 million, or 5 cents a share, one-time accrual for the relocation of 3Com's corporate offices.


Chronicle
LEAD: As part of the settlement of her divorce from JOHN W. KLUGE, PATRICIA KLUGE got the house.
Real-estate records in Charlottesville, Va., indicate that a 9.9-acre parcel, which includes a 45-room Georgian mansion, Albemarle House, was transferred to Mrs.
Kluge on June 13, The Richmond News Leader reported yesterday.


Advanced Computer Techiques reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Computer Techiques
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,481,779
1,502,816
Net inc
12,980
b140,232
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Sandy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sandy Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
7,628,292
7,329,100
Net loss
905,528
679,973
9mo rev
24,394,582
21,465,747
Net loss
1,528,875
2,869,810


Brock Exploration reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brock Exploration
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,932,000
8,588,000
Net inc
1,290,000
1,215,000
Share earns
.32
.30
The company is listed on the Pacific Stock Exchange.


By Design;   Print Shirts
LEAD: Every so often an ordinary bit of fashion becomes the height of style.
Take print shirts.
They've always been there.
They were O.K.
But did one care?
Suddenly, though, a tailored shirt of sensuous silk printed with the kind of pattern that usually shows up on designers' scarfs is a must-have.


Adelphia Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adelphia Communications Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
60,351,000
52,185,000
Net loss
28,415,000
38,594,000
Yr rev
239,704,000
187,636,000
Net loss
143,729,000
123,645,000


Chess
LEAD: The World Cup Open Tournament, which ended in early June at the Hotel Ismailov in Moscow, demonstrated once again that it is difficult to be fair to everyone at the same time.
This Grandmasters Association production was intended to obtain 12 qualifiers for the next World Cup cycle of elite competitions to be held in the 1991-92 period.


1,000 Muslims Reportedly Killed In Stampede at Mecca Pilgrimage
LEAD: About 1,400 Muslim pilgrims suffocated or were trampled to death Monday in a stampede in a pedestrian tunnel leading to the sacred city of Mecca, witnesses and diplomats said by telephone from the Saudi Arabian city.


Good Night To a Sleepy Princess
LEAD: American Ballet Theater's spring season at the Metropolitan Opera House came to a grand finale on Saturday night with a performance of ''The Sleeping Beauty,'' that most sumptuous of 19th-century ballets.
There were several surprises.
It was no surprise that Amanda McKerrow was a delicate Princess Aurora and that Julio Bocca was a vigorous and rather fiery Prince Desire.


The Media Business;   Ingersoll, in Swap, Sheds His U.S. Papers
LEAD: Ralph McA.
Ingersoll 2d, who aggressively acquired newspapers in this country over the last decade but has been under mounting financial pressure, left the newspaper business in the United States yesterday to run newspapers in Europe.


World Cup '90;   Haunted by a Tragedy, Turin Braces for England-West Germany
LEAD: The streets and piazzas were quiet today.
But city officials here were bracing for trouble.
All the elements that could lead to the worst incidents of hooliganism since the World Cup soccer finals began early last month were moving into place.


Hipotronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hipotronics Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 2
1990
1989
Sales
7,021,040
6,700,290
Net inc
880,054
807,287
Share earns
.43
.39
Shares outst
2,061,020
2,056,323
6mo sales
12,522,215
12,756,099
Net inc
1,499,358
1,485,782
Share earns
.73
.72
Shares outst
2,062,017
2,056,437


Review/Recital;   A Concertmaster With Varied Coloration
LEAD: Xiao-lu Li studied the violin in Shanghai and played in orchestras there until 1983, when he came to the United States to study.
Now he teaches at North Carolina State University and is the concertmaster of the Greensboro Symphony Orchestra.
On Saturday evening at Weill Recital Hall, he showed that he is also a capable and sometimes eloquent recitalist.


Evolution in Europe;   Humorlessly, a Long-Ruling Party Looks at Itself
LEAD: Mocked by the people, scolded by its leader and stripped of its monopoly, the Communist Party settled into town today in something of a red funk, a septuagenarian patronage machine in need of a new patron.


The Media Business: Advertising - Addenda;   Accounts
LEAD: Leon's Furniture Ltd., to W.B. Doner &amp; Co.


Sports People: Professional Hockey;   Still Hurting, Lemieux Seeks New Treatment
LEAD: Mario Lemieux, the Pittsburgh Penguins' star center, who missed six weeks of the past National Hockey League season while he sought therapy for his back, is scheduled for further treatment in Los Angeles this month.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., New York, appointed Frederick S. Schiff vice president and controller.


Charles A. Loreto, 87, A Justice in New York
LEAD: Justice Charles A. Loreto, who served 12 years on the Municipal Court and 15 years on the New York State Supreme Court in Manhattan and the Bronx, died on Sunday at Eastland Hospital in Texas.
He was 87 years old and lived in Eastland.


Volunteers Pay to Help Scientists Conducting Ecological Research
LEAD: AS a small boat crowded with researchers, instruments and canisters of water etched radiating circles on the glassy surface of Lake Naivasha, and fish eagles swooped from the trees, a voice sang out from on board: ''Temperature, 22.
Oxygen, 5.7.''


Company News;   First Florida Trims Bid for Mid-State
LEAD: First Florida Banks Inc. lowered the price it is willing pay to take over Mid-State Federal Savings Bank because it believes that Mid-State's loan loss reserves are inadequate under Federal guidelines.
Under the new agreement, First Florida said it would pay $48 million, or $22.43 a share, down from $54.2 million, or $25.07.


Lotus Sues 2 On Copyright Violation
LEAD: Acting swiftly to capitalize on last week's Federal court ruling giving copyright protection to the set of computer commands used in its popular 1-2-3 spreadsheet program, the Lotus Development Corporation sued two California software companies yesterday, accusing them of copyright infringement.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: ABB Asea Brown Boveri, Zurich, Switzerland, a Swiss-Swedish engineering company, said two of its units had received an order worth 700 million Danish kroner, or about $109 million, for 17 electric motor units from the Danish state railroad and an order from British Rail worth 150 million Swedish kronor, or about $105 million, for 20 freight locomotives.


Empire Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Empire Co.
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
453,753,000
410,404,000
Net inc
b6,996,000
d15,776,000
Share earns
.10
.39
Yr rev
1,809,280,000
1,596,036,000
Net inc
c8,568,000
38,155,000
Share earns
-
.78
b-Included $833,000 from capital gains and other items.


T Cell Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* T Cell Sciences Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,676,000
2,909,000
Net inc
285,000
127,000
Share earns
.03
.02
Shares outst
9,407,000
8,317,000
Yr rev
11,757,000
8,376,000
Net loss
1,044,000
1,058,000
Shares outst
8,591,000
8,302,000


Holiday Tomorrow: Independence Day
LEAD:
Fireworks
9:20 P.M. on the East River.
F.D.R Drive will be closed for viewing from 14th to 42d streets from 7 P.M. until after midnight.
NEW YORK
Government offices: Federal, state and municipal all closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.


Evolution in Europe;   Excerpts From Gorbachev Speech at the 28th Communist Party Congress
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's speech yesterday at the Soviet Communist Party Congress in Moscow, as translated and distributed by the Soviet press agency Tass:
Grim Legacy of Old


Hubble Astronomers Add Up Their Losses
LEAD: BECAUSE of the focusing defects found last week in the $1.5 billion Hubble Space Telescope, virtually all the key instruments aboard will lose a major part of their capabilities and the most exciting scientific missions will have to be postponed until replacement instruments can be installed.


Debentures Priced By Fannie Mae
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, yesterday priced a total of $1.3 billion in four-year and 10-year debentures through its regular selling group of securities dealers.


A Better Idea on Tax Credits
LEAD: Both the House and Senate have approved expansions of a wonderful but little-known anti-poverty weapon called the earned income tax credit.
This income supplement helps working parents with low wages by reducing their income taxes or, if they owe no tax, by paying them cash.


Foreign Debt Of U.S. Rises
LEAD: The United States sank deeper in debt in 1989, the Commerce Department reported today, as the nation's overall deficit with the rest of the world swelled by 25 percent, to $663.7 billion.


Clinical Data reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clinical Data
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,350,000
2,983,000
Net inc
b1,583,000
cd260,000
Share earns
.54
-
Yr rev
8,073,000
9,804,000
Net inc
b1,030,000
d20,000
Share earns
.35
-
Shares outst
2,959,917
3,014,073


Morgan's Foods reports earnings for Qtr to May 22
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan's Foods (AMEX)
Qtr to May 22
1990
1989
Sales
10,833,000
9,989,000
Net inc
b113,000
79,000
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
11,669,584
10,323,096
b-Included loss of $20,000 from discontinued operations.


The Marcos Verdict;   Marcos Is Cleared of All Charges In Racketeering and Fraud Case
LEAD: Imelda Marcos, the widow of the former Philippine President, was acquitted yesterday of charges that she raided the country's treasury and invested the money in the United States.


Rebel Forces in Liberia Surround the Capital and Begin an Attack
LEAD: Rebel forces began a major assault on Liberia's capital, Monrovia, today, and have cut all the main roads into the city, a senior Bush Administration official said.


Our Towns;   Country Cunning: A Mailbox Built To Endure It All
LEAD: The idea had long lingered in William O'Keefe's mind, but it didn't take shape until three years ago, shortly after he found his dented and decapitated mailbox lying along a country road.
Why not build an indestructible mailbox?
Mr.
O'Keefe, a service manager for a local oil company, had already lost seven mailboxes to vandalism.


Tiverton Petroleums reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tiverton Petroleums
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,812,389
1,824,492
Net inc
182,412
b2,354,649
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss
Results are in Canadian funds.


Concord Fabrics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Concord Fabrics Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 3
1990
1989
Sales
53,263,475
48,633,886
Net inc
1,307,905
1,854,336
Share earns
.37
.52
9mo sales
142,958,978
128,851,674
Net inc
2,811,384
2,429,044
Share earns
.79
.68


Metro Airlines Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metro Airlines Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
55,118,000
34,438,000
Net loss
4,231,000
9,151,000
Yr rev
194,562,000
147,452,000
Net loss
19,504,000
b2,735,000
b-After income of $7,965,000, or $1.36 a share, from an adjustment in accounting.


On Horse Racing;   Under the New State Law, Bettors Come in Last
LEAD: Yesterday morning, the New York State Legislature passed a 70-page omnibus bill authorizing more than a dozen significant changes in the operation of horse racing in the state.
Signed into law by Gov.
Mario Cuomo yesterday afternoon, the law appears to be a significant victory for the industry, especially the operators of the state's major tracks, but far less rewarding for the sport's customers.


Vikonics Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vikonics Inc. (OTC)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,314,000
4,010,000
Net loss
767,000
1,175,000


Southwestern Public Service Co.  reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwestern Public Service Co.  (NYSE)
Year to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
784,318,000
796,340,000
Net inc
118,073,000
108,927,000
Share earns
2.70
2.48
Shares outst
40,918,000
40,918,000
Share earnings are based on weighted average shares outstanding, and the earnings per share variance is calculated before rounding to nearest cent.


Company News;   Radisson In India Pact
LEAD: The Indian Government's leading hotel corporation said today that it had signed a collaboration agreement with Radisson Hotels International of Minneapolis for consultancy services, staff training and marketing.


The Public Must Reject 2 Live Crew's Message
LEAD: To the Editor:


Evolution in Europe;   Fearful of the Future, East Germans Promise to Work Harder Than Ever
LEAD: After spending a joyous Sunday celebrating with her new West German marks, Christine Liebe was back behind her dull gray sewing machine today, and her mood was far from jubilant.


Jazz Festival;   Some Latin and Some Late
LEAD: The JVC Jazz Festival, which had been wheezing occasionally during the last week, sputtered to its end on Saturday night during the first show of the Latin Jazz Jam at Carnegie Hall.
The concert, featuring the pianist Ramsey Lewis, the saxophonist Gato Barbieri and the pianist Eddie Palmieri, with the added guest pianist Papo Lucca, was neither jazz nor Latin music most of the time.


202 Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* 202 Data Systems (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,977
121,255
Net loss
45,410
b60,769
Share earns
-
.02
6mo rev
139,255
226,349
Net loss
20,332
b115,263
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Prices of Treasury Issues Steady
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were little changed and interest rates were basically flat in light trading yesterday, as dealers began coping with the peculiar demands of a holiday-shortened week.


Fashion;   Sprightly Clothes for Cruise or Career
LEAD: It is difficult for some European designers to understand the range of what is known in this country as the resort-cruise season.
Indigenous to the United States retailing trade, the season used to refer to clothes for warm climates offered by the stores here in midwinter.


Israeli Arab Poet Is Set Free, But Court Silences His Song
LEAD: An Israeli Arab poet charged with inciting violence through nationalistic verse was released from house arrest Sunday night pending trial.


3 Health-Care Bills Approved in Albany
LEAD: Concluding a session marred by contention and delay, state lawmakers finished a 23-hour legislative marathon this morning by passing three major health care bills, including one that would establish an innovative state-subsidized health insurance plan for poor children.


World Cup '90;   Naples Loves Maradona, but Loves Italy More
LEAD: Some fans in Naples may suffer from conflicting twitches Tuesday when Diego Maradona of Argentina takes the field against Italy in the semifinals of the World Cup.


Fashion;   Patterns
LEAD:
Perfumes in Print


ADS Associates Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ADS Associates Ltd.
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,000,000
10,300,000
Net inc
34,416
207,863
Share earns
.01
.03
Results are in Canadian funds.


Santa Monica Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Monica Bank (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,426,000
3,270,000
Per share
.58
.56
6mo net inc
6,439,000
6,383,000
Per share
1.10
1.09
Year-ago share earnings are adjusted to reflect a 6-for-5 stock split in Feb.


Bethel Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bethel Bancorp
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Net inc
227,022
272,520
Share earns
.43
.51
Yr net inc
944,376
1,061,000
Share earns
1.79
2.00


Reeds Jewelers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reeds Jewelers Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
11,829,000
10,774,000
Net inc
65,000
b18,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Basic Earth Science Systems Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Basic Earth Science Systems Inc.
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,722,000
1,507,000
Net inc
70,000
b201,000
Shares outst
15,184,949
14,530,214
b-Net loss


Company News;   New Printers Due at Apple
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. is expected to introduce two new low-cost laser printers next week to beat back the competition that has been snapping up some of its market share.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-12


NEW SCHOOL BOARD REFLECTS MOSAIC OF NEW YORK CITY
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday named a black woman to the remaining seat on the Board of Education, completing a board whose ethnic diversity reflects the school system's largely black and Hispanic population.


King World Products reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* King World Products (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
81,225,000
72,424,000
Net inc
b14,179,000
11,562,000
Share earns
.54
.46
Shares outst
26,200,000
25,200,000
9mo rev
351,953,000
303,473,000
Net inc
65,613,000
c59,399,000
Share earns
2.52
2.36
Shares outst
26,000,000
25,200,000


Tennis;   Becker Tames Cash; Lendl Beats Shelton
LEAD: Pat Cash crashed, Michael Chang's tightly woven groundstrokes became unraveled, and Ivan Lendl, finally cagey on Wimbledon's grass after years of letting it outwit him, made an authoritative escape from a third-round match that had been deadlocked and unpromising when it was halted by darkness Saturday.


Rise in Home Affordability
LEAD: Rising incomes and falling mortgage rates and prices enhanced the typical American family's ability to buy an existing single-family home in May.
The National Association of


Business People;   Lehrman, Ex-Candidate, Joins Consulting Firm
LEAD: Lewis E. Lehrman has found a way to merge his two passions - politics and business.
Mr.
Lehrman, the Republican and Conservative candidate who lost to Mario M. Cuomo in New York's 1982 gubernatorial election, recently left Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, where he was chief operating officer of its asset management division, to become chairman of Lehrman Bell Mueller Cannon.


Get Gorbachev Moving
LEAD: The weather is pleasant and things look the same.
There's no highly charged sense that once again, as John Reed wrote about Petrograd in 1917, these are days that will shake the world.
Mikhail Gorbachev is doing his best to keep his comrades from rocking the boat, trying to keep the Communist Party and the country together.


King vs. Douglas: Case Begins in Federal Court
LEAD: A lawyer for Don King told a Federal Court jury yesterday that the promoter was wrongly depicted as responsible for the delay in recognizing James (Buster) Douglas as champion after Douglas scored a 10th-round knockout of Mike Tyson for the heavyweight championship February in Tokyo.


Evolution in Europe;   East Germans Find Shelves Full And Opt for Food, Not Frivolities
LEAD: East Germans took their new West German marks for a trial spin today, hunting through stores newly stocked with Western goods, but for now they appeared mostly to be just looking.


The Public Must Reject 2 Live Crew's Message;   Insensitive, Stupid
LEAD: To the Editor:


Market Place;   Government Bond Gains Are Global
LEAD: WITH economies less than exuberant in most parts of the world, the last three months provided the holders of international government bonds with the best performance since 1987.


Jazz in July Festival to Open at the Y
LEAD: A concert of music by Thelonious Monk and Alec Wilder, and a program featuring two generations of jazz musicians, are among the highlights of the 92d Street Y's sixth annual Jazz in July, a festival of traditional and new jazz.


Horizon Gold reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Gold (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,706,091
1,812,697
Net loss
b3,250,318
c703,968
Shares outst
24,963,066
19,335,127
Yr sales
12,844,780
9,328,208
Net loss
b3,964,893
d333,008
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
21,895,848
17,716,742


Baseball;   Success of the 'Big Guys' Sparks Mets' Climb in the East
LEAD: ''My big guys,'' Davey Johnson used to call them. ''And when they start to hit,'' he used to say, ''we'll start to win.''


Taurus Footwear reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Taurus Footwear
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
11,325,000
16,241,000
Net loss
2,535,000
b1,071,000
b-After a loss of $230,000 from discontinued operations.
Year-ago first quarter was restated.
Results are in Canadian funds.


Waterhouse Investor ServFices reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Waterhouse Investor ServFices
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
5,503,000
5,173,200
Net inc
265,400
345,800
Share earns
.11
.14
9mo rev
16,535,100
14,051,400
Net inc
b603,100
672,000
Share earns
.25
.27
b-Included a charge of $364,162 from a writedown of the company's investment in a bank.


Synthetech reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Synthetech
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,617,000
471,000
Net inc
b304,000
c806,000
Share earns
.03
-
b-Represents a tax-loss carryforward.
c-Net loss
The company said that sales of its Peptide building blocks products and other chemicals increased to $1,200,000 for the latest year from $281,000 for the prior period.


Lennar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lennar Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
86,532,000
105,528,000
Net inc
3,729,000
6,448,000
Share earns
.37
.64
6mo rev
167,963,000
190,173,000
Net inc
7,099,000
12,215,000
Share earns
.70
1.22


The Imelda Verdict;   The Road to Acquittal
LEAD: Here is a brief chronology of the U.S. criminal case against the late Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos and his wife, Imelda.
Feb. 7, 1986 - Mr.
Marcos is declared the winner of the presidential election by the National Assembly, although he had lost the popular vote.
Demonstrations against him increase.


Economic Pulse; Southern California;   Test for Peace Dividend: Boom or Bust in California
LEAD: Southern California, perhaps more than any other region, offers a clear test of the American economy's capacity to convert from military to peaceful purposes.


SelecTronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SelecTronics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
7,319,000
4,427,000
Net loss
2,724,000
2,058,000
Shares outst
36,135,014
35,340,946
Yr sales
32,905,000
21,581,000
Net loss
5,413,000
b45,000
Shares outst
35,473,290
17,423,568


Challenger International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Challenger International Ltd.  (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,678,000
124,000
Net loss
392,000
28,000
6mo rev
6,002,000
143,000
Net loss
854,000
b20,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $140,000.


Barbara Carroll, So Polite at the Piano
LEAD: Barbara Carroll, the final participant this year in the early evening piano recital series of the JVC Jazz Festival, is the very model of a genteel saloon pianist.
For years, Miss Carroll has been a fixture at the Cafe Carlyle.
And on Saturday evening, Miss Carroll, elegantly coifed and gowned, brought her sedate mixture of jazz and society piano to Weill Recital


Feeling Effects of Bush and the Bailout
LEAD: Unlike the vast majority of Congressional incumbents, Representative John Hiler fights for his political life every two years, and this year President Bush's reversal on taxes promises to make that fight more difficult than usual.


Bridge
LEAD: When there are 11 top tricks and no certain losers, there is often a way to maneuver a 12th.
For good technique in this situation it would be hard to match the diagramed example.
It was reported by David Cliff of Basking Ridge, N.J., and was played in a Unit-Wide game at the Glen Rock Club in Fair Lawn, N


Readicare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Readicare Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
6,006,000
4,941,000
Net inc
b670,000
b352,000
Share earns
.08
.04
Shares outst
8,150,000
7,878,000
b-After extraordinary tax loss carryforwards of $215,000, or 2 cents a share, for the latest first quarter, and $137,000, or 1 cent a share, for the year-ago period.


Alpha Industries Inc. reports earnings for Year to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alpha Industries Inc. (AMEX)
Year to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
64,684,000
65,488,000
Net loss
15,075,000
b139,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income
The company attributed the 1990 loss to restructuring programs.
The year included $11,431,000 in restructuring expenses.


The Media Business: Advertising - Addenda;   DDB Needham Buys Baker Advertising
LEAD: DDB Needham has acquired Baker Advertising, an agency based in Troy, Mich.
DDB Needham did not disclose terms of the deal but said it would merge Baker with DDB Needham Detroit.


Westwood One reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westwood One (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
37,378,000
29,461,000
Net loss
3,817,000
6,553,000
6mo rev
69,173,000
55,917,000
Net loss
11,536,000
9,652,000





Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I thank the almighty God for the vindication, and I am in great awe for the jury system that symbolizes the soul of the American people.''
- Imelda Marcos.
[A1:2.]


University Patents Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* University Patents Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
271,542
111,088
Net loss
727,840
203,180
Shares outst
4,890,034
4,662,611
9mo rev
761,864
408,459
Net loss
1,715,036
1,376,484
Shares outst
4,875,494
4,659,248


Scheib (Earl) Inc.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scheib (Earl) Inc.(A)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
13,491,000
11,704,000
Net loss
b60,000
b481,000
Yr sales
56,836,000
55,568,000
Net inc
462,000
1,244,000
Share earns
.10
.27
b-After income tax benefits of $130,000 for the latest fourth quarter and $392,000 for year-ago period.


Canonie Environmental Servce reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canonie Environmental Servce (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,994,000
7,975,000
Net loss
478,000
b669,000
Share earns
-
.12
Shares outst
5,701,000
5,671,000
b-Net income


Serbia Referendum Snubbed By the Albanians in Kosovo
LEAD: Voters in Serbia cast ballots today in a referendum whose passage could delay free, multiparty elections and reduce the autonomy of the Yugoslav republic's restive Kosovo region.


'Waiting for Harold,' a L.I.R.R. Saga
LEAD: On the first Monday of a major reconstruction project that will incovenience everyone who takes the Long Island Rail Road this summer, dozens of trains were late yesterday, scores of forlorn passengers waited at Pennsylvania Station for canceled trains, and Chris McEvoy spent more than three hours trying to go home.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in SportsMonday yesterday about disk golf misstated the location of the Buzzy Creek course.
It is in Blue Point Park in West Milford, N.J., not New Milford.


Viruses Said to Pirate Host's Genetic Material In Invasion Strategies
LEAD: JUST when they thought they knew most of the nasty parasitic maneuvers of viruses, researchers are now finding a new and exceedingly devious way that the microbes exploit their hosts.
They have discovered that viruses can pirate away copies of genes that control the health and well-being of the host and then turn those genes against the host species.


Information Management Technologies Corp. reports earnings for 12mo March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Information Management Technologies Corp. (OTC)
12mo March 31
1990
1989
Sales
15,163,606
7,757,968
Net loss
1,552,122
4,415,002
Shares outst
8,224,652
7,084,080
The company said the latest fiscal figures included the results of Jon Rothenberg &amp; Associates since June 1989 and Coins Optical Disk Storage System since December 1989.


Intervoice Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intervoice Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,867,647
4,842,416
Net inc
1,186,151
1,125,109
Share earns
.21
.27
Shares outst
5,780,922
4,178,378


Company News;   Hercules Chief Retiring
LEAD: David S. Hollingsworth, the chairman and chief executive officer of Hercules Inc., announced today that he plans to retire next year.
He did not give a specific date.
Mr.
Hollingsworth, 62 years old, has been at the helm of the chemical company since March 1987.
Mr.
Hollingsworth joined Hercules 42 years ago and worked in or headed many of the its businesses including paper chemicals, flavors and fragrances and resins.


Global Auction Set for Some Savings Unit Assets
LEAD: The Government will hold an international auction in late September, via satellite, for properties worth more than $1 million each that were acquired from insolvent savings and loan institutions, Administration officials said today.


The Lip-Reading Slogan Aside, Mr. Bush Deserves Some Applause
LEAD: As the individual who is sometimes credited with making the biggest political mistake of the 1980's by saying -on no less an occasion than my acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention -that I would raise taxes, I take a special interest in how our President and members of Congress now struggle with the issue of taxes and the Federal deficit.


Stress and the Radish
LEAD: Pollen of radish plants subjected to environmental stress is less successful in siring seeds when in competition with pollen from radish plants grown in a more favorable environment, scientists reported in a recent issue of the journal Science.
The authors, Dr.
Helen J. Young, assistant professor of biology at Barnard College, and Dr.


French Air-Traffic Strike
LEAD: French air-traffic controllers said today that they would strike for three days beginning on Tuesday.
The action could wreak havoc with holiday traffic at the two main Paris airports, Orly and Charles de Gaulle.
Air France said the strike, over staffing, would force it to ground 60 percent of its European and Mediterranean flights, but that longer flights would not be affected.


Books of The Times;   An Easy Routine in India, Disrupted by a Child
LEAD:
The World of Nagaraj
By R. K. Narayan
186 pages. Viking. $18.95.


Water Main Break Repaired, but Effects Linger


Chronicle
LEAD: JOHN CHANCELLOR is recovering nicely after double-bypass surgery last Wednesday at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York and is to be released this weekend.
Mr.
Chancellor, 62 years old, had suffered chest pains after returning to New York last week from the tour for his new book, ''Peril and Promise.


Ripken Wishes Record Came With a Victory
LEAD: He'll take the record, but Cal Ripken Jr. would have been much happier with a victory.


Group Tries to Think Like the Fed
LEAD: As the Federal Reserve's top policy makers met today in Washington, 31 business people and economic analysts convened at the grand old Toledo Club to imitate - and thereby fathom immediately - the thinking of the people who determine the nation's interest rates and availability of money.


Soybeans and Pork Surge On Forecast of Hot Weather
LEAD: Forecasts for sizzling temperatures in the Midwest sparked sharp gains yesterday in the prices of soybean and pork futures amid speculation that hot weather would scorch the bean crop and slow the movement of hogs to market.


Southland Files With S.E.C. To Revise Exchange Offer
LEAD: The Southland Corporation, owner of the 7-Eleven convenience-store chain, said yesterday that it had filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to revise the terms of its exchange offer to restructure its outstanding public debt and preferred stock.


Kenn Stryker-Rodda, Teacher and Editor, 86
LEAD: Kenn Stryker-Rodda, a teacher, editor and lecturer, died Thursday at Heritage House, a care center in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., where he lived.
He was 86 years old.


The Media Business: Advertising - Addenda;   Miscellany
LEAD: Ogilvy &amp; Mather said it had opened a full-service agency in East Berlin.


Telepanel Systems reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telepanel Systems
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
415,525
60,424
Net loss
229,012
508,515
Shares outst
7,010,000
470,847
Results are in Canadian funds.


Company News;   Stock Repurchase By Kollmorgen
LEAD: The Kollmorgen Corporation said it had repurchased all of the Kollmorgen shares that had been held by the Vernitron Corporation and settled all litigation resulting from last year's failed merger agreement and the recently concluded proxy contest by Vernitron.


Richard B. Tuggle, 92, World War II Admiral
LEAD: Richard Brittain Tuggle, a retired rear admiral who participated in several major battles in World War II, died Sunday at the age of 92.
No cause of death was given.


Charles F. White, 86, Ex-M&amp;M Mars Head
LEAD: Charles F. White, retired president of M &amp; M Mars in Hackettstown, N.J., died on Saturday at Hershey Medical Center in Hershey, Pa.
He was 86 years old and lived in Lewisburg, Pa.


Review/Television;   Transforming a Man Into a Woman
LEAD: One of the most important and consistently laudable series on public television is ''P.O.V.'' (for Point of View).
Independent documentary makers are given an opportunity to show their work in as direct a context as possible.
The content may be sensitive or even controversial, but the broadcasts are not saddled with wrap-around panel discussions intended to convey the impression of balance or objectivity.


Wuzhong Journal;   A Corner of China Where the Minaret Stands Tall
LEAD: ''God is great!'' begins the muezzin's cry, and the men put down their cups of sweet tea and amble toward the nearest mosque to join a rising tide of Islam, which is as evident as the minarets speckling the countryside here in northwestern China.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.34
7.58
9.49
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.73
7.74
7.98
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.60
7.61
7.71
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.43
8.44
8.09
30-YR.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Seeing Stars


Sanders Joins Columbus
LEAD: Deion Sanders reported to the Yankees' minor league affiliate in Columbus, Ohio, today, but whether he will bolt baseball in August to report to the Atlanta Falcons' training camp remains an unanswered question.


Food Lion Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Food Lion Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 16
1990
1989
Sales
1,274,167,000
1,069,483,000
Net inc
40,836,000
31,972,000
Share earns
.13
.10
6mo sales
2,475,452,000
2,080,288,000
Net inc
77,965,000
60,692,000
Share earns
.24
.19


The Media Business: Advertising - Addenda;   People
LEAD: Bob Buckley has been promoted to senior vice president of the Young &amp; Rubicam subsidiary Creswell, Munsell, Fultz &amp; Zirbel.


WSMP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 18
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* WSMP Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 18
1990
1989
Revenue
14,868,000
15,015,000
Net loss
b34,000
c161,000
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
2,086,934
2,209,040
b-Included pretax gain of $284,000 from the disposal of certain restaurant assets.


Wells American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wells American Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
-
5,141,000
Net loss
b4,325,000
c2,034,000
Share earns
-
.40
Yr sales
6,206,000
13,178,000
Net loss
7,071,000
102,000
b-Included $1,743,000 inventory write down related to the suspension of manufacturing and a $1,183,000 reduction in the net realizable value of certain real estate and surplus personal property.


Savings Unit Curbs Eased
LEAD: Savings and loan regulators today temporarily eased restrictions imposed on savings institution lending by last year's bailout bill.
As expected, the Office of


Ms. Batista Wed To Herve Aaron
LEAD: Marina Batista and Herve Aaron were married yesterday at St.
Patrick's Cathedral by the Rev.
Eugene Merlet.


The Cosmos And Those No-Hitters
LEAD: It's hard to bleed too profusely for Andy Hawkins of the Yankees because of the losing no-hitter he pitched Sunday when you know the story of Denny Pickett - I think it was Denny Pickett.
It might have been Ronnie Madden, or Ernie Kumerow or Marco Dallesandro, but I'm pretty sure it was Denny Pickett.


New View of Ocean
LEAD: A NEW invention that is about to be tested at sea promises to give scientists a view of marine life that until now has been hidden from humans.


The Marcos Verdict;   The 'Wrong' Court
LEAD: From the start of what was to have been the prosecution of Ferdinand E. Marcos, one question hung like a shadow over an ambitious team of Federal prosecutors: did the case belong in United States courts?


Two Pesos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Two Pesos Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,048,000
8,309,000
Net loss
1,476,000
c453,000
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
8,009,000
7,933,000
Yr rev
40,215,000
40,566,000
Net loss
b2,728,000
d4,401,000
Shares outst
7,940,000
7,860,000


Fleetwood Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for 52wk to April 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fleetwood Enterprises Inc. (NYSE)
52wk to April 29
1990
1989
Revenue
1,549,424,000
1,618,523,000
Net inc
55,039,000
70,468,000
Share earns
2.42
3.06
Shares outst
22,755,000
23,053,000


Verdict or Mistrial Today, Bensonhurst Judge Declares
LEAD: The judge hearing the Bensonhurst racial-slaying case said yesterday that he would give the jury deliberating murder charges against John S. Vento until today to reach a verdict or he would declare a mistrial.


Thousands of South African Blacks Stay Off Jobs
LEAD: Hundreds of thousands of blacks stayed home from work across South Africa today at the start of a weeklong campaign organized by the African National Congress and its allies to protest factional violence in Natal, which has taken more than 3,000 lives.


CSX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CSX Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,047,000,000
1,974,000,000
Net inc
109,000,000
c151,000,000
Share earns
1.08
1.45
Shares outst
98,228,725
101,832,026
6mo rev
3,955,000,000
3,818,000,000
Net inc
b186,000,000
c233,000,000
Share earns
1.82
2.18
Shares outst
98,066,923
103,667,366


New Jersey Steel reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Jersey Steel (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
34,474,000
29,664,000
Net inc
2,238,000
2,831,000
Share earns
.39
.49
Shares outst
5,811,563
5,737,055
6mo sales
61,329,000
57,829,000
Net inc
2,755,000
7,229,000
Share earns
.47
1.26
Shares outst
5,803,910
5,746,446


INSIDE
LEAD:
Legal Aid and Voting Rights
A Federal judge ruled that poor people, to protect their voting rights, can use legal aid lawyers to challenge redistricting plans.
Page A14.
Right to Counsel Restricted
New York State's highest court ruled that a suspect's right to be represented by a lawyer could be limited in some cases.


Clarus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clarus Corp.
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
57,424,000
68,551,000
Net loss
b8,874,000
624,000
6mo sales
116,604,000
133,878,000
Net loss
b10,328,000
285,000
b-Included a writedown of $6.7 million of the investment in Optex Corp.


Maax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maax Inc.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
6,347,000
4,540,000
Net inc
b430,000
b345,000
Share earns
.08
.06
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $86,000 for the latest first quarter and $10,000 for year-ago period.


Star Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Star Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,021,000
10,471,000
Net loss
1,399,000
2,983,000
Shares outst
16,602,000
16,005,000
Yr rev
33,934,000
39,004,000
Net loss
4,862,000
b7,389,000
Shares outst
16,408,000
15,953,000


Bad Back Idles Mattingly as Yanks Fall
LEAD: In his most hopeful voice, Don Mattingly spoke tonight about missing just one game.


The Mark and the Pound Advance Against the Dollar
LEAD: The mark rose in foreign exchange markets yesterday, the first day of trading after the monetary union in East and West Germany over the weekend.
Demand for the British pound also remained strong.


Poorest Countries Seek Increases in Aid
LEAD: As the world's seven richest nations prepare for their annual economic summit meeting, to be held next week in Houston, the 42 poorest nations are knocking at the door to tell the haves what the have-nots would like to see come out of that exclusive gathering.


Rig Count Is Steady
LEAD: The number of rigs exploring for oil and natural gas in the United States slipped by only one last week, to a total of 1,020, Baker Hughes Inc. announced today.
A year ago the count was 817.


Company News;   Perry Drug Agrees To Acquire Stores
LEAD: Perry Drug Stores Inc. said it had signed an agreement with Reliable Drug Stores Inc. to acquire 24 more former Revco drugstores throughout Michigan.
Terms were not disclosed.


Wrong Surgery for Sick Schools
LEAD: For years, ''parental choice'' has been touted as a magic bullet to improve the beleaguered public schools.
Now, two scholars propose the ''ultimate'' choice plan - a deregulated free market in which public schools would rise or fall on their individual merits.


Cycling;   Rider Taking Classical Approach
LEAD: Somewhere between Mozart's ''Haffner'' Symphony (Kochel 385) and his ''Jupiter'' (K. 551), Gianni Bugno learned, allegro vivace, how to become a champion bicycle racer.


A Business Channel Fails
LEAD: The first European television business channel said last week that it was bankrupt and would go off the air.
''Intense negotiations with


Deal for Kay Is Valued at $410 Million
LEAD: Ratners Group P.L.C., the world's largest jewelry retailer, announced in London yesterday that as expected it would acquire Kay Jewelers Inc., the third-largest American jewelry chain, for about $410 million in stock.


Ruling Overturns a Zoning Law; Judge Stresses Affordable Housing
LEAD: In a case that may force restrictively zoned suburbs to open up, a state justice today invalidated an ordinance in North Salem, saying it ignored local and regional housing needs by failing to provide for affordable multifamily housing.


Trial of Christian Scientists In Son's Death Goes to Jury
LEAD: In the closing arguments of a manslaughter trial here, the prosecutor urged the jury today to set a clear standard of care for all children by convicting two parents who relied on prayer, rather than medicine, to treat their ill child.


WNYC Chief Moves To Reshape TV Station
LEAD: In his first 100 days as president of the WNYC Communications Group, Thomas B. Morgan has quietly begun to restructure New York City's television station to make it more responsive to the specific needs of local viewers.


Program Buying Helps to Lift Dow by 18.57
LEAD: Stocks perked up in the last half-hour yesterday, with traders attributing practically all of the gain to computerized program buying.


Interesting Software For the New PS/1
LEAD: AS far as hardware goes, the new PS/1 home computer from the International Business Machines Corporation is solid but unremarkable.


Designatronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Designatronics Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
8,828,000
6,449,000
Net inc
413,000
8,000
Share earns
.14
-
9mo sales
24,875,000
18,709,000
Net inc
735,000
184,000
Share earns
.25
.06


Cuban Dancer Wins World Ballet Contest
LEAD: A Cuban dancer has won first prize at the International Ballet Competition day while the principal dancer of the Houston Ballet has won the top award for women.


Zfax Image Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zfax Image Corp. (OTC)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
192,315
49,043
Net loss
482,236
350,779
Shares outst
2,335,880
1,669,842
The company said revenues increased due to higher sales at its Dallas retail store.


Source of Hair Regeneration Found at an Unexpected Site
LEAD: In a discovery that turns the prevailing wisdom about hair growth on its head, researchers have found that the source of new hair cells lies not at the very base of the hair, as scientists had long assumed, but further up the hair follicle, just below the scalp.


Campeau Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Campeau Corp.
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,261,000,000
2,230,000,000
Net loss
b80,000,000
c67,000,000
b-Included a $47 million gain on the sale of assets and a $21 million restructuring charge.
c-Included $98 million gain on the sale of assets.


Seven Oaks International reports earnings for Year April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seven Oaks International (OTC)
Year April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
21,851,000
29,050,000
Net loss
b2,602,000
c6,833,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $229,000 and after an extraordinary credit of $173,000, or 3 cents a share.


Scotland Yard Studies Sotheby's Silver Offering
LEAD: Scotland Yard is investigating the handling of 14 pieces of ancient Roman silver that Sotheby's is trying to sell for Lord Northampton and his family trust.


SK Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SK Technologies Corp. (OTC)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
801,314
469,650
Net loss
959,259
209,991


Freer Australian Trade
LEAD: Australia and New Zealand have lifted all trade barriers in a move to make them a stronger force in the Asia-Pacific region. ''Our future lies in open economies trading with each other in a free and fair way,'' said the Prime Ministers of both countries, Bob Hawke of Australia and Geoffrey Palmer of New Zealand, in a joint statement released today.


Chronicle
LEAD: In what must have been a most unusual service at the 300-year-old St.
Paul's Cathedral in London, Fozzy Bear, Gonzo and Oscar the Grouch attended yesterday's memorial for JIM HENSON, who gave them life.


The Media Business: Advertising - Addenda;   Ayer Promotions
LEAD: Ayer said it had promoted four executives to senior vice president: Donna F. Tuttle, chairman and chief executive of Ayer/Tuttle in Los Angeles; Mitchell Burg and Suzanne I. Kaufman, associate media directors, and Ephraim D. Goldstein, assistant director of marketing planning.
Ayer also named as a director Glenn E.


Review/Dance;   Temptation, Indolence, Exuberance And Loss
LEAD: The program presented by the Nanette Bearden Contemporary Dance Theater on Friday night at the Pace Downtown Theater was a good mix of dances, from the Talley Beatty classic ''Mourners Bench'' to two inventive pieces by Walter Rutledge, the company's assistant artistic director.


Stronger Warning for Women Is Required on Aspirin Labels
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration today announced a stronger warning against use of over-the-counter aspirin products by women in the last three months of pregnancy unless directed by a physician.


Stockholder Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stockholder Systems (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,000,000
7,000,000
Net inc
1,800,000
1,300,000
Share earns
.44
.33
Yr rev
25,700,000
22,100,000
Net inc
3,600,000
3,700,000
Share earns
.90
.92


West Germany Export Leader
LEAD: West Germany was the world's biggest exporter for the first three months of 1990, regaining the lead from the United States, the International Monetary Fund reported on Sunday.


New Delay for Options Plan
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission has asked the nation's five options exchanges to delay listing and trading stock options that are already traded by another exchange until October.


Economy Expanded in June, Says Survey of Managers
LEAD: A report by The National Association of Purchasing Management said the nation's economy continued to expand in June for the third straight month, a further sign of improved conditions in manufacturing industries.


William S. McChesney 3d, Retired Executive, 81
LEAD: William S. McChesney 3d, a retired vice president of the Aluminum Company of America, died on Saturday at Boca Raton Hospital in Florida.
He was 81 years old and lived in Delray Beach, Fla., and Sewickley, Pa.


Easy Goer Draws Rail for Suburban
LEAD: Easy Goer worked five furlongs in 58 1/5 seconds yesterday, then drew post No. 1 as a field of seven was entered for the $350,000 Suburban Handicap tomorrow at Belmont.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on June 18 about the Bolshoi Theater in Moscow misidentified Yuri Grigorovich.
He is the artistic director of the Bolshoi Ballet, not the Bolshoi Theater.
The ballet company is part of the Bolshoi Theater, whose general director is Vladimir Kokonin.


Designcraft Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Designcraft Industries Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,885,000
9,145,000
Net loss
24,000
738,000
The company said the decrease in sales in the latest first quarter was due primarily to the sale of various businesses during fiscal 1990.


New Retail Concepts Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Retail Concepts Inc. (OTC)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
28,865,625
3,000,652
Net inc
b1,539,322
b216,685
Share earns
.27
.05
Shares outst
5,679,435
4,681,381
b-Included a tax credit of $645,000, or 11 cents a share, and $112,000, or 3 cents a share, for the latest and year- ago periods, respectively.


Meadow Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meadow Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
9,669,000
11,518,000
Net loss
296,000
89,000
Shares outst
102,457,000
78,900,000
Sales represent net sales.
Results for 1989 are pro forma and assume Direct Action Marketing Inc.


Board of Education: 2 Veterans and 5 Newcomers
LEAD:
Gwendolyn C. Baker


First Full View of Extinct Worm-Like Animal
LEAD: SCIENTISTS have discovered the first complete fossils of an armored worm-like animal that lived 550 million years ago.
Until now, paleontologists have only been able to guess at the anatomy of these early complex creatures, known as halkieriids, by piecing together fragments of scales and shells.


Tennis;   Status: Undefeated. Future: Rosy. Age: 10.
LEAD: At a time when tennis prodigies seem to be surfacing every week, the latest hot prospect is a 10-year-old Californian, Venus Williams.


WordPerfect Offspring
LEAD: SUCCESSFUL programs create little industries of their own.
Add-on software offers features the original programmers forgot, or different ways to do the same things.
Books supplement and frequently improve on the manuals, or provide information for people using illegal copies who never had an official manual in the first place.


After 6 Hours, Jury Acquits Sharpton of All Charges
LEAD: After deliberating for less than six hours, a jury acquitted the Rev.
Al Sharpton last night of all charges of fraud and larceny brought by the State Attorney General's office.


Hubbardton Journal;   State Wary Of Giving Old Battles New Life
LEAD: If the fight on July 7, 1777, was the Battle of Hubbardton, the current one may come to be known as the Battle of the Battle of Hubbardton.


Company News;   U S Sprint to Offer Soviet Service
LEAD: Sprint International has reached agreement with the Soviet Government on a joint venture for a switching center in Moscow to provide high-speed data communications.
The center, a joint effort of U S Sprint and Central Telegraph of the Soviet Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, will connect with the Sprintnet international data network and provide


Transtechnology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transtechnology Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
62,352,000
71,621,000
Net loss
b4,627,000
c5,257,000
Share earns
-
1.02
Yr rev
198,510,000
219,034,000
Net loss
b8,442,000
c9,244,000
Share earns
-
1.80


Company News;   MCI Credit Rating Is Downgraded
LEAD: The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation downgraded its rating on some of the MCI Communications Corporation's debt.
The credit-rating agency said it lowered by one notch its ratings on MCI's senior unsecured debt and subordinated debt because of the acquisition of Telecom USA Inc., another long-distance phone company.


International American Homes reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International American Homes (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
35,525,000
49,024,000
Net loss
b21,265,000
d915,000
Share earns
-
.12
Shares outst
6,850,000
7,947,000
Yr rev
158,908,000
165,120,000
Net loss
c26,804,000
d4,185,000
Share earns
-
.53
Shares outst
7,117,000
7,947,000


New York State New Competitor for OTB
LEAD: After an all-night marathon of negotiations and over the bitter opposition of some New York City officials, the State Legislature today approved far-reaching changes in New York's regulation of horse racing that will clear the way for competition to the city's virtual monopoly over offtrack betting.


Schwartz Brothers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schwartz Brothers Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
29,884,343
23,683,062
Net inc
131,012
107,022
Share earns
.07
.06


Orenda Forest Products reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orenda Forest Products
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
18,434,300
19,574,400
Net inc
b1,279,400
c894,000
Share earns
.20
.15
b-Included a $251,800 charge from the sale of certain mineral properties.
c-Included $38,300 special gain.


Coney Island Man Arrested In Murder of Soviet Doctor
LEAD: A 22-year-old Coney Island man has been charged with robbery and second-degree murder in the death of a Soviet cardiologist in Forest Hills, Queens, last month, the police said yesterday.


Modernization by Board of Elections Serves New York Voters
LEAD: To the Editor:


Odyssey Entertainment Ltd. reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Odyssey Entertainment Ltd. (OTC)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
14,013,583
5,765,026
Net loss
b3,167,331
b3,498,119
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $797,646 for the latest year and $1,184,589 for 1989.


Setup Went On as Barry Said No, a Witness Tells Drug Trial
LEAD: The woman present at the Vista Hotel when prosecutors say Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. smoked crack testified today that the Mayor told her seven times that he did not want any drugs.


Developer's Woes Reported
LEAD: Only days after bankers required Donald J. Trump to turn over some measure of control as part of a loan pact to rescue him from financial disaster, another big New York developer is reported to be surrendering part of his interest in two trophy properties.


Company News;   Prime Inns
LEAD: Prime Motor Inns Inc. said it expects a substantial after-tax loss for the fiscal year that ended Saturday because it is establishing additional reserves and writing down assets.
It said the amount of the reserves and adjustments would be $150 million, of which $80 million was related to its investment in certain securities of Servico Inc.


American Science &amp; Engineerng Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Science &amp; Engineerng Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,994,000
6,286,000
Net loss
1,609,000
b53,000
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
3,725,000
3,753,000
Yr rev
18,449,000
24,804,000
Net loss
2,092,000
b400,000
Share earns
-
.11
Shares outst
3,725,000
3,724,000


Carnival Cruise reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carnival Cruise (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
325,500,000
284,700,000
Net inc
54,600,000
41,600,000
Share earns
.41
.31
6mo rev
611,900,000
516,400,000
Net inc
79,800,000
87,900,000
Share earns
.59
.65
The company said the decline in net income in the latest 6-month period is attributable to lower results during the first quarter when Holland America's Westerdam was out of service for the entire quarter and the carnivale was out for 6 weeks undergoing a major refurbishment.


Restrictions Put on Right To a Lawyer
LEAD: Reversing a decision that had made New York's right to legal counsel the most far-reaching in the nation, the state's highest court ruled today that representation by a lawyer could be restricted in some cases.


Company News;   300 Railway Workers Cut At Santa Fe
LEAD: The Santa Fe Pacific Corporation handed layoff notices to 300 Santa Fe Railway Company employees today and said it would cut the railroad's work force by an additional 1,200, or about 7.5 percent, by the end of 1992.


QUEBEC STRUGGLES TO FIND NEW ROLE
LEAD: These days, Quebec is a little like a partner in a marriage who concludes that the relationship has failed but finds divorce to be too costly.
Less drastic measures, like legal separation, are never as cut-and-dried, or as cathartic.


Warrentech reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Warrentech
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
17,126,287
13,472,093
Net inc
896,551
471,176
Shares outst
119,566,924
122,836,520
Share earnings are less than one cent.
Revenues represent net revenues.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TRACK AND FIELD
Briton Sets Javelin Record
Steve Backley of Britain set a world record for the javelin throw yesterday in Sweden with a toss of 293 feet 11 inches in his first throw at a meet in Stockholm's Olympic Stadium.
Backley surpassed the mark of 293-1, set by Patrik Boden of Sweden earlier this year in the United States.


Company News;   Rothmans to Buy Dutch Company
LEAD: Rothmans International P.L.C. said it had agreed to buy the Dutch pipe and cigarette tobacco company Theodorus Niemeyer B.V. from Gallaher Ltd., a subsidiary of American Brands Inc., for 245 million guilders, or about $130 million.
Niemeyer is mainly engaged in making fine cut and pipe tobaccos under such trademarks as Samson, Javaanse Jongens, Sail and


Galagraph Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Galagraph Ltd.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
363,382
470,183
Net loss
255,221
10,431


Capriati Doesn't Measure Up to Graf
LEAD: She lost, but lost with a grateful smile, too exhilarated by her lofty surroundings and venerable opponent to be very sorry about the way her Wimbledon adventure came to a halt.


Herbert L. Bruce, 89, Black Tammany Chief
LEAD: Herbert L. Bruce, the first black Democratic district leader to be elected in New York City, died Sunday at New York Hospital.
He was 89 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Shorewood Packaging reports earnings for Qtr to April 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shorewood Packaging (OTC)
Qtr to April 28
1990
1989
Revenue
35,238,000
33,589,000
Net inc
3,617,000
3,868,000
Share earns
.28
.30
Shares outst
13,150,000
13,103,000
Yr rev
139,330,000
127,136,000
Net inc
16,151,000
15,000,000
Share earns
1.23
1.15
Shares outst
13,129,000
13,071,000


PATRIARCH BEGINS 8-CITY TOUR OF U.S.
LEAD: The Ecumenical Patriarch Dimitrios I of Constantinople, the spiritual leader of more than 250 million Eastern Orthodox Christians, urged America to ''lead a moral and spiritual rebirth for the good of mankind'' as he arrived in Washington yesterday for a monthlong visit to the United States.


International Semi-Tech Miroelectronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Semi-Tech Miroelectronics Inc.
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
59,800,000
-
Net inc
1,439,000
721,000
Share earns
.11
.07
The latest first quarter's revenue figures included revenues from 100 percent of the Canadian operations and 41 percent of the equity interest of Semi-Tech Microelectronics (Far East) Ltd.


Review/Music;   Sacred and Contemporary From Russia
LEAD: One of a music lover's great joys is to discover a rich and unfamiliar vein of literature.
So for one listener, the concert by Nikolai Kachanov's Russian Chamber Chorus (of New York) on Thursday evening in the St.
James Chapel of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine offered among its many piquant pleasures a particular gratification.


Joseph C.R. Licklider Dies at 75; Foresaw New Uses for Computers
LEAD: Dr.
J.C.R.
Licklider, an early computer scientist who was credited with pioneering work that established the basis for concepts like time sharing and resource sharing, died last Tuesday at Symmes Hospital in Arlington, Mass.
He was 75 years old and lived in Arlington.


Citizens Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Utilities (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
87,995,114
78,202,032
Net inc
19,447,301
17,092,901
Share earns
.44
.37


Dalmys (Canada) Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dalmys (Canada) Ltd.
Qtr to May 26
1990
1989
Sales
34,100,000
36,700,000
Net loss
655,000
b123,000
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Nantucket Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nantucket Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to June 2
1990
1989
Sales
9,783,550
12,146,332
Net inc
272,383
615,629
Share earns
.11
.25
Shares outst
2,462,387
2,438,308


Firstcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstcorp Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
6,797,000
853,000
Yr net loss
b9,527,000
15,454,000
b-After a cumulative effect of an accounting change of $1,603,000.


More Than One Way to Aid Khmer Rouge
LEAD: To the Editor:


Business Digest
LEAD:
Companies


Evolution in Europe;   With Nonreaders Gone, Marxism's Journal Fails
LEAD: One of the world's most widely circulated unread magazines, Problems of Peace and Socialism, is capitulating before the problems that have uprooted Communism and is giving up publication.
It is also ceding the handsome building that the former Communist Government confiscated from the Roman Catholic


Brenda Lansdown, Who Devised a Way To Teach, Dies at 86
LEAD: Brenda Lansdown, a retired professor of education who introduced new teaching methods in China, died on Sunday at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
She was 86 years old and lived in Cambridge, Mass.
The cause of death was pneumonia, said Harriet Harvey, a friend.


Tennis;   At Wimbledon, Garrison Ends Seles's Streak
LEAD: Zina Garrison, on a diet of disappointment from the start of the year in which she had pegged herself as long overdue for a Grand Slam victory, earned a visit to her second Wimbledon semifinal today by outlasting Monica Seles, the French Open champion, 3-6, 6-3, 9-7.


An American Takes Aim At Reign of Dry Italian Pasta
LEAD: UNLIKE most foods, when it comes to pasta, fresh is not always better.
And with dry, factory-made pasta, imported usually is better than domestic.
Until now.


Jurors in Sharpton Trial Had Doubts Over Funds
LEAD: The jurors in the fraud and larceny trial of the Rev.
Al Sharpton voted to acquit the minister in six hours on Monday because the prosecutors had failed to prove that he had benefited from the $250,000 he was accused of having stolen, two jurors said yesterday in interviews.


Scarce Metal Hits $7,000 An Ounce
LEAD: The price of rhodium, a little-known but environmentally important precious metal, soared by $1,000, to a record $7,000 an ounce today, and some analysts expect the metal to climb higher before speculative pressures subside.


Chronicle
LEAD: MENACHEM BEGIN was recovering yesterday in Shaarei Tzedek Hospital in Jerusalem after an operation to repair a fractured hip.
He is expected to make a complete recovery, said the hospital's director, DR.
YONATHON HALEVY.
It was the former Prime Minister's second hospital stay since May, when he was hospitalized for two weeks with pneumonia.


Safety Board Blames Captain In '89 Jet Crash in East River
LEAD: Transportation Safety Board today put the blame for the crash last year of USAir Flight 5050 squarely on the plane's captain, saying he had failed to take several actions that would have prevented the jet from skidding off the end of the runway at La Guardia Airport.


American Rice reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Rice
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
190,196
-
Net inc
153,000
-
Share earns
.01
-
The company said comparable figures are unavailable; company commenced operations on April 30, 1988.
The company also said for the 11 months, April 30, 1988 to March 31, 1989, net income was $84,000, or 1 cent per share, on sales of $180,163.


Hold the Fireworks
LEAD: The biggest fireworks display I ever saw contained a gigantic portrait of Lyndon Johnson's face.
It was at the close of the Democratic National Convention that nominated Johnson for President in Atlantic City during the summer of 1964.


Chronicle
LEAD: CALVIN KLEIN was admitted to New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center last night for observation and treatment of broken ribs and lacerations to the head after he fell from a horse, said MARY CIALONE, night administrator at the hospital.
She said the fashion designer suffered the spill in the Hamptons and was flown from Long Island by helicopter.


Solidarity Experiences Founders Syndrome
LEAD: To the Editor:


Town Weighs Whether Sand Is Everyone's
LEAD: To Jack Canning, a real-estate man from New Hope, Pa., and his wife, Linda, who raises miniature horses, the seashore is a special place, almost mystical.


Prison Term In Fraud Case
LEAD: The president of a small military contractor based here was sentenced today to three years in prison and a $750,000 fine for his role in a 10-year scheme to avoid testing bolts that the company manufactured for use on military aircraft.


And Thank God It's Wednesday?
LEAD: FOR many Americans, today is like a firecracker that fizzled in mid air.


A.T.&amp;T. Buying 3 Units of Western Union
LEAD: The Western Union Corporation, the financially troubled company that pioneered telegraph and telex services, announced yesterday that it had agreed to sell its telex, computer mail and computer data transmission services to A.T.&amp;T. for $180 million.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Israel's Envoy to Egypt Quits, Citing Rightists
LEAD: Israel's Ambassador to Egypt, Shimon Shamir, resigned today, saying he could not reconcile his political views with those of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's new right-wing Government.


Saks Hasn't Met Its Goals In First Half, Memo Says
LEAD: The first-half performance of Saks Fifth Avenue has fallen short of its own projections and those of its new owner, a confidential memorandum shows.


David Byrne Concert Today
LEAD: David Byrne and his Pan-American band, Rei Momo, are to give the final concert of their tour at 3 P.M. today at Rumsey Playfield in the middle of Central Park at 72d Street.
The concert, which was rained out on Sunday, is presented by Summerstage (360-2777); admission is free.


Macy's Will Open In Providence in '93
LEAD: R. H. Macy &amp; Company announced plans to open a new department store in Providence, R.I., in the autumn of 1993.
The new Macy's will be one of the main anchors of a shopping complex under development called Providence Place in the city's Capital Center District.
The store is expected to employ about 500 people.


Chronicle
LEAD: KATHARINE HEPBURN, an amateur painter since the 1930's, has offered one of her paintings to an auction that will benefit a wildlife organization in East Lyme, Conn.
Miss Hepburn said it is the only work she has ever permitted to be sold or, for that matter, to be seen by the public.


Dixieland Jazz Concert
LEAD: A free outdoor performance of Dixieland jazz is to be given by the Smith Street Society Band at 1 P.M. today in front of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The museum is to be open today from 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.
Admission is $6 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: 879-5500.


World Cup '90;   Jubilant Argentines Fill Streets
LEAD: Seconds after Sergio Goycochea smothered Italy's last penalty shot, ecstatic Argentines poured into the streets in the capital city today to celebrate Argentina's advance to the World Cup soccer final.


Picnics: Declaring the Spirit of a People
LEAD: IT is a meal for our times - providing at once a respite from frenzy even as it affords the opportunity for social tolerance.
It is the picnic.
And on this Day of Independence, there is perhaps no more appropriate way to celebrate.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on June 23 about the Tobu Department Store Company of Japan misstated the value of the assets of the Tobu Railway Group, which owns it.
Tobu Railway has assets of more than 700 billion yen, or about $4.6 billion, not $700 million.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 29
June 22
June 30
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.1
7.7
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
2.9
Gasoline stocks
215.3
216.2
219.9
Distillate stocks
110.1
109.8
100.6
Crude imports, daily
6.6
6.5
5.6
Product imports, daily
2.1
3.0
2.2
Crude stocks
384.3
383.9
333.9
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
90.7
87.6
91.2


Dataflex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dataflex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
18,500,000
17,602,000
Net inc
775,000
534,000
Share earns
.22
.22
Shares outst
3,500,000
2,448,000


Africa Study of AIDS Drug Finds Immune-Cell Rise
LEAD: A new study in Africa by the World Health Organization has shown that a drug chewed as a wafer boosted the number of immune cells in a small number of AIDS patients whose immune cells had been damaged by the AIDS virus, an official of the international agency said yesterday.


Town Is a Manchester By a Different Name
LEAD: It's official.
Manchester has been renamed Manchester-by-the-Sea, to distinguish it from the four other New England Manchesters and 18 other Manchesters in the United States.


Baseball;   Mattingly Improves but Stays on Sidelines
LEAD: Don Mattingly's sore and stiff back showed improvement today, but the Yankee first baseman won't attempt a return to the lineup until Friday and may be asked to wait until after the three-day break for the All-Star Game.


The Rout of the Ozone Killers
LEAD: The chemicals that destroy the earth's fragile protective layer of ozone will be largely phased out by the year 2000 under an agreement reached at a 93-nation meeting in London last week.
That's a costly but vital step in averting a significant threat to the global environment.


World Cup '90;   England Asks for Heart, Spirit, Luck
LEAD: Their swagger has been unmistakable throughout the World Cup.
Since the final rounds of the tournament began last month, West Germany's players have talked, acted and performed as if they always knew they would advance at least this far, to the semifinals.


China and Indonesia Sign a Pact To Restore Ties Severed in 60's
LEAD: China and Indonesia signed an agreement today to restore diplomatic relations next month, ending a 23-year rift between the two most populous nations in East Asia.


USAir Terminal
LEAD: biUSAir Group Inc. said it planned to develop a new $250 million terminal at Philadelphia International Airport.
The 41-gate terminal is scheduled for completion in the third quarter of 1993.
USAir said preliminary plans call for 22 jet gates, some capable of handling wide-bodied aircraft, and 19 gates for its USAir Express regional airline affiliate.


Melville Acquires Toy Store Chain
LEAD: The Melville Corporation announced an agreement yesterday to buy the assets of Circus World Toy Stores Inc. for about $95 million in cash.
The purchase of the 330 Circus World stores from Greenman Brothers Inc. will expand Melville's position in toy retailing.
Circus World will become a part of its Kay


Growing Up in Flanders When the Nazis Came
LEAD: The problem with being an author who writes in Dutch, as Hugo Claus does, is that parts of the world outside the Netherlands and Belgium may never find out you exist, let alone ever read your books.


Evolution in Europe;   Little Opposition Expressed by the West to Bush's Plans to Revamp NATO
LEAD: President Bush's proposal to define NATO's nuclear arms as ''weapons of last resort'' and to make other changes in alliance strategy has stirred considerable concern in some Western European capitals, but no outright opposition.


Child-Custody Cases Test Frontiers of Family Law
LEAD: Michele G. and Nancy S., a lesbian couple, had lived together for 11 years when they decided to rear children.
Ms.
G. found a sperm donor, took part in the artificial insemination of Ms.
S. and was present in June 1980 at the delivery of a baby girl.
On the child's birth certificate, Ms.
S. was listed under ''mother,'' Ms.


Evolution in Europe;   Yugoslav Mass Grave Linked to Communists
LEAD: A mass grave discovered last week in northern Yugoslavia may contain the remains of a large number of people executed by the victorious Communist guerrillas in 1945, a Croatian newspaper reported today.


Johnson Products Co.  Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnson Products Co.  Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
9,652,000
7,680,000
Net inc
b759,000
c121,000
Share earns
.19
.03
9mo sales
23,964,000
20,894,000
Net inc
b1,387,000
c1,901,000
Share earns
.35
.48
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $277,000, or 7 cents a share for the quarter and $510,000, or 13 cents a share for the 9 months.


Call the Second Amendment Freedom Insurance;   Unequal Laws
LEAD: To the Editor:


Evolution in Europe;   German Unity by Year's End Now Almost Certain
LEAD: The East German Government's decision to call for all-German elections on Dec. 2 now makes it almost certain that Germany will be reunited by the end of this year, West German Government officials say.


Credit Extension For Control Data
LEAD: A group of banks led by the Bank of America has extended its credit agreement with the Control Data Corporation and offered expanded borrowing privileges to the computer company.
The agreement, first signed in July 1988, would have expired on Saturday.


Patten Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Patten Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Revenue
21,010,000
31,425,000
Net loss
9,832,000
c41,000
Yr rev
101,195,000
136,767,000
Net loss
b12,894,000
c8,601,000
Share earns
-
.50
b-Included an accounting adjustment of $2,500,000, or 14 cents a share, from extinguishment of debt.


'Yaaahh!' Fresh Air Vacations Start
LEAD: Cheryl Quaye, station manager for the Fresh Air Fund, surveyed the swarm of children at the Port Authority Bus Terminal in Manhattan yesterday morning and decided the time had come.
Lifting her bullhorn, she bellowed, ''Are you ready to go?''


Call the Second Amendment Freedom Insurance;   Archaic Rights?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Beeba's Creations Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beeba's Creations Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
46,898,034
39,358,141
Net loss
b5,296,032
c1,598,139
Share earns
-
.35
Shares outst
4,443,053
4,602,813
9mo sales
114,716,310
93,163,278
Net loss
b3,883,364
c3,006,086
Share earns
-
.65
Shares outst
4,587,035
4,600,852


Evolution in Europe;   Coat of Arms Is Restored
LEAD: Parliament voted overwhelmingly today to replace the Communist state emblem with Hungary's traditional coat of arms.


New Airbus Order
LEAD: The French state-owned domestic airline Air Inter has signed a contract with Airbus Industrie for seven Airbus A321 planes and has taken options on eight more, Airbus Industrie said in a statement.
Air Inter also exercised its five remaining options on the A320 model.
The airline has ordered a total of 24 Airbus A320's.


Lima Journal;   What's Hawked at Curbside? Dolares
LEAD: With his white jogging shoes padding on the pavement, Fernando Pantigoso loped alongside a slowing car and offered the day's special - the United States dollar at 65,000 intis.


After Her Acquittal, Marcos Is Now Facing Civil Cases
LEAD: Rejoicing in court and at church and at restaurants and parties, and in front of an endless procession of cameras, Imelda Marcos has expressed her gratitude in the last two days to the American justice system for clearing her of criminal charges.


Markets Closed
LEAD: Markets for trading stocks, bonds, currency and commodities will be closed today in the United States in observance of the Fourth of July.
They will re-open tomorrow.


Ousted U.S. Research Leader to Join Computer Consortium
LEAD: Craig I. Fields, who was removed as director of the Defense Department's long-range research agency in April, will become the No. 2 executive and eventually the head of the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation, a computer industry consortium in Austin, Tex.


Federated's New Buying Strategy
LEAD: Federated Stores Inc. is developing a new, more centralized buying strategy that could save it millions of dollars and enable it to lower its prices.
But the approach, which is central to Federated's plan to emerge from the company's five-and-a-half-month-old bankruptcy, could reduce the autonomy of the company's nine chains, which include Bloomingdale's and Abraham &amp; Straus, and make their merchandise more nearly uniform.


World Cup '90;   Argentina Eliminates Italy on Penalty Kicks
LEAD: Hot lava has gushed from Mount Vesuvius and earthquakes have rattled the city and foreign navies have sailed into the harbor, and now this city will be known throughout Italy for a sporting version of disaster: the defeat of the Italian national soccer team.


Wine Talk
LEAD: It seems only fitting, on Independence Day that we forgo what used to be known as the Old World and set out a few of our own good wines for consideration.
Traditionally, this is an occasion to talk about ''picnic wines'' and such.
The fact is that even in summer we sit down fully clothed at a table for most meals, and if wine is drunk it is not going to differ markedly from what we drink in winter.


Strawberry Hits 2 as Mets' 4 Homers Back Viola's 12th Victory
LEAD: After blitzing their way through June with 21 victories in 28 games, the Mets made it two straight in July last night when they hammered the Houston Astros, 12-0.
And they did it with a barrage of epic hitting that included four home runs, two of which banked against the scoreboard in remote right field.


Independence Day
LEAD:
FIREWORKS
9:20 P.M. on the East River.
F.D.R.
Drive will be closed for viewing from 14th to 42d Street form 7 P.M. until after midnight.
NEW YORK
Government offices: Federal, state and minicipal offices closed.
Post offices: Express mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.


Half of Cities in U.S. Say Revenue Fails To Cover Spending
LEAD: More than half the nation's cities and towns expect spending to exceed revenue in the current budget year and two-thirds of the municipalities say budget problems are worse than a year ago, according to a survey released Monday.


Critic's Notebook;   As Tanglewood Marks a 50th, Let the Cavils Not Be Sounded
LEAD: Coming up on Friday: the 50th anniversary of the Berkshire Music Center at the Tanglewood Festival.
So it's memory time - memories not only of the beginnings of the Music Center but also of the festival itself.


Dow-Datatimes Deal
LEAD: Dow Jones Information Services and Datatimes have agreed to a joint marketing and service deal to combine their electronic libraries, the two companies anounced on Monday.
Datatimes is a subsidiary of the Oklahoma Publishing Company, with a minority share owned by Dow Jones &amp; Company.
The arrangement will allow researchers to search electronically through the computerized files of 640 newspapers, magazines, news services and financial data sources.


Western Microwave Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Microwave Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
2,275,000
2,502,000
Net loss
621,000
225,000
Shares outst
1,405,000
1,431,000
6mo sales
5,059,000
5,178,000
Net loss
311,000
214,000
Shares outst
1,405,000
1,479,000


Iran-Iraq Talks Produce Progress On Ending Long Confrontation
LEAD: The Foreign Ministers of Iraq and Iran today held their first direct talks since their 1988 cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war.
The talks could open the way to a summit meeting between Presidents Saddam Hussein of Iraq and Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran and the negotiation of a peace treaty to end 10 years of hostility.


Memorial for John Faulk
LEAD: A memorial concert for John Henry Faulk, the Southern humorist and radio personality, is to be held at 5:30 P.M. on Monday at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street.
In 1962, Mr.
Faulk, who had a show on CBS radio, won a libel suit against Aware Inc., which was devoted to alerting broadcasters and advertisers about those in the entertainment industry it felt had ties to the Communist Party.


Food Notes
LEAD:
American Cheese


Humanitarian Aid for Romania Is Best
LEAD: To the Editor:


China Dissidents Lose Sway in Exile


Book Notes
LEAD: The Other Burton Novels on the best-seller list are usually written by well-known authors, but the nonfiction list almost always includes books by little-known authors or books that survived small first printings. ''The Closing of the American Mind,'' by Allan Bloom (Simon &amp; Schuster), and ''The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers,'' by Paul Kennedy (Random House), had first printings of fewer than 10,000 copies.


Hillenbrand Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hillenbrand Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 2
1990
1989
Revenue
278,507,000
257,021,000
Net inc
20,401,000
20,456,000
Share earns
.56
.55
6mo rev
557,822,000
494,585,000
Net inc
40,251,000
36,217,000
Share earns
1.09
.97


Woman in the News;   New Chief for School Board; Gwendolyn Calvert Baker
LEAD: Dr.
Gwendolyn Calvert Baker, elected yesterday as the new president of the New York City Board of Education, is an ardent champion of multicultural education, the idea that children can be taught to appreciate and respect the human coat of many colors.
It is a subject that was bred in the bone.


Bronx School Board Superseded
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday superseded a Bronx school board after it failed to name a superintendent or acting superintendent.


New Imcera President Seen as Heir Apparent
LEAD: The Imcera Group Inc., formerly the International Minerals and Chemical Corporation, yesterday named M. Blakeman Ingle as president and chief operating officer, making him the heir apparent.
The company also lost its chief financial officer, John A. Edwardson, who has been hired by the union group seeking to buy United


Oil Activity Has Shifted From U.S.
LEAD: For the first time, oil companies operating in the United States are spending more to look for oil abroad than at home, and most of their production and reserves are outside the United States, Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, the accounting firm, said yesterday.


Group Withdraws Offer for Talman
LEAD: An investor group dropped its $700 million offer for the Talman Home Federal Savings and Loan Association of Illinois, the state's largest savings institution.
Talman said in a statement that a Chicago-area banker, Harrison I. Steans, leader of the investment group, had abandoned the buyout because the savings and loan association's revised earnings projections fell below his original expectations.


It's Summertime, So Pass the Mayo
LEAD: MAYONNAISE is the sauce that holds summer together.
From potato salad to cole slaw to sandwiches, mayonnaise is the common chord, and as the mercury shoots up, so do its sales.


Track Fire Delays Subway Service 3 Hours
LEAD: Tens of thousands of homebound subway riders on the IRT suffered new disruptions yesterday when a track fire knocked out service north of 96th Street for almost three hours.


Fleet Norstar Sued By Shareholders
LEAD: Five shareholders are suing Fleet Norstar Financial Group Inc. and accusing it of concealing the extent of problem loans at the company's banks.
Three lawsuits filed in United States District Court in Providence contend the company's failure to make timely disclosure of its loan problems artificially inflated its profits and the price of its stock.


Notebook: Boxing;   Ex-Olympian Leaves Earlier Criticism Behind
LEAD: Riddick Bowe, the undefeated heavyweight (17-0, 15 knockouts), will headline his first network television card for CBS on Sunday against Art Tucker in Atlantic City.


Mentor Graphics Sees Profit Decline
LEAD: The Mentor Graphics Corporation said it expects to report second-quarter earnings of only 5 to 10 cents a share, down from 29 cents a year earlier.
Revenues of $100 million to $103 million are expected for the quarter, down from $106 million.
The company said the projected results would be significantly less than expected.


APSB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* APSB Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
451,000
361,000
Per share
.33
.26
6mo net inc
888,000
732,000
Per share
.65
.53


Drakewood Specializes In Interim Executives
LEAD: Temporary top executives are in vogue, and Ronald J. Diorio stands ready to supply them.


New Jersey Schools Get New Funds and New Commissioner


Evolution in Europe;   As Soviets Leave Hungary, Dispute Arises Over the Bill
LEAD: As they pull out of Hungary, Soviet troops are leaving behind a legacy that to Hungarians somehow befits the 45-year occupation - rows of grubby, rundown barracks, shoddy apartment buildings, fields of unexploded artillery shells, oil and other waste dumped directly into the ground.


Topics of The Times;   Fashion Report
LEAD: On a hot day last month a New Yorker who's run out of wardrobe went shopping along Lexington Avenue.
She didn't know what she wanted, so decided to look at what everyone else was wearing.
What she saw in one short block was this:


INSIDE
LEAD:
Liberian Rebels Advance
Liberian rebels reportedly moved toward the center of the capital in street-to-street fighting against Government troops.
Page 3.
Unrest Reported in Albania
Dozens of Albanians are reported to have taken refuge in foreign embassies, and troops are said to have opened fire to quell disorders.


Prices Rise in a Shortened Session
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds rose slightly yesterday and interest rates dipped at the close of an abbreviated trading session.


Call the Second Amendment Freedom Insurance;   Revolutionary Spirit
LEAD: To the Editor:


Factory Orders Up 2.1% in May
LEAD: Orders received by the nation's factories climbed a healthy 2.1 percent in May, the Commerce Department reported today, but the $5 billion rise was mainly attributed to higher production by auto makers worried about a possible strike this fall.


Marion R. Hart, 98; Made 7 Solo Flights Across the Atlantic
LEAD: Marion Rice Hart, a sportswoman and author who sailed a ketch around the world and in her later years made seven solo flights across the Atlantic, the last at 83 years old, died on Monday.
She was 98 years old and lived in Berkeley, Calif.
She previously lived in Washington and Manhattan.


NDC Automation reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NDC Automation
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,982,759
1,114,712
Net inc
63,899
b269,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
5,790,000
3,600,000
6mo rev
3,374,618
1,940,581
Net inc
71,924
b661,437
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
5,790,000
3,600,000


Banks With Stakes in Borrowers Are in Spotlight
LEAD: The eagerness shown recently by many bankers to restructure the debt of RJR Nabisco Inc. has put the spotlight on an unusual feature of the leveraged buyout phenomenon: banks that own equity stakes in their borrowers.


Lloyd W. Hazleton, 79, Biological Researcher
LEAD: Lloyd Walter Hazleton, retired president of Hazleton Laboratories Inc., a biotechnology research company, died on Monday at his home in McLean, Va.
He was 79 years old.
Dr.
Hazleton and his wife, Harriet, founded the company in 1946 on the grounds of an old country schoolhouse in Fairfax, Va.
It became one of the world's largest biological testing services, dealing with new chemicals and chemical compounds.


Metro Airlines Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metro Airlines Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
55,118,000
34,438,000
Net loss
4,231,000
9,151,000
Shares outst
6,098,000
5,931,000
Yr rev
194,562,000
147,452,000
Net loss
b19,504,000
c2,735,000
Shares outst
6,095,000
5,844,000


Review/Television;   The Patriotic Tradition: Effusing on Americana
LEAD: The Independence Day tradition of effusing over things American is honored tonight by ''On the Fourth of July with Charles Kuralt.'' The hourlong CBS News special at 10 P.M. is a quilt of swatches from the garrulous Mr.
Kuralt's reports of recent years for ''Sunday Morning'' and ''On the Road.''


Evolution in Europe;   Excerpts From Speeches at the Communist Party Congress
LEAD: Following are excerpts from speeches by Yegor K. Ligachev, Vladimir A. Kryuchkov and Eduard A. Shevardnadze today and Aleksandr N. Yakovlev on Monday to the Soviet Communist Party congress, as translated by The New York Times:
Yegor K. Ligachev
Politbury Member


Oil Rig Strikers Defy Norway
LEAD: Wildcat strikes on Norway's North Sea oil and gas platforms cut most production today in defiance of a back-to-work order by the Government.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
CBS Records, New York, a unit of Sony Corp., named Marvin Cohn president of CBS Music Publishing.


Court Ruling Encourages Affirmative Action
LEAD: A ruling by the Supreme Court that lucrative broadcast licenses may be distributed in a way that favors blacks and other minority members means that a variety of Federal programs requiring minority participation are now free from uncertainty and challenge, several legal scholars and civil rights lawyers say.


Bronx Woman Held in Death Of a Foster Child, 22 Months
LEAD: A 30-year-old Bronx woman was arrested last night and charged with second-degree murder in the death of her 22-month-old foster child, the police said.


Dow Rises 12.37 in Sluggish Trading
LEAD: Stocks advanced yesterday for the fourth straight session, but with many traders and investors stretching their Fourth of July holiday, activity continued sluggish and is expected to remain so at least until Monday.


Washington Talk;   On Taxes, Bush Shows None of His '88 Agility
LEAD: George Bush's 1988 campaign against Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis was widely seen as a model of sure-footed politics, a message a day, a theme a week, a relentless march to the White House.


Northwest Is Said to Study a Buyout of Eastern
LEAD: Northwest Airlines is pursuing a possible buyout of Eastern Airlines and is scheduled to hold talks with Eastern union representatives, a union official said yesterday.


Progress Made at Talks Between Two Koreas
LEAD: Senior officials from North Korea and South Korea resumed talks today and immediately reported progress in setting up a meeting between their Prime Ministers.


Champion Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to June 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Champion Enterprises Inc. (AMEX)
13wks to June 1
1990
1989
Sales
80,789,000
86,520,000
Net inc
711,000
b994,000
Share earns
.11
-
b-Net loss


Ruling on Allegheny Near
LEAD: United States Bankruptcy Judge Joseph Cosetti could confirm a bankruptcy reorganization plan for the Allegheny International Inc. as early as this week, officials close to the company and its creditors said today.


Officer Tells Jury of Finding Battered Jogger
LEAD: A New York City police officer quietly described to a rapt Manhattan jury yesterday the grisly scene when he turned the headlights of his radio car onto the blood-soaked body of a jogger who was raped and nearly beaten to death in Central Park last year.


McDonnell Douglas Close to Korean Pact
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said today that a final deal may be at hand for the Government to sell 120 of the company's F-18 fighter jets to South Korea.
The deal would be worth about $2.7 billion to McDonnell Douglas, which builds the attack fighter for the U.S.
Navy and also provides it to several foreign nations.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.31
8.34
N.A.
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.70
7.73
N.A.
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.59
7.60
N.A.
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.40
8.43
N.A.
30-YR.


Boxing;   Trump Tells of a Deal For Tyson vs. Douglas
LEAD: While Mike Tyson was losing his heavyweight title to James (Buster) Douglas last February in Tokyo, Donald Trump and Don King, promoter of both fighters, were apparently agreeing that Trump would get the live-site rights to a Douglas-Tyson rematch at Convention Hall, which adjoins Trump Plaza, in Atlantic


Baseball As a Potion
LEAD: The lockout that was the plague and scourge of America during much of the month of March seems to have receded into the mists of history, like the Peloponnesian War.
At most, a reference to it is occasionally made.


Selectronics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Selectronics Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
7,319,000
4,427,000
Net loss
2,724,000
2,058,000
Shares outst
36,135,014
35,340,946
Yr sales
32,905,000
21,581,000
Net loss
5,413,000
b45,000
Shares outst
35,473,290
17,423,568


Taj Mahal Casino Data
LEAD: The first operational quarter for Donald J. Trump's Taj Mahal Casino Resort, which opened in April, showed a pattern of earnings roughly in line with Atlantic City trends, analysts said yesterday.


Sidewalk Chalk-In Colors Harlem Plaza


Entrapment as Defense: Merely Showing That There Was a Trap Is Not Enough
LEAD: The videotape of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. smoking what prosecutors say is crack in a hotel room provides several openings for his lawyers to raise an entrapment defense, lawyers and legal scholars say.
But while it may be easy to raise the issue, it will be extremely difficult for Mr.
Barry's lawyers to succeed in making their case.


Sports People: Baseball;   3 Seek Exoneration
LEAD: Three players in the St.
Louis Cardinals organization have rejected an offer to settle charges of disorderly conduct that were filed against them as a result of a fight in Covington, Ky., the players' lawyer said yesterday.


Gustave Harrow Is Dead at 60; Assistant State Attorney General
LEAD: Gustave Harrow, a lawyer and former assistant New York State Attorney General who was a leader in shaping art legislation, died on Saturday.
He was 60 years old and lived in Forest Hills, Queens.


Chapman S. Root, 65, A Coca-Cola Bottler
LEAD: Chapman Shaw Root, a former chairman of the country's largest Coca-Cola bottling company, died on Monday at Emory Hospital in Atlanta.
He was 65 years old and lived in Ormond Beach.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Mr.
Root inherited Associated Coca-Cola Bottlers, which had plants in Pennsylvania, Florida, New York and New Jersey, from his grandfather.


Mecca Death Toll Is Confirmed; King Calls It Fate
LEAD: The Saudi Interior Minister, Prince Nayef, said today that 1,426 Muslim pilgrims died in a stampede in a pedestrian tunnel linking this city with a tent camp for pilgrims.


IEH Corp.  reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IEH Corp.
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,983,544
10,786,436
Net loss
b1,515,634
c52,308
Share earns
-
.02
b-Included a pre-tax charge of $759,167 from write-down of inventories.
c-Net income and included a pre-tax charge of $27,000 from settlement of litigation.


New Citizens Just in Time for Nation's Birthday


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
2-8


MANDELA HOPEFUL ON BRITISH TALKS
LEAD: Nelson Mandela expressed optimism today about the prospects of narrowing his differences with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher over economic sanctions against South Africa, and backed off from comments that had suggested that Britain should negotiate with the Irish Republican Army.


Crazy for the Red, White and Blue
LEAD: A man who went shopping for his wife's birthday last week bought her a shirt covered with stars and stripes - and marveled at social change.
Not many years ago, Abbie Hoffman was arrested for wearing a shirt like that.
Now the flag's bold graphics turn up everywhere, unchallenged.


Sanifill Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sanifill Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
6,275,000
5,307,000
Net inc
685,000
436,000
Share earns
.10
.06
The company said that due to a recent acquisition being accounted for as a pooling-of-interests, it has restated its earnings for the first quarter 1990.


Books of The Times;   Soviet and American Minds Meet in Their Essays
LEAD:
Openings
Original Essays by Contemporary Soviet and American Writers
Edited by Robert Atwan and Valery Vinokurov
Russian essays translated by Dudley Hagen.
Illustrated. 320 pages.
University of Washington Press. $40 ($24.95 paper).


Gold Advances for 5th Day; South Africa Tension Cited
LEAD: Gold futures prices advanced for the fifth straight day yesterday on the Commodity Exchange in New York in light trading stimulated by South African labor tensions and talk of buying interest from the Middle East.


The Hispanic Voice of New York: A 2d Theater Festival Chimes In
LEAD: Any doubts about the supremacy of New York as a prime center for Hispanic theater may be swept away with the arrival tomorrow of a new, and second, theater festival dedicated to the art of Spanish-language stagecraft.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article on Monday about the economic strength of a unified Germany misidentified an international real estate advisory firm.
It is Jones Lang Wootton.


Carolina Educator: Bold Leader or Big Spender?
LEAD: When James B. Holderman took over as president of the University of South Carolina in 1977, the school was considered by many as a ''good party school'' but very little else.


No Headline
LEAD: Because of holiday production requirements, The Times is printed today in two sections.
The Living Section begins on page 37 and Business Day on page 43.


Bassett Furniture Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bassett Furniture Industries Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
114,474,000
119,109,000
Net inc
5,746,000
5,145,000
Share earns
.71
.62
6mo sales
219,930,000
227,791,000
Net loss
969,000
b8,222,000
Share earns
-
.99


Carolina Freight Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolina Freight Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 16
1990
1989
Revenue
166,674,312
157,437,908
Net loss
911,571
b2,090,666
Share earns
-
.31
Shares outst
6,561,789
6,572,576
6mo rev
327,821,718
306,923,356
Net inc
65,624
3,610,798
Share earns
-
.54
Shares outst
6,560,591
6,577,540


German Art May Move To a Museum
LEAD: A plan has emerged from the Quedlinburg treasures court case in Dallas to move the contested artworks from two bank vaults to the Dallas Museum of Art where they may go on display, a museum official and a lawyer involved in the case said yesterday.


AIR TRAFFIC SLOWS IN FRENCH STRIKE
LEAD: Timing their action to coincide with the start of the European vacation season, French air traffic controllers began a three-day strike today that resulted in the cancellation of two-thirds of flights in and out of Paris.


Where's Mr. Bush on the Arts?
LEAD: ''Granted, the guy is walking a tightrope in a hurricane,'' a member of the art world said last week about John Frohnmayer, chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts. ''But he has to take a stronger position.''


Anatoly Grishchenko, Pilot at Chernobyl, 53
LEAD: A Soviet helicopter pilot who contracted leukemia after trying to douse the fire at the Chernobyl nuclear plant in 1986 has died, a hospital spokeswoman said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in the Sports section on Sunday about the baseball commissioner's investigation of George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, misstated the date of A. Bartlett Giamatti's death.
Mr.
Giamatti, who preceded Fay Vincent as commissioner, died on Sept. 1, 1989.


Corolla's Sales Surpass Model T's
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation's Corolla has passed Ford's Model T to become the second best-selling car in history, with more than 15 million produced, a company spokesman said today.


Eating Well
LEAD: FOR years Americans have been popping vitamin pills as if they were lemon drops: a little vitamin A because they don't eat enough yellow vegetables; some vitamin C in place of orange juice in the morning; a vitamin B12 pill for the vegetarian.


Bridge
LEAD: The least-exciting suit combination in the game, one would suppose, consists of a small tripleton opposite another small tripleton.
But it can be meaningful in the play, for reading the opponents' high-card points, and it can represent a serious problem in the bidding.


Mitchell Chasin Weds Amy Alkoff
LEAD: Amy Ellen Alkoff and Dr.
Mitchell Craig Chasin were married last evening at the Mamaroneck (N.Y.) Beach and Yacht Club by Rabbi Philip M. Weinberger and Cantor David Shiff.


Hungary Joint Ventures
LEAD: The number of joint-venture companies in Hungary has grown more than sixfold in the last year, official figures showed today.
The Ministry of International Economic Relations said there were 1,800 joint ventures in the country, compared with 280 at the end of June 1989.
Three hundred of them registered in


Town Built on Indian Land Lost Its Chance to Plan Ahead
LEAD: To the Editor:


Now, Custom Chips While You Wait
LEAD: In Silicon Valley, where fast-food restaurants and instant-copy centers are part of the way of life, the establishment of a same-day service for computer chips was only a matter of time.
This week, Chip Express, a spinoff of the Israeli electronics manufacturer Elron Electronic Industries, will open its doors in Santa Clara,


American List Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American List Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,663,667
1,904,618
Net inc
1,124,820
807,701
Share earns
.41
.29
Shares outst
2,761,732
2,771,732


Vitran Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vitran Corp.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
28,700,000
12,500,000
Net inc
b1,410,000
358,000
Share earns
.25
.06
6mo rev
53,700,000
24,300,000
Net inc
b2,130,000
576,000
Share earns
.38
.10
b-Included a $262,000 gain on the sale of property for the quarter, and the 6 months included a $517,000 gain on the sale of property.


Tennis;   Lendl Faces Another Little-Known Foe
LEAD: Both Ivan Lendl and Brad Pearce have declared themselves on a mission to win Wimbledon, but beyond the fact that each recently became the father of a baby daughter, the resemblance between them ends right there.


24 Women Say They Were Hit By Blown Darts
LEAD: At least 24 women have told the police that they were hit by a needle or dart in the last eight days while walking in midtown Manhattan, the police said yesterday.


Rowing;   U.S. Biggest Henley Entry
LEAD: The chance to compete at the Henley Royal Regatta continues to exert its attraction to American rowers, with the 30 entries from the United States representing the largest foreign contingent from the 17 nations competing at this year's regatta.


Trenton Education Chief Calls for New Creativity
LEAD: Dr.
John Ellis, New Jersey's new Education Commissioner, appealed today to all state residents to help find creative solutions to problems facing the state's troubled urban schools.


Stock Options At Chrysler
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation has granted some top managers stock options to keep their compensation packages competitive, a company spokesman said on Monday.


Economic Scene;   College Tuition: A Better Idea?
LEAD: THE problem: The earnings gap between those who went to college and those who did not has never been greater.
Yet tuition subsidies for all but the poorest students have become scarcer than Taittinger in Teheran.
Loans at market-rate interest are generally available to students who need them.
But not surprisingly, the children of financially pressed parents are loath to begin their working lives burdened with tens of thousands of dollars in education debts.


N and R Lines Will Undergo Repairs for Seven Weekends
LEAD: Riders of the N and R subway lines between Manhattan and Queens will face some trying weekends for the next month and a half as the Transit Authority halts service on sections of those lines for repair work, a spokesman for the agency said yesterday.


Chronicle
LEAD: ANDREW LLOYD WEBBER says that his marriage to SARAH BRIGHTMAN is over.
And that he has a new close friend.


Evolution in Europe;   SOVIET HARD-LINER ASSAILS GORBACHEV ON HIS LEADERSHIP
LEAD: The conservative pillar of the Politburo, Yegor K. Ligachev, roused delegates to the nationwide congress of the Communist Party today by deploring the five years of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's rule as a period of wavering and ''blind radicalism.''


Baseball;   Twins' Tapani Beats Clemens and Red Sox
LEAD: Kevin Tapani scattered seven hits in seven and one-third innings, outdueling Roger Clemens tonight as the Minnesota Twins beat the Boston Red Sox, 7-3.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: CORNISH hens are ideally suited for barbecuing or broiling.
They weigh only about a pound each, so they cook relatively quickly.
And they have firmer, moister flesh than chickens, so they don't dry out as quickly.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
ABB Asea Brown Boveri A.G., the Swedish-Swiss engineering group, said it had agreed to acquire CCC, a Spanish electrical engineering company that has seven plants and 2,900 employees.


Global Output Slowed in '89
LEAD: With economic growth at a virtual standstill in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, global economic output slowed last year and is expected to slow more this year, according to the United Nations World Economic Survey for 1990, published today.


Sports People: Baseball;   Padres' McKeon Wants One Fewer Hat
LEAD: Perhaps discouraged by the San Diego Padres' slump, in which the team has lost 14 of its last 19 games, Jack McKeon, the club's manager and vice president of baseball operations, said yesterday that he would like to give up his job in the dugout and concentrate on operational duties.


Merger Deals Down Sharply
LEAD: Merger activity fell sharply in the first half of the year because of the scarcity of financing, according to statistics released last week.


Baseball;   Leary Posts 11th Loss As Yankees Struggle
LEAD: A primer on Leary's difficult season: 10 losses when the night began, 6 defeats in his last 7 starting assignments and continued nonsupport by his teammates, who totaled 20 runs in his 3 victories but a mere 24 in his losses.


Rebates Are a Reason for Vehicle Price Increases by Big 3
LEAD: With sales sluggish, the Big Three domestic auto makers recently announced midyear price increases, a move that illustrates the curious economic logic that governs the pricing strategy in Detroit these days.


Dollar Ends Session Lower As Rise in Pound Continues
LEAD: The dollar ended mostly lower yesterday in quiet pre-holiday trading, while the British pound continued to gain strength on worldwide markets.


Bank Fund and C.D. Yields Are Lower for Fifth Week
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were off slightly for the week ended yesterday.
It was the fifth consecutive drop.


Topics of The Times;   CUNY Edges Yale
LEAD: The City University of New York, no stranger to distinction, has a new one: Its undergraduate body yields more corporate executives than any other school.


H.E.R.O.  Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* H.E.R.O.  Industries
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,541,561
2,519,583
Net inc
157,972
200,477
Share earns
.03
.04
6mo rev
4,576,059
4,404,665
Net inc
211,010
256,476
Share earns
.04
.05
Results are in Canadian dollars.


COST OF CLEANUP AT NUCLEAR SITES IS RAISED BY 50%
LEAD: The Energy Department today raised by 50 percent its estimate of the cost of cleaning up radioactive and toxic wastes at nuclear weapon production sites around the country over the next five years.


The Pop Life
LEAD: Connick the Versatile ''I've learned that people latch onto labels and stereotypes,'' Harry Connick Jr. said in a recent conversation. ''There was a period when I was asked in every single interview how I liked being the new Frank Sinatra.
It's nice to be compared to him, but with the release of my two new albums, I think people will soon realize that I do a lot more than interpret old songs.


T.H. Johnson, 46, West Point Professor And Director of Lab
LEAD: Col.
Thomas H. Johnson, director of the Science Research Laboratory at the United States Military Academy, died on June 26 at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington.
He was 46 years old and lived in Cornwall-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The academy reported that he died of lymphoma.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I was teaching second grade at a time Negroes were being called blacks, and my children had difficulty accepting that, because the word 'black' was so negative.
So we spent a whole year making beautiful things out of black construction paper and black materials.''
- Dr. Gwendolyn Calvert Baker, new president of the New York City Board of Education.


Brazilian Wonder Turns Out Bolivian
LEAD: One year after the lively song ''Lambada'' and the sensual dance of the same name arrived from Brazil and took first France and then Europe by storm, France's society of composers has ruled that the song is in fact Bolivian.


Evolution in Europe;   Albanians Take Refuge in Embassies
LEAD: Hundreds of Albanians rushed foreign embassies in that country's capital in recent days in an effort to flee the hard-line Communist country, diplomats said today.


Results Plus
LEAD:
CYCLING


Liberian Rebels Close In on City Center
LEAD: Liberian rebel forces were reported to be advancing slowly toward downtown Monrovia from the suburbs of the Liberian capital today in street-to-street fighting against Government forces.
A senior Bush Administration official said the Liberian President, Samuel K. Doe, was ''in deep trouble right now.


Raycomm Transworld IndusFtries reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raycomm Transworld IndusFtries (OTC)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
53,523,000
55,938,000
Net inc
729,000
b2,651,000
Share earns
.08
-
Shares outst
9,286,508
8,750,841
b-Net loss and included income from discontinued operations of $467,000, or 5 cents a share, which included a $637,000 gain on disposal.


Mortimer H. Gold, 91, Queens Philanthropist
LEAD: Mortimer H. Gold, a philanthropist who produced variety shows, circuses, carnivals and athletic events to benefit charitable organizations in Queens, died yesterday at Jamaica Hospital.
He was 91 years old and lived in Jamaica Estates.
He died after a stroke, his family said.


Literacy Cup That Erred
LEAD: There was just one thing wrong with a commemorative cup sold to benefit the city's literacy program: the Mayor's name was misspelled.
The cups marked the 10th anniversary celebration of Baltimore's redeveloped waterfront this week.
They declared that proceeds would benefit ''the literacy initiative of Baltimore City's Mayor, Kurt L.


Evolution in Europe;   U.S. Is Hoping to Sweeten German NATO Membership
LEAD: The United States is hoping that Moscow will quickly drop its opposition to the membership of a united Germany in NATO if the Western allies agree this week on a plan aimed at making the alliance less threatening to the Soviet Union, a senior Administration official said today.


Image Entertainment Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Image Entertainment Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,615,565
6,259,859
Net loss
b1,139,719
c156,523
Yr rev
28,107,443
18,479,985
Net loss
b1,343,406
778,957
b-Included non-recurring charges of $1,340,000 related to the write-off of certain production costs, reevaluation of production cost amortization and establishment of reserves for royalty advances, sales returns and excess inventory.


Audiovox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Audiovox Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
82,201,000
75,269,000
Net inc
603,000
30,000
Share earns
.07
-
6mo sales
150,433,000
138,234,000
Net inc
688,000
b1,399,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss
The company said the sales increase in the quarter was a result of increases in cellular and security product sales.


Witness in Barry Trial Now Denies Exceeding Agents' Instructions
LEAD: Concluding five days on the witness stand in the drug and perjury trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr., Rasheeda Moore today recanted earlier testimony that she had exceeded some instructions Federal agents gave her before the start of the undercover operation that resulted in the Mayor's arrest on charges of smoking crack.


Americans Sense a New Patriotism
LEAD: Blacks are playing a more prominent role than ever in this year's Independence Day celebration, which comes as blacks seem to be experiencing a growing sense of participating in the nation's rituals and history.


Daily News Unions Ask Cuomo for State Inquiry
LEAD: After five months of fruitless contract talks, union leaders at The Daily News yesterday urged Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to back a state inquiry into their dispute with management, and top state officials said they would meet with both sides tomorrow to consider the idea.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Companies


Sports People: Boxing;   Pryor Is Determined
LEAD: Aaron Pryor, armed with an ophthalmologist's report saying he has enough vision to continue boxing, is stepping up his bid to be cleared for bouts in Canada and New York State.


Court Tells Princeton Clubs They Must Admit Women
LEAD: In a decision that marked the end of an era embodied and romanticized by F. Scott Fitzgerald, the Supreme Court of New Jersey yesterday ordered the last two remaining male-only undergraduate clubs at Princeton University to begin admitting women.


Mainframes Aren't Museum Pieces
LEAD: When makers of personal computers and work stations talk about mainframe computers, they often call them dinosaurs.


Sports People: College;   Miami Reconsiders
LEAD: The University of Miami now says that joining an expanded Metro Conference is an attractive option.


In Zambia, Anger Over the Economy
LEAD: In riots here last week, residents of Mutendere Township, a dusty place of dirt roads and shabby housing, burned the flag of the nation's sole political party.


Juice Bowl Unit Sold by Campbell
LEAD: The Campbell Soup Company says it has sold its Juice Bowl Products subsidiary because it no longer fits in with the company's plans.
Juice Bowl was sold to ABA Holding Inc. for an undisclosed amount.
ABA Holding is the United States arm of Looza N.V., a Belgian fruit juice company.


R.P. Scherer reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* R.P. Scherer
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
307,940,000
293,284,000
Net loss
b23,059,000
c10,049,000
b-Reflects restructuring and other non-recurring charges of $15 million and increases of interest and goodwill amortization expenses, pursuant to the acquisition of the company in June 1989, of $34.4 million and $2.7 million, respectively.


About New York;   Laundry a Bore? Pedal Lifecycle During Dry Cycle
LEAD: Any comprehensive tour of the VideoTown Laundrette on the West Side of Manhattan would begin with the copying machine, just to the left of the front door.
It's five cents a page.
Then come the videotapes, between 6,000 and 7,000 of them.
There are Raisinets and Goobers in bins and a popcorn machine on the counter.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: A WOMAN whose name means nothing in social circles reports:


Woman Gets $3.75 Million Over Diaper Soap
LEAD: A West German chemical company has agreed to pay $3.75 million to a woman who said her leukemia was caused by a detergent used to launder her diapers when she was a baby.


Kurile Island Deal Rejected
LEAD: Japan today rejected as premature a Soviet proposal to share ownership of Soviet-held islands in the Kurile chain, which Japan claims.
The issue is a longstanding sore point that has prevented the Soviet Union and Japan from signing a peace treaty to formally end World War II.
Earlier this week, a political commentator, Vsevolod Ovchinnikov, wrote in Pravda, the Soviet Communist Party newspaper, that the dispute over the islands could be settled if Tokyo and Moscow agreed to place the islands under United Nations trusteeship.


Hockey;   Trottier Released by Islanders; Club Buys Out His Contract
LEAD: Bryan Trottier, the last active member of all four of the Islanders' Stanley Cup championship teams, yesterday received his release from Bill Torrey, the team's general manager.


For Eastern Europe, U.S. Teachers
LEAD: At first glance the people queued in front of Pan Am's ticket counter at Dulles International Airport looked like college students headed for a summer biking tour through England or France.
A closer look suggested otherwise: their duffel bags bulged with English textbooks and Shakespeare anthologies, and their destination was


Snooky Lanson, 76; Sang on a TV Show And in Nightclubs
LEAD: Snooky Lanson, a singing star of the popular 1950's television show ''Your Hit Parade,'' died on Monday at St.
Thomas Hospital here.
He was 76 years old.


Coors Completes Brewery Purchase
LEAD: The sale of Stroh's brewery in Memphis to the Adolph Coors Company was made final in a deal under which Coors will make beer outside of Golden for the first time in its 117-year history.
The Stroh Companies will continue to operate the 500-employee brewery until Sept. 1, when Coors will assume responsibility for operations.


Angola Rejects Rebel Relief-Aid Plan
LEAD: Saying it fears a trap laid by the United States, the Government of Angola has rejected a proposal by Jonas Savimbi, the American-backed rebel leader, for the creation of safe routes by which food and medicine can be supplied to famine-stricken areas under guerrilla control.


Man Acquitted On Major Count In Racial Killing
LEAD: The third trial in the Bensonhurst racial killing ended yesterday when jurors acquitted a young white man of intentional murder but could not reach a verdict on a second murder charge and on a riot charge.


Winner in Nebraska at Last; The Margin: 0.047 Percent
LEAD: Forty-eight days after the closest such contest in modern history, Ben Nelson, an Omaha lawyer, has been declared the winner of the Democratic primary for governor of Nebraska.


Peter Kash Weds Donna Friedman
LEAD: Donna Friedman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herman Friedman of Monsey, N.Y., was married yesterday at Shaare Tova Synagogue in Kew Gardens, Queens, to Peter Morgan Kash, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Kash of Bellmore, L.I.
Rabbi Harvey Goldscheider and Cantor David Rosenzweig performed the ceremony.


Valley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
20,617,000
19,839,000
Net inc
23,000
bc5,854,000
6mo sales
36,763,000
36,273,000
Net loss
1,240,000
b7,295,000
b-Included a charge of $5,905,000 from writedown of assets.


Bronx Gunman Was Obsessed, Prosecutor Says
LEAD: The prosecutor called the shooting a near-perfect crime, the well-planned act of a man obsessed with his neighbor's loud stereo, convinced of racism where there was none and determined to resolve himself what the police, the courts and others would not.


Call the Second Amendment Freedom Insurance
LEAD: To the Editor:


Horizontal Drilling, or How to Revive Oilfields
LEAD: In the long history of the Texas oil industry, there has rarely been a gusher as powerful as either of those that burst to the surface in the aging oil patch southwest of San Antonio last month.
In an area regarded as well past its oil-producing prime, the wells surged with 20,000 and 12,000 barrels a day, respectively, in a field where most wells produce less than 500.


Paul Strand Photos To National Gallery
LEAD: The National Gallery of Art in Washington is to receive 6 photographs by Paul Strand from a collection of more than 50 held by the Southwestern Bell Corporation.


Evolution in Europe;   Romanian President Backs Economic Reform Program
LEAD: President Ion Iliescu today declared his support for the Government's economic reform program but said introducing a market economy would pose a difficult challenge.


A Blind Man Drives an Auto, But Crashes and Is Arrested
LEAD: A blind man today fulfilled his long-held desire to drive but was arrested after he struck a telephone pole after a three-mile ride through the streets here.


Microwave Cooking
LEAD: WHILE a microwave oven is great for summer main courses, when you are trying to avoid kitchen heat, it is also a cool way to prepare for one of the easiest, most informal ways of entertaining, the cocktail party.
Despite the microwave oven's reputation as being good only for preparing small quantities, it can cook enough for large groups.


About Education
LEAD: President Bush has repeatedly supported the idea of youth community service but has not offered to finance such a program.
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, for one, is trying to put money behind the concept - $65 million for service programs in the schools -with the National Community Service Act of 1990.


France to Attend Talks on Atom Arms Curb
LEAD: France said today that for the first time it would attend talks on curbing the spread of nuclear weapons.


For Poles, Baseball And Rotary Foster American Dreams
LEAD: On Wednesday nights, the Rotarians meet at the Doctor's Club.
On Tuesdays and Thursdays, Little League ballplayers practice at a sports field in a Warsaw neighborhood.
And on Fridays, the Lions' Club gathers in the dining room of a suburban office building.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the breakdown of safeguards in the savings and loan industry included one accounting firm erroneously in a list of firms that have been sued by the Government over their auditing of failed savings institutions.
Coopers &amp; Lybrand has not been sued by the Government.


American Freed in Ecuador Savors Home and the Town That Saved Him
LEAD: After 61 days in captivity in the Colombian jungle, Scott Heimdal has returned to the Illinois city that passed collection plates and held bake sales to raise $60,000 to free him.


U.S. May Ban PAC's With Foreign Ties
LEAD: Spurred by pressure from lawmakers who maintain that foreign corporations are exerting undue influence on the American political system, the Federal Election Commission has agreed to consider banning the political action committees of such companies' American subsidiaries.


LIBERIAN OFFICER IS SAID TO DESERT
LEAD: The chief of President Samuel K. Doe's personal security force deserted today as Liberian rebel forces fired captured artillery and mortars at Government positions and inched closer to the center of Monrovia, the capital, United States officials said.


Russian Playwrights Discuss Role of Union
LEAD: It may have something to do with the way theater mirrors life, but the disagreement among a group of visiting Russian playwrights brought to New York's theater district a taste of what's going on in larger Soviet stages these days.


Review/Music;   Outdoor, Free and American
LEAD: The National Chorale has been singing at free concerts of American music in parks around the New York area since 1980.
The group began this year's series with a brief historical sampler in Damrosch Park on Tuesday evening.
The performance was carried live by WQXR, which is broadcasting concerts from Damrosch Park on


Markets Closed For Holiday
LEAD: Financial markets in the United States were closed yesterday for the Fourth of July.


Out-of-Doors Festival Set for Lincoln Center
LEAD: Performances by the Merce Cun-ningham Dance Company, Gunther Schuller conducting Charles Mingus's ''Epitaphs,'' and a Roots of American Music Festival celebrating blues, gospel and folk music are among the highlights of the 20th-anniversary season of Lincoln Center's Out-of-Doors Festival, to run from Aug.


Lessons in the Cracker Market
LEAD: Few products looked more promising.
When RJR Nabisco introduced a bite-size version of graham crackers last fall, the company was abuzz.
In the in-house lingo, the sweet, crispy snack was very ''more-ish'' (you wanted more of it) and had ''high poppability'' (you wanted to pop it in your mouth).


Evolution in Europe;   Poland Drops Demand For German Guarantee
LEAD: Poland today dropped its demand that the two Germanys guarantee its borders in a treaty before they unite.


Court Warrants for Traps and Stings
LEAD: The videotape showing the hotel encounter between Mayor Marion Barry of Washington and an F.B.I. informant, now playing repeatedly at his trial and on television, means many things to many people.
To the prosecution it proves cocaine use and perjury in denying using drugs.
To the defense it spells entrapment - Government overreaching to nail a troublesome black leader.


Small Renoir at Louvre Is Stolen in Daylight
LEAD: A small painting by Pierre Auguste Renoir, ''Portrait of a Seated Woman,'' was cut from its frame and stolen in broad daylight from a third-floor gallery at the Louvre Museum today, museum authorities announced.


On the Streets of New York, It's Motorists vs. Ambulances
LEAD: With red lights flashing and siren blaring, an ambulance weaved in and out of traffic in upper Manhattan recently, racing to get a woman who had suffered a heart attack to St.
Luke's Hospital at Amsterdam Avenue and 114th Street.


Botanic Garden Loses a Leader, Gains a Legacy
LEAD: There was no final ceremony for Donald E. Moore, who retired Saturday after 10 years as president of the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.


Review/Television;   With Sammy Davis, the Spirit Lingers
LEAD: It's called ''Frank, Liza and Sammy: The Ultimate Event.'' Actually, it's a tape of Frank Sinatra, Liza Minnelli and Sammy Davis Jr. in a 1989 concert in Detroit.
The show, sponsored by a beer company, was part of a national tour.
Ms.
Minnelli had replaced Dean Martin in the early rounds.
With the recent death of Mr.


BUSINESS DIGEST: THURSDAY, JULY 5, 1990
LEAD:
International


Currents;   New Waves In Quilting
LEAD: AT ''Visions: A New Decade,'' an exhibition of 83 quilts at the Museum of San Diego History, there are quilts that depict trees of the Pacific Northwest and a Mexican celebration of the Day of the Dead.
But the newest trend is quilts that look three dimensional.
Joyce Marquess Carey of Madison, Wis., created a series of three quilts called ''Glad Rags 5, 6, 7,'' top left, that look as if they are banners waving in the air.


San Jose Journal;   When Raising the Flag Is Sure to Raise a Storm
LEAD: It was to have been like thousands of other statues honoring local heroes that stand in public parks across the nation, a monument quickly transformed into a pigeon perch and another source of that eternal question of children: ''Who was that dude?''


U.S. Banks Cut Global Business As Rivals Grow
LEAD: Once the pacesetters for global expansion in the financial industry, American banks are retreating from foreign markets, losing business and stature to competitors from Europe and Japan.


Caroline Bowers Is Wed
LEAD: At the Swan Club in Roslyn, L.I., Caroline M. Bowers, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bill Bowers of Portland, Ore., was married yesterday to Howard M. Hyams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Al Hyams of Baldwin, L.I.
Rabbi Charles G. Agin officiated.
Mrs.
Hyams, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Hawaii and the Fashion Institute of Technology.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on the Law page on Friday about efforts to limit certain First Amendment protections incorrectly described the status of a lawsuit over whether panhandling may be prohibited on the New York City subways.
The suit is on appeal before the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, not the Supreme Court.


Houston Ballyhoos Its Rebirth, Again
LEAD: For Mayor Kathryn Whitmire, the Economic Summit of Industrialized Nations, to be held here next week, is ''probably the biggest thing to happen in Houston since the Johnson Space Center came to town.''


Dr. Farahe Maloof, 69; Headed Hospital Unit
LEAD: Dr.
Farahe Maloof, a former chief of the thyroid unit of Massachusetts General Hospital, died Monday.
Dr.
Maloof, a resident of Milton, Mass., was 69 years old.


Steinbrenner Gives His Side At Vincent Hearing Today
LEAD: George Steinbrenner finally gets to tell his side today.
And what he chooses to say in a hearing before Commissioner Fay Vincent might play an important part in determining the Yankee owner's future in baseball.


Dummy Arms Cause Closing of Terminal
LEAD: Six Pan American World Airways flights were delayed up to 20 minutes yesterday when a shipment of dummy handguns and hand grenades used for security training was halted at Kennedy International Airport.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Painting a Stone Fireplace
Q.
We recently purchased a 30-year-old house that has a large stone fireplace probably made of limestone.
Is it possible to paint the fireplace front?


Evolution in Europe;   Happy Is the Day! Marks for the Soviet Army
LEAD: ''We'd like to cash a check,'' the Soviet Army told West Germany's central Bundesbank today as it withdrew millions of marks to pay its troops stationed in East Germany.


Currents;   'But I Dialed Singapore!'
LEAD: TO amuse children strapped into car seats there is the yellow Kiddi Car Phone, which has blue and white buttons and a red antenna that clicks when it is raised.
The ''cellular phone,'' made by Fisher-Price, comes with a suction cup to attach to a car window.


End of the Party
LEAD: The party is a corpse.
Unless Mikhail Gorbachev at last acknowledges its death, one day he will be buried with it.


After Seven Months, Ramos Is Going Home
LEAD: Almost seven months after suffering a severe brain injury in an car accident, the Trail Blazer forward Ramon Ramos left a hospital rehabilitation center in Portland, Ore., on Tuesday.


Founder of Kaypro Sees Life in the Company Yet
LEAD: Innovation and unorthodoxy have long ruled at the Kaypro Corporation, reflected in the design of its personal computers and the style of its headquarters, a secluded compound near a beach, where employees munched health food from the company snack bar while they worked.


Marcos Faces a Judgment Against Property
LEAD: A $15.1 million judgment has been entered in Manhattan against Imelda Marcos, the former First Lady of the Philippines, based on a Federal court verdict in Seattle that found her and her late husband liable for the murders of two anti-Marcos advocates.


Evolution in Europe;   Other Moves on Embassies
LEAD: The mass attempt of the Albanians to gain freedom by storming diplomatic missions in Tirana over the last few days was apparently provoked by other similar attempts on a smaller scale in recent months.


In Italy, a Gloomy Day After
LEAD: Moments after Argentina bounced Italy out of the World Cup competition Tuesday night, window shutters flew open at an apartment overlooking Via di San Stefano del Cacco, a narrow street in Rome's historic center.


New Nike Commercials Promote Good Conduct
LEAD: Nike plans to start a $5 million advertising campaign next week in which its spokesmen promote not sneakers but good behavior.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The Fourth of July reminds me that I am an American.
Do I need to say anything else?''
- Jack M. Portnoy, a World War II veteran who works as a volunteer at a veterans' home in Queens.
[B1:4.]


The City Council Passes a Tax Test
LEAD: New York's City Council has survived its first major test under the new City Charter.
Negotiating with a new Mayor, David Dinkins, and without its old partner, the Board of Estimate, the Council approved a $28 billion budget that deals responsibly with the city's weakening economy.


For Many, Fourth of July Means More Than Fireworks


Accounts
LEAD: *
Intelligy Corp., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill Advertising, San Francisco, for the introduction of Wings, a collection of educational toys, games and activities for small children.


Sperm Count Goes Down In Summer
LEAD: Men who live in temperate climates produce significantly less sperm in summer than in winter, researchers report, a finding that partly accounts for fewer births in the spring.


Becker and Lendl Beat Elements and Rivals
LEAD: Although the rain stopped, the chill and gale persisted.
But the Wimbledon committee, evidently of a mind that their male quarterfinalists could keep a stiff upper lip at this critical stage of the tournament, hustled all four matches onto the nearest available court late this afternoon.


Evolution in Europe;   24-NATION GROUP EXPANDS AID PLAN IN EASTERN EUROPE
LEAD: Foreign ministers from 24 leading industrial nations agreed today to expand their economic aid program for Poland and Hungary to include the emerging East European democracies of Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia and East Germany.


Stocks Fall In London
LEAD: Stock prices closed lower today on the London Stock Exchange, depressed by mounting concern about the strengthening pound.


For Veterans, Wheelchairs Give the Day Somber Tone
LEAD: Forget the fireworks, the tricolored bunting draped over picnic tables and the jostle of the beach crowds.


Currents;   For Babies With Little Else to Smile At
LEAD: THE Variety House for Children in Manhattan, one of a handful of residential treatment centers and nurseries for small children handicapped by AIDS, cocaine addiction or other conditions, is cozy and full of whimsical details, like wood cabinets inlaid with animal motifs and floor tiles that form a whale.


PAPER IS BOMBED IN JOHANNESBURG
LEAD: A bomb exploded today at the offices of an Afrikaans-language weekly newspaper that reported the existence last month of a right-wing plot to kill President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela.


Currents;   A Moscow Of Dream And Reality
LEAD: ''ARCHITECTURAL Drawings of the Russian Avant-Garde,'' 150 drawings done from 1917 to 1934, reveals as much fantasy as Socialist Realism.
The drawings, at the Museum of Modern Art, include some for projects that were not built, among them a glass pyramid drawn in 1930 that resembles I. M. Pei's addition to the Louvre in Paris; a 1924 proposal for a newspaper building with rotating upper stories.


Human Growth Hormone Reverses Effects of Aging
LEAD: Treatment with human growth hormone can significantly reverse many effects of aging on the body, a new study has found.


ERA OF FREE TRADE TO BEGIN IN BRAZIL
LEAD: Breaking with decades of protectionism, Brazil's new Government has decided to open the nation's economy, the eighth largest in the West, to imports and free trade.


Health Advisory Issued On High Ozone Levels
LEAD: Residents of the New York metropolitan area were advised to limit automobile use and outdoor physical activity due to high ozone levels that began Tuesday and were expected to continue through today.


Market Place;   A Savings Bank Bucks the Trend
LEAD: IN the early 1980's, when almost everyone believed that growth was great for a bank, the Jamaica Savings Bank followed a radically different course.
It deliberately allowed assets to shrink.


JUDGE CHALLENGED AT TRIAL OF BARRY
LEAD: The American Civil Liberties Union filed court papers today arguing that a Federal judge should admit two supporters of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. who had been barred from the Mayor's drug and perjury trial.


Germans Top English With Penalty Kicks
LEAD: For the second time in two nights, a game of soccer turned into a game of chance to decide which of two quality teams would advance to the final of the World Cup.


Robber Commits Suicide
LEAD: A man robbed a convenience store in suburban Lakewood on Tuesday, was quickly cornered by the police and then shot himself to death after asking them to kill him, the authorities said.
The man was identified today as Darcy Willey, 24 years old, of Tacoma.


Pratt Recalls Some Jet Engines
LEAD: Pratt &amp; Whitney Inc. has recalled more than three dozen of its newest and largest jet engines because of a compressor problem that if left unchecked could prompt an engine to shut down during a flight.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE INDIAN OCEAN - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Show and Tell, Texas Style
In its role as host of the seven-nation economic summit meeting, Houston is proclaiming its own economic rebirth.
Page A14.
Gorbachev Vow on Economy
The Soviet President said that if the economy failed to begin rebounding in two years, the Communist Party leadership would quit.


A Sparkler By Jackson Halts Yanks
LEAD: Just when it looked as if the Yankees might salvage the final game of their latest trip through trouble, along came Bo Jackson.
The result: another loss.
Jackson rubbed out a momentary Yankee lead tonight when he crushed a three-run homer to center field in the seventh inning, a homer that resembled a fiery shooting star.


Amid Praise, Mexican Chief Draws Fire on Rights
LEAD: As a candidate for President in 1988, Carlos Salinas de Gortari promised that he would modernize the Mexican economy and usher in an era of true democracy.


Review/Dance;   American Festival Offers Masters and Others
LEAD: The American Dance Festival's summer season has entered the 1990's with a performance series entitled American Masters Plus.


Review/Music;   Pedestrians Help Make Performance
LEAD: Christopher Janney, a composer who specializes in environmental sound installations, wired up the Fifth Avenue staircase of the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Monday afternoon for a three-hour presentation of his ''Soundstair,'' a pedestrian-participation work.
The performance, which was part of the Rat-a-Tat-Tap festival of percussive music and dance, was offered as a celebration of the 25th anniversary of the Landmarks Preservation


Networks Wary on '94 World Cup Rights
LEAD: Although this year's World Cup soccer champion will not be crowned until Sunday, wrangling has already begun over who will televise the 1994 World Cup tournament in the United States.


Soccer, Like Life, Is a Lottery
LEAD: Here's something we can all root for in the World Cup final on Sunday: the lighting system.
If the fuses should happen to blow during a tie breaker at Olympic Stadium on Sunday night, we would all be treated to the spectacle of the biggest tournament in the world being decided by chance.


U.S. Court Opens Way For Cuts in Lilco's Rates
LEAD: A Federal Court of Appeals ruling has put an end, at least for now, to the drawn-out litigation between Suffolk County and the Long Island Lighting Company over the utility's rate increases while it was building the Shoreham nuclear power plant.


Parents Divided on Using Siblings in Marrow Case
LEAD: A judge has been asked to order blood tests on 3-year-old twins to determine whether they might be potential bone marrow donors for their half-brother, who is suffering from leukemia.


Canseco Is Vote Leader As All-Stars Are Listed
LEAD: Jose Canseco, the top vote-getter among all players, was one of three Oakland Athletics voted by the fans to the American League starting team for the All-Star Game Tuesday night at Wrigley Field.
Ryne Sandberg of the hometown Cubs topped the balloting in the National League.


People
LEAD: *
Kathy Harrington, president and chief creative officer of Stern Walters Partners, a Chicago agency, has been named to the additional post of chief executive.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Alliant Computer Systems Corp., Littleton, Mass., a manufacturer of standards-based parallel supercomputers, appointed Ronald H. Gruner vice chairman.
He will remain chief executive but be replaced as president by Craig J. Mundie, who also becomes chief operating officer.


Job for Beber Silverstein
LEAD: Ed McCabe, who made a name for himself and Frank Perdue through his copywriting for the chicken seller, will try to do the same for Mel Coleman, a Colorado rancher.
Mr.
McCabe's new agency, Beber Silverstein McCabe &amp; Partners, has won the advertising account of Coleman Natural Meats, a Denver producer of beef and lamb.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JOAN COLLINS is to return to the London stage in September as the sophisticated divorcee in Noel Coward's ''Private Lives.'' The play will be produced by MICHAEL CODRON, who has introduced the playwrights Tom Stoppard, Alan Ayckbourn and Michael Frayn to the West End.


Planning Is Begun on South Africa Aid Bank
LEAD: Nelson Mandela and the Rockefeller Foundation have begun to plan the creation of a South African development bank to change the country's white-dominated economy through foreign investment.


Critic's Notebook;   Britain's Writers Embrace the Offbeat
LEAD: When readers think of innovation and experimentation in the recent novel, they think of writers like Jorge Luis Borges, Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Mario Vargas Llosa, Carlos Fuentes, Milan Kundera, Thomas Pynchon and Donald Barthelme.
They think of the alternatives to naturalism produced by the magical realists from Latin America and Eastern Europe, and by American innovators reacting to the social and political confusions of the 1960's.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-11


Our Public Schools Encourage Mediocrity
LEAD: To Preserve Choice To the Editor:


Target Practice, With Public Money
LEAD: The U.S.
Army spends about $5 million a year to support civilian target shooting - for reasons that no longer make sense.


Scenes and Faces to Put on the Floor
LEAD: ELSIE VAN SAVAGE of Brunswick, Me., has hooked rugs with boats on them, or business logos, or favorite foods or images associated with special trips.


Should the West Bail Out Gorbachev?;   Yes, Targeted Aid Wouldn't Be Wasted
LEAD: When the heads of the leading industrial democracies meet in Houston next Monday, President Bush will face a question he has been trying to avoid: what can the West do to help Mikhail Gorbachev?


All Except the Texas Heat Is Under Rug for Summit
LEAD: In the ''war room'' tucked inside a nondescript suite in a high-rise building here, volunteers staff a bank of telephones in front of a wall-size map.


A Tribute by Nannies To One of Their Own
LEAD: There was a moment of suspense in the radio studio.
Four women waited for the first caller to pierce the intimacy of the soundproof room where Diane Rehm moderates a popular talk show here each weekday morning on WAMU.


Agonizing in Sweden: Welcome or Ouster for 150 Soviet Jews?
LEAD: Torn by a desire to limit immigration and uncertainty over how to react to the changes sweeping the Soviet Union, Swedes are agonizing over whether the country should give asylum to about 150 Soviet Jews who arrived over the last year.


Entrepreneurs Flourish As India Makes Reforms
LEAD: In the last decade, many young, aggressive entrepreneurs have flourished in India by forming ventures with foreign corporations, tapping the subcontinent's vast domestic markets and challenging the traditional power of older, family-held industrial empires.


Washington Talk;   Where Right Spin Can Mean You're In
LEAD: When President Bush appointed a Washington lawyer named Stephen Potts to the Administration's top ethics post two weeks ago, the choice seemed curious at first.


An Aggressive Easy Goer Wins Suburban
LEAD: Easy Goer tuned up for his showdown at Arlington Park next month with a contemptuously easy 3 3/4-length victory over De Roche yesterday in the $399,000 Suburban Handicap at Belmont Park.


Evolution in Europe;   In Fabled Samarkand, Newborns Fight for Life
LEAD: There is a dark side to the stunning fruitfulness of this ancient oasis city that teems so with market produce and some of the most prolific citizenry in the Soviet Union.


Columbia Gas Selects Chief for 2 Subsidiaries
LEAD: James P. Holland was elected chairman and chief executive of the Columbia Gas Transmission Corporation and the Columbia Gulf Transmission Company this week.
He replaces John D. Daly, who will become executive vice president and a director of the Columbia Gas System, the parent of the two companies, which are both based in Charleston, W.


Toxic Shock Toll Plummets
LEAD: Toxic shock syndrome has declined sharply since 1980, largely because of changes in tampons, the Federal Centers for Disease Control reports.


Carter Receives Liberty Medal


Our Public Schools Encourage Mediocrity;   A Success Story
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ostracism, He Taught, May Be the Worst Part of Homelessness
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wage Pacts Reached In Care of Retarded
LEAD: Workers for four private agencies serving mentally retarded people and emotionally disturbed children have reached tentative union contract agreements.
The workers are to vote on the agreements this week.


NATO's Most Crucial Summit
LEAD: In London today, NATO, which has lost its original reason for being, is opening its most crucial summit meeting in its existance.
Page A8.


Rest-Home Resident, 90, Cleared of Killing 3
LEAD: A 90-year-old man who often quarreled with others at the retirement home where he lived has been acquitted of thrashing three fellow residents to death with his heavy oak cane.


Germans To Have One Team
LEAD: There will be a unified German team for the Winter and Summer Olympics in 1992, the presidents of the two national Olympic committees announced today.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The favorite horse of QUEEN ELIZABETH II, which she rode in 18 Trooping the Color ceremonies, died Tuesday after a stroke.
A spokesman for Buckingham Palace said that Burmese, a 28-year-old mare, would be buried in the park at Windsor Castle, which is 22 miles west of London.


A Chilling Prospect
LEAD: The Rev.
Donald Wildmon of the American Family Association has not been a strong supporter of the free expression that some Americans, on their Independence Day, celebrated as a precious constitutional right.


Events: Insider's View of a Wright Home
LEAD: Remembering Wright, 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; 212-996-1100.


Mandela Calls British Talks 'Productive'
LEAD: Nelson Mandela met with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher for three hours today and said afterward that the two ''made progress,'' although they failed to agree on the use of economic sanctions and violence in ending apartheid.


One Man, Three Homes, One Mission: Preserving Architectural Treasures
LEAD: SOME people collect salt and pepper shakers.
Joseph Pell Lombardi collects houses.


Myra S. Eckstein, Student, Is a Bride
LEAD: The marriage of Myra S. Eckstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Eckstein of Great Neck, L.I., to Alon Y. Mogilner, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard J. Mogilner of Brooklyn, took place yesterday.
Rabbi Jacob M. Sable officiated at the Great Neck Synagogue.
Mrs.
Mogilner, 24 years old, graduated cum laude from New York University, where she also received an M.A.


On the Fourth, Feeling Cooked On a 93 degrees Grill
LEAD: Some celebrated the Fourth of July by gorging themselves on hot dogs and ice cream.
Others in the metropolitan area fed the homeless.
Almost all tried to escape the withering heat, whether at the beach, in swimming pools or even at an indoor ice-skating rink.


U.S. Pins Hopes on Guatemala Army
LEAD: The United States, losing faith in the civilian Government, has turned to this country's military to insure stability and combat growing drug trafficking, Western diplomats and Guatemalan officials say.


G.M. Hopes Solar-Car Race Will Aid Student Engineers
LEAD: Solar power never regained the enormous attention it commanded during the Arab oil embargo of the 1970's, but the General Motors Corporation hopes a race of solar-powered cars it is sponsoring will help persuade students to consider careers in engineering.


A Fidelity Link With Nuveen
LEAD: In a move that may foreshadow broad changes in the retail investment market, Fidelity Investments has agreed to market a popular product of John Nuveen &amp; Company to Fidelity's mutual fund and brokerage customers.


Evolution in Europe;   Albania Said to Weigh Passports for the Restive
LEAD: Western diplomats said today that the Albanian Government was considering whether to issue more than 10,000 visas and passports to hundreds of Albanians seeking asylum in embassies in Tirana, the capital, and thousands of other disgruntled citizens.


Lefebvre Backs Ejectees
LEAD: The American League president, Bobby Brown is scheduled to announce today or tomorrow the disposition of the case involving the brawl between Seattle and Milwaukee at the Kingdome last Saturday, but Manager Jim Lefebvre of the Mariners is saying already that he will appeal any suspensions or ''outrageous'' fines against his players.


Vicki Stein Dies at 67; Social Reform Leader
LEAD: Vicki Stein, founder of Victims Assistance Services of Westchester County, a group of professionals formed with state and county money to help victims of domestic violence and other crimes, died on Monday at White Plains Hospital.
She was 67 years old and lived in Scarsdale, N.Y.


Herman Goldfarb, 68, Is Dead; Executive Helped Crime Inquiry
LEAD: Herman Goldfarb, an insurance broker who worked undercover in an inquiry into organized crime in the New York garment industry in the early 70's and who later, while in the Federal witness-protection program, was tried for ordering the murder of a man who had threatened to reveal his identity, died on Sunday in San Diego.


Close to Home
LEAD: ''NOW down here is a rental unit, very nice for income.
Or when I get old I could put my nurse-companion there.
Or if I get rich I could move to the country, rent out the other three floors and keep this as my pied-a-terre.'' I sigh.
I have seen photographs of just the kind of simple but elegant city flat I have in mind in a British magazine called World of


Saatchi Set To Sell Unit
LEAD: The Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company, the London-based advertising conglomerate, said today that it had agreed to sell the Gartner Group, an American consulting firm, for $70 million.


Currents;   From the Master, More Rug Designs
LEAD: THE Frank Lloyd Wright rug collection of F. Schumacher &amp; Company has four new designs reinterpreting Wright's designs for a room in the 1902 Arthur Heurtley House in Oak Park, Ill.; two drapery panels for the 1906 Avery Coonley House in Riverside, Ill., and a 1926 cover design for Liberty magazine.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
CYCLING
Fignon Withdraws From Tour
Laurent Fignon, who lost on the final day to Greg LeMond in last year's Tour de France, dropped out of the race yesterday in the fifth stage while Steve Bauer of Canada continued to lead.
Yesterday's was the longest stage of the three-week race, 187 miles.


Black Minister Recruits More Men for the Church
LEAD: Not long ago, the Rev.
Jonny Ray Youngblood looked around his Brooklyn church and decided he was lonely. ''I was just about the only man there,'' he said.


Decision Near On a Pipeline From Canada
LEAD: An ambitious plan to deliver natural gas from Canada's abundant western reserves to six energy-hungry Northeastern states has pitted neighbor against neighbor and community against community, as well as leading to an uneasy coalition of environmentalists and domestic gas producers against the whole idea.


Review/Dance;   Waiting Impatiently for the Train to Chaos
LEAD: O Vertigo Dance is a company of fast, hard movers with strong presences and that indefinable French chic, though here on the scruffy side.
Or so it seemed from an appearance here by the Canadian dance company on Tuesday night at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival, where it performs through Saturday.


Boston Jury Convicts 2 Christian Scientists in Death of a Son
LEAD: Two Christian Scientists were convicted of manslaughter today in the death of their 2-year-old son because they relied on prayer to treat him rather than seeking conventional medical care.


Surging Mets Stumble a Bit, Then Overcome Astros
LEAD: The Mets are so immovable these days that they win even when Dwight Gooden pitches on a sweltering night with a blister on his index finger and loses a 4-0 lead in the late innings.
And that's precisely what they did last night before a sellout crowd of 48,072 fans in Shea Stadium.


Review/Dance;   Feet, Bringers of Thunder: Rat-a-Tat-Tap at Apollo
LEAD: The thunder that came from the Apollo Theater on Monday night was not an early fireworks celebration honoring the Fourth of July.
It was a brilliant pyrotechnical display of tap dancing, presented by Dancing in the Streets as the final event in Rat-a-Tat-Tap, its festival of percussive music and dance.


Review/Music;   Easy Sound of Patti Page
LEAD: Patti Page has maintained her balance in the tricky and treacherous world of pop music for more than 40 years by staying with the kind of simplicity that has enabled Perry Como to have an equally long career.
Miss Page opened a three-week engagement at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza) on Tuesday singing a program made up mostly of songs that she has been singing for years or that fit the pop and country-western styles of the late 1940's and early 50's when her career developed.


Evolution in Europe;   NATO Leaders Gather, In Search of a Purpose
LEAD: When President Bush and the 15 other leaders of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization gather in the palace of Lancaster House on Thursday morning, they will begin the most crucial summit meeting since the alliance came into being 41 years ago.


Berlin Project Is Approved
LEAD: West Berlin has approved plans for West Germany's biggest company, Daimler-Benz A.G., to build offices on a Berlin wall wasteland.


Metro Matters;   Life, Liberty And the Pursuit Of Realty Rights
LEAD: George Washington never slept in Hendrick I. Lott's farmhouse.
But after being routed in the Battle of Brooklyn Heights, remnants of his army that were not evacuated to Manhattan were said to have fled across Lott's farm.


Our Public Schools Encourage Mediocrity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Madrid Journal;   Spain Frets a Bit as Third-World Tide Sweeps In
LEAD: Over the last five centuries Spain has successively expelled Arabs, Jews, Masons and Protestants.
In the same period, millions of Spaniards left the country, emigrating first to the New World and more recently to northern Europe, where they found work, sent for their families and became part of local societies.


Ruling May Lead to Big Rise in States' Medicaid Costs
LEAD: Judging by Pennsylvania's experience, the states face substantial costs if hospitals and nursing homes take advantage of a recent Supreme Court decision affirming their right to sue states for higher Medicaid reimbursement rates.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: WHEN her stepson was 10 years old, Sally Jo Dady would punish him by sending him to his room. ''A few years later that stopped working because he had magazines, a radio and a TV in there,'' said Mrs.
Dady, who lives in Minneapolis. ''He would think being sent to his room was great.''


Celebration Turns Deadly
LEAD: Two people died yesterday and 200 have been arrested after street celebrations of Argentina's World Cup victory over Italy on Tuesday turned violent.


Items Worth $45 Million Missing From a U.S. Lab
LEAD: The General Accounting Office, investigating charges that equipment was stolen from the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory in California to buy illegal drugs, says an inventory shows that items worth more than $45 million are missing.


The Lilies of Summer
LEAD: LILIES have loomed larger in the human imagination for a greater stretch of history than any other flower except roses.
One species, the Madonna lily (Lilium candidum), is depicted in frescoes in Crete dating about 1500 B.C.
The fairly small flowers of this plant are so dazzling in their whiteness that they have become the stuff of myth and theology.


2 Leading Foes of One-Party Rule Are Reported Arrested by Kenya
LEAD: The two leaders of Kenya's unofficial opposition and the most outspoken advocates of a multi-party state were arrested here tonight after weeks of harassment.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Diner's Journal column of Weekend on Friday misidentified the new chef at 150 Wooster, a restaurant owned by Brian McNally.
He is Chris Gesualdi, not Geoffrey


Total in Dart Attacks Rises to 26 Women
LEAD: A man shooting darts through a homemade dart pipe has struck two more women in midtown, making the total of victims 26, the police said.


A Stylistic Departure For I.B.M.
LEAD: THE International Business Machines Corporation has decided to put on a happy face.
A new corporate advertising campaign for I.B.M., which as the behemoth of the computer world has been unable in recent years to move as quickly into new markets as some of its competitors, creates an image of a revitalized company that cares about its customers and is more than happy to take on all comers.


Personal Health
LEAD: Sweltering summer days and school vacations prompt millions of Americans to head for the country or the shore, move to a cabin in the woods or take in the sights in different parts of the country.
Most travel by car.


Evolution in Europe;   Gorbachev Gives Leadership 2 Years To Rejuvenate the Soviet Economy
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that if the troubled Soviet economy failed to begin rebounding in two years, then the Communist leadership of the party would quit ''of its own accord.''


CHRONICLE
LEAD: East Germans, long deprived of Western rock-and-roll, will get the chance to see the most enduring band of all, the ROLLING STONES.
The group, which played to 80,000 people in the Olympic Stadium in West Berlin last month, will return to Germany in August for an extra concert on its world tour, this time in East Berlin.


19 People in Crowd Are Hurt By an Errant Fireworks Shell
LEAD: Nineteen people were injured tonight when an errant shell from the town's Fourth of July fireworks display shot into a crowd of 5,000 people, the authorities said.


Talking Deals;   A Polaroid First In Minolta Accord
LEAD: The Polaroid Corporation's agreement last week to let the Minolta Camera Company of Japan take over the job of marketing Polaroid's most sophisticated instant camera to consumers was not the kind of deal anyone would have embraced around Polaroid's headquarters in Cambridge, Mass., until relatively recently.


Troubled Times for Architecture Industry
LEAD: The virtual evaporation of significant new construction projects in New York City is deeply hurting the architectural profession, forcing firms to lay off employees, cut their fees, diversify their practices and search for work in other cities and countries.


What's Mandela's Plan?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Talks in Taiwan Urge a Popular Presidential Vote
LEAD: After five days of strenuous national debate, a national conference on this island's future concluded today with a call for popular presidential elections.


Maurice Girodias, A French Publisher And an Author, 71
LEAD: Maurice Girodias, a French publisher whose early editions of such books as Vladimir Nabokov's ''Lolita'' and Henry Miller's ''Tropic of Capricorn'' led him into long battles with French censors, died here today at the age of 71, apparently of a heart attack.


Evolution in Europe;   In Leninallee, Cans, Bottles and Papers: It's the West's Waste
LEAD: Mirko Kontze, a sturdy East Berlin street cleaner, has his own way of measuring the arrival of Western capitalism: it is bringing a lot of garbage to his part of town.


In Bulgaria, the Official Party Must Go
LEAD: To the Editor:


Securities Mergers Still High
LEAD: The Securities Industry Association says consolidations stayed at a high level last year.


Fast Computer From NEC
LEAD: The NEC Corporation today announced what it said is the world's fastest mainframe computer.


A 'Last Resort' for NATO
LEAD: President Bush wants to reduce NATO's reliance on nuclear arms and on early nuclear first use.
But he also wants to preserve a nuclear option for the alliance.
He has found a reasonable way to do both by proposing to turn nuclear arms into ''weapons of last resort.''


Land-Buying Drive by Pentagon Runs Into Stiff Resistance in West
LEAD: The Pentagon is pressing its biggest land-buying drive since World War II, seeking to add nearly 4.5 million acres to its 25 million acres nationwide.


Is a Character Intense? Call Stephen Lang.
LEAD: Stephen Lang is playing another edgy guy.


Books of The Times;   Overcoming a Lifetime's Motivations to Drink
LEAD:
That Place in Minnesota
Changing Lives, Saving Lives
By Ed Fitzgerald
237 pages. Viking. $18.95.


HEALTH: Cheating on Insurance;   Insurers Say Growing Fraud In Health Care Costs Billions
LEAD: Most of the expectant couples who turned up for the delivery orientation at a hospital in Southern California two years ago were thrilled when an administrator told them, over coffee and doughnuts, that the hospital would offer a discount on their care.


Yields Post Modest Rise
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were narrowly higher for the week ended Tuesday.


Stewart, Valenzuela Battered This Time
LEAD: Dave Stewart and Fernando Valenzuela made their first starts since pitching no-hitters last Friday.


Bridge
LEAD: Imaginative players sometimes reject an obvious safe lead in favor of a risky one.


Peru Suspends Cuba Pact
LEAD: Peru has indefinitely suspended a year-old trade pact with Cuba because Havana missed a $5.2 million payment last month, a spokesman for Peru's Central Reserve Bank said today.
The payment was due on June 8, but Cuba neither paid nor asked Peru for refinancing, said Juan Zuniga, the bank spokesman.


Home Improvement
LEAD: SANDING a wood floor to refinish it is not too difficult, but it is dusty, noisy and time consuming.
A floor thickly covered with paint should be chemically stripped first, to reduce the amount of sanding necessary.


Karl Allison, 42, Director of Planning For Spoleto U.S.A.
LEAD: Karl Allison, the director of planning and development for the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. and a former Broadway and Off Broadway producer, died yesterday in a hospital in Perugia, Italy.
He was 42 years old.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: In the seven years that he was New York City's Parks Commissioner, HENRY J. STERN was noted for talking to trees and protecting the sex life of the dragonfly.
Now, he will be a gadfly.
The Citizens Union, the New York City watchdog organization that sometimes bites, has elected him its first fulltime president.


Trottier's Preference
LEAD: Bryan Trottier, whom the Islanders released Tuesday, may not be leaving the New York area.


Dollar Drops Against Yen in Europe
LEAD: The dollar fell below 150 yen in slow European trading today amid growing speculation that interest rates will decline in the United States.


Mergers Up In Europe as Barriers Fall
LEAD: The lure, and the fear, of 1992 are continuing to drive the pace of mergers and acquisitions in Europe, and more and more they are opening doors that had been closed in the past.


Benefactor Arrested For Defacing Sign
LEAD: A wealthy entrepreneur, known here for helping to beautify the town, has been arrested for spray-painting a real-estate sign near his house.


Cobblestones to Make A Comeback in SoHo
LEAD: The historic sections of a pair of SoHo streets will take on a purer 19th-century look during the next two years.


Not Quite the Fountain of Youth
LEAD: The report that injections of synthetic human growth hormone seem to reverse some of the effects of aging is much to be welcomed.
Previous recipes for stalling age included regular, strenuous exercise and going on a near-starvation diet.
But there are a few catches before couch potatoes and epicures can set their hopes high.


Growth Hormone and the Drive for a More Youthful State
LEAD: For the last 18 months or so Frederick McCullough has been like Popeye, or Tony the Tiger, or some other cartoon character with hyperbolic energy: shinnying up to the roof to put new concrete around the chimney, washing the aluminum siding around the house, and mowing and re-mowing the lawn.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Yamaha Motor Corporation, to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS/Pacific, for its RIVA motor scooter.


Kuwait Stance on OPEC
LEAD: Kuwait's new oil minister, Rashid Salim al-Ameeri, ended talks today in Algiers with OPEC colleagues and said his nation was cutting excess output and could be flexible on its demands for a bigger quota.


Fairs And Festivals
LEAD:
Today
FEAST,Our Lady of Mount Carmel Roman Catholic Church, Pleasant Avenue, from 114th to 116th Street, and 115th Street, between Pleasant and First Avenues.
Food, vendors, entertainment.
Today through July 16, 6 to 11 P.M.
Information: 534-0681.
FAIR,Giants Stadium, Meadowlands off Route 3, East Rutherford, N.J.


Liberian Troops Reported to Loot Capital Shops as Rebels Advance
LEAD: Troops looted shops today as rebels tightened their stranglehold on the Liberian capital and President Samuel K. Doe clung to power.


Cut the Custodians Down to Size
LEAD: For years, it's been difficult to tell who's in charge of New York City's schools: the custodians, who manage day-to-day maintenance of the buildings, or the Board of Education.
What is clear is that the custodians have too much power.


What's a Doctor of Law but Hyperbole Anyway?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Medicare Cleared in Hospital Closings
LEAD: Most of the 140 rural hospitals around the nation that shut down from 1985 through 1988 had been losing money because of high operating costs rather than inadequate government subsidies, according to a report by the General Accounting Office.


New York Rainy Days Mean Using Headlights
LEAD: Motorists will have to turn on their headlights whenever it rains or snows, under a measure signed into law today by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
The new law, which takes effect on Jan. 1, is intended mostly to help drivers see other cars in bad weather.


John A. Ludlow, Broker, 95
LEAD: John A. Ludlow, a New York broker and former governor of the American Stock Exchange, died on Wednesday at a nursing home in Cedar Grove, N.J.
He was 95 years old and lived in Upper Montclair, N.J.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bank of Montreal said it had com-pleted the estimated $23 million (Canadian), or $19.8 million (United States), sale of its 20 percent stake in Banque Transatlantique, a French bank, to the bank's largest shareholder, Credit Industriel et Commercial de Paris.


Review/Photography;   Tracing Photojournalism to Define It
LEAD: Despite their enormous impact on everyday life, the images that appear in newspapers and magazines remain relatively unexamined.
Even the definition of photojournalism is still subject to debate.
Does photojournalism have an esthetic and tradition of its own, or is it merely a term for pictures that are reproduced and seen by a large and largely uncritical public?


2 Lanes to Close On F.D.R. Drive For Three Years
LEAD: The traffic capacity of an 11-block section of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive will be choked off by one-third or more during roughly three years of repairs beginning later this month, New York State officials said yesterday.


Dinkins and Holtzman Contributors Handling City Bonds
LEAD: Five investment concerns were recently selected to be underwriters for $6 billion in New York City bonds, and it now turns out, to no one's great surprise, that all five were major contributors to the campaigns last year of Mayor David N. Dinkins and City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman.


Judge Limits Fernandez Role In Hiring of Superintendents
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez was handed his first significant setback yesterday when a state judge in Queens declared that the Chancellor may not interfere in the selection of district superintendents by New York City's 32 community school boards.


In Pakistan, Help for the Needy and Disadvantaged


Mattingly Day-to-Day
LEAD: Don Mattingly, who suffered back spasms Monday in Kansas City, Mo., underwent more treatment yesterday at Yankee Stadium and was examined by the team physician, Dr.
Stewart Hershon.
His condition was listed as day-to-day.
The team will decide today whether he will play in tonight's doubleheader against Minnesota.


Fire Out of Control in Alaska
LEAD: A raging fire today forced residents of a small town to abandon their homes, burned a Coast Guard station and other buildings, and blocked the Alaska Highway, the main road into the state.


Ernst Barred From Taking New York Work for 45 Days
LEAD: An administrative law judge has barred one of the world's largest accounting firms from accepting any new public audit work in the New York region for 45 days.
The order, naming Ernst &amp; Whinney, which has since merged with Arthur Young to form Ernst &amp; Young, results from defective audits that the firm is said to have performed nearly 10 years ago for the United States Surgical Corporation in Norwalk,


Deadlock Cited In Futures Case
LEAD: A jury considering the fate of the first traders to be tried in the Government's investigation of the world's largest futures exchanges said today that it had reached a partial verdict but was deadlocked on the remaining charges.


Bond Gives Up on Cup
LEAD: Alan Bond, the Australian financier whose companies have debts of more than $4 billion, has ended his 17-year association with the America's Cup, saying he will not be involved in the 1992 challenge off San Diego.


East German Auto Plant on the Brink
LEAD: The putt-putting, pollution-spewing, low-power Trabant automobile has long been the butt of jokes, including bumper stickers that say, ''Zero to 60 in 15 minutes.''


Gorbachev Appears Certain of Election To Keep Party Post
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev appeared today to have staked an unassailable claim to go on heading the Soviet Communist Party as delegates to the 28th Congress quarreled over the future of Communism, which was described by one delegate as ''sick.''


North Korean Exile Says Kim Staged Incident in 1950 War
LEAD: A former North Korean ambassador to Moscow, now in exile here, says that the North Korean leader invented a border incident with the South to start the Korean War in June 1950.


Jackson to Run For Lobby Post In Washington
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson announced today that he would run for the office of ''statehood senator'' from the District of Columbia, a new post created by the city government to lobby Congress for statehood.


Money Fund Assets Fall
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 513 money market mutual funds decreased $2.24 billion, to $382.70 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 161 institutional funds decreased by $222.8 million, to $91.61 billion.
The assets of the 250 general-purpose funds were down by $723.9 million, to $133.21 billion.


Lab Says Most Missing Equipment Is Found
LEAD: The Lawrence Livermore Laboratory said Thursday that it has accounted for all but a fraction of the more $45 million in equipment that had been reported missing.


Ulster Negotiations Delayed As Dublin Considers Its Role
LEAD: British and Irish officials said today that the unresolved question of when Dublin would enter proposed talks about returning a large degree of self-rule to Northern Ireland remained an obstacle to setting a date in the fall for beginning negotiations.


Dispute Over Seal Killings Divides South Africans
LEAD: A bitter environmental controversy has erupted in South Africa over the Government's plan to let a company from Taiwan kill up to 30,500 Cape fur seals each year along the windswept Atlantic coastline.


Major League Action Without Bats or Balls
LEAD: Baseball squeezed in some games between hearings yesterday.
But there was lots of action off the field.


Debt Outlook For Ecuador
LEAD: Ecuador's central bank said on Wednesday that $437 million of the country's $11.2 billion foreign debt might be eligible for relief under President Bush's recent proposals to relieve Latin America's debt burden.


No Change Seen at Fed On Rates
LEAD: Despite pressure from the White House and Congress to lower interest rates quickly to try to prevent a recession, the Federal Reserve apparently decided at a policy meeting this week to hold rates unchanged for the time being.


Auctions
LEAD:
$15 Million Cabinet


Woman Leaps, Halting 4 Trains on a Hot Day
LEAD: About 4,000 sweltering passengers were stranded for an hour inside subway cars on the West Side of Manhattan yesterday morning after a woman jumped to the tracks from between two cars of an uptown No. 1 train, the transit police said.


The Waterloo Festival
LEAD: Gerard Schwarz is to conduct the Waterloo Festival Orchestra in Mussorgsky's ''Night on Bald Mountain,'' David Diamond's Symphony No. 3 and Rachmaninoff's Second Piano Concerto at 8:30 P.M. tomorrow in the opening concert of the Waterloo Festival at Waterloo Village, Stanhope, N.J., at Exit 25 on Route 80.


Justice Department Files Antitrust Suit Against Architects
LEAD: The Justice Department filed a suit today against the American Institute of Architects contending that the professional group unreasonably restrained price competition.


Hans-Rudolf Kurz, Military Historian, 75
LEAD: Hans-Rudolf Kurz, a Swiss military historian who headed an international inquiry into the World War II record of President Kurt Waldheim of Austria, died on Friday.
He was 75 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Mr.
Kurz headed a commission of five historians that the Austrian Government named in 1987 to investigate accusations that Mr.


Tax on Securities Sales Is Viewed as Unlikely
LEAD: A tax on the sale of securities is among dozens of revenue-raising ideas being discussed in the White House and in Congress, but officials said the odds now seemed to be strongly against such a tax.


Ozone Action by Japan
LEAD: The Ministry of International Trade and Industry said on Wednesday that it was increasing financial help to industries that must limit the use of substances that damage the earth's ozone layer.
Ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbons are to be phased out by the year 2000 and methyl chloroform by 2005 under an international agreement known as the Montreal Protocol.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Restaurants
LEAD:
Arqua


Chronicle
LEAD: Gene Hackman may have narrowly avoided a heart attack when he checked into a hospital in Portland, Ore., complaining of chest pains. ''We think we got him just in the nick of time,'' DR.
HERBERT SEMLER said after he treated the actor for partial blockage of a coronary blood vessel at St.
Vincent Hospital and Medical


Burmese Military Slow In Handing Over Power
LEAD: It took the military government of Myanmar, formerly Burma, over a month to count the votes in the stunning election of May 27, in which the main opposition party won more than 80 percent of the seats.


On Stage
LEAD:
A London-Pittsburgh Project


Olive Ann Burns, 65, an Author Whose Illness Inspired Her Book
LEAD: Olive Ann Burns, whose illness with lymphoma prompted her to write the 1984 novel ''Cold Sassy Tree,'' died on Wednesday.
She was 65 years old and lived in Atlanta.


Review/Art;   Alice Aycock's Mighty Sculptures
LEAD: For the last three years, visitors to the Storm King Art Center here have been able to look across a broad field studded with giant steel sculptures by Mark di Suvero and see the white silhouette of Alice Aycock's ''Three-Fold Manifestation II.''


Albanian Dissidents Renew Rush on Foreign Embassies
LEAD: Hundreds of Albanians flocked to foreign embassies in Tirana today in a new rush to flee Europe's last Stalinist state and the Albanian Ambassador to Italy said his Government would allow refugees who had committed no crime to emigrate.


Sherman Act's 100 Years Of Protecting Competition
LEAD: The Sherman Antitrust Act, which this year marks its centennial, has had a long history of both vigorous enforcement and virtual oblivion.
In recent years it has not been as widely used by the Government to challenge many kinds of business agreements once viewed as improper.


Reckitt &amp; Colman Reassigns Brands
LEAD: Days after it completed most of its purchase of the Boyle-Midway division of American Home Products, Reckitt &amp; Colman Inc. said yesterday that it would reassign $40 million in advertising for the division's brands.


Detroit Signs Chevrier
LEAD: The Detroit Red Wings announced that they have signed the free-agent goaltender Alain Chevrier, who spent last season with the Chicago Blackhawks and the Pittsburgh Penguins.
Chevrier, 29 years old, was signed to a one-year contract, said General Manager Jimmy Devellano.(AP)


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Madison Ave. Turns an Ear To Rap Music
LEAD: YO, Madison Avenue!


PRAGUE ASSEMBLY RE-ELECTS HAVEL
LEAD: Parliament re-elected Vaclav Havel as President today, completing the first phase of Czechoslovakia's transition from four decades of Communist rule back to a Western-style democracy.


Hail Forces Airplane to Land
LEAD: Hail tore the nose cone of an Eastern Airlines plane flying out of Newark yesterday, forcing an emergency landing at Philadelphia International Airport.
Flight 161, bound for Atlanta with 47 people on board, landed safely in Philadelphia at 3:50 P.M. with no one hurt, said an Eastern spokesman.
Passengers were put on another flight.


Frances Ward Harrington, Editor, 86
LEAD: Frances Ward Harrington, a retired magazine editor, died on Wednesday at Caleb Hitchcock Medical Center in Bloomfield, Conn.
She was 86 years old and lived in Duncaster, a retirement community in Bloomfield.


Garrison Stuns Graf in Wimbledon Semifinal
LEAD: The defending champion, Steffi Graf, no longer invincible in her own eyes or in those of the players waiting in line to dethrone her, was upset today, 6-3, 3-6, 6-4, by Zina Garrison of Houston in the semifinals at Wimbledon.


Chilmark Raises UJB Stake to 6.7%
LEAD: The Chilmark Management Corporation has raised its stake in the UJB Financial Corporation to 6.7 percent from 5.2 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Chilmark said the shares had been purchased for investment purposes only.
UJB is a Princeton, N.J., banking company that owns United Jersey


A Murchison Will Lead Falcon Oil and Gas
LEAD: The Falcon Oil and Gas Company, a successful production and exploration company based in Odessa, Tex., said yesterday that it had named Spencer M. Murchison as president and chief executive.


Rite Aid Badgering Claimed
LEAD: The Rite Aid Corporation, the drugstore chain that was charged, along with its president, with trying to bribe an Ohio state pharmacy official, was singled out and badgered by state regulators, the company's lawyer asserted before a jury today.


After NATO: Concert of Europe
LEAD: Despite President Bush's invitation to Mikhail Gorbachev to attend a future NATO meeting, the United States and the Soviet Union are miles apart on how to construct a new security order in Europe.
Washington wants to hold on to NATO and bring a unified Germany into the Western alliance.
Moscow wants a collective security system in which the 35 members of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe would jointly build a new


Ducking the Constitution
LEAD: At the end of its term last week the Supreme Court looked the Constitution right in the eye - and blinked at its meaning.
The Court ruled that the Sixth Amendment's confrontation clause doesn't mean what it seems so clearly to say.
That's the clause that says, ''In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the right .


The Rule of Jean Renoir's Game: Art Is Life
LEAD: ANNA MAGNANI seems a bit too old, a bit too plump and awfully tired as she begins her role as a commedia dell'arte actress in ''The Golden Coach,'' Jean Renoir's unlikely 1952 film about an 18th-century Italian troupe performing in Peru.
Magnani's character, Camilla, has an ingenue's innocence and effortless charm, but she is played by a middle-aged woman who seems uncomfortably stuffed into a funny, harlequin-patterned dress.


Pryor to Be Tested
LEAD: Aaron Pryor will have an eye examination by a New York Athletic Commission doctor today to determine if can resume fighting in the state.


Preserving Old Values In an Africa That's New
LEAD: Among the modern arts of Africa is film, and eight examples of modern African cinematography will be shown - one film at 4 P.M. and again at 6:30 every Saturday through Aug. 25 - at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street.


Milton Gabel, Dentist, 83
LEAD: Dr.
Milton Gabel, a dentist who practiced in Manhattan for more than 50 years, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan at the age of 83.
His daughter, Sukhreet, said he died of complications from prostate cancer.


Yanks Must Pay $225,000 For Winfield Tampering
LEAD: The Yankees were ordered yesterday to pay $200,000 to the California Angels and were fined $25,000 by Commissioner Fay Vincent, who ruled that George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, had tampered with Dave Winfield after the outfielder was traded to the Angels.


Central Park Witness Says Rape Victim 'Hung to Life'
LEAD: The surgeon who treated the woman who was raped and beaten in Central Park last year said she was in ''deep shock and barely alive'' when an ambulance crew rushed her to the Metropolitan Hospital Center.


People
LEAD: *
James Caporimo, an art director at Waring &amp; LaRosa, has been promoted to senior vice president, creative.


McDonnell Raises MD-80 Deliveries
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said it had increased deliveries of its MD-80 aircraft in the second quarter to 34 planes, up from 24 in the corresponding period last year.
The increase raised MD-80 deliveries for the first six months to 59, a company record, said John Thom, a spokesman for McDonnell's Douglas Aircraft unit in Long Beach,


To Safeguard Taxpayers on S &amp; L's
LEAD: The Government has sold 155 failed savings and loan associations to new owners in the past three months.
That's three times what it sold in the preceding seven months.
The speedup is a good sign; the Administration is at last getting a grip on this monster task.
But it remains under heavy obligation to collar the crooks who made off with the money, and guard the taxpayers' interest.


At the Movies
LEAD:
Figgis in Binghamton


Fredrika Blair-Hastings, Author, 71
LEAD: Fredrika Blair-Hastings, author of a 1986 biography of the dancer Isadora Duncan, died on July 1.
She was 71 years old and lived in Carmel, Calif.


Review/Television;   West Africa's Echoes in New Orleans
LEAD: America's music has been forged as much in ghettos and rural backwaters as in the concert hall, and the folklorist Alan Lomax has been bringing it to outsiders since the 1930's.
In recent years, he has set out with a video crew, and the results can be seen on ''American Patchwork,'' a PBS series that begins this weekend.


No Headline
LEAD:
Friday
TOWER OF FAITH


Chronicle
LEAD: When only 37 people showed up on the first day of a conference to hear leading French Socialists speak, the conference chairman, OLIVIER STIRN, France's Minister of Tourism, leaped into action.
On the second day, as former Prime Ministers PIERRE MAUROY and LAURENT FABIUS and Defense Minister JEAN-PIERRE CHEVENEME


No Headline
LEAD: Tables Delayed


Health Funds Post Strong Gains
LEAD: With health and environmental funds leading the way, mutual stock funds turned in a strong performance in the second quarter of this year.
But as a group general equity funds still did not perform as well as the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 stock index.


Who Pays for the Clean Air Act?
LEAD: This time around, Washington couldn't be prouder.
Twenty years ago, when the major provisions of the Clean Air Act were passed, the word ''cost'' was hardly mentioned.
Now, with the bill in a House-Senate conference, the debate over amendments to the act is filled with figures purporting to capture the cost of the tiniest provision.


Work Wear Deal
LEAD: G &amp; K Services Inc. said it had signed an agreement to purchase the stock of the Work Wear Corporation of Canada Ltd. for about $68 million in cash and the repayment of $12 million in long-term debt.
Work Wear is Canada's largest uniform leasing company with revenues of about $62 million in 1989.
It is an indirect subsidiary of the Work Wear Corporation, a leading American uniform manufacturer owned principally by Paine Webber Capital Inc.


A Soprano at Caramoor
LEAD: Heidi Grant is to be the soprano soloist with the St.
Luke's Chamber Ensemble in Bach's Cantata No. 209 at 9 tonight in the Venetian Theater at Caramoor, on Girdle Ridge Road in Katonah, N.Y.
The all-Bach program also includes the First and Third Orchestral Suites, and the Concerto in D minor for Two Violins.


An Icy Oasis


Review/Art;   The Group Show as Crystal Ball
LEAD: THE group exhibition, that end-of-season ritual, is upon us, and with it comes the opportunity to take the art world's pulse.
This year, these shows seem to be everywhere, uptown and down, with something to offer nearly every esthetic palate.
Many of them are simply reprises of each gallery's stable of artists, but several exhibitions in S


Review/Dance;   Tango-Based Ballet From Johan Renvall
LEAD: The Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival has never seemed quite the right place for the classical ballet, though certainly it has presented some stellar ballet attractions over its 58 seasons.
For one thing, the stage of the Ted Shawn Theater here is a little small for bravura ballet dancing.
And the festival has a long and vivid modern dance history.


A Corporate Doctor Is Getting Fewer Calls
LEAD: There was a time when Victor H. Palmieri was flying so high he would have balked if clients tried to call the shots.
Now, he'd be grateful if they would simply call.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bank of America, San Francisco, named Barbara L. Rambo, a senior vice president, to manage its Northeast-Southeast institutional group in New York.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-8
A crucial summit conference opened with calls by President Bush and other leaders for a reshaped NATO alliance that would reassure the Soviet Union of the West's pacific intentions and guard against a revival of Soviet expansionism.
Page A1


Judge Refuses to Bar Group From Meeting in U.S. Forest
LEAD: A Federal district judge today rejected a legal foundation's request that he bar the environmental group Earth First from holding its annual meeting in a national forest in Montana next week.


IRAN'S CHIEF LINKS AID TO BETTER TIES
LEAD: In what appeared to be a forceful appeal for economic and humanitarian aid from the West, President Hashemi Rafsanjani was quoted today as saying there was a direct tie between foreign aid and improved relations with his Government.


Dozens Arrested in Miami at Haitian Protest
LEAD: Police officers in riot gear arrested about 50 people at a demonstration today by Haitian-Americans at a shopping center where they said a Haitian immigrant was beaten by Hispanic employees last week.


Market Place;   Ranking The Money Managers
LEAD: MANY stock indexes hit record highs this year, but most money managers earned less in the market in the first six months than they would have earned with Treasury bills, according to CDA Investment Technologies.


Power Failure in Brooklyn
LEAD: A 30-minute power failure affected 6,000 customers yesterday in the Sheepshead Bay section of Brooklyn.
A spokesman for Consolidated Edison, Martin Gitten, said a 27,000-volt line malfunctioned at noon, cutting off power from Avenue U to Manhattan Beach and from Brigham Street to Shell Road.
The power failure was not related to the weather, he said, although electricity use is always high during air-conditioner season.


Mitch Snyder, 46, Advocate of Homeless
LEAD: Mitch Snyder, who became a national figure in giving the movement in support of homeless people a public voice and face throughout the 1980's, was found hanged today in an apparent suicide.


Three Mets Are Chosen
LEAD: Three Mets, Darryl Strawberry, Frank Viola and John Franco, were picked yesterday for the All-Star Game at Wrigley Field on Tuesday as the managers, Tony La Russa and Roger Craig, filled out their rosters with pitchers and reserves.


Arts Panel Seeks Review For Four Rejected Grants
LEAD: The theater panel of the National Endowment for the Arts has denounced the agency's rejection of 4 of 18 grant recommendations and will urge a reconsideration of the decision, the panel's chairman, Philip Arnoult, said yesterday.


TV Weekend;   An Evening of Series, With Art, Love and War
LEAD: Series on Channel 13 are beginning and ending in unusual profusion on Sunday.


Schoeller Closes Yarn Plant in U.S.
LEAD: Schoeller Inc.'s plant here will close immediately, putting about 240 people out of work, the Switzerland-based company announced.
The company's president, Allen Booth, said from the United States headquarters in Hackensack, N.J., that the decision to close the acrylic yarn-spinning plant had been influenced by low overseas labor costs and recent domestic fashion changes that favor natural fibers.


Chronicle
LEAD: SPIKE LEE is going into retailing.
On July 22, a day before his movie ''Mo' Better Blues'' opens, Spike's Joint will open in a brownstone in Brooklyn.


12 Yards, 1 Swift Kick May Determine Final
LEAD: No soccer goalkeeper wants to be judged on stopping penalty kicks from only 12 yards.


How Campus Separatism Can Begin to End;   The Road Ahead
LEAD: To the Editor:


Thrift Office Will Open Its Cases
LEAD: In a sharp policy reversal, Bush Administration regulators said today that enforcement proceedings regarding failed savings and loans would be open to the public.
They inaugurated the policy by detailing charges in four pending cases, including the one involving Neil M. Bush, the President's son.


Review/Film;   The Jetsons In a Future Steeped In the Past
LEAD: Nothing fades faster than the future, or at least our fanciful notions of what the future ought to be.
And ''Jetsons: The Movie,'' a full-length animated version of the 1962 television show that was conceived by William Hanna and Joseph Barbera as ''the flip side of the Flintstones'' (in Mr. Hanna's words), has faded quite a bit.


San Francisco's Mayor Ousts Homeless Camp
LEAD: After months of charges that he was waffling on the matter, Mayor Art Agnos has ordered the police to break up a sprawling encampment of homeless people just outside City Hall.


Irving Berlin Was Swell to Cole Porter
LEAD: To the Editor:


Licensing Panel Rebuffed
LEAD: The Board of Examiners, which tests New York City's teachers, has been blocked by the Schools Chancellor from giving a test that would have enabled some employees to become supervisors.
Page B1.


Review/Jazz;   Grizzled Tone, Sure Logic
LEAD: The saxophonist Dewey Redman presented a relaxed first set at the Village Vanguard on Wednesday night, mixing be-bop, a standard and an original tune.
Mr.
Redman, who is known for his collaborations with the saxophonist Ornette Coleman, is a spare improviser, and in his hands solos unfold surely, phrase by phrase, pushed along by his slightly grizzled tone and steady logic.


Los Angeles Journal;   Brevity Follows Marathon In Retrial
LEAD: The McMartin Preschool child-molesting case, which produced the longest criminal trial in American history, is expected to go to a jury next week for the second time.
Its dimensions have so outgrown its substance that longtime observers now sound like baseball fans: they talk statistics.


World Bank Lending Drops
LEAD: Lending by the World Bank, the biggest source of aid to the third world, has declined in the last 12 months for the first time since 1985, the bank reported today.


Credit Card Fraud Charged
LEAD: Visa International and Mastercard International filed a multimillion-dollar fraud lawsuit today contending that a vast telemarketing scheme with nationwide tentacles recruited small companies to launder credit card charges.


Suspect Shot in Robbery Attempt at Jewelry Store
LEAD: A police officer eating lunch in the back room of a midtown jewelry store shot and critically wounded one of about eight men who tried to rob the store yesterday, the police said.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher In a Slow Trading Session
LEAD: The dollar closed mostly higher on world currency markets yesterday in light and uneventful trading.


Reporter's Notebook;   For Bush, Life on the Run Catches Up
LEAD: You may find this hard to believe, but President Bush originally wanted to make a day trip out of his visit to London for the meeting of the Atlantic alliance.


Paul Wynne, Who Aired Diary on AIDS, Dies at 47
LEAD: Paul Wynne, a broadcast journalist whose on-the-air diary about AIDS made television history, died of AIDS today at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center here.
He was 47 years old.


Raising Questions in 9 All-Stravinsky Concerts
LEAD: ''I think of the Summergarden series not as a group of unrelated concerts but as a museum exhibition with nine related events,'' said Paul Zukofsky, the violinist and conductor who has been directing the Museum of Modern Art's free outdoor concerts since 1987. ''In the same way the museum will exhibit a painter's work in depth, these concerts let us explore different aspects of composers.


Economic Scene;   The Huge Costs Of German Unity
LEAD: WEST GERMANY has now won its friendly takeover bid of East Germany, gaining not only a lot of real estate and 16 million more Germans, including 10 million workers, but also a host of decrepit factories, rundown roads and other poor public facilities.


Another Victim of Ohio Flood
LEAD: The police today recovered a body believed to be that of a 26th person killed by the flash flood that ravaged this eastern Ohio village last month.
Discovery of the body, which was found on the shore of the Ohio River, left as many as seven people still unaccounted for.
The exact figure is uncertain because of difficulties in obtaining a firm count on the number of people who lived in the area on the day of the flood.


L.I. Sound Is So Polluted It Faces Long-Term Damage, Scientists Say
LEAD: Parts of Long Island Sound are so polluted that it faces severe long-term environmental damage, say scientists, government officials and conservation groups.


Prosecutor to Ask Probation For Two Christian Scientists
LEAD: The prosecutor will recommend probation for two Christian Scientists found guilty of manslaughter in their son's death, a spokesman for the prosecutor said today.
A lawyer for the parents said the judge has said she will not jail them.


Upset Victory Is the Product of Hard-Won Confidence
LEAD: Zina Garrison's story is one of humble beginnings, painful transitions, and misplaced self-esteem, almost the stuff of soap opera.


Sketch Out on Dart Attacker
LEAD: A composite sketch of the man who is said to be shooting darts at women in Manhattan was released yesterday by the police.


Strawberry's 3-Run Blast Carries Slugging Mets Past Braves
LEAD: For teams in the National League, it's a bad enough fate to have the Mets on your schedule right now.
There is, of course, no choice but to play them.
There is also, though, no choice worse than to try to outslug them.


Altos Computer
LEAD: The Acer Group, the largest personal computer maker in Taiwan, said it had signed an agreement to buy Altos Computer Systems of San Jose, Calif., for $8.35 a share in cash.
The transaction is valued at about $94 million.
After the acquisition, which has been approved by the boards of both companies, Altos is to be operated as an independent subsidiary of Acer.


Dow Drops 32.42 Points, To 2,879.21
LEAD: In a matter of hours yesterday, stocks gave up much of what they had gained in the last five sessions.


3 More Kenyans Seized Calling for Opposition
LEAD: The authorities today detained three more prominent Kenyans linked to recent calls for a legalized opposition in this one-party state, including the son of a former vice president and two lawyers.


Third Witness Says Barry Used Cocaine
LEAD: A third witness testified today in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug trial that she had seen him use cocaine.


4 U.S. Crews Gain at Henley; Harvard Freshmen Defeated
LEAD: Four of the six eight-oared crews from the United States entered in the Thames Challenge Cup advanced today at the 151st Henley Royal Regatta.


Foreman Bout Set
LEAD: George Foreman, hoping to earn a shot at the heavyweight title, will continue his comeback against Ken Lakusta, the Canadian champion, on July 31 in Edmonton, Alberta.


Sidney Fread, 74, Dies; A Corporate Executive
LEAD: Sidney Fread, an executive in New York for several companies, died last Saturday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Phoenix.
He was 74 years old and lived in Phoenix.
His family said he had died of lung cancer.


White House Spurns Expansion Of Nation's Anti-Poverty Efforts
LEAD: After considering a variety of ambitious options, the Bush Administration has decided against proposing any major new program or strategy to combat poverty at this time, Administration officials said today.


King's Behavior Not Unusual, Arum Testifies
LEAD: Bob Arum, the boxing promoter who has had a longtime rivalry with Don King, gave testimony yesterday before a Federal Court jury that appeared to support King.


Court Rejects A 'Poison Pill'
LEAD: The Delaware Chancery Court ruled today that National Intergroup Inc., a beleaguered company whose businesses include metals, retail stores and wholesale drug distribution, must submit its amended shareholder rights, or ''poison pill,'' plan to a shareholder vote before it can be declared effective.


America's Future
LEAD: Children were the theme of the International Design Conference in Aspen this year.
For a week the participants heard architects, designers, teachers, psychologists and others talk about the needs of children.
And all about, their own children played on giant balls, painted, built constructions and generally demonstrated the wonders of youthful imagination.


Finland May Let Soviet Jews Use Airport on Way to Israel
LEAD: Soviet Jews could begin to fly to Israel next week from an airport in Finland, the Foreign Minister has said.
The operation would make Finland the fourth major route for Jews emigrating from the Soviet Union, along with Hungary, Romania and Poland.


Court Clears Sale Of Amdura Unit
LEAD: The Amdura Corporation said the United States District Court had approved the sale of the assets of the company's Coast-to-Coast Stores subsidiary to the Servistar Corporation.
Amdura said it expects the sale to close within 35 days.


Chronicle
LEAD: How can PRESIDENT BUSH elbow a potential 1992 opponent, MARIO M. CUOMO, while keeping his distance from the very uphill campaign for Governor that PIERRE A. RINFRET is waging against Mr.
Cuomo?


Review/Film;   A Cat That Can Show People's True Colors
LEAD: Whimsy and politics make extremely strange bedfellows, at least in ''The Cassandra Cat.'' This 27-year-old political allegory from Czechoslovakia, opening today at the Public Theater, is the story of a bespectacled cat who brings chaos to a small town when his glasses are removed.
Without those blinders, people literally show their true colors.


LAW: At the Bar;   The lawyer whose business card was so effective that it could lead to unwanted litigation.
LEAD: Even the most innocuous paraphernalia of a lawyer, it seems, can be the stuff of litigation.
Along with burning flags and the right to die, the United States Supreme Court recently ruled on the propriety of a lawyer's letterhead, the latest of several cases it has considered on lawyer advertising.


B. Traven's Secret Has Been Long Known
LEAD: To the Editor:


Easy Goer Nears Stride in Battle to Regain Form
LEAD: Easy Goer's 3 3/4-length victory in the Suburban Handicap at Belmont Park on Wednesday was not just proof that he is back to where he was in his prime last season.
It was also the same kind of experience that set him up for the best performance of his career a year ago.


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums
THE INTREPID, the aircraft carrier sea-air-and-space museum, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. daily, with the last tour at 4 P.M., at Pier 86, 46th Street and Hudson River.
Admission: children, $4; the elderly, $6; others, $7.
Information: 245-2533.
''A YEAR WITH CHILDREN,'' a selection of painting, sculpture, poetry and essays created by children of public schools in New York City and New Jersey, in the Learning Through Art-Guggenheim Museum Children's program, 8 A.M.


Ex-Union Official Convicted of Racketeering
LEAD: A former carpenters union official in New York City who was the central figure in an assault case against John Gotti has been convicted of labor racketeering and sentenced to a prison term of one to three years.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the departure of Ralph McA.
Ingersoll 2d from the United States newspaper business to run newspapers in Europe misidentifed the paper he operates in Ireland.
It is The Irish Press, not The Dublin Press.


...And in U.S. Court, Spira Pleads Not Guilty
LEAD: Howard Spira yesterday pleaded not guilty to charges that he tried to extort money from George Steinbrenner and that he threatened the Yankees' owner and Dave Winfield, the former Yankee outfielder.
The scheduling of his trial was put off until July 23 because the judge assigned to the case has been a guest of Steinbrenner at


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Vibes and Guitar


Pickens to Add To Koito Stake
LEAD: T. Boone Pickens, the Texas oilman who has been rebuffed in his attempts to get seats on the board of the Koito Manufacturing Company, said on Wednesday that he planned to increase his stake in the Japanese auto parts supplier.


Phil Boggs, 40, Diving Champion Who Won Olympic Gold Medal
LEAD: Phil Boggs, who dominated United States diving competition during the 1970's, died on Wednesday.
He was 40 years old.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.31
9.39
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.67
7.70
7.78
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.58
7.59
7.54
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.43
8.40
8.05
30-YR.


Olongapo Journal;   Sailors Can't Paint the Town, So Sin Trade Pales
LEAD: In this sleazy, honky-tonk town, which grew up out of the huge Subic Bay Naval Base to service it, the effect of new threats by Communist insurgents to kill Americans can be measured in beer.


Our Towns;   For Some People, Independence Is a Daily Worry
LEAD: The day before Independence Day, Rick Brenner was as independent as ever, leaving the group home at dawn to catch the 6:32 train into the city for his clerical job at the American Petroleum Institute.
He's been working there 15.8 years, makes $16,883.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Economy


UAL Suspends Jet Purchase Talks
LEAD: The UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, said today that it had suspended negotiations for a large aircraft purchase at the request of the employee group trying to buy the company.


Fire Destroys Jersey Stage-Set Factory


INSIDE
LEAD:
Jackson Seeks a Post
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson said he would run for ''statehood senator'' from the District of Columbia, a new post created by the city government to lobby for statehood.
Page A9.
To Save the Seals, or Not
A bitter environmental debate has erupted over South Africa's plan to let a company from Taiwan kill up to 30,500 fur seals each year.


Euthanasia Bid in Washington State
LEAD: Nancy Wallace walked up to a pair of strangers on a street in downtown Seattle the other day and started talking about the emotional torture brought on by the slow death of her mother.


Serbia Suspends Government of Albanian Region
LEAD: The Parliament of the Yugoslav republic of Serbia today suspended the Assembly and the Executive Council of the Kosovo region, which has a 90 percent ethnic Albanian population and has been the scene of ethnic disorders.


Japan Goals For 1990's
LEAD: The Government ministry that helped engineer Japan's export-fueled economic boom says that in the 1990's Japan must turn inward and set its own house in order.


Cuomo Requests Inquiry on Sale Of L.I. Raceway
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo asked the State Investigation Commission yesterday to investigate the purchase of Roosevelt Raceway with publicly assisted financing in 1984.


French to Help Poles Build Hotels
LEAD: Two French companies and a Polish concern signed an agreement to build 30 two-star hotels in Poland, the official news agency P.A.P. said.


Soviet Debate: Do Party Cells Have a Place?
LEAD: From the press gallery of the cavernous Kremlin hall where the Communist Party is holding its 28th congress, it is clear that this is not an ordinary political convention.


Israeli Laborites Defer Action on Party Chief
LEAD: The Labor Party's leadership bureau refused to take any position today on Labor's bruising contest for party leadership and left the party leader, Shimon Peres, and his challenger, Yitzhak Rabin, to continue quarreling for three more weeks.


Late-June Vehicle Sales Rose 12.5%
LEAD: Sales of domestically produced cars and light trucks jumped 12.5 percent in late June, surprising analysts and raising hopes among auto executives that the industry had turned a corner after a nine-month slump.


Review/Theater;   New Love? Or Just A New Life?
LEAD: At the outset of ''A Silent Thunder,'' Eduardo Ivan Lopez's sentimental romance at the Apple Corps Theater, Kimiyo, an Okinawan teen-ager working in her uncle's tailor shop, takes a man's suit off the rack and dances around the room softly singing Simon and Garfunkel's ''Condor Pasa.'' She is interrupted in this reverie by the arrival of Cpl.


Trouble Will Follow Bible-Club Ruling
LEAD: To the Editor:


2 Barry Supporters Get New Bid to Attend Trial
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today opened the way for two vocal supporters of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. to attend his drug and perjury trial, from which they have been barred by the trial judge.


Raising Taxes Will Strengthen Bush
LEAD: Democrats and many Republicans believe that President Bush's endorsement of higher taxes will hurt him politically.
But they ignore the four major benefits that a successful resolution of the U.S. budget problem would provide.


Louisiana's Arrogant, Insulting Abortion Law
LEAD: To the Editor:


Steinbrenner Has Day In Baseball's Court . . .
LEAD: George Steinbrenner was the lone witness during a daylong hearing before Fay Vincent yesterday.
The baseball commissioner, seeking more information from the Yankees owner about his activities, will hold a second session today.


Pop/Jazz;   A Maverick Upholding Traditional Values
LEAD: Merle Haggard has gone political again.
More than 20 years after his hit song ''Okie From Muskogee'' made him one of the most outspoken tongue waggers in country music, Mr.
Haggard, who is to perform tomorrow night at the Ritz with his 10-piece band, the Strangers, has decided to protest the protesters in a new song called ''Me and Crippled Soldiers.


Garrison Upsets Graf at Wimbledon


Books of The Times;   An Appropriated Title, Revisionist Sentiments
LEAD:
Eminent Victorians
By A. N. Wilson
240 pages. Illustrated. W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $25.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD: Cameroonian's Makassi Sam Fan Thomas, Kilimanjaro, 531 West 19th Street (627-2333).
Sam Fan Thomas, from Cameroon, sings music called makassi that has all of French-speaking Africa dancing, with three chords and a lilting beat that sets hips swaying.
The last time Mr.
Thomas appeared in New York, he had a Paris-based band that was irresistible; this time, with musicians from Cameroon, he may be even better.


Chronicle
LEAD: The new director of the venerable Comedie Francaise is JACQUES LASSALLE, a distinguished actor and stage director who has headed the National Theater of Strasbourg since 1983.
He succeeds Antoine Vitez, who died suddenly in May.


Treasury Prices Fall in Light Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities dipped and interest rates rose slightly in fairly light trading yesterday, as dealers positioned themselves for the release this morning of June employment data.


Joseph A. LaPlante, Law Professor, 67
LEAD: Joseph A. LaPlante, an author and a professor emeritus at the University of Connecticut School of Law, died on Sunday at his home in West Hartford.
He was 67 years old.


Up and Down The Freight Elevators
LEAD: Desperate for sympathy and understanding, George Steinbrenner had made himself available recently to any radio or television microphone within a million-mile radius of Yankee Stadium.
But when 30 Rockefeller Plaza watchers arrived early yesterday for Commissioner Fay Vincent's inquiry concerning payments to Howard Spira for information discrediting Dave Winfield, the


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This century has been marked by war and suffering on an unparalleled scale.


WESTERN LEADERS CALL FOR NEW NATO TO ASSURE SOVIETS
LEAD: President Bush and other Western leaders opened a crucial summit conference today with calls for a reshaped NATO alliance that would both reassure the Soviet Union of the West's peaceful intentions and guard against a possible revival of Soviet expansionism.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about a New Jersey Supreme Court order for two eating clubs at Princeton University to admit women misidentified Sally Frank, the alumna who sued the clubs 11 years ago.
She is a professor at New York Law School, not at New York University Law School.


9 Men Out, Suspended for Brawling
LEAD: In a sweeping mass suspension for an on-the-field brawl, Bobby Brown, the president of the American League, yesterday suspended four Seattle Mariners, four Milwaukee Brewers and Manager Tom Trebelhorn of Milwaukee for their actions in a 28-minute fight between the teams last Saturday night in Seattle.


How Campus Separatism Can Begin to End
LEAD: To the Editor:


2 Die, 600 Seized in Britain In Riots Over Soccer Defeat
LEAD: Moments after West Germany squeaked past England in Turin, Italy, to advance to the final of the World Cup soccer tournament, people spilled out of pubs and parties throughout England on Wednesday and went on rampages that ended with two deaths and 600 arrests.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
El Dorado Petit


Strike Falters in Norway
LEAD: Wildcat strikes on Norway's North Sea oil and gas platforms began to break down after workers on one of the most important fields decided to go back to work.


Fernandez Rebuffs Testing Agency, Halting an Exam
LEAD: The Board of Examiners, the agency that tests New York City's teachers and other school system employees for licenses, has been blocked by the Schools Chancellor from completing a test that would have enabled some employees to become supervisors.


Ex-GTE Colleagues Now at FPL Group
LEAD: James L. Broadhead and Stephen E. Frank, former colleagues at the GTE Corporation, will be working together again at the parent of the Florida Power and Light Company.


Washington at Work;   Jim Sasser, Reluctant Budget Chief Who Cornered President on Taxes
LEAD: Senator Jim Sasser has detested math since grade school.
He says he has no taste for intricate things, unless that means tinkering with the engine of a rust-coated 1967 Jaguar, now sidelined in the Senate garage, that he has been trying to fix up for years.


Welch's 10-Game Streak Is Stopped
LEAD: Teddy Higuera allowed two hits in seven innings and Gary Sheffield and Greg Brock each hit home runs today as the Milwaukee Brewers ended Bob Welch's streak of 10 consecutive victories and beat the Oakland Athletics, 4-3.


Hospitals Battling Specialists Over Revenues From Testing
LEAD: Squeezed by Government and employer efforts to reduce costs, many hospitals are battling with specialist physicians over the revenues generated by advanced testing equipment and life-support machines.
Some of the fights over these lucrative procedures are ending up in court.


Railroad Collision Injures 6
LEAD: An Amtrak train collided with a tractor-trailer rig today at a railraod crossing, injuring six people, including the engineer.
The New York-bound train, the Crescent, remained upright, and only the engine and the first set of wheels on the second of eight cars derailed.
The accident occurred at a crossing off Mississippi Route 11 shortly before 11 A.M.


Three Howard Beach Retrials Are Scheduled for Aug. 28
LEAD: Justice Thomas A. Demakos of State Supreme Court in Queens yesterday scheduled Aug. 28 for the retrials of three defendants in the 1986 Howard Beach racial-attack case.


5 Paris Museums Shut After Art Thefts
LEAD: Five Paris museums were closed and security was tightened at the Louvre today after three daring art thefts.


Youth, 14, Dies After Fireworks Explode in Can
LEAD: A 14-year-old Bengali youth who had come to New York City a few months ago died yesterday, one day after he was hit by metal shards while watching firecrackers being set off at a Fourth of July block party sponsored by the Hell's Angels, the police said.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about public access to the beach in Belmar, N.J., referred incorrectly to a former candidate for town office, Roy N. Colin.
Mr.
Colin ran for commissioner unsuccessfully in an election in which Mayor Maria Hernandez was recalled; Mr.
Colin was not recalled.


Thompson, Free Agent, Goes to Nuggets' Camp
LEAD: A week after watching his dream of being drafted into the National Basketball Association go unfulfilled, the former Syracuse guard Stevie Thompson is headed for a tryout with the Denver Nuggets at their free-agent camp later this month.


Corn and Soybean Prices Fall After Forecast of Rain
LEAD: Corn and soybean futures prices fell sharply yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade after the National Weather Service issued a rainy forecast for the Midwest.


Estonian Veterans Reunion Postponed as Soviet Armored Column Arrives


DEALS
LEAD:
BASEBALL
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE - Fined the Yankees $25,000 and ordered them to pay the California Angels $200,000 for violating the tampering rule with Dave Winfield after he was traded to the Angels.
AMERICAN LEAGUE - Suspended the Milwaukee Brewers' manager, Tom Trebelhorn, and Bob Sebra for five games and Gary Sheffield, Mike Felder, and B.


Sundstrand Sees Drop in Earnings
LEAD: The Sundstrand Corporation said it expected second-quarter earnings to be down about $7 million because of losses from its Brazilian operation.
In May, when business in Brazil almost came to a halt because of the Government's anti-inflation program, Sundstrand's Brazilian operation reduced its work force of 429 by 30 percent, to 318.


Sweeney Schriner, Hockey Player, 78
LEAD: David (Sweeney) Schriner, a member of the Hockey Hall of Fame and of two Stanley Cup teams with the Toronto Maple Leafs in the 1940's, died after a lengthy illness, the National Hockey League announced Thursday.
He was 78 years old.


Morris Stifles Royals With One-Hit Shutout
LEAD: Jack Morris, retiring the last 25 batters, pitched a one-hitter tonight and Cecil Fielder hit his 28th home run as the Detroit Tigers beat the Kansas City Royals, 4-0.


Official Who Released Nuclear Data Resigns Post
LEAD: The manager of the Hanford nuclear reservation, who ordered the release of documents showing the worst environmental abuses in the nuclear weapons complex, said yesterday that he was resigning to accept a job in private industry.


Japan Chain Buys U.S. Beef Processor
LEAD: The Kyotaru Company, a leading Japanese restaurant chain, has bought Best Western Foods Inc. for $41.5 million.
Masakazu Yoda, a Kyotaru spokesman, said the purchase of Best Western Foods, a Los Angeles beef-processing company, was part of a strategy to enter the processed-beef supply field.


Evolution in Europe;   An Alliance for a New Age: Has NATO Donned a Velvet Glove?
LEAD: ''Spectacular!'' said one of President Bush's aides today as the NATO summit conference ended. ''Got everything we wanted!'' said a second senior adviser.


An 'Embarrassed' Herzog Quits as Cardinals' Manager
LEAD: Whitey Herzog resigned as manager of the St.
Louis Cardinals today, saying he was embarrassed by the play of a team he had made into one of the best of the 1980's.
He accepted blame for the club's poor performance this season.


Evolution in Europe;   Excerpts From Speech by Yeltsin Before 28th Party Congress
LEAD: The following excerpts are from a speech before the Communist Party congress by Boris N. Yeltsin, president of the Russian republic and a leader of the congress's insurgent minority, as translated by The New York Times.


Evolution in Europe;   Ethnic Strife Persists in Yugoslav Republics
LEAD: Yugoslavia's biggest republic, Serbia, cracked down on the opposition and the press in a provincial hotbed today, while another republic, Slovenia, was ordered to rescind its sovereignty declaration.


Grains and Soybeans Drop On Good Weather Forecast
LEAD: Prices of grain and soybean futures plunged for the second straight day yesterday as more weather forecasters predicted ideal weather next week for Midwestern crop development and winter wheat harvesting.


Paper, Once Written Off, Keeps a Place in the Office
LEAD: A decade ago, computer companies trumpeted the arrival of the ''paperless office.'' It would be a workplace where memos and reports would be instantly distributed over electronic networks to be read on computer screens around the world, and where high-capacity memory disks would replace file cabinets.


Sonics Hire Motta's Son
LEAD: Kip Motta says he probably won't be talking basketball anymore with his father, Dick Motta, head coach of the Sacramento Kings.
That's because Kip, who was a Washington State University assistant basketball coach for the last three years, was hired on Thursday as an assistant to the Seattle SuperSonics' head coach, K.


Dow Rises 25.74 Points In Light Day
LEAD: Stocks advanced briskly yesterday, making up most of their sharp selloff the day before.
But with many traders taking a long Fourth of July holiday, volume dropped to the lowest level of the year.


Victory With Vision in Europe
LEAD: After World War I, the victors carved Europe into unstable pieces and imposed a peace that scarred winners and losers alike.
Germany was truncated geographically, and doomed to poverty by reparations.


Fed Voted in May Against Lower Rates
LEAD: Federal Reserve policy makers concluded at their May meeting that inflation posed too great a danger to allow interest rates to decline, minutes of the meeting released today show.


Beaten Jogger Fought On, Nurse Testifies
LEAD: Nine hours after being left for dead in the mud, the woman known as the Central Park jogger lay in a hospital bed, still struggling and kicking as if trying to fight off her assailants, a nurse testified yesterday in a hushed Manhattan courtroom.


Passive Smoking Study Refused to Be Taken as the Last Word;   Evidence Is Strong
LEAD: To the Editor:


Beliefs
LEAD: For a year the United States has been embroiled in a fitful debate over obscenity.
That is not necessarily bad.
A country indifferent to such a question would probably be a country that no longer cherished any beliefs deeply enough to care whether they were transgressed.
Or it would be a country so monolithic and complacent in its mores that affronting them was unimaginable.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on June 21 about a demonstration by environmentalists against wood cutting in Northern California misstated the increase in logging by the Pacific Lumber Company since its takeover by the Maxxam Group.
From 1985 to 1989, logging rose by slightly more than 100 percent.


Letter: On Criminal Justice;   The Diverse Uses of Probation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Blues Make Bid For Stevens
LEAD: After feathering Brett Hull's financial nest, the St.
Louis Blues are ready to do the same for Scott Stevens.


A Juvenile Jekyll With a Subtle Drug Message
LEAD: ''I feel strong,'' sings the protagonist of ''Jekyll and Hyde'' after downing a potion he has concocted in his laboratory. ''I feel brave.
For the first time ever, I even had to shave.''


Parents Are Suing Parents In Long Island Murder Case
LEAD: Three months after Robert Golub was convicted of the murder of Kelly Ann Tinyes in Valley Stream, her parents have sued his parents, contending that Mr. and Mrs.
Golub bear partial responsibility for the girl's death because they had failed to supervise their son properly.


The Met's Crystal Lights Get a Lift


Standard-Parts Debate Clouds Choices for Users of Cable TV
LEAD: Consumers' easy access to cable television's wide range of extra programs is being impeded by the inability of cable operators and television manufacturers to agree on standardized equipment.


Another Tough Loss For Hawkins
LEAD: Andy Hawkins must be wondering what torture he has to endure to squeeze out a victory as a pitcher for the Yankees.


Evolution in Europe;   Bulgaria's Leader Quits Post Over Crackdown on Protest
LEAD: President Petar Mladenov quit today over accusations that he ordered tanks to disperse an anti-Government protest in December, and his resignation set off rejoicing by thousands of Bulgarians.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: American and Soviet space travelers who had a historic rendezvous in space 15 years ago will hold a reunion on the ground at the Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Fla., on July 26.
Two former American astronauts, TOM STAFFORD, 60 years old, and DEKE SLAYTON, 66 years old, will rejoin two Soviet cosmonauts, ALEKSEI LEONOV, 56 years old, and VALERY KUBASH


Dropout Unit's Head Is Sentenced in Theft
LEAD: A former New York City schools official who admitted stealing $610,000 from a dropout program was sentenced yesterday to five years' probation as part of a plea agreement requiring him to make full restitution.


Books of The Times;   The Wild West in the Everglades
LEAD:
Killing Mister Watson
By Peter Matthiessen
372 pages. Random House. $21.95.


Twins Plead Innocent In Glen Ridge Case
LEAD: The former co-captains of the Glen Ridge High School football team have pleaded innocent to sexually assaulting a mentally handicapped girl more than a year ago.


Fixed Mortgages Slip
LEAD: Fixed-rate home mortgage rates averaged 10.06 percent this week, down from 10.15 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.46 percent this week, up from 8.45 percent the week before.


Louisiana Bill Would Require Warnings on Recordings
LEAD: The first bill in the United States requiring warning labels on record albums with potentially offensive lyrics was passed last night by the Louisiana State Senate by a vote of 29 to 9.
The bill, an amended version of legislation approved by the state's House of Representatives on May 10, requires warning labels on recordings with themes of rape, murder, suicide, illegal drug use, child abuse or satanic worship.


Evolution in Europe;   East German Unions Trying to Be Eastern Europe's Strongest
LEAD: After decades of docile behavior under the old Communist Government, East Germany's trade unions are flexing their muscles this week to make sure that workers' interests are not brushed aside as the nation rushes toward a free-market economy.


Evolution in Europe;   Cheney to Sign Accord With Greece on Bases
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney arrived in Greece today for a four-day visit to inspect U.S. military bases and to sign an agreement for an eight-year extension of base rights.


Bumpily, Rinfret Begins Unorthodox Quest
LEAD: Describing himself, Pierre A. Rinfret often uses the line, ''what you see is what you get.''


Review/Dance;   A Playful Approach to Perceptions
LEAD: John Martin, the critic who perhaps did the most to introduce modern dance to the nation in the 1930's and 40's, noted that unlike ballet, the new art form was ''a system, not a point of view.''


Dollar and Gold Are Mixed On News of Unemployment
LEAD: The dollar ended up mixed in domestic currency trading yesterday.
It had closed higher overseas after the release of a better-than-expected unemployment report in the United States.


Suburbs Are Wary of Bears' Wanderlust
LEAD: More and more lately, young and wayward black bears have been popping up in the leafy outer suburbs of metropolitan New York, providing residents with nervous amusement and testing the wits of the police.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a transmission error, an article on Sunday about the negotiations over the New York City budget misidentified a City Council member from Staten Island.
He is Alfred C. Cerullo 3d.


For Minority Broadcasters, a Role in What Is Seen and Heard
LEAD: Radio and television executives say Federal Communications Commission policies giving special consideration to minority applicants for broadcast licenses have resulted in a modest increase in the diversity of programming.


Simplify French Spelling if You Must, but Spare That Circumflex;   'Foodbowl,' as in Soccer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Edberg Beats Lendl and Faces Becker in Final
LEAD: Ivan Lendl's preparation for the 1990 Wimbledon may have been epic, but today, the curtain came down on him one round too early.
At the very moment he most needed it, Lendl ran out of his supply of inspired ambition, or zazrany, as they call it back in his discarded homeland of Czechoslovakia.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
CYCLING
Bauer Still in Front
Steve Bauer of Canada stayed in the overall lead yesterday through another damp day in the Tour de France as the first turning point of the race approached.
A 38-mile individual time trial from Vittel to Epinal today will give the racers a chance to gain time on the leaders after six days of flat stages in the race, which ends July 22 in Paris.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The National Press Club in Washington has received a $1 million endowment to improve its library.
The money was given, after a year of negotiation, by ERIC FRIEDHEIM, the founder and editor in chief of The Travel Agent, a travel industry publication.
Mr.
Friedheim, 80 years old, has been a club member since 1934.


Intergroup Suitor Backed by Court
LEAD: A Delaware court paved the way for an investor group to proceed in its takeover attempt of National Intergroup Inc., a Pittsburgh-based holding company of metals and pharmaceuticals.
Vice Chancellor Maurice Hartnett of the Delaware Chancery Court ruled that Centaur Partners Group might proceed with its appeal to the Delaware Supreme


A Democratic Protection Racket
LEAD: Congress may be on the verge of missing a historic opportunity to clean up this country's campaign laws - laws that give near-ironclad protection to incumbents in the House, promote the role of special interests over individual citizens and hide the amount of money that these special interests funnel into national campaigns.


Shuttle Leak Testing Is Set by Space Agency
LEAD: The National Areonautics and Space Administration said today that tests were planned on two coasts starting this weekend to isolate the source of hydrogen leaks that have grounded the nation's fleet of space shuttles.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JAMES BROWN could finish his prison sentence for aggravated assault at home if he completes the paper work.
Since he is within one and a half years of being eligible for parole, he meets a requirement for extended work release, said FRANCIS X. ARCHIBALD, spokesman for the South Carolina Department of


In Texas City, Newcomer Brings Abortion Turmoil
LEAD: Until recently, Corpus Christi was like most other cities when it came to the subject of abortion.
There were strong feelings on both sides, but other questions, like whether to increase property taxes, seemed more urgent.


Has Anybody Seen the Soccer Fans?
LEAD: Where have all the people gone?


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Shopping for CD's
LEAD: Yields on bank certificates of deposit rose briefly in May but have slipped gradually since, and rate analysts expect them to move lower through most of 1990.
Investors may want to lock in current interest rates.
Certificates of deposit are as safe as Treasury securities, while requiring far smaller minimum investments.


Mildred S. Olmsted, Leader of Pacifists And a Suffragist, 99
LEAD: Mildred Scott Olmsted, a longtime antiwar campaigner who was national executive director of a leading pro-disarmament group, died Monday at her home in Rose Valley, Pa., a suburb of Philadelphia.
She was 99 years old.


Cycladic Art May Be Sold, British High Court Rules
LEAD: The British High Court turned down a request by the Greek Government today to halt a sale of Cycladic sculptures scheduled at Sotheby's on Monday.


Tunis Journal;   In a Jobless Land, the Way Up Means a Visa Out
LEAD: By the time the steel gate in the French Embassy wall opened early in the afternoon, the line of Tunisians seeking visas to visit their former colonial power stretched and snaked around a corner and down a street, where Saida Khemeiri let it be known that she had beaten the system.


Wildfires Still Raging in Alaska, Still Threatening Crossroads Town
LEAD: Wildfires charred about 400 square miles of forests and tundra by today, and still threatened the town of Tok, where firefighters kept up a house-to-house battle against wind-driven flames.


Dinkins Campaign Audit Unfinished Months Later
LEAD: Eight months after the mayoral election, Mayor David N. Dinkins's campaign finances are still being audited by the city, and the costs of the audit are reducing the amount of surplus campaign funds the Mayor will return to the city under the new campaign finance law.


Ford-Portugal Deal On Plant Reported
LEAD: Portuguese Government officials declined to confirm a newspaper report that the Ford Motor Company had chosen Portugal for a new leisure vehicle production plant worth about $2 billion.
The sum would be the largest single foreign investment in Portugal, whose economy has been booming.


Control Data Acts To Sell VTC Unit
LEAD: The Control Data Corporation is again seeking buyers for VTC Inc., its 400-employee semiconductor maker in Bloomington.
Contol Data reached an agreement in the spring to sell the unit to Seattle Silicon of Bellevue, Wash., for an undisclosed amount, but delays in arranging financing have cost Seattle Silicon its exclusive purchase rights.


Christian Scientists Are Given Probation for Death of Child
LEAD: A judge here handed down a sentence of 10 years' probation today to two Christian Scientists convicted of manslaughter in the death of their 2-year-old son.
As a condition of the probation, the parents must take their three other children to a pediatrician for regular examinations.


BAT Strikes Back
LEAD: I am the Hubble telescope.
I was destined to see the outermost edge of the universe.
Much big talk accompanied my creation.


Patents;   Wristwatch Provides Measure of Heart Rate
LEAD: For people worried about overexerting themselves during exercise, two electrical engineers in Aloha, Ore., have invented a wristwatch that they say also provides an accurate reading of heart rates using just a touch of the fingers.


Fall at Window Kills an Infant In Kew Gardens
LEAD: An 18-month-old fell four stories to his death yesterday in Queens because a window guard had been improperly installed, the police said.


Gannett Expects Earnings Decline
LEAD: The Gannett Company said it expects its second-quarter earnings to be lower than a year earlier, in its first quarterly drop since the company went public 22 years ago.
Sheila Gibbons, a spokeswoman for the nation's biggest newspaper company, said Gannett would issue its actual earnings report for the April-June period in a few weeks.


In Louisiana, Veto On Abortion Bill
LEAD: Gov.
Buddy Roemer today vetoed a bill that would have outlawed all abortions except those performed to save the life of the pregnant woman, and the State House of Representatives quickly voted to override his veto after a short but emotional debate.


100 POSSIBLE CASES OF SAVINGS FRAUD GIVEN U.S. PRIORITY
LEAD: Stung by criticism that it has moved tentatively and ineffectively to prosecute savings and loan fraud, the Bush Administration has selected 100 savings institutions for priority investigation, Government officials disclosed today.


Strike Continues in Norway
LEAD: An illegal strike by offshore oil workers forced the Norwegian state oil company to shut down production again today, although other strikers were back at work.


Europe Reclaims Its Liberal Language
LEAD: Le Monde's editorial director, Andre Fontaine, remarked not long ago that European intellectuals, West and East-Central, were themselves undergoing a historic unification, having come to ''all use the same words and concepts and speak of the same things.'' Today in Budapest and in Paris, in books about politics and culture, in discussions at literary conferences, there is talk of rights, individual autonomy, pluralism, humanism, reform, progress.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Unemployment Edges Down


Evolution in Europe;   GERMANS IN TALKS ON POLITICAL UNITY


Japan Reduces Rice Payments
LEAD: Amid United States pressure to open its rice market, the Japanese Government decided today to cut the price it would pay to rice farmers this year by only 1.5 percent.


Evolution in Europe;   Poland Ousts Its Top Communist Cabinet Members
LEAD: Responding to growing social and political turmoil, Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki dismissed the most prominent remaining Communists from his Cabinet today and pledged that Poland would soon hold fully free elections for Parliament and the presidency.


NATO ALLIES, AFTER 40 YEARS, PROCLAIM END OF COLD WAR; INVITE GORBACHEV TO SPEAK
LEAD: President Bush and the other leaders of NATO today issued a declaration to end four decades of cold war by proposing to act jointly with Moscow and other East Europeans in stating that ''we are no longer adversaries.''


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.31
8.25
9.23
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.76
7.67
7.73
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.68
7.58
7.51
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.54
8.43
8.00
30-YR.


Evolution in Europe;   Daughter of Brezhnev Wins Return of Seized Valuables
LEAD: Galina Brezhnev, daughter of Leonid I. Brezhnev, the late Soviet leader, has won a lawsuit claiming a variety of valuables confiscated when her husband was sentenced to prison.


Bug Strips' Health Risk Is Revised
LEAD: In 1987 a Government report cited a chemical in pest strips as a probable cause of cancer, and the insect-control devices seemed to disappear from store shelves.
Now the Government is preparing a new report that the two American makers of the strips hope will revive their sales.


Store's Sign Leads To Anti-Bias Protests
LEAD: The owner of a pharmacy posted a sign reading, ''The black Americans from the manor are not welcome here - they are thieves,'' on Tuesday, and protesters have been gathering outside the store.


Henry Allen Lord Mali, Executive, 58
LEAD: Henry Allen Lord Mali, a New York textile executive, died on Thursday at the Yale-New Haven Hospital.
He was 58 years old and lived in Manhattan and Norfolk, Conn.
He died of complications from leukemia, his family said.


Philippines Given Advice
LEAD: The Philippines should improve its investment climate and work harder to sell itself abroad, a special representative of President Bush said today.


Seattle Gives Cheers To the Arts of Russia In Goodwill Festival
LEAD: During a single night here this week, theatergoers gave a standing ovation to a performance of Chekhov's ''Three Sisters'' performed in Russian, another audience rose to its feet to celebrate the Bolshoi Ballet's return to America, and a long line snaked outside the entrance of a gallery showing five centuries of treasures from Moscow.


Byron Rubenstein, 74, Rabbi in Connecticut
LEAD: Rabbi Byron T. Rubenstein, leader of the congregation at Temple Israel in Westport, Conn., for 23 years before he retired in 1982, died on Thursday at Mediplex of Westport.
He was 74 years old and lived in Westport.


Norman Mather, 76, Engineering Professor
LEAD: Norman Wells Mather, professor emeritus of electrical engineering at Princeton University, died on Tuesday at the Princeton (N.J.) Medical Center.
He was 76 years old and lived in Princeton.


Bridge
LEAD: All players are familiar with the post-mortem, which is favored by some but abhorred by others.
But few are aware of the pre-mortem, which can be accurate in the hands of a master.
The diagramed deal took place in a high-stakes rubber-bridge game in Toronto, and the North-South cards were held by Sam Kehela and Willy Lebovic, who won a National Men's


Mexican Leader Orders Curb On Police Use of Roadblocks
LEAD: President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has ordered the lifting of police roadblocks and imposed curbs on other activities of security forces, to crack down on human rights abuses.


Renamed Exxon Valdez Will Ply Different Waters
LEAD: The Exxon Valdez, the tanker that caused the nation's worst oil spill, will be returned to service next month under the name Exxon Mediterranean and will ply the seas half a world away from Alaska, the company that owns the vessel said today.


Truck Driver Killed in Holdup
LEAD: The driver of a Pepsi-Cola delivery truck was fatally shot yesterday during a holdup in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn, the police said.
The driver, Hank Fallacaro, 35 years old, of Brooklyn, was shot once in the chest shortly after noon at 630 Central Avenue while making deliveries, said Patrolman Fred Weiner, a police spokesman.


Evolution in Europe;   Albanians Reportedly Stream Into Embassies in the Capital
LEAD: About 3,000 Albanians crowded into Western embassies in the Albanian capital today, and the Austrian news agency reported that 10,000 jammed the streets, some of them fleeing police beatings in Europe's last Stalinist state.


3 U.S. Teams Advance
LEAD: Those traditional American rowing rivals, Yale and Harvard, advanced along with Temple today to the quarterfinals of the Thames Challenge Cup at the Henley Royal Regatta.


Passive Smoking Study Refused to Be Taken as the Last Word
LEAD: To the Editor:


Evolution in Europe;   Yeltsin Warns Soviet Party Its Time for Reform Is Short
LEAD: Boris N. Yeltsin, champion of the slender insurgent minority at the Communist Party congress, warned the party today that it must change everything from its name to its undemocratic methods or soon be ''dragged from legal power'' by a disgusted Soviet public.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With the Perils of Parking a Car
LEAD: In big cities many drivers justify the expense of parking in lots or garages by pointing to the security they can provide.
Yet it is not uncommon for owners to return for their cars and find dented fenders or scratched finishes.
Sometimes, property is missing.
And occasionally the car itself is gone - stolen.


About New York;   Brushing Up On 7 Million Facts In the Naked City
LEAD: It was an unlikely band of conspirators, the 13 who gathered, one flight up, in a nondescript building along a lackluster strip of East 49th Street.
Unlikely, because they were smiling and chatty even as they were planning new strategies for conquering the streets of New York and telling all to invading out-of-towners.


Surprise! VCR to Beat Was Born in the U.S.A.
LEAD: A tiny Arizona company has begun to market a new generation of videocassette recorder that could re-establish an American presence in consumer electronics, an industry dominated by Far East producers for the last 20 years.


Sulaiman Laments His Actions
LEAD: Jose Sulaiman, the president of the World Boxing Council, told a Federal Court jury in Manhattan yesterday that while a postfight videotape showed him saying he was withholding recognition from James (Buster) Douglas hours after Douglas knocked out Mike Tyson for the heavyweight championship on Feb.


Patents;   Red Dye Is Produced From Carrot Cultures
LEAD: Two Israeli researchers this week patented a method for producing an intense red dye for foods and cosmetics from carrot cells grown in petri dishes.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Thursday about immigrants in Spain misidentified the nation that formerly controlled Guinea-Bissau.
It is Portugal, not Spain.


New Force In Fashion: 'Dart Man'
LEAD: Standards of dress have subtly shifted in midtown Manhattan, and for once the culprit is not an avant-garde French designer or a trend-setting socialite.
The mysterious attacker known as the Dart Man is to blame.


NATO ALLIES, AFTER 40 YEARS, PROCLAIM END OF COLD WAR; INVITE GORBACHEV TO SPEAK    Shevardnadze Says the Measures Herald 'a Safe Future' for Europe
LEAD: The Soviet Government reacted with enthusiasm today to Western proposals for a new order in Europe, and said the moves would strengthen President Mikhail S. Gorbachev at a time when he is under increasing attack from hard-liners.


Deborah S. Lee Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Deborah Susan Lee, a doctoral candidate in clinical developmental psychology at Bryn Mawr College, and Steven Kenneth Fleischmann, a doctoral candidate in sociology at the University of Pennsylvania, were married yesterday at Black Point Bluff in The Sea Ranch, Calif.
Bruce F. Allen, a lawyer who was appointed a judge pro tem for the ceremony, officiated.


FOREIGN AFFAIRS What A Crazy Idea
LEAD: Waves of speeches roll by, reduced by the translator's monotone to a lulling sea song.
It's hard to stay attentive.
The Central Committee propaganda wheel who is reading out extracts, remarkably precise and objective at that, looked up and said: ''Oh dear, I've mixed up my papers.
It doesn't matter; the speaker's point was that we have to overcome the crisis of socialism,'' and he went on to the next speech.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on May 25 about a West Virginia man's indictment on Federal charges of racketeering and conspiracy misstated his religious affiliation.
A recent letter from a reader pointed out that the man, Keith Ham, was expelled from the Hare Krishna organization in 1987; he leads a splinter group.


Foes of Stalin Deserve Credit
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chinese Dissident Criticizes U.S. on Human Rights
LEAD: Fang Lizhi, China's leading dissident, said in an interview broadcast tonight that the United States had a ''double standard'' for human rights that was tougher on the Soviet Union than on China.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Thursday about the French publisher Maurice Girodias omitted his survivors.
He was survived by his second wife, Lilla; two daughters from a previous marriage, Valerie and Juliette; two sisters and a brother.


Iberia Air Bid In Argentina
LEAD: An investment group led by the Spanish national airline Iberia was the sole bidder today for a significant share in Argentina's national air carrier Aerolineas Argentinas.


Homeless Man Is Charged In Tossing Boy to His Death
LEAD: A homeless man with a long criminal record has been charged with the slaying of a 3-year-old boy who was thrown to his death Sunday from the roof of a seven-story building in Brooklyn, the police said yesterday.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Associated British Foods P.L.C., London, said it might make an offer for British Sugar and other food manufacturing companies of Berisford International P.L.C.


Results of Pryor Exam
LEAD: Aaron Pryor won't be able to fight in New York until at least September, when the doctor who examined him yesterday will present his conclusions to the New York Athletic Commission's medical board.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JULY 7, 1990
LEAD:
The Economy


Vincent Sets Timetable For Steinbrenner Ruling
LEAD: George Steinbrenner may know in two weeks just how his entanglements with Howard Spira and Dave Winfield will affect his future in baseball.


Renault Seeks All of Mack Trucks
LEAD: Mack Trucks Inc., an ailing company that still bears the most famous name in American truck making, announced yesterday that it had received a $100 million takeover bid from Renault, the French state-owned maker of autos and trucks.


Sharper Data for Rent Guidelines
LEAD: New York City's rent control laws force landlords, tenants and bureaucrats into periodic confrontations: how much rent is fair for what kind of housing?
A recent tax law creates a new, solid basis for such discussions - one that turns out to support the landlords' position.


Evolution in Europe;   Text of the Declaration After the NATO Talks
LEAD: Following is the text of the final declaration issued by the NATO summit conference here today:


Witness Testifies she sold Crack to Barry Many Times
LEAD: A former city employee testified today in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug trial that she sold crack to the Mayor on more than 20 occasions in 1988, sometimes handing it over at her home after he arrived by limousine, other times delivering it to him at hotels and at a city office building.


Mets Waken With 6 Runs In the Eighth
LEAD: The innings had merged quietly one into the other.
The threats, mild menaces at best, had unraveled without much inspiration.
It appeared that the Mets' offense was fated to rest.


In Moscow, New Yorkers Take 2 Prizes
LEAD: Two New York City singers, Deborah Voigt and Hans Choi, won top honors today in the voice categories at the ninth Tchaikovsky International Music Competition.


Jean Dabry, French Navigator, 89
LEAD: Jean Dabry, navigator for Jean Mermoz on several of the French pilot's pioneering flights in the 1930's, died on Wednesday.
He was 89 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
On May 12, 1930, Mr.
Dabry and Mr.
Mermoz completed the first nonstop flight between Africa and South America, crossing the South Atlantic from Senegal to Brazil in 21 hours and 14 minutes.


Bomb Blast Wounds 24 in Johannesburg


Snyder Told His Colleagues Of Being Audited by I.R.S.
LEAD: Six weeks before his suicide, Mitch Snyder told a meeting of his co-workers at the Community for Creative Non-Violence that he was being investigated by the Internal Revenue Service in connection with royalties he received from the 1986 television film of his life story, a spokeswoman for the organization said today.


Simplify French Spelling if You Must, but Spare That Circumflex
LEAD: To the Editor:


VW Raises Prices
LEAD: Volkswagen U.S. raised prices by an average of 2 percent on its 1991 Golf, GTI, Jetta, Passat and Vanagon models arriving at dealers now.
Pricing for the full Volkswagen model line will be announced this fall when the remaining 1991 vehicles become available, it said.


The Beat Goes On for Young Rhythmic Gymnast
LEAD: Michel Couturier still chuckles when he recalls the night he and his wife received a phone call at their Greenwich Village apartment from the excited rhythmic gymnastics coach at the United Nations International School on the East Side of Manhattan.


Davis to Get a Start
LEAD: Mark Davis, who won the National League Cy Young Award last year as a relief pitcher with San Diego but has been a major disappointment for Kansas City in the bullpen this year, is going to get a chance at starting.


Tokyo Leader Bars Aid to Soviets Until Settlement of Island Dispute
LEAD: Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu said today that ''it will not be possible'' for his Government to take part in economic assistance to the Soviet Union until Moscow has settled a 45-year-old territorial dispute over islands in the Kurile chain.


Navratilova Going for No. 9
LEAD: Martina Navratilova is known as the golden oldie at Wimbledon, where she is an eight-time singles champion, holds the record for singles victories with 98, and is poised to set another record Saturday if she can use her 11th appearance in the women's singles final to achieve a ninth title.


Fernandez Plans to Appeal Decision on Superintendents
LEAD: Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez said yesterday that he would appeal a State Supreme Court decision that limits his authority in the hiring of school district superintendents.


JOB FIGURES DEPRESS BOND PRICES
LEAD: Interest rates soared yesterday as prices of Treasury securities plunged.
The sharp price declines were fed by conflicting employment data released by the Government before trading began in New York and the losses became even more pronounced during the session.


Officer Is Found Guilty In Slaying of a Motorist
LEAD: A 26-year-old police officer was convicted yesterday of shooting an unarmed motorist to death in a burst of anger over a traffic dispute.


Patents;   A Picture-Framing Kit That Children Can Use
LEAD: For parents who feel compelled to exhibit their children's latest fingerpaintings, a graphics designer in New York City has patented a picture frame that is simple enough for small children to assemble themselves.


In East Europe, Cries for Change
LEAD: President Petar Mladenov of Bulgaria resigned yesterday over charges that he had ordered tanks to disperse an anti-Government protest in December, and his resignation touched off rejoicing by thousands of Bulgarians.
After students demanded that Mr.
Mladenov quit, he submitted his resignation to the newly elected Parliament ''in order not to be a reason to increase political tension,'' Bulgarian television said.


Liberian Foes Clash Near Doe Mansion
LEAD: Rebel forces attacked the port of Monrovia today and fought a battle less than two miles from the executive mansion where President Samuel K. Doe is trying to stay in power.


Ban on Discovery Airways
LEAD: The Government today ordered the Hawaii-based Discovery Airways closed down in one week, accusing the three-month-old carrier of violating United States laws on foreign ownership.


Travels in the U.S.: Savings Via Coupon Or Club
LEAD: More and more vacationers are seeking significant discounts on hotel rooms in the United States through special clubs or coupon books.
Those savings can extend, too, to some rental cars and short-term condominium rentals.


Explosion Kills 17 at Petrochemical Plant in Texas
LEAD: A fiery explosion at a petrochemical plant near the Houston Ship Channel killed 17 workers and injured five others, the authorities said today.


Police Guard Is Gone, but Koch Is Not Unprotected
LEAD: The Police Department has taken away the six-member security detail assigned to former Mayor Edward I. Koch since he left office on Dec. 31.
The department's action was based on the decision that police protection was ''no longer warranted,'' a police spokeswoman said.


N. C. Wyeth, Inventor, Dies at 78; Developed the Plastic Soda Bottle
LEAD: Nathaniel C. Wyeth, a Du Pont engineer who invented the plastic soda bottle, died Wednesday at the Penobscot Bay Medical Center in Glen Cove, Me.
He was 78 years old and lived in Tenants Harbor, Me., and Chadds Ford, Pa.


Europe Studies Women's Jobs
LEAD: Many female workers in the European Community are unable to get as much work as they want and are often overqualified and underpaid for the jobs they hold, according to a study presented this week by the European Community's Executive Commission.
Women in the European


Military's Accounting Offices Being Merged to Pare Costs
LEAD: To tighten control over military spending and save up to $150 million a year, the Pentagon plans to consolidate the separate accounting and finance offices of the Army, the Air Force, the Navy and the Marine Corps.


Jury Claims Deadlock In a Shooting Case
LEAD: Jurors in the trial of Rafael Rivera Garcia, the Puerto Rican artist and university professor accused of trying to kill his next-door neighbor, told the judge last evening that they are hopelessly deadlocked on most charges.


Big Board Fines Shearson For Actions in Merger Talks
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange censured Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. yesterday and fined the brokerage house $500,000 for improper actions during the firm's 1986 merger discussions with the E. F. Hutton Group, Wall Street executives said.


William McCarthy, 73, Retired Police Official
LEAD: Willliam McCarthy, a former First Deputy Commissioner of the New York Police Department, died on Thursday at the hospice of the Colonial Palms Nursing Home in Pompano Beach, Fla.
He was 73 years old and lived in Pompano Beach.


Seymour Baumrind, Rabbi, 70
LEAD: Rabbi Seymour Baumrind, rabbi emeritus of the Lake Success (L.I.) Jewish Center, died of a heart attack on June 29 while vacationing at St.
Agathe, Quebec, his son said.
Rabbi Baumrind was 70 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Is the Penalty Shootout Here to Stay? FIFA Says Yes.
LEAD: After Argentina proved itself better than Italy at penalty kicks in the semifinals of the World Cup last Tuesday night, the president of the world governing body of soccer, Joao Havelange, received a fax from a distraught Italian woman complaining that her country should not have been eliminated in such an unfair manner.


Old Jewelry Also Stolen From Louvre
LEAD: An inventory that was ordered after the theft of a Renoir painting from the Louvre has disclosed that a dozen pieces of ancient Roman jewelry were also stolen from the museum, officials said today.


A Law on the Books Lets Citizens Strike Back at Parking Bureau
LEAD: To the Editor:


Patents;   New Cream To Combat Wrinkles
LEAD: The quest for relief from wrinkles, a hallmark of aging, goes on.
This week, two medical researchers in Madison, Wis., patented a cream they said embodies a natural process for reclaiming skin damaged by sun and old age.


Behind Japan's Birth-Rate Furor
LEAD: To the Editor:


After Crisis, Unused Beds Increase In Hospitals Across New York City
LEAD: Five months after New York City's worst episode of hospital overcrowding in at least a decade, there is an abundance of vacant beds in many parts of town, and hospital experts are debating whether the overcrowding was an aberration or an omen.


Jobless Rate Slides Again; Hope for Easier Credit Dims
LEAD: In a report that further reduced hope for early Government action to lower interest rates, the Labor Department said today that the unemployment rate edged down another notch in June, to 5.2 percent, and that the number of new jobs rose to a higher level than most analysts expected.


Evolution in Europe;   Calming the Waters
LEAD: For a minute there this morning, it almost looked as if the United States had come close to agreeing to include surface naval forces in arms-reduction talks with the Soviet Union, something the United States Navy has stoutly resisted for years.


Evolution in Europe;   Romanian Party Plans to Recast Itself Soon
LEAD: A leader of Romania's governing National Salvation Front said today that the party would recast itself as a center-left social democratic movement and remove members who failed to toe the democratic line.


Your Money;   A Few Deductions About New Taxes
LEAD: No sooner had the words ''tax revenue increases'' formed on Presidential lips than citizens began asking what to expect and how to protect themselves.
Four tax and investment professionals, despite some wisps of clouds in their crystal balls, ventured to respond to those questions.


Peru: No Vietnam in the Andes
LEAD: President Bush's offer of military aid for Peru's antidrug campaign raises fears that he'll involve the U.S. in another Vietnam.
Those fears are unwarranted.
A tough military strategy in the Andes, coupled with substantial development aid, is essential to antidrug policy.


Ex-Savings Chief Curbed
LEAD: A Federal judge ordered Thomas Spiegel, the former head of the Columbia Savings and Loan Association, to post a $1 million bond today and placed severe restrictions on his financial movements while ruling on the legality of a Government case against Mr.
Spiegel, a Government attorney said.


F. K. Henri Henrion, Graphic Designer, 76
LEAD: F. K. Henri Henrion, an international graphic designer and educator, died on Thursday at his home in London.
He was 76 years old.


Marjorie M. Bitker, 89, Ex-Trustee of Barnard
LEAD: Marjorie M. Bitker, a writer and former trustee of Barnard College, died on Tuesday at Columbia Hospital in Milwaukee.
She was 89 years old and lived in Manhattan.


N.F.L. Sues Association
LEAD: Jack Donlan, executive director of the National Football League Management Council, says the Players Association insists it is not a labor union but continues to act like one.
So on Thursday in Minneapolis, the council and the league's 28 teams filed an antitrust suit in Federal Court against the Players Association, charging the association with illegally coordinating player-agent activity in negotiations involving rookies and veteran free agents.


Digital to Highlight Midrange Computers
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation will open its annual DEC World computer trade show Monday in Boston with a range of computer hardware and network announcements aimed at strengthening the computer maker's line of proprietary midrange computers.


Evolution in Europe;   NATO: AT A GLANCE


In a Dry Corner of Chile, a Pilgrimage to Grief
LEAD: One recent day, a 73-year-old man in a suit, tie and hat paced beside an open pit in the desert sands a few hundred yards from the Pacific Ocean and cried out in anguish for the son executed in 1973.


60% Recycling Goal Urged in New Jersey
LEAD: New Jersey officials should set a goal to recycle 60 percent of the state's garbage by 1995, a task force commissioned by Gov.
Jim Florio recommended today.


Evolution in Europe;   Comments By Soviets On NATO
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a statement yesterday by Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union as translated and transmitted by the official Soviet press agency Tass.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''The Atlantic Community must reach out to the countries of the East which were our adversaries in the cold war, and extend to them the hand of friendship.''
- The leaders of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. [1:6.]  ''In London it was declared that the West extends its hand to the East.


North Testifies at Grand Jury
LEAD: Oliver L. North, the former Reagan White House aide convicted in the Iran-contra affair, on Friday made his fourth appearance before a Federal grand jury investigating the affair.
Government officials have said the panel is looking into whether Reagan Administration aides not yet charged helped to deceive Congress about the sale of arms to Iran and covert military aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.


British Air Purchasing Boeing 747's
LEAD: British Airways P.L.C. placed an order today for Boeing 747-400 jumbo jets, Rolls-Royce engines and components that could ultimately be worth more than $8 billion.


FICTION
LEAD: TOWARD WHAT BRIGHT GLORY?
By Allen Drury. (Morrow, $22.95.) In his 17th novel, Allen Drury has set himself the task of resurrecting campus life at Stanford University in the last academic year before World War II.
From the vantage point of roughly a half-century, the period seems (as Evelyn Waugh described pre-Great War Oxford) as ''lost as Lyonnesse.


Wall Street;   T-Shirts: In Leaner Times, the Little Guys Are Losing
LEAD: It's getting scrappy out there in the T-shirt market.
Producers' capacity was stretched last year, as sales exploded by nearly 30 percent.
To avoid getting shorted this season, many wholesalers double-ordered the shirts, the sort on which decals and slogans are printed.


Eileen Reynolds, Lawyer, Is Wed
LEAD: Eileen Mary Reynolds, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph G. Reynolds of St.
Petersburg, Fla., was married yesterday in Newburgh, N.Y., to Ian William Weetman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Weetman of Whissel, Lancashire, England.
Msgr.
J.
Bernard Caverly performed the ceremony at the chapel of Mount St.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Glendale, Calif.;   2 Office Towers Rising at Last
LEAD: CONSTRUCTION of what will be this city's largest commercial office project, the $150 million Glendale City Center, has finally begun on a prime downtown parcel that has been sitting idle for five years.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-9


2 Harvard Boats In Henley Finals
LEAD: Harvard advanced two of its boats today to Sunday's finals of the 151st Henley Royal Regatta, and those two will be the only United States representatives still competing from the 30 entered this year.


Headliners;   Bye, George?
LEAD: In baseball, at least, possessions can cry out for new owners.
In recent years, much wailing has been heard from the New York Yankees, whose principal owner, George Steinbrenner, faced league disciplinary action on two fronts last week amid persistent speculation that he just might be thrown out of the game.


BRUSSELS FINDS A MARKET FOR EUROCHIC
LEAD: DEVIL-MAY-CARE, indifferent to propriety, perhaps even lsightly outrageous, the Manneken-Pis statue has served for centuries as the symbol of Brussels and as a stand-in for the typical Bruxellois.
The little boy with the gentle smile, however, may be feeling his age as the city around him under-goes its transformation from simply the capital of Belgium to the capital of Europe.


VINCENT IS BESEIGED IN FIRST FULL SEASON
LEAD: After calling George Steinbrenner to account for charges brought by a self-described gambler, after ordering the Yankees to pay $200,000 in compensation and $25,000 in fines for tampering, Fay Vincent was asked if baseball had been damaged during the unpleasant week that was.


Action Outshines Stars in C.F.L.
LEAD: Nearly 20,000 fans mill merrily into Lansdowne Park for an evening of pro football unlike any to be found on a Sunday afternoon in Mile High Stadium or Candlestick Park or Soldier Field during the fall.


The World;   On Tokyo's International Shopping List: More Clout
LEAD: ONLY a year ago the 1990's seemed bound to be the age of Japanese influence, as the biggest Pacific power approached the Pacific Century.


Design;   SITTING PRETTY
LEAD: It's the bigness that first inspires fear.
Then, having to make what seem like endless decisions.
Never mind the financial investment or the shopping time involved.
Even the sanest of folks can find buying a sofa a daunting experience.
For starters, consumers will usually be bombarded with questions from a pleasantly inquiring salesperson: what size and shape will fit the space?


Wall Street;   If You Believe in Domestic Oil . . .
LEAD: The stock market just can't seem to make up its mind about oil.


Major Dilemma For Yankee Fan
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Grant Aids Laid-off Workers
LEAD: WORKERS at the troubled UNC Naval Products in Montville have welcomed a United States Labor Department grant to help their laid-off colleagues.
But they say they need contracts, not job training.


Bush Will Not Oppose Japan's Plan to Aid China


Tech Notes;   A Robot With the Brains, Build and Gait for Mars
LEAD: If there is life on Mars, it may one day be rudely awakened by Ambler, a 12-foot-tall, six-legged walking robot being developed for National Aeronautics and Space Administration by Carnegie-Mellon University's Robotics Institute.
With the software ''brains'' and motor skills to explore rugged terrain, Ambler could bring a new dimension to exploration of the solar system, NASA and University officials say.


Cathie J. Martin, Professor, Weds
LEAD: Cathie J. Martin, a daughter of Robert M. Martin of Lexington, Mo., and Mary T. MacKenzie of Naples, Fla., was married yesterday to James R. Milkey at the home of his parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Robert K. Milkey of Granby, Conn.
The Rev.
Jennifer Phillips performed the Episcopal ceremony.


NONFICTION
LEAD: LUMP IT OR LEAVE IT.
By Florence King. (St. Martin's, $15.95.) In her new collection of essays, Florence King comes on - as usual - like someone with Tourette's syndrome at a diplomats' ball.
At a time when what she likes to call ''caring 'n' compassion'' have sissified American public discourse, Ms.


Sandra A. Lane Plans to Marry
LEAD: Sandra Alison Lane, a candidate for a master's degree in public health at Columbia University, and Jonathan Aaron Ballan, an associate at the New York law firm of Dewey Ballantine Bushby Palmer &amp; Wood, plan to marry in September.
Miss Lane is the daughter of Dr.
Stanley L. Lane of New York and the late Sylvia Lane.


'The 2 Greatest' Had Their Shots
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Underground Railroad Inspires New Interest
LEAD: WHEN Robert M. Hoffman purchased a home on Main Street in Farmington in 1944, he had no idea he was buying into one of the most dramatic episodes in American history.


Deborah Ann Firsty to Wed in October
LEAD: October wedding plans for Deborah Ann Firsty and Wayne Joseph Zuckerman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham Zuckerman of Hillside, N.J., have been made known by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Firsty of Santurce, P.R.


FERNANDEZ TAKES CHARGE
LEAD: James Traub depicts well the problems of corruption and inertia Joseph Fernandez faces as chancellor of the New York City schools system (''Fernandez Takes Charge,'' June 17).
But his article overlooks one ironic aspect of the situation, namely that Stanley S. Litow and Robin Willner, the powers who installed Fernandez, were themselves rewarded with posh jobs as his top lieutenants.


Moving On
LEAD: The man who pioneered the trust-fund program for The Athletics Congress and who was a key executive in long-distance running during the last decade, Alvin Chriss, has announced his resignation from TAC.
In addition to his work for the trust fund, designed to help athletes receive money for on-track and off-track activities while retaining their amateur status, the 60-year-old Chriss recently represented TAC in drug-testing appeals.


New York City Moves to Bar Idling Engines
LEAD: New York City workers armed with stopwatches will start a crackdown on engine-idling tomorrow in an effort to reduce air pollution.


A Fair That's Full of Style
LEAD: WHEN the glass blowers light their furnaces at the Allaire Craft Fair on Saturday, the fiery glow will echo flames that lighted a bog-iron forge at the same site nearly 200 years ago.


If Mozart Has Arrived, Can Kochel Be Far Behind?
LEAD: Bupleurum is the genus name for Hare's Ear, a plant marked by a single, earlike leaf that sheathes the top of its stem.
It is a member of the order Umbelliferae, which also includes carrots, parsley, dill, lovage and hemlock.
In the 19th century a new species of Hare's Ear was identified by one Professor Fenzl, who, following the custom of naming rare plants for distinguished botanists, called his discovery Bupleurum Koechelii.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Should Baseball Suspend Steinbrenner?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.


Patricia Shelley Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Gene Shelley of Scottsdale, Ariz., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Patricia A. Shelley and Serge J. L. Bushman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Bushman of New York.


From Remotest Russia, Warmhearted Traditions
LEAD: ''The Russian Village'' is an ingeniously convenient name for an unusual, warmhearted presentation of songs and folk dances from the northern Russian countryside that will begin a week of performances today in the New York City area.


66 Killed in Fierce Battle in East Sri Lanka
LEAD: Intense fighting broke out in eastern jungles today after soldiers surrounded an important rebel base and cut off sea and land escape routes, military officials said.


U.S. Soccer: Lights, Camera, Action!
LEAD: The distance the United States soccer program must travel before the next World Cup in 1994, America's first turn at being host to the world's largest sporting event, is formidable.
Without the opportunity to look back and see how far the sport has progressed in such a short time, America's task might seem insurmountable.


The Insular World of Wall Street?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Truth In Packaging?
LEAD: To the Editor:


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD: East Islip
$170,000
27 Oakwood Hills Drive
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 25-year-old splanch; dining room, den, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $5,300.
Greenlawn
$212,000
22 Bartel Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 18-year-old colonial; dining room, Florida room, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $4,300.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: The history of the game is replete with accidents of various kinds.
The first occurred in 1929 when Ely Culbertson took his foursome to Paris following a victory in London.
The scoring was French-style ''plafond'' with which the Americans were not familiar and the host country had a small lead throughout.


South America
LEAD: To the Editor: I recently returned from five weeks' travel in South America (Chile, Bolivia and Ecuador) and have been reading about the hooliganism in Moscow and State Department warnings regarding travel in Lithuania and other countries.


Young Lions and Elder Statesmen
LEAD: To the Editor:


Every Boy Has His Day
LEAD:
MY LIFE AS A DOG
By Reidar Jonsson.
Translated by Eivor Martinus.
220 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $17.95.


Miss Bullitt Wed To H. S. Burnett
LEAD: Clarissa W. Bullitt and H. Stephen Burnett were married yesterday at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in Manhattan.
The Rev.
F.
Forrester Church performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Burnett, a daughter of Mrs.
Francis J. Seidner of Washington and the late John C. Bullitt, graduated from Columbia University, where she is a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology.


Q and A;   Australian Aborigines
LEAD: Q. Our family plans to visit Australia in October.
We are interested in visiting an aborigine family. - Barbara Johnson, Brooklyn


MOTHERS: TIRED OF TAKING THE RAP
LEAD: In referring to biological research on mental illness, Janna Malamud Smith states: ''Schizophrenia is no longer understood only as the product of a mother's intrusive and smothering behavior. (She may be a player, but hardly alone on the stage.)''


Maradona Raises the Stakes
LEAD: He has already given one gift to his daughters in this soccer season: a wedding.


The Yankees' Week That Was
LEAD:
SUNDAY Three weeks after almost being released, Andy Hawkins pitches a no-hitter in Chicago and loses, 4-0.
The Yankees commit three errors in the eighth inning to allow the runs.
Hawkins becomes the first pitcher in 23 years to lose a complete-game no-hitter, the first in modern baseball history to pitch an eight-inning complete-game no hitter.


Hawkins House A Symbol of Success
LEAD: I enjoyed reading the article ''Suffolk Wrestling With Fate of Estates'' (May 13), which focused on the fate of several historic homes on the island.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Museum Is 90, but Young at Heart
LEAD: On sultry summer days, when a child's toughest decision may be whether to sell lemonade or draw with crayons, the Brooklyn Children's Museum ranks as one of the more sophisticated - and fun - places to learn something.


Portugal
LEAD: To the Editor: I would like to warn prospective travelers in Portugal of the possible theft of their luggage from a van or station wagon.
I remember vividly my shock and disbelief when five suitcases were stolen from our locked Ford while it was parked in a deluxe hotel parking lot.
The remaining 10 days of our stay were largely devoted to replacement of my husband's prescription medicines, some clothing and other necessities.


Perspectives: Changeover in the Housing Agency;   Putting a Dinkins Imprint on a Koch Plan
LEAD: The word that leaps from Felice Michetti's lips as she seeks to articulate the special stamp that the administration of David N. Dinkins will put on city-assisted housing programs is affordability.


Hard-Boiled in Hollywood
LEAD:
STARDUST
By Robert B. Parker.
256 pp. New York:
G. P. Putnam's Sons. $18.95.


Reflections on World Cup 1990
LEAD: In ''And Maradona Was Waiting,'' (The Times, June 25) about the contest between Argentina and Brazil, George Vecsey opened with the following statement: ''He (Diego Maradona of victorious Argentina) wore the fabled yellow jersey of Brazil like a trophy from a primitive war.
He waved it at the stands as if brandishing the pelt of a vanquished enemy.


Jose Durand, Professor And Author, Dies at 64
LEAD: Jose Durand, a professor in the department of Spanish and Portuguese of the University of California at Berkeley, died last Sunday while on a sabbatical in his native Lima, Peru.
He was 64 years old.


Why Persist With the 'Armed Struggle'?
LEAD: Despite their applause for Nelson Mandela, many Americans are uneasy about his insistent defense of ''the armed struggle'' in the fight against apartheid.
Understandably so: violence that may once have been fully justified to Mr.
Mandela now seems counterproductive in view of the startling changes in South


Rarely Used Law Leads to Vote on Hoboken Waterfront Plan
LEAD: IN an exercise of democracy rare to New Jersey, polls are set to open on Tuesday voters here can decide the fate of a major waterfront development project that supporters say will bring needed municipal revenue and opponents say will mar Hoboken's community character.


Campus Life: Texas;   After 5 Decades, A Movie Theater Shuts Its Doors
LEAD: A landmark campus-area movie theater has shut its doors.
The Varsity Theater, which opened when Franklin D. Roosevelt was ending his first Presidential term, had long been a haven for hundreds of thousands of University of Texas students.


The Power Behind All Those Ads
LEAD: This year, for the third year in a row, owners of Acura automobiles ranked them the most satisfying in America in the prestigious J. D. Power Customer Satisfaction Index survey of product quality and dealer service.


Democracy Rally Crushed in Kenya
LEAD: A demonstration calling for multiparty democracy and protesting the arrests of political opponents of the Kenyan Government was broken up today with police gunfire and tear gas.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:
CLASSICAL


Fashion;   Refreshing a Summer Wardrobe
LEAD: Clothes for a summer weekend: shorts, shirts, sweaters, easy jackets and, of course, pants.
It's all very simple.
Whether your weekends are spent in town or in the country, the formula is essentially the same.


Light Bulbs
LEAD: To the Editor: Travelers who like to read must be annoyed by the tiny light bulbs found in most American motel rooms - small because many guests seem to think it is their right to take the larger ones as a part of the service.


Talking: Resorts;   Finding Condo Tenants
LEAD: A FANTASY of many buyers of resort condominiums is that when they are not using them their units will be rented by contented, careful vacationers.
The upbeat sales literature for the resorts often encourages such expectations.


Death-Defying Acts
LEAD:
WRESTLING WITH THE ANGEL
A Memoir of My Triumph Over Illness.
By Max Lerner.
210 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $18.95.
TAKING HEART
By A. C. Greene.
222 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.


POLISH PARLIAMENT REBUFFS PREMIER
LEAD: In another blow to the political standing of the Government of Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki, the Polish Parliament has rejected two of the five Cabinet changes he proposed on Friday.


Race Cars as Actors Fuel the Eye in 'Thunder'
LEAD: The opening scene of ''Days of Thunder'' promises the real thing.
The camera pans over the stands at Daytona, Fla., into the paddock, across the rows of trailers and down to the stock cars lined up on the grids as they begin to follow the pace car round the track.
Then, as the green flag drops, there's the thunder of 44


Island Struggles With Increasing Toll of Children With AIDS
LEAD: At 3 1/2 years of age, Peter likes to play with keys and ars and to swing on his swing set.
Recently, his foster mother found him emptying onions out of the kitchen vegetable bin.
By the time she spotted him, he had peeled every onion and was lying among the skins.
Like any other child his age, he has a penchant for getting into mischief.


Colleen F. Gibbs To Wed in August
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John David Gibbs of Arlington Heights, Ill., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Colleen Frances Gibbs and Cornelius DeForest Howland 3d, a son of Mrs.
Cornelius D. Howland of Millbrook, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Howland.


Pauline Artioli Plans To Wed M. N. Findlay
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Artioli Jr. of Somers, Conn., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Pauline Ann Artioli and Michael Nielsen Findlay, a son of Mrs.
E.
Andrew Deeds of Charlotte, Vt., and David B. Findlay Jr. of New York.


Monkeys in Laboratory Dispute Are Killed
LEAD: A spokeswoman for the Government's National Institutes of Health said today that researchers had performed a final set of brain experiments on three monkeys that became a symbol for the animal rights movement and then humanely put them to death.


From a Writer's Standpoint, Rewards Are Worth the Risks
LEAD: The screenwriter Shane Black went off to his cabin for four months recently and emerged with an original screenplay that he then sold in an auction among the studios for $1.75 million.
While the price tag made national news, less noticed was the fact that Mr.
Black could have sold it for more but elected to take less - so that he could name the producer he wanted to work with.


Technology Helps the Blind On the Job
LEAD: AS technology spawns the production of higher-quality, less expensive computer, video and audio products, an increasing number of new tools are being made available to the blind and visually impaired that greatly widen their academic and career opportunities, experts say.


Kate Rentschler Wed in Michigan
LEAD: Kate Mason Rentschler, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter R. Rentschler of Walloon Lake, Mich., was married yesterday to James Keith Ausbrook, a son of Perry C. Ausbrook of Washington and the late Dale Kimble Ausbrook.
The Rev.
Frank Kordek, assisted by the Rev.
Thomas Cook, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Holy Childhood of Jesus Roman Catholic Church in Harbor Springs,


Time-Ravaged Tapes Pass On Their Priceless Music to CD's
LEAD: To the delight of serious collectors, older recordings of outstanding musical merit are constantly being reissued on CD.
Yet the process of transfer to the new digital format led to a sad discovery.
Many priceless master tapes of yesteryear had deteriorated, seemingly beyond hope of restoration.


'Noises Off,' With Flawless Timing
LEAD: ''NOISES OFF'' by Michael Frayn is about a provincial English touring troupe doing a tacky sex comedy ('' 'Nothing On' by Robin Housemonger'') - and doing it abominably.


Question of the Week;   Who Is Baseball's Best Player Now?
LEAD: When it comes to pure skills, the best man in baseball is Jose Canseco.
We have a modern Babe Ruth on our hands.


Tips on Buying Garden Hose
LEAD: WHEN buying garden hose, choose either rubber hose or hose made of reinforced rubber and vinyl.
Both are more durable, although more expensive, than hose made only of unreinforced vinyl.


By Old Carriage Roads on the Hudson, a New Hiking Trail
LEAD: EACH week, after Robert Marshall completes his clerical duties for Metro-North, he returns to his home here, sheds his coat and tie, picks up his block and tackle and a couple of giant pry bars, and goes out to do his other work.
Mr.
Marshall, 54 years old, is a trail blazer.
He has just designed and completed, with the help of volunteers from the Mohican Chapter of the Adirondack Mountain Club, a new eight-mile looped hiking trail on the east bank of the Hudson, just a few miles north of the Bear Mountain Bridge.


Question of the Week;   Who Is Baseball's Best Player Now?
LEAD: Ryne Sandberg.
The Gold Glove second baseman does it all, and does it whether the Cubs are good or poor.


Nora FitzGerald Married to Peter Finn
LEAD: Nora Patricia FitzGerald, the associate editor of Connecticut magazine, and Peter Finn, a reporter, were married yesterday at St.
Augustine Roman Catholic Church in North Branford, Conn., by the Rev.
Daniel F. McSheffrey.
The bride, who will keep her name, is 29 years old and a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.


Data Bank/July 8, 1990
LEAD:
$
Construction Spending
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
-0.4
-2.2
0.4
Factory Orders
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
2.1
-2.1
4.1
Employment
June
May
April
In thousands
118,389
118,350
118,116
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
6,447(5.2)
6,653(5.3)
6,670(5.4)
Truck Production
June 22-29
June 15-22
June 8-15
In units
47,070
92,252
92,430
Paperboard Production
Thousands of tons
763.1
724.0
735.9
Economic Activity
June
May
April
Purchasing Mangaer's


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q. Some years ago, we replaced our sun deck flooring with cedar.
Although I originally intended to apply several coats of varnish to this decking, I followed the advice of an ''expert'' and painted the flooring instead.
The paint soon peeled, and the deck has been repainted several times since.
Each time, all peeling paint was scraped off.


Navratilova Wins a Record Ninth Wimbledon Singles Title


Life, Death And Government
LEAD: When the advances of technology outstrip the quickening of ethical and moral values in a society, why then do we turn to the law for solutions?
The ''right to die'' bill in in the New Jersey Legislature (''Bill to Allow Living Wills Draws Criticism,'' May 20) is yet another symptom of our dependence on government to make more and more of life's decisions.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: It's no news to most of us that life can be, and very often is, ornery.
What's given with one hand is taken away with the other.
Nice things happen at inopportune times (there's no opportune time for bad things), perfect plans are marred by the unexpected, sure things turn out to be not so sure, and small gambles that are almost certainties backfire.


Khomeini's Tomb Attracts Pilgrims
LEAD: Here on the barren, sun-parched flats on the southern outskirts of Teheran, the Iranian Government is building a shrine to rival all but the greatest attractions of Islam - the final resting place for the man known here simply as the Imam.


BUSINESS DIARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
One Germany, United by Dreams of Cars and Color TV's
The last time anyone decided to rejoin a unified German government peacefully and voluntarily was in 1935, when the Saar region held a plebiscite.
Ever since, Germany's neighbors have viewed its consolidation, or expansion, with alarm.


'The Reluctant King'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ann Blumberg Weds Stephen Graham
LEAD: Ann Catherine Blumberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Kurt Blumberg of Boca Raton, Fla., was married yesterday to Stephen Charles Graham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence A. Graham of Florence, S.C., at the Capt.
Flanders House, an inn in Chilmark, Mass.
Bernard Issokson, a justice of the peace in Tisbury,


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 8, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
WHILE MY PRETTY ONE SLEEPS, by Mary
Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.95.) The murder of a
gossip writer in New York.
2
3
THE RUSSIA HOUSE, by John le Carre. (Bantam,
$5.95.) Espionage changes its ways as glasnost
begins to rust the Iron Curtain.


An Architecture That Set Out to Shake the World
LEAD: It is convenient to forget that for a brief moment in the 20th century, the Soviet Union was a throbbing center of modern art and architecture, perhaps even the most advanced country of all in terms of its official level of taste.
Modernism was not born there, but it could well be said to have reached its fastest, and in some ways its most promising, flowering in the Soviet Union.


Steinbrenner May Have Ally in Fehr
LEAD: George Steinbrenner may have found an unexpected ally in the Major League Baseball Players Association because the union believes the Yankees owner may have erroneously been found guilty of tampering.


Topics of the Times;   Luggage, Lost and Found
LEAD: One day last week a young woman about to take a very long plane trip packed herself a kind of CARE package.
There was cheese, prosciutto, bread, a tomato and a mango because she distrusts airline food.
Two newly purchased shirts and a sweater because she is wary of air-conditioning.
And three books, also newly purchased, in case the flight attendant ran out of magazines before she got to her seat.


Give Consumer a Break And Regulate Cable TV
LEAD: To the Editor:


English Fare Boring? Well, Not Desserts
LEAD: EVEN in the dark days of stringy beef and overcooked cabbage, the English knew how to make desserts.
Recently I spent a week in a tranquil seaside hotel in Lyme Regis, Dorset (the location of ''The French Lieutenant's Woman''), where the menu could have been a reprint from Escoffier's reign at the


Setting the Stage


How Old, Sweet Prince?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Held Captive by Cleopatra
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wedding Plans For Libby French
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
David Lafayette French of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Elizabeth Druecker French, and Kenneth Andrew Toudouze, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Paul Toudouze of San Antonio.


Hiking
LEAD: To the Editor: In his engrossing account of ''Hiking With History in the Pyrenees'' (Travel, May 20), Mark C. Hansen related that he crossed by train from Spain to Latour-de-Carol in France, from which point he trekked to the Canigou Masif.


MOTHERS: TIRED OF TAKING THE RAP
LEAD: It is not a question of fixing blame or exonerating from blame, but of understanding the centrality of the early relationship between parent and child.
The infant makes of its world what the world presents to it, mediated by the mother.
In this sense, the mother is central and powerful.
We know the mother has environmental limits to her power; the baby does not.


U.S. Viewers Get A Faulty Picture
LEAD: Watching soccer on television in the United States is like watching a great party going on across the street from your house.


Bulgarian Protest Continues Despite Ouster of President
LEAD: Hundreds of intellectuals whose protests helped push President Petar Mladenov from office said today that they would not end their protests until other demands were met.


Support Group For Stepmothers Re: ''Stepmothers Fight the Evil Image'' (April 29).
LEAD: ''It'' began when we responded to an ad in the newspaper that read ''Second Wives/Stepmothers support group forming. . .contact. . .''


In Germany, a Warning From Heiner Muller
LEAD: ''Most of my life I have been a victim of German history,'' says Heiner Muller, generally considered Germany's, both East and West, leading playwright.
In 1933, when he was 4, his father, a socialist who opposed Hitler, was dragged off to prison. ''I have to deal with history because it has dealt so much with me,'' Mr.


300 Haitians March at Site Of Violent Protest in Miami
LEAD: About 300 Haitians chanted and marched peacefully Saturday outside a shopping center where police had violently broken up a demonstration two days earlier.


Summary of Action in New York Legislature's 213th Session
LEAD: In a flurry of last-minute activity during the final days of its 213th Session, the New York State Legislature approved measures to create a children's health insurance program, to cap the fees that doctors may charge the elderly and to pump $420 million into New York's hospital system.


Question of the Week;   Who Is Baseball's Best Player Now?
LEAD: In this unfortunate age of overpaid underachievers, Ryne Sandberg of the Chicago Cubs leads the majors in hits, runs scored and times at bat.
He is second in home runs and batting average, and tied for third in the National League in runs batted in.
And, everyone already knows that he is the best-fielding second baseman in the game.


Is It or Isn't It? A Van Gogh Languishes in Limbo
LEAD: They are the masterpieces on the museum walls, the unvarying stars in our artistic firmament, the van Goghs and Goyas and Rembrandts and van der Weydens.
In our youth, we stood before them, notebook in hand, feverishly analyzing them for art-history classes.
Later, as we revisited them through the years, they became dear friends.


Israel Is Watching
LEAD:
EVERY SPY A PRINCE
The Complete History of Israel's
Intelligence Community.
By Dan Raviv and Yossi Melman.
Illustrated. 466 pp. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company. $24.95.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Do not delay applying fertilizer to woody plants, which need the summer months to ripen (harden) new growth.
Spray fruit trees again to keep them insect-disease free for the summer-fall harvest.
Protect rosebushes from fungus diseases.
Last call to control woolly adelgids on hemlocks.


Thwarting Theft
LEAD: To the Editor: After reading about the man who had his wallet stolen or rifled four times on three continents (''An Easy Mark to Pickpockets of 3 Continents,'' Travel, May 20), I would like to offer my own experience on a trip to Sicily.


Yes, Plastic Can Be Recycled
LEAD: I BURNED my hand the other morning.
Burned it on the paper coffee cup I was cradling in one hand, while trying to manage my briefcase and laptop computer in the other arm, all while trying to make my way onto a crowded elevator in my office in Trenton.


Taxes in Other Countries Buy More Services
LEAD: To the Editor:


Manhattan, Not Hoboken
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Sarah Ross Gant To Wed in August
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Gant of New Vernon, N.J., have announced plans for an August wedding for their daughter Sarah Ross Gant and Michael Anthony Mandanis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Mandanis of San Rafael, Calif.


Jill Dara Suttenberg to Wed in August
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Stewart Suttenberg of Syosset, N.Y., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Jill Dara Suttenberg and David Matthew Altshuler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan A. Altshuler of Belmont, Mass.
Miss Suttenberg, 24 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
An associate at Corporate Decisions, a Boston management consulting firm, she is also a saxophonist and the director of the Sunday Jazz Band at Harvard.


FERNANDEZ TAKES CHARGE
LEAD: It is refreshing to see a man like Joseph Fernandez take charge.


Very Bad Dream
LEAD: You could say Glenallen Hill of the Toronto Blue Jays got caught in a spider's web.
Hill had a lot of explaining to do yesterday.
He missed Toronto's 4-2 victory over Seattle because he injured himself Friday night trying to escape imaginary spiders in a nightmare. ''I have a phobia about spiders,'' Hill said.


Bush Accepts Japanese Aid to China, With Limits
LEAD: President Bush told Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan today that the Administration would not oppose Japanese plans to resume its multibillion-dollar program of aid to China.
But he urged Mr.
Kaifu to slow down the aid plan and limit its scope.


FICTION
LEAD: FURORS DIE.
By William Hoffman. (Louisiana State University, $18.95.) William Hoffman's 10th novel is an ambitious, well-written book.
Its great theme is that the believer, the person of conscience and religious faith, is destined for destruction in our dissolute culture.
Amos (Pinky) Cody is the son of a poor, alcoholic father and a mother who appears to be a religious fanatic.


Karah Henry and Marc van Gelder Are Married
LEAD: Karah Henry, a daughter of Frances McDonald Henry of Durham, N.C., and John F. Henry of Mattydale, N.Y., was married yesterday in Amsterdam to Marc C. van Gelder, a son of Mieke J. and Bob F. van Gelder-van Teeseling of Bussum, the Netherlands.
The Rev.
E.
E. van Steenis, a minister of the Dutch Remonstrant Protestant Church, performed the ceremony at St.


Broadcasters Mar Tennis
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


State Parks Show Effects Of Reductions in Budgets
LEAD: STATE officials say it is becoming increasingly hard to keep parks safe and clean as budgets continue to decline.


Keeping Score On Grammar
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
POLITICAL CARTOONS


Currency;   The Dollar's Down Again
LEAD: For those planning a trip to England this summer, the news in recent weeks has not been so good.
Since the beginning of June, the pound has risen by 10.5 cents, to $1.7865, from $1.6810.
This is a 6 percent increase - or, put another way, a 6 percent cut in the budget for American travelers.
And four cents of the pound's rise came in the last week.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: Two influences, one American, one Soviet, have conspired to give Soviet players opportunities they never had before.


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q. Some years ago, we replaced our sun deck flooring with cedar.
Although I originally intended to apply several coats of varnish to this decking, I followed the advice of an ''expert'' and painted the flooring instead.
The paint soon peeled, and the deck has been repainted several times since.
Each time, all peeling paint was scraped off.


Hungary Communists on Film With Terrorist
LEAD: State television today showed a secret film of talks between Hungarian officials and the international terrorist known as Carlos about 10 years ago and portrayed him as a playboy who sought out women and stayed in luxury hotels.


Italy Take Third Place
LEAD: Salvatore Schillaci took the goal-scoring lead for the World Cup and lifted Italy to third place in the soccer championship tonight, putting in a penalty kick with six minutes left for a 2-1 victory over England.


The Great Outdoors;


Food;   SAY CHEEEESE!
LEAD: I grew up thinking cheese was something a little smaller than a breadbox, about the color of finger-painted pumpkins and as perishable as powdered milk.
The only time I ever tasted the real thing was when my father was feeling flush enough to invest in a round of Colby longhorn to ration out in thin slices on saltines as a late-night snack.


Managing;   Turning a Boss Into a Client
LEAD: Kathryn H. Tunheim liked her job as Honeywell Inc.'s vice president of public relations, but she was hankering for the excitement of running a profit center.
Honeywell, meanwhile, wanted to halve the head count in Ms.
Tunheim's department.


Solar Derby
LEAD: The idea is appealingly Soap Box Derbyesque - a bunch of young people competing with their homemade cars.
Of course, the scale is slightly inflated.
Tomorrow morning, student teams from 32 colleges and universities will begin an 11-day, 1,700-mile race through eight states - from Walt Disney World in Florida to the General Motors Technical Center in Warren, Mich.


Mutual Funds;   Picking Apart the Returns
LEAD: Robert G. Maddern, an investor in Killingworth, Conn., knows the Fidelity Municipal Bond Fund is doing well.
But how well?
He got different answers from the three newspapers and magazines in his mailbox recently.
Because they arrived so close together, the discrepancy caught his eye.


Lolly Jewett to Wed Abner Oakes 3d&gt;
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Lincoln Jewett of Darien, Conn., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Laura Jewett and Abner Oakes 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abner Oakes 3d of Hamden, Conn.


A Hideaway Treasure On The East End
LEAD: IT is time for the annual phone call from my New Jersey friends asking where to eat in the Hamptons.
My No. 1 recommendation for this season is East Hampton's Fresno.
Forget the ''this season'' disclaimer; Fresno may be the best restaurant on the East End.


Yanks Win as Tolleson Races In on Kelly's Hit
LEAD: The Yankees got another uninspiring pitching effort from Jimmy Jones yesterday, but one of three rookies in the lineup delivered a big home run and the Yanks scored a 5-4 triumph in 12 innings over the Minnesota Twins.


Five U.S. Teams Face a Cup Lockout
LEAD: Organizers for the next America's Cup match are moving swiftly ahead with plans for a 1992 event.
But complaints of unfair play are surfacing from American teams who have been locked out unexpectedly from the competition.


Headliners;   Beyond Faith
LEAD: Some of the Boston jurors were in tears last week when they returned a verdict after a two-month trial, convicting two Christian Scientists, David and Ginger Twitchell, of manslaughter in the death of their 2-year-old son.
Following the precepts of their religion, the Twitchells relied on prayer instead of seeking conventional medical care to treat their son, Robyn, who died in 1986 of a bowel obstruction.


Betsy E. Painter Marries Roger A. Kline at Cornell
LEAD: Betsy Ellen Painter and Roger Army Kline were married yesterday at the Anabel Taylor Chapel at Cornell University.
The Rev.
Jack Lewis, a Presbyterian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony.


FICTION
LEAD: THE RED-HAIRED WOMAN: And Other Stories.
By Sigerson Clifford. (Mercier Press/Dufour Editions, Paper, $9.95.) ''Imagination is everything in a world going fast to the devil with realism,'' says a character in one of the playwright Sigerson Clifford's delicious tales, which first appeared in several Irish newspapers and were brought together in 1989, four years after his death.


A New Role for Rock - Fighting Back
LEAD: Finally, there's a 2 Live Crew record no one can censor - ''Banned in the U.S.A.,'' released on the Fourth of July.
The song's major transgression is grammar that has been bent to fit the rhymes, because the crude sexual boasting and four-letter words that made the 2 Live Crew (in)famous are completely absent.


Waltrip Hurt
LEAD: The milestone race that Darrell Waltrip thought he would be in yesterday went off without him, just as the races over the next two months will probably do.
Only hours after eating a piece of cake to celebrate what would have been the 500th Nascar race of his career, Waltrip wound up in a hospital on Friday night with serious injuries from a seven-car crash he was involved in at Daytona International Speedway in a practice run for yesterday's


Aid Can Answer a Soviet Question
LEAD: Secretary of State James Baker says the United States won't stand in the way of allies who want to offer aid to the Soviet Union.
And the Bush Administration is prepared to send technical assistance, but not to extend credits.


Americans Should Travel Wherever They Wish
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: Psst!
Have you heard?
It seems Garry Trudeau is, just maybe, a secret stamp fancier.


Defiant Moscow Council Acts To Give Away All Apartments
LEAD: The brash new City Council, opting for a utopian antidote to Communism, has voted to take the city's entire apartment housing stock from the state's control and give it away free to millions of hard-suffering tenants.


Tips on Buying Garden Hose
LEAD: WHEN buying garden hose, choose either rubber hose or hose made of reinforced rubber and vinyl.
Both are more durable, although more expensive, than hose made only of unreinforced vinyl.


Minor League Tour Has a Major Name
LEAD: Ben Hogan would probably take one stern look upon John Daly and smile.


The Region;   In Albany, Everything Important Seems to Happen at the Last Minute
LEAD: It is only in the frantic final days of the legislative session, when dozens of new laws may be created in a single hour, that the New York State Legislature really seems to accomplish anything substantial.


Fashion;   Where 60's and 70's Are Still Right On
LEAD: Like battered Gucci loafers and scuffed Vuitton steamer trunks, wilted little Pucci numbers from the 1960's carry a certain cachet that could make the sleek 1990 updates seem a bit obvious.


A Bitter Battle Rages Over Asbestos Claims
LEAD: The Manville Trust was meant to compensate tens of thousands of workers dying or diseased from exposure to asbestos.
But the two-year-old trust is already out of cash, because of higher than expected payments to early claimants and large attorneys' fees.
Many victims will have to wait until 2015 to get any payments.


World Markets;   Smaller Countries May Have the Edge
LEAD: Think small.
That's the theme among many portfolio managers who are looking into the second half of the year without great expectations for the world's equity markets.
They are going for smaller stock markets in Europe and Asia and picking stocks carefully rather than counting on the overall growth of a market.


Did the Mother Do It?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q.Q.
Some years ago, we replaced our sun deck flooring with cedar.
Although I originally intended to apply several coats of varnish to this decking, I followed the advice of an ''expert'' and painted the flooring instead.
The paint soon peeled, and the deck has been repainted several times since.
Each time, all peeling paint was scraped off.


New Procedures Proposed for Homeless
LEAD: A NEW approach to Westchester's costly homeless problem that emphasizes control and assessment rather than placement of the 4,500 residents in need of housing has been proposed by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, to cautious praise and some misgivings.


Question of the Week;   Who Is Baseball's Best Player Now?
LEAD: Tony Gwynn, because he has done it all: hit, field and throw, run, and win longer and better and more consistently than anyone else.


Jennifer Clarke Is Wed
LEAD: Jennifer Louise Clarke, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren E. Clarke of Newton, Mass., was married there yesterday at the Eliott Church of Newton to Lorin Moultrie Hitt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Moultrie L. Hitt of Silver Spring, Md.
The Rev.
Herbert R. Davis of the United Church of Christ officiated.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: The economic summit of industrialized nations begins in Houston.
Through Wednesday.
A 1,700-mile, 10-day race among 32 solar-powered cars begins in Orlando, Fla.
Consumer credit for May.
TUESDAY: Wholesale trade for May.
PC World Forum/Moscow, through Sunday.
WEDNESDAY: The Senate Banking Committee considers jurisdictional disputes between the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.


Patricia Vida and Michael J. Hallas Are Married
LEAD: Patricia Sally Vida and Michael Jeffrey Hallas were married at St.
Francis of Assisi Cathedral Church in Metuchen, N.J., by Msgr.
Dominic A. Turtora.
Mrs.
Hallas is the daughter of Aniko Labarca of Manhasset Hills, L.I., and Laszlo J. Vida of East Brunswick, N.J., and the stepdaughter of Thomas A.


A Collector Of the Unusual: Korean Ceramics
LEAD: Many art and antiques dealers began as collectors, exploring the offbeat areas that others overlook.
This was the case of Keum Ja Kang, a Korean newspaper photographer who came to the United States in 1963 on an assignment and decided to stay.
After she completed graduate studies in Far Eastern art at Columbia University in 1975, Mrs.


Russian Villagers In Yonkers
LEAD: THE Untermyer Performing Arts Festival, held amid the magnificent formal gardens and fountains of Untermyer Park in Yonkers, overlooking the Hudson, has brought the county first-rate artists in various disciplines for a dozen years now.


Question of the Week;   Who Is Baseball's Best Player Now?
LEAD: Rickey Henderson.
He is at or near the top in nine offensive categories.
He also closes the outfield gaps as effectively as any left fielder in baseball.


Allison S. White Is to Be Married
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Wyndham R. White 3d of Bronxville, N.Y., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Allison Stuart White, and Stephen Douglas Twente, a son of Patricia A. Twente and Dr.
Elmer W. Twente of Brooklyn.


How Stanford, Wealthy and Wise, Is Cutting Costs to Stay That Way
LEAD: On paper, Stanford University looks flush.
As it turns 100 in the fall, this college of lush greenery and rust-tiled roofs is blessed with prestige, a $2 billion endowment and generous alumni who have raised nearly $1.1 billion in a fund drive.


Steven Spielberg Promises: 'Th-Th-That's Not All, Folks'
LEAD: At first glance, it seems like old times.
In a warren of cubicles within a modern office building in the San Fernando Valley, teams of young, casually dressed animators labor furiously to supply their daily quota of raw cartoonage.
Production schedules and colored pencils litter the desks and drawing boards; walls and bulletin boards are festooned with sketches of familiar-looking ducks, rabbits and road runners.


On Financing For Folk Arts
LEAD: In an article on the role of New Jersey's former Assistant Secretary of State, Alvin S. Felzenberg, in promoting an artistic renaissance in the state (''State 'Guardian' of Arts Assumes National Endowment Role,'' May 20), the sole criticism voiced was by Fred Thomsen, president of the New Jersey Folklore


Campus Life;   Inroads by Unions Among Assistants In Graduate Study
LEAD: After a flurry of union agitation at universities around the nation, graduate teaching assistants have made significant gains in their campaigns for better pay, benefits and working conditions.


Three Voices And the Dangers Of Compromise
LEAD: Contemporary pop is so overrun by commercial formulas these days that marketing considerations exert a powerful influence on the way a record company presents a new singer to the public.


English Fare Boring? Well, Not Desserts
LEAD: EVEN in the dark days of stringy beef and overcooked cabbage, the English knew how to make desserts.
Recently I spent a week in a tranquil seaside hotel in Lyme Regis, Dorset (the location of ''The French Lieutenant's Woman''), where the menu could have been a reprint from Escoffier's reign at the


Kelly Healey Plans October Wedding
LEAD: Kelly Ann Healey, a public relations representative, and Peter James Albano, a vice president and bond trader, both at Salomon Brothers in New York, are planning an October wedding, the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Kevin Healey of Barrington, Ill., have announced.


Campus Life: Lafayette College;   Saving Streams (And For Credit): An Idea Spreads
LEAD: It started with a casual conversation between a swimming coach and a fisherman.
Now the resulting project - preserving the environmental quality of streams in eastern Pennsylvania -has grown to involve students from a half-dozen schools.


The Super-duper Bowl
LEAD: One billion people - a fifth of Earth's population - will watch the final game of the World Cup soccer championship on television today, according to utterly unreliable estimates of the contest's popularity.
Even if that's an exaggeration, it doesn't diminish the fact that soccer has more fans than any other sport on this planet.


Teachers' Union Seeks End to Tracking Policy
LEAD: The nation's largest teachers' union issued a report today calling for a gradual end to the tracking policy of grouping students according to past performance.


Rock, Rap and Reggae Rolled Into One
LEAD: The legacy of the 1980's is quick-change, recombinant rock - music that jumps from style to style without worrying about transitions or fusions.
A wave of bands is knocking together rock, rap, funk, reggae and hard core, simultaneously honoring and defying pop's fragmentation.


Style Makers;   Wilbert Murdock, Sports Technologist
LEAD: Growing up on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, Wilbert Murdock was interested in the martial arts and in contact sports like boxing.
He was a good student, especially in math and science, and today he gives talks in schools to encourage minority youngsters to pursue careers in technical fields, often showing the relationship of science and sports.


Spain
LEAD: To the Editor: During a recent trip to Spain as a guest at the Macarena Sol Hotel in Seville, my cameras were stolen.
This took place under the nose of my wife who only looked down to address a postcard.
I think that you should warn travelers to Spain, especially in light of the 1992 Olympics and Columbus celebrations, that they should hold on to their valuables, even in the lobby of a four-star hotel.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended June 23
MANHATTAN
Chelsea
$148,000
254 West 25th Street
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 755-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; exposed brick walls, new windows, renovated bath, common garden; maintenance $550, 49% tax-deductible (Broker: Herbert H. Kleigerman Associates)


He Was There
LEAD:
THEN AND NOW
How the World Has Changed Since WWII.
By Tad Szulc.
515 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company. $22.95.


Evening Hours;   A Macy's Party And a Tribute To Swimwear
LEAD: On Wednesday, 475 guests of R. H. Macy's chief executive, Edward S. Finkelstein, were treated to an unobstructed view of Macy's annual Fourth of July pyrotechnics display over the East River.
They included Macy's executives, their families and guests from the worlds of fashion and theater.
They boarded the Dutchess of New York yacht for a leisurely dinner cruise around the harbor, docking on the Long Island


A Passion for Chocolate
LEAD: Why all this fuss about Belgian chocolates, one wonders, as more and more of them appear on the grander avenues of the grander cities.
Their current prominence seems to be due to the newly sophisticated marketing of the Belgian bonbon, and to the growing chocolate consciousness of the Western world.


Postings: Community-Minded Savings;   Account Ability
LEAD: Most thrift institutions these days boast about how much more they pay for customers' deposits than the competition, and some have gotten into financial trouble for being too generous.
But the Dime Savings Bank of New York has a new program that boasts of paying less than the competition, and of letting the depositors provide the generosity.


This Is the Army, Mrs. Jones
LEAD:
UNCLE SAM'S BRIDES
The World of Military Wives.
By Bonnie Domrose Stone and Betty Sowers Alt.
225 pp. New York:
Walker &amp; Company. $19.95.


Sports of The Times;   The Fiasco of the 1990 Yankees
LEAD: Eventually the Yankees announced the attendance as 25,120, but according to American League policy, that total included tickets that were sold but not necessarily used.
At the start of Friday's twilight-night doubleheader with the Minnesota Twins, the spectators were so scattered they hardly outnumbered the pigeons swooping back and forth above the screen behind home plate and into the rafters under the upper deck.


Security Lapses Bring Rocky Flats Shutdown
LEAD: Security lapses, including a metal detector that had been adjusted by workers tired of hearing it set off by their steel-toe boots, has prompted a suspension of more operations at the Government's Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant.


New Jersey Computer Official Is Held in Car-Repair Bribery
LEAD: An executive of the second largest company that processes claims for New Jersey's pool for high-risk drivers was arrested today on charges of accepting bribes to allow body shops and appraisal companies to inflate repair bills, law-enforcement officials said.


Evoking the Spirit of Billie Holiday
LEAD: TO date, the most sensible attempt to capture the elusive mystique of the great Billie Holiday in theatrical terms is ''Lady Day at Emerson's Bar and Grill,'' Lanie Robertson's ''drama in the form of a cabaret act,'' as the playwright has described it.


Birth Pains;   Now Playing on the World Stage: The Taming of the New
LEAD: THIS is an extraordinary summer in international affairs, a summer when the leaders of the West are trying to keep the mighty steed of change from galloping away from them, trying to tame it and guide it.


U.S. READY TO LET SATELLITES GO UP ON SOVIET ROCKETS
LEAD: The Bush Administration has decided to allow American commercial satellites to be launched on Soviet rockets for the first time, Government and industry officials say.


Greekfest '90: Peaceful Fun in the Sun
LEAD: The guys said they came to look at the girls.
The girls said they came to look at the guys.
Everybody said they were not looking for trouble.


Cazuza, Brazilian Singer, 32
LEAD: Cazuza, a popular singer and composer in Brazil who emerged as a symbol in the country's fight against AIDS, died in his sleep today after a four-year struggle with the disease.
He was 32 years old.


Dana Spector Wed to Scott L. Kimmel
LEAD: Temple Beth-El in Great Neck, L.I., was the setting last evening for the wedding of Dana Irene Spector, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph K. Spector of Kings Point, L.I., and Scott Lauren Kimmel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Kimmel of Buffalo.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson officiated.


Minority Businesses: The Need Is Money
LEAD: OF all the challenges facing those who own small businesses, the most difficult is often borrowing the money needed to grow.


The Bitter Fight Over the Manville Trust
LEAD: Hordes of lawyers will fill the benches of a courtroom at the United States Courthouse in Brooklyn tomorrow to watch what will happen with more than 500 plaintiffs who say they have suffered from inhaling asbestos at the Brooklyn Navy Yard more than 25 years ago.
But the stakes are significantly greater than for just those former shipyard workers or their families.


No Women Allowed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Dance;   Fiorello Festival Honors Modern Tradition
LEAD: The new Fiorello Festival of dance got off to a model - and often exhilarating - start on Friday night with a program of work by Beverly Blossom, Janis Brenner and Jeanette Stoner.
The evening was a tribute in its way to the Hanya Holm-Alwin Nikolais-Murray Louis tradition of modern dance to which the three belong.


Aristotle's Science
LEAD: To the Editor:


Soviet Rural Life Looked at Through Urban-Colored Glasses
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Castle Builders, Some On-Site Consultation


The Conflict Within George Bush
LEAD: Being tired of reading George Bush's lips, I was reading some of my old newspaper clips the other day, and there in the middle of The Times's Op-Ed page of May 2, 1979, was a big headline: ''George Bush for President?''


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


'Cocktail Hour' Staged At Westport Playhouse
LEAD: ''THE COCKTAIL HOUR'' is A. R. Gurney's portrait of a middle-aged playwright who has written a play about his upper middle-class WASP family and called it ''The Cocktail Hour.''


Topics of the Times;   Mitch Snyder's Anger
LEAD: Sometimes anger serves a social purpose.
That was clearly true in the case of Mitch Snyder, who died last week at the age of 46.
His anger about the condition of the homeless in America fueled a national cause.


London's Garden Halls
LEAD: The well-known English indifference to fashion does not apply to plants.
A visit to the halls in Westminster in London where the Royal Horticultural Society stages 12 shows each year reveals that black pansies and hellebores (the claret colored ones above all) are now in favor.
And ''geraniums are making a comeback, you know,'' one frowzily dressed English matron excitedly assures her friend as they look over a display of pelargoniums.


Science Fiction
LEAD: In BEYOND THE FALL OF NIGHT (Ace/Putnam, $19.95), Arthur C. Clarke and Gregory Benford collaborate to bring forth a fascinating if ultimately unsatisfying chimera.
The starting point was Mr.
Clarke's first novel, ''Against the Fall of Night,'' which he began writing before his 21st birthday and which was first published in 1948 (after many revisions and time out for World War II) in a pulp magazine called Startling Stories.


Jaworski Cut
LEAD: The Kansas City Chiefs have put Ron Jaworski, the quarterback, on waivers and that means the 16-year pro, who led the Philadelphia Eagles to the 1981 Super Bowl, might have to call it a career.
He's 39 years old and had signed as a Plan B free agent with the Chiefs last season, but appeared in only six games before suffering a sprained knee and spent the rest of the season on injured reserve.(


Laura Ann Kirby, Teacher, Is Married
LEAD: Laura Ann Kirby, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert P. Kirby of Amelia Island, Jacksonville, Fla., was married yesterday in Woodstock, Vt., to David Francis Melbourne Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melbourne of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
William P. Gallagher and the Rev.
Henry A. Albeke officiated at Our Lady of the Snows Roman Catholic Church.


Question of the Week;   Who Is Baseball's Best Player Now?
LEAD: Gregg Jefferies of the Mets.
He's a baby compared with most of the guys who are up there on the lists, but at the rate he is going, can you imagine where he will be 10 years from now?


Reflections on World Cup 1990
LEAD: One cannot be totally disappointed with the United States team's performance in the World Cup tournament, although the United States team has a few weaknesses.
The first was poor ball-controlling techniques, and the second was the long passing of the ball.
The improvement in these areas would require good coaching and playing many matches with international teams in the next four years to be exposed to the international standard of play.


Review/Music;   Alumni Sing at Tanglewood Gala
LEAD: Tonight's opening concert of the Tanglewood season had the air of a class reunion.
The festival's educational adjunct -the Tanglewood Music Center - is 50 years old this summer, and there were distinguished alumni in every size, shape and form trundling on and off the stage of the Shed.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
FOR GOOD CAUSES


Laura B. Vail Wed To J. H. Wooster
LEAD: Laura Bicknell Vail, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter W. Vail of Hopkinton, N.H., was married yesterday to James Hendrie Wooster, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Wooster of Concord, Mass., at Trinity Episcopal Church on Martha's Vineyard, Mass.
The Rev.
Gary Eley performed the ceremony.


Presenting the Bolshoi: It's a Long Way From Sol Hurok
LEAD: When it opens on Tuesday at the New York State Theater, the Bolshoi Ballet will not look too different from the way it did on recent visits.
During the two-week engagement, the company will present a familiar quota of full-evening classics and spectacles - from ''Swan Lake'' and ''Romeo and Juliet'' to ''Ivan the Terrible,'' a modern-day signature work by Yuri Grigorovich, director and chief choreographer of the


Fish Biting at Fresh Air Fund Camp
LEAD: While growing up in Augusta, Ga., 40 years ago, Charlie Watson could always step outside his front door and find grass, trees, flowers and shrubs.
This summer his children will leave their inner-city home to explore nature while fishing, boating and hiking.


Diligence and Pride Keep Old Skills Alive
LEAD: THE steady rush of the Still River, which winds past the old grist mill in Brookfield, offers those who visit the Brookfield Craft Center one of many glimpses of the past.
During the 1800's, the main building in the community housed the Brookfield Mills and general store, where townspeople came to gossip and to barter food, ironware, furniture and other goods.


German Aid to Iraq Reported
LEAD: West German companies helped build a weapons factory in Iraq where a cannon was to be made, the German news magazine Der Spiegel said today.
The Hamburg-based weekly said confiscated documents showed that the factory near Baghdad, the Iraqi capital, was designed to produce guns.
Specialists fear that it was also the site where a cannon with a barrel 150 yards long and a range of 600 miles was to be built.


Gentle Scents Enhance a Flower Bed
LEAD: IT had rained the night before, and all the plants were washed clean.
They looked fresh and green.
There was also a fragrance in the yard, but it was not apparent where it was coming from.
Only a few plants were in bloom, as it was a between time, past the glories of spring, but not quite ready for the opulence of annuals.


ARIEL SHARON: TALKING TOUGH
LEAD: Ariel Sharon is in a typically expansive mood.
Midway through a late lunch at the Gush Katif cafe, deep inside one of the Gaza Strip's oldest Jewish settlements, he puts down his spoon, leans back in his chair and stretches his arms toward the panorama outside.


Penny-Wise and Pound-Foolish
LEAD: A philosopher wisely observed that those who ignore history's recorded blunders are condemned to repeat them.
Robert R. McMillan is the latest penny-wise, pound-foolish Long Island Power Authority basher to urge that Long Islanders entrust their energy future to LILCO's management (June 10).
Has Mr.


Headliners;   For the Short Run
LEAD: On the way to his next attempt at getting himself into the White House, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson intends to work on getting the District of Columbia into the union.
Mr.
Jackson announced last week that he would run for the newly created D.C. post of ''shadow senator,'' the main duty of which is to lobby Congress for statehood.


Bach Repertory Heard At Summer Music 1990
LEAD: LAST year at this time, concerts were filled with French music, for the French bicentennial.
On Saturday, Bastille Day, the French flutist Jean-Pierre Rampal will be among the guest artists at the opening of Summer Music 1990 at Harkness Memorial State Park in Waterford, but the repertory is Bach.


MOVIES OF THEIR OWN
LEAD: The camera focuses in on a stand of timber, trees in a quiet wood.
The day has a look of fall to it, arcs of sunlight cutting through the spare foliage, the ground blanketed with leaves turned brown and bone dry.
A breath of wind sends the leaves scuttling and, suddenly, a black fedora sails gently into the frame.


What the Met Can Learn From Madonna
LEAD: The history of classical-music performance since the time of Bach has been, in large part, a history of scale.
Not musical scales, but scale in terms of size.
As audiences and ensembles have grown, so have the spaces in which performances were to take place.
That, in turn, meant brighter, louder instruments along with augmented performing forces.


A Sacred Spa Where Sultans Led an Empire
LEAD: I think of Bursa as the most Eastern city in the west of Turkey - it lies not far from the Sea of Marmara, along the foothills of one of the tallest mountains in Turkey.
The mountain, Ulu Dag, now a ski resort, was once called Mount Olympus.
It rises at the beginning of the great high plains of Anatolia.


Becker, Edberg At Home In Final
LEAD: Bragging rights to Wimbledon's Center Court are hard to come by, but Boris Becker and Stefan Edberg, who will play there on Sunday in the men's singles final, have inarguably earned them.


Business Says Enough Is Enough
LEAD: Re: ''The Builders Are Trying to Undercut Us'' (May 27).


Congress and the Monk
LEAD: In late September of this year, Congress will have a splendid opportunity to honor itself and the name of the United States - and correct a great wrong done to a monk who leads a nation from exile.


Albania Shuffles Top Officials as Unrest Persists
LEAD: Albania's ruling Communist Party, challenged by increasing public dissent, reshuffled top party and Government officials today after a tumultuous week in which about 5,000 Albanians poured into Western embassies seeking refuge from Europe's last Stalinist state.


Postings: Changes at C.A.I.;   Adding Services
LEAD: A national organization little known to residents of condominiums, cooperatives and homeowner associations, but quite well known to the board members who run those forms of housing, is changing leaders and programs this month.
The Community Associations Institute, with headquarters in Alexandria, Va., and chapters across the country, is to be run by its new executive vice president, Barbara Byrd-Lawler of Austin, Tex.


U.S. Weighs a Shift on Cambodia Policy
LEAD: The Bush Administration is beginning quietly to reconsider its policy of supporting a guerrilla insurgency against the Vietnamese-backed Government of Cambodia, officials say.


Gentle Scents Enhance a Flower Bed
LEAD: IT had rained the night before, and all the plants were washed clean.
They looked fresh and green.
There was also a fragrance in the yard, but it was not apparent where it was coming from.
Only a few plants were in bloom, as it was a between time, past the glories of spring, but not quite ready for the opulence of annuals.


Hispanic Artist Is Acquitted in Shooting
LEAD: Rafael Rivera Garcia, a highly regarded Puerto Rican art professor who said the police, courts and city agencies left him defenseless against the terrifying harassment of a biased white neighbor, was acquitted yesterday of trying to murder the man.


Laldenga, Tribal Leader in India, 53
LEAD: Laldenga, a leader of India's Mizo tribe who fought a secessionist war before joining mainstream politics, died today in London, the Press Trust of India reported.
He was 53 years old.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
NEW YORK 1913: The Armory Show and the Paterson Strike Pageant, by Martin Green. (Collier/Macmillan, $14.95.) In 1913, just about the time that the famous show at the 69th Regiment Armory on Lexington Avenue was introducing New Yorkers to the likes of Picasso and Duchamp, Big Bill Haywood and the Wobblies were organizing a different kind of insurrection: a march up Fifth Avenue by 1,200 New Jersey millworkers striking for an eight-hour day.


Style Makers;   Dominique Aurientis, Accessories Designer
LEAD: In New York recently, Dominique Aurientis wore huge elephant-head earrings, half a dozen lapel pins, a scarf dangling golden charms, and two armloads of bracelets with gilded trimming.
Of course, the jewelry was all of her own design, and marked by a soupcon of wit and a large dose of sophistication.


The Executive Computer;   Worries About Radiation Continue, as Do Studies
LEAD: New studies continue to raise the troubling possibility that even the low levels of radiation emitted by most computer monitors have the potential to cause health problems.


Post-Poughkeepsie
LEAD:
THE GOD OF NIGHTMARES
By Paula Fox.
225 pp. San Francisco:
North Point Press.
$18.95.


Tips on Buying Garden Hose
LEAD: WHEN buying garden hose, choose either rubber hose or hose made of reinforced rubber and vinyl.
Both are more durable, although more expensive, than hose made only of unreinforced vinyl.


Our Disastrously Archaic Farm Policy
LEAD: Our 60-year farm-policy civil war is increasingly devastating to American competitiveness.
The Department of Agriculture will reward farmers for keeping idle almost 60 million acres this year - equivalent to shutting down all the crop land in California, Colorado, Kentucky, Louisiana, Montana and Wisconsin.


Michael Keohane Weds Ms. Mayer
LEAD: Elizabeth Emma Mayer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence A. Mayer of New York, was married yesterday in Laurel Hollow, L.I., to Michael William Keohane, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Keohane of Livingston, N.J.
The Rev.
Burton Davison, a Methodist minister, conducted the nondenominational ceremony at the home of Mr.


Streetscapes: 129 East 17th Street;   The 'Oldest' Apartment House
LEAD: A favorite stop on ''Lost New York'' walking tours is the site of the demolished Stuyvesant apartments of 1870 at 142 East 18th Street, believed to be the first genteel apartment house in a city then divided between private houses and tenements.


Sentence for Lie On Rape Charge Creates Debate
LEAD: When a Nebraska judge last month found Elizabeth Irene Richardson guilty of making a false accusation of rape, he handed down a sentence for which even he knew of no precedent: he ordered her to apologize in half-page advertisements in four newspapers and 10 spot announcements on two radio stations.


Liberian Rebels Cut Off a Government Stronghold
LEAD: Rebel forces continued their siege of Monrovia today, preventing food, water and fuel from entering the encircled Government stronghold in the city's densely populated center.


Nancy Whittaker To Wed in August
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Philip N. Whittaker of North Falmouth, Mass., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Nancy Crosby Whittaker and Neil Davin Charney, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Evan Charney of Boylston, Mass.


Emergency Room Remains Open
LEAD: As I read your article ''Community Hospitals Adapt to Changes'' (May 27), I found it to be quite enjoyable and unfortunately accurate in describing the financial plight of most of New York States' community hospitals.
There is a real financial crisis in the hospital industry due to reimbursement patterns of Medicaid,


Eight Conductors Are Passing the Baton at Caramoor
LEAD: THERE is more to ponder at the Caramoor Music Festival this summer than music's relationship to nature, or the stoicism of a wind player with a fly buzzing about his mouthpiece.


Where Seafood Gets a Proper Reception
LEAD: WHEN Cafe du Bec Fin opened more than 10 years ago, it merited an Excellent rating for its exquisite nouvelle-cuisine cooking and presentation.
Later, a change of ownership, from the original chef to his sous-chef, and a coarsening of the fare brought a revised appraisal in this column to Good.


Question of the Week;   Who Is Baseball's Best Player Now?
LEAD: Kirby Puckett.
Who else can lead the league in hitting, drive in 100 runs, steal you a base and win the Gold Glove in one of the most active positions in the game?


Calling a Book a Book
LEAD: To the Editor:


Peter Kemp Weds Donna M. Soares
LEAD: Donna Marie Soares, the daughter of Dr.
Anthony T. and Dr.
Louise M. Soares of Trumbull, Conn., was married yesterday to Peter Walton Kemp, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank B. Kemp of Alexandria, Va.
The Rev.
M.
Joseph Joaquin officiated at St.
Catherine of Siena Roman Catholic Church in Trumbull.


Rachel Countryman Is Bride of John W. Bracker
LEAD: Rachel Carole Countryman, the daughter of Joan C. Countryman of Philadelphia and Peter Countryman of West Lafayette, Ind., was married yesterday to John Wescott Bracker, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Earl F. Bracker of Concord, Mass., at the Germantown Monthly Meeting of the Religious Society of Friends in


MOTHERS: TIRED OF TAKING THE RAP
LEAD: Let's stop blaming mothers and turn our attention toward making the world a better place in which to raise children.


The Characters Are in Charge
LEAD:
LYING TOGETHER
By D. M. Thomas.
247 pp. New York: Viking. $17.95.


Question of the Week;   Who Is Baseball's Best Player Now?
LEAD: Nolan Ryan.
At the age of 43, he chalked up his sixth no-hitter last month.
Only Sandy Koufax, with four, and Cy Young and Bob Feller, with three each, have pitched more than two.


Campus Life: Bennington College;   Trying to Shake Off 'Anything Goes' Image
LEAD: Long known for its free-spirited environment, Bennington College is trying to shake off the image that, in the words of one administrator, ''anything goes here.''


Latchkey Summer
LEAD: Some of the most popular baby sitters in the city are named Nintendo, Bugs Bunny and the Brady Bunch.
Some of the most popular baby sitters in the city are 9 or 10 or 11 years old.
School lets out at 3 o'clock.
Mom and Dad get home at 6.
Some people have their bigger children tend the small ones, and some have their children go home and watch television and wait for the sound of their key in the lock.


INSIDE
LEAD:
U.S. Weighs Mideast Talks


Torturous Nights In an Easy Chair
LEAD: To the Editor:


Molly Cliff to Wed Matthew Bersani
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Walter C. Cliff of New York have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Mary Farrell Cliff and Matthew Donald Bersani, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Frank A. Bersani of Syracuse.


From a Model to Just Another Farm
LEAD: On this large collective farm, where the former government once demonstrated the virtues of Communist agriculture to foreign visitors, the fears of the 2,500 members far overshadow the hopes raised in this country by the coming of the West German mark.


No Gay Rights Vote In Massachusetts
LEAD: Opponents of a Massachusetts law protecting homosexuals from discrimination cannot try to repeal it through a referendum, the state's Supreme Judicial Court has ruled.


Postings: Subsidy for a Private Project;  $25,000 Discounts for Qualified Buyers
LEAD: Housing advocates have long complained that affordable-housing projects in New York City could not receive aid from the city or the state unless they were built on city-owned land to keep development costs to a minimum.


About Men;   Reunion In Da Nang
LEAD: We are four of us, men in our early 30's, squatting on crude stools on a sidewalk in Da Nang, a perpetually sunny city on the central coast of Vietnam.
At midmorning, the streets are crowded, noisy.
The heat is unbearable.
All four of us order iced coffee.
For long moments, we stay silent, awkward.


Penny-Wise and Pound-Foolish
LEAD: I strongly agree with Robert R. McMillan.
The Long Island Power Authority can serve no useful function at this time and will be a further drain on this heavily taxed community.
In addition, it has the potential of becoming a vehicle for political patronage.
BARRY S. SHANBORN
Plainview w


Turning Rah! - the Fourth R - Into Summertime Profits
LEAD: There was trouble with the Low T-Straddle.
Christal Kelly had gotten up there - eight feet above the ground, propped up by two fellow junior high students - but her eyes were squeezed shut.


C. D. O'Connor, 92, Who Headed School For the Deaf, Is Dead
LEAD: Clarence D. O'Connor, superintendent emeritus of the Lexington School for the Deaf in Jackson Heights, Queens, died on June 29 at New York Hospital.
He was 92 years old and lived in Manhattan.


The World;   Beyond Plain Vanilla: Immigration Has Accentuated Canada's Diversity
LEAD: As the historical story goes, when Jacques Cartier, the French explorer, stepped ashore in 1535 at the rapids near what was to become Quebec City, he confronted a band of curious natives.
Looking around at the pristine countryside, he asked them in French and sign language what they called that place.


Gentle Scents Enhance a Flower Bed
LEAD: IT had rained the night before, and all the plants were washed clean.
They looked fresh and green.
There was also a fragrance in the yard, but it was not apparent where it was coming from.
Only a few plants were in bloom, as it was a between time, past the glories of spring, but not quite ready for the opulence of annuals.


Vatican Alludes Harshly to Right-to-Die Bill
LEAD: The official Vatican newspaper today assailed right-to-die legislation, alluding to a bill passed by the New York State Legislature this month.


Tips on Buying Garden Hose
LEAD: WHEN buying garden hose, choose either rubber hose or hose made of reinforced rubber and vinyl.
Both are more durable, although more expensive, than hose made only of unreinforced vinyl.


The World;   Even an Earthquake May Not Be Enough to Pry Open Iran
LEAD: WHEN the earth trembled in late June and swallowed part of northwestern Iran, the world responded quickly.


Reclaiming Noble Gardens In Wales
LEAD: Wild Wales, with its naturally picturesque landscape, gnarled trees and trickling water, has come into its own in the garden world.
A number of important things have happened.
First, with the founding last year of the Welsh Historic Gardens Trust in Llandeilo in the county of Dyfed in South Wales, there is a new focus on recovering abandoned and ruined gardens and parks.


The Second Cemetery of Paris
LEAD: Some days, when Paris gets just too speedy, I prefer sweet-scented conifers to chestnuts in bloom, a tranquil, narrow path to a vibrant, wide avenue.
Though it's rush hour, I can actually hear birdsong, and only very distantly a faint susurrus of traffic.
Far from the melee of tourist buses, I relax in the peace and quiet of the Montparnasse Cemetery.


Where Were The Insights?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Barbara Clayton and George Shinopoulos Wed
LEAD: Barbara Hall Clayton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Clayton of New Vernon, N.J., was married yesterday in Waitesfield, Vt., to George Shinopoulos, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Shinopoulos of Boston.
The Rev.
Paul Martz conducted the Presbyterian ceremony at the Federated Church.


The Broad Benefits of a Gasoline Tax Hike
LEAD: Do you wish gas prices were as cheap as they were in the ''good old days'' of the 1950's?
If so, you might be surprised to learn that you would be hoping for an increase in gas prices.
After adjusting for inflation, Americans now spend some 35 cents less per gallon of gasoline than they did in 1950.


English Fare Boring? Well, Not Desserts
LEAD: EVEN in the dark days of stringy beef and overcooked cabbage, the English knew how to make desserts.
Recently I spent a week in a tranquil seaside hotel in Lyme Regis, Dorset (the location of ''The French Lieutenant's Woman''), where the menu could have been a reprint from Escoffier's reign at the Savoy.


9 States Unlawfully Jail Runaways, Group Says
LEAD: A Federal law intended to stop states from locking up runaway juveniles has succeeded in keeping tens of thousands of them free, but the National Coalition for the Homeless says nine states are still violating the law.


MOTHERS: TIRED OF TAKING THE RAP
LEAD: Janna Malamud Smith's article ''Mothers: Tired of Taking the Rap'' (June 10) certainly hit home.
The 1980's saw anti-momism as a growth business.
Look at the dialogue in popular television programs like ''Thirtysomething'': ''My mother is coming for a visit.'' Nudge, nudge, wink, wink.
Lots of eye rolling and in-joking among the cast.


Reflections on World Cup 1990
LEAD: I strongly object to part of ''A Defeat Revives a Dream,'' (The Times, June 15).
George Vecsey writes: ''The home-grown players do not develop the knack of scoring.
Mussolini once lamented that his nation was a nation of waiters.
It is not stretching the truth to say that Italy is currently a nation of midfielders.


P.G.A. Called Insensitive
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Carolyn P. Sawin To Wed in August
LEAD: Edward A. Sawin Jr. of Philadelphia has announced August wedding plans for his daughter Carolyn Patterson Sawin and Timothy Crawford Wilson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen B. Wilson of Irvington, N.Y.


Suzanne Dooley Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Suzanne Elizabeth Dooley, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Dooley of Saugerties, N.Y., was married yesterday at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Kingston, N.Y., to Charles Lee Quaintance 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles L. Quaintance of Highland Falls, N.Y.
The Rev.
Frank J. Damis officiated.


Sarah Von Culin Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Sarah Pearson Von Culin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond P. Von Culin of Pottersville, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher Mark Treanor, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William J. Treanor of Convent Station, N.J.
The Rev.
Mark R. Summer, a Lutheran minister, assisted by the Rev.
Boniface J. Treanor, a Roman Catholic priest and the bridegroom's uncle, performed the Lutheran ceremony at Zion Lutheran Church in Oldwick, N


Krone Set to Ride
LEAD: Her workout aboard Howling Success was just that, Julie Krone said yesterday at Monmouth Park, where the jockey took the first step back toward her return to competitive riding.
After riding the horse a half-mile, Krone declared herself ready to resume racing.
Krone fractured a forearm Nov. 24 in a spill at the Meadowlands and had surgery twice.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about a program in which low- and moderate-income families earn equity in cooperatives by helping in the buildings' renovations misstated the amount to be paid by residents of a building in Torrington.
Depending on their income, it is $250 to $525 a month including mortgage, utilities, property taxes and insurance.


AIDS-Infected Children Often Treated Belatedly
LEAD: FOR most of its victims, AIDS is a disease that might have been prevented.


The Unquiet Life Next to Building Sites
LEAD: NINA SKLANSKY moved into her new apartment on West 55th Street last August and, boy, was she pleased with it.
Then, on her first night there, through the windows and out of the walls came the BANG! and the CRASH! and the CLANNNGG! from the hotel being built across the street. ''It was like dinosaurs fighting out there,'' she said.


Outdoors;   A Farmer's Food for Thought
LEAD: Many of the books that come my way from publishing houses for possible review deal with presumably better ways to outwit some species of fish or game animal, or describe in detail the twists and turns of foot trails that lead one through forest and mountain in various regions of this country.


A HOSTAGE RELEASE PREDICTED BY IRAN
LEAD: The official Iranian press agency reported today that a Western hostage held in Lebanon, probably a European, was expected to be released shortly.


Harold Hirsch, 82; Started White Stag, Sportswear Concern
LEAD: Harold S. Hirsch, founder of the White Stag Manufacturing Company, a leading maker of casual sportswear, died of cancer at his home here Wednesday.
He was 82 years old.
Mr.
Hirsch, who became one of Portland's most prominent civic leaders, was a pioneer in the manufacture of outdoor clothing.


U.S., After Letter From Shamir, Looks Anew at Pushing for Middle East Peace Talks
LEAD: After considering a recent letter to President Bush from Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel, Administration officials have concluded that another attempt to organize Israeli-Palestinian talks may be justified.


Miss Waggaman Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Victoria Mackenzie Waggaman, the daughter of Mrs.
Robert Waggaman of Bethesda, Md., and the late Mr.
Waggaman, was married yesterday to Christopher Alfred Knopes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Knopes of Fairfax Station, Va.
The Right Rev.
Morgan Portius performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church in Edgartown, Mass.


Commercial Property: Air Rights;   Developer Cuts a Deal With a White Plains Church
LEAD: One of the first development-rights transfers in Westchester County has been concluded, setting the stage for a two-tower, half-million-square-foot commercial project in White Plains that would draw one-fifth of its bulk from the little country Gothic church beside which it would rise.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD: Freehold
$219,900
215 Stonehurst Boulevard  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; fireplace, 2-car garage, eat-in kitchen; taxes $3,357.
Fair Lawn
$197,000
8-10 Manor Avenue
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 47-year-old colonial; enclosed porch, full basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,990.


'Tell Them I'm Carrying Their Baby'
LEAD:
AN OPEN ADOPTION
By Lincoln Caplan.
150 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $17.95.


FERNANDEZ TAKES CHARGE
LEAD: Having been quoted by James Traub in his article, I would like to clarify the context of my remarks.
As I noted, the chancellor's first steps have been to increase the system's central command position, as part of a strategy aimed at producing greater school-based autonomy and accountability.
The fact that this move has not yet changed the climate of our schools is not, however, a criticism.


Navratilova Captures Ninth Singles Title
LEAD: She straddled the net to acknowledge a badly beaten opponent and then, her courtside courtesies complete, Martina Navratilova sank down on her sore, old knees for an instant of silent communion with the tennis court she loves best.


Fashion: On the Street;   Tributes Paid In a Manner That's Fitting
LEAD: The memorial service has become an increasingly frequent rite for those close to the fashion industry.
In the last few weeks alone, there have been tributes to three notable figures who died recently: the designer Halston, the model Pal Henry and the publicist Keezia Keeble.


Style Makers;   Hieu Dam, Bustier Designer
LEAD: Hieu Dam is to the ordinary woman in Los Angeles what Jean-Paul Gaultier is to Madonna.
Like Mr.
Gaultier, she designs bustiers.
In the last year, the 22-year-old designer, who lives in Los Angeles, has specialized in bustiers and bras - all lavishly ornamented with sequins, pearls, lace or safety pins.


Beef Interlude
LEAD:
COW
By Beat Sterchi.
Translated by Michael Hofmann.
353 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $19.95.


Etienne Chatiliez Fishes His 'River' For Clues to Life
LEAD: Etienne Chatiliez is the big noise these days in popular French cinema.
In 1988, after directing some 70 television commercials notable both for their humor and their against-the-techno-glitz-grain narrative qualities, he made a resounding leap into feature film with ''Life Is a Long Quiet River,'' which opens in New York on Friday at the Paris Theater.


EVOLUTION IN EUROPE: A New Face For NATO;   Military Must Change As the Threat Wanes
LEAD: The military strategy outlined by NATO leaders for adapting to the end of the cold war marks a break with 40 years of military planning and deployment.
But the new concepts - including multinational units and smaller and more mobile forces - will pose a challenge to those who must put them into action.


Underticket Races Hold Political Heat
LEAD: AS Connecticut's political faithful prepare to gather in Hartford for the state party conventions, the spotlights and headlines will focus on the candidates seeking the nominations for governor.
But the tops of the tickets will probably be determined without much drama.


France
LEAD: To the Editor: This letter is in response to Sylvia Steinbrock's complaint (Letters on Travel, May 6) about the 900 number of the French Government Tourist Office.
As a tour operator specializing in travel, to France only, I feel that the 900 number is an excellent initiative to help travelers get the information they seek to arrange their trip to France.


Jean Paris, 62, Director Of Design for Cartier
LEAD: Jean Paris, a former vice president and director of design for Cartier Inc. of New York, died on Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 62 years old.


English Fare Boring? Well, Not Desserts
LEAD: EVEN in the dark days of stringy beef and overcooked cabbage, the English knew how to make desserts.
Recently I spent a week in a tranquil seaside hotel in Lyme Regis, Dorset (the location of ''The French Lieutenant's Woman''), where the menu could have been a reprint from Escoffier's reign at the


Martha Bowers Wed To James A. Falcone
LEAD: Dr.
Martha Dandridge Bowers, a daughter of Mrs.
Michael J. Higgins of Palm Beach, Fla., and Sampson Pendleton Bowers of St.
Helena, Calif., was married yesterday to Dr.
James A. Falcone, a son of Josephine Falcone of Gilroy, Calif., and the late John Falcone.
The Rev.
Joseph Asturias, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Mission of San Juan Batista in San Juan Batista, Calif.


TRAVEL ADVISORY
LEAD:
Airline Group Fights German Security Levy


With Satay and Tiger Prawns, Fiery Thai Food Is a Hit in L.A.
LEAD: There are at least 120,000 Thais living in the greater Los Angeles area today - more than in any other region outside Thailand itself.
What has drawn them to the city?
Prakas Yenbamroong, a Thai banker-turned-restaurateur who has himself been an L.A. resident since 1979, suspects that it has something to do with the area's climate, which he considers not unlike that of Thailand- and, he adds unexpectedly, with the city's profusion of Chinese and Mexican restaurants.


Another Grief Observed
LEAD:
REBUILDING THE HOUSE
By Laurie Graham.
174 pp. New York:
Viking. $17.95.


Gorbachev Heads Off Confidence Vote
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev brought his unruly party congress under control today, heading off a series of up-or-down votes on his leadership team that had threatened to become a vote of confidence on Mr.
Gorbachev's programs.


Make Transportation Policy a Local Issue
LEAD: To the Editor:


Marcy Levinson Weds W. L. Williams
LEAD: Marcy Levinson, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joel D. Levinson of Mountainside, N.J., was married last evening in Summit, N.J., to Dr.
Wyman L. Williams, the son of Mrs.
Don Bradford of Greenwood, Ind.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman officiated at the Grand Summit Hotel.


Louisiana Senate Sustains Roemer's Veto of Anti-Abortion Bill
LEAD: The Louisiana State Senate today upheld the Governor's veto of a bill that would have created the strictest anti-abortion law of any state, all but killing any chances that the bill would become law.


Erik Weiner to Wed Carolyn Roska
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Jose C. Roska of Bloomsburg, Pa., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Carolyn Kangleon Roska and Erik Helge Weiner, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Erik Weiner of Falkoping, Sweden.


Annual Camden Show Offers a Lively Selection of 44 Works
LEAD: THIS city looks better than it did 10 years ago, but not as prosperous as it appears in William Hoffman's painting of it - one of 44 works that are now on view in the Stedman Gallery on the Rutgers-Camden campus.


August Wedding For Miss Wagner
LEAD: August wedding plans for MaryMoss Wagner and John Tracy Walker 4th, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walker 3d of Charlottesville, Va., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick W. Wagner 3d of New York.


On Language;   O Solecism Mio
LEAD: At the biannual meeting of the Judson Welliver Society, the association of former White House speechwriters, the Kennedy Administration's Ted Sorensen rose to assail my use of biannual in the invitation: ''This word means 'twice a year,' not 'every two years'; either Mr.
Safire has erred and should have said biennial, or I have not been invited to all the meetings.


Breaking Up?
LEAD: They have been teammates on the Indy-car circuit for a year and a half, but for Mario Andretti and his son Michael, that could end if there is substance to the speculation that Michael, 27 years old, will drive on the international Formula One circuit next year.


Mary Curtis Weds John Ulin in West
LEAD: Mary Alison Curtis, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Allen James Curtis of Palos Verdes Estates, Calif., was married yesterday to John Charles Ulin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Irwin Ulin of New York.
Judge Frank Baffa of Los Angeles County Superior Court officiated at the home of the bride's parents.


Mets Lose as Braves Show Power
LEAD: Jeff Innis, crouched and cringing at the base of the mound, never took his hands off his knees, never sneaked a desperate peek over his shoulder.
Innis had seen his pitch leap off Jim Presley's bat and understood instinctively that there was no need to look for it again.


Question of the Week;   Who Is Baseball's Best Player Now?
LEAD: Attitude cannot be taught. Gregg Jefferies has my vote.


The World;   Moscow's Party Congress Is No Party
LEAD: One worker to another: ''How come I didn't see you at the last party congress?''


Technology;   Rehabilitating the Image of the Two-Stroke Engine
LEAD: When the Berlin wall opened last fall, one recurring image of a society where technology had stood still for 40 years was the little East German Trabant automobile, with its noisy two-stroke engine spewing pollutants and fumes.
Westerners are more accustomed to two-strokes in lawnmowers than in cars.


Propping a Ladder on a Car, Firefighters Save Family of 6
LEAD: Firefighters saved a woman and her five children from a burning building in Queens yesterday when they put a ladder on a car roof to reach the third-floor room where they were trapped.


Penny-Wise and Pound Foolish
LEAD: I totally agree with Robert McMillan.
This board has completed its mission in that Shoreham will not operate as a nuclear facility.
It, therefore, makes no sense to pay for the election of a board that basically will have nothing to do ''except put out press releases.''


Headliners;   Ambling Along
LEAD: Imelda Marcos had the shoes; now she has walked.
In a case that began four years ago, Mrs.
Marcos, the widow of former Philippine President Ferdinand E. Marcos, was acquitted by a Federal court jury in Manhattan last week of helping her husband loot $200 million from the Philippine treasury and then investing the proceeds in art, jewelry and prime New York City real estate.


BASEBALL: American League;   A Royals Turnabout: Rookie One-Hits Tigers
LEAD: Kevin Appier, a rookie, pitched a one-hitter and Kurt Stillwell keyed a three-run third-inning attack tonight as the Kansas City Royals beat Detroit, 4-0, repaying the Tigers for Jack Morris's one-hitter Friday night.


Americans Should Travel Wherever They Wish;   Cuba Wants Tourists
LEAD: To the Editor:


Closing Costs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Massachusetts Lawmakers Pass Bill to Raise Income and Gas Taxes
LEAD: After three weeks of bitter negotiations that often lasted late into the night, the Massachusetts Legislature today sent a $1.6 billion tax package to the desk of Governor Michael S. Dukakis.
The Governor's press secretary said Mr.
Dukakis would sign the bill early next week.


Barbara Ashbrook Wed in Washington
LEAD: Barbara Ann Ashbrook and Sidney Freidberg were married yesterday at their home in Washington by Chief Judge Patricia M. Wald of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Reaping the Season's Mushroom Bounty
LEAD: The variety of mushrooms in specialty stores now is dazzling and, while they cost as much as or more than a rack of lamb or lobster, to my mind they are equally as sumptuous.


Deirdre Schaus and Christopher Painter Marry
LEAD: Deirdre Olivia Schaus, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Schaus of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., was married yesterday in Jamestown, R.I., to Christopher Enfield Painter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Whitfield Painter Jr. of Concord, Mass.
The Rev.
William J. O'Neill officiated at St.
Mark Roman Catholic Church.


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   Light Meals and Salads, Salads, Salads
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
David K's


Thrills? Millions? 'Spec' Scripts Bring Big Bids
LEAD: In Hollywood, money talks. What it has been saying recently is revolutionary.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
A Gathering of Golf Elders


Q and A
LEAD:
Dripping Air-Conditioner
Question: We live in a very old building in Manhattan.
Since tenants above us installed a very powerful air-conditioner in their window water constantly drips and often pours from it down to our ledge and window sill.
When their air-conditioner is on we cannot leave our windows open.


WHAT'S DOING IN Cape May
LEAD: Technically, Cape May, N.J., is a beach resort.
But the rather uninspiring stretch of sand there, packed though it may be on summer afternoons, is not the main point of this exuberantly Victorian town at the southeastern tip of New Jersey.
Cape May, a National Historic Landmark, is made for strolling, for porch-sitting, for steeping oneself in the atmosphere of another era.


The Singapore Sting
LEAD: Frequent visitors to Singapore know that amid the city's wonders there are occasional flies in the Tiger Balm.
Forty-eight-hour deliveries are frequent from Singapore's 24-hour tailors.
Happy hour comestibles in the city's bars and lounges are far below Western standards in quantity and variety if not in quality.


Sports of The Times;   Last Look at Italy's World Cup
LEAD: So who's going to win the World Cup final today? I look for signs.


Dance Keeps Cambodian Culture Alive
LEAD: DRESSED in a beaded gold velvet costume so tight she had to be sewn into it, with stacks of golden bracelets encircling her wrists, silk flowers in her hair and her face and lips painted, Somaly Hay looked nothing like a boy.
But she was wearing the costume of a young prince, in accordance with the traditions of


State Is Disappointed By Gambling Revenues
LEAD: GAMBLING revenues for the 1990 fiscal year, which ended last week, were disappointing, state officials said.
But they expressed hope that several changes in the state lottery would increase the state's take this year.


A Sin Tax On the Sale Of Stocks?
LEAD: Are stockbrokers to be treated like liquor store owners, with the Government making more money than the businessman every time a sale is made?


Fashion;   FOLLOWING ORDERS Stretch urethane bustier. To order from Frederick's of Hollywood. (800) 323-9525. Boa: Allan &amp; Suzi. Skirt: Jeanette for St. Martin. Stockings: Fogal. Ring: Maria Snyder. Charles Eames chair: Full House;
LEAD: In his pursuit of fashion novelty, Franco Moschino of Italy might well have thumbed through the Frederick's of Hollywood catalogue.
So might Thierry Mugler of France, Katharine Hamnett of Britain or, for that matter, any number of world-class style provocateurs in search of new ideas.
Leggy body stockings, lacy lingerie, slick bustiers - the venerable catalogue is rife with items that have influenced designers on both sides of the Atlantic.


Jack Welsch, Wine Executive, 77
LEAD: Jack Welsch, a wine distribution executive, died Wednesday.
He was 77 years old and lived in San Francisco.


Postings: Landmark for Sale;   Nast's House
LEAD: In Morristown, N.J., $1.2 million will buy a National Historic Landmark: a Second Empire-style house with 10 bedrooms, four bathrooms, a brass plaque at the door and memories of the illustrator and cartoonist Thomas Nast, who lived there from 1872 until his death in 1902.
But it will not buy an oyster ranch - although Mark


No Headline
LEAD:
Golf
Aching Archer Takes Senior Lead: George Archer took a two-stroke lead yesterday in the second round of the Northville Long Island Classic despite a flareup of chronic back problems.
Archer said he felt the back pain increase after last weekend's United States Senior Open in Paramus, N.J., where he tied for 13th.


Misuse of Savings Bailout Reported in Texas Purchase
LEAD: An Arizona insurance executive with a history of legal and regulatory problems was allowed to buy 15 insolvent Texas savings and loan associations with borrowed money in 1988 and was promised $1.85 billion in Federal subsidies.
Congressional investigators call the arrangement the worst abuse found in the Federal bailout program.


Date Update
LEAD:
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Apr.90
Apr. 89
Change
Starts
1,224
1,341
-8.7%
Completions
1,294
1,546
-16.3%
Sales
530
610
-13.1%
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)


Smaller Colleges Thrive
LEAD: To the Editor:


Grand Finale Today
LEAD: After a grand month of play, along with hooligans, penalty kicks, Italian flags and young men's faces painted in their national colors, the 1990 World Cup ends Sunday with a championship match in which West Germany is favored to defeat the team it lost to in the 1986 final, Argentina.


Ideas &amp; Trends;   Despite the Heat Summer in the City Has Always Been An Outdoor Affair
LEAD: The temperature has reached into the 90's and the public pollers still have not tumbled to the fact that what most often crops up in conversation these days is not perestroika, not racial unrest, not savings and loan scandal, not even traffic.
It is weather, a subject that in New York City has always been known to go to extremes.


&gt;A Show of Shapes, From 10 Sculptors
LEAD: AT Krasdale Foods here is a show by the 10 artists who inaugurated the Food Center Sculpture Park last summer.
The selection of 44 works - several of them prints and drawings - complements the outdoor display, and a good thing too, for this is scattered like a treasure hunt over the Hunts Point Food Distribution


Poland's 'Big Bang' Gets a Bad Rap
LEAD: To the Editor:


With Approval Wins
LEAD: With Approval confirmed his standing as the best grass horse in the East this year by scoring a comfortable 1 1/4-length victory over Alwuhush yesterday in the $87,600 Tidal Handicap at Belmont Park.


Reflections on World Cup 1990
LEAD: I was disappointed to read the article concerning the Ireland-Romania soccer match (''Ireland Tops Romania, Ending 0-0 Game on Final Penalty Kick,'' The Times, June 26).
Instead of quoting the Irish coach's remarks on tactics you quoted his remarks on drinking.
The article had many other slurs and subtle insults.


Gorbachev Heads Off Threat
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev brought his unruly Communist Party congress under control, heading off a threat to his leadership team.
Page 4.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
Court-Martialed by Mom


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Briarcliff Manor, NY.
$280,000
7 Larch Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 66-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, playroom, workshop; taxes $3,598.
Bronxville, N.Y.
$745,000
9 Sunny Brae Place
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 65-year-old regency; fireplace, sun room, garden, 3,200 square feet, 2-car detached garage; taxes $10,975.


Question of the Week;   Who Is Baseball's Best Player Now?
LEAD: Len Dykstra.
Is there another ballplayer who brings a bigger grin to the face of any real baseball fan?


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
NATURE CENTER OPEN


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I'm 51, and I'm probably too old to handle four or five immersion realities at the same time.''
- Stewart Brand, who writes about computers. [14:6.]


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Yosemite National Park is celebrating its centennial this year.
Marika Somogyi has produced a medal that depicts the Half Dome, one of the park's most famous attractions.


Jessica L. Weiss Engaged to Wed
LEAD: An August wedding is planned for Jessica Louise Weiss and Richard Michael Borden, the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Weiss of Plano, Tex., have announced.
Mr.
Borden is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter V. Borden of West Hartford, Conn.


Wedding Planned For Ms. Blaisdell
LEAD: Durwood A. Blaisdell of Orange, Conn., has announced September wedding plans for his daughter, Deborah Ann Blaisdell, and Raymond Joseph Snowdon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard J. Snowdon Jr. of Scranton, Pa.


Jonathan R. Hock Weds Ms. Brown
LEAD: Laura S. Brown, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Brown of Washington and Vineyard Haven, Mass., was married last evening at the Washington Hebrew Congregation to Jonathan R. Hock, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Hock of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Bruce Lustig and Cantor Michael Manevitch officiated.


Americans Should Travel Wherever They Wish;   U.S. Position Is Right
LEAD: To the Editor:


BASEBALL: National League;   Carter Is 5 for 5 as the Giants Beat the Cubs, 10-9
LEAD: Mike Kingery hit a two-run single in the ninth inning and Gary Carter went 5 for 5 as the San Francisco Giants defeated the Chicago Cubs today, 10-9.


Ms. Rabbott Wed To T. J. Anthony
LEAD: Lisa Helen Rabbott, a daughter of Nancy Fanning Rabbott of New Haven and the late John P. Rabbott Jr., was married yesterday to Timothy James Anthony, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Anthony of West Haven, Conn.
The Rev.
Dennis Murphy, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the St.
Thomas More Chapel at Yale


The Region;   Connecticut Begrudgingly Considers an Income Tax.
LEAD: About 20 years ago, Connecticut politicians tried tinkering with the state's tax system and brought on a political clampdown.
They created and passed an income tax for the first time, but within weeks the law was repealed under a storm of public outrage.
Tax reformers went underground, and a new generation of income-tax hard-liners within the state's majority


Homeless Advocates Debate How to Advance the Battle
LEAD: This week's suicide of Mitch Snyder, the nation's best-known advocate for the homeless, came at a time when their movement was already hurt by internal strife and an apparent decline in public support.


They All Love Her
LEAD:
WOMAN OF THE AEROPLANES
By Kojo Laing.
196 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company.
$16.95.


Lifestyle;   Whiny Annoyance, or Watery Fun?
LEAD: Flotillas of speedy little watercraft piloted by individual riders, some of them hardly old enough to ride a bicycle, are swarming the shores, lakes and rivers of the Northeast and are generating the kind of excitement and controversy that first accompanied snowmobiles and dirt bikes.


Letter From Tokyo: Brando, the Stones and Banana Yoshimoto
LEAD: As a new generation of Japanese novelists achieves cult status in Japan, with books frequently selling millions of copies in hard-cover editions alone, publishers in New York and Tokyo are making a fresh effort to internationalize the market for Japanese fiction.
Already some of the Japanese publishing houses have employed bilingual editors from New York and


For Seniors, Discounts on Plane and Train Fares
LEAD: Slipping past the 50th birthday may be a trauma, but the sting should be eased somewhat by the travel discounts that start to become available then.
One friend laughed about using her senior citizen card to discount a motel room for an assignation, but why not?


Queens Man Missing at Sea
LEAD: A Queens man was missing and presumed drowned after diving into the ocean from a chartered fishing boat early yesterday, a United States Coast Guard spokesman said.
Richard LaBarabera, 45 years old, jumped off the boat about four miles south of Jones Beach about 2:30 A.M. and disappeared in the water, said Petty Officer Kevin Gilheany of the United States Coast Guard.


Gentle Scents Enhance a Flower Bed
LEAD: IT had rained the night before, and all the plants were washed clean.
They looked fresh and green.
There was also a fragrance in the yard, but it was not apparent where it was coming from.
Only a few plants were in bloom, as it was a between time, past the glories of spring, but not quite ready for the opulence of annuals.


BEST SELLERS: July 8, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
14
4
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow.
(Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney
tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death
while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.


Beckenbauer Might Assist
LEAD: Franz Beckenbauer, the coach of West Germany's soccer team in the World Cup and a former player for the Cosmos, is expected to join the organizing committee for the 1994 World Cup in the United States.


Slovenia Defies Belgrade Call To Cancel Sovereignty Move
LEAD: The Slovenian republic today defied demands from Communist federal leaders in Belgrade to annul a declaration of full state sovereignty.


How Officers in a Florida City Test Stun Guns: the Hard Way
LEAD: Police officers here have been authorized to use stun guns as an alternative to nightsticks, but there is a catch: any officer who wants to use the device must be stunned by it first to know what it feels like.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: Even experienced camera hands who can explain the difference between single-servo auto focus and off-the-film automatic flash exposure are hard-pressed when it comes to binoculars.
Friends accustomed to receiving advice on all things optical are often met with confusion when they ask ''What's the best exit pupil diameter?


All About/Reformulated Gasolines;   As Pressure Grows, Refiners Develop Cleaner Fuels
LEAD: It is as if oil refiners had joined the Sierra Club.
Company after company has come out with gasoline reformulated to be kinder to the environment.
In this earth-conscious era, oil companies are competing to be green and clean.


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q. Some years ago, we replaced our sun deck flooring with cedar.
Although I originally intended to apply several coats of varnish to this decking, I followed the advice of an ''expert'' and painted the flooring instead.
The paint soon peeled, and the deck has been repainted several times since.
Each time, all peeling paint was scraped off.


Lakehurst Journal;   Navy Wants to Stop Paying for Borough Services
LEAD: FOR years, this sandy, mile-square Ocean County municipality and the sprawling Naval Air Engineering Center here have enjoyed a harmonious, almost symbiotic relationship.


Barry's Ordeal Accents City's Racial Divisions
LEAD: In recent days the trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. has sprawled far beyond the courtroom, becoming a painful morality play that has transfixed this city and generated extraordinary soul-searching among its citizens.


Warnings Beyond the Oil Patch
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tina M. Webster Wed To Thomas M. Loose
LEAD: At the First Congregational Church in Williamstown, Mass., Tina Maureen Webster and Thomas Maxwell Loose, both 23 years old and graduates of Williams College, were married yesterday by the Rev.
David Williams.


Lord, Geller To Be Merged
LEAD: The WPP Group P.L.C. said Friday that it would merge two of its companies - Brouillard Communications and Lord, Geller, Federico, Einstein Inc. - to form Brouillard/LGFE.


Laser Printers From Apple
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. will introduce two lower-priced laser printers on Monday that it expects to help it stave off growing competition.


Attention Deficit Is Traced to Inner Ear
LEAD: To the Editor:


Livery-Cab Driver Shot In Robbery in Brooklyn
LEAD: A livery-cab driver was shot in the neck early yesterday by three men who robbed him in Brooklyn, the police said.


Chronicle
LEAD: An archaeologist wants to dig up the lawn of CHARLES KURALT'S vacation home in Essex, Conn., but the television newsman has been -where else - on the road.


Pirates Defeat the Dodgers, 7-2
LEAD: LOS ANGELES, July 8 (AP) -Barry Bonds and Jeff King drove in three runs each and Doug Drabek won his first game in a month as the Pittsburgh Pirates beat the Los Angeles Dodgers today, 7-2, and held on to first place in the National League East, a half-game ahead of the Mets.


Brazil Backing Computer Imports
LEAD: The office of an American multinational company here recently received a knock on the door of the sort dreaded by business executives across Brazil: it was the computer police.


Ford Plant for Hungary
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company plans to spend $60 million to $70 million to build an auto-parts plant in Hungary, the state news agency said Friday.
The plant, which would also import Ford cars to Hungary, would be built southwest of Budapest, it said.
Ford plans to manufacture ignition coils and electronic fuel pumps at the plant.


Metro Datelines;   600 Rikers Prisoners Skip Meals in Protest
LEAD: Some 400 inmates at Rikers Island skipped lunch for a second day yesterday and 600 skipped dinner to protest state rules limiting the personal effects they can take when being transferred to state prisons, a New York City Department of Correction spokeswoman said.


RICO Reform: A Second Windfall for S &amp; L Crooks
LEAD: If the American people don't holler fast, the crooks who looted the nation's savings and loans are going to get off very cheaply.


Michael Drummond, 30, Artificial Heart Patient
LEAD: Michael Drummond, who in 1985 became the first person successfully given an artificial heart transplant as a bridge to receiving a human heart, died Saturday at the University of Arizona Medical Center in Tucson.
He was 30 years old and lived in Phoenix.


Setbacks Are Seen for Bond Rally
LEAD: Analysts and money managers say that the bond market rally that began in late spring has been sidetracked for the time being, but that it has not been derailed.
Consequently, yield levels, which had been inching lower, are likely to have an upward bias over the next few weeks at least.


Zebra Mussel Threatens Economy and Ecology
LEAD: Julie Kuberka stood on the edge of the Hudson River here, pulling in a laundry line cord with a white plastic tile at its end.
Her assistant, Jennifer Curnow, sealed the tile in a plastic freezer bag, ready to be sent back to a laboratory for analysis.





Each Country's Agenda at the Economic Summit Meeting
LEAD: UNITED STATES


Two Killings on One Street
LEAD: Two men were killed on different ends of 148th Street within 17 minutes yesterday morning, the police said.
Oscar Rojas, 20 years old, of 2472 Grant Avenue was stabbed twice in the chest in a dispute with another man at 1:30 A.M. in front of 333 East 148th Street in the Mott Haven section of the Bronx.


Rome Is Big Enough for 3 Tenors
LEAD: After a month as hosts of the World Cup soccer finals, Italians were ready for a spectacle of a different order, and they got it by the earful on Saturday night at the Baths of Caracalla.
Tenors, anyone?
Under a full moon, there were three of the world's greatest on the outdoor stage of the third-century Roman baths - Jose Carreras, Placido Domingo and Luciano


Kenyan Opposition Lawyer Asks for Refuge at Embassy
LEAD: A prominent Kenyan lawyer, who has been in the forefront of the push for a multiparty democracy, has sought refuge in the United States Embassy in Nairobi, the American Ambassador said today.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Save a Spot In the Hall
LEAD: Now in his ninth major league season, Ryne Sandberg, at the age of 30, is having his best year statistically.


Ms. Rosenstock Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Debra Lynn Rosenstock, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Rosenstock of Plainview, L.I., , was married yesterday to Michael V. Goetz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael S. Goetz of Philadelphia.
Rabbi Myron M. Fenster officiated at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.


Yankees (30-50) Decide to Give It a Rest
LEAD: The good news for the Yankees is that their next contact with a baseball won't be until Thursday.
They are so desperate to get away from the game that Manager Stump Merrill canceled a Wednesday workout.


Question Box
LEAD:
Close No-Hitters
Q.
In the wake of the same-night no-hitters thrown by Dave Stewart of the Oakland Athletics and Fernando Valenzuela of the Los Angeles Dodgers on June 29, there were reports of a similar feat happening in 1892 and of a double no-hit game in 1917.
Didn't Mike Warren of Oakland and Bob Forsch of the St.


No Headline
LEAD: After failing to override a veto of what would have been an almost total ban on abortion, the Louisiana Legislature today passed a bill nearly as strict that is based on language the Governor has indicated he would support.


Corrections
LEAD: The weather table for U.S. cities on Friday incorrectly reported the high temperature for Thursday in Washington.
It was 99 degrees, not 113.


Evolution in Europe;   Albania Says the West Delays Refugees' Visas
LEAD: Albania accused Western embassies in Tirana today of delaying visas to some 6,000 refugees holed up in foreign missions there, saying that it had agreed to let them go West and that the delay was creating tensions.


Lufthansa's Airbus Jets
LEAD: Lufthansa A.G., West Germany's state-controlled airline, said Thursday that it had signed an order worth more than two billion marks, or about $1.2 billion, to buy 20 new Airbus Industrie A321 jets and to take options on 20 more.
The A321 seats up to 180 passengers.


West Germany Captures World Cup
LEAD: West Germany won the 1990 World Cup tonight, defeating the defending champion, Argentina, in a match that typified the enduring themes of the monthlong tournament - few goals, nasty play and dull games.


For Incumbents, Savings Bailout Might Be Costly
LEAD: Republican and Democratic challengers in Congressional campaigns across the country are seizing upon the savings and loan crisis as the issue they say will make many incumbents vulnerable this year.


The Editorial Notebook;   Johnny Can't Add, Hiroko Can
LEAD: In international education tests among industrial nations, American students usually come close to the bottom in math and science; the Japanese are always on top.
More than 90 percent of Japanese children graduate from high school; close to 30 percent of Americans drop out.
If a nation depends on the quality of its people, American children should be worried about their future competitors.


After Weeping for Mandela, Many Prepare to Savor Visit
LEAD: For 30 years Willard Johnson fought an often thankless battle in Boston, protesting racial inequities in a country most Americans knew little about.
He helped organize some of the earliest demonstrations against South Africa's system of racial separation and was even arrested for it once.


Italy, Looking to the East, Seeks Economic Influence
LEAD: With one collective eye fixed resolutely west and the other glancing hopefully toward the east, Italian business and Government leaders are working hard these days to keep their focus.
If they can, they are convinced they will prosper.


New York Told To Base Raises On Job Needs
LEAD: As New York City begins contract negotiations with its largest municipal union today, a civic group says it should end the pattern of roughly comparable raises for all unions, in favor of a two-year freeze for uniformed workers and substantial pay increases for jobs with a shortage of applicants.


Eastern Europe: The Polluted Lands
LEAD: As Eastern Europe struggles toward democracy, it must also grapple with a ravaged environment.
Corrosive soot has fouled water and soil, and in blackened industrial cities the air is laced with heavy metals and chemicals.
In a world ruled by production targets, there was no pressure to clean up.


Five-Alarm Fire Destroys Rug Factory in Brooklyn


Anti-Crack Protesters Bring Fresh Voice to Drug-Plagued Times Square


Accounts
LEAD: *
Weekend Exercise Co., a manufacturer of dance, aerobic and exercise clothing, to Henszey &amp; Albert, with a budget between $1.5 million and $2 million.


Business and the Law;   For Lawyers, Few Big-Fee Deals
LEAD: The rate of growth at many leading law firms slowed considerably in 1989, but the legal business was nonetheless highly profitable, a study scheduled to be released today has found.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
COMMITTEE ON THE INDIAN OCEAN - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Americans' Support for Israel: Solid, but Not the Rock It Was
LEAD: Like many Americans, Donald Power long counted himself an admirer of Israel.
A Federal labor mediator who lives here in Saginaw, he marveled at the courage and spirit of the small nation, a fledgling democracy so imperiled yet so determined to survive.


More Space Available
LEAD: THE athlete as billboard is a familiar sight for spectators at sports events and a profitable venture for the athletes.
So it's not surprising to learn that skiers have heretofore felt cheated by rules imposed by the International Ski Federation limiting the amount of space they can sell on their uniforms.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Mass Killings in Yugoslavia
The discovery of secret graves has led to reports of mass killings 45 years ago by the Communist Partisans led by Marshal Tito.
Page A6.
Tales of Brutality in Liberia
Accounts of atrocities war have multiplied as nearly 2,000 civilians have been killed and many more wounded, say relief workers, missionaries and diplomats.


Review/Music;   David Diamond Tribute At Waterloo Festival
LEAD: The Waterloo Festival of the Arts, in its 15th-anniversary season, opened its classical-music series this weekend with a tribute to the American composer David Diamond, who turns 75 on Monday.
Mr.
Diamond's Partita (1935) was performed Friday evening at a festival chamber concert in Princeton, and his Symphony No.


A Fallen Hero Is Dreaming of Gold in '92
LEAD: It is an ending Hollywood might hesitate to write.


Suzanne Kaufman, Photographer, Wed
LEAD: Suzanne Kaufman, the daughter of Esther F. Kaufman of Brooklyn and the late Joseph A. Kaufman, was married yesterday to Lee McClure Come, a son of the Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold B. Come of Larkspur, Calif.
Rabbi Ari L. Fridkis performed the ceremony at CAMI Hall in New York.


Stephanie Hubelbank, a Lawyer, Weds
LEAD: Stephanie Laura Hubelbank, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Hubelbank of Bridgeport, Conn., was married yesterday to Douglas Michael Scheinman, a son of Phyllis Braff of East Hampton, L.I., and Graham M. Scheinman of New York.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi S. Jerome Wallin at Congregation B'nai Torah in Trumbull, Conn.


At More and More Jails, Smoking Is Forbidden
LEAD: When he was sent to the Randall County jail here to await trial on charges that he beat his wife to death, Larry McPhearson knew he would lose his freedom.
What he was not prepared to lose were his cigarettes.


Some U.S. Arts Grants Turned Down in Protest
LEAD: About 700 artists or arts groups so far have accepted grants made this year by the National Endowment for the Arts.
Some have vowed at the same time to challenge the accompanying restrictions on the content of their work.
But only a handful are known to have rejected the grants because of the restrictions.


PRETORIA ARRESTS 9 RIGHT-WINGERS
LEAD: The South African police announced today that nine white men with known right-wing sympathies have been arrested in connection with a series of bombings in the last three months.


Ned Ball, 81, President Of Brokerage in 1970's
LEAD: Ned B. Ball, a former president of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith, died Saturday at a hospital in Portland, Ore.
He was 81 years old.


McGovern Wins New Haven Open
LEAD: Although there is big-time pressure on the Ben Hogan Tour, galleries tend to be on the small side.
So Jim McGovern brought his own gallery today and went on to win the Ben Hogan New Haven Open.


Market Place;   How to View E-Systems Stock
LEAD: FOUR years ago, analysts expected E-Systems Inc., which makes highly sophisticated military electronics, to elude likely cutbacks in Pentagon spending and prosper.


Chile and U.S. to Begin Talks on Freeing Trade
LEAD: Chile, one of the lowest-tariff countries in Latin America, will open negotiations with Washington this week about establishing a free trade zone with the United States, Finance Minister Alejandro Foxley said Friday.


Catholic Parish Closings Bring Tears in Chicago
LEAD: Sophie Kochaney sat in the ninth pew at St.
Bridget Catholic Church today clutching a rosary as she has every Sunday for 51 years.
But this time she went through a fistful of tissues and received communion with tears in her eyes.


Satisfaction Lead to Acura
LEAD: The Acura luxury car division of the Honda Motor Company of Japan has topped the J. D. Power &amp; Associates list of cars most satisfying to owners for the fourth year in a row, the marketing company said last week.


West Side Co-op Acts Under Law and Contract
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hitachi China Software
LEAD: Hitachi Ltd. of Japan and a Chinese company will jointly develop Chinese versions of software that will connect Hitachi's general-purpose computer with China's personal computers, the Japanese company said last week.
China's personal computers are compatible with the I.B.M.
PC/XT and PC/AT.
Hitachi said it hoped the venture, with the China Great Wall Industrial Corporation, would enhance sales of its general-purpose computers in China.


Beckenbauer Has Several Attractive Alternatives
LEAD: Having today become perhaps the ultimate achiever in the history of his sport, Franz Beckenbauer has the luxury of choosing whether to take on a new challenge or to drift off into the hazy limelight enjoyed by very wealthy retired superstars.


Chronicle
LEAD: When ANTHONY J. F. O'REILLY became the chief executive of the H. J. Heinz Company 10 years ago, the company was smaller and less profitable.
If success is measured by one's peers, Mr.
O'Reilly has been successful indeed, since he was chosen as Chief Executive of the Year from more than 1,400 others.


What Students Read When They Don't Have To
LEAD: While scholars debate what books should be taught in college, there is no debate about those that students are reading outside the classroom.


PHYSICIANS CHIDED IN A CANCER STUDY
LEAD: Physicians must act more aggressively when women find lumps in their breasts, a study of malpractice claims and lawsuits indicates.


Mines Kill Sri Lanka Soldiers
LEAD: Tamil rebels detonated mines under a military truck and an armored car today, killing 8 Government soldiers and wounding 16, officials said.
The mines, buried in a road near Vavuniya, 140 miles north of Colombo, went off as the vehicles passed over them.
In Puttalam, north of the capital, President Ranasinghe Premadasa appealed to foreign governments to help start peace talks with the separatist rebels.


Israeli Arabs Dissent, But Remain Loyal
LEAD: To the Editor:


At Second, He's First In the Class
LEAD: RYNE SANDBERG will be the National League's starting second baseman in an All-Star Game for the sixth straight year tomorrow night in enviable circumstances.
At the age of 30, he is being praised with unusual unanimity throughout the baseball world, cited as a likely most valuable player, on the verge of setting important records.


Focus on Levi
LEAD: WHETHER he likes it or not, Wayne Levi is starting to be noticed.
With his third victory in 35 days last Sunday at the Greater Hartford Open, Levi became the first man of the new decade to win three tournaments in a season on the PGA Tour.


U.S. Plans $4 Billion Device That Failed Tests
LEAD: Breaking its own rules on buying major new weapons, the Pentagon is pressing ahead with a $4 billion electronic radar-jamming device that has failed crucial flight tests on fighter planes it is designed to protect.


Mullen Helps Veryfine And Loses Smartfood
LEAD: When Mullen Advertising decided to promote Veryfine juices as an alternative to soda, the agency made one mistake.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-8


Metro Matters;   The Hazy Future Of Trying to Plan For the Future
LEAD: Skeptics say strategic planning is for people you can't trust with the present.


On the Road in Iowa, 'The Greatest Thing'
LEAD: ''CAN I tell you an incredible story?'' Norman Kornreich asked, his blue eyes wide, his arms flying through the air.
He is sitting at the dining-room table of his home in Oceanside, L.I., with five years' worth of snapshots, cycling souvenirs and cloth patches heaped in front of him.


U.S. PLANS TO SEND PEOPLE, NOT CASH, TO ASSIST SOVIETS
LEAD: President Bush plans to tell the United States' six main industrial allies this week that he is prepared to send teams of experts to the Soviet Union to help it rebuild rail and communications networks, grain storage sites, food distribution systems and other essential services, senior White House officials said today.


New Tennis Racquet Plays It Straight
LEAD: A design innovation on the widebody tennis racquet combines a round (rather than oval) head with a throat that is straight rather than bowed.
The Orbi-Tech design from Spalding Sports Worldwide includes two models, both made of graphite, in 95- and 105-square-inch heads.


Davis Takes Title, Stopping Breland
LEAD: Aaron (Superman) Davis of the Bronx is the new World Boxing Association welterweight champion.


Henry J. Kuss Jr., 67, Negotiator Of Billions in U.S. Weapons Sales
LEAD: Henry J. Kuss Jr., an international military consultant who was the Defense Department's chief arms salesman in the 1960's, died of cancer Friday at Fairfax Hospital in Falls Church, Va., a family spokesman said.
He was 67 years old and lived in McLean, Va.


Those in Art Case May Settle It Themselves
LEAD: Opposing parties in the Quedlinburg art theft case now before Federal District Court in Dallas have resumed out-of-court negotiations, said a source close to the parties who spoke on condition that his name not be used.


Low-Cost State Condo Plan Is Criticized in Connecticut
LEAD: A plan by the Connecticut Department of Housing to buy unsold condominiums at low prices for eventual purchase by low- and middle-income buyers is meeting resistance from many quarters.


In the Zodiac Case, Still More Riddles Than Clues
LEAD: Four months after the gunman who calls himself the Zodiac shot his first victim, the largest police task force assembled in New York City since the Son of Sam murders is still baffled by the central riddle of the case: how the gunman knows the astrological signs of his victims.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We created a mythical image for Israel that neither Israel, despite all of its remarkable achievements, nor any other nation could ever live up to.''
-David A. Harris of the American Jewish Committee.
[A9:1.]


Evolution in Europe;   Bulgarians Call On More to Quit
LEAD: Student leaders called today for more resignations in Bulgaria's governing Socialist Party after protests forced out President Petar Mladenov.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of July 8:
MONDAY
Central VT Pub Svc
PS Group Inc
Kemper Corp
Sierra Pac Res
Lubys Cafeterias
Xerox Corp
Phillips Pete Co
TUESDAY
Arco Chem Co
Weis Mkts
Cummins Engine
Weyerhaeuser Co
Divrsfd Enrgies Minn
Williams Cos
Rite Aid Corp


From Liberian War, Tales of Brutality
LEAD: A young man was stopped last night as he was trying to reach his home.
It was dark, and long past Monrovia's dusk-to-dawn curfew.


Dr. Tibor Ham, 76, a Politician In Hungary and Physician in U.S.
LEAD: Dr.
Tibor Ham, a physician and a member of the Hungarian resistance to the Nazis in World War II, who fled into exile after the Communist takeover in 1947, died on Saturday at his home in McLean, Va.
He was 76 years old.
A son, Eugene, said Dr.
Ham died of prostate cancer.


Israeli Joins Labor Race
LEAD: A former Energy Minister, Moshe Shahal, declared his candidacy today to lead Israel's Labor Party, saying he would seek agreement with the United States on peace with Palestinians.
Mr.
Shahal, 56 years old, is an Iraqi-born lawyer and protege of the party leader, Shimon Peres.


Report Finds 638,900 Gun Crimes Yearly


Deep-Water Ports Offer Solution to Oil Spills;   Use Floating Booms
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
President Bush is prepared to send teams of experts to the Soviet Union to help it rebuild many essential services, but not to offer the extensive aid proposed by West Germany and France, senior White House officials said on the eve of the summit meeting of the Group of Seven industrial countries in Houston.


British Papers Facing a Shakeout
LEAD: The editor of The Financial Times recently sent his journalists a brisk memorandum urging them to cut costs.
Among the measures he suggested were avoiding expensive restaurants, canceling some foreign trips, using public transportation rather than taxis to Heathrow Airport and sharply curtailing the practice of ''F.T.


Harvard Varsity Coasts
LEAD: Harvard won one final with ease and lost another with verve as the 151st Henley Royal Regatta ended here today.


A Better Neighbor Policy
LEAD: Revolution is sweeping Latin America and Washington, sensibly, wants to encourage it.
For too long, Washington has subordinated vital hemispheric concerns to ideological contests in Central America.
President Bush's new economic program for the Americas signals a positive shift in priorities that can benefit Americans from Point Barrow to Tierra del


Deep-Water Ports Offer Solution to Oil Spills;   Loss of Older Ships
LEAD: To the Editor:


2/ Loaf Is Family Heartbreak in Egypt
LEAD: In a tangled part of town called Boulaq, all narrow streets and gimcrack homes and children beyond counting, a man called Hamid told a story the other day that said much about the problems confronting President Hosni Mubarak in the Arab world's most populous nation.


Police Officer Stabbed in Jerusalem


Bill Cullen, 70, Host and Panelist On Many TV Game Shows, Dies
LEAD: Bill Cullen, a host of television game shows for more than 30 years, died on Saturday at his home in the Bel Air section of Los Angeles.
He was 70 years old.


George T. Eggleston, Leading Isolationist In World War II, 83
LEAD: George T. Eggleston, a cartoonist, yachtsman, author, editor and isolationist who became embroiled in a national controversy in the 1940's, died Saturday in a nursing home in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 83 years old.


Dr. Jane Parnes Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Dr.
Jane Robin Parnes, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Parnes of Baldwin, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Nicholas Adrian Cataldo, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Cataldo of Eatontown, N.J.
Rabbi Cy Lowenheim officiated at the Roslyn Country Club in Roslyn Heights, L.I.


Fear of AIDS With Rape: How a Case Was Affected
LEAD: Prosecutors in Manhattan have agreed to a reduced sentence for a defendant in a rape case in exchange for the man's promise to take an AIDS test and provide the results to his victim.


Chronicle
LEAD: Racing fans in the Northeast will get their first look at WILLY T. RIBBS driving on the Championship Auto Racing Teams' Indy-car circuit next Sunday at the Marlboro Grand Prix at the Meadowlands.
Rooting for him will be BILL COSBY, his backer.


G. Zambonini, 48, Architect Who Led A New York Atelier
LEAD: Giuseppe Zambonini, an architect and loft renovator who founded the Open Atelier of Design in Manhattan, died on Saturday at his home in Atlanta.
He was 48 years old.
His death apparently resulted from a heart attack, a friend of the family said.


Bridge
LEAD: A social headache, less common now than it once was, belongs to the hostess who plans two tables of Chicago after-dinner bridge and finds herself with seven players instead of eight.
The solution, easy when you think of it, is ''shuttle dummy.'' Two tables are placed close together, and when one table has finished bidding the dummy crosses to the other to bid there.


Reds' Armstrong Is All-Star Starter
LEAD: Jack Armstrong of the Cincinnati Reds will start for the National League in Tuesday night's All-Star Game, Roger Craig, the league's manager, announced today.


Ms. Mallin Weds James K. Hanson
LEAD: Letitia Jane Mallin, the daughter of Joel M. Mallin of New York and Janice P. Mallin of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday to James Kenneth Hanson, the son of Donald W. Hanson of Salt Lake City and Jeanne Morrison of Jamestown, R.I.
Rabbi David Greenberg performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother.


Motorola Said to Seek License From I.B.M.
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation is in negotiations to license its most advanced memory-chip technology to Motorola Inc., several Government and industry officials say.


Page Buys 2 Publications
LEAD: Page Group Publishing Inc. has purchased a pair of reader-written magazines in Beverly Hills and Brentwood.


Carol Coombs and John Kaplan Wed
LEAD: Carol Lynne Coombs, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
F.
Alan Coombs of Salt Lake City, was married yesterday to John Stuart Kaplan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton H. Kaplan of Pittsfield, Mass.
Rabbis Harold Salzmann and Alan Berg officiated at Temple Anshe Amunim in Pittsfield.


'Degenerate' Artworks Survive Triumphant Over Nazi Degradation
LEAD: An exhibition that was staged by the Nazis to vilify artists like Picasso, Wassily Kandinsky and Paul Klee will be presented in Los Angeles next year, but under very different auspices.


In Egypt, the Rising Cost of Bread Reflects an Economic Crisis


Archer Outduels Beard
LEAD: George Archer, who took a two-shot lead into the final round of the Northville Long Island Classic at the Meadow Brook Club, won a head-to-head battle with Frank Beard today to capture the Senior PGA Tour event.


Judge Rejects Tour of Merc
LEAD: A Federal District judge has denied a request from jurors in the trial of three commodity traders that they be allowed to tour the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.


Great Neck Bridal For Ms. Meranus
LEAD: Elizabeth Meranus and Menachem Lazaroff were married last evening at the Great Neck Synagogue in Great Neck, L.I., by Rabbi Aaron Soloveitchik, a maternal great-uncle of the bridegroom.
Mrs.
Lazaroff is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Meranus of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Her husband is the son of Rabbi and Mrs.


Edberg Overcomes Becker To Regain Wimbledon Title
LEAD: When the match was over and it was truly time to surrender his title to the man he had claimed it from last year, Boris Becker paused for a moment and took a mental snapshot of the surroundings that have been most conducive to his urge to terrorize his competition.


Pittston Promotions Fill 2 New Positions
LEAD: The Pittston Company, a coal producer, air freight carrier and armored car service, has named Joseph C. Farrell president and chief operating officer and David L. Marshall vice chairman.


Frenchman Buying 80% Of Adidas
LEAD: Bernard Tapie, a French entrepreneur, politician and soccer team owner, has agreed to buy an 80 percent stake in Adidas A.G., the West German company that is one of the world's largest makers of sporting goods.


Many Census Aides Are Denied Chance For Jobless Benefits
LEAD: As thousands of temporary Census Bureau workers wrap up their work this summer, they are finding that they may not be able to collect unemployment checks because of a cost-cutting move by Congress six weeks ago.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Ames Department Stores Inc., Rocky Hill, Conn., appointed James D. Varrato senior vice president for distribution services, replacing Paul W. Reese Jr., who is leaving the company in September.


Heavy Schedule of Auctions This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week include today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, an offering tomorrow of 30-year bonds by the Resolution Funding Corporation to finance the bailout of savings institutions and Wednesday's auction of seven-year notes.


Italian Festival Fills the Streets of Brooklyn


Shah Jewna Journal;   Village Women Earn Respect (and Rupees, Too)
LEAD: To be a woman, 40 and unmarried in a farming village of rural Pakistan is virtually to count for nothing.
About all the attention a single woman can attract is negative: social ostracism and sometimes physical abuse.
But here in Shah Jewna, nobody fools with Jivni.


Boeing Expects to Trim More Jobs
LEAD: The Boeing Company said last week that it expected to cut its work force in Washington State by another 2,700 jobs in the second half of 1990, bringing total job reductions for the year to about 5,600.


What's New This Summer? 'Guerrillas' of the Airwaves
LEAD: PRODUCERS from two of the five series CBS will broadcast this summer call what they are doing ''guerrilla'' television.


Big Hopes Meet Hard Reality
LEAD: For Damon Bailey and Eric Montross, the distinctions between basketball myth and basketball reality sometimes blurred during their last three seasons in high school.


Chronicle
LEAD: Since February, KATIE KELLY has been teaching English to Amerasian children in Saigon.
She left her job as television critic and commentator on WNBC-TV in December.
She had been a schoolteacher in the 1960's and after vacationing in Vietnam in 1988, decided to return to Saigon.


Charon Crushes Rivals In Oaks
LEAD: Charon scored an overpowering nine-length victory yesterday in the $287,500 Coaching Club American Oaks at Belmont Park, and only one thing could have made her handlers happier: they almost wished that Go for Wand had been in the race.


Sarah Gribetz a Bride
LEAD: At Beth El Synagogue in New Rochelle, N.Y., Sarah D. Gribetz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
H.
Joel Gribetz of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to Michael W. Stern, a son of Mrs.
Wilhelm Stern of Riverdale and the late Dr.
Stern.
Rabbis Emily Korzenik and Abner Weiss officiated.
The bride graduated from Barnard College and received an M.S.


Evolution in Europe;   Democratic Hungary Nibbles on Political Fringes
LEAD: Three months after parliamentary elections in which voters here chose to make a clean break with the Communist past, Hungary is still lingering in a prolonged state of transition, debating issues that many thought were behind them.


Evolution in Europe;   Budapest Memorial to Jews
LEAD: Several thousand people crowded outside Hungary's main synagogue today as a memorial was dedicated honoring 600,000 Hungarian Jews killed during World War II.
The memorial by the sculptor Imre Varga depicts a powerful tree, 33 feet across, shaped like an inverted menorah, or candelabrum, with leaves bearing the names of victims.


As '900' Phone Lines Grow, Debate on Their Use Widens
LEAD: George Burditt of Santa Barbara, Calif., won $1 million recently by being the first person to punch in, using the buttons on his telephone, the correct numerical answers to seven questions.
He was the first winner of a new national contest that people enter by dialing a ''900'' telephone number, paying $2.99 for the call.


The Big Break
LEAD: PHIL LOMBARDI and Greg Olson are starring in this season's poor man's version of the Wally Pipp and Lou Gehrig story.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday
None
Tuesday
None
Wednesday
None
Thursday
None
Friday
Producer Prices
June
Retail Sales
June


Greece and U.S. Sign 8-Year Pact Exchanging Arms Aid for Extended Use of Bases
LEAD: Greece's new Conservative Government and the United States signed an eight-year agreement here today providing Greece with more than $1 billion worth of arms in return for the continued operation of American military bases in this country.


Retail Deal Expected For Trump
LEAD: Donald J. Trump is set to announce this morning that France's largest retailer has signed a 25-year lease in Trump Tower in a deal worth tens of millions of dollars, bankers said.


Jamie Columbus Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Jamie Lauren Columbus, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Columbus of Rochester, and Richard Allan Glaser, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Glaser of New York, were married yesterday by Rabbi Shamai Kanter in a garden near the bride's home in Rochester.


Joy and Challenge Mix In Dancing of the Giglio
LEAD: An ornate 85-foot tower, festooned with papier-mache lilies, angels and cherubim, bobbed and swirled through the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn yesterday afternoon as about 30,000 people crowded onto the normally quiet blocks around North Eighth and Havemeyer Streets for one of New York's oldest and liveliest festivals.


Painting the Pentagon Green
LEAD: Senator Nunn has recently offered a plan to enlist the Pentagon's aid in saving the planet.
Though the chairman of the Armed Services Committee's new interests may not be entirely unconnected to his old interest in safeguarding military spending, his ideas are worth considering on their merits.
They open up potentially important areas for cooperation, and set off a number of alarm bells.


Metro Datelines;   Prison Letters Warn Youths About Crime
LEAD: A Superior Court judge, hoping to gather vivid descriptions of criminal life that will warn young people away from lawlessness, has begun ordering convicted criminals to write him letters from jail.


The Industry Fights Back Over Taxes
LEAD: THE advertising industry has been waging a fierce battle with legislators who want to tax advertising or restrict ads for cigarettes and alcohol.
So far, the intense lobbying by Madison Avenue and its clients has kept tax laws and regulations off the books.


Deep-Water Ports Offer Solution to Oil Spills
LEAD: To the Editor:


Violence And Hypocrisy
LEAD: Seldom has there been a more blatant case of blaming the victim than those pious American demands, during Nelson Mandela's visit here, that he renounce violence as a political instrument.


Shattering Glass Added To the City Symphony
LEAD: To the Editor:


Winning Ugly, Losing Ugly, Just Plain Ugly
LEAD: GOOD thing the television ratings have been so low back in the States.
Otherwise, instead of having the World Soccer body worrying about the United States World Cup program for 1994, we might have the opposite problem of some lawmaker trying to ban the World Cup like so much controversial artwork.


People
LEAD: *
Malcolm Glenn has been named regional managing director for Asia at Leo Burnett International.


Reporter's Notebook;   The Welcome by Bush Is as Big as All Texas
LEAD: The Group of Four went to the rodeo tonight, where they saw armadillo races, bull riding, barrel racing, calf scrambling, the Grand Ole Opry, an Old West village, cowboys and Indians, oil rigs, square dancing, a sheriff with silver spurs, Styrofoam cacti, a model of the space shuttle, horseshoe contests, 1,250 gallons of barbecue sauce and jalapenos, 500 pounds of onions, 5,000 servings of cobbler and carrot cake, and 650 gallons of lemonade and iced tea.


Sizzling Mets Edge Braves
LEAD: At the game's start, the thermometer read 99 degrees.
An hour later, it had climbed to 102.
Warm, to be sure, but nothing like the reading inside John Franco's cap with one out in the the ninth inning.
That was off the chart.
Franco, just a couple of outs away from the cool of the clubhouse and the relaxation of the All-Star Game break, stood on the lonely rise of baked clay, upset at a rut in the mound, concerned about the 2-1 lead over the Braves he had been charged with preserving and incensed with himself for having issued consecutive walks.


Metro Datelines;   Vandals Set Fires In a Catholic Church
LEAD: Vandals broke into a Catholic church on Long Island, setting fires and knocking over holy water fonts, the police said yesterday.


Soviet Magazines Testing the American Market
LEAD: In the ultimate capitalist test, Soviet publications are gingerly making their way on to American newsstands in a market already saturated with foreign policy journals and glossy travel magazines.


Nekoosa Unit's Ex-Chief To Lead Wausau Paper
LEAD: The Wausau Paper Mills Company has named Arnold M. Nemirow president and chief executive to succeed William L. Goggins, who was killed in December in an auto accident.


2 in Family Die in Bronx Fire
LEAD: A smoky house fire, accidentally started by a child playing with a cigarette lighter, took the lives of a 43-year-old Bronx woman and her 4-year-old son yesterday in the Williamsbridge section, the authorities reported.
A police spokesman, Sgt.
Edward J. Burns, said the fire broke out about 4:15 P.M.


Evolution in Europe;   Piles of Bones in Yugoslavia Point to Partisan Massacres
LEAD: After the discovery of masses of human bones in secret graves in caves here and nearby over the last two weeks, a series of witnesses have come forward to report seeing large-scale shootings 45 years ago, painting a grisly picture of mass murder by the Communist Partisans led by Marshal Tito.


Outdoors: Salmon Madness in Ireland
LEAD: FROM pub to pub the word was spreading throughout the village, spoken in quiet but urgent tones, as though a password was being given in some druidic rite.
From McDermott's Bar to the Spa House, to the Castle Oaks Hotel and to P. J. Guerin's pub, which is the undisputed headquarters of the river rats, one heard: ''The fish are on the move!


The Rise of the Self-Published Best Seller
LEAD: When John Javna and Julie Bennett were discussing how to publish ''50 Simple Things You Can Do to Save the Earth,'' they considered offering it to a commercial book company. ''But we wanted it out in a hurry at an affordable price, so we decided to publish it ourselves,'' Mr.
Javna said.
The $4.95 book, published under the imprint of Earthworks Press, has been on the New York Times best-seller list for 22 weeks - 10 weeks as No.


East Joins West To Enjoy Victory
LEAD: Although the Teutonic triple that many Germans had been dreaming of fell through, they won the big one - the world championship of soccer - and East and West Germans alike poured into the streets today to celebrate West Germany's 1-0 triumph over Argentina.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
DOG SHOW
World Champion Crowned: A dog whose ancestors came from the sacred city of Lhasa, Tibet, is the champion of the canine world.
He is Ch.
Chakpori's Mao, a golden Lhasa Apso owned and handled by Bianca Saasen of Eindhoven, the Netherlands.
Mao triumphed yesterday at the world show in Brno, Czechoslovakia.


Review/Music;   Rock-and-Roll With Hair
LEAD: The group Faith No More, riding a hit album, ''The Real Thing,'' came to the Ritz on Friday night for a sold-out show.
The band, from California, falls into a loose group of rock bands that add a handful of different musical styles to raw rock-and-roll, sprinkling punk and metal with other rock forms and rap.


Deep-Water Ports Offer Solution to Oil Spills;   Impartial Standards
LEAD: To the Editor:


Washington Talk;   Mystery for Court: Case Of the Dwindling Docket
LEAD: The Supreme Court's 1989-1990 term ended late last month with an unsolved mystery: why are the Justice accepting fewer and fewer cases for decision?


New Life for Hoboken's Ghost Waterfront? Vote to Decide
LEAD: Brick and steel, bit by bit, the 90-year-old piers built here by German steamship lines to last for ages are reluctantly coming down, opening this Hudson River waterfront to a future filled with uncertainty.


West Germany Wins Soccer's World Cup
LEAD: West Germany won the World Cup for the third time yesterday when they defeated Argentina, 1-0, on a penalty kick by Andreas Brehme after a controversial foul in the 84th minute.
Winning ugly, losing ugly: George Vecsey writes that the final game of the World Cup was just plain ugly.
Beckenbauer's future: Franz Beckenbauer, the West German coach, is rumored to be in line for a major role in United States soccer.


Israeli Jets Destroy Lebanon Base Linked to Party of God Terrorism
LEAD: Israeli jets destroyed a base in southern Lebanon today that belonged to the pro-Iranian Party of God.


Lois Anzelowitz Wed in Princeton
LEAD: Lois Beth Anzelowitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Max Anzelowitz of Brooklyn, and Dennis Ronald Tanner, the son of the late Lillian Morrell Tavani of New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Eitan Weiner-Kaplow officiated at the Mountain Lakes House in Princeton, N.J.


Bonnie Honig Weds Michael Whinston
LEAD: Bonnie Honig, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Honig of Montreal, was married there yesterday to Michael Dennis Whinston, the son of Dr.
George J. Whinston of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Joan Aronson Whinston.
Rabbi Sidney Shoham performed the ceremony at the Queen Elizabeth Hotel.


Books of The Times;   Transcending a Family's Dark Side
LEAD:
Falling Angels
By Barbara Gowdy
199 pages. Soho Press. $18.95.


Brewers Win, 20-7, After Trailing by 7-0
LEAD: The Milwaukee Brewers, who trailed by 7-0 in the third inning, scored 20 unanswered runs today and beat the California Angels, 20-7.


War-Crimes Suspect Seeks to Stay in Canada
LEAD: A German-born rocket scientist who played an important role in the Apollo moon-landing program has begun a legal battle to stay in Canada as a visitor while he tries to regain the United States citizenship he lost six years ago as a result of war-crimes allegations.


Temtex Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Temtex Industries (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
6,531,000
7,555,000
Net loss
576,000
595,000
9mo sales
20,021,000
29,436,000
Net loss
645,000
558,000
Shares outst
2,456,641
2,456,641
Sales figures for 1989 are restated.


By Design;   In Pulsating Color
LEAD: If you're planning to experiment with color, one way to swing into it is with a bright bag.


Swiss Investor in Settlement
LEAD: A Swiss investor has agreed to settle Federal charges that he bought shares of Rorer Group Inc. while possessing nonpublic information about a pending merger between Rorer and Rhone-Poulenc S.A.


Prague's Plan to Aid Moscow
LEAD: While the economic summit meeting in Houston is focused on the question of aid to the Soviet Union, hardly anything is being said about the fragile economies of Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary, which are suffering from the monetary and economic unification of the two Germanys.
There is a way to address both issues simultaneously.


Thousands Take Refuge at Embassies in Albania


INSIDE
LEAD:
Roots of Anti-Gay Bias
Researchers are finding clues to the reasons some people develop stereotypes about homosexuals that are hard to dislodge and can lead to bias and violence.
Science Times, page C1.
Profits and Body Parts
Patients have no property rights to tissue used for medical research, but doctors must tell them if the research is potentially profitable, a California court ruled.


EA Engineering, Science, and Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EA Engineering, Science, and Technology Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
10,327,000
8,580,000
Net inc
42,000
301,000
Share earns
.02
.12
Shares outst
2,481,000
2,467,000
9mo rev
29,818,000
23,463,000
Net inc
549,000
739,000
Share earns
.22
.30
Shares outst
2,481,000
2,466,000


French Seek Niche With Trump Site
LEAD: Annoucing that it would open its first American outpost in Trump Tower in Manhattan, Galeries Lafayette, France's largest department store, said it would specialize in women's clothes made in Europe in an effort to succeed in a neighborhood that contains some of the world's most fashionable retailers.


Make Farm Programs Work as They Should;   For Truly Free Market
LEAD: To the Editor:


DCNY Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DCNY Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,435,583
5,861,744
Share earns
.55
.72
6mo net loss
252,986
b913,302
Share earns
-
.11
b-Net income


Results Plus
LEAD:
CYCLING
Italian Takes 9th Stage
Massimo Ghirotto of Italy won the ninth stage of the Tour de France yesterday while Steve Bauer of Canada held onto the overall lead for the ninth day.
Ghirotto broke away with Eduardo Chozas of Spain in the first of the mountain passes as the race crossed into Switzerland on a 122-mile leg from Besancon to Geneva.


Safety-Kleen Corp. reports earnings for 12wks to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Safety-Kleen Corp. (NYSE)
12wks to June 16
1990
1989
Revenue
132,885,000
110,148,000
Net inc
11,995,000
10,459,000
Share earns
.35
.31
Shares outst
34,477,000
33,902,000
24wk rev
258,488,000
211,324,000
Net inc
23,188,000
20,499,000
Share earns
.68
.61
Shares outst
34,242,000
33,816,000


Calton Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calton Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
60,215,000
40,621,000
Net inc
949,000
1,929,000
Share earns
.03
.06
Shares outst
33,580,000
33,687,000
6mo rev
99,088,000
54,207,000
Net inc
628,000
b729,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
33,614,000
33,765,000


ROEMER IS SILENT ON ABORTION BILL
LEAD: Gov.
Buddy Roemer refused to say today whether he would sign or veto a strict anti-abortion bill that the Legislature quickly drafted and passed Sunday night.


Make Farm Programs Work as They Should
LEAD: To the Editor:


OPEC Output Slipped in June
LEAD: Oil output of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries fell by 420,000 barrels a day in June, to 23.26 million, mainly because of a sharp drop in Iranian production, the Middle East Economic Survey said today.


Scott's Hospitality reports earnings for Year to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scott's Hospitality
Year to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
929,245,000
855,456,000
Net inc
b160,261,000
b52,385,000
Share earns
2.69
.88
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $98,328,000, or $1.65 a share, mostly from the sale of the hotel division and other interests, for the latest year.


Riney Helps Foote, Cone In Creating a Parody Ad
LEAD: ''High in the mountains of France, near a village called Combloux, there's a source of clean, crystal-clear water thas s as refshshg g any on Earth,'' says the folksy voice of Hal Riney in a television commercial that began yesterday.


New Musicals Project Puts 2d Production on Hold
LEAD: The New Musicals program at the State University College at Purchase, N.Y., has put its second production, ''The Secret Garden,'' on hold, and a refinancing of the program is being explored, the program's executive producer, Martin J. Bell, said yesterday.


A Toast of Optimism for the '94 Cup!
LEAD: Praise flowed like Italian wine today, as officials of the world governing body for soccer and the organizing committee of the 1990 World Cup expressed unconditional joy over the monthlong tournament that ended Sunday night.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Sunday about a computer technology known as virtual reality misidentified the television program on which Timothy Leary demonstrated such a system.
It was the ABC News program ''20/20,'' not CBS ''60 Minutes.''


Chance of Tuition Aid Keeps Needy in School, Study Finds
LEAD: Minority students, often from families unable to send them to college, are staying in school longer when they participate in programs that guarantee college tuition to needy students who are academically ready, according to a study by the United States General Accounting Office released yesterday.


First Federal Savings Bank of Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings Bank of Puerto Rico (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
b14,164,765
c3,295,746
Per share
-
.59
6mo net loss
b11,545,001
c6,401,933
Per share
-
1.25
b-Included $16,717,000 increase in loan-loss provision following examination by regulators for both the quarter and 6 months.


Calspan Awarded Air Force Contract
LEAD: Arvin Industries said its Calspan Corporation unit had been awarded a five-year contract to operate and maintain aerospace flight dynamics test facilities at the Air Force's Arnold Engineering Development Center in Tennessee.
Total value of the contract over the five years is $276.5 million, Arvin said.


New Trade Center in Washington: Will It Help or Hurt the Kennedy?
LEAD: Work is to begin in September on a monumental $738 million structure to be known as the International Cultural and Trade Center.
The complex, to be completed in 1995, is to be situated on Pennsylvania Avenue two blocks from the White House, and will also provide office space for a number of Federal agencies.


In Hong Kong, a New Confidence
LEAD: To the list of fictional acts of derring-do attributed to the Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles, the popular cartoon characters, many in this British colony now add a real feat: helping rescue the Hong Kong stock market.


Growing Pressures for a Married Priesthood
LEAD: Leo T. is a Roman Catholic priest who, like Catholic priests around the world, took a vow of celibacy when he was ordained.
For the last 10 years, however, Leo T. has had a sexual relationship with a woman.


Senate Set to Take Up Civil Rights Bill
LEAD: With the White House and civil rights groups at an impasse, the Senate is scheduled this week to take up major civil rights legislation that President Bush has vowed to veto.


Jones Agency Hired For Trump Project
LEAD: Donald J. Trump, the New York developer, said yesterday that he had hired Caroline Jones Advertising as the agency of record for Trump City, his development project on Manhattan's West Side.
The agency has been working on the account, whose size was not released, for several months.


Keystone Heritage Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Heritage Group
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,800,000
1,692,000
Share earns
.82
.85
6mo net inc
3,300,000
3,287,000
Share earns
1.52
1.65
Shares outst
2,196,214
1,996,357


Proposal to Sell Shares in El Al
LEAD: Two United States investment banks have advised Israel to sell 51 percent of the state-owned national airline, El Al, the Transport Ministry said today.


Judge Blocks Savings Sale
LEAD: A Federal judge forbade the sale by the Resolution Trust Company of an insolvent savings institution to a Arkansas bank yesterday on the ground that the sale would violate that state's laws limiting branch banking.


Riveting and Withering on Grass
LEAD: Parched was the password for the 1990 Wimbledon.


Careers;   Graduates Find Tighter Job Market
LEAD: THIS year's college graduates are having a harder time finding jobs than did the class of 1989, say Lee J. Svete, director of the office of career planning at St.
Lawrence University, a liberal arts college in Canton, N.Y., and Vicki Lynn, director of the career development center at the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in


Corrections
LEAD: A brief report by Reuters in the Company News columns of Business Day on Friday misstated the relationship between the USAir Group and CCAir Inc., which has filed under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
CCAir operates USAir Express flights under a contract agreement; it is not owned by USAir.


Cotton Extends Steep Slide As Energy Contracts Rise
LEAD: Cotton futures prices fell sharply yesterday on the New York Cotton Exchange, extending a slide that began last week and that represents the market's steepest drop this year.


Helen of Troy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Helen of Troy Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
24,730,000
23,287,000
Net inc
802,000
1,927,000
Share earns
.15
.35
Shares outst
5,365,566
5,502,510


Oce-van der Grinten NV reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oce-van der Grinten NV (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
307,900,000
263,300,000
Net inc
13,000,000
12,800,000
Share earns
.86
.85
6mo rev
604,000,000
516,100,000
Net inc
22,500,000
21,300,000
Share earns
1.49
1.42
Shares outst
15,067,000
15,032,000


Deep Discounts By Continental
LEAD: To attract impulsive leisure travelers, Continental Airlines is offering discounts of up to 65 percent on flights from its four hub cities during the next two weekends.
The catch is that the trips must be booked before midnight tomorrow, and the travelers must return the same weekend they leave.


City Begins Enforcing 19-Year-Old Law Limiting Motor Idling


A Summit Challenge: Farm Subsidies
LEAD: The leaders of the seven major industrialized nations may arrive at decisions in Houston this week that can make or break the present Uruguay Round of multinational trade talks.
If they listen to food exporting countries, especially in the third world, they will hear this: Open up markets, or forget about new trade rules on services and intellectual property.


Frances Vengen; Union Official, 93
LEAD: Frances Vengen, a garment industry union official for 25 years, died on Wednesday at her home in Lake City, Fla.
She was 93 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
There are no immediate survivors.


Nike Profits Increase 84%
LEAD: Nike Inc. vaulted ahead of all worldwide competitors in sales last year, the company said yesterday in reporting an 84 percent leap in its fourth-quarter profit.


Cooling-Off Period Is Set At Eastern
LEAD: Contract talks between Eastern Airlines and the Air Line Pilots Association have reached an impasse and a 30-day period for cooling off will begin on Tuesday, the sides said today.


Chamber Society's Director Reins In After a Year
LEAD: ''It's funny how a season's schedule turns out,'' said Fred Sherry, unpinning next season's Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center prospectus from a bulletin board in his office at Alice Tully Hall. ''You start out with certain instrumental combinations, and you don't have complete control over that, because it depends on who is available.


Springboard to Prep School: From the Bronx to Andover
LEAD: Thirteen-year-old Diana Figueroa will leave her home in the South Bronx this fall for the distinctly different world of Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass.
The distance in miles is small compared to the distance she has already traveled to win admission and the personal journey to come.


Corrections
LEAD: Articles on June 17, 18 and 23 about a fatal flood in Shadyside, Ohio, and a map on June 23, referred incorrectly to a creek that overflowed.
It is Wegee Creek.


Alpha Microsystems reports earnings for Qtr to May 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alpha Microsystems (OTC)
Qtr to May 27
1990
1989
Sales
13,510,000
14,087,000
Net loss
2,472,000
b579,000
Share earns
-
.19
Shares outst
2,836,000
3,117,000
b-Net income


For Africa, a Nod at Democracy
LEAD: The Organization of African Unity, a collection of more than 40 disparate countries, welcomed an independent Namibia at its annual gathering today, listened for the first time to Nelson Mandela but heard only elliptically about democracy.


Brooklyn Man Pleads Guilty To a Subway Painting Fraud
LEAD: A Brooklyn man who duped dozens of people into paying him ''insurance'' money while working on a bogus painting job in the subway system pleaded guilty to fraud yesterday, the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, announced.


Memory: It Seems a Whiff of Chocolate Helps
LEAD: THE power of an odor to stimulate memory, familiar to anybody in whom a whiff of perfume or cologne has stirred thoughts of a long-lost lover, has proved itself in a research laboratory.


Flatbush Store Manager Held In Assault on Black Woman
LEAD: A manager of a Korean grocery store in Brooklyn has been charged in an assault on a black customer that set off a boycott of the store.


Trying to Spare a Tree
LEAD: COMPUTERS were supposed to lead to the paperless office.
They haven't done so, and probably never will, but a program for the Macintosh called SuperGlue II can spare a few trees.


Dow Up 9.16, to 2,914.11, in Light Trading
LEAD: Stocks seesawed yesterday in persistent computer-assisted buying and selling programs before advancing slightly in light trading.


Becker Milk Co.  reports earnings for Year to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Becker Milk Co.
Year to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
426,214,367
395,894,969
Net inc
1,781,253
1,529,781
Share earns
1.01
.87
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. (OTC)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
18,811,208
11,295,947
Net loss
b2,078,000
b3,838,000
Shares outst
35,503,694
26,820,917
b-Included an extraordinary gain of $102,000 and $530,000, or 2 cents a share, for the latest and prior years, respectively.


Dukakis Delays a Rise In Massachusetts Taxes
LEAD: Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis today delayed signing a $1.8 billion tax measure that the Massachusetts Legislature sent him on Saturday, instead asking the state's highest court for an advisory opinion on the constitutionality of the proposed tax increase.


Brick Brewing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brick Brewing Co.
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
958,774
1,129,919
Net loss
144,877
29,346
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Examination for Sasser
LEAD: The Mets' catcher Mackey Sasser, who was hurt on Sunday in a play at home plate against the Braves, has strained ligaments in his right ankle and will be examined today by Dr.
Warren Fiske, a team physician, the Mets said.


Sandinista Protests Turn Violent; 4 Are Reported Killed in Managua
LEAD: A faltering strike by Sandinista-led Government employees abruptly turned into a violent political showdown today as Sandinista workers and students built barricades and burned vehicles at major intersections throughout the capital, bringing it to a standstill.


Municipal Unions Seek Wage Concessions as Negotiations With City Begin


Patient's Right to Tissue Is Limited
LEAD: In a case with far-reaching implications for research scientists and the biotechnology industry, the California Supreme Court ruled today that a patient does not have property rights over body tissues that may be used to develop new drugs or medicines.


Ex-Official in Prague Convicted of Abuses
LEAD: The former municipal head of the Communist Party in Prague was convicted today of abusing power by ordering the police to deal harshly with anti-Government demonstrators.
The ex-official, Miroslav Stepan, was sentenced to four years in prison.
He said he would appeal.


Rain and Cooler Trend Slow Alaskan Fires
LEAD: Rain and lower temperatures over the weekend helped slow the spread of wildfires that have charred more than 550,000 acres of timber, but 2,100 firefighters remained on the job today.


Howard Duff, 76, Hard-Boiled Actor In Movies and TV
LEAD: Howard Duff, a character actor who played the tough private detective Sam Spade on radio in the 1940's and a colorful Southern sheriff, Titus Semple, on the television series ''Flamingo Road'' in the 1980's, died Sunday at his home.
He was 76 years old.


New York City Spurs Anti-Apartheid Fight
LEAD: A New York City Council committee unanimously approved a bill yesterday that would further limit city business with banks or companies that have ties to South Africa and seek to reward banks that put pressure on the apartheid government there.


People
LEAD: *
Jay Bacal, Burton Blum, Maurice Mahler and Mindy Rosengarten have been named senior vice presidents and group creative directors at Griffin Bacal.


Bernard Perricone, 60, A Quadruplet in Texas
LEAD: Bernard Perricone, the youngest of the world's first documented male quadruplets to survive, died Sunday at a Nederland hospital.
He was 60 years old.


Consumer Credit Rose By $3.9 Billion in May
LEAD: Americans took out $3.9 billion more in consumer credit than they paid off in May, 10 times the amount incurred only a month earlier, the Government said today.


Whose Game Is It, Anyway?
LEAD: Some folks starting in the All-Star Game tonight in Wrigley Field, by dint of the fans' ballot, are not having years nearly as fancy as others who will be riding the cushions in the dugout.


Review/Television;   A Modern Life Lived in 50's and 60's Images
LEAD: Some marketing expert seems to have taken a look at the enormous film and television library owned by Universal Studios and wondered why it wasn't doing more to generate income.
Hey, how about a show in which the hero's behavior and attitudes are counterpointed with black-and-white clips from all those shows and old movies he watched on television while growing up in the 1950's and 60's?


Prices of Treasury Securities Fall
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities fell and interest rates rose in slow trading yesterday as the negative reaction to the data on June employment continued.


King Jury Hears Tape
LEAD: The jury in the Manhattan trial of Don King's breach-of-contract suit against James (Buster) Douglas, the heavyweight champion, yesterday heard a tape of King made shortly after Douglas knocked out Mike Tyson in February.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart in SportsMonday yesterday comparing Ryne Sandberg of the Chicago Cubs with other great second basemen misstated the number of games played by Rabbit Maranville at second base.
It was 513.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Slow Times For Trade Publications
LEAD: THE magazine industry certainly has its problems.
The plunge in advertising pages for consumer magazines has been closely watched: Ad pages fell 6.5 percent in May, after a 3.5 percent drop for the first quarter of this year, according to the Publishers Information Bureau.


First National Bancorp (Ga.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Bancorp (Ga.) (O)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,550,000
5,238,000
Per share
.62
.59
Shares outst
8,923,297
8,923,147
6mo net inc
11,295,000
10,462,000
Per share
1.26
1.17
Shares outst
8,922,534
8,923,248


Flexible Bond Trust Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flexible Bond Trust Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,705,702
1,639,283
Share earns
.22
.21
6mo net inc
3,472,411
2,166,012
Share earns
.45
.28
Net income represents net investment income.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.31
8.31
9.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.81
7.76
7.75
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.75
7.68
7.49
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.57
8.54
7.96
30-YR.


And for the G.O.P., Many Sites Contend
LEAD: The Republican National Committee is considering many cities for its 1992 convention, including New York, Cleveland, Houston, San Diego, New Orleans, Miami, Anaheim, Calif., and St.
Petersburg, Fla.


Dr. Jacob H. Conn, 86, A Psychiatrist, Is Dead
LEAD: Dr.
Jacob Harry Conn, a psychiatrist and educator for 50 years, died Wednesday at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.
He was 86 years old and lived in Baltimore.


Strawberry's Transformation;   Mets' Slugger Is Once Again Providing Consistent Power
LEAD: For Darryl Strawberry, the pause for the All-Star Game, whatever its merits with respect to momentum, is certainly not bad for effect.
It can't, after all, hurt either his stature in the game or his position at the negotiating table to let the magnitude of his last month sink in.


RF&amp;P Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RF&amp;P Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
18,700,000
19,300,000
Net inc
7,100,000
6,700,000
Share earns
.40
.38
6mo rev
34,500,000
35,900,000
Net inc
b10,300,000
15,800,000
Share earns
.59
.90
b-Included $3.9 million (pretax) of merger-related expenses.


Designs for 'When the Midi Is Just Right'
LEAD: Fashion is almost always in a state of flux, so it is curious that hemlines on the runways have remained stable for about three years.
With surprising unanimity, leading designers in Europe and America have shown suits, dresses and, for fall, coats that are no more than fingertip length.
An occasional below-the-knees style is seen on the runway and immediately dubbed dowdy.


Cape Cod Bank &amp; Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cape Cod Bank &amp; Trust (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,155,326
2,176,587
Per share
.51
.91
Net inc
2,244,056
4,418,425
Per share
.98
1.85
The company attributed the decline in earnings to a decline in the size of its loan portfolio and the continuation of a larger than normal provision for loan losses.


Oneok Inc. reports earnings for 12mos to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oneok Inc. (NYSE)
12mos to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
392,300,000
352,900,000
Net inc
33,000,000
16,600,000
Share earns
1.20
.58
Shares outst
27,157,000
28,052,000
Share earnings for year-ago 12 months have been restated for a 2-for- 1 stock split effective last quarter.


Anacin Account Shifted
LEAD: Advertising agency executives yesterday confirmed a trade magazine report that Whitehall Laboratories, a division of the American Home Products Corporation, New York, had switched the $17 million advertising account of the pain reliever Anacin to Partners &amp; Shevack from Young &amp; Rubicam.
Partners &amp; Shevack is already the agency for Anacin-3.


Witness Says He Gave Barry Cocaine in Mayor's Office
LEAD: A local restaurateur testified today in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug trial that he delivered cocaine to the Mayor in his City Hall office and saw him use the drug more than 30 times at places from Washington to the Bahamas.


Thrift Crooks in Jail
LEAD: To the Editor:


CVB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CVB Financial Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,170,000
1,934,000
Per share
.35
.31
6mo net inc
4,300,000
3,490,000
Per share
.69
.57
Shares outst
5,957,640
5,809,892
Per shares are fully diluted.


U.S. Takes the Lead
LEAD: Just when the noise level of complaints about lack of American vision in response to the new needs of Europe was reaching screech point, the Bush Administration came up with an impressive new plan.


Manville Plan Urged By Judge
LEAD: A Federal judge took the first steps yesterday toward consolidating hundreds of thousands of asbestos cases from around the nation into one large class action before him, in what he described as an effort to control the enormous legal costs.


Americans Voicing Anxiety on Japan As Concern in Tokyo Seems to Soften
LEAD: The American public's concern over the economic might of Japan appears to have risen sharply, heightening sentiment for limits on foreign investments, as Americans worry more about Japanese economic power than about Soviet military power.


Digital Communications Assn Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Communications Assn Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
53,428,000
54,040,000
Net inc
8,648,000
7,603,000
Share earns
.59
.51
Shares outst
14,609,000
14,851,000
Yr sales
203,156,000
208,226,000
Net inc
b37,423,000
c17,710,000
Share earns
2.53
1.19
Shares outst
14,819,000
14,878,000


New York Is Reportedly Chosen For '92 Democratic Convention
LEAD: The Democratic Party will hold its 1992 Presidential convention at Madison Square Garden, Democrats in New York and Washington said yesterday.


Talcon L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Talcon L.P. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Net loss
392,000
b2,523,000
6mo net loss
1,459,000
b2,253,000
b-Net income and included net gain of $833,000 on sale of partnership interest for both the quarter and 6 months.


Chronicle
LEAD: The celebration of Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS'S 63d birthday today will continue a mayoral tradition of sorts: ELLEN HART STRUM, who was Miss Subways of 1959 and who now owns Ellen's Coffee Cafe at Broadway and Chambers Street, a stopping-off spot for City Hall denizens, will bake a pie for each of the


Merrill Banker Quitting To Seek a Faster Track
LEAD: Not too long ago, a career in investment banking was considered the fast track.
In the 1980's, eager executives flocked to Wall Street to reshape companies and to get rich.


Tropical Rain Forest In Mexico Is Facing Destruction in Decade
LEAD: THE largest tropical rain forest in North America is being razed even more rapidly than that of the Amazon and is likely to disappear altogether in this decade unless the Mexican Government takes immediate steps to halt its destruction, scientists and environmental groups here say.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Houston Summit


Back Surgery For Lemieux
LEAD: Mario Lemieux will have back surgery Wednesday but there is a 90-percent chance he will be ready for the start of the Pittsburgh Penguins' season, the team doctor said today.


Paris Journal;   50 Years Later, de Gaulle's Glory Blinds France
LEAD: Fifty years after France surrendered to Nazi Germany, Gen.
Charles de Gaulle has once again come to the rescue, providing a series of competing anniversaries to help distract from wartime memories that many French would rather forget.


In Northern Ireland, a Centuries-Old Conflict Is on the March
LEAD: This is the ''marching season'' in Ulster, and the Protestant neighborhoods are bedecked with flags and banners and Union Jacks in celebration of the 300th anniversary of the Battle of the Boyne, where William III defeated Roman Catholic forces marching under the banner of the deposed Stuart King, James


California Amplifier Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Amplifier Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 2
1990
1989
Sales
3,535,000
2,440,000
Net inc
55,000
b123,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
4,244,000
3,977,000
b-Net loss


Athletics' Stewart Wins 20th Clemente Award
LEAD: Dave Stewart of the Oakland Athletics, who has won 20 games in each of the last three seasons and pitched a no-hit game on June 29 against the Toronto Blue Jays, yesterday was honored for nonsporting achievements.
The 33-year-old right-handed pitcher was named the recipient of the 20th Roberto Clemente Award, which is presented annually to the player who best exemplifies the spirit of the late Pittsburgh Pirates' Hall of


Fewer Name Changes
LEAD: The number of corporate name changes fell 9 percent in the first half of the year, compared with a year earlier, according to a survey released yesterday.


Point Richmond Journal;   Help Wtd: Exp Chef On Island W/Lux Vu
LEAD: Buried in the classified advertisements of a recent Sunday newspaper was ''a once in a lifetime opportunity'' to earn upward of $60,000 a year running a bed and breakfast inn in a lighthouse at the junction of San Francisco and San Pablo bays.


Finding a Home for Last Year's Model
LEAD: ANALYSTS say there are at least 40 million personal computers in use worldwide, and millions of new PC's will be added this year.
To Alex Randall, that means there are at least 40 million used computers out there that will eventually need a new home.


ISRAEL'S JETS RAID SHIITES IN LEBANON
LEAD: For the second day in succession, Israeli fighter-bombers pounded bases belonging to the pro-Iranian Party of God in southern Lebanon today.


Benihana National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Benihana National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to April 1
1990
1989
Sales
9,839,000
8,889,000
Net inc
122,000
b272,000
Share earns
.02
.05
Yr sales
38,730,000
34,766,000
Net inc
1,141,000
b1,726,000
Share earns
.20
.30
Shares outst
5,729,000
5,729,111


Seven Oaks International Inc. reports earnings for Year to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seven Oaks International Inc. (OTC)
Year to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
21,851,000
29,050,000
Net loss
b2,602,000
b6,833,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $229,000 and $3,041,000 for the latest year and 1989, respectively.


Alpha 1 Biomedicals Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alpha 1 Biomedicals Inc. (OTC)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
167,652
146,767
Net loss
1,373,279
1,289,990
Shares outst
3,716,769
3,423,491


Roadway Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roadway Services (OTC)
Qtr to June 16
1990
1989
Revenue
669,270,000
614,204,000
Net inc
22,808,000
26,220,000
Share earns
.58
.67
Shares outst
39,185,000
39,153,000
6mo rev
1,309,519,000
1,177,424,000
Net inc
39,309,000
41,969,000
Share earns
1.00
1.07
Shares outst
39,173,000
39,163,000


Court Refuses to Free a Jailed TV Reporter
LEAD: The Supreme Court by a vote of 7 to 2 today rejected a request to free a Texas television reporter serving a six-month jail term for refusing to reveal the name of a confidential source.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Talking to Bambi
Q. Can animals of different species understand each other?
A. ''In some cases, yes,'' said Colin Beer of the Institute of Animal Behavior of Rutgers University in Newark, who has done research on the complex signals gulls send to each other within the same species.


Firehouse Reopens in the Bronx


Golden Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden Enterprises Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
36,047,254
34,237,545
Net inc
1,367,553
1,543,542
Share earns
.11
.12
Shares outst
12,755,127
12,801,800
Yr rev
134,872,037
127,510,647
Net inc
4,438,894
5,391,265
Share earns
.35
.42
Shares outst
12,781,105
12,815,219


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Friday about Justice Francis T. Murphy Jr., the presiding justice of the Appellate Division of the New York State Supreme Court for the First Department, referred incorrectly to a letter sent him by a judicial review committee.
The letter, which Justice Murphy made public yesterday, said he had ''failed to exercise adequate supervision'' over the former Clerk of the Court, Harold J.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
ASK Computer Systems, Mountain View, Calif., appointed Eric Carlson vice president for engineering and product operations.


Newberry Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newberry Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
65,710
32,712
Shares outst
11,672,140
10,999,293
6mo net inc
70,945
46,910
Shares outst
11,365,292
10,999,293
The company said loan loss provision was $22,500 for the latest and year-ago quarters and $45,000 for the latest and year-ago 6 months.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The important question for 1992 is what kind of candidate does the Democratic Party nominate, not which city does the honors.
Atlanta couldn't save our last nominee.
New York is not going to do in our next one.''
- Bruce Reed of the Democratic Leadership Council. [B2:6.]


S.E.C. Inquiry On Western Union
LEAD: The Western Union Corporation disclosed that the Securities and Exchange Commission had begun a formal investigation into whether the company issued false financial statements from April 1986 through March 1989.
Western Union said that the S.E.C. was examining whether Western Union said that it believes its financial statements ''were accurate in all material respects'' and that it would cooperate fully.


The Right to Attend a Trial
LEAD: The trial of the District of Columbia's Mayor, Marion Barry, on drug and perjury charges brims with racial tension.
The judge made matters worse by barring two prominent supporters, the Rev.
Louis Farrakhan, the Black Muslim leader, and Bishop George Stallings Jr., a former Catholic priest who heads a breakaway congregation.


Global Income Plus Fund Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Global Income Plus Fund Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,792,830
6,221,212
Share earns
.24
.26
6mo net inc
11,971,594
11,822,212
Share earns
.49
.49
Net income represents net investment income.


On Horse Racing;   Help Wanted for Filly Triple Crown
LEAD: While everyone was busy lamenting the disintegration of this year's Triple Crown series for 3-year-old colts, the triple crown for fillies was quietly falling apart on its own.


Dick Turpin; Former Boxing Champion, 69
LEAD: Dick Turpin, the first black fighter to win a British boxing title, died recently in Leamington Spa, English newspapers reported today.
He was 69 years old.


51 Albanians Fly to Prague and Quickly Receive Political Asylum
LEAD: Fifty-one Albanians who had sought refuge in the Czechoslovak Embassy in Tirana, the Albanian capital, were flown to Prague early this morning, where they were granted political asylum, officials here and in Tirana said.


3d-Party Interest In Takeover Target
LEAD: The General Instrument Corporation disclosed that it had been approached by an unidentified financial concern seeking information about the New York-based electronics company.
The disclosure came as Forstmann Little &amp; Company formally began its friendly $1.6 billion tender offer for the company.


Telling Nation's Fortune: Does Consensus See All?
LEAD: In the mid-1970's, as Robert J. Eggert was about to retire as chief economist for RCA, he figured the company would want to continue his practice of conducting regular private surveys of what economic forecasters thought about the future.
After all, he had begun the surveys with the encouragement of RCA's chairman, David Sarnoff.


Oil Production By Venezuela
LEAD: Venezuela's state oil company Friday announced plans to increase production capacity nearly 50 percent in the next few years, despite a world oil glut that is driving prices down.


Salvadoran Jesuits Told the Truth and Died
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about a plan for Galeries Lafayette to open a store on the site previously occupied by Bonwit Teller misstated the address.
It is at 4 East 57th Street, between Fifth and Madison Avenues.
Fifth and 57th is the address of Tiffany's.


U.S.O.C. Offers to Help in Drug Testing
LEAD: The director of the United States Olympic Committee said that his organization would help The Athletics Congress untangle the web of controversy surrounding its drug-testing procedures by assuming responsiblity for testing.


New Microbial Agents May Help Kill Crop Pests
LEAD: ARMIES of bugs and microbes, their powers enhanced in some cases by genetic engineering, are being unleashed in fields and laboratories in a widening effort to control destructive agricultural pests without resorting to chemical pesticides.


Apartheid Foe Quits Pulpit in Scandal
LEAD: The Rev.
Allan A. Boesak, a Dutch Reformed cleric who gained renown in the struggle against apartheid, has resigned his ministry after acknowledging he had an extramarital affair with the niece of a former South African Cabinet minister.


Denial by Thompson
LEAD: The Georgetown University coach, John Thompson, in New York yesterday to promote Nike television commericals with a pro-education and anti-drug message, denied that the commercials were made in response to the recent controversy over high-priced sneakers.


Market Place;   Cleaning Spills: Is It Profitable?
LEAD: FROM the Exxon Valdez to the Mega Borg, when a tanker's oil hits the water these days, huge sums are spent on booms, skimmers and personnel for the cleanup.
But there are no pure plays in oil-spill cleanup companies.


Two of Three Convicted in Futures Case
LEAD: In the first of three trials stemming from the Government's undercover investigation of futures trading here, a Federal jury today convicted two traders at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange of cheating customers but acquitted a third defendant.
The jurors were unable to reach verdicts on dozens of other charges.


Chronicle
LEAD: WILLIAM MEREDITH is joining the company of ROBERT FROST, WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS, EZRA POUND, MARIANNE MOORE, ELIZABETH BISHOP and some 40 other American poets honored by their colleagues for distinguished poetic achievement.


Larry Conrad Is Dead; Indiana Politician, 55
LEAD: Larry Conrad, a former Secretary of State of Indiana, died Saturday at the Cardiology Hospital in Lyons, France.
He was 55 years old.
Mr.
Conrad suffered a ruptured aorta while attending a conference in France last month and died after undergoing open-heart surgery, Gov.
Evan Bayh's office announced.


General Dynamics In Saudi Tank Deal
LEAD: Saudi Arabia has signed a $3.1 billion deal to buy 315 M-1A2 tanks and support equipment from the General Dynamics Corporation, the Pentagon said today.


Europeans Accuse the U.S. of Balking on Plans to Combat Global Warming
LEAD: Senior European officials at the economic summit conference accused the United States today of frustrating their efforts to reach a new accord to combat global warming.


American Capital &amp; Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Capital &amp; Research Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
131,991,000
108,534,000
Net inc
2,759,000
1,678,000
Share earns
.15
.12
Shares outst
18,650,000
14,521,000
Share earnings and shares outstanding are fully diluted.


Telescopes Peer Through Cosmic Dust Into Maelstrom at Galaxy's Center
LEAD: ASTRONOMERS are peering deep into the heart of the Milky Way galaxy and seeing a riotous display of nearly every phenomenon of nature known to science, and possibly then some.


Buyout Unit Finds Banks In UAL Deal
LEAD: One month before a deadline for financing a $4.38 billion acquisition of the UAL Corporation, the employee buyout group has enlisted the tentative financial support of five major banks, according to United's unions and bank officials.
But none of the banks have signed agreements to provide loans, and several obstacles remain to be overcome before the Aug.


Majestic Electronic Stores reports earnings for Year to Feb 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Majestic Electronic Stores
Year to Feb 28
1990
1989
Sales
75,745,185
73,595,760
Net inc
872,202
1,097,869
Share earns
.17
.21
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Thinning Arctic Ice
LEAD: Surveys by submarines have turned up evidence that ice in the Arctic Ocean may have been thinner in the 1980's than in the 1970's, and scientists have tentatively raised the possibility that the thinning might have been caused by global warming.


Education Group's Report Card for Fernandez: 'B Average'
LEAD: After six months on the job, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez has been graded ''B average'' by a leading New York City educational advocacy group.


Avantek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avantek Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 16
1990
1989
Sales
34,514,000
37,439,000
Net inc
b623,000
c2,996,000
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
17,891,000
17,617,000
6mo sales
69,048,000
72,296,000
Net inc
b759,000
c3,513,000
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
17,851,000
17,597,000


Panel Hears How Federal Aid Profited a Savings Institution
LEAD: A Senate subcommittee was told today that a Texas savings and loan association made up of 15 failed institutions earned huge profits as a result of Government subsidies, but made only four new loans in 1989.


Still a Cold War for Aliens
LEAD: For 38 years, the McCarran-Walter Immigration Act has allowed the U.S. to bar foreign visitors whose ideas the Government finds offensive.
The number of visitors kept out each year varies, but the Government maintains a list of more than 350,000 people to be excluded.
At a time when world tensions are easing, that's an astounding victory of narrow-mindedness over good sense.


Denise Musnik; Advertising Executive, 58
LEAD: Denise Musnik, an advertising executive in Paris, died on Friday at the American Hospital in Neuilly-sur-Seine, France.
Miss Musnik, who was born in New York, was 58 years old and had lived in Paris for about 30 years.
She died of cancer, a friend said.
Miss Musnik was head of international communications for Publicis, the French advertising agency, and had previously worked for Glamour Magazine and Bonwit


Search for Flood Dead Ends
LEAD: The search for any remaining victims of last month's flooding has ended with the death count at 26, officials say.
Seven people are still listed as missing since June 14, when floodwaters and debris hurtled down Wegee and Pipe creeks on the outskirts of this eastern Ohio town, but officials now believe those people were not in the area at the time.


Oil Rig Count Falls by 9
LEAD: The number of working oil and natural gas rigs in the United States declined by nine last week, to a total of 1,011, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
A year ago this week, the count was 825, Baker said.
Baker Hughes's rig count reflects the number of rotary rigs actively exploring for oil and gas as of last Friday, not the number of producing wells.


Vincent Awaiting Word From Steinbrenner
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent, here to attend Tuesday's All-Star Game, said today that he had not heard from George Steinbrenner or Steinbrenner's representatives since Friday, when a two-day hearing into the Yankee owner's dealings with Howard Spira and Dave Winfield was adjourned.
At that hearing, Vincent gave Steinbrenner until the close of business on


Cab of the Month
LEAD: How slowly does traffic move in New York City on hot summer afternoons?
A passenger in a taxi meditated on the subject as the crush of cars on Central Park West inched forward at the rate of one or two cars per traffic-light cycle.
Then he was startled by a sight inside a cab inching along in the adjacent lane.


Are Laws Needed On Canned Music At Live Shows?
LEAD: With the best intentions, state legislators in New York and New Jersey are wading into a quagmire as they propose laws regulating the use of recorded music at live concerts.


U.S. PUSHES TO END FARMING SUBSIDIES
LEAD: The leaders of the seven richest Western nations began their 16th annual summit conference in the tropical heat of Houston this afternoon, with an intractable dispute over trade policy threatening to disrupt the unity of the three-day meeting.


CHILEAN MILITARY DEFENDS KILLINGS
LEAD: In an emotional national debate set off by recent discoveries of mass graves, the Chilean armed forces have defended the widespread executions after the overthrow of Salvador Allende Gossens in 1973 as a response to ''internal war'' instigated by Allende partisans.


Jury Starts Considering Case In 2d Child Molestation Trial
LEAD: Raymond Buckey's molestation trial went to the jury today after Judge Stanley Weisberg of Superior Court delivered 30 minutes of legal instructions.


Milastar Corp.  reports earnings for Year to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Milastar Corp.
Year to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
4,124,000
2,894,000
Net inc
353,000
b2,888,000
Share earns
.17
1.39
Shares outst
2,111,421
2,076,801
b-Included a tax credit of $170,000, or 8 cents a share.
The company said net income for fiscal 1989 included a $4,482,000 non- recurring capital gain before taxes from the sale of a stock investment and a $450,000 increase in interest income.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Lease Improves Trump's Financial Picture
LEAD: The long-term lease that Donald J. Trump signed yesterday with Galeries Lafayette is worth between $50 and $65 million, bankers said.


Books of The Times;   Primitive as a Mirror to Modern Eyes
LEAD:
Gone Primitive
Savage Intellects, Modern Lives
By Marianna Torgovnick
Illustrated. 328 pages. University of Chicago Press. $24.95.


All-Stars Take On Wrigley's Tricky Winds
LEAD: Jose Canseco, Cecil Fielder, Mark McGwire and Ken Griffey Jr., meet Wrigley Field, the windblown park that can make pitchers weep and the bleachers the most important place to be.


Mitsubishi Trust in U.S. Options Deal
LEAD: Eager to give its corporate clients worldwide an opportunity to deal in futures and options, the Mitsubishi Trust and Banking Corporation of Japan said today that it would form a venture with the Chicago Research and Trading Group Ltd., one of this country's leading traders of options and futures.


'Penny Stock' Broker Fined
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers said today that it had fined a brokerage for defrauding investors who bought a ''penny stock'' of a small food producer.


Why Math Drive in New York Schools Doesn't Stand a Chance
LEAD: To the Editor:


John C. Carroll; Union Executive, 68
LEAD: John C. Carroll, retired executive vice president of the Communications Workers of America, died Saturday at the Washington Hospital Center.
He was 68 years old and lived in Forestville, Md.


After The Cold War
LEAD: ''The walls that once confined people and ideas are collapsing.'' With those words the leaders of the Western alliance celebrated the end of the cold war.
They pledged their efforts to ''overcome the legacy of decades of suspicion.''


In the Rushdie Affair, Terrorism Triumphs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ford Extends Buyer Incentives
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it had extended buyer incentives on most 1989 and 1990 model cars until Aug. 8.
The incentives were scheduled to expire today.
Incentives on Lincoln cars were extended to Sept. 26, the auto maker said.
Ford's incentives range from $600 for the Aerostar mini-van and some pickups to $2,000 for the Lincoln Mark V


Inquest Held 3 Christian Scientists Contributed to the Death of a Boy
LEAD: Three Christian Science officials contributed to the death of Robyn Twitchell by discouraging his parents from calling a doctor, according to an inquest concluded three years ago and released last week.


Takeover Rumors Lift Crown's Stock
LEAD: The stock of the Crown Cork and Seal Company rose $2.25 today, to $63.125, on takeover rumors fueled by the death of its chairman, John Connelly, who was 85 years old.
Mr.
Connelly held 15.2 percent of the company's stock.


National Bancorp of Alaska reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Bancorp of Alaska
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,200,000
5,600,000
Per share
.78
.70
6mo net inc
12,500,000
10,300,000
Per share
1.57
1.29
Total assets were $2,100,000,000 and $2,300,000,000 for the latest and year- ago 6 months, respectively.


Our Towns;   At Jones Beach, A 'Public Sector' To Be Proud Of
LEAD: By noon Sunday it was hot and hazy and there were 100,000 human beings at Jones Beach, including James Daw, a lawyer, and his wife and children. ''Well, the main reason we like Jones Beach,'' said Mr.
Daw, ''is, as you can see, we're all alone.'' It was true.
Mr.
Daw was only a 15-minute walk from his car in the West End 1 parking lot, but Jones


Federal Paper Board Co.  Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Paper Board Co.  Inc. (NYSE)
12wks to June 16
1990
1989
Sales
317,203,000
308,789,000
Net inc
34,571,000
51,395,000
Share earns
.81
1.25
Shares outst
40,218,000
39,531,000
24wk sales
634,013,000
593,513,000
Net inc
73,357,000
98,491,000
Share earns
1.73
2.41
Shares outst
40,187,000
39,379,000


Unions Loath To Strike Daily News
LEAD: Six months after the opening of what both sides knew would be difficult contract talks, the 10 unions at The Daily News remain far from a settlement with the management.
But in recent weeks, they appear to have won some maneuvering room.


Study Links Alzheimer's and Heart Attacks
LEAD: IN a surprising finding from a study in the Bronx, two of the most common ailments of the elderly, heart attacks and Alzheimer's disease, have been linked for the first time.


A Wistful Glance Back At When the Wall Fell
LEAD: The breach of the Berlin wall was probably Gunther Schabowski's greatest achievement, and it was also his undoing.


Crownamerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crownamerica Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 2
1990
1989
Revenue
15,990,000
19,744,000
Net inc
3,000
71,000
Share earns
-
.07
9mo rev
51,843,000
58,145,000
Net inc
842,000
1,217,000
Share earns
.80
1.15
Shares outst
1,053,000
1,053,771


Carrington Labs reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carrington Labs (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,771,000
1,856,000
Net loss
1,144,000
b723,000
6mo sales
5,202,000
3,595,000
Net loss
1,801,000
b916,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $22,000 for the quarter and $50,000, or 1 cent a share for the 6 months.


Mobil to Pay Millions to Clean Up Vast Pool of Oil Beneath Brooklyn
LEAD: Mobil Oil has agreed to spend what is expected to be tens of millions of dollars to clean up a vast and hazardous pool of oil that has been seeping under the streets of Brooklyn for more than 40 years.


Busch Fighting Tax
LEAD: The Anheuser-Busch Companies, St.
Louis, has begun a television and radio campaign attacking proposals to increase the Federal tax on beer.
The ads, along with print ads sponsored by the Beer Institute in Washington, are being run in the districts of members of Congress involved in budget negotiations.


Premier Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,095,000
b99,381,000
Per share
.09
-
6mo net inc
3,160,000
b106,727,000
Per share
.13
-
b-Net loss
Loan loss provision was $5,965,000 and $9,549,000 for the latest quarter and 6 months, respectively; loan loss provision was $73,341,000 and $87,689,000 for the year-ago quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Patterns
LEAD:
Fashion School Rolls Dip


United Stationers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Stationers Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
250,335,000
243,797,000
Net inc
2,302,000
6,393,000
Share earns
.15
.41
Shares outst
15,504,372
15,479,952
9mo sales
751,028,000
733,283,000
Net inc
9,692,000
20,707,000
Share earns
.63
1.34
Shares outst
15,491,459
15,465,561


Texas Instruments Is Suing 5 Chip Makers Over a Patent
LEAD: Texas Instruments Inc. asked a Federal court today to rule that five American chip makers must obtain licenses to continue using a technique for gluing semiconductor components to their base.
Texas Instruments said the technique is based on a chip packaging method that it patented in 1977.


Talking Business; with Berry of Dominion Resources;   Electricity Use Expected to Rise
LEAD: Because of the heat last week, the demand for electricity rose so greatly in Washington that the local power company blacked out parts of its territory, again raising the question of whether electricity supplies are adequate.


2 Shuttle Veterans Grounded By NASA
LEAD: FOR the first time, NASA yesterday grounded two astronauts for violations of its safety rules.
One astronaut was involved in a fatal collision of stunt planes at an air show in central Texas last weekend.
The two astronatuts are veteran shuttle crew commanders. ''It's the first time we've ever replaced members of a crew for disciplinary reasons,'' said Jeffrey E.


Connecticut May Retry Daughter in Death Plot
LEAD: Karin Aparo, who was acquitted last month on charges that she was an accessory to her mother's murder, returned to court today as her lawyer requested that she be treated as a youthful offender if she is retried on charges that she conspired to kill her mother in 1987.


Passport Travel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Passport Travel Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
12,668,000
10,908,000
Net inc
69,797
104,156
Share earns
.08
.12
Shares outst
897,875
894,741
6mo sales
23,668,000
20,227,000
Net inc
33,551
29,266
Share earns
.04
.03
Shares outst
897,445
942,769


Candidate Is Asked to Quit Church Position
LEAD: A candidate for the State Legislature has been asked to resign from the parish council of a Roman Catholic church because he supports a woman's right to have an abortion.


Bulgaria's Renamed Communists in Disarray After Election
LEAD: Despite their solid victory in elections to Parliament last month, Bulgaria's renamed Communists are acting like a party in disarray.


Sallie Mae Prices $600 Million Issue
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, priced a $600 million issue yesterday in its regular monthy sale.
The Government-sponsored public corporation usually sells short-term floating-rate notes on the Monday before the second Thursday of each month, The notes, due Jan. 10, 1991, were priced at par to yield 25 basis points more than the bond-equivalent yield of the 91-day Treasury bill and are expected to begin trading today.


Vroooooooooooooooom Ends in 'Here's Your $220 Summons'
LEAD: John Mayak, a tour-bus driver from Pennsylvania, arrived in New York for the first time yesterday, so you can't blame him for being a bit surprised when a city inspector tapped on the door of his bus and presented him with a $220 ticket.
For idling.
Not a man to hide his feelings, Mr.
Mayak got back into the driver's seat and gunned his engine, spewing a gust of exhaust over the inspector.


Japanese Shrine Burns Down
LEAD: A fire today destroyed an important Shinto shrine guarding sacred rice being grown for the coronation of Emperor Akihito.
The police said they suspected anti-monarchist militants, who have said that they plan to disrupt Akihito's November coronation.
They say the imperial system is a remnant of prewar nationalism.


Auto Makers Split on Tax
LEAD: Sharp disagreement among Detroit auto makers over the need for a rise in gasoline taxes could reduce the industry's influence in the debate over reducing the Federal budget deficit, the American Automobile Association says.


U.P.S. Deal Set
LEAD: Mail Boxes Etc. signed a letter of intent to sell to United Parcel Service Inc. 400,000 shares of its common stock for $10.1 million and 400,000 warrants, each exercisable into one share of Mail Boxes common stock, for $1.2 million.
If U.P.S. fully exercises the warrants, it would acquire about a 17.4 percent equity interest in Mail Boxes.


Vincent Draddy, 83, an Innovator In Apparel Manufacturing, Dies
LEAD: Vincent de Paul Draddy, an innovative manufacturer of sportswear who introduced the Izod and Lacoste knit shirts to America, died on Sunday at United Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y.


The Arts on Parade
LEAD: A New Yorker at a small-town Fourth of July parade last week was thrilled by the bugle and drum corps, the floats and a veritable retrospective of fire trucks through the centuries.
But what thrilled her most were those marchers who brandished banners for the National Endowment for the Arts.
She liked their own small float, too - a city built of cardboard and colored a dark, dismal gray, over which was a sign that read ''A World Without Art.


Banco Popular de Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banco Popular de Puerto Rico (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
15,817,857
14,118,657
Per share
.79
.71
Shares outst
20,075,287
20,000,000
6mo net inc
30,960,842
26,584,945
Per share
1.54
1.33
Shares outst
20,066,723
20,000,000


Jerome Wolk; Lawyer, 73
LEAD: Jerome Wolk, a lawyer and real-estate developer on eastern Long Island, died on Sunday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 73 years old and lived in Great Neck.


Accused Judge Says Letter Shows He Is Cleared
LEAD: One of the state's most powerful judges has released a confidential letter sent to him by a state judicial review committee, which he said cleared him of allegations that he had interfered with disciplinary proceedings involving lawyers.


WESTERN AID ISSUE SHARPLY DEBATED BY SOVIET LEADERS
LEAD: Senior Soviet officials appealed today for Western economic help in moving the moribund Soviet economy toward a free market, but the issue has divided the Soviet Union almost as badly as it has split potential donor countries.


Trade School Agrees to Pay For Violations
LEAD: The largest chain of private trade schools in New York City has agreed to pay $850,000 for recruiting violations, the largest penalty ever assessed on a trade-school operator in the state.


Hong Kong to Try 5 Beijing Foes; Charge: Illegal Use of Megaphones
LEAD: In a few days, the British Government will put on trial five prominent pro-democracy campaigners accused of using hand-held megaphones without a permit at demonstrations here.
Critics say that the move is an attempt to appease the Government in Beijing.


American Bank of Connecticut reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Bank of Connecticut (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,547,000
1,431,000
Per share
.71
.66
6mo net inc
3,077,000
2,795,000
Per share
1.41
1.29
Shares outst
2,175,400
2,169,800


Crestmont Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crestmont Federal Savings &amp; Loan Assn (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net loss
6,662,000
c1,769,000
Share earns
-
.47
Yr net loss
b21,936,000
c6,311,000
Share earns
-
1.66
b-After a penalty on prepayment of FHLB advances of $1,504,000.


2 G.M. Units Form Joint Subsidiary
LEAD: The Hughes Aircraft Company and the Delco Electronics Corporation, both subsidiaries of the General Motors Corporation's GM Hughes Electronics unit, said they had formed a joint subsidiary to manufacture high-technology electronics.
The new subsidiary, H E Microwave, will produce electronics for automotive and military applications.


Output Climbs in China
LEAD: China's industrial output rose by 5.9 percent in June compared with the comparable period a year ago.
It was the biggest monthly jump this year.
The New China News Agency said today that the rate was evidence of a steady economic recovery from a stagnant period earlier this year.
But diplomats said the figure might be artificially high because a great deal of production was lost last June in the aftermath of the military crackdown in Beijing against pro-democracy demonstrations.


Thornburgh and Sessions Assailed for Traveling on Confiscated Jets
LEAD: A Congressional report criticizes Attorney General Dick Thornburgh and William S. Sessions, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, for their official travel aboard three executive jets seized from drug traffickers.


Consultants Ponder Coming Elections
LEAD: These are not the best of times for the men and women who produce political campaigns.
Analysts, pundits and even some politicians are deploring the state of American campaigning.


Ban on Hunting of Whales Upheld
LEAD: The International Whaling Commission has averted a threat to the five-year-old moratorium on commercial whaling.
The threat was turned back on Friday when the American representative blocked a proposal that would have allowed a limited catch of whales in the Atlantic.


Venezuela in Shift on Citgo
LEAD: The Venezuelan state oil company, Petroleos de Venezuela S.A., no longer plans to sell the 50 percent of the Citgo Petroleum Corporation that it purchased in February from the Southland Corporation, a senior Petroleos official said today.


Joseph Mailman, 88, Head of Philanthropy
LEAD: Joseph L. Mailman, an investor and philanthropist who was president of the Mailman Foundation, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 88 years old.


Secom General reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Secom General (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,200,000
2,000,000
Net inc
138,259
79,938
Shares outst
36,600,000
37,000,000
9mo sales
6,400,000
5,800,000
Net inc
429,436
288,628
Share earns
.01
-
Share earnings for the latest quarter and year-ago periods are less than 1 cent.


Chronicle
LEAD: DR.
THOMAS STARZL, a leader in the transplantation of human organs, was resting comfortably in fair condition at Presbyterian-University Hospital in Pittsburgh yesterday after being hospitalized on Sunday with chest pains, hospital officials said.


Communicable Diseases Masked Behind Doctors' Erratic Reporting
LEAD: WHEN computer programmers talk about garbage in, garbage out, they could also be referring to the problems some health officials have with statistics that are important to the control of communicable diseases.


Britain Will Reopen Inquiry on the Titanic
LEAD: Britain said today that it would reopen a 1912 inquiry into whether many of those lost with the Titanic could have been saved by a ship that was nearby when the liner sank.


Japan Air in Korea Link
LEAD: The Japan Air Lines Company said today that it would cooperate with Korean Air Lines to develop their computer reservation systems jointly.
It said the companies would trade data bases and establish reciprocal access between Japan Air's Axcess computer reservation system and Korean Air's Topas system.


5 More Reported Killed in Kenya Unrest
LEAD: Five people were reported killed in clashes with the police today as anti-Government protests spread from Nairobi to outlying cities.
The authorities were told to use whatever force was necessary to quell the demonstrations, which have left eight people dead in the last three days.


Marriott Corp. reports earnings for 12wks to June 15
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marriott Corp. (NYSE)
12wks to June 15
1990
1989
Sales
1,764,000,000
1,698,000,000
Net inc
46,000,000
b67,000,000
Share earns
.46
.59
Shares outst
100,400,000
112,900,000
24wk sales
3,448,000,000
3,325,000,000
Net inc
74,000,000
b113,000,000
Share earns
.72
1.00
Shares outst
102,500,000
113,000,000


Union Leader Vows to Win Pay Increases
LEAD: Negotiations on labor contracts for New York City municipal workers opened yesterday with the president of the largest union vowing to extract wage and benefit concessions from a Mayor the union helped to elect.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-11
Soviet officials appealed for aid from the West in moving the moribund Soviet economy toward a free market, but the issue has divided the Soviet Union almost as badly as it has split the potential donor countries.
Page A1


Machine Technology reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Machine Technology (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,468,748
4,932,942
Net inc
243,174
20,502
Share earns
.05
-
9mo sales
15,079,724
15,964,861
Net inc
471,769
283,910
Share earns
.10
.06
The company said that gross margins improved to 42 percent for the latest quarter from 40 percent for the third quarter of 1989.


Gorbachev Wins Fight On Leadership of Party
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today won a fight over the structure of the Communist Party leadership, limiting the prospect that he will be hobbled by hard-liners.


United Mobile Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Mobile Homes Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,268,816
2,159,019
Net loss
37,564
83,526
Shares outst
4,500,841
4,125,510
6mo rev
4,488,346
4,215,741
Net loss
27,122
202,052
Shares outst
4,465,308
4,125,510


Connecticut Indian Land in Legal Quandary
LEAD: For more than 300 years, since one of the first Indian reservations in the New World was set aside near what is now Bridgeport, the law of Connecticut has been the law of all the lands within it.


HarperCollins Buys 3 Jeffrey Archer Books
LEAD: HarperCollins has bought the next three books of Jeffrey Archer, the English author who recently said he was offered $20 million for the books by an unnamed publishing house.


German Fans Greet Team
LEAD: Tens of thousands of flag-waving fans greeted West Germany's World Cup champions here today in a peaceful show of pride that was a stark contrast to Sunday night when four people were killed and hundreds injured after street celebrations turned violent.


An Investment Banker Moves to Brick Making
LEAD: Philip R. Mengel, an investment banker, is moving from an abstract business to a concrete one, and from New York City to Reading, Pa., where the company he will head makes concrete products, bricks and other building materials.


Playing Their Own Game
LEAD: With the World Cup and Wimbledon finally settled and the Tour de France still in early stages, international sports fans can turn this week to the World Games in Australia.
Five teams are in Perth for the world championship of lacrosse - the United States, Canada, Britain, Australia and the Iroquois.


Sentence in Rape Hoax Appealed
LEAD: A woman who falsely accused a man of raping her appealed today to the Nebraska Supreme Court her perjury sentence, which requires her to pay for advertisements apologizing to the man.


Sex Differentiation
LEAD: NEWLY discovered fossils of a tree-dwelling primate that lived in North America 50 million years ago show the earliest known signs of sexual differentiation in primate behavior, paleontologists say.


Dollar Mixed in Light Day As Pound Continues to Rise
LEAD: The dollar finished mixed in light domestic trading yesterday as currency traders kept a close watch on the economic summit meeting in Houston but had little news to act upon.


Five Cubans Seek Protection
LEAD: Five Cubans entered the Czechoslovak Embassy in Havana today and asked for protection, an embassy spokesman reported.
It is not clear whether the five are seeking political asylum in Czechoslovakia.
Diplomats said it was the first time that Cubans had managed to obtain refuge in an East European embassy in Havana.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Australian Meat and Livestock Corp., to Brouillard/LGFE, for the Fresh Australian Range Lamb program.


Tests Find Leak Clues On Shuttle
LEAD: Space agency officials said today that a primary seal in a large pipe that carries liquid hydrogen fuel to the space shuttle is the ''prime suspect'' for causing leaks that have grounded all three of the spacecraft.


F.F.O. Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* F.F.O. Financial Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
452,483
585,124
Share earns
.21
.25
Shares outst
2,180,000
2,293,481
6mo net inc
754,049
1,275,158
Share earns
.35
.55
Shares outst
2,180,000
2,318,469


Ford Cancels Plant In the Philippines
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company has canceled plans to build a $150 million car-stereo plant in the Philippines because of fears about political stablility and security, the Trade and Industry Secretary, Jose Concepcion, said.
He said Ford was now considering Indonesia for a new site.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
BC Sugar Refinery Ltd., Vancouver, British Columbia, a sugar company, agreed to acquire 50 percent of Lantic Sugar Ltd. from Jannock Ltd., Toronto, for $110 million (Canadian).


Make Farm Programs Work as They Should;   Our Fiasco in India
LEAD: To the Editor:


Riggs National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Riggs National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b3,037,000
10,664,000
Per share
.22
.77
6mo net inc
b6,738,000
21,243,000
Per share
.49
1.54
b-Included a net gain of $4.6 million from purchase of subordinated debentures, a pretax gain of $800,000 on sale of real estate, and a $10.6 million provision for possible losses primarily on commercial real estate loans.


Bridge
LEAD: Early in the century, even before auction bridge turned into contract, it was normal in many parts of the world for bridge columns to end with a double-dummy problem.
Such problems rarely appear naturally, but the diagramed deal from the Spingold Knockout Teams in Chicago last August is certainly a candidate.


Chess
LEAD: There are certain logical, positional problems that come up from time to time in various games without getting a clearcut solution.
Often inaccuracies by both players disqualify the games as proper tests of the strategic values in question.
Moreover, special features of these positions can also intervene to make proving a general point difficult.


Homophobia: Scientists Find Clues To Its Roots
LEAD: A RISE in hostile actions against homosexuals can be traced primarily to hatred based on fear and self-righteousness rather than to the AIDS epidemic, researchers are finding.
Although polls show more Americans are beginning to accept homosexual men and women and support their rights, there has been a great increase in reports of anti-gay bias since the beginning of the epidemic.


New Details in Book on Brawley Case
LEAD: A new book on the Tawana Brawley case gives new details about how the black teen-ager fabricated her story that she had been raped by white men.


Defense in Jogger Trial Argues Rights Violation
LEAD: Defense lawyers in the Central Park rape trial tried to show yesterday that one of the defendants charged with attempted murder and rape of a jogger last year was arrested without first being read his rights.


Linear Technology reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Linear Technology (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,319,000
6,033,000
Net inc
480,000
803,000
Share earns
.12
.20
6mo sales
10,797,000
11,036,000
Net inc
963,000
1,214,000
Share earns
.24
.30
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Rangers Go With Youth And Deal For 2 Wings
LEAD: The Rangers, rolling the dice and replenishing the supply of youth they had drained through trades, yesterday completed two deals for right wings about whom there are definite questions but for whom there could be bright futures.


Chase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chase Corp.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
6,922,000
6,855,000
Net inc
248,000
221,000
Share earns
.06
.05
9mo rev
20,602,000
19,053,000
Net inc
829,000
477,000
Share earns
.19
.11
The company is listed on the Boston Stock Exchange.


General Signal Sale Of Ultratech Is Set
LEAD: The General Signal Corporation said it had agreed to sell its Ultratech Stepper division to a venture capital company and the division's employees.


Patricia C. Critchlow; Research Aide, 64
LEAD: Patricia C. Critchlow, a retired administrative aide with the International Food Policy Research Institute, died Sunday at her home in Newburyport, Mass.
She was 64 years old and lived previously in Hartsdale, N.Y.


Rights Group Cites Abuses Around World
LEAD: Using torture, murder and mass arrests, governments trampled the human rights of tens of thousands of people in 1989 to suppress conflicts stemming from ethnic or nationalist tensions, Amnesty International says.


Jersey Central's Preferred Stock
LEAD: The Jersey Central Power and Light Company, a unit of the General Public Utilities Corporation, yesterday priced $50 million in preferred stock in competitive bidding that was won by a group of underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Some Arts Aid Recipients Must Justify Their Projects
LEAD: New guidelines issued yesterday by the National Endowment for the Arts require grant recipients suspected of violating its restriction against obscenity to supply ''a written justification of the project'' and an explanation of how it complies with the language in the agency's 1990 appropriations legislation.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD:
DEAR DIARY:


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE


Rosewood, Insurer in Pact
LEAD: The First Executive Corporation and one of its largest shareholders, Rosewood Financial Inc., plan to discuss a possible joint restructuring or recapitalization of the beleaguered insurance company, the two concerns said today.


Boddie-Noell Restaurant Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boddie-Noell Restaurant Properties Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,376,855
1,331,712
Net inc
829,643
780,679
Share earns
.29
.27
6mo rev
2,599,173
2,559,192
Net inc
1,500,203
1,457,312
Share earns
.53
.51


High-Crime Areas Aren't Good for Business
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bidder for Hotel On W. 42d St. To Be Examined
LEAD: New York City officials said yesterday that they would investigate allegations that a group that has bid to run a former welfare hotel on West 42d Street had collected rent at two buildings in Brooklyn even after it had been ordered to relinquish control because of poor maintenance.


Brademas Plans to Step Down as President of N.Y.U. in 1991
LEAD: John Brademas, who nearly doubled the endowment of New York University and helped transform it into a major research institution in his nine years as president, said yesterday that he intended to step down in December 1991.


Defendant Waits for Verdict in McMartin Pre-School Trial


Jets Select Syracuse Wide Receiver in Draft
LEAD: The Jets continued to inject new life into their slumbering offense by taking Rob Moore, a Syracuse wide receiver ranked among the best collegians at his position, in the National Football League supplemental draft yesterday.


Getting After the Savings and Loan Crooks
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dow Jones Profits Fall
LEAD: Dow Jones &amp; Company said yesterday that its profits for the second quarter fell 27.9 percent.
One reason, it said, was interest and other costs related to its acquisition of Telerate Inc.; another was a weakness in the market for information services.


On Rainy Night, National Stars Suffer Drought
LEAD: An All-Star Game in Wrigley Field with two runs scored?


Norwest Merger
LEAD: United Banks of Colorado, the largest banking company in the state, said yesterday that it was discussing a possible merger with the Norwest Corporation, the largest banking company in Minnesota.
With $6 billion of assets, United Banks is about a fourth the size of Norwest.
The two companies, which have been the focus of merger rumors, said no agreement had been reached.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on July 2 about Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's appearance on


International Paper reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Paper (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,200,000,000
3,000,000,000
Net inc
185,000,000
229,000,000
Share earns
1.70
2.04
Shares outst
109,100,000
109,300,000
6mo sales
6,400,000,000
5,600,000,000
Net inc
365,000,000
452,000,000
Share earns
3.35
4.00
Shares outst
109,000,000
110,000,000


McDonnell Revamps Unit
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation's helicopter subsidiary said today that it had reorganized to focus on its commercial business because military spending was declining.


Diana Corp. reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diana Corp. (NYSE)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
290,320,000
610,814,000
Net loss
b4,885,000
c14,555,000
Shares outst
3,702,000
3,929,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $6,714,000, or $1.81 a share, which included a gain of $14,661,000 and a loss of $7,947,000 related to disposition of operations.


Education;   Fluency in English Required of Faculty
LEAD: A new law in Pennsylvania requires all college and university faculty members, including graduate teaching assistants, to be proficient in English.


Soviet Aid: Short Reach
LEAD: Sometimes the very struggle for unity undermines the semblance of unity, and such was the case, it seemed tonight, in the search here for a formula that would unite the seven leading democracies on the question of aid to the Soviet Union.


More South Africa Sanctions
LEAD: A tougher and expanded South African sanctions bill was unanimously adopted by the New York City Council yesterday.
The bill will expand existing laws that bar the city from doing business with companies that have ties to South Africa and will establish a rating system to judge the posture of banks in dealing with South Africa.


King Says His Goal Was a Title Rematch
LEAD: Don King testified yesterday that the reason he made a ringside protest over a referee's long count during the the Mike Tyson-James (Buster) Douglas heavyweight title fight was to lay the foundation for his real objective, to get a Douglas-Tyson rematch.


Ruth Brooks Littman And Jack Gross Marry
LEAD: The marriage of Ruth Brooks Littman to Jack Gross took place yesterday at the Fairview Country Club in Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Mark Winer performed the ceremony.


An All-Star After Years In Nowhere
LEAD: ''If I had gone into the front office before the season began and asked for a $15,000 All-Star clause in my contract,'' said Greg Olson, the catcher for the Atlanta Braves, ''I would have been laughed out of there.''


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This is a major breakthrough in alternative fuels that we think will be a harbinger of things to come.''
- Mayor Tom Bradley of Los Angeles, on United Parcel Service's shift to natural gas.
[A1:5]


Morrison Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to June 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morrison Inc. (OTC)
13wks to June 2
1990
1989
Revenue
235,558,000
230,555,000
Net inc
7,751,000
c8,544,000
Share earns
.46
.49
52wk rev
900,457,000
829,159,000
Net inc
b27,493,000
c32,046,000
Share earns
1.60
1.81
Shares outst
17,234,000
17,752,000


Mishima Anthology Wins Japanese Prize
LEAD: A collection of Yukio Mishima's short stories translated by John Bester of Britain has won the first Noma Prize for Japanese literature in translation.


Chronicle
LEAD: Gen.
MAXWELL R. THURMAN, the commander of the United States invasion of Panama last December, was admitted to Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington on Monday with a preliminary diagnosis of leukemia, the Pentagon has announced.


Education;   Atlanta School Chief Dismissed; Board Cites Lack of Trust
LEAD: The school board has dismissed the Superintendent here, citing a lack of ''mutual trust and cooperation.''


Domino's in Test With Burger King
LEAD: Burger King will begin test-marketing six-inch Domino's pizzas at four of its South Carolina restaurants in September.
The one-year experiment is aimed at the McDonald's Corporation's test of its own pizza in 200 of its restaurants.


Evolution in Europe;   U.N. Said to Be Near Deal For Exit of 6,000 Albanians
LEAD: A United Nations plan calling for the mass evacuation of an estimated 6,000 Albanians who have taken refuge in foreign embassies is close to being approved by the authorities in Tirana, European diplomats said today.


Oracle Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oracle Systems Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
334,398,000
215,935,000
Net inc
52,958,000
33,546,000
Share earns
.39
.25
Shares outst
137,310,000
136,115,000
Yr rev
970,844,000
583,673,000
Net inc
117,410,000
81,766,000
Share earns
.86
.61
Shares outst
136,826,000
135,066,000


Return of Paramilitary Chief Prompts Strike Call in Haiti
LEAD: Political and labor leaders called today for a general strike on Wednesday to protest the return from exile of the former leader of the brutal paramilitary force built by the Duvalier family to maintain its 30-year dictatorship.


Foreign Companies in U.S. Cited Again on Tax Record
LEAD: Congressional investigators and tax officials reported new evidence today that American subsidiaries of foreign automobile and electronics companies have been underpaying Federal income taxes, with at least $13 billion in back taxes now being sought by the Government.


Economic Scene;   Deregulation: The Good News
LEAD: WHEN most people think about deregulation these days they are apt to focus on the dubious pleasures of selecting a long-distance phone company or pleading for service from the local cable television monopolist - or worse, on the sheer gall of the savings and loan bandits who made off with the keys to the United States


Evolution in Europe;   Bulgaria Convenes a Post-Communist Parliament
LEAD: Bulgaria reached down to its roots today to convene its first Parliament elected in genuine elections after more than 40 years of Communist rule.


New Exhibit at the Bronx Zoo


Figure in Bomb Inquiry Accused of Perjury
LEAD: The man who became the focus of a Federal investigation of bombings that killed a Federal judge and a civil rights lawyer last year was indicted today on unrelated charges of perjury and bribery.


Evolution in Europe;   EAST BERLIN FINDS BOMBING SUSPECT
LEAD: East Germany has identified a man now imprisoned on rape charges in West Berlin as a leader of the 1986 bombing of a West Berlin discotheque that killed two American servicemen, Bush Administration officials said today.


Food Notes
LEAD:
The Fish Eaters


Chronicle
LEAD: CALVIN KLEIN was released from New York Hospital on Monday after a six-day stay for treatment of injuries he suffered while horseback riding on Long Island.
The 47-year-old fashion designer suffered two broken ribs and other injuries when he was thrown from a horse on July 3 in Bridgehampton.


John Connelly, 85, A Bottling Executive And Philanthropist
LEAD: John F. Connelly, chairman of the Crown Cork and Seal Company and head of the Connelly Foundation, a Philadelphia philanthropic organization, died Sunday at his home in Bryn Mawr, Pa.
He was 85 years old.


Business Digest
LEAD:
The Houston Summit


Saudis Press Oil Cutbacks
LEAD: Saudi Arabia held a meeting today of Persian Gulf oil ministers in Jidda, Saudi Arabia, on establishing a new OPEC output pact to end the overproduction that has sent oil prices plummeting.


Book Notes
LEAD: Appeal on Cheever The Illinois Appeals Court recently upheld a lower court decision that prohibited Academy Chicago from publishing its proposed collection of 68 stories by John Cheever.
But Jordan Miller, vice president of the independent Chicago publishing house, said yesterday that he would appeal the court's June 27 decision.


Evolution in Europe;   CONFRONTING FOES, GORBACHEV KEEPS PARTY LEADERSHIP
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev swept confidently to re-election as head of the Communist Party today, after confronting the party's hard-liners with a militant defense of the changes he has ignited in his society.


AIDS in Black Women Seen as Leading Killer
LEAD: AIDS is rapidly rising nationally as a cause of death among women aged 15 to 44 years old, and is the leading killer of black women in that group in New York and New Jersey, according to a new study by researchers at the Federal Centers for Disease Control.


World Bank Is Beginning To Tap Smaller Markets
LEAD: The World Bank began borrowing money in the smaller financial markets of the world yesterday when it became the first nonresident borrower in New Zealand.


Rangers Get a Center
LEAD: The Rangers yesterday acquired Brian McReynolds, a center, from the Winnipeg Jets in exchange for Simon Wheeldon, another center.
McReynolds, 25, had 2 assists in 9 games with Winnipeg and scored 18 goals with 41 assists for 59 points in 72 games with the Moncton Hawks of the American Hockey League last season.


Citing Extra Costs at 5 Airports, American Adds Ticket Surcharge
LEAD: American Airlines, reacting to what it calls ''excessive charges'' imposed by five airports, plans to add ticket surcharges of $1 to $4 beginning next week for its flights from those airports.


Cairo Journal;   With Islam in Vogue, Boutiques for the Pious
LEAD: When Mona el-Rifai returned from a spell in Saudi Arabia eight years ago, she had become used to wearing Islamic dress and thought others might like to do so as well, so she opened a store.


U.S. Team to Defend Title After 3 Decisive Victories
LEAD: Three decisive victories in three days have cleared the way for the United States to defend its world lacrosse title on Sunday.


Top Hurdles Matchup
LEAD: Jackie Joyner-Kersee, the world-record holder in the heptathlon, and her teammate, Gail Devers-Roberts, a 1988 Olympian who set the American record of 12.61 in the 100-meter hurdles in 1988, will compete in the 100-meter hurdles at the New York Games on July 29, said Fred Lebow, the executive director of the New York Road Runners Club.


Dollar Falls Against Pound; Forecast on Rates Lifts Yen
LEAD: The pound took center stage in foreign exchange trading yesterday, sending the dollar to an 18-month low against the British currency.
The dollar also fell sharply against the Japanese yen.


The Editorial Notebook;   Women Stereotyping Women
LEAD: Molly Yard, president of the National Organization for Women, predicts ''the feminization of power'' as more women win public office.
Women politicians talk enthusiastically about the ''decade of the woman.'' Dianne Feinstein, the Democratic nominee for governor of California, says that a woman official can protect abortion rights more reliably than a man.


Levi Strauss Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Levi Strauss Associates Inc.
Qtr to May 27
1990
1989
Sales
1,000,809,000
879,380,000
Net inc
56,484,000
57,730,000
6mo sales
1,879,221,000
1,648,644,000
Net inc
101,907,000
93,938,000


C.D. Yields Are Lower For Week
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were off slightly for the week ended yesterday, the sixth consecutive week of decline.


'Let Them Eat Jerk,'
LEAD: JERK-STYLE Jamaican barbecue is more prevalent than McDonald's along East 233d Street in the Bronx, and Allan Vernon is known there as Vernon, the King of Jerk.


Gold Drops, Then Recovers On Reports of Mideast Sales
LEAD: Gold futures prices fell yesterday amid signs of new bullion sales in the Middle East, but the market partly recovered after traders learned that the amount sold was relatively small.


Dow Jones &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dow Jones &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
441,628,000
437,744,000
Net inc
34,886,000
48,354,000
Share earns
.35
.48
Shares outst
100,744,000
100,619,000
6mo rev
868,691,000
844,504,000
Net inc
59,752,000
b248,357,000
Share earns
.59
2.47
Shares outst
100,784,000
100,704,000


S.E.C. Views Fund Moves By Brokers
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission is considering whether to install an early warning system to detect potential financial trouble at the nation's largest brokerage firms.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Judge Orders Vote Monitors At All Teamster Locals
A Federal judge ordered the teamsters' union to put court-appointed monitors at each local to scrutinize the election of national officers.
The judge said the monitors were needed because teamster leaders had tried to sabotage Federal efforts to rid the union of criminal influence.


Mulheren Convicted Of Fraud
LEAD: John A. Mulheren Jr., once an aggressive Wall Street speculator, was convicted yesterday of conspiring with Ivan F. Boesky to illegally manipulate stock prices, conduct sham transactions and exchange confidential market information.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Down
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds fell again and interest rates rose further yesterday despite a highly successful auction of $5 billion worth of new 30-year bonds offered by the Resolution Funding Corporation, the Federal agency charged with financing the savings and loan bailout.


Brooklyn Youth Is Wounded in Dispute Over Coat
LEAD: A 16-year-old Brooklyn high school student was shot and critically wounded yesterday during a disputeover an expensive coat, the police said.


Out-of-Control Car Kills Two Children And Hits Two Others
LEAD: A boy and a girl playing on their front lawn in Rosedale, Queens, were struck and killed last night by a car that ran through a stop sign, apparently out of control, the police said.


A.T.&amp;T. Layoffs
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said the number of employees to be laid off in its Network Services Division had been reduced to 4,300, from 6,000, because many workers had accepted early retirement.
The cuts, beginning in September, will affect workers in all states except Alaska, Delaware, Hawaii, Idaho and Vermont.


Interco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
357,899,000
468,654,000
Net loss
b41,283,000
c31,600,000
Shares outst
39,777,000
40,502,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $7,168,000.
c-After income from discontinued operations of $9,851,000, or 25 cents a share.


Waterfront Plan Loses, Barely
LEAD: City residents today rejected by 12 votes a waterfront redevelopment plan with the Port Authority that municipal officials said would be a financial boon but that opponents charged would overwhelm the small Hudson River community.
The vote was 4,418 against and 4,406 in favor of the plan, according to figures from the City Clerk's office.


Daly Getting New Pact With Pistons
LEAD: Chuck Daly, turning aside offers from network television and other National Basketball Association teams, said today that he would try to lead the Detroit Pistons to a third consecutive N.B.A. championship.


What Fundamentalism Offers Arab World
LEAD: To the Editor:


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abbott Laboratories (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,503,398,000
1,318,454,000
Net inc
240,224,000
212,555,000
Share earns
.55
.48
6mo sales
2,941,838,000
2,613,980,000
Net inc
465,174,000
410,520,000
Share earns
1.06
.92


Louis P. Singer, Investment Banker, 84
LEAD: Louis P. Singer, an investment banker and a retired senior partner in Troster, Singer &amp; Company, an over-the-counter securities concern, died on Monday at University Hospital in Denver.
He was 84 years old and lived in Hewlett Harbor, L.I.


11 Drug-Cartel Figures Arrested in Colombia
LEAD: The Colombian police have captured 11 leading members of the Medellin cocaine cartel in a big operation in the central part of the country, the news agency Colprensa reported today.


Suit Seeks to Bar Sale Of New Audio Players
LEAD: A group of music publishers, including the songwriter Sammy Cahn, has filed a lawsuit seeking to halt the sale in the United States of new digital audio tape recorders, contending that they contribute to copyright infringement.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: CERTAIN lean, meaty fish, like halibut, swordfish and marlin, require utmost care in preparation to prevent dryness.
If you barbecue or broil them, frequent basting is necessary.
Sauteeing is less risky, but you must check frequently to avoid even the slightest overcooking.
In this recipe for halibut with lemon sauce, I take the safest route, poaching.


Beach Towel a 9-5 Favorite To Win Meadowlands Pace
LEAD: Despite drawing the outside position in the field of 10 horses, Beach Towel is still the overwhelming favorite in the $1,153,500 Meadowlands Pace on Friday night.


New Chief Is Named At Wilkinson Sword
LEAD: Fred E. Hiller has been named president and chief executive of Wilkinson Sword North America, replacing Norman R. Proulx, who resigned from those positions in June, the company announced yesterday.
Mr.
Hiller, 50 years old, has been vice president of finance of the Atlanta-based razor and lighter company since 1986.


Double Celebration For French Cyclist
LEAD: Ronan Pensec celebrated his 27th birthday today with as pretty a present as the Tour de France can offer: he received the yellow jersey of the overall leader.


Video-Terminal Safety For Municipal Workers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Theater;   A Carnival of Satire and Savagery, With a Karamazov as Ringmaster
LEAD: Near the beginning of ''Father Was a Peculiar Man,'' an exhilarating evening of environmental street theater presented by En Garde Arts, an actor from the company of more than 60 performers approaches the audience and excitedly offers his theory of the significance of Madonna.
By suggesting that sex is possible in the age of AIDS, he says, she is ''trying to become a Christ - she will link us together.


All Nippon Is Planning $3.3 Billion Jet Order
LEAD: All Nippon Airways said today that it planned to buy about 30 medium-sized passenger jets for about $3.3 billion, substantially increasing its fleet.


Books of The Times;   Fleeing the Nazis With a Jaguar That May Be Real
LEAD:
Max and the Cats
By Moacyr Scliar
Translated by Eloah F. Giacomelli. 99 pages. Available Press/Ballantine Books. $7.95.


Sasser Injury Not Bad
LEAD: Mackey Sasser, the Mets' catcher who was injured in Sunday's game in Atlanta in a collision at home plate with Jim Presley, was examined by the Mets' team physician, Fiske Warren, yesterday and was reported to be suffering from a sprained right ankle.


State Dept. Tells Americans To Postpone Trips to Kenya
LEAD: The State Department advised American citizens today to defer all nonessential travel to Kenya because of anti-Government strife there.


Devils Like Newcomers
LEAD: Three of the Devils' most highly regarded prospects have signed multiyear contracts with the National Hockey League team, said Lou Lamoriello, the club president and general manager.
Zdeno Ciger, Jason Miller and Jarrod Skalde signed their first professional contracts and will attend training camp in


A Program to Make the Streets a Safe Place to Play


Al Merrill, Ski Coach, 69
LEAD: Al Merrill, coach of the United States Nordic ski team in three Olympics and a member of the National Ski Hall of Fame, died Sunday at Curley Health Care Center.
Mr.
Merrill, who suffered a stroke two years ago, was 69 years old.


Backward Flow The Years
LEAD: At last it seems possible to get younger.
Growth-hormone injections have done the trick for a test group of men aged 61 to 81, according to last week's science news.
Practically all of them perked up noticeably, regaining scientifically measurable amounts of the mustard commonly associated with younger men.


Brademas to Leave N.Y.U. Presidency


Rinfret and London Slug It Out as Cuomo Steps Deftly Aside
LEAD: While Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo was campaigning upstate yesterday, two opponents spent most of a half hour in a Manhattan television studio challenging each other's credentials and credibility.


USX and 2 Union Leaders Convicted in Alabama
LEAD: The USX Corporation and two United Steelworkers officials were convicted today of conspiring to provide the union officials with company pensions in exchange for major concessions in a 1983 labor contract.


Sikh Who Promoted Truce Is Shot to Death
LEAD: A Sikh leader who helped fashion a brief truce between the Indian Government and Sikh militants was assassinated today in the capital of Punjab.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-9


United Parcel to Alter Its Trucks In Los Angeles to Use Natural Gas
LEAD: The United Parcel Service said today that it planned to convert its 2,700 delivery trucks in the smog-choked Los Angeles area to run on cleaner-burning natural gas in the first major step by a company to comply with strict new vehicle-emissions laws here.


Drop in Worker Drug Use Found
LEAD: The number of American workers and job applicants who have tested positive for drug use has declined in recent years, a company that conducts the tests said today.


European Jobless Rate
LEAD: The unemployment rate in the European Community has remained steady at 8.6 percent for the first five months of the year, the European Community statistical office reported on Monday.
Unemployment ranged from 1.7 percent in Luxembourg to 16.6 percent in Ireland.


Chronicle
LEAD: When MADONNA, in Rome on the latest stop on her round-the-world tour, came under attack from the Vatican newspaper Osservatore Romano.
In an unusual commentary over a pop star passing through town, it declared her show to be sinful.


Nike Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nike Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
609,022,000
413,421,000
Net inc
67,222,000
36,458,000
Share earns
1.77
.97
Shares outst
37,925,000
37,650,000
Yr rev
2,235,244,000
1,710,803,000
Net inc
242,958,000
167,047,000
Share earns
6.42
4.45
Shares outst
37,834,000
37,572,000


NICARAGUA POLICE RAZE ROADBLOCKS
LEAD: Hundreds of striking Sandinista workers and students stood aside and offered little resistance today as riot police officers and army bulldozer crews knocked down barricades that the protesters had built to stop traffic in a nationwide protest that began here Monday morning.


SUPPORT FOR BUSH DECLINES IN POLL
LEAD: In the first public opinion survey to be released since President Bush abandoned his ''no new taxes'' pledge, the Gallup Organization reports that just over half the public disapproves of his new stand while 4 out of 10 approve.


Savings Office In Policy Shift
LEAD: Savings and loan bailout officials approved a policy today that they hope will save taxpayers money by selling insolvent institutions before they lose value under Government control.


Market Place;   Who Should Set Margin Levels?
LEAD: With the financial futures industry fearing for its future, and some parts of the securities industry warning of a financial crisis unless there is reform, pressure is building for Congress to control just how much risk speculators can take when they use the futures market to bet on whether stock prices will rise or fall.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about Galeries Lafayette's plan to open a store on 57th Street misstated the location of Henri Bendel.
That store is at 10 West 57th Street, just west of the Galeries Lafayette site.
The article also misstated the location of Saks Fifth Avenue in some editions.


Bo Knows How to Pitch a Product
LEAD: IN Bo Jackson's latest commercial for Nike Inc., there does not seem to be anything the versatile sports celebrity cannot do.
Playing on the well-known Nike theme that ''Bo knows,'' the spot shows the professional baseball and football player in at least 15 sports roles, from surfing to soccer.


Mary Gordon Is to Read In Trinity Church Series
LEAD: The novelist Mary Gordon is to read from her writing today at noon at St.
Paul's Chapel, Broadway and Fulton Street.
The reading, part of a free series sponsored by Trinity Church, was originally scheduled for last month, but had to be postponed because of activities involving the New York visit by the South African anti-apartheid leader Nelson Mandela.


Chronicle
LEAD: When they get off the plane in Moscow today, 50 young American musicians from all over the country will have just two days before they meet and start rehearsals with 50 of their Soviet counterparts for a joint concert at the Moscow Youth Palace on July 19.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Review/Film;   Showcase of One-Liners For a Rock Detective
LEAD: The person most likely to be entertained by ''The Adventures of Ford Fairlane'' need not be made aware of the film's existence.
He's already on the screen.


Foreman Is Sparring With HBO
LEAD: George Foreman isn't taking his marching orders these days from Home Box Office.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Colgate-Palmolive Co., to Pallas Advertising, San Francisco, for Viadent toothpaste and mouthwash, with a budget of $6 million.


Anatole Chelnov, Encyclopedia Executive, 71
LEAD: Anatole Chelnov, a retired vice president of the international division of Encyclopedia Britannica, died July 1 at his home in San Francisco.
He was 71 years old.


San Diego Bishop Resigns
LEAD: The Vatican announced Tuesday that Pope John Paul II had accepted not only Archbishop Marino's resignation but that of Bishop Leo T. Maher of San Diego.
Bishop Maher underwent surgery for a malignant brain tumor this spring and is 75 years old, the customary retirement age.
He will be succeeded by Msgr.


Monitors Ordered for Teamster Voting
LEAD: A Federal district judge in Manhattan yesterday ordered the International Brotherhood of Teamsters to put court-appointed monitors at every union local to scrutinize the 1991 election for national union officers.





The Pop Life
LEAD: A Literary Approach ''People don't have as much time to read as they used to have - that's why we need songwriting,'' Steve Earle said the other day. ''Songwriting is literature that you can read in your car.''


Alain Chapel, French Master Chef And Restaurateur, Is Dead at 53
LEAD: Alain Chapel, regarded as one of the finest chefs in France, died yesterday while visiting friends in Avignon, France.
He was 53 years old.


About New York;   Best of Friends Get Together, With Supervision
LEAD: Edgar B. sat with his 6-year-old child, Edgar B. Jr., at a small table.
Each week, the Bronx Family Court allows the father exactly an hour-and-a-quarter of closely supervised time with his son.
This was it.


People
LEAD: *
Lorraine Alper-Kramer has been appointed senior vice president and creative services director of BBDO Los Angeles.


Witness Says He Warned Barry to Curb Drug Use
LEAD: Testifying for a second day that he supplied Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. with drugs, including opium, a Washington restaurateur said today that he warned the Mayor many times that ''enough is enough.'' The witness said he urged him to cut back on drugs and to stop taking chances about where and with whom he used them.


Willis Reese, 77, Professor and Expert In International Law
LEAD: Willis L. M. Reese, the Charles Evans Hughes Professor of Law at Columbia University and the director of the Parker School of Foreign and Comparative Law at Columbia for 25 years, died on Monday at his home in Hughsonville, N.Y.
He was 77 years old and also had a home in Hewlett, L.I.
He died of colon cancer, a friend said.


Student Loan Marketing Association reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Student Loan Marketing Association (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
74,043,000
62,490,000
Per share
.72
.62
Shares outst
99,507,000
100,453,000
6mo net inc
145,077,000
123,745,000
Per share
1.41
1.22
Shares outst
99,319,000
101,392,000


McMahon Agrees To Become an Eagle
LEAD: Jim McMahon, the quarterback who led the Chicago Bears to victory in the Super Bowl in 1986, yesterday agreed to a one-year deal with the Philadelphia Eagles as a backup to Randall Cunningham, the elusive passer and runner.
McMahon understands the plans the Eagles have for him, according to Buddy Ryan, the Eagles' coach, who was the defensive coordinator for the Bears during their Super Bowl season.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
American Medical Holdings Inc., Dallas, said its American Medical International Inc. subsidiary, Beverly Hills, Calif., had completed the sale of its Swiss and Greek hospital companies for about $176.7 million.


Former West Virginia Governor Is Sentenced to 5 Years for Graft
LEAD: Former Gov.
Arch A. Moore Jr. was sentenced by a Federal district judge today to 5 years and 10 months in prison and a $170,000 fine for a variety of corrupt acts both in and out of office.


U.S. Savings Agency Weighs Suit Against Bush's Son and Others
LEAD: Federal regulators are considering filing a $200 million lawsuit against Neil Bush, the President's son, and other directors and officers of the defunct Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association in Denver, seeking to recover some of the $1 billion in losses from speculative lending and insider transactions, officials said today.


G.E. Sees Breakthroughs From New Diamond
LEAD: The General Electric Company announced yesterday that it had created a form of diamond with an enhanced ability to transmit heat and light.
Company spokesmen said it could lead to important advances in microchip design and new applications for lasers.


Textron Settles U.S. Charges
LEAD: Textron Inc. has agreed to pay a record $17.9 million to settle a whistle-blower's charges that one of its subsidiaries supplied the Coast Guard with faulty helicopter engines, the Justice Department said today.


Tyco Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyco Laboratories Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
555,950,000
538,442,000
Net inc
35,234,000
25,053,000
Share earns
.86
.61
Shares outst
41,100,000
40,875,000
Yr sales
2,102,740,000
1,971,093,000
Net inc
119,119,000
91,261,000
Share earns
2.90
2.31
Shares outst
41,020,000
39,470,000


Acquirer Of Savings Units Cited
LEAD: James M. Fail, the Arizona insurance executive whose acquisition of 15 failed Texas savings and loan associations from the Federal Government is under Congressional scrutiny, has misled regulators in the past about his background and legal problems.


Corrections
An article on Monday about a joint appearance by the tenors Jose Carreras, Placido Domingo and Luciano Pavarotti at the Baths of Caracalla in Rome on Saturday night misstated the extent of the television coverage.


Is Florio's Plan Stiff Medicine of Poison?;   It's the Only Cure
LEAD: Robin Hood is alive and well, and working out of the State House in Trenton, New Jersey.
You remember his motto - steal from the rich and give to the poor.


Lockheed Leases Air Force Hangar
LEAD: A subsidiary of the Lockheed Corporation said it had signed a lease to take over a hangar at Norton Air Force Base in San Bernardino, Calif.
Norton is one of 86 military bases scheduled to be closed by 1994.
The value of the lease was not disclosed.


Ending Interference On FM Broadcasts
LEAD: A European consortium developing a system for digital radio broadcasting has come up with a solution for a problem that causes interference in FM radio broadcasts.


On Plan to Build A Space Station
LEAD: A panel of space agency experts has concluded that the nation's planned $37 billion space station will require nearly 75 percent more maintenance than predicted in even the most recent gloomy forecast.


Residents Worry As Suspect, 95, Returns Home
LEAD: Last month, the police say, a 95-year-old Navy veteran entered an elderly neighbor's apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan and bludgeoned her to death - thus becoming one of the oldest murder suspects in the city's history.


L.S.U. Center Is Making An Impact on the Court
LEAD: Shaquille O'Neal sat on a bench outside his dormitory, shifting his weight in a futile effort to find a pocket of cool air on this hot, humid Minnesota night.
Each time he would find a good spot, a relentless army of mosquitoes would chase him off it and O'Neal, the imposing sophomore center for Louisiana State University, would swat them away, much like he has swatted away the basketball competition at the Olympic


Spas to Massage Both Body and Mind
LEAD: STEVEN RUBIN, who founded a large oil brokerage firm, flees his life several times a year for the Maharishi Ayur-Veda Health Center in Lancaster, Mass., a serene and elegant retreat where the emphasis is on integrating the mind and the body.


SUMMIT IS DIVIDED ON AID TO MOSCOW
LEAD: The leaders of seven major industrial democracies effectively agreed today to go their own way on the matter of aid to the Soviet Union, European and American officials said tonight.


Pitney Bowes Stock Plunges by 12.8%
LEAD: The stock of Pitney Bowes Inc., a maker of postage meters and mailing systems, fell sharply yesterday after the company announced that it expected weak second-quarter earnings.
Pitney Bowes shares fell $6.375, or 12.8 percent, to $43.50, on the New York Stock Exchange, where more than 1.6 million shares were traded.


The New Fancy Food Products
LEAD: IF the annual International Fancy Food and Confection Show is a barometer of American taste, the culinary atmosphere is heating up.
At the four-day trade show that ends today at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, there appeared to be more salsas, mustards and other condiments and spice-flavored items than ever, especially among new products.


The Houston Summit;   The Text of the Political Declaration
LEAD: Following is the text of the political declaration issued by heads of seven leading industrial democracies at their summit conference here today:
[1]


The Sunny Side of the Street
LEAD: The law we learned in Physics 101 that two bodies cannot occupy the same space at the same time is getting its annual hot weather test on the sidewalks of New York.
Back in January and February, streetwise walkers used the west side of the avenues in the morning and the east side in the afternoon, absorbing whatever warmth they could from the winter sun.


Evolution in Europe;   Czech Food Prices Increase 25% As Many Subsidies Are Removed
LEAD: Prices rose an average of 25 percent at grocery stores today as the Czechoslovak Government ended subsidies on farm products and fresh and processed food.
There was some grumbling, but on the whole there appeared to be widespread acceptance of the increases.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Wilander Comes Back
Mats Wilander, playing competitively for the first time in five months, defeated Johan Anderson, 6-0, 6-3, yesterday in the Swedish Open in Bastad. (AP)
TRACK AND FIELD
Burrell Stays Unbeaten
Leroy Burrell of the United States remained unbeaten at 100 meters in the Nikaia Grand Prix meet last night at Nice, France.


Chronicle
LEAD: ELLA FITZGERALD was treated for exhaustion at a hospital in The Hague yesterday after becoming ill in her hotel.
The 72-year-old singer, who was in The Netherlands to perform at the North Sea Jazz Festival, was admitted to the Bronovo Hospital on Monday and was in good condition, according to Dr.
CLIFFORD BOOK


Heekin Can reports earnings for Qtr to June 17
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heekin Can (OTC)
Qtr to June 17
1990
1989
Sales
78,779,000
77,744,000
Net inc
b2,893,000
c2,377,000
Share earns
.89
.73
6mo sales
147,956,000
143,756,000
Net inc
b4,773,000
c4,187,000
Share earns
1.46
1.29
Shares outst
3,265,000
3,250,000


Dynamics Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dynamics Research Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 16
1990
1989
Revenue
20,637,000
20,211,000
Net inc
626,000
611,000
Share earns
.13
.12
Shares outst
4,900,430
5,044,230
6mo rev
40,861,000
39,861,000
Net inc
1,235,000
1,214,000
Share earns
.25
.24
Shares outst
4,950,630
5,044,230


As Families Emigrate, Hong Kong's Elderly and Afflicted Are Left Stranded
LEAD: When Fung's family moved away from Hong Kong recently, they left her behind in a bleak, crowded Government home because Canada, their new country, would not accept the mentally retarded young woman.


Manhunt Readied as Zodiac Deadline Nears
LEAD: Police investigators are bracing for a new attack by the Zodiac gunman early tomorrow and are preparing to conduct an enormous hunt for the elusive figure.


Atlanta Bishop Resigns, Citing Stress
LEAD: Archbishop Eugene Marino, the first black to be appointed a Roman Catholic Archbishop in the United States, resigned today as head of the Atlanta Archdiocese, citing a need for ''spiritual renewal, psychological therapy and medical supervision.''


Collaborative Research reports earnings for Qtr to June 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Collaborative Research
Qtr to June 2
1990
1989
Revenue
2,304,000
2,382,000
Net loss
896,000
1,274,000
Shares outst
10,657,000
10,655,000
9mo rev
6,771,000
9,465,000
Net loss
1,839,000
3,188,000
Shares outst
10,656,000
10,655,000


Bridge
LEAD: Bidding that starts at the one-level is usually very accurate, like the operation of a watch.
But if the opponents begin with a pre-empt, it is like throwing sand in the watch.
Some good guessing is needed to be accurate, complicated by the fact that bad breaks are now more likely.


Fedders in Deal To Buy Emerson
LEAD: The Fedders Corporation, a leading manufacturer of air conditioners, said it plans to acquire Emerson Quiet Kool from the Jepson Corporation.
Terms of the transaction, which will combine two of the best-known names in air conditioners, were not disclosed.


Fathers' Rights On Adoption Are Expanded
LEAD: New York State's highest court today widely expanded the rights of unwed fathers, ruling that a state law restricting their ability to intervene in adoption proceedings was unconstitutional.


More Jogger Pictures Are Admitted in Trial
LEAD: The prosecution reached the midway point of its case in the Central Park rape trial yesterday, introducing additional photographs that showed the extent of the jogger's injuries.


Rival Christian Forces Agree To End Skirmishing in Beirut
LEAD: Opposing Christian forces agreed today to order their troops to stop shooting at one another.


For the Bolshoi Ballet Director, Politics Looms as Large as Art
LEAD: Yuri Grigorovich, the 63-year-old artistic director of the Bolshoi Ballet, says he never joined the Communist Party and finds it odd that he is in New York, as he put it the other day, ''discussing politics rather than art.''


Bill of Rights Gives Drivers No Privileges
LEAD: To the Editor:


Colorado Utility Offering Bonds
LEAD: In its first offering since 1987, the Public Service Company of Colorado is selling $75 million in 30-year first-mortgage bonds due 2020 through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


Education;   Johns Hopkins, Divided, Looks to Low-Key Era
LEAD: For the first time in nearly two decades, Steven Muller is not the president of the Johns Hopkins University.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE INDIAN OCEAN - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Dekalb Genetics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dekalb Genetics (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
84,000,000
83,800,000
Net inc
2,100,000
4,800,000
Share earns
.37
.85
9mo rev
252,000,000
235,900,000
Net inc
12,600,000
11,200,000
Share earns
2.23
1.98


A. Donald MacKinnon; Retired Lawyer Was 94
LEAD: A. Donald MacKinnon, a lawyer with Milbank, Tweed, Hadley, &amp; McCloy for nearly 50 years, died on June 21 at the Seabrook Health Center in Hilton Head Island, S.C.
He was 94 years old and moved to Hilton Head recently from Summit, N.J.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary last Wednesday about Gustave Harrow, Assistant Attorney General for the State of New York in the battle over the estate of the artist Mark Rothko, referred incompletely to the suit against Rothko's executors.
The heirs accused the executors not only of mismanaging the estate but also of conspiring with the Marlborough Gallery in Manhattan to defraud it.


John Henry Faulk Is Eulogized In a Gathering at Public Theater
LEAD: About 250 friends, colleagues and admirers of John Henry Faulk gathered at the Public Theater on Monday evening to reminisce about the Southern humorist and storyteller who broke the entertainment industry blacklist of the 1950's.


Research Profit Ruling
LEAD: The California Supreme Court has ruled that patients have no right to share in profits if their blood or organs become the source of lucrative scientific research.


SERVICE FOR SNYDER BRINGS CELEBRITIES
LEAD: Mitch Snyder's memorial service was held here today with all the trademarks that had characterized the homeless advocate's life: Hollywood celebrities mingled with homeless men and women and 37 people were arrested at City Hall in a protest after the service.


Court in Illinois Allows Cutoff of Man's Food
LEAD: The Illinois Supreme Court cleared the way today for a stroke victim's guardian to seek withdrawal of the food and water that is keeping the patient alive.


Technologies Plans To Build Spaceport
LEAD: The United Technologies Corporation plans to build and manage a commercial spaceport in northern Australia.
The Bush Administration gave informal approval on Sunday to a plan for a United Technologies subsidiary, the USBI Company of Huntsville, Ala., to develop the spaceport.
The base will be used to launch United States satellites on Soviet-built


Vernon Grant Dead; Book Artist Was 88
LEAD: Vernon Grant, a magazine and book illustrator who was the creator of the Kellogg's cereal characters Snap, Crackle and Pop, died on Monday at a nursing home where he had been staying for several weeks.
He was 88 years old.


Dow Falls 23.27 in Heavy Program Trading
LEAD: Stock prices sank yesterday in waves of computer-driven program selling that swept through the market most of the day.


Washington Talk;   White House Pins Hope On South Africa Leader
LEAD: When F. W. de Klerk visits the United States later this year, there are no plans for a rally in Yankee Stadium, for T-shirts or for mayors to line up to embrace him.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about a German-born scientist seeking to regain his United States citizenship referred incorrectly to the V-2, a World War II weapon on which he worked.
It was a ballistic rocket, not a flying drone or buzz bomb.


Vivigen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vivigen Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,881,400
2,262,400
Net inc
201,100
496,000
Share earns
.08
.20
6mo rev
5,788,900
4,159,900
Net inc
487,300
849,200
Share earns
.19
.35
The company said the decline in earnings, which began in the third quarter of 1989, was largely due to development of its new molecular testing capability and is now over.


Service Merchandise Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Service Merchandise Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
749,227,000
716,887,000
Net inc
b1,200,000
13,856,000
Share earns
.02
.27
Shares outst
52,556,000
51,280,000
6mo sales
1,374,674,000
1,282,289,000
Net loss
b14,307,000
c9,440,000
Share earns
-
.18
Shares outst
52,628,000
51,126,000


Ads That Bash the Japanese: Just Jokes or Veiled Racism?
LEAD: American advertisers are stepping up their attacks on Japan and its people, attempting to thwart sales of Japanese products through commercials that feature ominous references to the late Emperor Hirohito, photographs of Samurai warriors, exaggerated accents and veiled ridicule of the Japanese physique.


Appeals Court Upholds Penalty Against Maddox
LEAD: New York State's highest court yesterday let stand a lower court order suspending Alton H. Maddox Jr., who represented Tawana Brawley and other clients in racially sensitive cases, from practicing law.


As Democrats Prepare to Meet, the Spotlight Is Still on O'Neill
LEAD: Four months ago, when Gov.
William A. O'Neill announced that he would not run for a third full term as Governor, he seemed a beaten man.


Review/Music;   Recalling the 70's Magic
LEAD: When Jackson Browne released his first album 18 years ago, the Los Angeles-based singer and songwriter brought a deeply personal strain of romantic idealism to the folk-pop movement.
Steeped in the utopianism of Southern California's hippie culture, Mr.
Browne wrote visionary love songs and meditations that had dark premonitory undercurrents.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Ernest L. Arms, a longtime chief spokesman for Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co., and David L. Wilkinson are forming a communications and media relations firm in Chicago, Arms-Wilkinson Communications Inc.


Red Cross Faulted on Tainted-Blood Reports
LEAD: The American Red Cross has delayed reporting or has failed to report to the Federal Government hundreds of errors it has made in handling contaminated blood, a Federal inspector reports.


Jailed Reporter Names Woman Who Aided Him, and Is Freed
LEAD: A television reporter was freed today from the jail where he had served two weeks for refusing to identify a person who helped him get a telephone interview with a jailed murder suspect.


Senator Says A Bidder Urged Test of Telescope
LEAD: The losing bid to build the $1.5 billion Hubble Space Telescope called for a test that would have detected the flaw that has blurred its vision before it was ever launched into orbit, Senator Albert Gore Jr. said today.


Increases Voted on Rent-Stabilized Units
LEAD: In a decision that dissatisfied both landlords and tenants, the New York City Rent Guidelines Board last night approved rent increases of 4.5 percent for one-year leases and 7 percent for two-year leases in rent-stabilized apartments.


Eric M. Rogers, 87; Teacher Humanized Physics' Complexity
LEAD: Eric M. Rogers, a professor emeritus of physics at Princeton University who was known for his exuberance in explaining complex principles to non-science students, died on July 1 during a visit to Cambridge, England.
He was 87 years old.


Eric Warburg, 90, Investment Banker From Germany, Dies
LEAD: Eric M. Warburg, an international banker and a member of the German banking family, died on Monday at his home in Hamburg, West Germany.
He was 90 years old.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
AMEV Holdings Inc., New York, a unit of the Dutch company N.V.
AMEV, appointed Gary N. Yalen chief investment officer of AMEV Asset Management.


U.S. PETROLEUM DATA
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
July 6
June 29
July 11
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.3
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.0
3.0
Gasoline stocks
213.6
215.3
217.7
Distillate stocks
112.7
110.1
104.9
Crude imports, daily
6.2
6.7
6.1
Product imports, daily
2.3
2.3
2.3
Crude stocks
380.6
384.3
332.7
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
96.2
90.7
90.7


Robert Carpenter Jr., Ex-Phillies Owner, 74
LEAD: Robert Ruliph Morgan Carpenter Jr., the former owner of the Philadelphia Phillies, died of cancer Sunday.
He was 74 years old.


Donations Decline For Public Service Ads
LEAD: The donation by the media of time and space for public service campaigns dropped by 15 percent last year, to $1.04 billion, from $1.23 billion in 1988, the Advertising Council said yesterday.


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
Ketchum Communications, working through the Advertising Council, has prepared an ad campaign for the State Department.
The effort, which advises Americans on how to travel abroad safely, begins next month.


Review/Television;   A Trial as 'Inquest Into History'
LEAD: Was John Ivan Demjanjuk in fact the prison guard at Treblinka known as Ivan the Terrible, as an Israeli court concluded in 1988, or was he a victim of mistaken identity, as he steadily maintained throughout the trial that brought him a death sentence?
The verdict goes against Mr.
Demjanjuk in ''Treblinka's Ivan the Terrible: The Demjanjuk Dossier,'' tonight's report at 10 on Channel 13's ''Intercom Prime


Davis Distribution reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Davis Distribution
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
199,600,000
185,800,000
Net inc
b197,000
c585,000
Share earns
.13
-
b-After a loss from discontinued operations of $566,000.
c-Net loss
The company said the loss from discontinued operations in the latest year was related to the opening and subsequent closing of an experimental retail outlet.


Sandra M. Schor, 58, Author and Professor
LEAD: Sandra M. Schor, a poet, novelist and associate professor of English at Queens College, died on Monday at the Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
She was 58 years old and lived in Locust Valley, L.I., and in Manhattan.
Her family said she died of cancer.


Getting After the Savings and Loan Crooks;   Connecticut Bank Grab
LEAD: To the Editor:


Composing and Playing the Sounds for Silents
LEAD: ''Oh, there's plenty of work available,'' the organist Lee Erwin cheerfully proclaimed the other day.
Mr.
Erwin's specialty, composing and playing soundtrack music for silent films, might strike some as an arcane and perhaps technologically redundant sort of work.


Evolution in Europe;   Czech Embassy Shelters Cubans
LEAD: Two Cuban students seeking political asylum and five dissidents asking to tour Europe and return were staying in the Czechoslovak Embassy in Havana today, presenting Cuba and non-Communist Czechoslovakia with a tricky diplomatic problem.


For New York, Happier Days
LEAD: The Democrats could not have picked a better time for the announcement expected today that they'll hold their 1992 convention in New York City.
Much of the news emanating from the city lately has focused on racial strife, crime and a growing impatience of New Yorkers about life in their city.
But as the Democrats' impending choice demonstrates, New York remains a vibrant political capital.


A True Test of Diplomacy: Feeding the Summit Leaders
LEAD: The economic world focused on the business of the seven leading industrial powers here, but Houston's food community has been obsessed since April with the politics of culinary summitry.
The chefs and caterers wanted to do their part to make Houston look good after so many years at the bottom of the oil barrel.


Cuomo, Denying That He's Rich, Puts His Net Worth at $525,000
LEAD: Trying to quash a spate of reports that have labeled him rich, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today released copies of a confidential financial disclosure form.


Budget Talks Resume Amid Brewing Dispute Over Cuts in Military
LEAD: After a break of almost two weeks for the Fourth of July recess, White House and Congressional budget negotiators resumed their bargaining today amid a brewing dispute among Democrats over military spending.


Not Too Late for Canada to Be 51st State
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tin Group Nears End
LEAD: The International Tin Council, which never recovered from the 1985 collapse of its plans to support the price of tin, said last week that it would vote on July 31 to disband.
The Tin Council, made up of 22 tin-consuming and producing countries, no longer has any reason to continue after it settled its debts in March from a long-running case that followed the collapse of its buffer stock operations.


Salvador Rebels Say Hopes For Truce Have Grown Faint
LEAD: Rebels said today that a cease-fire in El Salvador's civil war was more remote because the rightist Government refused to agree to reduce the size of the military and purge human rights violators from its ranks.


Frederick's of Hollywood reports earnings for Qtr to June 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frederick's of Hollywood (AMEX)
Qtr to June 2
1990
1989
Sales
24,230,000
20,093,000
Net inc
731,000
607,000
Share earns
.13
.11
9mo sales
74,506,000
60,807,000
Net inc
3,176,000
2,266,000
Share earns
.56
.41
Share earnings are adjusted to reflect 3-for-2 stock splits distributed Sept.


Business Technology;   Next, Digital Radio For a Superior Sound
LEAD: Radio broadcasting is preparing for its biggest technological leap since FM technology was developed in the 1940's and 50's.


English Soccer Clubs Readmitted to Europe
LEAD: English soccer clubs were readmitted to European tournaments today without special conditions, ending a five-season ban imposed after the Heysel Stadium riot in Brussels in which 39 persons died.


Rates Increase At Citicorp Sale
LEAD: Interest rates rose modestly yesterday at Citicorp's weekly auction of 91-day and 182-day commercial paper.


Buyer of Savings Units Misled State Officials
LEAD: James M. Fail, the Arizona insurance executive whose acquisition of 15 failed Texas savings and loan associations from the Federal Government is under Congressional scrutiny, has misled regulators in the past about his legal problems.


Money Is Not a Factor as $3 Million Doesn't Mean a Thing
LEAD: Using the tale of the financial tape, baseball's chosen few who gathered here for the All-Star Game tonight were not measured by their salaries.


Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 16
1990
1989
Sales
3,402,690,000
3,439,591,000
Net inc
51,007,000
45,390,000
Share earns
1.33
1.19
Shares outst
38,203,000
38,194,000
The company said sales in the latest first quarter sales were affected by having 13 fewer stores in operation and also a sluggish sales climate in several regions that should improve as the year goes along.


Castle &amp; Cooke reports earnings for Qtr to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Castle &amp; Cooke (NYSE)
Qtr to June 16
1990
1989
Revenue
792,459,000
693,032,000
Net inc
38,924,000
35,213,000
Share earns
.66
.59
Shares outst
59,337,000
59,305,000
6mo rev
1,450,419,000
1,256,104,000
Net inc
56,999,000
47,698,000
Share earns
.96
.80
Shares outst
59,332,000
59,319,000


New York Health Care: A Big Step For Children
LEAD: Like many parents who cannot afford health insurance for their children, Edith M. Harris has known the guilt of delaying her sons' vaccinations and treating their fevers with compresses rather than antibiotics.


Many Drug Dealers Found With Jobs
LEAD: Many street-level drug dealers in the District of Columbia hold legitimate jobs and spend less than four hours a day hustling cocaine, heroin and other drugs, a study made public yesterday says.


For British Politician, Faded Dream Dies
LEAD: Dr.
David Owen turned 52 years old a few days ago, a month after the failure of his decadelong attempt to create a European-style Social Democratic Party outside the British Labor movement.


Eating Well
LEAD: UNDER pressure from consumers, major food companies including the Keebler Company, Sunshine Biscuits Inc., the Kellogg Company, the Ralston Purina Company, General Mills Inc. and Pepperidge Farm Inc.have been systematically replacing tropical oils in their products with less saturated soybean oil.


POLICE OPEN FIRE IN SOMALI STADIUM
LEAD: At least 65 people were killed when security forces opened fire on the crowd at a soccer match in Somalia, diplomats said today.
The Government had said that only three people were killed when troops fired on people throwing stones at the President.


White House Gases
LEAD: Reduce greenhouse gases?
The Bush Administration has again made clear, at the economic summit meeting in Houston, that it wants no part of an international timetable to limit emissions of carbon dioxide, which many fear will lead to a catastrophic warming of the earth's climate.


Education;   The Lessons Learned When College Officials Run Public Schools
LEAD: A year after Boston University became the first college to run an entire public school system, the schools of this poor, largely immigrant community are catching up but are not yet in the vanguard of public education.


Hartmarx Plans Store Closings
LEAD: The Hartmarx Corporation, the apparel maker and marketer best known for its men's wear, said it would close 65 stores and sell its minority interest in its Robert's Mexican affiliate, resulting in a charge against second-quarter earnings of $51 million.
Fifty stores will be closed this fall in the speciality stores group, it said, reducing the total in that group to 213.


Republic Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
294,019
139,774
Per share
.04
-
Shares outst
4,009,059
4,083,425
6mo net inc
507,031
318,029
Per share
.06
.01
Shares outst
4,010,893
4,035,951
Year-ago quarter share earnings are less than 1 cent a share after dividends on preferred shares.


GBC Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GBC Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,241,000
2,680,000
Per share
.60
.50
Shares outst
5,377,000
5,351,000
6mo net inc
6,179,000
4,996,000
Per share
1.15
.93
Shares outst
5,376,000
5,377,000


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Houston Summit


Theft Is Laid to Arkansas Attorney General
LEAD: The Arkansas Attorney General was charged with theft today, accused of entertaining political allies and friends at taxpayer expense totaling thousands of dollars.


Mexico Mine Bid Rejected
LEAD: A judge has rejected a bid of $468 million for the Cananea S.A. copper mine and thwarted efforts to return it to private ownership.


Sunwest Financial Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunwest Financial Services Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
12,329,000
b3,448,000
Per share
-
.37
Shares outst
9,409,705
9,351,333
6mo net loss
7,639,000
b10,496,000
Per share
-
1.12
Shares outst
9,404,545
9,347,603


Treasure-Hunting at Fabric Outlets


Dinkins Vows Glorious Show For Democrats
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins accepted the Democratic Party's gift of its 1992 National Convention to New York City yesterday, pledging to make it a ''glorious pageant of progress'' that would ''renew America's progressive values.''


Bridge
LEAD: Test yourself on the diagramed deal played at New York's Cavendish Club.
Looking at all four hands, would you choose to play or defend?
This was noted by Herb Lavine of Westfield, N.J., who held the West cards and correctly describes it as ''perversely interesting.''


American Medical Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Medical Holdings (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
706,864,000
720,115,000
Net inc
3,018,000
21,087,000
Share earns
.06
.30
9mo rev
2,173,100,000
2,045,000,000
Net loss
b69,200,000
c39,700,000
Share earns
-
.56


Right-to-Die Ruling Curtails Individual Liberty
LEAD: To the Editor:


Financial Center Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Financial Center Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
997,000
895,000
Per share
.76
.70
Shares outst
1,311,842
1,278,571
6mo net inc
1,601,000
1,434,000
Per share
1.22
1.13
Shares outst
1,312,295
1,269,026


Money-Fund Yields Down
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down for the week that ended yesterday.


Saving the Carpet at Moving Time
LEAD: DURO CARPET, a 40-year-old family-run business on lower First Avenue in Manhattan, will move wall-to-wall carpeting from one apartment to another, clean it, restore it, even cut it to a smaller size.


First Virginia Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Virginia Banks Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
16,828,000
16,657,000
Per share
.79
.79
Shares outst
21,348,000
21,047,000
6mo net inc
32,857,000
33,238,000
Per share
1.54
1.58
Shares outst
21,348,000
21,041,000


Nun Named to Head Covenant House
LEAD: Sister Mary Rose McGeady, the senior Catholic Charities official in Queens who has more than two decades of experience working with troubled youths, was named president of Covenant House yesterday, succeeding the Rev.
Bruce Ritter.


Net Up 4.5% At Motorola
LEAD: Motorola Inc. today reported a 4.5 percent gain in its second-quarter profit from the period a year ago, partly because of international demand for its cellular telephone technology.


McKeon Steps Down As Padres' Manager
LEAD: Jack McKeon, who recently announced that he planned to step down as San Diego's manager at the end of the season to concentrate on his other job as the Padres' vice president of baseball operations, hastened that act yesterday by resigning his field job and bringing in Greg Riddoch to fill it.


Deloitte Gains British Affiliate
LEAD: In a postscript to the wave of mergers that reshaped the accounting profession last year, Deloitte &amp; Touche's international firm said on Tuesday that it had acquired Spicer &amp; Oppenheim's affiliate in Britain, in a link that should add about $160 million to its roughly $300 million in annual billings.


Reputed Cartel Chief Eludes A Raid by Colombia's Police
LEAD: Security forces nearly captured Pablo Escobar, reputed leader of the Medellin cocaine cartel, but the fugitive escaped into the jungle, the police said today.


Syrian Says Israeli Raids Hinder Hostage Release
LEAD: The Foreign Minister of Syria, Farouk al-Sharaa, accused Israel today of causing a delay in the release of a Western hostage by pro-Iranian kidnappers in Lebanon, but promised that his country and Iran would continue their efforts to gain the captives' release.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
A.B.
Electrolux, a Swedish appliance maker, said it had won a contract, worth more than $100 million, to design and provide technology for a compressor factory in the Soviet Union.


Clinic Settles Malpractice Lawsuit By Parents Who Had Septuplets
LEAD: A fertility clinic has agreed to pay as much as $6 million to settle a malpractice lawsuit with a couple and their three surviving septuplets.


MRRM Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MRRM Inc.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,781,000
8,401,000
Net inc
308,000
221,000
Share earns
1.21
.87
Figures are in Canadian funds.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Fleet/Norstar Financial Group Inc. has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of $700 million in debt securities through underwriters that include Salomon Brothers Inc. and Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


South Florida Journal;   New Zeal Takes Aim at Official Vice
LEAD: If a surge of investigations and indictments of public officials and financiers is any guide, Miami and its sister municipalities have been enjoying their vices even more than usual lately.


Even Ernie Banks Wouldn't Have Wanted to Play Two
LEAD: Could it be that the baseball gods are still angry about those lights at Wrigley Field?


Ecuador's Debt Is Used To Create Scholarships
LEAD: Harvard University and an educational foundation in Ecuador have agreed to begin a program of converting Ecuador's foreign debt into Harvard scholarships for Ecuadorean students, university officials announced Tuesday.


Man Questioned on Dart Spree
LEAD: A man was being questioned last night by the police in connection with a series of dart attacks on women in midtown Manhattan.


Boston Acoustics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boston Acoustics Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
6,482,942
5,130,241
Net inc
767,810
591,808
Share earns
.38
.29


Farmers in Poland Block Roads to Press Demand for Financial Aid
LEAD: Farmers calling for relief from the Government's free-market economic program blockaded roads across Poland today for two hours.


Burnup &amp; Sims reports earnings for Year to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burnup &amp; Sims (OTC)
Year to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
192,712,000
178,380,000
Net inc
785,000
9,239,000
Share earns
.08
.90
Shares outst
9,662,000
10,304,000
The company said the latest year included $2.1 million reserve for prior years' income tax assessments.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about the sovereignty of Indian lands in Connecticut referred incorrectly to a proposal by the Mashantucket Pequot tribe to offer gambling on its reservation in Ledyard.
The tribe already conducts high-stakes bingo games; it wants to add other games of chance.


What California Has Isn't Gerrymandering
LEAD: To the Editor:


Polish Investors Angry
LEAD: Dozens of angry investors besieged the office of a Polish financier today after it closed for lack of funds and a newspaper reported that the financier might have vanished abroad.
The newspaper, Gazeta Wyborcza, said employees of Lech Grobelny, once Warsaw's best-known black market currency dealer, had closed his Safe Savings Bank after telling a prosecutor it had run out of money.


Former Casino Analyst Sues Trump
LEAD: Marvin B. Roffman, the casino analyst who was dismissed by his Philadelphia brokerage firm in March after he criticized the Taj Mahal casino owned by Donald J. Trump, filed a lawsuit on Tuesday in the Federal District Court in Philadelphia against Mr.
Trump and the Trump Organization.


Dollar Rebounds Modestly; Gold Prices Off in New York
LEAD: The dollar rebounded modestly yesterday, but foreign-exchange dealers predicted that the United States currency would resume its downward course shortly.


Dreco Energy Services Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dreco Energy Services Ltd. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
13,762,000
14,221,000
Net inc
1,078,000
845,000
Share earns
.22
.17
9mo rev
34,945,000
32,780,000
Net inc
1,936,000
1,519,000
Share earns
.40
.30
Results are in U.S.


Studies on Development of Empathy Challenge Some Old Assumptions
LEAD: The forces that mold a child into a caring adult are coming into sharper focus with new findings that question assumptions held by parents and psychologists alike.


Fear of Chaos Grows as China's Leaders Age
LEAD: A young Government official paused over his dinner the other day when he was asked what the death of China's senior leaders might mean. ''Chaos,'' he replied glumly. ''Maybe civil war.
It'll be back to the 1920's and 30's.''


Mead Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mead Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
1,228,900,000
1,207,400,000
Net inc
46,100,000
62,200,000
Share earns
.73
.96
Shares outst
66,400,000
67,300,000
6mo sales
2,370,300,000
2,336,300,000
Net inc
85,600,000
114,800,000
Share earns
1.35
1.77
Shares outst
66,700,000
67,300,000


Metro Matters;   Toe in the Water: Cuomo Scouts '92 Convention
LEAD: Welcoming Democratic National Convention delegates to his home state, the Governor eloquently quotes St.
Francis.
Five days later he accepts the Presidential nomination, allowing as how he had not aspired to the office and that he would have preferred a better candidate, but noting that ''from such dread responsibility one does not shrink in fear, in self-interest or in false humility.


N.C.A.A. Panel Approves Money Plan
LEAD: A National Collegiate Athletic Association subcommittee today approved recommendations for distributing $1 billion from the N.C.A.A.'s network television contract that include a formula to de-emphasize the monetary incentive for winning games in the annual basketball tournament.


A New Balance of Power
LEAD: It was, as President Bush described it on Monday, the first economic summit conference of the ''post-postwar era.'' And it turned out to be a kind of coming-out party for Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany, reflecting the new, more subtle balance of power in the world.


As Mets Surge Toward Top, Yanks Slumber;   After Slow Start, Everything Works
LEAD: Ask Bud Harrelson the question: wouldn't the Mets have turned things around even if Davey Johnson had stayed as manager?
And hear him answer, shrugging and smiling: ''We'll never know.''


Consolidated Papers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Papers (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
237,974,000
238,498,000
Net inc
38,072,000
43,621,000
Share earns
.88
1.00
6mo sales
478,361,000
480,937,000
Net inc
78,403,000
87,031,000
Share earns
1.80
2.00


Right-to-Die Ruling Curtails Individual Liberty;   Case for Living Wills
LEAD: To the Editor:


Compromise Offered on Regulating Stock Index Futures
LEAD: A key Senator offered a potential compromise today in the vigorous debate over the Administration's proposal for changes in the regulation of stock index futures.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Custodial Problems Persist In New York City Schools
Despite a contract two years ago heralded as the start of a new era in New York City school maintenance, problems with custodians remain.
Repairs are going undone, and access to buildings is still limited.
Education advocates are looking to new contract talks for a remedy.


Goodmark Foods reports earnings for Qtr to May 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goodmark Foods (OTC)
Qtr to May 27
1990
1989
Sales
36,400,000
33,376,000
Net inc
1,312,000
1,299,000
Share earns
.30
.30
Shares outst
4,340,000
4,394,000
Yr sales
136,734,000
129,116,000
Net inc
3,623,000
4,851,000
Share earns
.83
1.10
Shares outst
4,384,000
4,392,000


Dirty Schools: Will a New Contract Help Clean Them?
LEAD: A little more than two years ago, before the signing of a contract hailed as the start of a new era in school maintenance, New York City school custodians cleaned classrooms every other day, cafeterias once a week and mopped floors three times a year.
Head custodians were paid almost $20,000 more than the average teacher and about $7,000 less than the average principal.


Waterford Strike
LEAD: Workers at Waterford Crystal glass works in Ireland ended a 14-week strike today after agreeing on cost-cutting proposals with management.The strike by 2,300 workers at Waterford's three plants began on April 5 over cost cuts, including the scrapping of bonuses for 500 glass cutters.
Waterford said management and unions had agreed to refer issues on pay and conditions still in dispute to binding arbitration.


Sumitomo Unit's Offering Is a Japanese First in the U.S.
LEAD: Sumitomo Bank International Finance Ltd., a unit of Sumitomo Bank Ltd., became the first Japanese bank to sell a subordinated debt issue in the United States yesterday when it priced $500 million in notes with a maturity date of July 15, 2000, through an underwriting group led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Three Key Economic Issues Undecided as Meeting Ends
LEAD: The leaders of the seven most powerful industrial democracies wrapped up their three-day meeting here today by proclaiming their united goal of fostering worldwide prosperity, but they hardly resolved the three main economic issues that had divided them at the outset.


Lazare Kaplan International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lazare Kaplan International Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
34,337,000
27,999,000
Net inc
b2,352,000
c2,277,000
Share earns
.74
.72
Shares outst
3,190,795
3,138,000
Yr sales
109,747,000
80,532,000
Net inc
b5,268,000
c2,768,000
Share earns
1.65
.88
Shares outst
3,189,597
3,138,000


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: A FEW months ago, Sam Kirschner, who lives in Gwynedd Valley, Pa., a suburb of Philadelphia, visited his daughter Concetta, a sophomore at New York University.
The 19-year-old hesitantly started talking about her boyfriend, whom she had been seeing for more than a year.


Carolina First Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolina First Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
305,000
254,000
Per share
.18
.15
6mo net inc
548,000
496,000
Per share
.32
.29
Shares outst
1,699,636
1,695,636


Robert Jensen Is Dead; Buildings Historian, 51
LEAD: Robert Jensen, an architect and a historian of New York City's architectural past, died on July 4 at Mt.
Sinai Hospital.
He was 51 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Alfred Fuchs; Fur Broker, 90
LEAD: Alfred Fuchs, a retired fur broker, died on Sunday at Parkway General Hospital in North Miami Beach, Fla.
He was 90 years old and lived on Bar Harbor Island, Fla.


51 Albanian Refugees Recall Repression and Hope of Asylum
LEAD: The first Albanians allowed out of their country in its refugee crisis said today that the success of earlier asylum seekers and a desire to escape repressive Communist rule had prompted them to scale embassy walls in Tirana in hopes of settling in the West.


Review/Television;   New Doctor Adrift in Alaska
LEAD: On a plane to Alaska, Joel Fleischman, fresh out of Columbia University medical school, is compulsively telling a complete stranger, ''I'm not kidding myself; Anchorage isn't New York.'' But, he adds, ''It isn't Cambodia, and it has five Chinese restaurants.'' Then, for no particular reason, he declares, ''Let's face it, Jewish doctors are not exactly an endangered species.


Liberians Seek Refuge as Peace Talks Near


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Squeaky Floors
Q.
I have a one-story house that was built in 1968 and has hardwood floors.
Practically all these floors squeak when someone walks across them.
Can I cure the squeaking by working from under the house and driving wood screws up through the subflooring and into the finished flooring?


Collins Reinstated
LEAD: Tony Collins, the former New England Patriots running back who was suspended by the National Football League after testing positive for cocaine during a tryout with Indianpolis in 1988, has been reinstated by Commissioner Paul Tagliabue, league officials said yesterday.


Peoples Bancorp-N.C.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Bancorp-N.C.  (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,322,000
3,158,000
Per share
.48
.46
6mo net inc
6,435,000
6,207,000
Per share
.93
.90


Chronicle
LEAD: MARVIN LIEBMAN, a prominent conservative in political circles, has announced his homosexuality in an open letter in The National Review.
He said yesterday that he made the disclosure in the July 9 issue of The National Review in hopes of countering the ''homophobia'' that he said was evident in right-wing politics.


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: THE days have become hot and steamy, but most of the time I don't notice.
Where I work, in an office with two overachieving air-conditioning vents, the weather is always chilly.


Mercantile Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercantile Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
17,034,000
16,338,000
Per share
.60
.58
Shares outst
28,095,000
27,768,000
6mo net inc
34,313,000
32,333,000
Per share
1.22
1.16
Shares outst
28,080,000
27,755,000


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Thompson's New Source Of Ideas
LEAD: J. WALTER THOMPSON has found an usual way to come up with new advertising campaigns: it lets the research and account management departments do the job.


Cupertino National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cupertino National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
332,000
257,000
Per share
.32
.46
6mo net inc
612,000
504,000
Per share
.59
.92
Shares outst
962,171
506,168
The bank said the latest quarter's per share earnings reflected dilution due to the sale of 270,000 shares and the conversion of debentures into 164,500 shares in September 1989.


Gwinnett Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gwinnett Bancshares
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
603,000
495,000
Per share
.36
-
The bank said there are no common share earnings for the year-ago period because it converted to a stock company from a mutual in May 1990.


Protests in Haiti Shut Businesses
LEAD: Businesses closed and most public transportation halted throughout the capital today as political and labor leaders called a strike to protest the recent return from exile of two former Government officials widely associated with political violence and torture in Haiti.


Weis Markets reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weis Markets (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
318,396,000
308,708,000
Net inc
21,187,000
20,657,000
Share earns
.47
.46
6mo sales
632,367,000
610,211,000
Net inc
40,167,000
41,056,000
Share earns
.89
.91


Cambex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cambex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 2
1990
1989
Revenue
7,612,000
5,129,000
Net inc
1,003,000
386,000
Share earns
.32
.14
Shares outst
3,089,000
2,845,000
9mo rev
21,352,000
12,946,000
Net inc
2,689,000
1,005,000
Share earns
.87
.35
Shares outst
3,098,000
2,846,000


De Benedetti Wins Battle
LEAD: The industrialist Carlo de Benedetti has regained management control of the leading Italian publishing company, Arnaldo Mondadori, after a bitter seven-month battle to oust Silvio Berlusconi.


Carnage in Guatemala
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mecham Candidacy Challenged in Arizona
LEAD: Evan Mecham was back in court today, defending his right to run again for the governorship, from which he was removed by the State Legislature in an impeachment proceeding two years ago.


Bush Defends Blocking Kohl Environment Plan
LEAD: After blocking new worldwide environmental initiatives at the economic summit meeting here, President Bush attacked domestic critics of his stand today, insisting that he had defended American jobs from the assault of a radical fringe.


Valley Federal S&amp;L (Calif.) Assoc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Federal S&amp;L (Calif.) Assoc.(O)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,269,000
c2,554,000
Per share
1.07
-
6mo net inc
b16,012,000
c2,376,000
Per share
2.73
-
b-Included pretax gains of $4.5 million from the sale of nine savings branches and $1 million from the sale of real estate loan servicing rights.


Copper Hits 2-Month High On Heavy German Buying
LEAD: Prices of copper futures leaped to their highest levels in two months yesterday amid heavy buying by West German interests and renewed supply concerns.


Runaway Stolen Car Kills Boy, 4, And 2 Brooklyn Men Are Seized
LEAD: A 4-year-old Brooklyn boy who had proudly told his friends yesterday that he was going to kindergarten this fall was struck and killed by a runaway stolen car a few hours later as he played with his bicycle in front of his Crown Heights apartment building, the police said.


Biogen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Biogen Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
14,332,000
8,939,000
Net inc
151,000
b267,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
25,501,000
22,414,000
6mo rev
28,475,000
17,042,000
Net inc
422,000
b123,000
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
25,047,000
22,382,000


Wheeler Peak
LEAD: The Public Service Company of New Mexico said it had received a preliminary expression of interest about an acquisition by the Wheeler Peak Capital Corporation.
The company said Wheeler Peak had not submitted a formal proposal but had suggested a deal in which Public Service shareholders would receive $12 a share in cash and a portion of the common equity of the surviving company.


H.U.D. Project On Ninth Street Halted by Judge
LEAD: A judge ruled yesterday that the Department of Housing and Urban Development had violated its rules in approving funds for a low-income housing project on the Lower East Side.
The judge issued a preliminary order blocking H.U.D. from proceeding on the project.


Micro Bio-Medics reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micro Bio-Medics
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
9,687,476
9,710,529
Net inc
30,344
95,175
Share earns
.01
.02
Shares outst
5,286,028
5,230,278
6mo sales
18,241,593
17,614,400
Net inc
19,339
83,821
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
5,281,861
5,229,653


U.S. and U.N. Food Agency Head for a Clash
LEAD: The United States is heading for a new confrontation with the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, which threatens to suspend its vote next year, ending Washington's influence at the agency charged with promoting third-world agricultural development.


Jury Finds Nursing Home Liable for Routine Neglect
LEAD: A Federal jury in Mississippi has awarded damage verdicts to families of nursing home patients whose last years were blighted by neglect at a home run by the nation's largest nursing home chain.


Mandela Is Reported Ailing And Is Hospitalized in Kenya
LEAD: Nelson Mandela, reportedly suffering from pneumonia, arrived in Nairobi today and was said to have been admitted to a hospital.


Pacific National Financial reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific National Financial
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
47,523,000
33,924,000
Net inc
1,788,000
1,948,000
Per share
.28
.30
Figures are in Canadian funds.
The company attributed the earnings decline to rising Canadian interest rates in the fourth quarter.


Review/Ballet;   The Bolshoi Tradition Lives On in 'Swan Lake'
LEAD: The Bolshoi Ballet from Moscow opened Tuesday night at the New York State Theater with Yuri Grigorovich's version of ''Swan Lake.'' Nina Ananiashvili was a wonderful Odette-Odile, with the accent on Odile.
Her Siegfried, Aleksei Fadeyechev, had the nobility that courses in his veins from another memorable dancer in the role - his father, Nikolai


The Health of Hospitals - or Children?
LEAD: Passage of a big health care law stands as one of the New York Legislature's larger achievements this year.
Yet Dr.
David Axelrod, the state's Health Commissioner, talks of the need for a veto by Gov.
Mario Cuomo.
He argues that the bill is too generous to hospitals at the expense of children - and he has a point.


Walgreen Co. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Walgreen Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,521,757,000
1,350,708,000
Net inc
43,579,000
38,502,000
Share earns
.71
.63
9mo sales
4,555,163,000
4,039,064,000
Net inc
134,176,000
120,529,000
Share earns
2.18
1.96
Shares outst
61,688,000
61,615,000


Quebec Est Serieux
LEAD: Down where I come from in the Old Confederacy, the idea of secession is no longer so appealing.
Despite scare headlines, it's not as popular in Quebec as it once was, either.
Now, even ''separatism'' is used avec soigneusement.


Williams Is Selling 10.25% Debentures
LEAD: The Williams Companies of Tulsa, Okla., is offering $150 million in 30-year debentures through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


FNW Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FNW Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,955,000
3,541,000
Per share
.57
.51
6mo net inc
7,643,000
6,590,000
Per share
1.11
.96


Life Term and $19 Million Fine for Drug Boss
LEAD: The head of a violent drug ring in Brooklyn was sentenced yesterday to life in prison and fined $18.9 million.


Peerless Carpet reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peerless Carpet
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
134,536,000
59,232,000
Net loss
2,040,000
b1,738,000
Share earns
-
.20
b-Net income
Figures for 1990 included the results of recently acquired Galaxy Carpets and the Barrymore division.


Neil Bush Says Regulators Hid Clearing Proof
LEAD: Neil Bush, the President's son, charged today that Federal regulators had acted ''with vengeance'' against him.
He accused them of concealing evidence that he said would exonerate him of the allegations that he was engaged in a conflict of interest while serving as director of a Colorado savings and loan institution that failed in 1988.


Bush Picks Arms Negotiator To Head 'Star Wars' Program
LEAD: Henry Cooper, a former Government arms negotiator, will become the first civilian director of the ''Star Wars'' anti-missile program, the Pentagon announced Tuesday.


AMRE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMRE Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
64,607,000
50,703,000
Net inc
b2,060,000
c8,867,000
Share earns
.15
-
6mo rev
251,825,000
183,885,000
Net inc
b6,064,000
c5,744,000
Share earns
.43
-
Shares outst
14,137,000
13,617,000


People
LEAD: *
Richard Corelitz has been promoted to executive vice president of Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago.


Execufirst Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Execufirst Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
18,844
b170,499
Per share
.02
-
6mo net inc
25,787
b314,326
Per share
.02
-
b-Net loss


Central Park 'Campers' Study Ponds


Concern Over P.G.A. Site
LEAD: The N.A.A.C.P. urged the Professional Golfers' Association to reconsider holding its championship tournament at the all-white Shoal Creek country club.


Synovus Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Synovus Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
8,566,000
7,455,000
Per share
.26
.23
Shares outst
33,501,000
32,674,000
6mo net inc
16,915,000
14,857,000
Per share
.50
.45
Shares outst
33,501,000
32,743,000


Right-to-Die Ruling Curtails Individual Liberty;   A Christian Version
LEAD: To the Editor:


German Funds Frozen
LEAD: East Germany said today that it had frozen 56 new hard-currency bank accounts containing tens of millions of marks on suspicion that the sums were amassed through illegal speculation.
East Germany adopted the West German mark as its currency when the two Germanys merged their economies on July 1.
A Government spokesman, Matthias Gehler, said huge sums had been deposited in some special exchange accounts set up by citizens before the economic union, prompting investigations of 60,000 cases.


Planters Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Planters Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,981,000
2,848,000
Per share
.42
.41
Shares outst
7,031,312
7,025,696
6mo net inc
5,696,000
5,521,000
Per share
.81
.79
Shares outst
7,030,879
7,014,820


Great Bay Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Bay Bankshares
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
946,000
b1,329,000
Per share
-
.42
Yr net inc
470,000
4,500,000
Per share
.17
1.37
b-Net income


Write-Off On Bank Loans Due
LEAD: Federal banking regulators told the nation's largest banks yesterday that they must write off as a loss parts of their loans to Brazil and Argentina.


City National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* City National Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
13,771,000
16,124,000
Per share
.42
.51
Shares outst
32,727,836
31,372,640
6mo net inc
27,930,000
30,387,000
Per share
.86
.97
Shares outst
32,628,205
31,320,821


Harmonia Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harmonia Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,116,000
1,090,000
Per share
.23
-
6mo net inc
2,201,000
2,160,000
Per share
.46
-
The bank converted to stock ownership from mutual ownership in November 1989 and therefore per- share figures for the year-ago quarter and 6 months are not applicable.


Reader's Digest Fills Magazine Unit Post
LEAD: The Reader's Digest Association has named Ronald L. Cole, the publisher of the United States edition of Reader's Digest, as vice president of its magazine publishing group.
He will be replaced as publisher by John J. Donoghue, formerly the magazine's advertising sales director.


Homicides Up by 22%, Police Statistics Show
LEAD: The homicide rate in New York City rose 22.2 percent for the first three months of the year compared with the same period in 1989, the police said yesterday.


Fight to Preserve a Dylan Thomas View
LEAD: Each year more than 26,000 people visit a simple three-story boathouse perched on the rocky shore of the Taf Estuary in Laugharne, on the south coast of Wales, the last and most famous dwelling of Dylan Thomas.


Corrections
LEAD: The Advertising column on March 9, about advertising to minorities, omitted a name among founders of the Mingo Group agency.
In addition to Frank L. Mingo Jr. and Caroline R. Jones, they included Richard A. Guilmenot 3d.
Mr.
Guilmenot recently pointed out the error after a letter he wrote in March failed to arrive at The Times.


Lincoln Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Savings Bank
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
493,517
339,470
Per share
.55
.37
Shares outst
900,000
911,259
6mo net inc
925,774
703,788
Per share
1.03
.77
Shares outst
900,000
911,926


7 More in Cuba Seek Help at Czech Mission
LEAD: Seven more Cubans seeking to leave the country entered the Czechoslovak Embassy in Havana early today, bringing to 14 the number there, an embassy spokesman said.


George E. Wheeler, 75, Professor and Gymnast
LEAD: Dr.
George E. Wheeler, a professor of biology at Brooklyn College, died on Sunday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 75 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a cerebral hemorrhage, a stepdaughter, R. Khela Ransier, said.


Treasury's Rule Upsets Note Sale
LEAD: A ruling by the Treasury Department yesterday caught Wall Street by surprise and turned what had been expected to be a routine auction of $8 billion worth of new seven-year Treasury notes into a protest vote.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on July 4 about a National Transportation Safety Board report on the crash of a USAir jet at La Guardia Airport on Sept. 20 misstated the model of the plane.
It was a Boeing 737, not a 727.


Mets Recall Hundley
LEAD: With Mackey Sasser sidelined for another four to five games because of a sprained right ankle, the Mets announced yesterday they had recalled Todd Hundley from their Class AA farm club in Jackson, Miss., to share catching duties with Orlando Mercado for the five-game weekend series against the Reds in


Mercury Finance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mercury Finance Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,591,000
4,178,000
Per share
.32
.24
6mo net inc
10,820,000
7,965,000
Per share
.62
.46


On the Park, A Place Fit For Ben Hur
LEAD: FREDDIE LEIBA'S urge to surround himself with antiquities began in Trinidad when he was 10 years old.
He was sitting in a movie theater, engulfed in darkness.
On the screen was ''Samson and Delilah.''


California State Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California State Bank
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,053,000
916,000
Per share
.46
.52
Shares outst
2,259,167
1,723,308
6mo net inc
2,013,000
1,734,000
Per share
.89
.99
Shares outst
2,261,067
1,750,260


WHALES' HIND FEET SHOW UP IN FOSSILS
LEAD: Scientists have found the first direct fossil evidence that whales once had hind legs and feet and retained smaller but functional versions of them for more than 10 million years after they left the land for a life at sea.


Joseph E. Wisan; Professor, 89
LEAD: Dr.
Joseph E. Wisan, professor emeritus of history at City College, died on Monday at New York Infirmary-Beekman Downtown Hospital.
He was 89 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
He died of complications after stomach surgery, the university said.


Team Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Team Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
24,603,000
16,562,000
Net inc
1,619,000
864,000
Share earns
.34
.32
Shares outst
4,718,000
2,731,000
Yr rev
87,343,000
63,075,000
Net inc
4,707,000
b3,460,000
Share earns
1.33
1.27
Shares outst
3,546,000
2,732,000


Apple Technologists Forming New Venture
LEAD: Three well-known technologists from Apple Computer Inc., including perhaps its most distinguished programmer, Bill Atkinson, are forming a new company.


Outdoors;   Canoe-Hiking Tours In Adirondack Park
LEAD: One way to become acquainted with the stunning wilderness of New York State's Adirondack Park would be to join one of the canoe-hiking excursions offered by Adirondack Wilderness Tours.


U.S. Women's Open Title Elusive Even for Best
LEAD: The United States Women's Open, which begins today at the Atlanta Athletic Club, tends to separate the best from the rest to a greater degree than any other tournament in women's golf.


PRESIDENT DEFENDS HIS SON'S INTEGRITY IN SAVINGS INQUIRY
LEAD: President Bush today gave a ringing emotional defense of his son Neil, who has been accused of violating conflict of interest rules in a Denver savings and loan case, but he promised to stay out of the proceedings and ''let the system work.''


KLLM Transport reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* KLLM Transport (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
31,333,000
29,700,000
Net inc
1,102,000
816,000
Share earns
.43
.31
6mo rev
62,132,000
56,882,000
Net inc
1,487,000
1,064,000
Share earns
.58
.41
Shares outst
2,572,000
2,569,000


Robert Alan Roth; Lawyer, 40
LEAD: Robert Alan Roth, a New York lawyer, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 40 years old.


Talman Home Federal S&amp;L of Illinois reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Talman Home Federal S&amp;L of Illinois (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b4,082,000
6,510,000
Per share
.42
.67
6mo net inc
b8,595,000
12,561,000
Per share
.89
1.29
b-Included $2 million in income from an insurance recover relating to a fraud loss charged off in previous periods.


Town &amp; Country Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Town &amp; Country Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
99,822,150
105,074,773
Net inc
222,279
718,504
Share earns
.02
.06
Shares outst
11,880,262
11,829,744
Sales represent net sales.


Hartmarx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hartmarx Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
303,888,000
304,457,000
Net loss
b55,140,000
c3,135,000
Share earns
-
.16
6mo sales
646,071,000
631,836,000
Net loss
b52,775,000
c12,885,000
Share earns
-
.66
b-Included a $51 million after-tax restructuring charge for Specialty Stores and Country Miss.


King's Fight Comments Are Scrutinized at Trial
LEAD: Was Don King working behind the scenes to overturn the result of James (Buster) Douglas's 10th-round knockout of Mike Tyson?


U.S. Says Arrest Might Aid in Bomb Investigation
LEAD: Federal agents investigating a rash of bombings in the Southeast last December said today that they hoped the arrest on other charges of a man who was the focus of their investigation would eventually strengthen the bombing case.


No Steinbrenner Contact
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent received no response from George Steinbrenner today, the deadline Vincent had set for the Yankee owner to decide whether he wanted to add information before Vincent completes an investigation of his activities.


Israel Declines to Study Rabin Tie to Beatings
LEAD: Israel's Parliament decided today not to investigate charges that former Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin ordered soldiers to break the bones of Arab militants at the beginning of the Palestinian uprising.


Damson Energy reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Damson Energy (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
20,139,000
18,123,000
Net inc
1,423,000
390,000
Share earns
.02
-
The company said the share earnings for the latest quarter is for Class A; share earnings for Class B for the latest quarter is 4 cents a share and year-ago period is 1 cent a share.


Gorbachev Foe Fails to Win Key Post
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev survived a bold challenge today from his most prominent adversary within the Communist Party, Yegor K. Ligachev, an orthodox Marxist who failed in an attempt to take the powerful new post of deputy party leader.


Digital Sound reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Sound (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
5,540,000
6,507,000
Net loss
548,000
b791,000
Share earns
-
.05
Shares outst
19,702,000
15,686,000
6mo sales
14,794,000
10,551,000
Net inc
1,179,000
832,000
Share earns
.07
.05
Shares outst
17,702,000
15,755,000


Seventh-day Adventists Vote To Bar Ordination of Women
LEAD: The ruling body of the Seventh-day Adventist Church voted today to continue current practice and bar the ordination of women.


Chemical Bank Asian Operations
LEAD: The Chemical Banking Corporation said it planned to move all its Asian treasury operations outside Japan into Singapore and close its foreign exchange operations in Hong Kong.
Chemical will also close its branch office in Taipei, Taiwan.
Its Taiwan customer service operations will move to other units in Asia, Europe and North


Little Prince Productions Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Little Prince Productions Ltd.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,119
8,670
Net loss
34,913
172,263
Yr rev
21,731
22,793
Net loss
135,372
243,404


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This is not easy for me as a father.
It's easy for me as the President because the system is going to work and I will not intervene.''
- President Bush, discussing accusationsagainst his son.[A1:3.]


Review/Television;   The Boycotting of a Korean Grocery in Brooklyn
LEAD: The ''48 Hours'' correspondents on ''Simmer in the City,'' the report on the boycott of a Korean food store in Brooklyn at 8 tonight on CBS, cover many sides and angles of a dispute that has been at a stalemate for about six months.
They talk with the store's owner, with leaders of the boycott and with its supporters and opponents, with Mayor David N.


Lincoln Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,813,000
1,601,000
Per share
.40
.35
Shares outst
4,561,288
4,574,286
6mo net inc
3,432,000
3,006,000
Per share
.75
.67
Shares outst
4,961,288
4,509,000
The bank said earnings per share figures have been adjusted to reflect a 6-for-5 stock split paid on May 15, 1990 and a 20 percent stock dividend distributed on May 19, 1989.


Breakfast in New York
LEAD: Two years ago almost to the day, this man sat in a Soviet political camp, in punishment solitary, starving.
He would not eat the thin gruel or the gray lump of bread that was his breakfast ration.


Heritage Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Financial Services
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,865,000
1,784,000
Per share
.46
.44
6mo net inc
3,545,000
3,531,000
Per share
.88
.88
Share earnings are adjusted for a 5-for-4 stock split declared in June 1989.


Market Place;   Finding a Forum For Arbitration
LEAD: THE legal view of where investors' disputes with their brokers can be arbitrated is becoming increasingly muddled.
State and Federal courts disagree sharply; Federal regulators are undecided, and state lawmakers, sympathetic to the consumer, are adopting statutes that fly in the face of brokers' preference for industry-run arbitration panels.


Citing Study, Cuomo Urges a Drop in Milk Prices
LEAD: In a practice that state officials called unfair and unfortunate, New York retailers reduced the price of milk only slightly this spring after the farm price of milk plummeted from the record levels of last winter, according to a state report released today.


U.S. ADMITS PERIL OF 40'S EMISSIONS AT A-BOMB PLANT
LEAD: The Energy Department today acknowledged for the first time that the doses of radiation produced by an atomic weapons plant here in the 1940's and 1950's were high enough to cause illnesses, including cancer, in residents of the Pacific Northwest.


Barnett Banks reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barnett Banks (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
58,484,000
64,340,000
Per share
.93
1.02
Shares outst
62,899,649
63,041,599
6mo net inc
74,001,000
126,730,000
Per share
1.18
2.02
Shares outst
62,960,109
62,811,511


Corrections
LEAD: A article on Tuesday about labor negotiations at The Daily News referred incorrectly in some copies to a statute that empowers New York State to inquire into labor disputes.
It is 49 years old, not 39.


Books of The Times;   A Hard-Boiled Detective, and One Beyond That
LEAD:
Stardust
By Robert B. Parker
256 pages. G. P. Putnam's Sons. $18.95.
Blossom
By Andrew Vachss
255 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $17.95.


New Therapy Shown to Fight Bone Loss in Elderly
LEAD: The largest study ever conducted on osteoporosis has confirmed that a new treatment can strengthen elderly women's brittle bones and greatly reduce the risk of painful and deforming spinal fractures.


Architects Expand Use Of Glass Art
LEAD: PEOPLE who live in glass houses have begun to color the door, etch the windows and cloud the view.
The artists who create this haunting choreography - transforming the game of tag between sun and shadow into an architectural play of light - are glassmakers.
And the modernization of their medieval craft is invigorating both architecture and art.


Rear Adm. Paul Foley, Ex-Hofstra Official, 81
LEAD: Rear Adm.
Paul Foley Jr., former head of the Command and Staff Department of the Naval War College in Newport, R.I., and a retired Hofstra University official, died on Saturday at his home in Manhasset, N.Y.
He was 81 years old and died of pnuemonia and congestive heart failure, his wife, Cornelia, said.


Amid Discord, Talks on Boat People Are Put Off
LEAD: A 28-nation conference on Vietnamese boat people was postponed today when it became apparent that differences between the United States and Vietnam on one side and the Southeast Asian nations and Hong Kong on the other have not been bridged.


Trottier Disappointed
LEAD: A week after being released by the Islanders for whom he had played 15 seasons, Bryan Trottier yesterday issued a statement titled ''Trottier Bids Farewell to Islander Fans,'' in which he said he hoped to play a minimum of two more years in the National Hockey League.


Calendar of Events: Porcelain and Glass
LEAD:
Fine Service, Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6862.


A Texas Savings Indictment
LEAD: Edwin T. McBirney 3d, a flamboyant Texas financier, was indicted on 17 counts for actions at Sunbelt Savings Association.
Page D1.


William F. Peiffer, 61, Builder and Manager
LEAD: William F. Peiffer, a builder who helped coordinate the construction of the United States Embassy in Moscow, died on Tuesday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 61 years old and lived in Westfield, N.J.


Hayes-Dana Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hayes-Dana Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
136,335,000
141,794,000
Net inc
5,701,000
6,672,000
Share earns
.37
.41
6mo sales
255,355,000
284,209,000
Net inc
10,412,000
12,678,000
Share earns
.68
.78
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Thomas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thomas Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
116,404,000
112,536,000
Net inc
3,381,000
4,347,000
Share earns
.33
.43
Shares outst
10,249,478
10,165,848
6mo sales
236,496,000
199,986,000
Net inc
6,506,000
b9,665,000
Share earns
.64
.95
Shares outst
10,244,369
10,165,827


C.I.A. Tie Asserted in Indonesia Purge
LEAD: A dispute has developed over a report that 25 years ago, United States officials supplied up to 5,000 names of Indonesian Communists to the Indonesian Army, which was then engaged in a campaign to wipe out the Communist Party in that country.


Federal National Mortgage Assn reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal National Mortgage Assn (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
289,600,000
193,000,000
Share earns
1.10
.75
6mo net inc
566,200,000
358,200,000
Share earns
2.15
1.39
Share earnings are fully diluted.


Mitchell Draws Line in Budget Talks
LEAD: Hardening the battle lines with the White House over taxes, the Senate majority leader said today that he would not accept any budget agreement that lowered the tax rate on capital gains unless the deal also included a rise in the income tax rate paid by the wealthy.


Review/Jazz;   Freddy Cole's Light Touch
LEAD: Although the pianist and singer Nat (King) Cole died 25 years ago, his younger brother Freddy who is also a pianist and singer, has not yet managed to escape completely from his brother's shadow.


Keane Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keane Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
23,926,000
18,124,000
Net inc
1,363,000
883,000
Share earns
.29
.23
6mo rev
46,597,000
34,006,000
Net inc
2,488,000
1,710,000
Share earns
.56
.44
Shares outst
4,448,000
3,845,000


Excerpts From Economic Declaration by Chiefs of Seven Industrial Nations
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the Economic Declaration issued today by the leaders of the United States, Japan, West Germany, Britain, France, Italy and Canada at the conclusion of their summit meeting:


From Genius To Bass Boat In 3 Hours
LEAD: As a manager, Whitey Herzog seldom held team meetings.
If he thought a player needed inspiration, he preferred to talk to him individually.
But about three weeks ago, with the St.
Louis Cardinals plodding along in last place in the National League East, he addressed his team.
After his oration, he looked around the clubhouse.


Entree Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Entree Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
39,773,000
75,495,000
Net loss
12,000
10,612,000
Yr rev
179,066,000
396,060,000
Net loss
919,000
10,048,000


Tainted Drugs Once Felled Barry, Trial Is Told
LEAD: Two more close friends of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. testified today that he had frequently used illegal drugs, and one told of a frantic attempt to cover up that use several years ago when Mr.
Barry was hospitalized for what the witness described as the smoking of tainted cocaine.


T.W.A. to Join In Surcharge
LEAD: Trans World Airlines plans to follow the lead of American Airlines and impose ticket surcharges on its flights from five airports, a spokesman said yesterday.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
COMMITTEE ON THE INDIAN OCEAN - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Chemfix Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemfix Technologies Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
5,550,000
5,000,000
Net inc
392,423
152,312
Share earns
.05
.01
Shares outst
7,547,522
6,763,284
9mo rev
19,300,000
18,200,000
Net inc
1,250,000
49,258
Share earns
.17
.01
Shares outst
7,292,958
6,761,906


Deal Maker Indicted In Savings Fraud Case
LEAD: Edwin T. McBirney 3d, once a flamboyant young financier whose unfettered deal-making led to the creation and collapse of the Sunbelt Savings Association in the 1980's, was indicted today on 17 counts for his actions at Sunbelt involving a North Texas land development.


Bandag Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bandag Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
141,883,000
128,635,000
Net inc
18,748,000
18,378,000
Share earns
1.29
1.27
6mo sales
269,564,000
242,961,000
Net inc
34,436,000
33,894,000
Share earns
2.37
2.33


Rio Journal;   Bodyguards? Don't Leave Home Without Them
LEAD: The criminals' nicknames seem to be borrowed from the comics: Big Olive, Petunia, Butter George, Sweet Talker, Baby Skull, Little Rat and The Professor.


McCants Signs Big Pact
LEAD: Giving up his senior year of eligibility at the University of Alabama apparently has proved to be a profitable decision for Keith McCants.
The all-America linebacker, taken fourth in this spring's draft, has signed a five-year $7.4-million contract with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers that includes a $2.5 million cash signing bonus.


Canandaigua Wine Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canandaigua Wine Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
49,907,446
43,579,279
Net inc
1,278,607
602,370
Share earns
.30
.14
Shares outst
4,282,501
4,454,241
9mo sales
134,751,398
121,292,491
Net inc
3,322,315
1,745,154
Share earns
.78
.38
Shares outst
4,280,022
4,593,160


A. Schulman Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A. Schulman Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
181,634,000
162,778,000
Net inc
9,645,000
8,178,000
Share earns
.72
.61
Shares outst
13,406,616
13,395,671
9mo sales
506,003,000
483,479,000
Net inc
25,185,000
22,144,000
Share earns
1.88
1.65
Shares outst
13,402,952
13,394,368


Trump's High-Style French Tenant
LEAD: Encamped along the periphery of Galeries Lafayette's flagship department store here is a jumble of sidewalk sales booths manned by casually dressed employees of the store.
They sell everything from glass cleaners and portable steam irons to Hawaiian-print bathing suits and budget lingerie.


CBS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CBS Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
828,800,000
771,800,000
Net inc
138,000,000
118,800,000
Share earns
5.36
4.62
6mo sales
1,680,100,000
1,502,400,000
Net inc
223,300,000
b174,900,000
Share earns
8.67
6.80


Newhall Land and Farming Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newhall Land and Farming Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
43,999,000
31,114,000
Net inc
6,496,000
3,077,000
Per unit
.18
.08
Units outst
37,671,000
39,358,000
6mo rev
93,319,000
67,327,000
Net inc
19,601,000
11,489,000
Per unit
.52
.29
Units outst
37,945,000
39,540,000


Summit Promise - and Shame;   A Chance, at Least, for Fair Farm Policy
LEAD: The Houston summit meeting resolved no important dispute.
The leaders of the seven major industrialized nations did more agreeing to disagree than agreeing.
But to judge their annual economic conference a failure is hasty.
The leaders differed about how to aid the Soviet Union.
Dismayingly, they condoned help for China.


DeSoto Will Sell Off Most of Its Operations
LEAD: DeSoto Inc., which has been fending off a hostile takeover attempt since last year, announced today that it planned to sell most of the company's operations and distribute the proceeds to shareholders.


Review/Film;   Heading for Middle Age With Fear for Company
LEAD: Salad-bar tortellini has never looked as pathetic as it does in ''No Picnic,'' where the black-and-white photography gives it the color and texture of dingy gray sweat socks.
There are just a few close-ups of the dreary salad bar in Philip Hartman's 1986 film, which opens today at Anthology Film Archives after having made the rounds of several smaller film festivals.


Musicland Stores Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Musicland Stores Corp.
Qtr to June 25
1990
1989
Revenue
168,166,000
129,602,000
Net loss
1,785,000
2,362,000
6mo rev
318,088,000
257,104,000
Net loss
3,794,000
4,388,000


Hoboken Warns Of Tax Increase After Plan Dies
LEAD: A vote on Tuesday in which residents rejected a $30 million plan to redevelop Hoboken's waterfront is expected to result in tax increases and layoffs, officials said yesterday.


Sunair Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunair Electronics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,157,828
913,562
Net inc
37,278
30,479
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
3,930,727
3,930,727
9mo rev
3,162,769
3,267,536
Net inc
258,135
286,205
Share earns
.07
.07
Shares outst
3,930,727
3,930,727


Review/Music;   Mostly Mozart Opens, With Humor
LEAD: Mozart worship is, on the whole, a healthy thing.
It testifies to the possibility that vestiges of good sense may still be found in modern society.
Still, it does no harm occasionally to face the truth: even he sometimes had to produce music when the fires of inspiration flickered low.
One such work, ''Der Schauspieldirektor,'' a jocular singspiel known in English as ''The Impresario,'' served on Tuesday evening as the centerpiece of the opening concert of this summer's Mostly Mozart Festival.


Sonoco Products Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sonoco Products Co. (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
420,725,000
415,437,000
Net inc
27,554,000
28,555,000
Share earns
.63
.65
Shares outst
43,743,635
43,898,735
6mo sales
824,251,000
848,571,000
Net inc
52,366,000
53,128,000
Share earns
1.20
1.21
Shares outst
43,743,635
43,898,735


Chronicle
LEAD: In Rome, MADONNA's ''Blond Ambition'' concert drew a less-than-sellout crowd last night after weeks of protests against her by Roman Catholic organizations.
She canceled a second performance because of low ticket sales and a general strike threatened by labor unions.


Grieving for 2 Children Killed by Car
LEAD: What Vincent Greco remembered most yesterday was how careful the 5-year-old was.


Officer Dies as Mohawks and Quebec Police Clash
LEAD: About 200 armed Mohawk Indians fought off a police assault today in a dispute over plans to expand a private golf course surrounded by tribal land.
One officer was killed.


The Personal Means a Lot These Days
LEAD: Beyond the debates on Bavarian cowherds and Japanese rice farmers, beyond the conventions on global forests and jousts on the Uruguay Round, a more subtle, personal roundelay was taking place this week.


Perrier Regains Ground in Sales
LEAD: Source Perrier S.A. said sales of its bottled water in the United States recovered in May to two-thirds of their levels a year earlier, compared with near zero after a benzene contamination led to a worldwide recall. ''We honestly didn't think we'd reach this benchmark until months from now,'' said Kim Jeffery, senior vice president of sales and marketing for Perrier's United


Safeway Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Safeway Inc.
Qtr to June 16
1990
1989
Sales
3,435,100,000
3,271,400,000
Net inc
23,600,000
7,700,000
Share earns
.25
.10
Shares outst
94,100,000
79,700,000
6mo sales
6,771,100,000
6,498,000,000
Net inc
38,600,000
16,400,000
Share earns
.42
.22
Shares outst
91,300,000
79,700,000


Personal Health
LEAD: If you are one of the 50 million adult Americans who still smoke cigarettes, now is the best time to quit.
The incentives to end your affair with nicotine have never been greater.


Teledyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teledyne Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
882,100,000
907,700,000
Net inc
26,600,000
c46,800,000
Share earns
.48
.85
Shares outst
55,412,845
55,412,845
6mo sales
1,719,000,000
1,772,000,000
Net inc
b84,900,000
c117,300,000
Share earns
1.53
2.11
Shares outst
55,412,845
55,595,835


Motorola Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Motorola Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,715,000,000
2,385,000,000
Net inc
161,000,000
154,000,000
Share earns
1.22
1.18
Shares outst
131,200,000
129,800,000
6mo sales
5,248,000,000
4,560,000,000
Net inc
288,000,000
277,000,000
Share earns
2.20
2.13
Shares outst
130,900,000
129,800,000


Walker Has Surgery
LEAD: Kenny Walker of the Knicks yesterday underwent arthroscopic surgery at Lenox Hill Hospital to remove loose cartilage from his right knee.
Dr.
Norman Scott, the Knicks' team physician, performed the procedure, which was a precautionary measure after the forward felt discomfort last season and missed 14 games.


Needham Promotions
LEAD: DDB Needham promoted 10 employees to senior vice presidencies: Lauren Berger, Peter Gardiner, Judith Goldstein, Bob Huff, Alan Krinsky, Paul Manganiello, Carmine Marino, Joan Niborg, Steven Werby and David Wismer.
The agency also named Gary Leeds treasurer.


First Midwest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Midwest Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,503,000
b7,883,000
Per share
.47
.67
6mo net inc
10,337,000
c12,568,000
Per share
.88
1.07
b-Included a gain of $2,733,000 from the sale of a bank.,


Gorbachev Fends Off Hard-Line Challenge
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev survived a bold challenge by his most prominent adversary within the Soviet Communist Party, Yegor K. Ligachev, an orthodox Marxist who failed in an attempt to take the powerful new post of deputy party leader.


Violence to Women, Not Rape Victim's Name, Is the Real Issue
LEAD: To the Editor:


Plastibec LTEE reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plastibec LTEE
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
38,900,000
41,900,000
Net loss
b265,442
c410,517
Share earns
-
.04
b-Included an extraordinary loss of $159,074.
c-Net income
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Dow Up 41.83 in Heavy Program Trading
LEAD: Stocks advanced sharply yesterday in heavy trading, with oil, high-technology and drug stocks leading the way.


Hovnanian Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hovnanian Enterprises Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
50,287,000
71,091,000
Net inc
635,000
3,241,000
Share earns
.03
.16


Imperial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,329,000
6,104,000
Per share
.59
.57
Shares outst
10,681,293
10,630,069
6mo net inc
12,336,000
11,189,000
Per share
1.15
1.06
Shares outst
10,703,019
10,586,289


No Headline
LEAD: Perhaps the worst part about the Yankees' long, dry summer is this: there are still 82 games to go.


Suntrust Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suntrust Banks Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b88,500,000
85,900,000
Per share
.69
.66
6mo net inc
176,400,000
c169,900,000
Per share
1.38
1.31
Shares outst
127,400,000
128,900,000
b-Included gain of about $19 million from two purchase accounting adjustments on earlier acquisitions.


Summit Promise - and Shame;   But a Torpedo for Principled China Policy
LEAD: The Houston summiteers had a chance to use their economic power to shape reform in the Soviet Union and China.
They missed it.
Regrettably, they failed to unite on how to help the Soviet Union.
Shamefully, they winked at Japan's torpedoing of economic sanctions against China that were just beginning to yield results.


Canterbury Educational ServFices Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canterbury Educational ServFices Inc.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,005,013
3,329,407
Net inc
26,192
145,951
Share earns
.01
.03
Shares outst
4,624,700
4,679,897
6mo rev
4,435,208
3,994,181
Net inc
108,847
b545,132
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
4,624,700
4,672,814


President Talks About a Family Matter
LEAD: Near the end of a news conference yesterday after the economic summit meeting in Houston, President Bush was asked if he agreed with a suggestion by his son Neil that savings and loan regulators are conducting something of a vendetta against him largely because his name is Bush:


Andres Wines Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Andres Wines Ltd.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
7,254,522
8,584,906
Net inc
232,007
206,199
Share earns
.05
.04
Yr sales
53,310,822
56,042,263
Net inc
4,556,705
4,021,186
Share earns
1.02
.90
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Farm Credit Banks' Bonds Are Priced
LEAD: The FFCB Funding Corporation priced $350 million in consolidated systemwide bonds for the Farm Credit System banks for sale yesterday through various securities dealers and dealer banks.


Characters Are Freed By Author, Freeing Him
LEAD: Dennis McFarland says he is happy someone else will write the film treatment of his first novel, ''The Music Room.'' And he says he has no apprehension about what Hollywood might do with his story, which has received critical acclaim across the nation, especially for its lyrical prose.


Educational Development reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Educational Development
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,161,100
876,200
Net inc
32,600
77,000
Share earns
.01
.04


Rev. Edward Jurji, 83, Of Princeton Seminary
LEAD: The Rev.
Edward J. Jurji, a Presbyterian minister, retired educator and an author, died on Monday at his home in Monroe Village, a retirement community in Jamesburg, N.J.
He was 83 years old and died of pneumonia, a funeral home representative said.


New York City Is Urged to Buy Big Trump Site
LEAD: A group of Manhattan elected officials urged the city yesterday to buy the 76-acre Penn Yards site owned by Donald J. Trump on the Upper West Side and oversee its development by private interests for the greatest public benefit.


Two Worlds of Washington: Turmoil and Growth
LEAD: Every day, Ruth Ernst goes downtown from her northwest Washington neighborhood, from a subway stop that did not exist six years ago, to a law firm that had not been formed seven years ago, in a booming commercial center where four years ago metal grates covered decrepit storefronts and fear emptied the streets at dusk.


River Forest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* River Forest Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,556,000
4,072,000
Per share
.60
.54
6mo net inc
9,071,000
7,979,000
Per share
1.20
1.05


Men of Comiskey Fall in 13th Stanza
LEAD: On a cool, foggy afternoon in Comiskey Park's final season, what looked to be the ghosts of championships past took the field today.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-15
Coal miners held a protest strike in the Soviet Union to demand the resignation of the Soviet Government and greater local powers for industry and labor.
Page A1


Washington Federal S&amp;L (Seattle) Assoc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Federal S&amp;L (Seattle) Assoc.(O)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
16,122,000
13,505,000
Per share
.73
.62
Shares outst
21,941,436
21,828,414
9mo net inc
46,722,000
40,896,000
Per share
2.13
1.88
Shares outst
21,924,392
21,780,501


Jogger Hard to Identify in Hospital, Friend Testifies
LEAD: A colleague and former roommate of the Central Park jogger testified yesterday that his friend's face was so disfigured after she was beaten that it took him nearly 15 minutes to identify her at the hospital.


Richard B. Bernstein, 66, Is Dead; A Pioneer in Modern Chemistry
LEAD: Richard B. Bernstein, who pioneered a branch of science that studies details of the ultrafast processes that occur in chemical reactions, died in Helsinki, Finland, on Sunday.
He was 66 years old.


Summer, Children And 'War of the Exes'
LEAD: FOR legions of divorced fathers, a ritual is under way.
A time of love and reunion, it can also be an agony of dashed hopes and recrimination.
It is the extended summer visit with the children, an arrangement included in most divorce settlements, which in 9 of 10 cases give custody to the mother.


Affiliated Banc Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Banc Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
3,450,000
875,000
Shares outst
3,698,850
3,707,350
6mo net loss
2,932,000
b279,000
Per share
-
.07
b-Net income


Jamaica Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jamaica Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Net inc
2,141,000
2,195,000
The bank said it converted to stock form from mutual form on June 21 so there were no shares outstanding or per-share results prior to that time.


Lomas Set to Sell 3 Insurance Units
LEAD: The Lomas Financial Corporation said it would sell its three life insurance companies to an Indiana insurance company for $140 million in cash and $25 million in securities.
The deal must be approved by the United States Bankruptcy Court, which is overseeing Lomas while it is protected under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy


First Regional Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Regional Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
232,000
200,000
Per share
.11
.09
6mo net inc
343,000
480,000
Per share
.16
.22


Soviet Miners Strike for the Day, In Hope of Power and Better Life
LEAD: The nation's coal miners held a daylong protest strike today to demand the resignation of the Soviet Government and greater local powers for industry and labor.


19 Years Later, Father Asks New Inquiry on Police Killing
LEAD: Even after 19 years, Thomas Emma keeps his pain packed in a box, dragging it out for anyone who asks.
Marked ''Court Records,'' the box contains the facts and files that bring to life, time after time, the night in 1971 when Mr.
Emma's 17-year-old son, Anthony, was shot and killed by a Paramus police officer.


Results Plus
LEAD:
TENNIS
Edberg Struggles
Three days after winning the Wimbledon championship, Stefan Edberg had to struggle yesterday to beat Tommy Ho of the United States, 2-6, 7-6, 6-4, in the first round of the Gunze World tournament in Osaka, Japan.
Jaime Yzaga of Peru beat Jason Stoltenberg of Australia, 6-1, 6-3.


Chronicle
LEAD: PEARL BAILEY's left knee was replaced yesterday in a 55-minute operation at Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia. ''Everthing went according to plan,'' said the chief surgeon, Dr.
RICHARD H. ROTHMAN. ''There were no surprises.'' The 72-year-old singer received a new knee joint of plastic and metal.


Bickerstaff Resigns
LEAD: Bernie Bickerstaff resigned on Tuesday night as vice president of basketball operations for the Seattle SuperSonics.
Yesterday, he was hired as general manager of the Denver Nuggets.(AP)


Don Bessent; Pitcher, 59
LEAD: Don Bessent, a pitcher who was one of the Boys of Summer of the Brooklyn Dodgers, died of alcohol poisoning on Saturday.
He was 59 years old.


Russell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Russell Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
166,570,000
149,474,000
Net inc
12,857,000
9,994,000
Share earns
.31
.24
Shares outst
40,968,764
40,834,969
6mo sales
325,632,000
296,358,000
Net inc
27,215,000
22,986,000
Share earns
.66
.56
Shares outst
40,963,354
40,795,986


Silicon Valley Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silicon Valley Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,475,000
1,650,000
Per share
.43
.30
6mo net inc
4,773,000
3,155,000
Per share
.82
.57
The company said that total assets increased to $573 million at June 30, compared with $322 million at June 30, 1989, a 78-percent increase.


Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline PartFners L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline PartFners L.P. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
49,800,000
48,300,000
Net inc
18,000,000
17,600,000
Unit earns
.93
.91
6mo rev
96,500,000
91,300,000
Net inc
30,700,000
28,500,000
Unit earns
1.59
1.47


Hollywood Looks Beyond Mayhem For a Blockbuster
LEAD: Midway through the 1990 summer movie season, Hollywood is awash in expensive action-adventure films and still looking for the one box office blockbuster that could dominate the market as ''Batman'' did last year.


Federal Express Official Heads Smaller Concern
LEAD: Judith A. Rogala, a senior vice president at the Federal Express Corporation, has left the overnight delivery company for an entrepreneurial career as the president and chief executive of Flagship Express Inc., a small, new aviation services concern.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Action Industries, Cheswick, Pa., a marketer of housewares and giftware promotional programs, named as its chairman Sholom D. Comay, who will replace Ernest S. Berez, who is retiring.


Provena Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provena Foods Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
10,493,461
8,068,193
Net inc
196,223
b68,439
Share earns
.07
-
Shares outst
2,584,755
2,577,701
6mo sales
19,873,870
15,795,696
Net inc
395,028
111,564
Share earns
.15
.04
Shares outst
2,587,858
2,587,252


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.75
8.31
9.54
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.79
7.80
7.75
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.73
7.74
7.46
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.57
8.59
7.92
30-YR.


First Commercial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commercial Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,612,144
1,187,931
Per share
.33
.25
Shares outst
4,908,411
4,746,588
6mo net inc
3,157,000
2,302,000
Per share
.64
.50
Shares outst
4,909,000
4,064,000


LeMond Shows Form Of Old
LEAD: Ronan Pensec proved today that he is the man to beat in the Tour de France and Greg LeMond showed that he is in condition to try to do just that.


Joseph Sloan; Food Executive, 81
LEAD: Joseph Sloan, the owner of a supermarket chain in the Bronx, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old and died of cancer, his daughter-in-law, Judith Sloan, said.


N.B.A.'s Games Contribute To 16% Profit Gain at CBS
LEAD: CBS Inc. reported yesterday that its net income had risen 16 percent in the second quarter, in part because of one-time gains from the National Basketball Association's games and lower programming costs.


Senate Votes Sweeping Crime Bill, Banning Some Assault Weapons
LEAD: The Senate today overwhemingly approved a crime bill that includes a temporary ban on the sale and manufacture of certain semiautomatic assault weapons, greater Federal assistance to law-enforcement agencies and an expansion of the number of Federal crimes for which the death penalty can be imposed.


Democratic Chief Considers Cutting Convention for TV
LEAD: Ronald H. Brown, the Democratic national chairman, said today that he was thinking of shortening the party's 1992 Presidential convention to help make it more interesting to television viewers and thus television broadcasters, both of whom have been tuning out.


Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,131,572
907,669
Net inc
114,415
138,728
Share earns
.06
.13


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, an article in Business Day yesterday about an Arizona executive whose acquisition of 15 failed savings and loan associations is under Congressional scrutiny appeared in some editions under a misplaced headline from a different article.
The headline should have read: ''Acquirer of Savings Units Misled Regulators in 1979.


Bank of Granite reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of Granite
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,580,722
1,435,186
Per share
.42
.38
6mo net inc
3,108,444
2,823,363
Per share
.83
.75


Congress Unit Assails U.S. Information Policy
LEAD: The Federal Government is ignoring scientific and technical information that could potentially be one of its most valuable weapons in the battle for high-technology international competitiveness, the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment reports.


Talking Deals;   Bid for Kay Stirs Bondholders' Ire
LEAD: GIVEN the turmoil in the ''junk bond'' market over the last 12 months, holders of the highly leveraged securities should be accustomed to bad news.
But the recent offer by Ratners Group P.L.C., the world's largest jewelry retailer, to acquire Kay Jewelers Inc. for about $410 million in a stock swap has left many of bondholders upset by what they regard as the sheer brazenness of the proposed transaction.


CHAMORRO MOVES TO PLACATE UNIONS
LEAD: Seeking an urgent solution to violent political clashes that have shaken her Government, President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro said today that she would reopen negotiations with Sandinista unions and political leaders if they acted to end recent protests and restore public order.


Report Cites Concern Over Chip Industry
LEAD: The National Advisory Committee on Semiconductors is expected to issue a report on Thursday stating that the American electronics industry is endangered by a decline in strength of the American companies that produce sophisticated equipment and materials for making computer chips.


Checkpoint Systems reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Checkpoint Systems (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
14,025,000
12,674,000
Net inc
1,433,000
1,207,000
Share earns
.15
.13
Shares outst
9,673,000
9,198,000
6mo rev
25,580,000
20,912,000
Net inc
1,876,000
540,000
Share earns
.20
.06
Shares outst
9,615,000
9,191,000


Joe Appiah Is Dead; Ghanaian Politician And Ex-Envoy, 71
LEAD: Joe Appiah, a Ghanaian political figure and former diplomat whose marriage to a white British woman attracted wide publicity in 1953, died on Sunday in an Accra hospital, a family friend, Henry Louis Gates Jr., said.
Mr.
Appiah was 71 years old and lived in Kumasi, Ghana.


Labor Dept. Asks Rule Requiring Working Drivers to Use Seat Belt
LEAD: The Government intends to adopt a rule requiring that the 35 million American workers who drive on the job wear seat belts, Labor Secretary Elizabeth Dole announced today.


Kayak Racer Finds Reason to Smile
LEAD: Until about 11 o'clock this morning, the turn of events in Maylon Hanold's life had just about drained her faith in the adage that everything works out for best.


First Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
515,000
b346,000
Per share
.44
.28
Shares outst
1,171,758
1,223,338
9mo net inc
1,250,000
b1,226,000
Per share
1.04
1.00
Shares outst
1,198,569
1,220,019


Star Banc Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Star Banc Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
16,726,000
14,051,000
Per share
.57
.48
6mo net inc
33,827,000
29,528,000
Per share
1.16
1.02


Cherry Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cherry Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
63,759,000
49,420,000
Net inc
1,428,000
b993,000
Share earns
.31
-
b-Net loss


Everest &amp; Jennings InternaFtional reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Everest &amp; Jennings InternaFtional (AMEX)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
50,017,000
43,290,000
Net loss
b4,111,000
1,069,000
Shares outst
9,146,000
8,143,000
b-Included net interest expense of $2.17 million.
Year-ago loss from continuning operations of $973,000 included net interest expense of $990,000.


Hilton Hotels reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hilton Hotels (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
273,800,000
265,000,000
Net inc
38,200,000
42,000,000
Share earns
.79
.87
6mo rev
539,100,000
490,100,000
Net inc
63,300,000
55,100,000
Share earns
1.31
1.14


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: REPLACING a broken window is not too difficult.
But knowing how to proceed and working in a safe, orderly fashion assure the best results.


Rapes of 3 Elderly Harlem Women Linked
LEAD: The rapes of three elderly women in Harlem have been linked to the same attacker, the police said yesterday.


Treasure-Hunting at Fabric Store Outlets
LEAD: ON a recent Saturday, Debra Boast pounced on floral chintz fabric for her kitchen curtains.
Who cares if the polish is not as shiny as normal?


Arts Figures Denounce Endowment On Grants
LEAD: Artists, public officials and representatives of many local and national arts groups spoke out forcefully yesterday against the National Endowment for the Arts for its recent rejection of four grants that had been recommended to it.


Kennedy Gave Church No Role in Politics
LEAD: To the Editor:


2 Sons of Super Bowl Installed As Favorites for Yonkers Trot
LEAD: Two sons of Super Bowl, who in 1972 became the last winner of trotting's triple crown, were installed as the favorites in the two heats for Saturday's Yonkers Trot, the first leg of the triple crown.


Moves at Bozell
LEAD: Bozell has appointed Kim Gaynor general manager of Bozell Detroit.
He will replace George Beech, who will remain a consultant to the Detroit office during the transition.
Dennis F. Visich, the chief operating officer of Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore, will replace Mr.
Gaynor as executive vice president and director of client services at Bozell Dallas.


Canseco Is Force for A's
LEAD: Jose Canseco collected three hits, three runs batted in and his 23d home run as the Oakland A's outlasted the Minnesota Twins, 11-7, tonight.


O'Toole's Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* O'Toole's Group Inc.
Qtr to June 3
1990
1989
Net inc
468,156
333,886
Share earns
.06
.04
9mo rev
28,540,000
20,100,000
Net inc
1,459,731
1,377,620
Share earns
.19
.18
Figures are in Canadian funds.
Revenue figures for latest and year- ago quarters are not available.


Oshkosh Truck Awarded Contract
LEAD: The Defense Department said that the Army had picked the Oshkosh Truck Corporation as the winner of a competition worth more than $1 billion to build 2,707 specialized Army tractor-trailer trucks.


Company Plans Medical-Waste Plant in Brooklyn
LEAD: A leading waste-disposal company is negotiating to build a plant at the old Brooklyn Navy Yard to handle up to 240 tons a day of medical waste.


Books of The Times;   Impoverished Woman Claws Her Way Back Up
LEAD:
The Lady of Situations
By Louis Auchincloss
274 pages. Houghton Mifflin Company. $20.95.


Ethiopia Said to Cut Off Flight of Jews in Effort to Gain Israeli Arms
LEAD: Ethiopia has interrupted the emigration of Ethiopian Jews, apparently in an attempt to compel Israel to send it more weapons, according to the chairman of a Congressional panel on Africa.


2 New York Officials Attack Phone Request
LEAD: Two senior state officials yesterday strongly criticized a $1.4 billion rate increase sought by the New York Telephone Company, and said that the New York Public Service Commission should reverse its decision to allow the company to choose what information in the rate increase request is labeled a trade secret and sealed.


Economic Scene;   Deep Divisions At Summit Talks
LEAD: The Houston summit conference was a successful holding operation.
In the face of conflicts over aid to the Soviet Union, the elimination of agricultural subsidies and actions to deal with environmental pollution and global warming, the leaders of the seven major industrial countries preserved their civility and produced a set of compromises that will enable them to go on working together a while longer.


Liberian Army's 'Reign of Terror' Protested by U.S. and Other Embassies
LEAD: What many residents of this city call a ''reign of terror'' by Government troops against unarmed civilians thought to sympathize with rebels in this country's six-month-old civil war has worsened in recent weeks, diplomats and Liberian and foreign journalists say, prompting several embassies to file official protests.


Greenspan Talk Spurs Bond Rally
LEAD: Treasury bond prices rose and short-term interest rates fell sharply yesterday after Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, strongly suggested to Congress that the central bank was on the verge of easing monetary policy.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
FRIDAY
BROOKLYN BRIDGE ART


Arlington Race May Have Only 6
LEAD: The showdown at Arlington Park on Aug. 4 among Criminal Type, Easy Goer and Sunday Silence might just as well be a three-horse race.
Only three others are likely to run and they seem to be gunning for no more than fourth place.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Wilander Beaten in Second Round
Mats Wilander's comeback suffered a setback yesterday when the Swede was beaten by Marcelo Filippini of Uruguay, 6-2, 3-6, 7-6, in the second round of the Swedish Open in Bastad.
Wilander, ranked No. 1 in the world before slipping and then taking a five-month break, made several unforced errors in losing the third-set tie breaker.


A Messenger Is Arrested In Dart Case
LEAD: A 33-year-old messenger in the Time-Life Building was arrested yesterday and charged as the mysterious attacker who blew darts at well-dressed women in midtown Manhattan.


CPC International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CPC International (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,451,168,000
1,255,447,000
Net inc
94,981,000
83,129,000
Share earns
1.23
1.06
Shares outst
75,398,000
78,223,000
6mo sales
2,806,004,000
2,518,613,000
Net inc
173,854,000
150,780,000
Share earns
2.24
1.92
Shares outst
75,398,000
78,284,000


Computer Sciences Ends Buying Talks
LEAD: The Computer Sciences Corporation said it had ended talks over the possible acquisition of two subsidiaries of the Black &amp; Decker Corporation.
Computer Sciences said it had ended discussions with the Planning Research Corporation and Applied Technology Inc., which constitute the information electronics systems sector of Black &amp;


Farm House Foods reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Farm House Foods
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
109,205,000
110,985,000
Net loss
b19,179,000
b26,631,000
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $10,006,000 for the latest year and $9,696,000 for the year- earlier period.


Merger in France
LEAD: In one of the biggest mergers in French corporate history, the water utility Lyonnaise des Eaux will join with the construction company Dumez, creating a company with 100,000 employees and annual revenue of about $14.9 billion.
The merger will be through an exchange of four Lyonnaise shares for three Dumez shares.


Marvin S. Pittler, Executive, 61
LEAD: Marvin S. Pittler, vice president of manufacturing research for I.B.M.
Research, died on Wednesday at his office in Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
He was 61 years old and lived in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
The cause of death apparently was a heart attack, a spokesman for the company said.


Farm Trade Discussed
LEAD: Negotiators began discussing a compromise plan today to cut subsidies in world farm trade, a proposal that leaders of the world's richest industrial democracies backed at their economic summit meeting in Houston this week.


Impasse Ends on U.S. Bill to Aid Europe
LEAD: The Bush Administration and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee have reached agreement on the structure of an economic aid package for Eastern Europe that would allow the President to provide technical help to Moscow for the first time, Administration and Congressional officials said today.


Albany: More Errors Than Hits
LEAD: Sadly, it's easier this year to list Albany's sins of omission than its achievements.
The Legislature approved the state budget seven weeks late, at great cost to the taxpayer.
It failed to revise the inequitable school aid formula to direct more money to New York City and other needy districts.
It failed to impose new penalties for bias-related violence.


Pacific Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Bank
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,038,000
1,895,000
Per share
.78
.56
Shares outst
3,894,000
2,979,000
6mo net inc
5,044,000
3,433,000
Per share
1.30
1.15
Shares outst
3,894,000
2,983,000


Ms. Hanson Wed To David Murray
LEAD: Leda Feldman Hanson and David Murray, the deputy director of communications for the State Transportation Department in Albany, were married yesterday.
Justice E. Leo Milonas performed the ceremony in the courtroom of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


Teledyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teledyne Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
882,100,000
907,700,000
Net inc
26,600,000
c46,800,000
Share earns
.48
.85
Shares outst
55,412,845
55,412,845
6mo sales
1,719,000,000
1,772,000,000
Net inc
b84,900,000
c117,300,000
Share earns
1.53
2.11
Shares outst
55,412,845
55,595,835


Evelyn Klein Spitalny, Violinist, Is Dead at 79
LEAD: Evelyn Klein Spitalny, a violinist who was the concertmaster in Phil Spitalny's All-Girl Orchestra, died on Sunday at a hospital in Miami Beach.
She was 79 years old and died of heart failure, said the executor of her estate, Barton S. Goldberg.





Havana Firm as 15th Cuban Seeks Refuge in an Embassy
LEAD: The Cuban Government stood firm today in its refusal to negotiate the departure of Cubans seeking refuge in foreign embassies in Havana after the number of refugees rose to 15.


Tolland Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tolland Bank (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
149,000
292,000
Per share
.13
.29
6mo net inc
333,000
554,000
Per share
.25
.48


People
LEAD: *
Larry Weisberg has been appointed senior vice president for account services at Waring &amp; LaRosa.


Unitrin Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unitrin Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
303,800,000
272,200,000
Net inc
20,500,000
13,400,000
Share earns
.37
.24
6mo rev
602,400,000
544,300,000
Net inc
46,100,000
48,100,000
Share earns
.83
.87


Silverado Asset Sale Is Challenged
LEAD: Two board members of a Manhattan building have sued the Government to prevent it from selling 141 apartments seized at the building, One Harkness Place, as part of the savings and loan bailout.


United New Mexico Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United New Mexico Financial (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,430,000
1,317,000
Per share
.33
.31
6mo net inc
2,823,000
2,577,000
Per share
.66
.61


Scents and Sport
LEAD: Walk along a weedy roadside or an unmowed field, especially toward the end of a heavy summer day, and suddenly you are surrounded by surprising flowery smells from a couple of commonplace plants.
The bright, heady scent is from honeysuckle, an aggressive and unwelcome vine that climbs everywhere.
The musky scent comes from the gawky milkweed, whose clustered flowers summon up the poet's perfumes of Araby.


Vacation Spa Resorts reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vacation Spa Resorts
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,473,000
2,969,000
Net inc
995,000
88,000
Share earns
.05
-
9mo rev
11,343,000
7,457,000
Net inc
1,373,000
b1,224,000
Share earns
.05
.04
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $666,000, or 4 cents a share.


On Stage
LEAD:
Holmes's 'Swing'


Who's Performing When
LEAD: Serious Fun, an eclectic performance series, runs through Aug. 2 at Alice Tully Hall.
Tickets to each performance are $20 or $25; there is also an $80 coupon book for any five shows.
Information: 362-1911.
Here is a schedule:
Today
ANN MAGNUSON: ''You Could Be Home Now,'' 7:30 P.M. Also tomorrow, 7:30.


Rafa Journal;   No Troops (and No Stone-Throwing)
LEAD: The children of this teeming, squalid Palestinian refugee district are out this afternoon, laughing among themselves, kicking up swirls of dust as they knock soccer balls around in the street.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:
Harlin the Active


Pathe Suit Names Time Warner
LEAD: The Pathe Communications Corporaion filed a countersuit today in its attempt to negotiate a loan from Time Warner Inc. to help with the acquisition of the MGM-UA Communications Company.


Wacoal Corp.  reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wacoal Corp.
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
848,019,000
948,629,000
Net inc
45,873,000
45,356,000
Share earns
1.42
1.48
Shares outst
30,763,000
30,729,000
Share earnings represent earning per American Depositary Share, 5 shares of common stock.


Public Needs to Know About Unsafe Products
LEAD: To the Editor:


Channel Home Centers Names Chief Executive
LEAD: Channel Home Centers Inc., which runs 89 stores in Northeast and Middle Atlantic states, said yesterday that it had named Joseph Nusim, who has been operating a chain of warehouse clubs, to be its new president and chief executive, Mr.
Nusim, 54, succeeds Leon Berger, 67, who is retiring after 18 years with


Our Towns;   Future Scientist Asks, What Good Is the Moon?
LEAD: In the basement of an old college lab with no air conditioning, a small group of bright junior-high students, mostly black and Hispanic, spend their summer days studying math, physics, chemistry.
A University of Bridgeport professor, Richard Guerra, is trying to influence them to become engineers.


Jacob J. Alpern, 86, Steel Company Chief
LEAD: Jacob J. Alpern, an owner of the Grand Iron Works, once the largest fabricator and erector of structural steel in New York State, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old.
His family said he died of lung cancer.


Review/Film;   The Wrong Woman To Wrong
LEAD: The life of ease to be found within the Le Quesnoy household involves polished silver, handsome children in private-school uniforms, a stern father with an important job and a pert mother who feels guilty over not having made enough place mats for the church fair. ''Life Is a Long Quiet River,'' with a title that refers to this family's sunny complacency, is a sly French comedy about the circumstances that reduce the Le


Citizens Bancorp (Md.) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Bancorp (Md.)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
7,800,000
8,700,000
Per share
.54
.60
6mo net inc
15,320,000
16,990,000
Per share
1.06
1.17


Patriots Reject Collins
LEAD: The New England Patriots have told Tony Collins he doesn't fit into their future.


SPI Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SPI Pharmaceuticals (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
31,961,000
30,339,000
Net inc
b3,986,000
3,807,000
Share earns
.32
.31
Shares outst
12,365,000
12,378,000
6mo sales
65,671,000
59,899,000
Net inc
b6,796,000
6,412,000
Share earns
.55
.52
Shares outst
12,360,000
12,331,000


Carom Capital Corp.  reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carom Capital Corp.
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
998,173
436,444
Net loss
477,895
b82,652
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income
The company said fiscal 1990 results included a $150,000 loss from discontinued operations and a $325,000 writeoff of its investment in financial institutions, and those of the prior year include income from discontinued operations of $133,000 and a gain of $232,000 on the sale of the company's precious metals business.


U.S. Details Its Mandatory Food Labeling Plans
LEAD: The Bush Administration today offered new rules for mandatory nutritional labeling on virtually all packaged foods, including tighter restrictions on claims that a product has low or reduced cholesterol.


Weekend Subway Disruptions
LEAD:
Beginning tomorrow, service on the N and R line will be disrupted for reparis for seven consecutive weekends.
From 12:01 A.M.
Saturday until 5 A.M.
Monday, there will be no N or R service between 42d Street-Times Square and Queens Plaza and Queensboro Plaza.
Work will continue through Aug. 27.


SI Handling Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SI Handling Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 27
1990
1989
Sales
6,514,000
4,054,000
Net inc
10,000
51,000
Share earns
.01
.03


Burlington Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burlington Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
425,588,000
417,477,000
Net inc
b49,657,000
c306,200,000
Share earns
.35
2.03
Shares outst
141,749,000
150,224,000
6mo rev
939,388,000
865,408,000
Net inc
b137,385,000
c375,421,000
Share earns
.95
2.49
Shares outst
143,922,000
150,306,000


A Status Symbol No More


Mets, Battling Reds, Win Big and Lose Small
LEAD: Todd Hundley had seen Rob Dibble's fastball before, but only from a safe distance.
Hundley was sitting in Wrigley Field 48 hours earlier, a spectator watching stars, a 21-year-old with a future more in front of him than at hand.


Scientific Measurement SysFtems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scientific Measurement SysFtems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,729,000
2,163,000
Net inc
126,000
104,000
Share earns
.01
.01
9mo rev
5,245,000
4,418,000
Net inc
272,000
480,000
Share earns
.03
.03


West Mass Bankshares Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West Mass Bankshares Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
203,000
133,000
Per share
.16
.10
6mo net inc
401,000
323,000
Per share
.32
.25


When Communist Bosses Become Capitalist Ones
LEAD: With privatization in full swing in East Germany, thousands of workers and employees are discovering that sometimes their new capitalist bosses and their old Communist bosses are the same people.


2 Traders Cited By Exchange
LEAD: The Chicago Mercantile Exchange Wednesday charged two traders who were found guilty by a Federal jury of cheating customers with exchange violations that could lead to their expulsion.
The two traders, Robert


Miller (Herman) Inc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Miller (Herman) Inc.(O)
Qtr to June 2
1990
1989
Sales
223,806,000
213,299,000
Net inc
13,631,000
9,360,000
Share earns
.53
.37
Shares outst
25,636,745
25,613,350
Yr sales
865,016,000
828,981,000
Net inc
46,596,000
b45,702,000
Share earns
1.82
1.78
Shares outst
25,643,194
25,709,808


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Whatever else the participants at the economic summit meeting accomplished, President FRANCOIS MITTERRAND of France came away with a new title: distinguished professor of architecture at the University of Houston.
The title and an honorary doctorate of humanities was awarded in a hastily arranged presentation yesterday at the university's College of Architecture, the four-year-old building created by Philip Johnson after a design by the 19th century French architect Claude-Nicolas


Brady Gives Views on Bill
LEAD: Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady acknowledged today that the Bush Administration would probably fail to persuade the Senate to pass all of its proposals to revise the regulation of the financial markets.


Trump Says He Didn't Know He Employed Illegal Aliens
LEAD: Donald J. Trump took the witness stand yesterday to deny seven-year-old charges that he knowingly used 200 undocumented workers to demolish the old Bonwit Teller building to make way for Trump Tower, the glittering centerpiece of his real-estate empire.


S.E.C. Proposals Seek to Limit Risk in Money Funds
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission proposed new rules today intended to crack down on risky investments in the portfolios of money market funds.


Semiconductor Panel Backs Added Sematech Financing
LEAD: The chairman of the National Advisory Committee on Semiconductors said today that the committee still supported an increase in financing for Sematech, the semiconductor industry consortium.


Review/Photography;   Beauty and Challenge In Modern Landscapes
LEAD: One of the tasks of the art of the last 10 years has been to reconstruct the notion of natural beauty in the face of a seemingly endless onslaught against nature.
Mankind's alteration of previously pristine spaces, from tropical rain forests to the very air we breathe, poses a challenge that is not only environmental, but also esthetic: can art reflect what is happening to the natural world while retaining its traditional attachment to the sublime?


Micronetics Inc.  reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micronetics Inc.
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,166,945
2,930,477
Net inc
b118,228
c567,526
Share earns
.06
-
b-Included a tax benefit of $31,600, or 2 cents a share.
c-Net loss


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''In view of my great responsibilities towards the people of Russia and in connection with the move towards a multi-party system, I cannot fulfill only the instructions of the Communist Party.''
- Boris N. Yeltsin. [A1:6.]


Washington at Work;   Jack Kemp's Favorite Public Housing Tenant
LEAD: Her voice does not invite dissent.
Kimi Gray spots a child littering the lawn and responds with a machine gun locution that fuses her words into one unambiguous command: ''Come here, baby -Getthistrashouttamyyard.''


CNN Plans Experiment In 'Interactive News'
LEAD: Cable News Network today announced the first experiment in ''interactive news'' by a national television network - a program similar to those run by smaller stations in which viewers vote on whether to see ''Godzilla'' or ''Planet of the Apes'' as the late-night movie.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
American Express Travel Related Services Co., New York, a subsidiary of American Express Co., promoted Robin Renn to senior vice president of strategic planning.


Cal Rep Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cal Rep Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,526,948
1,727,713
Per share
.55
.62
6mo net inc
3,305,375
3,408,852
Per share
1.19
1.23


A British Official, Stirring Outcry, Says Germans Are Taking Over
LEAD: A senior British


Space Program Builds America's Future
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Macworld: Adversarial and Successful
LEAD: Macworld likes to stir up trouble, as the magazine's July issue shows.


Job Cuts Planned By Fisher-Price
LEAD: Fisher-Price Toys, a troubled unit of the Quaker Oats Company, said it would cut about 245 jobs at its headquarters here, and that between 300 and 400 jobs would be lost when a shutdown of a nearby plant in Holland, N.Y., is completed by November.
Until recently, the plant made molded plastic parts that were shipped to an East


U.S. to Reimburse Meese for His Legal Bills
LEAD: A Federal court awarded former Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d Government compensation of $460,509 today for the legal fees he incurred while he was the subject of an independent prosecutor's investigation.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Eating Outdoors


Home Savings &amp; Loan Assn Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Savings &amp; Loan Assn Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
610,474
766,596
Per share
.36
.45
9mo net inc
1,725,049
2,338,781
Per share
1.01
1.38


Wicat Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wicat Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
11,609,000
9,440,000
Net inc
384,000
21,000
Share earns
.02
-


Graf's Toughest Foe: the Press
LEAD: In past years she has left Wimbledon as a proud champion and been celebrated as a role model at home in West Germany.
But last week Steffi Graf departed from London a deeply troubled young woman.


Westinghouse Electric Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westinghouse Electric Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,175,000,000
3,178,000,000
Net inc
252,000,000
228,000,000
Share earns
.86
.78
Shares outst
294,000,000
291,800,000
6mo rev
6,037,000,000
6,065,000,000
Net inc
462,000,000
b417,000,000
Share earns
1.57
1.43
Shares outst
294,000,000
291,800,000


Transworld Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Transworld Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
601,000
530,000
Per share
.54
.48
Shares outst
1,119,141
1,109,480
6mo net inc
1,216,000
1,027,000
Per share
1.09
.93
Shares outst
1,117,835
1,109,030
Per share earnings for 1989 are adjusted to reflect 5-percent stock dividend paid April 18, 1990.


English, Language of Summits
LEAD: English is the lingua franca of summitry.
At NATO summit meetings, France's representatives still make a point of speaking French in plenary sessions, but in the corridors they converse informally in English.
At economic summit meetings, some leaders still rely on translators, but the sherpas who accompany them to the summit do their communique drafting in English.


Utah Medical Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Utah Medical Products Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
5,357,259
4,018,728
Net inc
941,459
512,182
Share earns
.12
.07
Shares outst
7,820,000
7,610,000
6mo sales
10,362,020
7,789,509
Net inc
1,709,032
921,383
Share earns
.22
.12
Shares outst
7,810,000
7,570,000


Review/Theater;   Apartheid in Microcosm
LEAD: It would be hard to imagine a more detestable pair of louts than Stoffel Le Grange and Nak van der Merwe, the Afrikaner protagonists of Michele Celeste's grim political allegory ''Hanging the President.''


Restaurants
LEAD: In today's perilous marketplace, one might think it imprudent to tinker with a winning formula.
Yet Richard Lavin, the affable and savvy restaurateur who owns Sofi on lower Fifth Avenue and Lavin's on West 39th Street, has done just that.
He has taken the popular Sofi, which served inventive American food for three years, and made it northern Italian - a move that seems akin to converting the New York Mets to a soccer team.


Confounding Predictions, a Gunman Foils a Hunt
LEAD: At 10:30 Wednesday night, a police dispatcher's voice crackled over thousands of radios: ''2230 hours.
Operation Watchdog is in effect.'' Scores of detectives and hundreds of police officers spread out across New York City, and the hunt for the elusive man who calls himself the Zodiac gunman was on.


Synovus Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Synovus Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
8,566,000
7,455,000
Per share
.26
.23
Shares outst
33,501,000
32,674,000
6mo net inc
16,915,000
14,857,000
Per share
.50
.45
Shares outst
33,501,000
32,743,000


President for Playboy
LEAD: Playboy Enterprises named Michael S. Perlis, the publisher of Playboy magazine, president of the company's publishing group.
Playboy also named Barbara Gutman senior vice president of circulation and planning, and Mary E. Levenson senior vice president of product licensing.


Unitel Video Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unitel Video Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
11,267,000
9,596,000
Net loss
198,000
b138,000
Share earns
-
.06
Shares outst
2,148,630
2,194,292
9mo rev
34,494,000
28,110,000
Net inc
417,000
1,261,000
Share earns
.19
.57
Shares outst
2,177,854
2,224,165


Portsmouth Bank Shares Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Portsmouth Bank Shares Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
983,000
1,072,000
Per share
.25
.27
Shares outst
3,895,294
3,954,167
6mo net inc
1,986,000
2,089,000
Per share
.51
.53
Shares outst
3,900,030
3,952,955


Hernandez Is Back
LEAD: Another former National League most valuable player, Keith Hernandez, rejoined the Cleveland Indians in Seattle yesterday after completing a brief rehabilitation stint with Winter Haven in Florida's Gulf Coast League.
The 36-year-old first baseman had 5 hits in 11 times at bat while testing his pulled left calf muscle.


Teledyne Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teledyne Canada
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
17,953,000
20,364,000
Net inc
880,000
1,873,000
Share earns
.41
.87
6mo rev
35,481,000
36,623,000
Net inc
1,510,000
2,723,000
Share earns
.70
1.26
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Amos Neyhart, 91; Originated Courses In Driver Education
LEAD: Amos E. Neyhart, an expert on automobile safety who originated driver education programs in the United States in the 1930's, died on July 5 at the Fairways Nursing Home in State College, Pa.
He was 91 years old.


House, 377-28, Approves Bill to Protect Disabled
LEAD: The House of Representatives gave final approval today to legislation that would extend full Federal protection against discrimination to millions of Americans with physical and mental disabilities.


Exabyte Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exabyte Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
46,340,000
18,474,000
Net inc
8,017,000
b2,317,000
Share earns
.38
.13
Shares outst
21,003,000
18,391,000
6mo sales
86,814,000
33,498,000
Net inc
14,680,000
b5,502,000
Share earns
.70
.30
Shares outst
20,959,000
18,352,000


Mcorp Bank Sale
LEAD: Mcorp agreed to sell its interest in Mbank Waco for an undisclosed amount to a private investment group led by Gerald J. Ford, chairman and chief executive of the Ford Bank Group in Lubbock, Tex.
Mcorp said it expects to complete the sale, subject to regulatory and bankruptcy court approvals, before Dec.


Auctions
LEAD:
Greece to the Rescue


Bacteria Role Is Hailed in Gulf Oil Cleanup
LEAD: Texas officials said today that preliminary results on using bacteria to clean up an oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico were ''very encouraging.''


Actors Back Arts Agency In Capital
LEAD: Several of the nation's best-known actors went to Capitol Hill today in defense of the National Endowment for the Arts.


P.L.O. Sets Condition on Sea Raiders
LEAD: The Palestine Liberation Organization is prepared to discipline the group that attempted in May to attack Israel from the Mediterranean, once the United States agrees to resume and expand its discussion with the P.L.O , leaders of the organization say.


Gibson Wants Dodgers To Send Him East
LEAD: Kirk Gibson, the subject of trade rumors over the last two weeks, said he did not formally ask the Los Angeles Dodgers to trade him until last Sunday during a stormy meeting with Dodger officials.


A Crime Bill Tainted by Death
LEAD: The omnibus crime bill that passed the Senate this week contains good provisions: gun control, a police corps, money for local law enforcement.
But they are heavily outweighed by misguided expansions of the death penalty.
It's now up to the House to keep the good and eliminate the bad.


Diagnostic Medical InstruFments Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diagnostic Medical InstruFments Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,380,391
1,216,238
Net inc
b40,853
c370,358
Share earns
.01
-
9mo rev
3,920,165
4,526,272
Net inc
b44,134
c477,043
Share earns
.01
-
b-Included an extraordinary tax benefit of $17,600 for both the quarter and 9 months.


Off the Road and Into Commuter Express Trains
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:
Legal Battle Over Beard
A black policeman whose job required him to shave despite a painful skin condition common to blacks won a ruling in Maryland.
Law, page B9.
Differing Democrats
Mario Cuomo of New York and Jim Florio of New Jersey, despite political affinities, have vastly different governing strategies.


Top Marketing Official Leaves The Daily News
LEAD: The Daily News announced yesterday that James Mason, its vice president of advertising and marketing, had resigned ''to pursue other business interests.'' The New York City newspaper would not elaborate, and Mr.
Mason could not be reached to comment.


Dollar Tumbles in Selloff After Greenspan's Remarks
LEAD: The dollar tumbled yesterday in a selloff set off by comments by Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, who suggested that the central bank might consider lowering interest rates.


TV Weekend;   A Bitter Divorce That Ends in Death
LEAD: Trying to do something about eroding audiences, the networks this summer are making efforts to offer viewers something more than the normal diet of reruns.
NBC, for instance, has gone to Canada to acquire a four-hour television movie called ''Love and Hate,'' which will be broadcast in two parts, Sunday and Monday at 9 P.M.


Mrs. Dole Buckles Up - Again
LEAD: As President Reagan's Secretary of Transportation, Elizabeth Dole was criticized for not pushing companies to install passive restraints - air bags and automatic seat belts - in cars.
Then in 1984 she helped engineer Rule 208, a landmark law that induced many states to require manually operated safety belts.


At Lincoln Center, Festival Where Fun Is Serious Business
LEAD: IN ''You Could Be Home Now,'' the solo piece by Ann Magnuson to open Lincoln Center's fourth annual Serious Fun festival at 7:30 tonight, this film actress (''Making Mr. Right'') and television performer (''Anything but Love'') is returning to the performance-art medium in which she made her reputation as an underground nightclub star.


Olin Will Appeal Decision of F.T.C.
LEAD: The Olin Corporation, a diversified chemicals maker, said it would appeal a Federal Trade Commission decision that its acquisition of some swimming-pool chemicals businesses and other assets from the FMC Corporation violated Federal antitrust regulations.


Crop Outlook Is Mixed
LEAD: Supplies of corn and soybeans appear tight, while wheat supplies are swelling with a big harvest, the Agriculture Department reported today in its monthly crop report.


TV Network Is Planned
LEAD: Dale Lang, a magazine publisher, said on Wednesday that he would start a new television network this fall presenting reruns of television shows and direct-response advertising programs.


First Colonial Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Colonial Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,783,100
b2,973,200
Per share
.31
.34
6mo net inc
5,249,400
b5,428,600
Per share
.59
.62
b-Included a $549,000 nonrecurring gain from freezing the company's over-funded pension plan for both the quarter and 6 months.


3 Killed as Train Crushes Van
LEAD: A van loaded with children on a family outing to an amusement park was crushed Wednesday evening when it drove into the path of a train, the authorities said.
Two children and a 25-year-old woman were killed.
Three adults and five children remained hospitalized today.


Soviets Say 3 Died in Armenian Ambush of Convoy
LEAD: Armenian militants attacked a convoy of vehicles in a disputed region of Azerbaijan and three people were killed in a battle between the attackers and Soviet troops, the official press agency Tass reported today.


Review/Jazz;   From Ragged Rawness to Breathiness
LEAD: The tenor saxophonist and composer Benny Golson, who started a six-night stand at Condon's on Tuesday night, likes to make connections.
Mr.
Golson's tone moves from the jagged rawness of Ben Webster to Lester Young's breathiness, but it's accompanied by an utterly contemporary harmonic sensibility.


M.R. Beal Firm Adds Carmona
LEAD: Two of Wall Street's leading minority-owned firms will join forces to compete better for the portion of Government business that is often reserved for minority-owned concerns.
M. R. Beal &amp; Company, a


Filling In Pompeii Gaps by Computer
LEAD: During the 242 years since their discovery, the ruins of Pompeii have been excavated, studied, looted, sold, admired and exhibited, and one might wonder whether the ancient Roman port could still harbor any surprises.
But an exhibition that opened this week at the I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art demonstrates that the appeal of


Soviet Party: Hazy Future
LEAD: It took 10 days for Mikhail S. Gorbachev to secure his triumph over the Communist Party, and less than a minute tonight to cast doubt on the value of his victory.


Foe of Kenya's Leader Said to Flee to London
LEAD: A major critic of President Daniel arap Moi who took refuge in the United States Embassy during four days of violent anti-Government protests has left Kenya for London, the United States Ambassador said today.


2 Books By Rushdie Are Sold
LEAD: Penguin U.S.A. and Granta Books of Britain announced yesterday that they had purchased the next two books of Salman Rushdie, the writer whose last novel led Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini to say he should be killed.


Media Logic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Media Logic Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
852,837
1,794,300
Net loss
b680,887
cd123,192
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
1,776,000
1,747,693
Yr sales
7,467,619
4,173,012
Net loss
b526,834
c69,661
Shares outst
1,776,000
1,747,693


National Penn Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Penn Bancshares
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,338,000
2,127,000
Per share
.88
.80
Shares outst
2,665,362
2,660,656
6mo net inc
4,550,000
4,102,000
Per share
1.71
1.54
Year-ago per share earnings and shares outstanding are adjusted to reflect a 5 percent stock dividend paid in October 1989.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Novellus Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Novellus Systems (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
16,549,000
12,155,000
Net inc
3,478,000
2,655,000
Share earns
.50
.41
Shares outst
6,989,000
6,466,000
6mo sales
31,744,000
22,606,000
Net inc
6,669,000
4,787,000
Share earns
.96
.78
Shares outst
6,938,000
6,156,000


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Dr.
ARNOLD RELMAN , editor in chief of The New England Journal of Medicine, is to retire next June after 14 years at the helm of the prestigious chronicle of medical research.
Dr.
Relman, who is 67 years old, said he plans to write, teach and lecture.
The weekly magazine is owned and published by the Massachusetts Medical Society, which is to form a committee to select a successor to Dr.


No Headline
LEAD: For the first time since testimony began nearly three weeks ago, the jury in the Central Park attack trial yesterday heard evidence linking one defendant with the rape and attempted murder of a jogger.


Louisiana Governor Tells of Quandary Over Bill to Ban Abortion
LEAD: When Gov.
Buddy Roemer of Louisiana was elected three years ago, he overthrew the political establishment by promising to make the tough decisions that others would not face.
Now he faces a decision that he says he is finding nearly impossible to make.


Investors Warned on Global Frauds
LEAD: Small investors were defrauded of $1.1 billion in the last two years through international investment swindles, the North American Securities Administrators Association told a Congressional committee yesterday.


Cray President Leaves In Rift With Chairman
LEAD: Marcelo A. Gumucio, president and chief operating officer of Cray Research Inc., resigned yesterday, saying that he and Cray's chairman, John A. Rollwagen, had agreed that their contrasting management styles made it impossible to work together.


Pirates Edge Padres By 4-3 in 15th Inning
LEAD: Jeff King's two-out single down the right-field line in the 15th inning ended a bullpen duel and gave the Pittsburgh Pirates a 4-3 victory tonight over San Diego, spoiling the debut of the new Padres manager, Greg Riddoch.


Rubbermaid Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rubbermaid Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
345,945,000
333,620,000
Net inc
32,450,000
28,210,000
Share earns
.44
.38
Shares outst
73,747,943
73,684,492
6mo sales
705,414,000
682,583,000
Net inc
65,560,000
57,515,000
Share earns
.89
.78
Shares outst
73,738,374
73,650,069


U.S. Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U.S. Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
47,262,000
38,431,000
Per share
.95
.78
Shares outst
49,820,000
49,440,000
6mo net inc
89,416,000
73,615,000
Per share
1.80
1.49
Shares outst
49,733,000
49,405,000


Political Memo;   Goals Similar, but Florio and Cuomo Split on Strategy
LEAD: Not long into their respective tenures as Governors of New York and New Jersey, Mario M. Cuomo and Jim Florio each audaciously expressed political philosophies of unapologetic liberalism.


U.S. Presents Anti-Drug Curriculum for Schools
LEAD: The Department of Education today issued a detailed program for drug prevention lessons that it will send to more than 120,000 school administrators across the country, in an effort to teach children skills for resisting drug use.


Merchants Bancshares Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merchants Bancshares Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,033,084
2,350,316
Per share
.53
.61
6mo net inc
4,117,464
4,481,897
Per share
1.07
1.17


A.O. Smith Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A.O. Smith Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
265,984,000
268,186,000
Net inc
12,534,000
7,496,000
Share earns
1.47
.83
Shares outst
7,915,162
7,923,173
6mo sales
503,142,000
542,583,000
Net inc
17,458,000
13,166,000
Share earns
1.98
1.42
Shares outst
7,912,850
7,962,299


Caere Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caere Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,835,000
4,898,000
Net inc
1,399,000
691,000
Share earns
.27
.20
Shares outst
5,248,000
3,456,000
6mo rev
13,050,000
8,931,000
Net inc
2,727,000
1,039,000
Share earns
.52
.30
Shares outst
5,242,000
3,454,000


Hubco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hubco Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
984,956
1,355,866
Per share
.25
.33
6mo net inc
1,983,097
2,454,052
Per share
.49
.60


BanPonce Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BanPonce Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,352,000
5,064,000
Per share
.75
.88
6mo net inc
8,556,000
10,073,000
Per share
1.48
1.75


I.B.M.-Diebold Joint Venture
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation and Diebold Inc. said they would combine their automated teller machine operations and develop and market new and existing products worldwide under a joint venture.


Waltrip Departs
LEAD: Darrell Waltrip, the Nascar driver, yesterday was released from the hospital in Daytona Beach, Fla., where he was recovering from injuries suffered last week during a practice run for the Pepsi 400.
Waltrip was flown to Nashville to continue his recovery from a broken left thigh bone and a dislocated bone in his left arm, said Larry Balewski, spokesman for Daytona International Speedway.


Structural Dynamics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Structural Dynamics (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
28,610,000
23,146,000
Net inc
3,065,000
1,983,000
Share earns
.22
.15
Shares outst
13,901,000
13,254,000
6mo rev
53,768,000
44,088,000
Net inc
5,476,000
3,519,000
Share earns
.40
.27
Shares outst
13,760,000
13,202,000


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Celanese Canada
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
98,500,000
100,800,000
Net inc
12,600,000
12,100,000
Share earns
.90
.87
6mo sales
190,500,000
202,400,000
Net inc
25,400,000
25,600,000
Share earns
1.83
1.85
Results are in Canadian dollars.


United Resolve Marked Conference on AIDS
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sudan Forces Refugees Back to Barren Lands
LEAD: In a new tactic in the seven-year Sudanese civil war, the Khartoum Government is forcing tens of thousands of refugees who fled to Khartoum from the south to return home, further straining food supplies in the famine-struck region, relief workers and village chiefs here say.


Cuomo Unafraid of Health Veto
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said yesterday that he would not care about the potential political fallout of vetoing a major health-care bill in this election year, but he said he has not decided whether to sign or kill the legislation.


Harleysville National reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harleysville National
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,550,918
1,490,212
Per share
.78
.75
6mo net inc
2,994,705
2,769,913
Per share
1.47
1.39


Sheehan and Lopez Sailing As Women's Open Starts
LEAD: Patty Sheehan and Nancy Lopez spurred each other to their best starts ever today in the United States Women's Open, the biggest tournament neither has ever won.


Where to Hear the Seminar Performers
LEAD: The New Music Seminar will run through Wednesday at various clubs in New York City and New Jersey.
A series ticket of $95 is good for admission to all regular performances and to one of five gala performances next week.
The series ticket will be available today and tomorrow from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. at the Village Voice, 842 Broadway, at 13th Street.


Mohawks Reinforce Position at Disputed Site


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Unconventional Curlew


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Wainwright's Sting


Raytheon Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raytheon Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
2,346,000,000
2,290,000,000
Net inc
144,800,000
133,700,000
Share earns
2.22
2.03
Shares outst
65,300,000
65,900,000
6mo sales
4,571,000,000
4,363,000,000
Net inc
275,700,000
254,500,000
Share earns
4.22
3.86
Shares outst
65,300,000
66,000,000


Abitibi Explores Recycled Paper
LEAD: Abitibi-Pricei Inc., the giant Canadian forest-products company, and two British publishers agreed to buy a venture that has been exploring building a newsprint plant in Scotland that would use only recycled fiber.
The partners are two London-based companies: The Daily Telegraph P.L.C., led by Conrad Black, and Mirror Group Newspapers Ltd., led by Robert Maxwell.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ISAAC STERN , who will be 70 years old on July 21, has been combining two of his loves - performing and parties - in birthday celebrations here and overseas. the violinist did so in Evian, France, on May 17, and in Paris on June 11 when he received the keys to the city.
In New York on Oct. 16, a concert and party will be held in New York; on Nov.


Plasti-Line Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plasti-Line Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
21,763,000
23,232,000
Net inc
339,000
1,078,000
Share earns
.09
.30
Shares outst
3,586,000
3,602,000
6mo sales
40,107,000
41,939,000
Net inc
358,000
1,621,000
Share earns
.10
.45
Shares outst
3,588,000
3,601,000


FED CONSIDERS CUT IN INTEREST RATES TO BOOST ECONOMY
LEAD: Expressing concern that banks have become overly cautious in lending money, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, said today that the central bank might need to cut interest rates to keep the economy moving ahead.


A $45 MILLION LOSS IS CITED ON LOANS TIED TO NEIL BUSH
LEAD: As a director of a Denver savings institution, Neil Bush voted to approve loans for a close business associate that resulted in a loss to the Government of at least $45 million, according to documents released by Federal regulators.


In Coal Fields of Siberia, Memories of a Promise
LEAD: ''What kind of masters are we?'' asked the miner, gray and lean and angry in his ebony moonscape of a workplace here in the rebellious coal fields of Siberia.


Guardian Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guardian Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,932,433
1,255,950
Per share
.52
.38
6mo net inc
3,408,502
2,428,235
Per share
.95
.73


Black Panelist at N.A.A.C.P. Session Accuses Studios of 'Jewish Racism'
LEAD: Hollywood's leading film and television studios and executives were accused of ''Jewish racism'' this week at the annual convention of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and several leaders of prominent Jewish organizations responded today, saying the incident damages relations between blacks and


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
7.75
9.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.67
7.79
7.77
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.57
7.73
7.56
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.49
8.57
7.87
30-YR.


Lattice Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lattice Semiconductor (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
16,611,000
7,108,000
Net inc
2,912,000
908,000
Share earns
.28
.12
Shares outst
10,279,000
7,599,000


Administration Is Cool To Tougher Spy Laws
LEAD: The Bush Administration reacted coolly today to some parts of a bipartisan Senate proposal to toughen Federal espionage laws, saying a number of the steps proposed were better left to the White House than to Congress.


In Washington, a Battle About a Prosecutor
LEAD: An attempt by Democrats to have an independent prosecutor appointed in the Neil Bush case brought an angry denunciation from Republicans today as the political battle over the nation's savings and loan debacle escalated.


Japan's Trade Surplus Rises
LEAD: A surge in exports widened Japan's trade surplus by 27.5 percent in June, causing some analysts to believe that an 18-month shrinking of the trade imbalance may be over.


Sheldahl Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sheldahl Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 1
1990
1989
Sales
22,698,000
22,547,000
Net inc
548,000
c1,022,000
Share earns
.12
-
9mo sales
72,054,000
64,062,000
Net loss
b850,000
1,366,000
b-Included a one-time restructuring charge of $3.2 million taken in the first quarter.


Liberty National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liberty National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
8,531,000
8,223,000
Per share
.74
.77
Shares outst
11,558,000
10,720,000
6mo net inc
17,085,000
15,717,000
Per share
1.49
1.47
Shares outst
11,491,000
10,717,000


Argonaut Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Argonaut Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
21,400,000
20,200,000
Share earns
2.30
2.02
Shares outst
9,302,452
10,012,266
6mo net inc
41,300,000
40,700,000
Share earns
4.42
4.01
Shares outst
9,345,379
10,160,406


Shelby Williams Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shelby Williams Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
42,386,000
42,723,000
Net inc
1,072,000
1,874,000
Share earns
.12
.20
6mo sales
83,347,000
83,041,000
Net inc
1,982,000
2,748,000
Share earns
.22
.29


A Convicted Killer Is Executed in Alabama
LEAD: An Alabama man convicted of abducting and killing a woman in 1976 was executed in the electric chair early Friday after failing in his last two attempts to get a reprieve.


Anthem Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anthem Electronics (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
110,055,000
76,552,000
Net inc
6,675,000
3,511,000
Share earns
.56
.31
6mo sales
210,061,000
146,572,000
Net inc
12,358,000
6,523,000
Share earns
1.04
.58


Marc Haas, Philatelist, Dies at 82; His Collection Netted $11 Million
LEAD: Marc Haas, a philatelist and business executive, died on Sunday at his home in Burgenstock, Switzerland.
He was 82 years old and also had a home in Manhattan.


Pauperized Workers Are Price of 'Free' Trade
LEAD: To the Editor:


After The Cold War (2)
LEAD: Through most of its history this has been an unmilitarized country.
The Framers of the Constitution wanted it that way.
To prevent a large standing army becoming a habit, they provided that Congress could not appropriate money for the military ''for a longer term than two years.''


First National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First National Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,600,000
1,400,000
Per share
.47
.44
6mo net inc
2,900,000
2,400,000
Per share
.87
.76
Per share earnings are fully diluted.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 512 money market mutual funds increased $3.10 billion, to $385.83 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 160 institutional funds increased by $215.40 million, to $91.82 billion.
The assets of the 250 general-purpose funds were up by $763.50 million, to $133.98 billion.


Robert B. Davies, Accountant, 72
LEAD: Robert B. Davies, a certified public accountant in Manhattan for 35 years, died on Wednesday.
He was 72 years old and lived in White Plains.


German Knife-Wielder Insane
LEAD: A woman who tried to kill West Germany's opposition candidate for Chancellor, Oskar Lafontaine, by attacking him with a knife is unfit to face trial and should be confined to a psychiatric hospital, prosecutors said today.
They said that the woman, Adelheid Streidel, 43 years old, was schizophrenic and asked a court not to proceed against her.


Oil Prices Surge as Saudis Agree to Reduce Output
LEAD: Prices of crude oil and byproducts soared yesterday on the news that Saudi Arabia had agreed to reduce its oil output temporarily to bolster sagging oil prices.


BUSINESS DIGEST: FRIDAY, JULY 13, 1990
LEAD:
The Economy


Century Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Century Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
581,000
991,000
Per share
.10
.17
6mo net inc
1,141,000
1,896,000
Per share
.20
.33


Review/Art;   Plaster as a Medium, Not Just an Interim Step
LEAD: ''The Expressionist Surface: Contemporary Art in Plaster,'' at the Queens Museum, calls attention to the current prominence of plaster.
With its modeled, carved, cast and rolled plaster, with its plaster boulders, tapestries, mannequins and horses, the exhibition suggests the many ways the material is now being used in sculpture, painting and installations.


Wayne J. Turnage, 47, An Operatic Baritone
LEAD: Wayne Jackson Turnage, a baritone who sang with the Washington Opera and Opera Ebony, died at his home in New York on Monday after a long illness.
He was 47 years old.


Valero Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valero Energy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
276,300,000
225,900,000
Net inc
19,900,000
18,500,000
Share earns
.51
.55
6mo rev
536,700,000
427,300,000
Net inc
29,600,000
29,900,000
Share earns
.73
.83


Radiation Peril at Hanford Is Detailed
LEAD: One in every 20 residents of 10 counties surrounding the Hanford nuclear weapons plant here absorbed ''significant'' amounts of radiation in three years ending December 1947, a panel of radiation and health experts said in a report released today.


Cuomo to Move His Own Funds Over Apartheid
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who for years has berated Republicans for blocking his efforts to rid New York State of any possible links to South Africa, announced tonight that he was withdrawing his own money from two financial institutions that have been made targets by a prominent anti-apartheid group.


Prime Bancshares Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Bancshares Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
611,000
376,000
Per share
.36
-
6mo net inc
1,104,000
678,000
Per share
.64
-
The bank's stock first traded on July 27, 1989.


Texas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
170,539,000
184,110,000
Net loss
162,000
b4,389,000
Shares outst
11,060,000
11,081,000
Yr sales
645,739,000
692,481,000
Net loss
7,342,000
bc3,780,000
Share earns
-
.13
Shares outst
11,060,000
11,081,000


Beating Japan at Its Own Game
LEAD: The story is familiar: An American company develops and dominates a consumer electronics market, only to lose it to lower-cost competitors from East Asia.
It happened with color television sets, calculators, digital watches and computer games, among many other products.


Barry Witness Says He Worried About Effect of Drugs on Mayor
LEAD: Describing himself as someone who had shared drugs with Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. and loved him like a twin brother, a Washington advertising executive testified today that he worried about the effect that frequent cocaine use was having on the Mayor's ability to govern.


Plea Deal Talks in Vento Case
LEAD: Preliminary discussions to arrange a possible plea bargain for John S. Vento have begun in the Bensonhurst murder case, a law-enforcement official said yesterday.


The Talk of Sullivan County;   Victory Leaves a Prosecutor With an Orphaned Court
LEAD: More than two years after the Sullivan County District Attorney's office asked, in an anonymous complaint, that a state judicial commission investigate the county court judge here, prosecutors have emerged triumphant in theory, if a little traumatized in practice.


A Clowning Bank-Robbery Caper
''What kind of clown are you?'' a bank guard snarls at a man in a circus costume, who has wedged one giant red shoe in the door at closing time.
Beneath his painted smile, Bill Murray assumes the most serious, sincere expression and answers sweetly, ''The crying-on-the-inside kind, I guess.''
After Mr.
Murray's character, Grimm, robs the bank and takes some hostages, the police chief bargains on the phone for their release. ''At least give me the women,'' the chief pleads, and Grimm yelps, ''Get your own women!''


Total System Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Total System Services Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revence
19,392,000
16,089,000
Net inc
3,001,000
2,616,000
Share earns
.19
.17
Shares outst
15,889,000
15,875,000
6mo rev
36,416,000
31,479,000
Net inc
5,655,000
5,018,000
Share earns
.36
.32
Shares outst
15,888,000
15,875,000


Contel Agrees to Takeover Offer by GTE
LEAD: In a move that would sharply expand both its local telephone operations and its fast-growing cellular telephone business, the GTE Corporation said yesterday that it had reached a preliminary agreement with the Contel Corporation to acquire the Atlanta-based company in a stock swap.
The deal would be worth about $6 billion, based on yesterday's closing stock prices.


Bank of East Tennessee reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of East Tennessee
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
148,420
111,361
Per share
.08
.06
6mo net inc
282,073
236,717
Per share
.15
.12


Market Place;   The New Charges Against Blinder
LEAD: New charges filed yesterday against Blinder, Robinson &amp; Company provided an unusual insight into the way the once high-flying firm became the nation's largest ''penny stock'' broker.


ISRAELI LABORITES SIDE AGAINST PERES
LEAD: The Labor Party's 150-member leadership bureau dealt a stinging blow to Shimon Peres this evening in his campaign to keep his position as party leader.


First Commercial Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commercial Bancshares
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,658,000
1,612,000
Per share
.44
.42
6mo net inc
3,427,000
3,339,000
Per share
.91
.88


First Commerce Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Commerce Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,207,000
7,221,000
Per share
.40
.58
6mo net inc
12,939,000
13,849,000
Per share
1.02
1.11


First Wachovia reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Wachovia (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
75,200,000
67,900,000
Per share
1.06
.96
6mo net inc
146,500,000
135,200,000
Per share
2.07
1.92
Per share earnings are fully diluted.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Allegheny International Inc., Pittsburgh, an electronics company, said its stock plan of reorganization for emergence from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection had been confirmed by the U.S.
Bankruptcy Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania.


National Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Commerce Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,378,000
5,796,000
Per share
.61
.55
6mo net inc
12,007,000
10,868,000
Per share
1.14
1.03


GEAC Computer Corp.  reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GEAC Computer Corp.
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
72,707,000
74,791,000
Net inc
8,150,000
4,520,000
Share earns
.38
.22
The company said the decline in revenues during the latest year was the result of the sale of its Canadian financial division.


Manila Tourist Areas Hit by 6 Bomb Blasts
LEAD: Six bombs exploded simultaneously before dawn today in the city's main tourist and financial districts, damaging several cars and buildings but causing no casualties, the police said.


Oil Spill Compromise Calls for Double Hulls
LEAD: A Congressional conference committee drafting legislation on oil spills decided today to require almost all oil tankers to be equipped with protective double hulls, phasing in the change over the next 20 years.


Government Seeks to Extend Ban On Broadcast of Offensive Shows
LEAD: Armed with new information about the viewing and listening habits of children, the Federal Communications Commission made a new effort today to impose a complete ban on what it considers indecent radio and television broadcasts.


Monoclonal Backs Quidel Acquisition
LEAD: Monoclonal Antibodies Inc., which sells fertility-test kits, said it had reached an agreement with the privately held Quidel Corporation under which Monoclonal would exchange about 9.7 million of its common shares for all shares of Quidel.


Review/Theater;   Shakespeare in the Wild West, in the Park
LEAD: If Cole Porter and company could transplant ''The Taming of the Shrew'' to sedate, late 1940's Baltimore, why can't the New York Shakespeare Festival let Kate and Petruchio have their standoff in the wild, late 19th-century West?
A.
J.
Antoon's rambunctious production of Shakespeare's comedy, at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park, turns out to be its own best argument.


Republicans on the Attack In Savings and Loan Crisis
LEAD: Unnerved by the rising public outrage over the nation's savings and loan scandal, the Republican Party opened an orchestrated effort today to blame the Democrats before the Democrats succeed in their effort to blame the Republicans.


Rating of Time Warner
LEAD: The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said this week that it had affirmed Time Warner Inc.'s BB-rated long-term debt and B-plus subordinated debt and preferred stock ratings.
The securities were removed from S.&amp;P.'s Creditwatch, where they had been placed for possible downgrading.
Roughly $1.5 billion of long-term debt and $5.6 billion of preferred stock are affected.


Astrex Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Astrex Inc. (AMEX)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
17,739,880
20,223,447
Net inc
b684,133
c617,207
Share earns
.64
-
b-After an extraordinary gain on extinguishment of debt of $2,373,889, or $2.21 a share.
c-Net loss and after an extraordinary gain on extinguishment of debt of $313,000, or 29 cents a share.


King Tells the Court Of Parrying Tactics
LEAD: Don King yesterday ended about 13 hours of loquacious testimony over two and a half days in the trial of his breach-of-contract suit against James (Buster) Douglas, the heavyweight champion, and John Johnson, his manager.


Nova Scotia Issue
LEAD: A $300 million debenture issue by Nova Scotia was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
The 9.375 percent debentures due to mature in 2002 are offered at 99.36 percent to yield 9.465 percent, or about 95 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Neworld Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neworld Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
99,000
2,129,000
Per share
.02
.51
Shares outst
4,035,000
4,175,000
6mo net inc
203,000
4,550,000
Per share
.05
1.06
Shares outst
4,035,000
4,295,000


Steinbrenner Replies
LEAD: In a letter to Commissioner Fay Vincent, attorneys for George Steinbrenner have finally replied on the procedure for the remaining portion of baseball's investigation of the Yankee owner's activities.
But Vincent declined to say today what the reply was.


Raritan Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raritan Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
432,000
412,000
Per share
.38
.36
6mo net inc
807,000
895,000
Per share
.70
.78


Ceradyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ceradyne Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
6,071,000
5,718,000
Net inc
198,000
b1,393,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo sales
12,083,000
11,688,000
Net inc
264,000
b2,253,000
Share earns
.04
-
b-Net loss


Genetics Institute Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genetics Institute Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
9,194,000
12,614,000
Net loss
7,918,000
3,812,000
Shares outst
14,212,000
14,029,000
9mo rev
17,749,000
24,979,000
Net loss
14,896,000
7,746,000
Shares outst
14,194,000
14,005,000


ACC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ACC Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,226,617
9,384,281
Net inc
485,390
325,100
Share earns
.14
.10
Shares outst
3,473,186
3,263,627
6mo rev
18,839,726
20,276,431
Net inc
950,722
598,712
Share earns
.28
.18
Shares outst
3,454,286
3,259,225


Casino Revenues Rise
LEAD: Revenues at Atlantic City's casinos rose 13.3 percent in June from a year earlier, helped by the $34.8 million net ''win'' reported at Donald J. Trump's new Taj Mahal casino, the New Jersey Casino Control Commission said today.
Gaming revenues amounted to $258.5 million in the month, but only four casinos had higher winnings than in June 1989.


Sandinistas End Strike as Chamorro Yields on Key Demands
LEAD: The Government and Sandinista unions reached agreement early today on a package of wage raises, job guarantees and political concessions, ending a 10-day walkout by Sandinista-led Government workers that had paralyzed the nation and provoked violent clashes between armed Sandinista and pro-Government demonstrators.


First Federal S&amp;L -Ft. Myers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal S&amp;L -Ft. Myers
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,407,000
1,770,000
Per share
.45
.57
9mo net inc
5,058,000
4,508,000
Per share
1.62
1.45


Baruch M. Bokser, 44, A Professor of Talmud
LEAD: Baruch M. Bokser, a professor of Talmud and rabbinical studies at the Jewish Theological Seminary, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 44 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Rowan Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rowan Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
70,826,000
60,554,000
Net loss
2,227,000
4,607,000
Shares outst
72,250,000
72,081,000
6mo rev
130,249,000
111,212,000
Net loss
8,390,000
15,736,000
Shares outst
72,216,000
72,070,000


Centennial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centennial Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
378,321
315,475
Per share
.21
.18
6mo net inc
711,735
600,380
Per share
.39
.34


Curtiss-Wright to Pay $30-a-Share Dividend
LEAD: The Curtiss-Wright Corporation, a diversified aerospace components manufacturer, announced yesterday that it had declared a one-time dividend of $30 a share.


Scientists Discover the Gene In a Nervous System Disease
LEAD: After three years of struggling to overcome frustrating technical snags and red herrings, scientists have isolated the gene that causes the disfiguring and sometimes fatal condition known as Elephant Man's disease.


In a Shift, Beijing Shrugs at Fang's Criticism
LEAD: In China's first official response to criticism over the last week from the exiled dissident Fang Lizhi, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said today that his conduct was not worth discussing.


Hawkins Loses Another No-Hitter, but Not His
LEAD: The Yankees are learning to expect the unexpected whenever Andy Hawkins starts a game, and they got it for the third successive time last night.
Melido Perez pitched a rain-shortened six-inning no-hitter against Hawkins and the Yankees and led the Chicago White Sox to an 8-0 victory at Yankee Stadium.


Valero Natural Gas Partners L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valero Natural Gas Partners L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
240,600,000
259,600,000
Net inc
5,300,000
1,200,000
Share earns
.27
.05
6mo rev
520,800,000
543,800,000
Net inc
10,700,000
5,800,000
Share earns
.54
.29


Mistrial Ruled for Mulheren
LEAD: A Federal judge in Manhattan declared a mistrial yesterday on 26 felony counts against John A. Mulheren Jr., the securities trader already convicted of illegal dealings with the stock speculator Ivan F. Boesky.


Refugee Ships Leave for Albania
LEAD: Ships from three nations sailed today to a rendezvous off Albania in a sea lift of more than 4,500 Albanians seeking to escape their homeland, Europe's last haven for hard-line Communists.


Eugene Levy, 63, Republican Member of New York Senate
LEAD: State Senator Eugene Levy, a Republican from Suffern, N.Y., who had served in the State Legislature since 1969, died yesterday in Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla.
He was 63 years old.


Italian Climbs Into Lead; LeMond Gains
LEAD: A day after he became the man to beat in the Tour de France, Ronan Pensec was beaten badly in an individual time trial and lost the overall leader's yellow jersey.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-7
The maverick of Soviet politics, Boris N. Yeltsin, announced he was quitting the Communist Party, dealing a sharp new blow to the once-monolithic force even as it struggled to stay united.
Page A1


Hyannis Journal;   Rose Kennedy at 100: Still Very Much Rose
LEAD: On Sunday, after Mass in her rambling seaside home here, Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy was sitting on the porch with her daughter Eunice Shriver and her grandson Robert Shriver.


William M. Weil, Manufacturer, 89
LEAD: William M. Weil, a retired manufacturer of specialized lighting, died on Monday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 89 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Rockwell Stock
LEAD: The Rockwell International Corporation said its board had extended the company's stock repurchase program by an additional $500 million.
It said that the program was started in March 1986 and extended in $500 million increments in March 1987 and December 1988.
Rockwell said that at current prices, the extended program would reduce common shares outstanding by about 7.5 percent.


From Bad to Worse
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sunwest Financial Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunwest Financial Services Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
12,329,000
b3,448,000
Per share
-
.37
Shares outst
9,409,705
9,351,333
6mo net loss
7,639,000
b10,496,000
Per share
-
1.12
Shares outst
9,404,545
9,347,603


Mission Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mission Valley Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,245,000
1,141,000
Per share
.35
.32
Shares outst
3,584,339
3,518,432
6mo net inc
2,360,000
2,083,000
Per share
.66
.64
Shares outst
3,590,924
3,269,656


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums
''A YEAR WITH CHILDREN,'' a selection of painting, sculpture, poetry and essays created by children of public schools in New York City and New Jersey, in the Learning Through Art/Guggenheim Museum Children's program, 8 A.M. to midnight daily, at the Fifth Avenue gallery windows of the Empire State Building, 350 Fifth Avenue, at 34th Street.


Texscan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texscan Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
13,491,000
12,563,000
Net inc
1,100,000
352,000
Share earns
.10
.03
Shares outst
11,027,798
10,984,520
Yr sales
50,126,000
48,495,000
Net inc
2,095,000
137,000
Share earns
.19
.01
Shares outst
10,913,208
10,878,529


First Union Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Union Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
86,933,000
73,697,000
Per share
.72
.69
6mo net inc
164,492,000
145,878,000
Per share
1.39
1.37
The bank said the second quarter of 1990 included an after-tax gain of $7 million from the divestiture of 13 branches in Florida.


KREMLIN MAVERICK LEAVES THE PARTY; MORE MAY FOLLOW
LEAD: Boris N. Yeltsin, the popular maverick of Soviet politics, announced today that he was quitting the Communist Party, dealing a sharp new blow to the once-monolithic force even as it struggled to stay united.


Six Nights for Sampling A World of Unsung Bands
LEAD: IN the next six days, 400 bands from around the world will pile into Manhattan as part of this year's New Music Seminar, an annual music-industry convention.
More than 30 nightclubs will overflow with the sounds of Spanish flamenco, Swedish hard-core, British hip-hop and industrial disco, German heavy metal and New York noise rock.


Review/Film;   Looking to the Dead For Mirth and Inspiration
LEAD: Current Hollywood thinking extends into the next world, but not very far.
Being dead has lately been presented on screen as a character-building experience, but beyond that the current ghost films hedge their bets.
The questions of just what ghosts can do, of what effect ghosts may have on others or even of how ghosts regard their new status are seldom even addressed.


European American Banks reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* European American Banks
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,115,000
22,825,000
6mo net loss
76,096,000
b42,875,000
b-Net income


Sherwin-Williams Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sherwin-Williams Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
611,385,000
583,984,000
Net inc
44,910,000
38,696,000
Share earns
1.03
.90
Shares outst
43,552,509
43,094,835
6mo sales
1,110,845,000
1,048,765,000
Net inc
54,905,000
47,506,000
Share earns
1.26
1.10
Shares outst
43,466,855
43,077,238


CHRONICLE
LEAD: For 10 years, the New York Public Library has bestowed its Literary Lions awards on contemporary writers, men and women whose works range from the urban sociology of Tom Wolfe to history in the making by Henry A. Kissinger or the novels of Toni Morrison and the plays of Edward Albee.
Many of the 200 award recipients will be honored at the library on Nov.


Paramount Lifts TV Stake
LEAD: Paramount Communications Inc. has increased its majority stake to 83.3 percent in a company that owns six television stations and has offered to buy the remaining interest for about $52 million.


G.M.A.C. Prices A Note Offering
LEAD: The General Motors Acceptance Corporation, a unit of the General Motors Corporation, is offering $200 million in senior notes due in 2005 through Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


AT THE BAR
LEAD: There is nothing odd about lawyers' showing up in the Albany City Courthouse.
But over the past few months and continuing through the summer, a steady stream of lawyers are coming before the court in a most unusual capacity: as defendants.


BSD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BSD Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,260,000
744,000
Per share
.34
.21
6mo net inc
2,270,000
1,490,000
Per share
.61
.43


Genlyte Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genlyte Group (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
123,012,000
128,507,000
Net inc
1,650,000
3,367,000
Share earns
.13
.26
6mo sales
254,746,000
257,760,000
Net inc
4,816,000
6,289,000
Share earns
.37
.48


Retail Sales Increased Slightly Last Month
LEAD: Lower prices and special promotions increased business at stores last month but sluggish economic conditions continued to restrain overall sales growth, the nation's largest retailers said yesterday.


Computer Task Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Task Group (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
56,538,000
59,747,000
Net inc
1,702,000
567,000
Share earns
.18
.07
Shares outst
9,670,000
8,362,000
6mo rev
115,688,000
118,308,000
Net inc
3,646,000
2,047,000
Share earns
.38
.25
Shares outst
9,697,000
8,306,000


Susan L. Borden Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Susan Laura Borden, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Borden of Forest Hills, Queens, was married last evening at the Tam O'Shanter Club in Brookville, L.I., to Dr.
Steve W. Rucker, a son of Gloria Rucker of West Orange, N.J., and Dr.
Maurice Rucker of Alfred, N.Y.
Rabbi Michael Davis performed the ceremony.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE INDIAN OCEAN - 10:30 A.M. and 3 P.M.
COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: 963-1234.
Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Space Program Builds America's Future;   Big-Science Bubble
LEAD: To the Editor:
Double, double, toil and trouble;
Challenger lost, and now it's Hubble.
Mirror faulty, image shake.
Water freeze, O ring break.
Heirs of Newton set aside.
Bottom line: cost override.
Double, double, toil and trouble;
Time to prick big-science bubble.
WILLIAM VOLK


Stock of Computer Associates Drops
LEAD: The stock of Computer Associates International Inc. plunged $6.25 a share today, to $10.25, on the New York Stock Exchange after the company said its results for the quarter ended June 30 were unlikely to meet analysts' estimates.
The 37.9 percent decline in the stock's price was the largest of the day on the Big


A. J. Talks Speed, Cars And Drivers
LEAD: A. J. Foyt has had a few cars that conked out, sometimes at Indianapolis or Daytona.
He's also been in a few that crashed.


Sensormatic Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sensormatic Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
56,602,000
45,645,000
Net inc
6,240,000
b10,370,000
Share earns
.23
.37
Shares outst
27,271,000
27,968,000
Yr rev
191,267,000
150,904,000
Net inc
20,027,000
b16,688,000
Share earns
.72
.60
Shares outst
27,815,000
27,817,000


INB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* INB Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b1,604,000
16,228,000
Per share
.09
.90
6mo net inc
b15,970,000
28,592,000
Per share
.88
1.58
b-Reflected the addition of $20 million to its provision for credit losses.


Kimberly-Clark reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kimberly-Clark (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,612,700,000
1,396,000,000
Net inc
b80,400,000
101,300,000
Share earns
1.01
1.26
6mo sales
3,186,000,000
2,817,800,000
Net inc
b197,600,000
204,400,000
Share earns
2.47
2.54
Shares outst
80,100,000
80,600,000


Potlatch Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Potlatch Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
321,234,000
296,092,000
Net inc
32,348,000
25,717,000
Share earns
1.12
.89
Shares outst
28,926,000
28,821,000
6mo sales
647,956,000
593,467,000
Net inc
69,355,000
61,629,000
Share earns
2.40
2.19
Shares outst
28,902,000
28,180,000


Dow Rises 37.13 to Set a Record
LEAD: The prospect of lower interest rates and higher corporate profits pushed stock prices to record levels yesterday.
The Dow Jones industrial average surged by 37.13, to a new high for the blue-chip average of 2,969.80.


Olympic Festival;   Blazing a Trail in Modern Pentathlon
LEAD: When Baron Pierre de Coubertin of France devised his model for the modern pentathlon, he didn't have anyone like Lori Norwood in mind.


Computer Technology Suit
LEAD: Two founders of an American computer company have filed a lawsuit against the Japanese farm equipment maker that financed them, charging the Japanese company with trying to take control of the computer maker's technology.


Today Home Entertainment reports earnings for Year to Dec 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Today Home Entertainment
Year to Dec 31
1989
1988
Revenue
5,801,132
5,184,886
Net loss
368,788
1,781,753
Shares outst
4,463,000
3,475,000


Parent May Seek Bid for Dole
LEAD: Castle &amp; Cooke Inc. said today that it was considering selling its Dole Food Company subsidiary after several companies had expressed interested in acquiring the operation.


Jogger Defense Case: Scattershot Approach
LEAD: Halfway through the trial of three teen-agers accused of beating and raping the woman most New Yorkers know only as ''the jogger,'' the defense lawyers have been notable mostly for what they have not done.


First Empire State reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Empire State (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
13,804,000
12,891,000
Per share
2.02
1.78
Shares outst
6,819,000
7,209,000
6mo net inc
26,570,000
b15,890,000
Per share
3.87
2.19
Shares outst
6,866,000
7,232,000


Kaydon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaydon Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
46,239,000
38,539,000
Net inc
6,982,000
6,107,000
Share earns
.81
.71
6mo sales
89,120,000
75,747,000
Net inc
12,970,000
11,731,000
Share earns
1.51
1.37


A Pianist Champions John Field
LEAD: ''The difficulty I've had this year is that I've been away from home so much, and that's something that takes getting used to,'' the pianist John O'Conor said the other day, speaking from his home in Dublin.
Apart from complaining about the Irish rain - particularly when he heard it was sunny and warm in New York


John H. Baer, Executive, 71
LEAD: John H. Baer, a textile industry executive, died on Tuesday at the Hotel Norfolk in Nairobi, Kenya, while on a business trip.
He was 71 years old and lived in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.


Florio Signs and Explains Tax Rise
LEAD: The battle over how to explain the largest tax increase in New Jersey history was joined by Gov.
Jim Florio today, as he signed the bill to raise $1.25 billion in new income taxes.
He described the action as property-tax relief for the middle class.


Repricing Calls Abroad
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission said today that it wants to change the international phone pricing system so that carriers can compete fairly and charge consumers less to call overseas.


Review/Ballet;   A 2d Cast in Bolshoi 'Swan Lake'
LEAD: More than one film or novel (usually comic) has concerned itself with the intrigues and gossip inherent in the ballet world.
But in the end, the only thing that matters is what takes place on stage.


Disney Tells Mowgli's Tales
LEAD: Its setting notwithstanding, ''The Jungle Book'' presents Walt Disney-style animation at its most urbane.
First released in 1967 and last shown theatrically in 1984, this full-length animated feature, which opens nationwide today, has a droll wit guaranteed to keep parents as well entertained as their children.


Democrats Retreating On Inquiry
LEAD: Democratic leaders pounded the Republicans over the savings and loan scandal today.
But the attempt to compel the Attorney General to consider appointing an independent prosecutor in the case of Neil Bush appeared to founder as Republican leaders threatened to retaliate by seeking an outside prosecutor to look into the actions of former Democratic leaders.


Boat of Something That Isn't Blotting Paper Arrives


Bail Denied for Dart-Case Suspect; His Lawyer Calls Evidence Flimsy
LEAD: A lawyer for a Bronx man accused of blowing homemade darts at women said yesterday that the evidence against his client is flimsy and the charges motivated by the publicity surrounding the attacks.


Beach Towel Wins by Nose In Rally at Meadowlands
LEAD: Beach Towel rallied midway through the stretch tonight and captured the $1,153,500 Meadowlands Pace by a nose over Jake and Elwood.


The People Threat
LEAD: Lucien Paye, head of the O.E.C.D., which groups 24 industrialized countries, was asked what worried him most on the horizon.
U.S. budget and trade deficits?
Protectionism?
Recession?


Review/Music;   Against All Odds: A 'Village' Festival
LEAD: For sheer feistiness, few classical-music series rival the Washington Square Music Festival, which has stood up to the vicissitudes of its Greenwich Village surroundings for more than three decades.
In recent years, with the park overrun by successive drug cultures, the setting has often seemed unwelcoming, if not actively hostile.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I want to change my life.
I want to lead a better life.
I don't want Communism.''
- Eno Vaso, an Albanian who fled to Italy. [5:5.]


Bahamas Facing More Questions As It Buries 39 Drowned Haitians
LEAD: Thirty-nine Haitians fleeing their impoverished Caribbean island drowned when their sailboat capsized and sank in choppy seas while being towed by Bahamian authorities, Government officials said.


Evolution in Europe;   20,000 in Bucharest Demand Release of Student
LEAD: More than 20,000 people gathered outside government buildings in Bucharest today in the biggest opposition protest since the December uprising that ousted Nicolae Ceausescu, the Communist dictator.


U.S. Policy on Cambodia Shifts a Bit
LEAD: In a break from past policy of shunning the Cambodian Government, the Bush Administration announced today that it had accepted an offer by Phnom Penh to cooperate in examining what could be the remains of Americans missing in action from the Vietnam War.


Airbus Industrie
LEAD: Airbus Industrie declined to comment on a French newspaper report that the European aircraft consortium had sharply cut its losses in 1989.
Airbus would say only that it expected to break even sooner than originally forecast.
Quoting sources in the industry, La Tribune de l'Expansion, a Paris daily, reported that Airbus had cut its losses to $150 million last year, from $508 million in 1988.


McDonnell Stock Climbs on Rumors
LEAD: The stock of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation moved higher today amid rumors and speculation about the struggling military contractor's future.
McDonnell Douglas's shares rose $1.25 each, to $44.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Evolution in Europe;   Remarks on Germany Prompt Tory Upheaval
LEAD: Anti-German remarks by one of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's closest Cabinet allies has plunged her Government into crisis and forced its deep divisions over the European Community into the open.


Pharmacists Can Spot Adverse Drug Reactions
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rights Bill for Disabled Is Sent to Bush
LEAD: The Senate today completed Congressional action on a far-reaching bill to bar discrimination against people with physical and mental disabilities.


British Inflation at 9.8%
LEAD: Britain's inflation rate, among the highest in the industrial world, climbed again in June, reaching an eight-year high of 9.8 percent, the Government said today.
The increase in the retail price index, from 9.7 percent in May, was slightly below economists' forecasts.
But the underlying rate of inflation, which excludes home loans and the poll tax, fell to 6.9 percent, from 7 percent in May, the Central Statistical Office said.


Inmate Executed in Alabama For 1976 Murder of Woman
LEAD: A black man convicted of murder 12 years ago read a statement denouncing the death penalty as racist and then was strapped into Alabama's electric chair and executed early today.


Report Urges Cutting New York Telephone Rates
LEAD: The staff of the state's utility regulating board recommended today that a rate increase sought by New York Telephone be denied and the company be forced to cut its rates instead.


Rates Fall On Moves By Fed
LEAD: The Federal Reserve took steps yesterday that lowered interest rates, a day after the central bank's chairman, Alan Greenspan, suggested that lower rates might be needed to stimulate the economy and alleviate a tightening of credit by major banks.


Patents;   Using a Gene To Prevent Crop Spoilage
LEAD: A biotechnology company in New Jersey won a patent this week for a method of preventing fruits and vegetables from spoiling by using genetic engineering to enhance their natural defenses against fungus.


In Canada, an Environmental Disaster Looms
LEAD: To the Editor:


Days of Fruit Tramp's Painful Harvest Fade
LEAD: Luther Henry Tindal, who is 45 years old and looks 60, and his wife, Linda, 34, rest on a dust-caked couch outside their $125-a-month cinderblock shack here, smoking discount cigarettes and drinking discount beer.


Sanders Back for Now
LEAD: After being recalled from the Yankees' Class AAA Columbus farm club for the second time this season, Deion Sanders might be thinking about changing his nickname from Prime Time to Yo-Yo.
But one thing the 22-year-old outfielder says he doesn't want to think about right now is his other athletic career, playing in the National Football League as a cornerback for the Atlanta


Mary B. Joy, Volunteer, 82
LEAD: Mary B. Joy, a former official with the American Association of University Women who was also active in many other civic organizations, died on Wednesday at her home in Morris Township, N.J.
She was 82 years old and died of congestive heart failure, her husband, Homer, said.


Letter: On Mega-Science;   'Big' Research Honors Human Spirit
LEAD: To the Editor:


Evolution in Europe;   Lower House in Poland Approves Bill to Make Citizens Stockholders
LEAD: Parliament's lower house today approved a plan that would give every citizen a share in any of several thousand companies now owned by the state.


Technical Innovators Don't Start With Math
LEAD: To the Editor:


Confident Ribbs Is Riding High
LEAD: Sometime during the Indy-car race through the streets of Detroit on June 17, Willy T. Ribbs had the rush of self-confidence that drivers say makes racing so addictive.


Yes to Yeltsin on Pluralism, at Least
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev remains hopeful that the Communist Party, still the only nationwide political force, provides the best vehicle for reforming the Soviet Union.
Boris Yeltsin, arguing that hard-liners who still dominate party ranks are unreformable, now abandons the party to take a different path to radical change.


Neil Bush, Meet Mr. Kafka
LEAD: A terrible thing is happening to President Bush's youngest son, Neil.
He is in danger of being turned into a sound bite.


Rain Strands 102 at the Women's Open
LEAD: Any complaints that the United States Women's Open was being played under conditions that were too easy came to an abrupt halt today as the field sloshed around a waterlogged golf course in the midst of waiting out three rain delays.


News Summary
LEAD: International
2-5
The Communist Party defections continued as the Moscow and Leningrad City Council leaders quit the party and insurgent forces began moving slowly toward forming a national opposition coalition.
Page 1
Thousands of Albanian refugees sailed into Western Europe and, they were certain, to a better life.


Religion Notes
LEAD: O'Connor and Rome There was a great deal of speculation last month when John Cardinal O'Connor abruptly left a spiritual retreat in California and got on a plane for Rome.
He had arrived in California just the day before from New York in anticipation of spending a week with other bishops from around the nation.


Pirates Extend Lead to Two Games
LEAD: Pittsburgh turned a suicide-squeeze bunt and a hit-and-run single into two runs to back Doug Drabek's strong pitching as the Pirates beat the San Diego Padres, 4-1, tonight for their ninth victory in 11 games.


Contel Stock Gains Illegal, S.E.C. Says
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission said yesterday that illegal profits of at least $1 million were obtained from a sophisticated insider trading scheme in the stock and options of the Contel Corporation shortly before the company announced Thursday that it would be bought by the GTE Corporation.


Mercedes-Benz In Union Talks
LEAD: A spokesman for Mercedes-Benz A.G. said today that the company was negotiating with unions to add special shifts at its factories to help meet rising demand from East Germany and elsewhere.
The auto-making arm of


Greek Orthodox Group Backs Married Bishops
LEAD: Representatives of the clergy and the laity of the Greek Orthodox Church in the Western hemisphere have recommended that the church allow married priests to become bishops.
The proposal, which would alter 1,300 years of Eastern Orthodox practice, would require an unusual consensus among Orthodox Christian bishops.


Evolution in Europe;   Stung by Denial of Western Aid, Romanian Officials Say Aim Is Democracy
LEAD: Stung by a decision last week by 24 Western nations to deny economic aid to Romania, Government officials here assert that this punishment was mistaken and that it will help keep Romanians impoverished while hurting the nation's efforts to set up a market economy.


800 Numbers Are on the Way, Budapest
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wiper Inventor Awarded $5 Million
LEAD: An inventor who spent more than a decade in court trying to win payments from auto makers for patents on the intermittent windshield wiper was awarded more than $5 million today against the Ford Motor Company.


Cambrex-Cyanmid
LEAD: The Cambrex Corporation, a chemical maker, said it planned to buy a large part of the American Cyanamid Company's textile chemicals business, including manufacturing plants in Charlotte, N.C., for undisclosed terms.
It also said it intended to make the purchase through a new company in which Cambrex would have a majority interest.


Dow Breaks 3,000 but Ends at 2,980.20
LEAD: Amid signs that the Federal Reserve had acted to lower interest rates, the Dow Jones industrial average briefly broke through the magical 3,000 barrier yesterday.


Albany Decrees Medicaid Spending, and New York City Pays
LEAD: To the Editor:


Drunken Flying Persists Despite Treatment Effort
LEAD: Bruce K. is a pilot who flies Boeing 727 jetliners for a major airline.
He is also a recovering alcoholic.


Santucci to Go To Italy in Battle Over a Slaying
LEAD: Ten years ago, a Queens restaurant owner named Jimmy Yu was shot and killed by a young holdup man who fled the eating place in Rego Park.
Within weeks the police identified a 17-year-old resident alien from Italy, Anthony Sciacca of Queens, as the gunman.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The late JOHN T. DORRANCE JR., the patriarch of the family that owns the majority interest in the Campbell Soup Company, left almost $30 million to each of his six grandchildren, who range in age from 5 to 18, according to his will, which was filed Wednesday in the Montgomery County Court in Norristown,


Public Library Reaps a Communist Harvest
LEAD: The current records of today's events are the stuff that tomorrow's historians will reconstruct their yesterdays on.
In the case of the Communist world, the documentation has until recently been almost exclusively official, tailored to administrative demands, and this is most of what the New York Public


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, the introduction to a table on Thursday listing the assets of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York characterized it incompletely.
It showed assets of Mr.
Cuomo's wife, Matilda, along with his.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JULY, 14, 1990
LEAD:
Markets


INSIDE
LEAD:
Disability Bill Is Cleared


Barry Prosecutors Close to Completing Case
LEAD: After 19 days of testimony from 22 witnesses, the prosecution in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug and perjury trial announced today that it had almost completed its case.


Three Indian Ministers Resign
LEAD: Three ministers resigned from the Indian Cabinet on Friday, threatening the survival of Prime Minister V. P. Singh's coalition Government, an aide to a minister said today.


Paul Laurent, French Communist, 65
LEAD: Paul Laurent, a senior official of the French Communist Party, died of cancer on Sunday.
He was 65 years old.


Baseball;   Steinbrenner Legal Strategy: Baseball Inquiry Was Unfair
LEAD: Apparently concerned that he will receive a lengthy suspension from baseball, George Steinbrenner is preparing a legal attack based on the assertion that baseball's investigation of him was biased.


General Instrument Up As New Interest Arises
LEAD: The shares of the General Instrument Corporation rose today on the expectation that a new offer might arise to top the friendly bid of $1.6 billion made earlier this month by Forstmann Little &amp; Company.


Yanks Fall to White Sox, 3-2


Focus of Bombing Inquiry Is Held Without Bail on Separate Charge
LEAD: A Federal district judge today ordered that the man who has become the focus of an investigation into two fatal bombings in the Southeast last December be held without bail after his indictment earlier this week on unrelated charges of perjury and obstruction of justice.


Hooker Corp. Ex-Chief
LEAD: The former head of the Hooker Corporation, the collapsed retailing concern, and his wife have declared bankruptcy, citing debts of nearly $400 million.
George and Sheila Herscu filed debtors' petitions in the Federal court at Melbourne on Monday, which the court accepted.
The Hooker Corporation was placed in receivership a year ago with debts of about $1.6 billion.


Review/Music;   Venerable Hanoverians Make New York Debut
LEAD: The Niedersachsisches Staatsorchester - or Lower Saxony State Orchestra - from Hanover, West Germany, traces its history to 1636, the year Duke George of Calenberg established his residence in the city.
That would make the orchestra 354 years old, 88 years younger than the Dresden Staatskapelle, and 107 years older than the Gewandhaus Orchestra of Leipzig, two of Europe's better-known


Adiey, Deux Chevaux
LEAD: This is a tough summer for the French.
Bad enough that a reunited Germany will put an end to French aspirations to the leadership of Europe.
Bad enough that the English are buying up half the Normandy and Brittany coasts as summer homes.
But now, the truly inconceivable has happened: Citroen has announced that, after 43 years, the last Deux Chevaux will roll off the final remaining production line, in Portugal, at the end of the month.


Viola Is Erratic and Reds Prove Exploitive
LEAD: From the season's start, Frank Viola has insisted that he doesn't focus on his statistics, being, among other things, suspicious that he might get dizzy from any high opinion of himself that might result.
Tonight, his numbers weren't anything to get dizzy about.


Evolution in Europe;   To Albanians, 'Ciao Italia!' Means Haven
LEAD: Tattered, penniless and weary, but jubilant just the same, thousands of Albanian refugees sailed today into Western Europe and, they were certain, to a better life.


Control Shift At Gallimard
LEAD: In a decision that would remove France's leading independent book publishing company from family control, Francoise Gallimard has agreed to sell her 12.5 percent stake in Editions Gallimard to the Banque Nationale de Paris.


Review/Theater;   Pop Star as a Nontraditional Romeo
LEAD: Lured by the pop-star glamour of Roland Gift, an unusually youthful theater audience swarmed through the Staller Center for the Arts at the State University here this evening for the first of five performances of Shakespeare's ''Romeo and Juliet.''


Courtnall to Blues
LEAD: The St.
Louis Blues continued rebuilding yesterday, trading a center, Peter Zezel, and a defenseman, Mike Lalor, to the Capitals for Geoff Courtnall, a left wing.
The deal came 12 hours after the Blues acquired Scott Stevens, a free-agent defenseman, from the Capitals. (AP)


Vikings' Browner Signs
LEAD: Joey Browner, a strong safety for the Minnesota Vikings who has played in the last five Pro Bowls, has signed three one-year contracts.


John F. Middlemiss, Lawyer, 91
LEAD: Prof.
John F. Middlemiss, a lawyer in Brooklyn and a retired law professor, died on Thursday at the home of a daughter, Nancy Palmer, in Fairfield, Conn., where he celebrated his 91st birthday on Sunday.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture yesterday with an article about the discovery of a gene that causes a nervous system disease was mislabeled by The Associated Press and published in error in some copies.


Costly Proposals to Curb Asbestos Ignite New York City Debate
LEAD: Proposals aimed at reducing the threat of airborne asbestos in buildings have set off a furious debate in New York City, which already has some of the toughest asbestos regulations in the country.


Esther L. Brown, 92, Social Anthropologist
LEAD: Esther Lucile Brown, an author, educator and social anthropologist whose contributions led to major changes in nursing education and practice, died July 6 at Pacific Presbyterian Medical Center in San Francisco.
She was 92 years old and lived in San Francisco.


Gold Prices Climb Sharply; Grain and Soybeans Also Up
LEAD: Prices of gold futures rallied strongly yesterday on the Commodity Exchange in New York, but some analysts wondered whether the market would sustain the gains, which were prompted in part by a decline in interest rates.


Hopes Rise on Fixing Shuttle Leaks So the Fleet Can Resume Flying
LEAD: The hydrogen fuel leaks on two space shuttles appear to stem from two entirely different problems in the fuel line, and space agency officials said today that the leaks should be relatively simple to fix so that the shuttle fleet can resume flying soon.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bancorp Hawaii Inc., Honolulu, said it would acquire FirstFed America Inc., Honolulu, a savings and loan holding company, and its units.


Castle &amp; Cooke
LEAD: The shares of Castle &amp; Cooke Inc. soared today in anticipation that the company would get a good price for its Dole Food Company unit.
Castle &amp; Cooke said late Thursday that it had been reached by several companies that wanted to buy Dole.
Castle &amp; Cooke's shares jumped $6 each today, to $36.50, on the New York Stock Exchange, where its 19.7 percent gain was the second best of the day.


Herbert Gilman, 65, A Marketing Pioneer For Discount Stores
LEAD: Herbert Gilman, a pioneer in discount merchandising and the former chief executive of Ames Department Stores Inc., died on Thursday at Hartford Hospital.
He was 65 years old and lived in West Hartford.


Music Festival in Japan Takes a Leaf From Tanglewood's Own Best Seller


Congress Is Close to Regulating Price of Basic Cable TV Service
LEAD: Pressed by widespread public anger over steep rate increases for cable television service, Congress is close to imposing modest controls over prices.
But disputes over proposals aimed at fostering competition could derail the legislation and leave the industry a winner by default.


Vehicle Sales Rose 2.5% in Early July
LEAD: Helped by strong demand for light trucks from General Motors and Ford, sales of American-built vehicles rose 2.5 percent in early July, the industry's second consecutive 10-day period of healthy sales gains.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS


Arizona Court Says Mecham Can Run Again
LEAD: The Arizona Supreme Court has unanimously ruled that former Gov.
Evan Mecham can run for governor this fall despite his being impeached and removed from the office in 1988.


Dead Batteries That Start
LEAD: Recharging a dead automobile battery can now be as easy as flipping a switch.


Earl Stewart, Golf Coach, 68
LEAD: Earl Stewart, who won two events on the PGA Tour and coached golf for 13 years at Southern Methodist University, died Wednesday after a long illness.
He was 68 years old.


Oka Journal;   Mohawks Make a Point: They Are Distinct, Too
LEAD: Lucy Gaspe gazed up St.-Michel Street, past a crowd of reporters and television crews, past knots of police officers with pump-action shotguns crouching behind a wall of sandbags, to a barricade of upturned police cars and a front-end loader at the crest of the hill.


Manley Beasley, Evangelist, 58
LEAD: The Rev.
Manley Beasley, a prominent Southern Baptist evangelist who did not allow a longtime kidney ailment to keep him away from the pulpit, died of kidney disease on Monday in a hospital in Dallas.
He was 58 years old.


Phillips Plan on Stock
LEAD: The Phillips Petroleum Company said on Thursday that its employee stock ownership plan would borrow about $400 million to buy about 15 million new common shares from Phillips.


The Right Role for the School Board
LEAD: New York City's school system is at a critical point of transition.
A new Board of Education, headed by Dr.
Gwendolyn Baker, is about to begin what could be a constructive or destructive relationship with Chancellor Joseph Fernandez.
Mr.
Fernandez has made an impressive start in his first seven months on the job.


Protester Told to Leave Site of King's Death
LEAD: A woman who has engaged in a protest for the last two years by camping in front of the motel where the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. died was ordered by a judge today to get out of the way of workers building a museum there.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: A co-star of the television comedy ''Cheers,'' KELSEY GRAMMER, has been ordered to stand trial in Van Nuys, Calif., on a cocaine possession charge after failing to enter a drug-treatment program.


Evolution in Europe;   Kohl Will Meet Gorbachev Today in Moscow on Unity
LEAD: Chancellor Helmut Kohl will fly to Moscow late Saturday for some personal diplomacy with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, hoping to convince the Soviet leader to drop his remaining objections to German unification within NATO, West German officials said today.


Starrett City Keeps Apartments Vacant Despite Waiting List
LEAD: In the 20 months since the United States Supreme Court outlawed racial quotas that favored white applicants to the huge Starrett City housing complex in Brooklyn, the black and Hispanic families who had sought apartments for years have remained stuck on a long waiting list.


QUAYLE DEFENDS BUSH'S TAX STAND
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle sought to reassure a nervous group of Republican leaders today that President Bush did not simply kick away one of their best campaign issues when he acknowledged last month that tax increases would be needed to reduce the Federal budget deficit.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With a Change in Doctors
LEAD: When a personal doctor retires or dies, long-term patients confront two problems: finding another doctor and obtaining medical records.


Dollar Rises in U.S. Trading After Declining in Europe
LEAD: The dollar rose in the United States yesterday in volatile, heavy trading after falling in Europe.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.06
8.25
9.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.60
7.67
7.83
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.52
7.57
7.62
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.41
8.49
7.91
30-YR.


Patents;   Third Company Offers Laser Eye Procedure
LEAD: Just as a resolution appeared at hand in a bitter patent battle over a promising laser technology to correct near-sightedness and far-sightedness, a new complication arose this week.


Evolution in Europe;   Text of Statement by Two Soviet Officials
LEAD: Following is the text of the statement by Gavriil K. Popov, the City Council chief in Moscow, and Anatoly A. Sobchak, his counterpart in Leningrad, announcing their decision to quit the Communist Party, as translated by The New York Times:


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   For Summer Driving
LEAD:
Automobile experts warn that if your car is not properly maintained in summer, a vacation could come to an unexpected stop.
Make sure that lights, brakes and wipers are in good condition.
The Automobile Club of New York says that a car's engine should always be properly tuned, and it suggests that the following items be checked before any warm-weather trip.


Evolution in Europe;   Prague Will Pull Some Citizens From Cuba
LEAD: Czechoslovakia is to evacuate its women and children living in Cuba as a diplomatic dispute with Havana worsens, Prague television reported today.


About New York;   Not Just Mortar Holds Together Church's Stones
LEAD: Eddie Pizzaro grew up poor in Spanish Harlem.
His father abused drugs, went to jail every so often and beat his precious mother in front of him.
Out on the ragged streets, friend after friend seemed to fall inexorably into similar dismal traps.


At Eastern, Optimism Despite a Glum Report
LEAD: ''Worse in the near term, better in the long term.''


Newman Signs Hornet Offer Sheet, Leaving Next Move to Knicks
LEAD: Johnny Newman, the Knick small forward, signed a free-agent offer sheet with the Charlotte Hornets yesterday.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about an exhibition of art labeled ''degenerate'' by the Nazis misstated the dates.
The show, ''1937: Modern Art and Politics in Prewar Germany,'' will be at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art from Feb. 17 to May 12, 1991, and at the Art Institute of Chicago from June 20 to Sept.


Rikers Melee Leaves 87 With Injuries
LEAD: At least 40 correction officers and 47 inmates were injured on Rikers Island yesterday when 48 Muslim prisoners seeking revenge for the slashing of their religious leader stormed the cell of his attacker, correction officials said.


Review/Dance;   An Odile as Harridan
LEAD: Lyudmila Semenyaka, the best known of the Bolshoi Ballet's current crop of visiting ballerinas, can do better than the ''Swan Lake'' she proffered with alternating casualness and intensity on Thursday night at the New York State Theater.


Producer Prices Up Modest 0.2%
LEAD: In a mixed reading on inflation, the Labor Department reported today that prices at the producer level rose a modest two-tenths of 1 percent in June but would have climbed much more without continued declines for energy and food.


Robert N. Timmins, 60, An Investment Banker
LEAD: Robert Nelson Timmins, a New York investment banker, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old.


Fake Car-Inspection Stickers Spreading
LEAD: Hundreds of counterfeit car-inspection stickers are turning up on cars in suburban New York counties in what motor-vehicle officials say is the largest such scheme they have seen.


Evolution in Europe;   2 TOP CITY CHIEFS QUIT SOVIET PARTY AS CONGRESS ENDS
LEAD: The Communist Party suffered additional major defections today as the Moscow and Leningrad City Council leaders quit the party and insurgent forces began moving slowly toward forming a national opposition coalition.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: A rare bas mitzvah will take place today in the eastern Chinese city of Kaifeng in Henan Province.
YILING LIVIA CHEN-JOSEPHSON, a young New Yorker who is the daughter of a Chinese mother and a Jewish father, is scheduled to read from the Torah in a Kaifeng museum and to complete the ancient coming-of-age ritual with a few words of recently learned


Louise A. Baum, Executive, 64
LEAD: Louise A. Baum, president of the Eastern Bag &amp; Paper Company of Bridgeport, Conn., died yesterday at her home in Fairfield, Conn.
She was 64 years old.


Strain on Ethiopian City: Stranded Jews
LEAD: Zewdu Sahelu, a 55-year-old Ethiopian Jew who has never been to school and can neither read nor write, arrived in the capital here two months ago from his farm, expecting to go to Israel.


Sandinista Democrats, Please Stand Up
LEAD: If the Sandinistas think their influence in Nicaragua's army, police and unions entitles them to force the elected Government of President Violeta Chamorro to share power, they don't understand what democratic politics is all about.


Hall of Fame Adds 2
LEAD: Joseph F. Cullman 3d, a leading organizer of women's professional tennis events, and Jan Kodes, one of the leading men's singles players of the early 1970's, will be inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in Newport, R.I., today.


Bridge
LEAD: Two publishers on opposite sides of the Atlantic, Robert Hale in Britain and Dover in the United States, provide a useful service by reprinting major works of bridge literature that have long been out of print.
Two of these, each with a transatlantic author-publisher combination, are worth noting.


Sears Expects Steep Drop In Second-Quarter Profits
LEAD: Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company said today that it expects a sharp decline in second-quarter earnings because its Allstate Insurance group's catastrophe-related losses exceeded expectations and sales by the merchandise group were disappointing.


Genentech Net Off 45%
LEAD: Genentech Inc. today reported sharply lower earnings for the second quarter because of expenses related to its planned merger with Roche Holdings Inc.
It also told of a weakening in sales of its heart-attack drug, tissue plasminogen activator, possibly because of mounting competition.


Deal Is Set For L.I. Papers
LEAD: The former owner of Chanry Communications, a financially troubled chain of free weekly newspapers on Long Island, has agreed in principle to buy back the chain from E. M. Warburg, Pincus &amp; Company.
Stan Henry, who founded


Westinghouse Profit Up 10.5%
LEAD: The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said on Thursday that its net income increased 10.5 percent in the second quarter as broadcasting revenue and operating profit grew.


A Douglas Counterpunch
LEAD: The heavyweight champion, James (Buster) Douglas, did not get much time on the witness stand yesterday to respond to the testimony of his promoter, Don King, but he got his licks in as he left Room 443 at United States District Court in Manhattan.


O'Neill Recalls Former Glories in Address to Party
LEAD: Gov.
William A. O'Neill, making his final address at a state convention as Connecticut's chief executive, spoke tonight of Democrats' past glories but offered no detailed guidance to a party that he conceded is now badly fractured.


Intergroup Move By Centaur Fails
LEAD: The Delaware Supreme Court ruled that the effort by Centaur Partners L.P. to expand the board of National Intergroup Inc. had failed.
The parties said the court had upheld National Intergroup's position that Centaur's proposal to amend the company's bylaws to increase the size of the board to 15, an increase of three members, required approval of 80 percent of the outstanding shares.


Still Excluded After All These Years
LEAD: Twenty summers after his book ''Ball Four'' was supposed to have destroyed the game of baseball as we know it, the leading pitcher of the Little Ferry Giants of the New Jersey Metropolitan League sat in his office and thought about his distinction in the history of the New York Yankees.


Mets Tell Strawberry Contract Talks Are Off
LEAD: The Mets, conceding that they ran the enormous risk of losing their marquee player and facing a severe public backlash next fall, said today that they had broken off contract negotiations with Darryl Strawberry because of a ''huge gulf'' and would not resume them until the end of the season.


Your Money;   A Foreign Twist In Fraud Schemes
LEAD: State securities administrators said in Congressional testimony this week that American investors, lured by promises of guaranteed high returns overseas, were defrauded of at least $1.1 billion in the last two years.


Robert McKay, 70, Legal Scholar Who Led 1971 Attica Panel, Dies
LEAD: Robert B. McKay, a former dean of the New York University Law School who led the New York State commission that investigated the 1971 Attica prison uprising, died yesterday morning in Reno, where he was to address the National Judicial College.
He was 70 years old and lived in Manhattan.


New York City School Board Shifts Application Costs to Teachers
LEAD: The New York City Board of Education, which until this month absorbed the full cost of substitute-teacher applications and most costs for prospective full-time teachers, has begun charging all applicants $104 in fees.


Books of The Times;   Israel's Master Spies: A Legend, With Lapses
LEAD:
Every Spy a Prince
The Complete History of Israel's Intelligence Community
By Dan Raviv and Yossi Melman
466 pages. Illustrated. A Marc Jaffe Book/ Houghton Mifflin. $24.95.


In Canada, an Environmental Disaster Looms;   Missed Opportunity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Yankees Get Hits but No Victory
LEAD: Steve Sax got a couple of hits: a double and a single.
Steve Balboni got a couple of hits: a single and his eighth home run of the season, a bases-empty shot in the fourth inning.
Nobody on the White Sox got more than one hit, but that didn't stop Chicago from beating the Yankees, 3-2, at Yankee Stadium last night.


Subway Solution
LEAD: To the Editor:


Strong Increase of 0.5% Shown in Retail Sales
LEAD: Helped by strong department store sales, overall retail sales rose five-tenths of 1 percent last month, the Government reported today.
It was the first increase since January.


Red Wings Replace Demers With Murray
LEAD: Jacques Demers, who guided the Detroit Red Wings to the playoffs for three consecutive seasons before the team missed out last season with a 28-38-14 record, was dismissed as head coach yesterday.
He was replaced by the former coach of the Washington Capitals, Bryan Murray, who will also be general manager.


Semen Tested in Jogger Case Was Not That of Defendants
LEAD: A scientific expert from the Federal Bureau of Investigation testified yesterday that a DNA analysis of semen found in the jogger in Central Park did not match any defendants charged with her rape and attempted murder.


Patents;   No Drill, No Novocain In Laser Dental System
LEAD: American Dental Laser Inc. of Birmingham, Mich., obtained a patent this week on a laser system to remove tooth and gum decay without the need for drills, scrapers or even Novocain.


Chinese Dissident to Study in U.S. (and to Speak Out)
LEAD: Fang Lizhi, China's most prominent dissident, said today that he planned to study in the United States for at least six months beginning in January.
He also said that while he was there he would meet with exiled Chinese dissidents and speak out against his country's Government.


Schools Chief in Los Angeles Says He'll Leave Next Year
LEAD: The Superintendent of Schools here announced Thursday that he would resign at the end of the next school year.


Concerns Grow About Marketing of Medical Alert Systems
LEAD: The growing use of personal emergency-alert systems, devices of potential benefit to millions of older people, is giving unscrupulous businesses a chance to prey on some of the nation's most vulnerable consumers.


Nunn Panel Cuts Pentagon $18 Billion
LEAD: In the first Congressional action on the 1991 military budget, a Senate committee today approved a plan to cut $18 billion from the Bush Administration's proposal, and called for sharp troop reductions in Europe and cuts in the ''Star Wars'' anti-missile program.


Diaper Debate: Cloth or Disposable?
LEAD: Disposable diapers have become a symbol of a throwaway society.
They squander resources and clog scarce landfills.
To be environmentally responsible, parents should use cloth diapers, which can be washed and re-used many times.
Or should they?
A study of the comprehensive environmental impact of both kinds of diapers, conducted for Procter &amp; Gamble by a prominent consulting company, suggests that neither has a strong advantage.


New Push For Adjusting Of Census
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins and Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York stepped up their criticism of the Census Bureau today, charging that the accuracy of the 1990 census was imperiled by the agency's reluctance to correct its tally to make up for millions of uncounted Americans.


Cynthia Morris Martin Plans to Wed in August
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William N. Martin of West Hartford, Conn., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Cynthia Morris Martin and David Noah Brown, the son of Murton L. Brown of New York and Carol Z. Brown of Boston.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Sabatini to Meet Grossman: Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina and Ann Grossman of the United States won their semifinal matches yesterday and will meet today in the singles final of the Gunze World tournament in Tokyo.
In men's play, Stefan Edberg of Sweden, the Wimbledon champion, withdrew from his semifinal against Jaime Yzaga of Peru after bruising his knee when he tripped over his racquet.


GORBACHEV MEETS WITH NATO'S CHIEF
LEAD: Underscoring a search for new relations between the North Atlantic alliance and the Kremlin, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today received the leader of NATO and agreed to visit and address the alliance at its headquarters in Brussels.


Wesleyan Student's Killing Is Tied to Drugs
LEAD: A student militant at Wesleyan University who was once considered one of the university's most promising minority scholars was killed during a drug deal, a police affidavit says.


Question Of the Week;   Should Baseball Suspend Steinbrenner?
LEAD: If guilty, yes.
If innocent, he should be allowed to return to his fraternity of selfish and arrogant owners, overpaid ballplayers, agents, and be forced to watch a Yankee game every day.


Perspectives: Town-House Rentals;   Awaiting a Comeback in High-End Sales
LEAD: It is not quite what they had in mind, but Irving Kovner and Jack Shafran have had no trouble finding tenants.
What they wanted was buyers.


Wall Street;   Close Ties at a Closed-End Fund
LEAD: One of the popular Wall Street parlor games these days is buying closed-end funds at a discount.
The rules are simple.
Check the price of a closed-end fund, a fund whose shares trade publicly like common stock.
Check the per-share market value of the fund's portfolio.
If the fund's price is a lot lower than its net asset value, consider it a bargain.


Investing Is One Thing, Insurance Another
LEAD: To the Editor:


Coach Arrested
LEAD: Just two days after he signed a two-year contract to remain head basketball coach at Cleveland State, Kevin Mackey was arrested Friday night on a charge of driving while intoxicated as he left a suspected drug house, the police said.
The school immediately suspended him without pay until more is learned about the case.


Focus: The Lake Erie Waterfront;   A Shrinking Supply of Developable Land
LEAD: After several years of rapid construction in the resort areas along Lake Erie, little waterfront property remains for additional development.
As a result, attention is turning to a tiny cluster of islands off the shore here.


Gastineau Is Thrown Out
LEAD: Mark Gastineau's debut in the Canadian Football League was just as provocative as the sack dance that used to set off opponents in the National Football League.
Doug Flutie's was just as spectacular as his college career.


Susan Dickson Story Wed
LEAD: At St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in New York, Susan Dickson Story, a daughter of Howard C. Story Jr. of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Carol Dickson Story, was married yesterday to David Campbell Cator, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Cator of Portola Valley, Calif.
The Rev.
Gary P. Fertig officiated.
Mrs.


The French Seek Their Own 'Peace Dividend'
LEAD: Having long pursued an independent military policy, the French Government is for the first time facing domestic pressure to reduce its arms spending in response to the changes sweeping the Warsaw Pact and NATO.


Business Diary/July 8-13
LEAD:
INTERNATIIONAL
The Best Little Summit in Texas
A summit conference meant to celebrate the triumph of free-market economics became a demonstration of laissez-faire diplomacy as well.
For every country and cause, the final communique had a clause.
As the conference in Houston ended, West Germany came away with the right to unilaterally aid the Soviet Union, Japan the right to aid China.


Meals With Artists at Mostly Mozart
LEAD: The Mostly Mozart Festival will open a series of pre-concert Meet-the-Artist ''Tastings'' tomorrow at Avery Fisher Hall.


On One Philippine Village, All the Forces That Rend
LEAD: The road from Lucena, the capital of Quezon Province, bogs down in mud miles from this fishing village at the base of the Bondoc peninsula.


College Students, at Least, Aren't Apathetic;   The Most Put Down
LEAD: To The Editor:


In Opera, 'Live' Is Livelier, but Also Riskier
LEAD: There are some things about a live operatic performance that a studio-made recording just can't duplicate.
All the possibilities - inspiration, subtlety, revelation of a composer's work, seizure of a great moment, athleticism with its risk of disaster, simple music-making - are in play before an audience of flesh and blood, in one particular moment.


The Secrets Of Gray Ranch
LEAD: In the nearly 90 years that Gray Ranch was managed as a working cattle ranch, it was able to preserve, as your article states, ''more separate species and subspecies of mammals . . . than any existing national wildlife refuge or national park in the continental United States.''


After Everything Came to Nothing
LEAD:
A LOT TO MAKE UP FOR.
By John Buell. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $18.95.) ''Strange that living should be so difficult,'' muses Stan Hagan, one of the three central characters in this quiet, sad, yet hopeful novel of people struggling to restore meaning and purpose to their lives.
Stan, a recovering drug addict and alcoholic, comes to the small Canadian town of Ashton in search of Del Symons, a young woman he mistreated during the time of their mutual enslavement to ''pleasures now joyless that they couldn't stop pursuing.


Tipping a Hat to the Universality of Modern Dance
LEAD: When Twyla Tharp is presented with the annual Samuel H. Scripps-American Dance Festival Award today for lifetime achievement in modern dance, she will not - as is customary - accept it in a theater.
The annual $25,000 award was established by the festival 10 years ago specifically to honor modern dance and its creative personalities.


Hampshire College
LEAD: As the mother of a 1990 Hampshire graduate and a veteran of various academic ceremonies, I feel that the unique quality of the college is perhaps most evident at its graduation ceremonies.
Instead of a mass of academic robes, there was a jaunty parade of individuals in costumes ranging from the outrageous to the conventional.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 15, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
WHILE MY PRETTY ONE SLEEPS, by Mary
Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $5.95.) The murder of a
gossip writer in New York.
2
8
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.)
Chinese-American women and their mothers.


'Cobbling Up' the Fruits of the Season
LEAD: COBBLERS are enjoying a renaissance.
Most often they are deep-dish fruit desserts with some kind of pastry topping.


Buying a Home
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Concert;   A Quartet Makes Musical Worlds Collide
LEAD: Picture the Allman Brothers and Boccherini as opposite banks of a river made wide with the passage of time.
For musicians to plant their feet comfortably on one shore and then the other requires an agility of mind and body, a faculty that the Boccherini Ensemble pursued with earnestness at the Knitting Factory on


Streetscapes: Morrisania Hospital;   A Tidy Relic of the 1920's Looking for a New Use
LEAD: Hidden by surrounding buildings, the 1929 Morrisania Hospital complex in the Highbridge section of the Bronx comes on you by surprise.
It's a full-block derelict, closed since 1976, but all the more surprising because it is such a tidy derelict, with its windows neatly removed.


Laura Sack Plans to Marry
LEAD: August wedding plans for Laura Sack and David Evan Lewis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Lewis of the Bronx, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Barnet Sack of West Hempstead, L.I.
Ms.
Sack, 23 years old, is a law student and an editor of the Journal of Law and Feminism at Yale University, where her fiance is studying for a master's degree in public and private management.


Over the Bounding Maine?
LEAD: ''COME sailing with us,'' said our friends last week. ''Just bring a bathing suit and a book and relax.
We'll do the rest.'' We found out that nothing is as relaxing as a midsummer sail, unless you count childbirth.


Glassy Skyscrapers And Other Villains Of the Movies
LEAD: If there were an Oscar for the best architecture criticism in a movie, ''Gremlins 2: The New Batch'' would win hands down.
Who could put Donald Trump in his place more deftly than Joe Dante, the director whose movie takes as its target a horrifyingly sleek and impersonal glass skyscraper built by a horrifyingly sleek and impersonal developer named Daniel Clamp?


Yanks Get Close but Fall Short
LEAD: By the second inning yesterday, everything had fallen into place as it always does.
The Chicago White Sox had seven runs, the Yankees had none, the afternoon at the Stadium was overcast and dreary, and people were booing, from the box seats to the bleachers.


Anne H. Rodgers Planning to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James Hurd Rodgers of New York and Darien, Conn., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Anne Helen Rodgers and Daniel Phillips Rice, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Lowry Rice of New Orleans.


There's Been a Delay At New York's Airports; Stand By for Information
LEAD: To the untrained eye, it seems a mystery.
Flights to and from New York airports have increased less than 5 percent over the past year, but delays have in some cases more than doubled.


Mutual Funds;   Variations on the Index Game
LEAD: With all the brouhaha about index funds these days, something important is slipping by.
Tracking Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index is not the only way to go - or perhaps the best.


Taking a Number
LEAD: In West Virginia politics, they do take prisoners.
Last week former Gov.
Arch A. Moore Jr. was sentenced to become one, joining nearly a dozen state legislators, lobbyists and government workers who have been convicted on corruption charges in the last couple of years.
Mr.
Moore, who served two terms as Governor in the 1970's and one term in the late 1980's, pleaded guilty to Federal charges of extortion, mail fraud, tax fraud and attempting to obstruct the grand jury that indicted him.


World Markets;   In Japan, Smaller Is Beautiful
LEAD: What's going on in Tokyo?
Why are some small stocks soaring and the lesser-known stock indexes at record highs?
With the closely watched Nikkei 225 Index still floundering around 32,600, how can some forecasters still expect it to hit 40,000 - a new high - by the end of the year?
And has Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, given a boost to market hopes with his surprising promise to lower


Andrettis in Front At Meadowlands
LEAD: When it comes time to figure out the Andretti family legacy, one item in the inheritance will be a front-row starting spot at the Meadowlands Indy-car race.


'Romeo and Juliet': Words of Love
LEAD: FOR the first production of his last season as artistic director of the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival, Paul Barry has hauled out an inauspicious ''Romeo and Juliet.''


Ms. Sadik-Kahn Weds Mark Geistfeld
LEAD: Janette Sadik-Khan was married yesterday to Mark Geistfeld at the home of her father and stepmother, Mr. and Mrs.
Orhan I. Sadik-Khan, in Old Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Thomas L. Stiers, a Congregational minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony.


Dream Mile in Oslo Is Won by Falcon
LEAD: Joe Falcon captured the Dream Mile, Carl Lewis won a close 100 meters and Jan Zelezny of Czechoslovakia broke the world record in the javelin tonight at the Bislett Games.


FICTION
LEAD:
BEN.
By Max Schott. (North Point, $17.95.) '' 'Mom has a tumor in her brain.
It's growing,' I said, brightly.
To have a tumor in your brain - like a ship in a bottle - would be novelty enough alone, but to have one growing was nearly a miracle.'' Max, the young boy who narrates this novel by the author of ''Murphy's Romance,'' is naive enough to be fascinated and hopeful about desperate situations, yet he is honest and real enough that the reader never tires of him.


'Cobbling Up' the Fruits of the Season
LEAD: COBBLERS are enjoying a renaissance.
Most often they are deep-dish fruit desserts with some kind of pastry topping.


Cuba Said to Fire at Fugitive
LEAD: A Cuban who tried to gain refuge in the Spanish Embassy here on Friday night was captured by Cuban police officers who fired shots as they followed him onto the embassy patio and then dragged him away, witnesses said today.
The event was confirmed by Spanish diplomatic aides who asked not to be named.


25/ Ferry Fare to Double
LEAD: Like Ebbets Field, the 25-cent Staten Island Ferry fare will soon be wistfully recalled by New Yorkers.


Dana Allen Planning to Wed
LEAD: August wedding plans for Dana E. Allen and Benjamin F. Sands, a son of Sarah Darlington Sands of Merida, Mexico, and William F. Sands of Dallas, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Leonard Allen of Lebanon, N.J.
Ms.
Allen, 29 years old, graduated from Yale University and earned an M.B.A.


The Fascination of Dinosaurs
LEAD: In the recent interesting article about an exhibition of dinosaurs at the Monmouth Museum (''Don't Pet the Dinosaurs, Museum Hit Show Asks''), it was pointed out that in the first three weeks the exhibition drew 29,000 children and adults, illustrating the fascination that dinosaurs have for people of all ages.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: When you give up a rook for a minor piece - a bishop or a knight - the process is called an exchange sacrifice to indicate that even though each player has exchanged one unit, the value of the respective units is unequal.
Yet, although a rook is formally worth approximately one and a half pawns more than a minor piece, the transaction is frequently a gain of material because the opponent must lose several pawns along with his bishop or knight.


Patriarch Reaches Out to Embrace Far-Flung Flocks in Orthodoxy
LEAD: Within 24 hours of arriving in New York City, Ecumenical Patriarch Dimitrios I of Constantinople, spiritual leader of the world's Eastern Orthodox Christians, presided over two services aimed at healing centuries-old divisions among Eastern and Western Christians as well as more recent divisions in his own flock.


Dr. Kahn Plans August Wedding
LEAD: Dr.
Laura Helene Kahn, a staff resident in internal medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York, and David Nathaniel Spergel, an assistant professor of astrophysical sciences at Princeton University, are planning an August wedding.


Pedigreed Pieces Haven't Lost Their Luster
LEAD: So far in 1990, antiques enthusiasts have paid premium prices at auctions for the finest period objects.
This comes at a time when there are indications in the market that the decade-old antiques boom may be on the wane.


Mets' Marshall in Hospital; Ulcer Is Feared
LEAD: The Mets' Mike Marshall, one day after engaging in an angry clubhouse quarrel with Manager Bud Harrelson over lack of playing time, checked into a hospital here today for what was initially described as a stomach disorder and feared to be a bleeding ulcer.
Marshall, a first baseman, was scheduled to remain at Christ


Leaving the Groves of Academe for the Fruits of Painting
LEAD: WHEN Virginia Woolf wrote about a room of one's own, she didn't specify which room.
She didn't rule out the attic, for instance.
Woolf, claiming for women writers the physical space in which to explore spiritual space, left self-image issues to later generations of feminists.


FICTION
LEAD:
AWAY FROM HOME: A Novel in Ten Episodes.
By Penelope Farmer. (Victor Gollancz/Trafalgar Square/David &amp; Charles, $19.95.) When it is pointed out to Elinor, the central character in the British writer Penelope Farmer's third novel for adults, that she is letting her feelings run away with her, she rails against the notion that people ought to have a sense of humor, a belief that she equates with not taking oneself seriously.


Rolling on the Rogue
LEAD: I have always loved rivers.
I learned I could feel the rhythms of a river in a canoe.
But I hoped that, in a whitewater kayak, I could become part of the river.
So I ventured in May to Sundance Expeditions on the Rogue River in southwest Oregon for a nine-day kayaking course.


Championship Prospect Is Destroyed
LEAD: Grand Canyon, headed for last May's Kentucky Derby until sidelined by injury, was humanely destroyed today after contracting laminitis, a frequently fatal disease of the hoof, Overbrook Farm said.


New York City's Property-Tax Squeeze
LEAD: In what may lead to a larger battle over New York City's property tax system, the City Council has approved tax rates for the current fiscal year that hold down increases for the owners of cooperatives, condominiums and rental apartments.


Edith Livingstone To Wed in August
LEAD: August wedding plans for Edith Anne Livingstone and Joshua L. Sheinkman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Sheinkman of New York, has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Livingstone of Belmont, Mass.


No More Feeling Left Out
LEAD: Meredith Rainey often tells the story of how she walked into the Harvard track office in 1986, in the fall of her freshman year, and asked Fred Haggerty if she could go out for the sport.
She was unaware at the time that Haggerty, coach of the men's and women's teams, had vowed not to allow any more walk-ons.


Q and A
LEAD:
Taking Tea in London


The Census: Why We Can't Count
LEAD: When the nation's greatest and most troubled exercise in counting finally comes to an end - when the last form flicks through the machines, when the last enumerator turns in the last Questionnaire Misdelivery Record Nonresponse Follow-up, when the last lawsuit is filed - the 1990 census seems certain to stand as a bleak landmark in the annals of arithmetic.


Mexican Dishes at a New Address
LEAD: WE first encountered Clyde's Mexican Grille and Bar (then Clyde's Mexican Cafe) late in 1988, ensconced in tiny quarters in a fitness club in Stamford.
Now it is in a free-standing building (formerly occupied by the Gaslight and several other restaurants) on Route 1 in Old Greenwich.


Practical Traveler;   Getting Cash Abroad: Bank Cards Make It Easy
LEAD: When my family and I first traveled to England in 1965, we carried an engraved-letterhead note from our bank in New York that would have done credit to Edith Wharton.
It introduced us to a bank in the City of London that would cash one of our New York checks, in case we ran through our $10 ''tip pack'' of British currency and our traveler's checks.


Lawns Exact Price Some Won't Pay
LEAD: WHEN 17-month-old Ari Winkleman toddles around his Hastings-on-Hudson backyard, his parents worry about the spills and falls he will take as he exercises his new-found motor skills.
What they don't worry about is his exposure to pesticides on their property.


In Which They Served
LEAD: To the Editor:


Malcolm Wiener Weds Carolyn Seely
LEAD: Carolyn Talbot Seely, a counsel to Bob Dole, the Senate Republican leader, and Malcolm Hewitt Wiener, the founder and chairman of the Millburn Corporation and Comminvest, New York investment management companies, were married June 8.
Iris McCleery, a justice of the peace in Ridgefield, Conn., officiated at the bridegroom's home there.


Books From The Times
LEAD:
LANGUAGE MAVEN STRIKES AGAIN.
By William Safire. (Doubleday, $22.95.) What is a maven, anyway, and how is it different from a pundit or a boffin?
How formal is semiformal?
Which is worse, going bananas or going ballistic?
When did anxiety turn into stress?
William Safire's sixth compilation from his weekly column On Language in The New York Times Magazine - augmented with contributions from friends and readers, the Lexicographic Irregulars - addresses these and many, many other pertinent issues raised in the course of reading, writing, talking and listening in America.


Renee Smith Is Engaged
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Gerson Smith of Margate, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Renee Smith and Allan Jeffrey Borkow, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen E. Borkow of Hewlett Harbor, L.I.
Ms.
Smith, 27 years old, is a painter and print maker in New York.
She is a graduate of Carnegie-Mellon University and earned a master's degree in fine arts at Columbia University.


Gorbachev Fills New and Less Powerful Politburo
LEAD: The Communist Party significantly revamped its Politburo today, carrying out Mikhail S. Gorbachev's plan to separate the party hierarchy from the Government.


Savings and Loan Bailout, Soviet Style
LEAD: Read my lips: No more savings and loan crisis.


Warning to Lamenters
LEAD: I read that a former newspaper colleague of mine is so depressed by the way things are in the United States these days that he says it reminds him of Romania.


Wife's Heir Sues Armand Hammer
LEAD: The ownership of one of the world's most valuable private collections of art, that of the industrialist Dr.
Armand Hammer, has come under attack in a Los Angeles court, as has Dr.
Hammer's legal right to bequeath the works to the new museum bearing his name.


Dr. Heidi S. Sonn to Wed
LEAD: Dr.
Heidi Sue Sonn, a chiropractor in New York, and Louis Tancredi, an independent film producer, are planning an October wedding, the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley M. Sonn of Tarrytown, N.Y., have announced.
Dr.
Sonn graduated from Nassau Community College and the New York Chiropractic College.


BEFORE APARTHEID, AND POSSIBLY AFTER
LEAD:
A HISTORY OF SOUTH AFRICA
By Leonard Thompson.
Illustrated. 288 pp. New Haven:
Yale University Press. $29.95.


For Whom Does The Bell Toll?
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Editorial Notebook;   Mr. Bush and America's Greens
LEAD: President Bush's next summit meeting might well be a cozy little chat in the Oval Office with a handful of environmental leaders.
There's much common ground between them.
But one would never know that from the poisonous and sometimes silly rhetoric that filled the air during last week's economic summit meeting in


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   On L.I., a Preserve's Unspoiled Quiet
LEAD: Just an hour from Manhattan, there is a place of peace and beauty in Nassau County where the only reminder of civilization is the occasional sound of a car on Route 106.
In the Muttontown Preserve, birds, wild animals, forests and fields coexist, quietly recalling the Long Island of two centuries ago.


Neil Bush Inquiry Unfair, Say Half in Poll
LEAD: Half of Americans think that Federal regulators are unfairly focusing on the involvement of the president's son in the Silverado Savings and Loan case, according to a magazine poll.


VULNERABLE LIVES
LEAD:
THE BODY AND ITS DANGERS
And Other Stories.
By Allen Barnett.
181 pp. New York:
St. Martin's Press. $15.95.


Postings: Paying the Points;   50 Affordable Bronx Town Houses
LEAD: 50 affordable two-family town houses nearing completion in the Crotona Park section of the Bronx, offered to pay the mortgage points for the first 25 buyers.
A point is 1 percent of a mortgage, and most lenders charge two or three as an origination fee for a home loan.


Nancy Chadrjian and John P. Tumelty Are Married
LEAD: Nancy Chadrjian, an assistant district attorney in the Bronx, and John Philip Tumelty, an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn, were married yesterday at St.
Peter of Alcantara Roman Catholic Church in Port Washington, L.I.
The Rev.
George Stack performed the ceremony.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a bad mildew problem on the outside of our house, especially on the north side.
We have tried the usual measures, including scrubbing with bleach, but nothing has helped.
We are now planning to cover these eaves with aluminum or vinyl siding.
Must the mildew be washed off before the new siding is installed over it?


Is Laughter The Recipe for Love?
LEAD: Laugh - love, commingled seemed to be the traditional remedy that Janet Pomeranz, in her bittersweet article found completely inadequate to cheer her out of her melancholia (May 27).


Forecast For 'Today': Cloudy
LEAD: The seemingly harmless addition of Deborah Norville to the ''Today'' show to ''give Jane a jolt'' is every working woman's worst nightmare.
Who would, after more than 13 years on the job, like to come to work and, without warning, find someone new at one's desk?


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD:
Additional titles of interest:


Harpists Without Halos Test Their Wings
LEAD: A determined group of younger musicians, mostly women, is scrambling to find ways to bring the harp into the late 20th century.
For an instrument that numbers diminutive angels and a Marx brother among its best-known virtuosos, that is no easy or straightforward task.
Some harpists are following the Swiss star Andreas Vollenweider into New Age washes.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
PLAYS IN THE MAKING


The Ratio of Values, Dollar and Otherwise
LEAD: To the Editor:


Figure in Slaying of Polish Priest Hints at Involvement of Superiors
LEAD: The secret-police captain convicted in the 1984 killing of a pro-Solidarity priest has raised new questions about whether more senior officials in the Interior Ministry were involved.


Miss Thornton To Be a Bride
LEAD: August wedding plans for Suzanne Thornton and Thomas R. DeNunzio, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph D. DeNunzio of Riverside, Conn., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Thornton of Barrington, N.H.


Question Of the Week;   Should Baseball Suspend Steinbrenner?
LEAD: If baseball officials would avoid charges of being as imperious and mercurial as Steinbrenner himself, they will ask themselves this perhaps troublesome question before imposing any penalty: What would we mete out under identical circumstances to one of the more ''likable'' of baseball owners, such as Gene Autry or the late Tom Yawkey, Connie Mack or Walter Briggs?


In Their Flight, Albanians See Hope
LEAD: Albanian refugees who fled their homeland said today that they hoped their daring would encourage more of their compatriots to resist Albania's hard-line Communist Government.


Campus Life: Cleveland State;   Sit-In Supports Departing Official For Minorities
LEAD: A sit-in at Cleveland State University by black students protesting the departure of a vice president for minority affairs in a salary dispute moved into its third week Friday with no end in sight.
The demonstration by the students, who are occupying the first floor of the Fenn Tower administration building, has led to intervention by the Mayor of


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: In June I went to a friend's wedding.
Like most weddings these days, this one featured a cast that included not only a bride, bridegroom and assorted attendants, but also a wedding photographer and a member of that newest of aspiring occupations, a videographer.


Forecast For 'Today': Cloudy
LEAD: Bill Carter's article about the ''Today'' show anchor Bryant Gumbel - and the contretemps swirling about him - was refreshingly evenhanded and temperate (''Forecast for 'Today': Cloudy,'' June 10).
But could any of us measure up to the kind of intense scrutiny Gumbel has received?


LOVE WALKED OUT, WEARING ONLY A SCARF
LEAD:
SEPARATE HOURS
By Jonathan Baumbach.
204 pp. Boulder, Colo.:
Fiction Collective Two. Cloth, $18.95. Paper, $8.95.


Army Plans to End R.O.T.C. at 50 Schools
LEAD: The Army has announced that it will close its Reserve Officer Training Corps program at 50 colleges and universities at the end of the next academic year.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Mont Belvieu, Tex.;   A Gas Leak Prods Exodus
LEAD: SINCE 1986, more than 200 families and five churches have moved several miles from the five-square-mile center of this town of 1,700 people.
They moved because the town sits on a salt dome where 43 percent of the liquid natural gas in Texas is stored and where a dangerous leak was discovered in 1980.


Life Within Earshot Of the Firing Range
LEAD: If Michael Ziatyk of Larchmont thinks power mowers are disturbing [''Gardening Equipment Provokes a New Look at Noise Ordinances,'' June 24]  he ought to come by and see what it is to live nearby a shooting range as we do here in New Castle.


Campus Life: Mississippi;   New Graduates Prepare To Teach in Rural Areas
LEAD: Armed with honors, degrees and noble ambitions, 25 of the nation's brightest scholars are going to battle for better education in some of the neediest schools in this state's rural areas.


'Cobbling Up' the Fruits of the Season
LEAD: COBBLERS are enjoying a renaissance.
Most often they are deep-dish fruit desserts with some kind of pastry topping.


U.S. Tries to Block Sale to Iraq
LEAD: The Pentagon is trying to prevent Iraq from receiving industrial furnaces that some experts say could be used to make weapons.
Page 3.


Ms. Allen Plans To Wed in August
LEAD: August wedding plans for Judith Gibson Allen and Paul Francis Mulkerrin, a son of Margaret Mulkerrin of Somerville, Mass., and the late Michael Mulkerrin, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon E. Allen of Osterville, Mass.


Mailing Is Curbed in Vermont
LEAD: Mailing privileges for Vermont lawmakers will be suspended through Jan. 1, 1991 as part of a cost-cutting effort.
The Legislative Council, eight lawmakers who oversee internal business, this week notified the other 172 members of the House and Senate of several cost-savings measures.
The changes included suspension of stenographic services, stationery and postage.


Eastern Is Expected to Face Criminal Charges
LEAD: A Federal grand jury is preparing to file criminal charges against Eastern Airlines, accusing it of faulty maintenance practices at La Guardia and Kennedy International Airports in New York and Hartsfield International in Atlanta, lawyers involved in the investigation said yesterday.


Sheehan Sets 2 Marks at Open
LEAD: In the midst of a meterological Maelstrom, Patty Sheehan completed the two best opening rounds in the history of the United States Women's Open today to take a six-shot lead into what officials hope will be a 36-hole finale Sunday.


The Lake Erie Waterfront; A Shrinking Supply of Developable Land
LEAD: After several years of rapid construction in the resort areas along Lake Erie, little waterfront property remains for additional development.
As a result, attention is turning to a tiny cluster of islands off the shore here.


Grocery Bag Re-use Nets Rewards
LEAD: JANET MURPHY of West Hartford stood in line at the checkout counter of the Cheese and Stuff supermarket in Hartford and handed the cashier a wrinkled brown grocery bag and a green-and-white card.
As she watched, the cashier punched the card.
When all the holes in the card are punched, Mrs.
Murphy will receive one dollar off on a purchase.


Corrections
LEAD: An article last Sunday about bills adopted in the New York State Legislature misstated the status of one.


Lawmakers Vote to Reduce Allowances of Ex-Presidents
LEAD: The House of Representatives voted Friday to trim the Bush Administration's request for office allowances paid to the four living former Presidents.
It rejected a proposal to eliminate the allowances entirely.


LeMond Breaks Free to Close Gap
LEAD: Everybody expected the Tour de France to get off to a new beginning today, and it did as Erik Breukink and Greg LeMond went on a long breakaway and made up nearly five minutes of their deficit on the man in the yellow jersey, Claudio Chiappucci.


Lisa S. Garson Marries
LEAD: Lisa S. Garson, a daughter of Louise A. Morris of Beachwood, Ohio, and Peter K. Garson of Pepper Pike, Ohio, was married last evening in Cleveland to Raymond A. DiPrinzio, a son of Yolanda DiPrinzio of New York and the late Mr.
DiPrinzio.
Rabbi Michael Oppenheimer and the Rev.
David A. Novak, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Oakwood Country Club.


Once Upon a Time, Berlin, Too, Was a City of Light
LEAD: In the matter of the great city of Berlin, which is now in such a state of ebullition, I have a mental image that many people find perverse.
My private Berlin has nothing of the pompous, bombastic, self-satisfied Berlin, all tuba and trombone and bass drum, that was the natural backdrop for the outbreak of World War I.


Political Crisis Grips India's Governing Coalition
LEAD: Prime Minister V. P. Singh offered his resignation on Saturday to his party's leader, who said later that he had rejected it.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
INSIDE TRACK: My Professional Life in Amateur Track and Field.
By Carl Lewis with Jeffrey Marx. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) Carl Lewis, the track and field superstar who has won six Olympic gold medals, is one of the world's greatest athletes.
In his autobiography, ''Inside Track,'' Mr.
Lewis focuses not on his athletic prowess but on the reasons why he has been unable to cash in on his celebrity.


An Explanation On Missed Vote
LEAD: The July 1 edition reported that I was absent during the vote to approve a 43,000-square-foot terminal at the County Airport [''Legislators Seek New Compromise on Air Terminal''] .
It was correctly reported that I voted for the proposed 24,000-square-foot terminal - which also went down to defeat during our June 25 meeting.


BASEBALL: National League;   Pirates Stay on a Roll by Beating the Padres
LEAD: R. J. Reynolds's two-run single broke an eighth-inning tie and Barry Bonds hit a homer today as the surging Pittsburgh Pirates continued to dominate San Diego by beating the Padres, 8-4.
Pittsburgh has won 10 of 11 games against the Padres this season, including all 5 at Three Rivers Stadium, after losing 9 of 12 to them last season.


Two Mamet Hallmarks: Pain and Failure
LEAD: DAVID MAMET'S plays are populated for the most part by characters who are unable to establish meaningful relationships.


Food;   Aleppo's Allure Mhammara gets its sweet-and-sour tang from a reduction of ripe pomegranates and sugar.
LEAD: ''We take food very seriously here and we are great carnivores,'' said my hostess proudly, opening her refrigerator-sized freezer.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:
Family Business
1989. RCA/Columbia. 1:53. LD, $34.95. CC. R.
Sean Connery (Jessie), who begat Dustin Hoffman (Vito), who begat Matthew Broderick (Adam), is the charming and roguish patriarch in Sidney Lumet's film about a family that develops togetherness after a bungled theft at a Long Island research lab.


Shipping Concern Faces $43 Million Penalty
LEAD: A Federal district judge here says he will probably impose a $43 million penalty against a Japanese shipping company for keeping double books to avoid paying a crew of 21 Filipinos most of the wages called for under industry-union agreements.


An August Bridal For Lisa Radley
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Radley of Pueblo, Colo., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter, Lisa Louise Radley, and Roger Tighe Mullarkey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. X. Mullarkey of Locust Valley, L.I.


LEANING ON CONGRESS
LEAD:
LION IN THE LOBBY
Clarence Mitchell, Jr.'s Struggle for the Passage of Civil Rights Laws.
By Denton L. Watson.
Illustrated. 846 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company. $24.95.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: If horse racing is the sport of kings, stamp-collecting may be the hobby of kings.


Giant Steps;   Germany Makes the Most of Its Newfound Power
LEAD: There is no doubt in anyone's mind in London, Paris or Bonn that the Western leader who dominates the international agenda these days is not Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain or President Bush of the United States, but Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany.


Wall Street;   The Week That Was for Investor Mario Gabelli
LEAD: It was a lucrative week for Mario Gabelli, the New York investor who has long been predicting a wave of takeovers in the independent telephone market.
Mr.
Gabelli owns 8 million shares of Contel, whose stock leaped $7.125 a share Thursday on the news of its merger with the GTE Corporation.
That deal meant a paper profit for Mr.


HEALTH CONDITIONS WORSEN FOR YOUNG
LEAD: Conditions for children in New York City have deteriorated significantly in the last 15 years, with marked increases in infant mortality, reports of child abuse and the number of children living in poverty, according to an index tabulated by social scientists at Fordham University.


Fiber Art: Beyond the Mundane
LEAD: THERE is a surprising harmony among some plastic baskets, Op Art quilts and the 154-year-old converted gristmill where they are now on display at the Hunterdon Art Center.
Both the center and the work in the ''Fiber as Art'' exhibition bear witness to their more mundane beginnings.


All It Takes Is One Bad Cop
LEAD: It was Sir William Schwenck Gilbert - better known as the Gilbert of Gilbert and Sullivan - who had the good sense to observe (in his lyrics for Act II of ''The Pirates of Penzance''), ''A policeman's lot is not a happy one!''


Heidi Eckman to Wed B. P. Silverstein
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Eckman of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Heidi Kim Eckman, to Barry Philip Silverstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Silverstein of West Newton, Mass.
A September wedding is planned.


Jennifer R. Gierke To Wed in Fall
LEAD: The engagement of Jennifer Rae Gierke to James Alfred Mitchell, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul L. Mitchell of Melville, L.I., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Bradford M. Gierke of Tacoma, Wash., and Janet Rae McKay of Bellevue, Wash.
A November wedding is planned.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
By the Air to the Beach


TV VIEW
LEAD: ''Funny, you don't look Jewish.''


Alison Friedman To Marry in Fall
LEAD: October wedding plans for Alison Jennifer Friedman and Ens.
Daniel Alexander Miller have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel S. Friedman of New York.
Ensign Miller is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor S. Miller of New Rochelle, N.Y.


Man Who Killed 3 Boys Gets Death Penalty in Washington
LEAD: A jury today sentenced to death a man who confessed to torturing and strangling one boy and stabbing to death two young brothers he found riding their bikes in a park here.


Question Of the Week;   Should Baseball Suspend Steinbrenner?
LEAD: Definitely, without a doubt, Steinbrenner should be suspended.
Unlawful activities should not be tolerated along with the downfall of such a once-respected baseball franchise.


Avon Keeps Ringing, but Wall Street Won't Answer
LEAD: His round, jovial face and twinkling eyes belie it, but James E. Preston is getting annoyed.


A THATCHER ALLY QUITS AMID FUROR
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's closest Cabinet ally resigned today on the third day of a controversy over an interview in which he denounced European monetary union as ''a German racket designed to take over the whole of Europe.''


Hampshire College
LEAD: Yes, there are those of us who ''failed'' at experimental education, who caught the bus back to requirements and midterms and cumulative grade-point averages.
And I don't think we are necessarily less self-reliant or less willing to take chances than the students who stayed.


BEST SELLERS: July 15, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow.
(Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney
tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death
while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.


Easing the Task of Buying Lumber
LEAD: BUYING lumber can be confusing.
For example, any piece of lumber that is less than two inches thick and eight inches wide is called a strip; any piece less than two inches thick but more than eight inches wide is called a board.


Review/Theater;   From Trivia to Tragedy in 'Jersey City'
LEAD: As the audience meets Magaly and Pa in ''Jersey City,'' Wendy Hammond's jarring new play at the Second Stage Theater, they are finishing their evening meal with a game of baseball trivia.
Magaly, still tomboy enough at age 15 to prefer a catcher's mitt to a new dress for a present, knows what year Willie Mays and Mickey Mantle broke in as rookies, then stumps her dad with a question about what outfielder is named after a fruit (until she starts chanting ''Dar-ryl'' to give him a clue).


ACCOUNTING FOR POLITICS IN THE BAILOUT DEBATE
LEAD: ANTICIPATING that the political costs of the savings and loan scandal will begin to come due in the fall, Democrats and Republicans have begun to intensify their efforts to stick each other with the bill.
The blame game reached new heights of vituperation last week as attention focused sharply on Neil Bush, the President's youngest son, and his role in the collapse of the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Institution in


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   High-End Sales Are Down in Greenwich
LEAD: In northeast Greenwich, 26 stately pleasure domes have been built at Conyers Farm, a 1,500-acre enclave resembling a contemporary Xanadu.
Maintaining its private, pastoral quality is a set of covenants under which no more than 60 families may live on minimum lots of 10 acres, protected in perpetuity by deed restrictions.


Currency;   Surprises From the Fed
LEAD: Last week, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, took the foreign exchange market by surprise, announcing Thursday that the central bank might ease interest rates because of dwindling credit from commercial banks and then, on Friday, actually pushing rates down slightly.
The dollar fell sharply after his remarks but recovered some on Friday, partly because the June increase in producer prices was disappointingly high.


SOVIET COMMUNISM IS TAKING FOREVER TO SAY GOODBYE
LEAD: To anyone who had known Moscow when secrecy was an obsession and the Communist Party was almighty, the action last week in the Kremlin's cavernous Palace of Congresses was wondrous to behold.


Blue Cross: Traditional but No Stick in the Mud
LEAD: To the Editor:


To the Dogs
LEAD: In an attempt to ease some of the tensions between the cities of Cincinnati and Cleveland, Sam Wyche, the Bengals' coach, put himself at the mercy of the infamous ''Dog Pound'' fans in Cleveland on Friday and in doing so raised about $8,000 for the Salvation Army homeless and hunger programs in that city.


Making Goodbyes Easier For the Fresh Air Fund
LEAD: The Fresh Air Fund builds bridges between the woods of upstate camps and farms and the children of city streets and housing projects.
And the fund builds other bridges, between the children and those who help the fund in ways large and small.


Aftershock in San Francisco
LEAD: I'd just like to point out that no region of our nation is immune to ecological catastrophe.
Ohio is, at the moment, underwater.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
JACK GANCE, by Ward Just. (Ivy, $4.95.) A young pollster with connections to the Chicago political machine becomes a White House aide and then a senator.
Last year our reviewer, Judith Martin, said Ward Just ''is not only the most literary chronicler of the daily lives and moral dilemmas of contemporary politicians, bureaucrats, intelligence agents, military officers, diplomats, lawyers and journalists, but one of the few novelists even interested in depicting such people realistically.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: Business inventories for May.
TUESDAY: Merchandise trade for May.
Industrial capacity and utilization for June.
WEDNESDAY: Housing starts and consumer prices for June.
Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan appears before the Senate Banking Committee.
The United Auto Workers begin contract talks with General Motors.


The Ratio of Values, Dollar and Otherwise
LEAD: To the Editor:


Off Track
LEAD: When Rick Mears leaves his hotel this morning for the five-minute ride to the Meadowlands Sports Complex in East Rutherford, N.J., where he will be driving in the Marlboro Grand Prix, you can bet he will allow a little extra time.
Two hours, perhaps.


Q and A
LEAD:
Passing Along Costs
Question: I own an occupied, rent-stabilized apartment in Riverdale.
Recently, new windows were installed throughout the building and I have started paying an assessment that will last for the next year to cover the costs of that project as well as other scheduled improvements.


Lee Brooks Engaged To Michele B. Plotnik
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Herman Plotnik of Westwood, N.J., have announced March wedding plans for their daughter, Michele Beth Plotnik, and Lee Warren Brooks, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Selig Brooks of Fair Lawn, N.J.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Syria and Egypt Reconcile
President Assad of Syria arrived for his first visit since Egypt began talks with Israel 13 years ago.
Page 3.
Airline Safety Investigation
A Federal grand jury is expected to indict Eastern Airlines in connection with faulty maintenance.
Page 24.


Soviets Have Outlined a Peace Proposal for Afghanistan, U.S. Officials Say
LEAD: Bush Administration officials say the Soviet Union has floated the outlines of a proposal that could lead to a settlement of the 12-year war in Afghanistan.


Three Cars Seized in Inquiry On Car-Bomb Killing on L.I.
LEAD: Suffolk County homicide detectives have seized a workbench and two cars from the home of a Nassau County police officer in the investigation of the car-bomb killing of an undercover detective, law-enforcement sources said.


Betsy Guinzburg To Wed Next Year
LEAD: The engagement of Betsy Guinzburg to Arthur Brian Markman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward S. Markman of Edison, N.J., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Guinzburg of Englewood, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.


Syria Leader Visits Cairo, Mending Ties
LEAD: President Hafez al-Assad of Syria arrived here today on his first visit in 13 years, a period of estrangement that began with Egypt's decision to sign a peace treaty with Israel.


Taking Issue
LEAD: Behind the success of Armand Hammer was not only his late wife, but also her purse, according to a lawsuit filed last week in Los Angeles.
Robert Weiss, the executor of Frances Hammer's estate, charged that soon after their marriage in 1956, a struggling Mr.
Hammer borrowed from his wealthy wife - paying little or no interest - to build Occidental Petroleum into an industrial giant and that some of Mr.


Question Of the Week;   Should Baseball Suspend Steinbrenner?
LEAD: Merely to suspend Steinbrenner would be a tragedy.
Nothing less than a forced sale of the ball club will rescue the legions of still-loyal Yankee fans and the team from the darkness and disgrace that this egomaniacal man has inflicted on us.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended June 30
MANHATTAN
Carnegie Hill
$705,000
4 East 95th Street
3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, large kitchen, fireplace; maintenance $1,369, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Carnegie Hill Properties)


TB Testing And Treating
LEAD: Although tuberculosis can affect almost any organ, by far the most common form involves the lungs.
Its symptoms include a cough, fevers, drenching night sweats, fatigue, weight loss and blood-tinged sputum.
They can vary in severity.
Some patients dismiss their symptoms as a smoker's cough while others have a serious pneumonia.


A December Wedding For Jamie N. Kolodkin
LEAD: The engagement of Jamie Naomi Kolodkin to Michael Howard Carus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Carus of Merrick, L.I., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur S. Kolodkin of Stamford, Conn.
A December wedding is planned.


Museums Hear a Knock on the Door: Politics
LEAD: Those who need further evidence that nowadays no manner of alchemy can separate the art world from the world of politics might consider the following incident, which illuminates what is becoming a quagmire for American museums.


Bridgeport Celebrates Its Diversity
LEAD: TRUMPET fanfares will introduce the 50th anniversary gala of the Norfolk Chamber Music Festival in Norfolk this afternoon at 3, followed by opera arias and vocal duets, short instrumental works of Bartok and Schumann, a Mozart String Quartet and other compositions.
The performers, all members of the Norfolk faculty, include the trumpeters Allan Dean and Robert Nagel, the pianists Donald Currier, Ward Davenny and Joan Panetti, the oboist Ronald Roseman, the Tokyo Quartet and others.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on page 39 of The Times Magazine today, with the Fashion column, reverses the identities of two women in some copies.


PUBLIC &amp; PRIVATE Conventional Wisdom
LEAD: It was two hours into the New Year in Manhattan; the sidewalks were grubby with confetti, the back seats of cabs were full of drunks and the George Washington Bridge hung silver over the river.
Just outside the Lincoln tunnel was a woman, working.
She was wearing high heels, the bottom to a bikini, and a satin banner that said in glitter 1976.


Data Update
LEAD:
BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
May 90
Apr. 90
May 89
New York
3,302
2,692
4,382
New Jersey
1,795
1,872
4,084
Connecticut
945
632
1,111
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago


Question Of the Week;   Should Baseball Suspend Steinbrenner?
LEAD: Should honorable, decent men who personify Yankee Tradition (Yogi Berra and Dick Howser) have suffered the indignity and humiliation of being dismissed?


Campus Life: Carnegie-Mellon;   Campus Police Dust Off Old Idea: Bicycle Officers
LEAD: Students at Carnegie-Mellon University will soon be protected by a new campus security officer - the bicycle patroller.


'Cobbling Up' the Fruits of the Season
LEAD: COBBLERS are enjoying a renaissance.
Most often they are deep-dish fruit desserts with some kind of pastry topping.


Eligible At Age 14
LEAD: At age 14 in her first year as a pro, Jennifer Capriati has already influenced women's tennis.
Acknowledging her presence in the ranks among the top 20 players in the world, the Women's International Professional Tennis Council has revised its eligibility rules to allow the talented Floridian to qualify for the season-ending Virginia Slims Championships on Nov.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD: International


Elizabeth LightfootWed in Connecticut
LEAD: Elizabeth Baxter Lightfoot, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Lightfoot of Lyme, Conn., was married yesterday to Nicholas Clements, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Havranek of Dorset, England, by the Rev.
Dean C. Ahlberg at the First Congregational Church in Old Lyme, Conn.


Question Of the Week;   Should Baseball Suspend Steinbrenner?
LEAD: Steinbrenner may be meddlesome and idiotic, but it is his constitutional right.
He should stay unless found guilty in the Spira hearing.


Campus Life: University of Minnesota;   Women Dancers Will Be Allowed To Cheer Again
LEAD: A ban on performances by the University of Minnesota's women's dance line at men's athletic events was rescinded last week by the university's president, Nils Hasselmo.


St. Andrews Through the Caddy's Eyes
LEAD: Forgive my lack of modesty, but I am the most experienced and the best regular caddie at the Old Course at St.
Andrews.
I have caddied there at least four times a week for the last 44 years, since I was 14 years old.
Of course, it has been my great privilege to carry Arnold Palmer's bag there in three British Opens, as well as the 25 others he has played in.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: The traditional big month of weddings is now behind us, which means nothing because fall is another major wedding season.
And then, of course, there are all kinds of weddings in winter, spring and the middle of summer.
So when you get right down to it, there isn't a time of the year when great numbers of people aren't getting married.


Hampshire College
LEAD: Brown quotes one Hampshire student who found students at the University of Massachusetts overly distracted with test scores (''It was like a big high school'').
It is likely that this attitude is due less to a lack of talent and creativity among students at the state-run university than to a desire to one day find a good job.


NEXT STOP FOR MANKIND
LEAD:
MARS BECKONS
The Mysteries, the Challenges, the Expectations of Our Next Great Adventure in Space.
By John Noble Wilford.
Illustrated. 244 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Tokyo Tries to Rewrite Some Recent Bad Memories
LEAD: Japan's Education Ministry, long criticized for sanitizing school textbooks that try to detail Japanese wartime atrocities and the nation's domination of much of Asia, has embarked on a new task: toning down accounts of recent political scandals.


Forecast For 'Today': Cloudy
LEAD: Originally, I regarded the Gumbel memo as a strange (and failed) attempt on the part of the network to add spice to the ''Today'' show by injecting controversy into it.
Now it seems the memo is being used as a scapegoat for the poor decisions made by executives on the show.


CRIME
LEAD: If you're over 60 and still on Wall Street, you might as well be dead.
So goes the cutthroat business credo in Annette Meyers's TENDER DEATH (Bantam, $17.95), which causes the heroine, Leslie Wetzon, no end of distress.
Not only is the headhunter-sleuth having problems placing her veteran clients (''The older broker had become a dinosaur''), but the mysterious death of a 78-year-old woman with vast stock holdings has her wondering whether there might be some plot afoot to boot all the old-timers off the Street and into the grave.


They're Foreign But Getting More Familiar
LEAD: Later this month New Yorker Video will release four titles from its library of 400 foreign films.
One, ''Sand and Blood,'' is in French.
Two others are in Spanish and German.
The fourth, ''Dragon Chow'' (set in a Chinese restaurant) is in German, Urdu and Mandarin.
Along with other recent releases, the four films may be indicative of what some hope is a growing interest in foreign movies in this country, not to mention a developing tolerance for something many


School Racial Balance Supported in a Survey
LEAD: STATE residents believe that achieving racial balance in public schools will improve the quality of education for all students, but they oppose forced desegregation through busing, a survey has found.


New Policy for PGA Sites
LEAD: The Professional Golfers' Association intends to consider the membership policies of a potential host club before selecting the site of the PGA Championship, the organization said today.


Campus Life: Carnegie-Mellon;   A Different Beat: When Bagpiping Becomes a Major
LEAD: Carnegie-Mellon University has always marched to the beat of a different instrument.
Bagpipers lead the school's kiltie band onto the football field, and they lead the graduating classes in their commencement processions.


Barbara B. Hope Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Barbara Buchanan Hope, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Deane Gordon Hope of Hilton Head Island, S.C., was married yesterday to Anthony Louis Gentile Jr., a son of Mrs.
Gentile of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Gentile.
The Rev.
Dr.
Hilary R. Bercovici performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Episcopal Church in Scarborough, N


William F. Weigel, Lawyer, 66
LEAD: William F. Weigel, a New York City lawyer and the former chairman of the Westchester County Republican Party, died on Friday morning at New York Hospital.
He was 66 years old and lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.


Lifestyle;   Shhhhhhhhh! More Men Are Coloring Their Hair
LEAD: The differences between men and women are slowly disappearing, at least in the hair salon.
First, men ventured into unisex parlors for hair cuts.
Then they tried perms.
Now, more are getting color: highlights so locks look sun-touched, or dark streaks to emphasize the pepper rather than the salt.


BEHIND THE SCREEN
LEAD:
WORKING IN HOLLYWOOD
By Alexandra Brouwer
and Thomas Lee Wright.
546 pp. New York:
Crown Publishers. $24.95.


Postings: 'Historic Preservation in Queens';   Nominees for Landmark Designation
LEAD: With a sense of affection and urgency, two leaders of the landmarks movement in Queens have compiled an 88-page book titled ''Historic Preservation in Queens.'' It lists buildings that are official city landmarks or are on the National Register of Historic Places, as well as structures that were designated by the Landmarks Preservation Commission but later stripped of landmark status by the Board of


Jennie McAvoy to Wed Bart L. Landenberger
LEAD: The engagement of Jennie Van Pelt McAvoy to Bart Lawrence Landenberger, the son of Jane Hamilton Landenberger of Bedford, N.Y., and the late John Landenberger, has been announced by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Edward H. McAvoy of Tappan, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a bad mildew problem on the outside of our house, especially on the north side.
We have tried the usual measures, including scrubbing with bleach, but nothing has helped.
We are now planning to cover these eaves with aluminum or vinyl siding.
Must the mildew be washed off before the new siding is installed over it?


Taiwanese Drops Plan to Kill 30,000 Seals n South Africa
LEAD: A businessman has dropped plans to kill 30,000 South African seals after protests by international animal rights advocates, the Government said today.


Tech Notes;   A New Lease on Life for the Printed Word
LEAD: For libraries around the world, the enemy is time.
Since the 1850's, when all-rag paper became prohibitively expensive, printing has been done on wood-pulp paper.
But alum, a component in that paper, reacts with atmospheric moisture to form an acid that dissolves the wood fibers: books become discolored and brittle.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Hawthorne
$180,000
165 Hillcrest Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old, custom-built ranch; h/w floors, natural woodwork; taxes $3,722.
Howell$154,900
443 Casino Drive
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 18-year-old ranch; enclosed porch, den, family room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $2,443.


Ms. Bauerle and D. S. Potter to Marry
LEAD: Ellen Ann Bauerle and David Stone Potter plan to marry in August.
Ms.
Bauerle is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Bauerle of Delaware, Ohio; her fiance is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
David Potter of New York.


INDIA OF THE IMAGINATION ...
LEAD:
THE WORLD OF NAGARAJ
By R. K. Narayan.
186 pp. New York:
Viking. $18.95.


Black Children Living With One Parent Put at 55%
LEAD: More than half the nation's 9.8 million black children under 18 years old and nearly a third of the seven million Hispanic children lived with only one parent in 1989, according to a Census Bureau report.


Zombie Assassins, Desert Rhythms and the Beats
LEAD: Rock-and-roll, with its unbookish culture, seems an unlikely candidate to adopt a literary figure.
But there is no longer any doubt that the perennial iconoclast-author William Burroughs has been given a lifetime pass to the rock-and-roll circus.
The bassist and songwriter Bill Laswell, leading a loose assemblage of players he calls Material, recently drafted the writer to read excerpts from his latest novel, ''The Western Lands,'' as part of the album ''Seven Souls'' (Virgin 91360; CD and cassette).


Campus Life: Dartmouth;   College Reviews Sex Case Rules; Editor Suspended
LEAD: Dartmouth College is reviewing its procedures for dealing with sexual assault and harassment following two cases involving the editor of the college newspaper, who has been suspended over accusations that he sexually abused a woman student.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
NEW AND OLD


Too Many Bosses, Too Few Workers
LEAD: Before Americans can celebrate the decline of Communism, we should ponder why a Japanese eighth grader typically knows more mathematics than an American with an M.B.A., and whether our own decline can be far behind the Soviet Union's.
I believe we can avoid that fate, but we need to make a number of fundamental changes in business, government and education if we are to continue to prosper.


In Besieged Liberian Capital, Hunger and Sleepless Nights
LEAD: The danger peaks near dawn, said a man named Jenkins, when Government soldiers, sometimes wearing masks, stalk the gates in front of the makeshift refugee camp within the walls of the American Cooperative School.


Fashion;   What They're Wearing: The Bright Suit
LEAD: Has black been banished?
Probably not, but it has been pushed aside for the moment.
These photos, taken at recent social events in New York, clearly show that vibrant colors have overtaken black as the sophisticate's choice.
And it's not just the obvious shades, like red, that are being chosen, but juicier ones like orange and pistachio.


In the Summer's Heat, Mulch Is Vital
LEAD: EVERYONE makes fun of the word mulch.
It does sound strange, yet it is fun to say.
Those who are serious members of the trowel and hoe fraternity know well what the word mulch means, however, and they are good practitioners of its use.


Priscilla Singer To Wed in Fall
LEAD: October wedding plans for Priscilla Singer and James Halper have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Singer of Harrison, N.Y.
Mr.
Halper is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Halper of Washington.


Rent Regulators Can't Please Anyone, Even Themselves
LEAD: The scene looked more like a stage production of ''Marat/ Sade'' than an important annual meeting of a government regulatory body.
Hundreds of landlords and tenants stood on opposite sides of a large hall, stamping their feet and shouting down the members of the panel attempting to reach a consensus on the stage.


Zulu Leader Sharpens His Challenge to Mandela
LEAD: In a tacit challenge to the African National Congress, Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, the principal Zulu leader, moved today to convert his movement into a multiracial political party and said that it must be reckoned with in future negotiations that the Government convenes on the nation's future.


An Inverse Trompe l'Oeil
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Music;   Summergarden Series Opens at Modern Museum
LEAD: The concept for this year's Summergarden series of concerts in the Sculpture Garden of the Museum of Modern Art is most attractive on paper.
For the first time, the season is devoted to a single composer: Stravinsky, appropriate to the setting.
The artistic director, Paul Zukofsky, has programmed about half of Stravinsky's works, trying in the process to elucidate the relationships among his three main compositional periods (loosely speaking): Russian, Neo-Classical and


Quick Call Wins Tom Fool in Upset
LEAD: Quick Call, who usually saves his best races for Saratoga, found a wet Belmont track to his liking yesterday and scored a front-running four-length upset victory over Sewickley in the $87,800 Tom Fool Stakes.


Who Will Call The Signals in 1990?
LEAD:
The chart below examines the quarterback situation for each of the 28 N.F.L. teams.
Dates given are when rookies and veterans report to camp.
National Conference
ATLANTA: July 26; Chris Miller benefits in the Falcons' new run-and-shoot offense with the addition of Andre Rison.
CHICAGO: July 26; Jim Harbaugh is 2-5 as a starter; Mike Tomczak is 21-9.


Jody Irish to Wed Clifford Farren Jr.
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William Peter Irish of Chatham, N.J., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Joan Marie Irish and Clifford Anthony Farren Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Farren of Belmar, N.J.


Cabot Paley and Donald Thaler Married on L.I.
LEAD: Cabot Barber Paley, a clinical social worker, and Dr.
Donald Paul Thaler, a dentist, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Judge Edward Horne of East Hampton Town Court officiated at Gardiners Marina in East Hampton, L.I.


A Dissent On Thermography
LEAD: Uncritical presentation of a controversial medical procedure, thermography (''Diagnoses by Photographing Body Heat,'' New Jersey Q &amp; A, June 17), is both poor journalism and a disservice to readers, patients, the medical profession and the legal system, to name a few.


How a Real-Life Drama Came to an Unhappy End
LEAD: When the avant-garde theater director Anne Bogart and the Trinity Repertory Company came to the last act of their drama in May and parted company, it was more than a dispute over budget cuts.
The fact that after less than a year the 38-year-old director and one of the nation's leading regional companies did not live happily ever after is an example of the challenge now confronting a number of the nation's not-for-profit theaters: how to secure the next generation of artistic directors while maintaining a faithful subscriber audience (the key to a sound operating budget) and at the same time


Lael E. Conlon To Wed in August
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
M.
Clark Conlon of Stamford, Conn., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Lael Elizabeth Conlon and Gordon Stewart Kiesling, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Stewart Keisling of Princeton, N.J.


Salazar Returning
LEAD: The name of Alberto Salazar first blazed across the world distance-running scene in 1980, when Salazar won the first of three straight New York City Marathons and snapped Bill Rodgers's string of four.
Now almost eight years after his last victory in that 26-mile-385-yard event, the 32-year-old Salazar is planning to return to running in the Big Apple after several years of injuries and operations.


Back For a Day


Suit May Be Filed Over Hales Trophy
LEAD: An attempt to claim a historic trophy for the fastest time under power across the Atlantic Ocean has produced a controversy that seeks to separate commerce from sport.


Postings: Brewster in Transition;   D'Agostino North
LEAD: First came the villagers, then the weekenders, then growing numbers of resident commuters who ride the Upper Harlem Line and, finally, the office campuses with crew-cut lawns that have muscled their way in among the apple orchards and dairy farms of Putnam County.


Data Bank/July 15, 1990


Shouldn't Executives in Tokyo Know Their Own Address?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
China Introduces Round-Trip Air Ticketing
BEIJING


Study Finds Americans Want News but Aren't Well Informed
LEAD: When it comes to the news, a survey indicates that Americans are both broadly interested and quite uninformed.


Royal Troubador Wins Yonkers Trot
LEAD: After throwing a scare into his followers by going off stride in his elimination race tonight, Royal Troubador was the dominant horse in the $424,965 Yonkers Trot final on the richest night of harness racing in Yonkers Raceway's history.


Elizabeth L. Hiser to Marry Charles P. Hoban
LEAD: August wedding plans for Elizabeth Lawrence Hiser and Charles Park Hoban, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward M. Hoban of Lake Forest, Ill., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Harold R. Hiser Jr. of Short Hills, N.J.


Abortion Trap in Louisiana
LEAD: In its zeal to enact the nation's stiffest anti-abortion law, the Louisiana Legislature has passed a bill that Gov.
Buddy Roemer must veto if he holds to his own standards.
A politician with a pro-life record, Mr.
Roemer asked his Legislature to exempt victims of rape and incest from any new law.


A Onetime Aide to Bush Shows a Lobbyist's Magic


HER THING WITH HENRY
LEAD:
NO GUARANTEES
By Melissa Lentricchia.
186 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company.
$16.95.


A Mystery Man in the End to DiMaggio's Streak
LEAD: Joe DiMaggio's 56-game hitting streak came to an end in Cleveland on July 17, 1941.
Most serious fans know that DiMaggio was stopped by the clutch pitching of the Indians' starter, Al Smith (12 victories, 13 losses that year), and the reliever Jim Bagby Jr. (9-15) and by two great fielding plays by the third baseman, Ken


Campus Life: S.M.U.;   3 Sets of Proposals To Reduce Costs Win Cash Awards
LEAD: Southern Methodist University has begun giving money to students and faculty and staff members whose proposals can help the school save money.


NOT ITS FINEST HOUR
LEAD:
AN AMERICAN LOOKS AT BRITAIN
By Richard Critchfield.
496 pp. New York:
Doubleday. $22.95.


William Burrud, 65, Television Producer Of Nature Programs
LEAD: William James Burrud, a television producer and narrator of nature shows and travelogues, died Thursday at his home in Sunset Beach, Calif., after a heart attack.
He was 65 years old.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Snap old flowers off geraniums and cut them off pansies, petunias, snapdragons and other annuals to keep the plants blooming; formation of seed pods will stop flowering.
If bloom is finished, cut stalks off astilbes, foxgloves, phlox, lilies, heucheras, delphiniums and other perennials to prevent seed pods.


What's New? Not Enough
LEAD: To the Editor:


'Reading Freud'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hers;   Prince Charming Comes Back
LEAD: Just the other day it happened again: I was sifting through a rack of charming but inflationary baby clothes together with my friend Susan when she said, sotto voce: ''I talked to my cousin yesterday.
She saw 'Pretty Woman.' She said she loved it, too.'' Although I doubt Susan's cousin loves the movie as much as does Susan, who's seen it three times, the list of suspects keeps growing.


Bluemner's Vision of Landscape In Drawings and Watercolors
LEAD: REBUTTING criticism of the 1913 Armory Show, one of the participants, Oscar Bluemner, contended that art was still ''largely misunderstood'' in America.
Art is not meant ''to amuse or instruct,'' he said, nor is it to be taken as ''imitation of nature.'' Its purpose, rather, is to elevate and liberate by making ''articulate the life of its time.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a bad mildew problem on the outside of our house, especially on the north side.
We have tried the usual measures, including scrubbing with bleach, but nothing has helped.
We are now planning to cover these eaves with aluminum or vinyl siding.
Must the mildew be washed off before the new siding is installed over it?


Who Coined 'Magical Realism'?
LEAD: To the Editor:


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
NASSAU FOLK FESTIVAL


Virginia Ehrlich to Marry Mathias J. Thoerner
LEAD: August wedding plans for Virginia Ehrlich and Mathias Johannes Thoerner, a son of Baroness Teuffel von Birkensee of Feldafing, West Germany, and Hans Hofmeier of Tegernsee, West Germany, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
M.
Gordon Ehrlich of Chestnut Hill, Mass.


By Horse Through Ireland's West
LEAD: The horses and riders tread softly through the peat bog at the top of a windswept Connemara mountain.
Manes and tails wave like the tall russet-tipped grasses of the bog.
In the near distance are granite boulders and small pastures enclosed by serpentine lace walls, so called for the holes left for the wind.


Tests for Kindergarten: Relaxing the Screening
LEAD: UNTIL this year, about 225 4- and 5-years-olds were routinely given a developmental screening to test their readiness to enter the Katonah-Lewisboro school system kindergartens.
But for this fall's kindergarten class, the test will be voluntary, as the appropriateness and the reliability of the standardized test has been increasingly called into question.


College Students, at Least, Aren't Apathetic
LEAD: To the Editor:


Susan Lefkon Is Married
LEAD: Susan R. Lefkon, the daughter of Roger Lefkon of Los Angeles and Carole Lefkon of Douglaston, Queens, was married last evening to Jeffrey L. Giniger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Giniger of Rock Hill, N.Y.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnick officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Giniger, 27 years old, is a sales representative at Vidi Vici, a fashion showroom in New York.


The Wondrous World of Connemara
LEAD: Connemara is that wild hinterland on the west coast of Ireland, bounded on the north by Clew Bay, on the south by Galway Bay and on the east by Lough Corrib and Lough Mask.


Design;   Suspended in Time
LEAD: There were a lot of things Barbara Weiser didn't know. ''It never dawned on me,'' she recalls. ''Like most apartment dwellers, I didn't know that faucets didn't come on sinks or that pipes don't last forever.'' But as an owner of Charivari, the Manhattan clothing chain, she has a sure eye.
For years, every time she passed this house she knew it had charm, even though she had never been inside it.


The Case of 2 Live Crew Tells Much About the American Psyche
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hampshire College
LEAD: As the unofficially designated ''first dropout'' of Hampshire College (1971-72), I would like to describe my impression of the tumultuous first days there (''What's New at Frisbee U.'' by Chip Brown, June 10).
Like many applicants, I was mesmerized by the promise of the truly ''progressive'' education described in the college's catalogue.


Forecast For 'Today': Cloudy
LEAD: Bryant Gumbel's prescription for ''Today'' may be responsible for the decline in the show's ratings, but that's what can happen when network executives mistake a star interviewer-newsman for a market researcher.


The Summer's Fare: Readings to Musicals
LEAD: THOSE who enjoy lively, thriving professional summer theater in Connecticut can hold onto a few signs of stability in an otherwise changing, shrinking - and Shakespeare-less - summer season.


Gypsy Moth Spraying: Other Views
LEAD: Normally I enjoy reading Pete Dunne's ''In the Natural State,'' but he is dead wrong in his recent piece on the gypsy moth.


Style Makers;   Robert R. Carpenter, Athletic Wear Designer
LEAD: When Robert R. Capener was a 6-foot 3 1/2-inch point guard on the Brigham Young University basketball team, he would work on his clothes before he worked on his jump shot.
He doctored this T-shirts by cutting off sleeves and carving out bigger armholes.


Commercial Property: Office Leasing;   Law Firms Top Financial Houses in Rental Activity
LEAD: In one of the biggest deals of a slow year, the law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy has signed a 20-year lease for at least 330,000 square feet at One Chase Manhattan Plaza in lower Manhattan, with options that could bring its space to 750,000 square feet - or fully one-third of the tower.


Fashion: On the Lawn;   Dressing For the Kids At a Benefit In Bellport
LEAD: For the last decade, the turn-of-the-century charm of Bellport, L.I., has had a particular appeal to those in the fashion business.
In that time, a generation of designers, retailers, photographers and publicists has discovered the quiet charm of this bayside village.


IN HAITI, THUGGERY IS EASIER ALL THE TIME
LEAD: With the return from exile last week of two figures associated with political violence and torture, one pessimistic notion seemed to resound clearly through the thick atmosphere of Port-au-Prince.
For many, the return of Roger Lafontant, the former head of the Tontons Macoute, and Williams Regala, a top army officer under Jean-Claude Duvalier and successor dictatorships, showed how little ground has been gained in the four years since Mr.


U.S. Seeks to Deny Furnaces to Iraq
LEAD: Concerned about the growing sophistication of Iraq's military, the Pentagon is leading a last-minute effort to prevent Baghdad from importing industrial furnaces that some experts say could be used to make components for missiles and atomic weapons.


Another Riff: Kill the Mikes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Works in Progressf;   Glyph Erosion
LEAD: Since its discovery in Luxor, Egypt, in 1904, the tomb of Nefertari, favored queen of Ramses II, has been valued for its wall paintings.
Its glyphs and murals, dating from the 13th century B.C. and presenting the queen as an elaborately adorned woman of great elegance, are testimony to the penchant of Ramses


In the Summer's Heat, Mulch Is Vital
LEAD: EVERYONE makes fun of the word mulch.
It does sound strange, yet it is fun to say.
Those who are serious members of the trowel and hoe fraternity know well what the word mulch means, however, and they are good practitioners of its use.


Ms. Hoyt Married To Marc L. Disick
LEAD: Carolyn Hoyt, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Hoyt of Glen Cove, L.I., was married last evening to Rabbi Marc L. Disick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Disick of West Hempstead, L.I.
Rabbi Charles A. Kroloff and Cantor Martha T. Novick officiated at Temple Emanu-El in Westfield, N.J.


Stacy Dutton to Wed Mark Cunneen
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick G. Dutton of Washington have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Stacy Maria Dutton and Mark James Cunneen, a son of Elizabeth White Cunneen of Meriden, Conn., and Robert J. Cunneen of Phoenix.


Jeanne Edelen Is Engaged
LEAD: August wedding plans for Jeanne Edelen and Felix Bizaoui, the son of Ida Bizaoui of Southfield, Mich., and the late Eli Bizaoui, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Edelen of Newtown, Conn.
Miss Edelen, 26 years old, graduated from the Madeira School and the Muscular Therapy Institute in Cambridge, Mass.


SCREAMS IN THE NIGHT
LEAD:
BOHIN MANOR
By Tadeusz Konwicki.
Translated by Richard Lourie.
240 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.95.


Opening Camp With the Quarterback Shuffle
LEAD: After a tedious decision-making process that resulted in his becoming the No. 1 selection in the college draft, after signing a six-year, $15 million contract to play in his hometown for the Indianapolis Colts and after practicing at the Colts' training center for the last month, Jeff George took a vacation in


Los Angeles Subway Tunnel Fire Weakens Freeway


In New Music, Capitalism Meets the Fringe
LEAD: The New Music Seminar started as a conspiracy in 1980.
It was a gathering, in one rehearsal studio, of 200 people from the margins of the music business, outsiders plotting to get their music heard.
Ten years later, the New Music Seminar is the biggest music-business convention in the United States.


Showing the World That China Is Still in Business
LEAD: On what is now an expanse of rice paddies and dilapidated buldings, China has begun a massive project to build an Asian financial capital and prove to the world that it is still open for business.


Cone Is Right on Target
LEAD: The rhythm was fluid, the location precise, the fastball flat-out fierce, all of which made the analysis in his own mind indisputable.
David Cone, the right-hander for the Mets with the ability to turn an encouraging roll into a long run of brilliance, is gathering momentum.


An Albatross Named Shearson
LEAD: It was a run-of-the-mill tombstone advertisement touting the underwriting by Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. of a retail mutual fund.
But the ad, which appeared in recent weeks, contained one change that spoke volumes about how the firm has been transformed in the past six months: Lehman Brothers was listed in the tombstone and the names Shearson and


Are the Good Old Days Back Already?
LEAD: Suddenly, the summer of 1990 is starting to seem like the summer of 1987.
The Dow is setting records, deals are being done, insider trading allegations are flying and the stories about Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company make the leveraged buyout kings sound like geniuses again.


Review/Dance;   Young Collaborators Offer Three Premieres
LEAD: One of the big surprises of the American Dance Festival is the annual program by the Young Choreographers and Composers in Residence.
Each summer, three choreographers collaborate on new works with three composers.
It is impossible to predict what the results will be, and it is always fascinating to discover what young dancers and musicians have on their creative minds.


Lois Moran Young Dead at 81; Musical Star and Movie Actress
LEAD: Lois Moran Young, a star of Hollywood's silent films and Broadway musicals who began charming audiences as a dancer at the Paris Opera at the age of 13, died Friday at the Kachina Point Health Center, a nursing home in Sedona, Ariz., near Flagstaff.
She was 81 years old and lived in Sedona.


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   Bistros With a Fresh New Look Or a Face That's Happily Faded
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times, and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Restaurant Florent


A Parent Behind Every Medal
LEAD: When Elverda Commings introduced her 5-year-old son to swimming in 1979, her ambitions were confined to the local Boys Club in Blackjack, Mo.
She paid the $5 membership fee and later, when her son began racing, she paid a modest meet fee of 75 cents per event.


Openings for the Homeless
LEAD: The summer months tend to dull City Hall's conscience on the homeless problem: with no one likely to freeze to death, the lack of decent shelter seems less urgent.
But warm weather also means the homeless are far more visible - a sad, glaring reminder of official neglect.


Addresses in Times Square Signal Prestige, if Not Logic
LEAD: You could spend a lifetime walking up and down Wall Street and never tread on Wall Street Plaza, circle Times Square endlessly and miss 2 Times Square and pace the length of the Avenue of the Americas without entering No. 1325.


Deborah Ellen Burton Weds Stan M. Wrobel
LEAD: Deborah Ellen Burton, a daughter of Dr.
Anna Burton and Dr.
Murray E. Burton of Teaneck, N.J., was married yesterday at the couple's home in Ann Arbor, Mich., to Stan Michael Wrobel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Wrobel of New Port Richey, Fla.
The Rev.
Ward Hallman, a minister of the Unity Church, officiated.


In the Summer's Heat, Mulch Is Vital
LEAD: EVERYONE makes fun of the word mulch.
It does sound strange, yet it is fun to say.
Those who are serious members of the trowel and hoe fraternity know well what the word mulch means, however, and they are good practitioners of its use.


Dams May Be Razed So the Salmon Can Pass
LEAD: The Elwha River comes bouncing out of the high-country heart of this million-acre park, a surge of clean water that used to provide passage for some of the world's biggest salmon, the giant chinooks.


The Return of TB: A special report.;   TUBERCULOSIS GERM RESURGING AS RISK TO PUBLIC HEALTH
LEAD: Borne on a tide of AIDS, homelessness and drug and alcohol use, tuberculosis is re-emerging as a public health threat in the United States, particularly in inner cities.


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article last Sunday about budget cuts at Stanford University referred incorrectly in some copies to the distance between Stanford and San Francisco.
The university is about 35 miles southeast of the city.


Outdoors
LEAD: Great rivers cause anglers to fall in love.


Elizabeth Waring, Pediatrician, Wed
LEAD: Dr.
Elizabeth L. Waring, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David L. Waring of New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Massella Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Massella of Mount Lebanon, Pa.
The Rev.
George A. Wilt officiated at St.
Bernard Roman Catholic Church in Pittsburgh.


CHENEY DISPUTED ON PLANE'S MERITS
LEAD: The fight between Congress and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney over the fate of the Osprey, the tilt-rotor aircraft that ascends like a helicopter and flies like a plane, has heated up with the release of a study commissioned by the Pentagon at Congress's request.


A Marriage Made Off Broadway Takes the Cake
LEAD: On the steps of a church in Greenwich Village in Manhattan, a small crowd waits expectantly for a wedding to begin.
Suddenly the bride appears and dashes inside. ''Don't look at the bride!'' her bridesmaids scream. ''It's bad luck.'' But everybody ignores them, for they have paid admission to attend.


Forecast For 'Today': Cloudy
LEAD: The solution to NBC's ''Today'' problem is so obvious that it appears no one can see it.
When a show is so clearly dominated, both in style and content, as ''Today'' is by Bryant Gumbel, there is no real way to ''fix'' the sliding ratings without also doing something about Gumbel.


Houston Scorecard
LEAD: When the leaders of the Group of Seven industrialized nations met last week in Houston, the three main issues of contention were trade policy, aid to the Soviet Union and the environment.
Here, by David E. Rosenbaum, a New York Times correspondent who covered the Houston event, is a look at the issues, what the summit meeting produced and the outlook.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about Japan's efforts to turn economic power into political influence gave an incomplete name and affiliation for a NATO seminar participant.
He is Masashi Nishihara, a professor at the National Defense Academy.


Miss Birnie Weds Pedro M. Garzon
LEAD: Karen A. Birnie, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Scott Birnie of Oakville, Ontario, was married yesterday to Pedro M. Garzon, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Antonio A. Garzon of West Brighton, S.I.
The Rev.
Leslie Merlin performed the Presbyterian ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Havel: Prison for Journalists?
LEAD: ''Where you stand depends upon where you sit'' is one of the oldest saws in politics.
On no issue does this hold more than on the issue of free speech.


An August Bridal For Susan Parrish
LEAD: August wedding plans for Susan Scott Parrish and Bruce Cordiner Judge have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, T. Kirkpatrick Parrish 3d of Greenwich, Conn., and Mrs.
Lawrence A. Bianchi of Boston.
Mr.
Judge is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Judge of Ann Arbor, Mich.


... AND OF MEMORY
LEAD:
THIS MY PEOPLE
By Madanjeet Singh.
Illustrated. 157 pp. New York:
Rizzoli. $50.


SHORTWAVE LINKS TRAVELERS TO WORD OF HOME
LEAD: American tourists have always had a way of seeking out offbeat places.
This summer they may roam even farther afield than before, as Eastern Europe seems increasingly congenial to visitors.
So chances are that vacationers abroad may find themselves at some point a long way from the nearest newsstand that carries English-language papers.


Homeless In America
LEAD: Do we really need studies costing millions of dollars to tell us why we have a homeless problem (''Homeless in America,'' by Mitchel Levitas, June 10)?
I can give the answer for nothing, in a couple of sentences:


With Time and Influence Evaporating, Aquino Finds Rivals All Around Her
LEAD: As her shaky six-year term winds down and her rivals maneuver for 1992 presidential elections, President Corazon C. Aquino is trying almost desperately to preserve some political leverage.


Special Museums From Subs to Nuts: Enough Already?
LEAD: THE American Silver Museum, in Meriden, was supposed to open this summer, but the building is locked shut.
The museum has run out of money, and while it seeks more support, some people in the state wonder whether Connecticut already has too many specialized museums.


Gypsy Moth Spraying: Other Views
LEAD: In response to Pete Dunne's ''In the Natural State'' column, ''In Trying to Kill the Gypsy Moth, Are We Going Too Far?'':


Hampshire College
LEAD: Education at Hampshire College encouraged a personal focus.
Certainly, not everyone could handle the questions: What do you want?
What interests you?
In fact, many, for whatever reason -parents, Vietnam, economic status or self-indulgence - found they couldn't handle the absence of structure.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Annadale
LEAD: Although the Annadale neighborhood is flat, the district manager of Community Board 3 refers to it as ''the Beverly Hills of Staten Island.'' Situated on 1.8 square miles of the island's south shore, the community is one of the wealthiest in New York City.
Some say Annadale owes its cachet to its lack of sewers.


American Express
LEAD: To the Editor: On a recent trip to Europe, I discovered just how ''helpful'' the American Express office can be to American tourists.
Since I had planned to meet friends in different cities, we relied on the various American Express offices as a means of leaving and retrieving messages.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. We have a bad mildew problem on the outside of our house, especially on the north side.
We have tried the usual measures, including scrubbing with bleach, but nothing has helped.
We are now planning to cover these eaves with aluminum or vinyl siding.
Must the mildew be washed off before the new siding is installed over it?


Lasix Debate: Case of Neglect
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Performing Troupes Blending Their Art
LEAD: ROBBY BARNETT, an artistic director of the Pilobolus Dance Theater, said he felt ''a bit starry eyed'' when David Hays, the founder and director of the National Theater of the Deaf, suggested two years ago at an art function in Hartford that they collaborate on a new works.
Though it was the first time that the leaders of the two Connecticut-based companies had ever met, Mr.


IS HE A MATCH FOR THATCHER?
LEAD: The last time Neil Kinnock, the British Labor party leader, came to the White House, in March 1987, he had his work cut out for him, trying to convince President Reagan and Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger that the Anglo-American special relationship and the NATO alliance would actually be strengthened if


The Vegetarian Snacks of South India
LEAD: AT 7 A.M. in the restaurant at the New Woodlands in Madras, more than 10 people are already waiting in line for breakfast.
The scent of coconut drifts through the air as barefoot waiters race past bearing trays loaded with steaming white patties and large, fragrant pancakes.
Madrasis and visitors pore over their morning papers, washing down patties and pancakes with small cups of sweet, milky coffee.


College Students, at Least, Aren't Apathetic;   Dark Clouds on Horizon
LEAD: To the Editor:


Summer Concerts in Enticing Settings
LEAD: LISTENING to fine music in beautiful surroundings can add immeasurably to the delight, and this week there are several opportunities to enjoy concerts in esthetically pleasing settings.


Bush's Campaign Pledge of No New Taxes: Misleading or Naive?
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Never-Say-Die British Musical
LEAD: SUMMER-STOCK theaters are those places in which young hopefuls in the industry can gain experience and where more-experienced hopefuls can hone their craft while waiting for that big break.


Easing the Task of Buying Lumber
LEAD: BUYING lumber can be confusing.
For example, any piece of lumber that is less than two inches thick and eight inches wide is called a strip; any piece less than two inches thick but more than eight inches wide is called a board.


Style Makers;   Lambros Milona, Designer
LEAD: Just because his father, uncle and grandfather are furriers doesn't mean Lambros Milona has to follow in their footsteps.
Although he grew up in the Milona workrooms on Seveth Avenue, he decided to veer slightly off the well-worn track.
He set his sights on designing leather and suede ready-to-wear items.


Talking: 2d Homes;   Lessening Tax Bite on A Resale
LEAD: The sale of a vacation home has never been blessed with the tax advantages that normally help to reduce or postpone indefinitely the capital gains tax due on the sale of a principal residence.
This is a problem for the seven million households that the American Resort and Residential Development Association estimates now own second homes.


Colorado Prairie Dog Shoot Takes Place Despite Protests
LEAD: The first Top Dog World Championship Prairie Dog Shoot competition got under way today with more than 100 participants, despite protests by about two dozen supporters of animal rights.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: A recent study suggested that players should shuffle seven times to insure a satisfactory mix of the cards.
It is unlikely that players accustomed to a perfunctory two or three riffles will change their ways, but a point to consider is the type of bridge being played.


SOME PRIMATES WEREN'T TO BE TRUSTED
LEAD:
THE DARK ROMANCE OF DIAN FOSSEY
By Harold T. P. Hayes.
Illustrated. 351 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.95.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD:
Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


Connecticut Democrats Split in Peace
LEAD: Connecticut's Democrats split over the choice of a candidate for governor at their state convention here today, forcing the first gubernatorial primary in 12 years.
But the break was far less rancorous than many delegates had feared.


Campus Life: Michigan State;   Anti-Drinking Bid Results in Seizure Of Fake Licenses
LEAD: In an effort to crack down on what they said was an increase in under-age drinking, the East Lansing police have confiscated more than 700 fake driver's licenses from students.


IN SEARCH OF THE LATINO WRITER
LEAD: When Oscar Hijuelos, a Cuban-American, won the 1990 Pulitzer Prize in fiction for his novel ''The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love,'' the award raised the possibility that Latino writers in the United States could at last find a wide audience for their work.
If so, their success has been a long time coming.


Amper Is Using The Environment
LEAD: P. T. Barnum, who mockingly announced there was a sucker born every minute, has a new and aggressive student in Richard Amper.
Unfortunately for the rest of us, Mr.
Amper looks to sucker the taxpayer and in his essay, ''The Builders Are Trying to Undercut Us'' (May 28), he shows just how adept he is at his scam.


Is Tonality Pie in the Sky Or Pie in the Face?
LEAD: Nothing is harder to kill than a good myth.
Beat on it with hard facts, and it will hardly notice.
Chop off its head, and it will grow another one by nightfall.
Nothing, it seems, can put an end to a myth but its replacement by another myth.


The Prince of Many Faces
LEAD: To the Editor:


Running the Rapids Of Utah's San Juan
LEAD: A white roar disturbs the canyon quiet.
Roabie Johnson pulls a pair of pliers from the holster on her belt and draws a diagram in the sand: two parallel lines to show the course of the river, three or four circles to indicate rocks, and a series of peaks that stand for tail waves. ''These pliers are your boat,'' she says as she threads the tool through the circles and aims it directly at the peaks.


'Hedda' Wears Brain on Her Sleeve
LEAD: ''HEDDA GABLER'' is 100 years old, but the tantalizing title character in Ibsen's classic of demented psychology remains a puzzlement.
The prevailing perception of Hedda as predator, ''a hopeless specimen of degeneracy'' or merely ''mean'' was epitomized by Brooks Atkinson's pronouncement in 1936: ''In cold fact, she is the most hateful woman in dramatic literature.


Gabrielle von Henneberg Is Engaged
LEAD: September wedding plans for Gabrielle Jesman von Henneberg and David Archibald Gillies, a son of Joy Gillies of Northport, L.I., and Archibald L. Gillies of New York, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mrs.
Robert P. Bass Jr. and Jacek von Henneberg, both of Cambridge, Mass.


Vincent Studies Past for Help On the Decision at Hand
LEAD: Fay Vincent's commissionership is relatively young.
Yet, as he begins his deliberations on the fate of the Yankees' principal owner, George Steinbrenner, he does so equipped with the knowledge of 70 years of precedent-setting acts by commissioners past.


On the Road, Again
LEAD: A recent Midwestern drive presented more than expected sights like the Gateway Arch, Sears Tower and Blue Water Bridge.
The roads between scheduled stops revealed a four-decade evolution in American motoring.
The Interstate highways enter the 1990's, like many of us who travel them, pushing middle age.


AFTERSHOCK IN SAN FRANCISCO
LEAD: Fenton Johnson's article ''Aftershock in San Francisco'' (June 17) left the mistaken impression that San Francisco's disaster planning is rooted in denial.
Nothing could be further from the truth.


Little Progress Is Seen OnEnvironment Goals
LEAD: THREE years after Connecticut developed a comprehensive environmental plan setting out goals for the year 2000, a state environmental panel has reported little progress toward meeting them.


East's Archives Reveal Ties to Terrorists
LEAD: With every passing day, disclosures from secret files of the former Communist governments in Eastern Europe show more clearly that well into the 1980's, they gave sanctuary to Middle Eastern and Western European terrorist groups that were attacking Western targets, despite official denials at the time.


Free to Speak, Bulgarians Aren't Sure What to Say
LEAD: Bulgarians like Stefan Dankov are having a hard time deciding if these will be the ''good old days.''


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article in the Business section last Sunday reported on a Dallas company, National Spirit Group Inc., that conducts cheerleader training camps and sells cheerleading equipment.
The article discussed the 1988 acquisition of National Spirit by the Prospect Group Inc. of New York and quoted Lawrence Herkimer, National Spirit's founder and chairman, as having said, ''We have never had a down year.


Laura Shapiro Marries Richard Price
LEAD: Laura Ruth Shapiro, a lawyer, was married yesterday at the Water Club in New York to Acting Justice Richard Lee Price of State Supreme Court in the Bronx.
Harry W. Davis, a retired acting justice of State Supreme Court, officiated.


Nancy Carlson Is Wed to Timothy Berners-Lee
LEAD: Nancy Carlson and Timothy J. Berners-Lee were married yesterday at the Greenfield Hill Congregational Church in Fairfield, Conn., by the Rev.
George C. Bland.
Mrs.
Berners-Lee is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
D.
Bret Carlson of Fairfield.
Her husband is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Conway Berners-Lee of London.


Politics on TV: Too Fast, Too Loose?
LEAD: It has taken a decade for the message to sink in, but the advertising industry has come to accept the fact that consumers do not receive information only from the usual sources - network television, newspapers and magazines.
They are continuously bombarded with sights, sounds and sentence fragments, often unconsciously, as they drive by billboards, glance at T-shirt logos and open their mail.


Sophistication After Humble Origins
LEAD: EAST HAMPTON'S Laundry Restaurant is celebrating its 10th anniversary.
Although that is not a monumental milestone for most Long Island restaurants, for an East Ender, it is an accomplishment.


Dent Returns, For a Day
LEAD: Barely a month has gone by since his dismissal, but Bucky Dent looked refreshed and ready yesterday.
He smiled a lot, he shook hands with old friends and he talked about coming back.


Mari Nakachi to Wed D. A. Simkowitz
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Hiroshi Nakachi of Tokyo have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Mari Nakachi and Daniel A. Simkowitz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Simkowitz of Bloomington, Ind.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
CLOWN PRINCE OF HOLLYWOOD: The Antic Life and Times of Jack L. Warner.
By Bob Thomas. (McGraw-Hill, $19.95.) ''Moguls?
Don't like the word,'' Jack Leonard Warner once said. ''It reminds me of some bad Turkish cigarettes I used to smoke.'' Yet for more than 25 years there was perhaps no better word to describe him as he helped run Hollywood and dictate the cinematic tastes of the American public.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Should the Mets Have Called Off Strawberry Talks?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.


Taking Bows
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation had Lee Iacocca; New York University had John Brademas.
Not that the university was on the verge of extinction when Dr.
Brademas took over as president in 1981, but it was looking to grow and looking for a leader who knew where to look for money.
Dr.
Brademas did.
He came to the university with 11 terms in Congress behind him and quickly became a familiar figure in the New York financial community.


Homeless In America
LEAD: The Better Homes Foundation, a nonprofit organization serving homeless families, has been in contact with more than 1,000 programs that deal with issues regarding the homeless.
Many of these programs find ''substance abuse'' a growing problem.
However, this does not mean that substance abuse causes family homelessness.


Forecast For 'Today': Cloudy
LEAD: I was surprised that there was virtually no mention in your article of John Palmer, who was one of the big plusses of ''Today.'' Although we were all sad to see Jane Pauley leave the show, there are many of us who were sorry to see this highly respected, veteran news professional downgraded to second-string status.


Cathryn L. Kishbaugh Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Cathryn Lee Kishbaugh, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert S. Kishbaugh of Atkinson, N.H., was married there yesterday to Christopher Robert MacLean, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. MacLean of Waccabuc, N.Y.
The Rev.
Leslie L. Leavitt Jr. officiated at the Atkinson Congregational Church.


Question Of the Week;   Should Baseball Suspend Steinbrenner?
LEAD: No, definitely not.
For destroying the most honored franchise in sports and impugning the reputation of baseball, expulsion is required.
Immediate.
Forever.


Susan R. Plath Is Married To Michael E. Winston
LEAD: Susan R. Plath, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren J. Plath of Yorktown Heights, N.Y., and Michael E. Winston, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund P. Winston Jr. of Houston, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert F. Dorer, a minister of the Dutch Reformed Church of America, performed the ceremony at the Union Church of Pocantico Hills in North Tarrytown, N


Big Dishes Come Back
LEAD: Mark Twain considered reports of his death exaggerated.
Likewise, the widely proclaimed demise of big-dish antennas (to receive satellite television) also turned out to be grossly overstated.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Mixing Pasta and Potatoes For a Carbohydrate Dream
LEAD: From time to time, Italian cookbooks and restaurants come up with some combination of pasta and potatoes - the carbohydrate-loader's dream.


WORLDS IN COLLUSION
LEAD:
A ROMANCE OF THE EQUATOR
The Best Fantasy Stories of Brian W. Aldiss.
345 pp. New York: Atheneum. $18.95.


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
East Islip
$147,900
35 Adams Street West
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 20-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, deck, patio, 1-car garage; taxes $4,300.
Farmingdale
$175,000
19 Pine Tree Drive
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement; taxes $4,500.


Nancy Sachs to Marry Paul Wiener
LEAD: Nancy Fairchild Sachs, a partner in the law firm of Wilson, Elser, Moskowitz, Edelman &amp; Dicker in New York, and Dr.
Paul Bennett Wiener, a nephrologist with the Norwalk (Conn.) Medical Group, plan to marry in August.
Ms.
Sachs is the daughter of Gloria Sachs of New York and Irwin Sachs of Rye, N.Y.


Experts Say Rikers Melee Shows Many of Jail's Flaws
LEAD: The melee in which 66 officers and inmates were injured Friday on Rikers Island was termed ''particularly distressing and ominous'' yesterday by the chairman of the New York City Board of Correction, because it indicates a failure to control the jail even when it is not overcrowded.


NATO Leader Makes Official Visit to Moscow


Clemson to Establish M.B.A. Program in Moscow
LEAD: Students in the Soviet Union will be able to earn a degree that epitomizes capitalism, a master's in business administration, under a program that Clemson University is setting up in Moscow, the university announced today.


Fashion;   Stylish Rainwear's as Welcome as Sun in Summer
LEAD: Summer showers may suggest lighthearted frolic, but if they fall on a work day, serious protection is in order.
Happily, new fibers and styling have produced coats that can do the job all year.


Review/Dance;   L'Esquisse In Gothic Romance
LEAD: The Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival has a distinctively paradisiacal air these days.
There is a sense that every inch of the newly landscaped, refurbished festival complex in the Berkshire woods has been happily taken over by dance, from the rustic benches and woodland ponds that offer performers and dancers in training moments of private meditation to studios brimming with classes and informal events that are open to theatergoers' casual inspection.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
Concerto for Piano and Guns


All About/Watches;   Watchmakers Are Ringing The Old Back In, as a Varied Industry Revives and Thrives
LEAD: If the modern watch industry had a theme song, it would probably be Peter Allen's ''Everything Old Is New Again.'' Mechanical watches, which all but ceded the market to quartz movements more than a decade ago, are best-sellers again.
Analog faces, the ones with big hands and little hands, have recaptured a chunk of the market from digital displays.


Caroline A. Ewert To Marry in Fall
LEAD: The engagement of Caroline A. Ewert to Richard A. Jaenicke, a son of Ann B. Jaenicke of Lancaster, Pa., and Henry R. Jaenicke of Greenwich, Conn., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred P. Ewert of New York.
A November wedding is planned.


Managing;   Giving Less Time to Good Causes
LEAD: Two years ago, internal dissension threatened to destroy the Shanti Project, the San Francisco nonprofit group that is one of the world's largest providers of care for people with AIDS.
Its founder had stepped aside and Douglas P. Holloway, a member of Shanti's board, ran the group on a day-to-day basis for eight months while holding down a full-time job as an executive vice president of Wells Fargo &amp;


Vaccinations
LEAD: To the Editor: In the article ''New Phone Line Advises Travelers About Vaccines'' (Practical Traveler, May 13), Rosamond R. Dewart of the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta was quoted as recommending allowing six weeks prior to travel for getting information on vaccinations.
I suggest that travelers allow at least eight weeks.


Anne Alley and Dan Morris Wed in New Mexico
LEAD: Anne Lamberton Alley and Dan Casement Morris were married yesterday in an Episcopal ceremony at the Loreto Chapel in Santa Fe, N.M., by the Rev.
Robbins Clarke.
Mrs.
Alley-Morris, 26 years old, is the daughter of Helen Lamberton of Baltimore and James B. Alley Jr. of Santa Fe.
Mr.
Morris, 30, is the son of Alexandra Casement Morris and Robert Brown Morris, both of Midland,


Wendy Davies Wed to Walter Johnsen
LEAD: Wendy Anne Wilding Davies and Walter Craig Johnsen were married yesterday at the Brick Presbyterian Church by the Rev.
Herbert B. Anderson.
The bride is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward A. Davies of New York.
Her husband is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter S. Johnsen of Saddle River, N.J.


Shoes or Shoeboxes At the Beach
LEAD: Calling visitors to Cape May ''shoobes'' because they bring all their needs to the shore in a shoebox is certainly colorful (Cape May Journal, ''Facing the Tourist Season With Mixed Feelings'' but is at variance with the etymology or folk wisdom on Long Beach Island.


A Top-Rated Canadian Drama Crosses the Border
LEAD: ''Love and Hate,'' a two-part mini-series beginning tonight on NBC, dramatizes one of the most sensational murder cases in Canadian history: Colin Thatcher, a millionaire rancher and the most flamboyant politician in Saskatchewan, was convicted in 1984 of murdering his former wife or having her murdered.


Alison Gregg Weds E. J. Corcoran 2d
LEAD: Trinity Episcopal Church in Newport, R.I., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Margaret Alison Gregg, a daughter of Ambassador and Mrs.
Donald P. Gregg of Bethesda, Md., to Edward John Corcoran 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward B. Corcoran of Middletown, R.I.


OUR COSTLIEST WAR
LEAD:
THE RED KING'S REBELLION
Racial Politics in New England, 1675-1678.
By Russell Bourne.
Illustrated. 273 pp. New York:
Atheneum. $22.95.


Out of the Freezer, A Man of the 60's Faces the 90's
LEAD: Willie husband stayed out a lot longer than he said he would, and his wife, Joy, is furious.
When he tries to calm her, she swats him away and announces, ''My life with you is over.'' Still, Willie won't give up.
He backs her against the bedroom wall and quietly pleads his case.
With a drawl that's part Jimmy Stewart, part Henry


Sri Lanka Rebels Said to Kill 35 Muslim Bus Passengers
LEAD: Tamil rebels stopped three buses and shot to death at least 35 Muslim passengers in eastern Sri Lanka, Defense Ministry officials said today.


Street Fair Killer Committed
LEAD: David R. Peterson, the man found innocent by reason of insanity in the 1989 slaying of a 9-year-old girl at a busy street fair, has been committed to the state's only maximum-security mental hospital.
The State's Psychiatric Security Review Board on Friday found that Mr.
Peterson was a danger to the public and should remain at Whiting Forensic Institute in Middletown, a board official said.


A's Beat Brewers on Welch's 14th
LEAD: Bob Welch won his major league-leading 14th game today and Jose Canseco hit his 24th home run to lead the Oakland Athletics past the Milwaukee Brewers, 3-1.


Eric Mingo Is Married To Cynthia E. Barber
LEAD: Cynthia E. Barber, the daughter of Hortense L. Howell-Barber of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to Eric R. Mingo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Mingo of New York.
The Rev.
David D. Cockcroft performed the ceremony at the Riverdale Presbyterian Church.


A Cool Respite In Highlands Of Malaysia
LEAD: For the miners, rubber planters and colonial officers who made Malaya their main chance in the late 19th century, the sweltering lowlands must have seemed a trial, to be endured then just as now by repeatedly dousing the body with cold water.


GRANT IS AWARDED TO CURB DROPOUTS
LEAD: Mount Holyoke College and the city of Holyoke, Mass., will open a new public middle school this fall that is intended to be a model for fighting rising dropout rates among urban youngsters, especially Hispanic students.


Jet Door Sought in Sea for Accident Clue
LEAD: Seventeen months after a cargo door blew off a United Airlines Boeing 747 south of Hawaii, sweeping nine passengers to their deaths, an effort to retrieve the door from an ocean depth of more than 14,000 feet is scheduled to begin late this week.


Postings: Restaurant on the Hudson;   A Marina Plus
LEAD: A long-neglected stretch of parkland along the Hudson River in northern Manhattan will be the site of a 127-slip marina and 60-seat restaurant if a plan by the New York City Parks Department is approved.


College Students, at Least, Aren't Apathetic;   Income Every Time
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sports of The Times;   Where Are Rizzuto's Old-Timers?
LEAD: Before he put on a Yankee uniform for what he agreed would probably be the last time, Phil Rizzuto was finishing another cup of coffee.


'In the Black': Spectacle at Kent Gallery
LEAD: KENT has art galleries like cities have bars.
The number has gone from zero to seven in less than seven years - roughly one per 350 inhabitants.
With its vintage railroad station and a Main Street rich in clapboard buildings, the hamlet could never have been an eyesore, but there's no doubt that it has been overtaken by gentrification, gilded store signs and all.


Northeast Notebook: Newport, Me.;   What's Next After the Fire?
LEAD: A fire that destroyed a large section of the historic downtown here in May has left the question of when and how to rebuild.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We are concerned about out-of-sequence and vanity addresses.
They're really proliferating.
It's hard even for old-timers - but particularly for newcomers - to find their way around town.''
-Marla G. Simpson,
director of land-use planning
in the office of the
Manhattan Borough President.


Fox in The Network Henhouse
LEAD: Keenen Ivory Wayans, Executive Producer, Writer and star of Fox Broadcasting Company's ''In Living Color,'' had a problem.
He and Tamara Rawitt, one of the show's producers, had developed a sketch that would push the Fox network's cutting-edge humor policy to its limit.
Or break it.


In the Summer's Heat, Mulch Is Vital
LEAD: EVERYONE makes fun of the word mulch.
It does sound strange, yet it is fun to say.
Those who are serious members of the trowel and hoe fraternity know well what the word mulch means, however, and they are good practitioners of its use.


Yonkers Resolves Housing Obstacle
LEAD: A TWO-MONTH disagreement between Yonkers and the builder of the first 142 of 200 units of court-ordered desegregated housing in the city was resolved last week, clearing the way for construction of the low-income units to begin next month.


The Executive Computer;   Modem Makers Are Picking Up the Pace
LEAD: Computers are getting faster, more powerful and more reliable, and so too are modems, the devices that allow two or more computers to share information over regular telephone lines.
Fairly bristling with advanced circuitry, the new modems achieve their performance by taking over a lot of processing done by computer-based software communications protocols.


Campus Life: Georgia;   Faculty and Staff Fight Drug Tests For New Members
LEAD: Faculty and staff members at the University of Georgia are opposed to a new state law requiring all applicants for state employment to submit to drug testing.


Homeless In America
LEAD: In your article on the homeless, a Department of Housing and Urban Development official comments, ''We can't have socialism for the poor and capitalism for the wealthy.'' In fact, just the opposite is true.
President Bush proposes to spend $700 million on housing programs for the poor, while the cost to taxpayers of bailing out the savings and loan industry is estimated at anywhere from $325 billion to more than $1 trillion.


Taking a Course In 'Freshman' Mischief
LEAD: The Komodo Dragon, an endangered 10-foot lizard that preys on small wild pigs, is not ordinarily much in the news.
But in December 1984, a former organized crime figure named Charles Cantino, a k a Vincent A. Teresa, was charged with smuggling this and other exotic species into the United States.


Racing Faces New Drug Problem As Steroid Use Troubles Breeders
LEAD: Amid the bluegrass of Lexington, Ky., this week and the breezes of Saratoga Springs, N.Y., next month, tuxedoed auctioneers will sell nearly a thousand sleek and blue-blooded yearlings for more than $200 million to dreamers and speculators searching for the next Secretariat.


Easing the Task of Buying Lumber
LEAD: BUYING lumber can be confusing.
For example, any piece of lumber that is less than two inches thick and eight inches wide is called a strip; any piece less than two inches thick but more than eight inches wide is called a board.


Review/Cabaret;   Sharp Satire From a Trio Named Betty
LEAD: Midway in a cabaret act that is as musically sophisticated as it is verbally acute, Amy Ziff, the self-proclaimed diva of the female pop trio Betty, adopts the personality of a generic B-movie character named Kat.


Ejection for A-Train Vagrants Tonight
LEAD: In a move opposed by Mayor David N. Dinkins, the Transit Authority plans to make a concerted effort tonight to eject vagrants sleeping on the A train who prevent employees from cleaning subway cars.


Recycling: New Report, New Debate
LEAD: NEW JERSEY residents are recycling more trash than anyone had expected, according to a new report that has already begun to intensify the incinerators vs. recycling debate.


14 Juillet, avec Guillotine, Storms the Meat Market
LEAD: Dancers with tawdry ruffles around their hips and plumes in their hair did the cancan.
A buxom Marie Antoinette lost her head.
And Georges Danton and Maximilien Robespierre, in late 18th-century garb, discussed their Reign of Terror over Rolling Rocks.
It was Bastille Day a la New York.
Ten days after their own Independence Day and with revolutions still unfolding in Eastern Europe, Francophiles and would-be beachgoers kept home by the clouds flocked to the cobblestoned meatpacking district yesterday for a quirky celebration of the


Local Law 10
LEAD: To the Editor:


Forecast For 'Today': Cloudy
LEAD: I say, bravo, Bryant.
He runs a terrific show.
It took guts for him to write that memo, and I happen to agree with his assessment of Willard Scott.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Hartford, Conn.
$500,000
226 Palm Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 90-year-old colonial; dining room, pantry, fireplace, 1 acre; taxes $1,186.
Simsbury, Conn.
$155,000
Walnut Hill Road
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 31-year-old Cape Cod; formal dining room, bedroom skylights, large country kitchen; taxes $1,515.


A Night for the Opera And the Bolshoi, Too
LEAD: On Tuesday, 600 guests turned out for a black-tie dinner-dance at the Promenade of the New York State Theater, proving that even the summer heat can't keep the benefit crowd down.
Its purpose was to raise funds for the general benefit of the New York City Opera, which is providing a home for two weeks for the Bolshoi


Taking a Rest
LEAD: Job pressures are not limited to the secular world.
When Archbishop Eugene A. Marino resigned last week as head of the Atlanta archidiocese, colleagues said he had been under ''a great deal of stress'' in a growing archdiocese with a shortage of priests.
The 56-year-old Archbishop had temporarily relinquished his duties in May, when he entered a retreat after suffering chest pains brought on, his doctors said, by ''physical and psychological stresses possibly relating to cardiovascular functions.


Adrianne Benton Weds Robert Furniss
LEAD: Adrianne Craig Benton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Benton of Evanston, Ill., was married yesterday to Robert French Furniss, a son of Susan W. Furniss of Fort Collins, Colo., and the late Norman Furniss.
The Rev.
George Conway, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.


Vienna
LEAD: In the past 100 years this city has slipped from the center of the universe - at least in the eyes of the Viennese - to the periphery of Western Europe.
It is a position that the Viennese have never quite acknowledged.


Technology;   Making Bad Smell Good By Tricking the Nose
LEAD: Two years ago, Reggie Vokes had an odor problem.
When hot, sultry air settled over the garbage landfill he manages in West Palm Beach, Fla., nearby residents complained about the sour smells wafting their way.


Transactions
LEAD: Baseball


R. D. Rudman Weds Karen Greenberg
LEAD: Karen Sydney Greenberg, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sidney S. Greenberg of New York, was married last evening in New York to Richard David Rudman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel Rudman of Milwaukee.
Rabbi Miriam Shapero performed the ceremony at the Mark Hotel.


THE PATTERN IN 'THE YELLOW WALLPAPER'
LEAD: TO ''HERLAND'' AND BEYOND
The Life and Work of Charlotte Perkins Gilman.
By Ann J. Lane.
Illustrated. 413 pages. New York:
Pantheon Books. $29.95.


Ban on Drug Is Sought in Florida
LEAD: Animal-rights supporters plan to challenge a state decision allowing the use of a powerful class of steroids on race horses.
They say the drugs pose a danger to both horses and jockeys.


Nicaragua's Price Of Order in the Ranks Is Chaos in the Streets
LEAD: When Nicaraguans awoke last week to bitter street fighting, the most important news was not who joined the fracas, but who stayed away.


Fashion;   Swinging Into Summer Without the Wrinkles
LEAD: ''Knits are the summer's answer to cashmere because they're soft and movable, and they feel good against the body,'' said Donna Karan, the fashion designer. ''They're thoroughly modern for the hot days of summer.''


Equal Work?
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE NON-RUSSIANS ARE COMING
LEAD:
SOVIET DISUNION
A History of the Nationalities
Problem in the USSR.
By Bohdan Nahaylo and Victor Swoboda.
Illustrated. 432 pp. New York:
The Free Press. $29.95.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Salt is something associated with health - too little can cause fainting in hot weather and too much can raise blood pressure.
But, salt is a necessity, especially in hot climates, and its use has been a curious amalgam of barter and currency for centuries.
The word salary, for example, comes from the Latin salarium, which was the money paid to Roman soldiers to buy salt.


DON'T BLAME MRS. O'LEARY
LEAD:
AMERICAN APOCALYPSE
The Great Fire and the Myth of Chicago.
By Ross Miller.
Illustrated. 287 pp. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press. $24.95.


For Prostitute, Limelight and Now Jail
LEAD: It may have been bravado; it may have been naivete; it may have been her way of collecting her allotted 15 minutes of fame.
But for Linda Kean, allowing herself to be photographed for a magazine article on AIDS has led to an attempt by the police to have her charged with attempted murder.


Town's Roots Are Tended With Love
LEAD: GLADYS HUSTED OWEN stood next to an antique table dotted with five- and six-pound Revolutionary War cannonballs and gazed proudly at a watercolor of the Marquis de Lafayette. ''This was our most illustrious guest,'' said Mrs.
Owen, her silver-and-white-flecked hair tucked neatly into a bun. ''We had a ball for him right here in this house.


Amy's Daytona Air-Bag Experience
LEAD: I have known about Amy ever since she ran into a tree.
She is 23 years old, a restaurant manager on Long Island, and a friend of my son's.
She also knows more about air bags than most of us.


Ilene Podgur Is Married
LEAD: Ilene Podgur, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Podgur of Brookline, Mass., was married last evening in Boston to Thomas Vogel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gunter Vogel of Heilbronn, West Germany.
Rabbi Benjamin Rudavsky officiated at the Ritz-Carlton.
Mrs.
Vogel, 28 years old and a graduate of Syracuse University, is the leasing manager at the Mutual of America Life Insurance Company in New York.


Fashion;   What's Coming: Lots of Color
LEAD: Not missing a beat, American designers are picking up on pretty shadings and continuing them for fall.
It gets really interesting when two or more colors are combined.
Here are a few of the new looks that should soon be arriving in stores.


Question Of the Week;   Should Baseball Suspend Steinbrenner?
LEAD: No, George should not be suspended.
Was Winfield suspended for his check to Spira, taking money from his charity for his own use, and holding back money that he promised to give to his foundation?


Dr. Glass Is to Wed Dr. D. M. Sacknoff
LEAD: Dr.
Andrea Leslie Glass and Dr.
David Matthew Sacknoff, 1988 graduates of the New York Medical College and residents in internal medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York, are planning an October wedding.
The announcement was made by the prospective bride's parents, Judith R. Glass of Huntington, L.I., and Don B.


The Secrets Of Gray Ranch
LEAD: I am overwhelmed by the power the Nature Conservancy has to preserve Gray Ranch for the plants and animals that live there (''The Secrets of Gray Ranch,'' by Bruce Selcraig, June 3).
How very sad it would be for the ranch to become threatened by too many visitors, or, worse, sold to the United States Fish and Wildlife


Easing the Task of Buying Lumber
LEAD: BUYING lumber can be confusing.
For example, any piece of lumber that is less than two inches thick and eight inches wide is called a strip; any piece less than two inches thick but more than eight inches wide is called a board.


Keeping a Business All in the Family
LEAD: FATHERS and sons, mothers and daughters, mothers and sons, fathers and daughters: the continuity of family businesses depends on the willingness of younger family members to join the family firm and, sometimes, to take it in new directions.


A Fan's Note
LEAD: To the Editor:


AFRICA'S IRON HANDS STRUGGLE TO HANG ON
LEAD: When thousands of Zambians rushed onto the streets of Lusaka last month to celebrate what they thought was a successful overthrow of their longtime President, Kenneth D. Kaunda, they were expressing what citizens in many parts of Africa have been saying more and more: Africa's original big men have been around too long.


On Language;   Empowerment And Denouncement
LEAD: The Energizing word among ''bleeding-heart conservatives'' (an oxymoron that Jack F. Kemp, the Housing and Urban Development Secretary, uses to describe himself and his followers) is empowerment.


Manhattan Chefs With Stylish Cuisine Find a Home on L.I.
LEAD: FOR some prominent chefs from New York City, restaurants and food shops on the Island are providing safe harbors in the economic storm.


FLORIO POPULARITY CRASHES IN SURVEY
LEAD: Approval of Gov.
Jim Florio's job performance has plummeted among New Jerseyans over the last three months, as they have reacted negatively to the multitude of tax increases he introduced in his first months in office, a new poll has found.


Southmark's Insolvency
LEAD: A court-appointed examiner has charged that the Southmark Corporation's former top officers caused the collapse of the real estate concern and then concealed its failing financial condition with the help of outside auditors.


Shots Are Heard
LEAD: THERE is a touch of ceremony in the way traditional yachtsmen run their races.
But the routine was interrupted during one of the first races of the Liberty Cup Regatta two weeks ago in New York Harbor.
The marine division of the New Jersey State Police became part of the act, much to the chagrin of the race committee.


Good and Bad S &amp; L Politics
LEAD: Suddenly it's open season for savings and loan politics.
Some House Democrats have been pressing for an independent counsel to investigate President Bush's son Neil.
A clutch of Democratic and Republican Representatives feel the scandal's heat in their races for re-election.
And both houses are rushing bills to beef up the pursuit of S &amp; L crooks.


Mildred Falk Loew, Editor and Author, 79
LEAD: Mildred Falk Loew, a former editor and part owner of The American Mercury magazine, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 79 years old.


Question Box
LEAD:
All-Star Sluggers


Courts Are Undoing Efforts To Aid Minority Contractors
LEAD: As a result of a recent Supreme Court decision, courts around the country are dismantling state and local programs that set aside contracts for companies whose owners are members of minority groups.


Review/Television;   On One Summer Day in 1989, a Firearm Harvest of Death
LEAD: ''A Day in the Death of America'' is not an elegant piece of work, with its lurid photography, haunted-house music and hyped-up re-enactments.
Yet the idea behind it, a recounting of some of the 61 deaths by gun that occurred in the United States on July 16, 1989, is powerful enough to hold you to your set.


Kodes All Smiles
LEAD: JAN KODES of Czechoslovakia, who was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame at the Newport (R.I.) Casino on Saturday, has had other things to smile about recently.


Ella Fran Gleimer Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Ellen Fran Gleimer, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sol E. Gleimer of Brooklyn, was married yesterday at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I., to Richard Earl Hustead, a son of Mrs.
Frank Driskill of Glendale, Calif.
Rabbi Jack Bemporad and Cantor Howard Stahl officiated.


Laura Ioachim Marries Martin Reichel
LEAD: Laura Ioachim, a medical student at the State University of New York Health Science Center in Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Dr.
Martin Reichel, a resident in dermatology at the University of California Medical Center at Davis.
Rabbi Stanley Bramnick officiated at the Sleepy Hollow Country Club in Scarborough, N


Adirondacks to Help Trout by Poisoning Rivals
LEAD: Reachable only after hours of paddling and portaging through the northern Adirondack wilderness, Bessie and Nellie Ponds look like a fisherman's paradise.
The waters are still and deep, and the woods are so quiet that a loon's call seems almost startling.
But there is a problem: The fishing is lousy.


Review/Opera;   A Plausible Semi-Staged 'Pique Dame'
LEAD: Like Zubin Mehta, Seiji Ozawa seems eager to expand his operatic activities.
Perhaps partly for that reason, he has taken to offering semi-staged operatic productions every summer with the Boston Symphony at its Tanglewood festival in the Berkshires.
This year's installment was tonight's ''Pique Dame,'' and despite some reservations it turned out to be a genuinely effective realization of one of Tchaikovsky's masterpieces.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Western Publishing Group, to Berenter Greenhouse &amp; Webster for its Games Gang Ltd. division, with a budget of $2 million.


KOHL SEES SOVIETS AMID UPBEAT MOOD
LEAD: Smiling and bantering like old friends, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany said today that they expected major progress in their talks on lifting the last obstacles to German unity.


Computer Lawsuit Criticized by Japanese
LEAD: Kubota Ltd. said today that a lawsuit filed against it by two Silicon Valley entrepreneurs was ''baseless and irrational'' and suggested that the men were trying to enrich themselves.


Metro Matters;   How to Crack The Blue Wall Of Police Silence?
LEAD: On the same day recently that the New York Civil Liberties Union was criticizing the Police Department's ability to police itself, a police sergeant in Brooklyn was suspended after two officers accused him of brutality.
Investigators are struggling to corroborate the allegation.
Everybody agrees, though, that its source was unusual.


People
LEAD: *
Bobbi Blair has been promoted to senior vice president for media at Buena Vista Pictures Marketing.


Publishing World Is Shaken As Advances for Books Soar
LEAD: Many publishers were irate three weeks ago after Dell Publishing agreed to pay $12.3 million for Ken Follett's next two novels.
Now, having had time to think it over, they are even angrier, in part because HarperCollins quickly bought three books by Jeffery Archer, for what the British author said was more than $20 million.


Royals Rout Red Sox, 13-4
LEAD: Gerald Perry led an 18-hit attack with a single, double and three stolen bases as the Kansas City Royals scored three runs to break a sixth-inning tie today and beat the Boston Red Sox, 13-4.


Market Place;   Digital Finally Follows a Trend
LEAD: KENNETH H. OLSEN, the founder and president of the Digital Equipment Corporation, has always been a rugged individualist who has studiously avoided fads and fashions in the computer industry.


At St. Andrews, the Memories Match the Mystique
LEAD: BRITISH OPENS are unavoidably memorable when they are held at the Old Course in St.
Andrews, Scotland.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Tennis
Titles for Sampras and Sabatini: Pete Sampras of the United States recorded 10 aces in winning the men's singles title, and Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina took the women's title yesterday in the Gunze world tournament in Tokyo.
Sampras, ranked 18th in the world, scored an easy 6-1, 6-4 victory over 46th-ranked Jaime Yzaga of Peru.


Acid Test for New Hearst Magazines
LEAD: With virtually no advance publicity, Jupiter, a sprightly looking astrology magazine, appeared last winter on newsstands across the country.
A second issue followed months later.


Rail Line Makes Debut In the Land of Freeways
LEAD: With a mixture of fanfare and skepticism, Los Angeles this week opens the first leg of a multibillion-dollar, 150-mile commuter rail line intended to help save this car-choked city from a future of paralyzed roads and unbreathable air.


Contenders Take a Back Seat
LEAD: This was not the long-awaited day for Sean Kelly, the man who was and would again be king even if just for a day, if that day occurred in the Tour de France.


Official Sees No Crime by Bush's Son
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh said today that the Justice Department was not convinced that Neil Bush, the President's son, had engaged in criminal actions while a director at the failed Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association in Denver.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-7
The Soviet state broadcast monopoly was ordered to be revamped to allow a more democratic and competitive variety of broadcast outlets that might further shrink the Communist Party's power over national life.
Page A1


Associated Press Pact
LEAD: The Associated Press and its technical employees reached a tentative agreement on a new three-year labor contract, both sides announced yesterday.
Under the agreement, reached Saturday, the weekly salaries of top-scale technical workers would increase $23.50 the first year, $24 the second and $24.50 in the third year, to $636.50.


Haagen-Dazs Account Dropped by Margeotes
LEAD: Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss an-nounced Friday that it had resigned the Haagen-Dazs Company account.


William Burrud, 65, Television Producer Of Nature Programs
LEAD: William James Burrud, a television producer and narrator of nature shows and travelogues, died Thursday at his home in Sunset Beach, Calif., after a heart attack.
He was 65 years old.


4 Children Are Killed in Car With 13-Year-Old at Wheel
LEAD: With a 13-year-old girl behind the wheel while her uncle was using one hand to help steer, a station wagon went into a rain-swollen creek, killing four children, the police said today.


No New Nuclear Missiles for NATO
LEAD: As Soviet forces withdraw from Eastern Europe and NATO moves smartly to reduce its dependence on nuclear weapons, it makes no sense for the alliance to consider deploying new tactical air-to-surface missiles.
But NATO is planning to do just that if Prime Minister Thatcher of Britain, with President


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MAYOR DAVID N. DINKINS of New York was struck in the right eye by a tennis ball yesterday during a celebrity tournament match with MAYOR SHARPE JAMES of Newark at Flushing Meadow Park in Queens.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of July 16:
MONDAY
Dana Corp
Eastern Utils
Goodrich B.F. Co
Lilly Eli &amp; Co
Oxford Inds
Russ Togs
Southern Co
TUESDAY
AAR Corp
Amer. Cap. Mgmt &amp; Resh
Cincinnati Milacron
Federal Natl Mtg Assn
Hawaiian Elec Inds
Honeywell
ICM Ppty Invs Inc
K Mart Corp
Mellon Bank Corp
Natl.


Dr. George Wythe, 96, A Former U.S. Official
LEAD: Dr.
George Wythe, a former Latin American specialist and section chief in the Department of Commerce, died on June 23 at a hospital in Vienna, where he had lived in retirement.
He was 96 years old.


A Therapy Based on Tapping Your Feet
LEAD: DURING running, the feet absorb a great amount of shock and transmit signals of distress to the legs, the back and other parts of the body.
Now the growing field of reflexology offers runners a chance to use their feet as a source of comfort, healing and even runner's high.


Don't Expect Bailout To Stimulate Economy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Drama Is Past Tense in Georgia Race
LEAD: Near the end of a debate on Saturday between the five Democratic contenders for governor, former Mayor Andrew Young of Atlanta said he wanted to sum up what distinguished him from his opponents.


Dinkins Appoints a New Sheriff to Collect Billions Owed in Fines
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins has appointed a new city sheriff to head what amounts to an expanded central municipal collection agency that will seek to recover some of the more than $4 billion owed over the years to the city.
About $2 billion is owed by motorists who have ignored parking fines and penalties.


Corrections Detroit Set For Talks With U.A.W.
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Monday about negotiations between the Big Three auto companies and the United Automobile Workers referred incorrectly to the union membership of workers at United States plants owned wholly or partly by Japanese car makers.
At some plants, hourly workers are indeed represented by the United Automobile Workers.
LEAD: Contract negotiations between the Big Three auto makers and the United Automobile Workers union, which have historically been fractious, show signs of being much tamer this year.
But the apparent calm may be deceiving.


Outdoors: Dog Days, Trout Days, and Yesterdays
LEAD: EVEN though it was late afternoon when Vic Pomiecko of Claremont, N.H., and I reached Chapin Pond, the heat was oppressive.
It was not ideal trout-fishing weather.
The surface temperature of the pond was 72 degrees, too hot for trout, which begin to languish when the water gets much above 65 degrees.


Expos Outslug Braves, 16-14
LEAD: Andres Galarraga hit a three-run home run in the sixth inning and drove in the tie-breaking run with a ninth-inning single today as the Montreal Expos took advantage of poor Atlanta fielding for a 16-14 victory.


Joseph P. Dougherty, Broadcast Executive, 66
LEAD: Joseph P. Dougherty, a retired executive vice president of Capital Cities/ ABC, died on Saturday in Point Pleasant Hospital in Point Pleasant, N.J.
He was 66 years old.


U.S. Must First Support Korean Democracy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We began putting nuts in our mouth and testing them on our teeth, and I must say our teeth are strong.
We'll crack them.''
- Mikhail S. Gorbachev, after meeting withChancellor Helmut Kohlon German unification. [A6:5.]


Argentine Thieves Slain, Igniting Debate on Justice
LEAD: A few weeks ago, a man shopping in a suburban store heard the sound of glass breaking and ran outside in time to see two men getting into their car with the tape deck from his car.


Kurt Eichenwald Is Wed to Dr. Pearse
LEAD: Dr.
Theresa Felicia Pearse, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John J. Pearse of New York, was married yesterday to Kurt Alexander Eichenwald, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Heinz F. Eichenwald of Dallas.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman and the Rev.
Dr.
Richard J. Petranek Jr., an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic


Joseph Blumenthal, Typographer For Frost's Poetry, Is Dead at 92
LEAD: Joseph Blumenthal, a publisher and typographer who printed special editions of Robert Frost's poems for more than 30 years, died on Wednesday at his home in West Cornwall, Conn.
He was 92 years old.


Dobsonville Journal;   Bulldozers Visit a Township, Followed by Misery
LEAD: After waiting nearly five years in vain for a proper house, Calvin Mukondeli spent his savings of nearly $190 as a down payment on a prefabricated shack of wood and metal that he built for his wife and three children.


Revamped 'Brazil Inc.' To Make Case to Banks
LEAD: Having started an overhaul of the economy and a striking removal of trade barriers, the Government of Brazil is now looking to the international financial community for support.


Putting Together the Pieces of an Unfinished Book
LEAD: The covered arcades of Paris, wrought with iron and surmounted by sparkling ceilings of glass, have been among that city's most celebrated architectural features since the 19th century.
But for Susan Buck-Morss, an associate professor of government at Cornell University, the arcades have been the focus of a lengthy task of scholarly detective work, an attempt to decipher a massive, mysterious, unfinished tome by a renowned critic and philosopher who has been dead for 50 years.


Books of The Times;   English: A Linguistic Success Story
LEAD:
The Mother Tongue
English and How It Got That Way
By Bill Bryson
270 pages. William Morrow. $18.95.


Jennifer L. Gentin Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Jennifer Lynn Gentin, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sidney Gentin of Great Neck, L.I., was married yesterday at Waveny House in New Canaan, Conn., to Mark Steven Lieblein, the son of Joan Lieblein and Dr.
Jerome Lieblein, both of San Diego.
Rabbi Hillel Silverman officiated.


Bernstein Cancels in Japan
LEAD: Leonard Bernstein, suffering from what his doctors and managers said was exhaustion, is cutting short a three-week tour for a new music festival in this country and is returning to the United States for medical treatment.


An American Is Watching the British Press
LEAD: When it comes to criticizing the British press, nobody here beats an American, Bob Borzello.


Big Soviet Harvest Seen
LEAD: The prospects are still good for a bumper grain harvest in the Soviet Union this year, the Agriculture Department said last week.
Total grain production is estimated at 215 million metric tons, up from 211.1 million in 1989, the department said in a report.
That would be the largest since a record 237.4 million tons in 1978.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ROSE KENNEDY was briefly wheeled before a large group of relatives and guests who marked the family matriarch's 100th birthday celebration yesterday with a gathering on the lawn outside her home.


Chicago's Thigpen Pulls Out the Stops
LEAD: Bobby Thigpen, the Chicago White Sox relief pitcher, is not exactly a phenomenon, although it is somewhat phenomenal that he is suddenly the best late-inning closer in baseball.


Fairy Tales With a Moral: Don't Use Drugs
LEAD: The communications industry will soon aim anti-drug advertising at children 6 to 8 years old, using as its medium not broadcasting or billboards, but bedtime stories.


125,000 Attend Base's Air Show, Billed as Panama Re-enactment
LEAD: About 125,000 people attended an air show on Saturday that was billed as a re-enactment of the invasion of Panama, but the military, reacting to criticism of insensitivity to those who were killed, played down the event.


Seeing What's New in Now You See It, Now You Don't
LEAD: Marie Blood regaled a standing-room-only crowd of several hundred here tonight with childhood reminiscences of her famous uncle, Harry Houdini, jumping off bridges, escaping from handcuffs and tickling her without using his hands.


Economic Calendar Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
LEAD:
Monday
Business Inventories . . . May
Tuesday
Balance of Trade . . . June
Industrial Production . . . June
Capacity Utilization . . . June
Wednesday
Consumer Price Index . . . June
Housing Construction . . . June
Thursday
None
Friday


Treasury Is Selling Only Bills This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.


Token Dance Wins Prioress in Upset
LEAD: Token Dance sat behind a sizzling speed duel between the favorites and then whizzed by them through the stretch to post a two-length upset victory over Stella Madrid yesterday in the $882,950 Prioress Stakes at Belmont.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: CHARLES KURALT has turned down a request by a group of archaeologists to dig up the front lawn of his Connecticut vacation house.


U.S. Concern On Fake Bills
LEAD: Computers, printers and copiers have become so sophisticated that United States currency and other securities can be counterfeited with remarkable accuracy, the Treasury Department said Friday.


New Chief of BBC Unit To Push U.S. Expansion
LEAD: BBC/Lionheart Television International Inc., the distributor in the United States for the British Broadcasting Corporation's programming, has named Sarah Frank president and chief executive.


Alejandro Galido, Philippine General, 54
LEAD: Brig.
Gen.
Alejandro Galido, a figure in the events of last December, when dissidents in the Philippine military failed in a coup attempt, died today of liver cancer, officials said.
He was 54.


Transit Police Eject Homeless From Train
LEAD: Four men who appeared to be homeless and were sleeping in their seats on an IND A train were ejected without incident last night by transit police so that employees could clean the subway cars.


Hormone Therapy Seen to Cut Risk of Broken Hip
LEAD: Women who begin hormone replacement therapy at or near menopause can sharply decrease their risk of having a broken hip in the next decade, a new study of 23,000 women has shown.


WHITE HOUSE SEEKS WAY TO AID NASA
LEAD: Concerned over recent troubles with the Hubble telescope and the space shuttle, the White House has been holding discussions on how to shore up support for the nation's space program, Bush Administration officials said today.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Buckeye Financial Corp., Columbus, Ohio, a holding company, named Michael Thomas chairman and chief executive of its principal subsidiary, Buckeye Federal Savings and Loan Association.


Nabisco Refinance Plan Set
LEAD: The RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation said last night that it would begin its $6.9 billion refinancing program today, buying back some of its high-yield ''junk bonds'' in the open market, receiving additional equity and securing new bank loans.


Contel Chairman Is 80, But Shuns Retirement
LEAD: After finding a safe berth for the Contel Corporation, with the proposed merger of Contel into the GTE Corporation, some might expect Charles Wohlstetter to feel that his work is complete and think about retirement.


Quebec Mohawks Keep Up Bridge Blockade
LEAD: Indians locked in a land dispute with the Canadian authorities reversed themselves today and kept up their blockade of a bridge into Montreal.


Correction
LEAD: An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Wednesday misstated the type of magazine to be included quarterly with People magazine.
It will be a version of In Health, a three-year-old magazine published by Time Warner and Hippocrates Partners; it will not be a new magazine.


Teen-Ager Convicted in 1988 Murder and Robbery in Bronx
LEAD: An 18-year-old Bronx man was convicted on Saturday night of robbing and killing a construction contractor who employed a friend of his in 1988.


INSIDE
LEAD:
World Poverty and Africa
Poverty is likely to decline by the year 2000, except in sub-Saharan Africa, according to the first major study of the world's poor in a decade, by the World Bank.
Page A3.
The Law Seeks Longer Arms
State prosecutors hope to obtain the broad powers exercised by their Federal counterparts to seize the property of drug traffickers.


States Seek Tougher Drug Forfeit Laws
LEAD: Federal prosecutors have captured public attention in recent years with their seizures of jets, mansions and office buildings owned by drug dealers.
But state prosecutors, who handle 90 percent of all drug cases, find themselves frustrated by laws that generally restrict them to confiscating only the beepers, automobiles and cash in the possession of suspects when they are seized.


U.S. Must First Support Korean Democracy;   Lessons of the War
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ambulance Blockers, You're on Camera
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gang Poses as Police in Bronx Robberies
LEAD: An armed gang, its members impersonating plainclothes police officers and drug agents right down to their bulletproof vests and the red bubble on their car's dashboard, robbed and ransacked two multifamily houses in the Bronx on Saturday, the police said yesterday.


South Korea's Hopes For China Trade Ebb
LEAD: Two years ago, the road to China was a winding, almost secret path for South Korean business executives, but one that was illuminated with hope.
After a number of bitter encounters, that hope has given way to disappointment and frustration.


United States Tops Canada for the Title
LEAD: Kevin Cook and Roddy Marino each scored four goals today to lead the United States to a rain-splattered 19-15 victory over Canada in the Lacrosse World Series championship game.


Covenant House's New Broom
LEAD: Sister Mary Rose McGeady's priorities are very clear.
She told an interviewer she's not aware of any more important job in America than ''taking care of our troubled young people.'' Fortunately for thousands of troubled young people, she's earned the chance to do just that, as the new director of Covenant


Capital Led the Nation In '88 Justice Spending
LEAD: The District of Columbia spent $859 per person in 1988 for police protection, the courts, jails and other criminal and civil justice services, higher by far than any state and four times the national average, the Justice Department said in a report released today.


For Judge in Barry Trial, Prime Concern for Jury
LEAD: When Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson of Federal District Court here learned that he had been selected to preside over the drug and perjury trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr., he said he had two immediate thoughts: It was going to be an exciting episode in his judicial career, and he would have to sequester the jury.


The Other Guy Did It
LEAD: Ed Rollins, the able and usually unflappable Republican strategist, sounded defensive and more than a little panicky at his party's Chicago meeting last week.
He was trying to claim that it was the Democrats who had ''sold out the taxpayers'' in the colossal savings and loan scandal.


World Farm Subsidies in Trade-Talk Spotlight
LEAD: When international trade talks reconvene in Geneva on July 23, the negotiators will resume their long-stalled discussions of agriculture subsidies.


King Wins At the Open
LEAD: After spending three rainy days shooting two of the best rounds ever played in a United States Women's Open, Patty Sheehan undid it all with two terrible rounds in one sun-drenched Sunday to lose the championship to Betsy King.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television;   For Networks, the Punch Line Is a Bigger Bottom Line
LEAD: THE sound stages are being re-activated here this week as production begins on the fall season's television series.
And the large majority of those stages will be filled with people telling jokes.


Thousands Rally at Kremlin To Shout Disdain for Party
LEAD: Thousands of ordinary citizens marched and rallied outside the Kremlin walls today to demand that the Communist Party concede failure and turn its remaining wealth and power back to the nation.


Gen. George L. Mabry Jr., 72; Was Awarded Medal of Honor
LEAD: Gen.
George L. Mabry Jr., who won the Medal of Honor in World War II and later commanded American forces in the Panama Canal Zone, died Friday at Richland Memorial Hospital in Columbia, S.C.
He was 72 years old and lived in Columbia.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: The Economy


Chicago Man Sets Sail From New York on Solo Trip Around the World


Employers Can Do Something About L.I. Traffic
LEAD: To the Editor:


Norris Is Released by A's
LEAD: When the Oakland Athletics placed Carney Lansford on the 15-day disabled list today and called up two minor leaguers, they also released the pitcher Mike Norris, who was attempting a comeback after a six-year absence from the major leagues.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: After three months of spirited exchanges between Jerusalem and Paris that required the personal intervention of Prime Minister MICHEL ROCARD, and the Minister of Culture JACK LANG, both of France, and the Director General of French Museums, OLIVIER CHEVRILLON, word came that ''formalities connected with the export'' of 103 works by MARC CHAGA


In Iran, a Glimpse of Ankle Can Bring Out the Komiteh
LEAD: ''My socks, my socks!'' the panicky Iranian woman said, throwing off her shoes and hurriedly trying to pull socks over her bare feet as the officer approached the taxi.
Noticing that the young woman was accompanied by a Western visitor and apparently wanting to avoid an incident, the officer waved the car on without inspection.


Report by World Bank Sees Poverty Lessening By 2000 Except in Africa
LEAD: The first major study of the world's poor in a decade says that poverty is likely to decline by the year 2000, except in sub-Saharan Africa.


No Excommunication Threats in Europe
LEAD: To the Editor:


Diplomacy Fails to End Store Boycott In Flatbush
LEAD: Little but the seasons have changed in front of the Korean-owned Family Red Apple grocery store in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn.


Review/Ballet;   The Bolshoi's 'Romeo and Juliet,' More Prokofiev Than Shakespeare
LEAD: Ballets named ''Romeo and Juliet'' are not in short supply and most of those on the boards have been created by Western choreographers.


Nancy Walworth Weds Robert Chant
LEAD: Nancy Campbell Walworth, a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
James C. Walworth of Freeport, L.I., was married there yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Transfiguration to Robert James Chant, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Richard Chant of Bayport, L.I.
The Rev.
Daniel S. Harris 3d performed the ceremony, assisted by the bride's father.


Marjorie Dermer Becomes a Bride
LEAD: Marjorie Frances Dermer and Dr.
Joshua Isaac Dorsky were married yesterday at the Davenport Club in New Rochelle, N.Y., by Rabbi Lawrence Raphael.
Mrs.
Dermer-Dorsky is a daughter of Mrs.
Joseph Dermer of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Dermer.
Her husband is a son of Marsha Dorsky and Morris Dorsky, both of New


On Wall's Site, a Communist Garage Sale
LEAD: Perhaps the surest sign that Communism is crumbling is that the price of its pieces is falling.


Bridge
LEAD: Suppose you wander into a strange club in another country and sit down behind one of the players.
He holds the West cards shown in the diagram, and you wonder whether or not he is an expert.
You are mildly surprised that he chooses to open one spade rather than one no-trump: It is obvious that he employs four-card major openings, and you suspect that he favors the weak no-trump opening.


A Decisive Victory For Michael Andretti
LEAD: The Marlboro Grand Prix was the kind of Indy-car race in which Arie Luyendyk could finish fourth after driving his car toward the Lincoln Tunnel, Teo Fabi could finish third without brakes or a clutch, and Michael Andretti could win while keeping an eye on his fuel gauge.


Review/Television;   Martin Scorsese as Seen By Friends and Peers
LEAD: Public television's ''American Masters'' has been dedicating the first three weeks of its new season to film directors.
So far there have been documentaries about Preston Sturges and John Cassavetes.
Tonight at 9 on Channel 13, there's ''Martin Scorsese Directs,'' an hourlong biography produced and directed by Joel Sucher and Steven Fischler, former film students of Mr.


Net at Federal Express Rises
LEAD: The Federal Express Corporation said last week that its profits rose 5.1 percent in its fourth quarter but slumped for the year in large part because of the acquisition of Tiger International.


After 19 Killings, Many More Livery Cabdrivers Quit
LEAD: Midway through a 12-hour shift in which he had driven from one end of the Bronx to the other for $9.50 and to points in between for lesser fares, Joe DeMaio parked outside the Thruway Private Taxi Company and explained why the killings of 19 cabdrivers this year have not frightened him.


China-Soviet Venture Seen
LEAD: The cautious process of rebuilding the strained relations between the Soviet Union and China have taken another modest step forward with a report here today that the first Chinese-Soviet joint venture in China will soon be established.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Fred/Alan Takes to The Streets
LEAD: AT first glance, the new campaign for Barq's soft drinks is nothing out of the ordinary, with shots of soda cans under the headline, ''So try 'em already.''


3 to Share DHL Stake
LEAD: The Japan Air Lines Company, Deutsche Lufthansa A.G. and the Nissho Iwai Corporation, a Japanese trading company, agreed to take a combined stake of 2.52 percent in the DHL Corporation, the American holding company of the DHL World Express air-courier service.
J.A.L. and Lufthansa will each own 1 percent and Nissho will buy the remaining stake, subject to the approval of the United States Government.


Mets Stumped and Silenced by 'Nasty' Reds
LEAD: The Nasty Boys had their nasty stuff, a rude state of affairs that made for a very quiet, very polite exit by the Mets.


Carcasses of 23 Gray Whales Wash Up on Islands in Alaska
LEAD: Twenty-three gray whale carcasses have washed up on two remote islands in the Gulf of Alaska, and scientists plan a study to determine why they died.


Albanian Refugees Arrive in France


Youth Shot Over a Coat Dies
LEAD: A 16-year-old Brooklyn high school student who was shot last Tuesday during a dispute over an expensive coat died yesterday at Brookdale Hospital, the police said.
The dead student, Peter Andrews, of 103d Street in the Canarsie section, was shot outside South Shore High School.
A 14-year-old suspect, Wayne McIntosh, of Avenue B in the East New York section, now faces homicide charges, which will be considered by a grand jury, said Sgt.


A Way to Drink and Dive
LEAD: A scuba diver in Miami has developed a pouch that allows divers to drink fluids under water.
The device comes with a collapsible bag that feeds beverages through a port in a specially designed mouthpiece.


Sudan Asserts It Just Helps Refugees Go Back to South
LEAD: The Government said on Saturday that it was helping about 190,000 refugees return to the south, where they had fled famine and civil war.


Another War - the One on Poverty - Is Over, Too
LEAD: The New York Times headline on July 7 was exuberant: ''NATO Allies, After 40 Years, Proclaim End of Cold War.''


Discussions Are Held On Fast Data Network
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation, the MCI Communications Corporation and officials at a group of Michigan universities have quietly begun discussions with the Federal Government about creating a nonprofit company that would operate a high-speed computer network that could one day reach every home in the country.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Some in Eastern Flock See Dream: Patriarch Worships in Manhattan
LEAD: Maria Kollaris, a 70-year-old widow dressed completely in black, wept as His Holiness Dimitrios I, Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, entered the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity on East 74th Street.


GORBACHEV ORDERS CHANGE IN CONTROL OVER TV AND RADIO
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev ordered today that the state broadcast monopoly be drastically revamped to allow a more democratic and competitive variety of broadcast outlets that might further shrink the Communist Party's power over national life.


Showing of Pride For the Iroquois
LEAD: The final standing of the 1990 lacrosse world championships may read four losses in a row for the Iroquois Nationals, but team officials are calling the Native Americans' return to international competition after a century's banishment a major success.


A Final Test for the Board of Estimate
LEAD: Two final decisions on pivotal land-use questions face the Board of Estimate before it ceases to exist under terms of the new City Charter.
One decision appears easy; the other, difficult.
They will be remembered as a test of wisdom and courage as the board closes its 90-year run.


No Excommunication Threats in Europe;   'In Our Opinion'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Unseating Helms: Rival Charts His Uphill Climb
LEAD: Harvey Gantt is telling the Harvey Gantt story, spinning it into a rich tapestry of the American Dream.


Slovenia Hopes to Find New Role in Yugoslavia
LEAD: Under pressure from the federal Government and burdened by economic problems, the newly elected leaders in the Yugoslav republic of Slovenia are pressing to forge a sovereign state and recast Slovenia's relationship with the country's five other republics.


Business Scene;   Unexpected Shift In a Labor Rate
LEAD: AN era might be ending, unexpectedly.
Americans have been jumping into the labor force in ever-increasing numbers since the 1960's, so that today about 66.4 percent of the working-age population holds jobs or seeks them.
The problem is that the labor participation rate, as it is called, was the same 66.4 percent a year ago.


Romania Struggles to Improve Its Image
LEAD: While Czechoslovakia's Foreign Minister argues for a new political architecture in Europe and Poland's Foreign Minister concentrates on safeguarding his nation's postwar borders, Romania's new Foreign Minister, Adrian Nastase, has a different focus: helping his nation join the family of Europe.


Powerboating: Women and the Sea
LEAD: WOMEN who go to sea on powerboats tend to go along for the ride.
Although a vast majority of the 15 million recreational boats in the United States are powerboats, it is not the women of America in charge of driving.


Florio's School Aid Dream Is Town's Nightmare
LEAD: Education officials here have finished projecting the impact of lost state aid under Gov.
Jim Florio's new school financing formula.
They say the figures pose nightmarish years ahead for the town's children and taxpayers.


Critic's Notebook;   Now at a Theater Near You: A Skyrocketing Body Count
LEAD: In ''Die Hard 2,'' the new film that is less a sequel to than a remake of the 1988 hit ''Die Hard,'' Bruce Willis uses an icicle to stab a man in the brain via the eye socket.
Later, another unfortunate man is sucked into a 747's jet engine and comes out the other end looking like borscht.


King Wins U.S. Open


One-Legged Runner Tries to Inspire Others
LEAD: IN the world of track and field, a difference of 1.9 seconds separates Carl Lewis from Dennis Oehler.
In life, however, there is a greater difference between the two men.


2 Airlines End Dispute
LEAD: The Spanish state-owned airline Iberia Lineas Aereas de Espana S.A. said it had reached an agreement with the AMR Corporation's American Airlines unit to resolve a four-month dispute on booking systems.
It said more details of Iberia's flights to the United States would be provided to American Airlines'


Yanks Swept as Boos Follow Mattingly
LEAD: The ball settled into Carlton Fisk's glove, and then the boos fell around Don Mattingly like rain.
They followed him from home plate to the dugout, where he sat on the bench and listened to the growing frustration.


Brooke Hillary, Student, Is Wed
LEAD: Brooke Elizabeth Hillary and William Elwood Schmearer 4th were married yesterday at the Bedford (N.Y.) Presbyterian Church by the Rev.
Paul D. Alcorn.
Mrs.
Hillary-Schmearer is the daughter of Grace Harvey Fuller of Lindenhurst, L.I., and Norman Sheresky of New York.
Her husband is the son of Mr. and Mrs.


Sizing Up Germans: A Thatcher Symposium
LEAD: A British newspaper reported today that Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher convoked a daylong seminar of historians and German experts in March that discussed positive and negative aspects of the Germans.


Airline Ruling In Argentina
LEAD: Argentina's Supreme Court has removed a legal obstacle in the privatization of the Aerolineas Argentinas carrier, the official news agency said on Saturday.


Little Change Expected for Rates
LEAD: The bond market, which has so far this summer received help from both the President of the United States and the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, may have a more difficult time finding new friends in the weeks ahead.
But without further assistance, credit market analysts said, interest rates were not likely to decline much from current levels, and might even rise.


Data Verify Economy's Malaise: 16 States in or Near a Recession
LEAD: The national economy has become so sluggish that 16 states, with more than a third of the nation's population, are in a recession or close to one, an analysis of employment data shows.
And throughout the country, people are talking of stagnant wages, falling real estate prices, deeply indebted corporations and jobs that are getting harder to find.


Kenneth G. Zalkin, Lawyer, 46
LEAD: Kenneth G. Zalkin, a lawyer, died on Saturday at the Ritz Tower in Manhattan.
He was 46 years old.


Roger Stern Is Married to Gail Seibel
LEAD: Gail Cynthia Seibel and Roger Alan Stern were married yesterday at Dowling College in Oakdale, L.I., by Rabbi Laurence A. Kotok.
Mrs.
Stern is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Max Seibel of Seaford, L.I.
Her husband is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter H. Stern of Roslyn Harbor, L.I.


'Harmony' And the Mets
LEAD: THE newspaper story out of Cincinnati yesterday reported that Mike Marshall of the Mets had checked into a hospital ''for what was initially described as a stomach disorder and feared to be a bleeding ulcer.''


Thankful at 104
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cummins Will Sell 27% Stake
LEAD: The Cummins Engine Company yesterday announced a series of transactions that would give it an immediate infusion of $250 million in fresh capital in return for surrendering a 27 percent stake to the Ford Motor Company, Tenneco Inc. and Kubota Ltd. of Japan.


Festival Ends Amid Questions
LEAD: The 12th Olympic Festival ended this evening with solid reviews for a job well done, but also with a nagging question that has remained unanswered for the last five years: What does it all mean?


Marcos Is Subpoened In New Federal Inquiry
LEAD: Two weeks after a Federal jury acquitted her of fraud, Imelda Marcos has been ordered by the United States Justice Department to face grand jury questioning in another proceeding.


Bombings Kill 43 in Troubled Pakistani Province    The blasts were all within 30 minutes of each other. No one claimed responsibility, but the police said they suspected Sindh nationalists, who regularly clash with Mojahirs, immigrants from India. (Agence France-Presse)


Waiting to Click
LEAD: EARLY last month, Mike Kelley, a sophomore at Arizona State, was named the 1990 Baseball America player of the year as the country's best college player, joining an impressive list of previous winners, including Dave Magadan of the Mets, the 1983 winner; Oddibe McDowell of the Atlanta Braves (1984), Pete Incaviglia of the Texas Rangers (1985), Casey Close (1986), Robin Ventura of the Chicago White Sox (1987), John Olerud of the Toronto Blue Jays (1988) and Ben McDonald of the Baltimore


Settlement Discussed In King-Douglas Trial
LEAD: With settlement talks in the works, a recess was called yesterday in the trial pitting Don King, the promoter, against James (Buster) Douglas, the heavyweight champion.


Eastern's Maintenance Case
LEAD: Attorneys for Eastern Airlines met yesterday with representatives of the United States Attorney's office in Brooklyn but were unable to reach an agreement in a grand jury investigation of the carrier's maintenance practices at three airports.


Seized Savings Unit Assets To Be Sold in Huge Blocks
LEAD: The Bush Administration approved a trial plan today to speed up the savings and loan bailout by selling seized real estate and other savings and loan assets in multimillion-dollar blocks.


Hibernia Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hibernia Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
17,026,000
15,351,000
Per share
.62
.58
Shares outst
27,352,000
26,629,000
6mo net loss
7,885,000
b30,574,000
Per share
-
1.15
Shares outst
27,287,000
26,570,000


International Airline Support Group Inc. reports earnings for Year May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Airline Support Group Inc. (OTC)
Year May 31
1990
1989
Sales
10,067,313
8,019,891
Net inc
553,996
487,327
Share earns
.20
.19
Shares outst
2,807,398
2,600,000


Automobile Protection Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Automobile Protection Corp.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,278,421
2,799,198
Net inc
8,467
b29,096
9mo rev
10,565,927
7,640,468
Net loss
30,949
c239,098
Share earns
-
.05
Shares outst
5,204,000
4,768,794
b-Net loss


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MONTSERRAT CABALLE fell five feet to the ground when a row of seats collapsed yesterday in the amphitheater of Merida, Spain.
Miss Caballe, whose opulent voice and ample presence are much sought after, was attending a performance conducted by MSTISLAV ROSTROPOVICH.


United Investors Management Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Investors Management Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
65,798,000
60,172,000
Net inc
15,565,000
12,593,000
Share earns
.41
.33
6mo rev
129,122,000
113,900,000
Net inc
30,822,000
24,801,000
Share earns
.81
.66


Nationalism Dies Hard
LEAD: Like a summer storm, Nicholas Ridley's outburst against Germany and the European Community might have cleared the air.
There's no doubt the British Minister for Trade and Industry said what Prime Minister Thatcher was thinking, before he had to resign Saturday.


Heublein Jobs Heading West
LEAD: The San Francisco agency Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein has a number a new accounts on which to test its creative reputation.
The agency has been awarded all but one of Heublein's alcoholic beverages, formerly advertised by Young &amp; Rubicam.
The brands include Jose


Our Towns;   All-Natural Food For the Dog Who Has It All
LEAD: ''It's Shelbie's birthday?'' asked Jordana Bloom, petting a customer at her gourmet health-food store. ''It's your birthday, Shelbie?
Did you tell Jeannette it's Shelbie's birthday?'' Jeanette Champsaur, star saleswoman at Lick Your Chops, was up front finishing a high-protein, high-fiber order for a new customer, Wizzy Wig.


Industrial Funding reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Industrial Funding (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
13,051,000
8,932,000
Net loss
258,000
b1,005,000
Share earns
-
.18
Shares outst
7,500,000
5,625,000
6mo rev
25,413,000
16,666,000
Net inc
1,283,000
1,851,000
Share earns
.17
.33
Shares outst
7,427,000
5,625,000


Tornadoes and Flash Floods Strike Drought-Stricken Parts of Texas


Boise Cascade Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boise Cascade Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,058,250,000
1,101,330,000
Net inc
23,030,000
75,260,000
Share earns
.52
1.68
6mo rev
2,126,770,000
2,203,550,000
Net inc
56,600,000
153,510,000
Share earns
1.31
3.42
Shares outst
38,051,000
44,914,000


Bank of San Francisco Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of San Francisco Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
802,000
619,000
Per share
.38
.29
Shares outst
1,949,740
1,909,318
6mo net inc
1,598,000
1,079,000
Per share
.76
.50
Shares outst
1,951,532
1,909,225


Review/Performance Art;   Ann Magnuson, a Cast All by Herself
LEAD: At a time when New York City edges steadily toward chaos, it's no coincidence that Thornton Wilder's ''Our Town'' should exert a special fascination on local theater artists.
Wilder's evocation of New England small-town life at the turn of the century serves as a central text for ''Route 1 and 9,'' the Wooster Group's theatrical collage about the decline of the New York.


NCR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NCR Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,605,000,000
1,528,000,000
Net inc
115,000,000
110,000,000
Share earns
1.66
1.42
Shares outst
69,300,000
77,700,000
6mo rev
2,870,000,000
2,778,000,000
Net inc
167,000,000
171,000,000
Share earns
2.38
2.17
Shares outst
70,100,000
78,900,000


CCA Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CCA Industries
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
6,256,648
3,905,247
Net inc
194,610
b260,841
Share earns
.03
.04
6mo rev
11,522,631
6,819,767
Net inc
378,529
b500,047
Share earns
.05
.07
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $132,175, or 2 cents a share, and $251,201, or 3 cents a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Franklin Electric reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Franklin Electric (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
47,763,000
49,157,000
Net inc
b3,554,000
c3,524,000
Share earns
.43
1.22
Shares outst
6,173,000
2,899,000
6mo sales
90,754,000
92,174,000
Net inc
b6,212,000
c6,144,000
Share earns
.71
2.12
Shares outst
6,181,000
2,901,000


Hawthorne Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawthorne Financial Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,556,165
3,678,614
Per share
1.37
1.42
6mo net inc
7,912,258
8,079,343
Per share
3.04
3.11


Universal Health Realty InFcome Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Health Realty InFcome Trust (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,418,000
4,478,000
Net inc
1,854,000
2,240,000
Share earns
.26
.32
6mo rev
8,911,000
8,706,000
Net inc
3,894,000
4,299,000
Share earns
.55
.61


Shades of the 60's: Psychedelic and Nonbiodegradable
LEAD: Michael Kors calls it his Lee Radziwill look.
For fall, the designer showed a group of velvet styles, including a plush balmacaan coat, worn over stovepipe velvet slacks.


Evolution in Europe;   As Bush Hails Decision, Many See Bonn Gaining
LEAD: President Bush today hailed the Soviet Union's decision to accept a united Germany as a member of NATO, describing it as an act of statesmanship.
He said the move resulted, at least in part, from measures adopted by the alliance at its meeting in London 10 days ago.


Flextronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flextronics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
41,006,000
50,074,000
Net loss
22,087,000
8,614,000
Yr sales
171,333,000
201,927,000
Net loss
36,682,000
11,267,000


Random Access Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Random Access Inc.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,285,871
6,275,575
Net inc
82,286
93,290
Share earns
.02
.02
9mo rev
24,059,811
14,836,716
Net inc
303,117
387,667
Share earns
.07
.09


First Federal Western Pa reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Western Pa
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
422,000
356,000
Per share
.32
.27
6mo net inc
715,000
774,000
Per share
.54
.59


Her Name on Record But Still Kept Secret
LEAD: The identity of the woman known as the Central Park jogger remained unknown to the public yesterday, even as she appeared as a witness in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
McDonnell Douglas will eliminate as many as 17,000 jobs, or 13 percent of its work force.
The cutbacks represent the most striking example yet of the impact of declining Pentagon spending and intense competition in the commercial aircraft business. [Page A1.]
The F.C.C.


CK Federal Savings reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CK Federal Savings
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
691,834
562,433
Per share
.51
.42
9mo net inc
2,086,747
1,770,293
Per share
1.55
1.35


Margaret Lockwood, 73, Is Dead; A Popular Actress in British Films
LEAD: Margaret Lockwood, an actress who became one of the most popular figures in British films of the late 1940's, died on Sunday.
She was 73 years old.


Epic Health Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Epic Health Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
12,322,140
9,366,857
Net inc
70,091
b921,420
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
23,581,538
18,870,450
Net inc
211,237
b1,017,964
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
12,795,733
11,314,252


NCNB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NCNB Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
137,424,000
91,536,000
Per share
1.30
1.00
Shares outst
101,561,000
86,633,000
6mo net inc
227,486,000
167,326,000
Per share
2.64
1.82
Shares outst
101,415,000
86,509,000


First N.Y. Business Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First N.Y. Business Bank (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b61,000
1,006,000
Per share
.02
.27
6mo net inc
794,000
1,901,000
Per share
.21
.51
b-Included a gain of $2 million on sale of leasehold.


Salick Health Care reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Salick Health Care (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
17,779,000
13,805,000
Net inc
972,000
1,003,000
Share earns
.18
.18
Shares outst
5,517,000
5,593,000
9mo rev
50,854,000
37,121,000
Net inc
2,542,000
3,017,000
Share earns
.46
.54
Shares outst
5,570,000
5,605,000


Civic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Civic Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
743,000
460,000
Per share
.30
.25
6mo net inc
1,393,000
882,000
Per share
.59
.49


Companies Forge Recycling Venture
LEAD: The Stone Container Corporation and Waste Management of North America, the No. 1 trash collector worldwide, signed an agreement that is expected to result in the world's largest marketing enterprise for recycled paper.


A Top Chinese Leader Challenges Hard-Liners
LEAD: When foreign journalists asked Li Ruihuan three years ago about his prospects for promotion, he mischievously cited a Chinese proverb: ''Men dread fame as a pig dreads fattening, for both can be a prelude to slaughter.''


Yankee Farm Clubs: A Harvest of Hope
LEAD: George Steinbrenner, principal owner of the Yankees, has spoken recently of rebuilding the team with young players from within the organization.
There are already four rookies on the Yankee roster, and Steinbrenner has promised more.


On Horse Racing;   Cards Overweighted With New York-Breds
LEAD: New York racing's July doldrums are an annual event, but this year they are worse and more troublesome than ever.


North Carolina Loves Those Highways
LEAD: To the Editor:


Beating High Phone Rates Abroad
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company and the MCI Communications Corporation have introduced services that allow Americans traveling abroad to call home through an American operator, which can be cheaper than paying foreign telephone companies' rates for long international calls.


Airsensors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Airsensors Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,373,267
3,910,567
Net loss
323,795
1,629,004
Yr rev
28,496,792
4,458,473
Net loss
2,059,961
3,401,150
Shares outst
19,806,007
18,011,346
Latest results included first year of combined operations for Airsensors and Impco, acquired in March 1989.


Hoya to Texas A&amp;M
LEAD: Texas A&amp;M announced yesterday that David Edwards would transfer to the school from Georgetown this fall.
The 5-11, 170-pound Edwards, who played high school basketball at Andrew Jackson in Queens, must sit out this season but will have three years of eligibility remaining.
He played 31 games for the Hoyas last season, averaging 5.4 points.(


Electro-Catheter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electro-Catheter Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,125,219
2,152,859
Net inc
114,170
b149,823
Share earns
.03
-
Shares outst
3,787,400
3,572,067
9mo rev
6,040,227
6,064,769
Net loss
61,382
470,630
b-Net loss


Ashton-Tate Sells Software Product
LEAD: The Ashton-Tate Corporation said it was selling its dBase Mac software product to New Era Software Group Inc., a Miami-based company specializing in software for Apple Computer's Macintosh.


Evolution in Europe;   Promise of Yalta: Redeemed at Last?
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's acceptance of NATO membership for a united Germany brings the West closer to achieving the failed promises of Yalta in February 1945 for freedom, democracy and self-determination for all of Central and Eastern Europe.


CNB Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CNB Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,410,000
3,357,000
Per share
.52
.51
Shares outst
6,560,000
6,582,000
6mo net inc
6,804,000
6,421,000
Per share
1.04
.98
Shares outst
6,571,000
6,584,000


Staff Builders reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Staff Builders (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
41,430,000
47,948,000
Net inc
296,000
283,000
Share earns
.03
.03
Shares outst
6,566,494
6,685,020


'Smart, Driven' Woman Overcomes Reluctance
LEAD: The lithe, blond woman known as the Central Park jogger surrendered yesterday some of the privacy she has coveted since the night when she was dragged off a running path in the park and nearly beaten to death.


Crestar Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crestar Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
8,957,000
25,393,000
Per share
.26
.81
6mo net inc
36,069,000
49,759,000
Per share
1.11
1.59


American Franchise Group reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Franchise Group (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,633,000
2,812,000
Net inc
62,000
b258,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss
Revenue represents gross revenues.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Mastercard Plans to Offer Discounts
LEAD: IN an extension of its new pitch to Middle America, Mastercard International Inc. said yesterday that it was joining six national retailers to offer discounts of 10 percent to 50 percent on items like compact disks and furniture when consumers charge them on Mastercard.


F&amp;M Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* F&amp;M Financial (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
383,000
884,000
Per share
.13
.33
6mo net inc
1,385,000
1,689,000
Per share
.47
.63
The bank said share earnings are adjusted for a 5-for-4 stock split paid May 2.


Asbestos Suits Converted Into National Class Action
LEAD: A Federal judge in Cleveland approved a nationwide class action of all personal injury asbestos lawsuits yesterday, consolidating more than 100,000 cases onto his docket and beating to the punch a Federal judge in Brooklyn who expressed the same idea last week.


First Bancorp of Ohio reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Bancorp of Ohio (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
7,897,000
9,529,000
Per share
.65
.79
6mo net inc
16,962,000
18,984,000
Per share
1.40
1.57


Worldwide Value Fund Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Worldwide Value Fund Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
101,000
244,000
Per share
.03
.08
6mo net inc
156,000
201,000
Per share
.05
.07
Net income represents net investment income.
Net assets were $57,184,694 and $60,374,209 for the latest and year-ago quarters, respectively.


RSI Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RSI Holdings
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
15,289,000
14,058,000
Net inc
b82,000
c94,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
44,762,000
44,919,000
Net inc
b182,000
c268,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $55,000, or 1 cent a share, and $136,000, or 2 cents a share, for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Audit Firm: Victim or Accomplice?
LEAD: In their view, they were unwitting victims of a client's desperate scheme to doctor the books and keep the business afloat.
But to the Securities and Exchange Commission, they were willing accomplices who valued their six-figure fees more than their duty to keep the client's shareholders and potential investors informed.


Lydall Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lydall Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
31,588,000
34,997,000
Net inc
2,304,000
2,223,000
Share earns
.78
.75
6mo sales
63,942,000
67,638,000
Net inc
4,525,000
4,170,000
Share earns
1.53
1.42


E-Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E-Systems Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
438,356,000
395,927,000
Net inc
b13,988,000
19,426,000
Share earns
.45
.63
6mo sales
896,129,000
790,857,000
Net inc
b35,886,000
38,495,000
Share earns
1.15
1.24


Southern National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,042,000
5,560,000
Per share
.30
.28
6mo net inc
11,589,000
10,755,000
Per share
.58
.54


Beaten Jogger Testifies, but Cannot Recall Attack
LEAD: The woman known as the Central Park jogger walked unsteadily into the witness box in a Manhattan courtroom yesterday, suddenly taking a visible role in a case that has proceeded publicly without her in the 15 months since she was beaten and left for dead.


Columbus Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Columbus Energy Corp.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,222,000
2,197,000
Net inc
b34,000
c2,242,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
4,652,000
4,135,000
Net inc
b252,000
c2,911,000
Share earns
.09
-
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $12,000 for the quarter and $86,000, or 3 cents a share, for the 6 months, and a $130,000 reversal of 1989 provision in 1990 for both the quarter and 6 months.


Lower Landfill Fees Will Cost New York Plenty
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lake Shore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lake Shore Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,927,000
2,708,000
Per share
.36
.34
6mo net inc
5,727,000
5,722,000
Per share
.70
.70


Maxicare's Bankruptcy
LEAD: Maxicare Health Plans Inc. said today that it had moved a step closer to emerging from bankruptcy protection with the approval of the company's reorganization plan by the Federal Bankruptcy Court in Santa Ana, Calif.


Immucor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Immucor Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,360,858
2,740,712
Net inc
579,044
436,293
Share earns
.11
.09
6mo sales
12,209,063
9,760,243
Net inc
2,063,488
1,349,491
Share earns
.41
.27


Autodie Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Autodie Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
20,999,932
31,040,090
Net loss
14,844,865
b1,549,448
Share earns
-
.30
9mo sales
82,217,020
87,569,003
Net loss
19,654,721
b3,385,883
Share earns
-
.66
b-Net income


Evolution in Europe;   Excerpts From Kohl-Gorbachev News Conference on Germany and NATO
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a news conference today in Zheleznovodsk, U.S.S.R., at which Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union discussed the membership of a united Germany in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
The news conference was broadcast on West German television and was recorded and translated by The New York Times.


Evolution in Europe;   Refugees Quit the Czech Embassy in Havana
LEAD: All 12 of the Cubans who have taken refuge at the Czechoslovak Embassy since last week left the embassy voluntarily late today, the Cuban news agency Prensa Latina said.


Whitman Medical Corp.  reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Whitman Medical Corp.
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,686,475
2,052,134
Net inc
97,721
219,790
Share earns
.08
.19


Paul W. Pinkerton, Accountant, 74
LEAD: Paul W. Pinkerton, a partner in Haskins &amp; Sells accounting firm, died on Friday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 74 years old and lived in Wayne, N.J.


Hometown Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hometown Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b120,000
169,000
Per share
.07
.09
6mo net loss
1,947,000
c316,000
Per share
-
.17
b-Included a gain of $41,000 from tax-loss carryforwards.
c-Net income


Bank of New York Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of New York Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
70,408,000
114,344,000
Per share
.90
1.60
6mo net inc
172,710,000
215,394,000
Per share
2.28
3.05


Atico Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atico Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b1,050,000
c87,000
Share earns
.19
.01
6mo net inc
b2,056,000
c286,000
Share earns
.36
.05
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $262,000, or 5 cents a share, and $391,000, or 7 cents a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


2 New Laser Printers From Apple
LEAD: APPLE Computer Inc., trailing its competitors by many months, has introduced two new lower-cost laser printers.
At suggested list prices of $1,999 and $3,299, they do not approach the low prices of personal laser printers available for MS-DOS computers, which are now widely available for less than $1,500.


Israelis Wound 11 in Action Over Gaza Strip Wall Graffiti
LEAD: Israeli troops shot and wounded 11 Palestinian protesters in the Gaza Strip today and entered the town of Rafa and the refugee camp nearby for the first time in months to order residents to erase Palestinian nationalist graffiti.


F.C.C. ACTS TO CUT RATES UP TO 50% ON CALLS ABROAD
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission, concerned that the cost of providing international telephone service has been falling far faster than the prices that callers pay, has begun an effort to force down rates by up to 50 percent within three years.


Twyla Tharp Is Honored
LEAD: Twyla Tharp received the 1990 Samuel H. Scripps American Dance Festival Award on Sunday night in the East Campus Gym of Duke University.
The occasion proved unusual in several respects.


Midlantic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midlantic Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
24,770,000
b61,557,000
Per share
-
1.57
6mo net loss
23,366,000
b121,106,000
Per share
-
3.10
b-Net income
Per share earnings are diluted.
During the second quarter, the company strengthened its reserve for possible loan losses by providing $186 million, an action that was prompted by increases in non-performing loans primarily due to deterioration in New Jersey's real estate markets and overall economic environment.


Evolution in Europe;   Security Chief Says Ceausescu's Son Opposed Parents' Order


I.B.M. Net Up by 5.2% In Quarter
LEAD: In a stronger-than-expected report that pushed its stock to a new high for the year, the International Business Machines Corporation yesterday reported a 5.2 percent rise in its second-quarter net income on an 8.4 percent revenue gain.


Ford Will Build Plant in Hungary
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said it would invest $80 million to build an auto parts factory in Hungary, joining its rival, the General Motors Corporation, in setting up shop in the Eastern European nation.


Supertex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Supertex Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
5,984,000
5,207,000
Net inc
706,000
746,000
Share earns
.06
.06


Parasites Take the Biological Spotlight
LEAD: TO the ancient Greeks, the word ''parasite'' meant one who eats at the table of another.
But far from having the decency to sit down for dinner, most parasites in nature suck the blood, sip at the gastric juices of the intestines, pierce into the nourishing warmth of muscle tissue and otherwise leech rudely off the fluids and labors of their unwilling hosts.


The Education of Jim Florio
LEAD: Gov.
Jim Florio has courageously raised New Jersey's taxes, and his reward is a 19 percent crash in popularity.
His experiment is being watched around the country by Democrats who wonder if voters can be persuaded to overcome their resistance to taxes.
Mr.
Florio doesn't deserve to be punished for his honesty, but he does need to explain better what he is doing and why.


General Building Products reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Building Products (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
17,932,000
21,248,000
Net loss
949,000
b625,000
6mo sales
34,770,000
41,088,000
Net loss
1,605,000
b1,623,000
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $215,000 for the quarter and $298,000 for the 6 months.


Chess
LEAD: There are indeed setups in chess that demand patience and invincible will.
Most of these are characterized by an aggressor with an advantage in space trying to break through a solid, though cramped, position with a latent weakness in pawn structure.
This does take time and relentless determination and extended maneuvering.


At Least 258 Killed in Philippine Earthquake


Seagull Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seagull Energy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
38,499,000
37,272,000
Net inc
2,725,000
904,000
Share earns
.33
.05
Shares outst
8,287,691
6,507,676
6mo rev
101,458,000
98,275,000
Net inc
11,686,000
8,175,000
Share earns
1.47
1.03
Shares outst
7,931,425
6,830,869


Central Jersey Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Jersey Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,056,000
4,892,000
Per share
.25
.57
6mo net inc
5,353,000
9,671,000
Per share
.63
1.13


Aero Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aero Systems Inc.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
8,310,641
9,320,328
Net loss
118,224
b53,412
Share earns
-
.01
b-Net income


Inter-Tel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inter-Tel Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
18,139,000
14,650,000
Net inc
485,000
10,000
Share earns
.06
-
6mo rev
35,126,000
29,885,000
Net inc
816,000
101,000
Share earns
.10
.01


Bush Scraps Intelligence Board, Appointing a New Panel of 6
LEAD: President Bush today scrapped the White House's 15-member advisory board on intelligence issues and replaced it with a 6-member panel composed largely of veteran intelligence officials and scientists.


Sheehan's Plummet Not Unprecedented
LEAD: In sheer numbers, Patty Sheehan's loss of 11 shots over 34 holes to Betsy King in Sunday's final 36 holes of the United States Women's Open seemed unbelievable.
But in the hard reality of championship golf, it was not so unusual.


Braintree Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Braintree Savings Bank
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
155,000
412,000
Per share
.09
.26
6mo net inc
304,000
658,000
Per share
.19
.42


Jennifer Convertibles reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jennifer Convertibles
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
8,231,940
7,518,623
Net inc
18,501
b194,491
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
2,981,184
2,950,153
9mo rev
24,286,670
21,389,753
Net loss
378,356
1,314,775
Shares outst
2,981,184
2,789,621


L'Etat, C'Est Moi
LEAD: During the cold war the United States often supported undemocratic governments in the third world on the ground that they were pro-Western.
Now that the cold war is over, and won, what should this country do when a third-world government we have favored turns nasty?


Hickam (Dow B.) Inc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hickam (Dow B.) Inc.(O)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,211,000
2,829,000
Net inc
102,000
217,000
Share earns
.05
.10
6mo sales
6,359,000
5,583,000
Net inc
223,000
410,000
Share earns
.10
.19


Reserve Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reserve Industries (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,118,051
2,470,495
Net loss
b134,010
cd309,114
Share earns
-
.16
Shares outst
2,036,663
1,974,990
9mo rev
6,788,482
7,033,486
Net inc
b2,277
c554,276
Share earns
-
.28
Shares outst
2,036,663
1,974,990


Golden West Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden West Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
49,276,000
40,236,000
Share earns
.78
.64
Shares outst
63,087,671
62,887,292
6mo net inc
96,250,000
75,262,000
Share earns
1.53
1.20
Shares outst
63,068,427
62,860,926


Judge Clears Allegheny Deal
LEAD: A bankruptcy judge has approved a $50 million settlement of a creditor lawsuit against Allegheny International Inc., increasing the small-appliance manufacturer's chances of emerging from Chapter 11 bankruptcy.


Mountain West Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mountain West Savings Bank
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
54,000
b452,000
Per share
-
.27
9mo net inc
670,000
c433,000
Per share
.38
-
b-Net income
c-Net loss


Mosinee Paper Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mosinee Paper Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
52,700,000
58,330,000
Net inc
3,184,000
3,638,000
Share earns
.45
.51
Shares outst
7,020,393
7,241,351
6mo sales
109,054,000
117,110,000
Net inc
6,066,000
b12,282,000
Share earns
.86
1.70
Shares outst
7,020,393
7,241,351


Racial Suit by a Black Against a Black Fails
LEAD: A Federal judge ruled today that a woman's poor attitude led to her dismissal by the Internal Revenue Service, not racial discrimination as she had charge in a lawsuit.


Books of The Times;   A Novel About Tolstoy's Painful, Waning Days
LEAD:
The Last Station
A Novel of Tolstoy's Last Year
By Jay Parini
290 pages. Henry Holt &amp; Company. $22.95.


Nicor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nicor Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
269,200,000
257,800,000
Net inc
20,400,000
15,200,000
Share earns
.69
.50
Shares outst
29,000,000
29,700,000
6mo rev
900,300,000
939,800,000
Net inc
64,200,000
69,800,000
Share earns
2.18
2.32
Shares outst
29,100,000
29,600,000


Burr-Brown Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burr-Brown Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
43,163,000
44,078,000
Net inc
1,180,000
2,054,000
Share earns
.12
.21
Shares outst
9,631,000
9,701,000
6mo sales
85,020,000
88,029,000
Net inc
2,758,000
5,091,000
Share earns
.29
.52
Shares outst
9,621,000
9,698,000


By Design;   White for Night
LEAD: White has completely overtaken black as the color of the night.
Dress-up clothes ranging from casual to the most elegant look brighter (and newer) in dazzling white or creamy ivory, even the little slips of skin-tight stretchy stuff that one thought would only work in black.


A Garbage Pact Averts A Strike in New Jersey
LEAD: Members of a Teamsters local threatening a strike against garbage haulers in 13 northern and central New Jersey counties approved a three-year contract yesterday.


CCB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CCB Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,079,000
5,146,000
Per share
1.00
1.02
Shares outst
5,066,190
5,037,899
6mo net inc
10,022,000
10,303,000
Per share
1.98
2.05
Shares outst
5,066,190
5,027,842


Dow Ends at 2,999.75 With a Rise of 19.55
LEAD: The Dow Jones industrial average flirted yesterday with a close above 3,000, but it ended the day just shy of that benchmark.
Stock market analysts contended nevertheless that the performance indicated that stock prices still seemed to be climbing, at least for a while longer.


Guardsman Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guardsman Products Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
48,198,000
48,290,000
Net inc
930,000
1,963,000
Share earns
.13
.28
6mo sales
95,884,000
95,231,000
Net inc
2,601,000
3,458,000
Share earns
.36
.50


Yankees' Owner Has More to Say On Inquiry
LEAD: With a decision on George Steinbrenner's future in baseball perhaps only a week away, lawyers for the Yankees' principal owner submitted additional material to Commissioner Fay Vincent yesterday.


Joseph V. Stolper, Antiques Dealer, 89
LEAD: Joseph V. Stolper, an antiques dealer, died on Friday in Orlando, Fla.
He was 89 years old.


First Tennessee National reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Tennessee National (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
16,191,000
b10,931,000
Per share
1.01
-
Shares outst
15,947,355
15,825,324
6mo net inc
19,661,000
1,967,000
Per share
1.23
.12
Shares outst
15,943,821
15,820,775


Value Line reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Value Line (OTC)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
15,968,000
15,994,000
Net inc
4,109,000
4,842,000
Share earns
.41
.48
Yr rev
63,498,000
66,211,000
Net inc
b12,475,000
18,533,000
Share earns
1.25
1.86
b-Included $22.6 million non-recurring loss from payments to Value Line cash fund as a result of a default of Integrated Resources Inc.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: It was a sweet moment for BETHINE CHURCH, the dedication of the Frank Church-River of No Return Wilderness.
Before her husband died in 1984, Congress voted to name the largest wilderness area in the continental United States after him.


Bionaire Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bionaire Inc.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,600,000
4,700,000
Net loss
2,164,000
769,000
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Business and Health;   Programs to Keep Retirees Healthy
LEAD: AT the Campbell Soup Company's fitness center in Camden, N.J., Bill Brown, a 79-year-old retiree, leads an exercise class called flexibility.


No to a Balanced Budget Amendment
LEAD: The balanced budget amendment that the House will vote on today is impractical, unenforceable and wouldn't end Federal deficits.
But it would litter the Constitution with a vacuous promise, and invite greater cynicism in budget-making.


Administration Raises Estimate on the Deficit
LEAD: Apparently trying to generate an atmosphere of crisis, the Administration sharply raised its official estimate of the Federal deficit in the next fiscal year and predicted dire consequences from automatic spending cuts - including steep reductions in spending on the military, air-traffic control and health services - if a budget agreement with


New Dates For Series
LEAD: The World Series will start on Tuesday, Oct. 16, three days later than originally scheduled, in the home park of the National League champion.


Gibson (C.R.) Co.  (A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gibson (C.R.) Co.  (A)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
13,777,000
12,017,000
Net inc
499,000
426,000
Share earns
.10
.08
6mo sales
29,351,000
25,551,000
Net inc
1,320,000
1,110,000
Share earns
.26
.22
Year-ago quarter, latest and year- ago 6 months' share earnings are adjusted for a 4-for-3 stock split effected in the form of a stock dividend in 1990.


How Palmer Magnified British Open
LEAD: During the practice rounds for last year's British Open at Troon, a photographer from a London newspaper approached Arnold Palmer on the 15th hole.


Office Club Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Office Club Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
63,686,000
31,032,000
Net inc
432,000
b631,000
Share earns
.07
-
Shares outst
6,173,000
5,912,000
6mo sales
127,663,000
60,365,000
Net inc
1,141,000
b832,000
Share earns
.19
-
Shares outst
6,149,000
5,911,000


Central Fidelity Banks reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Fidelity Banks (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
14,196,000
13,578,000
Per share
.93
.88
6mo net inc
28,250,000
26,502,000
Per share
1.84
1.72


Tide West Oil Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tide West Oil Co.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
756,626
602,616
Net inc
263,707
138,220
Share earns
.03
.01


Q-Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Q-Med Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,728,024
1,890,671
Net loss
376,703
349,773
Shares outst
6,640,315
6,044,965
6mo sales
3,611,507
4,115,252
Net loss
363,197
631,156
Shares outst
6,640,315
6,044,965


Southland's Creditors Accept Sweetened Bid
LEAD: The Southland Corporation's major creditors agreed today to sweetened terms of a takeover offer from Japan's Ito-Yokado Group that will give Southland's debt holders 20 percent of the company and an additional $30 million.


Lowlands Low No More As S.I. Favors Swamps
LEAD: Not so long ago, wetlands were considered disease-harboring nuisances -in other words, swamps.


Wynn Waits for Woes to Settle
LEAD: Whether or not the contractual dispute between Don King, the promoter, and James (Buster) Douglas, the heavyweight champion, is settled out of court, Steve Wynn still has problems.


Archer-Daniels-Midland Co.  reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Archer-Daniels-Midland Co.  (NYSE)
Year to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
483,522,000
424,673,000
Share earns
1.71
1.52
Shares outst
282,743,000
280,107,000


Grappling With the Cost Of Saving Earth's Ozone
LEAD: AS scientists, engineers and manufacturers struggle to find substitutes for the ozone-destroying chemicals world governments have decided to ban, there are fears that the cost of replacing them might include environmental risks, as well as a financial burden for consumers.


Temple-Inland Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Temple-Inland Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
587,400,000
489,100,000
Net inc
65,700,000
52,900,000
Share earns
1.18
.96
Shares outst
55,526,000
55,244,000
6mo rev
1,178,600,000
962,600,000
Net inc
127,900,000
107,400,000
Share earns
2.30
1.94
Shares outst
55,478,000
55,393,000


If It's East of the Mississippi, It's Blanketed in Pollution's Haze
LEAD: DESPITE some improvement in the last 15 years, haze caused by air pollution casts a concealing cloak over the entire Eastern United States, routinely reducing visibility by more than 80 percent in countryside and city alike, a federally sponsored study has found.


Daiwa Office In Budapest
LEAD: The Daiwa Securities Company will open an office in Budapest by the end of the year, becoming the first Japanese brokerage in Eastern Europe, a Daiwa official said today.


Bankers Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankers Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,469,000
2,424,000
Per share
.64
-
6mo net inc
6,605,000
5,299,000
The per share earnings for the latest 6 months and both year-ago periods were unavailable as the company converted from mutual to a stock ownership on March 23.





Thermal Profiles reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thermal Profiles
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,830,307
6,499,866
Net loss
b2,596,426
b4,912,181
Shares outst
3,323,273
3,121,305
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $883,149 and $1,113,733 for the latest and prior years, respectively.


G.A.O. Urges Inspection Of Investment Advisers
LEAD: The General Accounting Office said today that investors were at risk as a result of the way the Securities and Exchange Commission oversees the nation's investment advisers.


A.T.&amp;T. Plans Rate Rise
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company announced yesterday that it planned to raise its average long-distance rates for most business customers by five-tenths of a percent.
The increase is set to take effect on July 27.


Comnet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comnet Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
7,138,000
6,861,000
Net inc
b626,000
c3,238,000
Share earns
.23
-
Yr rev
22,856,000
21,591,000
Net inc
b1,370,000
c2,807,000
Share earns
.51
-
b-Included an extraordinary credit from an accounting change of $175,000, or 7 cents a share, for both the quarter and year.


Benjamin P. Schoenfein, Banker, 91
LEAD: Benjamin P. Schoenfein, a retired New York City banker, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 91 years old.


Pentair Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pentair Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
294,924,000
303,928,000
Net inc
7,049,000
10,332,000
Share earns
.50
.84
Shares outst
10,842,000
10,795,000
6mo sales
581,315,000
578,687,000
Net inc
12,700,000
19,342,000
Share earns
.92
1.59
Shares outst
10,866,000
10,786,000


Profits Off For Some Big Banks
LEAD: Problems with bad real estate loans and sluggish demand for new loans are depressing profits of some large banks around the country, reports yesterday of earnings for the second quarter showed.


Wellman Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wellman Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
209,400,000
92,100,000
Net inc
18,300,000
14,100,000
Share earns
.56
.49
Shares outst
32,646,000
29,035,000
6mo sales
418,000,000
183,900,000
Net inc
36,200,000
27,500,000
Share earns
1.11
.95
Shares outst
32,646,000
29,034,000


Florafax International reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florafax International (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,419,000
2,481,000
Net loss
57,000
b129,000
Share earns
-
.03
9mo rev
6,873,000
6,861,000
Net loss
415,000
b396,000
Share earns
-
.08
b-Net income


Poseidon Pools of America reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Poseidon Pools of America (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
7,184,000
9,555,000
Net loss
913,000
b516,000
Share earns
-
.07
Shares outst
7,214,753
7,248,945
9mo sales
12,139,000
14,725,000
Net loss
4,467,000
1,826,000
Shares outst
7,161,093
7,251,678


Facing Grim Data on Young Males, Blacks Grope for Ways to End Blight
LEAD: Ronald Taylor, a black sociologist at the University of Connecticut, went back to the old neighborhood in Hartford the other day for the first time in years and was jolted by the sight of young men hanging out and selling drugs on once-familiar streets.


Brenton Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brenton Banks Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,625,542
2,402,744
Per share
.55
.50
6mo net inc
5,037,742
4,486,163
Per share
1.05
.93


First of America Bank Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First of America Bank Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
31,568,000
32,328,000
Per share
1.58
1.56
Shares outst
17,217,427
17,748,283
6mo net inc
64,413,000
64,264,000
Per share
3.17
3.09
Shares outst
17,492,688
17,811,761


ECI Environmental Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ECI Environmental Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
5,567,000
5,500,000
Net loss
97,000
b672,000
Share earns
-
.19
9mo rev
18,071,000
13,525,000
Net inc
417,000
927,000
Share earns
.10
.27
b-Net income


Ross Cosmetics Distribution Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ross Cosmetics Distribution Centers Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,822,193
4,199,139
Net loss
b64,735
c69,385
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
3,148,529
3,039,096
9mo sales
13,751,858
12,512,865
Net inc
286,693
138,462
Share earns
.09
.05
Shares outst
3,146,343
3,007,030


Revco Study Questions Company's Health at '86 Buyout
LEAD: A court-appointed official said yesterday that the $1.25 billion leveraged buyout of Revco D. S. Inc. might have left the company with so little capital that it was virtually insolvent when the buyout was completed.


Learonal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Learonal Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
36,524,000
36,860,000
Net inc
b2,067,000
2,692,000
Share earns
.23
.30
Shares outst
8,808,819
9,003,441
b-Included a $250,000 non-recurring charge related to environmental compliance matters at one of the company's U.S.


$73 Million Sought From Eddie Antar
LEAD: A Federal District judge ordered Eddie Antar to turn over $73 million he made through his Crazy Eddie electronics empire.
Federal officials say Mr.
Antar, who has been missing since he appeared in court on Feb. 13, made the money with fraudulent record-keeping and insider trading at Crazy Eddie Inc., now defunct.


Medchem Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medchem Products Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
3,862,103
5,600,315
Net inc
b589,334
1,046,562
Share earns
.13
.22
Shares outst
4,537,682
4,712,431
9mo sales
16,602,820
16,006,512
Net inc
2,528,954
2,463,029
Share earns
.55
.56
Shares outst
4,570,181
4,406,127


Cybertek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cybertek Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,735,000
5,570,000
Net inc
722,000
312,000
Share earns
.19
.08


Valley Capital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Capital Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
8,938,000
8,632,000
Per share
.83
.77
Shares outst
10,722,068
11,259,904
6mo net inc
17,734,000
b18,387,000
Per share
1.65
1.64
Shares outst
10,721,855
11,256,333


Group Delays Action on Drug Forfeit Laws
LEAD: A law-writing organization yesterday postponed consideration of a draft law intended to help state prosecutors put drug traffickers out of business by confiscating their property.
Civil rights advocates oppose the proposal, saying that it would give prosecutors far too much authority.


Krug International Inc. reports earnings for Year March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Krug International Inc. (OTC)
Year March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
89,810,000
84,731,000
Net loss
b4,907,000
c1,057,000
Share earns
-
.25
b-After a loss of $7,748,000 from discontinued operations.
c-Net income and after a loss from discontinued operations of $1,897,000.


Square Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Square Industries
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
17,728,000
15,759,000
Net inc
b476,000
306,000
Share earns
.40
.25
Shares outst
1,192,689
1,215,249
b-Included $41,000 tax loss carryforward from its Canadian operation.


Boise Cascade Net Tumbles
LEAD: The Boise Cascade Corporation said today that second-quarter profit tumbled 69.4 percent, mainly because of falling prices.


Experts Say Jogger's Amnesia Is Typical Loss
LEAD: The Central Park jogger's amnesia is absolutely typical of people who suffer severe head injuries, neurologists said, and it is virtually impossible that she will ever remember the beating and rape of last year.


Environmental Tectonics reports earnings for Qtr to May 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Environmental Tectonics
Qtr to May 25
1990
1989
Sales
4,781,000
4,822,000
Net inc
256,000
132,000
Share earns
.12
.07


0.9% Gain in Business Sales Limits Growth in Inventories
LEAD: A rebound in business sales in May helped keep inventories growing at a moderate rate and helped reduce the time it takes to exhaust the backlog of goods, the Government said today in a sign of continued economic expansion.


Bill on Farm Spending Meeting Stiff Opposition
LEAD: The 1990 farm bill, which heads toward the floor of both the Senate and the House this week, is meeting unaccustomed opposition from the Bush Administration and from newly aroused city and suburban legislators who seek to cut or redirect large Federal subsidies to agriculture.


Johnson Controls Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnson Controls Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,172,400,000
910,600,000
Net inc
27,000,000
23,500,000
Share earns
.63
.62
9mo sales
3,327,600,000
2,634,700,000
Net inc
63,400,000
73,700,000
Share earns
1.45
1.98


Anthem Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anthem Electronics Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
110,055,000
76,552,000
Net inc
6,675,000
3,511,000
Share earns
.56
.31
Shares outst
11,944,000
11,297,000
6mo sales
210,061,000
146,572,000
Net inc
12,358,000
6,523,000
Share earns
1.04
.58
Shares outst
11,889,000
11,295,000


Rinfret Says He Put $540,250 Into Campaign
LEAD: Pierre A. Rinfret, the Republican candidate for governor, released some grim figures yesterday about his first outing as a political candidate.


Aspen Wind Inc.  reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aspen Wind Inc.
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
933,576
227,673
Net inc
20,398
b330,970
Shares outst
6,590,000
4,190,156
b-Net loss
The company said the acquisition of Sadler Point Marina represented a 42 percent, or $298,451 addition to last year revenues, while the sale of houseboat interests represented 58 percent of the increase in revenue, or $407,452 over fiscal 1989 revenues.


10 Years Later, Hepatitis Study Still Yields Critical Data on AIDS
LEAD: MORE than 10 years ago, 6,705 gay men here rolled up their sleeves, gave samples of blood and answered a detailed questionnaire about their health, including their sexual and drug habits.


Acquisitions By Japanese Rise Sharply
LEAD: Japanese purchases of American companies jumped sharply in the first half of this year, while American purchases in Japan remained small.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
8.06
9.28
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.62
7.60
7.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.51
7.52
7.72
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.41
8.41
7.97
30-YR.


Worlco Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Worlco Data Systems
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,650,000
3,790,000
Net loss
872,000
153,000
Yr rev
13,416,512
13,984,359
Net loss
1,138,875
b288,376
Share earns
-
.09
b-Net income


Robert Ginell, Professor, 78
LEAD: Robert Ginell, professor emeritus of chemistry at Brooklyn College, died on July 10 at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Baltimore.
He was 78 years old and lived in Baldwin, L.I.


Murder Case That Has Strained Ties to Mexico Goes to Jury
LEAD: The case of four men accused of torturing and murdering an American drug agent in Mexico went to a Federal jury today.
Thetrial is part of a prosecution effort that has strained relations between the United States and Mexico for more than five years.


Affiliated Bankshares of Colo reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Bankshares of Colo (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,594,000
1,607,000
Per share
.23
.13
6mo net inc
4,617,000
2,717,000
Per share
.40
.22


Review/Dance;   'Infinity': All Laura Dean's, Both Step and Sound
LEAD: This year the American Dance Festival is calling its performances at Page Auditorium of Duke University the American Masters Plus Series.
That phrase says much about the festival's policies.


G.E. Profits Set a Record For Quarter
LEAD: The General Electric Company said yesterday that it had achieved record operating profit margins in the second quarter and that its net earnings rose to nearly $1.09 billion, a 12 percent increase from the $972 million of a year earlier.


Bush Hails Soviet Decision
LEAD: President Bush hailed the Soviet Union's decision to accept a united Germany as a member of the NATO alliance, describing the move as an act of statesmanship.
Page A9.


Net Up 16.3% At W. R. Grace
LEAD: W. R. Grace &amp; Company yesterday reported a 16.3 percent increase in its second-quarter profit on a 7.8 percent growth in revenue.


T.C.C. Beverages Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* T.C.C. Beverages Ltd.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
269,829,000
249,864,000
Net inc
8,718,000
7,149,000
Share earns
.19
.18
6mo rev
456,341,000
412,372,000
Net inc
5,153,000
2,191,000
Share earns
.07
.05
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Cutting Desk-Top Publishing Costs
LEAD: IF you cannot justify the cost of software or more capable hardware needed to run a top-of-the-line desktop publishing program, you still might consider a low- or mid-priced offering.
One of them, Avagio, produces handsome printed pages at a good price, and your present equipment may well be all you need.


College Bound Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* College Bound Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,087,069
269,642
Net inc
313,008
54,891
Share earns
.06
.01
9mo sales
2,558,277
456,567
Net inc
846,208
105,936
Share earns
.18
.03


Pope &amp; Talbot Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pope &amp; Talbot Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
143,770,000
160,538,000
Net inc
b8,577,000
11,155,000
Share earns
.73
.95
6mo rev
292,824,000
306,853,000
Net inc
b19,599,000
20,592,000
Share earns
1.67
1.75


Will Italy Ever Be Ready for Unification?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Estimate on Deficit Is Raised Sharply
LEAD: Apparently trying to generate an atmosphere of crisis, the Bush Administration sharply raised its official estimate of the Federal deficit in the next fiscal year today and predicted dire consequences from automatic spending cuts if a budget agreement with Congress is not reached.


Hawkinge Journal;   Where the Few Triumphed, Ghosts Haunt Skies
LEAD: The ghosts of 1940 still haunt The Cat and Custard pub a half century after the Battle of Britain.


Education Consumers Should Have a Choice;   Still Far to Go
LEAD: To the Editor:


BB&amp;T Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BB&amp;T Financial Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
13,023,000
10,702,000
Shares outst
19,547,003
19,340,429
Per share
.67
.55
6mo net inc
25,812,000
21,745,000
Per share
1.32
1.14
Shares outst
19,534,794
19,075,446


Cuomo Group to Pull Money From Bank on a Protest List
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's campaign committee said today that it would remove its money from Chemical Bank because the bank does business with the South African Government.


Pennzoil to Lift Chevron Stake
LEAD: The Pennzoil Company said today that it planned to increase its stake in the Chevron Corporation to nearly 10 percent by using the $480 million remaining from its 1988 settlement with Texaco Inc.


Halperin Expected To Head the Comex
LEAD: David A. Halperin is expected to be appointed president of the Commodity Exchange tomorrow, exchange officials said yesterday.
Mr.
Halperin, a former executive vice president of the Comex, currently holds a similar post at the New York Mercantile Exchange.


W.W. Williams Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* W.W. Williams Co.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
19,930,000
18,951,000
Net inc
487,000
b535,000
Share earns
.50
.53
6mo rev
38,018,000
35,973,000
Net inc
837,000
b834,000
Share earns
.85
.84
b-Included income of $17,000, or 2 cents a share, and $29,000, or 3 cents a share, for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Integra Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Integra Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
17,535,000
17,646,000
Per share
.71
.70
6mo net inc
34,959,000
34,735,000
Per share
1.41
1.38


Bridge
LEAD: Conventional wisdom dictates that a player with a freakish hand and a very long suit should make every effort to play in that suit.
In exceptional cases, especially at match-point scoring, it may be right to venture three no-trump if the suit is a minor.
To do so in a major is hardly ever appropriate, and the diagramed example may constitute a world record in this area.


First Chicago Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Chicago Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
87,400,000
134,400,000
Per share
1.22
1.98
6mo net inc
156,000,000
259,100,000
Net inc
2.15
3.83
The latest second quarter's earnings included tax benefits related to 1987's net operting loss and a gain of $13.5 million from the sale of First Chicago's merchant processing business of its bank credit card operations.


Joseph D. Cotler, 76; Led a Liquor Concern
LEAD: Joseph D. Cotler, former president and chief executive of ''21'' Brands Inc., and an official of the McKesson Liquor Company, died at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center on Thursday.
He was 76 years old and lived in East Rockaway, L.I.


Commercial Bancorp of Colo reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial Bancorp of Colo
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
268,000
265,000
Per share
.16
.17
Shares outst
1,679,000
1,529,000
6mo net inc
483,000
559,000
Per share
.29
.37
Shares outst
1,682,000
1,529,000


Westamerica Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westamerica Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,630,000
1,605,000
Per share
.50
.31
6mo net inc
4,985,000
3,124,000
Per share
.95
.61


Salem Carpet Mills reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Salem Carpet Mills (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
118,333,000
109,058,000
Net inc
1,002,000
2,410,000
Share earns
.12
.30
Shares outst
8,143,406
8,068,118
6mo sales
230,605,000
198,299,000
Net inc
1,484,000
3,082,000
Share earns
.18
.38
Shares outst
8,141,157
8,062,100


Alcan Aluminium Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alcan Aluminium Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,149,000,000
2,320,000,000
Net inc
84,000,000
b244,000,000
Share earns
.35
1.05
Shares outst
223,900,000
227,800,000
6mo rev
4,273,000,000
4,559,000,000
Net inc
256,000,000
513,000,000
Share earns
1.09
2.21


International Business Mahines Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Business Mahines Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
16,495,000,000
15,213,000,000
Net inc
1,410,000,000
1,340,000,000
Share earns
2.45
2.31
Shares outst
573,300,000
581,400,000
6mo rev
30,680,000,000
27,943,000,000
Net inc
2,447,000,000
2,290,000,000
Share earns
4.26
3.92
Shares outst
573,800,000
584,900,000


Saberhagen Placed On Disabled List
LEAD: Bret Saberhagen, last year's American League Cy Young Award winner, was placed on the 21-day disabled list by the Kansas City Royals yesterday.


Education Consumers Should Have a Choice;   Public in Name Only
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dover Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
561,651,000
549,452,000
Net inc
42,252,000
42,101,000
Share earns
.68
.66
6mo sales
1,090,293,000
1,064,249,000
Net inc
78,620,000
74,221,000
Share earns
1.27
1.16
Shares outst
61,673,000
63,887,000


Stratamerica Corp.  reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stratamerica Corp.
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
16,605,000
28,876,000
Net inc
b2,102,000
c650,000
Share earns
.46
.14
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $290,000, or 6 cents a share, which represented after-tax gain on sale of publishing division.


Goodrich (B.F.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goodrich (B.F.) (N)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
632,500,000
628,800,000
Net inc
b55,400,000
c52,300,000
Share earns
2.10
1.98
Shares outst
25,400,000
25,300,000
6mo sales
1,222,300,000
1,244,700,000
Net inc
b71,600,000
c105,300,000
Share earns
2.66
4.00
Shares outst
25,400,000
25,200,000


Crossland and Chase Deal
LEAD: In an effort to bolster its capital position, the Crossland Savings Bank, New York's biggest savings and loan, has entered into an agreement to sell the servicing rights on $1.7 billion of mortgages to the Chase Home Mortgage Corporation.


Video Display Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Video Display Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
12,938,000
12,784,000
Net inc
484,000
720,000
Share earns
.12
.18
Shares outst
4,117,000
4,108,000


Evolution in Europe;   Ukrainians Declare Republic Sovereign Inside Soviet System
LEAD: The vast and rich Ukraine, one of the largest and most important republics in the Soviet Union, became the latest to declare its sovereignty today, challenging the Gorbachev Government to a larger share of self-determination and natural resources.


Borland International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Borland International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
41,068,000
23,033,000
Net inc
4,633,000
1,585,000
Share earns
.32
.13
Shares outst
14,510,000
12,319,000


Voter-Registration Plan Needs Better Support
LEAD: To the Editor:


Goldome reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Goldome (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b10,800,000
c225,400,000
Per share
.36
-
Shares outst
28,106,118
28,062,446
6mo net inc
b36,200,000
c264,300,000
Per share
1.24
-
Shares outst
28,105,645
28,061,877


Applause, Confusion On RJR Debt
LEAD: Prices of some RJR Nabisco ''junk bonds'' soared - though not to expected levels - in heavy trading yesterday, as a $6.9 billion refinancing plan was generally well received by Wall Street.


Retailing Corp. of America reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Retailing Corp. of America (OTC)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
108,462,000
110,526,000
Net loss
b15,005,000
b2,499,000
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $9,935,000 and $2,197,000 for the latest and prior years, respectively.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
April-June
Change
1990
Fron '89
Aluminum Co. of America
$ 161,900,000
-43.2
Boise Cascade Corp.
23,000,000
-69.5
E-Systems Inc.
14,000,000
-27.8
Fingerhut Cos.
8,800,000
+91.3
General Electric Co.


Morgan (J.P.) &amp; Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan (J.P.) &amp; Co.  (N)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b207,000,000
206,000,000
Per share
1.06
1.09
Shares outst
188,288,445
186,227,211
6mo net inc
c606,000,000
386,000,000
Per share
3.16
2.05
Shares outst
187,847,948
185,831,924


Mine Safety Appliances reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mine Safety Appliances (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
118,171,000
101,651,000
Net inc
7,870,000
7,168,000
Share earns
1.21
1.09
6mo sales
230,133,000
204,348,000
Net inc
14,294,000
13,252,000
Share earns
2.19
2.01


National Health Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Health Laboratories Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
127,400,000
99,900,000
Net inc
21,500,000
17,100,000
Share earns
.22
.17
Shares outst
99,059,281
99,000,000
6mo sales
249,500,000
193,800,000
Net inc
41,400,000
32,900,000
Share earns
.42
.33
Shares outst
99,029,804
99,000,000


Stoneridge Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stoneridge Resources Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
52,231,000
52,984,000
Net loss
2,210,000
539,000
9mo rev
106,975,000
127,930,000
Net loss
8,493,000
1,086,000
Results for latest quarter and 9 months included after-tax charges incurred by the company's 52 percent- owned subsidiary, Orange-co Inc., aggregating $1.2 million and $4.8 million, respectively.


Rite Aid Charges Dismissed
LEAD: A judge dismissed all charges against the Rite Aid Corporation and its president today after ruling that the evidence against them in a bribery case was circumstantial.


Environmentalists vs. Property Owners in Staten Island Wetlands


Review/Television;   Jane Pauley Interviewing The Harried and Hopeful
LEAD: Fans of Jane Pauley, relax.
She returns tonight at 10 on NBC in an easy-to-take hour called ''Real Life With Jane Pauley.'' It is the first of five summer specials adapted to the popular former co-anchor of the ''Today'' show, with the prospect of finding a place in the new television season.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American National Can Co., Chicago, a can manufacturer, promoted Thomas N. Eagleson to senior vice president for manufacturing, food metal-North America, and Richard G. Sturdevant to senior vice president for manufacturing, beverage cans-North America.


Evolution in Europe;   Baker Says U.S. Is Ready to Create Links With Soviet Non-Communists
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today that the United States is prepared to begin a dialogue with the emerging non-Communist opposition to the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


U.S. Policy On Inquiries
LEAD: Federal regulators who have opened civil proceedings on failed savings institutions to public scrutiny, including a case involving President Bush's son Neil, may expand the policy to include institutions not under Government control.


Cummins Shares Rise By $3.125
LEAD: Shares of the Cummins Engine Company rose sharply yesterday as analysts and shareholders assessed the company's plan to sell $250 million worth of its common stock, representing a 27 percent stake, to three industrial companies.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International


Grace (W.R.) &amp; Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grace (W.R.) &amp; Co.  (N)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,628,468,000
1,510,730,000
Net inc
51,292,000
b44,069,000
Share earns
.60
.52
6mo rev
3,135,811,000
2,907,909,000
Net inc
83,901,000
b73,483,000
Share earns
.98
.86


Cypress Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to July 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cypress Semiconductor (NYSE)
Qtr to July 2
1990
1989
Revenue
53,839,000
50,593,000
Net inc
8,505,000
7,598,000
Share earns
.22
.20
6mo rev
106,670,000
96,777,000
Net inc
16,804,000
14,724,000
Share earns
.43
.38


Creative Computer ApplicaFtions Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Creative Computer ApplicaFtions Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
1,093,319
1,042,013
Net inc
55,840
49,386
Share earns
.01
.01
9mo sales
3,323,709
2,546,473
Net inc
214,236
b15,821
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
10,275,391
9,702,768


Poe &amp; Associates reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Poe &amp; Associates
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
11,468,000
9,256,000
Net inc
850,000
790,000
Share earns
.22
.21
6mo rev
22,872,000
19,182,000
Net inc
2,100,000
2,021,000
Share earns
.54
.53


Fluke (John) Manufacturing Co.  (A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fluke (John) Manufacturing Co.  (A)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
58,480,000
63,973,000
Net inc
3,209,000
b12,188,000
Share earns
.45
1.48
Shares outst
7,084,930
8,236,327
9mo sales
178,543,000
184,946,000
Net inc
10,418,000
b19,353,000
Share earns
1.47
2.24
Shares outst
7,077,556
8,641,096


Weitek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weitek Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
16,000,000
11,500,000
Net inc
2,257,000
1,632,000
Share earns
.26
.19
Shares outst
8,697,000
8,443,000
6mo rev
31,200,000
22,200,000
Net inc
4,392,000
3,136,000
Share earns
.51
.37
Shares outst
8,654,000
8,425,000


Data Hint More Dust Hides Spiral Galaxies
LEAD: ASTRONOMERS have long thought that spiral galaxies were relatively free from opaque clouds of dust, but new observations suggest that they are much less transparent and thus contain an enormous amount of mass in the form of unseen stars.
If true, the finding could undermine one theoretical pillar in modern astrophysics.


New Funds Bailing Out Bad Buyouts
LEAD: A $1 billion fund raised last week by two Chicago investors who make up the Zell/Chilmark limited partnership is a sign of how finance in the 1990's will differ from the 1980's.


State Gave 2 Liquor Permits to Same Times Sq. Bar
LEAD: After a brief run, the Stage Left cabaret closed its doors on Times Square last year.
But the failed club lives on in a lawsuit and an investigation that has entangled the State Liquor Authority, present and former officials, the son of a top official, prominent lawyers and two companies that had hoped to reap considerable income.


Larkin H. Farinholt, 84, Professor And Sloan Foundation Executive
LEAD: Dr.
Larkin H. Farinholt, a chemistry professor and foundation executive who held a number of scientific posts in Washington, died Thursday at the Long Green Nursing Home in Baltimore.
He was 84 years old and lived in Manhattan and Leonia, N.J., for many years.
A daughter, Kathryn, said he died of pneumonia.


Vision Becomes Reality for Europe
LEAD: President Gorbachev yesterday showed great courage in accepting a unified Germany in NATO.
And Chancellor Kohl of West Germany demonstrated high statesmanship in agreeing to limit the future all-German army to troop levels below those now possessed by West Germany alone, and to grant credits to Germany's longtime adversary.


Tom Brown Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tom Brown Inc. (OTC)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
18,423,000
17,580,000
Net loss
4,702,000
9,534,000
Shares outst
2,582,916
1,999,672
Figures for 1990 are restated.
The company changed its accounting method for its oil and gas operations from the full-cost method to the successful-efforts method.


2 Families Sue Heavy-Metal Band As Having Driven Sons to Suicide
LEAD: Two days before Christmas in 1985, a pair of young Nevada men shot themselves after listening to albums by the heavy-metal band Judas Priest.
Today the rock group and CBS Records went on trial in Washoe County District Court here, accused by the men's families of having driven them to suicide.


U.N. Says Pretoria Meets 1 of 5 Conditions
LEAD: The United Nations said today that the South African Government had so far fully carried out one of the five measures it believes must be taken before a climate of genuine political freedom can develop and meaningful negotiations take place on ending apartheid.


More Growth for Lilly As a New Drug Stars
LEAD: Even before this month, Eli Lilly &amp; Company was having a year beyond the dreams of most American companies: It was well on its way to surpassing its 1989 performance, when it was the fourth-best company on the Fortune 500 list in terms of profit as a percentage of sales.


First Team Sports reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Team Sports (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,911,152
1,175,459
Net inc
539,089
282,835
Share earns
.18
.11


Security Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Pacific (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
195,200,000
184,500,000
Per share
1.59
1.58
Shares outst
117,500,000
113,300,000
6mo net inc
383,600,000
363,800,000
Net inc
3.13
3.12
Shares outst
117,000,000
113,000,000


First Peoples Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Peoples Financial
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,383,000
b3,192,000
Per share
.89
1.08
Shares outst
2,631,000
2,910,000
6mo net inc
5,143,000
b6,811,000
Per share
1.89
2.25
Shares outst
2,675,000
2,987,000


Qume Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Qume Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
57,039,000
56,548,000
Net loss
1,831,000
b3,698,000
Share earns
-
.31
Shares outst
11,203,000
11,771,000
b-Net income and included capital gain of $1.6 million relating to a private placement of common stock of OTC Technology.


Yanks End Latest Dry Spell, Beating Royals
LEAD: The signs were all there for another night of doom in the Bronx.
Jesse Barfield's first-inning drive to the left-field fence, which seemed certain to become at least a two-run double and possibly a three-run home run, had been transformed into an out because of fan interference.


New Rules and Incinerator Jitters Mean Hospital Waste Piles Up
LEAD: Two summers ago, the New York metropolitan area recoiled in horror as a few syringes and blood vials washed up on local beaches.
The authorities pledged to hunt down and punish those responsible and New York, and many other states, made hospital disposal practices subject to sterner regulation and stricter punishment.


Ralph Humphrey, An Abstract Painter And a Teacher, 58
LEAD: Ralph Humphrey, an abstract painter whose works were a link between Abstract Expressionism and Minimalism, died on Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 58 years old and lived in Manhattan.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Among the 10 African-Americans honored by the National Coalition of 100 Black Women last night at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York were EUZHAN PALCY, the director of ''A Dry White Season,'' a film that examines South Africa's system of apartheid; JUDITH JAMISON, the artistic director of the Alvin Ailey Dance Theater, and MAYA ANGELOU, the poet.


18 Killed in Lebanon as Shiites Battle in South
LEAD: Warring Shiite Muslim factions today fought their fiercest battles in six months for control of a strategic district in southern Lebanon, and the police said 18 people were killed and 50 wounded.


Cognitive Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cognitive Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,094,000
1,117,000
Net loss
3,000
47,000
6mo rev
1,937,000
1,676,000
Net inc
44,000
b223,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Net loss


Knogo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knogo Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
17,821,000
18,319,000
Net inc
624,000
1,409,000
Share earns
.12
.27
Shares outst
5,252,894
5,219,621


Corn and Other Grains Drop On Good Weather Forecast
LEAD: Prices of corn futures sank yesterday to the lowest levels in three months on the Chicago Board of Trade, reflecting forecasts for more good growing weather and a lack of strong export demand.
Other grain and soybean futures also ended lower.


Fifth Third Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fifth Third Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
29,894,000
27,858,000
Per share
.76
.72
Shares outst
39,193,000
38,760,000
6mo net inc
56,365,000
51,793,000
Per share
1.44
1.34
Shares outst
39,176,000
38,745,000


Merrimac Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merrimac Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to June 16
1990
1989
Sales
3,669,908
3,321,525
Net inc
277,826
156,504
Share earns
.13
.07
Shares outst
2,234,251
2,233,835
6mo sales
6,671,153
6,515,727
Net inc
484,513
300,406
Share earns
.22
.13
Shares outst
2,243,466
2,232,354


Pathe Pays MGM More
LEAD: Pathe Communications Inc. paid an additional $53 million in cash yesterday toward its $1.3 billion merger with MGM/UA Communications.
That brings Pathe's total cash commitment to $253 million.


Techknits Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Techknits Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
362,575
931,165
Net loss
104,651
b19,880
b-Net income


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Every summer the power pack migrates to the Rockies, where the Aspen Institute holds its symposium on domestic and international affairs.
This year, MARGARET THATCHER and PRESIDENT BUSH will speak to 400 government and business leaders at the institute's 40th anniversary symposium.


RJR Move Helps Lift 'Junk Bonds'
LEAD: Word that the RJR Holdings Corporation has begun a $6.9 billion refinancing program for RJR Nabisco served as a long-awaited tonic to the market for high-yield ''junk bonds'' yesterday, and prices of most issues posted strong gains in heavy trading.


Nichols Institute reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nichols Institute (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
43,631,000
32,546,000
Net inc
1,967,000
1,153,000
Share earns
.15
.11
Shares outst
13,528,000
10,485,000
6mo rev
84,531,000
62,722,000
Net inc
3,665,000
2,113,000
Share earns
.27
.20
Shares outst
13,444,000
10,336,000


Terrell Spurns Minors
LEAD: The pitcher Walt Terrell is declining his demotion to the Pittsburgh Pirates' Class AAA farm club in Buffalo. ''He's not going to Buffalo; he's not even considering going to Buffalo,'' Terrell's agent, Alan Meersand of Manhattan Beach, Calif., said yesterday.
On Saturday, Terrell, who had a 2-7 record, was given three days to accept or reject the assignment to the farm club.


Sono-Tek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sono-Tek Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
396,041
669,566
Net loss
189,864
b125,336
Share earns
-
.03
b-Net income


Chase Manhattan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chase Manhattan Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
52,000,000
137,000,000
Per share
.24
1.31
6mo net inc
96,000,000
269,000,000
Net inc
.44
2.59
Chase noted that its latest second quarter net was adversely affected by a $75 million increase over the year- ago period in the provision for possible credit losses, principally due to adverse conditions in certain domestic real estate markets.


Acclaim Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Acclaim Entertainment Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
26,144,000
12,328,000
Net inc
1,780,000
1,438,000
Share earns
.10
.08
9mo sales
98,113,000
44,104,000
Net inc
9,570,000
6,054,000
Share earns
.52
.36
Shares outst
18,393,785
16,954,000


Valley National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
8,305,000
8,302,000
Per share
.65
.65
Shares outst
12,681,792
12,705,894
6mo net inc
16,729,000
16,725,000
Per share
1.32
1.32
Shares outst
12,681,816
12,704,450


Cytrx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cytrx Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
526,543
359,332
Net inc
27,712
b1,325,447
6mo rev
541,729
798,170
Net loss
594,513
2,643,536
b-Net loss


Society Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Society Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
39,944,000
b59,952,000
Per share
1.20
-
Shares outst
33,336,907
35,768,554
6mo net inc
80,284,000
b25,411,000
Per share
2.36
-
Shares outst
33,032,000
34,392,513


Syrian Leader Says He Is Ready to Seek Peace
LEAD: President Hafez al-Assad of Syria ended his first visit to Egypt in 13 years today by agreeing in general to join Egypt's efforts to negotiate a peaceful resolution of the 40-year Arab-Israeli conflict.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Admar Group Inc., Orange, Calif., a medical cost-containment concern, said it would not proceed with its proposed merger with Capp Care Inc., because of an inability to resolve philosophical differences.


British Retail Sales Fall
LEAD: Retail sales in Britain plummeted by 2.8 percent in June, the biggest drop since 1979 and the clearest indication that consumers are feeling the pinch of the Government's high interest rate policy.
The decline compared with a rise of 1.4 percent in May.


Enough Haggling on Civil Rights
LEAD: It's been a year since the Supreme Court, after misreading civil rights laws in several cases, overruled its own unanimous 1971 precedent that gave full force to the pathbreaking 1964 Civil Rights Act.
It's been two months since President Bush, saying he wanted to sign a new rights bill, ordered negotiations with


3-Hitter by Garrelts Thwarts Pirates, 6-1
LEAD: Scott Garrelts, ineffective in three previous starts against Pittsburgh this season, pitched a three-hitter to lead the surging San Francisco Giants to a 6-1 victory tonight over the Pirates.


Spectrum Control Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spectrum Control Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
8,105,000
8,525,000
Net loss
913,000
b481,000
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
9,454,486
5,409,161
6mo sales
16,493,000
15,917,000
Net loss
1,334,000
b79,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
7,442,136
5,403,116


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace referred incorrectly in some copies to a Watergate tape in which President Nixon told Attorney General John N. Mitchell that he wanted aides to ''stonewall it.'' The tape was recorded on March 22, 1973, not in 1972.


Kevlin Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kevlin Microwave (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,122,402
2,760,279
Net inc
1,451
40,002
Share earns
-
.02
Yr rev
9,782,830
9,451,420
Net inc
274,220
476,486
Share earns
.10
.18


Greenwich Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greenwich Pharmaceuticals (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,678,000
909,000
Net loss
68,000
2,292,000
Shares outst
22,074,000
20,512,000
6mo rev
3,803,000
985,000
Net loss
2,482,000
4,744,000
Shares outst
22,069,000
20,296,000


Will the Manson Story Play As Myth, Operatically at That?
LEAD: Ruthless tyrants, deranged power-mad murderers and other grotesque villains are no strangers to the opera stage.
But as opera subjects go, the cult leader Charles Manson may represent a bench mark of some kind.


Arkansas Freightways reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arkansas Freightways
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
35,355,000
24,736,000
Net inc
2,051,000
1,556,000
Share earns
.37
.28
Shares outst
5,608,244
5,568,755
6mo rev
66,477,000
45,986,000
Net inc
3,105,000
1,931,000
Share earns
.56
.40
Shares outst
5,591,915
4,883,482


Wal Mart Offers 10-Year Notes
LEAD: Wal Mart Stores Inc., the discount retail chain, yesterday offered $500 million worth of 10-year notes through an underwriting group led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


AIRCRAFT COMPANY TO CUT 17,000 JOBS
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said today that it would eliminate as many as 17,000 jobs, or nearly 13 percent of its work force.
The cutbacks represent the most striking example of the economic effect of declining Pentagon spending and the intense competition in the commercial aircraft business.


Careers;   Unusual Ways Used In Filling Jobs
LEAD: LAST year, Travelers Mortgage Services of Cherry Hill, N.J., a unit of the Travelers Corporation, the insurance giant, increased its staff about 30 percent nationwide, to 1,800 people.


Binks Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Binks Manufacturing Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
66,934,000
55,858,000
Net inc
1,665,000
b2,735,000
Share earns
.57
.96
6mo sales
123,770,000
106,678,000
Net inc
3,767,000
b4,607,000
Share earns
1.28
1.62


Frequency Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frequency Electronics Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
17,343,000
16,316,000
Net inc
670,000
685,000
Share earns
.12
.12
Yr sales
61,787,000
57,905,000
Net inc
2,537,000
2,386,000
Share earns
.46
.43


Confident, Flattered and Even Tickled to Be 'The Other American'
LEAD: Andy Hampsten, ''The Other American,'' is having a pretty good Tour de France, too.
Eleventh over all in the 161-man field, a surprisingly strong third in a recent sprint finish and one of the world's finest climbers, Hampsten is looking forward with newfound confidence to the race's two days in the Pyrenees, which start


Vicor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vicor Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,732,000
7,860,000
Net inc
1,134,000
739,000
Share earns
.12
.08
Shares outst
9,471,000
9,511,000
6mo rev
16,083,000
15,144,000
Net inc
1,886,000
1,345,000
Share earns
.20
.14
Shares outst
9,400,000
9,511,000


Movie Superstore Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Movie Superstore Inc. (OTC)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,700,000
185,760
Net loss
826,103
113,124
Shares outst
2,400,000
2,200,000
Revenue represents rental revenue.


Quayle Disavows Louisiana Senate Candidate
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle said today that the White House was strongly opposed to the United States Senate candidacy of David Duke, the Louisiana Republican and former Ku Klux Klan leader.


Shaw Loses Appeal
LEAD: A Federal appeals court ruled in favor of the Boston Celtics today in their contract dispute with Brian Shaw.


Evolution in Europe;   The German-NATO Drama: 9 Fateful Months
LEAD: Oct. 7, 1989: Gorbachev, visiting East Germany on its 40th anniversary, declares to Eric Honecker, the longtime, hard-line leader: ''Life punishes those who delay.''


38 Are Injured In 4-Alarm Fire In Empire State
LEAD: A smoky four-alarm blaze broke out in the Empire State Building last evening, injuring 38 people, including 31 firefighters, and miring traffic in that part of midtown for hours.


Lojack Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lojack Corp.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,676,118
1,468,669
Net loss
1,642,166
711,316
Shares outst
11,859,241
10,734,605
Year-ago results are restated.


First Community Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Community Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,813,000
1,565,000
Per share
.45
.40
6mo net inc
3,542,000
3,277,000
Per share
.89
.84


Mets Go From Sizzle To Fizzle
LEAD: The uncertain idle has become a disturbing stall.
The Mets, until very recently the National League's smoothest, most dynamic engine of offense, have gone momentarily still.


Altera Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Altera Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
19,301,000
14,540,000
Net inc
3,333,000
2,566,000
Share earns
.17
.13
Shares outst
20,045,000
19,685,000
6mo sales
36,632,000
27,008,000
Net inc
6,401,000
4,851,000
Share earns
.32
.25
Shares outst
19,947,000
19,626,000


Equifax reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equifax (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
233,528,000
212,097,000
Net inc
13,694,000
11,997,000
Share earns
.28
.24
Shares outst
49,218,381
48,989,974
6mo rev
451,569,000
407,587,000
Net inc
23,463,000
20,462,000
Share earns
.48
.42
Shares outst
49,179,554
48,974,726


Bayer Set to Buy Citric Acid Plant
LEAD: Bayer USA Inc. said its parent company had signed a contract to buy the citric acid business and assets of a plant in Britain for about $100 million.


Hamptons Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hamptons Bancshares
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
704,000
b303,000
Per share
-
.35
Shares outst
848,731
850,246
6mo net loss
593,000
b565,000
Per share
-
.66
Shares outst
848,731
850,246
b-Net income


Queens Pitcher to Jays
LEAD: The Toronto Blue Jays have persuaded the pitcher Steve Karsay, who was 14-1 with Christ the King High School in Middle Village, Queens, last season, to forgo college and pursue professional baseball.
Karsay was Toronto's first pick in the June free-agent draft.
The 18-year-old Karsay said he signed a one-year deal and received a big signing bonus, but he refused to get into specifics.


Dollar Up in Light Trading; Gold and Silver Prices Fall
LEAD: The dollar moved higher against most major foreign currencies yesterday although traders continued to worry about the direction of American interest rates.


Market Place;   How Much Should Companies Tell?
LEAD: A bitter and intensifying quarrel between Caterpillar Inc. and Wall Street analysts over the company's delayed disclosure of information that proved damaging to its stock price raises several important questions for companies and investors alike:


Anti-Tax Station Turns FM Into Florio Mashing
LEAD: ''Good MORN-ing New JER-sey,'' intoned the baldish, avuncular disk jockey before the microphone, Jim Gearhart, who carries the important morning-drive slot on ''New Jersey one-oh-one point five,'' as WKXW-FM in Trenton likes to call itself. ''Now the news.''


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Night Mirror


Aggression in Men: Hormone Levels Are a Key
LEAD: WHEN men are domineering and intensely competitive, it may be just another case of raging hormones, specifically the male sex hormone testosterone, researchers say.


White House Orders Review of NASA Goals
LEAD: Vice President Dan Quayle said today that the White House had asked the space agency to appoint an outside study group to consider the long-term direction of the nation's space program.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Young, Black, Endangered
Studies show what inner-city residents know all too well: the United States is rapidly losing much of a generation of young black men to drugs, homicide and prison.
Page A14.
Asbestos Cases Joined
A Federal judge in Cleveland, pre-empting a counterpart in Brooklyn, consolidated more than 100,000 asbestos cases.


Berenice R. Morris, 81, Composer and Scholar
LEAD: Berenice Robinson Morris, a composer, teacher and editor, died on Friday in Mount Vernon Hospital.
She was 81 years old and lived in Mount Vernon, N.Y.


PATTERNS
LEAD:
The Macy's Sale


Hospital Staffing Services reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hospital Staffing Services (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
6,529,885
6,516,941
Net inc
288,926
473,144
Share earns
.07
.15
Shares outst
4,250,268
3,185,120
6mo rev
12,907,323
12,585,486
Net inc
759,242
937,415
Share earns
.18
.30
Shares outst
4,264,380
3,172,184


International Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* International Electronics
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
956,598
821,221
Net loss
17,901
62,757
9mo sales
2,796,168
2,203,860
Net loss
50,709
241,047


RMI Titanium Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RMI Titanium Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
68,943,000
60,164,000
Net inc
8,150,000
5,726,000
Share earns
.54
.38
6mo sales
136,972,000
118,000,000
Net inc
16,654,000
11,736,000
Share earns
1.11
.78


Data Transmission Network reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Data Transmission Network (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,329,000
3,505,000
Net inc
314,000
193,000
Share earns
.09
.06
6mo rev
8,531,000
6,568,000
Net inc
477,000
332,000
Share earns
.14
.10


Applied Magnetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Applied Magnetics Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
94,996,000
74,027,000
Net inc
3,064,000
460,000
Share earns
.19
.03
Shares outst
16,544,000
16,191,000
9mo sales
262,835,000
233,285,000
Net loss
11,472,000
b7,320,000
Share earns
-
.45
Shares outst
16,005,000
16,176,000


Glatfelter (P.H.) Co.  (A) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glatfelter (P.H.) Co.  (A)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
156,907,000
156,634,000
Net inc
22,264,000
24,846,000
Share earns
.94
1.03
Shares outst
23,685,000
24,290,000
6mo sales
315,414,000
312,055,000
Net inc
42,228,000
49,232,000
Share earns
1.78
2.03
Shares outst
23,692,000
24,288,000


Aluminum Co. of America reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aluminum Co. of America (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,726,300,000
2,825,000,000
Net inc
161,900,000
285,200,000
Share earns
1.86
3.21
6mo rev
5,410,900,000
5,522,500,000
Net inc
310,500,000
561,200,000
Share earns
3.55
6.33
Shares outst
87,140,898
88,438,295


MacArthur Grants Are Awarded to 36
LEAD: The MacArthur Foundation of Chicago, widening the range of its coveted annual awards to gifted people, named a juggler, a photographer and a preserver of disappearing varieties of seeds among its 36 winners of fellowships yesterday.


Iraq Frees British Nurse Jailed in Spy Case
LEAD: Iraq freed a British nurse today who had been sentenced to 15 years in prison for helping a journalist for a British publication who was hanged by Baghdad on charges of espionage.


Settlement Reached in Justice Dept. Spying Inquiry
LEAD: The Justice Department will pay $25,000 to a former official cleared of espionage allegations, heading off a lawsuit over an erroneous report about the inquiry, his lawyer said today.


First Eastern Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Eastern Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,562,000
7,820,000
Per share
.65
.80
Shares outst
10,102,811
9,775,862
6mo net inc
11,965,000
15,668,000
Per share
1.20
1.60
Shares outst
9,947,282
9,763,340


National City Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National City Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
67,569,000
65,839,000
Per share
1.12
1.09
6mo net inc
132,034,000
128,282,000
Net inc
2.18
2.12


First Oak Brook Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Oak Brook Bancshares
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
723,000
642,000
Per share
.60
.53
6mo net inc
1,407,000
1,059,000
Per share
1.17
.88


New Mexico &amp; Arizona Land Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New Mexico &amp; Arizona Land Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,974,925
2,078,845
Net inc
751,523
b732,807
Share earns
.30
-
6mo rev
4,879,647
4,615,018
Net inc
603,701
b1,066,102
Share earns
.24
-
b-Net loss


Chart House Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chart House Enterprises Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
38,850,000
36,003,000
Net inc
2,322,000
1,436,000
Share earns
.29
.29
Shares outst
8,132,000
5,011,000
6mo rev
75,052,000
69,732,000
Net inc
3,885,000
2,084,000
Share earns
.48
.42
Shares outst
8,130,000
5,011,000


Universal Foods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Foods Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
197,893,000
219,777,000
Net inc
b12,102,000
8,928,000
Share earns
.47
.35
9mo rev
641,948,000
609,084,000
Net inc
b35,471,000
28,168,000
Share earns
1.40
1.13


Foreign Influence Gains In the Adventist Church


Torchmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Torchmark Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
60,464,000
53,526,000
Share earns
1.13
.98
6mo net inc
120,829,000
105,077,000
Share earns
2.24
1.92


Protester Is Removed From King Motel Site
LEAD: Sheriff's deputies today carried away a protester who had camped for two years in front of a museum construction site at the Lorraine Motel, where the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was slain.


Ryan's Family Steak House reports earnings for Qtr to July 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ryan's Family Steak House (OTC)
Qtr to July 4
1990
1989
Revenue
71,512,000
62,357,000
Net inc
6,762,000
5,658,000
Share earns
.13
.11
Shares outst
52,885,000
52,820,000
6mo rev
136,407,000
115,590,000
Net inc
12,678,000
10,281,000
Share earns
.24
.20
Shares outst
52,825,000
52,694,000


Robert-Mark Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Robert-Mark Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,316,000
749,000
Net loss
172,000
661,000
Shares outst
4,588,000
4,338,000


Education Consumers Should Have a Choice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Allied Bankshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Bankshares Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
973,000
951,000
Per share
.19
.18
6mo net inc
1,911,000
2,055,000
Per share
.37
.39


Hallwood Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hallwood Industries
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
8,127,000
6,930,000
Net inc
201,000
b3,208,000
Share earns
.07
-
Shares outst
2,816,476
2,841,672
b-Net loss and after a loss from discontinued operations of $3,412,000.


Max R. Spencer, Executive, 68
LEAD: Max R. Spencer, vice president for operations of the world grain division of the Continental Grain Company, died on Saturday at Morristown Memorial Hospital in New Jersey.
He was 68 years old and lived in Convent Station, N.J.


Goodrich Net Increases 5.9%
LEAD: The B. F. Goodrich Company, now a specialty chemical company and a leading producer of resins, yesterday reported a 5.9 percent increase in its second-quarter earnings, primarily reflecting a $20.5 million after-tax gain from the sale of its Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Company subsidiary to Michelin of


Rare Lightning
LEAD: Scientists from the University of Minnesota say they have made the first image of an uncommon form of lightning flashing between cloud tops and the clear air above.


Siliconix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 17
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Siliconix Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 17
1990
1989
Sales
29,645,000
29,672,000
Net loss
12,907,000
5,238,000
6mo sales
57,522,000
56,010,000
Net loss
16,973,000
11,944,000
Latest quarter results were adversely impacted by $11.4 million from the settlement of a patent infringement suit with International Rectifier and the accrual of Chapter 11 related expenses.


President Is Appointed For Monarch Capital
LEAD: Roger T. Servison, a marketer who helped to build Fidelity Investments into a mutual fund giant, is leaving to become president of the Monarch Capital Corporation, which sells insurance and annuities.


Atlanfed Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlanfed Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
258,040
83,759
Per share
.30
.10


General Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Electric Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
14,400,000,000
13,500,000,000
Net inc
1,088,000,000
972,000,000
Share earns
1.22
1.08
6mo rev
27,000,000,000
25,400,000,000
Net inc
2,038,000,000
1,821,000,000
Share earns
2.28
2.02


American Bancorp-Nevada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Bancorp-Nevada
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
317,595
429,034
Per share
.24
.35
6mo net inc
707,540
906,402
Per share
.54
.76
The bank said the 1989 earnings included a one-time FASB tax adjustment of $323,727.


Citizens Banking reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Banking (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,947,000
4,831,000
Per share
.74
.72
Shares outst
6,674,498
6,695,979
6mo net inc
9,744,000
9,576,000
Per share
1.46
1.43
Shares outst
6,681,508
6,697,893


Choctaw Ponders 2d Offer for Justin
LEAD: Choctaw Securitites L.P., said it was considering making a second offer to acquire Justin Industries, ''while simultaneously seeking to remove the company's directors.''


Mackey Tests Positive
LEAD: A urine sample taken from the Cleveland State basketball coach, Kevin Mackey, after his arrest last Friday has revealed traces of cocaine, the police in Cleveland said yesterday.


John Musser, 82, Dies; Weyerhaeuser Official
LEAD: John M. Musser, an executive of the Weyerhaeuser Company and its affiliated businesses from 1934 until his retirement in 1978, died Saturday at his home in St.
Paul.
He was 82 years old.


Badger Meter Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Badger Meter Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
20,471,000
18,679,000
Net inc
784,000
733,000
Share earns
.50
.48
6mo sales
39,309,000
36,808,000
Net inc
1,445,000
1,317,000
Share earns
.93
.86


Childhood Abuse Tied to Ill Health in Women
LEAD: WOMEN who were abused as children have more health problems and require more hospital care than women who were not abused, researchers have found.


Gendex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gendex Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,781,000
7,262,000
Net inc
714,000
537,000
Share earns
.20
.18


Evolution in Europe;   GORBACHEV CLEARS WAY FOR GERMAN UNITY, DROPPING OBJECTION TO NATO MEMBERSHIP
LEAD: The Soviet Union and West Germany agreed today to let a united Germany join NATO and to lift virtually all other remaining barriers to German reunification.


Micropolis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Micropolis Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
97,338,000
79,277,000
Net inc
2,353,000
b10,625,000
Share earns
.20
-
Shares outst
11,620,000
11,555,000
6mo sales
173,226,000
159,906,000
Net inc
1,302,000
b23,919,000
Share earns
.11
-
Shares outst
11,620,000
11,526,000


Accor in Sale Talks With Divi Hotels
LEAD: Divi Hotels N.V. said yesterday that it was negotiating to sell its Caribbean resort business to Accor S.A., the French hotel company that last week bought the Motel 6 chain.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We are leaving one epoch in international relations, and entering another, a period, I think, of strong, prolonged peace.''
- Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
[A1:6.]


Island Building Plan Dropped
LEAD: The developer of a proposed $1 billion high-rise condominium complex on Davids Island in Long Island Sound, two-thirds of a mile from the mainland, withdrew his application today in the face of its rejection as an ''elitist concept'' by state officials.


Earthquake in the Philippines Kills at Least 258, Including 48 Children in One School
LEAD: A major earthquake registering 7.7 on the Richter scale killed at least 258 people on Monday on the main island of the Philippines, including 48 children whose school collapsed and 210 others caught in stampedes or in falling buildings, officials said.


Alcoa's Net Is Down by 43%
LEAD: The Aluminum Company of America, citing a softening in aluminum prices and lower income from the company's affiliate in Brazil, yesterday reported a 43 percent drop in second-quarter earnings.


Reader's Digest Fills New Post
LEAD: Reader's Digest yesterday named Richard D. Wright to the new position of associate publisher-sales development and said that it was eliminating about 25 jobs in its advertising sales organization.


Robert Oel Briggs, Lamp Designer, 60
LEAD: Robert Oel Briggs, a lamp and accessories designer, died on July 9 at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 60 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Jane Pauley Turns Archeologist to Examine 'Real Life'
LEAD: Jane Pauley begins a new career in prime time tonight with the first edition of ''Real Life With Jane Pauley.'' Both Ms.
Pauley and NBC have a lot riding on its success.


Fingerhut Cos.  Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fingerhut Cos.  Inc. (NYSE)
13wks to June 29
1990
1989
Revenue
263,008,000
242,137,000
Net inc
8,834,000
4,600,000
Share earns
.36
-
26wk rev
484,414,000
462,578,000
Net inc
16,351,000
8,800,000
Share earns
.66
-
The company was 100 percent- owned by Primerica Corp.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Smith Reaches Second Round
Seventh-seeded Anne Smith advanced to the second round of the Virginia Slims of Newport tournament in Rhode Island last night by beating unseeded Terry Phelps, 6-2, 6-3.
Smith is ranked 30th in the world.
In other first-round matches, unseeded Meredith McGraff upset eighth-seeded Dinky van Rensburg, 6-2, 6-4, and fifth-seeded Gretchen Magers beat Laura Golarsa, 6-4, 7-6.(AP)
Teltscher Advances in Comeback Bid: Eliot Teltscher, playing his first tournament in two years, posted a 6-4, 4-6, 6-3 victory over Jeff


Young Gains Berth in a Runoff To Run for Governor of Georgia
LEAD: Lieut.
Gov.
Zell Miller of Georgia finished first today in the Democratic primary but was forced into a runoff next month with Andrew Young, the former Mayor of Atlanta who is seeking to become the state's first black governor.


Trustco Bank Corp N.Y.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trustco Bank Corp N.Y.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,608,000
2,515,000
Per share
.87
.84
6mo net inc
5,143,000
4,654,000
Per share
1.71
1.55


LABORITE GREETED WARMLY IN CAPITAL
LEAD: The British Labor Party leader, Neil Kinnock, was greeted warmly today by a Bush Administration that appeared eager to listen to his ideas, in sharp contrast with the icy reception he received from the Reagan Administration three years ago.


Avalanche Kills 40 Climbers in Soviet Central Asia
LEAD: One of the worst tragedies in the history of mountain climbing has claimed the lives of at least 40 members of an international team killed Friday by an avalanche in the remote Pamir mountains in the Soviet Union near the Chinese border, according to Government reports.


A and C Trains Halted
LEAD: More than 100,000 IND riders on the Fulton Street line in Brooklyn lost service for several hours yesterday because of problems in replacing track, the Transit Authority said.
The problems began at 6:15 A.M., and A and C trains from Broadway-East New York to Jay Street-Borough Hall were stopped for a few hours, a spokeswoman for the authority, Caren Gardner, said.


Youth's Recounting of Jogger Rape Is Read to Jury
LEAD: One of the three defendants charged in the rape and attempted murder of a jogger in Central Park confessed to his part in the attack, a New York City Police detective testified yesterday.


Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Revenue
2,868,527,000
2,899,759,000
Net inc
74,140,000
b70,195,000
Share earns
.64
.62
Shares outst
106,762,000
102,941,000
6mo rev
5,532,962,000
5,695,738,000
Net inc
115,446,000
b107,381,000
Share earns
.98
.93
Shares outst
106,677,000
102,612,000


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:
Split Over Awards


Federal Signal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Federal Signal Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
116,145,000
104,730,000
Net inc
b10,124,000
c6,006,000
Share earns
.66
.39
6mo rev
219,483,000
197,142,000
Net inc
b15,484,000
c10,809,000
Share earns
1.01
.71


Sovran Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sovran Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
22,111,000
65,483,000
Per share
.37
1.10
6mo net inc
88,692,000
127,374,000
Per share
1.48
2.13


P.L.O. Fighters Fan Out in Southern Lebanon    P.L.O. troops, above, fired at a Party of God position in Jarjuh from an armored vehicle. (Agence France-Presse)


Doctor and His Family Die; Found Attached to IV Tubes
LEAD: A physician, his wife and their two teen-age children were found dead in their home here today, intravenous tubes connected to their bodies.


Review/Television;   Identifying Genetic Defects and Dealing With Them
LEAD: The hopes aroused by a new batch of medical miracles are examined in a moving way tonight at 10 on an ABC News Special, ''The Perfect Baby.'' The hour focuses on several sets of parents and children whose lives have been profoundly affected by the existence or prospect of some genetic defect.
The host, Barbara


Ohio Edison Co. reports earnings for 12mos to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ohio Edison Co. (NYSE)
12mos to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,178,287,000
2,159,402,000
Net inc
359,458,000
b235,987,000
Share earns
2.17
1.36
b-Reflected a $128 million, one-time non-cash write-off for certain nuclear construction costs for the year net income and share earnings.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: AMERICA'S love affair with hamburgers is never more evident than in summer, when barbecue grills across the land send up smoke signals announcing the patties are on.
As much as I like a hamburger made from freshly ground sirloin, it's fun to experiment with other types of burgers.


King, Douglas Reach Settlement
LEAD: Don King and James (Buster) Douglas, the heavyweight champion, settled their differences early yesterday morning.
The settlement frees Douglas to defend his title against Evander Holyfield in September.


Mellon Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mellon Bank Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b142,000,000
c64,000,000
Per share
2.80
1.27
Shares outst
43,942,000
33,935,000
6mo net inc
207,000,000
c141,000,000
Per share
4.07
3.03
Shares outst
40,324,000
31,705,000


Air-India's Head Quits To Join Private Sector
LEAD: Rajan Jetley, the 40-year-old chairman of India's Government-owned international carrier, Air-India, who streamlined the company and helped to make it profitable, said yesterday that he would resign.


McGraw-Hill Net Is Down
LEAD: McGraw-Hill Inc. said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings fell 26.6 percent from a year earlier as improved results in financial services were offset by declines in publishing and information services.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Chiat/Day Is Selling Unit
LEAD: Chiat/Day/Mojo has agreed to sell a public relations subsidiary, Jessica Dee Communications, to the firm's management.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.


Prague Announces a 50% Rise in Gasoline Prices
LEAD: The Czechoslovak Government announced a 50 percent increase in gasoline prices today, to take effect Wednesday at midnight.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
8.00
9.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.61
7.62
7.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.49
7.51
7.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.40
8.41
8.04
30-YR.


Library Files Checked In Zodiac Investigation
LEAD: Detectives seeking the so-called Zodiac gunman have obtained a subpoena for library records and are interviewing people who have recently requested books by an early 20th-century Scottish poet who practiced black magic, the police and library officials said.


Brooklyn Philharmonic Names a New Official
LEAD: Vicki Margulies has been appointed the executive director of the Brooklyn Philharmonic Symphony Orchestra, the Brooklyn Academy of Music announced on Monday.
Ms.
Margulies is to replace Jerry McCathern, who left the orchestra after serving as its first executive director for about a year.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
U.N. COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW, WORKING GROUP ON
INTERNATIONAL PAYMENTS - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Drug Used to Treat Premenstrual Pains Is Found Ineffective
LEAD: A drug commonly used to treat the emotional and physical pain that millions of women suffer before menstruation does not work, researchers say.


Intergraph Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intergraph Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
254,115,000
219,180,000
Net inc
16,547,000
20,447,000
Share earns
.33
.37
Shares outst
50,205,000
54,750,000
6mo rev
484,144,000
404,876,000
Net inc
31,512,000
b39,955,000
Share earns
.63
.72
Shares outst
50,209,000
55,390,000


About New York;   A Touch of Class Sets Sail Away From Life's Care
LEAD: The skyline of New York, one of the most compelling sights on this planet, was taking fuzzy shape through the haze. ''Pity it's a bit misty,'' said Robin Allen Woodall, master of the Queen Elizabeth 2.


Savings Crime Bill Is Proposed
LEAD: Democrats in the House of Representatives will propose a savings and loan enforcement package on Wednesday that will include a bipartisan national commission to examine the roots of one the nation's worst financial crisis as well as new legal weapons to fight crime in the savings and loan industry,


Cuban Linked to Terror Bombings Is Freed by Government in Miami
LEAD: Orlando Bosch, a right-wing Cuban who is believed by American officials to be responsible for dozens of bombings aimed at the Castro Government, was released from jail here today in a deal with the United States Government.


Usinor-Sacilor Plans Purchase of Edgcomb
LEAD: France's biggest steel company, the state-owned Usinor-Sacilor S.A., said today that it planned to acquire the Edgcomb Corporation, a privately held United States steelmaker.
No price was given for the acquisition, which must be approved by Federal authorities.


Dow Unchanged After Earlier Topping 3,000
LEAD: The Dow Jones industrial average broke through the 3,000 barrier for the third consecutive session yesterday, but fell back sharply and ended the day at 2,999.75 - unchanged from the day before.


Soviets Make the Best Of New German Might
LEAD: It will long be debated who won and who lost when Mikhail S. Gorbachev gave his blessing to the reunification of Germany.


Economic Scene;   Does Gorbachev Know Best?
LEAD: SUPPOSE Mikhail Gorbachev threw a free-market party and nobody wanted to dance?


Boatmen's Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boatmen's Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
33,043,000
33,028,000
Per share
.95
.95
6mo net inc
65,541,000
63,958,000
Per share
1.89
1.85


Lilly (Eli) &amp; Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lilly (Eli) &amp; Co.  (N)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,225,400,000
986,600,000
Net inc
274,400,000
217,100,000
Share earns
.93
.75
Shares outst
296,029,000
288,699,000
6mo sales
2,466,000,000
2,038,600,000
Net inc
615,200,000
501,800,000
Share earns
2.07
1.74
Shares outst
296,805,000
288,673,000


LeMond Is Poised to Strike in Tour
LEAD: With a magnificent ride over three major peaks in the Pyrenees today, Greg LeMond moved into second place in the Tour de France, only five seconds behind the leader, Claudio Chiappucci of Italy.
The American appeared to burn off all his other opposition and position himself for his second successive victory and third over all.


Citicorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citicorp (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
248,000,000
395,000,000
Per share
.64
1.11
6mo net inc
479,000,000
924,000,000
Per share
1.24
2.63
Citicorp said net income in the first half of 1989 included a $77 million gain from the sale of Tokyo premises and $154 million of revenues from Brazilian cash payments since suspended.


VF Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VF Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
634,686,000
611,122,000
Net inc
22,400,000
45,513,000
Share earns
.37
.67
6mo rev
1,201,874,000
1,173,911,000
Net inc
45,616,000
83,780,000
Share earns
.76
1.23
The company said that part of the 45-percent earnings drop in the latest second quarter was due to problems at its jeans operations and Jantzen division.


No Pact for Greschner
LEAD: The Rangers announced yesterday that they would not renew the contract of Ron Greschner, the team's career leader among defensemen in goals (179), assists (431) and points (610), as well as the team's career leader in penalty minutes (1,226).


Wells Fargo &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wells Fargo &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
232,400,000
147,400,000
Share earns
4.40
2.68
Shares outst
51,300,000
52,300,000
6mo net inc
392,200,000
288,900,000
Share earns
7.45
5.24
Shares outst
50,900,000
52,400,000


Head of Javits Center Says Major Expansion Is Needed
LEAD: Barely four years after its completion, the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center needs to expand by as much as a third - 600,000 square feet - to remain competitive and to attract the nation's largest trade shows, the acting president of the center says.


Great Pond Journal;   Son's Memory Lives On Under Trees He Loved
LEAD: Deep in these Maine woods, where the summer nights are cold and ancient pine trees caress the sky, Jane and Jack Schultz nurse a grief that is at once profoundly public and private.


First Florida Banks reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Florida Banks (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
11,849,000
12,681,000
Per share
.75
.80
6mo net inc
18,306,000
25,607,000
Per share
1.16
1.61


Los Angeles Schools Name Superintendent
LEAD: William Anton, a longtime administrator in the Los Angeles County school system, has been named Superintendent, becoming the first Hispanic chief of the nation's second-largest school district.


Computer Screen Dumping Charged
LEAD: Frustrated by what they say are the unfair pricing practices of eight major Japanese electronics companies, a small group of American makers of flat screens used in advanced portable computers filed an anti-dumping petition yesterday, calling for an investigation by the United States Government.


Profits Rise For Merrill And Schwab
LEAD: Large investment banking fees helped to lift second-quarter earnings at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the nation's largest brokerage firm.
Earnings also increased at Charles Schwab, the nation's largest discount broker, but fell slightly at Paine Webber Inc., a leading retail firm.


Dime Savings Bank of N.Y.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dime Savings Bank of N.Y.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b10,076,000
c5,037,000
Per share
.44
.22
Shares outst
22,835,000
22,806,000
6mo net inc
b30,449,000
c15,515,000
Per share
1.33
.68
Shares outst
22,835,000
22,807,000


Oil Prices End Day Mixed; Supplies Reported Higher
LEAD: Prices of petroleum futures ended mixed yesterday as late buying offset a wave of selling by profit-takers.
But many in the market expect crude oil prices to retreat today, after a report yesterday by an industry trade group showing an unexpected increase in American supplies.


Chronicle
LEAD: After 50 years and 990 radio broadcasts of the Metropolitan Opera, Texaco will pick up the tab for three operas to be shown on public television next season.
The operas will appear on two PBS programs, ''The Metropolitan Opera Presents'' and ''Great Performances.'' The bill is about $4 million, said JAMES W.


Garrard Jewelers Is Sold to Asprey
LEAD: The British royal family's favorite jeweler, Garrard, was sold to Asprey P.L.C., a luxury-goods company, as part of a merger deal worth $:75 million, or $135 million.
Asprey said it had agreed to buy the Mappin &amp; Webb jewelery and silver group, which owns Garrard, from the Sears P.L.C. department store chain.


Christmas 'Wrap-Off' for the Gifted
LEAD: It was instant meltdown weather for Frosty the Snowman yesterday but one corner of the World Trade Center looked a lot like Christmas.
Santa Claus, sweaty in a velvety red suit, was ho-ho-ing (''No seersucker in this line of work,'' he said) and nine ribbon-snipping store gift-wrappers were piling their creations under a tree.


GTE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GTE Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
4,578,527,000
4,323,473,000
Net inc
363,708,000
328,764,000
Share earns
.54
.49
Shares outst
660,233,000
649,896,000
6mo sales
9,080,223,000
8,446,094,000
Net inc
718,875,000
657,999,000
Share earns
1.06
.97
Shares outst
659,905,000
651,026,000


EATING WELL
LEAD: MOST people's diets fall far short of the ideal set by organizations like the National Academy of Sciences, the National Cancer Institute and the American Heart Association: cutting back on fat, eating more fiber, reducing cholesterol, eating more fruits, vegetables and whole-grain foods.


Sundstrand Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sundstrand Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
404,500,000
394,300,000
Net inc
21,300,000
b37,900,000
Share earns
.57
.93
6mo sales
805,700,000
771,400,000
Net inc
47,900,000
b64,200,000
Share earns
1.29
1.56


One Germany: Next Steps
LEAD: Some dates are tentative.
Sept. 12. 'Two plus four' talks involving the two Germanys and the four World War II victors, the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain and France, prepare a 'final document' to present to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Oct. 4.
East German elections in reconstituted states (Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Saxony-Anhalt, Brandeburg, Thuringia and Saxony), paving the way for the accession of East Germany to West Germany under Article 23 of the West German Constitution, which authorized every state to join the federation.


Scott Paper Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scott Paper Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,321,000,000
1,254,100,000
Net inc
74,600,000
71,500,000
Share earns
1.01
.93
Shares outst
73,600,000
77,000,000
6mo sales
2,617,000,000
2,523,000,000
Net inc
134,700,000
158,000,000
Share earns
1.83
2.05
Shares outst
73,600,000
77,100,000


An Updated 'Les Indes' by Rameau Enlivens Aix-en-Provence Festival
LEAD: With summer arts festivals blooming like sunflowers across southern France, Aix-en-Provence is constantly required to demonstrate that the region's most established and pricey music festival has not grown staid and predictable.


Washington Talk;   Quayle Panel at Center Of a Space-Policy Shift
LEAD: It is in the nature of vice presidents to yearn for territory where they can leave their mark, and so it is in the nature of Dan Quayle.
For him, space is the place, and his instrument is the National Space Council, a White House-based interagency policy group of which he is chairman.


U.N. Chief Asks 5 Powers to Join in Mideast Talks
LEAD: Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar has asked the five permanent Security Council members to help unblock the stalled Middle East peace process.


RADIATION RECORDS OF 44,000 RELEASED
LEAD: Ending years of conflict over medical secrecy between independent scientists and the Government, the Department of Energy today released the radiation exposure records of 44,000 workers at its Hanford nuclear reservation here.


Coin Toss Will Decide an Election in Illinois
LEAD: After a wrenching campaign, a razor-thin margin of victory, a tedious recount and months of haggling in court, a tight legislative race between a staunch opponent of abortion and an abortion rights advocate will be decided by a coin toss.


Union Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Bank (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
36,316,000
34,068,000
Per share
1.05
1.00
Shares outst
32,139,000
31,004,000
6mo net inc
70,881,000
67,527,000
Per share
2.05
2.00
Shares outst
32,052,000
30,856,000


Killer Is Put to Death By Injection in Texas After Appeal Denied
LEAD: A former prostitute with a criminal record that began in his childhood was put to death today for killing a man he maintained had made homosexual advances.


Cincinnati Milacron Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Milacron Inc. (NYSE)
12wks to June 16
1990
1989
Sales
204,804,000
192,308,000
Net inc
3,114,000
b5,238,000
Share earns
.12
.21
24wk sales
395,435,000
380,630,000
Net inc
5,621,000
b15,276,000
Share earns
.22
.62


MORE FRIENDS SAY BARRY USED DRUGS
LEAD: Two more of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s closest friends testified against him today in his drug trial, saying they had seen him use powdered cocaine and crack at least 30 times.


The President's English
LEAD: President Bush greeted fellow summiteers at their meeting in Houston last week with a ringing but ungrammatical declaration that ''a new world of freedom lays before us.'' The major wire services and most newspapers - The A.P., U.P.I., Reuters, The Washington Post, Newsday and The New York Times, among others - reported it verbatim.


Intel Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intel Corp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
968,301,000
747,337,000
Net inc
170,693,000
99,319,000
Share earns
.84
.53
Shares outst
203,774,000
188,305,000
6mo rev
1,862,758,000
1,460,420,000
Net inc
314,461,000
196,323,000
Share earns
1.57
1.05
Shares outst
200,243,000
186,875,000


Boat Speed Limit Is 4 M.P.H.
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins signed a bill yesterday to limit boats to 4 miles an hour on the Pelham Bay Park lagoon in the Bronx, too slow for water-skiing.
The measure was introduced by Councilman Jerry L. Crispino, Democrat of the Bronx, who said homeowners had complained about the noise and danger from the boats.


Iraq Threatens Emirates And Kuwait on Oil Glut
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq today openly threatened to use force against Arab oil-exporting nations if they did not curb their excess production, which he said had weakened oil prices and hurt the Iraqi economy.


Don't Help Terrorists
LEAD: To the Editor:


Two Held in a Robbery and Impersonation
LEAD: An employee and a former employee of the Immigration and Naturalization Service have been arrested in connection with a Bronx robbery on Saturday in which the robbers posed as Federal drug-enforcement agents, the police said.
A third suspect was being sought.
The police were investigating whether the two suspects, a man arrested on Monday and a woman arrested yesterday, were involved in a similar robbery 12 hours earlier in the Soundview section.


Norwest Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norwest Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
70,000,000
62,500,000
Per share
.68
.60
6mo net inc
138,400,000
123,100,000
Per share
1.33
1.18


Faith E. Andrews; Shaker Scholar, 93
LEAD: Faith E. Andrews, an authority on the Shaker religious sect, died on July 6 at a nursing home in Pittsfield, Mass. was 93 years old and lived in Pittsfield.


Tokyo Is to Ban Fish Nets Early
LEAD: Japan will stop drift-net fishing in the South Pacific this season, a year before the date set by a United Nations resolution, the Japanese Embassy said today.


INSIDE
LEAD:
A Savings-Crime Proposal
House Democrats will propose a savings and loan enforcement package that includes a bipartisan commission to examine the crisis, as well as new legal weapons.
Page D1.
Neil Bush and a Nemesis
Several disclosures in the Neil Bush case stem from the work of investigators for a Democratic senatorial candidate in Colorado.


2 Germanys Cooperate In Retrieving Treasures
LEAD: A church in East Germany is receiving help from West Germany to retrieve art treasures believed stolen by an American soldier at the end of World War II, a West German official said Monday.


Joseph Johnson Sr., 83, Western Union Official
LEAD: Joseph D. Johnson Sr., a retired executive of Western Union International, died on Sunday at North Shore Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 83 years old and lived in Huntington Station, L.I.


Group Reduces Multimedia Stake
LEAD: A group of three investment partnerships led by Sandler Associations of Hewlett, L.I., said it had lowered its stake in Multimedia Inc. to 2.9 percent from 7.34 percent.
Multimedia, based in Greenville, S.C., publishes newspapers and operates radio and television stations.
The company has 11.3 million shares outstanding.


Madonna Talks End
LEAD: Madonna will not be as ubiquitous as planned.
Reebok International Ltd., the athletic footwear company, said yesterday that negotiations for an endorsement agreement with the pop singer and star of ''Dick Tracy'' had ended. ''Timing and schedules became the critical factors,'' a spokeswoman for Reebok said, referring to Madonna's current world concert tour.


In Land of Big, Ryan's Biggest
LEAD: In Texas, parents reward the straight-A work of their grade-schoolers with tickets to see Nolan Ryan pitch.
He has been praised by editorial writers and political columnists, courted by advertisers and Republican Party officials attracted to his wholesome country-boy image, exploited by makers of baseball memorabilia, who spot a sure thing, and idolized by thousands of wide-eyed youngsters whom he has met in autograph sessions for Texas charities.


Tartikoff Gets Promotion In a Realignment at NBC
LEAD: NBC announced today that Brandon Tartikoff, the longtime president of its entertainment division, had been elevated to the new position of chairman of the NBC Entertainment Group.


2 Won't Be Charged in Bombing Case
LEAD: Two members of the radical environmental group Earth First will not be charged with transporting the bomb that exploded in their car and injured them in May, lawyers for the two said today.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
'Something Pure'


Paine Webber Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paine Webber Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
468,203,000
432,991,000
Net inc
14,648,000
15,089,000
Share earns
.35
.33
Shares outst
25,244,000
27,569,000
6mo rev
894,263,000
829,965,000
Net inc
25,429,000
24,266,000
Share earns
.55
.44
Shares outst
25,185,000
27,884,000


Just Say Cheese And No One Seems To Agree About It
LEAD: WHAT with all the changes in the world, nothing can be taken for granted anymore.
Just ask the American Cheese Society.
The association of cheese makers, buyers and lovers convened in Manhattan last week for its seventh annual conference to consider this pressing question:


McGraw-Hill Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McGraw-Hill Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
457,770,000
428,437,000
Net inc
37,203,000
b50,770,000
Share earns
.76
1.04
Shares outst
48,791,000
48,728,000
6mo rev
877,792,000
818,759,000
Net inc
53,692,000
bc81,941,000
Share earns
1.10
1.68
Shares outst
48,798,000
48,713,000


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: OUR friend, the Jackson Heights takeout gourmet, hadn't realized just how often she ordered Chinese food delivered or what a creature of habit she had become.
Not until the other evening, that is, when she dialed and said, ''I'd like to place an order'' and from the other end came the friendly reply, ''Ah!


HEALTH RISKS SEEN IN BLOOD PRESSURE JUST ABOVE NORMAL
LEAD: Above-normal blood pressure, even if it is not high enough to qualify as hypertension, can permanently damage heart and blood vessels and increase the risk of heart attack, a new study says.


New York City Police Dept. Doesn't Want to Find Hate Crimes
LEAD: To the Editor:


American Cyanamid Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Cyanamid Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,228,300,000
1,159,300,000
Net inc
b111,400,000
c107,100,000
Share earns
1.16
1.15
6mo sales
2,380,800,000
2,257,500,000
Net inc
b202,300,000
c192,100,000
Share earns
2.11
2.06
Shares outst
95,618,784
93,355,742


An Odd Couple: Assad and Shamir
LEAD: President Assad of Syria may have signaled an intriguing new flexibility during his remarkable visit to Egypt this week.
Adroit American diplomacy could turn it into a new opening for Mideast talks.
But that will require the Bush Administration to sell two strategic points:


Neil Bush's Trouble as Political Gold: A Colorado Candidacy Rises on Issue
LEAD: Neil Bush's entanglement in the nation's savings and loan scandal not only is a staple of local news reports here but also a focus of Colorado politics in this election year.


Two Injured as Plane Crashes in Upstate Park


Review/Pop;   At the Palladium, 3 Groups From Spain
LEAD: Though it seemed as if the mix-and-match pop music esthetic that began in the early 1980's might lumber to a stop in the 1990's, it hasn't.
African, American and European pop music all greedily suck in cultures, easily available by travel and record collections.
The result is a party where the old mingles with the new, where a sense of cultural movement, always exciting, momentarily blinds an audience to its differences, uniting it.


Bor Journal;   Dinkaland, Where Cattle Are Treated Like Equals
LEAD: To visit the cattle camp of Chief Alier Ayen, a Dinka tribesman, in the gray dawn of the southern Sudan is to see a gathering resembling ghosts.


12 Cubans Surrender And Leave an Embassy
LEAD: Twelve Cuban refugees surrendered unconditionally and left the Czechoslovak Embassy on Monday after fighting among themselves and holding five Czechoslovak diplomats hostage for more than five hours.


Georgians Pick Candidates for Governor


Profit Up 32.5% At Honeywell
LEAD: Honeywell Inc. announced today that its net income in its fiscal second quarter rose 32.5 percent as sales increased 2 percent.


Court Broadens Scope of Inquiry on H.U.D.
LEAD: The special prosecutor in the case of Samuel R. Pierce Jr., the Reagan Administration's Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, has received a broad mandate to investigate those who received Federal housing grants from 1984 to 1988.


Shuttles Can Fly Again Soon, NASA Predicts
LEAD: Expressing optimism that fuel-leak problems can be corrected quickly, space agency officials said today that the nation's grounded space shuttle fleet could start flying again as early as mid-August.


U.S. Drug Fighter Cites A Shortage as Positive
LEAD: A senior Federal drug official testified today that a cocaine shortage in major metropolitan areas is ''the first positive development in domestic wholesale cocaine availability and prices since the onset of the cocaine epidemic.''


Corrections
LEAD: The Sports of The Times column yesterday misstated the year in which Jack Nicklaus played the British Open with a chance to win golf's grand slam.
It was 1972, not 1982.


E.W. Scripps Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E.W. Scripps Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
331,881,000
320,891,000
Net loss
b162,000
c25,169,000
Share earns
-
.32
Shares outst
76,522,000
78,751,000
6mo rev
629,357,000
615,802,000
Net inc
b9,563,000
40,253,000
Share earns
.12
.51
Shares outst
76,506,000
78,747,000


Groups Taking Aid Donations
LEAD:
American Friends Service Committee, Philippines Earthquake Assistance, 1501 Cherry Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 19102.
American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee, 711 Third Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10017.
American Jewish World Service, 1290 Avenue of the Americas, New York, N.Y. 10104.
American Red Cross, Philippines Earthquake Disaster, P.O.


Big Donations Again Marking New York Political Campaigns
LEAD: Big money is back in New York political campaigns after a brief respite in last year's municipal elections when New York City's new campaign finance law imposed sharp limits on individual and corporate contributions.


Dealer Incentives At Ford Reported
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company will offer sales incentives to dealers on some high-volume 1991 models and will increase advertising spending, according to a trade journal report.
Automotive News said the incentives include a first-time-ever rebate of up to $500 on 1991 Ford Escorts.
The incentives are in the form of a rebate to dealers, and the rebate amount will be based on the number of vehicles sold from July 10 to Aug.


New Jersey Court Seen as Leader on Rights
LEAD: The New Jersey Supreme Court, in ruling last month that children in the state's poorest cities have a right to the same educational opportunities as children in wealthy suburbs, added to its reputation as a leader among state courts trying to expand individual rights by using State Constitutions, common law and their own body of case law as precedent.


Honeywell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Honeywell Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
1,547,600,000
1,515,800,000
Net inc
b99,100,000
c74,800,000
Share earns
2.58
1.73
6mo sales
3,074,400,000
2,948,300,000
Net inc
b189,200,000
c137,700,000
Share earns
4.87
3.19
Shares outst
38,894,115
43,147,012


Chronicle
LEAD: DIMITRIOS I, Patriarch of Eastern Orthodox Christians, made an unscheduled stop on Monday on his tour of New York City.
The Patriarch, 75 years old, consulted DR.
ARIADNA PAPAGEORGE, an otolaryngologist, at Manhattan Eye and Ear Hospital.
His car, with its ''Hellenic 1'' license plate, and a phalanx of bodyguards and police officers were not exactly inconspicuous.


Springs Industries reports earnings for 13wks to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Springs Industries (NYSE)
13wks to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
485,361,000
488,933,000
Net inc
10,660,000
16,714,000
Share earns
.60
.94
26wk sales
944,562,000
960,795,000
Net inc
18,223,000
32,003,000
Share earns
1.02
1.80
Shares outst
17,834,000
17,795,000


Stanley B. Kurzina Jr.; Engineer, 85
LEAD: Stanley B. Kurzina Jr., an engineer and manufacturing excutive, died Friday at his home in Wayland, Mass.
He was 85 years old.


Fire Officials Charge Empire State Building Management in Blaze
LEAD: A day after a fierce office fire in the Empire State Building left 38 people injured, the Fire Department filed criminal charges yesterday against the management of the landmark skyscraper, claiming that defects in the alarm system may have slowed the response of firefighters.


FMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FMC Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
991,500,000
921,400,000
Net inc
54,800,000
b50,900,000
Share earns
1.52
1.41
6mo sales
1,808,900,000
1,762,400,000
Net inc
92,800,000
b80,900,000
Share earns
2.57
2.25


Dominion Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dominion Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
20,300,000
23,186,000
Per share
.53
.61
6mo net inc
6,406,000
46,569,000
Per share
.15
1.21


Three New York Bills to Veto
LEAD: In their rush to adjourn, Albany legislators bowed to lobbying pressure and approved three ill-conceived bills.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo has no responsible choice but to rise above election year politics and veto them.


Chronicle
LEAD: Reading beats sleeping pills, PRESIDENT BUSH has concluded.
When asked by one of a group of magazine publishers visiting the White House yesterday what he has been reading for fun, Mr.
Bush began with a recitation of official documents.


Chemical Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Banking Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
113,100,000
128,600,000
Per share
1.02
1.65
Shares outst
90,700,000
65,500,000
6mo net inc
b264,800,000
246,500,000
Per share
2.57
3.14
Shares outst
88,300,000
65,400,000


Keystone Consolidated Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Consolidated Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
86,102,000
87,589,000
Net inc
b8,513,000
c4,527,000
Share earns
1.51
.82
Shares outst
5,640,000
5,521,000
6mo sales
166,065,000
159,948,000
Net inc
b13,102,000
c7,013,000
Share earns
2.33
1.27
Shares outst
5,625,000
5,509,000


Trade Report Spurs Decline In Dollar in World Trading
LEAD: The dollar weakened on world cur-rency markets yesterday after the United States reported a widening of its trade deficit in May.


Decline Continues in Yields For Bank Funds and C.D.'s
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts continued to ease during the week that ended yesterday.
It was the seventh consecutive week of decline.


21 Held in $1 Million Theft Of Food Headed for Needy
LEAD: Twenty-one people and 6 companies on Long Island were accused today of systematically stealing more than $1 million worth of Government-subsidized food destined for schoolchildren, the elderly and the homeless.


First Constitution Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Constitution Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
18,995,000
b4,558,000
Per share
-
.42
6mo net loss
58,378,000
b9,683,000
Per share
-
.89
b-Net income and the 6 months included a gain of $730,000, or 7 cents a share, from change in method of accounting.


Coca-Cola Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coca-Cola Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,739,308,000
2,331,165,000
Net inc
409,932,000
b345,519,000
Share earns
.61
.49
Shares outst
667,375,000
696,655,000
6mo rev
4,887,586,000
4,241,769,000
Net inc
693,397,000
b605,328,000
Share earns
1.02
.85
Shares outst
669,347,000
701,093,000


Banc One Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banc One Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
103,964,000
91,327,000
Per share
.70
.64
Shares outst
147,325,000
142,724,000
6mo net inc
205,782,000
178,488,000
Per share
1.40
1.24
Shares outst
145,849,000
142,625,000


CHRONICLE
LEAD: SHERRIE ROLLINS, former public-affairs director of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, left her old desk on Friday and sat down to her new one on Monday, as director of news information for ABC News in New York.
As for leaving government for the media, ''it's a chance to work for the other side,'' Mrs.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
AIG Acquisition Corp., New York, completed its tender offer for all outstanding common shares of Fischbach Corp., New York, an electrical and mechanical engineering concern.


Panel Warns of Risks in Global Trading
LEAD: Warning of potentially serious risks to investors, institutions and the economy from round-the-clock trading in stocks and futures, an independent agency of Congress said today that it might fall to lawmakers to lay out regulatory policy toward the emerging global marketplace because ''it is not clear'' if the regulatory agencies share a ''common view.


Industrial Output Rises 0.4% On Auto and Utility Strength
LEAD: A spurt in automobile production and a heat wave that increased utility output pushed industrial production up four-tenths of a percent in June, the Federal Reserve reported today.


World Bank Considers Loan Charge Reduction
LEAD: World Bank officials announced yesterday that the the bank's net income topped $1 billion in 1990, for the sixth year in a row, and that the institution would now consider reducing its borrowers' costs.


Giants and Jets Wait
LEAD: As National Football League teams head into training camps this week and next, the draft choices who have signed contracts reached 80 yesterday, according to a count by the N.F.L.
Management Council.


Is Sanders Staying? He's Puzzled
LEAD: The notebooks open and the tape recorders whir, and suddenly there is a crowd around him - just the way Deion Sanders seems to like it.


Interstate in Sale
LEAD: First Interstate Bancorp said it had completed the sale of its consumer finance subsidiary, Nova Financial Services, to Transamerica Finance Group Inc. for $119 million in cash.
Transamerica Finance, based in Los Angeles, is a subsidiary of the Transamerica Corporation.
First Interstate, based in Los Angeles, said last March that it would sell Nova as part of its strategy to focus on relationship-oriented consumer banking and middle-market lending.


New Vim and Vigor For the Y.M.C.A.
LEAD: IT'S a typical morning at the branch of the Milwaukee Y.M.C.A. in this suburb.
All through the building, there is a constant coming and going of men and women, mostly in running shoes and T-shirts, on their way to exercise class or weight training or a session on the running track that is suspended above the basketball courts.


Upjohn Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Upjohn Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
804,710,000
727,688,000
Net inc
114,056,000
b94,583,000
Share earns
.62
.51
6mo sales
1,577,624,000
1,472,775,000
Net inc
228,332,000
b197,607,000
Share earns
1.23
1.06


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Fuqua Industries, Atlanta, a consumer products company, promoted James M. Bahin to senior vice president for operations and John F. Bartels to senior vice president and chief financial officer.
Colin W. Brown was promoted to senior vice president, general counsel and secretary, and James R. Foster was promoted to senior vice president for finance and corporate development and treasurer.


Shipping Trash Out of State Stirs Backlash
LEAD: New Jersey and New York State are facing a growing national backlash over the rapidly increasing practice of trucking municipal garbage they cannot dispose of to landfills in other states.


Some Sturdy Old Dogs Show Up With a New Trick or Two
LEAD: SOMETIMES, finding familiar pots and pans that have been cleverly redesigned, or tools with a new twist, can be more exciting than discovering brand-new equipment.
In recent perusals of kitchenware shops, I came up with four new versions of common tools that would be worthy additions to any home cook's arsenal.


TRW Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TRW Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,100,000,000
1,844,000,000
Net inc
63,000,000
70,000,000
Share earns
1.02
1.14
6mo sales
4,091,000,000
3,629,000,000
Net inc
120,000,000
139,000,000
Share earns
1.95
2.27
Shares outst
61,200,000
60,700,000


Seagram to Cut Staffs in U.S.
LEAD: Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons Inc., a subsidiary of the Seagram Company, Montreal, said its House of Seagram division, which produces and markets distilled spirits in the United States, would cut 177 positions from its sales, marketing and support staffs.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Hoosiers are no more anxious to live next to East Coast trash than the residents of the East Coast appear to be.''
- Senator Dan Coats, Republican of Indiana. [B1:5.]


Rockwell International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rockwell International (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,126,000,000
3,212,000,000
Net inc
171,200,000
178,100,000
Share earns
.71
.70
9mo sales
9,162,000,000
9,243,000,000
Net inc
490,400,000
b608,800,000
Share earns
2.00
2.37


Review/Film;   Ugly, Deadly, Horrible Spiders That Are Funny
LEAD: Cancel that camping trip, and fix those holes in the screens.
Today brings the advent of ''Arachnophobia,'' a gleeful horror film about deadly, bad-tempered tropical spiders for whom the word ''itsy-bitsy'' is truly a black joke.


Number of Killings Soars In Big Cities Across U.S.
LEAD: After an alarming increase last year, homicide rates have continued to soar this year, and experts attribute the rise to an increase in drug disputes, deadlier weapons and a tendency among more young people to start careers in crime with a gun.


Williams Rejects Pact
LEAD: John Williams, the Cleveland Cavaliers' 6-foot-11-inch forward, has rejected a two-year contract offer for a reported $9 million from Il Messaggero Roma of the Italian League and will stay in the National Basketball Association, his agent, Mark Bartelstein, said last night.


Primerica to Buy American Capital
LEAD: The Primerica Corporation said it had signed an agreement to acquire the 17 percent of American Capital Management and Research Inc. stock that it does not already own.
Under the agreement, American Capital shareholders could receive either 0.32 share of Primerica or $11.50 in cash for each share of American Capital.


A Nicaraguan Envoy Is Seized In Japan on U.S. Drug Charge
LEAD: A Nicaraguan diplomat in Tokyo was arrested there yesterday on United States charges that he took part in a plot to smuggle millions of dollars of heroin into New York City.


Keycorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keycorp (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
37,210,000
33,420,000
Per share
.87
.77
6mo net inc
73,491,000
64,426,000
Per share
1.72
1.49


Home for Retarded Faces Legal Fight
LEAD: New York City officials went to court yesterday to stop the state from closing a Greenwich Village residential center for severely mentally retarded adults.


Market Place;   Gloomy Prospects Facing Retailers
LEAD: DESPITE a slight rise in the latest store sales figures, American consumers are likely to remain reluctant shoppers for the rest of this year, according to store executives and industry analysts.
And that grim outlook means no end is in sight to the difficulties facing most American retailers and their suppliers.


Treasury Issues Narrowly Mixed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were very narrowly mixed in thin trading yesterday, as credit market participants sat back and waited to see what the Federal Reserve Board chairman, Alan Greenspan, says to Congress today.


Joseph R. Corso, 81; Retired as a Justice Of a New York Court
LEAD: Joseph R. Corso, a retired New York State Supreme Court Justice and a former State Assemblyman, died on Monday at Tisch Hospital of New York University.
He was 81 years old and lived in Mattituck, L.I.


Citizens &amp; Southern Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens &amp; Southern Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
57,688,000
58,564,000
Per share
.91
.91
6mo net inc
99,328,000
116,332,000
Per share
1.55
1.81


Francis Parkman, 92, Ex-Headmaster In Massachusetts
LEAD: Francis Parkman, the first president of the National Association of Independent Schools and a former headmaster of St.
Mark's School in Southborough, Mass., died Sunday at the North Hill Health Center in Needham, Mass., where he had lived for the last four years.


Mackey's Double Life
LEAD: Calling his wife ''a saint'' who lived with ''a devil,'' the suspended Cleveland State University basketball coach, Kevin Mackey, said yesterday that he had been living two lives, one as a public figure and family man, the other as an alcohol and drug abuser.


Ethyl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ethyl Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
603,256,000
602,551,000
Net inc
57,128,000
b57,565,000
Share earns
.48
.48
Shares outst
119,320,000
120,347,000
6mo rev
1,212,988,000
1,173,048,000
Net inc
109,575,000
b113,953,000
Share earns
.92
.95
Shares outst
119,350,000
120,479,000


2 GERMANYS VOW TO RETAIN BORDER WITH THE POLES
LEAD: East and West Germany agreed today to resolve Polish anxieties by promising to guarantee the postwar German-Polish frontier, and in doing so, the Germans all but guaranteed international endorsement of their own reunification by the end of the year.


Bosworth Is Waived After Failing Physical
LEAD: Brian Bosworth, the brash but talented linebacker who signed an $11 million, 10-year contract with Seattle after he was chosen out of the University of Oklahoma in the 1987 supplemental draft, was waived by the Seahawks yesterday after failing a physical on the injured right shoulder that kept him out most of last season.


Wells Fargo Is Acquiring 130 Branches
LEAD: The Great American Bank, a San Diego-based savings and loan that has had heavy losses, agreed today to sell its California branch network and other assets to Wells Fargo &amp; Company.


Wondering if Sanders Will Stay? So Is He.
LEAD: They were never rivals, Deion Sanders said last night.
That was simply a creation of the news media, something to stir competition.
He always liked and respected Bo Jackson, he said.
He even told Jackson that he admired him when the two of them were interviewed on a radio show in Kansas City two weeks ago.


Midland Montagu Is Closing Government Securities Unit
LEAD: The beleaguered Government securities business lost another primary dealer yesterday, as Midland Montagu, the international and investment banking arm of Britain's Midland Bank P.L.C., announced that it would close Midland Montagu Securities Inc. after an orderly winding down of business.


Manufacturers National reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manufacturers National (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
27,183,000
26,828,000
Per share
1.80
1.76
6mo net inc
49,096,000
51,672,000
Per share
3.24
3.41
The company said the latest 6 months' results were affected by a first quarter $6 million provision for consolidation costs and a $4.8 million gain on an exchange of debt.


New York to Fight Bunching of Unpopular Projects
LEAD: For the first time, New York City has drafted guidelines aimed at ending its practice of putting a disproportionate share of programs for the homeless, the mentally ill and drug abusers in the poorest city neighborhoods.


Race On for an Electric-Car Battery
LEAD: Encouraged by serious consideration of laws that might make commercial production of electric cars practical within a decade, companies from small start-ups to some of the world's largest battery manufacturers are racing for a breakthrough in battery technology.


Manila Puts Quake Toll at 309 as Search Continues
LEAD: Rescue workers continued to dig in piles of rubble for the dead and the living today, as Philippine officials said the earthquake on Monday had killed at least 309 people and injured at least 595.


Vetoed Bill Protected Public Employees
LEAD: To the Editor:


General Manager Set For Fuji Bank in U.S.
LEAD: Tomohiro Kamio has taken command of the New York branch of Fuji Bank as general manager, his first assignment in the United States.


Great Lakes Chemical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Lakes Chemical Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
256,493,000
192,305,000
Net inc
34,535,000
31,231,000
Share earns
.98
.90
Shares outst
35,124,173
34,886,642
6mo rev
532,040,040
365,364,000
Net inc
68,843,000
59,806,000
Share earns
1.96
1.72
Shares outst
35,098,313
34,863,602


Savings Unit Hearings Set
LEAD: An Arizona man who bought 15 failed Texas savings and loans from the Government despite previous problems with state regulators, has agreed to testify at a Senate hearing on the acquisitions, Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum said today.


No Headline
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Apr.-June
Change
1990
From '89
American Cyanamid Co.
$ 111,400,000
+4.0
Cincinnati Milacron Inc.
3,100,000
-40.4
Coca-Cola Co.
409,900,000
+18.6
Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc.
55,300,000
+42.5
Adolph Coors Co.
25,100,000
+48.5
Federal Signal Corp.


Kill New Weapons for a Peace Dividend
LEAD: Led by Sam Nunn, the Senate Armed Services Committee has sensibly trimmed $18 billion from the excessive $306 billion originally requested by the Bush Administration for defense in 1991.
That's a lot better than Defense Secretary Cheney's proposed cut of $8 billion.
But even the Nunn proposal falls far short of what's necessary now to reduce military spending by a reasonable 25 percent five years hence.


100,000 Must Leave Fez
LEAD: Morocco said today that the ancient city of Fez was falling into decay through overcrowding and that 100,000 residents would have to leave.
The normal population of 120,000 has swollen to over 300,000 without any new houses being built, Moulay Ahmed Alaoui, minister of State without portfolio, told a news conference.


Grainger (W.W.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grainger (W.W.) (N)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
495,682,000
446,933,000
Net inc
32,090,000
30,329,000
Share earns
1.16
1.12
6mo sales
943,103,000
840,536,000
Net inc
60,941,000
57,890,000
Share earns
2.21
2.13


Coors (Adolph) Co.  (O) reports earnings for 12wks to June 17
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coors (Adolph) Co.  (O)
12wks to June 17
1990
1989
Sales
475,361,000
425,510,000
Net inc
25,140,000
16,871,000
Share earns
.68
.46
Shares outst
37,002,000
36,704,000
24wk sales
869,687,000
749,592,000
Net inc
32,827,000
12,066,000
Share earns
.89
.33
Shares outst
36,957,000
36,700,000


Book Notes
LEAD:
Dissident's Memoirs


Magazine Revenues Up
LEAD: Magazine advertising revenues for the first half of 1990 rose a slim 1.6 percent, to $3.28 billion, compared with the period a year earlier, according to the Publishers Information Bureau.
Advertising pages fell 3.3 percent.


Accounts
LEAD: * Twin Tire Systems, Dallas, to the Dallas office of Ayer.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-12
Germany will guarantee the borders of the post war German-Polish frontier, according to an agreement reached between the two Germanys and the four World War II Allies.
The accord virtually assures world endorsement of German reunification.
Page A1


Trying to Make a Right Out of Wrongs
LEAD: To the Editor:


G. E. Lawyer to Join Morgan
LEAD: Philip A. Lacovara, a former Watergate prosecutor, is leaving the General Electric Company to become general counsel and secretary of Morgan Stanley Group, the Wall Street firm said yesterday.


Coke Income Rose 18.6% In 2d Quarter
LEAD: The Coca-Cola Company said today that its second-quarter profits rose 18.6 percent.
The company's chairman, Roberto C. Goizueta, said he expected continued strong earnings for the rest of 1990 and for 1991.


New York State Bond Offering
LEAD: The State of New York yesterday offered $225 million of general obligation bonds at competitive bid.


Lukens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lukens Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
178,870,000
162,689,000
Net inc
11,671,000
8,922,000
Share earns
1.34
1.06
6mo sales
349,489,000
322,258,000
Net inc
22,591,000
16,052,000
Share earns
2.59
1.88
Year-ago periods ended July 1.


Banana Cream to Sour-Cream Raisin, Homemade Pies From the Heartland
LEAD: THIS little town, a few miles off Interstate 94 amid the rolling dairy and corn country of western Wisconsin, is off the beaten path to the uninitiated, but it is clearly marked on the maps of pie lovers.


Corrections
LEAD: The Metro Matters column on Monday misidentified the Deputy Chief in charge of the investigative bureau of the New York City Civilian Complaint Review Board.
He is Kevin P. Farrell.


Senate Votes Import Curbs On Apparel but Veto Looms
LEAD: The Senate, by a vote of 68 to 32, approved legislation today to curb imports of textiles and apparel.


Review/Pop;   A Triple Bill Takes Rock Back Toward Its Roots
LEAD: Rock roots have grown twisted over the last decade.
Before the 1980's, musicians who tried to hold onto roots were the conservative mainstream, battling newcomers who didn't respect old methods.
But with the arrival of computerized music, mainstream rock developed amnesia, leaving it to cranks and fringe elements to reclaim handmade sounds and traditional formats.


Kohl Outlines a Vision: A Neighborly Germany
LEAD: A day after winning Soviet agreement to drop its objections to German unification, Chancellor Helmut Kohl extended the hand of conciliation and cooperation today and offered a vision of the first united German nation of the 20th century on good terms with all its neighbors.


State Street Boston reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* State Street Boston (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
28,523,000
24,934,000
Per share
.77
.68
6mo net inc
56,133,000
48,954,000
Per share
1.52
1.34


Pfizer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pfizer Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
1,495,700,000
1,302,700,000
Net inc
151,200,000
135,700,000
Share earns
.90
.80
6mo sales
2,977,700,000
2,739,000,000
Net inc
b403,100,000
376,500,000
Share earns
2.40
2.23


A Lawyer to Trust
LEAD: In an age marked by suspicion of both leadership and the legal profession, Robert McKay was in a trusted class by himself.
Former dean and teacher at New York University's law school, he gave leadership to every cause that benefited the law, democracy and justice.
When he died last week at the age of 70, he was in Reno to address the National Judicial


Great Western Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Western Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
78,240,000
51,854,000
Share earns
.60
.40
6mo net inc
152,392,000
109,059,000
Share earns
1.18
.85
The company said resutls do not include the acquisitions on July 2, 1990 of the Centrust or Gibraltar-Florida franchises accounted for using the purchase method of accounting.


Public Service Enterprise Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service Enterprise Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,074,002,000
1,047,694,000
Net inc
98,292,000
113,662,000
Share earns
.47
.55
Shares outst
211,116,433
205,350,418
6mo rev
2,399,212,000
2,343,834,000
Net inc
242,952,000
268,085,000
Share earns
1.15
1.31
Shares outst
211,108,470
205,350,418


Apply Lessons of Vietnam and El Salvador to Peru;   Yanqui Intruders
LEAD: To the Editor:


Eastern Europeans Lack Money to Study in West
LEAD: Thousands of Eastern European students, eager to sample the educational offerings of the West, are seeking to matriculate at American universities, according to the United States Information Agency.


It's Only Money
LEAD: ''Hot dog!
That's where my money goes!'' is the refrain of an old drinking song celebrating some curious expenditures.
Here is where money goes nowadays: LAWYERS STRIKE AGAIN ''Effectively out of cash.'' That's The New York Times's report on the Manville Personal Injury Settlement Trust.
It was set up in 1988 to pay workers' claims for illness caused by inhaling asbestos fibers.


Prostitute in Article Is Ordered Released
LEAD: An Oakland prostitute was ordered released today from jail where she was detained as the police sought to charge her with attempted murder.
She had been arrested after Newsweek magazine quoted her as saying she continued to work despite being infected with the AIDS virus.


Three Drug Companies Post Strong Profits
LEAD: Eli Lilly &amp; Company, Pfizer Inc. and the Upjohn Company said yesterday that they had double-digit gains in profits and sales of drug and health-care products in the three months ended June 30.


Rose in Court Tomorrow For Tax-Case Sentencing
LEAD: Having been banished from baseball for the rest of his life, Pete Rose will learn tomorrow if he has to spend part of that life in prison.


Subsidies for Artists: Is Denying a Grant Really Censorship?
LEAD: Visitors to the benefit performance staged the other night for the Franklin Furnace, an avant-garde performance space in the TriBeCa section of Manhattan, heard angry protesters warn against what they perceived as Government censorship of the arts.


Chronicle
LEAD: JOE COCKER has scheduled a benefit concert for his neighbors in Santa Barbara, Calif., whose homes were ravaged by fire last month.
The rock-and-roll singer lives less than a mile from the area where more than 524 structures, mostly homes, were burned.


Valentin Pikul Is Dead; Historical Novelist, 62
LEAD: Valentin Pikul, a popular historical novelist whose books focused on Russia's sweeping upheavals, has died, the news agency Tass reported today.
He was 62 years old.


F.D.A. Critical Of Drug Lab
LEAD: Eleven of 13 studies conducted for generic drug manufacturers by a Pittsburgh laboratory violated regulations of the Food and Drug Administration or standards of good laboratory practice, according to an F.D.A. inspection, the agency has said.


Sharon Plan for Immigrants Derailed
LEAD: An Israeli Cabinet minister and the Supreme Court both dealt blows today to Housing Minister Ariel Sharon's emergency program to provide housing for the huge influx of Soviet Jewish immigrants.


Bridge
LEAD: There are times at the bridge table when virtue has to be its own reward.
The diagramed deal, played July 2 in a Pan-American Pairs in Washington, is an extreme example.
Brad Moss and Michael Radin, both of Manhattan, bid superbly to reach the perfect contract, but emerged with the same score as those whose efforts were pedestrian.


Laura Perls, 84, Dies in Germany; Founder of Gestalt Psychotherapy
LEAD: Laura Perls, a founder of the Gestalt school of psychotherapy, died Friday in Pforzheim, West Germany.
She was 84 years old.


Tosco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tosco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
577,532,000
334,179,000
Net inc
48,164,000
28,029,000
Share earns
2.62
1.83
Shares outst
17,021,000
12,784,000
6mo sales
1,054,723,000
608,908,000
Net inc
41,217,000
20,000,000
Share earns
2.01
.88
Shares outst
16,907,000
11,766,000


Youth Service Is New Route to Diplomas and Jobs
LEAD: Rubber soles padded soundlessly along a hallway of Coler Memorial Hospital recently as Yaninth Maldonado guided an elderly man in a wheelchair to a nearby day room.
With each step, Ms.
Maldonado, a teen-age mother with an eighth-grade education, moved closer to her own goal: attaining a college diploma.


Hijacker Sent Back to Moscow, With a Message
LEAD: A Soviet teen-ager who forced a passenger plane to go to Sweden last month because he was fed up with life in the Soviet Union was returned to Moscow today.
Soviet officials hailed his extradition as a breakthrough in this country's struggle against a remarkable epidemic of hijackings.


Six Soldiers Found in Florida AWOL From U.S. Spy Unit
LEAD: Six soldiers missing from an Army intelligence unit at a sensitive National Security Agency eavesdropping post in West Germany have been apprehended in Florida and are the focus of a routine counterespionage investigation, the Pentagon said today.


Coca-Cola Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coca-Cola Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,124,910,000
1,088,490,000
Net inc
b55,327,000
38,822,000
Share earns
.42
.26
Shares outst
120,898,000
130,678,000
6mo rev
2,031,288,000
1,948,053,000
Net inc
b63,360,000
52,274,000
Share earns
.45
.33
Shares outst
121,411,000
131,483,000


Manufacturers Hanover reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manufacturers Hanover (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b33,000,000
106,000,000
Per share
.31
1.87
6mo net inc
b129,000,000
209,000,000
Per share
1.51
3.70
b-After a special one-time restructuring charge of $100 million, or $60 million after-tax.


Senate Votes to Limit Debate On Provisions of Rights Bill
LEAD: Seeking to encourage compromise by the White House, job discrimination, the Senate today voted to limit debate on a major bill to prevent job discrimination.


Commerce Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
14,277,000
15,344,000
Per share
.74
.78
6mo net inc
30,308,000
30,024,000
Per share
1.57
1.54


Hubbell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hubbell Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
183,057,000
168,311,000
Net inc
22,360,000
20,913,000
Share earns
.78
.73
6mo sales
356,793,000
330,066,000
Net inc
43,504,000
40,076,000
Share earns
1.52
1.40


New Store With Same Distinctive Shoes
LEAD: THERE was Cher, face half-hidden by a big black hat, ordering five pairs of boots, size 8 1/2.
It was midafternoon on Monday, and the new Susan Bennis/Warren Edwards shoe store at 22 West 57th Street, between Fifth and Sixth Avenues, was off to an auspicious start.


McReynolds Revives, Sparks Mets
LEAD: Concern, tension, panic - the words had begun to resurface through the locker room of the Mets.
They were words, though, that had no discernible effect on Kevin McReynolds.
But then most don't.


Son of a Former Faculty Member Is Held in Wesleyan Firebombing
LEAD: A young man whose father was on the Wesleyan University faculty and whose cousin is accused of killing a black student advocate was charged today with the firebombing of the university's administration building.


Review/Dance;   The Stars of New Works: Gloom, Doom and Angst
LEAD: The gloom was pretty much unrelieved on Friday night at the handsome theater at the Fiorello H. La Guardia High School of Music and the Arts when the new Fiorello Festival presented the second of three programs of new and recent dance.
Each choreographer represented - Zvi Gotheiner, Elisa King and James Sewell - had a sense of craft.


Fears of a Pi Gap Are, Well, Irrational;   Job for Mathematicians
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: The Economy


Nynex Denies 1988 Actions Raised Rates
LEAD: The chairman of the Nynex Corporation said yesterday that the company had dismissed two purchasing employees and disciplined six others in the summer of 1988 for improper business activities, but he insisted that their actions had not resulted in higher telephone rates for New York residents.


Synagogue Accord Is Reached To Allow Services in a House
LEAD: Village officials and a group of Jews in Westhampton Beach agreed today to allow religious services at a house here, a lawyer said.


Soviets Report New Clashes In Central Asian City of Osh
LEAD: New ethnic clashes have broken out in the Central Asian republic of Kirghizia, injuring 27 people, the Tass press agency said today.
It said the police fired warning shots to break up the fighting.


Red Sox Hit Into Two Triple Plays But Win
LEAD: Minnesota became the first team in major league history to get two triple plays in one game last night, but it wasn't enough to overcome eight shutout innings by Tom Bolton as the Boston Red Sox beat the Twins, 1-0.


Bond Sells Assets To Lower Its Debt
LEAD: Bond Corporation Holdings, the Australian-based conglomerate, said it had sold more assets to cut its debt of $6.67 billion (Australian), about $5.3 billion (United States).
It said that in April it had sold its Observation City seaside resort in northern Perth to Pakwell Pty. for $77.34 million (Australian).


Steinbrenner Reportedly Cited Fear of Spira
LEAD: George Steinbrenner told Commissioner Fay Vincent that he paid $40,000 to Howard Spira because he feared Spira would harm him or his family, The National reported today.


Lawrence Zirinsky, 72, Real-Estate Developer
LEAD: Lawrence Zirinsky, a real-estate developer, died Monday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 72 years old and lived in Manhattan.


About Education
LEAD: A headline on the front page of The New York Times of June 13 said, ''A New Road to Learning: Teaching the Whole Child.''


Huffy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Huffy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
148,102,000
127,323,000
Net inc
7,052,000
5,301,000
Share earns
.79
.62
Shares outst
10,261,215
8,987,664
6mo sales
276,930,000
243,089,000
Net inc
13,105,000
9,636,000
Share earns
1.47
1.14
Shares outst
10,275,012
8,938,266


Books of The Times;   A Soldier Who Supported New Deal Social Change
LEAD:
General of the Army
George C. Marshall, Soldier and Statesman
By Ed Cray
847 pages. Illustrated. W. W. Norton. $35.


Fears of a Pi Gap Are, Well, Irrational
LEAD: To the Editor:


Details Are Given In Addidas Deal
LEAD: Bernard Tapie, the French businessman who announced on July 7 that he would take over Addidas A.G., the West German sporting goods manufacturer, said here Monday that he would pay $290 million for an 80 percent stake and receive financing from eight French, German and Japanese banks.
Mr.
Tapie, a soccer team owner and Socialist member of Parliament, had not given details when he made his annoucement in Rome before the finals of the World


Rig Count Falls in Week
LEAD: The number of working oil and natural gas rigs in the United States fell by 10 last week, to 1,001, Baker Hughes Inc. reported on Monday.
It was the third consecutive week of decline.
A year ago the count stood at 820.


Manslaughter Is New Charge In Vento Case
LEAD: A grand jury filed superseding indictments yesterday adding manslaughter charges to earlier charges against John S. Vento and four other defendants in the Bensonhurst murder case, the Brooklyn District Attorney announced.


Citicorp Posts 37% Drop in Net
LEAD: Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company, said yesterday that its earnings fell 37 percent in the second quarter from a year earlier, despite continued growth in its highly profitable consumer banking businesses.


New Reactor Designs Are Criticized in Report
LEAD: Manufacturers designing a new generation of nuclear reactors overstate the safety benefits of new features, and their changes would leave the plants more vulnerable than current designs to certain kinds of accidents, according to a 200-page study released yesterday by a nuclear watchdog group.


L.I. Town Votes Housing Project For Its Homeless
LEAD: The North Hempstead Town Council cleared the way today for Nassau County's first permanent housing for the homeless when one Council member, after changing his mind several times, finally said he would support the plan for the six-family building.


Reynolds Metals Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reynolds Metals Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,534,900,000
1,648,500,000
Net inc
103,000,000
150,700,000
Share earns
1.75
2.55
Shares outst
59,100,000
59,000,000
6mo sales
2,921,200,000
3,093,700,000
Net inc
180,700,000
275,200,000
Share earns
3.06
4.85
Shares outst
59,100,000
56,800,000


Net Off 3.9% At Rockwell
LEAD: The Rockwell International Corporation said today that its third-quarter earnings fell 3.9 percent on a 3.1 percent decline in revenues.


Results Plus
LEAD:
TENNIS
McEnroe Defeats Chamberlin
John McEnroe, making his first tournament appearance since an opening-round loss at Wimbledon, defeated Paul Chamberlin, 6-2, 6-3, last night in a second-round match of the Sovran Bank Classic in Washington.
McEnroe, seeded third, did not face a break point until the last game of the match and he broke Chamberlin in the sixth game of each set.


First Security Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Security Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
12,638,000
11,508,000
Per share
.92
.85
6mo net inc
25,206,000
21,590,000
Per share
1.84
1.60
Shares outst
13,615,000
13,361,000
Results for all periods reported have been restated to reflect the merger of United Savings Bank, Salem, Ore., into First Security Corp.


Charles Schwab Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Charles Schwab Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
154,700,000
139,000,000
Net inc
4,800,000
4,200,000
Share earns
.17
.15
Shares outst
27,500,000
27,900,000
6mo rev
304,400,000
261,400,000
Net inc
8,500,000
8,300,000
Share earns
.31
.30
Shares outst
27,500,000
27,800,000


United Telecommunications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Telecommunications (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,070,000,000
1,852,500,000
Net inc
40,600,000
90,500,000
Share earns
.18
.43
Shares outst
213,900,000
208,400,000
6mo rev
4,093,800,000
3,618,600,000
Net inc
148,200,000
166,900,000
Share earns
.69
.79
Shares outst
212,600,000
208,400,000


United Telecom's Profit Down 55.1%; GTE Gains
LEAD: United Telecommunications Inc. yesterday announced a 55.1 percent decline in second-quarter earnings and said it would lay off as many as 1,300 employees to contain rising costs at its long-distance telephone service subsidiary, the U S Sprint Communications Company.


Intel Net Up Nearly 72%
LEAD: The Intel Corporation, paced by strong sales of its microprocessors, recorded an increase of 71.9 percent in net income in the second quarter compared with a year earlier.


Hubble Has Backup Mirror, Unused
LEAD: NASA has a backup mirror for the Hubble Space Telescope that could have replaced the flawed mirror on the $1.5 billion craft and would even have been optically superior in some respects, astronomers said yesterday.


Fruit of the Loom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fruit of the Loom Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
443,000,000
379,600,000
Net inc
37,300,000
25,800,000
Share earns
.60
.42
6mo sales
766,700,000
661,600,000
Net inc
50,100,000
33,500,000
Share earns
.81
.54


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Campaigns For Children Criticized
LEAD: IN a wide-ranging attack on how some of the best-known American corporations market to young children, Consumers Union, the publisher of Consumer Reports magazine, released a study yesterday detailing what it denounced as increasingly pervasive and hidden advertising to ''America's most vulnerable consumers.


G.O.P. in House to Fight Any Tax Rise
LEAD: As the Bush Administration and Congressional Democrats sought to narrow their differences over taxes, restive House Republicans made plain today that they would vigorously oppose any tax increase.


5 POWERS REPORT GAINS ON CAMBODIA
LEAD: The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council announced today that they had advanced toward agreement on a peace formula for Cambodia, but they gave no hint that the warring factions were any closer to settling their differences.


Supermarkets Reach Out To Hispanic Customers
LEAD: FROM the tortilleria of the Tianguis supermarket here comes the slap, slap, slap of women making tortillas by hand.
On a Saturday afternoon, the market is in perpetual motion: women mix, shape and bake tortillas almost nonstop.
The result is corn tortillas, flour tortillas (with or without lard), corn chips and tostados.


Bush Declares He Does Not Feel Left Out by Gorbachev and Kohl
LEAD: President Bush sought today to dispel any suggestion that Germany and the Soviet Union had reached an independent agreement on German unification, saying the United States ''has been in the forefront'' on the issue since before the Berlin wall was opened.


Coach Is Suspended
LEAD: Chuck DeBus of Santa Monica, Calif., the longtime coach of the Los Angeles Track Club and a former coach at U.C.L.A., has been suspended from track and field for life, The Athletics Congress announced yesterday.


Apply Lessons of Vietnam and El Salvador to Peru
LEAD: To the Editor:


Trade Deficit Increases Modestly
LEAD: The nation's trade deficit rose modestly in May, to $7.73 billion, fueled by the economy's heavy reliance on oil imports and foreign automobiles, the Commerce Department reported today.


Polaroid Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Polaroid Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
475,600,000
486,600,000
Net inc
32,900,000
42,700,000
Share earns
.45
.62
Shares outst
51,990,000
55,137,000
6mo sales
911,800,000
928,900,000
Net inc
64,700,000
68,600,000
Share earns
.89
.87
Shares outst
52,033,000
62,513,000


Louisiana-Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Louisiana-Pacific Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
501,500,000
526,100,000
Net inc
38,000,000
48,400,000
Share earns
1.01
1.27
6mo sales
976,300,000
993,100,000
Net inc
73,800,000
88,300,000
Share earns
1.96
2.32


WINE TALK
LEAD: THE wine industry is in trouble, beset by neoprohibitionists and health groups and legislators who see it as a rich mine of untapped tax revenue despite falling sales.


People
LEAD: *
Joseph Bruce, Michael Garcia and Joy Sliwa have been promoted to executive vice presidents at Geer, DuBois Inc., while Steve Farricker, Allen Ginsberg and Nancy Korda have been promoted to senior vice presidents.


Six Justices and Their Chief
LEAD: Chief Justice Robert N. Wilentz of the New Jersey Supreme Court, who was appointed by former Gov.
Brendan T. Byrne in 1979, is a former State Assemblyman and the son of the late David T. Wilentz, the former Attorney General who prosecuted Bruno Richard Hauptmann for the kidnapping of Charles A. Lindbergh's son.


CBS Starts Taking Cues From Fox
LEAD: CBS executives said here this week that the success of the Fox Broadcasting Company has changed the rules of prime-time programming and that CBS would now be interested in acquiring shows like Fox's ''Married . . .
With Children.'' At a press conference on Monday to publicize the coming fall season, Howard Stringer, president of the CBS Broadcast Group, said CBS was sending out a signal to producers of comedy shows that they will be given an ''open throttle'' to help change C


National Lampoon's Two Top Officers Quit
LEAD: The humor magazine National Lampoon said its co-chairmen and chief executives, the actor Tim Matheson and the producer Daniel Grodnik, had resigned.


Apply Lessons of Vietnam and El Salvador to Peru;   Human Rights Abuses
LEAD: To the Editor:


Philip Rutledge, 84; Civil Engineer Led Professional Society
LEAD: Philip C. Rutledge, a retired partner in Mueser, Rutledge, Wentworth &amp; Johnson, a consulting engineering firm, died Saturday at Indian River Estates Medical Center in Vero Beach, Fla.
He was 84 years old and lived in Vero Beach.


Pacific Western Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Western Bancshares (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,285,000
3,003,000
Per share
.34
.25
6mo net inc
8,288,000
5,441,000
Per share
.65
.46
Shares outst
12,774,000
11,925,000


Stanley Works reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stanley Works (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
498,900,000
491,500,000
Net inc
30,600,000
30,800,000
Share earns
.72
.72
Shares outst
42,294,000
43,184,000
6mo sales
983,000,000
972,100,000
Net inc
53,100,000
55,400,000
Share earns
1.25
1.29
Shares outst
42,542,000
43,055,000


Dash Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dash Industries Inc.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,353,367
4,619,583
Net loss
85,746
b20,895
6mo sales
8,485,175
9,050,701
Net loss
113,255
b33,790
Shares outst
7,603,112
7,598,612
b-Net income


Homicide Is First in Tuckahoe in 15 Years
LEAD: A 25-year-old woman was shot and killed on a much-traveled pathway near a Westchester County train station on Tuesday, and her father said today that she had moved from New York City because she thought it was too dangerous.


Hopes Dying In the Rubble In Philippines
LEAD: A young vendor in the market here has become something of a hero in the wake of the earthquake that devastated parts of the city on Monday.


Washington at Work;   As Guerrilla or General, Gingrich Has a Mission
LEAD: The morning Newt Gingrich heard about President Bush's turnaround on new taxes, he was so enraged, he says, that he slammed down the phone on John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bell Atlantic Corp., Philadelphia, the telecommunications company, purchased Simborg Systems Corp., a hospital communications company, which it renamed Bell Atlantic Healthcare Systems.
Terms were not disclosed.


Sell Cars, Not Racism
LEAD: American auto dealers are running ads that attack the Japanese, with slighting references to samurai warriors and physical stature.
Such racism, a shameful response, is no substitute for making better cars.
Disputing the cost or quality of Japanese cars is fair game; attacking their makers is not.


Republic Health Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic Health Corp.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
123,794,000
120,700,000
Net loss
b46,506,000
15,829,000
9mo rev
361,414,000
353,239,000
Net loss
102,664,000
45,265,000
b-Included non-recurring charges of $46,140,000 from a write-down of $41,522,000 to cover costs anticipated from the sale of certain facilities, and $4,618,000 associated with a recapitalization.


East German Job Data
LEAD: East German unemployment soared by 60 percent in the first two weeks of July to reach 224,000, Labor Minister Regine Hildebrandt said today.
She told the A.D.N. news agency that between 30,000 and 40,000 people were joining the unemployment lines weekly.
Another 500,000 have applied for short-time work - a Government-sponsored halfway stage between employment and joblessness - since East and West Germany merged their economies along free market lines July 1, she said.


Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co.  Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co.  Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
675,073,000
514,684,000
Net inc
32,078,000
27,204,000
Share earns
1.11
1.04
Shares outst
28,836,784
26,411,467
6mo sales
1,241,648,000
946,522,000
Net inc
53,439,000
46,414,000
Share earns
1.85
1.76
Shares outst
28,836,784
26,411,467


Evolution in Europe;   Bulgaria's Ousted Dictator Agrees to Face His Accusers
LEAD: In a move that is certain to unnerve and perhaps unseat some of the currently ruling leaders of Bulgaria's former Communist Party, Todor Zhivkov, the toppled Bulgarian dictator, has agreed to appear before Parliament as soon as next week to address allegations that have been leveled against him.


The New York Times Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* The New York Times Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
468,863,000
460,307,000
Net inc
b26,827,000
c41,312,000
Share earns
.35
.53
Shares outst
76,181,000
78,249,000
6mo rev
900,051,000
883,375,000
Net inc
b43,416,000
c74,828,000
Share earns
.57
.95
Shares outst
76,507,000
78,631,000


Chemical Waste Management Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemical Waste Management Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
270,446,000
221,802,000
Net inc
43,081,000
34,479,000
Share earns
.21
.17
Shares outst
207,124,000
201,008,000
6mo rev
503,197,000
411,630,000
Net inc
77,786,000
63,452,000
Share earns
.38
.31
Shares outst
206,966,000
200,768,000


Richardson Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Richardson Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
45,273,000
46,998,000
Net inc
1,706,000
3,106,000
Share earns
.15
.28
Yr sales
160,101,000
156,630,000
Net inc
1,012,000
11,892,000
Share earns
.09
1.07
Latest year share earnings included $8 million in charges for manufacturing restructuring costs and the anticipated disposal of certain inventory items.


Advance Ross Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advance Ross Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
704,000
498,000
Net inc
2,126,000
b27,000
Share earns
1.09
-
6mo sales
1,236,000
836,000
Net inc
2,164,000
b61,000
Share earns
1.11
-
b-Net loss
The company said the increase in net income primarily resulted from the settlement of an audit by the I.R.S.


Evolution in Europe;   U.S. Gives Soviets Menu Of American Expertise
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d has given Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union a list of economic assistance projects the Bush Administration is prepared to undertake in the Soviet Union, a senior Administration official said today.


Charles Travers Davies, Insurance Executive, 80
LEAD: Charles Travers Davies, who was corporate secretary and assistant to the president of the Hanover Insurance Company when it was in New York City, died on Tuesday at his home in Stratford, Conn.
He was 80 years old Mr.
Davies died of anemia, his daughter, Patricia Haas, said.


Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,196,034,000
1,057,572,000
Net inc
122,990,000
150,416,000
Share earns
.67
.80
6mo rev
2,346,072,000
2,117,352,000
Net inc
233,300,000
293,719,000
Share earns
1.27
1.57
Shares outst
183,050,000
187,018,000


Leukemia Victim Can't Force Kin to Have Marrow Tested
LEAD: A 12-year-old boy suffering from leukemia cannot demand that two half-siblings be tested to see if they would be compatible bone marrow donors, a judge ruled today in dismissing a lawsuit brought by the boy's father.


Alden Electronics Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to June 23
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alden Electronics Inc. (OTC)
13wks to June 23
1990
1989
Revenue
4,034,296
5,433,962
Net inc
122,855
194,639
Share earns
.06
.09
Year-ago period ended June 17, 1989.


First Illinois Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Illinois Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,144,000
4,899,000
Per share
.19
.18
6mo net inc
10,273,000
9,345,000
Per share
.37
.34


Cincinnati Bell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Bell Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
245,269,000
227,431,000
Net inc
23,848,000
24,011,000
Share earns
.38
.38
Shares outst
60,175,000
59,691,000
6mo rev
466,608,000
449,906,000
Net inc
42,184,000
48,615,000
Share earns
.67
.77
Shares outst
60,077,000
60,195,000


Evolution in Europe;   To Thwart Moscow's Draft, Lithuania Prepares Its Own
LEAD: Lithuania has announced plans to draft all young men in the republic into a new, independent national defense force that would replace Soviet military service, officials in the republic said today.


AMR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMR Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,974,400,000
2,715,700,000
Net inc
129,200,000
177,900,000
Share earns
2.05
2.83
Shares outst
63,000,000
62,800,000
6mo rev
5,662,600,000
5,166,700,000
Net inc
109,900,000
278,900,000
Share earns
1.75
4.43


Treasures With a Past, But Cheap
LEAD: WHEN he went to buy his wife a desk, David Weinschneider couldn't believe the prices. ''I kept telling myself, there's got to be a cheaper way,'' he recalled.


Medical Action Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medical Action Industries (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,706,000
6,991,000
Net loss
610,000
b148,000
Share earns
-
.03
Yr sales
24,223,000
26,626,000
Net loss
514,000
b475,000
Share earns
-
.10
b-Net income


Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,483,883,000
2,244,335,000
Net inc
417,258,000
345,205,000
Share earns
.79
.66
6mo sales
4,941,594,000
4,509,298,000
Net inc
826,333,000
688,792,000
Share earns
1.57
1.32
Shares outst
525,755,000
522,240,000


Killer Is Put to Death In Texas After Court Turns Down Appeal
LEAD: A 33-year-old man with a criminal record that began when he was 12 was executed by injection early today for a 1980 murder.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Flooring Over Concrete


Constellation Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Constellation Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
688,000
7,570,000
Per share
.09
.96
6mo net inc
1,246,000
15,213,000
Per share
.16
1.94
Shares outst
8,065,410
6,436,520


Evolution in Europe;   7 More Top Russians Resign From the Party
LEAD: Moscow's Deputy Mayor and six members of Parliament left the Soviet Communist Party today in a quickening exodus of prominent radicals.


Scientists Say Gene On Y Chromosome Makes a Man a Man
LEAD: The mystery of what makes a man a man may never be solved, but scientists now think they know what makes a male masculine.
They have found a key gene on the Y chromosome that seems to act as a master switch for maleness, transforming a growing human fetus that otherwise would become a girl into a baby boy.


For Some, 'No Beards' Is Painful Job Rule
LEAD: For millions of men with coarse, curly hair there is no such thing as a smooth clean shave.
For these men, shaving is painful because they develop razor bumps on the face and neck from the closely cut ends of hairs that imbed themselves to irritate and scar the skin.


Taped Confession Played at Jogger Trial
LEAD: A Manhattan jury viewed in silence yesterday a videotape in which one defendant in the Central Park jogger case detailed the rape and beating of the victim.


Currents;   For U.S., the Stately Inns of England
LEAD: LAURA ASHLEY did it first: marketed the English country-house life style, everything from romantic floral frocks to soft chintz fabrics and wallpapers.


Bankruptcy Helps a Steelmaker
LEAD: The Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corporation appears to be turning itself into an example of how bankruptcy can sometimes have a rejuvenating effect.


AMR's Profit Down 27.4%
LEAD: The AMR Corporation, the nation's largest airline company, said yesterday that its earnings fell 27.4 percent in the second quarter because of weaker traffic than expected and higher operating expenses.


Sharpton Surrenders to Start 15-Day Term
LEAD: The Rev.
Al Sharpton surrendered yesterday in Queens to begin a 15-day jail sentence for disorderly conduct stemming from his leadership of a Day of Outrage demonstration in 1988 that tied up traffic at La Guardia Airport.


Bonds Fall as Inflation Rate Rises
LEAD: Treasury bond prices sagged and long-term interest rates rose fairly sharply yesterday in response to disappointing inflation news and badly received testimony from the Federal Reserve Board's chairman, Alan Greenspan.


Suffolk Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suffolk Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,400,000
1,302,000
Per share
.42
.39
6mo net inc
2,808,000
2,664,000
Per share
.85
.80


Sealright Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sealright Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
56,755,000
54,987,000
Net inc
5,471,000
5,093,000
Share earns
.50
.46
6mo sales
103,223,000
96,977,000
Net inc
b8,198,000
7,619,000
Share earns
.74
.69
b-Included a pretax gain of $350,000 in the first quarter resulting from an 11-acre land transfer to Sealright from the City of Kansas City, Kansas.


Merck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merck &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,899,300,000
1,585,200,000
Net inc
470,200,000
396,600,000
Share earns
1.20
1.00
Shares outst
391,300,000
396,600,000
6mo sales
3,657,800,000
3,156,600,000
Net inc
874,000,000
737,000,000
Share earns
2.23
1.86
Shares outst
392,600,000
396,700,000


Old Drug Is Found to Cut Heart Risk
LEAD: In a large new study, a drug that had fallen out of favor as a routine treatment has dramatically cut the risk of fatal and nonfatal heart attacks among people who had previously suffered one.


Brand Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brand Cos.  (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
94,767,000
64,704,000
Net inc
3,644,000
2,353,000
Share earns
.18
.13
Shares outst
20,765,000
18,672,000
6mo rev
183,938,000
109,053,000
Net inc
6,812,000
3,710,000
Share earns
.33
.20
Shares outst
20,596,000
18,610,000


Asher to HarperCollins
LEAD: Aaron Asher, who resigned last week as publisher of Grove Weidenfeld, yesterday was appointed a vice president of HarperCollins.
He will publish about 20 books a year under his own imprint, Aaron Asher Books.


American Home Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Home Products (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,605,064,000
1,587,908,000
Net inc
b270,350,000
239,495,000
Share earns
.86
.77
Shares outst
313,938,000
311,010,000
6mo sales
3,418,499,000
3,334,659,000
Net inc
b584,838,000
519,587,000
Share earns
1.86
1.67
Shares outst
313,776,000
310,675,000


Square D Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Square D Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
406,499,000
416,302,000
Net inc
b34,227,000
c32,197,000
Share earns
1.40
1.28
Shares outst
23,335,000
25,236,000
6mo sales
795,024,000
810,036,000
Net inc
b61,341,000
c59,801,000
Share earns
2.49
2.37
Shares outst
23,335,000
25,236,000


Idex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Idex Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
60,061,000
57,056,000
Net inc
b4,847,000
c5,114,000
Share earns
.45
.45
Shares outst
10,807,000
7,852,000
6mo sales
115,269,000
112,805,000
Net inc
b8,643,000
c9,768,000
Share earns
.80
.93
Shares outst
10,807,000
7,208,000


The News Shuts Press And Cuts Some Jobs
LEAD: In what it described as a cost-cutting measure, The Daily News shut down one of three presses last night at its satellite plant in Garden City, L.I., eliminating 15 to 20 jobs a night.


Verifone Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Verifone Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Revenue
41,078,000
30,026,000
Net inc
3,987,000
2,992,000
Share earns
.17
.15
Shares outst
22,795,000
19,876,000
6mo rev
74,115,000
52,155,000
Net inc
6,212,000
4,847,000
Share earns
.29
.24
Shares outst
21,791,000
19,879,000


Money-Fund Yields Drop
LEAD: Yields on tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report continued to decline in the week ended yesterday.


A Lost Era of Buying, as a Camera Saw It
LEAD: FEW people would accuse Consumer Reports of being stylish.
Month after month the magazine, published by Consumers Union, turns to topics like washing machines, term life insurance and shampoo, and presents them in a dry, technical style.


Colorado National Bankhares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colorado National Bankhares (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,237,000
518,000
Per share
.11
.05
6mo net inc
2,787,000
2,921,000
Per share
.25
.27


Steinbrenner Hearing: Excerpts
LEAD: Following are excerpts from George Steinbrenner's hearing before Commissioner Fay Vincent on July 5 and July 6, as released by the commissioner's office yesterday:
Payment to Spira: The Motivations
VINCENT: The payment of the $40,000.
Your testimony is that you made this payment out of a mixture of motivations.


Industry Gets Access To Secret Technology
LEAD: The Government is softening a decades-old secrecy policy that has kept private industry from gaining access to various technological advances developed in the nation's nuclear weapons programs, Energy Secretary James D. Watkins said today.


PREMIER OF CZECHS SEEKS U.S. CAPITAL
LEAD: The Premier of the Czech region of this country is to arrive in the United States on Friday in search of what he calls pluralism.


Burlington Northern Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burlington Northern Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,172,000,000
1,155,000,000
Net inc
71,000,000
56,000,000
Share earns
.92
.74
Shares outst
76,794,000
75,660,000
6mo rev
2,355,000,000
2,280,000,000
Net inc
134,000,000
89,000,000
Share earns
1.74
1.18
Shares outst
76,644,000
75,438,000


CHRONICLE
LEAD: AUGUST WILSON and JUDY OLIVER plan to divorce, and Mr.
Wilson blames it on work.
The playwright, who has won two Pulitzer Prizes in three years, said that he has been home only about three months a year during the last five years.


Westcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westcorp Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,252,000
2,462,000
Per share
.31
.15
6mo net inc
8,164,000
5,654,000
Per share
.49
.34


Maytag Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maytag Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
788,530,000
813,545,000
Net inc
30,411,000
28,239,000
Share earns
.29
.27
Shares outst
105,603,000
105,826,000
6mo sales
1,550,604,000
1,492,118,000
Net inc
63,060,000
62,352,000
Share earns
.60
.61
Shares outst
105,591,000
101,563,000


Behind U.S. Reversal: Gains by the Khmer Rouge
LEAD: Defense and intelligence officials say they are increasingly concerned that the Communist Khmer Rouge guerrillas are winning their war to oust the Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government.
The Bush Administration's announcement today that it is withdrawing recognition of the Cambodian rebel coalition and opening talks with


A Divisive Issue of German Unity: How to Reconcile Abortion Laws
LEAD: The question of how to deal with abortion has become one of the most divisive issues between East and West Germany as the two nations move toward full reunification.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: As the chief scientist for the successful Voyager Project exploring the outer planets, Dr.
EDWARD C. STONE has virtually lived at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., for the last 18 years.
Now he is to be the next director of the laboratory, which leads the world in planetary exploration.


Apple Computer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apple Computer Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
1,364,760,000
1,248,212,000
Net inc
119,764,000
96,129,000
Share earns
.96
.74
Shares outst
124,479,000
129,271,000
9mo sales
4,204,345,000
3,900,266,000
Net inc
376,419,000
292,953,000
Share earns
2.96
2.28
Shares outst
126,978,000
128,255,000


Union Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Pacific Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,784,000,000
1,625,000,000
Net inc
153,000,000
152,000,000
Share earns
1.53
1.41
6mo rev
3,510,000,000
3,176,000,000
Net inc
281,000,000
290,000,000
Share earns
2.80
2.63
Shares outst
100,400,000
110,600,000


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
Apr-June
Change
1990
From '89
Alltel Corp.
$ 44,600,000
+3.5
American Home Products
270,400,000
+12.9
Ameritech
352,300,000
+11.3
AMR Corp.
129,200,000
-27.4
Apple Computer Inc.


American Business Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Business Products Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
94,806,000
97,680,000
Net inc
3,004,000
3,132,000
Share earns
.42
.44
Shares outst
7,158,776
7,150,576
6mo sales
195,208,000
195,983,000
Net inc
6,831,000
6,461,000
Share earns
.95
.90
Shares outst
7,160,285
7,148,631


Legent Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Legent Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
42,255,000
34,658,000
Net inc
8,559,000
7,601,000
Share earns
.40
.35
9mo rev
123,005,000
100,093,000
Net inc
b24,014,000
17,321,000
Share earns
1.11
.80
b-Included first quarter charges of $975,000 related to the company's acquisition of Business Software Technology Inc.


The Delights of Your Own Window Box
LEAD: BETTER late than never when it comes to planting a window box garden.
Shelves of colorful transplants continue to fill florist and garden shops, so it's possible to plant now and enjoy a vibrant display until frost.


Bankers First reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankers First (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,301,000
1,196,000
Per share
.30
.28
6mo net inc
2,591,000
2,442,000
Per share
.60
.57


Close to Home
LEAD: ''I KNOW what we should do,'' my oldest friend said after the takeout fish and chips and the California chablis. ''We'll go for a walk down Paper Street.''


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trinity Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
283,100,000
311,600,000
Net inc
5,900,000
13,800,000
Share earns
.28
.75
Shares outst
21,300,000
18,400,000
The company said revenues and net income in the first quarter were affected by a reduction in shipments of railcars of about 1,300 cars due to several changes of production lines to different railcar types.


I.B.M. Is Reported To Weigh Deal
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation may sell several marginal businesses, including typewriter and keyboard manufacturing operations in Lexington, Ky., for about $2 billion, people in the securities industry said.


Hawaiian Electric reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawaiian Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
254,170,000
216,878,000
Net inc
13,805,000
15,038,000
Share earns
.64
.72
6mo rev
491,762,000
416,969,000
Net inc
25,126,000
32,351,000
Share earns
1.17
1.55


Teach for America Can So Do Something
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fleet/Norstar Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fleet/Norstar Financial Group (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
60,085,000
90,153,000
Per share
.54
.81
Shares outst
109,256,512
108,605,421
6mo net loss
38,024,000
b182,586,000
Per share
-
1.65
Shares outst
109,190,352
108,277,110


Topics of The Times;   Urban Bite
LEAD: Among the many sins that come with summer - sunburn, sleeplessness, stringy hair, shirts soaked by the time you get to work - city dwellers often forget the bite.


Orange-co Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orange-co Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
39,238,000
52,984,000
Net loss
b2,922,000
c218,000
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
10,197,000
10,277,000
9mo sales
93,982,000
127,930,000
Net loss
b9,894,000
c3,067,000
Share earns
-
.30
Shares outst
10,199,000
10,292,000


Alison Leggatt Is Dead; British Actress Was 86
LEAD: Alison Leggatt, an actress who won renown in plays by John Osborne and Harold Pinter, died on Sunday, her family said today.
She was 86 years old.


U.S. Rests Case Depicting Barry as Drug Addict
LEAD: The prosecution rested today in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug trial after calling a final witness to bolster its contention that the Mayor regularly used drugs over the past six years and lied to investigators about that use.


Norbert Witt, 81, Dies; A Maker of Noxzema
LEAD: Norbert A. Witt, former president of the Noxell Corporation, makers of Noxzema skin cream and other cosmetic products, died on Saturday in Palm Beach Gardens Hospital, Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 81 years old and lived in Palm Beach.


Pyramid Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pyramid Technology (OTC)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Revenue
48,675,000
24,295,000
Net inc
6,853,000
1,472,000
Share earns
.41
.12
Shares outst
11,762,000
8,679,000
9mo rev
124,034,000
73,344,000
Net inc
11,512,000
5,615,000
Share earns
1.14
.65
Shares outst
10,089,000
8,697,000


Topics of The Times;   Saratoga's Unsettling Secret
LEAD: New York already has an official animal (beaver), song (''I Love New York'') and muffin (apple).
Now a bill awaiting Gov.
Mario Cuomo's signature would create an official bottle: the prized emerald-green vessel once used to distribute mineral water from a spring in Saratoga.


Viola and Scott Duel Almost to the Wire
LEAD: Frank Viola and Mike Scott, locked in a duel of stamina and stuff, tonight went at it pitch for pitch.
Pausing only long enough to grab a drink and a breath, Viola for the Mets and Scott for the Astros raced like lightning through the other's teammates, trading shutout inning for shutout inning.


American Petrofina Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Petrofina Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
832,606,000
847,421,000
Net inc
53,805,000
41,849,000
Share earns
3.48
2.71
6mo rev
1,728,878,000
1,566,311,000
Net inc
80,023,000
90,609,000
Share earns
5.17
6.02


Bridge
LEAD: Several thousand players converging on Boston for the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals, which begin there tomorrow, will find one event already in progress.
The Grand National Teams championship, which began at the grass-roots level eight months ago, is now down to 23 teams from all parts of the United


Evans &amp; Sutherland reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Evans &amp; Sutherland (OTC)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
38,746,000
34,438,000
Net inc
4,666,000
1,804,000
Share earns
.51
.21
Shares outst
9,203,000
8,587,000
6mo sales
76,284,000
59,606,000
Net inc
8,619,000
b3,137,000
Share earns
.95
.37
Shares outst
9,083,000
8,545,000


Pulitzer Publishing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pulitzer Publishing Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
103,859,000
103,306,000
Net inc
4,597,000
6,920,000
Share earns
.44
.66
Shares outst
10,475,000
10,467,000
6mo rev
199,016,000
197,415,000
Net inc
5,503,000
9,967,000
Share earns
.53
.95
Shares outst
10,475,000
10,468,000


WNET Names Director Of Public-Affairs Programs
LEAD: Fred Noriega, a news producer and correspondent at WCBS-TV since 1975, will become the director of public-affairs programming at WNET, New York City's major public television station, on Aug. 20, the station announced yesterday.


Marlboro Cup Pairings
LEAD: Pairings in the Marlboro Cup of New York soccer tournament, Aug. 10 and 12 at Giants Stadium, were announced yesterday at a news luncheon at the ''21'' Club.
The United States national team, the defending Marlboro Cup champions, will play Flamengo of Brazil in the second game of a doubleheader on Friday, Aug.


General Dynamics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Dynamics Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,624,400,000
2,529,700,000
Net loss
b240,000,000
c58,400,000
Share earns
-
1.39
6mo sales
5,115,400,000
4,890,600,000
Net loss
b116,300,000
c133,800,000
Share earns
-
3.20


Jefferson Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferson Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,751,000
4,320,000
Per share
.54
.62
6mo net inc
7,352,000
8,378,000
Per share
1.06
1.21


Nuclear Waste Dump Will Fail, Study Says
LEAD: The Government's approach to building an underground nuclear waste repository is ''bound to fail'' because it demands a level of safety that science cannot guarantee, the National Research Council said in a study made public today.


Senate Votes to Give S.E.C. Wider Enforcement Powers
LEAD: The Senate tonight approved a measure intended to strengthen the enforcement powers of the Securities and Exchange Commission by expanding the range of securities law violations for which it can impose civil penalties.


Sumitomo Bank of California reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sumitomo Bank of California (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
11,030,000
7,970,000
Per share
1.34
1.04
6mo net inc
20,870,000
15,690,000
Per share
2.54
2.14
Shares outst
8,222,845
7,599,655


First Bank System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Bank System Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
29,900,000
53,000,000
Per share
.38
.77
6mo net inc
58,400,000
103,300,000
Per share
.75
1.54


Learonal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Learonal Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
36,524,000
36,860,000
Net inc
2,067,000
2,692,000
Share earns
.23
.30


Bronx Woman, 91, Is Killed In an Apparent Robbery
LEAD: The body of a 91-year-old woman who had been beaten and stabbed to death was found yesterday in her Bronx apartment, the police said.


New Jersey Officials Defend Exporting Trash
LEAD: New Jersey's highest elected officials clashed with a senator from Indiana and one from Ohio today over New Jersey's growing practice of shipping trash that it cannot accommodate to other states.


F.T.C. Challenges Carbide Unit's Sale
LEAD: The Union Carbide Corporation said the Federal Trade Commission had asked the Federal District Court in Washington to block Union Carbide's proposed sale of the company's urethane polyols and propylene glycols business to the ARCO Chemical Company because the deal might limit competition.


Currents;   Sheets as Decor (Don't Climb the Wall)
LEAD: DECORATING with sheets seems easy.
Doing it is another story. ''For years we've seen rooms transformed with sheets in lots of decorating magazines, but we had no idea how to actually do it,'' said Margaux King, a producer at ONTO, a video production company.
She, a colleague, Erika Lindberg, and Kay Jones, an interior designer, created ''Weekend Bedroom Makeover With


Shiite Fighting Rages in South Lebanon
LEAD: Rival Shiite Muslim militiamen fought fierce battles in southern Lebanon today for the third day in a row, and the police said 21 people were killed and 40 wounded.


Iraq Speaks of Acts of War
LEAD: Iraq warned fellow OPEC members today that it viewed violations of the cartel's production quotas as virtual acts of war, and accused neighboring Kuwait of stealing its oil over the last decade.


Polaroid's Profit Drops 23%
LEAD: The Polaroid Corporation reported Tuesday that weak demand for its instant-picture products pulled second-quarter earnings down 23 percent.


ENDS RECOGNITION OF REBELS; AGREES TO TALKS WITH HANOI
LEAD: In a major policy reversal, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d announced today that the Bush Administration was withdrawing its diplomatic recognition of the Cambodian guerrilla coalition, which includes the Communist Khmer Rouge, and opening negotiations with Vietnam on settling the Cambodian conflict.


Royal Trustco Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Royal Trustco Ltd.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,272,000,000
901,000,000
Net inc
69,000,000
69,000,000
Share earns
.38
.46
6mo rev
2,486,000,000
1,605,000,000
Net inc
141,000,000
129,000,000
Share earns
.78
.86


Currents;   Architectural Tour Of British Towns
LEAD: AT a time when Prince Charles has made people more aware of city planning issues than ever before, a new book by the British writer Mark Girouard, ''The English Town: A History of Urban Life'' (Yale University Press, $39.95), seems timely.


Comerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comerica Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
32,191,000
30,281,000
Per share
1.90
1.86
Shares outst
16,501,428
15,768,478
6mo net inc
63,738,000
57,674,000
Per share
3.76
3.52
Shares outst
16,487,840
15,746,934


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


U.S. Imports Record 49.9% of Oil
LEAD: The United States imported a record 49.9 percent of its oil destined for its homes, autos and factories in the first half of this year, the American Petroleum Institute reported yesterday.
The half-year statistics confirm a trend that has been evident in fits and starts for months: the decline of the


Evolution in Europe;   4 Killed and 100 Are Injured In Unrest in Soviet Republic
LEAD: Ethnic protesters burned buildings and attacked a police officer in the Central Asian republic of Kirghizia overnight, leaving four people dead, the official Tass press agency said today.


Profits Rise At 4 Large Drug Makers
LEAD: Merck &amp; Company, the world's largest drug company, said yesterday that its profits rose by 18.6 percent in the second quarter, which was in line with the company's forecasts of a slower growth in earnings after a 24 percent increase in all of 1989.
Merck's sales in the quarter increased by 19.8 percent, surpassing analysts' predictions.


Baker's Middle East Phone
LEAD: Lately, preoccupied with the summit meetings of NATO in London and the industrial democracies in Houston, the Administration has downplayed the Middle East.
Understandable as this diversion of attention may be, events may not permit the luxury of delay.


Omen for Young: Low Black Turnout
LEAD: In his bid to become Georgia's first black governor, Andrew Young may have won a place on the runoff ballot Tuesday in the state's Democratic gubernatorial primary, but many of his campaign aides and other political observers said today that he had failed to generate the enthusiasm among black voters needed to win the nomination.


Culling the Past to Embellish a Garden
LEAD: ''In the summer, a lot of folk-art customers want to add something fanciful to the garden,'' said Thomas K. Woodard, owner of Thos.
K.
Woodard American Antiques &amp; Quilts.


DF Southeastern Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DF Southeastern Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,327,000
1,818,000
Per share
.72
.39
6mo net inc
6,265,000
5,129,000
Per share
1.35
1.11


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.93
8.00
9.21
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.56
7.61
7.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.48
7.49
7.70
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.46
8.407.98
30-YR.


New Jersey Defends Policy of Exporting Trash


Erly Industries reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Erly Industries (OTC)
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Sales
431,413,000
313,034,000
Net inc
b2,240,000
c13,994,000
Share earns
.81
-
Shares outst
2,753,889
2,628,914
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $147,000, or 5 cents a share and an extraordinary credit of $863,000, or 31 cents a share.


General Dynamics Loss Tied to Cost Overruns
LEAD: The General Dynamics Corporation said today that it had a $240 million loss in the second quarter after setting aside $450 million to account for cost overruns on a new combat plane for the Navy.
But the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, General Dynamics' partner in building the Navy plane, decided not to take a financial charge on the program and reported a profit of $57 million for the period.


Magazine of the Right That Tripped Up a Tory
LEAD: Its circulation is small, its stance conservative.
Its editor is Dominic Lawson, the son of a prominent Tory.
So when The Spectator became the magazine that brought down a senior Cabinet member in the Conservative Thatcher Government last week, some saw it as paradoxical.


Nationwide Health Properties reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nationwide Health Properties
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,801,000
8,893,000
Net inc
4,326,000
2,705,000
Share earns
.39
.33
Shares outst
11,195,000
8,195,000
6mo rev
15,390,000
17,692,000
Net inc
8,179,000
4,983,000
Share earns
.76
.61
Shares outst
10,714,000
8,195,000


Comptronix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comptronix Corp.
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
15,323,000
12,874,000
Net inc
610,000
578,000
Share earns
.07
.08
Shares outst
8,707,000
7,434,000
6mo sales
25,380,000
24,200,000
Net inc
931,000
1,011,000
Share earns
.11
.15
Shares outst
8,707,000
6,875,000


First Interstate Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Interstate Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
95,059,000
c103,136,000
Per share
1.42
2.02
Shares outst
60,085,321
46,852,024
6mo net inc
b222,279,000
c235,336,000
Per share
3.60
4.83
Shares outst
56,334,826
46,311,033


Lexicon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lexicon Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
4,080,587
4,273,349
Net loss
b291,607
c755,030
Shares outst
7,794,205
7,490,451
9mo rev
9,107,033
12,372,224
Net loss
b1,384,106
c1,952,440
Shares outst
7,746,608
7,502,159


Republic New York Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic New York Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
52,600,000
43,800,000
Per share
1.43
1.25
6mo net inc
97,100,000
85,500,000
Per share
2.74
2.45


A New Director At College Arts Center
LEAD: A new director of the Colden Center for the Performing Arts at Queens College, Ralph Sandler, assumed his post on Monday.


Merrill's Down, but Yanks Are Up


15 Are Charged in a Scheme To Cheat Car Insurance Firms
LEAD: Fifteen people have been charged with operating an insurance scheme in Brooklyn that bilked at least $300,000 from insurers, Attorney General Robert Abrams said yesterday.


New Jersey Court Protects Trash From Police Searches
LEAD: Garbage left on the curb is private and the state cannot search through it without a warrant, the New Jersey Supreme Court has ruled.


2 Soviet Astronauts Escape Death After Being Trapped Outside Mir
LEAD: Two Soviet astronauts walking in space were trapped outside the Mir space station on Tuesday when an airlock door failed to close, forcing them to use an emergency re-entry procedure as their air supplies ran dangerously low, Soviet press reports and American experts said yesterday.


Putnam Trust Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Putnam Trust Co.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,199,000
1,057,000
Per share
.42
.37
6mo net inc
2,261,000
2,298,000
Per share
.79
.80


No Matter What They Say, Census Needs Fixing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cray Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cray Computer Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
13,269,000
10,417,000
Shares outst
18,017,000
16,370,000
6mo net loss
25,669,000
20,514,000
Shares outst
17,477,000
16,370,000
The company said it reported no revenue because it is in the development stage.


Price Index Surged 0.5% Last Month
LEAD: Surges in the prices of food, housing and gasoline led to a five-tenths of 1 percent rise in consumer prices in June, the Labor Department said today.
The unexpectedly sharp rise followed two months of more modest advances and moved the annual rate of inflation up to 5.9 percent so far this year.


Kroger Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kroger Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 16
1990
1989
Sales
4,742,386,772
4,425,895,432
Net inc
25,258,078
b2,525,883
Share earns
.30
-
Shares outst
84,721,616
81,099,106
6mo sales
9,301,145,892
8,916,671,531
Net inc
14,992,765
b21,496,720
Share earns
.18
-
Shares outst
84,409,093
81,099,106


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: RHODA and Bruce Miller's 19-year-old son, Marc, will leave home this fall to begin his junior year at the University of Delaware.
But their two eldest sons, Bill, 22, and Jon, 21, are living at home in West Orange, N.J. ''indefinitely,'' Mrs.
Miller said.


Diamond Shamrock Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diamond Shamrock Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
566,600,000
549,700,000
Net inc
12,200,000
26,900,000
Share earns
.45
1.02
6mo rev
1,151,200,000
1,016,200,000
Net inc
16,500,000
41,800,000
Share earns
.56
1.59


Telxon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Telxon Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
40,244,000
35,307,000
Net inc
b3,732,000
c557,000
Share earns
.28
.04
b-Included a gain of $2,266,000, or 17 cents a share, from early extinguishment of debt and tax-loss carryforward.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Agassi Struggles to Victory
Top-seeded Andre Agassi, playing for the first time since his loss in the French Open final, struggled through a first-set tie breaker before defeating Brad Pearce, 7-6, 6-3, yesterday in the second round of the Sovran Bank Classic in Washington.
Agassi, ranked fourth in the world, trailed, 4-2, in the first set and faced a set point in the tie breaker before winning it, 9-7.


G.E. Unit Buys British Concern
LEAD: The GE Capital Corporation, the financial services subsidiary of the General Electric Company, announced yesterday that it had acquired Burton Group Financial Services P.L.C. of Britain, which manages credit-card accounts and provides other services to retailers, for $329 million in cash.
Burton Group


4 Legends' Matchup Is Also Farewell
LEAD: In Greek mythology, the Elysian Fields are the haven at the ends of the earth where the most exalted heroes go after death.
At the Old Course, they are the sanctuaries of fairway between the hellish bunkers on the 567-yard 14th hole.


Supercomputing Solutions reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Supercomputing Solutions
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
733,723
360,752
Net loss
1,113,756
743,836
6mo rev
1,129,816
817,363
Net loss
2,505,968
1,241,815


Gannett Co.  Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gannett Co.  Inc. (NYSE)
13wks to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
893,795,000
904,174,000
Net inc
105,267,000
112,104,000
Share earns
.66
.70
26wk rev
1,707,195,000
1,721,733,000
Net inc
180,268,000
187,005,000
Share earns
1.13
1.16


Printronix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Printronix Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
29,668,000
29,250,000
Net inc
1,005,000
b607,000
Share earns
.26
-
Shares outst
3,807,862
4,576,561
b-Net loss


Sister of Former Dictator on Trial in Romania


Shad Quits as Chairman In Shake-Up at Drexel
LEAD: John S. R. Shad resigned yesterday as the chairman of the Drexel Burnham Lambert Group, as the firm moved to put more outsiders on its board.
The firm named Ralph S. Saul, a former president of the American Stock Exchange and one of the three independent directors on the board, to succeed Mr.
Shad as chairman.


Go Corp. and I.B.M. In Pen Software Pact
LEAD: The Go Corporation, a start-up company developing computers that can be operated with a pen-like device instead of a keyboard, said today that it had licensed its basic software to the International Business Machines Corporation.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-14
A major reversal on Cambodia was announced by Secretary of State Baker.
The Administration is withdrawing its recognition of the Cambodian guerrilla coalition and opening negotiations with Vietnam on settling the Cambodian conflict.
Page A1


Wavetek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wavetek Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
22,924,000
21,025,000
Net inc
b515,000
234,000
Share earns
.06
.03
9mo sales
70,206,000
64,142,000
Net inc
b2,304,000
686,000
Share earns
.26
.08
b-Included a tax credit of $244,000, or 3 cents a share.


2 Go Too Far in Test Drive
LEAD: Just 90 minutes into his new job, an automobile salesman was accosted at knifepoint by his first customers, 19-year-old twins who proceeded to steal the car they wanted to test drive, the police said.
The two led the police on a 12-mile chase before they were stopped and arrested on suspicion of armed robbery.


Fedders Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fedders Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
103,449,000
125,731,000
Net inc
7,368,000
7,903,000
Share earns
.39
.41
Shares outst
18,835,000
19,228,000
6mo sales
215,941,000
232,712,000
Net inc
15,453,000
14,727,000
Share earns
.83
.77
Shares outst
18,664,000
19,045,000


Mid-America Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mid-America Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,473,000
2,734,000
Per share
.37
.41
6mo net inc
4,905,000
5,588,000
Per share
.74
.83
Year-ago per share earnings adjusted to reflect 10 percent stock dividend paid in June 1990.


Manley Still Banned
LEAD: Dexter Manley has been told by the National Football League that his reinstatement will not be considered until November, when he will have served one year of his drug suspension.
Manley, a Washington Redskins defensive end, was permanently banned from the N.F.L. on Nov. 18 for his third violation of the league's substance-abuse policy.


Home Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Financial Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,300,000
2,335,000
Per share
.52
.52
Shares outst
4,452,000
4,451,000
6mo net inc
4,448,000
4,500,000
Per share
1.00
1.01
Shares outst
4,455,000
4,450,000


Street Theater Audience Must Make a Choice
LEAD: ''The more aggressive you are as a member of the audience, the more you see,'' Mira-Lani Oglesby was saying. ''I know I always elbow my way to the front, every night I'm there.'' She's there rather frequently, being the co-author of ''Father Was a Peculiar Man,'' the theatrical event that is unfolding these nights in the streets of downtown Manhattan.


Primary for Surrogate Attracts Big Spenders
LEAD: Five candidates are likely to spend a total of about $2 million trying to win the Democratic nomination - and almost certain election - for one of two Manhattan surrogate posts.


Books of The Times;   Untangling the Strands of the Wedtech Scandal
LEAD:
Too Good to Be True
The Outlandish Story of Wedtech
By James Traub
Illustrated. 379 pages. Doubleday. $21.95.


Newmil Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newmil Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
655,000
1,103,000
Per share
.15
.20
Shares outst
4,483,888
5,593,374
Yr net inc
3,575,000
5,483,000
Per share
.77
.91
Shares outst
4,661,381
6,014,991


Review/Ballet;   A Tyrant With Self-Doubts, in the Bolshoi's 'Ivan'
LEAD: Ivan the Awe-Inspiring, better known as the Terrible in the West, would seem an odd subject for a ballet.
In 1975, Yuri Grigorovich's choreography and staging for the Bolshoi Ballet proved otherwise.


2 Southern Baptist News Chiefs Are Dismissed
LEAD: A month after solidifying their control over the Southern Baptist Convention, the denomination's fundamentalist leadership dismissed the two top editors of the convention's news and information service.


Hanna (M.A.) Co.  (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hanna (M.A.) Co.  (N)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
289,377,000
291,490,000
Net inc
18,101,000
c35,870,000
Share earns
.65
1.48
Shares outst
27,842,369
28,149,927
6mo sales
557,269,000
547,902,000
Net inc
b21,665,000
c49,686,000
Share earns
.78
2.08
Shares outst
27,816,710
22,893,986


Rooney Linked to Bets
LEAD: The late Art Rooney, founder of the Pittsburgh Steelers, was described in court yesterday as a good customer of a man on trial for doing millions of dollars' worth of bookmaking.
The comment about Rooney came in opening statements at the trial of Paul Hankish, whom the Government said started running a bookmaking operation out of Bridgeport, Ohio, in 1957.


Olco Petroleum Group reports earnings for Year to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Olco Petroleum Group
Year to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
406,800,000
359,300,000
Net inc
1,400,000
900,000
Share earns
.09
.06
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Extra Patrols To Be Added For 7 Precincts
LEAD: Stung by a steep rise in murders and robberies across New York City, the Dinkins administration announced yesterday that it would pay 200 police officers overtime wages each day to work extra shifts walking beats in seven of the most crime-ridden precincts.


Art, and My First Dirty Word
LEAD: When I was a little boy, my father spanked me when I was bad.
It was my mother's duty to teach me to distinguish between right and wrong.
When I stepped over the boundaries she had set for me, I knew I had him to answer to.
She taught, he punished and I grew up.


East Side Developer Enlists a Close Adviser of Dinkins
LEAD: In a textbook tale of politics and personalities, a developer's embattled effort to build a luxury apartment tower on the site of a landmark tenement complex in Manhattan took a twist yesterday that combined a debate, a delay and a hand from one of Mayor David N. Dinkins's closest supporters.


Who Says A Factory Must Look Like One?
LEAD: THE British designer David Mellor believes that Britain's post-World War II town planners made a ''major strategic mistake'' when they segregated the places where people worked from the places where they lived. ''I've always thought that manufacturing should be integrated with living and with the countryside,'' he said.


Bancorp New Jersey Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp New Jersey Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
742,000
780,000
Per share
.29
.29
Shares outst
2,560,793
2,711,563
6mo net inc
1,465,000
1,674,000
Per share
.56
.62
Shares outst
2,598,818
2,702,913


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We admire the President, and we support the President, but we don't work for the President.''
- Representative Mickey Edwards, an Oklahoma Republican.
[A20:3.]


United's Nonunion Workers Agree to Join the Buyout Bid
LEAD: The unions seeking to buy the UAL Corporation have reached an agreement with the airline's 26,000 non-union employees, bringing aboard the last employee group that had held out, representatives of the employees said yesterday.


Citicorp Sees No Big Layoffs
LEAD: Citicorp officials yesterday acknowledged the need for reorganization of their global finance group, which handles large corporations in North America, Europe and Japan.


Justin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Justin Industries (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
71,776,000
66,373,000
Net inc
1,819,000
1,106,000
Share earns
.21
.13
6mo sales
135,376,000
126,154,000
Net inc
2,348,000
1,315,000
Share earns
.27
.15


CHRONICLE
LEAD: RITA KLIMOVA, the popular, ebullient Czechoslovak Ambassador to the United States, says she plans to work as long as possible while being treated for malignant leukemia in this country.
Mrs.
Klimova's cancer was diagnosed at Walter Reed Army Hospital three weeks ago.


80 SCHOOLS CHOSEN FOR NEW YORK TEST OF POWER SHARING
LEAD: Eighty New York City schools have been chosen to begin Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez's trademark experiment in power sharing among teachers, parents and principals, but scores of other schools have signaled a stiffening resistance to the Chancellor by staying out of the process.


Washington State Tax-Exempt Bonds
LEAD: The State of Washington offered a total of $195 million in general obligation bonds in the tax-exempt municipal bond market yesterday.


Oil Leaks Into Arthur Kill After 2 Barges Collide
LEAD: A barge leaving Exxon's Bayway refinery in Linden, N.J., slammed into a sister barge that was docked there yesterday, dumping 37,000 gallons of home heating oil into the Arthur Kill.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace referred incorrectly in some editions to the outcome of the Alger Hiss case.


New Sonoco President Plans Worldwide Focus
LEAD: The Sonoco Products Company is not well known but it has been around for a while.
It declared its 263d consecutive quarterly dividend yesterday and it also announced a new president and chief operating officer, Russell C. King Jr.
Mr.
King, 55, has worked for the manufacturer of paper and plastic products, which is the largest producer of plastic grocery sacks, since he got out of Wofford College, in Spartanburg, S.C., in 1956.


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
New York Pride has chosen Fred/ Alan Inc. to create an anti-litter campaign, which will begin in the late summer or early fall.
New York Pride has also worked with Burkhardt &amp; Christy Advertising on a campaign to encourage New Yorkers to be nicer.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JONATHAN POLLARD, who is serving a life sentence in a Federal penitentiary at Marion, Ill., for spying, is divorcing his wife, ANNE POLLARD.
The papers were served yesterday to her bedside at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City.


Snap-On Tools Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Snap-On Tools Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
239,472,000
226,394,000
Net inc
27,151,000
27,315,000
Share earns
.66
.66
Shares outst
41,152,000
40,972,000
6mo sales
479,866,000
458,540,000
Net inc
58,283,000
58,685,000
Share earns
1.42
1.43
Shares outst
41,152,000
40,972,000


Inter-Regional Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inter-Regional Financial Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
81,466,000
81,489,000
Net inc
b1,492,000
c2,645,000
Share earns
.18
.34
6mo rev
158,744,000
151,656,000
Net inc
b1,641,000
c1,831,000
Share earns
.19
.23


Worthen Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Worthen Banking Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,126,000
2,208,000
Per share
.47
.20
6mo net inc
9,223,000
4,240,000
Per share
.84
.39


Intermec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intermec Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
41,852,000
37,816,000
Net inc
b147,000
2,050,000
Share earns
.02
.28
Shares outst
8,358,000
7,241,000
b-Lowered by a $1 million relocation charge and the higher overhead associated with its new facility as well as continuing weakness in sales to the Department of Defense.


Yun Po Sun, 92, Dies; Ex-President of Korea
LEAD: Former President Yun Po Sun of South Korea died Wednesday night at the age of 92, his aides said today.


Market Place;   Paramount Gets No Rave Review
LEAD: PARAMOUNT COMMUNICATIONS stock closed yesterday at 43, near its 52-week low of 40 1/2 and well below its 52-week high of 52 7/8.
Behind the decline, several Wall Street analysts said, is the concern that the company has made a number of enormously expensive films including ''Harlem Nights,'' ''Another 48 Hours,'' ''Days of Thunder,'' ''The Two Jakes'' and ''Godfather I


Brothers Shift Duties At Bergen Brunswig
LEAD: The Martini brothers are rearranging the management combination that enabled the two pharmacists from New Jersey to create the Bergen Brunswig Corporation, one of the country's major wholesale drug distributors.


Blue-White Rhapsody: 300 Pieces of Old China
LEAD: For lovers of antiques, the setting could not be better.
First, the walk up a shaded brick path to an 1810 Federal-style mansion.
Then through the big center hall, past 18th-century Chippendale serving tables, needle and petit point wing chairs and a Waterford chandelier.
And on to the main ballroom, to find pieces of blue and white china from the 1700's to the present.


Centerbank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centerbank (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
5,006,000
b3,757,000
Per share
-
.31
6mo net loss
19,625,000
b6,277,000
Per share
-
.52
b-Net income


Metro Matters;   Seeking to Make The Unpopular More Palatable
LEAD: In Yonkers yesterday, Mayor Henry Spallone not only accepted a $95,000 payoff from a power broker but also held a news conference to announce it.


Despite Veto Threat, Senate Passes Civil Rights Measure
LEAD: After failing to reach a compromise with the Bush Administration in last-minute negotiations, the Senate passed a major civil rights bill tonight in a form that President Bush has already threatened to veto.


Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
83,899,000
76,399,000
Net inc
2,406,000
1,298,000
Share earns
.45
.24
Shares outst
5,403,620
5,401,932


Fisher Transportation Servces Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fisher Transportation Servces Inc.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
3,311,436
4,166,636
Net loss
321,255
172,584
6mo rev
6,327,403
7,914,353
Net loss
997,397
408,412


Ahmanson (H.F.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ahmanson (H.F.) (N)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
60,070,000
39,692,000
Share earns
.61
.40
6mo net inc
121,821,000
78,892,000
Share earns
1.23
.80


Public Service Co. of Colorado reports earnings for 12mos to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service Co. of Colorado (NYSE)
12mos to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,676,087,000
1,702,592,000
Net inc
138,168,000
115,021,000
Share earns
2.37
1.95
Shares outst
52,958,000
52,458,000


Forschner Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forschner Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,704,000
9,117,000
Net inc
502,000
426,000
Share earns
.12
.10
6mo rev
20,912,000
18,050,000
Net inc
857,000
718,000
Share earns
.21
.18
The company said year-ago results are restated to reflect a change to the last-in, first-out method of accounting for inventories which resulted in reductions of $105,000 and $208,000 in income before taxes and 2 cents and 3 cents in net income per share from that previously reported under the first-in, first-


Personal Health
LEAD: ''Civilized'' people have long tolerated the dictates of fashion and dress codes that have forced children into movement-inhibiting uniforms and women into gut-gouging corsets, circulation-stopping hose and belts and ankle-breaking heels and platform soles.


Coffee Prices Post Gains; Gasoline and Pork Plunge
LEAD: Snow in Chile and a volcano in Guatemala helped lift coffee futures prices yesterday on New York's Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange, although neither event was believed to have damaged coffee plants.


Sherwin-Williams, DeSoto In Deal
LEAD: DeSoto Inc. announced it would sell its consumer paint business to the Sherwin-Williams Company of Cleveland for $80 million.
The sale, which is subject to stockholder and regulatory approval, would complete a partial liquidation by DeSoto, based in Des Plaines, Ill., in hopes of avoiding a takeover by the Sutton Holding Corporation, a New


Owner's Varying Explanations Are at Issue
LEAD: At his hearing two weeks ago, Commissioner Fay Vincent and his deputy, Steve Greenberg, pointedly noted that George Steinbrenner had changed his version of events, such as the reason for his $40,000 payment to Howard Spira, from one telling to the next.


Bancorp of Mississippi reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp of Mississippi (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,514,000
3,175,000
Per share
.74
.66
6mo net inc
6,575,000
6,437,000
Per share
1.37
1.34


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Saturday about vacant apartments in the Starrett City housing complex in Brooklyn misidentified the owner.
The development, recently renamed Starrett at Spring Creek, is owned by Starrett City Associates, not the Starrett Housing Corporation.


Our German Future
LEAD: Something is wrong with me. I can't rejoice at the great news.


John Volkmann, 84, Psychology Professor
LEAD: John Volkmann, professor emeritus of psychology at Mount Holyoke College, who specialized in the psychology of judgment, died last Thursday at his home in Northampton, Mass.
He was 84 years old.


Comex Names New President
LEAD: The New York Commodity Exchange yesterday confirmed the appointment of David A. Halperin as the new president of the exchange.


American City Business Jourals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American City Business Jourals Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
18,297,000
14,794,000
Net inc
1,006,000
b1,104,000
Share earns
.14
.12
Shares outst
3,338,000
4,104,000
6mo rev
32,750,000
26,859,000
Net inc
3,584,000
741,000
Share earns
.74
-
Shares outst
3,338,000
4,086,000


Intergroup Proxy Battle
LEAD: National Intergroup Inc. said today that it would offer Centaur Partners L.P. a seat on its board if it defeats the investment group's bid to gain three seats at the company's annual meeting next Wednesday.


Conner Peripherals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conner Peripherals (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
303,782,000
163,971,000
Net inc
26,647,000
9,431,000
Share earns
.54
.26
Shares outst
49,265,000
36,204,000
6mo sales
538,892,000
294,841,000
Net inc
42,069,000
15,087,000
Share earns
.92
.42
Shares outst
45,681,000
36,032,000


Dr. Richard M. Overholt, Surgeon And an Anti-Smoking Pioneer, 88
LEAD: Dr.
Richard M. Overholt, a chest surgeon who began crusading against smoking in the early 1930's, died on Monday at New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston.
He was 88 years old and lived in Dedham, Mass.
His family said he died of liver cancer.


Ball Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ball Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
381,900,000
337,200,000
Net inc
18,800,000
15,000,000
Share earns
.80
.64
Shares outst
21,816,992
23,474,148
6mo sales
703,400,000
594,500,000
Net inc
28,000,000
22,700,000
Share earns
1.16
.97


Review/Music;   Mezzo Sings Entirely Mozart
LEAD: Cecilia Bartoli's American debut on Tuesday evening at the Mostly Mozart Festival presented a listener with a familiar dilemma: whether to dwell on the obvious (the hotly publicized 24-year-old mezzo-soprano has talent), or to stress the shortcomings that her singing of Mozart and Rossini arias disclosed and that the European grapevine had not prepared one to expect.


Flight International reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flight International
Qtr to Jan 31
1990
1989
Revenue
11,477,742
16,240,848
Net loss
2,690,695
182,299
Shares outst
3,335,970
3,345,671
9mo rev
41,133,310
42,446,078
Net loss
2,810,053
b1,407,933
Share earns
-
.49
Shares outst
3,335,807
2,877,530


Kent Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kent Electronics Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
15,893,000
10,153,000
Net inc
905,000
658,000
Share earns
.23
.18
The company said its results partially reflected the acceleration of its acquisition of Pyramid Electronics Supply Inc.


Piniella Expresses Anger at Steinbrenner
LEAD: Lou Piniella, who served two terms as the Yankees' manager before being hired by the Reds shortly after last season, reacted angrily today to having his ''sports betting habits'' mentioned by George Steinbrenner during the Yankee owner's recent hearing with Commissioner Fay Vincent.


In Cambodia: Not a Moment Too Soon
LEAD: ''We want to do everything we can to prevent a return of the Khmer Rouge to power.'' With those words, Secretary of State Baker has restored a measure of decency, and realism, to America's policy toward the tormented land of Cambodia.


Whitman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Whitman Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,030,900,000
955,800,000
Net inc
b32,900,000
c27,600,000
Share earns
.23
.17
6mo sales
1,958,300,000
1,815,200,000
Net inc
b58,600,000
c65,400,000
Share earns
.38
.47


Home Builders See Recession And Blame the Savings Crisis
LEAD: For the first time since the recession of the early 1980's, the rate of new housing construction has dropped for five consecutive months, providing further proof, home builders say, that the economic and regulatory fallout from the savings and loan crisis has pulled one of the country's biggest industries into a recession.


Easy Goer Is Retired After Bone Chip Is Found
LEAD: Easy Goer, whose moments of brilliance stirred the passions of American racegoers over the last two years, was retired from racing yesterday because of a bone chip in his right front ankle.


Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
352,498,000
318,068,000
Net inc
31,545,000
27,399,000
Share earns
1.05
.91
6mo sales
667,139,000
594,414,000
Net inc
53,972,000
46,623,000
Share earns
1.79
1.55
Shares outst
30,140,000
30,131,000


Johnny Wayne, Comic On TV, Is Dead at 72
LEAD: Johnny Wayne, a king of comedy of Canadian radio and television as half of the Wayne and Shuster team, died today.
He was 72 years old.
He died of cancer, said Leonard Starmer, the executive producer of the ''Wayne and Shuster'' CBC-TV show.


Abington Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abington Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
392,000
b307,000
Per share
-
.15
6mo net loss
515,000
b707,000
Per share
-
.34
b-Net income


Adelphia Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adelphia Communications Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
50,223,000
52,185,000
Net loss
41,625,000
38,594,000
Yr rev
229,576,000
187,636,000
Net loss
156,939,000
123,645,000


Organizers: Chip vs. Paper
LEAD: THE computers I have been using are the size of small paperback books.
They contain as much memory as desk-top computers did 10 years ago.
Each can store over 1,000 telephone numbers and addresses, calculate spread sheets, keep my daily schedule and tell the time in over 200 cities.


The Cambodian Ordeal: A Country Bleeds for 15 Years
LEAD: Aril 1975 Communist guerrillas of the Khmer Rouge seize the capital, Phnom Penh, defeating the non-Communist Government of Marshal Lon Nol.
Under the leadership of Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge impose a brutal reorganization of society in which more than a million people die.
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, their virtual prisoner, is named head of state.


MCI Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCI Communications Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,867,000,000
1,594,000,000
Net inc
177,000,000
150,000,000
Share earns
.67
.56
Shares outst
255,000,000
254,000,000
6mo rev
3,674,000,000
3,094,000,000
Net inc
340,000,000
b285,000,000
Share earns
1.28
1.07
Shares outst
254,000,000
252,000,000


Home Improvement
LEAD: MOST glues for home repair are strong and easy to use.
Choosing the right kind can be confusing, but you can do most jobs with one of the first four listed below.
The major ingredient is usually displayed prominently on the label.
Since some glues are hazardous, they must be used with care; read and follow the manufacturer's instructions.


Noland Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noland Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
113,940,161
121,587,372
Net inc
1,602,160
1,755,200
Share earns
.44
.47
6mo sales
219,510,249
226,440,825
Net inc
2,430,798
2,304,058
Share earns
.66
.62
Shares outst
3,700,876
3,700,876


Review/Television;   New Entry in the Late-Night Stakes
LEAD: Like everyone else in television, ABC is struggling to squeeze a bit more profit out of every hour in every day.
The late-night schedule is one obvious target area, with its captive audience of insomniacs.
ABC has done very nicely indeed with Ted Koppel's ''Nightline'' at 11:30 P.M.
Now, deciding to follow that think-tank format with some comic relief, the network is opening up its midnight slot Monday through Friday to ''Into the Night Starring Rick Dees.


Beyond Murphy's Law
LEAD: John Pike, the space specialist of the Federation of American Scientists, has observed fatalistically that recent troubling events at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration mostly reflect Murphy's Law in orbit: Anything that can go wrong will go wrong.


Roland de Margerie, French Diplomat, 91
LEAD: Roland de Margerie, a French diplomat who played a major role in French-German reconciliation after World War II, died last week, his family said today.
He was 91 years old.


Arvin Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arvin Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
444,609,000
397,604,000
Net inc
b10,767,000
c7,320,000
Share earns
.47
.32
Shares outst
18,833,000
18,908,000
6mo sales
840,079,000
767,074,000
Net inc
b12,972,000
c10,073,000
Share earns
.49
.41
Shares outst
18,819,000
18,881,000


A Subway Fire Delays Service For Four Hours
LEAD: A smoky fire on tracks shared by three subway lines near the DeKalb Avenue station in Brooklyn stopped service for almost four hours during yesterday's evening rush and delayed more than 100,000 riders, the Transit Authority said.


Jackson Holds Out On Nuggets' Offer
LEAD: Chris Jackson's agent says the Denver Nuggets will have to pay its first-round draft pick a minimum of $11.5 million for the guard's first five seasons in the National Basketball Association.


Office Depot reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Office Depot (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
136,769,000
63,816,000
Net inc
1,578,000
1,140,000
Share earns
.10
.08
Shares outst
16,195,000
14,379,000
6mo sales
279,396,000
127,326,000
Net inc
4,482,000
b3,216,000
Share earns
.28
.23
Shares outst
16,137,000
14,028,000


Programming &amp; Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Programming &amp; Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
6,801,259
8,799,195
Net inc
1,210,659
1,277,323
Share earns
.67
.71


Canadian Pacific Forest Prodcts Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Pacific Forest Prodcts Ltd.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
650,600,000
741,800,000
Net inc
6,600,000
72,900,000
Share earns
.15
1.66
6mo sales
1,292,700,000
1,452,800,000
Net inc
11,400,000
138,000,000
Share earns
.26
3.14


Independent Bank Corp.- Mich.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Bank Corp.- Mich.  (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
556,000
692,000
Per share
.23
.27
6mo net inc
1,002,000
1,319,000
Per share
.41
.53
The per share earnings are diluted.


A Dairy Town Doubts Brother Killed Brother
LEAD: For as long as anyone here can remember, Adelbert Ward and his brother Bill were inseparable.
Each morning they would ride into town together on their tractor - neither could drive a car -and order the same thing for breakfast.


Provident Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provident Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,083,000
5,058,000
Per share
.51
.67
Shares outst
7,754,000
7,616,000
6mo net inc
8,930,000
9,571,000
Per share
1.13
1.25
Shares outst
7,722,000
7,673,000


Polish Anti-Semitism Remains a Danger
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dana Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,371,600,000
1,389,700,000
Net inc
31,600,000
42,900,000
Share earns
.78
1.05
6mo rev
2,697,100,000
2,769,500,000
Net inc
54,700,000
81,800,000
Share earns
1.34
2.01
Shares outst
41,000,000
40,800,000


Net Surges At Philip Morris
LEAD: Philip Morris Companies Inc., the world's largest consumer-products company and the maker of Marlboro cigarettes, reported yesterday that second-quarter earnings surged 27.2 percent, to $948 million, or $1.03 a share, from $745 million a year earlier, or 80 cents a share.


Summit Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summit Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
8,981,000
10,651,000
Per share
.44
.52
6mo net inc
19,091,000
b11,060,000
Per share
.93
.52
b-After a loss of $9,226,000 from an adjustment in accounting.


Warner Lambert reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Warner Lambert (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,154,773,000
1,024,708,000
Net inc
134,499,000
112,363,000
Share earns
1.00
.83
Shares outst
134,161,000
135,446,000
6mo sales
2,254,794,000
2,044,383,000
Net inc
254,773,000
213,434,000
Share earns
1.90
1.58
Shares outst
134,364,000
135,502,000


D.&amp;B. Profit Drops 18.2%
LEAD: The Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation said yesterday that its second-quarter profit fell 18.2 percent, reflecting lower revenue and higher costs at its domestic credit services segment.


Rohm &amp; Haas Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rohm &amp; Haas Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
768,500,000
735,200,000
Net inc
70,000,000
69,300,000
Share earns
1.05
1.04
Shares outst
66,700,000
66,597,000
6mo sales
1,462,900,000
1,414,700,000
Net inc
124,100,000
122,400,000
Share earns
1.86
1.64
Shares outst
66,669,000
66,581,000


The Owner Who Paid A Gambler
LEAD: If you fed the speech patterns and the thought patterns and the moral patterns into a computer, without any identifying details, the computer would maybe hiccup a bit at the sleaze being forced into its microchips and would then flash back the message:


Mandela Is Home, and Happy as 'a Boy of 36'
LEAD: Nelson Mandela returned home today fatigued but buoyant from his tour of the United States and 13 other countries.
He said he wanted to meet President F. W. de Klerk to arrange further talks between the African National Congress and the white minority Goverment.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: GORDON P. EATON is to be the new director of the Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory in Palisades, N.Y.
Dr.
Eaton, a geologist and president of Iowa State University, will take up his new duties at the observatory, one of the leading institutes of earth science in the world, on Nov. 1.


Savings Bailout to Use Up Cash in 3 Months
LEAD: Underscoring the need for an infusion of money soon to continue the costly bailout of the savings and loan industry, regulators will announce Thursday that they plan to spend what they have left to seize and sell failed savings and loans in the next three months.


Critic's Notebook;   Louisiana Legislators Take a New Attitude Toward Song Lyrics
LEAD: The good times are rolling to a stop in Louisiana, where the State Senate has enacted a bill requiring warning stickers on albums with lyrics that advocate or encourage ''rape, incest, bestiality, sadomasochism, prostitution, homicide, unlawful ritualistic acts, suicide,'' as well as bias crimes and unlawful use of controlled drugs or alcohol.


American Health Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Health Properties Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
14,009,000
11,526,000
Net inc
7,022,000
5,112,000
Share earns
.48
.45
Shares outst
14,694,000
11,316,000
6mo rev
27,324,000
21,622,000
Net inc
13,347,000
9,552,000
Share earns
.91
.85
Shares outst
14,672,000
11,213,000


Dow Falls 18.07 in Heavy Program Selling
LEAD: Investors turned cautious yesterday amid heavy program selling, depressing stock prices for the first time in more than a week and leaving the Dow 3,000 level as a barrier still to be crossed.


Holyfield Files Motion Seeking To Fight Douglas on Sept. 21
LEAD: Just when the heavyweight champion thought he was ready to climb back into the ring, another court matter may delay him.


Ipsco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ipsco Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
97,932,000
127,906,000
Net loss
b21,736,000
c6,831,000
Share earns
-
.48
6mo sales
202,622,000
248,536,000
Net loss
b19,917,000
c13,018,000
Share earns
-
.92
b-Reflected a non-recurring charge of $19,758,000 from the writedown of certain assets in manufacture of electric resistance weld tubular products in Canada, and the cost of associated salaried staff reductions.


A&amp;W Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A&amp;W Brands Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
34,288,000
32,260,000
Net inc
2,502,000
1,995,000
Share earns
.27
.22
6mo sales
61,298,000
55,830,000
Net inc
5,888,000
4,753,000
Share earns
.64
.52


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Monday about the savings and loan crisis misstated the percentage of respondents in a Gallup poll who believed that neither the Republicans nor the Democrats were to blame.
It was 10 percent, not 81 percent.
Over all, 35 percent said the Republicans were more to blame, 19 percent said the Democrats, 16 percent blamed both and 20 percent said they did not know.


Arbitrator Finds 3d Case of Baseball Collusion
LEAD: Major league baseball players completed a sweep of the collusion cases yesterday when an independent arbitrator ruled that club owners willfully acted against free agents by using a salary-offer databank in 1987 even though they had just been found guilty in the initial collusion case.


MacMillan Bloedel reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MacMillan Bloedel (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
806,900,000
862,000,000
Net inc
28,800,000
68,300,000
Share earns
.25
.64
6mo sales
1,588,200,000
1,669,000,000
Net inc
58,800,000
141,700,000
Share earns
.51
1.32


American Guaranty Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Guaranty Financial (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,658,000
724,000
Net inc
4,000
b83,000
Shares outst
6,112,849
5,701,015
6mo rev
2,785,000
733,000
Net loss
98,000
178,000
Shares outst
6,112,849
4,901,025


U.S. Issues Asylum Rules Praised as Fairer to Aliens
LEAD: The Bush Administration announced major changes today in immigration rules to protect the rights of aliens who seek asylum in the United States and fear persecution abroad.


C3 Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* C3 Inc.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
14,423,000
15,273,000
Net loss
19,846,000
1,625,000
Yr rev
56,795,000
68,788,000
Net loss
37,540,000
791,000


Quipp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quipp Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,207,615
3,236,513
Net loss
71,684
187,344
6mo sales
5,866,194
6,296,503
Net loss
154,346
493,287


Consolidated Rail Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Rail Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
861,000,000
881,000,000
Net inc
74,000,000
82,000,000
Share earns
1.61
1.19
6mo rev
1,684,000,000
1,753,000,000
Net inc
99,000,000
142,000,000
Share earns
1.86
2.07


Cash America Investments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cash America Investments Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
26,580,000
20,222,000
Net inc
1,921,000
1,518,000
Share earns
.16
.13
Shares outst
12,099,628
11,984,633
6mo rev
53,119,000
39,111,000
Net inc
3,761,000
2,922,000
Share earns
.31
.24
Shares outst
12,081,381
12,338,396


Gannett Profits Decline 6.1%
LEAD: Reporting its first quarterly drop since it went public 22 years ago, the Gannett Company said today that second-quarter earnings fell 6.1 percent from the comparable quarter in 1989.


Chemical Plan for Securities From Allied Credit Accounts
LEAD: The Chemical Banking Corporation said yesterday that two subsidiaries had developed a program to create securities out of the credit-card receivables of the Allied Stores Corporation, which has received protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


United States Surgical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United States Surgical Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
119,198,000
86,392,000
Net inc
10,774,000
b9,506,000
Share earns
.42
.42
Shares outst
25,638,000
22,896,000
6mo sales
225,097,000
165,682,000
Net inc
19,057,000
b15,555,000
Share earns
.76
.68
Shares outst
25,182,000
22,876,000


Capital Southwest reports earnings for As of June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capital Southwest (OTC)
As of June 30
1990
1989
Assets
97,597,742
85,705,014
Perr share
26.98
24.05
Assets represented net assets.


Senate Ethics Committee Urges A Denunciation of Durenberger
LEAD: The Senate Ethics Committee recommended today that Senator Dave Durenberger be publicly denounced by the full Senate, ordered to pay restitution and possibly be punished by the Republican Party for what it called intentional breaking of Senate rules for personal financial gain.


Garbo's Collection and a van Gogh Are to Be Sold
LEAD: Greta Garbo's art collection -paintings by Renoir, Bonnard, Kees van Dongen and Alexei von Jawlensky - is to be auctioned along with her 18th-century French antique furnishings at Sotheby's in New York and London in the fall, Diana D. Brooks, president of Sotheby's in North America, announced yesterday.


Greenspan Sticks to Policy
LEAD: The Fed chairman suggested interest rates would not drop soon, despite Administration pressure.
But another rate is up: Consumer prices rose half a percent in June.
Pages D1 and D5.


Shawmut National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shawmut National Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
30,200,000
66,800,000
Per share
.40
.88
6mo net inc
70,800,000
131,500,000
Per share
.95
1.73


Drabek and King Help Pirates Top Giants, 11-2
LEAD: Jeff King drove in five runs, four with a grand slam, to back Doug Drabek's pitching tonight as the Pittsburgh Pirates routed the San Francisco Giants, 11-2.


Greenspan Not Cutting Rates Soon
LEAD: Despite increased pressure from the Bush Administration for a quick reduction in interest rates, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, suggested today that rates would not be lowered soon, except to offset unusually restrictive commercial lending practices.


Times Co. Profit Dropped in the 2d Quarter
LEAD: The New York Times Company reported yesterday that income in the second quarter fell to $26.8 million, or 35 cents a share, down 35.1 percent from net income of $41.3 million, or 53 cents a share, in the corresponding quarter of 1989.


Shaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shaw Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
427,022,000
330,050,000
Net inc
21,792,000
17,234,000
Share earns
.70
.57
Shares outst
31,105,623
30,000,000
Yr sales
1,475,390,000
1,175,962,000
Net inc
65,443,000
47,618,000
Share earns
2.11
1.57
Shares outst
30,976,928
30,307,064


Karl Menninger, 96, Dies; Leader in U.S. Psychiatry
LEAD: Dr.
Karl Augustus Menninger, one of the foremost practitioners and advocates of psychiatry in the United States, died yesterday at Stormont-Vail Regional Medical Center in Topeka, Kan.
He was 96 years old and lived in Topeka.


Lutherans Punish 2 Churches for Gay Ordinations
LEAD: After an extraordinary public hearing, thought to be the first by a church on the issue of ordaining homosexuals, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America suspended two congregations today for ordaining an openly gay man and two lesbians.


Your Money or Your Air, and Be Quick
LEAD: To the Editor:


American Ecology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Ecology Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
14,658,000
9,649,000
Net inc
1,694,000
b2,784,000
Share earns
.57
-
6mo rev
23,879,000
19,982,000
Net inc
1,416,000
b2,491,000
Share earns
.48
-
b-Net loss and included losses from discontinued operations of $2,465,000 and $2,624,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively, which reflects National Ecology Inc.


Ameribanc Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameribanc Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
772,000
474,000
Per share
.35
.22
6mo net inc
980,000
1,196,000
Per share
.45
.55


Republicans in House Defy Bush, Declaring Opposition to Tax Rise
LEAD: House Republicans defied President Bush today and adopted a resolution declaring their opposition to tax increases as part of a compromise to reduce the budget deficit.


A Child's Nightmare in Italy Is Now the Nation's Shame
LEAD: Every now and then a relatively small incident causes a country to examine its soul, and the sad tale of 6-year-old Vanessa Moretti has made Italy look inward this week.
They do not like what they see, some Italians say.


Metrobank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Metrobank (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,540,000
1,451,000
Per share
.32
.35
Shares outst
4,750,172
4,119,532
6mo net inc
2,705,000
2,497,000
Per share
.57
.61
Shares outst
4,748,172
4,113,068


Inmate Loses Ruling on Procreation Rights
LEAD: The Federal prison system can deny an inmate the right to father a child by artificial insemination, an appellate court panel has ruled.


Merry Land &amp; Investment Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merry Land &amp; Investment Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,130,000
9,730,000
Net inc
814,000
2,442,000
Share earns
.08
.25
Shares outst
9,537,000
9,782,000
6mo rev
18,723,000
19,358,000
Net inc
2,438,000
5,156,000
Share earns
.25
.53
Shares outst
9,580,000
9,777,000


First Michigan Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Michigan Bank Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,293,000
4,076,000
Per share
.47
.45
6mo net inc
8,431,000
8,020,000
Per share
.92
.88
Per share earnings are diluted.


Apple's Net Up by 24.7% In 3d Quarter
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. today announced a substantial gain in net income in its most recent quarter but said it would probably report a decline in the quarter that has just begun.


Currents;   As 6 Artists Saw Cities Since 1910
LEAD: ''THE URBAN LANDSCAPE,'' a show at the Philippe Daverio Gallery through Aug. 4, explores six artists' paintings, drawings and photographs dating from 1910 to the present.


Zero Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zero Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
50,660,000
49,327,000
Net inc
4,002,000
4,428,000
Share earns
.25
.28
Shares outst
15,866,000
15,846,000
Share earnings for 1989 have been adjusted for the stock split distributed in September 1989.


Cullen-Frost Bankers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cullen-Frost Bankers (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
622,000
762,000
Per share
.07
.09
Shares outst
8,781,481
8,642,617
6mo net inc
1,133,000
1,491,000
Per share
.13
.17
Shares outst
8,747,513
8,620,714


Valmont Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valmont Industries (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
214,606,000
199,646,000
Net inc
5,379,000
6,077,000
Share earns
.46
.53
Shares outst
11,793,000
11,590,000
6mo sales
429,088,000
389,070,000
Net inc
9,831,000
10,252,000
Share earns
.84
.89
Shares outst
11,745,000
11,550,000


Standard-Pacific L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard-Pacific L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
110,725,000
110,259,000
Net inc
16,879,000
26,090,000
Share earns
.62
.95
6mo sales
209,900,000
212,938,000
Net inc
35,591,000
b49,681,000
Share earns
1.30
1.81


Hybritech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hybritech Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
29,400,000
22,600,000
Net inc
18,100,000
13,000,000
6mo sales
60,200,000
45,600,000
Net inc
37,000,000
26,600,000
The company is a subsidiary of Eli Lilly &amp; Co.


Evolution in Europe;   Marxist Functionaries Prosper in New Poland
LEAD: When the Solidarity-led Government began its ambitious program to convert the Polish economy to capitalism in January, Zenon Jurema was the general manager of the state-owned retail monopoly in this northern city.


Showbiz Pizza Time reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Showbiz Pizza Time (OTC)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Revenue
43,051,000
41,721,000
Net inc
2,465,000
1,239,000
Share earns
.41
.21
Shares outst
5,869,000
5,304,000
6mo rev
90,518,000
86,072,000
Net inc
7,285,000
3,779,000
Share earns
1.23
.70
Shares outst
5,788,000
5,164,000


Prosecutor to Retry Youth in Mother's Death
LEAD: The State's Attorney, facing intense public pressure to push for a second trial against Karin Aparo, moved today to retry the teen-ager on murder-conspiracy charges in her mother's 1987 death.


Yanks Look to the Field
LEAD: There may have been controversy swirling around their employer, but in the clubhouse yesterday it was simply business as usual for the Yankees.


Cavalier Homes Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cavalier Homes Inc. (AMEX)
13wks to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
19,788,486
22,850,527
Net inc
302,001
403,960
Share earns
.16
.21
26wk sales
33,966,111
40,277,482
Net inc
61,042
359,817
Share earns
.03
.18


PNC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PNC Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
108,850,000
125,469,000
Per share
1.15
1.33
Shares outst
94,789,000
93,521,000
6mo net inc
183,364,000
249,056,000
Per share
1.93
2.65
Shares outst
94,659,000
93,166,000


Educating the Welfare Recipient Off the Rolls
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
234,789,577
229,884,371
Net inc
16,438,178
15,058,694
Share earns
.80
.74
Shares outst
20,594,419
20,498,597
6mo rev
444,089,426
426,281,572
Net inc
30,159,620
25,384,655
Share earns
1.47
1.24
Shares outst
20,585,194
20,489,366


Lotus Development Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lotus Development Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
175,238,000
132,199,000
Net inc
23,463,000
10,272,000
Share earns
.54
.25
Shares outst
43,755,000
41,816,000
6mo sales
340,756,000
252,169,000
Net inc
46,255,000
15,571,000
Share earns
1.06
.37
Shares outst
43,530,000
42,109,000


Decorators Feel the Pinch As Jobs Wane
LEAD: ''PEOPLE in this business are used to saying 'everything is fabulous,' '' a New York decorator said recently.


Saudis Criticized Over Mecca Tunnel Disaster
LEAD: The death of 1,426 Muslim pilgrims earlier this month in a tunnel stampede in Mecca has led to strong criticism of Saudi Arabia in several Muslim countries in connection with the disaster.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Chronicle column yesterday about sponsorship of Metropolitan Opera telecasts misstated the use to be made of $4 million from Texaco, omitted the identity of co-sponsors and misstated the telecast schedule.


Taipei Journal;   Castaway From China Lands in Trouble in Taiwan
LEAD: Seven years ago, Hou Dejian, a Taiwan-born folk singer, defected from here to mainland China on a quest for the meaning of life.
In June, the Chinese authorities put him on a Taiwan-bound fishing boat, and now, like a refugee, he feels uneasy in both lands.


Huntington Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Huntington Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
27,713,000
27,169,000
Per share
.49
.48
6mo net inc
55,120,000
53,231,000
Per share
.98
.95
Year-ago periods restated for the mergers of First Macomb Bancorp Inc.


Alltel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alltel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
388,585,000
366,532,000
Net inc
44,620,000
43,103,000
Share earns
.54
.53
6mo rev
773,118,000
694,104,000
Net inc
90,268,000
86,106,000
Share earns
1.10
1.06


No Matter What They Say, Census Needs Fixing;   Tax and Single Women
LEAD: To the Editor:


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Coordinated Apparel Inc., New York, a clothing manufacturer, named Richard T. Lewis president and chief operating officer.
He replaces Frederick B. Dean, who becomes chairman and remains chief executive.


McDonnell Douglas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McDonnell Douglas Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,119,000,000
3,370,000,000
Net inc
b57,000,000
c48,000,000
Share earns
1.49
-
6mo rev
7,944,000,000
6,586,000,000
Net inc
b59,000,000
d121,000,000
Share earns
1.54
3.18


No Headline
LEAD: AIR-CONDITIONERS that don't cool correctly often need new thermostats, control switches or fan motors, or perhaps just a thorough cleaning, said Ellen Elias, a vice president of Elgot, a family business that has been repairing air-conditioners for 45 years.
She added that excessive noise might be caused by a manufacturing defect or improper installation.


Direct Rule Reimposed in Kasmir by India
LEAD: The Government reimposed direct federal rule today in Kashmir, where Indian security forces are battling to put down a rebellion by Muslim separatists.


Administrator at Tulane Named to Head Rutgers
LEAD: Rutgers University today named the provost and graduate dean at Tulane University, Dr.
Francis L. Lawrence, as its 18th president.


NASA WAS CURBED IN CHECKING MIRROR
LEAD: A former head of the space agency testified today that the military restricted the number of NASA inspectors present when a defective mirror for the Hubble Space Telescope was made.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Senate Passes Civil Rights Bill
The Senate passed a major civil rights bill in a form that President Bush has threatened to veto.
The vote on the sweeping measure to bar job discrimination was 65 to 34.
A White House spokesman said Mr.
Bush would work with the House to seek a bill he could sign.


United Television Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Television Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
32,211,000
28,554,000
Net inc
5,322,000
c1,557,000
Share earns
.49
.14
Shares outst
10,835,000
10,969,000
6mo rev
57,983,000
51,809,000
Net inc
b41,463,000
c852,000
Share earns
3.82
.08
Shares outst
10,847,000
10,947,000


Youth in Forefront as Yankees Defeat Royals
LEAD: Before his other troubles began to unfold, George Steinbrenner sat in a hotel room in Boston six weeks ago and announced his decision - a risky one, he conceded - to make changes.


Mattel's Shift On Barbie Ads
LEAD: For about 20 years, Mattel Inc. has sold ethnic versions of its legendary Barbie Doll.
There is a black Barbie, an


Ameritech reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameritech (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,680,200,000
2,552,900,000
Net inc
352,300,000
316,600,000
Share earns
1.33
1.19
Shares outst
264,876,000
265,958,000
6mo rev
5,299,300,000
5,053,600,000
Net inc
655,800,000
617,400,000
Share earns
2.46
2.31
Shares outst
266,514,000
267,108,000


No Hope, Doctor Ends Family's Lives
LEAD: For the past 20 years Anthony R. Paul had preached the medicine of hope to his cancer patients and was noted among his colleagues for using the most aggressive new procedures for keeping the patients alive.
But Monday night, he turned his skills to the practice of death.


First Citizens Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Citizens Bancshares
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
7,885,000
7,465,000
Per share
.85
.79
6mo net inc
15,075,000
13,491,000
Per share
1.62
1.42


Long Delay Seen in Patents For Genetic Engineering
LEAD: The Patent and Trademark Office's slowness in issuing patents to companies developing genetically engineered drugs is worse than the agency says, according to new, still unpublished statistics.


Northrop Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northrop Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,414,100,000
1,397,100,000
Net inc
29,300,000
b78,100,000
Share earns
.63
-
6mo sales
2,691,300,000
2,677,800,000
Net inc
125,300,000
b68,400,000
Share earns
2.67
-


BBDO to Buy A Creative Atlanta Shop
LEAD: IN a move calculated to increase the agency's creative firepower, BBDO/Atlanta announced yesterday that it would acquire Hutcheson/ Shutze, a small Atlanta agency known for its innovative work.


Peggy Mann Houlton, 65, Author Of Books About Drug Abuse, Dies
LEAD: Peggy Mann Houlton, the author of more than 35 books and many magazine articles, died on Tuesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
She was 65 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Ameritrust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameritrust Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
18,400,000
30,300,000
Per share
.45
.83
Shares outst
37,361,600
36,495,200
6mo net loss
33,200,000
b58,200,000
Per share
-
1.59
Shares outst
37,356,700
36,613,800


Tokyo Said to Tell China It Will Go Ahead on Loan
LEAD: A senior Japanese official has told Chinese leaders here that despite the tepid endorsement its diplomatic opening to China received from President Bush in Houston it intends to push ahead, a Japanese official who attended the meetings said.


Rinfret Offers Cuomo Apology
LEAD: Pierre A. Rinfret, the Republican candidate for governor of New York, who has quickly gained a reputation for ''shooting from the lip,'' apologized yesterday to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo for one of his comments.


2d Canseco With A's
LEAD: Ozzie Canseco, the younger brother of Jose Canseco, has been called up from the Athletics' Class AA team to play alongside his brother in the Oakland outfield.
The Huntsville Stars' manager, Jeff Newman, told the younger Canseco Tuesday night that Manager Tony La Russa of the Athletics wanted him to join the American League West Division leaders.


Rallying in the Pyrenees, Team Repays LeMond
LEAD: Greg LeMond lost control of the Tour de France for 20 kilometers today, but he and his Z teammates rallied to prove the adage that professional bicycle racing is an individual sport practiced by teams.


TCF Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TCF Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
b32,318,000
c5,469,000
Per share
-
.75
6mo net loss
29,142,000
c10,565,000
Per share
-
1.46
b-After a reversal of tax benefits of $1,324,000.
c-Net income and after tax loss carryforwards of $2,293,000, or 31 cents a share, for the quarter and $4,405,000, or 61 cents a share, for the 6 months.


Man Waving Shotgun Is Killed by Police
LEAD: An apparently deranged man waving a sawed-off shotgun was trailed by a police team along several streets in the Park Slope neighborhood of Brooklyn yesterday, then shot to death by the officers while they tried to capture him as several dozen witnesses looked on in horror.


Merchants National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Merchants National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
9,608,000
12,810,000
Per share
.66
.87
6mo net inc
14,211,000
25,249,000
Per share
.97
1.72


California Water Service Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Water Service Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
31,743,000
30,913,000
Net inc
3,783,000
3,935,000
Share earns
.66
.69
6mo rev
56,164,000
53,898,000
Net inc
5,340,000
5,562,000
Share earns
.93
.97


First Western Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Western Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,465,000
1,326,000
Per share
.75
.68
6mo net inc
2,901,000
2,614,000
Per share
1.49
1.34


Topics of The Times;   Government by the Number
LEAD: The Louisiana Legislature left some 400 bills for Gov.
Buddy Roemer when it adjourned last week.
The remarkably harsh anti-abortion bill has attracted wide attention.


Philip Morris Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Philip Morris Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,740,000,000
11,420,000,000
Net inc
948,000,000
745,000,000
Share earns
1.03
.80
Shares outst
924,000,000
926,000,000
6mo rev
24,128,000,000
22,030,000,000
Net inc
1,723,000,000
1,335,000,000
Share earns
1.86
1.44
Shares outst
925,000,000
925,000,000


Cadence Design Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cadence Design Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
49,095,000
33,534,000
Net inc
9,853,000
6,467,000
Share earns
.32
.21
Shares outst
31,161,000
30,457,000
6mo rev
95,210,000
62,798,000
Net inc
18,834,000
12,729,000
Share earns
.61
.43
Shares outst
30,958,000
29,471,000


I.R.S. Inquiry Delays Talks on Stolen Artworks
LEAD: An investigation by the Internal Revenue Service has stalled out-of-court negotiations between opposing parties in the Quedlinburg treasures case, now before Federal District Court in Dallas, a lawyer for the defense said yesterday.


MCI's Profits Increase 18%
LEAD: The MCI Communications Corporation, the nation's second-largest long-distance telephone company, today reported an 18 percent gain in its second-quarter net income.


Dollar Ends Higher in U.S.; Gold Prices Are Down a Bit
LEAD: The dollar ended mostly higher in choppy trading yesterday after falling overseas, as Congressional testimony by Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, failed to erase confusion over American interest rates.


People
LEAD: *
Thomas De Francesco has been appointed director of marketing at the Reader's Digest magazine Travel Holiday.


Sequent Computer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sequent Computer Systems (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
58,203,000
31,216,000
Net inc
5,717,000
b3,466,000
Share earns
.24
.18
6mo rev
108,915,000
57,316,000
Net inc
10,337,000
b5,822,000
Share earns
.46
.32


Events: Antiques, Day Lilies and Gems
LEAD: Catalogued Antiques, Westchester County Center, Bronx River Parkway at Central Avenue, White Plains; (914) 949-8900.


Continental Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Bank Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
b56,700,000
c64,100,000
Per share
-
1.01
6mo net loss
b49,000
c139,700,000
Per share
-
2.25
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $10.6 million for the quarter and $15.6 million for the 6 months.


G.O.P. Strategists Fear Neil Bush Must Bargain
LEAD: As the political fallout from Neil Bush's involvement in the Silverado savings and loan scandal mounts, some top Republican strategists have concluded that he should make a deal with Federal regulators.


Cycare Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cycare Systems (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
19,578,000
22,373,000
Net loss
b14,180,000
c791,000
Share earns
-
.14
6mo rev
39,967,000
44,407,000
Net loss
b13,401,000
c1,591,000
Share earns
-
.28
b-Included write-offs and provisions for restructuring charges related to the company's previously announced strategic redirection.


Reebok International Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reebok International Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
527,229,000
431,481,000
Net inc
43,386,000
40,752,000
Share earns
.38
.36
Shares outst
114,826,000
114,114,000
6mo sales
1,081,633,000
919,968,000
Net inc
96,105,000
90,161,000
Share earns
.84
.79
Shares outst
114,760,000
114,005,000


Lance Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lance Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 16
1990
1989
Sales
106,782
103,112
Net inc
11,401
11,033
Share earns
.37
.35
Shares outst
31,291,578
31,625,278
6mo sales
209,736
200,079
Net inc
22,236
19,469
Share earns
.71
.62
Shares outst
31,291,578
31,625,278


ICN Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ICN Pharmaceuticals (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
67,260,000
44,505,000
Net loss
b1,504,000
c2,988,000
Share earns
-
.21
Shares outst
11,707,000
14,217,000
6mo sales
133,939,000
86,990,000
Net loss
b7,970,000
c5,868,000
Share earns
-
.39
Shares outst
11,845,000
14,759,000


Star-Spangled Style Defines a Look And a Way of Life, Too
LEAD: FOR years, people have been asking Mary Ellisor Emmerling when the American Country style will run its course. ''Never,'' she answers. ''It's just getting better and better.
It's not a fad, it's a life style.''


Review/Music;   Perlman And Ax
LEAD: Though it may not rank up there with weighty issues like performance practice, the matter of who gets top billing in a concert program is not wholly negligible, since it can affect the way in which music is perceived.
These days - perhaps always - billing has more to do with celebrity than with historical or musical sense, so it was altogether predictable that the violinist Itzhak Perlman would outrank the pianist Emanuel Ax in their joint recital at Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday evening as part of the Mostly Mozart Festival.


Finnish Scientists to Study Gravity in Eclipse
LEAD: When the Moon eclipses the Sun this weekend, scientists in Finland plan to conduct a wide variety of experiments to test whether the gravity of one massive body can partly shield that of another.


Talking Deals;   Sour Investment By Pension Funds
LEAD: A $425 MILLION deal that was widely heralded last year as the entry of American pension funds into Europe's real estate markets has been hammered recently by high interest rates in Britain, and the investors that took part in the deal have watched the value of the properties drop sharply in the last few months.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Housing construction has declined for five months in a row, the first time that has happened since the recession of the early 1980's.
Home builders say the fallout from the savings and loan crisis has pulled their industry into a recession. [Page A1.]
Greenspan suggested that rates would not come down soon, to offset unusually restrictive bank lending practices.


Teco Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Teco Energy Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
278,100,000
264,500,000
Net inc
38,400,000
34,900,000
Share earns
.68
.62
6mo rev
514,500,000
513,400,000
Net inc
65,800,000
62,800,000
Share earns
1.16
1.11


South Africa Sanctions Make Dream Possible
LEAD: To the Editor:


Crane Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crane Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
380,400,000
383,900,000
Net inc
16,072,000
16,144,000
Share earns
.50
.49
6mo sales
732,000,000
732,000,000
Net inc
29,589,000
26,839,000
Share earns
.92
.82


Rolls-Royce Cuts
LEAD: Rolls-Royce P.L.C., the aircraft engine maker, said it would eliminate up to 800 jobs at its Bristol, England, plant.
The cuts will be over the next two years, a company spokesman said.
The plant, which employs about 8,000 people, makes military aircraft engines.
The spokesman said the cuts were required because of the British Government's recent cancellation of an order for 33 Tornado aircraft.


Loss Reported At HomeFed
LEAD: The HomeFed Corporation, the parent of HomeFed Bank, a San Diego-based savings institution, today reported a second-quarter loss of $108.2 million after setting up a loss provision of $234 million to cover a rise in problem real estate loans.


San Francisco Treating Ex-Squatters as Guests
LEAD: Most of the indigent men evicted from their sour-smelling bedrolls in a downtown park here the other day are now enjoying clean towels, catered meals, free telephones and the advice and comfort of caseworkers at two new shelters, where the homeless are invariably referred to as guests.


A Sure Way to Beat the Heat, and a Great Excuse to Do So


Michigan National reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Michigan National (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
16,990,000
23,042,000
Per share
1.15
1.49
Shares outst
14,744,000
15,414,000
6mo net inc
37,004,000
b46,457,000
Per share
2.47
3.02
Shares outst
14,979,000
15,405,000


Butler T. Henderson, Educator, 71
LEAD: Butler T. Henderson, an official of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund for the last 18 years, died at St.
Luke's Hospital on Monday.
He was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Corning to Sell Most of Iwaki Stake
LEAD: Corning Inc. agreed to sell most of its 33.4 percent stake in the Iwaki Glass Company, a Tokyo-based manufacturer of industrial, consumer and laboratory products, to its partner in the concern, the Asahi Glass Company.
Corning would not disclose the amount, but said the deal would result in a one-time gain after taxes of $18 million against its third-quarter earnings.


British Plea to Workers
LEAD: The British Government urged workers today to hold down demands for higher wages as the country's unemployment rate increased for the third straight month.
The number of people out of work in June rose by 5,600, to a seasonally adjusted 1.62 million, or 5.7 percent of the work force, unchanged from May's revised figure, the Department of Employment said.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 513 money market mutual funds increased $3.67 billion, to $389.91 billion, for the week ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 160 institutional funds increased by $2.99 billion, to $94.81 billion.
The assets of the 251 general-purpose funds were up by $313.30 million, to $134.70 billion.


2 Brothers Admit Fraud Scheme; Judge Orders Fines of $1.2 Million
LEAD: Two brothers who operate an electrical contracting company pleaded guilty yesterday to fraudulently billing the City of New York and agreed to pay fines of as much as $1.2 million, city investigators said.


Slain Woman 'Loved Her TV' and Baseball
LEAD: At 91 years of age, Susie White still did her own shopping, attended church on most Sundays, and enjoyed going on trips with the Senior Citizens Center of the James Monroe Houses in the Soundview section of the Bronx.


Tiozzo to Make Title Defense
LEAD: Christophe Tiozzo of France makes the first defense of his World Boxing Association supermiddleweight title Friday night against Paul Whittaker of Kenner, La.


Youth Drowns in a Brooklyn Creek


Patchogue Clamming Is Back
LEAD: Six years after a 750-acre area of Patchogue Bay was found too polluted for shellfishing, the state has declared the clams clean and reopened the waters.
The pollution had stemmed from Patchogue's sewage plant, which was upgraded in 1985.
The town of Brookhaven and Suffolk County tested the water and the shellfish for three years, and the State Environmental Conservation Department said Wednesday that shellfishing could resume.


MCA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCA Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
949,942,000
828,256,000
Net inc
44,781,000
b41,972,000
Share earns
.54
.58
Shares outst
83,245,493
73,142,872
6mo rev
1,862,888,000
1,531,602,000
Net inc
76,359,000
b69,313,000
Share earns
.96
.95
Shares outst
79,243,797
73,141,969


Equimark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Equimark Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
15,525,000
b4,022,000
Per share
-
.33
Shares outst
11,854,000
9,536,000
6mo net loss
30,972,000
b9,703,000
Per share
-
.83
Shares outst
11,921,000
9,523,000


WHITE HOUSE BARS IRAQ FURNACE SALE
LEAD: The White House moved today to block the shipment of three advanced industrial furnaces to Iraq because of concern that they will be used on nuclear weapons-related projects.


Mattel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mattel Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
318,040,000
272,267,000
Net inc
20,288,000
16,564,000
Share earns
.40
.33
Shares outst
50,995,000
49,569,000
6mo sales
552,007,000
467,570,000
Net inc
28,715,000
20,891,000
Share earns
.57
.42
Shares outst
50,780,000
49,285,000


HomeFed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HomeFed Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
108,189,000
b28,134,000
Per share
-
1.30
Shares outst
21,481,854
24,358,423
6mo net loss
73,644,000
b58,606,000
Per share
-
2.72
Shares outst
21,313,838
24,348,462


Kubota Is Put in Middle Of an East-West Clash
LEAD: For his first meeting with officials of Kubota Ltd. in 1986, Allen H. Michels decorated the offices of his Silicon Valley computer company with pictures of tractors.
It was a sign of respect for the Osaka-based farm equipment manufacturer that was to end up investing $45 million in Mr.
Michels's company, the Ardent Computer


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
7.93
9.20
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.55
7.56
8.03
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.45
7.48
7.72
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.45
8.46
7.94
30-YR.


Centex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centex Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
565,914,000
464,628,000
Net inc
16,470,000
15,265,000
Share earns
1.05
1.00
Shares outst
15,649,981
15,250,625


Apple Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apple Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,288,000
b6,358,000
Per share
1.15
1.39
Shares outst
4,596,750
4,592,500
6mo net inc
9,935,000
b12,477,000
Per share
2.16
2.72
Shares outst
4,596,750
4,592,500


Navistar May Bid For Mack Trucks
LEAD: The Navistar International Transportation Corporation may top the French car maker Renault S.A.'s $100 million offer for Mack Trucks Inc., the ailing truck maker said.
Renault, which is owned by the French Government, controls 44.5 percent of Mack and is bidding $6 a share, or $100 million, for the remaining shares.


Treasuries Mixed in Slow Trading
LEAD: The prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in quiet trading yesterday, and the difference between short-term and long-term interest rates widened further.


Signet Banking reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Signet Banking (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,920,000
31,339,000
Per share
.11
1.15
6mo net inc
30,053,000
62,834,000
Per share
1.13
2.29


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
FCB/Leber Katz Partners has created a public service campaign for Girls Incorporated, the organization formerly called Girls Clubs of America.


American President Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American President Cos.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Revenue
510,800,000
529,700,000
Net inc
1,500,000
5,700,000
Share earns
-
.14
Shares outst
19,400,000
16,700,000
6mo rev
1,097,400,000
1,100,400,000
Net loss
1,000,000
b11,500,000
Share earns
-
.27
Shares outst
19,600,000
16,700,000


Banks of Iowa reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banks of Iowa (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,266,851
5,734,810
Per share
1.61
1.46
6mo net inc
11,446,251
11,368,024
Per share
2.91
2.90


Review/Theater;   Gotta Sing! (But Only if the Song's in a Failed Show.)
LEAD: ''Ed Linderman's Broadway Jukebox'' has a nifty concept.
On entering the John Houseman Theater, patrons are handed a list of 85 songs chosen mostly from unsuccessful shows of the last three decades and given slips of paper on which to vote for the ones they would like to hear.


Man With Shotgun Killed by Police Had a Record
LEAD: The man who was killed in a fusillade of police bullets on Wednesday as he walked down a Brooklyn street waving a sawed-off shotgun and asking to see his wife was a house painter with a history of arrests, the police said yesterday.


Sunbelt-Case Plea Entered
LEAD: The former chairman of the Sunbelt Savings Association of Texas pleaded not guilty today to bank-fraud charges stemming from his efforts to finance a $700 million real estate deal in California.


Canadian Prelate Quits In Clerics' Sex Scandal
LEAD: The Archbishop of Newfoundland has resigned after charges that the Roman Catholic Church's hierarchy ignored or failed to deal effectively with three years of scandal involving allegations of sexual abuse against altar boys, orphaned youths and others by Roman Catholic priests and church laymen.


75 Percent of Oil Spill Is Out of Arthur Kill
LEAD: More than 75 percent of a 40,000-gallon oil spill in the Arthur Kill had been recovered or evaporated and the shipping channel was open to all traffic this afternoon, the United States Coast Guard said.


Champion International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Champion International Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,260,013,000
1,289,334,000
Net inc
63,469,000
113,874,000
Share earns
.61
1.20
Shares outst
92,561,000
95,112,000
6mo sales
2,544,419,000
2,578,043,000
Net inc
133,243,000
227,382,000
Share earns
1.29
2.39
Shares outst
92,554,000
95,211,000


Goodwill Games Open With Large Turnout
LEAD: Four years ago in Moscow, the Turner Broadcasting System, Ted Turner, president, set out to prove that leading international athletes might enjoy competing against one another in a major event even if the countries they represented did not necessarily get along politically.


F.T.C. Won't Push Alcohol Ad Warnings
LEAD: The Federal Trade Commission has declined to endorse legislation that would require health warnings in all alcohol advertising, including television commercials.


American Electric Power reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Electric Power (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,260,000,000
1,197,000,000
Net inc
112,291,000
129,288,000
Share earns
.60
.67
Shares outst
186,036,000
193,535,000
Yr rev
5,239,000,000
4,979,000,000
Net inc
597,005,000
621,700,000
Share earns
3.12
3.21
Shares outst
191,564,000
193,535,000


Unisys Profit Off Sharply
LEAD: The Unisys Corporation reported today that its second-quarter profit fell sharply, blaming weak domestic sales in part for the results.


Higher Fares, Less Reward: New York Cabs Hit a Slump
LEAD: The taxi industry in New York City has undergone sweeping changes in the last 18 months that have made the business less rewarding for drivers and owners.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Reds Lose Jackson
LEAD: For the Cincinnati Reds' left-hander Danny Jackson, a torn rotator cuff couldn't have come at a worse time.


A Who's Who of Fashion on Seventh Avenue


Leonard Rosenblatt, Executive, Dies at 60
LEAD: Leonard Rosenblatt, former president and chief executive of Ausimont Industries, a multinational chemical company with headquarters in Waltham, Mass., died yesterday at Dana Farber Institute in Boston.
He was 60 years old and lived in Boston.


Chronicle
LEAD: The first Frenchwoman to become a rabbi, despite some hostile reactions, will be installed in the synagogue of the Jewish Liberal Movement of France in Paris on Sept. 1.
The rabbi, OAULINEcq BEBE, 26 years old, said recently that she was sure that God has a sense of humor and that her pioneering quest seemed a natural culmination of her studies in England and Israel, with support by


Appeals Panel Orders Raises for City Judges
LEAD: A New York appeals court ruled today that some City Court judges are entitled to pay raises.


Big Profit For No. 3 U.S. Bank
LEAD: The BankAmerica Corporation, the nation's third-largest bank, announced yesterday that its earnings declined 12 percent in the second quarter, but profits were still more than at any other banking company in the country.


Washington Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
80,000,000
b3,500,000
Per share
-
.51
6mo net loss
86,000,000
b7,100,000
Per share
-
1.01
b-Net income


Caesars Seeks Rest Of Jersey Casino
LEAD: Caesars World Inc. said it would begin a $22-a-share tender offer for the 13.4 percent of Caesars New Jersey Inc. that it does not own.
The offer is valued at $47.9 million.


Ralston Purina reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ralston Purina (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,714,300,000
1,624,100,000
Net inc
92,400,000
83,800,000
Share earns
1.55
1.27
Shares outst
56,300,000
61,800,000
9mo sales
5,310,000,000
4,894,500,000
Net inc
314,300,000
b377,300,000
Share earns
5.08
5.75
Shares outst
58,900,000
64,100,000


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Monday about negotiations between the Big Three auto companies and the United Automobile Workers referred incorrectly to the union membership of workers at United States plants owned wholly or partly by Japanese car makers.
At some plants, hourly workers are indeed represented by the United Automobile Workers.


Primerica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Primerica Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,554,000,000
1,402,000,000
Net inc
96,900,000
63,400,000
Share earns
.84
.65
Shares outst
117,900,000
99,200,000
6mo rev
2,997,000,000
2,640,000,000
Net inc
180,100,000
114,800,000
Share earns
1.56
1.18
Shares outst
117,400,000
99,200,000


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Currents column of The Home Section yesterday about a decorating videotape, ''Weekend Bedroom Makeover With Sheets,'' misstated the running time.
It is 45 minutes, not 5.


Law: At The Bar;   Here she comes to Wall Street: Miss America. Maybe.
LEAD: Victor Hugo once declared: ''Greater than the tread of mighty armies is an idea whose time has come.'' And it may just be that in our litigious age - when, to cite one index, there are 100,000 lawyers in California alone - the time has finally come for Miss America to be a corporate lawyer.


Dean Foods Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dean Foods Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
552,204,000
437,673,000
Net inc
21,123,000
b22,163,000
Share earns
.79
.84
Yr sales
1,987,517,000
1,683,578,000
Net inc
61,232,000
60,433,000
Share earns
2.29
2.28


Northern Trust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern Trust Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
28,500,000
28,900,000
Per share
.77
.79
6mo net inc
54,400,000
54,300,000
Per share
1.46
1.49


Western Union Sweetens Offer
LEAD: The financially troubled Western Union Corporation yesterday sweetened its exchange offer for bondholders for the fourth time, and a spokesman for the bondholders said he expected the offer would be accepted.
Western Union, based in


Uncovered Short Sales Are Off 2.8% on Big Board
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that short interest for the period ended July 13 decreased by 2.8 percent from a record level for the period ended a month ago.
The decline amounted to 18.6 million shares.
Short interest is the number of shares sold short by investors and not yet covered.


Los Ebanos Journal;   Time No Longer Stays Still for Ferry
LEAD: In this sleepy community a few yards from the border, the boundaries between the United States and Mexico tend to blur.


Georgia-Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia-Pacific (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,519,000,000
2,640,000,000
Net inc
107,000,000
172,000,000
Share earns
1.25
1.90
6mo sales
6,178,000,000
5,087,000,000
Net inc
208,000,000
326,000,000
Share earns
2.43
3.55


New York Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New York Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,505,000
355,000
Per share
.45
.10
9mo net inc
3,675,000
2,522,000
Per share
1.08
.72


Judge Upholds X Rating For Almodovar Film
LEAD: A New York State judge upheld the X rating given to the Pedro Almodovar film ''Tie Me Up!
Tie Me Down!'' yesterday and said he inferred that Miramax Films, the distributor, had brought the suit for publicity purposes.


Seoul to Open Border With North Briefly
LEAD: President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea announced today that his Government would open the border with North Korea at Panmunjon for five days next month to permit citizens of North and South Korea to travel in each other's countries.


Washington Mutual Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Mutual Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
10,233,000
7,549,000
Per share
.59
.50
6mo net inc
18,726,000
12,307,000
Per share
1.07
.81


For Bolshoi Star, a Relearning Experience Abroad
LEAD: At first glance, Nina Ananiashvili might be a teen-age schoolgirl.
Her small, heart-shaped face is solemn one minute, brimming with laughter the next.
In repose, her long, thin limbs have an adolescent's gawkiness.


ACCORD IS SOUGHT ON RIGHTS MEASURE TO AVERT A VETO
LEAD: Supporters of a major bill to prevent job discrimination, approved by the Senate Wednesday night, said today that they would work with the White House to avert a veto.


South African Communist on the Air
LEAD: Joe Slovo, who as leader of the South African Communist Party evokes fear and loathing in many whites, went on a popular phone-in radio show here Wednesday night to answer questions about himself and his party, both of which were outlawed until February.


Life-Science Research Faces Legal Perils
LEAD: To the Editor:


Business Week Publishing Russian-Language Edition
LEAD: Business Week, the weekly bible of the American business community, now has an audience in the Soviet Union.


West One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West One Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
10,208,000
8,436,000
Per share
.82
.68
Shares outst
12,448,092
12,355,953
6mo net inc
18,997,000
16,249,000
Per share
1.53
1.32
Shares outst
12,442,006
12,333,580


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Sonic Boom


Penalties Are Increased For Violence by Inmates
LEAD: Seeking to stem a recent increase in stabbings and attacks in New York City's jails, correction officials said yesterday that they would increase the penalties for violence by inmates.


Clayton &amp; Dubilier
LEAD: Clayton &amp; Dubilier Inc., a leveraged buyout firm in New York, is negotiating to buy a typewriter factory and other low-technology businesses from the International Business Machines Corporation, Wall Street officials said.
The officials had said that I.B.M. was in negotiations to sell the properties, valued at about $2 billion, but the prospective buyer was not identified.


Central &amp; South West Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central &amp; South West Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
649,000,000
598,000,000
Net inc
59,000,000
78,000,000
Share earns
.54
.75
Yr rev
2,583,000,000
2,536,000,000
Net inc
278,000,000
353,000,000
Share earns
2.63
3.40


Rose Sentenced to 5 Months For Filing False Tax Returns
LEAD: Pete Rose, baseball's career hit leader, was sentenced today to five months in a Federal correctional institution for filing false income-tax returns.


Dr. Marvin M. Fein, 66, Chemist and Executive
LEAD: Dr.
Marvin M. Fein, an organic chemist and research executive, died on Tuesday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 66 years old and lived in Westfield, N.J.


Review/Ballet;   The Bolshoi Offers a New Ivan, With a New Fury
LEAD: The Bolshoi really became the Bolshoi with Aleksei Fadeyechev's stunning local debut in the title role in ''Ivan the Terrible'' on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater.


U.S. Jury Subpoenas Records Of South Carolina Politicians
LEAD: A Federal grand jury here has subpoenaed the campaign records of all 124 members of the state's House of Representatives, and news reports here today said the inquiry was tied to an undercover effort by the Federal Bureau of Investigation in which lawmakers were offered cash in exchange for their votes.


Chrysler Expecting to Post A Big Loss in Third Quarter
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation acknowledged today that it expects to report a ''substantial loss'' in its third quarter, ending on Sept. 30.


Chronicle
LEAD: DREW E. ALTMAN, who last year withdrew his name from consideration as head of the agency that oversees the $100 billion Medicare program because of opposition from conservative Republicans, has found a warm reception at the HENRY J. KAISER Family Foundation.
Dr.
Altman has been named president of the philanthropy, whose $400 million in assets make it a significant voice in health care.


Edward J. Williams, Investor, 42
LEAD: Edward J. Williams, senior managing director in the government securities department of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the investment banking and brokerage firm, was pronounced dead on Wednesday at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
He was 42 years old and lived in Lloyd Harbor, L.I.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Malden Mills, Lawrence, Mass., a maker of synthetic fabrics used in outdoor garments, to Mullen Advertising, with a budget of $2 million.


American Telephone &amp; Teleraph Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Telephone &amp; Teleraph Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,025,000,000
9,256,000,000
Net inc
657,000,000
699,000,000
Share earns
.60
.65
Shares outst
1,091,000,000
1,078,000,000
6mo rev
17,917,000,000
17,915,000,000
Net inc
1,325,000,000
1,293,000,000
Share earns
1.22
1.20
Shares outst
1,087,000,000
1,077,000,000


BankAmerica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankAmerica Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
267,000,000
b304,000,000
Per share
1.17
1.50
Shares outst
212,106,000
194,002,000
6mo net inc
545,000,000
b579,000,000
Per share
2.41
2.88
Shares outst
211,530,000
191,099,000


U.S. Shift Dismays China
LEAD: China issued a stern and disappointed response to the announcement that the United States was withdrawing support for China's closest ally in Cambodia.
Page A2.


Browning-Ferris Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Browning-Ferris Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
767,562,000
647,441,000
Net inc
82,378,000
d71,170,000
Share earns
.54
.47
9mo rev
2,173,524,000
1,793,263,000
Net loss
b77,454,000
cd189,603,000
Share earns
-
1.26


Bancorp Hawaii reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp Hawaii (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
22,912,000
19,624,000
Per share
1.38
1.22
6mo net inc
45,452,000
37,670,000
Per share
2.74
2.35


Polish President Says He Is Willing to Yield Office
LEAD: Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski, the Communist President of Poland, today expressed willingness to give up his office to a freely elected successor, perhaps as soon as this year.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Economy


Mack Trucks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mack Trucks Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
400,921,000
518,848,000
Net loss
63,321,000
b19,620,000
Shares outst
29,776,600
29,670,340
6mo sales
793,938,000
1,012,488,000
Net loss
97,246,000
b18,417,000
Shares outst
29,764,882
29,673,530


Hawkeye Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawkeye Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,231,000
5,108,000
Per share
.43
.42
6mo net inc
9,855,000
9,420,000
Per share
.82
.78


Law;   Supreme Court Dissenters: Loners or Pioneers?
LEAD: A Supreme Court term earns its place in history on the basis of its majority opinions, the arguments that prevailed rather than those the majority discarded or overlooked.


A 28-Year Clorox Man Is Named President
LEAD: The Clorox Company, known for its bleach and other household products, announced yesterday that it had named Robert A. Bolingbroke as president and chief operating officer.


Virginia Electrocutes Killer of an Elderly Neighbor
LEAD: A 27-year-old man was executed today in Virginia's electric chair for the murder of an 87-year-old woman he had known all his life.


Grumman's Chairman Resigns Unexpectedly
LEAD: The chairman of the Grumman Corporation resigned unexpectedly yesterday.
John O'Brien, an outspoken leader who is credited with guiding the aerospace concern through difficult times, is leaving the company immediately for ''personal reasons,'' a statement said.


Multimedia Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multimedia Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
123,919,000
121,020,000
Net inc
b9,609,000
10,787,000
Share earns
.77
.87
Shares outst
12,379,000
12,425,000
6mo rev
233,745,000
227,317,000
Net inc
b15,658,000
15,427,000
Share earns
1.26
1.24
Shares outst
12,379,000
12,407,000


First Alabama Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Alabama Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
17,107,000
15,117,000
Per share
.52
.46
6mo net inc
33,053,000
31,056,000
Per share
1.01
.94


'Be Nice to the Germans'
LEAD:
Before a visit to Britain last spring by the West German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, Margaret Thatcher confidentially convened a seminar of experts to discuss Germany's past, present and future as a powerful reunited nation in the heart of a new Europe.


Lady Ashton, 92, Dies; English Fashion Editor
LEAD: Lady Ashton, better known as Madge Garland, who was fashion editor of English Vogue in the 1930's and founded the Royal College of Art's Fashion School, has died, according to news reports on Wednesday.
She was 92 years old.


Bias Seen Against Pregnant Addicts
LEAD: Most women prosecuted for using illegal drugs while pregnant have been poor members of racial minorities, experts say, even though drug use in pregnancy is equally prevalent in white middle-class women.


Bit Player to Top Hare, or, Hopping to Stardom
LEAD: Bugs Bunny, the future movie star, publicly uttered his first ''Eh, what's up, Doc?'' on July 27, 1940, the day that ''A Wild Hare,'' a landmark Warner Brothers cartoon, was released. ''It's a convenient peg to hang a 50th anniversary exhibition on,'' said Brian Walker, exhibit director of the Museum of Cartoon Art in Westchester County.


Obscenity Guidelines Worry Opera
LEAD: A member of the fund-raising department at the New York City Opera has expressed concern that the company's production of Arnold Schoenberg's ''Moses und Aron,'' which is to open on Sept. 22, might run afoul of new guidelines on obscenity, issued last week by the National Endowment for the Arts, because it calls for three naked virgins.


Keystone Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Financial Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
8,072,000
7,148,000
Per share
.69
.61
Shares outst
11,653,218
11,747,509
6mo net inc
15,742,000
14,420,000
Per share
1.35
1.21
Shares outst
11,678,668
11,890,950


Puget Sound Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puget Sound Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
11,490,000
10,465,000
Per share
.70
.66
Shares outst
16,527,183
16,389,484
6mo net inc
23,000,000
21,200,000
Per share
1.39
1.29
Shares outst
16,502,484
16,374,944


Port-au-Prince Journal;   Boldly, Duvalier Bullies Step From the Shadows
LEAD: To hear Claude Raymond tell it, he is just one of several democratically inclined candidates who pin their hopes for an end to chaos here on elections in November.


Give Screenwriters Credit for What They Do
LEAD: To the Editor:


New European Telescope Called Equal to Hubble
LEAD: While the space agency tries to overcome a crippling flaw in the Hubble Space Telescope, European scientists have developed a new type of ground-based telescope that promises to work as well as a perfectly functioning space-based instrument at a small fraction of the Hubble's cost.


Harris Acquisition
LEAD: D. George Harris &amp; Associates, an investment group, said it had agreed to acquire the soda products division of the Kerr-McGee Chemical Corporation, an energy and chemical company based in Oklahoma City, for $210 million.
The division has 1,100 employees.
The deal includes three chemical-processing plants in Trona, Calif.


At the Movies
LEAD:
Rooker's Past


Lotus Shares Fall On Income Report
LEAD: A day after saying that its third-quarter net income would be lower than the previous year's, the shares of the Lotus Development Corporation fell $6.125 each yesterday, to $25.125, in over-the-counter trading.
Scott Smith of the Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corporation said he had downgraded Lotus to an unattractive rating, from a neutral, based on the announcement.


Review/Film;   Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Seals, Grown Up and in the Navy
LEAD: What will Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles be when they grow up?
On the evidence of ''Navy Seals,'' they are perfectly suited to be members of an elite Navy commando team.
The men who fight Middle Eastern terrorists in this new action film are a mere step away from the adolescent Turtles in maturity and complexity of character, though they are not likely to come near them in box-office grosses.


Pollution Raises Cost Of Bailout
LEAD: Pollution problems at properties the Government has taken from failed savings institutions will add billions of dollars to the cost of the savings and loan bailout, Government officials and environmental experts said today.


Biggs Withdraws
LEAD: Carl (the Truth) Williams twice said he had back problems and pulled out of a scheduled heavyweight bout with Tyrell Biggs, the 1984 Olympic gold medalist.
The match was rescheduled for a third time, next Tuesday in Atlantic City.
But this time Biggs came up with an aching back and withdrew.


Hippocrates Apostle Dies at 80; Translated 9 Works by Aristotle
LEAD: Hippocrates G. Apostle, an emeritus professor of mathematics and philosophy at Grinnell College who specialized in the works of Aristotle, died on Wednesday at his home in Grinnell, Iowa.
He was 80 years old.
The college said he died of lung cancer.


Ferro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ferro Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
282,089,000
275,450,000
Net inc
7,139,000
13,161,000
Share earns
.33
.59
Shares outst
19,399,901
21,083,893
6mo sales
561,794,000
546,916,000
Net inc
13,142,000
25,530,000
Share earns
.59
1.19
Shares outst
19,496,000
20,895,513


Multibank Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multibank Financial (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
11,912,000
b7,366,000
Per share
-
.79
6mo net loss
9,156,000
b14,580,000
Per share
-
1.51
b-Net income


INSIDE
LEAD:
South Korea to Open Border
South Korea announced that it would open its tightly sealed border with North Korea for five days next month for free travel between residents from both sides.
Page A3.
A Cheaper Rival to Hubble
Europeans have developed a ground-based telescope that promises to work as well as a perfectly functioning Hubble Space Telescope, and at a far lower cost.


Manila Assesses Damage and High Cost of Quake
LEAD: As the generally fruitless and frustrating search for survivors of Monday's earthquake continued today, Philippine officials began to assess the physical damage and weigh the costs of reconstruction.


EG&amp;G Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EG&amp;G Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
612,151,000
410,719,000
Net inc
19,874,000
17,459,000
Share earns
.69
.60
Shares outst
28,745,000
29,183,000
6mo sales
1,173,146,000
801,630,000
Net inc
34,528,000
34,169,000
Share earns
1.20
1.16
Shares outst
28,856,000
29,502,000


How Doctor of Law Degree Came About
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fujitsu Weighs Stake In a Computer Maker
LEAD: Japan's leading computer company, Fujitsu Ltd., said today that it was considering whether to buy a stake in ICL P.L.C., Britain's sole maker of mainframe computers, in a move that could give the Japanese company a major European foothold.


Pork Bellies Plunge Again; Grain and Soybeans Mixed
LEAD: Prices of frozen pork belly futures plummeted by the daily limit of 2 cents a pound yesterday for the second straight day on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, reflecting burdensome supplies and slack demand for bacon.


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PPG Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,571,600,000
1,490,400,000
Net inc
b141,000,000
127,300,000
Share earns
1.31
1.13
Shares outst
107,600,000
112,800,000
6mo sales
3,049,900,000
2,949,800,000
Net inc
b266,300,000
257,100,000
Share earns
2.47
2.28
Shares outst
108,000,000
112,900,000


American Express Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Express Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,062,700,000
6,356,600,000
Net inc
b319,600,000
316,100,000
Share earns
.73
.73
6mo rev
11,967,600,000
12,223,600,000
Net loss
b300,200,000
c568,000,000
Share earns
-
1.32


Mozart and More
LEAD: Mark Elder is to conduct the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra in the Overture to Mozart's ''Idomeneo,'' the Mozart Piano Concerto No. 24, Tchaikovsky's Variations on a Rococo Theme, and Haydn's Symphony No. 90 at Avery Fisher Hall tonight at 8.
Vladimir Feltsman will be the piano soloist in the Mozart, and Mischa Maisky will be the cello soloist in the Tchaikovsky.


Arlington Losing Appealing Matchups
LEAD: Easy Goer's retirement from racing on Wednesday not only stripped the Arlington Challenge Cup of most of its appeal, but also pointed out the dangers of predicating an entire race on the participation of a particular horse.


Stotler Accepts Offer for Stake
LEAD: A financially pressed commodity brokerage headed by the chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade, Karsten Mahlmann, said today that it had tentatively accepted an investor's offer to buy a substantial stake in the company.
The brokerage, Stotler &amp;


GOV. DUKAKIS SIGNS INCREASE IN TAXES
LEAD: Given a push by an opinion from the state's highest court, a package of tax increases totaling more than $1 billion and intended to solve Massachusetts' fiscal crisis has been signed into law by Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis.


Schering-Plough Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schering-Plough Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
864,000,000
805,500,000
Net inc
144,100,000
120,500,000
Share earns
.64
.53
6mo sales
1,729,100,000
1,637,300,000
Net inc
294,500,000
246,200,000
Share earns
1.30
1.09
Shares outst
226,600,000
225,200,000


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Saturday about the Greek Orthodox Church and the New York visit of Ecumenical Patriarch Dimitrios I of Constantinople referred incorrectly to Peter F. Vallone.
He is the Speaker of the City Council, not the President.


No Headline
LEAD: The sky is the ceiling for pop and jazz concerts around New York City this weekend.


Chronicle
LEAD: Mother Goose has inspired six leading illustrators of children's books to produce a limited-edition portfolio based on the captivating rhymes.
Its sales are to help homeless children.
The six, MAURICE SENDAK, CHRIS VAN ALLSBURG, BARRY MOSER, SEYMOUR CHWAST, DANIEL PALAVIN and GUY BILLOUT have been working separately on the ''The Mother Goose Collection'' for a year.


Tennis Open Raises Prize
LEAD: The men's and women's singles winners this year at the United States Open tennis tournament will each earn $350,000 and the doubles winners will earn $142,861 each from a record total of $6,349,250 in prize money.


Owner Gives Details Of 1974 Suspension
LEAD: It was in 1974 that he became the first company executive ever indicted on felony charges in connection with illegal corporate contributions to election campaigns, but George Steinbrenner, who pleaded guilty to reduced charges and was fined later that year, remembers many of those long-ago events as if they happened yesterday.


American General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American General Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,203,600,000
1,051,927,000
Net inc
197,991,000
b189,991,000
Share earns
1.65
1.47
Shares outst
119,425,000
131,756,000
6mo rev
2,244,064,000
2,057,898,000
Net inc
305,132,000
b287,163,000
Share earns
2.55
2.24
Shares outst
119,375,000
132,706,000


10,000 ROMANIANS PROTEST ARRESTS
LEAD: More than 10,000 protesters rallied today in the western city of Timisoara, the cradle of the revolution against Nicolae Ceausescu, to urge the Romanian Government to free dissidents seized during unrest last month.


Barry's Bodyguards Testify That They Never Saw Him Using Drugs
LEAD: Appearing as the defense's first witnesses, two of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s bodyguards testified today in his trial in Federal court that they had never seen him use or possess drugs.


TV Weekend;   Not So Tall in the Saddle, A Teacher Meets the West
LEAD: Despite a violence quotient that might make ''Die Hard 2'' blanch, ''El Diablo'' is a splendid hoot of a western, a kind of tall tale told with a sly wink.
Directed by Peter Markle (''Youngblood''), the Wizan/Black Films production is having its premiere on Home Box Office at 8 on Sunday evening.


Hanoi's Partial Victory;   U.S. Shift on Cambodia Is Latest Example Of Pact With Moscow on Regional Disputes
LEAD: The decision by the United States to alter its Cambodia policy and talk directly to Vietnam is another indication of the growing Soviet-American accord on regional conflicts, this time at the expense of Beijing, the main ally of the Khmer Rouge guerrillas.


Auctions
LEAD:
Of the Shakers


Review/Art;   Linking Words and Images Explosively
LEAD: Lorna Simpson's Conceptual-based art, which is currently the subject of a ''Projects'' exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art, has a double theme: the oppression of blacks and of women.
Combining large-scale photographs with words engraved on small plastic plaques, Ms.
Simpson fuses these themes into a unity that is sometimes provocative, sometimes too simple and stylish for its own good.


Greek Publisher and Editor Sentenced in Phone-Tapping
LEAD: An appeals court has upheld the conviction of the publisher and the former managing editor of a Greek newspaper in the phone-tapping of the New York Times bureau in Athens, a court spokesman said today.


Illinois Tool Works reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Illinois Tool Works (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
652,616,000
572,776,000
Net inc
49,878,000
44,404,000
Share earns
.92
.83
6mo rev
1,220,305,000
1,066,620,000
Net inc
90,496,000
81,432,000
Share earns
1.68
1.53


Yankees' Owner Waits With Apprehension
LEAD: While expressing confidence about how his baseball future will turn out, George Steinbrenner said yesterday that he would find it difficult to accept a suspension and under no circumstances would he sell the Yankees.


China Faults U.S. Shift on Cambodia
LEAD: China issued a stern and disappointed response today to the American announcement that Washington was withdrawing support for China's closest ally in Cambodia and beginning direct talks with Vietnam, China's bitterest rival in Asia.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Third Avenue Summerfest, Third Avenue in Manhattan will be closed Sunday from 42d to 57th Streets from 8 A.M. to 8 P.M.


Books of The Times;   A Pair of Authors' Fictional Collage of a Doomed Artist
LEAD:
Boone
By Brooks Hansen and Nick Davis
394 pages. Summit Books. $19.95.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Eating Outdoors


Colgate-Palmolive Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colgate-Palmolive Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,452,850,000
1,289,738,000
Net inc
81,912,000
b73,596,000
Share earns
1.17
1.06
6mo sales
2,754,018,000
2,493,362,000
Net inc
163,151,000
b140,799,000
Share earns
2.32
2.04


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Boeing Co., Seattle, said Canadian Airlines International had converted options to firm orders for three jets valued about $350 million.


A Lesson From Vincent
LEAD: The focus may have been on the best interests of baseball, but with 15 lawyers in the room, hardly excluding the baseball commissioner, Fay Vincent, it is not surprising that the talk at the commissioner's recent hearing into the George Steinbrenner matter got a bit lawyerly at times.


On Stage
LEAD:
Rhinos on Parade


A Hudson Retreat Is Split by a Fight Over Development
LEAD: Joan Lawlor Reilly remembers taking the 125th Street Ferry across the Hudson River to this sliver of a waterfront town where her parents rented a shack and some sweet shade from a Dutchman named Goethius.


From Rust Belt to Money Belt in Buffalo
LEAD: There are not many bright spots in the New York economy these days, and one of the few can be found in the unlikeliest of places: Buffalo.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
Friday
DANCING IN THE PARKS


Glenfed reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Glenfed (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
619,937,000
677,441,000
Net inc
24,438,000
b29,249,000
Share earns
.77
.98
Yr rev
2,570,885,000
2,500,739,000
Net inc
117,276,000
116,015,000
Share earns
3.79
3.92
Shares outst
32,519,862
30,193,435


Contracts Fill the Life of Steinbrenner
LEAD: To followers of the life and times of George Steinbrenner, the seeming inconsistencies raised in his testimony at his recent hearing before the commissioner of baseball, Fay Vincent, add up to the consistencies in the history of the Yankees' principal owner.


Bonn and Prague Leaders Plan to Meet Waldheim
LEAD: Presidents Richard von Weizsacker of West Germany and Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia plan to meet Kurt Waldheim next Thursday, which would end four years of near-isolation for Austria's head of state.


Schlumberger Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schlumberger Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,292,065,000
1,196,862,000
Net inc
144,756,000
b126,824,000
Share earns
.61
.53
Shares outst
237,774,000
237,618,000
6mo rev
2,513,826,000
2,378,618,000
Net inc
273,000,000
b175,000,000
Share earns
1.15
.74


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, a chronology yesterday about events of the last 15 years in Cambodia omitted an entry in some copies.
The paragraph, for August 1989, should have read: ''Peace talks in Paris involving 19 nations and the four warring Cambodian factions collapse.'' In some copies the chronology also referred incorrectly to the Vietnamese installation of a Government led by Heng Samrin.


Phelps Dodge Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phelps Dodge Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
682,800,000
694,500,000
Net inc
114,500,000
126,400,000
Share earns
3.30
3.50
Shares outst
34,700,000
36,100,000
6mo rev
1,325,400,000
1,437,800,000
Net inc
225,800,000
292,300,000
Share earns
6.50
8.03
Shares outst
34,700,000
36,400,000


Piano at Caramoor
LEAD: Daming Zhu, a Chinese pianist, is to play the Bach-Busoni Chaconne, Beethoven's ''Waldstein'' Sonata and works by Chopin in the Spanish Courtyard at Caramoor, on Girdle Ridge Road in Katonah, N.Y., tonight at 9.
Tickets are $20.
Information and directions: (914) 232-1252.


Rev. Nelson Thayer, A Drew Professor, 53
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr.
Nelson Thayer, a professor of psychology and religion at Drew University, died yesterday at his home in Madison, N.J.
He was 53 years old.


Formal Reprimand of Rep. Frank Is Urged by House's Ethics Panel
LEAD: The House ethics committee voted today to recommend that Representative Barney Frank receive a formal reprimand from the House for his relationship with a male prostitute, Congressional officials said.


Market Place;   Integrated's Battle Over Partnerships
LEAD: IN the world of investing, there are few better positions than that of general partner in a widely distributed partnership.
The fees roll in, generally regardless of how well the partnership is doing, and it is difficult to lose the job.


G.O.P. Whip Withdraws Opposition to Taxes
LEAD: One day after lending his vocal support to a Republican resolution that opposed any tax increases, the House Republican whip today told budget negotiators that he was prepared to ''sponsor and support'' such increases.


We'll Be Sorry if Japan's Money Stays at Home
LEAD: To the Editor:


Earnings Decline 6% At A.T.&amp;T.
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that its earnings had fallen 6 percent in the second quarter.
It attributed the drop to lower equipment sales and rentals, higher income taxes and the costs of introducing a combination calling card and credit card.


J.R. Carroll, 85, Dies; Philadelphia Architect
LEAD: J. Roy Carroll Jr., a Philadelphia architect who was a former president of the American Institute of Architects, died on Tuesday at Crozer Hospital in Chester, Pa.
He was 85 years old and lived in Swarthmore, Pa.
He died after a short illness, his family said.
Among Mr.
Carroll's best-known designs were two Philadelphia landmarks, Prentiss House of the Presbyterian Board of Pensions and the headquarters of the American Society for Testing and Materials.


Ex-Sabre Loses Appeal
LEAD: A New York appeals court in Buffalo has upheld a lower court's decision dismissing a lawsuit by a former Sabres star, Rick Martin, that charged the team with misdiagnosing a knee injury that ultimately ended his career.


Atlantic Monthly Wins Right to Book on Havel
LEAD: Atlantic Monthly Press won the auction yesterday for the authorized biography of Vaclav Havel, the playwright who became President of Czechoslovakia last December.
It plans to publish the book in the fall of 1991.


Twist in Shaw Case
LEAD: Federal Judge A. David Mazzone gave the Boston Celtics permission yesterday to serve as Brian Shaw's agent in breaking the guard's contract with the Italian team Il Messaggero Roma, for which he played last season.


Southwestern Bell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwestern Bell Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,169,700,000
2,140,500,000
Net inc
262,500,000
261,500,000
Share earns
.87
.87
Shares outst
300,600,000
300,600,000
6mo rev
4,298,900,000
4,198,100,000
Net inc
510,300,000
500,300,000
Share earns
1.70
1.66
Shares outst
300,600,000
300,600,000


Corrections Riegle Giving Money Back
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a brief article in Business Day yesterday about Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr.'s return of campaign contributions from the savings and loan industry referred incorrectly to contributions given him by the Phoenix developer Charles H. Keating Jr.
In March 1988, Mr.
Riegle returned $78,250 from Mr.
LEAD: Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr., Democrat of Michigan and one of five Senators who received large campaign contributions from the Phoenix developer Charles H. Keating Jr., announced today that he would return almost $120,000 contributed to him by savings and loan associations over the last eight years.


Another Nixon Summit, at His Library
LEAD: Almost 16 years after he resigned the Presidency in disgrace, Richard M. Nixon was hailed today as a statesman and a peacemaker as he presided over the dedication of the $21 million Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace in this small Orange County town.


Review/Photography;   No Shells or Vegetables, but Still Weston's World
LEAD: The breathtaking exhibition ''Weston's Westons: Portraits and Nudes,'' which is to open today at the International Center of Photography, is remarkable first and foremost as a collection of exquisite prints by one of modern photography's essential figures.
Focused on two important aspects of Edward


Trump Phone Poll Skewed
LEAD: A Cincinnati financier, Carl H. Lindner, organized a phone blitz that skewed the results of a call-in telephone poll on Donald Trump conducted for USA Today, the newspaper said today.


Other Stars Who Have Served Time
LEAD: In drawing a five-month sentence for two felony tax-evasion convictions, Pete Rose yesterday became the latest in a line of well-known athletes who have been incarcerated for deeds off the playing field.


Cumberland Federal reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cumberland Federal
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
3,417,000
b1,740,000
Per share
-
.70
6mo net loss
1,783,000
b3,224,000
Per share
-
1.30
b-Net income
Latest periods' results included a $7 million charge to recognize a further decline in value of the assets of its real estate project in Nashville, Tenn.


Norman and Allen Pound Out A Tie at St. Andrews With 66
LEAD: If the Old Course continues to take the kind of par pounding that was administered by the field today in the first round of the 119th British Open, the knobby moonscape fairways may look like a parking lot with a couple of speed bumps by the end of the championship.


The Big Plunge on School Reform
LEAD: New York City's Schools Chancellor, Joseph Fernandez, has long promoted the idea that principals, teachers and parents in individual schools ought to share power.
Now 117 of the city's 984 schools are ready to take up the challenge.
In a system that already divides authority between a central board and 32 community boards, giving more power to individual schools is the ultimate decentralization plan, and it's off to a reasonable start.


MCA's Profits Are Up by 6.7%
LEAD: MCA Inc. said today that its second-quarter earnings increased 6.7 percent, to $44.8 million, or 54 cents a share, from $42 million, or 58 cents a share, on fewer shares in the period a year ago.


Bugno Wins a 2d Stage
LEAD: Gianni Bugno of Italy won his second stage in the Tour de France today and it was again a big one, the traditional sprint at the end of the long, flat trip from Pau to Bordeaux.


Germans to Unify Soccer Teams
LEAD: Soccer officials from East and West Germany agreed today to merge their leagues and form a joint national team next year.


Choice of Cell Irks Sharpton
LEAD: The Rev.
Al Sharpton, who on Wednesday began serving a 15-day jail sentence for disorderly conduct, complained yesterday that he had been made to sleep in a Rikers Island jail bed that had been occupied by a defendant in the Bensonhurst racial-killing case.


T as in Treasure, Texas - and Theft
LEAD: The Quedlinburg Treasure, slowly surfacing in Texas, is the stuff of a Dashiell Hammett novel.
Like the Maltese Falcon, it provokes enormous greed.
What it doesn't appear to provoke is a sense of shame among those delaying its return to its proper owner, a German church.


Beverly Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beverly Enterprises Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
520,807,000
523,584,000
Net inc
3,296,000
b97,941,000
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
65,532,000
53,597,000
6mo rev
1,022,694,000
1,034,685,000
Net inc
3,978,000
b107,300,000
Share earns
.06
-
Shares outst
59,951,000
53,597,000


Unisys Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unisys Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,470,800,000
2,574,500,000
Net inc
11,800,000
53,600,000
Share earns
-
.17
Shares outst
159,054,000
158,864,000
6mo rev
4,777,100,000
4,776,300,000
Net inc
8,600,000
b25,100,000
Shares outst
158,611,000
158,759,000


Death of a Student Rebel: Who, Unmasked, Was He?
LEAD: As a leader of the student protests that gripped Wesleyan University this spring, Nicholas B. Haddad cultivated an image as an angry young man with vague Middle-Eastern roots who knew well the ways of violence.


Survivors of Iowa Plane Crash Return to Accident Site


2 Americans Killed and 59 Others Injured in Bus Crash in England


ARCO Chemical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ARCO Chemical Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
705,000,000
726,000,000
Net inc
102,000,000
120,000,000
Share earns
1.06
1.25
6mo rev
1,390,000,000
1,425,000,000
Net inc
b227,000,000
236,000,000
Share earns
2.37
2.46


Citadel Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citadel Holding Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,882,000
b3,767,000
Per share
2.06
1.14
6mo net inc
14,108,000
b6,784,000
Per share
4.27
2.06
b-Included an insurance recovery of $1.4 million.


Review/Film;   Applying 1950's Cool To the 80's
LEAD: Most high school seniors can't wait to get away to college.
Audry sits at the breakfast table and explains why she's not going. ''Dad,'' she says in that parents-never-understand tone, ''history is coming to an end.'' Then she reads aloud from a favorite book about the various ways people might die after a nuclear blast.


Ripken Ties Errorless Mark as Orioles Win
LEAD: Cal Ripken Jr. tied a major league record with his 88th consecutive errorless game at shortstop and drove in two runs with a first-inning double tonight as the Baltimore Orioles beat the Chicago White Sox, 4-1.


Firstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstar Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
23,900,000
22,164,000
Per share
1.03
.95
6mo net inc
47,600,000
42,435,000
Per share
2.04
1.81


National Medical Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Medical Enterprises Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
888,725,000
989,577,000
Net inc
b69,015,000
c5,468,000
Share earns
.87
.07
Shares outst
79,757,000
78,413,000
Yr rev
3,935,289,000
3,675,846,000
Net inc
b238,916,000
c143,339,000
Share earns
3.00
1.93
Shares outst
80,109,000
75,135,000


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-7
News analysis: The policy shift by the U.S. on Cambodia and the decision to talk directly to Vietnam are indications of the growing Soviet-American accord on regional conflicts, this time at the expense of Beijing, the main ally of the Khmer Rouge guerrillas.


Gateway Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gateway Financial
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
11,593,000
b3,090,000
Per share
-
.39
6mo net loss
18,573,000
b6,226,000
Per share
-
.78
b-Net income


Lockheed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lockheed Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
2,416,000,000
2,557,000,000
Net inc
81,000,000
80,000,000
Share earns
1.28
1.24
Shares outst
63,200,000
64,300,000
6mo sales
4,670,000,000
4,651,000,000
Net inc
150,000,000
b142,000,000
Share earns
2.37
2.29
Shares outst
63,200,000
61,900,000


Corrections
LEAD: Because of editing errors, an article on Monday about the Richard Nixon Library, and a resulting correction in this space yesterday, referred incorrectly to the outcome of the Alger Hiss case in 1950.
The charge on which Mr.
Hiss was convicted was perjury, arising from his denial of having provided secret State Department documents to a confessed former Communist spy, Whittaker Chambers.


Dr. David Decker, Cancer Researcher, 72
LEAD: Dr.
David Decker, who developed two important drugs in the treatment of ovarian cancer, died of bone cancer Tuesday at his home here.
He was 72 years old.
Dr.
Decker joined the Mayo Clinic in 1947 as a graduate fellow and became a consultant in 1950.
He was chairman of the department of obstetrics and gynecology from 1969 to 1977.


A Medicaid Proposal
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bonn Says Foes' Spy Habits Persist
LEAD: East Germany has stopped spying but the Soviet Union and most other countries of Eastern Europe have not given it up yet, the West German Interior Ministry said today.


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums
''JEKYLL AND HYDE,'' a musical for children age 10 and older, about a contemporary teen-ager, by Theaterworks/U.S.A., 11 A.M. and 1 P.M. today and 11 A.M. tomorrow and on Sunday (final performances), at the Promenade Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street.
Free; first come first served, starting at 10 A.M.


Dow Gains 12.13 Points, To 2,993.81
LEAD: Stocks advanced yesterday in brisk trading but investors remained cautious amid a flood of earnings reports that are still carrying surprises.
Programmed selling continued to dominate the market.


World Lawyers' Group Cancels Kenya Parley
LEAD: The International Bar Association announced today that it had canceled its annual convention scheduled in Kenya.
The move came at a time of international criticism of the human rights record of the Government.


S.E.C. Chairman Criticizes Proposal to Tax Stock Sales
LEAD: The chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, Richard C. Breeden, warned today that a proposed tax on the sale of securities could lead to an exodus of foreign investors from the nation's stock markets.


They're Young, Bright and Talented, And on Broadway
LEAD: IF you're 10 years old and you want to be a firefighter, all you can do is play with the garden hose and wait.
Major league baseball player?
Join the Little League.
But if you want to be a professonal actor - right now - you just might have a shot.


Embalmed Body of Bulgarian Communist Is Taken From Mausoleum and Cremated
LEAD: The embalmed body of the man regarded as the founder of Communist Bulgaria, Georgi Dimitrov, was removed from a mausoleum in Sofia's main square on Wednesday and cremated, news reports in Sofia said today.


A Nuclear Step and Maybe a Leap
LEAD: In a transaction that could pave the way for building new nuclear plants, the Consumers Power Company said yesterday that it had arranged to sell a major part of a 19-year-old reactor to the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, a reactor manufacturer.
Consumers Power, the biggest utility in Michigan, had already announced that the Bechtel Power


Explosion Kills One and Injures 63 in Ohio
LEAD: Two explosions ripped through a chemical plant on this city's North Side today, killing one worker, leaving another missing and injuring at least 63 people at the plant and in nearby homes and businesses.


Shadowy Bombing Case Is Focusing On Reclusive and Enigmatic Figure
LEAD: He's a phantom, a reclusive loner with a mop of dark hair and hypnotic eyes who for the most part has gone though life without a trace.


Occidental Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Occidental Petroleum Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,122,000,000
5,050,000,000
Net inc
b89,000,000
c80,000,000
Share earns
.30
.29
Shares outst
294,000,000
269,000,000
6mo rev
10,281,000,000
10,193,000,000
Net inc
b197,000,000
c147,000,000
Share earns
.67
.53
Shares outst
290,000,000
269,000,000


DEALS
LEAD:
FOOTBALL
CINCINNATI (AFC) - Signed James Francis, linebacker, to a five-year contract.
Waived Mike Martin, wide receiver-kickoff returner.


Pacific Telesis Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Telesis Group (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,434,000,000
2,407,000,000
Net inc
287,000,000
325,000,000
Share earns
.72
.79
Shares outst
403,689,000
413,089,000
6mo rev
4,807,000,000
4,750,000,000
Net inc
549,000,000
642,000,000
Share earns
1.37
1.55
Shares outst
406,811,000
414,710,000


Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,600,000,000
3,300,000,000
Net inc
51,000,000
55,000,000
Share earns
.44
.54
Shares outst
88,300,000
101,600,000
6mo rev
5,200,000,000
6,300,000,000
Net loss
b864,000,000
c40,000,000
Share earns
-
.31
Shares outst
88,100,000
88,600,000


Gillette Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gillette Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,029,000,000
903,900,000
Net inc
82,100,000
62,500,000
Share earns
.70
.65
6mo sales
2,076,200,000
1,844,900,000
Net inc
169,100,000
140,100,000
Share earns
1.45
1.45
Shares outst
96,976,000
96,671,000


First Fidelity Bancorp-N.J.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Fidelity Bancorp-N.J.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
150,362,000
b63,229,000
Per share
-
1.03
6mo net loss
129,252,000
b128,231,000
Per share
-
2.10
Shares outst
58,855,191
57,871,330
b-Net income


Georges Dargaud, 79; Published Tintin Books
LEAD: Georges Dargaud, who first published the popular Tintin books and the Asterix comic-book series, died Wednesday after a long illness, his publishing house said today.
He was 79 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Mr.
Dargaud founded Dargaud Editeur in 1936 and took an active role in operating the publishing house until selling it to the Media Participation group in January 1989.


When Finding the Gold Can Take a Little Brass
LEAD: Alice Mason entertains real-estate clients at dinner parties that make the gossip columns.
Linda Stein, known as the broker to the stars, poses for paparazzi with movie actors and rock musicians.
Edward Lee Cave escorts clients to charity balls, while Clark Halstead transports clients in a London cab refitted with accouterments from a London club.


BellSouth Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BellSouth Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,619,200,000
3,468,000,000
Net inc
445,200,000
418,100,000
Share earns
.92
.87
6mo rev
7,144,000,000
6,836,100,000
Net inc
868,400,000
867,700,000
Share earns
1.80
1.83


Sherman Statue's Sculptor Wanted the Gilding Toned Down
LEAD: To the Editor:


Moscow Sends Security Chief To Kirghizia After New Riots
LEAD: The commander of the Soviet Union's security troops, Col.
Gen.
Yuri Shatalin, has flown to the Central Asian republic of Kirghizia to coordinate action after the killing of several more people in ethnic rioting, the press agency Tass said today.


Outdoors, Concert Fare That's Serious And Rare
LEAD: MANY concertgoers consider hearing music out of doors an inherently less focused undertaking than listening to a performance in a concert hall.
That view is not groundless: outdoor concerts are often built on decidedly ''lite'' fare, and encourage the notion that the performances, like Baroque Tafelmusik, are being offered as pleasantly innocuous dinner music.


Rangers Sign Two
LEAD: The Rangers yesterday signed two defensemen: Kord Cernich, who had 11 goals and 25 assists in 46 games last season with Lake Superior State, and Eric Germain, a free agent who spent the last three years in the Los Angeles Kings organization, playing 59 games last season with New Haven of the American Hockey League.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Rostagno Stops McEnroe Again
Derrick Rostagno yesterday defeated John McEnroe for the second time in a month, duplicating his Wimbledon upset with a 6-3, 1-6, 6-1 victory in the third round of the Sovran Bank Classic in Washington.
Rostagno, ranked 113th in the world, lost his serve only twice - when he dropped the second set - and charged through the third set by breaking McEnroe twice.


Our Towns;   The Porch War: Will 19th Century Win Over 18th?
LEAD: Like many houses here, 128 Main Street was built in the colonial style around 1790.
And like many such homes, during the late 19th century, as this became a tourist area, the colonials were embellished with Victorian-style additions, including a small front porch.


Economic Scene;   The Evidence Backs Greenspan
LEAD: IN his testimony this week on the midyear state of the economy, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, seemed to be tiptoeing through a mine field, spread with the dangers of recession, inflation, a worsening budget deficit and a weakened financial structure in the private sector.


Athos Menaboni, Artist, 94
LEAD: Athos Menaboni, an artist whose paintings of birds were widely admired, died Wednesday.
He was 94 years old.


U.S. Says Envoy Suspected as Spy Tried to Resign on Eve of Hearing
LEAD: Felix S. Bloch, the American diplomat who is suspected of spying for the Soviet Union, tried two weeks ago to quit his State Department job, the department said today.
The effort came a few days before Mr.
Bloch was to appear at a hearing to protest efforts to dismiss him as a national security threat, the department said.


Wilmington Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wilmington Trust (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
16,004,000
13,829,000
Per share
.92
.78
Shares outst
17,391,000
17,759,000
6mo net inc
30,645,000
26,528,000
Per share
1.76
1.50
Shares outst
17,432,000
17,743,000


People
LEAD: *
Allen Klein has been named senior vice president and group creative director at Leo Burnett Co.


Central Bancshares of the South reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Bancshares of the South
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
12,816,000
11,082,000
Per share
.61
.51
6mo net inc
23,620,000
21,375,000
Per share
1.12
.99


The Bosch Case Does Violence to Justice
LEAD: The release from jail of Orlando Bosch, convicted of terrorist violence and officially deemed a most undesirable alien, is a startling example of political justice.
The Justice Department, under no legal compulsion but conspicuous political pressure, has let him out, winning cheers from local politicians - and squandering


University of Michigan Wins Race for Solar-Powered Cars
LEAD: The Sunrunner, a student-built solar car that runs on ''the power of a hair dryer,'' today won a Florida-to-Detroit race by 32 sun-powered vehicles.


Mackey Is Dismissed By Cleveland State
LEAD: Eight days after he was rehired for two years, six days after he was arrested on a drunken driving charge, five days after he was suspended by the university and two days after he admitted to a cocaine and alcohol problem, Kevin Mackey was dismissed yesterday as basketball coach at Cleveland State.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Much Trumpeting


Editorial Notebook;   Who Lost Eastern Europe?
LEAD: Bad news from abroad sometimes is brought home with such force that it rocks domestic politics.
That's what happened in 1949; hard-liners asked insistently, ''Who lost China?'' And it's happening today in the Soviet Union.


Kohl Gets German Spotlight But Genscher Had the Vision
LEAD: The man of the hour of German unity may be Chancellor Helmut Kohl, but the man who first saw it coming is certainly Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher.


Old National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old National Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,223,000
5,430,000
Per share
.47
.47
6mo net inc
10,173,000
11,084,000
Per share
.91
.95


Owens-Corning Fiberglas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Owens-Corning Fiberglas (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
771,000,000
721,000,000
Net inc
39,000,000
54,000,000
Share earns
.92
1.28
Shares outst
42,063,000
42,166,000
6mo sales
1,519,000,000
1,386,000,000
Net inc
b71,000,000
89,000,000
Share earns
1.68
2.10
Shares outst
42,077,000
42,136,000


Hall of Fame Voting: How Rose Might Fare
LEAD: Pete Rose, baseball's career hit leader, will go on the ballot for the Hall of Fame in December 1991.
He would need 75 percent of the voting members of the Baseball Writers Association of America (last year there were 444 voters).
Some of the voters were asked yesterday how Rose's prison sentence would affect their vote.


American General's Net Increases by 4.2%
LEAD: The American General Corporation, the large Houston-based insurer that put itself on the auction block last May, said today that its net income rose 4.2 percent in the second quarter, to $198 million, or $1.65 a share.


Jets Sign Hector but Can't Agree On Terms With Top Draft Pick
LEAD: The Jets agreed to terms yesterday with Johnny Hector, their leading rusher last season, but negotiations with their No. 1 draft choice, Blair Thomas, produced no agreement.


New Leader at Midway Air Is Looking to Philadelphia
LEAD: Midway Airlines Inc., a mid-size Chicago-based carrier that is trying to establish a second hub in Philadelphia, has named Thomas E. Schick, the former president of Piedmont Airlines, as president and chief operating officer.


Bond Agrees To Resign
LEAD: Alan Bond, the Australian entrepreneur with worldwide holdings in brewing, real estate and publishing, will resign as chairman of his company to appease creditors under an agreement announced today.


Courtroom Statements By Rose and the Judge
LEAD: Following are the statement made by Pete Rose at his sentencing in United States District Court in Cincinnati and excerpts from the statement by Judge S. Arthur Spiegel, as reported by The Associated Press.
ROSE'S STATEMENT


Progressive Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Progressive Bank
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
4,472,000
b2,036,000
Per share
-
.69
6mo net loss
3,359,000
b4,353,000
Per share
-
1.48
b-Net income


Georgia-Pacific Income Falls
LEAD: The Georgia-Pacific Corporation said today that its second-quarter earnings were down 37.7 percent from a year ago, reflecting costs from its $5 billion takeover of the Great Northern Nekoosa Corporation.


Judge Clears Way for Trial Over Turkish Art at Met
LEAD: A ruling by a Federal judge on Monday has opened the way for a trial to determine the ownership of a hoard of ancient artworks acquired by the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1966.


Seafirst Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seafirst Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
34,291,000
31,733,000
6mo net inc
59,182,000
59,224,000


Argentina Agrees to Sell Majority Share of Its Airline
LEAD: Argentina, which agreed last month to sell its national telecommunications company to Spanish and American interests, has now agreed to sell a majority share of the national airline, Aerolineas Argentinas, to a consortium led by the Spanish airline Iberia.


Review/Pop;   Raunchy Rap From the 2 Live Crew
LEAD: The kind of show that the 2 Live Crew gave on Wednesday night at the Palladium got them arrested last month in their home state, Florida.
In New York, it was easy to see what the fuss was about - lewd, crude four-letter words rapped to a hip-hop beat - and hard to imagine the performance as anything more than lowbrow comedy, hardly a serious threat to the moral tone of the republic.


Textron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Textron Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,989,100,000
1,848,300,000
Net inc
72,100,000
b59,300,000
Share earns
.80
.67
Shares outst
90,001,000
87,990,000
6mo rev
3,873,000,000
3,674,300,000
Net inc
138,300,000
b122,600,000
Share earns
1.53
1.51
Shares outst
90,268,000
87,530,000


Pete Rose Won't Con The Kids
LEAD: For Pete Rose, the first five months will be the easiest.
He must report on Aug. 10 to an Ashland, Ky., ''minicamp,'' as it's known, that is still under construction across the street from a Federal medium-security slammer about a three-hour drive from the courthouse where he was sentenced yesterday for two felony tax-evasion convictions.


Many Companies in Pennsylvania Reject State's Takeover Protection
LEAD: When Pennsylvania passed the toughest anti-takeover law in the nation three months ago, the move was seen as a favor for the state's companies, protecting them from unfriendly bidders.
But in the last couple of weeks, many of Pennsylvania's largest and best-known corporations, including the Westinghouse Electric Corporation and the H.


Wall Denies Silverado Intervention
LEAD: M. Danny Wall, the former chief Federal regulator of the savings and loan industry, denied today that the closing of the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association of Denver was delayed until after the 1988 Presidential elections to avoid political embarrassment for President Bush, whose son Neil was a Silverado director until


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Citicorp, New York named as a director H. O. Ruding, a former finance minister of the Netherlands.


Scientific Link Is Still Missing In Jogger Trial
LEAD: Offering what is believed to be their final forensic evidence, the prosecutors failed again yesterday to link scientifically three defendants to the rape and attempted murder of the Central Park jogger.


Commonwealth Edison Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Edison Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
846,399,000
1,309,824,000
Net loss
378,416,000
b152,613,000
Share earns
-
.61
6mo rev
2,225,048,000
2,672,800,000
Net loss
291,259,000
b292,068,000
Share earns
-
1.15


Cone's Strikeout Toll Grows as Braves Fall
LEAD: David Cone could soon be ready for marathons.
The Mets right-hander last night turned in his fourth consecutive 10K-plus performance, striking out 11 as the Mets scored a 6-2 victory over the Atlanta Braves at Shea Stadium.


American Express Net Rises 1.2%
LEAD: The American Express Company reported yesterday that second-quarter earnings edged up 1.2 percent from the quarter a year earlier and that revenues fell slightly.


When Reality Dawns
LEAD: Representative Stephen Solarz of New York has been a principal shaper and supporter of American policy on Cambodia for years.
The policy has been to isolate the Hun Sen Government in Phnom Penh as a Vietnamese puppet, aid two small non-Communist guerrilla forces, urge them into coalition with the Khmer Rouge and give the coalition Cambodia's seat at the United Nations.


Hercules Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hercules Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
795,753,000
791,481,000
Net inc
30,209,000
41,635,000
Share earns
.64
.88
6mo sales
1,567,165,000
1,530,879,000
Net inc
63,920,000
b101,440,000
Share earns
1.36
2.16


Prostitute Was Paid For Newsweek Article
LEAD: Newsweek has acknowledged paying an Oakland prostitute $60 after she posed for a photograph and told the magazine's reporter that she was continuing to work the streets despite being infected with the AIDS virus.


Leary Wins and Righetti Sets a Record
LEAD: At a time in Yankee history when the avoidance of ignominy can be considered a sign of progress, Tim Leary made progress tonight.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Won some, lost some, all interesting.''
- Former President Richard M. Nixon, reviewing his political career. [A1:2.]


Magazines' Ad Prospects Look Bleak
LEAD: AS magazine publishers start negotiating with advertisers this month for advertising contracts for 1991, the publishers are faced with a bleak prospect.
It is beginning to look as if some important advertisers are not very interested in magazines, and the downturn in advertising that began this year may pick up momentum next year.


Hasbro Net Off Sharply
LEAD: Sharply lower sales during the last three months cut Hasbro Inc.'s second-quarter profits nearly 52 percent from the comparable period a year earlier, the company said today.
The toy maker earned $8.7 million, or 15 cents a share, compared with $18.1 million, or 31 cents a share.
The results stem from dismal revenues of about $277.2 million during this year's second quarter, down 7.9 percent from $301.3 million.


No Headline
LEAD:
Remi


Review/Film;   Marlon Brando as Importer, Or Whatever It Is He Does
LEAD: Daybreak.
A cornfield.
Two men in evening clothes.
And a seven-foot lizard on a leash.
These components of the final scene of ''The Freshman,'' a witty and enchanted comedy written and directed by Andrew Bergman, will not reveal anything worthwhile about how the film's mad plot finally resolves itself.


We'll Be Sorry if Japan's Money Stays at Home;   Far From a Free Ride
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dollar Off in Light Trading; Small Traders Take Profits
LEAD: The dollar ended mostly lower yesterday in lackluster trading, with little news to affect the market.


Wanted: Land For Dump Sites; Benefits Offered
LEAD: One of the nation's largest waste-disposal companies wants to locate garbage landfills in New York State and in an unusual twist is asking for volunteers.


Inland Steel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inland Steel Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,011,150,000
1,110,521,000
Net inc
19,987,000
b45,327,000
Share earns
.42
1.25
Shares outst
31,809,000
37,733,000
6mo sales
2,003,655,000
2,211,952,000
Net inc
38,730,000
b94,717,000
Share earns
.79
2.62
Shares outst
31,809,000
37,733,000


First City Bancorp of Texas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First City Bancorp of Texas (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
19,800,000
28,100,000
Per share
.76
1.19
6mo net inc
109,900,000
54,300,000
Per share
5.22
2.27
Shares outst
18,900,000
17,900,000


Nynex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nynex Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,440,000,000
3,300,000,000
Net inc
300,600,000
279,000,000
Share earns
1.52
1.42
6mo rev
6,758,400,000
6,533,900,000
Net inc
592,000,000
562,600,000
Share earns
2.98
2.86


Becton Dickinson reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Becton Dickinson (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
496,569,000
442,773,000
Net inc
46,697,000
b86,396,000
Share earns
1.20
2.19
Shares outst
38,324,000
39,086,000
9mo sales
1,446,132,000
1,311,833,000
Net inc
119,955,000
b159,115,000
Share earns
3.07
4.00
Shares outst
38,729,000
39,759,000


United Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Technologies (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,689,800,000
5,271,400,000
Net inc
207,500,000
197,300,000
Share earns
1.64
1.50
6mo rev
10,491,300,000
9,729,200,000
Net inc
342,000,000
321,000,000
Share earns
2.69
2.45


Gallimard's President Wins Control
LEAD: A bitter family battle for control of Editions Gallimard ended today with a victory for its president, Antoine Gallimard.


Textron Has 21.6% Gain
LEAD: Textron Inc. reported today that its net income in the second quarter was up 21.6 percent, to $72.1 million.
The company said the earnings, which amounted to 80 cents a share, had improved from the $59.3 million, or 67 cents a share, it earned from April through June 1989.


Citytrust Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citytrust Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
b21,261,000
34,760,000
6mo net loss
28,656,000
28,285,000
b-Included one-time gain of $3.4 million from sale of credit card portfolio.
The company attributed the latest quarter loss to the loan-loss provision, the writedown of $3.5 million of real estate and lost interest income and collection expenses related to the ''high'' level of non-performing assets.


Dadour Dadourian Is Dead at 84; Exporter Helped Armenian Causes
LEAD: Dadour Dadourian, chairman and former chief executive officer of Dadourian Export Corporation and Interroyal Corporation, a shelving-manufacturing company, died on Wednesday at St.
Francis Hospital in Roslyn, L.I.
He was 84 years old and lived in Flower Hill, L.I.


Meanwhile in New York
LEAD: To the Editor:


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
463,119,000
434,763,000
Net inc
26,095,000
43,952,000
Share earns
.20
.45
Shares outst
82,479,000
79,920,000
6mo rev
1,042,088,000
958,615,000
Net inc
73,979,000
114,479,000
Share earns
.67
1.24
Shares outst
81,519,000
79,756,000


FPL Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* FPL Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,575,314,000
1,530,119,000
Net inc
96,746,000
111,077,000
Share earns
.72
.85
Shares outst
135,204,054
131,121,667
6mo rev
2,932,778,000
2,895,892,000
Net inc
136,136,000
181,626,000
Share earns
1.01
1.39
Shares outst
134,741,789
131,121,667


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Brunswick Corp., Skokie, Ill., manufacturer of home leisure, boating and aerospace equipment, said it had acquired Kiekhaefer Aeromaring Inc., a supplier of high-performance marine propulsion products, Fond du lac, Wis.
Terms were not disclosed.


Review/Dance;   Charlip and Friends
LEAD: There were fairies in the gardens at Wave Hill on Saturday night, as well as drowsy cows, giant dancing leaves, Victorian mirages and a sexy naiad, in ''Long-Distance Calls and Close-up Dances,'' a program of pieces by Remy Charlip and friends that opened the summer Dancescape program at that beautiful environmental center in the Riverdale section of the


Hemlo Gold Mines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hemlo Gold Mines
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
54,866,000
53,152,000
Net inc
b1,017,000
12,303,000
Share earns
.01
.14
6mo rev
103,757,000
98,333,000
Net inc
b10,107,000
18,741,000
Share earns
.11
.21
b-After an extraordinary charge of $11,600,000 which represents a write- down of the carrying value of the company's investment in and advances to Windarra Minerals Ltd.


Jerusalem Journal;   The Uprising Finds Its Way Into Art
LEAD: For years Palestinians have walked down a dirt alley between two dilapidated office buildings to reach the Arab Cultural Center, only to find that works with nationalist themes have been condemned or banned by the Israelis.


Mongolia Votes Tomorrow
LEAD: Mongolia holds its first free elections on Sunday.
The governing Communist Party is expected to win, although its grip on power might be loosened.
Mongolians are joining the demands for freedom and democracy that have swept across the Soviet bloc.
In March, Parliament gave up the Communists' constitutionally guaranteed monopoly on power.


Midtown Spree Of 20 Robberies Linked to Trio
LEAD: Three men arrested on Thursday after a drugstore holdup were responsible for at least 20 robberies - and possibly as many as 40 - of small businesses and food stores in midtown Manhattan in the last two months, the police said yesterday.


Quantum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Quantum Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
162,685,000
91,822,000
Net inc
17,339,000
11,590,000
Share earns
.60
.43
Share earnings are adjusted for a 3-for-2 stock split effective April 21, 1989 and a 2-for-1 stock split effective Aug.


Vacancy on the Court;   Court Vacancy to Challenge President on Volatile Issues
LEAD: The resignation of Justice William J. Brennan Jr. sets the stage for an extraordinary political challenge for President Bush.


Puget Sound Power &amp; Light reports earnings for 12mos to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puget Sound Power &amp; Light (NYSE)
12mos to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
899,711,000
856,875,000
Net inc
118,756,000
131,351,000
Share earns
1.91
2.14
The company said that during the latest 12 months $11.3 million of deferred investment tax credits were credited to income compared to $20.6 million a year ago.


Evolution in Europe;   Ousted but Unrepentant, Jakes Keeps the Faith in a Prague Villa
LEAD: Secluded, idle and unrepentant, Milos Jakes sat in the villa that is his sole remaining perquisite from the days only eight months back when he ruled Czechoslovakia.
He ruminated about the collapse of a system and professed his unaltered faith in Communism.


At Nynex, Dial N for Nightmare
LEAD: Executives at the Nynex Corporation and its biggest subsidiary, the New York Telephone Company, are living a public-utility official's nightmare.


Now a New Europe
LEAD: Now comes the long, intricate process of reorganizing Europe.
The last couple of weeks - the NATO summit meeting, the Kohl-Gorbachev accord, the Paris talks on Germany - have removed all important barriers that kept Germany and the Continent divided since World War II.


Walter Davis Stays Put
LEAD: Walter Davis, who is 35 years old and a 13-year veteran in the National Basketball Association, has signed a two-year contract with the Nuggets, choosing to remain in Denver because he has a daughter about to enter grade school there and a wife who loves the Rocky Mountains.


Panatech Research &amp; DevelFopment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Panatech Research &amp; DevelFopment (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
251,400
b47,000
Share earns
.58
-
Shares outst
4,332,100
3,725,700
b-Net loss
Results for 1989 included the results of Allied Interstate Datanet Corp.


Tellabs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tellabs Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
51,603,000
45,237,000
Net inc
2,131,000
2,888,000
Share earns
.17
.23
6mo sales
100,873,000
85,642,000
Net inc
4,673,000
5,356,000
Share earns
.37
.43
Shares outst
12,628,000
12,593,000


In Drug Case, Mayor's Brother Is Sent to Jail
LEAD: The brother of Mayor John Daniels of New Haven was sentenced today to four years in prison for drug dealing after telling the judge he was happy he was caught because otherwise ''I'd probably still be out there doing drugs.''


Washington Culture Center Delayed Over High Costs
LEAD: Plans for the construction of a $738 million International Cultural and Trade Center on Pennsylvania Avenue were suspended this week when the Government agency that was to lease the building refused to sign the contract.


Review/Dance;   Recalling the Critters of Wave Hill's Past
LEAD: The setting was idyllic. But the dance was prosaic.


An Assault on Police Discipline
LEAD: Ask New York City cops why they join the force and they'll tell you: helping people, steady work and the pension.
The threat of losing the generous pension benefit has long given administrators a way to enforce discipline.
A bill on Gov.
Mario Cuomo's desk would weaken that discipline; it would guarantee pensions even for officers who turn brutal or corrupt.


Nova Corp. of Alberta reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nova Corp. of Alberta
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,237,000,000
1,209,000,000
Net inc
b56,000,000
76,000,000
Share earns
.17
.29
6mo rev
2,432,000,000
2,506,000,000
Net inc
b92,000,000
205,000,000
Share earns
.28
.80
Shares outst
299,000,000
245,000,000


Standard Register Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Register Co. (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
178,459,000
176,020,000
Net inc
8,873,000
9,514,000
Share earns
.30
.32
6mo rev
352,928,000
347,650,000
Net inc
18,355,000
18,039,000
Share earns
.62
.61


Strawberry Causes Furor
LEAD: Fay Vincent, the baseball commissioner, said yesterday that he would look into recent published comments of Darryl Strawberry in an effort to determine whether they violated rules concerning tampering.


Your Money;   Overseas Stocks Require Caution
LEAD: Stock markets in both Europe and Japan have substantially outperformed American markets in recent years, leading some investment experts to recommend foreign holdings to put some pep into portfolios.
Yet, the North American Securities Administrators Association, in a report issued last week, warned


Interstate Power Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interstate Power Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
61,823,000
58,658,000
Net inc
4,614,000
3,306,000
Share earns
.41
.26
6mo rev
269,651,000
273,503,000
Net inc
b28,998,000
23,462,000
Share earns
2.77
2.17


REVIEW IS ORDERED
LEAD: A Federal appeals court today suspended all three of Oliver L. North's Iran-contra felony convictions and overturned one of them in a ruling that threw into doubt the entire case against the former Marine Corps lieutenant colonel.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on July 13 about a certifed public accountant in Manhattan rendered his full name incorrectly.


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
315,870,000
304,240,000
Net inc
37,225,000
41,914,000
Share earns
.72
.83
Yr rev
1,436,596,000
1,391,981,000
Net inc
216,372,000
201,364,000
Share earns
4.23
4.04


Patents;   2 Treatments For Cocaine Addiction
LEAD: To help cocaine users free themselves from their addictions, medical researchers in Maryland and California obtained separate patents this week related to new methods of treatment.


Precision Castparts Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Precision Castparts Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
129,800,000
111,600,000
Net inc
7,400,000
7,700,000
Share earns
.43
.45
Shares outst
17,300,000
17,000,000
In the year-ago quarter no tax provision was required, adding 16 cents to earnings.


Texas Instruments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Instruments Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,592,000,000
1,630,000,000
Net inc
11,000,000
106,000,000
Share earns
.02
1.14
Shares outst
81,832,263
84,984,877
6mo rev
3,128,000,000
3,227,000,000
Net inc
24,000,000
191,000,000
Share earns
.07
2.04


Siren Glut Has Desensitized New York Drivers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jason Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jason Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
31,044,000
27,519,000
Net inc
1,178,000
1,097,000
Share earns
.21
.20
6mo sales
62,614,000
51,613,000
Net inc
2,407,000
2,079,000
Share earns
.43
.37
Share earnings adjusted for a 3-for-2 stock split in April 1990.


A Yankee State of Mind?
LEAD: Might the New York Legislature hire and fire Yankee managers?
Could the Governor veto trades?
Would the State Comptroller have to approve spending for free agents?
Who would decide the starting lineup?


Universal Health
LEAD: An investment group led by members of the Bass family of Fort Worth raised its stake in Universal Health Services Inc. to the equivalent of 11.4 percent of the company's class B stock, from 10.3 percent.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, the group said it had held, and expected to continue having, discussions with Universal's managers about its investment in the company.


Tricare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tricare Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
7,174,000
5,714,000
Net inc
532,000
366,000
Share earns
.14
.13
Shares outst
3,885,000
2,833,000
Yr rev
24,465,000
20,539,000
Net inc
1,610,000
1,258,000
Share earns
.50
.44
Shares outst
3,228,000
2,833,000


New England Electric System reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New England Electric System (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,751,100,000
1,566,785,000
Net inc
142,402,000
120,215,000
Share earns
2.32
2.08
Shares outst
61,501,563
57,771,858


Evolution in Europe;   Soviet Ethnic Conflicts Flare As Gorbachev Meets Leaders
LEAD: Ethnic violence broke out again today in the Caucasus and in Central Asia as President Mikhail S. Gorbachev met leaders of the 15 Soviet republics.


Lindberg Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lindberg Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
19,844,439
20,553,462
Net inc
757,762
976,531
Share earns
.16
.21
6mo sales
39,156,000
41,869,000
Net inc
1,454,346
1,918,000
Share earns
.31
.41


New York City Moves to Discourage Unsafe Window Gates
LEAD: New York City yesterday announced a campaign to curb the use of window gates and double-key cylinder door locks that are installed to keep out would-be burglars but that sometimes trap occupants in a fire.


Lee Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lee Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
75,322,000
69,237,000
Net inc
11,000,000
11,047,000
Share earns
.46
.45
Shares outst
23,720,000
24,804,000
9mo rev
211,188,000
201,715,000
Net inc
27,139,000
28,447,000
Share earns
1.13
1.14
Shares outst
24,098,000
24,866,000


Some Good Things Grow With a Little Neglect
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TRACK AND FIELD
Javelin Thrower Regains Mark
Steve Backley regained his world record in the men's javelin throw yesterday with a heave of 298 feet 6 inches in an International Amateur Athletic Federation Grand Prix meet at Crystal Palace in London.
Opposing Jan Zelezny of Czechoslovakia, the man who took the mark from him at Oslo, Norway, a week ago, Backley became the first man to throw the javelin more than 90 meters (295-3).


Dominion Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dominion Resources Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
846,300,000
850,800,000
Net inc
85,700,000
51,500,000
Share earns
.85
.52
Shares outst
101,200,000
98,700,000
6mo rev
1,718,600,000
1,776,700,000
Net inc
212,700,000
144,600,000
Share earns
2.11
1.47
Shares outst
100,900,000
98,500,000


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about an advanced new European telescope misstated its resolving power in some copies.
It is 0.17 arc seconds, not 1.7 arc seconds. (An arc second is an angle equivalent to one-3,600th of a degree.) A diagram referred incorrectly to the type of telescope with a resolving power of 0.25 arc seconds.


Uni-Marts reports earnings for Qtr to June 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Uni-Marts (OTC)
Qtr to June 28
1990
1989
Revenue
61,835,908
57,933,371
Net inc
447,232
308,884
Share earns
.07
.05
9mo rev
176,760,649
155,985,866
Net inc
1,789,102
1,729,123
Share earns
.28
.27


Three-Five Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Three-Five Systems
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
4,147,966
2,736,064
Net inc
163,724
33,710
Share earns
.05
.01
Shares outst
3,398,548
3,334,464
6mo sales
6,935,764
5,377,344
Net inc
237,422
44,410
Share earns
.08
.02
Shares outst
3,017,237
2,329,180


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
Companies


Shopping for CD Rates by Telephone
LEAD: Dialing for dollars has moved from the fantasy of television game shows to the reality of the trillion-dollar market for certificates of deposit.


McDonald's Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McDonald's Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,701,300,000
1,548,100,000
Net inc
215,800,000
196,000,000
Share earns
.59
.53
Shares outst
358,300,000
372,800,000
6mo rev
3,234,400,000
2,929,900,000
Net inc
373,900,000
337,700,000
Share earns
1.02
.90
Shares outst
359,200,000
374,100,000


Net Up 6.9% At U S West
LEAD: Spurred by cost-cutting in its telephone division, U S West reported today that its second-quarter earnings rose 6.9 percent compared with the quarter in 1989.


The 'Quota' Dispute
LEAD: In the painful history of the effort to integrate the country's offices, factories and educational institutions, there has been no word more emotionally loaded or universally shunned than ''quota.''


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.93
8.00
9.20
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.54
7.55
8.11
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.46
7.45
7.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.42
8.45
7.96
30-YR.


Namsco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Namsco Corp.
Qtr to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,249,626
1,343,133
Net inc
41,505
71,718
Share earns
.01
.02


Soybean Prices Plummet; Corn and Wheat Are Lower
LEAD: Prices of soybean futures fell sharply yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade amid forecasts for a weekend of beneficial rain in the Middle West, where weather has been nearly perfect for crops during most of the summer.


St. Joseph Light &amp; Power reports earnings for 12mos to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St. Joseph Light &amp; Power (NYSE)
12mos to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
78,800,000
78,300,000
Net inc
9,600,000
10,400,000
Share earns
2.27
2.34


Ryan Wins No. 299 As Rangers Roll, 5-3
LEAD: Nolan Ryan, with his fastball crackling, his curve and changeup behaving themselves nicely, moved along at an easy and rapid clip at Arlington Stadium tonight and was clearly on the way to the 299th victory of his remarkable 24-year major league career.


How Silverado Recruited Neil Bush
LEAD: The odyssey of Neil Bush and the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association began at a neighborhood dinner party in the spring of 1985, when he sat a few seats away from Michael Wise, said James E. Nesland, Mr.
Bush's lawyer.


Police Cleared In the Death Of a Suspect
LEAD: The Bronx District Attorney's office yesterday cleared nine police officers of responsibility for the death last September of an unarmed mugging suspect who died in police custody.


Bus Terminal Curbs Hosing
LEAD: For years the Port Authority has used water hoses to clean the sidewalks outside its midtown Manhattan bus terminal, washing away the trash and debris left by the 200,000 commuters who pass there each day.


Excel Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Excel Industries Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
77,050,000
75,631,000
Net inc
3,178,000
2,349,000
Share earns
.49
.36
6mo sales
138,669,000
153,294,000
Net inc
4,712,000
5,669,000
Share earns
.73
.88


Scecorp reports earnings for 12mos to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scecorp (NYSE)
12mos to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,987,559,000
6,670,711,000
Net inc
837,728,000
756,828,000
Share earns
3.83
3.46
Shares outst
218,469,000
218,457,000


Inside
LEAD:
A Question of 'Quotas'


The Hands That Caught Ryan's Heat
LEAD: Jeff Torborg talked about his left hand, the hand that caught most of Nolan Ryan's booming fastballs in 1973 when the two players were with the California Angels.
It was the year that Ryan, with his 100-mile-per-hour heater (give or take a mile or two per hour of smoke on a given outing), established the major league record for strikeouts in a season, 383.


Tax Protest Shows Splits In New Jersey
LEAD: A gathering of mayors from across New Jersey tonight was advertised by its host, Mayor Peggy Lasky of Holmdel, as a search for ''constructive reform'' of the $2.8 billion in higher income taxes and sales taxes that Gov.
Jim Florio pushed through the Legislature.


Universal Medical Buildings L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Medical Buildings L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
22,825,249
20,246,100
Net loss
1,323,376
b238,143
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
8,460,425
9,330,264
6mo rev
42,532,662
36,170,607
Net loss
2,220,122
b757,850
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
8,787,271
9,338,797


Houston Journal;   Seeking Some Relief, She Stepped Out of Line
LEAD: By LISA BELKIN


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a leader of student protests at Wesleyan University, Nicholas B. Haddad, misstated his relationship to two men.
Mr.
Haddad knew, but was not related to, Kumar Viswanathan, who is accused in his killing, and Sudhama Ranganathan, who is accused of having fire-bombed the office of Wesleyan's president.


2-Day Ruling: Don't Run Over That Plover
LEAD: Saying the issue ''requires a Solomon to resolve,'' a Federal judge decided yesterday to limit garbage collection on a private Queens beach this weekend to protect four piping plover chicks.


Princeton Diagnostic Labs reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Princeton Diagnostic Labs (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,200,000
1,900,000
Net inc
93,000
45,000
Share earns
.04
.02
6mo rev
4,100,000
3,600,000
Net inc
157,000
85,000
Share earns
.06
.03


Tennant Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tennant Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
54,804,000
49,876,000
Net inc
b5,238,000
3,606,000
Share earns
1.06
.68
Shares outst
4,922,000
5,288,000
6mo sales
101,227,000
91,893,000
Net inc
b8,123,000
5,666,000
Share earns
1.65
1.07
Shares outst
4,922,100
5,304,300


Trilling Medical Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trilling Medical Technologies
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,094,538
416,906
Net loss
47,330
267,428
Shares outst
26,170,634
26,004,980
9mo rev
3,284,561
1,696,361
Net inc
68,590
b382,925
Shares outst
26,085,686
22,536,446


Johnson Worldwide Assocites Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnson Worldwide Assocites Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
81,980,000
63,808,000
Net inc
6,468,000
b4,988,000
Share earns
.81
.63
9mo sales
213,261,000
175,987,000
Net inc
15,209,000
b12,927,000
Share earns
1.91
1.63


5 New Jersey Troopers Acquitted In Disputed Beatings of 3 Drivers
LEAD: In a case that had a trooper testifying against troopers, five members of the New Jersey State Police yesterday were acquitted of charges involving the alleged beatings of three motorists almost two years ago.


U S West Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U S West Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,410,800,000
2,434,600,000
Net inc
b276,400,000
258,600,000
Share earns
.72
.71
Shares outst
383,820,000
364,961,000
6mo rev
4,836,900,000
4,828,200,000
Net inc
b548,300,000
508,200,000
Share earns
1.45
1.39
Shares outst
379,331,000
365,138,000


Newspaper Wins Appeal on Lawsuit
LEAD: The Minnesota Supreme Court ruled yesterday that a newspaper's promise to conceal the identity of a news source was not an enforceable oral contract.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The strenuous demands of Court work and its related duties required or expected of a Justice appear at this time to be incompatible with my advancing age and medical condition.
I, therefore, retire effective immediately as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.''
- Supreme Court Justice William J.





Furor Over Call to Sell Organs of Poor People
LEAD: A politician's proposal that the county government sell the organs of dead welfare recipients has prompted such outrage here that some experts fear it will undermine efforts to solve a serious shortage of organ donors.


Pledge for Arts Grants Is Modified
LEAD: Recipients of joint grants from the Rockefeller Foundation and the National Endowment for the Arts may modify the pledge they are now required to make, according to instructions mailed to them by the foundation yesterday.


No Time for RICO 'Reform'
LEAD: Just as the savings and loan scandal awakens the public to the costs of fraud, some members of Congress propose undercutting the country's most sweeping civil fraud law.
The 1970 law is called ''Civil RICO,'' short for Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations.
It enables private citizens as well as government to seek triple damages for all kinds of commercial fraud.


New York State Electric &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New York State Electric &amp; Gas (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
367,009,000
344,760,000
Net inc
43,311,000
39,652,000
Share earns
.69
.64
Shares outst
57,859,000
57,038,000
6mo rev
805,302,000
757,873,000
Net inc
113,632,000
107,390,000
Share earns
1.86
1.77
Shares outst
57,756,000
56,927,000


Sterling Capital Corp. reports earnings for As of June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterling Capital Corp. (AMEX)
As of June 30
1990
1989
Assets
17,998,633
17,246,250
Per share
7.20
6.90
Assets represented net assets.


U.N.L.V. Barred From Defending Its Title
LEAD: After 13 years, the National Collegiate Athletic Association today finally succeeded in penalizing the University of Nevada-Las Vegas basketball coach, Jerry Tarkanian, banning his Runnin' Rebels from defending their national basketball championship.


Warren M. Sperry, 90, Brain Chemistry Expert
LEAD: Warren Myron Sperry, a neurochemist, died on July 11 at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 90 years old and lived in Yonkers.


Royals Make Moves
LEAD: The Kansas City Royals yesterday put Bo Jackson on the 15-day disabled list, reinstated Bob Boone and delayed surgery on Bret Saberhagen.


Perkins Papers Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Perkins Papers Ltd.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
18,906,000
18,510,000
Net inc
991,000
1,174,000
Share earns
.16
.19
6mo sales
37,422,000
34,973,000
Net inc
1,726,000
1,210,000
Share earns
.27
.19
Results are in Canadian funds.


Tektronix Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to May 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tektronix Inc. (NYSE)
12wks to May 26
1990
1989
Sales
362,286,000
361,649,000
Net loss
65,700,000
2,126,000
Shares outst
29,104,000
28,857,000
52wk sales
1,408,253,000
1,432,996,000
Net loss
92,595,000
b18,905,000
Share earns
-
.66
Shares outst
29,026,000
28,549,000


Technology Stocks Sink As Profits Dip
LEAD: Technology stocks continued their steep descent today as more companies posted earnings that were below expectations or said that business appeared to be getting weaker.


Egil Aarvik, Nobel Official, 77
LEAD: Egil Aarvik, head of the Norwegian Nobel Committee, which awards the Nobel Peace Prize, died on Thursday, the news agency N.T.B. said today.
He was 77 years old.
The cause of death was not reported.


Brennan's Letter To the President
LEAD: Following are Associate Justice William J. Brennan Jr.'s letter to President Bush today announcing his resignation, and a statement issued tonight by the Justice:
My Dear Mr. President,


Progroup Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Progroup Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
10,922,000
10,319,000
Net inc
295,000
814,000
Share earns
.12
.33
9mo sales
27,397,000
26,141,000
Net inc
336,000
1,205,000
Share earns
.14
.49


Sandinistas' U.S. Friends: Case of Dashed Ideals
LEAD: Americans who spent much of the last 10 years working in the United States and Nicaragua on behalf of the Sandinista Government now find themselves back in their cramped and dreary offices in New York, stunned by defeat, deserted by their constituency and searching for a new outlet for their dreams.


American Maize-Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Maize-Products Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
129,438,000
138,585,000
Net inc
4,657,000
b5,784,000
Share earns
.70
.88
6mo sales
244,619,000
257,703,000
Net inc
7,924,000
b7,922,000
Share earns
1.19
1.20


Dollar and Gold Are Mixed; Trading Is Light and Choppy
LEAD: The dollar turned in a mixed performance yesterday, ending slightly lower in domestic trading against every major currency but the Japanese yen and Canadian dollar.


Heritage Media Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Media Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
47,757,000
42,029,000
Net loss
3,673,000
9,246,000
Shares outst
41,199,000
22,569,000
6mo rev
95,800,000
62,790,000
Net loss
7,779,000
15,927,000
Shares outst
41,040,000
20,882,000


Boeing Holding Talks To Sell de Havilland
LEAD: The Boeing Company said today that it was discussing the possible sale of its de Havilland commuter-aircraft division to Aeritalia of Italy and Aerospatiale of France.
De Havilland, which Boeing purchased from the Canadian Government in 1986, builds airplanes with 36 to 56 seats and is based in Downsview,


Jets Joined by 2 More
LEAD: Two more Jets joined the fold yesterday when Dale Dawkins, a ninth-round draft pick out of Miami, signed a contract and Curt Singer of Tennessee, a reserve free-agent tackle acquired last year, agreed to terms.
All players are required to report to camp by 6 P.M. tomorrow.
The signings brought the list of Jets draft choices signed to 8 of 15 taken.


Heroin Is Making Comeback In Lethal Tandem With Crack
LEAD: Stepping behind a rusty railroad car on the Brooklyn waterfront the other day, Brenda Gonzales stoked her crack pipe and inhaled deeply.
Moments later she scooped grains of heroin into her nostrils.


Regal-Beloit Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Regal-Beloit Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
43,342,000
41,294,000
Net inc
3,006,000
2,918,000
Share earns
.30
.29
6mo sales
88,303,000
81,605,000
Net inc
5,801,000
6,300,000
Share earns
.58
.63


Tug of War Resolves Age-Old Rivalry


Graco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Graco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
78,906,000
80,007,000
Net inc
4,554,000
3,792,000
Share earns
.62
.53
6mo sales
147,053,000
146,688,000
Net inc
7,067,000
6,149,000
Share earns
.97
.86


De Klerk Announces New Round of Talks With Mandela Aides
LEAD: The South African Government and the African National Congress will hold their next round of talks starting on Aug. 6 in Pretoria, President F. W. de Klerk's office announced today.


Folk Museum Homeward Bound
LEAD: The Museum of American Folk Art's gypsy days are numbered.
Three years from now, the museum is to reopen in new quarters - four floors at the base of a new 28-story office tower - at its old address, 49 West 53d Street.
Construction of the building, designed by David Childs of Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill, is to begin next spring.


Cincinnati Fire Officials Investigating Cause of Explosion


Some Good Things Grow With a Little Neglect;   A Corporate Effort
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Thursday about second-quarter earnings at Philip Morris Companies Inc. misstated the operating profit and volume gain of two units of its Kraft General Foods division.
Only the Kraft international operations, not Kraft domestic, posted a 50 percent increase in operating earnings and a 5 percent volume gain.


Giving Immunity Presents Hurdle for Conviction
LEAD: The ruling by a Federal appeals panel today ordering new hearings in Oliver L. North's case demonstrates the enormous difficulties in bringing to trial a public official who has previously been forced to testify in a high-visibility case before Congress.


Universal Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Universal Health Services (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
151,530,000
147,025,000
Net inc
3,501,000
2,924,000
Share earns
.26
.20
Shares outst
15,212,000
14,691,000
6mo rev
318,068,000
300,494,000
Net inc
9,066,000
7,396,000
Share earns
.64
.50
Shares outst
15,295,000
14,696,000


Lindy Boggs to Quit House, Ending a Louisiana Dynasty
LEAD: Representative Lindy Boggs, the second half of a political dynasty that began with her husband, Hale Boggs, 50 years ago, announced today that she would not seek re-election.


Du Pont Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Du Pont Canada
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
409,300,000
405,000,000
Net inc
26,300,000
30,100,000
Share earns
.85
.96
6mo sales
769,100,000
747,600,000
Net inc
47,200,000
63,200,000
Share earns
1.53
2.02
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Carlisle Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carlisle Cos.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
161,143,000
141,707,000
Net inc
6,605,000
b11,130,000
Share earns
.82
1.38
6mo sales
311,793,000
284,802,000
Net inc
10,693,000
b17,269,000
Share earns
1.33
2.14


Those Cursed Lips
LEAD: Dr.
Liverworth, as the world's foremost authority on lips, will you clarify the situation for me?


Six U.S. Judges Will Meet On Burden of Asbestos Suits
LEAD: Acting like a rump judicial body, six Federal judges from around the nation whose dockets are swelling with asbestos cases are planning an extraordinary meeting soon to resolve tens of thousands of them.


Duke Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duke Power Co.  (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,624,531,000
3,620,167,000
Net inc
561,042,000
471,714,000
Share earns
5.03
4.13


Santa Fe Energy Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Energy Resources Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
70,400,000
84,100,000
Net loss
5,600,000
b10,200,000
Share earns
-
.20
Shares outst
63,800,000
52,100,000
6mo rev
166,500,000
163,200,000
Net loss
500,000
b40,500,000
Share earns
-
.78
Shares outst
59,600,000
52,100,000


Caterpillar Profit Off 67.4%
LEAD: Caterpillar Inc. said today that its earnings fell 67.4 percent in the second quarter, confirming its earlier prediction that profits would plunge.


Santa Fe Energy Partners L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Energy Partners L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
27,900,000
31,200,000
Net loss
4,100,000
1,700,000
Shares outst
51,400,000
40,400,000
6mo rev
63,100,000
69,800,000
Net loss
3,100,000
b3,500,000
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
50,300,000
39,400,000


Commerce Clearing House reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Clearing House (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
178,576,000
173,866,000
Net inc
12,370,000
12,888,000
Share earns
.70
.72
6mo rev
403,462,000
386,775,000
Net inc
41,521,000
41,724,000
Share earns
2.34
2.32


Norman and Faldo Set Scorching Pace
LEAD: British Open showdowns seem to identify the best player in the world more definitively than any of golf's other major championships.
And today, the second round of the 119th Open set the stage for what could be the most consequential battle for No. 1 in several years.


Inquiry on Grumman Ex-Chief
LEAD: John O'Brien, who resigned abruptly as chairman of the Grumman Corporation late Thursday, is the subject of a Federal grand jury investigation into possible illegal loans from a military subcontractor and lobbyist, Federal officials said yesterday.


Triad Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Triad Systems (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
35,240,000
37,396,000
Net inc
b430,000
c1,337,000
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
11,853,000
8,222,000
9mo rev
103,563,000
105,565,000
Net inc
b1,063,000
d4,380,000
Share earns
.09
.53
Shares outst
11,587,000
9,836,000


Hotel Investors Acquisition Bid
LEAD: A California investor, Leonard M. Ross, has offered to acquire the remaining hotel and casino properties of Hotel Investors Trust for $46 million.
Hotel Investors, based in Los


Patents;   A Method to Improve Flowering of Fruit Trees
LEAD: A team of Canadian and Australian agricultural researchers has patented a method for helping fruit trees bear flowers more consistently.


Myers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Myers Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
52,586,579
50,448,978
Net inc
3,103,176
2,601,134
Share earns
.47
.39
6mo sales
97,837,086
93,693,874
Net inc
5,097,793
4,207,166
Share earns
.77
.63


Alaska Pipeline Reaches Accord
LEAD: The operator of the trans-Alaska pipeline, which carries a quarter of the nation's domestically produced oil, has reached an agreement with state officials on measures to cut air pollution, ending a threat that the pipeline would be shut down. the Alyeska Pipeline Service Company, the consortium of seven oil companies that operates the 800-mile pipeline, had threatened to cut off an important source of oil as a deadline approached for compliance with an Environmental Protection Agency order.


ISRAELI SAYS U.S. BACKS NEW MISSILE
LEAD: The United States will continue to back Israel's $160 million Arrow missile project, billed as the answer to the short-range weapons of neighboring Arab countries, Defense Minister Moshe Arens of Israel said today after meeting with Defense Secretary Dick Cheney.


Thomson McKinnon Asset Management reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thomson McKinnon Asset Management (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,000,000
8,500,000
Net inc
3,600,000
3,600,000
Share earns
.36
.36
6mo rev
17,800,000
16,600,000
Net inc
7,241,000
7,085,000
Share earns
.72
.70


A Feminist Artwork For University Library
LEAD: The University of the District of Columbia today accepted the gift of ''The Dinner Party,'' Judy Chicago's mixed-media installation, at the university's Carnegie Library where itwill be on exhibition beginning in the fall of 1991.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Buying Luggage
LEAD: Luggage is coming out of the closet as people prepare to pack for August vacations.
And while most will carry bags they have toted on previous trips, others will head for department stores, luggage shops, chain stores and discount stores.


Media General Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Media General Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
158,024,000
149,912,000
Net inc
12,409,000
6,056,000
Share earns
.48
.23
Shares outst
25,965,000
25,918,000
6mo rev
306,065,000
299,178,000
Net inc
15,115,000
17,947,000
Share earns
.58
.69
Shares outst
25,960,000
25,931,000


About New York;   They Are Gay, And Asking God To Save Them
LEAD: Here we are at Glad Tidings Tabernacle on West 33d Street between Eighth and Ninth Avenues. ''Prayer is the Key,'' proclaims a banner. ''Praise the Lord!'' goes the hymn's refrain.
A single ceiling fan barely moves the stale air in a basement chapel.
Arms reach for heaven. ''Amens'' provide prayerful punctuation.


Vista Chemical Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vista Chemical Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
182,872,000
202,330,000
Net inc
20,407,000
35,100,000
Share earns
1.93
2.36
Shares outst
10,599,000
14,874,000
9mo sales
536,714,000
591,991,000
Net inc
50,763,000
98,804,000
Share earns
4.79
6.61
Shares outst
10,598,000
14,956,000


Panama Companies Sue U.S. for Damages
LEAD: A group of companies based in Panama have filed a $30 million lawsuit against the United States Government, charging that the Government failed to protect their property in the invasion of Panama last year.


Mexico Asks U.S. to Arrest 2 Men Accused in Abduction of Doctor
LEAD: The Mexican Government, angered by the seizure in Guadalajara of a doctor accused in the torture and killing of an American drug agent, has asked the United States to arrest two men accused of involvement in the abduction.


Trottier Signs Contract To Join the Penguins
LEAD: For Bryan Trottier, the ride may not be over yet; he is just changing horses.
The Pittsburgh Penguins signed the former Islander center yesterday, just two and a half weeks after Trottier was released by a team he starred with for 15 seasons and helped lead to four consecutive Stanley Cup championships.


Ahmanson Sells Its Headquarters
LEAD: H. F. Ahmanson &amp; Company, a savings and loan holding company based here, sold its downtown headquarters building to a partnership between Kawasaki Enterprises Inc. of Japan and Takenaka &amp; Company in Los Angeles.
Ahmanson declined to disclose the sale price, but said it would record a $12 million pretax gain.


Books of The Times;   Agnes de Mille's Stories of Herself and Others
LEAD:
Portrait Gallery
By Agnes de Mille
Illustrated. 314 pages. Houghton Mifflin
$19.95.


National Sanitary Supply Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Sanitary Supply Co.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
66,365,000
66,909,000
Net inc
927,000
1,093,000
Share earns
.15
.18
Shares outst
6,129,000
6,118,000
6mo sales
129,923,000
128,917,000
Net inc
1,635,000
1,934,000
Share earns
.27
.32
Shares outst
6,125,000
6,115,000


Caterpillar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caterpillar Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,947,000,000
3,041,000,000
Net inc
46,000,000
141,000,000
Share earns
.46
1.39
6mo sales
5,884,000,000
5,721,000,000
Net inc
145,000,000
282,000,000
Share earns
1.43
2.78


Life Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Life Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
36,012,000
35,134,000
Net inc
b3,442,000
3,373,000
Share earns
.25
.25
6mo rev
73,720,000
69,458,000
Net inc
6,950,000
6,698,000
Share earns
.51
.49
b-Included charge of ''about'' $100,000 from ''downsizing'' of molecular diagnostics business.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The rock 'n' roll performer CHUCK BERRY has been charged with child abuse and possession of marijuana based on evidence seized in a raid on his home last month, according to the authorities in St.
Charles, Mo.


Detective Asked About Handling Of Jogger Case
LEAD: A lawyer for a defendant in the Central Park jogger trial suggested yesterday that his client had been cowed and goaded into confessing by veiled threats of torture and lurid questions that challenged his masculinity.


SPX reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SPX (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
202,805,000
163,956,000
Net inc
10,000,000
b60,500,000
Share earns
.72
4.44
Shares outst
13,786,000
13,631,000
6mo sales
368,956,000
327,869,000
Net inc
14,100,000
b73,000,000
Share earns
1.02
5.36
Shares outst
13,781,000
13,611,000


Showdown Looms for Leaders
LEAD: The showdown between Greg LeMond of the United States and Claudio Chiappucci of Italy has come down to 28.5 miles on the next-to-last day instead of 15 miles on the final day.
And it will be in the rolling green hills and forests of central France instead of the shuttered buildings around Paris.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the Government's sale of savings and loan assets referred incorrectly to a mandate to the Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency overseeing the industry bailout.
The maximum number of years for which it is allowed to lend up to 85 percent of the purchase price to buyers of large asset portfolios is 5, not 15.


On the Defensive, Republicans Name a Spokesman
LEAD: Faced with rising partisan warfare around issues like taxes and the savings and loan scandal, the Republican National Committee moved to shore up its political operation today, announcing that Charles Black would serve as official spokesman during the illness of Lee Atwater, the party's national chairman.


Roto-Rooter Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Roto-Rooter Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
18,449,000
16,382,000
Net inc
1,368,000
1,466,000
Share earns
.28
.30
6mo rev
36,660,000
32,423,000
Net inc
2,732,000
2,827,000
Share earns
.55
.57


Yankees Come Close But Not Close Enough
LEAD: The frustrations of a last-place team are not always humiliating.
More often, they result from the small opportunities that slip away, the decisive moments that form a pattern, and the long deep breath from a manager whose team has just lost a game that easily could have been won.


Steinbrenner Loses in Bid for More Witnesses
LEAD: Lawyers for George Steinbrenner failed yesterday in their effort to have Peter Ueberroth, the former baseball commissioner; Dave Winfield, the former Yankee outfielder, and Howard Spira heard as witnesses in Commissioner Fay Vincent's investigation of the Yankees' principal owner.


Liberian Guerrillas Capture Monrovia's Northern Sector
LEAD: Rebels captured much of the northern part of Liberia's capital today after fighting pitched battles with the few hundred remaining soldiers defending President Samuel K. Doe.


Slocan Forest reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Slocan Forest
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
60,200,000
52,100,000
Net inc
1,900,000
3,800,000
Share earns
.17
.35
6mo sales
115,100,000
97,700,000
Net inc
2,800,000
5,800,000
Share earns
.26
.54
The company said production and unit cost at the rebuilt Vavenby sawmill are not up to normal levels, resulting in a loss of 9 cents a share on the latest 6-month earnings.


News Summary
LEAD:
International
2-5
The 30-year civil war in Ethiopia is drawing closer to the capital, Addis Ababa.
People are hoarding food and fuel, and long lines for passports attest to a rush to leave.
Page 1
Rebels captured a part of Monrovia, Liberia's capital, after fighting pitched battles with the few hundred remaining soldiers defending President Samuel K.


The Met's March of the 'Macho He-Men'
LEAD: ''All right, fellas, basically we need to know you can all march,'' the director called out to the 33 men gathered in a large underground studio at the Metropolitan Opera House. ''Start off on the right foot.
For some unknown reason, probably something they do in Hungary, they all start on the right leg.


Chemed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemed Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
151,365,000
151,098,000
Net inc
5,371,000
7,246,000
Share earns
.51
.71
6mo rev
295,294,000
292,974,000
Net inc
b9,567,000
12,566,000
Share earns
.92
1.28
Shares outst
10,431,000
9,814,000


An Evolving Cityscape Mixes New Shapes With Old
LEAD: Urban renewal is a natural, continuing process in New York.
New construction supplements old, creating a subtle but vital sense of evolution in the city.


Test Accused Rapists For Hepatitis B Also
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mentor Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mentor Graphics (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
101,001,000
105,829,000
Net inc
3,648,000
12,332,000
Share earns
.08
.29
Shares outst
46,061,000
43,270,000
6mo rev
217,748,000
206,337,000
Net inc
15,205,000
23,990,000
Share earns
.34
.56
Shares outst
45,289,000
42,810,000


CHRONICLE
LEAD: A $30 million lawsuit filed against GERALDO RIVERA by a woman who was arrested during a drug raid carried live on national television has been settled out of court in Houston for an undisclosed amount, lawyers for the two sides said yesterday.


Chrysler Makes Plea To U.A.W.
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation, responding to its financial difficulties, said it suggested to the United Automobile Workers today that the company must have a more favorable labor contract than the ones that will be negotiated with the General Motors Corporation and the Ford Motor Company this year.


'Ulysses' Editors Clash in a Joycean Hades
LEAD: To the Editor:


Morrison Knudsen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morrison Knudsen Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
380,217,000
570,378,000
Net inc
b7,529,000
7,241,000
Share earns
.65
.63
6mo rev
779,577,000
1,031,535,000
Net inc
b14,739,000
13,584,000
Share earns
1.27
1.19


Uninsured? Go to Jail.
LEAD: Driving south of the border without Mexican automobile insurance could land you behind bars.


Accord Reached on Cleanup of Times Beach
LEAD: Federal and state environmental officials announced an agreement today intended to clear the way for the cleanup of dioxin-contaminated Times Beach, Mo., which has been deserted since 1983.


McClatchy Newspapers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McClatchy Newspapers (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
107,591,000
97,322,000
Net inc
7,822,000
9,984,000
Share earns
.27
.35
6mo rev
202,693,000
184,250,000
Net inc
10,180,000
14,838,000
Share earns
.36
.52


Ford Gets Offers For Subsidiary
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company has received three bids for its aerospace subsidiary and may accept one within a week, a company spokesman, Thomas Rhoades, said.
The bids were made by the Loral Corporation; a consortium including the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, the Carlyle Group, an investment firm, and Aerospatiale, the French aerospace company, and a joint offer by Alcatel N.V.


Joan Whitney Kramer, Singer and Songwriter, 76
LEAD: Joan Whitney Kramer, a singer and the co-author of many hit songs, died on July 12 in Westport, Conn.
She was 76 years old and lived in Westport.


Carolina Power &amp; Light Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carolina Power &amp; Light Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
579,591,000
558,012,000
Net inc
1,871,000
72,645,000
Share earns
-
.81
Shares outst
83,875,000
80,368,000
6mo rev
1,221,148,000
1,162,013,000
Net inc
117,736,000
176,728,000
Share earns
1.20
2.00
Shares outst
85,269,000
80,368,000


Lone Star Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lone Star Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
71,247,000
96,250,000
Net inc
1,543,000
b6,620,000
Share earns
.02
.32
6mo sales
113,292,000
154,508,000
Net loss
9,280,000
9,662,000
b-Included recognition of $5.6 million, or 34 cents a share, of investment tax credits.


John J. Fuller, Consultant, 59
LEAD: John J. Fuller, president of Fuller Associates, insurance and benefits consultants in Litchfield, Conn., died on Thursday at Charlotte Hungerford Hospital in Torrington, Conn.
He was 59 years old and lived in Litchfield.


Lafarge Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lafarge Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
429,808,000
394,501,000
Net inc
29,396,000
37,964,000
Share earns
.57
.76
Shares outst
51,658,000
50,066,000
6mo sales
669,177,000
601,881,000
Net loss
11,047,000
b18,331,000
Share earns
-
.37
Shares outst
51,128,000
50,016,000


Net Up 4.6% At Kellogg
LEAD: The Kellogg Company said today that higher international sales of ready-to-eat cereal helped it to a 4.6 percent increase in second-quarter profits.


Horizon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Horizon Industries (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
79,660,000
78,097,000
Net loss
494,000
b1,614,000
Share earns
-
.34
Shares outst
5,450,000
4,782,000
9mo sales
228,880,000
222,835,000
Net loss
2,403,000
b4,256,000
Share earns
-
.97
Shares outst
5,438,000
4,398,000


Pathe Makes First Payment
LEAD: The MGM/UA Communications Company said today that its stockholders had received the first payment from the Pathe Communications Corporation in connection with Pathe's tender offer for MGM/UA.


Robert O. Shepler, 66, Reinsurance Executive
LEAD: Robert O. Shepler, president of the General Reassurance Corporation for 20 years before retiring in 1987, died on Wednesday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 66 years old and lived in Greenwich.


TSI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* TSI Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
9,208,000
8,148,000
Net inc
422,000
b372,000
Share earns
.17
.15
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $39,000.


Kaman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaman Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
207,070,000
204,011,000
Net inc
4,761,000
6,900,000
Share earns
.26
.38
6mo rev
410,929,000
407,659,000
Net inc
9,104,000
13,726,000
Share earns
.50
.76


NASA STUDIES SHOW ITS SPACE STATION MUST BE SIMPLIFIED
LEAD: The space agency said yesterday that the planned $37 billion space station would have to be substantially simplified to reduce its need for maintenance by robots and astronauts walking in space.


American Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Brands Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,952,400,000
2,722,600,000
Net inc
158,400,000
120,200,000
Share earns
1.62
1.25
Shares outst
95,883,883
93,565,174
6mo rev
6,156,100,000
5,968,500,000
Net inc
353,800,000
292,400,000
Share earns
3.62
3.05
Shares outst
95,852,704
93,530,070


Otter Tail Power Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Otter Tail Power Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
39,789,000
39,506,000
Net inc
5,452,000
5,342,000
Share earns
.43
.40
6mo rev
171,645,000
176,415,000
Net inc
24,785,000
25,284,000
Share earns
1.93
1.93


Gary Carter Sidelined
LEAD: The San Francisco Giants yesterday placed Gary Carter, the former Mets catcher, on the 15-day disabled list retroactive to July 9 because of a bruised right shoulder.
Kirt Manwaring, a catcher, was recalled from Phoenix of the Class AAA Pacific Coast League.(AP)


Seabrook at Full Power
LEAD: The Seabrook nuclear power plant, for years the focus of the nation's debate over whether atomic energy is safe, reached full power for the first time Thursday night.
New Hampshire Yankee, the operator of the $6.6 billion plant, said full power was reached at 9:52 P.M., the culmination of a series of power step-ups that had been under way since the Nuclear Regulatory Commission granted Seabrook a commercial operating license in March.


Synoptics Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Synoptics Communications (OTC)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Revenue
41,254,000
16,182,000
Net inc
6,706,000
1,929,000
Share earns
.34
.13
Shares outst
19,714,000
15,001,000
6mo rev
71,346,000
30,831,000
Net inc
10,861,000
3,868,000
Share earns
.56
.26
Shares outst
19,414,000
14,960,000


Kellogg Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kellogg Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,257,600,000
1,234,000,000
Net inc
135,700,000
129,700,000
Share earns
1.13
1.06
6mo sales
2,466,400,000
2,368,100,000
Net inc
232,000,000
b289,200,000
Share earns
1.92
2.36


Beliefs
LEAD: Anezka Janouskova is 15 years old and, unlike her father and her grandfather, she will probably never have to go to jail for her religion.


Disputed Lockheed Contract Is Canceled by Navy
LEAD: The Navy today dealt a major blow to the Lockheed Corporation, canceling a contract for the company to build a new generation of submarine-fighting aircraft because of what the Navy said was Lockheed's inadequate performance.


Arteries Are Unblocked Without Drugs in Study
LEAD: People with blocked coronary arteries who adhere to a strict vegetarian diet, engage in mild daily exercise and practice stress-reduction techniques can reverse the blockage, according to a study being published today.


Oregon Steel Mills reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oregon Steel Mills (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
78,302,000
60,516,000
Net inc
8,062,000
6,014,000
Share earns
1.01
.76
6mo sales
153,067,000
118,064,000
Net inc
15,144,000
10,557,000
Share earns
1.90
1.35


Rethink Space
LEAD: In the wake of the Hubble Space Telescope catastrophe and the grounding of the space shuttle fleet, Vice President Quayle has set up a review of NASA's direction and goals.
A review is surely needed.
Both NASA's hardware and the goals the White House has set for it are still pointed to the needs of a different era.


Connecticut Republicans Appear Ready to Nominate Rep. Rowland
LEAD: Connecticut's Republican Party, buoyant but still stung by the defection of former Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr., filled the Civic Center here tonight to start a two-day convention that is expected to culminate on Saturday with the nomination of Representative John G. Rowland of Waterbury for governor.


Stevens Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stevens Graphics (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
37,997,000
31,435,000
Net inc
3,217,000
2,742,000
Share earns
.36
.34
Shares outst
9,060,000
8,018,000
6mo sales
71,687,000
58,861,000
Net inc
4,780,000
3,822,000
Share earns
.54
.48
Shares outst
8,979,000
7,957,000


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
Net Income
Percent
Apr.-June
Change
1990
From '89
Advanced Micro Devices Inc.
$ (5,900,000)
-
Alaska Air Group Inc.
9,600,000
-
8.6
American Brands Inc.
158,400,000
+
31.8
Aztar Corp.


Advanced Micro Devices Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Micro Devices Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
267,700,000
274,884,000
Net loss
b5,921,000
c12,073,000
Share earns
-
.12
Shares outst
81,727,000
82,256,000
6mo sales
539,172,000
544,504,000
Net inc
b7,198,000
22,144,000
Share earns
.02
.21
Shares outst
82,978,000
81,962,000


Panel Focused on Frank's Use of Office
LEAD: The House ethics committee today disclosed the reasons for its recommendation that Representative Barney Frank be reprimanded, concluding that he should be punished not for his personal behavior with a male prostitute but because he improperly used his office to aid the prostitute.


Research Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Research Co.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
4,860,000
6,249,000
Net inc
24,100
279,400
Share earns
.02
.24
Shares outst
1,148,693
1,148,693
9mo sales
15,620,900
17,084,700
Net inc
48,300
623,000
Share earns
.04
.47
Shares outst
1,148,693
1,316,822


Danaher Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Danaher Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Revenue
202,999,000
198,605,000
Net inc
11,549,000
12,546,000
Share earns
.46
.53
Shares outst
25,118,584
23,761,280
6mo rev
383,553,000
393,579,000
Net inc
22,191,000
23,958,000
Share earns
.92
1.00
Shares outst
24,247,751
24,047,501


Figgie International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Figgie International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
342,511,000
333,468,000
Net inc
11,910,000
b13,686,000
Share earns
.68
.61
Shares outst
17,478,273
22,179,990
6mo rev
682,924,000
653,823,000
Net inc
24,005,000
b28,420,000
Share earns
1.37
1.28
Shares outst
17,505,776
22,225,752


Lamson &amp; Sessions reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lamson &amp; Sessions (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
84,960,000
92,511,000
Net inc
1,843,000
3,443,000
Share earns
.14
.27
Shares outst
13,206,000
12,823,000
6mo sales
160,464,000
180,019,000
Net inc
2,108,000
6,828,000
Share earns
.16
.54
Shares outst
13,206,000
12,372,000


Matlack Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Matlack Systems (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
56,655,000
57,139,000
Net inc
505,000
130,000
Share earns
.09
.03
Shares outst
5,647,000
5,324,000
9mo rev
164,449,000
167,472,000
Net loss
597,000
b47,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
5,647,000
5,324,000


Minnesota Power &amp; Light Co. reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Minnesota Power &amp; Light Co. (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
475,612,000
462,876,000
Net inc
b91,976,000
73,685,000
Share earns
3.00
2.38
b-Included a gain of $54,740,000, or $1.10 a share, from the sale of the company's telecommunications unit and a charge of $12,190,000 relating to an anticipated gain from a cancelled sale of certain company generating capacity.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Dogs and Summer Heat
LEAD: Dogs can suffer more than people from high temperatures and humidity, and those that are accustomed to an indoor life are especially at risk during summer outings.
Micky Niego, director of companion animal services at the New York chapter of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and Dr.


Evolution in Europe;   In Moscow, an Artistic Donnybrook
LEAD: The house that Konstantin S. Melnikov built for himself is an eccentric little cylinder tucked amid the ruins of a once elegant neighborhood in central Moscow.


Woodhead Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Woodhead Industries (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
17,599,000
18,316,000
Net inc
b1,101,000
1,212,000
Share earns
.34
.38
Shares outst
3,233,000
3,166,000
9mo sales
55,038,000
54,413,000
Net inc
b3,701,000
3,175,000
Share earns
1.14
1.01
Shares outst
3,234,000
3,146,000


Alaska Air Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alaska Air Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
263,347,000
226,626,000
Net inc
9,606,000
10,539,000
Share earns
.59
.66
Shares outst
13,492,000
15,910,000
6mo rev
494,144,000
424,290,000
Net inc
7,546,000
16,945,000
Share earns
.35
1.07
Shares outst
14,016,000
15,882,000


Western Micro Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Micro Technology (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
19,871,000
21,759,000
Net loss
436,000
b168,000
Share earns
-
.06
b-Net income


Expos Lose Santovenia
LEAD: Montreal's starting catcher, Nelson Santovenia, will undergo surgery for torn cartilage in his left knee today and will be lost to the Expos for at least six weeks.
Santovenia, who is batting .191, was placed on the disabled list on Thursday.(AP)


Sunrise Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunrise Technologies
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,417,339
556,835
Net inc
162,069
40,228
Share earns
.02
.01
Shares outst
7,257,940
5,460,445
6mo rev
2,591,401
906,879
Net inc
280,969
61,075
Share earns
.04
.01
Shares outst
7,218,149
4,690,631


Letter: On the Environment;   What Astronauts and Cosmonauts See
LEAD: To the Editor:


Virginia Executes Man for Murder
LEAD: A man was executed in Virginia's electric chair Thursday night for the murder of an 87-year-old woman he had known all his life.


Barry's Defense Calls a Top U.S. Witness a Liar
LEAD: The defense in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug and perjury trial charged today that Charles Lewis, one of the prosecution's most important witnesses, had lied in testimony not only about the Mayor's drug activity but also about his own.


New York City Now Backs Family-Aid Bill
LEAD: New York City officials helped keep a state foster-care prevention bill alive today by dropping their opposition to it and encouraging Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to sign it.


Safety Agency and G.M. at Loggerheads Over Brake Problem
LEAD: The Federal Government is urging the General Motors Corporation to recall some 450,000 cars because of a suspected brake defect.
But the auto maker is refusing to do so, setting the stage for a possible court fight.


Aztar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aztar Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 28
1990
1989
Revenue
131,256,000
140,707,000
Net loss
b25,171,000
8,091,000
Shares outst
40,796,000
40,280,000
6mo rev
256,401,000
259,186,000
Net loss
15,872,000
26,720,000
Shares outst
40,814,000
40,079,000


SEI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SEI Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
42,865,000
36,251,000
Net inc
3,043,000
2,993,000
Share earns
.27
.26
Shares outst
11,288,000
11,618,000
6mo rev
84,555,000
69,081,000
Net inc
5,985,000
6,223,000
Share earns
.54
.53
Shares outst
11,008,000
11,741,000


London Stock Exchange Is Rocked by a Bombing
LEAD: A bomb blast rocked the London Stock Exchange in the heart of the financial district today after warnings said to be from the Irish Republican Army were telephoned to the police and news organizations.


Barrowman Breaks Breast-Stroke Mark
LEAD: The fireworks were supposed to come in the first individual event of the Goodwill Games, with Matt Biondi, the Olympic champion, and Tom Jager, the world-record holder, in the men's 50-meter freestyle.


'Pretty Woman' Finds Best Friend in Profits
LEAD: The romantic comedy ''Pretty Woman,'' released in the movie industry's off season, could well become the highest-grossing film this year.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Because of the Third Avenue Summerfest, Third Avenue in Manhattan will be closed tomorrow from 42d to 57th Streets from 8 A.M. to 8 P.M.


No Appeal in False Rape Case
LEAD: A woman sentenced to apologize in radio and newspaper advertisements to a man she had falsely accused of raping her will drop her appeal of the sentence, her lawyer said today.


One Price Clothing Stores reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* One Price Clothing Stores (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
34,091,904
24,414,209
Net inc
2,896,216
1,821,238
Share earns
.43
.27
6mo sales
58,852,837
39,140,452
Net inc
2,758,611
1,994,823
Share earns
.42
.30


Progressive Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Progressive Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
345,900,000
353,600,000
Net inc
36,800,000
31,500,000
Share earns
1.49
1.18
6mo rev
687,500,000
702,500,000
Net inc
64,200,000
54,000,000
Share earns
2.56
2.02


Right Management ConsultFants reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Right Management ConsultFants
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,077,000
5,716,000
Net inc
589,000
308,000
Share earns
.22
.12
6mo rev
15,608,000
10,876,000
Net inc
1,107,000
579,000
Share earns
.41
.22


Man Tried to Extort Money From Forbes, U.S. Charges
LEAD: A 24-year-old Bronx man was arrested yesterday and charged with trying to extort money from the late magazine publisher Malcolm Forbes and the Forbes family by threatening to damage the publisher's reputation.


Vulcan Materials Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vulcan Materials Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
295,682,000
293,717,000
Net inc
39,664,000
43,554,000
Share earns
1.02
1.07
6mo sales
527,702,000
511,227,000
Net inc
58,341,000
b60,730,000
Share earns
1.49
1.49


Dexter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dexter Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
227,865,000
224,665,000
Net inc
12,130,000
12,598,000
Share earns
.50
.51
6mo rev
457,069,000
442,433,000
Net inc
22,121,000
24,028,000
Share earns
.91
.97


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a brief article in Business Day yesterday about Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr.'s return of campaign contributions from the savings and loan industry referred incorrectly to contributions given him by the Phoenix developer Charles H. Keating Jr.
In March 1988, Mr.
Riegle returned $78,250 from Mr.


Fletcher Challenge Canada reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fletcher Challenge Canada
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
299,000,000
366,000,000
Net inc
b37,000,000
32,000,000
Share earns
.62
.54
6mo sales
581,000,000
702,000,000
Net inc
b53,000,000
71,000,000
Share earns
.88
1.20


Desoto Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Desoto Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
124,920,000
121,135,000
Net inc
3,886,000
198,000
Share earns
.95
.05
6mo rev
234,512,000
220,163,000
Net inc
6,442,000
1,609,000
Share earns
1.58
.40


Curragh Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Curragh Resources (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
70,500,000
50,700,000
Net inc
15,100,000
10,700,000
Share earns
.56
.43
6mo net inc
29,300,000
31,000,000
Share earns
1.13
1.24
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Knee Surgery for Rose
LEAD: Pete Rose underwent arthroscopic surgery on his injured right knee yesterday, a day after being sentenced to prison for tax offenses.


Kansas City Southern Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas City Southern Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
129,000,000
124,800,000
Net inc
8,700,000
b9,300,000
Share earns
.82
.88
6mo rev
259,600,000
248,700,000
Net inc
18,200,000
b16,800,000
Share earns
1.73
1.60


Hexcel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hexcel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
110,196,000
110,809,000
Net inc
1,705,000
3,462,000
Share earns
.24
.50
6mo sales
216,959,000
212,091,000
Net inc
2,934,000
5,007,000
Share earns
.42
.72
The company said included in second quarter and first half 1990 results were benefits of about 7 cents a share and 14 cents a share, respectively, due to the extension of the depreciation recovery periods of certain property and equipment to coincide with changes in business conditions.


Excerpts From Rulings On North's Conviction
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the decision today by a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia in the Iran-contra case of Oliver L. North, former aide to the National Security Council.


Philip Leacock, 72, Director of Movies And Dramas for TV
LEAD: Philip Leacock, a film and television director, died on July 14 while on holiday in London with his family.
He was 72 years old and lived in Pacific Palisades, Calif.
No cause of death was given.
The British-born Mr.
Leacock, who made documentaries before taking on feature-length movies, had his first hit in 1950 with ''The Kidnappers,'' a family movie set in Nova Scotia.


Morihiko Hasegawa, Toy Marketer, 62
LEAD: Morihiko Hasegawa, president of Play-Jour International, a toy marketing company based in Tokyo, died on July 13 at St.
Mariana Hospital in Kawasaki, Japan.
He was 62 years old and lived in Yokohama.
A Play-Jour spokesman said he died of cancer.


BRENNAN, KEY LIBERAL, QUITS SUPREME COURT; BATTLE FOR SEAT LIKELY
LEAD: Justice William J. Brennan Jr., the Supreme Court's senior member, resigned from the Court tonight, effective immediately.


Loblaw Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loblaw Cos.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,964,700,000
1,856,500,000
Net inc
23,400,000
15,900,000
Share earns
.27
.18
6mo sales
3,800,300,000
3,567,100,000
Net inc
39,400,000
28,200,000
Share earns
.44
.32
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Ethiopia's Long War Draws Closer to the Capital
LEAD: In this ramshackle capital of two million, people are hoarding food and fuel, and long lines at the passport office attest to a rush to leave as a 30-year conflict draws closer from the countryside.


Some Good Things Grow With a Little Neglect;   Memorial to a Friend
LEAD: To the Editor:


Baseball;   Braves Keep Striking Out As Mets Win
LEAD: The Mets' pitching rotation is on a roll, and last night, Sid Fernandez, dispensing his own brand of smoke before yielding to the heat, added his own spin to its momentum as the Mets defeated the Atlanta Braves, 6-1, at Shea Stadium.


Savings Deposits Fall $19.9 Billion
LEAD: The nation's savings institutions lost net deposits of $19.9 billion in the first two months of 1990, nearly matching the record outflows of a year earlier, the Government said today.


Nude Characters to Remain In City Opera Production
LEAD: Christopher Keene, the general director of the New York City Opera, said today that the company did not plan to alter its production of Arnold Schoenberg's ''Moses und Aron,'' which is to open on Sept. 22.


Bridge
LEAD: Six young experts qualified here Thursday night to represent the United States in the 1991 World Junior Championships, for players age 25 and under, to be played in Ann Arbor, Mich.
In a two-day Imp Pairs Trial, Brad Moss of Manhattan and Leonard Holtz of Los Angeles headed the standings with 65.4 imps.


Patents;   A Food Preservative That's Made Naturally
LEAD: Researchers at Microlife Technics Inc. of Sarasota, Fla., which specializes in developing commercially useful bacteria, obtained a patent this week for a naturally produced food preservative that fights common molds.


Unifi Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Unifi Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 24
1990
1989
Sales
107,463,014
114,438,221
Net inc
8,898,675
8,693,892
Share earns
.45
.44
Yr sales
398,930,937
392,208,157
Net inc
28,292,625
26,159,579
Share earns
1.41
1.27
Latest year results included a $1,852,844 credit from an accounting change.


North Korea Counters Seoul On Plan to Open the Frontier
LEAD: North Korea today swiftly countered a South Korean challenge to open temporarily their heavily fortified border, laying down strict conditions before Koreans could cross between the two countries.


Scientists Learn How Marijuana Works in Brain
LEAD: Researchers plan to report that they have discovered receptors in the brain that are stimulated by marijuana, suggesting that the body produces a substance similar to marijuana and uses it to relieve pain and stress.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: For the fifth Friday in a row, the Maryland Public Television program ''Wall Street Week With LOUIS RUKEYSER'' went on the air last evening without its host.
RICH DUBROFF, the producer of the nationally televised program, on which a panel of financial experts analyzes the week's activities on Wall Street, said that Mr.


Meetings Are Shifted By Chase
LEAD: Hurt by weak earnings, Citicorp and the Chase Manhattan Corporation, the nation's first- and second-largest banking companies, are cutting costs and focusing on the most prestigious part of their businesses: handling large corporate clients.


Rolland Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rolland Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
104,297,000
114,844,000
Net loss
2,088,000
155,000
6mo sales
213,219,000
231,382,000
Net loss
1,914,000
b751,000
Share earns
-
.20
b-Net income
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Prices of Treasury Issues Post Small Rise
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities posted small increases yesterday in a muted reaction to further indications that the Federal Reserve was lowering key interest rates.


Health Warnings Issued as Air Pollution Builds Up
LEAD: Air pollution was worse this week than it has been all year, and health advisories were issued throughout the Northeast as heat and stagnant air helped form ground-level ozone, a major component of smog.


Programs Push Dow Back to 2,961.14
LEAD: Stocks fell sharply yesterday in waves of programmed selling prompted by growing skittishness over the state of the economy, continued weakness in earnings and concern that high-technology stocks may have soared too high.


Unused Beds or Not, Hospitals Stay Crowded
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hollywood Film Makers Protest Rating System
LEAD: Some of Hollywood's best-known film makers have signed a petition criticizing the rating system of the Motion Picture Association of America.


Torotel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Torotel Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,174,000
2,223,000
Net inc
b800,000
46,000
Share earns
.30
.02
Yr sales
9,179,000
9,107,000
Net inc
337,000
305,000
Share earns
.13
.12
b-Included a gain of $83,000, or 3 cents a share, from the sale of three acres of land and a gain of $51,000, or 2 cents a share, from the reversal of an overaccrual of certain non-income taxes in a prior period.


Ruddick reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ruddick (AMEX)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
357,663,000
338,694,000
Net inc
6,365,000
5,874,000
Share earns
.63
.60
9mo sales
1,064,075,000
965,629,000
Net inc
18,108,000
14,247,000
Share earns
1.08
1.46
The company's Harris Teeter unit had sales of $293 million in the latest quarter, an increase of $20 million over the year-ago period.


Ziegler Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ziegler Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,092,000
9,387,000
Net inc
902,000
1,666,000
Share earns
.34
.44
6mo rev
16,748,000
16,352,000
Net inc
1,178,000
1,280,000
Share earns
.44
.48


American Brands in Deal for Moen
LEAD: American Brands Inc., a consumer products company that has been adding to its non-tobacco businesses, said yesterday that it would buy the Moen Group Inc., a plumbing manufacturer, from Forstmann Little &amp; Company for $975 million.


Storage Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Storage Technology Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Revenue
276,358,000
235,957,000
Net inc
b11,430,000
4,388,000
Share earns
.34
.17
Shares outst
33,577,000
26,107,000
6mo rev
536,276,000
450,078,000
Net inc
b19,933,000
c17,190,000
Share earns
.66
.66
Shares outst
30,172,000
26,129,000


Charles Keller, 88, Professor of History At Williams College
LEAD: Charles R. Keller, an emeritus professor of history at Williams College and a leader in secondary education, died on Wednesday at North Adams Regional Hospital in Massachusetts.


Aquino Defends Effort To Save Quake Victims
LEAD: President Corazon C. Aquino defended her Government today against criticism that it has been slow and ineffective in aiding victims of an earthquake that killed nearly 700 people.


Ozone Levels Continue to Exceed Federal Health Standards


Tidewater Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tidewater Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
55,800,000
44,800,000
Net inc
6,300,000
b5,100,000
Share earns
.22
-
Shares outst
28,617,741
22,428,895
b-Net loss


India Tells Separatists It Won't Compromise
LEAD: Prime Minister V. P. Singh declared today that his Government would not yield to separatist groups seeking independence in the state of Kashmir.
But he said he was prepared to open talks if the groups declared loyalty to India and laid down their arms.


Helms Aide Stirs Furor With Racial Accusation
LEAD: The head of the N.A.A.C.P. and a black civil rights pioneer employed by Senator Jesse Helms have clashed over assertions by the Helms aide that some American black leaders are controlled by 15 powerful white men and are engaged in criminal and immoral activities.


U.S. Says China Backs Halt In Weapons to Khmer Rouge
LEAD: A senior State Department official told Congress today that China had agreed to stop arms shipments to the Khmer Rouge guerrillas and to support a disarming of all military forces in Cambodia as part of an arrangement leading to elections there.


Patents;   Barbecue Blocks Now Come in Flavors
LEAD: To combine the convenience of charcoal with the aroma of woods like hickory and mesquite, an inventor in Los Angeles, Emerson B. Holmes, has patented barbecue-flavored blocks.


Kennametal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kennametal Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
156,355,000
124,549,000
Net inc
8,939,000
8,677,000
Share earns
.86
.84
Shares outst
10,478,000
10,375,000
Yr sales
589,023,000
472,200,000
Net inc
32,113,000
29,994,000
Share earns
3.08
2.90
Shares outst
10,436,000
10,348,000


NONFICTION
LEAD:
THE STATIONS OF SOLITUDE.
By Alice Koller. (Morrow, $19.95.) In this account of her struggles with self-imposed solitude, the essayist Alice Koller discloses her most intimate secrets with startling nonchalance.
She can get away with this because she stands as far away from us as possible and because her voice is strong and carries, not only from the New England and Virginia country houses where she has spent the past 28 years, but from the place just beyond the pale of human contact where she lives.


Wave Hill Forced to Disband Cultural Programs
LEAD: Wave Hill, the park and cultural center in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, will eliminate its concerts, dance series and art exhibitions and cut its staff by 20 percent during the next year.


Should the Mets Have Called Off Strawberry Talks
LEAD: It is true that Strawberry has been scalding for the last six weeks, but his track record shows him to have had such spurts before.
It is also admirable that he has chosen to change his life, becoming consistently more alert and determined.


Ms. Weber Weds Karl-Erik Gude
LEAD: Elizabeth Dorsey Weber and Karl-Erik Leopoldo Gude were married yesterday at the Scarborough (N.Y.) Presbyterian Church by the Rev.
George A. Van Arnam, a United Methodist minister who is an uncle of the bride.


So Close To 3,000 - And Then So Far
LEAD: Just when everyone knew the program traders were going to bail them out by buying stocks, they didn't.
That may be the simplest summary of a week when the Dow Jones industrial average first failed to close over 3,000 by the smallest margin possible, and then saw prices crumble in the final moments Friday.


Ms. Anderson Weds James Ackerman
LEAD: Susan Denise Anderson, a textiles designer in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., was married there yesterday to James Harold Ackerman, a sculptor and cabinetmaker in Saratoga Springs.
The Rev.
Charles O. Milford, a Baptist minister, and Rabbi Alvin Roth officiated.


Outdoor Concerts Fill Afternoons
LEAD: SUNDAY afternoons bring all sorts of free concerts to the Bronx these summer days, with band programs at Lehman College already under way, and a variety of chamber, vocal and orchestral music set to begin next week in the Bronx Arts Ensemble's ''Summer Music 90.''


Even Open-Minded Women Must Vote Their Own Best Interests
LEAD: To the Editor:


Anna Tobin Marries Paul D'Ambrosio
LEAD: Anna Therese Tobin, a daughter of Judge Beverly C. Tobin and Edwin J. Tobin of Albany, was married there yesterday at St.
James Roman Catholic Church to Paul Salvatore D'Ambrosio, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas D'Ambrosio of Elmira, N.Y.
The Revs.
Richard Fragomeni and James Steuer officiated.


Erica Gail Rubinstein and Jay Leon Are Engaged
LEAD: Erica Gail Rubinstein and Jay Leon are planning an October wedding.
The engagement was announced by the bride's mother, Ricki Rubinstein of Riverdale, the Bronx.


'A Deed of Death'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Furious About Cable
LEAD: The Cable Act of 1984 freed cable television companies to gouge customers.
And gouge is just what many of them did - with wretched service and unconscionable rates.
One company had to be forced by law just to answer telephone calls from an army of irate customers.
In the cable business, one Congressman gibed, ''customer service is an oxymoron.


Dandelions and Rabbits Need Space, Too
LEAD: IT did not start out as a contest.
The catbird was just singing from a branch of the pine tree with a long happy series of chortles, trills and burbles that made up a happy tune.
The song sounded very much like the endless cheer of the purple finch, until the catbird was spotted from below.


Lip-Synching Can Make Music Sweeter
LEAD: The recent fuss over canned music at live concerts assumes there's a con going on.
The argument, put forth by rock critics and legislators, holds that real music must have real live musicians playing it.
Anything else is aural Naugahyde.


Sergei Paradzhanov, Armenian Director, 66
LEAD: Sergei Paradzhanov, an Armenian film director, has died after a long illness, the official press agency Tass said today.
He was 66 years old.


Evolution in Europe;   Immigrants for South Africa
LEAD: More than 48,000 residents of Eastern Europe have inquired about immigrating to South Africa this year, the Government-run radio said today.
A total of 375 immigrants from Poland, Yugoslavia, Hungary and the Soviet Union arrived in the first five months of 1990, the South African Broadcasting Corporation said.


Data Bank/July 22, 1990
LEAD:
Consumer Price Index
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.2
0.2
Housing Starts
June
May
April
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,180
1,210
1,250
Merchandise Exports
May
April
March
In billions
$32.7
$32.0
$33.2
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$40.5
$39.3
$41.6
Business Inventories
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
0.4
0.1
0.0
Industrial Production Index
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
0.4
0.6
-0.2
Petroleum Imports
Jan-June
July-Dec'89
Jan-June'89 $


HAITI WANTS U.N. TO MONITOR VOTE
LEAD: Haiti has become the first United Nations member to request that its elections be monitored by the organization to insure that they are free and fair.


Victims of A Hidden War
LEAD: ON the gouged, crumbling road from Phnom Penh to the southern Cambodian port of Kampot, a man weaves a bicycle awkwardly among the potholes.
He is pedaling with one foot; the stump of the other is swaddled in a kramar, or cotton scarf, slung from the handlebar.


Evolution in Europe;   Bulgarians in Turkish Regions End Strike Over Bias Charge
LEAD: Bulgarian nationalists ended a five-day strike in predominantly Turkish regions today after Parliament promised to investigate their grievances.


Fashion: On the Street;   Dresses Just Looking For a Breeze
LEAD: When it's hot, there is nothing like wearing a layer of air.
That is what these billowing dresses provide, and it's a style that has it all over this summer's tight Lycra sheaths when city streets start to radiate.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
NUTMEG STATE GAMES


Colts Sign Morgan
LEAD: HE has caught more passes (534) for more yards (10,352) and more touchdowns (67) than anyone else in the history of the New England Patriots franchise, but the way the Patriots figured it when they released him this year, after 13 arduous seasons and at the age of 35, Stanley Morgan had simply outlived his usefulness as a wide receiver.


Janet Guss Is Married
LEAD: Janet Linda Guss and Charles Brian LaChaussee were married last evening at Tarrytown House in Tarrytown, N.Y., by Rabbi Neil Borovitz.
Mrs.
LaChaussee is a research assistant at the Obesity Research Center at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
Her husband is a legal assistant at Prudential-Bache Securities in New York and a student at New York Law School.


Jane Ann Vogel To Marry in Fall
LEAD: October wedding plans for Jane Ann Vogel and Richard Jules Brickell, the son of Norman L. Brickell and Elinor W. Cohen, both of New York, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Judith A. Schein of Livingston, N.J., and William E. Vogel of Montclair, N.J.


Lighten Up, Wotan
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Charges Sought Against Nuclear Official
LEAD: The Justice Department has decided not to prosecute the former chief of staff at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, who was found by the commission's inspector general to have given false and contradictory information to Congress.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our den has a cement slab floor that is covered with squares of wood parquet flooring.
This floor has no insulation and is cold in the winter.
I would like to cover it with ceramic tiles.
The wood squares are still firm and sticking solidly.
Would it be possible to leave the wood flooring in place as insulation and then lay the tiles directly over this?


Embattled Liberia Leader Expels U.S. Aide
LEAD: President Samuel K. Doe of Liberia expelled the United States military attache today, accusing him of providing support to the advancing rebels, as support for Mr.
Doe diminished further within his own Government.


Behind the Facades, Surprises in Budapest
LEAD: Behind the iron gates of Budapest, in courtyards buried within unassuming apartment buildings, offices and universities, a traveler can find forgotten treasures of art and architecture, and footprints of the wars and revolutions that have marched across Hungary for the last millennium.


Returning Workers Trained for Real Jobs
LEAD: A SIMPLE premise lies behind the Re-entry Program of the Middlesex County Chamber of Commerce: people who have been out of the work force a long time need training that prepares them for available jobs.
Since its inception in 1986, the program has trained 400 people, placed more than 90 percent of them in jobs and earned the trust of employers in Middletown and neighboring communities in Middlesex County.


Taking Care of Carpets and Rugs
LEAD: RUGS and carpets need regular care: frequent light cleaning to remove dirt before it becomes embedded, attention to the pile and deep cleaning about once a year.
Although hand-knotted, fragile and antique rugs require special handling, ordinary tufted rugs and carpets made of synthetics or wool can be cared by applying the following techniques:


Riyadh and Beijing Declare Start of Full Diplomatic Ties
LEAD: Saudi Arabia and China announced today that they had upgraded their trade links to full diplomatic relations.


Poland's Black Madonna
LEAD: For six centuries, through Poland's wars and vacillating fortunes, the faithful have walked days, often the last distance on their knees, to revere the Black Madonna of Czestochowa.
Painted on wood - legend has it by the brush of St.
Luke - the doleful four-foot-high icon is the focus of the nation's spiritual life.


Northeast Notebook: Philadelphia;   Rejuvenating Drake Tower
LEAD: The 61-year-old Drake Tower in Center City is undergoing an interior renovation in a conversion from its primary use as a dormitory to an apartment house.
It will be ''a New York-style apartment building, with a concierge, at Philadelphia prices,'' said Milton Cross, a spokesman for the development group.


News Summary
LEAD: International
3-13
East Germany's economic problems are beginning to reflect its transition to a market economy.
Joblessness, officially unknown a year ago, is growing.
Page 1
Solidarity's continuing rift has had a disillusioning effect on Henryk Wujec, a leader of the Solidarity caucus in Parliament.


Western Europe, Its Births Falling, Wonders Who'll Do All the Work
LEAD: French families receive generous welfare and tax incentives to have more children, but to no avail.
Mothers in France are no longer averaging the 2.1 children needed to insure a natural replacement of the country's population.


Suzanne Gaba Is Engaged to Dr. James Aisenberg
LEAD: October wedding plans for Suzanne Gaba and Dr.
James Aisenberg have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Gaba of Rockville Centre, L.I.
Dr.
Aisenberg is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alan C. Aisenberg of Boston.


Present at the Miracle
LEAD:
THE MAGIC LANTERN
The Revolution of '89 Witnessed in
Warsaw, Budapest, Berlin, and Prague.
By Timothy Garton Ash.
156 pp. New York: Random House. $17.95.


Salads to Take on a Picnic
LEAD: PICNICS are fun for the host because there are no last-minute pressures.
All the food is prepared beforehand.
Ideally, I like to have a simple central dish such as cold roast chicken, ham or pork loin or even a poached salmon - around which various salads can be organized.
These are chosen to provide contrasting textures and flavors.


Ryan Wincing His Way to 300th
LEAD: It seemed odd.
When Nolan Ryan of the Texas Rangers hobbled out of the trainer's room in Arlington Stadium on Friday night with an ice bag taped around his right ankle and was met by a group of mostly local reporters, all of them asked about his back.


LADIES' COMPARTMENT
LEAD: I understand that traveling alone in India can be an uncomfortable experience for a woman (Hers: ''Ladies' Compartment,'' by Martha Stevenson, July 1).
But it is unfair to condemn Indian men on the basis of a problem that hasn't been solved at home.
Stevenson should travel across the United States in a bus and see that gender relations are mired in medieval times, no matter where you are.


BUSINESS DIARY/July 15-20
LEAD:
Home Builders' Lament: Fewer New Houses, Fewer New Buyers
Everyone's favorite leveraged investment is going sour.
Housing starts have fallen five months in a row, the Commerce Department reported last week - down 15.7 percent in a year to an annual rate of 1.18 million in June.
Home builders blame their old friends, the savings institutions, who are now unwilling or unable to back them.


TWO SIDES PREPARE FOR HARD BATTLE ON COURT NOMINEE
LEAD: President Bush began discussions today on a successor to Justice William J. Brennan Jr., while liberals and conservatives immediately began organizing for what many predicted would be a bruising battle over the shape of the Supreme Court in the 1990's and the constitutional right to abortion.


Diacritical Critic
LEAD: To the Editor:


Getting Help For a Class Reunion
LEAD: Recently I attended my first reunion of Asbury Park High School's class of 1949, and I can't recall ever having had more fun.


Avery L. Chappell Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Chappell of New York have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Avery Lincoln Chappell, and John Kevin Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Smith of Yonkers.


'A Deed of Death'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Salads to Take on a Picnic
LEAD: PICNICS are fun for the host because there are no last-minute pressures.
All the food is prepared beforehand.
Ideally, I like to have a simple central dish such as cold roast chicken, ham or pork loin or even a poached salmon - around which various salads can be organized.
These are chosen to provide contrasting textures and flavors.


Evolution in Europe;   Judge in Trial of Ceausescu Loyalists Is Replaced
LEAD: Photo: A lawyer for 24 former Romanian Communist leaders arguing yesterday that the judge in the case could not be objective because he had presided at the trials of the ousted dictator Nicolae Ceausescu.
The trial adjourned after the military court agreed to replace the judge. (Agence France-Presse)


At Play With All the King's Men
LEAD: Chess is neither the oldest board game in the world nor the most difficult to master.
For 14 centuries, however, judging from the wealth of innovative sets that survive, it has challenged designers and artisans on four continents.


Soldier and General Alike To Feel Bite of Budget Ax
LEAD: Driven by sharp budget cuts and a decrease in global tensions, the Pentagon is drastically shrinking its all-volunteer force, and the effort is causing anxiety at all levels of the military.


Wall Street;   The Zero-Coupon Twist to the Old Convertible Bond
LEAD: THE market got news last week of two new pending issues of LYONS, one of the trademarked borrowing gimmicks from Merrill Lynch.
A LYON, or Liquid Yield Option Note, is Merrill's zero-coupon twist on the old-fashioned convertible bond.
Issued at a big discount from its value at maturity, a corporation's LYON gives the buyer the right to convert the bond into a fixed number of the company's shares, or an equal sum of cash, at the company's option.


Ms. Drayton to Wed Jonathan W. Old 3d
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Drayton of Villanova, Pa., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Constance Cameron Drayton and Jonathan Whitehead Old 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Old Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.


The Ump's Side of It
LEAD:
BEHIND THE MASK: My Double Life in Baseball.
By Dave Pallone with Alan Steinberg. (Viking, $18.95.) Every baseball umpire dons a mask to work behind home plate, but the former National League umpire Dave Pallone wore one off the field as well.
The reason, Mr.
Pallone reveals in his emotional memoir, written with the freelance writer Alan Steinberg, is that he is gay.


Mutual Funds;   Balancing Retirement and Growth
LEAD: LAST month, when he was named emeritus university librarian, Phillip Rosenstein was honored at a champagne bash for 250 people at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.
But he still doesn't know what he will do later this month, when he actually leaves the Newark-based library, taking a big chunk of his pension money with him.


Ellyn Polishook To Marry in '91
LEAD: April wedding plans for Ellyn J. Polishook and David H. Wander, a son of Arlene Wander and Philip Wander, both of New York, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Paul G. Polishook of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 22, 1990
LEAD:
Weeks This On Week List Fiction
1 1 CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan comes to the rescue of Americans fighting Colombian drug lords.
2 4 WHILE MY PRETTY ONE SLEEPS, by Mary Higgins Clark.


A Company Stands on Its Own Feats
LEAD: During the freewheeling 80's, when almost any company was fair game for raiders and other businesses willingly sold themselves, many American hi-fi manufacturers were gobbled up by foreign investors.
What happened in the case of Analog and Digital Systems, better known to audio fans as a/d/s/, is all the more remarkable.


Rebels Are Said to Block Food Aid to Ethiopia
LEAD: The rebel army controlling most of the northern Ethiopian province of Eritrea is blocking desperately needed famine relief supplies, members of the United States Congress and officials of the United Nations say.


Susan A. Drier Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Judge and Mrs.
William A. Dreier of Warren, N.J., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter, Susan Alice Dreier, and David Charles Wishnow, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Wishnow of Bridgewater, N.J.


Home Market Opening Doors For First-Time Purchasers
LEAD: After years of sitting on the sidelines because of soaring housing costs and high interest rates, first-time home buyers in the New York region are finally getting a break.
The relief, say bankers, brokers and the buyers themselves, is in lower prices, cost-cutting incentives offered by both builders and individual sellers and more flexible loan policies of mortgage lenders and insurers.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Chappaqua, N.Y.
$437,500
4 North Place
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 11-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace, deck, 2-car garage, 0.55 acre; taxes $7,710.
Mamaroneck, N.Y.
$910,000
16 Gate House Lane
5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, year-old contemporary; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, 4,500 square feet, 0.65 acre; taxes not yet assessed.


Driving and Speeding On the Sprain Brook
LEAD: The attention given to the challenge of unreasonable speeds and irrational driving behavior in the article ''Chasing Speeders on the Sprain Brook'' [July 1] , is encouraging; the details are more appalling and dismaying than expected.
My fear of driving approaches others' fear of flying, and it depresses me to learn how justified is that fear.


Some Points On Affordable Housing
LEAD: The article ''Effort on Affordable Housing Is Falling Short of Goal'' (May 27) provided an excellent update on the status of affordable housing in New Jersey.
With due respect to the tireless efforts of many builders, nonprofit organizations, the Council on Affordable Housing and the State Division of Housing Development, I would like to point out the following.


MAGNET TRAINS' USE LIMITED, U.S. SAYS
LEAD: High-speed passenger trains that ride on magnetic cushions are economically feasible in the next 10 or 20 years, but only on a relatively small scale, according to a new report by the Federal Railroad Administration.


One Man With a Purpose Takes On Heart Disease
LEAD: The ''little guy out here in Omaha,'' as Phil Sokolof sees himself, has a new message for the giants of the fast-food industry.
He has no plans to let up on them until he sees a lot of improvement in American diets.


Corrections
LEAD: A letter to the editor on July 8 about the Pyrenees rendered the signature incorrectly.
It was Harvard Hollenberg.


Should the Mets Have Called Off Strawberry Talks
LEAD: Yes.
Strawberry's performance during the remainder of the season and pennant race should be indicia of what we can expect from him during the course of the long-term contract that he seeks.
And if his performance would be adversely affected by the pressure that is brought about by the uncertainty of his future with the Mets, the organization should give second thought to whether this is the type of player it wants on its team.


Postings: The Morton House on 42d St.;   A Bit of Fifth Avenue History
LEAD: ''My mother would never have consented to my making my first appearance in a public room, so to Mrs.
Morton's we went,'' the novelist Edith Wharton wrote, as she recalled coming out into society in 1879. ''Mrs.
Morton's'' was a sturdy brick dwelling, with handsome arched windows, at Fifth Avenue and 42d Street.


TOLSTOY IN TORMENT
LEAD:
THE LAST STATION
A Novel of Tolstoy's Last Year.
By Jay Parini.
290 pp. New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $22.95.


Argentines See Spread of Poverty's Pain, and Start to Believe It
LEAD: Along the waterfront, this river delta town northwest of Buenos Aires still shows signs of the fashionable summer colony that it once was: the rowing club, the pastel houses with gingerbread trim, and, a few blocks away, a train station that might have been plucked from rural England.


Style Makers;   Willy van Rooy, Shoe Designer
LEAD: Willy van Rooy, 47 years old, is proof that there is life after modeling.


Arthur Tremain Hertig Dies at 86; Led Human Embryology Studies
LEAD: Arthur Tremain Hertig, whose pioneering studies on human embryology contributed to the development by others of the contraceptive pill and in vitro fertilization, died Friday at Falmouth Hospital in Falmouth, Mass.
He was 86 years old.


A Windfall Nears In Inheritances From The Richest Generation
LEAD: WITH the wealthiest generation of elderly people in the country's history reaching the end of their lives, economists are trying to predict what will happen to their money.


Phoebe VaughnTo Marry in Fall
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
George A. Vaughn of Princeton, N.J., and Warwick, Bermuda, have announced the engagement of their daughter Phoebe Hinman Vaughn to Andrew Willard Outerbridge, a son of Mrs.
John Hollis Kaufmann of Somerset, Bermuda, and Colebrook, N.H., and Yeaton Outerbridge of Smith's parish, Bermuda, and Jamestown, R.I.


Taking Care of Carpets and Rugs
LEAD: RUGS and carpets need regular care: frequent light cleaning to remove dirt before it becomes embedded, attention to the pile and deep cleaning about once a year.
Although hand-knotted, fragile and antique rugs require special handling, ordinary tufted rugs and carpets made of synthetics or wool can be cared by applying the following techniques:


Is 'Quality' An Idea Whose Time Has Gone?
LEAD: At the opening of ''The Magicians of the Earth,'' the gigantic exhibition of contemporary art in Paris last summer, I mentioned to another American art critic that I found the selection of Western artists troublesome.
I also said that some of the non-Western artists were not very good.


Volunteers Are Trained To Combat Child Abuse
LEAD: RECENT Supreme Court decisions have once again turned the spotlight on child abuse, that most disturbing of family crimes.
Last year, 4,600 cases of child abuse were reported in the county, a number that has climbed steadily in recent years, said Efrain Centeno, executive director of the Exchange Club Child-Abuse Prevention Center of New York.


Campus Life: Maryland;   Tenants Fighting With Landlords Against New Law
LEAD: Two landlords and their University of Maryland student tenants have teamed up to challenge a Prince George's County law restricting student housing.


Summer's Heroes: More Guts Than Glory FILM VIEW
LEAD: In 1956, when John Wayne played his greatest role in John Ford's film ''The Searchers,'' he appeared as a lonely, embittered, deeply prejudiced figure, a mean-spirited warrior estranged from home and family.
By the end of the film, Mr.
Wayne's Indian fighter Ethan Edwards was able, quite literally, to close the door on those antisocial feelings and embrace his loved ones and a peaceful, quieter life.


Arts Administration: A Further Word
LEAD: I appreciated your article on the ''exodus'' of arts administrators in the Westchester Weekly [''For Diverse Reasons, an Exodus of County Arts Administrators,'' July 1] .
Overall, I think you conveyed my comments with accuracy.
However, I am writing to clarify two statements attributed to me.
While contrasting levels of Federal and New York State financial support for the arts, you stated that I pointed out that N.E.A.


Herbert Nelson, 76, Actor on Broadway And on Television
LEAD: Herbert Nelson, an actor whose repertory ranged from Shakespeare to Broadway comedy to television drama and soap operas, died on Thursday at the Actors Fund of America Nursing Home in Englewood, N.J.
He was 76 years old.
A former resident of Leonia, N.J., he had lived in Venice, Calif., until last year.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: It may be an exaggeration, but not by much, to say that everyone has one.
And there's at least one good thing to be said for this thing: it's the place to go whenever whatever you are looking for can't be found anywhere else.
On the other hand, if you do look there, and even if you find what you want, more often than not it's a mess.


New Ideas Are Changing Nuclear Debate
LEAD: A NEW generation of nuclear power plants - smaller, simpler and probably safer - is taking shape on the drawing boards.
But rethinking the nuclear reactor is raising difficult issues for manufacturers and critics alike.


Melissa Lamkin To Wed in the Fall
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert T. Lamkin of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Melissa Warren Lamkin to William Baldwin Kuesel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas R. Kuesel of Darien.
An October wedding is planned.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: Now that the dog days are here, the subject of heat and photography is never far from my mind.
To tell the truth, when it's really hot outside the idea of carrying around a black, five-pound hunk of electronic and optical technology does not seem that appealing.
I'd rather be carrying one of those tiny, battery-operated fans than having a thick camera strap bite into my sweaty neck.


Campus Life: Dartmouth;   Student to Fight Sex-Abuse Charge And Suspension
LEAD: A Dartmouth College student found guilty of sexual abuse last spring by the college's discipline committee and suspended until January will file a lawsuit against the college this week seeking to nullify the actions, his lawyer says.


Are Prospects Improving for Fishermen?
LEAD: THE sign on the telephone pole near the Long Island Shore in Mamaroneck warns: ''Closed area.
Taking clams and other shellfish from this uncertified area is prohibited.
Violations are punishable by a fine, a jail sentence or both.''


A.B. Duke to Leave Post as Chancellor Of L.I.U. Campus
LEAD: Angier Biddle Duke announced his retirement yesterday as chancellor of Long Island University's Southampton campus, ending a long career in international diplomacy and academia.


Q and A
LEAD:
Marrying in Israel


Stories of 2 Ex-Wives Enliven Michigan Race
LEAD: Here's the top of the political news from Michigan: Gov.
James J. Blanchard, a two-term Democrat, has begun his campaign for re-election, facing a well-financed challenge from State Senator John Engler, a Republican.


Car Rental
LEAD: To the Editor: Having recently returned from a vacation in Veracruz, Mexico, I would like your readers to know that the cost of renting a car there can be staggering.
The least expensive air-conditioned car available from Hertz (a Chrysler Shadow) cost approximately $110 a day for a three-day rental.


M. E. Gemes Wed To Miss Thayer
LEAD: Marian Ball Thayer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sydney Thayer 3d of Coatesville, Pa., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Kenneth Edwin Gemes, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Karl E. Gemes of Atlanta.
The Rev.
Timothy Pickering, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.


Photo: Daniel Harnett as Charles Manson in ''The Manson Family.'' (Dona Ann McAdams/''The Manson Family'')Review/Music;   A Theater Work About Charles Manson
LEAD: John Moran still counts among the brighter lights of vanguard American musical theater.
But it cannot be said that he has advanced his cause with his latest music drama, ''The Manson Family,'' which opened a two-night run on Tuesday at Alice Tully Hall as part of the Serious Fun series there.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our den has a cement slab floor that is covered with squares of wood parquet flooring.
This floor has no insulation and is cold in the winter.
I would like to cover it with ceramic tiles.
The wood squares are still firm and sticking solidly.
Would it be possible to leave the wood flooring in place as insulation and then lay the tiles directly over this?


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:
CLASSICAL
Tchaikovsky: Symphony No. 1, 'Francesca da Rimini'
Gewandhaus Orchestra conducted by Kurt Masur. Teldec 2292-44939; CD and cassette.
It is hardly surprising that the East German Kurt Masur, best-known for his crisp, clear-cut approach to German classics, would respond to Tchaikovsky as if he were a Russian Mendelssohn.


Time for Colleges to Take Back the Field
LEAD: THE word is out: big-time college sport, which had been moving rather impressively toward a new rectitude under the whip of a born-again leadership (mostly college presidents fed up with being truant officers), is about to go off the wagon again.
Thanks once more to the willingness of television to sponsor debauchery, and the eagerness of college athletic departments to sucker in, half - or so it seems - of the major college programs in the country are said to be preparing to throw caution - and tradition, and common sense - to the winds in a wholesale realignment of who-plays-whom.


It's Real, All Right, And It's Choice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Brennan's Liberal Legacy to a Divided Supreme Court
LEAD: IN his nearly 34 years as a United States Supreme Court Justice, William J. Brennan Jr. weathered the ideological conflicts that occurred as the Warren Court was transformed into the Burger and Rehnquist Courts.
During eight Presidential Administrations, his role changed from that of a cornerstone of the Court's liberal majority to the author of some of its most stirring dissents.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: When nature leaves no stone unturned, you get a smooth, sandy beach.
When chess strategists leave no stone unturned, you get a whole series of jagged edges, White and Black taking turns at sharp victories.


Free at Last
LEAD:
BLACK VOTES COUNT
Political Empowerment in Mississippi After 1965.
By Frank R. Parker.
254 pp. Chapel Hill:
The University of North Carolina Press.
Cloth, $29.95. Paper, $12.95.


All About/Cat Supplies;   Billions for Food, And Knicknacks to Boot
LEAD: AS the popularity of cats continues to soar - at 58 million, they now outnumber dogs as household pets by about seven million - so does the market for feline-related products.
Some are strictly for cats.
But many others court the needs, whims and fancies of cat owners.


Wedding Planned For Ms. DeVecchi
LEAD: Robert P. DeVecchi of New York and Florence Sloan DeVecch of Cambridge, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Margaret Lincoln DeVecchi to Peter Johnstone Smith, the son of Mrs.
Albert Oliver Smith of Milton, Mass., and the late Mr.
Smith.
A September wedding is planned.


BRUSH UP YOUR SHAKESPEARE
LEAD: What is quotable?
To quote, or what to quote, that is the question.
Should I dress up in taffeta phrases or stick to russet yeas and honest kersey noes? (What is kersey, anyway?) Will a dab of Shakespeare daintily perfume my wit or just sound like the literary belching of a compulsive nerd?
But that is not the question.


Salads to Take on a Picnic
LEAD: PICNICS are fun for the host because there are no last-minute pressures.
All the food is prepared beforehand.
Ideally, I like to have a simple central dish such as cold roast chicken, ham or pork loin or even a poached salmon - around which various salads can be organized.
These are chosen to provide contrasting textures and flavors.


Bureaucracy Cup
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


LADIES' COMPARTMENT
LEAD: While planning a recent solo trip to Europe, I received warnings from friends about the dangers of a woman traveling alone in Italy.
My experience there confirmed that, in general, women are valued only as mothers or else seen as sex objects.
However, I never had any problems because I refused to be intimidated.


Public Ownership Is Good Public Relations
LEAD: Sometimes public leaders lose touch with reality as they sit at their lonely pinnacle of power.
Some never had much of a grasp to start with.
Richard Kessel, chairman of the Long Island Power Authority, is an example.


Blue Jays Win, 2-1, on Homers
LEAD: Dave Stieb gave up five hits in eight innings and George Bell and Pat Borders had bases-empty home runs today as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the Oakland Athletics, 2-1.


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
Air Fares Cut In California Price War


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Seattle;   Rejuvenating The Fair Site
LEAD: THE City Council approved a proposal last week to spend $167 million to upgrade the 74-acre Seattle Center, which comprises 26 of the buildings that housed the 1962 World's Fair, among them the 605-foot Space Needle.


Montubio Placed First in Brooklyn
LEAD: Mi Selecto finished first but Montubio was awarded the victory in the $403,200 Brooklyn Handicap yesterday at Belmont Park after an unusual disqualification that made no difference to anyone who wagered on the race.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in some copies yesterday misstated the date of William H. Rehnquist's appointment to the Supreme Court.
He was named to the Court in 1972 by President Richard M. Nixon and elevated to Chief Justice in 1986 by President Ronald Reagan.


And Then I Have This Bridge . . .
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reeling Padres Transform From Contenders to Rebuilders
LEAD: The San Diego Padres have executed one of the better magic tricks of recent seasons.
They have gone from contenders to rebuilders right before their very eyes.


Tax Increase: Challenges Amid the Furor
LEAD: THE mounting grass-roots opposition to Gov.
Jim Florio's tax package and school aid plan is posing difficult challenges for all sides involved in the intensifying debate.


DEALS
LEAD:
Baseball


By Request, Gypsy Violins
LEAD: Always playing, the violinist in his gold-embroidered blue tunic strolls to the table where a couple are halfway through their roast duck dinner and asks for their selection.
As something is murmured, the fiddler strikes up the plangent opening bars of ''There Is Only One Girl in the World.''


Date Update
LEAD:
INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
June
May
June 89
Rents
156.9
-0.1
4.7
Homeowner's costs
163.7
-0.4
6.6
Fuel and utilities
102.2
1.3
1.5
*4*(Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics)
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk,
*4*Westchester, Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union,
*4*Hudson, Middlesex, Somerset and Passaic.


Breaching Ethics for Love and Money
LEAD: BOTH houses of Congress did some cleaning last week.
A House panel voted to punish a Democrat who did wrong for a lover and a Senate committee voted to sanction a Republican who did wrong for cash.


Lifestyle;   Keeping Cool While Moving Muscles
LEAD: The wet look is back with a vengeance, as the fitness brigade - sticky, sweat-drenched, cradling water bottles - braces for another humid summer.


Restoration Encounters Head Winds
LEAD: The Lettie G. Howard was a proud fishing schooner in her youth, carrying mackerel and cod from the cold Atlantic to markets like New York.


Agriculture May Be Vanishing, but Farmers' Fairs Are Booming
LEAD: AS farming vanishes from Connecticut, the popularity of country fairs, with events from jam judging to oxen pulls, is booming.
But as the larger fairs draw ever-growing crowds and ever-growing traffic problems, and as all the fairs confront a shrinking pool of volunteers, some people see problems ahead for these events.


2 Dodgers Arrested
LEAD: THE Los Angeles Dodger infielders Alfredo Griffin and Juan Samuel were arrested on assault charges early yesterday after an early-morning fight involving a bartender at a Pittsburgh nightclub.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: The coins of Corsica are few.
The island has never been truly independent.
Since Roman times, it has been possessed by the Byzantine Empire, the kingdom of Lombardy, Charlemagne, Pisa, Genoa, the kingdom of Aragon, two successive Genoese banks and France.


Gretchen Johnson Planning to Wed
LEAD: September wedding plans for Gretchen Ann Snow Johnson and Michael Francis Bigham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry J. Bigham of Annapolis, Md., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Johnson of Pottersville, N.J.


Correction
LEAD: Because of a transmission error, an article last Sunday about museums in Connecticut misstated the ranking of the Old State House in Hartford, by number of visitors.
It is the state's sixth-largest tourist attraction, not the largest.


Karen Finley's Rage, Pain, Hate and Hope
LEAD: Karen Finley's subject is not obscenity.
Her subject is pain, rage, love, lovelessness, need, fear, dehumanization, oppression, brutality and consolation.
But obscenity is what will be on everyone's mind tonight, at Lincoln Center's Serious Fun festival, when she performs her now notorious piece ''We Keep Our Victims Ready.


Photo: Hazel Sabas, seated at left, Mui Cheuk Yin and Christine Abeling, right, performing in ''The Letter,'' by Silvia Unzueta. (Jay Anderson for The New York Times)Review.Dance;   Diversity From South Of the Border
LEAD: A whole world of modern dance lies beyond this country's borders.
The American Dance Festival is to be congratulated, therefore, for establishing the International Choreographers Workshop, which, with financing from the United States Information Agency and the Rockefeller Foundation, enables choreographers from overseas to gather each summer on the campus of Duke University to take classes, observe festival performances and exchange ideas.


Shiite Militias Continue to Battle in South Lebanon
LEAD: Shiite Muslim factions fought another round of ferocious battles in southern Lebanon today, in which 30 people were killed and 45 were wounded, the police said.


Philippine Quake Survivors Treated by Volunteers


Japan Isn't Playing by Different Rules
LEAD: Slowly and almost imperceptibly, over more than a decade, America has been retreating from one of the most fundamental principles that has distinguished our nation from others: our faith in competition.
We have been finding excuses to avoid competition and adopting policies to that effect, often, ironically, in the name of competitiveness.


Still Courted, 'Merry Widow' Is 85
LEAD: SINCE its Viennese premiere in 1905, the Franz Lehar operetta ''The Merry Widow'' has been a high-spirited staple of the world's musical stages in innumerable translations and adaptations - not to mention filmed, danced, recorded and even ice-skated versions.


Ann Halan to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Halan of New Caanan, Conn., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Ann Elizabeth Halan, and L. Crawford Brickley Jr., the son of Dawn J. Doyle of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Mr.
Brickley of Greenville, Tenn.
The prospective bride and bridegroom are associates at the New York law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts.


If We Don't Give Gorbachev Help, Europe Will
LEAD: To the Editor:


Peter Forbes Wed to Erica de Berry
LEAD: Erica Longfellow de Berry, a daughter of Mrs.
Joseph G. T. de Berry of Portland, Conn., and the late Mr. de Berry, was married yesterday to Peter Forbes, the son of Dr.
John D. Forbes of Charlottesville, Va., and the late Margaret Funkhouser Forbes.
The Rev.
Thomas J. S. Mikelson, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Longfellow House in Cambridge,


'A Deed of Death'
LEAD: To the Editor:


In the Balance, Court and Country
LEAD: Only moments after Justice William Brennan's retirement, the politicians and interest groups began churning with speculation.
Will the Supreme Court, teetering on its center, veer sharply right?
How will President Bush exploit his first chance to nominate a Justice?
Must we brace for a confirmation fight that could dwarf the Senate's 1987 brawl over Robert


NONFICTION
LEAD:
BLOOD EVIDENCE: A Story of True Crime in the Suburban South.
By Craig A. Lewis. (August House, $17.95.) In the early morning hours of March 31, 1980, someone killed Kathleen Graham with a sledgehammer in her Shreveport, La., home.
Her husband, who was in the bedroom with her at the time, displayed no emotion over his wife's murder.


New Look as Jets Start Camp
LEAD: As the Jets' training camp opens, there are new players, a new head coach, new assistants and new front-office people.
But whether the club has managed to turn over a new leaf after last season's dismal 4-12 record remains to be seen.


Should the Mets Have Called Off Strawberry Talks
LEAD: The Mets' front office have let talent like Kevin Mitchell and Len Dykstra slip from their fingers.
Now it would seem that Darryl Strawberry is next.


Battling the Lethargy at Douglas
LEAD: THESE should be happy days at the McDonnell Douglas Corporation's sprawling Douglas Aircraft plant here.
With demand from airlines booming, Douglas has a record backlog of orders for its MD-80/90 series of midrange commercial jetliners.
Douglas, second in the commercial aircraft business in the United States to the Boeing Company, is within months of delivering the first of its new MD-11 wide-body jets.


Jennifer A. Dutton Marries D. M. Whyte Jr. in Vermont
LEAD: Jennifer A. Dutton, an elementary-school teacher in Oceanside, L.I., was married yesterday to Dennis M. Whyte Jr., a commodities trader on the New York Futures Exchange and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
The Rev.
William P. Gallagher, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Union Christian Church in Plymouth,


Ms. Brodeur Wed To Chris Brewster
LEAD: Adrienne Willets Brodeur, a legislative aide at the San Diego Board of Supervisors, and Bartlett Christmas Brewster, the captain of the lifeguard services division of the San Diego Park and Recreation Department, were married yesterday in Orleans, Mass.
The Rev.
Valjeanne Paxton, a United Church of Christ minister and the bride's aunt, performed the ceremony at the summer home of the bride's mother, Mrs.


William Beckett, Paper Executive, 81
LEAD: William Beckett, a former president of the Beckett Paper Company of Hamilton, Ohio, died Thursday at his home in Hamilton at the age of 81.
The company said he had been in declining health for two years.


Savannah
LEAD: To the Editor: As one who has been doing research on the history of Savannah, I enjoyed Peter Applebome's piece on ''Savannah's Leafy Green Squares'' (Travel, May 13).
I would, however, like to set the record straight on Savannah's Mickve Israel Synagogue, which Mr.
Applebome notes, ''describes itself as the oldest Reform congregation in the United States.


Miss Fite to Wed Jonathan C. Clay
LEAD: The engagement of Whitney Ann Fite to Jonathan Chace Clay has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. Fite of London, Grosse Pointe, Mich., and Nantucket, Mass.
Mr.
Clay is the son of Harris Clay of Augusta, Ga., and Mrs.
Robert E. Carroll of New York.
An October wedding is planned.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our den has a cement slab floor that is covered with squares of wood parquet flooring.
This floor has no insulation and is cold in the winter.
I would like to cover it with ceramic tiles.
The wood squares are still firm and sticking solidly.
Would it be possible to leave the wood flooring in place as insulation and then lay the tiles directly over this?


Review/Rock;   Rock Icon Modernizes Sounds From the Past
LEAD: Of all the ancient rock dreadnoughts supplying audiences with a vestige of the 1960's and early 1970's, Robert Plant has survived the best.
Having shed the worst of his Led Zepplin mannerisms and left them to countless heavy metal bands, he's instead tried to work out a balance between the hippie experimentalism of Led


C-Span Dials Call-In Radio And Gets Quite an Earful
LEAD: Is call-in radio a forum of democracy or a form of Bedlam?
Is it a means of connecting in a society where aloneness threatens or an opportunity for a moment's solo in space?
Is it an invitation to communication or to demagogy?


Sarah Smith Wed To William Klein
LEAD: Sarah Wheelwright Smith, the daughter of Mrs.
Blake E. Vance of San Diego and Colin E. Smith of Berkeley, Calif., was married yesterday to William Renn Klein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William T. Klein of Locust Valley, L.I.
The Rev.
Philip E. Perkins officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Riverside, Conn.


Castel Gandolfo Makes Ready for the Pope
LEAD: It tends to be quieter when the town's chief summer resident is away, and so there was not much to do in the main square this day other than sit at the cafe and shoo flies.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: Though golfers are accustomed to the idea of handicapping, it is a novel concept for tournament bridge players.
A Handicap Knockout Team Championship was on the schedule of the Greater New York Bridge Association's Summer Regional in Manhattan a week ago.
It provided for almost all participants a first taste of this type of contest.


Salads to Take on a Picnic
LEAD: PICNICS are fun for the host because there are no last-minute pressures.
All the food is prepared beforehand.
Ideally, I like to have a simple central dish such as cold roast chicken, ham or pork loin or even a poached salmon - around which various salads can be organized.
These are chosen to provide contrasting textures and flavors.


Republicans Nominate Rowland While Taking Swipes at Weicker
LEAD: Representative John G. Rowland of Waterbury, a conservative who adamantly opposes a state income tax, won the Connecticut Republican Party's gubernatorial nomination here today at a convention that took repeated swipes at the candidate leading in the polls, Lowell P. Weicker Jr., the Republican former


Works in Progress;   On High
LEAD: ''Near the heart, on top of the head, the right shoulder, other places, too,'' says Joel Ghivelder, listing the damaged regions on the mountaintop statue of Jesus that is perhaps Rio de Janeiro's most famous landmark.
Ghivelder, an architect, is overseeing the restoration of the statue and the public space around its foundation, a project that began last March.


Campus Life:;   Summer's Hot Topics: East Bloc and the Earth
LEAD: Eastern Europe, particularly the Soviet Union, is this year's summer vacation destination of choice for American students, who are flocking to glimpse the rise of democracy or exchange cultural values in what were recently less-friendly lands.
For those sticking closer to home, environmental issues are an increasing concern, while political internships in


She Saw Wondrous Opportunities at Jacob's Pillow
LEAD: Is it possible that a decade has passed since Liz Thompson became artistic director of the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival?
At summer's end, Ms.
Thompson, now the Pillow's executive producer, departs to head the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
She leaves the Pillow, a small but internationally known festival in Becket, Mass., a very different place from the one she found several years after the death of its founder, Ted Shawn.


Cheering On the Youngest Readers
LEAD: IT is storming outside the Scarsdale Public Library.
Rain streaks the windows of a cozy alcove in the Children's Room.
There, a lineup of little ones sits, waiting to tell the ''listeners'' about the books they have read.


Evening Hours;   Queen Awards And a Benefit For a Museum
LEAD: On Monday, A.T.&amp;T. and the National Coalition of 100 Black Women held their 8th annual Candace Awards dinner at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Prepared To Serve
LEAD: HE is described as so eager to get started on the next phase of his life you'd think he was a bonus baby waiting for the opening of his first spring training rather than a rookie offender looking forward to his first incarceration.


Us vs. Them Is No Longer Enough
LEAD: THE Bush Administration's policy shift on Cambodia last week is the latest evidence of how the thaw in American-Soviet relations is transforming both superpowers' approach to regional conflicts.


Insolvent Bank Bought Cheaply With Help of Former Bush Aide
LEAD: The Arizona businessman who secured $1.85 billion in Federal savings and loan subsidies with lobbying help from a former aide to President Bush was also able to buy an insolvent Oklahoma bank at a favorable price despite his failure to meet Federal standards for such purchases.


Cara Ivy Somach Is Engaged to Marry
LEAD: Cara Ivy Somach and J. Robert Londin, lawyers in New York, plan to marry in October.


Control of New York's State Senate Becomes a Big Deal
LEAD: PRESIDENT BUSH is coming to New York on Tuesday to raise money for Republicans.
Not for Pierre A. Rinfret, the Republican candidate for governor, but for the Republican State Committee, which has a $1 million debt, and, more important, for the Republican State Senate Campaign Committee, which already has $1.2 million in its treasury.


Dr. Stricker to Wed
LEAD: Dr.
Barbara Stricker, a resident at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, and Dr.
Michael Friedman, a resident at the Mount Sinai Medical Center, plan to marry next fall.
Dr.
Stricker's parents are Mrs.
Norman Kaufman of Riverdale, the Bronx, and Dr.
Howard Stricker of Fort Lee, N.J.
Dr.
Friedman is the son of Lois Klaristenfeld of Fort Lee and Joseph Friedman of Oceanside, L.I.


Taking Care of Carpets and Rugs
LEAD: RUGS and carpets need regular care: frequent light cleaning to remove dirt before it becomes embedded, attention to the pile and deep cleaning about once a year.
Although hand-knotted, fragile and antique rugs require special handling, ordinary tufted rugs and carpets made of synthetics or wool can be cared by applying the following techniques:


Japan Pays Up
LEAD: The Japanese Government, good to its word, sent the World Bank a check for $7,706,000 last week in final payment on a highway loan.
Japan?
Borrowing?
To build roads?
Yes.
Back in the 1950's and 1960's, when Japan was hardly an economic powerhouse, it borrowed $863 million from the bank for projects to rebuild its economy.


Festive Shakespeare at Boscobel
LEAD: A MOST ingratiating company is treating us to the most pleasant and pure evening of Shakespeare in many a summer.
Welcome to the Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival where, for once, the appellation is apt.
This is a festival that's truly festive.
On July 12, ''Much Ado About Nothing'' began the group's third season under a tent on the sumptuous grounds of the 40-acre Boscobel Estate.


How Ted Turner Saved the World
LEAD: TED TURNER is a notorious film colorizer from way back.
He is also responsible for those soporific Atlanta Braves broadcasts into defenseless homes and taverns all over this land.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on July 8 about the reclaimed Aberglasney garden in Wales misidentified a structure.
It was a stable block, not a cloister and terrace walks.


Should the Mets Have Called Off Strawberry Talks
LEAD: The Mets should have learned from the Milwaukee Brewers, with Robin Yount, and continue their talks with Strawberry.
Once he wins the National League's most valuable player award and becomes a free agent, his value will inevitably increase.
KENNETH C. SIEGEL
Bridgeport, Conn.


Talking: Brokers;   Resolving Fears and Doubts
LEAD: Regulatory authorities are receiving a growing number of complaints from buyers and sellers about the way they are treated by real estate brokers.
New York State, for example, received some 3,000 complaints in 1989, up from 2,200 in 1987.
This is resulting in a rewriting of regulations to better protect and educate buyers.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Opposition Rallies in Korea


Office Romance Makes Firehouse a Fire Home
LEAD: In 1982, when Cecelia O. Salters became the first woman to join Ladder Company 9, most of her colleagues at the firehouse on Great Jones Street in lower Manhattan let her know they preferred firemen.


Getting Caruso Right (And Horribly Wrong)
LEAD: Nearly seven decades after his death, Enrico Caruso remains this century's most famous tenor, vividly present in 246 surviving recordings that trace the trajectory of his career and technique and attest to his influence on the art of singing.
Although desirable for these reasons - and because of his crucial role in the history of recording - a good ''complete Caruso'' remained, in several LP projects, an elusive ideal.


Commercial Property: Ladies' Mile;   Some Landmarks Languish as a Precinct Prospers By David W. Dunlap
LEAD: Until recently, it did not seem too farfetched to imagine the Avenue of the Americas reclaiming some of its Gilded Age vibrancy south of 23d Street, where heroically scaled but long neglected department stores line the street.


Northeast Notebook: South Portland, Me.;   City to State: Buy It Again
LEAD: This city's government wants the state to buy 13.9 acres of oceanfront land with an asking price of $6 million.
The catch is that the state recently handed over its title to a developer.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We're all for peace.
But there is something totally wrong about how this is happening.


Taxes, S. &amp; L.'s, Anxiety: Recipe For a Political Shakeout?
LEAD: AFTER months of quiescence in American politics, the two parties are finally stirring, lurching into the 1990's and the uncharted political terrain beyond Reaganism.


U.S. to Limit Waste Burning at Rocky Flats
LEAD: The Department of Energy has agreed not to burn waste containing plutonium and hazardous chemicals at the last two operable incinerators at its Rocky Flats weapons plant near Denver, unless it can win permission from the Colorado Department of Health or the United States Environmental Protection Agency.


Is That a Dark Cloud or a Silver Lining for Aluminum?
LEAD: THE earnings released last week by aluminum producers were, in a word, grim.
But the companies appeared unfazed and said profits would start climbing soon.


Erin P. Edwards Engaged to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Erin Paige Edwards to Stephen Louis Fairchild, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Fairchild of New York, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Gordon A. Edwards and Mikal L. Edwards, both of Brussels.
A September 1991 wedding is planned.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
TRIAL BY JURY.
By Steven Brill and the editors and reporters of The American Lawyer. (American Lawyer/Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, Cloth, $24.95; Paper, $12.95.) ''Trial by Jury'' is to litigation what sportswriting is to playing ball.
It is a collection of articles, originally published in The American Lawyer, about 17 celebrated lawsuits of the 1980's.


Don't Tread On the Taxpayer
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tamil Rebel Bombing Cuts Off a Peninsula
LEAD: Tamil rebels blew up the Elephant Pass causeway, cutting off the Jaffna peninsula in the north from the rest of the island, the military said today.


PLAQUE TO FASCIST UNNERVES SLOVAKS
LEAD: A dispute over a plaque put up to commemorate the Rev.
Jozef Tiso, a Roman Catholic priest who headed Slovakia's pro-fascist independence government during World War II, has led many Czechoslovaks to ask where their new-found freedom is leading them.


Corrections
LEAD: The Practical Traveler column on July 8 misstated the scope of discounts for older passengers on Amtrak.
The 25 percent discounts do not apply to sleeping accommodations, club service or custom class.


Evolution in Europe;   Tea at Dusk in Tashkent Is a Ritual for Men Alone
LEAD: By midafternoon the sun is as brazen as the male egos gathering in the dappled cool under a canopy of trees.


World Markets;   France's Buying Binge Takes Its Toll
LEAD: STATE-CONTROLLED French companies are breaking the mold.
Rather than tending to their home market, they are aggressively buying abroad, both in Europe and the United States.
Some, like Renault, are positioning themselves for the economic union of Europe in 1992; others, like Rhone-Poulenc, are pursuing the grander goal of a top ranking in their industry, worldwide.


Gayle Joan Miller Is Married to Martin Reingold
LEAD: Gayle Joan Miller and Martin Reingold were married last evening at the home of the bride's mother, Estelle Sommers, in New Milford, Conn.
Rabbi Stanley Davids officiated.


Love in Bloomsbury
LEAD:
LYDIA AND MAYNARD
The Letters of Lydia Lopokova and John Maynard Keynes.
Edited by Polly Hill and Richard Keynes.
Illustrated. 367 pp. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons. $24.95.


Kyle-Beth Basson Is Married on L.I.
LEAD: Kyle-Beth Basson and Steven Martin Hilfer were married last evening at Temple Sinai in Roslyn, L.I., by Rabbi Aaron Petuchowski.
Mrs.
Hilfer is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin E. Basson of Upper Brookville, L.I.
Her husband is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abraham Hilfer of Jamaica Estates, Queens.


Campus Life: Juilliard;   Four Musicians Take to the Road With Piano in Tow
LEAD: Until June, much of what four young pianists from the Juilliard School knew about pianos was how to coax music from the keyboard.
But by early this month they had also learned how to dismantle, pack, reassemble and tune the instrument.


Dandelions and Rabbits Need Space, Too
LEAD: IT did not start out as a contest.
The catbird was just singing from a branch of the pine tree with a long happy series of chortles, trills and burbles that made up a happy tune.
The song sounded very much like the endless cheer of the purple finch, until the catbird was spotted from below.


LeMond Takes the Tour Lead
LEAD: It wasn't close.
Greg LeMond sped away from Claudio Chiappucci of Italy in the showdown time trial in the Tour de France today and donned the yellow jersey of the overall leader for the first time in the three-week race.


Public Ownership Is Good for Politicians
LEAD: Richard Kessel's article (''Power Authority Is Necessary to Oversee Lilco,'' June 24) emphasizes the $5.5 billion cost of Shoreham.
Let us examine the facts: Both Federal and State governments actively encouraged the building of a nuclear plant at Shoreham.
After construction was well along, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission began to order hundreds of changes in design, and many completed and started structures had to be destroyed and new ones installed, beginning from scratch.


It's Cudweed and Crowberry! Hold That Native Flora List!
LEAD: Two rare plants, the purple crowberry and the wood cudweed, have been discovered in New York State for the first time, the state botanist reported this week.


U.S.-Cuba Gulf Is Still There
LEAD: As it has so often in recent international sports events, Cuba needed little time to gain attention at the Goodwill Games, for reasons wholly unrelated to competition.


Postings: Calvin Klein Cosmetic;   Easing A Squeeze
LEAD: A space squeeze in its Wayne, N.J., building is prompting the Calvin Klein Cosmetics Company, which makes and distributes the Obsession and Eternity fragrance lines, to spread out and move west.
The company will lease a new 142,500-square-foot warehouse and distribution center that is being built for it in the International Trade Center in Mount Olive.


Postings: Betting on a $15 Billion Project;   Offices Near Atlantic City
LEAD: Although commercial development has slowed to a snail's pace in much of the Northeast, a partnership of American and British builders thinks it has the right opportunity in an unlikely corner of the region: 10 miles west of Atlantic City, where ground has been broken for a 40-acre office project.They have named the complex Harbor Creek Office


Corrections
LEAD: An article on June 24 about travelers' safety in Athens referred incorrectly to a Greek restriction on visitors.
Only passengers on charter flights from Europe are required to show proof of prepaid accommodation; the requirement has not been applied to Americans.


By The Beautiful Black Sea
LEAD: In pictures and from the air, the Bulgarian Black Sea coast looks like a vacationer's paradise.
The rolling hills of the coast meet the blue and green Black Sea along beaches of golden sand that seem made for swimming and sun bathing.
Picturesque villages where each house is wreathed in grape vines, roses and house plants sprouting from oil cans and jars and old tires dot the coastal roads.


Awash With Seafood in Waterbury
LEAD: ANY preconceptions one might have about the fare to be found at a cafe calling itself No Fish Today can be tossed out the window when the huge chalkboard menu is hauled to the table.
The long list is awash with fish and seafood dishes, plus a handful of other choices.


THE POPPERS AND THE PLAINS
LEAD: Your article on the Poppers suggests that they would allow Indians to live on the Buffalo Commons.
Do they assume that these Indians are going to ''go native'' and cheerfully pose for photos as the deer and the antelope play for the amusement of the eco-chic on chartered covered-wagon tours?


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   A Summer Supper From Garden and Sea
LEAD: With a pot and a food processor, you can have yourself a refreshing supper that makes the most of summer's sweet, juicy tomatoes and sparkling bright green basil.


Managing;   Treasuring the Technology Guru
LEAD: AT TRW Inc. and the United Technologies Corporation, the title is ''vice president of science and technology.'' At Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, it's ''executive vice president for operations systems and telecommunications.'' Chemical Bank sticks with the plain-vanilla ''chief technology officer.''


Tax Reform Is a Gremlin in the Economy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Coyotes Can Still Enjoy Break From Hunters
LEAD: New York State's coyotes can rest easy for another year.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo announced yesterday that the sponsors of a bill that would have allowed year-round coyote hunting in the Adirondack Park had agreed to withdraw it.
In return, the Governor said the state would undertake a study of the state's ''coyote problem.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on the film page of the Arts and Leisure section today misstates the title of a film starring Kiefer Sutherland and Emily Lloyd.


The Gielgud Who Refurbished the Australian Ballet
LEAD: There will be a Gielgud at Lincoln Center this week, but this particular Gielgud will not be delivering stirring soliloquies from Shakespeare or taking to the stage in any physical way, except perhaps for a final curtain call.


Practical Traveler;   A New Rental Car Option: the Mobile Phone
LEAD: LAST spring Continental canceled an evening flight out of Newark after two postponements, and at 10:30 P.M.
I stood dismally in line to have my ticket revalidated for early morning.
I was calculating when I could get to bed and when I would have to get up again when I saw the man ahead of me using a cellular phone to reserve a hotel room.


Design;   A Soft Touch
LEAD: The sequence of pale rooms is devoid of pattern and color.
The architectural details are subtle and correct.
In each room, antiques are placed sparingly.
The look is slightly unfinished - a brand of romantic modernism that is the unmistakable signature of Boston-based designer William Hodgins.
In many ways, the style recalls the work of two great designers from earlier in this century: Billy Baldwin and Syrie Maugham.


Let the Elderly Choose to Work or Not
LEAD: To the Editor:


'Presumed Innocent' Tackles a Tough Case
LEAD: Almost everybody already knows who did the whodunit, so who'll buy a ticket to the movie?
For ''Presumed Innocent,'' such is the cinematic paradox of literary success.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Was Pete Rose's Sentence Fair?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.


Correction
LEAD: An article on May 27 about Christie's and Sotheby's auction houses characterized Sotheby's incorrectly.
It was founded by Samuel Baker, not by his nephew John Sotheby.
A reader's letter pointed out the error several weeks after it occurred, and The Times inadvertently delayed a correction.


Getting Close to Nature in Montana More Women Gaining Entry To Boardroom
LEAD: A SEAT on a board of directors has always been one of the ultimate signs of achievement.
Increasingly, the doors to the boardrooms of major corporations and foundations have been swinging open to admit women.


Doris F. Serruto Marries
LEAD: Doris Frances Serruto, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy Serruto of Short Hills, N.J., was married there yesterday at St.
Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church to John Nelson Thomas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Thomas of Plymouth, Mich.
Msgr.
Harrold A. Murray officiated.
Mrs.
Thomas, 25 years old, and her husband, 26, are graduates of Miami University in Ohio.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
THEME IS FITNESS


Fashion;   Summer Clothes That Can Swing Into Fall Choose colors like khaki or navy.
LEAD: When it's still warm but you feel it's time for a wardrobe change, what do you buy?
Certainly not any of the new fall woolens just coming into the stores, at least not if you want something to wear right now.
The answer: Think silk.
Or cotton.
Or rayon.
And think neutral colors.


Outdoors;   Atlantic Bonito: Swift and Strong
LEAD: NO one would deny that the striped bass and the bluefish are the primary quarry of saltwater fly-fishermen from New Jersey to Cape Cod, but every once in a while you'll encounter a fly-fisherman who has been hooked by the Atlantic bonito.


Flexibility Can Be Authentic, Too
LEAD: The early-music movement, one of the most remarkable cultural phenomena of this century, evidently has attained a state of maturity that allows zealous disciples to question its underlying principles.
I recently mentioned in this space thoughtful articles in Historical Performance, the journal of Early Music America, that reflected the fading of self-righteousness and amateurism in the movement.


Strawberry Hits 24th And Darling Wins
LEAD: The shot rose into the misty night sky, straightened slightly as it approached its apex and crashed solidly into the foul pole in right field.
The tiny white rocket, in addition to being a home run, was Darryl Strawberry's least controversial and most convincing campaign statement of the last 48 hours.


Suzanne Nachman and David Mercado to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Nachman Jr. of New York have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Suzanne Lynn Nachman, and David Mercado, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Mercado of New York.


Maria-Flora Miller, Student, to Wed
LEAD: Late August wedding plans for Maria-Flora Miller and Anthony Michael Smoller, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Smoller of Larchmont, N.Y., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Ava Mohas of Mill Neck, L.I., and Leverett Saltonstall Miller of Fairfield, Fla.


A Show of 31 Paintings, Chosen From a Field of 200
LEAD: THE exhibition ''New Jersey Painting Today'' is the first juried annual to be staged at Phyllis Rothman, the still newish gallery on Fairleigh Dickinson's Florham-Madison campus.
The judge was Zoltan Buki, curator at the State Museum in Trenton, and from about 200 entrants he culled 31.


Program Traces Evolution of Ragtime Into Jazz
LEAD: THE New World Consort, ensemble in residence at Wesleyan University, has given birth to the New World Jazz Orchestra, proudly calling it ''Connecticut's only concert ensemble specializing in the authentic re-creation of historic American music.'' Tomorrow evening at 6:30 (or Tuesday if rain makes a postponement necessary), the orchestra goes to Goodwin Park in Hartford with a program tracing the evolution of ragtime into


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ending July 7
MANHATTAN
Carnegie Hill
$260,000
152 East 94th Street
1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. prewar penthouse co-op; 24-hr. doorman, large sunken living room, wraparound terrace; maintenance $965, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: Carnegie Hill Properties)


Thousands in Korea, Opposing Roh, Clash With Police
LEAD: Thousands of protesters clashed with the riot police today after a huge anti-Government rally drew together South Korea's splintered opposition and attracted about 300,000 people.


Bill Would Raise Minimum For Car Insurance Liability
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is facing a decision on whether to raise the minimum amount of automobile liability insurance that New Yorkers must carry.
If he does so, lawyers say, bigger damage awards would result.
But insurers warn that an increase could also mean more lawsuits that would drive up the cost of motorists' premiums.


Talk Radio
LEAD: There was a time, not long ago, when most of the publicity that Joe Slovo got consisted of diatribes from the South African Government, which regularly accused him of being the mastermind behind bombings and assassinations carried out by the African National Congress.
For 40 years he and the organization he leads, the South African Communist Party, were outlawed.


Cambodian Says He Fears Risk of a Greater War
LEAD: Prince Norodom Ranariddh, son of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the commander of his army, says the American shift of policy on Cambodia offers Vietnam an opportunity that he fears Hanoi will not seize, thus risking an intensification of the war in Cambodia.


A Young Crusader Fights for Integration
LEAD: MILO SHEFF is one of the 17 public school students who are the plaintiffs in a lawsuit that has focused attention on the problems of racial isolation in Connecticut's schools.


Betty Moravek Is Married
LEAD: Betty Ann Moravek and Orson Jay F. Bouton Jr. were married yesterday at the Immaculate Conception Roman Catholic Church in Jamaica Estates, Queens.
The Rev.
Thomas Joyce, a Roman Catholic priest, and the Rev.
Donald H. Brown, a United Methodist minister, officiated.
Mrs.
Bouton, a graduate of Queens College, is a daughter of the late Mr.


Priscilla Newton Weds Patrick Scobie
LEAD: Priscilla Ann Newton, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James C. Newton of Pelham Manor, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Patrick Sean Scobie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Scobie of Chippewa Falls, Wis.
The Rev.
David S. Hoag officiated at Christ Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Scobie, 24 years old, graduated from the Westover School and cum laude from Wheaton College.


Sailing's Version Of a 4-Minute Mile
LEAD: Sailors worldwide are closing in on a speed barrier that is to sailing what the four-minute mile was to running.
The wall they are confronting is at 50 knots, or about 58 miles an hour.
At the rate records are toppling, the magic number is within sight, say speed-sailing experts.


Foundation Seeks to Restore U.S. Competitive Edge
LEAD: An American philanthropy plans to spend millions of dollars to bring scholars and industrial leaders together in projects to restore the nation's competitive edge in manufacturing and trade.


Revolution in the Gallery
LEAD:
RUSSIAN ART
From Neoclassicism to the Avant-Garde, 1800-1917: Painting, Sculpture, Architecture.
By Dmitri V. Sarabianov.
Illustrated. 320 pp. New York: Harry N. Abrams. $65.
WOMEN ARTISTS OF RUSSIA'S NEW AGE, 1900-1935
By M. N. Yablonskaya.
Edited by Anthony Parton.
Illustrated.


Ms. Kalmanson Plans to Marry
LEAD: The engagement of Helene Michele Kalmanson to Brad Alan Epstein, the son of Dr.
Raymond D. Epstein of Deerfield Beach, Fla., and the late Frances G. Epstein, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Martin L. Kalmanson of West Hempstead, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bohemia
$202,000
1025 Locust Avenue
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, custom-built 12-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room w/fireplace, 1 acre, 2-car garage; taxes $4,600.
Levittown
$144,000
30 Haymaker Lane
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 35- year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.


A Toss-Up
LEAD: Because Dwight D. Eisenhower landed on his face, Rosemary Mulligan expects to land in the Illinois State Legislature.
Ms.
Mulligan called ''tails'' last week when a state election official flipped an Eisenhower dollar to determine the winner of a tied March 20 Republican primary election.
The coin toss came after months of courtroom haggling and several recounts found that Ms.


The Mute Swan Covers the Northeast
LEAD: In the Long Island Journal item for June 24, ''Taking Aim at Swans'', the particular swan referred to is termed ''mute.''


NEW JOBLESSNESS STARTING TO PINCH IN EAST GERMANY
LEAD: Three weeks after economic and monetary union with West Germany, the East is beginning to feel the pain of the transition to a market economy.


High-Tech Cooperation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Saved, for the Day
LEAD: On a crowded bus from the airport into Manhattan, the driver picked up his microphone and addressed his captive audience. ''I feel it's my duty to warn you that at Grand Central Station there are hustlers who will rip you off.'' He described the people who offer to carry luggage or hail a cab, how they work in pairs and grab suitcases or pick pockets.


Message To the West
LEAD: Neil Kinnock, leader of the British Labor Party, came to New York, delivered a serious speech before an important audience, raised an issue critical to the future of freedom in the Soviet Union - and then got the answer wrong.


'Guest' Takes Early Gold
LEAD: Dave Mora of Bloomington, Ind., an unofficial member of the United States team, became the first track and field gold medalist of the 1990 Goodwill Games today, winning the men's marathon.


Style Makers;   Barbara Blank, Tie Designer
LEAD: She earned a master's in psychology at Harvard and studied art history in Italy.
Now Barbara Blank designs ties.
That isn't as illogical as it sounds.


The Chernobyl Syndrome
LEAD:
THE LEGACY OF CHERNOBYL
By Zhores A. Medvedev.
Illustrated. 352 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $24.95.
DEADLY DECEIT
Low-Level Radiation, High-Level Cover-Up.
By Jay M. Gould and Benjamin A. Goldman with Kate Millpointer.
Illustrated. 222 pp. New York:
Four Walls Eight Windows.


Technology;   Delving Into the Consumer Unconscious
LEAD: BASICALLY it looks like a desk lamp with a chunky smoked-glass body.
In fact, it is Lee Weinblatt's People Reader, a device designed to surreptitiously monitor the way people react to magazine advertising.
Behind the smoked glass are two tiny, remote-controlled video cameras, one that tracks eye movements and another that monitors which page is being perused.


Siding With the Men
LEAD:
SEXUAL PERSONAE
Art and Decadence From Nefertiti to Emily Dickinson.
By Camille Paglia.
Illustrated. 718 pp. New Haven:
Yale University Press. $35.


Not Exactly the Typical American Couple
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Portugal, Wheels of Misfortune
LEAD: When I moved to Portugal last year after covering guerrilla wars in Ethiopia, Iraq and Afghanistan, I assumed I was putting the dangerous part of my life behind me.
I couldn't have been more wrong.


Trying to Avoid the One-Genre Trap
LEAD: Like many a contest winner before him, Barry Douglas has built his reputation on the bold Romantics - Tchaikovsky, Rachmaninoff, Liszt, among others.
So his performance of the Mozart Concerto No. 22 in E-flat at Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday and Wednesday evenings, with the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra conducted by Mark


Cubs Add to Streak, Beating Giants
LEAD: Doug Dascenzo scored the tying run in the eighth inning on a balk by a reliever, Jeff Brantley, and Marvell Wynne raced home from second on Jose Uribe's error at shortstop as the Chicago Cubs defeated the San Francisco Giants today, 3-2.


GIAP REMEMBERS
LEAD: Gen.
Vo Nguyen Giap, the Vietnamese Communist commander, is certainly a man of deep commitment, and Stanley Karnow's fascination with his erudition and style is understandable (''Giap Remembers,'' June 24).
But before we grant Giap an eminent place in the ''pantheon of military leaders,'' we ought to remember one thing.


A New Taste (Afghani) in Huntington
LEAD: HISTORIC Huntington Village now has an Afghani restaurant.
Incongruous as that might seem, it is not a bad fit.
Huntingtonians have long demonstrated their love for Greek food by supporting three storefront Greek restaurants within two blocks of each other.
There are some similarities between the two cusines: souvlaki becomes shish kebab and baklava translates to bughluva.


Famous and Fined
LEAD: WINNING the Indianapolis 500 brings a driver fame and fortune, but not immunity from the rules of racing as the 1990 Indy winner, Arie Luyendyk, has just learned.


To Each His Own Vacation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Should the Mets Have Called Off Strawberry Talks
LEAD: The Mets are prepared to make Darryl Strawberry an incredibly wealthy young man with a reported salary of $3 million to $4 million per year.
They have also shown tremendous loyalty and sensitivity in supporting Darryl during his personal difficulties.
If they choose to delay contract negotiations until after the season to avoid a distracting media circus, they are totally within their rights to do so.


Once More, Yankee Effort Goes to Waste
LEAD: A double-play ball hits a seam and caroms off the shortstop for a single.
The single leads to the decisive run.
An opposing pitcher returns from the minor leagues with the resolve that the time has come to relax.
A second consecutive complete game becomes a second consecutive loss.


Barton Gellman to Marry Tracy Sivitz in September
LEAD: September wedding plans for Tracy Ellen Sivitz and Barton David Gellman have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald J. Sivitz of Chappaqua, N.Y.


For van Gogh's Fans, There's Room at the Inn
LEAD: A century ago, on the advice of his brother, Theo, and the painter Pissarro, Vincent van Gogh traveled from Paris to Auvers, a small village along the banks of the River Oise, where a certain Dr.
Gachet awaited to treat him.
Just 20 miles north of the capital, Auvers is ''far enough from Paris to be real country,'' wrote van Gogh in the first of many letters to Theo describing his new surroundings.


Think Winds
LEAD: To the Editor:


Baylor's Interview
LEAD: THE thrills keep coming for Don Baylor, the former American League most valuable player (1979) whose five-team, 19-year playing career ended after the 1988 season.


August Wedding For Ms. Randall
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Randall of Norwalk, Conn., have announced August wedding plans for their daughter Juliet Farrar Randall and Lawrence Randolph Bailey Jr., a son of Mr.
Bailey of Queens and Cora T. Walker of New York.


BEST SELLERS: July 22, 1990
LEAD:
Weeks This Last On Week Week List Fiction
1 1 6 THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow.  (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.


Dirt And Dignity
LEAD: She walked into the courtroom, which was an accomplishment all by itself. ''She looked great,'' said one observer, ''for a person who's been beaten to death.'' By the time she testified, wearing a purple suit and assorted scars, it had become almost fitting that the only thing we did not know about her was her name.


Postings: To Renting Graduates;   Greeley Was Right
LEAD: Go west, young graduates, go west and save on the rent.
As long as you don't go much past Salt Lake City.


Mrs. Quayle Undergoes Operation for Cancer
LEAD: Marilyn Quayle, the wife of Vice President Dan Quayle, underwent surgery today for cervical cancer and is expected to make a full recovery, White House aides said.


Dandelions and Rabbits Need Space, Too
LEAD: IT did not start out as a contest.
The catbird was just singing from a branch of the pine tree with a long happy series of chortles, trills and burbles that made up a happy tune.
The song sounded very much like the endless cheer of the purple finch, until the catbird was spotted from below.


If Case Goes to Court, Vincent's Side Is Prepared
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent, forced by the George Steinbrenner case to learn quickly the history of baseball disciplinary proceedings, arrived at a conclusion: ''In situations where owners have been investigated by the commissioner, routinely they go to Federal court,'' Vincent said. ''Routinely they lose in Federal court.


Japanese in the New York Region Begin to Feel the Sting of Prejudice
LEAD: Japanese who have settled in the New York suburbs, whether for a temporary business assignment or for good, are starting to feel a backlash from their growing presence and the rising economic tensions between Japan and the United States.


Berlin
LEAD: Less than six months ago, preparing for a night out at one of East Berlin's theaters was a nerve-racking experience for the Western visitor: tickets had to be reserved well in advance through an East German Government agency and crossing from West Berlin involved standing in long lines at one of the two border crossings open to foreigners, Friedrichstrasse and Checkpoint Charlie.


Home Field Has Defender
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Lisa A. Ehrlich Plans to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs Stephen Ehrlich of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lisa Anne Ehrlich, to Emanuel Robert Pearlman, a son of Leonard D. Pearlman and Roberta C. Pearlman, both of New York.
A September wedding is planned.


Campus Life: Yale;   Putting a Limit On How Long Graduates Teach
LEAD: An administration plan to eliminate up to a quarter of the teaching positions for graduate students is forcing academic departments to rethink how much time professors spend teaching and has prompted graduate students to threaten to unionize.


Bomber Away?
LEAD: It seems that the Bush Administration doesn't consider Orlando Bosch that bad a guy, after all.
Dr.
Bosch, an anti-Castro Cuban who American officials say is responsible for dozens of bombings, including that of a Cuban airliner in Chile in 1976, last week was granted limited parole by the Justice Department, which had detained him in Florida for two years as an undesirable alien.


Perspectives: 42d Street Redevelopment;   Picking Up the Pace of Preparing the Site
LEAD: In the life of a longterm development project there are frustrating periods followed by bursts of progress.
A condemnation order from a judge in April set off such a burst in the saga of New York City's effort to redevelop 42d Street from Times Square to Eighth Avenue.


Three New York City Success Stories
LEAD: Saving and rehabilitating old buildings has become so common in the last few years that it is tempting to think of the whole process as easy - after all, if no one is clamoring any longer to tear a landmark down, hasn't the hardest battle been won?
Not necessarily: roughly 15 years passed between the departure of the New York City Police Department from its old headquarters at 240 Centre Street in Manhattan and that building's reopening last year as a strikingly elegant cooperative apartment building; an even longer period elapsed between the abandonment of the old Association


When Beauty Shows No Mercy
LEAD:
THE TRANSPARENT MAN
By Anthony Hecht.
75 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.
COLLECTED EARLIER POEMS
By Anthony Hecht.
Illustrated. 272 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $22.95.


Sending the Wrong Signal at Shea Stadium
LEAD: To the Editor:


HEALTHY INDULGENCE
LEAD: In ''Healthy Indulgence'' (Food, June 24), Jacques Pepin does an admirable job of delivering savory and attractive low-fat fare.
However, in the future, I hope Pepin's nutritional profiles for servings will be expressed in whole numbers, rather than counts extended to two decimal places. (One recipe, for example, estimated a lime cookie's calories at 59.63.) At best, a recipe analysis is an estimate of nutrient content, with considerable margin for error in either direction.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
No Parties for the Party


Fury Rising in Quebec Over Mohawk Standoff
LEAD: For the last 10 days, Canadians watching television have been confronted with the stark image of Mohawk Indians armed as if for war, in camouflage uniforms, bandannas across their faces, blockading one of the most crucial transport arteries in the country, the Mercier bridge across the St.
Lawrence River into


The Executive Computer;   When Computing Power Is Generated by the Lawyers
LEAD: IT used to be that programmers, engineers and marketers were the centerpiece of the computer industry.
Now lawyers are taking center stage.
Dozens of computer companies are wrangling over copyright and patent issues, and some analysts fear that legal code, rather than software code, is emerging as the factor that will determine which companies and products will dominate the 1990's.


Culture Shock as East Greets West
LEAD: West is meeting East this summer in Europe's newly democratic countries, and the clash of cultures has bewildered, frustrated and exhilarated both the visitors and the hosts.


Talent and All the Right Connections
LEAD:
VILLAGE
As It Happened Through a Fifteen Year Period.
By Robert McAlmon.
Edited by Edward N. S. Lorusso.
170 pp. Albuquerque, N.M.:
University of New Mexico Press. Paper, $14.95.


For Carl Reiner, The Comic Touch Is Hands-Off Magic
LEAD: Remember the scene from ''Where's Poppa?'' in which the shy, mother-dominated lawyer played by George Segal tries to seduce the ethereal nurse played by Trish Van Devere while the two are standing upright on a bed that offers them no support at all?


Currency;   For Now, the Dollar Holds Its Own
LEAD: Well, not much happened.
Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan's semi-annual testimony to Congress on monetary policy was a little anticlimactic after he said the previous week that the Fed would lower interest rates to offset a credit squeeze.
If anything, he signaled in his testimony that interest rates would not be moving lower again soon.


Faldo Surges Ahead by 5 Shots
LEAD: Nick Faldo kept up the fastest pace ever set in a British Open today, one that even the hottest golfers could not catch and one that all but left Greg Norman buried in one of the claustrophobic bunkers of the Old Course.


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   The Season is Right For Gardens and Cafes
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Barrow Street Cafe


About Men;   A Familiar Ring
LEAD: Seven years after my father's death, I have begun wearing his ring.
Not always.
I wear it, talismanically, to weddings, funerals and other solemnities, on long drives toward meaningful destinations.
I slip it on, I will sheepishly admit, for its powers.


Air Corps Sank Navy With Shocking Ease
LEAD: To the Editor:


Churchill and the Reluctant King
LEAD: To the Editor:


Wall Street;   The Dubious Profits in Patriotism
LEAD: PATRIOTISM may be the last refuge of scoundrels, but it is often the first choice of companies seeking the ear of the investing public.
Consider the case of American Spirit Corporation of Beverly Hills, Calif.


County's Landless Farmers Cultivate Community Gardens
LEAD: IT is always an uphill battle for gardeners.
But for some the fight is tougher than for others.


Lois Maurillo Is Married
LEAD: Lois A. Maurillo, a teacher at Public School 124 in Brooklyn, and John Yasko 2d, an inspector for Trans World Airlines at Kennedy International Airport, were married yesterday at St.
Charles Borromeo Roman Catholic Church in Brooklyn by the Rev.
Charles McLaughlin.
The bride, the daughter of the late Dr.


Sterling Oxford Edition Is Defining Luxury
LEAD: ONCE in a while, if you do this right, you have to talk about cars that almost nobody drives.
You have to write about Yugos, for instance.
Or, at the high end, you put pencil to paper about the Lamborghini, which seems to exist solely for the covers of car magazines and for Lee Iacocca commercials.


MURDER IS CHARGED
LEAD: A Bronx man who told the police he wrested a gun away from an armed robber and then fatally shot his assailant was arrested yesterday on murder charges, although a police spokesman said investigators thought the man had acted in self-defense.


Nancy J. Vawter Is Wed To Michael J. Jackonis Jr.


Evolution in Europe;   For One Man, Solidarity Is Nothing but Splinters
LEAD: When Henryk Wujec recounts his two decades in Poland's political struggles, the years of underground organizing against the Communists, the beatings and the three years in jail, the chapter that pains him the most is the latest one.


Impressionist Illustrator Is Recalled in Old Lyme
LEAD: THE line dividing publicity from criticism is not as clear as it used to be.
These days, dealers and museum personnel quite often get right to the point by asking reviewers to ''generate'' interest in a show and, upon encountering resistance, will invoke the popularity of the art, as if they are helpless in the face of public opinion.


Southern Women in a Small Town
LEAD: WHETHER or not a factual difference exists between Southern women and the rest of us, a mythology of the Southern woman does exist.


Grace Church
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jan Laurie Kreisberg Plans to Marry in October
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Kreisberg of Garden City, L.I., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Jan Laurie Kreisberg, and Charles Rosenberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Rosenberg of Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Ms.
Kreisberg, 38 years old, graduated from American University and has an M.A. in sociology from the New School for Social Research.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
LEAD: ''Herein lies the tragedy of all the age: not that men are poor - all men know something of poverty; not that men are wicked - who is good?
Not that men are ignorant - what is truth?
Nay, but that men know so little of men.'' - W. E. B. DuBois.


The View From: Trail Wood in Hampton;   Author's Beloved Fields Remain His Memorial
LEAD: THE journey through Trail Wood, the Edwin Way Teale memorial sanctuary in Hampton, begins at a break in a stone wall opening into Firefly Meadow.
Here a path bordered by wildflowers and furrowed grasses leads to the bridge over Stepping Stone Brook, where largemouth bass meander among the water weeds.


Christina Cassidy Engaged to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Cassidy of Loudonville, N.Y., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Christina Cassidy and David Leslie Martino, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph A. Martino of Clifton Park, N.Y.


Reviews/Dance;   A Rarity Is Part of Bolshoi Mixed Bill
LEAD: For its final program of the season, the Bolshoi Ballet presented a mixed bill on Friday night at the New York State Theater that included two ''firsts.''


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Keep after insect-disease problems before they overwhelm the plants.
Transplanting and dividing continues.
Finish pruning, especially spring-flowering species.
Last call to apply fertilizer to ornamentals so the new growth has time to develop and harden before cold weather.
Keep up fruit tree spray and rose spray as protective measures against disease problems.





Vacancy on the Court;   Brennan in His Own Words
LEAD:
On Interpreting the Constitution


'Star Wars' Addition Is Criticized
LEAD: A Congressional report has criticized the nation's ''Star Wars'' program, saying the recent addition of a new weapon concept has complicated and delayed the process of deciding whether the system is feasible.


SPIES &amp; THRILLERS
LEAD: Double revenge is the motif of BLOOD TIDE by Robert F. Jones (Atlantic Monthly, $19.95).
The book is about a father and his daughter.
He, a former Navy man as strong and as patriotic as they come, was captured during the Vietnam War.
He was put through excruciating torture and held up through it all.


Advice for N.B.A.
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


28 Hurt as Bus Hits Girder On the Williamsburg Bridge
LEAD: Twenty-eight people were injured yesterday when a city bus skidded out of control on a rain-slicked roadway and slammed into an elevated train stanchion as the bus was exiting the Williamsburg Bridge, the authorities said.


Orthodox in Israel Pressing for a Ban on Pork
LEAD: Orthodox politicians are trying to outlaw pork, the most unkosher of foods.


Gorbachev Rings the Doorbell of The 'Common European House'
LEAD: IT is perhaps inevitable given the history of this century that Germans making deals with Russians would rouse a certain wariness.
But when Mikhail S. Gorbachev gave his imprimatur to German unity, he was following a compulsion with deep roots in Russian history, and his gaze ranged far beyond Germany.


Susan Staudohar Is a Bride
LEAD: Susan M. Staudohar, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter F. Staudohar of Duluth, Minn., was married there yesterday at the Cathedral of Our Lady of the Rosary to Mark D. Hill, a son of Mrs.
Nicholas T. Popadiuk of El Toro, Calif., and James J. Hill of Mount Baldy, Calif.
The Rev.
Anthony Giudice officiated.


Armin Jordan: In Search of an Elusive Spotlight
LEAD: Erato - the French label that had until last year been distributed here by RCA but has now been taken up by Elektra Classics - is back.
And so, too, is Armin Jordan.
Mr.
Jordan is not especially well known on this side of the Atlantic, and there probably aren't a great many collectors who have been waiting in breathless anticipation for new releases from the


After 'True Love' There Comes the 'Dog Fight'
LEAD: There's probably no intersection in California that better sums up the crazy human mosaic of life than the one where Columbus Avenue meets Broadway.


Toni Jay to Marry Michael A. Asch in November
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Barry Jay of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Toni Georgenne Jay to Michael Alan Asch, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur L. Asch of Sands Point, L.I.
A November wedding is planned.


Should the Mets Have Called Off Strawberry Talks
LEAD: Sign him now.
Unless Strawberry signs a contract with the Mets before the season ends, he will be putting on another team's jersey, and it will be the biggest mistake the Mets have ever made.
MEIR SIEGEL
New Rochelle, N.Y.


A Tale of Four Cities
LEAD:
WHERE I FELL TO EARTH
A Life in Four Cities.
By Peter Conrad.
252 pp. New York:
Poseidon Press.
$18.95.


Army Town in Texas Pays the Price of Peace
LEAD: There were no victory parades here when the cold war ended.
Instead, warriors began slipping away, tanks were lined up neatly on parking lots for storage, and the civilians who live around this huge Army base started feeling as though they were the losers.


Why L. T. Deserves $2 Million
LEAD: AT a corner table in LT's, his new restaurant on Route 17 not far from Giants Stadium, the proprietor's voice was firm.


On Language;   A Taste for Scrambled English
LEAD: In Stockholm, There is a chain of fast-food restaurants where you can get, along with a risk of heartburn, what must rank as the ultimate in culinary oxymorons: a hamburger called a Mini Big.


Simms to Start Again, but . . .
LEAD: When the Giants open their training camp here Monday, their quarterback situation will be clear.
Sort of.


Judge's Killing Prompts a Challenge
LEAD: IN 1950, when Congress first drafted a plan to financially protect the widowed spouses of Federal judges, the grim possibility that a justice would be assassinated was not within its collective memory.
In the last 11 years, however, three judges have been murdered in connection with cases they have heard, the first such incidents since the pioneer days of the 1800's, and Capitol


Dandelions and Rabbits Need Space, Too
LEAD: IT did not start out as a contest.
The catbird was just singing from a branch of the pine tree with a long happy series of chortles, trills and burbles that made up a happy tune.
The song sounded very much like the endless cheer of the purple finch, until the catbird was spotted from below.


Jean Brenchley Wed to Bernard Asbell
LEAD: Jean E. Brenchley, a professor of microbiology at Pennsylvania State University, and Bernard Asbell, an associate professor of English there, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Stan Aronson, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Edward Brenchley of Canton,


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: Almost every stamp issued by the United States seems to point topical collectors in a new direction.
The latest was occasioned by the issuance of a block of four stamps in March to honor great movies of 1939.


Randall W. Hoffman, College Administrator, 77
LEAD: Randall Walrath Hoffmann, a professor of English who had been an administrator at several colleges, died on Tuesday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Tryon, N.C.
He was 77 years old and had recently moved to Tryon from Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
He died of heart failure, his wife said.
Mr.
Hoffmann was the dean of students at Hofstra University in Hempstead, L.I., from 1951 to 1966.


The Ant Man
LEAD: E.O.
Wilson doesn't make a lot of headway hiking through the Panamanian rain forest.
Invertebrates distract him.
He stops to poke.
A wasp is acting strangely - he must see why.
A bee clamps its mandibles onto his hand - no problem.
He'll just observe it for a while.
He snaps off epiphytes - plants that grow in the lower forest canopy - looking for nesting ants.


Corrections
LEAD: A music listing in the Arts and Leisure Guide today misstates the date for ''Turandot'' by the New York Grand Opera in Central Park.
It will be performed on Thursday night, not Tuesday.


Safer Monitors Threaten the U.S. Computer Industry
LEAD: To the Editor:


Taking Care of Carpets and Rugs
LEAD: RUGS and carpets need regular care: frequent light cleaning to remove dirt before it becomes embedded, attention to the pile and deep cleaning about once a year.
Although hand-knotted, fragile and antique rugs require special handling, ordinary tufted rugs and carpets made of synthetics or wool can be cared by applying the following techniques:


Should the Mets Have Called Off Strawberry Talks
LEAD: Absolutely.
By ending talks with Strawberry, the Mets will have a better chance at winning the pennant, because Darryl will have to produce every day.
JONATHAN NOVICH
Scarsdale, N.Y.


When Employees Face Commuting
LEAD: The ''reverse commute'' and the suburban-to-suburban commute have become the most serious ground transportation problems in the country.
The June 3 article ''Ranks of Reverse Commuters Expected to Grow'' touched the surface of the employee commuting problems during and after a company relocation.


'Miss Daisy' Drives Into Westport
LEAD: THREE of the American theater's most popular recent plays are included in this summer's repertory at the Westport Country Playhouse: ''The Cocktail Hour,'' which was seen early this month; ''Driving Miss Daisy,'' now playing, and ''Steel Magnolias,'' coming up on July 31.


&gt;LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
The Bells Are Ringing


Anne K. Howey to Marry R. T. Carson in December
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Howey of Summit, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Anne Kristen Howey to Robert T. Carson, the son of Mrs.
James Weatherstone of Summit and Benjamin R. Carson of Warminster, Pa.
A December wedding is planned.


A Little Airport Delay Has a Multiplier Effect
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Man in Close Touch With People as Well as With History
LEAD: Almost everywhere he went in the last decade, Justice William J. Brennan Jr. was importuned by liberals not to retire from the Supreme Court despite his advancing age, lest they lose a champion and conservatives gain a majority.


Taking a Pratfall on the Nastiness Threshold
LEAD: Popular entertainment does, after all, have a revulsion threshold.
Andrew Dice Clay should know.
He stepped over it and is now desperately trying to salvage his career as a stand-up comic.
At the beginning of this year, Mr.
Clay was playing to standing-room-only at Madison Square Garden.
A week and a half ago, he was restraining sobs on ''The Arsenio Hall Show,'' after whining that ''whenever somebody is on top, they try to bring him down - that's the way it is.


Streetscapes: The 1914 Stewart Building;   A Delicate Work of Ceramic in the Path of a Tower
LEAD: ''I call it the Wedgwood Building,'' said Susan Tunick, president of the Friends of Terra Cotta, a preservation organization. ''There's nothing like it in New York.'' Indeed, the blue-and-white, terra-cotta building at the southwest corner of 37th Street and Fifth Avenue, built in 1914, is a striking example of the ceramic arts.


Q and A
LEAD:
The Red House
Question: I have always been curious about the building known as Red House on the south side of West 85th Street just off off Riverside Drive.
What can you tell me about it? . . .
S.
L., Manhattan
Answer: The six-story, 50-unit apartment building at 350 West 85th Street was completed in 1904.


In Eastern Europe's Churches, Triumph Leads to Uncertainty
LEAD: FOR four decades, religious believers in Eastern Europe lived under seige.
Their buildings were confiscated, their ceremonies regulated, their publications censored, their youth groups outlawed, their seminaries closed, their professional careers blocked, their leaders spied upon, jailed, harassed, intimidated, bribed or even killed.


Maura Moynihan, a Comic, Is Married To John F. Avedon, a Writer, on L.I.
LEAD: Maura Russell Moynihan, a partner in the comedy team of Moynihan and Green, was married yesterday in Montauk, L.I., to John Franklin Avedon, a writer.
The Rev.
Ernest Campbell, a Presbyterian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the summer home of the bridegroom's parents, Mr. and Mrs.


H.U.D. Scandal's Lesson: It's a Long Road From Revelation to Resolution
LEAD: IN the fall of 1989, when the scandals at the Department of Housing and Urban Development were one of the biggest stories in America, David Burns, a senior staff member in the department's New York office, asked his superiors in Washington for permission to talk with the press about past wrongdoing at the agency.


A Fine Scottish Hand
LEAD: Next to lunching on goat cheese and gelignite, one of the more dangerous things you can do in London is to mess with the National Gallery.
Not only is it, inch for inch, as great a picture gallery as the world can show; it is midmost, inmost England.
Gloriously situated at the north end of Trafalgar Square, it is the sanctuary of a specific sensibility and the stronghold for 150 years of a heroic view of art.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Off the Tourist Track, An Area Full of History
LEAD: The one-traffic-light village of Red Hook sits inconspicuously in the northwest corner of Dutchess County, near the Hudson River, off the beaten track of the tourist trail that takes thousands of visitors each year to more popular attractions in Rhinebeck and Hyde Park to the south.


No Auditions, No Charge, Just Happy Music
LEAD: IT was a quintessential Connecticut summer scene: the evening band concert in the gazebo on Fairfield's Sherman Green.
Revelers of all ages listened to the band and watched the antics of the local children.
Mothers chased errant toddlers through the maze of lawn chairs and blankets, and two little boys with their hands over their ears dared each other to ascend the steps of the gazebo, where the band played ''The Georgia Cakewalk.


A Return to Jazz Standards, and a Bit Beyond
LEAD: The neoclassic temper of 1980's jazz, exemplified by Wynton Marsalis's polished playing and his back-to-blues-and-swing philosophy, has lately taken shape as more than a one-man movement.
Tireless proselytizing by the 29-year-old trumpet player against jazz's associating too closely with other types of music has instilled a revivalist spirit in an even younger generation.


THE POPPERS AND THE PLAINS
LEAD: Frank and Deborah Popper's plan for a Buffalo Commons in the Great Plains has great romantic appeal (''The Poppers and the Plains,'' by Anne Matthews, June 24).
As a lawyer and conservationist, I spent considerable time several years ago on a similar proposal for eastern Montana - the Big Open - researching the practicalities of implementing such a scheme.


The People Who Are Putting Taste Back on the Table
LEAD: THE Quaker Oats Company saw boundless potential in the $7 million a year rice-cake business when it bought a small producer in 1985.
Supported by the Quaker name and advertising budget, rice-cake sales took off as health-conscious consumers sampled the filling, 35-calorie, fat-free snacks.
But then consumers discovered another thing about rice cakes: their taste value was about on a par with styrofoam.


I-80's Exits To History In Nebraska
LEAD: A lot of people drive across Nebraska; few linger.
They get a bad case of lead foot as they barrel west on Interstate 80 trying to get the 450 miles of Nebraska behind them as quickly as possible.
This is a shame.
Nebraska is a place of clear light and calming vistas, of architectural landmarks, both majestic and humble, and many quirky little museums.


Rimbaud and Verlaine, Together Again
LEAD:
IN MEMORIAM TO IDENTITY
By Kathy Acker.
Illustrated. 265 pp. New York:
Grove Weidenfeld. $19.95.


Measles' Risks Found Reduced by Vitamin A
LEAD: Vitamin A supplements can significantly reduce the risk of death and serious complications in children with severe measles, a new study has found.


Bohemian Dumplings: Plebeian but Tasty
LEAD: Dumpling dough must be beaten until it talks to the bowl, my mother used to advise as the thickening, sticky mass hit the side with a thwop.


Looking Ahead
LEAD: MONDAY: Treasury Department's budget deficit report for June.
Negotiators from 105 countries take part in trade talks in Geneva, through Friday.


Relocation, an Idea As Old as Moses
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our den has a cement slab floor that is covered with squares of wood parquet flooring.
This floor has no insulation and is cold in the winter.
I would like to cover it with ceramic tiles.
The wood squares are still firm and sticking solidly.
Would it be possible to leave the wood flooring in place as insulation and then lay the tiles directly over this?


VACANCY OF THE COURT: An Activist's Legacy;   From Personal Liberties to Voting Rights, Brennan Led Way in Changing the Nation
LEAD: Justice William J. Brennan Jr.'s departure from the Supreme Court brings to an end not only a remarkable judicial career but also an era in the Court's history.


David's Island Impasse Linked to Public Access
LEAD: THE failure of the developers of David's Island in New Rochelle to grant meaningful public access to the exclusive residential community they planned was a major factor in the decision by state officials last week to reject the project.


Judith Ratner Engaged To Kenneth S. Geller
LEAD: September wedding plans for Dr.
Judith Barbara Ratner and Kenneth Steven Geller, a son of Sylvia R. Geller of Rego Park, Queens, and the late Edward Geller, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Milton B. Ratner of Tenafly, N.J.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Freehold
$210,000
22 Fern Avenue
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 26-year-old contemporary; 2-car garage, c/a, family room, 1 acre; taxes $2,870.
Jackson
$132,900
6 Culpepper Court
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 17-year-old contemporary; deck, 2-car garage, family room, patio; taxes $2,711.


The Book That Wouldn't Die: A Writer's Last and Longest Voyage
LEAD: By nature, our friend was a searcher.
He had traveled through Africa and Asia and the Lowlands of Scotland, but his longest, most intricate journey was in the world of publishing.
It was a journey that lasted almost nine years and began with a voyage on the Regina Maris, an early 20th-century sailing vessel on which our friend traveled from Boston Harbor to Newfoundland, then on to Greenland to chart the migratory patterns of whales.


Margot Calogeras to Marry
LEAD: Margot Calogeras and David Clark Pannett plan to marry in the fall.
Ms.
Calogeras, a daughter of Dr.
Miriam Tauber of New York and Dr.
Roy Calogeras of Wiesbaden, West Germany, is a cum laude graduate of Columbia University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Mr.
Pannett, the son of Mr. and Mrs.


Sink It, and Link It
LEAD: To the Editor:


If We Don't Give Gorbachev Help, Europe Will;   Everyone Gains
LEAD: To the Editor:


Beyond the Loom
LEAD: For more than three decades Lenore Tawney has been a revolutionary figure in fiber art.
In the 1950's she was credited with freeing weaving from the confines of the loom.
She was one of the first to juxtapose areas of plain weave with areas of unwoven warp, to incorporate knots, braids, shells and feathers into her pieces and to create weavings intended to be hung away from a wall, adding a sculptural dimension to what traditionally had been a flat art.


Tech Notes;   Thwarting a Nuclear Tap Root
LEAD: RESEARCHERS at the Batelle Institute's Pacific Northwest Laboratory in Richland, Wash., have developed a way to inhibit the growth of plant roots for as long as 100 years.


Steinlen Wins Handicap
LEAD: Steinlen, last year's champion American grass horse, went over the $3 million mark in career earnings yesterday when he led all the way to win the $500,000 Caesars International Handicap at Atlantic City Race Course in New Jersey.


Carmella Welch Weds
LEAD: Carmella Welch, a daughter of Carol Welch of Astoria, Queens, and the late William Welch, was married last evening to Michael Keyles, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Keyles of Sayreville, N.J.
The Rev.
James Covington and Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.


U.S.O.C. Watches Steinbrenner Case
LEAD: Robert Helmick, the president of the United States Olympic Committee, said today that it ''seemed inappropriate'' to discuss any possible change in George Steinbrenner's relationship with the U.S.O.C. until the Yankee owner's problems stemming from a $40,000 payment to Howard Spira, a self-described gambler, had been resolved.


Siegfried Who? The Limits of Fame
LEAD: Siegfried Matthus counts as East Germany's most successful opera composer, with his works performed throughout Eastern Europe and, increasingly, West Germany.
Up to now, however, apart from the ministrations of a few champions of his orchestral music, he has remained largely unknown in the United States.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
WASTED, by Linda Wolfe. (Pocket Books, $4.95.) The author of ''The Professor and the Prostitute'' tells the story of the jaded Upper East Side subculture of sex and drugs that gave rise to Jennifer Levin and Robert E. Chambers Jr., the friend who killed her late one night in Central Park. ''In the end, what makes this an excellent, valuable book is that it raises larger questions no less deserving of our attention and consideration,'' Michael M.


Fresh Air Fund Youths Get Connecticut Respite
LEAD: There are 7,500 different stories that inner-city children tell of their Fresh Air Fund summers with a host family that takes them in for a two-week repreive from the summer streets.
The stories take place in the woods or in a classroom, at a pool or a beach, during a rainstorm or in sunshine.


Fashion;   Herald of Autumn: Catalogue in Mailbox
LEAD: Free mail-order catalogues for fall are jamming mailboxes.
The fashion stories they tell are midsummer's patio reading, filled with rich colors in fabrics and designs that evoke distant times and latitudes.


Ms. Peterson Wed To Jan K. Elsbach
LEAD: Kimberly Dee Peterson, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Finley Marshall of Vermillion, S.D., was married yesterday in Sheffield, Mass., to Dr.
Jan Kees Elsbach, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Peter Elsbach of New York.
Betsy Holtzinger, the Town Justice of Stockbridge, Mass., performed the ceremony at the weekend home of the bridegroom's parents.


Cuba Blocks More Embassies
LEAD: The Cuban police sealed off the Canadian and West German Embassies today and tightened a security cordon around the Spanish Embassy after nine more Cubans slipped through during the night and broke in.
The latest arrivals brought to 18 the number of Cubans staying at the Spanish Embassy, further complicating a diplomatic quarrel that has strained relations between Madrid and Havana.


Telephone Update
LEAD: New York City has 8,100 sidewalk pay phones.
That should be plenty, if they all worked, and if long-winded talkers didn't monopolize the ones that do.


Review/Concert;   Norfolk Festival: The Happy Outcome of a Musical Learning Experience
LEAD: Like the Music Center at Tanglewood some 40 miles to the north, the Norfolk Chamber Music Festival in northwestern Connecticut is celebrating a half-century of summer schooling for young musicians.


Helen Shelton to Wed Maurice Holmes
LEAD: The engagement of Helen Claudina Shelton to Maurice Lawrence Holmes, the son of Mary L. Holmes-Brown of Chicago, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Shelton of New York.
A September wedding is planned.


Jean McDonough Weds W. R. Mattson
LEAD: Jean Marie McDonough and William Ross Mattson were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Transfiguration in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The Rev.
Timothy M. Johnson performed the ceremony.


Off Base
LEAD: A Federal judge in Cincinnati said he saw two people in front of him last week: Pete Rose the living legend and Pete Rose the tax cheat.
He sent them both to jail for five months.
Rose, who batted his way on to base more times than anybody else in baseball, pleaded guilty to two felony counts of filing false income tax returns.


'Anarchy' of Cheating Hits Palestinian Schools
LEAD: Palestinian high-school seniors took final exams this week.
But at many schools the examinations turned out to be tests of how blatantly they could cheat.


Investigation of Vote Buying Shakes S. Carolina Capital
LEAD: A Federal grand jury's investigation into the possibility of vast corruption in the South Carolina Legislature appears to be expanding rapidly and has left this capital city shaken.


'86 and '87 Mazdas Recalled
LEAD: The Mazda Motor Corporation on Friday recalled 102,548 of its 1985 and 1986 model 626 cars because of potentially faulty ignition switches.
The company said the switch could wear out after extended use and affect the operation of the windshield wipers and washers, engine cooling fan, heater blower and air-conditioner compressor.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Tennis
Agassi Routs Chang: Top-seeded Andre Agassi overpowered Michael Chang, 6-3, 6-1, last night to join Jim Grabb in the finals of the Sovran Bank Classic tournament in Washington.
Agassi jumped on Chang's serve and used a strong baseline game to beat the him for the fourth time without a defeat in matches between the two young American stars.


Beachgoers Warned of Buried Ammunition
LEAD: VISITORS to Connecticut's largest beach do not have to worry about raw sewage and hypodermic needles littering their beach.
Instead, they are are being warned of live mortar rounds that may be buried deep in the sand.


Renamed Exxon Valdez Sets Out for Sea Trials


Katherine Foote Is Married
LEAD: Katherine Deming Foote, a teacher at St.
Ann's School in Brooklyn, and Joseph Henry Haddock, an actor, were married yesterday at the First Congregational Church in Branford, Conn., by the Rev.
Gary Smith.
The bride, 25 years old, is the daughter of Imogen Howe Solem of Redding, Conn., and William J.


Business and the Law;   For Regulators, Courts Are Tough
LEAD: IN Congress, regulators and prosecutors have found a welcome ally in the aftermath of the troubles of the savings and banking industries, getting more than they have sought in resources and legislation.


Universal's Harvey Stake
LEAD: Universal Pictures said last week that it had acquired a minority interest in Harvey Comics Entertainment, a Santa Monica, Calif., publisher of cartoon and comic characters like Casper, the Friendly Ghost; Richie Rich, and Baby Huey.
Terms were not disclosed.
The agreement, announced by Thomas Pollock, the chairman of Universal Pictures, focuses on the use of the Harvey characters in such areas as motion pictures, television, home video and theme parks.


Evergreen Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Evergreen Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,146,000
2,628,000
Per share
.46
.57
Shares outst
4,702,527
4,596,839
6mo net inc
4,599,000
5,211,000
Per share
.98
1.13
Share outst
4,669,378
4,596,073
Year-ago per share earnings and shares outstanding reflected the 3-for- 2 stock split in September 1989, effected in the form of a 50 percent dividend.


BancTexas Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BancTexas Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
1,928,000
8,814,000
6mo net loss
4,091,000
15,775,000
The 1989 results included BancTexas Dallas, which was then a subsidiary of BancTexas Group.


Jehovah's Word at Yankee Stadium
LEAD: Clutching umbrellas and fans and hiding from the sun under tarpaulins, tens of thousands of people at Yankee Stadium yesterday watched Jehu and Jezebel fight a war of biblical proportions.


Striving to Regain Top Form
LEAD: The interview was over, the tape recorder stopped.
Showing a reporter to the door of his hotel room, Greg LeMond suddenly turned and with an anguished look on his face said: ''All winter I had people throwing money at me.
Hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Would you have said no?''


Jacobs Engineering Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jacobs Engineering Group (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
221,113,000
228,602,000
Net inc
3,640,000
2,614,000
Share earns
.32
.24
Shares outst
11,329,300
10,981,400
9mo rev
651,455,000
584,644,000
Net inc
10,365,000
7,062,000
Share earns
.93
.66
Shares outst
11,136,100
10,684,400


Evolution in Europe;   German Paper Reports Chile Refuses Asylum to Honecker
LEAD: Chile has barred Erich Honecker, the deposed East German Communist leader, from entering the country after West Germany said that allowing him in would be an ''especially unfriendly occurrence,'' the newspaper Welt am Sonntag said today.


Miler Gets Faster With Age
LEAD: WHEN Larry Almberg was in college he ran the mile in 4 minutes 10 seconds.


First Hawaiian Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Hawaiian Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
17,433,000
14,785,000
Per share
.65
.55
6mo net inc
33,285,000
27,950,000
Per share
1.24
1.04


Look-Alike's Confession Sets Man Free After 8 Years in Jail
LEAD: A 25-year-old man who was imprisoned eight years ago for rape and robbery has been released after a man who looks like him confessed to the crimes, lawyers said.


Shiites Backed by Iran Crush Raid by Rivals in Lebanon
LEAD: The Iranian-backed Party of God today crushed an attack by rival Shiite Muslims backed by Palestinian guerrillas after two days of fighting in a mountaintop town in southern Lebanon, the police said.


Joyner-Kersee Off Her Record Pace
LEAD: Jackie Joyner-Kersee, looking to break the 7,300-point barrier in the heptathlon, made an early assault on that lofty figure today at the Goodwill Games before losing all hope with two sub-par performances.


Ashland Coal reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ashland Coal (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
112,022,000
80,235,000
Net inc
7,846,000
b4,839,000
Share earns
.48
.29
6mo rev
202,226,000
156,846,000
Net inc
14,677,000
b11,121,000
Share earns
.90
.67
b-Included a second-quarter income-tax adjustment of $728,000 and after-tax interest income of $269,000 on a related refund for both the quarter and 6 months.


Wild Shooting On Street Hits Girl, 9, in Car
LEAD: A 9-year-old girl was shot in the head early yesterday in Brooklyn when a bullet the police said was fired by a man shooting wildly at an old enemy crashed into the car where she lay asleep, waiting to be carried up to bed after a day at an amusement park.


Seoul's Opposition Resigns En Masse From Parliament
LEAD: All 80 opposition members in South Korea's National Assembly resigned today to back their demands for new general elections.


Chris-Craft Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chris-Craft Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
80,124,000
71,111,000
Net inc
20,730,000
3,467,000
Share earns
.80
.13
6mo rev
144,234,000
129,927,000
Net inc
b255,999,000
4,722,000
Share earns
9.93
.17


Old, Weak and a Loser: Crack User's Image Falls
LEAD: Crack has begun to get a bad name among a growing number of young people in New York City's poorest neighborhoods, according to some teen-agers, police officers and researchers who work on the streets.
Rather than a challenge, something to test a teen-ager's mettle, they say, the smokable form of cocaine is gaining a reputation as a drug ''for losers.


Tandem Computers reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandem Computers (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
472,028,000
420,687,000
Net inc
32,436,000
30,759,000
Share earns
.30
.31
Shares outst
109,531,000
100,569,000
9mo rev
1,359,804,000
1,176,360,000
Net inc
89,998,000
78,912,000
Share earns
.83
.79
Shares outst
108,622,000
100,213,000


Conston Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conston Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 2
1990
1989
Revenue
38,644,000
43,902,000
Net loss
b20,098,000
195,000
b-Included estimated restructuring charge of $20 million related to Chapter 11 reorganization.


Illinois Central Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Illinois Central Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
137,600,000
132,900,000
Net inc
11,100,000
3,000,000
Share earns
.47
.03
6mo rev
285,900,000
281,400,000
Net inc
24,900,000
2,700,000
Share earns
1.08
.02
The share earnings are based on 18.9 million common shares outstanding and are calculated after giving effect to preferred dividend requirements of $2.3 million for the quarter and $4.5 million for the 6 months.


150 Teaneck Marchers Protest April Shooting
LEAD: About 150 people protesting the killing of a black teen-ager by a white policeman marched down the township's main commercial district Saturday and rallied peacefully in front of the municipal complex.


Reporter's Notebook;   As Jogger Trial Unfolds, the Fear Hits Home
LEAD: When she walked into a Manhattan courtroom last week, the Central Park jogger was not as surefooted as she was that night 15 months ago when a friend saw her go out in her black running tights and her crisp white shirt.


Hon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hon Industries (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
158,156,000
140,621,000
Net inc
8,190,000
7,614,000
Share earns
.25
.22
6mo sales
331,959,000
287,561,000
Net inc
19,707,000
17,210,000
Share earns
.59
.49


Critic's Notebook;   Post-Modernism Goes to the Movies
LEAD: A mass-market hero like Marty McFly - Michael J. Fox's time-traveling character in the ''Back to the Future'' series - doesn't seem to have much in common with David Lynch or Spike Lee.
But in ''Back to the Future, Part III,'' simple little Marty turns post-modern.
He lands in the old West, calls himself Clint Eastwood and mocks western movie cliches as he heads toward a serious shoot-out on Main


Priest and Union Chiefs Charged in Fraud Case
LEAD: For several years, busloads of avid bingo fans would converge on the United Steelworkers union hall here for a high-stakes bingo game that took in an estimated $2 million a year and was ostensibly sponsored by a local Roman Catholic parish.


Stone &amp; Webster reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stone &amp; Webster (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
62,617,000
72,219,000
Net inc
1,002,000
6,408,000
Share earns
.06
.42
6mo rev
135,738,000
147,045,000
Net inc
b6,237,000
12,973,000
Share earns
.41
.85
b-Included net income of $2,853,000, or 19 cents a share, from sale of investment securities.


Market Place;   Witches Come Home to Roost
LEAD: THE witches were out on Friday, and now the questions are starting.


South Africa Easing Up on Its Political Censorship of Books
LEAD: In a basement room of the South African Library here rest hundreds of books, political tracts and magazines that the Government thinks South Africans, for their own good, should not read.


Note to Readers
LEAD: The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge receipt of or return articles unless they are accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Officer at Sallie Mae Named to Chief's Post
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association has named Lawrence A. Hough its president and chief executive to succeed Edward A. Fox, who left in May to head the Amos Tuck business school at Dartmouth.


Overseas Chinese Movement Loses Steam
LEAD: To the Editor:


30 Million Americans Can't Joke Poverty Away;   The Fun of Being Poor
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Red Herring in Black and White
LEAD: Calling the proposed Civil Rights Act of 1990 a ''quota bill,'' as President Bush does, doesn't make it so.
It may confuse some citizens and allow the Bush Administration to fool itself.


Evolution in Europe;   East Germans Battle Over Final Day
LEAD: East Germany's elected coalition Government wrangled all day and into the night before reaching a compromise on whether the country should legally cease to exist a day before or a day after all-German elections set for Dec. 2.


Nixon's Rap
LEAD: ''I have often thought that if there had been a good rap group around in those days I might have chosen a career in music instead of politics.''
- Richard Nixon, reminiscing about his life, on an audio tape at the Nixon Library.
U can't keep me down, can't keep me down
U can't keep me down, can't keep me down
U can't keep me down, can't keep me down
U can't keep me down, can't keep me down


Portland General reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Portland General (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
184,668,000
173,220,000
Net inc
2,337,000
b327,000
Share earns
.05
.01
6mo rev
424,827,000
392,800,000
Net inc
38,874,000
b37,910,000
Share earns
.84
.82
b-Included a loss from discontinued operations of $1,304,000 and $2,419,000 for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


China and Saudis Open Diplomatic Relations
LEAD: China and Saudi Arabia announced today that they had established diplomatic relations.


Foster (L.B.) Co.  (O) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foster (L.B.) Co.  (O)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
62,407,000
62,678,000
Net inc
888,000
906,000
Share earns
.09
.09
6mo sales
118,750,000
116,128,000
Net inc
1,839,000
1,450,000
Share earns
.19
.15


PAYOUTS IN BHOPAL ARE GOING SLOWLY
LEAD: More than five years after deadly gas leaked from a pesticide plant here, causing the world's worst industrial disaster, relief payments are reaching many of the surviving victims.
But the distribution of assistance is so uneven that more than 400,000 eligible people have received nothing, and benefits have been small even for the recipients.


LeMond Wins Tour; Faldo Wins Open


Sudden Fame for a Compromise on Trade
LEAD: A Dutch civil servant with a dry sense of humor and an endless supply of patience was in bed with the flu in Geneva when leaders of the world's seven major industrial powers found themselves struggling to pronounce his name at the Houston summit meeting earlier this month.


Dennison Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dennison Manufacturing (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
195,578,000
196,596,000
Net inc
b4,125,000
10,194,000
Share earns
.26
.64
6mo sales
374,388,000
376,891,000
Net inc
b6,152,000
c16,414,000
Share earns
.38
1.03


Reviews/Television;   Pride in His Sons and His Country
LEAD: Reaction against the selfish 1980's continues to proliferate in television dramas.
Already on line are several newly sensitive heroes, men like the title character of ''Shannon's Deal,'' who has turned his back on the fast track of megabuck salaries and conspicuous consumption.
Now with ''Rising Son,'' at 8 tonight on the T


Economic Pulse; New England;   IN NEW ENGLAND, HARDEST RECESSION IN U.S. TAKES HOLD
LEAD: After a decade of spectacular growth built on the pillars of high-technology industries, military contractors and financial services, New England has plunged into recession, the worst of any region in the country.


SFFed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SFFed Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,658,000
1,775,000
Per share
.60
.23
6mo net inc
9,291,000
3,102,000
Per share
1.19
.40


Promus Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Promus Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Revenue
253,533,000
237,251,000
Net inc
8,512,000
-
Share earns
.33
-
6mo rev
487,352,000
456,041,000
Net inc
26,151,000
-
Share earns
1.01
-
Shares outstanding were 26,003,000 and 25,951,000 for the latest quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Peace Starts To Take Toll
LEAD: With big weapons makers like the McDonnell Douglas Corporation laying off thousands of employees and with communities across the country bracing for further cuts in the arms budget, many companies, workers and Government officials are scrambling to find nonmilitary uses for jobs, skills and technology long supported by the


First Republic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Republic Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,046,000
306,000
Per share
.30
.09
6mo net inc
1,318,000
492,000
Per share
.38
.15
First Republic said its latest 6 months' results included a provision of $660,000 for collateralized overnight deposit investments that may have been undercollateralized by a Drexel Burnham Lambert Group Inc.


Reviews/Television;   Cole Porter: Still De-Lovely
LEAD: ''You're the Top: The Cole Porter Story'' offers a portrait of a man who gave his talent to his life, his genius to his work.
The story, told with a generous sampling of three decades of Porter hits interspersed among reminiscences of relatives, friends and show-biz associates, can be seen on tonight's edition of ''American Masters,'' at 9 on Channel 13 and at 10 on


Looking at Future, A Reflective Lewis Finds Kind Words
LEAD: IN the midst of another summer season, his 10th at the world-class level, Carl Lewis is finding the big issues of his competitive life - Ben Johnson and the stagnation of track and field in the United States - relatively unchanged from the last few years.


Antone Pressler, Senator's Father, 74
LEAD: Antone (Tony) Pressler, the father of Senator Larry Pressler, Republican of South Dakata, died Saturday of Alzheimer's disease in a nursing home in Salem, S.D.
He was 74 years old.
Mr.
Pressler, a farmer, spent his life in Humboldt, a town near Sioux Falls, where he and his wife, Loretta, reared their five children.


Butterfly Rematch Disappoints Biondi
LEAD: The prevailing thought around the world, at least in most places outside of Surinam, was that Matt Biondi had erred in judgment at the end of the 100-meter butterfly in the 1988 Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, and that's why Anthony Nesty beat him by .001 seconds.


Old Stone Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Stone Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,359,000
8,138,000
Per share
.44
.88
6mo net inc
7,405,000
16,741,000
Per share
.72
1.82
Old Stone said its second quarter results included: a $10 million pre-tax gain on the sale of its Washington division; a $10 million recapture of reserves for Mexican debt; and $8.8 million in valuation losses relating to real estate redevelopment projects.


Houghton Mifflin reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Houghton Mifflin (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
122,478,000
110,401,000
Net inc
11,496,000
10,503,000
Share earns
.81
.74
6mo sales
166,262,000
154,043,000
Net inc
b554,000
749,000
b-After nonrecurring net gain of $4,035,000.


Evolution in Europe;   Mongolia Casts Votes in Multiparty Primary
LEAD: Mongolians began voting today in their Communist-ruled nation's first multiparty election, a primary for local, provincial and national legislators.


Courts, Wills and Women
LEAD: A new study of right-to-die cases has found that the courts treat women very differently from men.


Pittsfield Error
LEAD: DIDN'T like that call at first?


Thomas &amp; Betts reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thomas &amp; Betts (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
151,666,000
136,175,000
Net inc
15,006,000
14,114,000
Share earns
.88
.83
Shares outst
17,045,000
16,999,000
6mo sales
304,809,000
273,562,000
Net inc
30,506,000
29,554,000
Share earns
1.79
1.74
Shares outst
17,033,000
16,986,000


Coachmen Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coachmen Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
80,486,105
87,103,820
Net inc
548,300
b443,424
Share earns
.07
-
6mo sales
156,819,515
178,871,406
Net inc
621,727
c2,412,076
Share earns
.08
.32
b-Net loss


Howtek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Howtek Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,818,000
4,474,000
Net inc
396,000
b1,694,000
Share earns
.05
-
6mo rev
11,368,000
8,290,000
Net inc
568,000
b3,291,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss


Vogler Killed in Crash
LEAD: Rich Vogler's life ended the same way his father's did: in a crash on a small Indiana race track.


'Best Interests' Rule Limits Steinbrenner
LEAD: George Steinbrenner will be largely powerless to appeal whatever sanctions may be meted to him by the baseball commissioner, Fay Vincent, unless, authorities on sports law say, he can prove that Vincent acted either capriciously or maliciously.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-7
Most East German military officers will not be included in the all-German force after unification, West German and NATO officials say.
Page A1


Bowater reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bowater (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
342,333,000
363,596,000
Net inc
b14,201,000
37,982,000
Share earns
.36
1.01
6mo sales
680,594,000
722,276,000
Net inc
b36,409,000
76,895,000
Share earns
.95
2.05
b-After an extraordinary charge of $9,046,000 for both the quarter and 6 months and certain non-recurring items related to employee benefit costs that contributed $2.4 million, or 7 cents a share, to net income for both the quarter and 6 months.


M.T.A. Finds Homeless Easy to Roust, but Hard to Keep Out
LEAD: In the nine months since the Metropolitan Transportation Authority began a campaign to rid the subways and railroads of homeless people and panhandlers, thousands of vagrants have been evicted from trains, platforms and terminals.


High Water Level Temporarily Stalls High Temperature in Queens


Springfield Journal;   A Rumor of AIDS, a Slander Award
LEAD: Robert McCune seemed uneasy as he walked up Main Street here, especially for a man who had just won $25,350 in a Nebraska Supreme Court case that may give him and his hometown of 780 people a place in legal history.


Ashton Tate reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ashton Tate (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
48,072,000
59,489,000
Net loss
12,551,000
19,780,000
Shares outst
26,583,000
26,441,000
6mo rev
105,076,000
149,292,000
Net loss
13,530,000
8,278,000
Shares outst
26,598,000
26,381,000


Owens &amp; Minor reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Owens &amp; Minor (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
300,719,000
218,729,000
Net inc
1,974,000
5,000
Share earns
.23
-
6mo sales
593,277,000
414,547,000
Net inc
3,496,000
897,000
Share earns
.41
.11


LSI Logic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSI Logic Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
159,698,000
140,888,000
Net inc
6,203,000
4,476,000
Share earns
.15
.11
Shares outst
42,579,000
41,761,000
6mo rev
298,770,000
274,785,000
Net inc
b8,299,000
12,511,000
Share earns
.20
.30
Shares outst
42,127,000
41,675,000


Firstier Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstier Financial (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,340,000
6,092,000
Per share
1.09
1.05
6mo net inc
12,793,000
12,972,000
Per share
2.20
2.24


PANEL'S CHAIRMAN TO URGE ENDING B-2
LEAD: The chairman of the House Armed Services Committee will urge Monday that production of the B-2 bomber be ended, virtually assuring enough votes to defeat the $63 billion program in the House and setting the stage for a battle with the Senate.


Leon Spinks's Son Is Fatally Shot
LEAD: The son of the former heavyweight boxing champion Leon Spinks was shot to death as he was driving home early this morning after visiting his girlfriend, the police said.


Amsouth Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amsouth Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
18,806,000
21,131,000
Per share
.80
.87
Shares outst
23,415,000
24,278,000
6mo net inc
39,303,000
41,999,000
Per share
1.66
1.73
Shares outst
23,623,000
24,261,000


Proposals On Foreign Investors
LEAD: Mirroring concern about a sevenfold rise in foreign investment in United States companies in the last decade, Congress is considering a spate of bills that would help the Government assess the extent of foreign ownership and its impact on the economy.


5 Hospitalized With Injuries From Bus Crash on Bridge
LEAD: Five people remained hospitalized yesterday with injuries they received when a city bus skidded out of control on the Williamsburg Bridge on Saturday afternoon, crashing into a pillar during a rainstorm.
Twenty-two of the 35 passengers were hurt.


Jefferies Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jefferies Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
45,734,000
35,018,000
Net inc
2,742,000
2,385,000
Share earns
.45
.38
Shares outst
6,154,000
6,271,000
6mo rev
78,926,000
69,221,000
Net inc
3,527,000
4,604,000
Share earns
.57
.72
Shares outst
6,148,000
6,417,000


Nashua Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nashua Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
151,917,000
141,144,000
Net inc
5,051,000
b4,693,000
Share earns
.61
.49
Shares outst
8,325,000
9,604,000
6mo sales
290,128,000
277,502,000
Net inc
8,651,000
b7,251,000
Share earns
.98
.76
Shares outst
8,806,000
9,595,000


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday
None
Tuesday
None
Wednesday
Durable Goods Orders
June
Thursday
None
Friday
Gross National Product
2d Qtr.


First American Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First American Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
9,326,000
3,233,000
Per share
.41
.14
Shares outst
23,212,000
23,024,000
6mo net loss
35,521,000
b18,593,000
Per share
-
.81
Shares outst
23,161,000
23,023,000


Pinnock Resigns From His American Showcase
LEAD: Trevor Pinnock, the English harpsichordist and conductor, has resigned as the music director of the Classical Band, the period-instrument chamber orchestra established last year that was widely regarded as an American showcase for him.


LeMond Cruises to Tour Finish Line
LEAD: Unchallengeable in the lead and glowing in his yellow jersey, Greg LeMond cruised into Paris today as the winner of the Tour de France for the second successive year.


Old Kent Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Kent Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
22,303,000
21,222,000
Per share
.83
.81
6mo net inc
44,405,000
41,511,000
Per share
1.67
1.58


Balance Sheets in 90's: Less Debt
LEAD: As the stock market climbs to record highs, American corporations are rushing to issue equity with an eagerness not seen since before the October 1987 stock market crash.


Fort Wayne National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fort Wayne National Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,410,000
4,787,000
Per share
.57
.62
6mo net inc
8,728,000
9,452,000
Per share
1.13
1.23


Wolf Weinreb, Landlord, 93
LEAD: Wolf Weinreb, an owner and manager of apartment buildings in Manhattan and the Bronx, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 93 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Expert on Turnarounds Needs Loan to Win Job
LEAD: Kenneth C. Cleveland has an unusual deal: he will become chairman and chief executive of a failing maker of circuit boards, Metropolitan Circuits Inc., if he can find financing for the company within 30 days.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Another Title for Agassi: Top-seeded Andre Agassi completed a dominant week of tennis by overwhelming Jim Grabb yesterday, 6-1, 6-4, in Washington in the final of the Sovran Bank Classic for his third title of the year.
Agassi routed the sixth-seeded Grabb in 63 minutes in winning the $70,000 singles title.


Men of 'Falsettoland' As Their Old Selves But With New Fears
LEAD: There is a nine-year-old photo hanging in the lobby at Playwrights Horizons that shows a jubilant scene from ''March of the Falsettos,'' the Off Broadway celebration of the unfettered gay existence written by William Finn and directed by James Lapine.


Florio Faces Growing Anti-Tax Storm in New Jersey
LEAD: Barely six months after taking office, Gov.
Jim Florio is confronted with a growing tax revolt that is fast turning into a general wave of discontent threatening his dominance of the machinery of government in New Jersey.


Plaza Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Plaza Commerce Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,320,000
2,105,000
Per share
.33
.30
6mo net inc
4,430,000
4,010,000
Per share
.63
.57


John Harold Fanning Dies at 73; A Chief of Labor Relations Board
LEAD: John H. Fanning, a member of the National Labor Relations Board for a record 25 years and its chairman from 1977 to 1981, died Saturday at Georgetown University Hospital.
He was 73 years old and lived in Bethesda, Md.


Baseball Gear for Tennis? It Couldn't Hurt


St. Jude Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St. Jude Medical Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
45,681,000
37,834,000
Net inc
16,368,000
13,210,000
Share earns
.34
.28
6mo sales
91,319,000
76,668,000
Net inc
33,105,000
26,086,000
Share earns
.69
.55


Crompton &amp; Knowles reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crompton &amp; Knowles (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
98,350,000
95,041,000
Net inc
8,810,000
7,335,000
Share earns
.36
.30
Shares outst
24,677,000
24,455,000
6mo sales
192,737,000
182,815,000
Net inc
15,740,000
12,663,000
Share earns
.64
.52
Shares outst
24,763,000
24,415,000


Metro Matters;   Shadow of Crack On Young Lives: Death and Arrest
LEAD: Nicholas McCall of Suffolk County and Sherif S. Byrd of the Bronx never met, but crack was a common denominator in their lives.


Iran's Students Chafe as Islam Puts Imprint on Their Futures
LEAD: Along Enghelab Street, the tree-lined boulevard that is the Iranian equivalent of Harvard Square, the students who are the future of this country say they cannot predict where the Islamic revolution in Iran will lead them.


The East-West Choice Holds Their Interest
LEAD: To the Editor:


Gatx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gatx Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
212,800,000
172,000,000
Net inc
17,900,000
15,300,000
Share earns
.75
.81
Shares outst
19,313,000
19,211,000
6mo rev
403,700,000
325,000,000
Net inc
37,800,000
32,700,000
Share earns
1.61
1.73
Shares outst
19,303,000
19,200,000


And That's Why No One Can Get Anywhere in New York City;   Nightmare on Wheels
LEAD: To the Editor:


PERES OVERCOMES RABIN CHALLENGE
LEAD: In an unexpected result, Shimon Peres tonight defeated an effort by Yitzhak Rabin to replace him as leader of the Labor Party.


Olin Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Olin Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
660,000,000
658,000,000
Net inc
b29,000,000
35,000,000
Share earns
1.41
1.70
Shares outst
19,100,000
20,400,000
6mo rev
1,296,000,000
1,329,000,000
Net inc
b61,000,000
69,000,000
Share earns
3.01
3.37
Shares outst
19,000,000
20,500,000


Georgia Gulf Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia Gulf Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
218,722,000
292,284,000
Net inc
15,710,000
49,331,000
Share earns
.50
1.91
Shares outst
31,363,081
25,781,339
6mo sales
470,361,000
610,049,000
Net inc
53,093,000
104,682,000
Share earns
1.90
4.04
Shares outst
27,958,454
25,925,610


Nash Finch Co. reports earnings for 12wks to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nash Finch Co. (OTC)
12wks to June 16
1990
1989
Revenue
561,995,552
512,501,170
Net inc
4,473,859
1,058,963
Share earns
.41
.10
Shares outst
10,870,366
10,868,216
24wk rev
1,072,734,704
999,346,120
Net inc
6,379,443
2,861,616
Share earns
.59
.26
Shares outst
10,869,990
10,867,268


A Determined Faldo Grabs British Open Title
LEAD: Perhaps the greatest tribute to the quality of golf Nick Faldo played to win the 119th British Open today was that - like a lightning rod rising above the ultimate golfing landscape - he very nearly took the electricity out of the magical atmosphere of St.
Andrews.


30 Million Americans Can't Joke Poverty Away
LEAD: To the Editor:


Topics of The Times;   Hot Town, Hot Togs
LEAD: New York in summer is a two-wardrobe town.
There is the stuff to wear in air-conditioned rooms and the stuff to wear on the street, and life consists of shuffling off the one for the other.
Unfortunately, however, New Yorkers get the stuff to wear on the street all wrong.


Fulton Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fulton Financial
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,700,000
5,600,000
Per share
.49
.47
6mo net inc
11,700,000
11,300,000
Per share
1.00
.95


Bridge
LEAD: The closest Grand National Team Championship final in the history of the event ended here today at 3 A.M., long after other play in the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals was completed.
After 64 deals of regulation play the scores were tied, but a 12-board playoff gave victory to Doug Simson and Walter Johnson, both Columbus, Ohio, Jeff Meckstroth, Reynoldsburg, Ohio, Eric Rodwell, West Lafayette, Ind., and Dennis Clerkin, Bloomington,


South Africa Said to Capture Rebel Infiltrators as New Talks Near
LEAD: Armed guerrillas of the African National Congress's military wing, Spear of the Nation, are reported to have been captured while infiltrating South Africa from bases in exile, posing problems for talks between the Government and the congress.


Dr. Howard Grob, 58, A Scientist and Dean
LEAD: Dr.
Howard S. Grob, a professor of biology at Adelphi University whose laboratory work helped clear the way for in vitro fertilization, died on Friday on a research trip to Phoenix.
He was 58 years old and lived on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.


Sewage Enters Three Rivers After Treatment Plant Fire
LEAD: The city's second-largest sewage treatment plant shut down for several hours yesterday after an electrical fire, spewing untreated waste into the East, Harlem and Hudson Rivers, a city environmental-protection official said.


NCNB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NCNB Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
137,424,000
91,536,000
Per share
1.30
1.00
Shares outst
101,561,000
86,633,000
6mo net inc
277,486,000
167,326,000
Per share
2.64
1.82
Shares outst
101,415,000
86,509,000


Zambia Gets Relief on Debt
LEAD: Zambia, which has one of Africa's largest debt burdens, was granted relief on $2.4 billion of its debt last week at a meeting of its creditors in Paris, Finance Minister Gibson Chigaga said today.


3 U.S. Auctions This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week include today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, an auction Wednesday of two-year notes and an auction Thursday of one-year bills.


Bush and the Court
LEAD: For years, the liberal's nightmare has been the death or retirement of one of the three aged Justices who have prevented total domination of the Supreme Court by a conservative majority.
Now the nightmare appears to have come true in the announced departure of the distinguished William J. Brennan Jr.


South Carolina National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* South Carolina National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
13,380,000
15,607,000
Per share
.63
.72
6mo net inc
b29,128,000
30,358,000
Per share
1.36
1.40
b-After a gain of $6,052,000, or 28 cents a share, from an adjustment in accounting.


Paccar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paccar Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
632,021,000
850,240,000
Net inc
18,805,000
47,477,000
Share earns
.54
1.36
6mo sales
1,290,730,000
1,684,791,000
Net inc
43,877,000
94,786,000
Share earns
1.26
2.69


Ecolab Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ecolab Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
373,017,000
359,810,000
Net inc
15,411,000
11,867,000
Share earns
.57
.43
Shares outst
23,534,000
27,437,000
6mo sales
641,896,000
595,174,000
Net inc
13,069,000
4,121,000
Share earns
.39
.15
Shares outst
23,598,000
27,408,000


Mets Lose, Seek Help for the Bullpen
LEAD: The crisis had worsened because the latest cost, a 3-2 defeat yesterday to the Atlanta Braves, had been obvious and not inexpensive.
And so the Mets acted instantly.


Sealed Air Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sealed Air Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
103,027,000
99,107,000
Net inc
3,060,000
b2,324,000
Share earns
.35
-
Shares outst
8,736,000
8,212,000
6mo sales
204,455,000
194,783,000
Net inc
5,875,000
4,886,000
Share earns
.67
.60
Shares outst
8,720,000
8,208,000


Criminal Type Out of Race
LEAD: Criminal Type was withdrawn yesterday from the Arlington Challenge Cup at Arlington Park on Aug. 4, reducing what had once looked like the race of the year into a one-horse showcase for Sunday Silence.


Gorman-Rupp Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gorman-Rupp Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
29,177,000
31,192,000
Net inc
2,164,000
2,343,000
Share earns
.57
.62
6mo sales
58,487,000
58,398,000
Net inc
4,262,000
4,260,000
Share earns
1.12
1.12


Coudoux Journal;   Where Summer's Flames Turn Serenity to Ashes
LEAD: Driven by strong winds, the fire took less than three hours to sweep across 8,500 acres of pine-covered hills and besiege this tiny village, forcing most of its 2,500 inhabitants to flee as firefighters struggled to save their homes.


Eastern Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eastern Enterprises (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
223,860,000
197,155,000
Net inc
b18,095,000
11,439,000
Share earns
.78
.50
Shares outst
23,311,000
23,276,000
6mo rev
526,544,000
454,418,000
Net inc
49,593,000
42,892,000
Share earns
2.13
1.85
Shares outst
23,314,000
23,246,000


Led by Court, Hospitals Take New Interest in Living Wills
LEAD: Less than three weeks after the United States Supreme Court ruled that states could compel hospitals to keep a comatose patient alive against a family's wishes, the ethics committee at Presbyterian University Hospital in Pittsburgh convened a meeting to consider the implications.


Indian Gaming Spreads, Upsetting Some States
LEAD: To the irritation of some state governments, a booming gambling industry operated by Indian tribes is beginning to spread off the reservations.


Chronicle
LEAD: The European premiere of ''The Frogs,'' written in 1974 by STEPHEN SONDHEIM and the late BERT SHEVELOVE, will get a splashy production tomorrow in a swimming pool in Brentford, in West London.
JOHN GARDYNE is directing the actors who can sing, dance and act without drowning.


And That's Why No One Can Get Anywhere in New York City
LEAD: To the Editor:





BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Congress is considering ways to assess foreign ownership and its impact on the economy, mirroring concern about the rise in foreign investment in the United States in the last decade. [D1.]
American companies are rushing to issue new shares with an eagerness not seen since before the October 1987 stock market crash.


Miss Shimer Weds K. Stephen Piper
LEAD: Jennifer Rosann Shimer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Zachary Shimer of Armonk, N.Y., was married yesterday in North Castle, N.Y., to K. Stephen Piper, a son of Pamela Piper and Douglas Piper, both of Silver Spring, Md.
The Rev.
Anne Tyndall, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Middle Patent United Methodist


Chronicle
LEAD: SCHUYLER G. CHAPIN, dean emeritus of Columbia University's School of the Arts, former general manager of the Metropolitan Opera Association, vice president and director of the Masterworks Division of Columbia Records and vice president of Lincoln Center, has a new job: vice president for concert and artists worldwide of Steinway &amp; Sons, the 137-year old piano company.


Dr. I. L. Bennett Jr., 68, Ex-Dean Of N.Y.U.'s School of Medicine
LEAD: Dr.
Ivan L. Bennett Jr., a former dean of the New York University School of Medicine and an adviser to President Lyndon B. Johnson, died on Saturday in Tokyo.
He was 68 years old and lived in Bronxville, N.Y.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a brief article on the Media Business page on Tuesday referred incorrectly to an advertising agency that has handled the alcoholic beverages of Heublein Inc.
Young &amp; Rubicam has handled some accounts, not all; McCann-Erickson Worldwide also handles several.
All but one of the Young &amp; Rubicam accounts were awarded last week to Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, and the other account went to Waring &amp; LaRosa.


A Growing Menu of Food Magazines
LEAD: With articles like ''How Safe is the Seafood We Eat?'' and ''Healthful New Approaches to Heirloom Cooking,'' a new magazine will go on sale this week, aimed at readers with a sophisticated taste in food and a serious interest in health.


Trinova Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trinova Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
500,793,000
495,955,000
Net inc
17,814,000
23,288,000
Share earns
.56
.67
6mo sales
986,399,000
980,207,000
Net inc
32,294,000
b41,689,000
Share earns
1.02
1.21


Outdoors: Summer Anglers Take Note
LEAD: SUMMER angling for such species as trout, salmon and smallmouth bass is hit-or-miss unless you are prepared to spend time locating your quarry.


Pirates Powered By 2 Light Hitters
LEAD: Gary Redus hit a grand slam, the light-hitting Rafael Belliard had a three-run double and Pittsburgh turned five walks into runs to rally for an 11-6 victory over the Los Angeles Dodgers today.


Multimedia Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multimedia Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
123,919,000
121,020,000
Net inc
b9,609,000
10,787,000
Share earns
.77
.87
Shares outst
12,379,000
12,425,000
6mo rev
233,745,000
227,317,000
Net inc
b15,658,000
15,427,000
Share earns
1.26
1.24
Shares outst
12,379,000
12,407,000


Hasbro Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hasbro Inc. (AMEX)
13wks to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
277,291,000
301,373,000
Net inc
8,725,000
18,155,000
Share earns
.15
.31
Shares outst
58,326,000
59,012,000
26wk rev
578,443,000
589,684,000
Net inc
28,156,000
36,882,000
Share earns
.48
.63
Shares outst
58,761,000
59,008,000


Evolution in Europe;   Solidarity Committees Repel Move on Walesa's Candidacy
LEAD: Solidarity's powerful Civic Committees fended off a wildcat attempt today to win their backing for Lech Walesa's campaign to become President.


Benefit for Dancers' Fund
LEAD: Seven composers and musicians will perform in a benefit for the Emergency Fund for Student Dancers tonight at 8 at the Martha Graham School of Contemporary Dance, 316 East 63d Street.
The fund provides emergency loans to dance students.
Tickets are $10.
Information: 838-5886.


Jockey Rides Wooden Winner
LEAD: IN Julie Krone's eight-month journey back to racing after breaking an arm in a spill at the Meadowlands last November, she has had surgery twice and has spent months riding pleasure horses, weeks lifting weights, and days breezing horses at the track.
But as Krone returns to riding at Monmouth tomorrow, her 27th birthday, a good deal of the credit for the jockey's comeback could go to a horse named


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article on Thursday about abortion laws in East and West Germany referred incorrectly to the West's law.
If two doctors certify that the pregnancy resulted from rape or causes great physical or emotional distress to the mother, abortion is permitted through the 12th week of pregnancy, not the 22d.


Evolution in Europe;   Statue of Soviet Soldier Is Removed From Polish City


Autoclave Engineers reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Autoclave Engineers (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
26,465,000
22,470,000
Net inc
2,397,000
b1,744,000
Share earns
.56
.41
Yr sales
84,858,000
76,353,000
Net inc
5,570,000
b5,826,000
Share earns
1.29
1.35
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $353,000, or 8 cents a share, for the quarter and $917,000, or 21 cents a share, for the year.


Santa Fe Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Pacific (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
660,700,000
722,200,000
Net loss
1,300,000
c2,700,000
Share earns
-
.02
6mo rev
1,404,800,000
1,412,300,000
Net loss
b62,700,000
c190,200,000
Share earns
-
1.19
Shares outst
158,400,000
159,000,000


Dole Wary That Abortion May Color Court Selection
LEAD: With President Bush set to make a decision on a Supreme Court nominee, possibly as early as this week, the Senate Republican leader warned today of ''a blood bath'' if abortion was used as a litmus test by the White House for the appointment.


Vons Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to June 17
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vons Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 17
1990
1989
Sales
1,221,800,000
1,196,800,000
Net inc
b15,900,000
c8,800,000
Share earns
.41
-
6mo sales
2,433,500,000
2,378,200,000
Net inc
b31,100,000
c22,200,000
Share earns
.80
-


BHC Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BHC Communications (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
75,020,000
65,555,000
Net inc
b35,716,000
c4,939,000
Share earns
1.22
-
6mo rev
134,677,000
119,248,000
Net inc
b418,978,000
c874,000
Share earns
14.29
-


British Censor Is Said to Ban A Movie That Mocks Rushdie
LEAD: British censors have banned a movie based on the controversy surrounding the author Salman Rushdie on the ground that it could be libelous, the film's distributor said today.


Washington Talk;   Bush Finds That Woes Of Son Visit the Father
LEAD: Jimmy Carter had Billy Carter.
Ronald Reagan's son danced in his underwear on live television.
Abraham Lincoln's wife was accused of being a Confederate spy.


Computer Finds Fish
LEAD: The fisherman who relies on a depth sounder to locate his catch may find the job easier with a new sonar device.


Question Box
LEAD:
Rose the All-Star
Q.
How successful was the National League team in All-Star Games in which Pete Rose played for it and how successful was Rose as an all-star?
A.
The team was wildly successful, but the player was mildly so.
During the 16 All-Star Games Rose appeared in between 1965 and 1985 as a member of the Cincinnati Reds or the Philadelphia Phillies, his side came away with the victory 15 times.


Macy Reported Asking Advice
LEAD: R. H. Macy &amp; Company has asked at least three investment banks to suggest ways for the department store chain to reduce its debt and raise money, Crain's New York Business reports in this week's issue.


Newell Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newell Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
262,029,000
275,739,000
Net inc
21,989,000
17,128,000
Share earns
.36
.28
6mo sales
519,915,000
547,604,000
Net inc
46,144,000
31,161,000
Share earns
.76
.51
Sales for the year-ago quarter and 6 months included about $16 million and $34 million from the sale of operations, respectively.


At Book Imprints, Personal Touch Thrives
LEAD: When Aaron Asher was given his own imprint at HarperCollins last week, just days after he resigned as publisher of Grove Weidenfeld, he joined a growing list of editors whose names appear on a book's spine.


Alexander &amp; Baldwin reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alexander &amp; Baldwin (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
170,743,000
152,390,000
Net inc
22,446,000
21,505,000
Share earns
.49
.50
6mo rev
374,159,000
489,213,000
Net inc
69,571,000
156,839,000
Share earns
1.51
3.37


The Face of the City;   The North River Plant Still Stinks
LEAD: Last winter, New York City officials said they just didn't know why the North River Sewage Plant in northern Manhattan emitted a foul odor on certain days.
Now it's mid-summer and nothing has changed.
There's a new Mayor, David Dinkins, and a new Environmental Protection Commissioner, Albert Appleton.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of July 22
MONDAY
Detroit Edison Co
Rohm &amp; Haas Co
Howell Corp
Stone Container Corp
Lubrizol Corp
Superior Inds Intl
Phila. Elec Co.
TUESDAY
Ahmanson H. F. &amp; Co
Kansas Gas &amp; Elec
Alltel Corp.
Merck &amp; Co
Amoco Corp
Newmont Mng Corp
Ball Corp
Noble Affiliates
Bausch &amp; Lomb
Norfolk Southn Corp
Black Hills Corp
Norwest Corp
Brush Wellman
PSI Res Inc
Cigna Corp
Reebok Intl Ltd
Cilcorp Inc
Reynolds &amp; Reynolds
Conn.


Cenvest Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cenvest Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
7,548,000
b865,000
Per share
-
.22
6mo net loss
6,957,000
b2,120,000
Per share
-
.54
b-Net income


American Management SysFtems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Management SysFtems (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
63,371,000
56,819,000
Net inc
2,160,000
370,000
Share earns
.18
.03
Shares outst
10,106,000
10,389,000
6mo rev
121,580,000
107,715,000
Net inc
3,386,000
b506,000
Share earns
.26
-
Shares outst
10,152,000
10,434,000


CalFed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CalFed Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
53,000,000
b19,100,000
Per share
-
.76
6mo net loss
34,100,000
b36,600,000
Per share
-
1.46
b-Net income


East German Consultants Forging Links With West
LEAD: The words management, marketing and consultant were not in the East German dictionary during four decades of Communism.
Now, from lexicographic oblivion, Heino Ackert and Michael Jarowinsky have emerged as two of East Germany's first private management and marketing consultants.


La Petite Academy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* La Petite Academy Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
51,036,000
43,351,000
Net inc
2,512,000
2,070,000
Share earns
.16
.13
6mo rev
100,935,000
85,342,000
Net inc
5,181,000
4,106,000
Share earns
.33
.26


Chronicle
LEAD: A stop in the name of truck tonnage is on the lips of DIANA ROSS, who is upset over Connecticut's plans to put a weigh station on Interstate 95 near her Greenwich home.


To the Rescue
LEAD: IN the mid-1980's, the National Park Service began searching for ways to attract more women to the traditionally male-dominated field of surf-lifeguarding.
A result was the All-Woman Lifeguard Tournament, an annual event at Jacob Riis Park in the Rockaways.
This year's tournament will take place Wednesday at 8:45 A


Topics of The Times;   Dial F for Friend
LEAD: A colleague who knows about computers has a hard time getting off the phone.
Now that one friend after another has bought a home computer, they call her.
Urgently.
They may be accomplished professionals but when confronted by their first DOS (disk operating system) prompt and a 10-pound instruction book in techno-jargon, they panic.


Tartikoff Show Goes On, But Its Script Is Changing
LEAD: JUST before Brandon Tartikoff faced the press for the last time as NBC's chief programming executive, he strapped on a mobile microphone and headset, a la Madonna, and sang a two-minute rap number with the network's newest star, Will Smith - also known as the Fresh Prince.


Orioles Complete Sweep of Chicago
LEAD: Baltimore completed a four-game sweep of the Chicago White Sox today as Randy Milligan went 4 for 4 with a home run in a 9-3 victory.


The Wait On Death Row;   Legal Delays Thwart Death Penalty
LEAD: Sixteen years afterward, the year 1974 flickers like a dim dot in a vast night sky.
At this time in 1974, President Richard M. Nixon had yet to resign. ''Jaws'' was a runaway best seller for beach reading.
Streaking was a fad. ''The Sting'' had won the Oscar for Best Picture.


As More People Take to Personal Watercraft, Dangers Increase
LEAD: To the Editor:


John C. Lackas, 85, Colonel and Professor
LEAD: John C. Lackas, a retired Army colonel and a professor emeritus of business at Queensborough Community College, died on Friday at the Monroe Health Care Center, in Monroe, N.J., where he lived.
A family spokesman said he died of natural causes.
He was 85 years old.


3 Young Children Killed in Blaze At Apartment Building in Harlem
LEAD: Three children were killed early yesterday and 21 firefighters and police officers were hurt after one of the children, playing with matches in bed, set a Harlem apartment building afire, fire officials said.


Lynn Moskowitz Is Married on L.I.
LEAD: Lynn Frances Moskowitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Moskowitz of New Hyde Park, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Scott Neil Schafrank, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael Schafrank of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Myron M. Fenster performed the ceremony at the Harrison House in Glen Cove, L.I.


Fat Farmers at the Public Trough
LEAD: Federal farm subsidies cost the taxpayer $20 billion a year and the consumer an additional $10 billion.


Durr-Fillauer Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Durr-Fillauer Medical Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
204,959,000
173,345,000
Net inc
4,131,000
3,448,000
Share earns
.40
.35
6mo rev
405,766,000
345,221,000
Net inc
7,699,000
6,234,000
Share earns
.75
.71


Gay Rights Protesters Demonstrate Against State Senate Majority Leader


Photos of Nude Children Spark Obscenity Debate
LEAD: In a city known for being broad-minded about nearly every form of expression, the taking and exhibiting of photographs of nude children is seen as neither startling nor necessarily a cause for alarm.


Foothill Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foothill Group (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,999,000
26,980,000
Net loss
b3,972,000
c3,243,000
Share earns
-
.32
6mo rev
36,574,000
51,299,000
Net loss
b1,871,000
c6,651,000
Share earns
-
.66
b-Included valuation adjustments of about $9 million on its high-yield investment portfolio.


Evolution in Europe;   C.I.A. Accused of Overestimating Soviet Economy
LEAD: The Central Intelligence Agency, which has prided itself on its knowledge of the inner workings of the Soviet Union, has come under criticism from some lawmakers and economists who say it greatly overestimated the strength of the Soviet economy.


Harry Bennett, Chenist, 95
LEAD: Harry Bennett, a consulting chemist and the author or chief editor of more than 50 reference books, including the 28-volume ''Chemical Formulary,'' the ''Chemical and Technical Dictionary'' and the Encyclopedia of Chemical Trademarks and Synonyms,'' died on Friday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Miami Beach, where he lived.


Computers Change the Face of Type
LEAD: The words you are reading are printed in a sober typeface called Imperial, a style created in 1957 and used in The New York Times since July 3, 1967.
On the front page of this paper are far older type styles, like those of the headlines over some single-column stories, which are printed in Latin extra condensed, a late 19th century design used in The


Grace Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grace Energy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
112,826,000
88,531,000
Net inc
2,128,000
6,508,000
Share earns
.09
.26
6mo rev
226,804,000
183,664,000
Net inc
8,045,000
12,640,000
Share earns
.33
.49
Year-ago share earnings are presented on a pro forma basis, adjusted to reflect interest and estimated administrative expenses in operating results as if the company's initial public offering in the 1989 third quarter had been completed on Jan.


Rise in Long-Term Rates Forecast
LEAD: The bond market is likely to have a difficult time adjusting to the Federal Reserve's new, seemingly more benign attitude about inflation, credit market analysts say.


Owen D. Cox, Federal Judge, 80
LEAD: Owen D. Cox, a retired Federal district judge who in the 1970's ordered the busing of thousands of Corpus Christi students in the interest of desegregation, died Saturday at a nursing home here.
He was 80 years old.


Evolution in Europe;   Moscow Fears That Lack of Food May Provoke Crisis
LEAD: The Soviet Government has warned the nation that social tensions will probably increase because of worsening food problems and a limited supply of hard currency to purchase grain overseas.


Matlack Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Matlack Systems Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
56,655,000
57,139,000
Net inc
505,000
130,000
Share earns
.09
.03
9mo rev
164,449,000
167,472,000
Net loss
597,000
b47,000
Share earns
-
.01
Shares outst
5,647,000
5,324,000


Calming the Waters in a Bronx Lagoon, to Skiers' Dismay
LEAD: In the decades-old battle of Pelham Bay Lagoon, the scullers seem to have vanquished the water-skiers.
But Daniel Natchez, who has skied the narrow north Bronx waterway for 25 years, and his comrades are not about to give up easily.


Independence Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independence Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,206,000
1,422,000
Per share
.56
.13
6mo net inc
12,357,000
6,833,000
Per share
1.12
.64
Year-ago periods' net income included an extraordinary gain of $340,000.


Greater New York Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greater New York Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,153,000
c6,172,000
Per share
.13
.44
6mo net inc
b6,280,000
c12,024,000
Per share
.40
.83
b-After an extraordinary gain of $1,156,000, or 8 cents a share.


Books of The Times;   A Hollywood Caper That Cuts to the Chase
LEAD:
Get Shorty
By Elmore Leonard
292 pages. Delacorte. $18.95.


Paribas Expected to Seek Bigger U.S. Financial Role
LEAD: Eight months after botching the biggest takeover ever proposed in France, Compagnie Financiere de Paribas, guided by a new management team, is fashioning a strategy to help restore an image that was badly bruised by the failed 26.2 billion franc ($4.7 billion) bid for Navigation Mixte, the French conglomerate.


Boulevard Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boulevard Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
3,828,000
b2,767,000
Per share
-
.37
Shares outst
6,662,000
8,096,000
6mo net loss
1,830,000
b6,283,000
Per share
-
.84
Shares outst
7,351,000
8,089,000
b


Earned Or Not, Yankees Win, 10-6
LEAD: It just seemed fitting that at the end of an afternoon in which the Yankees botched a rundown play, missed a suicide squeeze and lost a lead in the late innings - all, of course, on a day that Andy Hawkins was their starting pitcher - Hawkins should place this game into perspective.


INSIDE
LEAD:
High Court, High Drama
As President Bush studied Supreme Court candidates, he was warned that his decision could divide the nation on the issue of abortion.
Page A8.
Peres Defeats Challenge
Shimon Peres unexpectedly defeated an effort by Yitzhak Rabin to replace him as leader of Israel's opposition Labor Party.


Delay on Steinbrenner
LEAD: Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball, said today that he probably would not decide the fate of George Steinbrenner until next week.


Women Are Giving Triathlons a Run
LEAD: THOSE athletes competing in the Danskin sprint-distance triathlon in White Plains on Sunday are testimony to the growing popularity of the sport among women.
The second (and only East Coast) race of the Danskin Women's Triathlon Series is an 800-meter swim across Lake Isle, followed by a 20-kilometer bike race down the Bronx River Parkway, followed by a 5-kilometer run on the parkway to the Kensico Dam.


Rock Mimics Life, and a Wall Falls
LEAD: More than 150,000 rock music fans converged here on Saturday night for what was billed as the most elaborate musical extravaganza ever staged.


Barnes Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Barnes Group (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
141,092,000
134,109,000
Net inc
b4,698,000
c6,088,000
Share earns
.77
1.01
Shares outst
6,074,420
5,466,518
6mo sales
282,328,000
262,855,000
Net inc
b8,370,000
c9,564,000
Share earns
1.38
1.54
Shares outst
6,070,883
5,494,409


Manuel Puig, Realist Author, 57; Wrote 'Kiss of the Spider Woman'
LEAD: Manuel Puig, the Argentine novelist whose work ''The Kiss of the Spider Woman'' was made into an award-winning film, died yesterday in Cuernavaca, Mexico.
He was 57 years old.


What They Say on 'The Strip'
LEAD: ''BACK-TO-BACK,'' cried Larry Johnson, the star center of the University of Nevada-Las Vegas, as he threw a large, moist arm around the thin, moist neck of his teammate, the standout forward Stacey Augmon, in the team's rapturous locker room on the night of April 2.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''All my friends, we don't do crack because we look at the older guys on the block.


Oakland Closer on Raiders
LEAD: The possibility that the National Football League's Raiders might move back to Oakland from Los Angeles is inching closer to resolution.


Evolution in Europe;   Zhivkov Relative Fears For Ousted Bulgarian
LEAD: The granddaughter of Todor Zhivkov, the ousted Communist leader, has expressed fear for his safety, saying the country's new leaders are afraid that his testimony may expose their misdeeds.


As Court Fight Drags On, Bhopal Aid Is Uneven


Washington Water Power reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Water Power (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
127,673,000
110,181,000
Net inc
b21,099,000
c16,732,000
Share earns
.84
.62
6mo rev
543,824,000
500,482,000
Net inc
b76,459,000
c72,962,000
Share earns
2.93
2.71


Outboard Marine Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Outboard Marine Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
310,700,000
411,300,000
Net loss
b15,000,000
c6,800,000
Share earns
-
.35
9mo sales
852,600,000
1,078,300,000
Net loss
b34,100,000
c19,700,000
Share earns
-
1.02


Iran's Ailing Economy Is Reeling From Quake
LEAD: Just when Iran's sickly economy seemed incapable of sustaining another blow, it was dealt a tremendous one by the earthquake in June.


Infotron Systems reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Infotron Systems (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
23,158,000
23,896,000
Net inc
88,000
1,049,000
Share earns
.02
.20
Shares outst
5,174,000
5,223,000
6mo rev
42,528,000
46,585,000
Net loss
7,163,000
b2,080,000
Share earns
-
.40
Shares outst
5,159,000
5,224,000


Health Care Property InvestFors Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Health Care Property InvestFors Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,089,000
3,612,000
Share earns
.53
.40
Shares outst
11,480,000
9,060,000
6mo net inc
11,321,000
6,983,000
Share earns
1.03
.81
Shares outst
11,003,000
8,619,000


Medusa Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medusa Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
54,954,000
51,807,000
Net inc
5,455,000
4,253,000
Share earns
.51
.40
Shares outst
10,671,000
10,613,000
6mo sales
82,655,000
76,200,000
Net inc
4,235,000
1,837,000
Share earns
.40
.17
Shares outst
10,658,000
10,571,000


Evolution in Europe;   Most East German Troops Facing Unemployment After Unification
LEAD: Although the East and West German armed forces will be merged into an all-German force of 370,000 after unification, West German and NATO military officials say most East German officers and career enlisted personnel should start looking for other jobs in civilian life now.


Crossland Savings FSB reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crossland Savings FSB (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
39,972,000
b3,798,000
6mo net loss
176,425,000
b15,584,000
b-Net income
There were no per share earnings for year-ago periods after preferred dividends.


Thousands of Romanians Rally for the Release of Student Leader


Jets and Moore Reach Agreement
LEAD: The Jets signed one of their No. 1 picks today when Rob Moore, the wide receiver from Syracuse taken in the supplemental draft earlier this month, agreed to terms on the eve of the opening day of training camp.


Warren Mitofsky Weds Ronda Shaw
LEAD: Dr.
Ronda Shaw, a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, and Warren Jay Mitofsky, the executive director of Voter Research and Surveys in New York, were married yesterday at the Water Club in New York by Rabbi Harold I. Saperstein.


Leslie Fay Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Leslie Fay Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
166,302,000
154,965,000
Net inc
1,089,000
309,000
Share earns
.06
.02
Shares outst
19,092,000
19,086,000
6mo sales
389,180,000
358,349,000
Net inc
10,749,000
9,879,000
Share earns
.56
.52
Shares outst
19,091,000
19,085,000


American Filtrona Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Filtrona Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
36,637,000
38,786,000
Net inc
1,787,000
1,969,000
Share earns
.48
.53
Shares outst
3,716,000
3,696,000
6mo rev
73,852,000
76,055,000
Net inc
3,640,000
4,054,000
Share earns
.98
1.10
Shares outst
3,714,000
3,689,000


Bard (C.R.) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bard (C.R.) Inc.(N)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
194,100,000
201,000,000
Net inc
10,100,000
21,800,000
Share earns
.19
.39
6mo sales
389,300,000
398,200,000
Net inc
19,300,000
43,100,000
Share earns
.36
.77
Shares outst
54,231,000
56,258,000


Southern New England TeleFcommunications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern New England TeleFcommunications (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
403,800,000
416,900,000
Net inc
36,700,000
b63,900,000
Share earns
.61
1.02
6mo rev
805,300,000
824,000,000
Net inc
75,700,000
b105,200,000
Share earns
1.23
1.68


UST Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UST Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
191,056,000
173,143,000
Net inc
56,863,000
49,967,000
Share earns
.50
.43
Shares outst
114,098,000
116,847,000
6mo sales
366,306,000
330,712,000
Net inc
109,508,000
93,982,000
Share earns
.96
.81
Shares outst
114,471,000
116,657,000


Lyondell Petrochemical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lyondell Petrochemical (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,403,000,000
1,486,000,000
Net inc
155,000,000
103,000,000
Share earns
1.93
1.29
6mo sales
2,891,000,000
2,754,000,000
Net inc
233,000,000
237,000,000
Share earns
2.91
2.96


Burrell Edges Lewis in Goodwill 100 Meters
LEAD: The world's fastest human of last year and this year proved again tonight that it's not Carl Lewis.


Giving Sanctuary, Fairly
LEAD: No sooner do refugees from persecution abroad arrive in the United States than, often, they face a maze of inconsistency as they seek asylum.
Welcome new rules just issued by the Bush Administration at last promise to make the process more objective and fair.


Quality Goods Beat Japan-Bashing Ads
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nasim Ahmed; Pakistani Diplomat, 63
LEAD: Nasim Ahmed, a Pakistani journalist and diplomat who served as his country's chief delegate to the United Nations for the last 13 months, died yesterday in Tokyo.
He was 63 years old and lived in London.


What's Wrong With Legalizing Drugs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Imperial Oil Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Oil Ltd. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,694,000,000
2,684,000,000
Net inc
238,000,000
144,000,000
Share earns
1.25
.84
6mo rev
5,320,000,000
4,662,000,000
Net inc
388,000,000
257,000,000
Share earns
2.04
1.52


Benefit Plan for N.B.A.
LEAD: An agreement on a benefit plan that would provide retired National Basketball Association players with pre-pension financial and medical security was announced yesterday by the league and the National Basketball Players Association.
David Stern, the league's commissioner, said the program would be submitted for approval to the Federal District Court in New Jersey that oversees an antitrust agreement between the players and the league.


Campeau Granted Assets Extension
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation said in Toronto that the Edward J. DeBartolo Company, a major American shopping-mall developer, has extended until Aug. 6 a stand-still agreement under which DeBartolo will not seize any Campeau assets without first providing nine days' notice.
Campeau, a Canadian developer, owns the Federated Department Stores and Allied Stores Corporation, two American retail chains.


Chess
LEAD: Tournament competitors may be divided into two types: the front runners, who must have everything go right from the beginning if they are to triumph, and the resilient ones, who win despite an early setback.
The 21-year-old Soviet grandmaster Vassily Ivanchuk belongs to the second group.


High Plains Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* High Plains Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,108,584
4,711,729
Net inc
585,658
b216,993
Share earns
.23
-
Yr rev
20,070,027
19,019,683
Net inc
1,262,398
b1,066,926
Share earns
.49
-
b-Net loss


Florida Prepares For Its Defense
LEAD: The University of Florida has acknowledged six major rules violations during a National Collegiate Athletic Association investigation but has disputed an allegation that the infractions demonstrated a lack of institutional control of the school's football and basketball programs.


James Randall Creel; Judge, 85
LEAD: James Randall Creel, a retired judge of the New York City Criminal Court, died on Sunday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
He was 85 years old and lived in Mill Neck, L.I.


RAC Mortgage Investment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RAC Mortgage Investment Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
35,866,000
25,074,000
Net inc
3,090,000
253,000
Share earns
.22
.02
6mo rev
73,311,000
49,603,000
Net inc
5,923,000
b3,387,000
Share earns
.41
-


Dollar Falls Against Mark, Declining to a 2 1/2-Year Low
LEAD: The dollar fell sharply against most European currencies yesterday, hitting a two-and-a-half-year low against the West German mark.


Review/Pop;   Musical Technology for Maximum Shock
LEAD: The Wax Trax record label show at the Ritz last Tuesday night ground to a close with the appearance of M.C. 900-Foot Jesus and the final act, Thrill Kill Kult.
Wax Trax, a Chicago-based label that often records groups loosely fitting under the title of industrial dance music, promotes music that has an ambivalance about modernity.


LSB Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSB Bancshares Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,023,000
966,000
Per share
.38
.36
6mo net inc
2,053,000
1,902,000
Per share
.76
.70
Shares outst
2,699,800
2,160,236
Latest quarter and 6 months per share earnings are restated to reflect a 1-for-4 stock split paid April 16.


Queens Man Held in '89 Bombing
LEAD: Newspaper clippings that a 22-year-old Queens man collected led to his arrest yesterday on charges of setting off a pipe bomb at Queensboro Community College in 1989, a police commander said.


Greyhound Dial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Greyhound Dial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
912,318,000
925,460,000
Net loss
b60,840,000
c35,648,000
Share earns
-
.92
6mo rev
1,777,822,000
1,767,249,000
Net loss
b43,950,000
c50,484,000
Share earns
-
1.30
Shares outst
39,809,000
38,440,000


Cosmetic &amp; Fragrance ConFcepts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cosmetic &amp; Fragrance ConFcepts Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
18,056,000
16,155,000
Net inc
302,000
155,000
Share earns
.10
.05
9mo sales
58,262,000
48,734,000
Net inc
1,328,000
512,000
Share earns
.43
.17


Oregon Metallurgical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oregon Metallurgical (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
23,503,000
30,708,000
Net inc
2,258,000
5,045,000
Share earns
.22
.54
Shares outst
10,460,000
9,318,000
6mo sales
49,325,000
56,909,000
Net inc
4,907,000
b19,989,000
Share earns
.47
2.15
Shares outst
10,460,000
9,318,000


Steel Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Steel Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
38,171,000
29,086,000
Net inc
2,005,000
1,468,000
Share earns
.25
.18
9mo sales
102,456,000
93,736,000
Net inc
b4,878,000
5,111,000
Share earns
.61
.64
b-Included an accounting adjustment gain of $250,000, or 3 cents a share.


Allies in Southeast Asia Criticize Washington's Shift on Cambodia
LEAD: America's allies in Southeast Asia criticized Washington today for its shift in Cambodia policy, saying that without further progress toward peace they would work to keep Cambodia's seat at the United Nations in the possession of the current owners, the Khmer Rouge and their two guerrilla coalition partners.


Undersea Uranium
LEAD: Uranium buried in ocean sediments through natural processes moves downward through the sediments rather than upward toward the water, and then is immobilized when a new layer of sediments is deposited, scientists have found.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amtech Systems Inc., Tempe, Ariz., a maker of semiconductor equipment, said negotiations for the planned acquisition of Tystar Corp., , had ended because of the weak condition of the semiconductor equipment market.


Cummins Engine reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cummins Engine (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
871,300,000
930,900,000
Net inc
6,100,000
23,900,000
Share earns
.15
2.03
6mo sales
1,732,700,000
1,851,700,000
Net inc
15,000,000
43,400,000
Share earns
.56
3.65


People
LEAD: *
Michael M. Colt has been named senior vice president and group creative director at the Leo Burnett Co.


Ukraine's Glittering Hopes
LEAD: The Bank of England has begun searching its dusty archives to see if it can account for a barrel of gold supposedly deposited by a military leader from the Ukraine 270 years ago.
Members of the the Soviet republic's new Parliament would like the gold returned.


'Circuit Breakers' Help Index Futures Recover
LEAD: Activation of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange's ''circuit breakers'' here this morning helped prices of Standard &amp; Poor's 500 stock-index futures rebound after plunging shortly after the opening of trading.


Women Readers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Firstier Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstier Financial (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,340,000
6,092,000
Per share
1.09
1.05
6mo net inc
12,793,000
12,972,000
Per share
2.20
2.24


Trans Financial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trans Financial Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
730,000
701,000
Per share
.58
.56
6mo net inc
1,401,000
1,337,000
Per share
1.12
1.07


Edwin E. Hokin, 74, A Manufacturer, Dies
LEAD: Edwin E. Hokin, retired chairman and chief executive officer of UNR Industries, died Thursday at his home in Chicago at the age of 74.


Truck Kills 3 Workers on I-95
LEAD: Three highway workers were killed this morning when a flatbed truck rammed into two parked construction vehicles and a group of workers on the shoulder of southbound Interstate 95.
The truck crossed into the right lane of the three-lane highway just after it had been closed so workers from AMI Industries of Meriden could repair guard rails, a state police spokesman said.


Tyler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyler Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
58,874,000
51,749,000
Net inc
b1,858,000
c2,908,000
Share earns
.09
.13
Shares outst
21,134,000
21,543,000
6mo sales
110,177,000
93,066,000
Net inc
b2,123,000
c905,000
Share earns
.10
.04
Shares outst
21,024,000
21,523,000


Rockport Journal;   A Small-Town Library Vs. a Big-City Museum
LEAD: For years, residents of this seaside artist colony have barely had space to look for books in their tiny turn-of-the-century library.
So when Franz Denghausen, a millionaire sculptor and poet, offered to leave $1 million to his town for a new public library, Rockport officials eagerly accepted.


Mighty Fire Ants March Out of the South
LEAD: IN the annals of entomological villainy, few insects are as despised, as feared and as meticulously investigated as the tiny imported fire ant, which attacks humans, animals, plants, other insects and even electrical devices.


A Revolution as the Bolshoi Meets Capitalism
LEAD: ''I'm the bandit who sold out the Bolshoi Theater,'' Vladimir Kokonin, the 52-year-old general director of Moscow's grand opera house, said in New York the other day.
Just joking, of course, he added.


Health Chief Denounces Agency Over Mishandling of Pap Tests
LEAD: The New York City Health Commissioner denounced his department yesterday for ''outrageous insensitivity'' and ''betrayal of the public trust'' for allowing thousands of cancer tests on poor women to languish unread for up to a year in a city laboratory.


Power, at a Price
LEAD: THE Compaq Computer Corporation of Houston, considered the technological leader in the personal computer business, has introduced two new computers that once again extend the definition of desktop power.
Naturally, they also extend the price range as well.


Am Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Am Communications
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
828,000
352,000
Net loss
b84,000
b464,000
b-After income of $15,000 for the latest quarter and a loss of $104,000 for the year-earlier period, both from discontinued operations.


Crown American Founder Moves Son to Key Post
LEAD: Frank J. Pasquerilla, who built a small masonry contracting business into a large real estate company, the Crown American Corporation, is relinquishing more responsibility to his 31-year-old son, Mark E. Pasquerilla.


Ford Picks Loral-Hutton To Buy Unit
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company said today that a joint venture of the Loral Corporation and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. had been selected to acquire Ford's aerospace subsidiary, an important maker of satellites and missiles.


Britain Ponders Powergen Sale
LEAD: The British Government said today that it might sell the state-owned electricity generator Powergen to Hanson P.L.C., the British conglomerate, rather than to the public.


American Capital ManageFment &amp; Research Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Capital ManageFment &amp; Research Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
24,490,000
25,730,000
Net inc
5,020,000
4,990,000
Share earns
.21
.21
6mo rev
48,940,000
51,250,000
Net inc
10,090,000
10,150,000
Share earns
.41
.42


Walbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Walbro Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
39,761,000
32,147,000
Net inc
641,000
822,000
Share earns
.15
.20
6mo sales
76,838,000
70,153,000
Net inc
1,824,000
b2,471,000
Share earns
.43
.61
b-Included an accounting adjustment gain of $336,000, or 8 cents a share.


Corrections
LEAD: The Metropolitan Almanac section of the Weather Report last Tuesday misstated the year of the record high temperature for July 16.
It was 1980, not 1989.


Chronicle
LEAD: ALLISON ATLAS'sS search for a perfectly matched bone marrow donor has inspired 50,000 people in the United States and Israel to roll up their sleeves for blood tests.
Although 10 patients have found donors because of the Atlas family's search, no such match has been found for the 20-year-old woman leukemia sufferer from Bethesda, Md., who has leukemia.


Viola Crumbles As Mets Lose
LEAD: Monolithic teams like the Mets aren't supposed to lose this way, but tonight they did.
And league-leading pitchers like Frank Viola aren't supposed to lose this way, but tonight he did.


Chandler Files Lawsuit
LEAD: Chris Chandler, who was the starting quarterback for the Indianapolis Colts last season before being injured, filed a lawsuit yesterday in Indianapolis seeking a $50,000 workout bonus the player says the club owes him.


U.S. Complains About Barricade Around Its Main Office in Havana
LEAD: The State Department said today that it was displeased with a barricade erected by the Cuban police in Havana around three sides of the United States interests section in Havana.


Preaching to Brazil From Hawaii
LEAD: Americans lecture Brazil on the shameless destruction of its tropical forests.
They would sound less sanctimonious if the United States took better care of its own tropical forests, in Hawaii and Puerto Rico.


Abitibi-Price reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Abitibi-Price (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
803,100,000
830,300,000
Net loss
b3,700,000
c28,800,000
Share earns
-
.39
6mo sales
1,587,900,000
1,640,400,000
Net loss
b15,000,000
c55,100,000
Share earns
-
.74


John R. Bond; Magazine Publisher, 77
LEAD: John R. Bond, publisher of Road &amp; Track magazine from 1949 to 1972, died Friday at his home here.
He was 77 years old.
He died of emphysema, family members said.
Mr.
Bond bought Road &amp; Track, an automobile magazine, with his second wife, Elaine, said his son, John Jr.
As publisher, Mr.
Bond instituted staples of automotive journalism like the technical road test.


BancTexas Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BancTexas Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
1,928,000
8,814,000
6mo net loss
4,091,000
15,775,000
The 1989 results included BancTexas Dallas, which was then a subsidiary of BancTexas Group.


Judean Cave City Yields Trove of Ancient Secrets
LEAD: THOUSANDS of people moved to this boulder-strewn meadow between the eighth and first centuries B.C. partly because of its proximity to trade routes.
But the Biblical town of Maresha had another attraction, too: as much as anything else, it flourished because of its caves, hundreds of elaborate caverns forming an underground city that generations of dwellers carved out of the soft limestone just a foot or two beneath the surface.


Superior Surgical Mfg.  Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Superior Surgical Mfg.  Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
33,905,540
30,962,281
Net inc
2,739,253
2,094,295
Share earns
1.26
.92
Shares outst
2,172,260
2,272,251
6mo sales
62,602,998
58,525,111
Net inc
4,384,017
3,456,704
Share earns
2.01
1.52
Shares outst
2,185,209
2,270,732


Strife Holds Fast in Kashmir As 24 Are Killed in 24 Hours
LEAD: Secessionist violence in Kashmir killed at least 24 people in a 24-hour period, the police said today.


Arrow Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arrow Financial Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,410,000
2,384,000
Per share
.52
.52
6mo net inc
4,828,000
4,654,000
Per share
1.05
1.02


Joe Turner; Jazz Pianist, 82
LEAD: The jazz pianist Joe Turner, who played with such greats as Louis Armstrong and Benny Carter, died of a heart attack on Saturday in Paris, the city where he lived for nearly 30 years.
He was 82 years old.


Soviet Is Said to Defect
LEAD: Sergei Fedorov, a center for the Soviet national hockey squad that is participating in the Goodwill Games, has reportedly left the team to join the Red Wings of the National Hockey League.


Chevron Divisions' Revamping Is Set
LEAD: Chevron Corporation said it would restructure its non-coal minerals business to focus on three major projects with strong long-term cash-flow and earnings potential.
The related sale of assets that do not fit into the restructuring plan is expected to generate $70 million in proceeds before taxes.


NFS Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NFS Financial Corp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
1,029,000
b206,000
Per share
-
.07
6mo net loss
976,000
b954,000
Per share
-
.33
b-Net income


The Bar Exam vs. the Law
LEAD: In ''Rain Man,'' the autistic savant, Raymond Babbitt, played by Dustin Hoffman, could at a glance precisely count the number of toothpicks that had fallen from a box.
It is a skill that would serve him well if he were taking the New York State bar examination today and the multistate bar exam tomorrow.


Harvey B. Taterka; Ophthalmologist, 59
LEAD: Dr.
Harvey B. Taterka, an ophthalmologist and professor of clinical ophthalmology at New York University Medical Center, died on Sunday at the medical center.
He was 59 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Paper in Dublin Will Automate
LEAD: Ingersoll Publications Ltd. announced yesterday that it had reached agreement with unions at The Irish Press in Dublin that will allow the paper to install computerized typesetting equipment by the end of the year and to take other cost-saving measures.


Empi Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Empi Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,993,338
3,126,133
Net inc
207,687
128,448
Share earns
.11
.07
6mo sales
7,625,220
5,982,546
Net inc
416,060
220,845
Share earns
.22
.12


No-Shows: Taylor Leads Giants' List
LEAD: The Giants opened training camp today with 74 players on hand and 13 absent.
The absentees included such key veterans as Lawrence Taylor, Bart Oates, Maurice Carthon, Mark Collins and the entire starting defensive line: Leonard Marshall, Erik Howard and Eric Dorsey.


General Signal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Signal Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
481,657,000
488,538,000
Net loss
b21,890,000
c18,668,000
Share earns
-
.98
Shares outst
19,175,000
19,027,000
6mo rev
952,051,000
966,949,000
Net loss
b1,640,000
c38,482,000
Share earns
-
2.02
Shares outst
19,137,000
19,037,000


Atlantic Richfield Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic Richfield Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
4,035,000,000
4,334,000,000
Net inc
391,000,000
467,000,000
Share earns
2.36
2.66
Shares outst
165,800,000
175,800,000
6mo rev
8,250,000,000
8,296,000,000
Net inc
983,000,000
1,171,000,000
Share earns
5.91
6.66
Shares outst
166,300,000
175,900,000


Ropak Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ropak Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
28,257,000
27,463,000
Net inc
1,096,000
644,000
Share earns
.32
.18
6mo sales
49,139,000
48,446,000
Net inc
1,262,000
875,000
Share earns
.37
.25
Share earnings reflect a 10-percent stock dividend paid on June 30.


Iran's Leaders Achieve a Subtle Balance of Power
LEAD: The relationship between the two men who run Iran is sometimes likened to that of two talented but competitive dancing partners.


New NCNB Notes Will Yield 10.2%
LEAD: The NCNB Corporation offered $200 million of subordinated debentures yesterday through an underwriting syndicate led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


Golden Nugget Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Golden Nugget Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
207,584,000
65,283,000
Net inc
15,957,000
b8,378,000
Share earns
.82
-
Shares outst
19,389,170
16,305,084
6mo rev
415,678,000
115,140,000
Net inc
33,271,000
1,726,000
Share earns
1.74
.09
Shares outst
19,124,238
18,678,782


Ashland Oil Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ashland Oil Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,239,896,000
2,219,822,000
Net inc
100,004,000
43,510,000
Share earns
1.79
.78
Shares outst
55,764,000
55,568,000
9mo sales
6,522,362,000
6,272,516,000
Net inc
122,929,000
125,613,000
Share earns
2.21
2.26
Shares outst
55,625,000
55,497,000


Thousands Flee South Lebanon as Battles Spread
LEAD: Artillery and rocket exchanges between warring Shiite Muslim militia forces covered a wide area in a disputed region of southern Lebanon today, and thousands of civilians fled their homes fearing an expansion of the conflict.


An 'Intellectual Mind': David Hackett Souter
LEAD: In the 22 years since he left private law practice to work as a government lawyer, David H. Souter, President Bush's Supreme Court nominee, has not given a speech, written a law review article or, as far as anyone knows, taken a position on the correctness of the Supreme Court's precedents on abortion or any other issue.


Treasuries Decline in Hectic Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved lower yesterday, gyrating wildly most of the day, as credit market participants reacted to the huge swings in the stock market.


Larry Johnson to Stay
LEAD: Larry Johnson, the power forward who helped Nevada-Las Vegas win the national collegiate championship last spring, said yesterday that he would return to play his senior season with the Runnin' Rebels, even though the National Collegiate Athletic Association has barred the team from defending its title.


Peoples Savings (Brockton) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Peoples Savings (Brockton)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
194,000
b570,000
Per share
-
.25
6mo net loss
3,573,000
b496,000
Per share
-
.22
b-Net income


Resorts Debt Plan Gains Approval
LEAD: Resorts International Inc. said its bondholders had approved a reorganization plan intended to take Merv Griffin's casino company out of bankruptcy.


Amwest Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amwest Insurance Group (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
944,000
586,000
Share earns
.40
.23
Shares outst
2,366,000
2,511,000
6mo net inc
1,657,000
1,581,000
Share earns
.70
.63
Shares outst
2,382,000
2,514,000


Edgard Feder; Music Critic, 81
LEAD: Edgard Feder, a music critic, cellist and conductor, died at his home in Manhattan on Sunday.
He was 81 years old.


New Manager of Big Polish Steel Mill Puts His Private Experience to Work
LEAD: The only managerial experience that Zygmunt Borek had to recommend him for a 28,000-employee steel plant was that he once ran a company with 62 employees.


Heart Cancer
LEAD:
Q.Does cancer ever develop in the heart?
A.There is such a thing as cancer of the heart, but it is extremely rare, according to the cancer statistics branch of the National Cancer Institute, part of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.


Tyson Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tyson Foods Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
978,672,000
606,100,000
Net inc
33,453,000
27,474,000
Share earns
.51
.43
Shares outst
65,700,677
63,925,109
6mo sales
2,811,376,000
1,643,368,000
Net inc
82,769,000
69,009,000
Share earns
1.26
1.08
Shares outst
65,684,801
63,901,746


Alimentation Couche-Tard reports earnings for Year to April 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alimentation Couche-Tard
Year to April 29
1990
1989
Revenue
67,200,000
50,300,000
Net inc
b1,300,000
b1,120,000
Share earns
.21
.18
b-After extraordinary charges of $150,000 for the latest year and $270,000 for the year-earlier period.


Comdial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Comdial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
21,842,000
20,953,000
Net inc
261,000
b783,000
Share earns
.01
-
6mo rev
42,073,000
40,096,000
Net inc
301,000
b2,421,000
Share earns
.02
-
b-Net loss


Regional Split in Cystic Fibrosis
LEAD: Scientists who are studying the gene that causes cystic fibrosis, the most common hereditary illness among Caucasians, have found a link between a particular mutation in the gene and the severity of the illness.
They said today that the severe form of the mutation is most prevalent in northern European countries like the Scandinavian nations, Germany and Holland and among people with northern


Bush's Move: Caution Wins
LEAD: Sometimes President Bush does the bold and unexpected, as he did when he chose Dan Quayle as his running mate in 1988.
But more often he is cautious, and that was his mode today in the nomination of Judge David H. Souter of New Hampshire to the Supreme Court.


Talking Business; with Mooney of Cable TV Association;   Doubtful Outlook On Re-regulation
LEAD: James P. Mooney is president and chief executive of the National Cable Television Association, a lobbying group for the industry.
In 1984, he and his organization helped to insure passage of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, which allowed cable companies to set their own charges for basic cable service.


Arts Censorship Threatens All Our Freedoms;   Hellhole of Opera
LEAD: To the Editor:


Park Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Park Communications Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
42,772,000
43,224,000
Net inc
5,873,000
5,829,000
Share earns
.28
.28
6mo rev
78,921,000
79,796,000
Net inc
8,683,000
8,674,000
Share earns
.42
.42
Share earnings for 1989 are restated to reflect a 3-for-2 stock split effective September 15, 1989.


Stolt Tankers &amp; Terminals reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stolt Tankers &amp; Terminals (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
148,200,000
127,100,000
Net inc
b34,100,000
c20,200,000
Share earns
1.26
.74
6mo rev
291,800,000
246,700,000
Net inc
b46,600,000
c33,300,000
Share earns
1.73
1.23


Tax-Exempt Chrysler Trust Backed by Municipal Leases
LEAD: In an innovative financing, the Chrysler Financial Corporation offered $35 million worth of tax-exempt asset-backed securities late last week through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


Bell Atlantic Net Up 6.2%
LEAD: The Bell Atlantic Corporation yesterday reported a 6.2 percent gain in second-quarter income as both its telephone and non-telephone business volume expanded.


First Indiana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Indiana Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,398,000
762,000
Per share
.48
.30
6mo net inc
2,644,000
1,445,000
Per share
.90
.56
The per share earnings are pro forma.


Suburban Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suburban Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,273,000
1,854,000
Per share
.34
.48
6mo net inc
1,135,000
4,064,000
Per share
.30
1.03


Nestle Is Set to Sell Its Restaurant Unit
LEAD: Nestle Enterprises Inc. announced yesterday that it would put the Stouffer Restaurant Company up for sale.
The company said the sale was an attempt to withdraw from the restaurant business, enabling it to focus more heavily on the retail food and beverage market.


Rockefeller Foundation Starts Ecology Effort
LEAD: THE Rockefeller Foundation is undertaking a $50 million global environmental program with the ambitious aim of curbing ecologically damaging practices of industrial and poor countries.


G.M. Goal: Restore Saab's Luster
LEAD: David J. Herman, the new chief executive of Saab Automobile A.B., faces more than the usual challenge in trying to turn a loss-ridden auto maker into one that can flourish in a crowded luxury car market.


Time Warner Reports A Loss of $189 Million
LEAD: Time Warner Inc. yesterday reported a net loss of $189 million for the second quarter.
If Time Inc. and Warner Communications Inc. had been merged at this time last year, the company would have reported a comparable loss.
The company's revenues for the quarter rose by 4.4 percent, to $2.58 billion, from $2.47 billion in the previous quarter.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Coors Brewing Co., to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago, for Coors Extra Gold beer, from GSD&amp; M, Austin, Tex., with an estimated budget of $20 million.


Baxter International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baxter International Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,003,000,000
1,856,000,000
Net inc
110,000,000
104,000,000
Share earns
.37
.35
Shares outst
283,000,000
281,000,000
6mo sales
3,906,000,000
3,630,000,000
Net loss
b273,000,000
c205,000,000
Share earns
-
.69
Shares outst
249,000,000
281,000,000


Rollins Environmental ServFices Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rollins Environmental ServFices Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
54,486,000
39,565,000
Net inc
7,224,000
b33,484,000
Share earns
.12
-
9mo rev
146,492,000
117,776,000
Net inc
19,179,000
b26,360,000
Share earns
.32
-


Liberian Rebels Invade Capital's Center
LEAD: Rebel fighters waded across a swamp and shot their way into the center of the capital today, surprising Government troops who had been defending two bridges leading into the city.


Natec Resources reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Natec Resources
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
884,391
612,720
Net loss
1,152,265
131,219
Shares outst
24,996,221
13,712,721
6mo rev
1,557,557
1,262,592
Net loss
2,304,524
314,396
Shares outst
24,996,221
13,712,721


McMillan Surprises Jets By Staying Out of Camp
LEAD: Erik McMillan, the Jets' All-Pro safety, single-handedly doubled the number of veteran holdouts by not reporting for the opening day of training camp today.


Arts Censorship Threatens All Our Freedoms;   Stop Using My Money
LEAD: To the Editor:


IBP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* IBP Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,601,424,000
2,341,534,000
Net inc
15,841,000
8,567,000
Share earns
.34
.18
6mo sales
4,975,436,000
4,576,848,000
Net inc
20,231,000
9,947,000
Share earns
.43
.21


Cooker Restaurant Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cooker Restaurant Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
8,134,000
7,355,000
Net inc
520,000
342,000
Share earns
.05
.04
Shares outst
10,940,813
7,907,846
6mo sales
16,286,000
13,673,000
Net inc
933,000
656,000
Share earns
.09
.09
Shares outst
10,940,813
7,700,482


Isabelle Liberman, 71, Authority on Dyslexia
LEAD: Dr.
Isabelle Liberman, an authority on reading disabilities who taught for 21 years at the University of Connecticut, died on Thursday at her home in Mansfield Center, Conn.
She was 71 years old.
Her family said she died of heart failure.
Dr.
Liberman wrote widely on dyslexia, and at her death she was a research associate at the Haskins Laboratories in New Haven, which is associated with Yale and the University of


Grenada Sunburst System reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grenada Sunburst System
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,384,685
3,746,735
Per share
.27
.42
Shares outst
8,846,847
8,849,682
6mo net inc
5,144,044
6,599,087
Per share
.58
.75
Shares outst
8,848,257
8,849,682


FRANCE CHARGES EMBASSY GUN RING
LEAD: The head of the security detachment at the French Embassy in Beirut has been charged with operating an arms-smuggling ring out of the diplomatic mission and with supplying weapons to underworld gangs in the south of France.


Sir Hamilton Whyte, British Diplomat, 63
LEAD: Sir Hamilton Whyte, a retired member of the British diplomatic service, died on Friday at his home in Ford, Sussex, England.
He was 63 years old.


Inco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inco Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
775,000,000
1,066,200,000
Net inc
203,900,000
195,700,000
Share earns
1.94
1.84
6mo sales
1,509,800,000
2,183,700,000
Net inc
271,600,000
472,000,000
Share earns
2.58
4.44


Results Plus
LEAD:
GOLF
Daniel Wins in Sudden Death
Beth Daniel overcame a two-stroke deficit on the final three holes, then rolled in a 12-foot birdie putt on the first hole of a sudden-death playoff yesterday to beat Patty Sheehan in the rain-delayed Phar-Mor Youngstown Classic in Vienna, Ohio.
Daniel earned a $60,000 first prize in the Ladies Professional Golf Assocation event plus a $50,000 bonus for being the leading money-winner in the two events sponsored by Phar-Mor drugstores.


The New York That's Here to Stay
LEAD: It hasn't been declared a landmark because, architecturally, it doesn't deserve to be.
Furthermore, it's going to be rubble within the next few months because a Japanese developer has something grand in mind for the site.
So if anybody wants to see the place where Edith Wharton, nee Jones, made her debut into New York society, he'd better hurry to the corner of 42d Street and Fifth


Rollins Truck Leasing reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rollins Truck Leasing (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
84,035,000
79,062,000
Net inc
4,692,000
4,237,000
Share earns
.25
.23
Shares outst
18,762,000
18,768,000
9mo rev
244,417,000
230,928,000
Net inc
12,679,000
12,577,000
Share earns
.68
.67
Shares outst
18,762,000
18,768,000


Altered Models Of Assault Guns Elude U.S. Ban
LEAD: The Bush Administration's ban on military assault-style weapons, criticized as a tepid response to drug-related violence when it took effect last year, has been weakened by a provision that allows redesigned versions of the weapons to be imported.


OCEAN PROBE SEEKS AIR ACCIDENT CLUES
LEAD: The Navy began a search of the ocean floor today for a cargo door that blew off a United Airlines jumbo jet, causing nine people to be swept to their death over the Pacific Ocean and injuring five others 17 months ago.


New York City Needs Strategic Planning to Keep From Drifting
LEAD: To the Editor:


150,000 in Bulgaria Honor Memory of Communist Hero
LEAD: About 150,000 people took part in a procession today to pay respects to Georgi Dimitrov, the Bulgarian Communist leader whose remains were removed from his mausoleum last week.


Article in Pravda Says Anti-Semitism Is Rife
LEAD: Anti-Semitism in the Soviet Union has reached alarming levels and threatens the process of political reform, a Soviet historian said in an article in Pravda on Sunday.


Talks on Korean Ties Held in Truce Border Village


Southeastern Public Service Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southeastern Public Service Co.
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
53,168,000
54,648,000
Net inc
852,000
1,666,000
Share earns
.07
.14
Shares outst
11,655,000
11,655,000


Corrections
LEAD: An article on July 15 about a resurgence in tuberculosis referred incorrectly to an assistant professor of medicine at Yale University.
He is Dr.
Lloyd Friedman.


Amoco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amoco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,450,000,000
6,811,000,000
Net inc
b379,000,000
497,000,000
Share earns
.75
.96
Shares outst
508,914,000
517,131,000
6mo rev
14,521,000,000
13,332,000,000
Net inc
b845,000,000
955,000,000
Share earns
1.66
1.85
Shares outst
509,850,000
517,149,000


Giga-Tronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Giga-Tronics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,673,000
3,505,000
Net inc
187,000
533,000
Share earns
.07
.20
Shares outst
2,570,000
2,645,000


Atlantic American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlantic American Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
19,108,000
20,778,000
Net inc
b397,000
c3,816,000
Share earns
.03
-
6mo rev
37,890,000
43,289,000
Net loss
b31,000
6,977,000
b-Included extraordinary gain from repurchase of long-term debt of $105,000, or 1 cent a share, for the quarter and $167,000, or 2 cents a share, for the 6 months.


Stanley Shapiro, 65; 'Pillow Talk' Script Won Him an Oscar
LEAD: Stanley Shapiro, a screen writer who won an Academy Award for ''Pillow Talk,'' a romantic comedy starring Doris Day and Rock Hudson, died on Saturday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center here.
He was 65 years old.


Jury in Child Molesting Case Reaches Verdict on 2 Counts
LEAD: The jury in the McMartin Preschool child- molesting case told the court today that it had reached verdicts on two counts against Raymond Buckey but had deadlocked on the remaining six charges.


Faldo Uses Dedication To Reach Higher Levels
LEAD: Nick Faldo calls it ''the circle,'' a personal continuum that begins with dedication and leads to improvement, spawning renewed enthusiasm for his simple but all-consuming goal: to be the best golfer in the world.


Fuqua Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fuqua Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
250,511,000
231,822,000
Net inc
5,796,000
b2,168,000
Share earns
.32
.10
Shares outst
18,061,000
21,485,000
6mo sales
496,794,000
478,548,000
Net inc
11,782,000
b7,287,000
Share earns
.62
.34
Shares outst
18,945,000
21,487,000


Augat Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Augat Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
77,709,000
80,035,000
Net inc
4,843,000
2,200,000
Share earns
.27
.12
Shares outst
18,030,000
17,928,000
6mo sales
149,496,000
160,425,000
Net inc
8,221,000
5,200,000
Share earns
.46
.29
Shares outst
18,020,000
17,928,000


Marble Financial reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marble Financial
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b1,009,000
c1,658,000
Per share
.31
-
Shares outst
3,242,393
3,246,711
6mo net inc
b2,688,000
c92,000
Per share
.83
-
Shares outst
3,238,993
3,253,132
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $287,000, or 9 cents a share and $830,000, or 26 cents a share for the quarter and 6 months, respectively.


Manville Net Declines 24%
LEAD: Citing eroding construction-related markets, the Manville Corporation today reported second-quarter earnings of $52.6 million, or 41 cents a share, down 24 percent from $69.4 million, or 55 cents a share, a year earlier.


Bridge
LEAD: Two experts from the New York metropolitan region entered the Life Master Pair Championship on Friday, the opening event of the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals, because they wanted to practice for the Spingold Knockout Teams competion that began today.


Simpson Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Simpson Industries (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
54,087,000
51,776,000
Net inc
2,826,000
3,228,000
Share earns
.29
.34
6mo sales
100,769,000
102,833,000
Net inc
4,328,000
6,976,000
Share earns
.45
.73


Xerox Shifts To Y.&amp; R. From B.S.B.
LEAD: THE Xerox Corporation has awarded its corporate and product advertising accounts to Young &amp; Rubicam's New York office.
Xerox had been reviewing its corporate advertising, but decided to consolidate its estimated $30 million to $40 million media advertising account at Y.&amp; R. The news was another blow for Backer Spielvogel Bates, which had handled the Xerox account since 1986.


Review/Jazz;   Jim Cullum's Adventures
LEAD: Jazz in July, the annual festival of ''hot jazz, ragtime, old-time and blues'' at the 92d Street Y began its sixth year last Tuesday evening with a program that emphasized that the series has established its own traditions.


Goodwill Games Losses
LEAD: The Goodwill Games are creating losses of double the original estimate for Turner Broadcasting System Inc., Ted Turner told stockholders today, raising questions about the future of the competition.
This year's games are likely to produce a loss in the same range as the $26 million from the inaugural 1986 Goodwill Games in Moscow, Mr.


Exco Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exco Technologies
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,500,000
7,900,000
Net inc
433,000
388,000
Share earns
.08
.07
9mo sales
22,800,000
22,200,000
Net inc
1,400,000
427,000
Share earns
.27
.08
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Puzzle of Sailor's Death Solved After 31 Years: The Answer Is AIDS
LEAD: DOCTORS in Manchester, England, have diagnosed a case of AIDS by using a new laboratory technique on tissue stored for 31 years.


Westport Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westport Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
494,000
b169,000
Per share
-
.08
6mo net loss
1,661,000
b569,000
Per share
-
.27
b-Net income


Bell Atlantic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell Atlantic Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,075,500,000
2,882,200,000
Net inc
362,800,000
341,700,000
Share earns
.92
.87
Shares outst
393,400,000
393,200,000
6mo rev
6,094,100,000
5,650,500,000
Net inc
718,100,000
672,500,000
Share earns
1.82
1.71
Shares outst
393,700,000
393,400,000


Ameriana Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameriana Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
651,000
543,000
Per share
.34
.29
6mo net inc
1,285,000
1,062,000
Per share
.68
.56


McDonald's and Wendy's to Use Oil
LEAD: The McDonald's Corporation and Wendy's International Inc. said yesterday that they would start cooking their french fries and hash brown potatoes in 100 percent vegetable oil, abandoning a blend of vegetable oil and beef tallow that had made them targets of anti-cholesterol campaigners.


Saberhagen Undergoes Successful Surgery
LEAD: Bret Saberhagen, a Cy Young Award winner in 1985 and 1989, underwent successful arthroscopic surgery on his right elbow yesterday, the Kansas City Royals announced.


Communications Satellite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Communications Satellite Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
116,800,000
102,800,000
Net inc
18,700,000
18,300,000
Share earns
1.00
.99
6mo rev
227,500,000
200,200,000
Net inc
37,700,000
34,800,000
Share earns
2.00
1.88


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Markets


Gastineau on Waivers
LEAD: Mark Gastineau, the former Jet defensive end who signed with the British Columbia Lions of the Canadian Football League on June 13, was placed on waivers yesterday, the club said in Vancouver.


Lone Star Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lone Star Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
145,600,000
159,200,000
Net inc
9,600,000
b14,500,000
Share earns
.48
-
6mo rev
292,000,000
306,500,000
Net inc
17,900,000
b31,600,000
Share earns
.89
-


NO 'LITMUS TEST,' PRESIDENT SAYS
LEAD: Acting swiftly in the face of a divisive debate on the abortion issue, President Bush announced today that he would nominate David H. Souter, a 50-year-old Federal appeals court judge, to the Supreme Court.


Washington Talk;   Congress Less Tolerant On Colleagues' Behavior
LEAD: Members of the House and the Senate dislike two things almost equally.
One is to comment on each other's ethical behavior.
The other is to cast recorded votes on touchy matters.


Technitrol Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technitrol Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
22,692,000
24,760,000
Net inc
1,384,000
2,277,000
Share earns
.70
1.16
6mo sales
45,929,000
48,791,000
Net inc
3,030,000
4,094,000
Share earns
1.53
2.08


Reviews/Ballet;   Departures Of Style In Bolshoi 'Highlights'
LEAD: The Bolshoi Ballet presented a disappointing afternoon of dance in its ''Highlights'' program on Saturday at the New York State Theater.
Part of the problem seemed to be a sticky floor that tripped more than one dancer and may have been responsible for some of the messy interstitial phrasing.
But in general the dancers looked unduly second-rate.


Bankers Trust N.Y.  Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bankers Trust N.Y.  Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
174,000,000
175,000,000
Per share
2.06
2.14
6mo net inc
372,000,000
339,000,000
Per share
4.42
4.16


American Business ComputFers reports earnings for Year to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Business ComputFers
Year to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,680,000
5,065,000
Net loss
1,590,000
b155,000
Share earns
-
.02
b-Net income


Paris Heat: Versace and Lacroix Open the Fall Shows
LEAD: The haute couture shows opened with a blast of prints and color over the weekend.
Gianni Versace set the stage for a sizzling display of fall fashions with minuscule outfits in fiery prints that barely covered the torso.
Skirts that reached finger-tip level were on the long side.
Except for the fairly elaborate swags and jewels, the ball gowns could have passed as swimsuits.


Bush Presents Plan to Help Andean Nations Grow Non-Coca Crops
LEAD: President Bush announced trade concessions, expanded agricultural development assistance and other measures to help Ecuador, Colombia, Bolivia and Peru, the main cocaine-producing countries of Latin America, to develop alternative exports.


A Solar Particle That Wasn't There Offers Enticing Clues to the Cosmos
LEAD: A HIGHLY sensitive Soviet-American detector operating deep in a mine in the Caucasus region since the first of the year has failed to find any of the ghostly solar particles it sought, but scientists are more excited than disappointed.


In Rarity, Utility Seeks Another in Midwest
LEAD: In a move that is rare among utilities, the Kansas City Power and Light Company made a hostile tender offer yesterday for the shares of a neighboring utility, the Kansas Gas and Electric Company.
Kansas City Power said the bid was worth $857 million.


Maxxam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maxxam Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
610,000,000
576,500,000
Net inc
60,300,000
26,700,000
Share earns
6.34
3.15
6mo sales
1,182,300,000
1,148,700,000
Net inc
94,100,000
33,700,000
Share earns
9.89
3.97


Xilinx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Xilinx Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
18,510,000
10,381,000
Net inc
2,800,000
1,577,000
Share earns
.14
.09
Shares outst
20,498,000
18,281,000
The latest quarter represents the company's first quarter as a public company.


Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
677,300,000
606,300,000
Net inc
80,800,000
77,300,000
Share earns
1.10
1.08
Shares outst
73,600,000
71,800,000
6mo rev
1,373,000,000
1,229,000,000
Net inc
175,000,000
165,600,000
Share earns
2.39
2.31
Shares outst
73,300,000
71,700,000


Health Chief Rules Out Big Growth in Programs
LEAD: The Secretary of Health and Human Services today denounced ''those who call for a radical revamping of our health-care system,'' but he said the Bush Administration was looking for new ways to protect some of the 31 million Americans who lack health insurance.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It is not appropriate, in choosing a Supreme Court Justice, to use any litmus test.
And I want a Justice who will ably and fairly interpret the law across the range of issues the Court faces.''
- President Bush. [A18:1.]


Rinfret Attacks Cuomo Fiscal Policies
LEAD: The Cuomo administration is ''burning the furniture for firewood'' by borrowing extensively, using one-time revenues to fill budget gaps and dipping into state reserve funds, Pierre A. Rinfret, the Republican candidate for governor, said yesterday.


Why Faldo Deserves The Title
LEAD: rrIn the years when Bobby Jones dominated golf, he was known as ''the mechanical man.'' Just wind him up and send him clicking around a course.
But if Jones was golf's ''mechanical man,'' Nick Faldo is now its ''computer disk.'' Just program him and point him to the first tee.


Careplus Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Careplus Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
11,553,000
8,520,000
Net inc
987,000
452,000
Share earns
.15
.09
Shares outst
6,514,000
5,921,000
6mo rev
22,127,000
16,951,000
Net inc
1,811,000
828,000
Share earns
.28
.16
Shares outst
6,378,000
5,064,000


Deluxe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deluxe Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
328,900,000
310,800,000
Net inc
38,200,000
34,200,000
Share earns
.45
.40
6mo sales
673,900,000
627,700,000
Net inc
74,200,000
64,700,000
Share earns
.87
.76


Art's Way Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to May 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Art's Way Manufacturing
Qtr to May 26
1990
1989
Sales
4,770,000
4,540,000
Net inc
343,000
304,000
Share earns
.30
.23
Shares outst
1,102,028
1,320,730
Yr sales
19,245,000
22,342,000
Net inc
1,221,000
1,863,000
Share earns
.96
1.44


Rift Over Water On Indian Land Has Deep Roots
LEAD: From the edge of this Hopi Indian village on the rim of the Third Mesa, with hot white sky and parched high desert as far as the eye can see, the splash of cool water can be heard.


Closing the Chapter on Easy Goer
LEAD: Imagine, for a moment, Easy Goer in a world without Sunday Silence.


National Community Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Community Banks Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,600,000
12,100,000
Per share
.44
1.16
6mo net inc
10,000,000
23,700,000
Per share
.96
2.27


Beckman Instruments Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beckman Instruments Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
202,900,000
200,500,000
Net inc
8,600,000
11,400,000
Share earns
.30
.40
6mo sales
388,400,000
399,500,000
Net inc
16,600,000
22,100,000
Share earns
.58
.78


Aspin Now Says He Opposes B-2, Handing Serious Setback to Bush
LEAD: The chairman of the House Armed Services Committee said today that he would join an effort to end production of the B-2 bomber, dealing a serious blow to President Bush's effort to build the aircraft.


Exxon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Exxon Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
26,088,000,000
23,612,000,000
Net inc
1,100,000,000
b140,000,000
Share earns
.87
.11
6mo rev
52,801,000,000
45,868,000,000
Net inc
2,380,000,000
b1,950,000,000
Share earns
1.88
1.52


Accord Set On Lincoln
LEAD: Unsecured creditors of Charles H. Keating Jr.'s bankrupt American Continental Corporation reached an agreement with the Government last week that will settle claims against the company's former subsidiary, the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association of Irvine, Calif.


Forschner Group reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forschner Group
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
10,704,000
9,117,000
Net inc
502,000
426,000
Share earns
.12
.10
6mo sales
20,912,000
18,050,000
Net inc
857,000
718,000
Share earns
.21
.18
The company said the year-ago results are restated to reflect a change to the last-in, first-out method of accounting for inventories which resulted in reductions of $105,000 and $208,000 in income before taxes and 2 cents and 3 cents in net income per share from that previously reported under the first-in, first-out


Corrections
LEAD: A table on Sunday listing Congressional votes by Representatives from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut misstated the positions of many members on a proposed constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget.
A corrected tally appears today on page B5.


Sri Lankans Close to Rebels Quit Parliament
LEAD: Members of a political party considered close to the major Tamil rebel group resigned from Parliament today to protest what they called atrocities by the military in its war against the guerrillas.


Safeco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Safeco Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
791,810,000
728,519,000
Net inc
76,008,000
73,668,000
Share earns
1.20
1.17
6mo rev
1,569,848,000
1,433,792,000
Net inc
132,300,000
139,262,000
Share earns
2.09
2.20


Harry Prebluda Dies; Biochemist Was 79
LEAD: Harry J. Prebluda, a biochemist and consultant, died Saturday at his home in Miami Beach.
He was 79 years old and moved to Miami Beach from Trenton 10 years ago.


2 Endangered Cranes Hatch on Same Day
LEAD: TWO black-necked cranes, a rare species that lives in the wild only in remote parts of Central Asia, hatched in captivity on the same day but half a world apart.
The hatchings on July 10 were the first in captivity outside China.


No Compromise, Say Civil Rights Bill's Sponsors
LEAD: Leading supporters of the civil rights bill in the House of Representatives said today that they had little interest in negotiating with the White House on changing the bill, which President Bush has threatened to veto.


Crackdown Set on Vans Serving as Gypsy Buses
LEAD: They often use the same route numbers as city buses, stop at the same bus stops and charge discount fares - only $1, not the $1.15 that Transit Authority riders have been paying since January.


Neorx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Neorx Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
268,000
1,771,000
Net loss
3,752,000
3,476,000
9mo rev
2,005,000
4,949,000
Net loss
b13,794,000
11,046,000
b-Included restructuring costs of $1,410,000.


Nathaniel Field; Accountant, 84
LEAD: Nathaniel Field, a certified public accountant in Manhattan, died on Thursday in Providence Hospital in Anchorage.
He was 84 years old.


Advanced Magnetics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Advanced Magnetics Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,202,000
1,761,000
Net inc
38,000
92,000
Share earns
.01
.03
Shares outst
3,422,465
3,087,941
9mo rev
6,722,000
5,356,000
Net inc
270,000
543,000
Share earns
.08
.18
Shares outst
3,345,945
3,072,855


Boulevard Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Boulevard Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
3,828,000
b2,767,000
Per share
-
.37
Shares outst
6,662,000
8,096,000
6mo net loss
1,830,000
b6,283,000
Per share
-
.84
Shares outst
7,351,000
8,089,000
b


Review/Theater;   'Pal Joey,' 50 Years Older but Also New
LEAD: When the musical ''Pal Joey'' opened in 1940, Brooks Atkinson ended his review in The New York Times with a rhetorical question that remains one of the most quoted lines in the annals of Broadway theater criticism: ''Can you draw sweet water from a foul well?''


Manville Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Manville Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
561,075,000
564,572,000
Net inc
52,637,000
b69,399,000
Share earns
.41
.55
6mo sales
1,079,025,000
1,072,877,000
Net inc
77,537,000
b103,751,000
Share earns
.58
.80


Lubrizol Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lubrizol Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
357,811,000
327,456,000
Net inc
33,077,000
26,016,000
Share earns
.92
.70
Shares outst
35,807,000
37,342,000
6mo rev
714,981,000
672,637,000
Net inc
62,212,000
56,716,000
Share earns
1.72
1.52
Shares outst
36,225,000
37,403,000


Eldec Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 24
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eldec Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 24
1990
1989
Sales
30,666,000
25,366,000
Net inc
1,152,000
885,000
Share earns
.21
.16


Noriega's Troops Now Form Police With U.S. Aid, Panamanians Say
LEAD: Miguel Antonio Bernal, a respected Panamanian scholar and social critic, was eating dinner with friends recently in a restaurant when his companions noticed a man they recognized as their torturer during their detention under Manuel Antonio Noriega.


Comments by President On His Choice of Justice
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference in Washington yesterday, when he announced the appointment of Judge David H. Souter as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, as recorded by The New York Times through the facitilties of Cable News Network:
OPENING STATEMENT


American Television &amp; ComFmunications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Television &amp; ComFmunications Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
275,341,000
240,072,000
Net inc
28,399,000
24,457,000
Share earns
.26
.22
6mo rev
541,788,000
472,806,000
Net inc
55,201,000
44,941,000
Share earns
.50
.41


American Network Group reports earnings for Year to March 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Network Group
Year to March 31
1990
1989
Revenue
5,788,944
4,688,344
Net loss
1,572,452
22,000
Shares outst
7,450,850
5,094,777


How 2 Schools So Alike Can Be So Different
LEAD: Public School 28 and Public School 309 are a 10-block walk from each other in the same frayed and indigent Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood in Brooklyn, but in some ways, they are miles apart.


Compaq Offering 2 New Computers
LEAD: The Compaq Computer Corporation introduced two high-end personal computers, the Compaq Deskpro 486/ 33L and Compaq Deskpro 386/33L, priced between $9,999 and $19,499 depending on configuration.
It also announced a 486-based version of its Systempro line priced between $20,999 and $29,999.
The computers, which approach the performance levels of engineering work stations and minicomputers, may be difficult for personal computer retailers to sell effectively, analysts said.


Exxon Profit Surges; Amoco and ARCO Off
LEAD: The Exxon Corporation, the world's largest oil company, today reported a huge increase in its second-quarter profits, mainly because of comparisons with the heavy costs related to cleanup efforts after the Alaskan oil spill in the quarter last year.


Hartford Steam Boiler InspecFtion &amp; Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hartford Steam Boiler InspecFtion &amp; Insurance (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
139,938,000
124,879,000
Net inc
19,808,000
19,643,000
Share earns
.96
.96
6mo rev
273,738,000
242,946,000
Net inc
40,173,000
39,405,000
Share earns
1.94
1.92


Accor Is Gambling on U.S. Motels
LEAD: The $1.3 billion deal by the French hotel and restaurant company Accor S.A. to purchase Motel 6, the Dallas-based chain of economy motels, may be the boldest move yet by two executives already known for their boldness and management skills.


Chrysler And Hyundai Venture Off
LEAD: With its domestic market share falling and doubts growing about its long-term viability as an independent car maker, the Chrysler Corporation canceled a small-car venture with Hyundai of South Korea today.
The company also confirmed that it would build a low-priced version of its Dodge Shadow and Plymouth


Eaton Corp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eaton Corp (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
952,800,000
969,400,000
Net inc
b53,600,000
c63,400,000
Share earns
1.49
1.72
Shares outst
35,850,000
36,894,000
6mo rev
1,894,400,000
1,927,100,000
Net inc
b107,300,000
c130,600,000
Share earns
2.97
3.53
Shares outst
36,145,000
36,967,000


RJR Nabisco's Parent Posts $108 Million Loss for Quarter
LEAD: The RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation, the parent of the tobacco-and-food giant that recently refinanced part of history's largest leveraged buyout, yesterday announced a loss of $108 million for the second quarter, compared with a loss of $319 million in the comparable period last year.
The improved performance exceeded analysts' expectations.


Spain Prices Issue Of 10-Year Notes
LEAD: The Kingdom of Spain made its first public offering in the United States debt markets yesterday, pricing $300 million worth of 10-year notes.


Thermwood Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thermwood Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,386,049
2,383,032
Net inc
2,617
109,348
Share earns
-
.02
9mo sales
7,197,619
7,216,586
Net inc
41,660
367,455
Share earns
.01
.08


Sun Microsystems' New Work Station
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc., the leading vendor of engineering work stations, is expected on Wednesday to announce a new computer and an expansion of its distribution to include more personal computer retailers.
The moves constitute a continuing effort by Sun, which is based in Mountain View, Calif., to broaden the market for its machines beyond engineers to people in business.


Meritor Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meritor Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
b136,763,000
c21,176,000
6mo net loss
b165,960,000
c8,988,000
b-Included total charge of $74.5 million from restructuring for both periods, and included in the total restructuring charge was a $337 million gain from the sale of 54 branch offices to Mellon Bank.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Los Angeles Trolley Derails
LEAD: A train on the new Southern California trolley line derailed Sunday when a four-inch-long metal wire became wedged between tracks, preventing the train from switching smoothly.
There were no injuries.
The Pico Station, at the downtown end of the 22-mile Long Beach-to-Los Angeles line, was closed for three hours.


Gasoline Prices Steady
LEAD: Gasoline prices, which normally go up this time of the year as more people take to the road on vacations, remained unusually steady during the last two weeks, an industry analyst said Sunday.
The average national price for a gallon of gas, including all taxes, was 117.72 cents, according to the biweekly Lundberg Survey of nearly 13,000 service stations, completed Friday.


INSIDE
LEAD:  Health Policy Is Outlined
The Health Secretary denounced calls for a radical revamping of the health-care system, but said ways were being sought to protect those lacking insurance.
Page A10.
Forging a New Poland
Poland's chances for prosperity rest with people like Zygmunt Borek, a private manager hired to transform a huge state-run steel mill.


Mr. Justice Brennan
LEAD: It was only gradually, in the 1960's, that observers of the Supreme Court came to understand the influence of William J. Brennan Jr.
When he retired last week, everyone knew.
One student of the Court put it: ''He is the great expositor of modern constitutional law.''


Review/Theater;   Finley Mocks Her Critics In Her Art
LEAD: Early in her powerful one-woman show, ''We Keep Our Victims Ready,'' Karen Finley mocks conservative critics who have denounced her work as obscene by offering her own satirical portrait of an American cultural landscape stripped bare by arts censorship.


Nature Switches Roles For the Mating Game
LEAD: STEREOTYPED though the behavior may seem, in most species it is the female animal who is the finicky one, and the males who vie with each other to attract her favors.
Now researchers have found that, among katydids and crickets, nature's normal gender roles are sometimes reversed, with the male standing by as two or more female suitors rear up in a pitched battle for his affection.


Cytogen Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cytogen Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
845,000
1,887,000
Net loss
4,657,000
3,062,000
Shares outst
12,378,000
11,962,000
6mo rev
2,535,000
3,620,000
Net loss
8,229,000
6,926,000
Shares outst
12,373,000
11,955,000


Germantown Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Germantown Savings Bank
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b3,578,000
c2,189,000
Per share
.89
.54
6mo net inc
b5,678,000
c4,335,000
Per share
1.41
1.10
b-Included pretax gain of $1.87 million from sale of two banking units.


VanFed Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* VanFed Bancorp
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
336,000
276,000
Per share
.29
.24
6mo net inc
734,000
560,000
Per share
.64
.49


Chronicle
LEAD: This week's issue of the Argentine newsmagazine Noticias was greeted with dismay and disbelief by politicians and government leaders over the weekend.
There, revealingly wrapped in a honey-colored fox coat, with bare legs, was MARIE JULIA ALSOGARAY, who had just presided over the $5 billion privatization of the


Southern Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,019,000,000
1,882,000,000
Net inc
216,000,000
187,000,000
Share earns
.68
.60
6mo rev
3,686,013,000
3,560,770,000
Net inc
329,054,000
384,397,000
Share earns
1.04
1.22


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.93
7.93
9.17
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.52
7.54
8.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.43
7.46
7.72
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.43
8.42
7.93
30-YR.


Centel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
339,827,000
298,372,000
Net inc
b15,246,000
c7,983,000
Share earns
.18
.09
6mo rev
655,785,000
579,915,000
Net inc
b29,411,000
c12,684,000
Share earns
.34
.14
b-After losses from discontinued operations of $842,000 for the quarter and $3,183,000 for the 6 months.


Philharmonic in New-Music 'Horizons'
LEAD: The New York Philharmonic will rehearse and then perform six new orchestral works during ''Horizons '90: New Music for Orchestra,'' to take place this week at Davis Hall at City College, Convent Avenue and 133d Street.
Lawrence Leighton Smith, the music director of the Louisville Orchestra, will lead the orchestra in four open rehearsals tomorrow and Thursday, followed by a performance of the six works on


Patterns
LEAD:
Picking Up on a Good Thing


Continental Fare Cuts Set
LEAD: Continental Airlines said today that it was cutting fares by as much as 57 percent for travel during the next three weekends.


CalFed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CalFed Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
53,000,000
b19,100,000
Per share
-
.76
6mo net loss
34,100,000
b36,600,000
Per share
-
1.46
b-Net income


Savings Crisis Panel Sought
LEAD: Three Senators called for the creation of an independent commission last week to investigate the causes of the savings and loan crisis.
The Senators, Christopher S. Bond, Republican of Missouri; Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, and Charles S. Robb, Democrat of Virginia, said they would seek to establish a commission excluding all current members of Congress and the Bush


Asarco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Asarco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
543,100,000
539,300,000
Net inc
50,200,000
50,800,000
Share earns
1.21
1.20
Shares outst
41,600,000
42,200,000
6mo sales
1,064,400,000
1,157,500,000
Net inc
86,000,000
119,300,000
Share earns
2.07
2.83
Shares outst
41,600,000
42,100,000


Death Count in Philippine Earthquake Is Said to Pass 1,600


Prof. James D. Hart Is Dead at 76; Chronicled America's Literature
LEAD: James D. Hart, a literary scholar who was a professor at the University of California at Berkeley for 54 years, died yesterday at his home in Berkeley at the age of 79.
His family said he died of a brain tumor.


Rogers Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Rogers Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
47,021,000
43,073,000
Net loss
b4,559,000
c386,000
Share earns
-
.13
6mo sales
94,881,000
85,417,000
Net loss
4,062,000
c719,000
Share earns
-
.24
b-Included a pretax charge of about $7 million.


Suit Challenges Policy On Cable-TV Sex Show
LEAD: A lawsuit filed on behalf of a producer of late-night programs featuring nudity and sex argues that Manhattan Cable Television violates Federal and state law by requiring some producers to submit programs for pre-screening.


Minnesota Mining &amp; Mfg reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Minnesota Mining &amp; Mfg (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,234,000,000
3,025,000,000
Net inc
342,000,000
327,000,000
Share earns
1.54
1.49
Shares outst
222,084,393
219,502,376
6mo sales
6,398,000,000
6,042,000,000
Net inc
677,000,000
645,000,000
Share earns
3.05
2.92
Shares outst
222,305,085
221,115,732


U.S. Tops Puerto Rico In Fight-Marred Game
LEAD: The United States men's basketball team had two fights on its hands in its Goodwill Games opener tonight.


United Canadian Shares Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Canadian Shares Ltd.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
16,415,037
17,315,537
Net inc
10,331
878,861
Share earns
.01
.63
6mo sales
33,670,241
36,245,467
Net inc
249,141
1,804,811
Share earns
.18
1.28
Figures are in Canadian funds.


House Passes Bill to Restrict Ads On Children's Television Programs
LEAD: The House yesterday voted to limit advertising on children's television programs and to require the Federal Communications Commission to consider the amount of educational programming that a broadcaster presents in approving license renewals.


Alfa Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alfa Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
52,335,056
48,048,809
Net inc
6,606,672
5,936,779
Share earns
.32
.28
6mo rev
103,396,753
94,527,999
Net inc
9,934,095
12,392,983
Share earns
.48
.59
Shares outst
20,889,756
20,941,756


'Some Breathing Time' After the Market Plunge
LEAD: At 10:30 yesterday morning, as stock prices plunged, the hot line that connects the Chicago Mercantile Exchange with the floor of the New York Stock Exchange rang and ''circuit breakers'' were set into motion.


Scientists and Planners Consider New Limits To Coastal Development
LEAD: GROWING evidence that coastal erosion occurs continuously, not just in calamitous bursts like Hurricane Hugo, has led scientists, planners and some Federal disaster officials to urge a stringent new approach to limiting development along the nation's shoreline.
Their campaign is opposed by many builders, property owners and others with a financial or political stake on the coast.


Hong Kong Journal;   For Gentry's Old Home, an Outstanding New Face
LEAD: One day before long, when Dame Lydia Dunn joins the House of Lords, a legislative institution that has symbolized British male gentry for centuries, she will stand out not only because she is a woman but also because she is Chinese.


HBO &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HBO &amp; Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
50,387,000
45,912,000
Net inc
2,382,000
2,343,000
Share earns
.16
.15
Shares outst
14,684,000
15,887,000
6mo rev
89,291,000
90,594,000
Net inc
1,077,000
3,797,000
Share earns
.07
.24
Shares outst
14,908,000
15,879,000


Vitalink Communications reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vitalink Communications (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
15,811,000
15,652,000
Net inc
2,407,000
b5,070,000
Share earns
.17
.42
Shares outst
14,070,000
11,965,000
9mo sales
52,713,000
40,093,000
Net inc
11,177,000
b13,245,000
Share earns
.79
1.12
Shares outst
14,095,000
11,778,000


American Reliance Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Reliance Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
21,263,000
17,604,000
Net inc
2,111,000
2,094,000
Share earns
.83
.82
6mo rev
40,469,000
34,127,000
Net inc
3,196,000
2,948,000
Share earns
1.25
1.16


Fire Causes Rift In Department Over Manpower
LEAD: The engine company that would have arrived first at a fire in Harlem on Sunday morning where three young children died could not respond immediately because it was in the Bronx helping another unit, firefighters and fire officials said yesterday.


Arizona Instrument Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arizona Instrument Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,629,358
2,293,783
Net inc
10,973
b285,912
6mo rev
4,518,498
4,627,590
Net loss
791,308
269,322
b-Net loss


Contel Inquiry Names More
LEAD: Nine Swiss bank employees bought securities of the Contel Corporation just before the GTE Corporation said it would acquire the company, a lawyer for the Securities and Exchange Commission said yesterday.


INVESTMENT LINKS FORMER BUSH AIDE TO F.D.I.C. OFFICIAL
LEAD: Two years after he helped buy an insolvent Oklahoma bank from Federal regulators, a former aide to George Bush invested $100,000 with a Federal official involved in negotiating the bank deal, according to public records and participants in the deal.


Avemco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avemco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
20,955,000
23,445,000
Net inc
2,836,000
4,065,000
Share earns
.36
.46
Shares outst
7,905,497
8,915,794
6mo rev
40,627,000
48,904,000
Net inc
6,505,000
8,778,000
Share earns
.82
.98
Shares outst
7,981,286
8,965,060


Rally in Gold Prices Begins On Signs of Mideast Buying
LEAD: Gold futures prices surged to their highest levels in two months yesterday as sharply lower stock prices, a weaker dollar and signs of Middle Eastern buying revived investors' interest in the metal.


Books of The Times;   Writing About Writing About Writing
LEAD:
Lying Together
By D. M. Thomas
247 pages. Viking. $17.95.


Philadelphia Electric reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Philadelphia Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
841,865,000
777,541,000
Net inc
120,410,000
108,945,000
Share earns
.45
.41
Shares outst
213,942,447
208,260,038
6mo rev
1,795,413,000
1,667,912,000
Net inc
60,405,000
252,255,000
Share earns
.06
.98
Shares outst
213,061,663
207,515,582


Northwest Seeking Deal For Eastern
LEAD: Talks began yesterday to put together a plan for Northwest Airlines to buy a large part of Eastern Airlines while overseeing the liquidation of the rest of its assets for Eastern's unsecured creditors, people close to the negotiations said.


Times Mirror Officer Expected to Head CNN
LEAD: W. Thomas Johnson Jr., the former publisher of The Los Angeles Times and vice chairman of the Times Mirror Company, will soon be named president and chief executive of Cable News Network in Atlanta.


Cenvest Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cenvest Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
7,548,000
b865,000
Per share
-
.22
6mo net loss
6,957,000
b2,120,000
Per share
-
.54
b-Net income


NAVAJOS' LEADER IS ON TRIAL TODAY
LEAD: After four postponements since January, the first of three fraud trials in a Navajo court will begin Tuesday for the suspended leader of the nation's largest Indian tribe.


Amerada Hess Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amerada Hess Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,232,800,000
1,473,900,000
Net loss
72,100,000
b133,500,000
Share earns
-
1.65
6mo rev
2,894,400,000
2,958,700,000
Net loss
32,500,000
b353,700,000
Share earns
-
4.35
Shares outst
81,000,000
81,300,000


Consolidated Freightways Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Freightways Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,044,243,000
1,036,820,000
Net loss
3,593,000
bc9,090,000
Share earns
-
.19
Shares outst
34,985,352
38,812,144
6mo rev
2,041,954,000
1,762,921,000
Net loss
37,479,000
bd41,628,000
Share earns
-
1.05
Shares outst
34,984,352
38,268,973


Ethics Inquiry Is Sought On Metzenbaum and Staff
LEAD: The Senate Ethics Committee was asked today to open an inquiry into the conduct of Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum and his staff on the Judiciary Committee in their investigation of specific savings and loan deals.


Dow Drops 56.44 After Big Selloff
LEAD: Hamburgers, student loans and lingering doubts about Alan Greenspan's intentions on interest rates touched off a major stock market slide yesterday.


School Study Assails New York Failure Rate
LEAD: Almost two-thirds of New York City's high school students failed at least one course during the fall 1989 semester, and half of those failed three or more courses, a study by an educational advocacy group has found.


Murder Witness Pleads Guilty in Drug Case
LEAD: Gina Feliciano, a witness in the Bensonhurst murder case, pleaded guilty in Brooklyn yesterday to a misdemeanor charge of possessing cocaine.


Narrow Focus Might Help Steinbrenner
LEAD: By trying to call Peter Ueberroth and Fay Vincent to testify at a reopened hearing, George Steinbrenner's attorneys were hoping to minimize any potential penalty by establishing that baseball had known about his relationship with Howard Spira and tacitly condoned it.


Greeks Narrowly Ratify Pact Allowing U.S. Bases to Stay
LEAD: The Greek Parliament narrowly ratified a new defense treaty early today that would allow two United States military bases to remain on the island of Crete for at least eight more years.


Independent Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Bank Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
2,399,000
b2,372,000
Per share
-
.46
6mo net loss
1,389,000
b4,726,000
Per share
-
.92
b-Net income


Return of Ben Johnson Welcomed
LEAD: The president of the International Amateur Athletic Federation, the world governing body for track and field, said Ben Johnson has been drug-tested four times in the last year, each with a negative result, and that he welcomes Johnson's return to competition in September when his two-year suspension for drug use at the 1988 Seoul


Iraq Deploys Troops Near Kuwait Border Amid Dispute on Oil
LEAD: American military officials are closely watching a new deployment of thousands of troops by Iraq along its border with Kuwait, where recent political tensions appeared to be escalating into armed posturing by the two Persian Gulf nations, Pentagon officials said tonight.


Witness Contradicts Account of Drug Sale to Barry
LEAD: A defense witness in the drug trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. today directly contradicted earlier testimony by a witness for the prosecution who said she sold crack to the Mayor in a city office building and, at the same time, handed him a job application.


Engineers Battle to Restart Pump to Halt Sewage Flow
LEAD: Millions of gallons of raw sewage continued to flow into New York's rivers yesterday as engineers struggled to restart a giant pump needed to process all the waste received by the city's second-largest treatment plant.


Brooklyn Landlord, To Keep Racial Mix, Looks to Soviet Jews
LEAD: As part of a plan to maintain racial and ethnic balance at the Starrett City housing complex in southeast Brooklyn, the owners are considering making apartments available to Soviet Jews who come to the United States.
Critics say that would circumvent a United States Supreme Court decision that found Starrett had discriminated against black and Hispanic families on its waiting list.


Our Towns;   The Homeless Head for Suburb And Suits Follow
LEAD: Frank Calamari was hired to provide security while the Westhelp housing for the homeless was being built in Mount Vernon in 1989 and for the Westhelp complex now under construction in Greenburgh.
The Mount Vernon neighborhood is a working-class-to-poor area, mainly black.
There are vacant lots, boarded-up houses, drug dealers nearby.


The President Proposes
LEAD: Nominations to the Supreme Court are different.
With impressive speed, President Bush has chosen his nominee to fill the Supreme Court vacancy created by Justice William Brennan's retirement.
He believes that the public and the Senate will be impressed by the intellect, credentials and judicious fairness of David Souter.


Chronicle
LEAD: MARILYN QUAYLE is ''doing well at Bethesda Naval Hospital'' after weekend surgery, DAVID BECKWITH, a spokesman for Vice President DAN QUAYLE, said yesterday, adding, ''We expect her to return home sometime this week.'' The spokesman said the family did not want to disclose the type of operations, but published published reports have said it was for cervical cancer.


Superior Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Superior Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
75,420,000
68,778,000
Net inc
4,474,000
4,210,000
Share earns
.52
.48
6mo sales
138,334,000
131,675,000
Net inc
8,164,000
8,141,000
Share earns
.95
.93
Shares outst
8,612,000
8,718,000


Mapco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mapco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
606,700,000
535,000,000
Net inc
41,400,000
28,400,000
Share earns
1.31
.72
Shares outst
31,300,000
39,500,000
6mo rev
1,243,100,000
1,003,400,000
Net inc
78,100,000
63,800,000
Share earns
2.41
1.61
Shares outst
32,500,000
39,700,000


By Design;   Overalls, When Paris Sizzles
LEAD: More men than one would want to see are sitting in outdoor cafes and strolling around the Left Bank wearing walking shorts and no shirt at all, not even an undershirt.
No doubt the extreme heat explains this state of undress, just as it probably does the new street fashion glimpsed on women here.


U.S. Students Do Well At Olympiad of Math
LEAD: DESPITE fears among many educators that American students are falling far behind the rest of the world in mathematics, a six-member team of American high school students has placed third in the International Mathematical Olympiad.


First American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First American Corp.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
9,326,000
3,233,000
Per share
.41
.14
Shares outst
23,212,000
23,024,000
6mo net loss
35,521,000
b18,593,000
Per share
-
.81
Shares outst
23,161,000
23,023,000


New Deutsch Effort On the Homeless
LEAD: In the background is a Pennsylvania Station billboard for the Bally's casino in Atlantic City. ''Bally's does it my way,'' boasts a tuxedo-clad Frank Sinatra.
The soundtrack comes from a lighthearted Thanksgiving dinner. ''I'm on a see-food diet,'' a guest says, joking. ''Whenever I see food, I eat it.


First Republic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Republic Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,046,000
306,000
Per share
.30
.09
6mo net inc
1,318,000
492,000
Per share
.38
.15
First Republic said its latest 6 months' results included a provision of $660,000 for collateralized overnight deposit investments that may have been undercollateralized by a Drexel Burnham Lambert Group Inc.


United Missouri Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Missouri Bancshares
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
9,429,000
8,969,000
Per share
.75
.68
6mo net inc
19,710,000
b20,012,000
Per share
1.57
1.51
Shares outst
12,526,677
13,271,432
b-Reflected a gain from a change in accounting for income taxes of $2.4 million.


Reviews/Dancing;   A Role Debut in 'Ivan'
LEAD: The role of Anastasiya in Yuri Grigorovich's ''Ivan the Terrible'' is rather like a delicate cream filling between two sturdy sandwich slices.
The title character moves through the ballet's depiction of 16th-century Russia like a dark and brooding storm.
His opponent, Prince Kurbsky, is a powerful warrior and worrier.


Reich &amp; Tang reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reich &amp; Tang (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,369,000
9,586,000
Net inc
4,000,000
4,530,000
Share earns
.40
.45
6mo rev
18,970,000
18,261,000
Net inc
8,377,000
8,584,000
Share earns
.84
.86


Museum to Display Caribbean Costumes
LEAD: More than 30 costumes and 20 masks used in religious celebrations by the multi-ethnic population of the Caribbean islands make up a traveling exhibition that is to open on Sept. 7 at the Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, in the Crown Heights section.


Ballard Medical reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ballard Medical
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,735,432
5,463,820
Net inc
1,538,417
1,056,557
Share earns
.28
.20
9mo sales
21,113,179
14,597,973
Net inc
b4,346,604
2,834,972
Share earns
.79
.54
b-Included net income after taxes from two non-recurring items of $448,018.


Time Warner Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Time Warner Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,585,000,000
2,477,000,000
Net loss
51,000,000
52,000,000
Shares outst
57,500,000
57,000,000
6mo rev
5,326,000,000
5,025,000,000
Net loss
102,000,000
133,000,000
Shares outst
57,500,000
56,800,000


Electromagnetic Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Electromagnetic Sciences Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
16,976,000
12,809,000
Net inc
165,000
366,000
Share earns
.02
.05
6mo sales
32,167,000
26,100,000
Net inc
301,000
1,121,000
Share earns
.04
.16


Western Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Bank
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,072,000
882,000
Per share
.50
.41
6mo net inc
1,774,000
1,650,000
Per share
.83
.77


Casey Joins Celtic Staff
LEAD: Don Casey, who was dismissed as head coach of the Los Angeles Clippers after last season, was hired yesterday as an assistant coach of the Boston Celtics.
Casey, 53, joins the staff of Chris Ford, the former Celtic assistant who is taking over after the dismissal of Jimmy Rodgers.(AP)


Liz Claiborne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Liz Claiborne Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
340,255,000
271,553,000
Net inc
34,933,000
28,790,000
Share earns
.40
.33
6mo sales
761,106,000
624,447,000
Net inc
87,547,000
73,090,000
Share earns
1.00
.83


BHA Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BHA Group Inc.
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
20,377,000
14,824,000
Net inc
1,682,000
1,303,000
Share earns
.26
.21
9mo sales
53,401,000
41,208,000
Net inc
3,961,000
2,965,000
Share earns
.61
.53
Shares outst
6,508,201
5,581,566


Fastcomm Communications reports earnings for Qtr to April 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fastcomm Communications
Qtr to April 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,403,478
592,052
Net inc
286,031
b102,985
Share earns
.07
-
Yr rev
3,362,124
1,767,292
Net inc
423,030
b596,046
Share earns
.10
-
b-Net loss


Bird Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bird Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
33,356,000
32,674,000
Net inc
2,144,000
b8,986,000
Share earns
.48
2.00
Shares outst
3,664,760
4,294,007
6mo sales
59,155,000
60,249,000
Net inc
2,955,000
b9,221,000
Share earns
.60
1.94
Shares outst
3,644,033
4,351,412


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Bank of Tokyo Ltd., Tokyo, appointed Yoji Anzai executive vice president in charge of investment banking at its North American headquarters in New York.


HEI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 2
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HEI Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 2
1990
1989
Sales
2,063,212
2,003,636
Net loss
512,505
b409,345
9mo sales
6,167,520
6,274,514
Net loss
856,833
375,483
b-Included an extraordinary charge from a reversal of a tax loss carryforward of $7,000.


Union Carbide Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Carbide Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,135,000,000
2,277,000,000
Net inc
116,000,000
186,000,000
Share earns
.81
1.33
Shares outst
143,151,787
140,667,379
6mo sales
4,308,000,000
4,518,000,000
Net inc
210,000,000
387,000,000
Share earns
1.47
2.76
Shares outst
142,810,735
140,197,443


Man Charged in Shooting Hoped to Join Police Force
LEAD: The 22-year-old man charged in the shooting of a 9-year-old Brooklyn girl on Sunday is a former professional baseball player who had returned to his Brooklyn home hoping to become a police officer like his older sister, friends of the man said yesterday.


House Votes to Bolster Enforcement by S.E.C.
LEAD: The House of Representatives unanimously approved a measure today to broaden and strengthen the enforcement powers of the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Bankers Trust Profit Is Flat
LEAD: The Bankers Trust New York Corporation said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings were flat compared with the comparable period of 1989, reflecting continued write-offs of loans to third-world nations.


Now for the Deeds
LEAD: Everybody is complaining about leadership these days.
Anyone who seems to be standing tall is across the border.


Count of Oil Rigs Rises
LEAD: The number of working oil and natural gas rigs in the United States increased by 21 this week to 1,022, according to Baker Hughes Inc., a maker of oil drilling equipment.
This week's increase reversed a series of declines, including a drop of 10 rigs last week.
A year ago, the count was 830.
New Mexico's rig count was down by six, Louisiana lost four rigs and North Dakota dropped one rig.


Detective Says He Tricked Jogger Suspect
LEAD: A New York City police detective testified yesterday that he tricked one of the defendants in the Central Park jogger trial into confessing.


Commercial Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commercial Bancshares
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,208,000
2,961,000
Per share
.52
.47
6mo net inc
6,409,000
5,500,000
Per share
1.03
.88


Americans Help Czechs Clean Up After the Soviets
LEAD: An American environmental cleanup company is cleaning up the ecological mess left by Soviet military units after they withdrew from a base in northern Czechoslvakia, and two others have concluded contracts for similar work at other installations that Soviet troops are leaving.


Puritan Oil Moves to Ayer
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company yesterday switched the advertising account for Puritan oil from Grey Advertising to Ayer.
Grey remains the agency for the company's Crisco shortening and oil products.


Harsco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harsco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
451,319,000
354,984,000
Net inc
21,964,000
bc14,531,000
Share earns
.83
-
Shares outst
26,217,000
26,214,000
6mo sales
839,790,000
725,018,000
Net inc
34,966,000
c952,000
Share earns
1.33
.04
Shares outst
26,214,000
26,313,000


California Energy Co.  Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Energy Co.  Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
23,121,000
11,365,000
Net inc
4,083,000
2,530,000
Share earns
.16
.10
6mo rev
39,782,000
18,990,000
Net inc
5,785,000
4,209,000
Share earns
.22
.16


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-9
The role of Panamanian soldiers who served under Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega has prompted an intense debate.
Many people are lamenting that with the soldiers' conversion into policemen Panama now has ''Noriegism without Noriega.''
Page A1


Bemis Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bemis Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
281,448,000
280,450,000
Net inc
13,788,000
12,528,000
Share earns
.54
.48
6mo sales
553,227,000
545,548,000
Net inc
23,155,000
20,337,000
Share earns
.90
.78


Navy Suspends a Plan to Use Dolphins as Guards
LEAD: Under mounting legal pressure from animal rights groups, the Navy has suspended its plan to use bottle-nosed dolphins to guard a nuclear submarine base.


Student Loan Fiscal Crisis
LEAD: The Education Department said today that it would try to resolve a financial crisis at one of the nation's largest guarantors of student loans.
The Higher Education


Few Have Moved So Fast
LEAD: The speed with which President Bush selected his first Supreme Court nominee was unusual but not without precedent.


The S &amp; L Horror Show: Act II
LEAD: As an outraged public reviews the first act of the savings and loan disaster - a horror show of swindling, administrative delusions and Congressional and regulatory bungling - the curtain is rising on yet another gruesome sight: the execution of the bailout itself.


Monsanto Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Monsanto Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,367,000,000
2,348,000,000
Net inc
b247,000,000
241,000,000
Share earns
1.90
1.77
6mo sales
4,653,000,000
4,613,000,000
Net inc
b441,000,000
463,000,000
Share earns
3.37
3.39
Shares outst
131,100,000
136,400,000


Albany International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Albany International (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
133,994,000
130,350,000
Net inc
3,716,000
12,932,000
Share earns
.15
.52
6mo sales
265,031,000
248,516,000
Net inc
6,218,000
22,293,000
Share earns
.25
.89


Trace Products reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trace Products (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
7,826,000
6,308,000
Net inc
886,000
413,000
Share earns
.09
.04


Amax Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amax Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
984,700,000
1,080,800,000
Net inc
b56,900,000
130,900,000
Share earns
.65
1.53
Shares outst
87,800,000
85,400,000
6mo sales
1,912,600,000
2,060,400,000
Net inc
b106,900,000
245,100,000
Share earns
1.22
2.87
Shares outst
87,300,000
85,200,000


Contel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Contel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
844,000,000
755,000,000
Net inc
43,000,000
67,000,000
Share earns
.27
.42
6mo rev
1,641,000,000
1,503,000,000
Net inc
97,000,000
131,000,000
Share earns
.61
.82


Martinez and Expos Shut Out the Pirates by 5-0
LEAD: Dennis Martinez pitched a four-hitter and Tim Wallach drove in four runs, leading the Montreal Expos past the Pittsburgh Pirates, 5-0, tonight.


Detroit Edison Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Detroit Edison Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
796,256,000
758,445,000
Net inc
117,763,000
96,133,000
Share earns
.74
.59
6mo rev
1,611,817,000
1,548,566,000
Net inc
254,311,000
198,881,000
Share earns
1.61
1.23


Careers;   Educating Engineers For Top Posts
LEAD: MANY engineering schools have been broadening their curriculums to hone the management skills of their students, so that they can hold more top management positions.


Divestiture By Marriott
LEAD: The Marriott Corporation said that it now controlled more than 50 percent of Basic American Medical Inc. and that it planned to dispose of its holdings in the Indianapolis-based health care concern.


Ametek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ametek Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
157,591,000
145,158,000
Net inc
10,467,000
10,898,000
Share earns
.24
.24
Shares outst
44,276,117
44,149,843
6mo sales
326,506,000
289,216,000
Net inc
20,225,000
22,202,000
Share earns
.46
.50
Shares outst
44,276,117
44,149,843


No Headline
LEAD: The frustrations in the professional life of Chuck Cary can be found in increments of five days, each time he takes the mound for the Yankees.
The starting pitcher's cyclical hope of every-fifth-day has come and gone again and again, until now, when the distance between victories can be measured in weeks.


Market Place;   Wall St. Volatility Reflects Larger Economic Worries
LEAD: A sharp fall in stock prices yesterday reflected growing worries over the health of the economy, especially the erosion of corporate profits, as well as a stock market that has grown increasingly fragile, some traders and analysts say.


First Home Federal S&amp;L Assn reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Home Federal S&amp;L Assn
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
149,266
490,153
Share earns
.10
.34
6mo net inc
600,274
940,283
Share earns
.39
.65
The 1990 results for the quarter and 6 months were lower than anticipated due primarily to a loss provision of $286,303 for real estate acquired in settlement of loans and additional expenses associated with its pending acquisition by Huntington Bancshares Inc.


Corrections
LEAD: Picture captions on Sunday about the dismantling of the Second Armored Division at Fort Hood, Tex., misidentified the vehicles shown.
The front-page picture showed M-2 Bradley infantry carriers, and the picture with the continuation showed M-88 tank-towing vehicles.


Scripps Howard Broadcasting Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scripps Howard Broadcasting Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
84,384,000
79,142,000
Net inc
9,150,000
7,304,000
Share earns
.89
.71
Shares outst
10,328,000
10,328,000
6mo rev
113,596,000
109,839,000
Net inc
12,498,000
9,181,000
Share earns
1.21
.89
Shares outst
10,328,000
10,328,000


1989 Reports Are Criticized
LEAD: The investigative arm of Congress today discounted reports by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission on the cause of the 190-point drop in the Dow Jones industrial average on Oct. 13, 1989.


Twin P's of 'Twin Peaks': Production and Promotion
LEAD: Robert A. Iger, the president of ABC Entertainment, decided that his network's most talked about new television show had, as he put it, ''invaded the American cultural consciousness'' when he opened The New Yorker magazine this summer and saw a cartoon of a married couple staring peevishly at each other.


Repertorio Espanol To Present Double Bill
LEAD: A play and a musical about the lives of Puerto Ricans in contemporary New York City and in 19th-century Puerto Rico are to be presented as a double bill by Repertorio Espanol beginning Aug. 11 at 8 P.M. at 138 East 27th Street.


Howard Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Howard Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net loss
15,684,000
b4,623,000
Per share
-
.32
Shares outst
14,365,221
14,354,921
6mo net loss
33,174,000
b13,143,000
Per share
-
.91
Shares outst
14,365,221
14,424,862


Arts Censorship Threatens All Our Freedoms
LEAD: To the Editors:


Stoneridge Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stoneridge Resources Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
52,231,000
52,840,000
Net loss
b2,210,000
539,000
Shares outst
13,184,990
10,144,568
9mo rev
106,975,000
127,930,000
Net loss
b8,493,000
1,086,000
Shares outst
12,064,723
7,904,135


First Hawaiian Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Hawaiian Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
17,433,000
14,785,000
Per share
.65
.55
6mo net inc
33,285,000
27,950,000
Per share
1.24
1.04


Southtrust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southtrust Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
19,024,000
17,831,000
Per share
.70
.67
6mo net inc
31,659,000
35,245,000
Per share
1.17
1.33


DH Technology reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DH Technology (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,968,000
10,471,000
Net inc
1,765,000
1,457,000
Share earns
.35
.29
Shares outst
5,086,000
4,991,000
6mo rev
22,479,000
19,951,000
Net inc
3,842,000
2,682,000
Share earns
.69
.54
Shares outst
5,066,000
4,955,000


Books for Novices
LEAD: IN computing, as in many other pursuits, getting started is the hardest part.
And getting off to a good start is especially important, because a frustrating beginning can poison subsequent sessions at the keyboard.


Puritan-Bennett Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Puritan-Bennett Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
63,255,000
56,633,000
Net inc
3,752,000
4,308,000
Share earns
.32
.38
Shares outst
11,440,057
11,281,237
6mo sales
125,126,000
110,531,000
Net inc
7,926,000
8,450,000
Share earns
.69
.75
Shares outst
11,419,214
11,266,035


Soybeans Resume Decline While Oil Continues to Gain
LEAD: Soybean futures prices resumed their slide yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade, while crude oil futures extended their gains on the New York Mercantile Exchange.


Cardinal Distribution reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cardinal Distribution (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
242,094,000
203,300,000
Net inc
3,307,000
2,367,000
Share earns
.31
.25


On a Remote Soviet Island, Lessons in Capitalism
LEAD: A Los Angeles business professor and a Soviet economist have announced that they are introducing the nuts and bolts of capitalism to the inhabitants of the remote Russian island of Sakhalin, north of Japan, in one of the latest free-market experiments in the Soviet Union.


2 Accounting Groups Split on Rule-Making
LEAD: In a defiant challenge to the authority of the Financial Accounting Standards Board to set accounting policy, the leading professional group of accountants has alerted the board that it plans to consult the board's experts less often and that it may issue its own rules, even when the board staunchly opposes them.


People
LEAD: *
David M. Biebelberg has been named senior vice president and group director at Griffin Bacal Inc.


Upper Broadway Loses Last of Its Fur Salons
LEAD: From the curb in front of his shuttered shop, Robert Payne pointed south, then north along Broadway, at the east side of the avenue, then the west.


CMS Energy reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CMS Energy (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
641,695,000
608,892,000
Net inc
63,042,000
63,261,000
Share earns
.77
.77
Shares outst
81,491,000
82,491,000
6mo rev
1,511,833,000
1,531,443,000
Net inc
166,360,000
169,582,000
Share earns
2.04
2.06
Shares outst
81,579,000
82,232,000


BTR Acquisition
LEAD: BTR P.L.C., a London-based industrial products company, said its BTR Inc. unit had signed an agreement to buy two subsidiaries of Canada's Ivaco Inc. for $112.3 million.
The company said the agreement for Niagara Lockport Industries Quebec and Niagara Lockport Industries was subject to the completion of a definitive stock purchase agreement.


Consolidated Edison Co. of N.Y.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consolidated Edison Co. of N.Y.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,263,269,000
1,218,000,000
Net inc
49,065,000
65,650,000
Share earns
.18
.24
Shares outst
228,172,000
228,022,000
6mo rev
2,757,853,000
2,605,026,000
Net inc
187,139,000
218,182,000
Share earns
.74
.87
Shares outst
228,165,000
228,013,000


Recruit Case Sentencing
LEAD: The 80-year-old former chairman of the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation could face a jail sentence in the Recruit Company stock scandal, Japanese news reports said today.


About New York;   Nights of Glitz, A Velvet Rope And Memories
LEAD: Today is the first anniversary of the death of 45-year-old Steve Rubell, that loquacious scamp who made his mark by being in the right place at the right time in a town where that is often all that matters.


Ingersoll-Rand Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ingersoll-Rand Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
932,000,000
907,400,000
Net inc
53,900,000
52,400,000
Share earns
1.03
.98
6mo sales
1,834,300,000
1,709,200,000
Net inc
99,500,000
b101,600,000
Share earns
1.89
1.91


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a profile yesterday about Judge David H. Souter's selection for the Supreme Court misattributed a description of him.
The comment, that he was ''about 135 pounds - and about 120 pounds of brain,'' was from John T. Broderick, counsel for the New Hampshire State Democratic Party and president of the New Hampshire Bar Association.


For Mandela, South Africa Comes First
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hudson Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hudson Foods Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
184,076,290
177,454,043
Net inc
4,381,187
13,559,547
Share earns
.30
1.01
Shares outst
14,851,076
13,423,739
9mo sales
479,466,463
455,688,786
Net inc
6,686,378
19,198,976
Share earns
.47
1.45
Shares outst
14,368,747
13,256,765


Results Plus
LEAD:
GOLF
Penalty Is Costly for Miller
Doug Miller of Roslyn, L.I., shot what would have been a course-record 64 over the difficult Black Course at Bethpage State Park on Long Island yesterday but wound up with a 66 after a two-stroke penalty, the best round on the opening day of the 54-hole Michelob New York State Open.


Treasury Securities Fall Slightly
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities fell slightly and interest rates inched higher in light trading yesterday.


New York City Still Growing, Studies Assert
LEAD: Economists, demographers and city planners say the population of New York City has continued to grow and is now larger than ever - 8 million - an assertion that challenges official estimates, demographic trends and conventional wisdom.


Texaco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texaco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,721,000,000
8,449,000,000
Net inc
353,000,000
366,000,000
Share earns
1.26
1.39
6mo rev
17,877,000,000
18,059,000,000
Net inc
681,000,000
b1,821,000,000
Share earns
2.41
7.19


Books of The Times;   Prowling Through Peru Seeking Birds to Name
LEAD:
A Parrot Without a Name
The Search for the Last Unknown Birds on Earth
By Don Stap
Illustrated. 239 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


U.S. Vehicle Sales Down 13.2% in Mid-July Period
LEAD: The market for new autos softened in mid-July, as sales of domestically produced cars and light trucks fell 13.2 percent compared with unusually strong sales in the period last year.


Bumbling Yankees Lose One More Time
LEAD: Deion Sanders may be gone within a week, back to the National Football League and a sport he once described as his wife, as opposed to his summertime girlfriend.


Alleghany Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alleghany Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
358,700,000
267,900,000
Net inc
26,600,000
17,400,000
Share earns
4.07
2.72
6mo rev
689,800,000
521,900,000
Net inc
37,600,000
24,400,000
Share earns
5.79
3.83


3 Going to Trial Accused of Flying Jetliner Under Alcohol's Influence
LEAD: In a case that is being watched closely by aviation experts and safety groups, three former Northwest Airlines pilots accused of flying a commercial jet while under the influence of alcohol go on trial in Federal District Court in Minneapolis today.
It is the first time that criminal charges have been brought against airline pilots for drunken flying, and the aviation industry is eager to see what precedent the court sets.


Smith's Food &amp; Drug Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smith's Food &amp; Drug Centers Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
501,191,000
421,845,000
Net inc
8,354,000
5,955,000
Share earns
.34
.30
Shares outst
25,272,000
19,968,000
6mo sales
988,936,000
821,086,000
Net inc
16,673,000
11,633,000
Share earns
.66
.59
Shares outst
25,272,000
19,664,000


Book Notes
LEAD:
Of Shevardnadzi


Boots and Saddles For a New Breed
LEAD: THE American love affair with the horse, born on the frontier and branded on the national psyche by movies and television, is thriving in the gentrified enclaves of horse shows, equestrian arenas, exclusive estates and the suburban settings of backyards.


Driver Killed, 11 Children Injured in Brooklyn Bus Crash


Giants to Give Guyton A Bigger Responsibility
LEAD: One year and one day ago, the Giants waived Kenny Hill, their veteran strong safety, and gave the job to Greg Jackson, a rookie.
In the season opener against the Washington Redskins, when Jackson was fooled on a play-action pass and gave up a 48-yard touchdown to Ricky Sanders, he lost the job to another rookie, Myron


A 33-Year Employee Heads Brown &amp; Root
LEAD: Brown &amp; Root Inc., one of the world's largest engineering and construction companies, has named Bernard Pieper as its new chief executive.


Tribune Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tribune Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
656,215,000
643,143,000
Net inc
56,117,000
75,324,000
Share earns
.78
.98
Shares outst
66,404,000
73,013,000
6mo rev
1,239,784,000
1,196,069,000
Net inc
89,638,000
112,098,000
Share earns
1.21
1.47
Shares outst
67,257,000
73,684,000


Hearty Food in an Idaho Cabin
LEAD: THE log cabin lodge looked like a set from the back lot of a Hollywood studio shooting an old western.


INFECTED SURGEONS POSE LOW AIDS RISK
LEAD: A surgeon with AIDS who operated on thousands of people apparently did not infect any of them with the AIDS virus, a study has found, suggesting that patients face a minimal risk of contracting the disease from such exposure.


ServiceMaster L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ServiceMaster L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
456,423,000
401,290,000
Net inc
18,914,000
18,129,000
Share earns
.60
.56
6mo rev
888,500,000
785,889,000
Net inc
35,585,000
34,483,000
Share earns
1.13
1.06


3 Are Hurt in Motel Explosion And Fire on New Jersey Shore
LEAD: Three men were injured, one seriously, in an explosion and fire last night at the Marian Motel in Seaside Heights, N.J., the police said.


Evolution in Europe;   Gorbachev Reported to Yield to Yeltsin in 'the War of the Banks'
LEAD: When Boris N. Yeltsin, President of the Russian republic, moved earlier this month to challenge President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's monopoly of the Government banking system, it seemed that the two leaders were headed for their first high-stakes confrontation.


The Right Way to Raise Taxes
LEAD: An attitudinal dam broke when President Bush last month grudgingly acknowledged he could swallow new taxes.
There was a wave of relief that finally the country could control its towering fiscal deficits.
But now the rush has worn off and the Congressional budget negotiators are finally getting down to the hard part: deciding how to raise revenues.


Barry's Defense Counters Witness's Testimony of a Sexual Assault
LEAD: Charles Lewis, a leading prosecution witness in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s drug and perjury trial, testified today that he could not support a female acquaintance's charge that Mr.
Barry had sexually attacked her.


Red Grange Recovering
LEAD: Harold (Red) Grange, the legendary Galloping Ghost of football, has been diagnosed as having Parkinson's disease but should be returning to his home in Lake Wales, Fla., after a few more weeks at an extended-care center, according to his wife. ''He won't be going dancing,'' said Muggs Grange, his wife of more than 49 years.


At Last, Medicine Really Listens to van Gogh
LEAD: A medical report being published today contends that Vincent van Gogh was not mad and did not have epilepsy, as has been speculated, but had a painful inner ear disorder that caused him to cut off his left ear and eventually to kill himself.





Sewage Plant Pump Repaired
LEAD: Engineers restored a damaged pump at the city's second-largest sewage-treatment plant yesterday afternoon, two days after an electrical fire shut down the plant and caused a major sewage spill into the East and Harlem Rivers.
Four of five pumps are now available for use at the plant on Wards Island, said Tina Casey, a spokeswoman for the city's Department of Environmental Protection.


New York City Auctions $1.1 Billion in Tax Notes
LEAD: The City of New York held a competitive auction of $1.1 billion worth of short-term tax anticipation notes.


An Investment Adviser Becomes a Private Bank
LEAD: Morris W. Offit has a new bank named after him, the Offitbank.


Phillips Petroleum Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Phillips Petroleum Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,980,000,000
3,299,000,000
Net inc
105,000,000
197,000,000
Share earns
.43
.81
Shares outst
245,136,000
243,758,000
6mo rev
6,112,000,000
6,401,000,000
Net inc
b364,000,000
387,000,000
Share earns
1.49
1.59
Shares outst
244,529,000
243,561,000


Review/Ballet;   An Australian 'Giselle' With the Fervor of Youth
LEAD: By the time the Australian Ballet ended its opening night on Monday with a fiercely dramatic version of ''Giselle,'' the audience in the Metropolitan Opera House was beside itself, happily infected with the fervor that had wafted so wonderfully across from the dancers.


Seagate Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seagate Technology Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
668,074,000
370,463,000
Net inc
29,694,000
24,016,000
Share earns
.46
.46
Shares outst
64,895,000
51,906,000
Yr sales
2,413,178,000
1,371,568,000
Net inc
117,241,000
349,000
Share earns
1.92
.01
Shares outst
61,199,000
50,548,000


76ers Select Shue As General Manager
LEAD: Gene Shue, a player for 10 years and a coach for 23 in the National Basketball Association, began a new phase of his pro career when he was named general manager of the Philadelphia 76ers yesterday.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MARLON BRANDO planned to make a shrine out of the room where his daughter's boyfriend was slain, a lawyer said yesterday at a hearing in Los Angeles for the actor's son, who is charged with murdering the young Tahitian.


Lawmakers Ask Broader Inquiry On Reagan's Housing Secretary
LEAD: A House panel asked a special prosecutor today to broaden his investigation of former Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr. to determine whether Mr.
Pierce illegally steered Government-related business to his former law firm.


Melville Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Melville Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,949,195,000
1,675,270,000
Net inc
78,250,000
61,626,000
Share earns
.72
.56
6mo sales
3,567,034,000
3,204,367,000
Net inc
86,061,000
85,856,000
Share earns
.76
.78


Watkins-Johnson reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Watkins-Johnson (NYSE)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Sales
77,626,000
82,272,000
Net inc
b3,660,000
5,524,000
Share earns
.46
.66
6mo sales
152,186,000
163,045,000
Net inc
6,020,000
10,722,000
Share earns
.75
1.28
b-Included a gain of $514,000, or 6 cents a share, resulting from the settlement of a pricing dispute on a contract with the U.S.


Evolution in Europe;   Communists Take Lead In Mongolian Elections
LEAD: Mongolians apparently have handed their Communist rulers a comfortable victory in the vast Central Asian nation's first free elections, according to results from first-round voting announced today.


Unions Prepare Boycott Against The Daily News
LEAD: Labor leaders at The Daily News announced yesterday that they would organize an ''all-fronts boycott'' against the newspaper.


Key West Journal;   Island Mayor Likes Bucking the Tide
LEAD: In most American towns being a former bootlegger, smuggler, mercenary, gunrunner, gambler, saloonkeeper and womanizer would not, perhaps, be among the best credentials to become mayor.


Vincent Has No Plan To Pursue Winfield
LEAD: Dave Winfield and his relationship with Howard Spira will not be the subject of any further inquiry after Commissioner Fay Vincent wraps up his investigation of George Steinbrenner.


Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Borden Chemicals &amp; Plastics L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Revenue
109,153,000
129,988,000
Net inc
14,880,000
22,708,000
Share earns
.40
.61
6mo rev
208,001,000
265,908,000
Net inc
18,868,000
54,344,000
Share earns
.51
1.46


Net Up at Chevron and Mobil as Texaco and Phillips Fall
LEAD: The Chevron Corporation, helped by steady gasoline prices and demand in the West, where half of its refined products are sold in the United States, continued to outperform most major oil companies in the second quarter, posting a strong profit gain of 60.4 percent.


Morgan Stanley Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morgan Stanley Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,446,086,000
1,516,149,000
Net inc
58,048,000
112,130,000
Share earns
1.44
2.83
Shares outst
37,216,059
37,920,952
6mo rev
2,843,275,000
2,754,923,000
Net inc
140,182,000
193,259,000
Share earns
3.51
4.86
Shares outst
37,412,257
37,798,582


ULSTER NUN KILLED WITH 3 POLICEMEN
LEAD: A Roman Catholic nun and three policemen were killed today when a bomb ripped through a car near Armagh in Northern Ireland, the police said.


Weirton Steel reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weirton Steel (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
302,300,000
341,900,000
Net inc
6,400,000
400,000
Share earns
.30
.02
6mo sales
614,200,000
705,700,000
Net inc
10,400,000
6,500,000
Share earns
.48
.32


Armco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Armco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
457,200,000
665,600,000
Net loss
b85,100,000
c75,600,000
Share earns
-
.84
Shares outst
88,500,000
88,400,000
6mo sales
903,100,000
1,565,400,000
Net loss
b72,200,000
c116,500,000
Share earns
-
1.28
Shares outst
88,500,000
88,200,000


Stalled Geneva Farm Talks Are Suspended for a Month
LEAD: The United States and the European Community, failing to make progress at talks in Geneva in resolving a festering trade dispute over farm subsidies, suspended negotiations today for a month.


Fed Approves Sovran Merger
LEAD: The Federal Reserve Board said yesterday that it had approved the merger between Sovran Financial Corporation, Virginia's largest banking company and the Citizens and Southern Corporation of Atlanta.


Holy Infringement! Batman Wins Award
LEAD: A company that distributed wristwatches decorated with a logo resembling that of Batman has been ordered to pay more than $40,000 to the caped crusader's copyright owners.


Few Heads Are Turned By Profits' Turnaround
LEAD: The selloff in the stock market on Monday, which many analysts attributed to weak profits, actually came at a time when company earnings seem to be rising again.


Health-Care Rationing Takes From the Poor;   Compassion and Fraud
LEAD: To the Editor:


Greenspan Emphasizes Fight Against Inflation
LEAD: Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, provided little hope today to politicians who want to see interest rates lowered and bank regulations eased.


Union Electric Co. reports earnings for 12mo to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Electric Co. (NYSE)
12mo to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,018,217,000
2,018,716,000
Net inc
307,842,000
270,059,000
Share earns
2.86
2.40


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: CHICKEN livers are not only among the most inexpensive meats, but they also are one of the most versatile.
They can be used in stuffings, sauces, pates, terrines, in rice dishes and in scores of main courses.
One of my favorite preparations calls for simply dipping the livers in seasoned flour and then cooking them in oil until crisp and browned.


Bush's Court Choice;   Sununu Tells How and Why He Pushed Souter for Court
LEAD: John H. Sununu, the White House chief of staff, said today that he had assured President Bush that David H. Souter would uphold conservative values on the Supreme Court.
He also said he had given ''strong personal support'' to Judge Souter at a key moment in the President's decision-making.


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: NEARLY every weekend Jordan Monkarsh begs, cajoles and even yells at people wandering along the boardwalk in this Los Angeles resort community, to get them to try the sausage from his stand, Jody Maroni's Sausage Kingdom.


In Switch, Israel Backs U.S. Radio Transmitter
LEAD: An Israeli Government panel approved plans today for a powerful Voice of America radio relay station in the Negev, reversing an earlier decision to postpone the project pending an environmental study.


Sasser's 2 Homers Get Mets On Track
LEAD: There were cracks in the facade, all right: Darryl Strawberry, with two hits in 24 times up; Dwight Gooden, confessing that his pitching shoulder felt stiff; Kevin Elster, sidelined because his shoulder felt very stiff; Mackey Sasser, limping and chafing on a severely sprained right ankle, and the


Eight Possible Sites Selected For U. of California Campus
LEAD: The biggest guessing game in California education circles over the last few years has been speculation on where the University of California Board of Regents will put a new $300 million campus.


Mahlmann's Firm Fails to Sell Equity Stake
LEAD: Stotler Group Inc., a financially troubled commodity brokerage headed by Karsten Mahlmann, who is also chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade, said today that it had failed to obtain a much-needed infusion of capital from an outside investor group.


Unisys Computers
LEAD: The Unisys Corporation will offer new versions of its A Series and 1100/ 2200 mainframe systems.
The new A16 model is currently available and priced between $1.75 million and $5.9 million depending on configuration, the company said.
The new A12 model is also available and priced between $495,000 and $2.4 million.


Smith Corona Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smith Corona Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
79,800,000
112,400,000
Net loss
1,500,000
b3,100,000
Yr sales
471,400,000
493,100,000
Net inc
32,900,000
b35,300,000
Share earns
1.09
1.17
b-Included net charges of $14.6 million and $19 million, for the quarter and year, respectively, related to a supplemental performance plan which terminated with the Aug.


Market Place;   Warnaco Grows With 'Junk Bonds'
LEAD: AT a time when many manufacturers are acting more like retailers to keep their goods from gathering dust on the shelves, Warnaco Inc., one of the nation's oldest clothing makers, appears to go even further than most.
One result is that Warnaco appears to be weathering a leveraged buyout so well that it expects to report its first annual profit since it was bought out in 1986 by the Spectrum


Times Mirror Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Times Mirror Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
906,615,000
861,339,000
Net inc
46,985,000
b84,988,000
Share earns
.36
.66
6mo rev
1,781,767,000
1,708,234,000
Net inc
92,998,000
b153,775,000
Share earns
.72
1.19


Marietta Net Climbs 8.7%
LEAD: Earnings for the Martin Marietta Corporation, a leading aerospace and military contractor, increased in the second quarter because of the success of several space programs, the company said today.


Net Plunges At Two Big Brokerages
LEAD: Reflecting the slump on Wall Street, two of the largest investment houses, the Morgan Stanley Group and Salomon Inc., reported quarterly earnings yesterday that were down sharply from the comparable period last year.


Health-Care Rationing Takes From the Poor
LEAD: To the Editor:


TBS Uncertain It Will Support Another Goodwill Games in '94
LEAD: Despite the Turner Broadcasting System's plans to stage the Goodwill Games in 1994 and 1998, the company's chief financial officer said today that a firm decision would not be made until the board of directors reviews the 1990 games, now under way.


Genuine Parts Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genuine Parts Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
842,664,000
812,264,000
Net inc
51,607,000
50,008,000
Share earns
.67
.65
6mo sales
1,663,922,000
1,583,230,000
Net inc
98,593,000
95,007,000
Share earns
1.27
1.23


Bush Addresses Dinner to Raise G.O.P. Money
LEAD: President Bush came to a fund-raising dinner in New York last night to praise the Republican candidate for governor, Pierre A. Rinfret, but not to raise much money for him.


Evolution in Europe;   Election Dispute Splits East German Coalition
LEAD: East Germany's three-month-old coalition Government lost its smallest partner today over the question of how to conduct the Dec. 2 all-German elections that will be the country's last official act.


Bridge
LEAD: Young players made a big impression on the first day of Spingold Knockout play at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
Four of the players who qualified last week to represent North America in the 1991 World Junior Championships advanced, and two of them scored a notable upset on a day in which form prevailed, both in the Spingold and the Women's


Schwab Agrees to Censure
LEAD: Charles Schwab &amp; Company, the discount brokerage firm, said on Monday that a hearing panel of the New York Stock Exchange had approved a settlement resolving a review of unauthorized trading of customer shares by Schwab's reorganization department.
A separate review by the Securities and Exchange Commission has not been completed.


Control Data Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Control Data Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
405,600,000
804,300,000
Net inc
b11,200,000
c497,300,000
Share earns
.26
-
6mo rev
827,200,000
1,647,800,000
Net inc
18,000,000
c493,800,000
Share earns
.42
-


It's Familiar Story for U.S. As Soviets Triumph Again
LEAD: The United States is always starting over with its national basketball team, but the Soviet Union is not used to a major rebuilding program smack in the middle of a tournament.


Death in Arab Uprising
LEAD: An 18-year-old Palestinian died today from wounds suffered in an earlier clash with Israeli soldiers, Arab reports said.
It was the first uprising death from army gunfire reported in a month.
The victim, Mahmud Helal Salame, was shot in the neck July 14 in a clash between soldiers and stone-throwing youths in the West Bank village of Beit Lid, Arab reports said.


ITT Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ITT Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
5,226,000,000
5,215,000,000
Net inc
b397,000,000
c244,000,000
Share earns
3.00
1.70
6mo sales
10,159,000,000
10,045,000,000
Net inc
b650,000,000
c444,000,000
Share earns
4.88
3.10
Shares outst
129,466,000
140,909,000


Secret Memos by Police Are Sought
LEAD: Two months after the discovery of confidential New York City police memorandums that defense lawyers say could lead to the reversal of scores of convictions, prosecutors are still culling through the cases behind closed doors and defense lawyers are clamoring for a list of the defendants.


Blending Sports Management With Diplomacy
LEAD: A year ago, Brian Gowdy was finishing a six-month academic internship in the Caribbean, teaching retarded children and adults how to play soccer and volleyball and trying to convince teachers that sports can enhance the quality of life for the retarded.


Computer Associates Intl reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Associates Intl (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
255,058,000
303,207,000
Net inc
3,592,000
10,689,000
Share earns
.02
.06


Bell South to Test Wireless Phones
LEAD: The Bell South Corporation applied to the Federal Communications Commission for permission to test tiny wireless telephones in Atlanta over the next two years.
Bell South said the test, which would involve up to 300 handsets, would use as much existing cellular telephone technology as possible.
Some experts say that such a system, known as a personal communications network, could prove cheaper than current cellular telephone service.


U.S. Policies Criticized by Allies in Asia
LEAD: America's allies in Southeast Asia today bitterly criticized Washington's policies on Indochina and refugees as inconsistent and counterproductive.


I.B.M. Stops Ads For P.G.A Event
LEAD: I.B.M. will not broadcast television advertisements during the P.G.A.
Championship next month because of racial exclusion at Shoal Creek Country Club, site of the golf tournament.
A spokeswoman, Gina Chew-Holman, said today that when the corporation learned of the racial issue, ''we decided it would not be an appropriate vehicle for our advertising.


Capital Cities/ABC Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capital Cities/ABC Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Revenue
1,357,284,000
1,226,499,000
Net inc
142,300,000
140,200,000
Share earns
8.19
7.83
Shares outst
17,375,000
17,910,000
6mo rev
2,619,605,000
2,346,940,000
Net inc
248,614,000
222,926,000
Share earns
14.27
12.40
Shares outst
17,425,000
17,980,000


Health-Care Rationing Takes From the Poor;   Medicare Capped in '84
LEAD: To the Editor:


Suit Filed by Mitel Against A.T.&amp;T.
LEAD: The Mitel Corporation, a Canadian telecommunications systems manufacturer, has sued the American Telephone and Telegragh Company in a Florida court for taking ''predatory actions'' against it.


Electric Chair Tested on Vat of Water
LEAD: Using a metal strainer, a pipe and a vat of salty water to simulate a human body, an independent expert has tested Florida's electric chair and declared that it works effectively.


On Deadline Day, Cuomo Vetoes 2 Bills Opposed by Dinkins
LEAD: In a victory for the Dinkins administration, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today vetoed two measures that the Mayor's office had opposed.


Allied-Signal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied-Signal Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,184,000,000
3,115,000,000
Net inc
121,000,000
b166,000,000
Share earns
.88
1.11
Shares outst
138,956,914
149,019,543
6mo sales
6,239,000,000
6,057,000,000
Net inc
250,000,000
b292,000,000
Share earns
1.78
1.96
Shares outst
140,876,895
148,682,842


ESPN Losses Trim Capital Cities/ABC Net
LEAD: Capital Cities/ABC Inc., owner of the No. 2-ranked television network, said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings edged up 1.5 percent but said third-quarter results might be lower if advertising demand did not improve.


Pepsico's Profits Climbed by 10.4% in the Second Quarter
LEAD: Pepsico Inc., the world's second-largest soft-drink company and the nation's No. 2 operator of fast-food restaurants, said that earnings in the second quarter ended June 16 rose 10.4 percent, to $292.5 million, or $1.10 a share, from $264.9 million a year earlier, or $1.00 a share.


Arrow Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arrow Electronics (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
242,061,000
225,534,000
Net inc
2,777,000
243,000
Share earns
.13
-
6mo sales
488,810,000
463,424,000
Net inc
5,500,000
2,359,000
Share earns
.24
-
Preferred dividends exceeded net income in year-ago periods.


Profits Up 9% At Interpublic
LEAD: The Interpublic Group of Companies said second-quarter earnings rose 9 percent, to $30.9 million, or 92 cents a share, from $28.3 million, or 84 cents a share, in the period last year.
Revenues rose 8 percent, to $342.4 million.


Mobil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mobil Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
13,820,000,000
14,033,000,000
Net inc
b498,000,000
c401,000,000
Share earns
1.19
.98
6mo rev
28,853,000,000
28,053,000,000
Net inc
b898,000,000
830,000,000
Share earns
2.13
2.02


Westmoreland Coal Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westmoreland Coal Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
142,155,000
153,839,000
Net inc
5,179,000
b805,000
Share earns
.63
-
6mo rev
270,147,000
303,561,000
Net inc
7,928,000
2,645,000
Share earns
.96
.32
b


Critic's Notebook;   English Theater Quick on Political Trigger
LEAD: In the 1970's, during the heyday of the Joint Stock Company and other politically inclined theatrical organizations, English playwrights like Caryl Churchill, David Hare and Howard Brenton often reacted immediately to public issues.
Faced with urgent political questions, the writers reached for their quill cudgels.


Millipore Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Millipore Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
173,804,000
167,049,000
Net inc
13,915,000
13,466,000
Share earns
.50
.48
Shares outst
27,873,000
27,903,000
6mo sales
338,521,000
327,834,000
Net inc
26,930,000
25,893,000
Share earns
.97
.93
Shares outst
27,879,000
27,894,000


Seger May Quit Fed's Board
LEAD: President Bush may get a third chance to appoint a member of the Federal Reserve Board if Martha R. Seger resigns.


Washington Post Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Post Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
379,551,000
374,457,000
Net inc
55,947,000
60,486,000
Share earns
4.60
4.72
Shares outst
12,147,000
12,815,000
6mo rev
720,517,000
716,334,000
Net inc
94,967,000
101,986,000
Share earns
7.76
7.94
Shares outst
12,246,000
12,845,000


Sallie Mae Shares Fall
LEAD: Shares of the Student Loan Marketing Association, were lower in heavy trading yesterday amid concern about the financial crisis at a key guarantor, analysts said.


A Mechanical Milkmaid: Will Cows Be Content?
LEAD: Robots have cleaned up nuclear power plants, assembled electronic devices and painted cars, but are they ready for one of mankind's oldest jobs - milking cows?


Rangers Sign Center
LEAD: General Manager Neil Smith of the Rangers announced yesterday the signing of Ross Fitzpatrick, a 29-year-old free-agent center who played last season with Hershey of the American Hockey League, where he registered a league-high 58 assists and finished second in scoring with 103 points.
He had been in the Philadelphia organization since 1982.


Economic Scene;   Sticky Traffic, Slick Fixes
LEAD: FRESH from their triumphs in Eastern Europe, free-market economists are pushing market solutions for problems closer to home.
Markets are being touted as the most efficient way to save wildlife, improve public education and reduce acid rain.
Could they also be used to tame the scourge of America's city-sprawls: the rush-hour traffic jam?


Salomon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Salomon Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,093,000,000
2,328,000,000
Net inc
120,000,000
253,000,000
Share earns
.89
1.89
Shares outst
117,000,000
125,600,000
6mo rev
4,446,000,000
3,867,000,000
Net inc
239,000,000
225,000,000
Share earns
1.77
1.54
Shares outst
117,500,000
126,200,000


Gunman Kills Father and Shoots Baby
LEAD: A 1-year-old girl sitting in her mother's lap was shot and critically wounded in Brooklyn yesterday morning when a gunman fired two shots at their car, killing her father, as they waited at a stop sign.


Robinson Of Tigers Flirts With No-Hitter
LEAD: Jeff Robinson of the Detroit Tigers lost a no-hitter on Mike Devereaux's leadoff homer in the eighth, but wound up with an 8-2 victory over Baltimore tonight behind a four-homer barrage.


A Captain 'On Stage' At Tables
LEAD: LIKE so many people in his generation, Paul McLaughlin, a 30-year-old from Brooklyn, started waiting on tables as a way to make money while he was in college. ''I never took it seriously,'' Mr.
McLaughlin said. ''My entire family is involved in investment banking.''


The Slimming Of Fat Fast Food
LEAD: WHEN McDonald's, Burger King and Wendy's announced in recent days that they would fry their potatoes in all vegetable oil instead of a mixture of beef tallow and vegetable oil, it was just one more sign that fast-food chains have learned a lesson: to survive in today's health-conscious society, they must provide more nutritious alternatives to double cheeseburgers and fried chicken.


Unit of Nynex Denies Overpayments Charge
LEAD: Denying charges by New York Attorney General Robert Abrams and others, the New York Telephone Company said yesterday that its review of purchasing practices from 1984 to 1988 had found no evidence of financial improprieties.


The Exalted Victims on Ryan's List
LEAD: Harry Spilman was agitated, and got Nolan Ryan on the phone. ''Nolan, how come I'm not on the list?'' he asked one day last summer to his neighbor in Alvin, Tex., and former opponent and teammate, Nolan Ryan. ''What list?'' asked Ryan. ''The list of every guy you ever struck out in the major leagues,'' said Spilman.


Pilgrim's Pride reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pilgrim's Pride (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
188,570,000
176,152,000
Net inc
7,038,000
13,567,000
Share earns
.31
.60
9mo sales
529,206,000
484,056,000
Net inc
12,039,000
16,034,000
Share earns
.53
.71


COMMITTEE PASSES A GUN RESTRICTION
LEAD: The House Judiciary Committee approved legislation today to require a seven-day waiting period to buy a handgun.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: PRINCE CHARLES, the heir to the British throne, has entered the world of commerce with what might be the ultimate upper-crust loaf, an organic bread named after his Highgrove Home Farm and bearing the Duchy of Cornwall crest.
The Tesco supermarket chain began selling Wholemeal Highgrove yesterday for $1.07 a loaf in its stores in southeastern England.


Debate on the Fate Of Arts Endowment Is Postponed
LEAD: The long-awaited debate on the future of the National Endowment for the Arts will be awaited still longer: it has been put off, probably until September.


WESTERN LEADERS PLAN U.N. MEETING
LEAD: President Bush and the leaders of six other major industrial democracies agreed at their summit meeting in Houston this month that they would all do their best to attend a ''world summit for children'' to be held here on Sept. 29 and 30, diplomats and United Nations officials said today.


Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
13,851,700,000
13,281,300,000
Net inc
237,900,000
c391,200,000
Share earns
.69
1.11
6mo rev
26,457,500,000
25,441,800,000
Net inc
b344,200,000
c648,900,000
Share earns
1.00
1.81


East Germans' Anxiety Dulls Thrill of Victory
LEAD: Standing on the podium, their faces revealed a little of the happiness one might expect at such an occasion.
These were medal winners, after all, and they tried to look the part.


5 Years May Be Needed To Close Savings Cases
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, criticized for his sluggish response to the savings and loan crisis, told a Senate panel today that the Justice Department will need at least five years to prosecute the most serious cases of fraud at 100 institutions on its priority list.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: RYAN CROCKER, a career diplomat with wide Middle East experience, has been named by PRESIDENT BUSH to be Ambassador to Lebanon, the White House announced yesterday.
If he is confirmed by the Senate, the 41-year old diplomat would be one of the youngest American ambassadors, although he will not be heading for


Playing the B46 Lotto: Will the Bus Show Up?
LEAD: At 12:41 P.M. on a recent weekday, Bernice Cross leaned against the glass in a shady corner of the bus shelter at Utica and Church Avenues and began what has come to be known as the ''lotto wait.'' That's because the chances of a bus on the B46 line in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn running on time are about the same as winning the lottery.


Cultural Differences
LEAD: To The Living Section:


McMillan Shows Up at Jets' Training Camp
LEAD: Erik McMillan, the All-Pro free safety who was unexpectedly absent when the Jets' training camp opened on Monday, unexpectedly showed up late this afternoon.


Pepsico Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 16
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pepsico Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 16
1990
1989
Sales
4,204,700,000
3,592,700,000
Net inc
b292,500,000
c264,900,000
Share earns
1.10
1.00
Shares outst
266,800,000
265,200,000
6mo sales
7,882,400,000
6,551,000,000
Net inc
b474,400,000
c430,000,000
Share earns
1.78
1.62
Shares outst
266,500,000
264,900,000


Yellow Freight System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Yellow Freight System Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
570,044,000
564,675,000
Net inc
16,449,000
18,463,000
Share earns
.58
.64
6mo rev
1,137,506,000
1,094,574,000
Net inc
29,880,000
b63,421,000
Share earns
1.05
2.20


C.D.'s and Bank Funds Off
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts continued to slide during the week that ended yesterday.
It was the eighth consecutive week of decline, and reflected a flight to quality caused in large part by a weak stock market.


Warning: Some of This Live Concert Isn't;   Consumer Fraud
LEAD: To the Editor:


European Rocket Launches TV Satellites


Calm Senate, Restless House Prepare for Debates on Ethics
LEAD: As the Senate prepared to open what is expected to be a low-key debate on Wednesday about Senator Dave Durenberger's ethical conduct, a leader of House conservatives today pledged to press for a harsher judgment there in the case of Representative Barney Frank.


Marion Merrell Dow Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marion Merrell Dow Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
629,000,000
261,000,000
Net inc
130,000,000
71,000,000
Share earns
.47
.45
Shares outst
278,000,000
156,000,000
6mo sales
1,207,000,000
504,000,000
Net inc
241,000,000
126,000,000
Share earns
.87
.80
Shares outst
278,000,000
156,000,000


Eddie Quillan, Actor, 83
LEAD: Eddie Quillan, an actor who played young heroes and boys next door in some of Hollywood's most memorable motion pictures, died here on Thursday.
He was 83 years old.


Varian Associates reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Varian Associates (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
343,600,000
303,700,000
Net loss
b34,100,000
c9,100,000
Share earns
-
.45
9mo sales
926,100,000
886,200,000
Net loss
b18,700,000
c30,500,000
Share earns
-
1.46


Bush's Court Choice;   The Judge Speaks: Excerpts From Souter's Decisions in New Hampshire
LEAD: In his seven years as an Associate Justice of the New Hampshire Supreme Court, David H. Souter wrote opinions in a wide variety of legal cases.
Two months ago, he became a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, in Boston, but has not yet written any opinions for that court.


G.M. to Sell Trucks Fueled by Natural Gas
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation today entered the market for vehicles powered by cleaner-burning compressed natural gas.


O'Sullivan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* O'Sullivan Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
55,844,000
59,403,000
Net inc
5,115,000
5,461,000
Share earns
.31
.33
Shares outst
16,486,000
16,486,000
6mo sales
105,551,000
120,406,000
Net inc
7,911,000
9,717,000
Share earns
.48
.59
Shares outst
16,486,000
16,487,000


Weyerhaeuser Co. reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Weyerhaeuser Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
2,392,418,000
2,643,958,000
Net inc
114,256,000
154,863,000
Share earns
.54
.73
6mo sales
4,674,921,000
4,965,250,000
Net inc
244,314,000
302,950,000
Share earns
1.15
1.43
Shares outst
204,764,000
208,173,000


Buenos Aires Journal;   High Atop His Bicycle, a Comic Hurls Some Bolts
LEAD: It's not because of his long battle with obesity that Enrique Pinti spends 20 minutes during each of his sold-out stage shows furiously pedaling a stationary bicycle while spewing a breathless assault on the Argentine national character.


Seaborne Guerrillas Shell the Residence Of Liberia's Leader
LEAD: A rebel gunboat attacked President Samuel K. Doe's seafront executive mansion before dawn today and troops inside the fortified command post fired back, witnesses said.


Stephen J. Riker Weds Ms. Baker
LEAD: Margery Baker, a producer of special events for CBS News in New York, was married yesterday to Stephen Jonathan Riker, a real-estate executive in New York.
Rabbi Alex Goldman performed the ceremony at the Lotos Club.


U.N. Relief Ship Is Recalled As Ethiopia Rebels Hold Port
LEAD: Facing opposition from Ethiopian rebels, the United Nations abandoned efforts today to reopen an Ethiopian port through which it hoped to ferry food for about 4 million people at risk of starvation.


Christie's Anticipates Record Auction Sales
LEAD: Christie's International announced yesterday that it expected record worldwide auction sales of $2.4 billion for the 1989-1990 season, which winds down this month and is to end on Aug. 31.


Premier Industrial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Premier Industrial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
167,847,000
160,566,000
Net inc
20,164,000
19,294,000
Share earns
.35
.33
Yr rev
626,243,000
596,146,000
Net inc
74,715,000
69,704,000
Share earns
1.29
1.13


Kenjiro Takayanagi, Electrical Engineer, 91
LEAD: Kenjiro Takayanagi, known as the father of Japanese television, died of pneumonia on Monday in a hospital in Yokosuka, company officials said today.
He was 91 years old.


Ryder System reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ryder System (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,309,632,000
1,288,459,000
Net inc
32,152,000
32,475,000
Share earns
.39
.40
Shares outst
75,298,000
76,895,000
6mo sales
2,559,934,000
2,511,217,000
Net inc
39,409,000
58,661,000
Share earns
.45
.70
Shares outst
75,622,000
78,131,000


Allied Products Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Products Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
128,954,000
157,498,000
Net inc
819,000
b920,000
Share earns
-
.01
6mo sales
290,777,000
317,084,000
Net inc
4,710,000
b5,731,000
Share earns
.61
.81


Bush's Court Choice;   Ascetic at Home but Vigorous on Bench
LEAD: When lawyers assess a candidate for the Supreme Court, they generally make comparisons to known judicial quantities.
That is how the lawyers of New Hampshire are describing Judge David H. Souter, whom they have followed from private practice in Concord to the State Attorney General's office to the state and


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
7.93
9.19
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.58
7.52
8.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.45
7.43
7.59
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.47
8.43
7.88
30-YR.


Across South Africa, Shattering Days of Violence
LEAD: As South Africa gropes toward negotiations between the white-dominated Government and the black majority, the nation is being torn by some of its worst violence in recent years.


Gooden Bothered By Stiff Shoulder
LEAD: One year after suffering a torn muscle behind the right shoulder, Dwight Gooden acknowledged tonight that he had been pitching for the last couple of weeks with some stiffness behind the shoulder.


A Needle, Three Miles Down
LEAD: The Navy has developed such skill in recovering objects lost on the ocean floor that this week it embarked on a remarkably difficult search.
It is seeking a cargo door that blew off a United Airlines jumbo jet en route from Honolulu to New Zealand.


Ryan's Night of Reckoning
LEAD: In the marketplace found in the slim newspaper columns of classified advertising, a 43-year-old man has become as hot a ticket as New Kids on the Block.


Gary Reynolds, 40, Curator of Artworks At Newark Museum
LEAD: Gary A. Reynolds, curator of painting and sculpture at the Newark Museum since 1983, died on Monday at Tisch Hospital of New York University Medical Center.
He was 40 years old and lived in Manhattan.


McGirt Has Surgery
LEAD: James (Buddy) McGirt, the International Boxing Federation's top-ranked welterweight contender, underwent surgery yesterday to repair tendons in his left elbow that were torn during the third round of his 10-round victory by unanimous decision over Jose Leonard Bermudez in Atlantic City on Sunday.
According to Dr.


The Value of Time
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Business Hours End for the Upper West Side's Last Furrier


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''He would be technically conservative, but not ideologically conservative, not like a Scalia.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD:
DEAR Diary:


Bush's Court Choice;   SENATORS DIVIDED ON ASKING SOUTER HIS ABORTION VIEW
LEAD: A day after President Bush announced his choice of David H. Souter for the Supreme Court, a sharp dispute broke out today in Congress and among interest groups over how far the Senate should go in eliciting his position on abortion.


Bid to Curb Aid On Sugar Fails
LEAD: The House and Senate easily defeated a proposal today to trim the United States sugar program, sidestepping charges that the subsidies hurt sugar-exporting nations and inflated domestic food prices.


Food Notes
LEAD:
A Bit of Texas Downtown Looking more like a truck stop than a cafe, the new Texas Tortilla Bakery, 36 Water Street (near Coenties Slip) in Manhattan easily satisfies a hunger for warm, fresh tortillas, mellow beans, lightly charred chicken or beef fajitas and salsa with a gentle kick.
The bakery and cafe is open for dining in or taking out.


Girl, 9, Hit by Stray Bullet, Dies; Suspect Offers a Not-Guilty Plea
LEAD: A 9-year-old girl from Brooklyn died early yesterday, two days after being struck in the head by a stray bullet as she slept in her family's car after an outing at an amusement park.


Sun Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,890,000,000
2,920,000,000
Net inc
115,000,000
105,000,000
Share earns
1.07
.98
Shares outst
107,006,694
106,876,034
6mo rev
6,000,000,000
5,560,000,000
Net inc
186,000,000
186,000,000
Share earns
1.73
1.74
Shares outst
107,012,061
106,799,187


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
ARCO, Los Angeles, promoted to senior vice presidents: Harrell E. Bilhartz Jr., who becomes president of ARCO Alaska; E. Kent Damon Jr., for planning and control, and Anthony G. Fernandes, who becomes president of ARCO Coal Co.
William C. Rusnack, who was also named senior vice president, becomes president of ARCO Transportation Co.


Sears Reports a 29% Drop In Earnings for 2d Quarter
LEAD: As it said it would several weeks ago, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company today reported disappointing second-quarter earnings, making already skeptical analysts even more concerned about the company's future.


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: IN the past six and a half years, Robert Pearson, a former hairdresser from London, has carved out an improbable niche as the owner and manager of Stick to Your Ribs, a barbecue restaurant that is widely regarded as the best in the New York region and possibly in the Northeast.


Zenith Reports Loss in Quarter
LEAD: The Zenith Electronics Corporation today reported a second-quarter loss of $11.2 million, compared with a loss of $5.2 million in the period a year earlier.


Honeywell Spinoff
LEAD: Honeywell Inc. today provided new details about the planned spinoff of its military and marine business.
For each four shares of Honeywell stock, shareholders will receive one share in the new, free-standing military company, Alliant Techsystems Inc.


Evolution in Europe;   As Yeltsin Sets Quick Tempo, Gorbachev Tries to Keep Beat
LEAD: In a country where power has long been a game of older men, Boris N. Yeltsin's choice of a 32-year-old banking specialist to run the Finance Ministry of the vast Russian republic raised some eyebrows.


Spiegel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spiegel Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
403,737,000
327,561,000
Net inc
7,662,000
6,671,000
Share earns
.15
.13
Shares outst
51,952,593
51,945,827
6mo rev
793,601,000
652,758,000
Net inc
15,425,000
13,006,000
Share earns
.30
.25
Shares outst
51,949,701
51,945,827


Giving Polystyrene Another Chance
LEAD: The machinery is deafening, the floors are messy, and the pungent air is thick with flies on a summer day inside the Plastics Again polystyrene recycling plant here, an hour's drive west of Boston.
But the scene is enough to delight a plastic manufacturer.


Senators Urge Compromise On Bill to Control Futures
LEAD: In the face of heavy opposition from the futures industry, senators concerned about the possibility of another stock market collapse said today that a compromise was needed in the bitter battle over legislation to reform Federal regulation over the nation's financial markets.


A Pop(ulist) Quiz;   This man is:     (a) A designer of Nixon's 'Southern strategy'     (b) The Democrats' next Presidential candidate     (c) Kevin Phillips     (d) All of the above
LEAD: Move over, Mario.
Take a hike, Teddy.
Amscray, Albert.
The Democratic Party has found a new standard-bearer.
He's young and a master of the nine-second sound bite.


Reuters Net Rises by 27%
LEAD: Reuters Holdings P.L.C., the British news agency and financial information services group, said today that its earnings jumped 27 percent in the first half of the year, helped by strong sales in all big markets, particularly Europe.


Interpublic Group of Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interpublic Group of Cos.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
342,401,000
317,069,000
Net inc
b30,940,000
c28,300,000
Share earns
.92
.84
6mo rev
626,888,000
593,558,000
Net inc
b39,576,000
c36,311,000
Share earns
1.18
1.08


The Pop Life
LEAD:
Between the Lines


Indigency Issue Delays Trial of Navajo Leader
LEAD: The trial of Peter MacDonald, the suspended chairman of the Navajo Tribe, was delayed again today after the Navajo Supreme Court ordered a review of his legal representation.


Dow Chemical Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dow Chemical Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
4,807,000,000
4,601,000,000
Net inc
364,000,000
728,000,000
Share earns
1.34
2.70
Shares outst
270,100,000
269,900,000
6mo sales
9,707,000,000
9,086,000,000
Net inc
826,000,000
1,471,000,000
Share earns
3.05
5.42
Shares outst
269,800,000
271,700,000


16 Seized in Thefts of Jewelry Later Fenced Through Stores
LEAD: Sixteen people were arrested and charged yesterday as part of a ring that stole jewelry, precious metals, gems and rare coins and then fenced them through two of the members' jewelry stores in Manhattan, the Federal authorities said.


Union Weighs 'Miss Saigon' Casting
LEAD: Members of the Actors' Equity Association failed to decide yesterday whether the union would permit the English actor Jonathan Pryce to repeat his performance as a Eurasian when the hit musical ''Miss Saigon'' moves to Broadway from London.


Bavaro's Knee Passes a Test
LEAD: Mark Bavaro, who underwent ligament surgery on his left knee in January, went through his first contact work today at the Giants' training camp.
Bavaro took several hits on the knee during the morning practice, and afterward he and Coach Bill Parcells were happy.


Overseas Investment Down in U.S.
LEAD: Foreign investors shunned American stocks and Treasury securities in the first quarter of 1990, leaving the domestic markets with a net outflow of foreign investment in stocks and bonds for the first time since 1983.


Chesapeake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chesapeake Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
222,774,000
213,392,000
Net inc
7,502,000
11,981,000
Share earns
.36
.58
6mo sales
426,391,000
401,364,000
Net inc
11,933,000
24,839,000
Share earns
.58
1.21


Woolworth Shares Fall on Profit News
LEAD: Shares of the Woolworth Corporation fell $1.125, to $32.625, yesterday in New York Stock Exchange trading after Harold Sells, the company's chairman and chief executive, said that he expected record sales in 1990, but that it was too soon to tell whether second-quarter 1990 profits would top the record set in the comparable period last year.


Chevron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chevron Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,931,000,000
8,212,000,000
Net inc
b648,000,000
c404,000,000
Share earns
1.83
1.18
Shares outst
353,891,000
340,967,000
6mo rev
18,523,000,000
15,942,000,000
Net inc
b1,121,000,000
c717,000,000
Share earns
3.16
2.09
Shares outst
354,414,000
340,914,000


Plan for Fee At Airports Is Scrapped
LEAD: American Airlines Inc. today withdrew plans to add surcharges of $1 to $4 at five airports that the carrier said were charging ''exorbitant and intolerable'' landing fees.


Wings Seek Fedorov
LEAD: The Detroit Red Wings, who made Sergei Fedorov of the Soviet Union a fourth-round pick in the 1989 National Hockey League entry draft, asked the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service yesterday to give a temporary work permit to the 20-year-old center in an application signed by Jim Lites, the Red


Tax Would Hurt Electricity's Role in Reducing Global Warming
LEAD: To the Editor:


RPM Inc. reports earnings for Year to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RPM Inc. (OTC)
Year to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
444,823,880
376,116,999
Net inc
27,710,369
24,243,325
Share earns
1.23
1.08


Judging Barney Frank
LEAD: Barney Frank, a bright, articulate and productive Congressman, has committed serious indiscretions in his personal dealings with a male prostitute.
By his own admission he deserves the reprimand that the House Ethics Committee has proposed to the full House.


Lawyer's Questions in Jogger Trial Appear to Hurt Client
LEAD: A defense lawyer in the Central Park jogger trial inadvertently elicited testimony from a prosecution witness yesterday that added incriminating details to the confession introduced by the prosecution.


b-Included $500,000 gain reFlated to termination of a penFsion plan.
LEAD:
Latest quarter's net income equaled less than 1 cent a share.


Evolution in Europe;   K.G.B. Critic Is Charged
LEAD: The federal prosecutor's office filed criminal charges today against a retired high-ranking K.G.B. officer, asserting that his public charges of abuses in the secret police had violated secrecy laws.
But the target, former Maj.
Gen.
Oleg D. Kalugin, said he was immune from prosecution because he was recently registered as a candidate for a vacant seat in the Soviet


Archeologists Unearth 'Golden Calf' in Israel
LEAD: Harvard University archeologists excavating Canaanite ruins surrounding the site of the ancient port city of Ashkelon have unearthed a ''golden calf'' that was an object of worship dating from the second millennium B.C.


Clark Equipment reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Clark Equipment (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
343,895,000
356,227,000
Net inc
b17,423,000
c17,094,000
Share earns
1.01
1.00
6mo sales
729,665,000
669,882,000
Net inc
b37,468,000
c31,128,000
Share earns
2.17
1.82


More Saatchi Sales Plans Are Reported
LEAD: ROBERT LOUIS-DREYFUS, the chief executive of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company, has had his hands full dealing with the financial problems of the advertising and communications giant.
But one of the most nettlesome concerns for him lately is the steady stream of rumors about how far he plans to go in dismantling the London-based public relations, consulting and advertising conglomerate constructed by Charles and Maurice


Cooper Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cooper Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,585,000,000
1,349,900,000
Net inc
99,800,000
71,800,000
Share earns
.79
.70
Shares outst
111,081,000
102,865,000
6mo rev
3,005,300,000
2,389,100,000
Net inc
159,600,000
109,800,000
Share earns
1.22
1.07
Shares outst
110,769,000
102,709,000


Chrysler Offering
LEAD: The Chrysler Auto Receivables Company offered $1 billion worth of securities backed by retail installment contracts on new or used autos and light trucks through an underwriting syndicate led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
The 8 3/4 percent securities, which have a final maturity of Aug. 15, 1995, were priced at $99.718, to yield 8.856 percent, which is 77 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, over the prevailing yield on the when-issued two-year Treasury notes at the time of pricing.


Johnson &amp; Johnson reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Johnson &amp; Johnson (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,825,000,000
2,390,000,000
Net inc
353,000,000
297,000,000
Share earns
1.06
.89
6mo sales
5,663,000,000
4,835,000,000
Net inc
b597,000,000
614,000,000
Share earns
1.79
1.84


Evolution in Europe;   At Home State's Court, Opinions In a Direct, Uncomplicated Style
LEAD: Until he became a Federal judge this spring, David H. Souter was a member of a five-judge state supreme court on which dissent is infrequent, opinions hardly ever contain a footnote, and a day's work is as likely to consist of a zoning appeal or child custody dispute as a case of constitutional dimension.


ASYLUM-SEEKERS STRAIN CUBA'S TIES
LEAD: An influx of Cubans seeking asylum in foreign embassies here has strained relations between the Castro Government and the country's two most important Western economic partners, Spain and Canada.
Several unexplained incidents during the crisis have raised suspicions among some Western diplomats that


Amoco Cadiz Damages Set
LEAD: A judge today ordered the Amoco Corporation to pay about $155 million in damages for a huge oil spill from the Amoco Cadiz tanker off the northern coast of France in 1978.


Gingerly, Dow Gains 17.82 Back
LEAD: Despite heavy program selling, stock prices recovered some ground yesterday in strong trading.
But many investors remained cautious in the wake of Monday's big selloff.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-8


Northern Telecom Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northern Telecom Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,700,300,000
1,523,800,000
Net inc
95,700,000
75,300,000
Share earns
.37
.29
Shares outst
242,262,000
239,897,000
6mo rev
3,270,900,000
2,903,500,000
Net inc
174,800,000
127,900,000
Share earns
.67
.49
Shares outst
242,046,000
239,557,000


Deficit Raises as Much Alarm As Illegal Drugs, a Poll Finds
LEAD: The American public now cites the Federal budget deficit as frequently as it mentions illegal drugs as the most important problem facing the country, according to the latest Gallup Poll.


Carter-Wallace reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Carter-Wallace (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
153,401,000
138,418,000
Net inc
14,429,000
13,562,000
Share earns
.94
.89
Shares outst
15,353,000
15,177,000


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the acquisition of the Ford Motor Company's aerospace unit referred incorrectly to the involvement of Shearson Lehman Hutton.
Merchant banking partnerships managed by Shearson (but not Shearson itself) will contribute $150 million of equity in a joint venture with the Loral Corporation to purchase the unit.


Oratory Cooled to Speed Budget Talks
LEAD: Facing mounting pressure to conclude a budget deal before Congress adjourns for its August recess, President Bush and top Congressional leaders agreed today to cool their political oratory in hopes of spurring stalled negotiations on a $50 billion deficit-cutting package.


Kerr-McGee Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kerr-McGee Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
845,800,000
821,200,000
Net inc
30,100,000
b34,700,000
Share earns
.60
.71
Shares outst
50,029,000
48,346,000
6mo sales
1,657,600,000
1,538,300,000
Net inc
57,200,000
b98,600,000
Share earns
1.14
2.03
Shares outst
50,109,000
48,340,000


New Focus On Service: Relearning a Lost Art
LEAD: THE nonprofessional actor-waiter with the ''Hi, I'm. . .'' introduction who does not know ''Who gets the fish?'' is as much a part of the social history of the 1980's as ''Have a nice day.'' But at a time when the restaurant industry is suffering, the fallout is serious.


Review/Fashion;   Montana Wins Paris Over With Clean Lanvin Look
LEAD: Everybody loves a hero, especially one who has fallen and redeemed himself.
So Claude Montana received wave after wave of applause as he walked down the runway this afternoon at the Palais de Chaillot after showing his second couture collection for the House of Lanvin.
His first show for the house, in


Dollar Weakens as Worries On Interest Rates Continue
LEAD: The dollar weakened yesterday against key foreign currencies in worldwide trading.


Philip S. Bergman, Neurologist, 69
LEAD: Dr.
Philip S. Bergman, a retired neurologist, died on Monday at New Rochelle (N.Y.) Hospital.
He was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Endowment Requests a List of Performers
LEAD: The National Endowment for the Arts has asked Franklin Furnace, an avant-garde performance space in the TriBeCa section of Manhattan, to provide details on ''the identity of the artists involved'' and ''the nature of the work to be performed'' in its forthcoming season.


On Chefs' Attitudes
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Zenith Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zenith Electronics Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
334,100,000
385,200,000
Net loss
11,200,000
c13,000,000
6mo sales
689,800,000
728,900,000
Net loss
b26,200,000
c17,000,000
b-After a loss crom discontinued operations of $11 million.


Dr. Louis M. Hellman Dies at 82; A Champion of Family Planning
LEAD: Dr.
Louis M. Hellman, a physician who as a Federal health official advocated public financing of birth control, abortion and voluntary sterilization for the poor, died Sunday at the George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
He was 82 years old and lived in Hydes, Md.


Irving Rosenthal, Insurance Executive, 82
LEAD: Irving Rosenthal, a retired executive vice president of the Guardian Life Insurance Company of America, died on Monday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 82 years old and lived in the Bronx.


At the Nation's Table
LEAD: TO many hot-dog aficionados, derring-do consists of slathering a dog with chili and cheese.
Now consider how the counter staff serves hot dogs at the Wieners Circle, a stand on Chicago's North Side:


Allegheny Power System reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allegheny Power System (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
550,155,000
558,714,000
Net inc
39,071,000
42,541,000
Share earns
.74
.81
Shares outst
52,958,490
52,310,290
6mo rev
1,178,987,000
1,148,835,000
Net inc
102,682,000
105,012,000
Share earns
1.94
2.01
Shares outst
52,876,226
52,223,553


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
The lobbyist who helped investors buy troubled savings and loans claimed to be entitled to a multimillion-dollar share in a deal in which $1.85 billion in subsidies went to one client. [Page A1.]  Thornburgh said the Justice Department would need at least five years to prosecute the most serious cases of savings fraud.


Deadly Decision on Assault Rifles
LEAD: The Alice-in-Wonderland world of gun control grows curiouser and, perhaps, deadlier.
Just one year ago, gun control advocates cheered when President Bush banned foreign-made military assault rifles - the so-called Rambo guns favored by drug traffickers and other criminals.
But now the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms has decided to allow


Tandy Introducing Home Computer
LEAD: The Tandy Corporation will introduce a home computer today that the company said would be less expensive than the model introduced by the International Business Machines Corporation last month.
I.B.M. introduced the PCjr in late 1983, but withdrew the product in 1985 after disappointing sales.
Tandy, which was one of the first personal computer makers, has continued to sell to the home market and is now considered the leading maker of home computers by market researchers.


Group Urges Limits On Outside Earnings Of Council Members
LEAD: To eliminate potential conflicts of interest, sharp restrictions should be placed on the outside income members of the newly empowered New York City Council can earn in addition to their official salaries, a civic group said yesterday.


Thruway Agency to Examine All of Its Bridges for Erosion
LEAD: The Thruway Authority announced today that it had begun a $4.6 million two-year study of erosion under its bridges.


Uncovered Short Sales of Active Nasdaq Issues Up 1%
LEAD: The National Association of Securities Dealers yesterday reported an increase of slightly more than 1 percent in the short interest in actively traded over-the-counter securities in its national market system for the four weeks that ended in mid-July.


Warning: Some of This Live Concert Isn't
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Cable Watchers Only
LEAD: Fans in the New York area who want to watch Nolan Ryan go for his 300th victory when his Texas Rangers take on the Yankees in Texas at 8:30 tonight are out of luck if they don't have cable or an accommodating friend or a handy bar that does.


4 Traders Are Charged
LEAD: The Commodity Futures Trading Commission charged today that four traders on the floor of the New York Mercantile Exchange engaged in a conspiracy to use their advance knowledge of customer orders to make illegal profits.


Talks End; Charges Seen At Eastern
LEAD: Eastern Airlines has failed to reach a plea-bargaining agreement in a Federal investigation of past maintenance practices, and a grand jury is expected to indict the carrier this week on criminal charges, Eastern's court-appointed trustee and Federal officials said yesterday.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Chemical Waste Management, Oak Brook, Ill., a hazardous waste management service, and UNC Inc., Annapolis, Md., an aerospace and aviation company, announced jointly that a CWM subsidiary had acquired for $24 million two UNC subsidiaries engaged in providing environmental restoration and waste management services to the Federal Government.


John Benedict, 57, An Editor of Poetry And of Anthologies
LEAD: John G. Benedict, an editor and director of W. W. Norton &amp; Company, died on Monday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 57 years old.


Knight-Ridder Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knight-Ridder Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
591,739,000
578,700,000
Net inc
44,609,000
b126,853,000
Share earns
.88
2.44
Shares outst
50,874,000
51,956,000
6mo rev
1,146,654,000
1,119,444,000
Net inc
70,458,000
b147,342,000
Share earns
1.37
2.82
Shares outst
51,333,000
52,274,000


INSIDE
LEAD:
Stocks Move Back Up
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 17.82 points, to 2,922,52, but many investors remained cautious in the wake of Monday's selloff.
Page D1.
Airline Drops Fee Plan
American Airlines decided not to add surcharges of $1 to $4 at five airports that the carrier said were charging ''exorbitant'' landing fees.


Changes at I.B.M.
LEAD: The International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it was reorganizing its European management structure to give top executives in each country greater responsibility for major business lines.
I.B.M. said the moves would be completed by 1992.


Review/Television;   2 Shows Aim Young and Younger
LEAD: In its never-ending quest for the fountain of youthful audiences, Fox Broadcasting tonight is offering the first episodes of ''Glory Days,'' whose heroes are four post-high school chums heading in different directions, and ''Molloy,'' all about a frisky actress just turned 13.
Neither offers an occasion to break out the soda pop.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Wine Talk
LEAD: FROM his secluded aerie high on Spring Mountain, just behind this town, Philip Togni can take in virtually all of the Napa Valley.


RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,459,000,000
3,300,000,000
Net loss
b108,000,000
c319,000,000
6mo sales
6,663,000,000
6,226,000,000
Net loss
330,000,000
c558,000,000
b-Reflected $444 million of charges for non-cash interest primarily related to the company's leveraged buyout in 1989, as well as $308 million of other non-cash charges, including amortization of intangibles and depreciation.


U.S. Deploys Air and Sea Forces After Iraq Threatens 2 Neighbors
LEAD: The United States has dispatched two aerial refueling planes to the United Arab Emirates and sent combat ships to sea in a rare exercise with the Persian Gulf nation after Iraqi threats to use military force against the Emirates and Kuwait, Bush Administration officials said today.


Wolohan Lumber Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wolohan Lumber Co. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
88,268,000
79,902,000
Net inc
4,164,000
4,053,000
Share earns
.64
.63
6mo sales
141,356,000
128,852,000
Net inc
5,106,000
4,907,000
Share earns
.79
.76


Martin Marietta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Martin Marietta Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,657,153,000
1,433,448,000
Net inc
94,521,000
86,921,000
Share earns
1.85
1.64
Shares outst
50,923,905
52,912,638
6mo sales
3,076,023,000
2,749,800,000
Net inc
161,614,000
146,133,000
Share earns
3.17
2.76
Shares outst
50,948,185
52,876,660


Valcom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valcom Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
96,566,000
87,911,000
Net inc
1,647,000
1,333,000
Share earns
.41
.30
Shares outst
4,005,000
4,465,300
6mo rev
198,178,000
169,112,000
Net inc
3,207,000
2,659,000
Share earns
.78
.60
Shares outst
4,117,500
4,465,300


OPEC Meets Today; Talks Are Clouded by Iraq's Threat to Kuwait
LEAD: Oil ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries are to begin a meeting in Geneva on Wednesday in the shadow of an Iraqi threat to use military force against Kuwait.


Penn Central Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penn Central Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
554,500,000
444,200,000
Net inc
26,100,000
26,900,000
Share earns
.40
.38
Shares outst
64,500,000
70,800,000
6mo rev
1,041,100,000
787,300,000
Net inc
51,100,000
b119,600,000
Share earns
.79
1.69
Shares outst
64,800,000
70,900,000


Panel Says Ex-Bush Aide Claimed Millions From a Savings Unit Deal
LEAD: A lobbyist who helped investors buy troubled savings institutions claimed to be entitled to a multimillion-dollar share in a deal providing $1.85 billion in Federal subsidies to one client, a Senate committee disclosed today.


Pact Reached To Save Water In New York
LEAD: New York City, threatened with a state ban on all new building in a third of Manhattan and parts of Brooklyn and Queens because sewage treatment in those areas is inadequate, has agreed to enforce far-reaching water conservation measures.


Tambrands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tambrands Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
169,276,000
166,107,000
Net inc
31,772,000
26,162,000
Share earns
1.49
1.17
6mo sales
328,532,000
296,043,000
Net inc
53,837,000
44,184,000
Share earns
2.50
1.98


Newspaper Company Profits Skid
LEAD: The Times Mirror Company said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings dropped 44.7 percent from results a year ago that included a gain on a timberlands sale, while the Tribune Company said its profit fell 25 percent in the quarter.


Taxpayers' Choice
LEAD: If the authorities had taken the advice I gave them 15 years ago, this ridiculous quarrel about art, taxes, smut and politics would not be afflicting the most trivial minds of our generation.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
$
July 20
July 13
July 21
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.2
7.3
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.9
2.8
Gasoline stocks
216.3
215.6
221.3
Distillate stocks
117.1
114.7
109.4
Crude imports, daily
6.6
7.0
6.4
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.9
2.2
Crude stocks
383.7
385.3
330.5
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
93.7
92.9
90.7


Donald M. Lovejoy, 93, A Retired Stockbroker
LEAD: Donald Meston Lovejoy, a former general partner at Bache &amp; Company, died on Monday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 93 years old and lived in Greenwich and in Gulf Stream, Fla.


Southwest Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwest Airlines (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
308,210,000
263,646,000
Net inc
23,534,000
19,237,000
Share earns
.82
.64
Shares outst
28,805,000
30,175,000
6mo rev
568,789,000
493,033,000
Net inc
28,628,000
38,881,000
Share earns
.99
1.28
Shares outst
28,946,000
30,446,000


Sold! For $2.9 Million
LEAD: A half-brother to Summer Squall, the 1990 Preakness Stakes winner, brought a top price of $2.9 million yesterday at the Keeneland July Selected Yearling Sale at Lexington, Ky.
The bay colt by Seattle Slew out of Weekend Surprise was purchased by BBA (Ireland) for Tomonori Tsurumaki of Japan.
The colt, consigned by Lane's End Farm near Versailles, will stay in America to race, said Noel O'Callaghan, a BBA director who signed for the colt.


Dollar Is Mixed, With Gains Against Yen and Pound
LEAD: The dollar was mixed yesterday in foreign exchange trading, rising against the Japanese yen and the British pound but losing ground against other key currencies.


Jury in jogger Trial Hears Last of 3 Confessions
LEAD: The jury in the Central Park jogger trial yesterday heard the last of a series of confessions given by the three defendants in the rape and attempted murder case.


3 Studios Pursue One Tale: Robin Hood's
LEAD: Hungry for material for its stars, Hollywood has decided to revive the legend of Robin Hood.
No fewer than three different companies have been jockeying for months to bring the hero of Sherwood Forest back to the screen in separate productions next year, well aware that at least one of those projects is bound to fall by the wayside.


Curb on Some Program Trades to Be Tried
LEAD: The Securities and Exchange Commission today unanimously approved a one-year trial of a New York Stock Exchange rule that would curtail a type of computerized trading on days when the stock market swings widely up or down.


Souter and Senate: How Far Should Questions Go?
LEAD: The nomination of Judge David H. Souter to the Supreme Court has reopened with particular ferocity a debate that has been going on for nearly two centuries over how far the Senate may go in exploring a nominee's views on the most profound public questions of the day.


New Clues Emerge on a Fatal Hereditary Disease
LEAD: Researchers have discovered a number of new clues to the cause of a baffling hereditary disease, Marfan syndrome, best known for its role in the deaths of the Olympic volleyball player Flo Hyman and the University of Maryland basketball star Chris Patten.


Personal Health
LEAD: Children are not the only ones who go on holiday when the school year ends.
A little-known virus that causes mini-epidemics among elementary school children in April, May and June also takes a break.


Ex-Passaic Housing Official Admits He Lied to Congress
LEAD: A former Passaic Housing Authority official admitted today that he lied to Congress during a Federal investigation of mismanagement in the Department of Housing and Urban Development.


Centerior Energy Corp. reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centerior Energy Corp. (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,308,002,000
2,180,328,000
Net inc
226,819,000
b71,216,000
Share earns
1.62
-
b-Net loss
Year-ago 12 months results included the writeoff of nuclear plant investments.


Review/Dance;   Cast Changes in Australian 'Giselle'
LEAD: In Maina Gielgud's production of ''Giselle'' for the Australian Ballet, the wilis (ghosts of jilted maidens) are seen for the first time as shrouded white figures, faces covered by huge bridal veils.
They rise up from a horizon of mist, not from the usual stage wings, and surge toward the audience.


Art of the Ashcan and Other Schools
LEAD: FACTORY scenes, street scenes, portraits, abstract works - they are the kinds of images that bring to mind the early decades of the century.
Twenty years ago Stewart Ross started collecting these evocative American paintings, which date from the 20's to the 50's.


Making Glassware Whole Again
LEAD: A SCRATCHED Art Nouveau Lalique plaque with a nymph face is in need of repair and a chipped chandelier prism needs grinding.
Then there is the Baccarat lion with a severed tail, the cordial glass with a broken stem and the Steuben eagle with a broken wing. ''After it is polished, it will look like it was never damaged,'' said Augustine Jochec (pronounced JOE-check).


Signature of Distinction: The Rise and Fall of a Legend
LEAD: There are New Yorkers who say they live in a T. D'Alessandro building and do so in the knowing, complicitous tones usually reserved for boasting of landmarks by Stanford White or living rooms by Billy Baldwin.


Cause of Kidney Failure Is Curtailed in Animals
LEAD: Scientists have devised an experimental treatment that dramatically stops scarring from a kidney disease in animals and holds promise for preventing the same problem in humans.


Vice President's Wife Released After Surgery
LEAD: Marilyn Quayle was released from Bethesda Naval Hospital today, four days after undergoing a hysterectomy, the Vice President's press office said.


Acquisitions Firm Formed
LEAD: Morgan Grenfell Group P.L.C. of London said yesterday that it was joining Eric Gleacher, former head of mergers and acquisitions at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, to form a firm to be called Gleacher Morgan Grenfell Inc. that will do merger and acquisition work in the United States and abroad.


Colts Sign Zendejas
LEAD: Max Zendejas, a place-kicker who has played for the Washington Redskins and the Green Bay Packers, signed a two-year contract with the Indianapolis Colts on Tuesday.


Britain to Cut Force in Germany by a Half
LEAD: Britain said today that it planned by the mid-1990's to withdraw half of the more than 66,000 troops it has stationed in West Germany and to cut the nation's overall regular forces by 18 percent.


What New Policy Toward Cambodia?
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker's statement on Cambodia, while constructive, has produced more confusion than clarity on U.S. policy toward Southeast Asia.


Shuttle to Be Taken Off Pad After Work on Leak Fails
LEAD: In spite of attempts to seal off leaks, hydrogen fuel seeped from the space shuttle Atlantis in tests today, and the craft will be removed from its Florida launching pad for more extensive repairs, space agency officials said.


2 Steelmakers' Profits Decline
LEAD: The Bethlehem Steel Corporation yesterday reported a 74 percent drop in second-quarter earnings while the Allegheny Ludlum Corporation posted a 38 percent plunge.
Both steelmakers blamed lower steel prices for part of the deterioration.


GE Aircraft
LEAD: GE Aircraft Engines, a unit of the General Electric Company, said Air Afrique had placed a $150 million order for its CF6-80C2 high-bypass turbofan engine for eight Airbus Industrie aircraft.
GE Aircraft said Air Afrique, an African consortium, is the largest operator of GE CF6 engines in Africa.
With this order, Air Afrique will introduce the first A310-300 aircraft into the regional market in 1991.


AST Research reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AST Research (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
151,827,000
123,454,000
Net inc
15,208,000
2,482,000
Share earns
1.18
.21
Shares outst
12,918,000
11,708,000
Yr sales
533,814,000
456,520,000
Net inc
35,067,000
b7,579,000
Share earns
2.86
-
Shares outst
12,265,000
11,580,000


Lewis Wins Long Jump, Lengthens Streak to 64
LEAD: Carl Lewis extended one of the most remarkable streaks in track and field history tonight, winning the men's long-jump competition at the Goodwill Games for his 64th consecutive victory in the event.


Arson Charged As Fire Levels A Shantytown
LEAD: A homeless woman involved in a lovers' quarrel set fire to a shack under the West Side Highway yesterday morning, setting off a blaze that reduced a shantytown to rubble, fire officials said.


Expos Top Pirates on Rookie's Homer in 10th
LEAD: Marquis Grissom, a rookie for the Expos, singled and scored the tying run in the bottom of the ninth, then hit his first home run of the season in the 10th, a three-run shot that gave Montreal an 8-7 victory today over the Pittsburgh Pirates.


Talking Deals;   Showdown Time At Bond Brewing
LEAD: EXECUTIVES of indebted companies and battered investors in high-yield ''junk bonds'' may push companies close to the brink as they battle over their competing interests.
A piece of the troubled empire of Alan Bond, the Australian entrepreneur, now appears headed for liquidation.


Vernon (Buster) Wiles; Stunt Man, 79
LEAD: Vernon (Buster) Wiles, who worked as a movie stunt man in Hollywood and as a double for Errol Flynn, died Friday.
He was 79 years old.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: Companies


Outdoors;   Variety of Birds Offered At Shooting Preserves
LEAD: rrA new directory of shooting preserves in this country and Canada is now available from the North American Gamebird Association.


Federal Appeals Court Stays Killer's Execution in Florida
LEAD: A Federal appeals court issued a temporary stay today 12 hours before Anthony Bertolotti was to be executed.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Caesars World Inc., Los Angeles, said it had started its $22-a-share tender offer for the 2,175,945 outstandinng shares of Caesars New Jersey Inc. common stock it does not own.


Peter A. Brandon, 76, Former Hat Executive
LEAD: Peter Amman Brandon, a former vice president of a hat-design company, Mr.
John, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 76 years old.


Frisson My Timbers
LEAD: What is it that runs down your spine when you see movie scenes like the unforgettable moment in ''Wait Until Dark'' when Alan Arkin, seemingly dead, suddenly leaps across the room at the blind Audrey Hepburn?
A shiver of fear?
No, not if you mean to be, well, au courant.
To judge by current journalistic fashion, you should be experiencing a frisson, a French term for shiver or shudder.


Probation for Harvey
LEAD: Bryan Harvey, a reliever for the California Angels, has been fined $1,031 by a California court and placed on three years' probation after pleading guilty to driving under the influence last April. (AP)


Indian in Takeover Is Paroled
LEAD: An American Indian charged in the armed takeover of a newspaper in Lumberton in 1988 has been granted parole from a work-release program in Charlotte.
The Indian, Timothy Jacobs, received a six-year prison sentence in June 1989 after pleading guilty to second-degree kidnapping.
Mr.
Jacobs and another Indian, Eddie Hatcher, took over the The Robesonian on Feb.


A Breakthrough on Evolution As Guppies Change Behavior
LEAD: The theory of evolution, so often cited but almost never challenged in an experiment in the real world, has withstood a rigorous test of one of its key elements.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.93
8.00
8.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.56
7.58
8.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.46
7.45
7.60
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.41
8.47
7.88
30-YR.


Lead in Paint
LEAD: To The Home Section:


June Orders For Durables Fell by 3.2%
LEAD: A large drop in demand for military goods like tanks and aircraft lowered orders for durable goods sharply in June in a new sign of economic weakness, the Commerce Department said today.


Crystal Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crystal Brands Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
177,477,000
161,861,000
Net loss
1,402,000
b2,397,000
Shares outst
9,095,813
9,060,325
6mo sales
396,277,000
385,178,000
Net inc
5,232,000
b3,671,000
Share earns
.58
.41
Shares outst
9,089,870
9,053,133


Pro Bono
LEAD: *
Grey Advertising and the GCI Group, its public-relations subsidiary, have created a campaign for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's Volunteer Public Awareness and Recruitment Campaign in New York.


Blind Man Hikes 1,200 Miles
LEAD: A North Carolinian has passed the halfway mark in an attempt to become the first blind man to walk the 2,143-mile Appalachian Trail.
Since he left Georgia on March 9, Bill Irwin has hiked more than 1,200 miles over some of the roughest terrain in the East.
The 49-year-old hiker, who is accompanated by his guide dog Orient, hopes to reach Mount Katahdin in Maine, the northern end of the trail, by October.


Soviets to Sell Diamond Stockpile Through a Subsidiary of De Beers
LEAD: In an effort to raise badly needly foreign currency for its beleaguered economy, the Soviet Union has agreed to sell its uncut diamonds through the international diamond cartel controlled by De Beers of South Africa.


As Johnny Learns to Shop, Hiroko Learns to Think;   Lengthen School Year
LEAD: To the Editor:


Clifford Harvuot, 77, A Baritone at the Met
LEAD: Clifford Harvuot, a baritone who performed regularly at the Metropolitan Opera from 1947 to 1975, died on Sunday at Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern, L.I.
He was 77 years old.


Study Suggests Menopause Doesn't Affect Mental Health
LEAD: A new study suggests that contrary to popular belief, menopause does not cause stress or depression in most healthy women, and it may even improve mental health for some.


As Johnny Learns to Shop, Hiroko Learns to Think;   Look to the Family
LEAD: To the Editor:


Computer Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Sciences (NYSE)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Revenue
407,573,000
342,085,000
Net inc
13,728,000
13,116,000
Share earns
.85
.82
Year-ago first quarter included $870,000 in equity earnings from an ownership interest in Infonet, which Computer Sciences divested.


Stay Iraq's Scimitar, Together
LEAD: Saddam Hussein has made Iraq a threat to peace and commerce in the Persian Gulf, and beyond.
He started the savage eight-year war with Iran.
He recently brandished missiles at Israel.
And now he's picking on weak Kuwait.
Unless Western and Arab nations react firmly and quickly, his bullying could ignite another war in the fragile Middle


F.B.I. Investigates an Agent Accused of Avoiding Arrest
LEAD: The Justice Department is investigating charges that the Federal Bureau of Investigation's top agent for South Carolina avoided a drunken-driving arrest with the help of the state's chief highway patrolman.


British Aerospace To Fight Ruling
LEAD: British Aerospace P.L.C. said it would appeal a European Commission order that it repay illegal Government subsidies it received when it bought the formerly state-owned Rover car maker.
British Aerospace said it would appeal to the European Court of Justice the order to repay $:44.4 million, or about $80 million.


At Love Canal, Land Rush on a Burial Ground
LEAD: In Love Canal, the abandoned neighborhood built around 21,800 tons of buried toxic chemicals and sludge, lawns are being reseeded, roofs reshingled and houses painted a gleaming white.


The Divorced Father
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Electronic Data Systems And G.M.A.C. in Profit Rise
LEAD: The General Motors Acceptance Corporation and the Electronic Data Systems Corporation posted solid second-quarter earnings gains, but profits slipped 21.3 percent at the GM Hughes Electronics Corporation, which includes Hughes Aircraft and Delco Electronics.


Art of Questioning;   Some Jogger Defense Lawyers Fear A Colleague's Cross-Examinations
LEAD: There's an old saying among lawyers that advocates should never ask a question they don't know the answer to.


Metro Datelines;   Man Slain in Attack Was Murder Witness
LEAD: The police are investigating whether there is a connection between the killing on Tuesday of a Brooklyn man, whose 1-year-old daughter was critically wounded in the attack, and testimony that the man gave in May in a murder case, officials said yesterday.


Brooklyn Union Gas reports earnings for 12mo June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brooklyn Union Gas (NYSE)
12mo June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,003,467,000
963,412,000
Net inc
67,151,000
74,405,000
Share earns
2.59
2.97
Revenue represented operating revenues.


Drills at Giant Camp Have Collegiate Flavor
LEAD: Bill Parcells, like most other pro football coaches, recites the party line about players who are missing from training camp.
When he is asked whether it is frustrating to have eight Giants veterans and three draftees out because of contract disputes, he says he can coach only the players who are here.


Phone Company In Bond Offering
LEAD: The Southern New England Telephone Company offered $100 million in 40-year bonds through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.


Book Advances Stir Surprise, Not Anger
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
4 Seeded Players Eliminated
Brad Gilbert, seeded second at the Player's Limited International in Toronto, was upset yesterday, 7-5, 4-6, 6-2, by 65th-ranked Todd Witsken in the second round of play.
The tournament lost three other seeded players yesterday: Derrick Rostagno beat Jean Fleurian, Jakob Hlasek beat Michael Korda, and Jim Grabb retired in the first set against Jimmy


Johannesburg Journal;   For an Afrikaner Weekly, Success Brings Bombs
LEAD: When right-wing whites tried to blow up the newspaper office of Vrye Weekblad early this month, they paid the small Afrikaans-language weekly a sincere if terrifying compliment.


Mattingly Out Indefinitely With Back Injury uf871&gt;
LEAD: Don Mattingly, sidelined for seven games recently because of a chronic back problem and struggling through his poorest professional season, agreed tonight to come out of the Yankee lineup.


Making a Move at the Goodwill Games


Tyson to Fight Stewart
LEAD: Don King is back promoting fights only eight days after achieving what he called a total victory over James (Buster) Douglas, the heavyweight champion, and his manager, John Johnson, in an out-of-court settlement of a breach-of-contract suit.


Bally Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bally Manufacturing (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
553,568,000
518,794,000
Net inc
b9,194,000
c21,497,000
Share earns
.26
.68
Shares outst
27,457,556
31,382,251
6mo rev
1,104,841,000
1,035,503,000
Net inc
b16,781,000
c33,346,000
Share earns
.47
1.06
Shares outst
27,348,733
31,224,482


New Leader Of Anglicans: George Leonard Carey
LEAD: Bishop George Carey, a bishop for less than three years, was named today as the next Archbishop of Canterbury, spiritual head of the Church of England and 70 million Anglicans around the world.


Bridge
LEAD: There were upsets in each of the major events at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals here on Tuesday.


Moynihan Calls Bush's Remarks About New York City 'Abusive'
LEAD: Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan today labeled President Bush's remarks about New York at a Republican fund-raising event on Tuesday night at the Waldorf-Astoria ''abusive'' and ''beneath the Presidency.''


2 More Cancel TV Ads
LEAD: The Toyota Motor Corporation and Anheuser-Busch yesterday joined the International Business Machines Corporation in canceling plans to run television commercials during next month's P.G.A.
Championship at the all-white Shoal Creek Country Club.


Metro Datelines;   Gunman Sentenced In Detectives' Deaths
LEAD: A 26-year-old man was sentenced yesterday to the maximum of 52 years to life in prison for killing two New York detectives with another detective's gun on a highway in Queens in November.


Organized Crime's Role
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh expressed doubt today that investigations of savings and loan collapses would uncover evidence of widespread involvement by organized crime.


Vote Delayed Again on a 364-Mile Pipeline
LEAD: A Federal agency today further delayed a decision on a proposal to build a pipeline to carry natural gas from Canada to six Northeastern states.
The agency voted to hold one more hearing.


Britain Approves Link With Sabena
LEAD: The British Government cleared British Airways P.L.C.'s planned link with Sabena Belgian World Airlines.
The decision came after an investigation that found that British Airways' intended 20 percent stake in Sabena would not operate against the public interest.


In Texas, A Portable Eakins
LEAD: T-SHIRTS are the latest development in the saga of Thomas Eakins's painting ''The Swimming Hole,'' now in the Amon Carter Museum in Fort Worth.


Metro Datelines;   Weicker Submits Petitions for Ballot
LEAD: Former Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr., declaring, ''Politics will never be the same,'' filed petitions yesterday with what he said were 105,431 signatures, 10 times the required number, for a place on the November gubernatorial ballot.


Healthier Savings Units Show a Drop in Losses
LEAD: In what some saw as an attempt to put the best light on the savings and loan cleanup, regulators said today that losses were being stemmed at many institutions not under Government control.


Treasury Bond Prices Are Higher
LEAD: Treasury bond prices rose and long-term interest rates fell yesterday on evidence of further weakness in the economy and an indication that at least one key member of the Federal Reserve Board opposes the central bank's current stance on monetary policy.


Coslet Adjusting As a Boss
LEAD: rrOut on the grass of the Jets' practice field yesterday, Bruce Coslet, the new coach, was wearing a white shirt, tan shorts, white socks and white football shoes.
Peering through sunglasses, he moved from one group of players to another during drills, then stood off to the side as the offense ran through plays.


Bronx Livery Driver Is Slain
LEAD: A 61-year-old livery-cab driver was shot in the head and killed in a robbery in the Bronx early yesterday, the police said.
He was the 19th livery-cab driver and 20th cabdriver of any kind killed in New York City so far this year.
The driver, George Fitzgerald, who worked for the Bessie Cab Company, was shot once in the head in front of 1155 Cromwell Avenue in the Highbridge section at 1:45 A.M.


For a Loved Poet, a Moscow Eulogy
LEAD: A decade into death, Vladimir Vysotsky's bardic voice was heard at his graveside today, carrying in throaty scraps from the portable tape recorders of some of the tens of thousands of devotees who trooped past to honor his continuing lyrical power over the nation.


Avon Products reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Avon Products (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
793,300,000
777,700,000
Net inc
47,500,000
39,500,000
Share earns
.68
.56
Shares outst
56,650,000
54,910,000
6mo sales
1,497,100,000
1,482,600,000
Net inc
62,700,000
45,700,000
Share earns
.79
.51
Shares outst
56,610,000
54,400,000


Dandees Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dandees Enterprises Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Sales
323,103
166,977
Net loss
264,797
30,842
Shares outst
1,200,000
700,000
9mo sales
578,176
651,197
Net loss
767,549
106,895
Shares outst
1,116,667
700,000


Textile Bill Advances
LEAD: The House Ways and Means Committee approved a textile import quota bill today and sent it to the full House.
The bill would establish United States import quotas for each category of textiles, textile products and nonrubber footwear beginning this year.
Imports from Canada and Israel would be exempt because those countries have free-trade agreements with the United States.


Computer Horizons Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 27
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Computer Horizons Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to June 27
1990
1989
Revenue
24,301,000
20,747,000
Net inc
770,000
112,000
Share earns
.30
.05
6mo rev
48,420,000
40,467,000
Net inc
1,452,000
b1,555,000
Share earns
.58
.63
b-Included a gain of $1,042,000, or 42 cents a share, from accounting change.


Mandela Hints at Flexibility in Talks
LEAD: Nelson Mandela suggested today that the African National Congress might consider compromises to achieve progress in formal negotiations with the Government on the country's future.


Summit Interpreter Moves On to U.N.
LEAD: For years he was there when the Soviet and American leaders met, strategically in the middle, interpreting everything they said.


More AIDS Testing Recommended
LEAD: Federal health officials are recommending that hospitals in areas with large numbers of AIDS cases should routinely offer testing for the disease to all their other patients.


Commercial Rocket Launched After 3 Delays
LEAD: A newly repaired unmanned rocket blasted into space today with a satellite that will use chemicals to transform the lines of Earth's invisible magnetic field into brilliant bursts of color.


New President in Line To Be Southeast Chief
LEAD: Douglas E. Ebert, who left the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company in the spring after 22 years, has been named president and chief operating officer of the Miami-based Southeast Bank N.A. and is scheduled to become the bank's next chief executive.


Brady Expects Some New Limits To Be Put on Deposit Insurance
LEAD: Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady said today that the Bush Administration was leaning in the direction of limiting individuals and businesses to a maximum of $100,000 in deposit insurance, whether in one or several accounts.


Robber Makes Fatal Mistake
LEAD: An armed robber was shot to death early Tuesday after he burst into a motel room unaware that seven armed officers were inside setting up a drug trap, the authorities said.
The officers were in adjoining rooms when Darnell Madison, 37 years old, brandishing a revolver, and Jacqueline Lynn Simmons, 21, entered.


Nicaragua's Economic Slide Led to Strike
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:
House Sustains Veto Of Family Leave Bill
The House failed by 53 votes to override President Bush's veto of a bill that would have required employers to grant workers as much as three months of unpaid leave for births, adoptions or family emergencies.


Castro, Standing Firm Against the Tide, Is Bracing Cuba for Harder Times
LEAD: With an end to large-scale Soviet economic subsidies to Cuba in sight, the Government of Fidel Castro has begun warning people here to prepare for the worst.


Dow Up 8.42, to 2,930.94; Investors Cautious
LEAD: Stock prices continued to recover yesterday from Monday's huge selloff, but trading volume weakened and investors remained exceptionally cautious in an uncertain market.


House Backs Bush Veto of Family Leave Bill
LEAD: The House of Representatives today failed by 53 votes to override President Bush's veto of a bill requiring employers to grant workers time off without pay for births, adoptions or emergencies in the family.


In the Nickname of Time
LEAD: Centenary College, a small Methodist institution in New Jersey, takes its name from the fact that it opened in 1867, the 100th anniversary of American Methodism.
Until last fall it had no nickname.
Its teams weren't the Lions or the Tigers or the anything.
So it ran a contest.


Brunswick Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Brunswick Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
670,400,000
771,900,000
Net inc
19,500,000
b20,500,000
Share earns
.22
.23
6mo sales
1,356,000,000
1,563,000,000
Net inc
34,200,000
b37,700,000
Share earns
.39
.43


Anheuser Net Up 10.2%
LEAD: The Anheuser-Busch Companies today reported record profits and sales for the second quarter as new brands aided growth at the world's largest brewer.


Ex-Broadway Dancer Killed in Bronx
LEAD: A teen-ager who had danced on Broadway was killed in the Bronx early Tuesday morning when a sniper with a machine gun fired on his car and riddled it with bullets.
The shots came from an apartment-building roof where young drug-gang members regularly shoot weapons for thrills, the police said yesterday.


As Johnny Learns to Shop, Hiroko Learns to Think
LEAD: To the Editor:


Events: The Season Of Plants and Crafts
LEAD: 40 Strong, Ward-Nasse Gallery, 178 Prince Street (Sullivan Street); (212) 925-6951.


Sanctuary for Liberian Victims
LEAD: As many as 14,000 Liberian visitors find themselves stuck in the United States while a bloody civil war rages in their homeland.
They need a safe haven until things stabilize.
Even if the Bush Administration gives them temporary refuge, their plight underscores the need for Congress to formalize safe haven status generally for visitors who seek a port in a sudden storm.


Car Rental-Retailer Pact
LEAD: Thrifty Rent-A-Car System will open offices in Montgomery Ward &amp; Company department stores in 15 cities and will accept the retailer's credit card in all 24 of its Washington offices, Thrifty announced Tuesday.
Thrifty, the fifth-largest car rental company in North America and a subsidiary of the Chrysler Corporation, will begin accepting Montgomery Ward credit cards on Aug.


Amdahl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amdahl Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to June 29
1990
1989
Revenue
519,109,000
470,643,000
Net inc
46,326,000
32,807,000
Share earns
.42
.30
Shares outst
110,532,000
109,659,000
6mo rev
1,025,873,000
940,955,000
Net inc
76,230,000
78,402,000
Share earns
.69
.72
Shares outst
110,360,000
109,494,000


Columbia 'Junk Bond' Sale Set
LEAD: In the single largest sale ever of ''junk bonds,'' the Columbia Savings and Loan Association said today that it had agreed to sell its entire portfolio of the high-yield, high-risk securities to a Canadian investment company for $3 billion.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Mitsubishi Executive Begins New York Job
LEAD: Yutaka Hasegawa, who has moved several times in the last six years, hopes the new job he began yesterday as the senior executive officer of the Mitsubishi Bank's North American headquarters and general manager of the New York branch will lead to a bit of permanence.


Yankees Lose but Still Spoil Ryan's Party
LEAD: The people had come for a party, and Nolan Ryan was prepared to be the honored guest.
He had talked about earning his 300th major league victory in style, of hoping to pitch a complete game if his recent back trouble did not persist.
He spoke of his hope for his best game of the year.
Instead, Ryan was left with his worst.


Texas Instruments
LEAD: Texas Instruments Inc. said it would start a print advertising campaign to convince parents of the importance of education.
The ads, created by McCann-Erickson, are not wholly altruistic; they point out how the company's calculators and other products can help American children compete in the global economy.


AMP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AMP Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
751,776,000
723,260,000
Net inc
68,299,000
65,799,000
Share earns
.64
.62
Shares outst
106,529,885
106,660,520
6mo sales
1,516,200,000
1,435,820,000
Net inc
148,132,000
143,096,000
Share earns
1.39
1.34
Shares outst
106,509,073
106,918,631


NEW ORLEANS JURY ACQUITS OFFICIAL
LEAD: The longtime District Attorney of New Orleans, Harry Connick, was acquitted today of Federal charges that he had aided and abetted an illegal gambling operation.


Sotheby's Says Sales Could Top $3.2 Billion
LEAD: Sotheby's Holdings announced yesterday that it expected record worldwide auction sales of $3.2 billion for the 1989-90 season, which ends on Aug. 31.


Coast Distribution System reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Coast Distribution System (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
48,614,000
43,462,000
Net inc
1,385,000
1,984,000
Share earns
.30
.40
Shares outst
4,687,563
5,086,921
6mo sales
82,999,000
72,096,000
Net inc
1,292,000
2,192,000
Share earns
.29
.46
Shares outst
4,589,594
5,102,435


Culbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Culbro Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
260,383,000
249,847,000
Net inc
3,032,000
2,887,000
Share earns
.70
.67
6mo rev
492,766,000
479,996,000
Net inc
3,939,000
4,057,000
Share earns
.91
.94


Saint Laurent in Top Form


Token Thieves? Listen to This: Now They Steal the Bus Itself.
LEAD: Transit officials, already preoccupied with fighting subway token thieves and turnstile jumpers, must now find a way to foil a new type of adversary: the bus rustler.


Yields Down Only a Bit
LEAD: Yields on tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report continued to decline in the week ended yesterday.
The declines, however, were not significant.


Review/Fashion;   Saint Laurent's Fall Collection looks as Relaxed as He Does
LEAD: All he has to do to attract attention is to walk down the runway.
Yves Saint Laurent did that Wednesday morning, looking fit and proud in a natty beige wool suit, after his successful couture opening at the Hotel Inter-Continental.
He was followed along the route by thunderous applause and was immediately besieged by photographers.


Shackleford to Italy
LEAD: Charles Shackleford, a center-forward with the Nets who appears to have been shut out of playing time with the drafting of Derrick Coleman from Syracuse and the return of Roy Hinson from the injury list, will spend next season with S.C.
Juventus of Caserta in the Italian League, Shackleford's agent confirmed yesterday.


Amdahl Posts 41% Profit Gain
LEAD: The Amdahl Corporation today reported improved revenues and earnings for the second quarter.
Based in Sunnyvale, Calif., Amdahl produces mainframe computers compatible with those of the International Business Machines Corporation.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-9
Iraq seemed to win a political victory, forcing Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates to reduce oil production and pushing OPEC to raise oil prices.
Iraq's success came as tensions in the Gulf region seemed to diminish considerably.
Page A1


U.P.S. Getting Ready for Possible Walkout
LEAD: United Parcel Service of America Inc., the nation's largest parcel-post carrier,is bracing for a possible strike next week, and its big corporate customers are already diverting packages away from the carrier.


Market Place;   Western Union's Reorganization
LEAD: AFTER six years of financial turmoil, including two close calls with filing for bankruptcy, a drastically smaller Western Union Corporation may be on the verge of emerging as a company that can meet its obligations.


Thousands in Hong Kong Meet Deadline for British Immigration Plan


A Mingling of Antiques and Flowers
LEAD: THEY met by chance a few weeks ago.


Two Women's Magazines Have Setbacks
LEAD: Yesterday was a cheerless day for the women's magazine field as Woman magazine announced that it would cease publication and Woman's Day was taken off the auction block because no one would meet its owner's asking price.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: A 45-YEAR-OLD woman, noticing that her mother seemed depressed, asked her if the trouble was sexual problems.
When her mother admitted to the daughter that that was the case, the daughter referred her to places where her parents might get help.
And she gave her mother specific suggestions on how to make herself more sexually attractive.


Label Bill For Albums Is Vetoed In Louisiana
LEAD: Gov.
Buddy Roemer vetoed a bill today that would have required warning stickers on record albums with potentially offensive lyrics.
The bill was the first in the United States ordering the use of warning labels on albums.


Commodities Firm Closing
LEAD: A commodities brokerage firm headed by the chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade is going out of business because the company is unable to pay its debts.


Actors' Equity Attacks Casting of 'Miss Saigon'
LEAD: The Actors' Equity Association said yesterday that it ''condemns'' the proposed casting of an English actor ''painted yellow'' in the leading role in ''Miss Saigon'' when the musical moves from London to Broadway.


Allegheny Ludlum reports earnings for Qtr to July 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allegheny Ludlum (NYSE)
Qtr to July 1
1990
1989
Sales
295,994,000
333,813,000
Net inc
22,639,000
36,685,000
Share earns
.68
1.08
6mo sales
575,414,000
697,736,000
Net inc
45,897,000
71,051,000
Share earns
1.37
2.10


USAir Loses $75 Million
LEAD: The parent of USAir said it lost $75 million in the most recent three-month period, attributing the drop to weakness in the nation's economy.
America West Airlines said it registered second-quarter profits of more than $6 million, double its earnings from the comparable period last year.


A New Focus Revives Storage Technology
LEAD: Companies, like people, often emerge from a brush with disaster intent on making the most of their second chance.
Few, however, have enjoyed a more impressive comeback than Storage Technology Inc.


Review/Music;   Wanted: Perfect Mozart Performers
LEAD: Lincoln Center's plan to program every one of Mozart's 626 opus numbers next season to commemorate the 200th anniversary of his death is both noble and dangerously overweening.
If anything could make the miracle of Mozart into humdrum, it would be this kind of gather-all, which might appeal more to the stamp collector and statistician than to the music listener.


Air Products &amp; Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Air Products &amp; Chemicals (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
712,800,000
663,700,000
Net inc
b56,800,000
53,300,000
Share earns
1.02
.97
9mo sales
2,078,400,000
1,973,200,000
Net inc
c166,800,000
d171,100,000
Share earns
3.01
3.12


Microsoft Net Increases 76.2%
LEAD: Buoyed by strong initial sales of its new Windows 3.0 product, the Microsoft Corporation today reported a 76.2 percent rise in net income for its fourth fiscal quarter, on a 53 percent gain in revenue.
The Redmond, Wash., company also became the first personal computer software company to exceed $1 billion in annual revenues.


Why Mowing the Lawn Is Fun Again
LEAD: ALMOST as soon as I bought it 15 years ago, I wanted to get rid of my gasoline lawn mower.


Anheuser-Busch Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Anheuser-Busch Cos.  (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,778,700,000
2,479,800,000
Net inc
257,500,000
233,700,000
Share earns
.90
.82
Shares outst
285,000,000
287,000,000
6mo sales
5,171,600,000
4,684,900,000
Net inc
440,000,000
400,800,000
Share earns
1.54
1.40
Shares outst
285,000,000
286,000,000


Gorbachev Sets Deadline for Militants to Disarm
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev set a deadline today for the disarming of militant groups and warned that troops might be sent if such groups continued to endanger the lives of the civilian population.


Jail Term for Takeover Specialist
LEAD: Donald C. Carter, the brash confidant to a generation of takeover artists, was sentenced yesterday to 16 months to four years in state prison.
In March he pleaded guilty to one count of larceny and one count of tax fraud.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday describing the process used by the White House in selecting Judge David H. Souter for the Supreme Court referred incorrectly in some copies to Meldrim Thomson Jr.
He is the former, not the late, Governor of New Hampshire.


Diceon Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Diceon Electronics (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
31,682,000
27,687,000
Net loss
2,447,000
1,107,000
Shares outst
5,195,000
5,811,000
9mo sales
91,120,000
87,893,000
Net loss
5,067,000
2,132,000


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about refugees in embassies in Havana referred incorrectly in some editions to the diplomats who voiced suspicions that Cuban Government agents were posing as asylum seekers.
The diplomats were Western, but not West German.


Clorox Assignments
LEAD: The Clorox Company said it would reassign the advertising accounts for Pine-Sol cleaner and Combat insecticide, which it is acquiring from the American Cyanamid Company.
Pine-Sol will go to the San Francisco office of Young &amp; Rubicam, while DDB Needham in Chicago will get Combat.
The incumbent agency is Carrafiello Diehl &amp; Associates, Irvington, N.Y.


America West Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* America West Airlines (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
326,138,000
238,591,000
Net inc
b6,141,000
c3,032,000
Share earns
.29
.14
Shares outst
23,175,849
18,425,559
6mo rev
630,942,000
471,721,000
Net inc
b3,563,000
c13,101,000
Share earns
.18
.70


Du Pont And Merck In Venture
LEAD: Merck &amp; Company and E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company announced a 50-50 joint venture yesterday to create an independent drug company with $700 million in estimated sales.


Let 'Em Eat Cake
LEAD: ''In the war on poverty,'' Ronald Reagan often said, ''poverty won.'' That used to be just Reaganite overstatement; but under President Bush, poverty can hardly lose.


Leftovers Become Sustenance For Needy
LEAD: The dinner menu, once again, was to be United States Department of Agriculture canned pork, canned corn and rice at a homeless shelter here for 50 single men and women with children.


Two Say They Did Not See Barry Use Drugs
LEAD: Two defense witnesses in Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s trial on drug and perjury charges today called into question earlier testimony that Mr.
Barry used drugs on a 1986 cruise off St.
Thomas.


Minds Are Bent by Sex In 2 Horror Thrillers
LEAD:
Lie to Me
By David Martin
269 pages. Random House. $18.95.
Nemesis
By Rosamond Smith
276 pages. A William Abrahams Book/ E. P. Dutton. $18.95.


Digital Has Its First Loss Ever
LEAD: Feeling the effects of a changing computer industry, the Digital Equipment Corporation yesterday reported the first quarterly loss in its 25-year history as a public company and declared a $400 million charge for retraining staff, closing operations and reducing total employment by 5,000 to 6,000.


Pirates Step It Up When Challengers Nip at Their Heels
LEAD: The Philadelphia Phillies nudged the Pittsburgh Pirates out of first place by a half-game on May 25.
The Pirates returned to first the next day and proceeded to reel off a five-game winning streak.


Engel Retires After Plea
LEAD: Bob Engel, the suspended National League umpire, pleaded no contest today to stealing baseball cards, then announced he was retiring from baseball.


When the Mind Goes Blank: Crisis for the Elderly
LEAD: It can be a moment of dread for the elderly.


Questions for the Judge
LEAD: What is the one thing everybody wants to know about Judge David Souter of Weare, N.H.?


Ulster Questions 2 in Killing Of Nun and 3 Police Officers
LEAD: The Royal Ulster Constabulary said today that it had detained two men for questioning in an Irish Republican Army bombing on Tuesday that killed three police officers and a Roman Catholic nun who happened to be driving by.


EASTERN AIRLINES INDICTED IN SCHEME OVER MAINTENANCE
LEAD: Eastern Airlines and nine of its managers were indicted yesterday on charges that supervisors at three airports routinely ignored vital repairs and maintenance and then falsified records to make it appear as if the work had been performed.


GSD&amp;M Keeps Account of Southwest Airlines
LEAD: A week after it lost the Coors Extra Gold beer account, which billed about $20 million last year, GSD&amp;M Advertising of Austin, Tex., averted another blow yesterday by surviving a review for the creative portion of the Southwest Airlines account.


Chronicle
LEAD: It costs $5,000 to restore one horse on the antique carousel in Prospect Park and HILDY SIMMONS and ANITA NAGER are celebrating their 40th birthdays.
Those numbers add up to a party tonight at the Prospect Park Picnic House, where Ms.
Nager, the grants administrator for the Fund for the City of New York, and Ms.


Krone Returns Quickly To Winners' Circle
LEAD: Returning to thoroughbred racing yesterday after eight months of recuperation from a Nov. 24 spill, Julie Krone guided an undistinguished 3-year-old maiden to victory in the third race at Monmouth Park.


Chambers Development Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chambers Development Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
56,329,000
40,432,000
Net inc
8,810,000
6,602,000
Share earns
.16
.13
Shares outst
54,825,000
49,954,000
6mo sales
107,619,000
73,312,000
Net inc
16,740,000
12,100,000
Share earns
.31
.25
Shares outst
54,779,000
48,023,000


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


CRI Insured Mortgage Assn Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CRI Insured Mortgage Assn Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
13,767,460
-
Net inc
4,012,031
-
Share earns
.20
-
6mo rev
26,539,930
-
Net inc
9,952,209
-
Share earns
.49
-
The company said comparable results for 1989 are unavailable because the company was not yet operating.


Fire Stops Morning Rush-Hour Traffic on the West Side Highway


One of Britain's Pillars Is Testing Its Strength
LEAD: Under its new editor, the former columnist Simon Jenkins, Britain's oldest and best-known daily newspaper, The Times, is trying to regain its former glory.


Chronicle
LEAD: Officials of the Koch administration continue their transition to the private sector.
JAMES P. STUCKEY who, as president of the New York City Public Development Corporation from 1986 through 1989, managed a multibillion-dollar portfolio of city-sponsored commercial and industrial projects, will be the managing director of Gronich &amp; Company, a real-estate brokerage and services organization in


Apple Chip Deal Is Reported
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. is seeking an agreement with Outbound Systems Inc., a small Colorado computer company, that would allow Apple's key chips to be used in Outbound's machines, according to industry officials.


Captain in Alaska Oil Spill Loses License for 9 Months
LEAD: The Coast Guard today suspended the captain's license of Joseph Hazelwood for nine months for his actions as the skipper of the Exxon Valdez when she ran aground off Alaska in March 1989.


Herbert Baldwin, 96, Ex-Official in Westport
LEAD: Herbert E. Baldwin, an apple grower, legislator and first selectman of Westport, Conn., for 10 years, died on Monday in the Carolton Convalescent Hospital in Fairfield, Conn.
He was 96 years old and lived in Westport.


Washington at Work;   Federal Reserve's Chairman Blends Eye for Politics With Fiscal Skills
LEAD: An admiring colleague says Alan Greenspan at his desk, his coat off, hunched in front of his computer screen and pouring over economic data, resembles an archeologist studying the latest find in hieroglyphics or a mathematician proving a theorem.


Turkoman Rugs Tell A Tale Of War
LEAD: JOYCE LOWE, a rug buyer for the carpet-store chain Sandler &amp; Worth, traveled to Pakistan in May and returned with a cache of colorful flat-weave rugs made by Turkoman nomads, refugees from Afghanistan.
But while the techniques and colors are traditional, the designs reflect the experience of a country at war.


3 Detained Lawyers Released In Kenya but Not 3 Politicians
LEAD: The Kenyan Government today released three lawyers detained without charges three weeks ago but kept in prison three politicians detained in the same crackdown on advocates of political pluralism.


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: WE did everything right.
When we got there, on Friday night, we took deep breaths of the stock-scented air and said wasn't it wonderful to be out of that hot, sticky city.
Then we strolled the grounds (six-tenths of an acre), disturbing a pair of dandelion-eating rabbits, and marveled at the sky.
Only one or two stars are ever visible in the sky over New York, so we get pretty excited when we see constellations.


Sun to Sell Its Computer Work Stations in Stores
LEAD: Sun Microsystems Inc., in a direct challenge to personal computer manufacturers, announced today that it would sell its engineering work stations through computer retailers.


Critic's Notebook;   Television Brings Out A Melodramatic Side Of the Legal Process
LEAD: As the first trial in the case of the Central Park jogger comes to a close, the loyal television viewer is again learning that the legal process is a category of melodrama.
Trials that earn the most attention from local news and magazine shows, not to speak of docudramas, have all the elements of the nation's prime-time favorites: sex and violence, conflict and commotion.


Airbus Contract Is Given to Rohr
LEAD: Airbus Industrie will pay Rohr Industries $1 billion to supply 800 jets with engine nacelle systems, the aerodynamic structures that surround jet engines.
In 1984, Rohr made a similar deal with the European consortium, involving 200 Airbus A320's.


People
LEAD: *
Mary Conrad, Bill Daily, Steve Seyferth and Martin Sherrod have been promoted to senior vice president in the account management department of Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago.


Bethlehem Steel reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bethlehem Steel (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,275,400,000
1,433,600,000
Net inc
21,900,000
b84,100,000
Share earns
.21
1.03
6mo sales
2,490,700,000
2,836,100,000
Net inc
43,200,000
b148,800,000
Share earns
.41
1.81
Shares outst
75,493,000
74,805,000


Conair Buys Faberge
LEAD: The Conair Corporation, a marketer of personal products and consumer appliances based in Edison, N.J., announced yesterday that it had purchased the Faberge Salon division of Chesebrough-Pond's Inc. for an undisclosed price.
Chesebrough-Pond's, a maker of personal products, is based in Greenwich, Conn.


Consul Restaurant Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Consul Restaurant Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to May 31
1990
1989
Revenue
23,499,000
20,781,000
Net inc
515,000
476,000
Share earns
.04
.04
Shares outst
13,748,000
12,743,000
Yr rev
88,347,000
80,024,000
Net inc
247,000
65,000
Share earns
.02
.01
Shares outst
13,181,000
12,523,000


Betz Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Betz Laboratories (OTC)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
147,614,684
130,443,830
Net inc
16,408,704
14,067,637
Share earns
.53
.45
Shares outst
28,592,718
30,963,790
6mo sales
290,940,219
254,821,511
Net inc
31,806,653
27,226,858
Share earns
1.03
.88
Shares outst
28,531,916
30,935,598


Dallas Museum Neutral On German Treasure
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cray Research reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cray Research (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
227,015,000
128,259,000
Net inc
42,580,000
4,414,000
Share earns
1.49
.15
6mo rev
362,884,000
244,398,000
Net inc
52,058,000
5,923,000
Share earns
1.82
.20


Baker Hughes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baker Hughes Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
711,628,000
588,953,000
Net inc
37,970,000
b16,713,000
Share earns
.28
.13
Shares outst
132,291,000
119,071,000
9mo rev
1,891,415,000
1,723,798,000
Net inc
93,685,000
b48,798,000
Share earns
.70
.37
Shares outst
126,274,000
118,778,000


James Carey; Banker, 84
LEAD: James Carey, a retired vice president of the Bank of New York, died on Tuesday at the Princeton (N.J.) Medical Center.
He was 84 years old and lived in Princeton.


As Baby Boomers Turn 40, Ammirati and BMW Adjust
LEAD: Ammirati &amp; Puris, the agency whose ads for BMW's ''Ultimate Driving Machine,'' Club Med and Waterford crystal helped establish the 1980's as the ''Me Decade,'' is doing an about-face.


Zambia's Leader Announces Plan to Free 1,000 Prisoners
LEAD: Under heavy pressure to make political reforms, President Kenneth Kaunda said today that he would free more than 1,000 prisoners by the end of next month, including some accused of plotting to overthrow him.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''If there is a smudge on the Seal of the United States Senate, or on the Star of the North, as we like to call our state, I will work my hardest to polish both back to brightness.''
- Senator Dave Durenberger of Minnesota. [A1:3.]


Ayer's Ad Celebrates Certificate From Army
LEAD: In a postscript to the long-running dispute between Ayer and the Army, the advertising agency took out a full-page ad yesterday in The New York Times yesterday (page A20) to announce that it had received a Certificate of Achievement from the Army for ''exceptionally meritorious service'' from July 1, 1967, to Jan.


Vapor of a Cleaning Solvent Is Linked to Cincinnati Blast
LEAD: Vapors of a cleaning solvent leaking from equipment used to mix chemicals led to the deadly explosions and fire that rocked a chemical plant last week, a fire investigator says.


Skipper Suspended


Obscene Album Charge Denied
LEAD: A record store owner who refused to stop selling a 2 Live Crew album pleaded not guilty Tuesday to a charge of promoting obscene material.
David Risher, owner of Hog Wild Records and Tapes, was released on a personal recognizance bond after a hearing before Judge Tony Jimenez 3d of Bexar County Court.


Massachusetts Lawmakers Balk at Budget and Re-examine Taxes
LEAD: Rebelling against the latest attempt to resolve the state's budget crisis, Massachusetts legislators refused to approve a $13.7 billion budget and moved to repeal central elements of a $1.8 billion tax increase that was signed into law last week.


Dow Chemical Profits Drop by 50%
LEAD: The Dow Chemical Company, the nation's No. 2 chemical maker, said Tuesday that its second-quarter profits slumped 50 percent, to $364 million, the latest in a growing list of companies to report disappointing results.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on the Education page yesterday listing university presidents who have resigned or announced their resignations since June 1989 included an incorrect entry.
Edward Bloustein of Rutgers died on Dec. 9, 1989, while president.


Estimate Board Can Go Fighting for Clean Air
LEAD: To the Editor:


Metro Matters;   Risks to Cuomo If the Opposition Lacks Credibility
LEAD: Despite his self-confidence and his apparent lead in public opinion polls, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo arguably cannot afford to debate his Republican opponent, Pierre A. Rinfret.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: LAYING bricks with plain sand instead of mortar is an easy way to pave areas like patios, walks and driveways.
Bricks are arranged close together on a bed of packed sand surrounded by a border.
After they are in place, more sand is swept into the crevices between them to prevent shifting.


Pactel and Cellular Plan Midwest Venture
LEAD: The Pacific Telesis Group and Cellular Communications Inc. said yesterday that they had agreed to combine their cellular telephone interests in the Midwest in an equally owned joint venture.


Grand Jury To Investigate Guardsmen
LEAD: A state grand jury here is investigating whether officers in the New York National Guard stole tens of thousands of dollars earmarked for tuition reimbursement of Guard soldiers, law-enforcement officials said today.


Constar International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Constar International Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
125,732,000
141,506,000
Net inc
3,911,000
3,894,000
Share earns
.53
.62
Shares outst
7,404,000
6,265,000
6mo sales
249,386,000
277,225,000
Net inc
8,246,000
7,456,000
Share earns
1.10
1.20
Shares outst
7,447,000
6,169,000


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Body Copy, a quarterly advertising trade magazine that was started in Los Angeles last year, will suspend publication, its publisher, David Breznau, said.


A Seaside Seating Spectacular
LEAD: ALTHOUGH it is several blocks from the ocean in Santa Monica, Calif., the Gallery of Functional Art has created its own miniature seaside scene with sand, a 15-foot pier, a 12-foot-long bicycle path and a parking lot for one car.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day on Saturday about a proposed acquisition by Watsco Inc. referred erroneously to stock action by the company.
Watsco shareholders have not approved a reverse stock split.


Patricia Keane Mason; Gallery Owner, 62
LEAD: Patricia Keane Mason, a former art gallery owner who was active in charities, died on Saturday at Beth Israel Medical Center.
She was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Bible Bounty
LEAD: Ephraim perished because he worshipped Baal, the god the golden calf represented.
And those who followed Ephraim's path, the Old Testament thundered, would be ''like the morning mist, like dew that vanishes early, like chaff blown from the threshing floor or smoke from a chimney.''


Iraq Said to Prevail in Oil Dispute With Kuwait and Arab Emirates
LEAD: Iraq appeared today to have won a political victory, forcing Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates to reduce oil production and pushing the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to raise oil prices.


'Old Man' of Jets Is Alive and Kicking
LEAD: Pat Leahy took a good bit of good-natured kidding about his age yesterday after the Jets' new head coach, Bruce Coslet, was asked to evaluate the performance of the rookies in training camp.


FELLOW SENATORS VOTE TO DENOUNCE DURENBERGER, 96-0
LEAD: The Senate took the rare step of punishing one of its own members today, denouncing Senator Dave Durenberger for bringing ''dishonor and disrepute'' to the institution through improper financial dealings.


Intergroup In Proxy Loss
LEAD: National Intergroup Inc. today lost a proxy battle with Centaur Partners L.P. as three Centaur candidates were apparently elected to National Intergroup's 12-member board.


Pessimism Over Budget Talks Grows
LEAD: White House and Congressional negotiators worked separately to prepare deficit-cutting proposals today amid growing pessimism among many Democrats that an agreement on next year's Federal budget could be reached any time soon.


Two Companies Out of Bidding
LEAD: The General Instrument Corporation said two companies that had expressed an interest in the New York-based electronics concern are no longer interested in a transaction.
Neither comForstmann Little &amp; Company has already agreed to pay $44.50 a share, or $1.6 billion, for all of General Instrument's outstanding shares.


Chronicle
LEAD: JOHN DENVER, the singer and environmentalist, is joining forces with representatives of the Amway Corporation, the United Nations Environment Programs and the space agency to establish the Aspen Institute on Global Change.
The institute will seek to enlist leading scientists to exchange ideas at summer seminars in Aspen, Colo.


Police Raid Dogfight Arena in Bronx


A Big Round Table With a Story to Tell
LEAD: EVEN at first sight, it seemed clear that there must be a story behind the huge, handsome, round table and the graceful mismatched chairs that surround it. ''It was made for a sea captain's family in Biddeford, Me., in 1820,'' said Morgan Rank, an antiques dealer in East Hampton, L.I., whose shop is dominated by the 7-feet-8-inch diameter table.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Dull Counter Top
Q.The finish on the plastic counter top in my kitchen is practically gone.
Is it possible to paint this plastic, and if so, what preparation is needed and what kind of paint should I use?
A.You can paint the counter top, but I'm not sure it would be a good idea.
You risk scratching the paint when you cut or prepare food, and that could mean toxic particles mixed in with the food.


Norfolk's Profit Falls 10.2%
LEAD: The Norfolk Southern Corporation said today that its second-quarter earnings fell 10.2 percent from a year earlier, when the company had a one-time $13.6 million gain.


Bankers Set to Extend Trump Loan Deadline
LEAD: Bankers are preparing to extend the deadline on the bridge loan that saved Donald J. Trump from bankruptcy as they continue to prepare the documentation for a permanent loan package, bankers involved in the deal said yesterday.


Metro Datelines;   5 Indicted by U.S. In '89 Cocaine Seizure
LEAD: The Federal Government announced the arrest and indictment of five men yesterday, including one described as a high-ranking member of the Colombian Cali drug cartel, in connection with the importation of five and a half tons of cocaine in 1989, the largest amount ever seized in New York City.


Mets Survive Late Scare And Hold Off the Phillies
LEAD: Rocketing from one extreme to the other, the Mets zoomed into a 9-0 lead over the Philadelphia Phillies tonight with one of their best bursts of hitting of the season.
But then they came within one line drive of squandering the entire performance when the Phillies rallied in the late innings, bunched seven groundball singles in a row for six runs in the ninth and nearly sent the


For Dinkins, Ballroom's Fate Is Emotional and Sensitive Issue
LEAD: Blocks from the apartment where he raised his children, a somber hulk of a building, rich with history and once stained with blood, haunts Mayor David N. Dinkins these days.
It embodies a hero of his past and his hopes for his old neighborhood's future, challenging him to balance the two.


It's Not Chic. It's Not Plain. It's Homey.
LEAD: In a starkly decorated house on Long Island, a collection of china teapots shaped like English cottages seems out of place, a little pool of charm.
The modernist who collects them (with some embarrassment) cannot fathom her passion for them.
But Grant McCracken can.


John Cleary, Ex-Chief Of Con Ed, Dies at 88
LEAD: John V. Cleary, a former president of Consolidated Edison, died on Monday at the Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y., where he lived.
He was 88 years old.


Alberto-Culver Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alberto-Culver Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
201,732,000
182,161,000
Net inc
9,624,000
8,282,000
Share earns
.36
.31
Shares outst
26,700,000
26,198,000
9mo sales
572,788,000
525,233,000
Net inc
23,655,000
20,061,000
Share earns
.89
.76
Shares outst
26,547,000
26,166,000


Gold Prices Continue Rally; Mideast Buying Is Indicated
LEAD: Gold futures prices rose substantially yesterday on the Commodity Exchange in New York, and, although the market closed well below the day's highs, analysts said the recent rally appeared likely to continue.


O. C. Rowntree, 78; Led Mustard Company
LEAD: O. Cedric Rowntree, a former chairman of the R. T. French Company, maker of French's mustard and other food products, died yesterday at his home in Rochester.
He was 78 years old.


Role for Ivana Trump: An American in Paris
LEAD: Every fashion season has its off-the-runway star around whom photographers flock, taking endless shots for the newspapers and magazines of the world.
The star has often been an actress like Sophia Loren, Faye Dunaway or Joan Collins (during the reign of ''Dynasty''), or royalty.
Princess Caroline of Monaco still draws the cameras, as she did yesterday at the Chanel show, wearing a white


Occidental Notes Are Priced at $100
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Corporation offered $150 million in senior 20-year notes through an underwriting syndicate led by the Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corporation.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bankers Trust Co., New York, appointed Scott C. Marden, a managing director, as head of its New York corporate finance group.


Review/Theater;   Satiric Mileage From Public Figures
LEAD: Harry Shearer's transition from comedy writer and stand-up comic to performance artist seems trapped in a holding pattern.
As the closing act in ''The Men's Room,'' a three-part show on Saturday in the Lincoln Center Serious Fun festival, Mr.
Shearer sought satiric mileage at the expense of public figures - with wavering results.


Gerald Hedley Dead; Ar Restorer Was 41
LEAD: Gerald Hedley, described by the National Gallery here as one of the world's leading experts in art restoration, died on Saturday in a mountaineering accident in the French Alps.
He was 41 years old.


Bail of $10 Million Set for Brando Son Charged in Killing
LEAD: Christian Brando, 32-year-old son of the actor Marlon Brando, has been ordered to stand trial for murder in the fatal shooting of his half-sister's boyfriend and is being held on unusually high bail of $10 million.


Liberian Rebels, Pressing Their Attack on Capital, Raid Airfield
LEAD: Rebels today attacked the airfield that was Monrovia's last link to the outside world and closed in on the city from two directions in some of the heaviest fighting for control of the capital.


Longer Rest for Gooden
LEAD: The Mets decided today to give Dwight Gooden two extra days to rest his stiff right shoulder, scratched him from his scheduled start on Friday, and said he would pitch Sunday against the St.
Louis Cardinals in Shea Stadium.


Chrysler Plans To Close Plant
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation said today that it would close a Canadian plant and consolidate all of its Jeep production at its Toledo, Ohio, complex.


Tenneco Net Rises 14%
LEAD: Tenneco Inc. announced today that its second-quarter earnings rose 14 percent from a year earlier.
Net income totaled $206 million, or $1.61 a share, compared with $180 million, or $1.38 a share, in the 1989 second quarter.
Revenue of $3.64 billion in the latest quarter was down slightly from $3.66 billion in last year's quarter.


Alleghany Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alleghany Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
358,700,000
267,900,000
Net inc
26,600,000
17,400,000
Share earns
4.07
2.72
6mo rev
689,800,000
521,900,000
Net inc
37,600,000
24,400,000
Share earns
5.79
3.83


Two Koreas Sign Pact For High-Level Visits
LEAD: North and South Korea signed an agreement today for an exchange of visits this year by their Prime Ministers.


Souter Meets With Leaders of Senate In Session of Humor and Good Will
LEAD: Judge David H. Souter, President Bush's choice for the Supreme Court, visited the Senate's Democratic and Republican leaders today in a relaxed atmosphere that reflected the absence of active opposition to his nomination so far.


U.S. Defeats Italy and Enters Medal Round


Mandela Meets de Klerk on Plot Reports
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk met with Nelson Mandela tonight for what the authorities said were urgent talks on police assertions that members of the African National Congress and South African Communist Party had prepared a plot to overthrow the Government.


Castro Assails Spain for Standoff
LEAD: In a speech marking the 37th anniversary of a guerrilla attack that began the Cuban revolution, President Fidel Castro bitterly criticized Spain today for the standoff involving refugees seeking asylum in its embassy here.


Review/Film;   It's Love at First Sight, Even in the Age of AIDS
LEAD: ''Would you still want to be my lover if I tested positive?'' Steven is still mourning his lover, who died of AIDS, when he asks Peter this tough, chilling question about the AIDS test. ''Men in Love'' would be a much better film if Peter, an exotic Hawaiian gardener, and Steven, a pale blond from San Francisco, had not fallen in love at first sight in a scene that features extreme close-ups of their star-struck eyes.


How a School Grew, With Alumna's Help
LEAD: When Filomen D'Agostino Greenberg of Coney Island first arrived as a student at New York University Law School, she found five small, cramped rooms in a single building east of Washington Square Park.
The year was 1917.


Wilbur S. Smith, 78, a Designer Of Major Transportation Systems
LEAD: Wilbur S. Smith, a retired international transportation designer and developer, died on Wednesday at the Providence Hospital in Columbia, S.C.
He was 78 years old and lived in Columbia.


Man Tells of Stealing 13 Buses, Police Say
LEAD: A 25-year-old from Queens who was arrested on Wednesday in the theft of a bus for a joy ride has confessed to taking 13 of the 22 buses that have been stolen in the last year, the transit police said yesterday.


Angelo T. Acerra, 64, Bishop for the Military
LEAD: The Rev.
Angelo T. Acerra, Auxiliary Bishop of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese for the United States Military Services, died yesterday at his home in Alexandria, Va., at the age of 64.


Municipal Services Shrinking in Suburbs
LEAD: Cities and towns across the New York metropolitan region are reducing services, sometimes drastically, under pressure from the slowing economy, declining state aid and a populace tired of ever-rising property taxes.


Court Backs Go-Video In Suit Over Japanese
LEAD: Go-Video Inc. said today that a Federal court had denied motions to dismiss its antitrust lawsuit against several Japanese manufacturers of videocassette recorders.


Scientist Criticized for Dioxin Stand
LEAD: A House subcommittee chairman accused a top Federal scientist today of improperly aiding the paper industry's campaign to loosen restrictions on dioxin pollution in water.


Juror Removed After Report of Phone Calls
LEAD: A member of a Federal jury was removed by the judge from deliberations in a six-month-old money-laundering trial today after a report that the juror had telephoned members of a Colombian drug ring for more information about the case.


Rinfret Interview: A Plan for Harlem
LEAD: Following are excerpts from an interview with Pierre A. Rinfret, the Republican candidate for governor.
It was conducted on Tuesday at The New York Times.
Mr.
Rinfret was accompanied by his campaign manager, Assemblyman John Faso of Kinderhook.
Q.
Can you give us a scenario how you can win against a well-financed incumbent, particularly in view of the fact that your governmental experience - I went back as far as Al Smith - and no gubernatorial candidate has as little governmental experience as you, maybe since the beginning of the century?


Evolution in Europe;   Yeltsin Offers Bonus to Bring In Crop
LEAD: Warning of a looming ''disaster'' as the nation's bumper farm crop goes unharvested, Boris N. Yeltsin, President of the Russian republic, sought today to offer an incentive coupon plan to channel scarce consumer goods to workers who help bring in the crops.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The case of the perplexing pompano has been settled out of court.
It started last August when JEAN-CLAUDE BAKER, the owner of Chez Josephine on West 42d Street in Manhattan, arrived with three guests at Sapore di Mare, a fashionable restaurantin East Hampton, L.I., owned by PINO LUONGO.
By all accounts, Mr.


New York Hospitals to Urge AIDS Tests for Patients
LEAD: The New York City municipal hospital system announced yesterday that it would encourage all of its adult patients to be tested for the AIDS virus, a shift aimed at helping tens of thousands of people who need treatment.


Mussorgsky's 'Pictures'
LEAD: The guitarist Kazuhito Yamashita is to perform his arrangements of Mussorgsky's ''Pictures at an Exhibition'' and Bach's Cello Suite No. 6 at 5:30 P.M. on Sunday at Caramoor, Girdle Ridge Road in Katonah, N.Y.
The program is also to include Toru Takemitsu's ''Folios I, II and III'' and Fernando Sor's ''Variations on a Theme by Mozart'' (Op.


Washington Talk;   Bush Stumps in 1990, Looking for 1988's Beef
LEAD: The difference between the two parties may have come down to this: a can of Mace.


'Kids Club' Helps to Lift Burger King
LEAD: AFTER a series of highly publicized marketing missteps Burger King may have discovered an effective tool to use in challenging rival McDonald's - children.


Prices of Soybeans Surge On Signs of Soviet Buying
LEAD: Soybean futures prices surged yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade in a rally fueled by perceptions that the Soviet Union was shopping for soybean meal after a months-long absence from world commodity markets.


A Dance Retreat Makes Changes, but Its Spirit Stays the Same
LEAD: The road winds through green, heavily wooded hills and into a clearing, on the far side of which stands the theater made famous by Ted Shawn, who in 1933 founded the Jacob's Pillow summer dance festival and school.
To the left stands a large, giddily striped tent that serves as a cafe and bar.
Down the road, past the old farmhouse that has been turned into offices and the cabins that serve as dormitories and dance studios, an outdoor stage may be seen through the trees.


Ex-BankAmerica Head Joins Investment Firm
LEAD: Samuel H. Armacost, who ran the BankAmerica Corporation as it fell into crisis several years ago, has joined Weiss Peck &amp; Greer, an investment firm involved in management buyouts and venture capital.


BARRY SAYS F.B.I. IS AFTER BLACKS
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. and his lead defense lawyer charged today that the Federal Government had an ''assault force'' of law officers that traveled the country singling out black officials for undercover operations.


Microsoft On Profits
LEAD: After reporting record earnings and revenues on Wednesday for its 15th year in business, the Microsoft Corporation cautioned today that its unusually strong profits were not likely to continue in the next fiscal year.


A Jazz Reunion in Brooklyn
LEAD: WHEN Randy Weston and Max Roach join forces on Sunday afternoon for a concert in the Brooklyn Museum's sculpture garden, they will be celebrating their roots in more ways than one.


Phillies Rout heaton and Pirates
LEAD: Charlie Hayes hit a two-run homer off Neal Heaton in Philadelphia's five-run first inning tonight, and Carmelo Martinez drove in three runs as the Phillies romped past the Pittsburgh Pirates, 12-4.


Columbia's Paul Plans To Retire Next Year
LEAD: Al Paul, a member of the Columbia University athletic staff for 30 years and the senior athletic director in the Ivy League, announced yesterday that he would retire at the end of the next academic year, in June 1991.


AT THE MOVIES
LEAD:
His Story, Her Story


Books of The Times;   Portrait of a Tortured Artist in a Tortured City
LEAD:
Arrogance
By Joanna Scott
283 pages. Linden Press/Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.


Mattingly Home in Indiana to Rest
LEAD: Stumbling along on a course that could lead to a franchise record for losses, the Yankees face a series of decisions and deadlines that seem to have created an identity crisis.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
U.S. Gains Federation Semifinals
Zina Garrison and Gigi Fernandez broke Jana Novotna's serve in the ninth game of the second set yesterday, opening the way for the United States to score a 7-6, 6-4 doubles victory over Czechoslovakia and win their quarterfinal match of the Federation Cup by 2-1 in Norcross, Ga.


Ramos to Play in Spain
LEAD: Seeking to continue to pick up the kind of international experience members of the United States national team crave, Tab Ramos has signed a one-year professional contract with Figueres, a Second Division club in Spain.
The announcement was made yesterday by the United States Soccer Federation.


Jet Safety Relishes Second Chance
LEAD: Brian Washington has had a taste of the football world and a taste of the real world and right now, he thinks the football world is where he belongs.
The Jets think he might be right.


Cigna Keeps Unit
LEAD: The Cigna Corporation said it had decided to keep its individual financial services division, which had revenues of more than $600 million and net income of $61 million in 1989.
The company said it received several offers for the unit over the last 18 months, but that none matched the value to Cigna of retaining the unit.


Middle-Distance Runner Has Come a Long Way
LEAD: When Joe Falcon accepted a track scholarship to the University of Arkansas in 1985, making money from distance running or even achieving worldwide recognition were not very high on his list of priorities.


People
LEAD: * Laura Eshbaugh has been named vice chairman of Whittle Communications.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Two weeks ago, after a 12-year court fight, DR.
ROBERT W. KEARNS won a $5.2 million verdict against the Ford Motor Company for infringement on his patents for the intermittent windshield wiper.
Yesterday, the 63-year-old former engineering professor at Wayne State University, was in the Montgomery County Detention Center in Rockville, Md., for failure to honor a separation agreement with his wife, PHYLLIS KEAR


Hampton, Giants' Top Draft Pick, Signs $2.6 Million Deal
LEAD: The Giants' offensive backfield received a lift today when Rodney Hampton, this year's first-round draft choice, and Aaron Emanuel, the seventh-round choice, agreed to contracts.


Brent Mydland, 37, Keyboardist In Grateful Dead Since 1979, Dies
LEAD: Brent Mydland, the keyboardist for the rock band Grateful Dead since 1979, died yesterday at his home in Lafayette, Calif.
He was 37 years old.


CSX Offers Notes
LEAD: The CSX Corporation, a Richmond transportation holding company, offered $250 million worth of 10-year notes yesterday through an underwriting syndicate led by the First Boston Corporation.
The 9 1/2 percent notes, which are noncallable for life, mature on Aug. 1, 2000.
They were priced at 99.62 to yield 9.56 percent, 1.08 percentage points over the prevailing yield on the Treasury's 8 7/8 percent 10-year notes.


Bridge
LEAD: One top-ranked team was ousted here Wednesday night in the Spingold Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals, and another barely survived.


Knoll Being Sold To Westinghouse
LEAD: The Westinghouse Electric Corporation agreed to buy Knoll International Inc., a privately held maker of office furniture based in New York that has about 2,800 employees.
The acquisition would make Westinghouse one of the three largest makers of office furniture.
No terms were announced.





Johnson Leads L.P.G.A. by Two
LEAD: As some of the big names got off to poor starts, Chris Johnson, a nonwinner since 1987, shot a four-under-par 67 today and took a two-stroke lead in the richest event on the Ladies Professional Golf Association tour, the $1 million Mazda L.P.G.A.
Classic.


Pepsico in 3-1 Split
LEAD: Pepsico Inc. said its board had declared a 3-for-1 stock split, payable Sept. 4 to shareholders of record on Aug. 10.
The company also said its board had declared a regular quarterly dividend, as adjusted for the split, of 10 cents a share, payable Sept. 30 to holders of record on Sept. 14.


Panel Plans Special Services District for Times Sq.
LEAD: A committee of Times Square business and community leaders announced plans yesterday to create a special district that would provide everything from sanitation to security services for Times Square.


Honduran Guilty of Kidnapping, Not Murder, of U.S. Drug Agent
LEAD: A Honduran drug trafficker was found guilty today of racketeering, kidnapping and conspiracy in the abduction and killing of a Federal drug agent, Enrique Camarena Salazar, and his pilot in Mexico.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
A Bayou Bistro


Note to Readers
LEAD: The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge receipt of or return articles unless they are accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, the Advertising column in Business Day on Wednesday misstated the price paid by the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company to buy two advertising agencies in 1986.


2 Koreas Reach an Accord, Then Resume Abuse
LEAD: Only hours after North and South Korea signed an agreement on Thursday for a historic first meeting between their Prime Ministers, hopes for rapid progress were dimmed when negotiations over a brief opening of the border next month seemed to collapse.


Abortion Issue a Magnet for A.B.A. Annual Event
LEAD: Ordinarily, it might be difficult for many lawyers to get excited about the American Bar Association's annual meeting in Chicago next month, which will feature the typical round of seminars on legal issues, many boring and obscure.


Fairs And Festivals
LEAD:
TODAY
CRAFTS FAIR, Village Green, New Milford, Conn.
More than 200 exhibitors, food, entertainment, auction; sponsored by the New Milford Chamber of Commerce.
Today, 1 to 10 P.M.; tomorrow, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Information: (203) 354-6080 or (914) 273-4667.
TOMORROW
SALUTE TO HARLEM FESTIVAL, #125th Street and West Side Highway.


WEEKENDER GUIDE
LEAD:
FRIDAY
LITERATURE SPOKEN HERE


McEnroe in Quarterfinals
LEAD: In an afternoon free of upsets at the Player's Limited International, John McEnroe, Michael Chang, Tim Mayotte and Jay Berger advanced to the quarterfinal round today.


Earle Mack Wed To Carol Dickey
LEAD: Carol Dickey, an interior designer in New York, and Earle I. Mack, the chairman of the New York State Racing Commission, were married last evening at the home of the bridegroom's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Bert Mack, in Jamaica Estates, Queens.
Rabbis Israel Mowshowitz and Moshe Pomerantz officiated.


U.S. Team Winner In Relays
LEAD: The track and field competition of the Goodwill Games ended tonight with the United States and the Soviet Union winning events in which they have long excelled.


Earnings Plunge at G.M., Ford
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation and the Ford Motor Company yesterday reported sharply lower second-quarter profits.
Both auto makers cited difficult market conditions in North America, and both were hit by economic disruption in Brazil that virtually stopped vehicle production there.


Dollar Rises Against Yen As Gold Ends Mostly Lower
LEAD: The dollar rose against the Japanese yen but finished mixed against most other primary currencies in seesaw trading yesterday.


Coast S.&amp; L. Reports Loss
LEAD: Coast Savings Financial Inc., the parent company of a Los Angeles-based savings and loan association, said today that it lost $28.7 million in the second quarter after adding to its loss reserves to reflect problems in several real estate markets.
In the period a year earlier, Coast earned $5.8 million, or 41 cents a share.


Review/Fashion;   Givenchy and Valentino Revel in Luxury
LEAD: Exquisite fabrics, intricate workmanship and plenty of jewel embroidery, the hallmarks of couture fashions, were the real stars of the last two major fall and winter showings.
Hubert de Givenchy, now part of the LVMH Moet Hennessy-Louis Vuitton empire that controls Christian Dior and Christian Lacroix, appropriately dedicated his collection to ''luxury and quality.


District of Columbia's Budget Clears House
LEAD: The House on Thursday left intact funds for abortions in the District of Columbia but cut money for the city's university.


Compaq Profits Rise 24.3%; Sales Disappoint Wall St.
LEAD: The Compaq Computer Corporation said today that its net income rose 24.3 percent in the second quarter, to $104.3 million, or $1.18 a share, from $83.9 million, or 98 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year ago.


Arts Honors Announced
LEAD: The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts announced today that its 1990 honors will go to the jazz trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie, the actress Katharine Hepburn, the opera singer Rise Stevens, the composer Jule Styne and the film director and writer Billy Wilder.


Ryan Loses Right Stuff In Quest for 300th Victory
LEAD: Nolan Ryan, in shorts and sneakers without socks, sat thoughtfully in front of his locker cubicle in the Texas Rangers' clubhouse before Wednesday night's game against the Yankees. ''Butterflies?'' someone asked him. ''Always got butterflies before I pitch,'' he said, in his easy, Texas drawl.


State Enters Labor Dispute At Daily New
LEAD: Calling the labor dispute at The Daily News an explosive situation that could harm the regional economy, New York State's Labor Commissioner announced yesterday that he had appointed a fact-finding panel to help the two sides reach an accord on new contracts.


Service for Rabbi Kelman
LEAD: A service for Rabbi Wolfe Kelman, executive vice president of the Rabbinical Assembly for nearly 40 years, will be held at on Wednesday at 6 P.M. at the Park Avenue Synagogue at Madison Avenue and 87th Street.
The participants will include Rabbis Arthur Hertzberg, professor of religion at Dartmouth College, and Alexander Schindler, president of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations.


Evolution in Europe;   2 HEADS OF STATE CALL ON WALDHEIM
LEAD: Presidents Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia and Richard von Weizsacker of West Germany met with President Kurt Waldheim of Austria today, further eroding efforts over the last four years to isolate Mr.
Waldheim diplomatically because of his war record.


Telecom Chief Gets MCI Post
LEAD: O. Gene Gabbard, chairman and chief executive of Telecom USA, will become executive vice president and chief financial officer of the MCI Communications Corporation after the completion of MCI's acquisition of Telecom, MCI said yesterday.
Mr.
Gabbard, 50 years old, has led Telecom USA, based in Atlanta, since its formation in 1988 through the merger of his former company, SouthernNet, and the Teleconnect Company.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 513 money market mutual funds increased $1.93 billion, to $391.84 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 160 institutional funds rose $366 million, to $95.18 billion.
Those of the 251 general-purpose funds rose $1.21 billion, to $135.91 billion.


Court in New Jersey Upholds Right to Sue Cigarette Makers
LEAD: The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled yesterday that warning labels on cigarette packs and advertisements do not protect manufacturers against damage claims filed by smokers or their relatives.


Review/Art;   The State of the City as Sculptors See It
LEAD: EACH year the outdoor sculpture season seems to have more to say about the art and life of New York City.
With some artists seeking exposure, others trying to define for themselves the meanings of public art, still others trying to leave their stamp on a street or square, and with all the artists now trying to wrestle with urban dramas for which it seems no author or director exists, the outdoor sculpture season has become a way of gauging not only the state of the art world but also the state of the city.


Where to Get Teachers? It Could Be in the Army
LEAD: Educators facing teacher shortages are working to mine a new source: the tens of thousands of soldiers due to be laid off as America's military forces shrink.


Ousted Arts Official Gets New Federal Job
LEAD: Alvin S. Felzenberg, who was asked to leave his job as senior deputy chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts on May 25 by John E. Frohnmayer, chairman of the agency, has been named executive director of the President's Commission on the Federal Appointment Process, a spokesman for the White House said today.


Gang Attacks 3 And Yells Slurs On West Street
LEAD: Three men were attacked early yesterday by a gang that shouted anti-homosexual slurs at them in Greenwich Village, the police said.


More Setbacks for Bolar
LEAD: Under pressure because of a generic-drug scandal, the Bolar Pharmaceutical Company said on Wednesday that it would discontinue making 14 drugs and recall 4 other drugs.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There is an overall attitude out there that life is cheap.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Express Bank Ltd., New York, a unit of American Express Co., appointed Suzan T. Picariello senior vice president and head of the Latin American and Caribbean region of the firm's consumer financial services group.


Stray Bullet Claims Another New York Child
LEAD: A 3-year-old Brooklyn boy was killed yesterday when gunmen fired more than 18 rounds from semiautomatic pistols through a steel-covered door as he slept in his family's apartment.
He was the third child killed in New York City this week by bullets apparently intended for someone else.


Review/Music;   A Hybrid Of Styles Encourages Bopping
LEAD: Rock and jazz made incursions into chamber-music territory (or was it the other way around?) in ''Sonic Boom,'' Friday evening's installment of the Serious Fun series at Alice Tully Hall.
The violinist Mary Rowell, the British keyboard sextet Piano Circus, the percussionist and vocalist David Moss and the Soldier String Quartet offered music that, for the most part, had a greater visceral than intellectual appeal.


Ashton-Tate Plan
LEAD: The Ashton-Tate Company, a computer-software producer based in Torrance, Calif., said it would introduce a new version of its dBASE IV software next Tuesday, but it cautioned against expectations that the product would help the company return quickly to profitability.
A spokeswoman said the software, called dBASE IV Version 1.1, would be introduced to analysts and the media in New York.


United Banks And Norwest
LEAD: The Norwest Corporation, a Minneapolis-based banking company, said it had agreed to acquire United Banks of Colorado Inc., Denver, for about $440 million.


Steinbrenner's Side Sought 48 Witnesses
LEAD: The current baseball commissioner, a former commissioner, a district attorney, a hefty assortment of lawyers and investigators, Howard Cosell and a Bronx letter carrier were among 48 people whose names George Steinbrenner's attorneys presented as possible witnesses in his hearing before Fay Vincent.


Models For a Justice
LEAD: Senator Warren Rudman of New Hampshire was asked the other day whether Judge David Souter especially admired any past members of the Supreme Court.
Senator Rudman said he thought the Souter favorites were Justices Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. and John Marshall Harlan the younger.


Evolution in Europe;   A Moscow Puzzle: Reforms First or Foreign Aid?
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has acknowledged that perestroika will not work without help from foreign friends, and Western economic analysts do not disagree.
But they say they believe Mr.
Gorbachev is putting the cart before the horse.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.06
7.93
9.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.58
7.56
7.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.47
7.46
7.54
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.42
8.41
7.77
30-YR.


Cambodia Turns Over Remains Thought to Be Those of U.S. Soldiers


Assessing The Damage At Eastern
LEAD: The indictment of Eastern Airlines on Wednesday on charges of ignoring maintenance and falsifying records could not have come at a more trying time for the carrier, industry analysts said yesterday.
July is a peak travel season, and the airline has just begun an ambitious advertising campaign aimed at winning back business travelers and travel agents.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The crowd of 30,000 at the Padres-Reds doubleheader in San Diego on Wednesday night were not amused when ROSEANNE BARR, unfamiliar with the sound system, gave a shrill rendition of ''The Star-Spangled Banner.'' When she finished, boos filled the stadium, and the comedian responded by reaching for her crotch and spitting on the ground.


Bill Limiting Cable TV Fees Is Approved by House Panel
LEAD: The cable television industry moved closer to some re-regulation yesterday with the endorsement by a House panel of a bill to limit rates for cable service and the release of a Federal Communications Commission report recommending that some cable program producers that also own cable systems be required to sell their products to rivals.


Burrell's Debut a Hit
LEAD: Scott Burrell, who is attempting careers in both pro baseball and college basketball, is happy with his debut as a minor league pitcher with the St.
Catharines (Ontario) Blue Jays of the Class A New York-Penn League Wednesaday night.


President Appointed At Plymouth Lamston
LEAD: Robert Tammero, who has been president both of Bloomingdale's and of Abraham &amp; Straus, the New York store divisions of Federated Department Stores, has been named president of the Plymouth Lamston Stores Corporation, which is owned by Tribeca Holding Corporation, a New York-based investment firm.


Boesky and Milken Granted Immunity by House Panel
LEAD: A House committee voted today to grant the ''junk bond'' financier Michael R. Milken and Ivan F. Boesky, the convicted stock speculator, immunity from additional prosecution in order to get them to testify before Congress.


Church Can't Afford to Spurn Married Priests
LEAD: To the Editor:


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


SALVADORAN FOES IN RIGHTS ACCORD
LEAD: In their first formal accord after a decade of civil war marked by brutality against civilians, negotiators for the Salvadoran Government and leftist guerrillas agreed today to international verification of human rights.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amoco Chemical Co., Chicago, a petroleum and chemical company and a unit of Amoco Corp., said it would spend $200 million to expand olefins production at its Chocolate Bayou plant near Alvin, Tex.


Six New Or Recent Orchestral Works
LEAD: Rehearsals are the private struggles by which public performance is made to seem effortless and trouble-free.
There are those who would keep it that way.
Symphonic music is theater too, they say.
It employs its own artifices to bind listeners and music together; one is by hiding from the observer the intervening problems of learning and technique.


Bond Setback Is Reported
LEAD: Australia's highest court reportedly ruled today that Alan Bond, the beleaguered entrepreneur, is unfit to hold broadcasting licenses.


Knicks Welcome Mustaf to Club Enthusiastically
LEAD: He's a long, tall drink of water with the finesse of a small forward, a desire to play the power position, and according to the Knicks general manager, a probable future as an intimidating center.


OPEC Moves Closer to a Pact on Production
LEAD: The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries moved closer today to an agreement that would set a ceiling on its 13 members' production of 22.5 million barrels a day and raise oil prices to at least $20 a barrel.


Marshall Says He Never Heard of Bush's Nominee
LEAD: Justice Thurgood M. Marshall, in remarks that were unusually candid for a member of the Supreme Court, left the clear impression in an interview broadcast last night that he thinks someone other than David H. Souter should have been nominated for a seat on the Court.


House, 408 to 18, Reprimands Rep. Frank for Ethics Violations
LEAD: After an emotional and often rancorous debate, the House of Representatives voted today to reprimand Representative Barney Frank for ethical breaches involving his relationship with a male prostitute.


Profits Off 26% At Whirlpool
LEAD: The Whirlpool Corporation said today that its second-quarter profit tumbled 26 percent despite a 4.3 percent increase in revenue.
The company cited economic troubles affecting its Brazilian operations.


Review/Photography;   Victorian Mother's Daughters: So Pure, So Romantic
LEAD: Since irony seems to be art's most important product lately, appreciating the hyper-romantic sensibility of Victorian-era British photography requires a suspension of disbelief.
True, the sugary tableaux of Henry Peach Robinson and the allegorical portraits by Julia Margaret Cameron may be viewed as precursors of the overtly fabricated art photography of the 1980's.


A Cyprus Solution - Long Overdue
LEAD: A ranking United Nations official familiar with the U.N.-sponsored negotiations on Cyprus's future recently told me that, in his view, of all the world's intractable problems the Cyprus situation is one that is clearly solvable.
He said that progress depended on outside pressure on Turkey, especially by the U.S., to remove its troops from the island nation, and on insuring that the Greek and Turkish Governments fully participate in any agreement on Cyprus's future political structure.


A Leg Problem Kept Souter Out of Service
LEAD: David H. Souter, President Bush's nominee to the Supreme Court, failed a medical examination by his draft board while a student at Harvard Law School in 1966 because one leg was found to be an inch shorter than the other, a White House spokeswoman said today.


Trade Talks Unsuccessful
LEAD: Four days of global trade talks ended on a sour note today, with developing countries accusing rich nations of jeopardizing world commerce.


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums
CENTRAL PARK ZOO, #10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday to Friday and until 8 P.M. on Tuesday and 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. on weekends; gift shop and cafeteria are open the same hours, at Fifth Avenue and 65th Street.
Admission: children under 3, free; ages 3 to 12, 25 cents; over 65, 50 cents; others, $1.


Accounts
LEAD: * Norwalk Furniture, Norwalk, Ohio, to W.B. Doner &amp; Company.


Shulton Purchase
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company said it had completed the purchase of the toiletries and fragrances portion of the American Cyanamid Company's Shulton Group, excluding the Pierre Cardin fragrance line.
Under the agreement announced last month, Procter &amp; Gamble acquired Shulton's Old Spice and Santa Fe men's toiletries and fragrances, and several other products.


A Tardy Walk Down the Aisle Leads Straight To The Bench For a Couple (Of Young Lawyers).
LEAD: The story could be called ''Saturday the Rabbi Arrived Late,'' though just how late remains in dispute.
Or, if you prefer something more musical, it could be ''Get Me to the Synagogue on Time.'' It's also listed as Adler v.
Frank in the Broward County Circuit.


Battle for Family Leave Will Be Fought in States
LEAD: Groups that favor giving workers unpaid leave to care for newborn babies and ailing relatives are preparing to lobby individual states for legislation to do what a Federal bill vetoed by President Bush would have done.


Bush Signs Landmark Bill for the Disabled


LeMond Run Down
LEAD: Greg LeMond is back on his bicycle, but he's hurting after his third Tour de France victory.


U.S. Starts Removing Gas Shells in Germany
LEAD: The United States began removing 400 tons of chemical weapons from West Germany today after environmentalists lost a last-ditch effort to stop the operation.


Flow of Ethiopian Jews to Israel Is Back to Normal
LEAD: The Governments of Ethiopia and Israel said today that the flow of Ethiopian Jews to Israel had returned to normal levels after a series of recent disruptions that had stranded thousands of Ethiopians in refugee camps.


Review/Dance;   A Message About Women
LEAD: The ingredients were good in Brenda Daniels's new ''Irises,'' presented last Friday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio.
Ms.
Daniels's dream of a dancer's body is long, slender and impressively lithe, with an amusingly blank, slightly insolent face topped by a spiky punk haircut.
She has assembled a group of seven witty and able female dancers who occupy the stage with a teasing boldness.


Disney Posts Record Profits
LEAD: The Walt Disney Company today reported record sales and profits for the third quarter based on the continued strong performance of all of its three operating segments.


The Cardinal, Comity and AIDS
LEAD: New York State desperately needs 3,000 nursing home beds, mostly in New York City, for AIDS patients.
It has received applications from various service agencies willing to sponsor 1,700.
Among the sponsors is the Catholic Archdiocese of New York, which promises to provide 400 beds, half of them almost immediately.


No Gamecock Sanctions
LEAD: South Carolina's football program escaped sanctions today as the National Collegiate Athletic Association announced it had found no serious rule violations resulting from a steroid scandal that had led to prison terms for three former assistant coaches.


Review/Film;   Who Killed a Prosecutor? Her Lover? Or Another?
LEAD: A magician deliberately orchestrates his audience's suspicions as a means of concealing the real tricks of his trade.
Scott Turow accomplished something very similar with ''Presumed Innocent,'' his spellbinding courtroom novel in which the narrator finds himself accused of having murdered a seductive co-worker.


Why Voters Tune Out Political Messages
LEAD: To the Editor:


S.&amp; L. Testimony Sought
LEAD: Two developers who defaulted on loans to the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association of Denver were asked by a House subcommittee today to testify at a hearing next month.
Representative Frank Annunzio, Democrat of Illinois, said he wanted to find out how the developers, William Walters and Kenneth Good, could still live in expensive homes and drive luxury cars while claiming they could not repay their loans.


Church Can't Afford to Spurn Married Priests;   When Rome Listens
LEAD: To the Editor:


59th St. Bridgemarket Proposal Is Close to Fading Away
LEAD: Having taken more than a decade to get virtually nowhere - stirring terrific controversy in the process - a plan to build an enormous marketplace in the vaulted chambers beneath the Queensboro Bridge now appears close to collapse.


A Law for Every American
LEAD: There have been many bill-signing ceremonies at the White House, but none quite like yesterday's.
Under a hot summer sun on the South Lawn, more than 2,000 advocates for the disabled, many in wheelchairs, cheered mightily as President Bush signed a law that could bring 43 million handicapped people into society's mainstream.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
COMPANIES
G.E. agreed to pay one of the largest fines ever assessed for defrauding the Defense Department.
It was convicted in February of overcharging the Army for a battlefield computer system. [Page A1.]
The indictment of Eastern Airlines could not have come at a more trying time for the carrier, analysts said.


On Stage
LEAD:
Short Stories in Song


Our Towns;   God's Hand Seen In Deli Counter And 15 Aisles
LEAD: Yesterday morning, Ellen Watson, who is 75, and her good friend Viola Walker were saying how lovely it was that the Governor and the Mayor were coming to dedicate the brand new Pathmark supermarket here.


Fire Kills 12 and Injures 25 in Lebanon as Fuel Truck Hits a Hotel
LEAD: A fuel truck hit a hotel in eastern Lebanon today and burst into flames, starting a fire that killed 12 people and badly burned 25 others, the police said.


New Faces: Adrienne Shelly and Robert Burke;   2 Performers Who've Lived Their Roles
LEAD: Although 24-year-old Adrienne Shelly and 29-year-old Robert Burke are making their screen debuts in Hal Hartley's film ''The Unbelievable Truth,'' both actors seem to have known their characters inside out before even reading the script.


UAL Net Up 5.1%; Delta's Down 61.1%
LEAD: The nation's second- and third-largest airlines reported mixed earnings results yesterday for the quarter that ended in June.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a brief article on the Media Business page on Wednesday about the Interpublic Group of Companies misstated the revenue effect of its exchange of an interest in Lowe Marschalk for more ownership of the Lowe Group.
Since its completion in July last year, the transaction has reduced domestic revenue; it did not increase 1989 second-quarter earnings.


Dow Falls 10.15 Points, To 2,920.79
LEAD: Stock prices weakened yesterday in sluggish trading, with investors continuing to show nervousness over disappointing earnings.


How Commercial TV Can Pay for Public TV
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Two Cultures


New York Panel Allows Release of Phone Data
LEAD: Three administrative law judges of the New York Public Service Commission ruled yesterday to allow the release of some of the documents that the New York Telephone Company had sought to label as trade secrets in its request for a $1.4 billion rate increase.


Japanese Lessor Thrives Under Loose Regulation
LEAD: In the staid world of Japanese finance, the Orix Corporation is like a jazz musician.
It can improvise across the spectrum of financial markets more freely than securities houses and insurance companies here because, as a leasing company, it operates under a separate and more liberal regulatory system.


2 Are Killed and 17 Injured In Soweto Railway Violence
LEAD: Two people were killed and 17 wounded in two separate outbreaks of factional violence, the South African police reported today.


Rinfret Urges Freeze On Spending by State
LEAD: In a broad presentation of his fiscal policies if elected New York's governor, Pierre A. Rinfret says he would balance the state budget by freezing spending at its current level but would avoid sweeping cuts in state personnel and programs.


B. J. Viviano, 79, Dies; Lawyer and Sports Star
LEAD: Bartholomew J. Viviano, a lawyer who had been a college football star, died on Wednesday at his home in Sea Bright, N.J.
He was 79 years old.


Times-Prentice Hall Venture
LEAD: Prentice Hall and The New York Times will offer a program to help college students and professors use current events in studying major subjects, according to a joint announcement from the companies yesterday.


Bonds Fall On Trump Swap Plan
LEAD: The price of ''junk bonds'' backing Donald J. Trump's casinos fell yesterday on news that the developer was considering offering holders of the high-yield securities equity ownership in his casinos in exchange for a cut in interest payments.


Hector Torres Is Dead; Fashion Designer, 46
LEAD: Hector Torres, a fashion designer, died July 7 at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 46 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Lawyer Challenges Police on Statement In Jogger Rape Case
LEAD: A defense lawyer in the Central Park jogger case challenged the detective who handled his client's statement, accusing him of ''putting words'' in the youth's mouth.


Museum to Store Stolen Art
LEAD: The Quedlinburg treasures will be stored at the Dallas Museum of Art but not displayed there until a lawsuit contesting their ownership is settled, the museum announced yesterday.


Review/Theater;   Eluding the Language Police After Spanish Is Outlawed
LEAD: By the time ''The English Only Restaurant'' ends, you wonder what language, if any, you have been hearing during its 90 minutes.
It hardly matters; the meaning is beyond mere words.
This wild musical farce by Silvio Martinez Palau, with music and lyrics by Sergio Garcia-Marruz and Saul Spangenberg, mauls the English and Spanish languages and lampoons the pretensions of upwardly mobile Latinos, the snobberies of English-speaking


British Utility In Loss for Year
LEAD: National Power P.L.C., a Government-owned British electric utility that is preparing for privatization, today posted a loss of $:605 million, or $1.1 billion, for the year and said it would cut 5,000 jobs over the next five years.


G.O.P. FAVORS LIMIT ON TAX DEDUCTIONS FOR LOCAL LEVIES
LEAD: The Bush Administration and senior Congressional Republicans have agreed on a budget proposal that would limit the amount of state and local income taxes that taxpayers could deduct on their Federal returns, Congressional officials said today.


U.S. Says Study Suggests Dentist Conveyed AIDS
LEAD: Federal health officials yesterday reported evidence suggesting that for the first time a health professional with AIDS had transmitted the virus that causes the disease to a patient during a medical procedure.


Economic Scene;   Who Is No. 1? It's Hard to Say
LEAD: WHICH country has the strongest economy in the world?


New Jersey Will Benefit From Florio's School District Reform
LEAD: To the Editor:


A 93% Pay Cut, to Just $1 Million
LEAD: Paul B. Fireman, whose salary and bonus of $14.6 million last year as chairman and chief executive of Reebok International made him one of the highest-paid heads of a publicly held company, has agreed to take one of the biggest pay cuts ever, the company said yesterday.


Church Can't Afford to Spurn Married Priests;   Reappraisal Is Needed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hunter Guard Charged In Stabbing of Student
LEAD: A Hunter College student was stabbed in the chest in the lobby of his dormitory early yesterday morning by a security guard on duty in the lobby, whom the student had complained about, the police said.


Liberian Rebels Said to Take Capital's Airfield
LEAD: Liberian rebels have captured Spriggs-Payne Airfield, Monrovia's last communications link with the outside world, a rebel official in the nearby Ivory Coast said today.


Review/Film;   Dreams of Glory Fueling A Short Bout of Gore
LEAD: According to the standards by which deranged, joy-riding killers are measured, Georgina Grayson and Ricky Allen, an English showgirl and an American G.I. who teamed up in London in 1944, weren't much.
Their spree took the life of only one victim, a taxi driver who gave the so-called cleft-chin murder its nickname.


Soviet Astronauts Shut Station's Faulty Hatch
LEAD: Two Soviet astronauts closed a faulty hatch on their orbiting station today during a three-and-a-half hour walk in space, Soviet television said.


Restaurants
LEAD: New Yorkers have become justifiably cynical about restaurants owned by celebrities.
Over the years many flimsy places have opened to much fanfare and briefly attracted voyeur diners, only to disappear like second-rate summer movies.
TriBeCa Grill, the ''Ten Commandments'' of movie-star restaurants, has much more going for it than just a stellar marquee.


Boeing Net Nearly Doubles
LEAD: The Boeing Company said its net income for the second quarter nearly doubled from a year ago because of continuing strong shipments of commercial airplanes.
But the company said it continues to have problems in its military and space businesses, and it expects them to post a significant operating loss in 1990.


Courage (Nerve?) in the Senate
LEAD: It took some courage for the Senate formally to denounce Senator Dave Durenberger, but not much.
Senator Durenberger's ethical violations were too blatant to escape the Senate's 96-to-0 judgment.
What took courage - nerve is more like it - was the Senate's willingness to render ethical judgment on anyone.


Senators Tell Souter What to Expect at Hearings
LEAD: Judge David H. Souter, President Bush's Supreme Court nominee, spent a second day on Capitol Hill today and was told by both Democratic and Republican senators to expect to answer questions about his judicial philosophy and his views on the Supreme Court's role.


Dickerson Missing
LEAD: Eric Dickerson was a no-show yesterday as veterans began arriving at the Indianapolis Colts' training camp.
Dickerson, who has a $1.45 million contract this year and has said he wants to be traded, had told The Indianapolis News, ''Even if I was there, my heart and soul wouldn't be in it.''


U.S. Open Looking for a New TV Contract, Too
LEAD: The United States Open, still looking for a more pristine alternative to its noisy, outgrown site at Flushing Meadows, is also looking for a new television contract because its $18 million agreement with CBS expires this year.


2 Networks Say No To No Excuses Jeans
LEAD: The new advertising campaign for No Excuses jeans, starring Marla Maples, is unlikely to appear on any of the three major television networks, having run afoul of their standards.


I.C.I. Reports Drop in Profits
LEAD: Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C. said today that its profit dropped 29.6 percent in the second quarter and announced that it was restructuring its fertilizer business.


Goodyear, Citing Costs, Reports Loss
LEAD: The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, the world's second-largest tire producer, yesterday reported a second-quarter loss of $9.4 million, reflecting costs associated with belt-tightening and reorganization.


Max Kamiel; Accountant, 85
LEAD: Max Kamiel, a retired certified public accountant, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 85 years old and lived in Manhattan.


U.S. Weighs Sanctions on Iraq Over Baghdad's Oil-Dispute Tactics
LEAD: The Bush Administration has started a wide-ranging review of American policy toward Iraq and will consider new economic sanctions and export controls as a result of Iraq's threats against two oil-producing neighbors on the Persian Gulf, Administration officials said today.


Market Place;   Investors Struggle to Value RJR Nabisco's New Issue
LEAD: Investors are trying to determine the value of the new RJR Nabisco security that will be exchanged for some of the company's ''junk bonds.''


Auctions
LEAD:
Asian Gods in Stone


Earle Palmer to Acquire Franklin &amp; Associates
LEAD: Earle Palmer Brown, an agency with headquarters in Bethesda, Md., moved closer to its goal of becoming a major national agency yesterday by signing a letter of intent to acquire the San Diego agency Franklin &amp; Associates Advertising and Public Relations.


G.E. Agrees to Pay $16.1 Million Fine For Pentagon Fraud
LEAD: The General Electric Company, which was convicted in a jury trial in February of overcharging the Army for a battlefield computer system, agreed yesterday to pay one of the largest fines ever assessed for defrauding the Defense Department.


Church Can't Afford to Spurn Married Priests;   Never Any Ban
LEAD: To the Editor:


TV Weekend;   Skip the Pen, Forget the Paper; Just Send Videos
LEAD: CBS is having a promising run with original programming this summer.
At 10 P.M. on Thursdays, the network is doing very nicely indeed with ''Northern Exposure,'' a show about a doctor from New York who moves to Alaska.
And at 9:30 P.M. on Fridays, there is ''Wish You Were Here,'' the second episode of which can be seen this evening.


At Caramoor Tonight
LEAD: The St.
Luke's Chamber Ensemble is to play Telemann's Sonata in A, Prokofiev's ''Overture on Hebrew Themes'' and the Schubert Octet (D. 803) at 9 tonight in the Spanish Courtyard at Caramoor, Girdle Ridge Road in Katonah, N.Y.
Tickets are $20.
Information and directions: (914) 232-1252.


Burgers in France
LEAD: The Burger King Corporation, in cooperation with the French restaurant and hotel company Elitair, announced plans to open the first two fast-food restaurants at rest stops along France's national highway.
One will be near Evry, southeast of Paris, on the A-6 highway.
The other, a drive-through restaurant, will be near Bordeaux on the A-10 highway.


Silber Taps Public's Anger to Run a Strong Race in Massachusetts
LEAD: Despite waging an unusual, provocative campaign that has broken many of the rules of politics and offended some women, blacks and the elderly, John R. Silber is running more strongly than expected in the Massachusetts race for governor and could be in position to win the Democratic nomination in September.


Democrats Reject Offer On Campaign Spending
LEAD: As the Senate nears a debate on revising Federal campaign financing laws, Democrats today rejected a Republican offer to place some limits on the contributions that candidates for the Senate may raise.


Congress Reaches an Accord On Legislation for Oil Spills
LEAD: Negotiators representing the Senate and the House of Representatives today completed work on a compromise bill on oil spills, and lawmakers said final action on the measure was likely before the Congress takes its August recess.


New CNBC President
LEAD: The National Broadcasting Company, moving quickly to find a replacement for the head of its Consumer News and Business Channel cable service, appointed Albert Barber yesterday as president of CNBC.
Mr.
Barber, 44 years old, has been NBC's executive vice president and chief financial officer since 1987.


Futures Bill Agreement Is Expected
LEAD: The Bush Administration is close to agreeing to compromise legislation that would give the Securities and Exchange Commission far less than the broad new authority it had wanted to regulate stock index futures, Congressional aides said tonight.


Goodwill Games Uniting (Some of) World's Best
LEAD: For years, sponsors and the organizer have been selling the Goodwill Games as a major world sports event. ''Uniting the World's Best,'' says the Games' promotional slogan.
After a week of competition, the promise has been largely fulfilled except in track and field.


If You Want to Watch
LEAD: Where Wien Stadium at Columbia University's Baker Field, 218th Street and Broadway.
When Sunday: Competition involving local athletes begins at 11:30 A.M.
World-class events begin at 3 P.M.
The final, the men's mile, is scheduled for 6:35 P.M.
Tickets Available through TicketMaster, telephone (212) 307-7171; the New York Road Runners Club, 9 East 89th Street, telephone 860-4455, and, on Sunday only, at Wien Stadium.


U.S. Inquiry Into Stock Transfer By Dinkins Ends Without Charges
LEAD: Federal prosecutors have ended their investigation into Mayor David N. Dinkins's transfer of Inner City Broadcasting stock to his son without filing criminal charges, the United States Attorney in Brooklyn, Andrew J. Maloney, said yesterday.


Oyama Journal;   One Plum After Another; Still the People Leave
LEAD: Three decades ago, when the enemy in much of rural Japan was poverty combined with brutal working conditions, this riverside farming town became a symbol of self-improvement by encouraging the local farmers to break their dependence on rice and experiment with cash crops, principally plums and chestnuts.


INSIDE
LEAD:
A Verdict in Camarena Case
A Honduran was found guilty of three charges, but acquitted of murder, in the death of an American drug agent, Enrique Camarena.
Page A14.
Family Fight in New Forum
A debate over unpaid leave for workers who need to care for family members is moving to the states after the veto of a Federal bill.


Notes and Bonds Little Changed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds were little changed in sluggish trading yesterday, as dealers watched the progress of budget negotiations in Washington and waited for a preliminary report this morning on how much the economy grew in the second quarter.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Starrett City Withdraws Proposal To Offer Apartments to Soviet Jews
LEAD: The owners of the Starrett City housing complex in southeast Brooklyn yesterday withdrew a plan to make apartments available to Soviet Jewish emigres.


Trial Date Set in Burn Attack
LEAD: A Sept. 5 trial date was set yesterday for the youth accused of setting fire to David Opont, the 12-year-old who was seriously burned on the morning of March 7 in Brooklyn.
The name of the suspect, who was 13 at the time of the attack, has not been released because of his age.
He has been held in a juvenile detention center since his arrest, the night after the attack.


36 Are Hurt in Subway Crash in Brooklyn


Jerry Zaks Goes to Work For Jujamcyn Theaters
LEAD: Jerry Zaks, the Tony Award-winning director, has resigned as director in residence at the Lincoln Center Theater to accept a salaried, untitled position with Jujamcyn Theaters to develop plays and musicals for the company's five Broadway theaters.


Disciplinary Actions by the House
LEAD:
EXPULSION
1861: John B. Clark, Democrat of Missouri, for support of rebellion.
1861: Henry C. Burnett, Democrat of Kentucky, for support of rebellion.
1861: John W. Reid, Democrat of Missouri, for support of rebellion.
1861: Michael (Ozzie) Myers, Democrat of Pennsylvania, for corruption in connection with the ''Abscam'' scandal.


Ms. Boyd Weds Mr. Conner; Couple to Honeymoon in Jail
LEAD: Sheila Maria Boyd and Jerry Conner, both of Brooklyn, were married yesterday in Queens Borough Hall.
Afterward, they celebrated at Cobblestone's Restaurant, a few blocks away at 117-18 Queens Boulevard in Forest Hills.


Kenya Rearrests a Freed Lawyer, Saying His Magazine Is Seditious
LEAD: One of three Kenyan lawyers formally released from detention on Wednesday was arrested again and charged today with publication of a seditious magazine.


Corrections
LEAD: An article last Friday about Pennsylvania companies' rejection of the state's takeover protection misidentified the nation's largest pension fund.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on July 12 about Robert A. Roth, a New York lawyer, described his background incompletely.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-7


American People Need Stealth and Aegis
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Art;   In a Show on the Issues, The Focus Is Outrage
LEAD: ''Art in the Anchorage'' is a great way to beat the heat and feel it too.
This seventh annual summer show of installation artworks, organized by Creative Time Inc., takes place in one of the city's greatest hidden interiors: the cavernous brick vaults of the Brooklyn Bridge's Anchorage (Brooklyn side), a space pleasantly immune to the waves of heat and humidity assaulting the


Big S.&amp; L. Loss In San Diego
LEAD: The Great American Bank, a troubled savings and loan in San Diego, reported a large loss for the second quarter because of the deterioration of its portfolio of Arizona real estate.


Goodwill: Dissidents And Luaus
LEAD: rrIt has been widely reported that Soviet officials were not amused when a hockey player jumped to the Detroit Red Wings while he was supposed to be playing in the Goodwill Games this week.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Betty at the Ballroom


In the Bomb Sight: The Bomber
LEAD: Les Aspin, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, says he will stop supporting the B-2, the nuclear bomber designed so cleverly that to enemy radar it's the size of a bird.
He no longer sees a unique and compelling mission for the plane.
Sam Nunn, his Senate counterpart, warns that the B-2 could fail in the Senate, too.


Mets Split and Share First Place With Pirates
LEAD: The Mets split a doubleheader with the St.
Louis Cardinals last night before 45,936 scoreboard-watching fans in Shea Stadium.
But they still managed to reach a milestone when they sidestepped into a first-place tie in the National League East with the team they've been chasing all season, the Pittsburgh


Evolution in Europe;   East German Coalition Finds Accord on Election Formula
LEAD: The East German Social Democrats decided today not to leave the coalition with Prime Minister Lothar de Maiziere and the Christian Democrats after an all-German parliamentary committee found a compromise for holding all-German elections on Dec. 2.


Groups in Northeast Protest Plan to Cap Deductions for Taxes
LEAD: Predicting devastating consequences for state and local governments throughout the Northeast, school boards, business groups and municipal officials in New York and neighboring states began a spontaneous protest today against a Bush Administration proposal to restrict the deductions for state and local taxes on


Avianca Offers Crash Survivors $75,000 Apiece
LEAD: Avianca Airlines offered yesterday to pay $75,000 each to passengers who were injured or relatives of passengers who were killed in the crash of its Flight 52 on Long Island early this year, without requiring that they give up their suits against the airline.


The Gorbachev Goal Posts
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney counts himself among the hard-line skeptics who oppose American aid to the Soviet Union and resist cuts in military spending.
He told reporters that he had made a list of 9 or 10 ''tough'' steps he would regard ''as hard evidence that the Soviets have fundamentally transformed themselves.


Your Money;   New Software Offers Advice
LEAD: Three new software packages offer great help in personal finance.
Hyatt Legal Services' Home Lawyer and WillMaker 4.0 can help with legal matters, while Make Your Paycheck Last helps people keep their spending within their income.


St. Vincent's Discovers a Financial Cure
LEAD: A week after Margaret Broughal was brought by ambulance to St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan, her left side immobilized by a stroke, physical therapists began helping her exercise her weakened body.


Acting Silly About Color
LEAD: Actors' Equity doesn't like the idea of a British actor ''painted yellow'' playing the lead role of a Eurasian in ''Miss Saigon'' when the musical comes to Broadway from London next spring.
That, it says, would be ''an affront to the Asian community.''


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''On issues like this, the extremes speak the loudest and with the most concerted voices.


Douglas-Holyfield Date
LEAD: In an agreement reached by both camps, the heavyweight title fight between the champion, James (Buster) Douglas, and Evander Holyfield has been rescheduled from Sept. 21 to Oct. 25.
The bout will still be held at the Mirage Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas, Nev.


G.N.P. Rate Up Just 1.2% In 2d Period
LEAD: In its latest figures on the health of the American economy, the Commerce Department reported yesterday that the United States was much closer to a recession than Government statistics had recognized until now.


Review/Theater;   A Chekhovian Goulash With Odd Ingredients
LEAD: When Ethyl Eichelberger is at his sharpest, his theatrical spoofs are sendups without being put-downs.
This was the case with his one-man version of ''King Lear'' and his feminization of ''Hamlet'' (starring Black-Eyed Susan).
With his new show, ''Das Vedanya Mama'' (at Performance Space 122), the result is less delirious than fragmented.


Patents;   New Method Of Prognosis On AIDS
LEAD: Researchers affiliated with the University of California at Los Angeles have obtained a patent on an experimental test to predict whether a person infected with the AIDS virus will quickly develop symptoms.


Social Security Panel Opposes Moynihan Plan
LEAD: A bipartisan Federal advisory panel said today that it opposed Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan's proposal to cut Social Security payroll taxes.


Victims of Rebel Attacks Buried in Sri Lanka


Review/Dance;   A Fourth Cast for the Australians' 'Giselle'
LEAD: David Ashmole, once with the Royal Ballet in Britain, and Miranda Coney were the fine new leads in the Australian Ballet's last performance of ''Giselle'' on Thursday night.


Republicans Demand a Budget From Democrats
LEAD: Congressional Republicans, angry that a White House budget proposal calling for higher taxes has become public without a companion proposal from Democrats, demanded today that the Democrats produce one before Congress adjourns for its August recess.


Hollywood Inspects Student Films
LEAD: Even before New York University's Institute of Film and Television began its fifth annual invitational screening of student films here this week, the word had already spread across Hollywood: If you're in the market for fresh young talent, this is an event you can't afford to miss.


Bridge
LEAD: Almost all of the favored teams were still in contention today in the quarterfinal stage of the Spingold Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.


Ford-Cummins Accord Set
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company and the Cummins Engine Company have agreed to several provisions intended to cement their new relationship, according to documents filed yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


U.S. and Soviet Teams Lead Goodwill Standing
LEAD: It was just the other day that Bela Karolyi was talking about how the United States' female gymnasts were closing the gap on their Soviet counterparts, the best in the world since most people can remember.
And here were the Goodwill Games to prove his point.


Fires Consume More Than a Million Alaskan Acres


Lawyers Criticize Blood Tests on Captain of Exxon Tanker
LEAD: More than a year after the skipper of the Exxon Valdez, Joseph J. Hazelwood, was publicly ridiculed as a drunk, a furor has erupted over whether a laboratory mishandled his alcohol test results.


Books of The Times;   Status of India's Women Offers Hope and Despair
LEAD:
May You Be the Mother of a Hundred Sons
A Journey Among the Women of India
By Elisabeth Bumiller
Illustrated. 306 pages. Random House.
$19.95.


Investor Group To Acquire McGaw
LEAD: An investor group led by James M. Sweeney, a health-care industry executive, said today that it has agreed to acquire McGaw Laboratories for $210 million plus what it called ''other consideration.'' The group has financial backing from Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons Inc. and the Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corporation.


Shell Oil Net Drops 63.4%
LEAD: The Shell Oil Company said today that its net income fell 63.4 percent in the second quarter, as earnings declined in each of its exploration, refining and marketing and chemical units.


About New York;   A 'Bum' Gleans The Discarded To Find History
LEAD: Leo Hershkowitz grew up on the streets of the East Bronx, playing stickball, scurrying from the constabulary and thumbing his nose at authority.
By the time he began school, his contrary course was set.
When a teacher assigned a book, he'd read another.
When given an essay topic, he'd write about something else.


Dinkins Still Receiving Contributions
LEAD: Demonstrating that victory has a thousand fathers even in a non-election year, Mayor David N. Dinkins has received $974,173 in contributions since the first of the year.


Baker Hints at Direct Contact With Phnom Penh
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today that Washington might further modify its Indochina policy by opening direct diplomatic contacts with the Communist Government of Cambodia.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart yesterday listing members of the House of Representatives who have faced disciplinary action was incomplete.
An omitted group, members whom the House refused to recognize as legitimate lawmakers and who were denied their seats, is listed today in a chart on page 6.


Pirates Knocked Out of First Place
LEAD: Dennis Cook pitched five shutout relief innings and Charlie Hayes hit a home run and drove in two runs as the Philadelphia Phillies beat Pittsburgh, 5-3, tonight, knocking the slumping Pirates out of first place in the National League East.


Dow Drops 22.28 Points, To 2,898.51
LEAD: Continuing fears of new earnings shocks, a decline in the dollar and heavy movement of money into short-term Treasury notes kept stock prices under strong pressure yesterday.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


CONSUMER'S WORLD:: Guidepost;   Refrigerating Food
LEAD: If food that should be refrigerated is left at room temperature during the summer, it is likely to spoil in about an hour.
And expiration dates on dairy products are less reliable in hot weather.
Spoilage cannot always be detected, because sometimes the problem is in the toxins the food is giving off.


Why Family Doctors Are Sent to the Country
LEAD: To the Editor:


TRINIDAD MUSLIMS PROCLAIM REVOLT
LEAD: A small Muslim militant group attempted yesterday to overthrow the Government of the Caribbean republic of Trinidad and Tobago, seizing the national television station in the capital and claiming to have taken the Prime Minister and Cabinet hostage.


New York Exempts Archdiocese From Requirements on AIDS Care
LEAD: The New York State Public Health Council voted yesterday to exempt Catholic-operated AIDS nursing homes from requirements that patients receive condoms, safe-sex counseling, contraceptives and abortion services.
The decision paves the way for the archdiocese to provide hundreds of beds to AIDS patients.


Violence Shuts Ford's Brazil Plant
LEAD: The Brazilian subsidiary of the Ford Motor Company has closed its plant in Sao Paulo state for repairs for an indefinite period, after striking workers went on a rampage for the third time in less than a week.
Workers broke windows, damaged cars and computer terminals and started a fire in the administration building of the plant in Sao Bernardo do


Rebels Attack Center of Liberia Capital
LEAD: More than 300 rebels invaded central Monrovia today and were locked in bitter street fighting with Government troops.


New York Regents Drop Charges Against Former Medical Examiner
LEAD: The New York State Board of Regents today dismissed all charges of misconduct against Dr.
Elliot M. Gross, the former Chief Medical Examiner of New York City, ending a five-year state investigation.


2 Contractors' Ratings Cut
LEAD: The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation yesterday reduced the debt ratings of two large military contractors, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation and the General Dynamics Corporation.
Moody's Investors Service also cut the ratings of McDonnell Douglas.


Congress Backs Curbs Against Iraq
LEAD: The House and the Senate defied the Bush Administration today and voted to impose economic sanctions on Iraq, citing what lawmakers viewed as the human rights violations and increasingly bellicose policies of President Saddam Hussein's Government.


With Bar Exams Over, Oates Reports to Camp
LEAD: The last major piece in the Giants' offensive line fell into place today when Bart Oates, the starting center since 1985, reported to training camp four days late.


Ex-Farah Head Battles for Old Job
LEAD: The former chairman and chief executive of Farah Inc. is trying to take back control of the ailing company that his parents founded 70 years ago, one of the nation's largest makers of men's slacks and casual clothing.


Israeli Sees Chemical Option Against Iraqis
LEAD: Israel can respond with its own chemical weapons if Iraq attacks it with similar arms, Science Minister Yuval Neeman said today.


Weak Link Found for Fallout and Leukemia
LEAD: Researchers have found a weak association between radioactive fallout from atomic testing in Nevada in the 1950's and leukemia rates in people who lived downwind, but they said the evidence was not strong enough to prove the tests caused the cancer.


Ryan on Television
LEAD: ESPN, the cable sports network, will televise Nolan Ryan's second attempt at his 300th victory when Ryan pitches for the Texas Rangers on Tuesday night against the Brewers in Milwaukee.
The game will begin at 8:30 P.M.
Eastern time.(AP)


Youth's Father Says He Urged Park-Rape Lie
LEAD: The father of a defendant testified yesterday that he told his son to lie - to admit raping and beating a jogger in Central Park -so that the police would let him go home.


New Signs of Weak Economy
LEAD: The gross national product report indicated the United States was much closer to a recession than statistics had recognized until now.
Page 29.


Diversionary Tactic on S.&amp; L.'s
LEAD: Several members of Congress propose creating a nonpartisan commission to dig out the full story of the savings and loan scandal.
They make it sound like a serious attempt to rise above politics.
It smells more like a refuge for politicians.


Krieg Agrees to Pact
LEAD: Dave Krieg, the Seahawks' regular quarterback for the last six seasons, has agreed to terms on a four-year contract with Seattle after missing eight days of training camp.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
11.00
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
8.18
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.54
7.58
7.84
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.42
7.47
7.49
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.35
8.42
7.70
30-YR.


Bertram Thorp Blake Jr., Executive, 71
LEAD: Bertram Thorp Blake Jr., a retired paper company executive, died yesterday at his home in Darien, Conn.
He was 71 years old.
Mr.
Blake died of lung cancer, his wife, Margaret, said.
Mr.
Blake was executive vice president of the Paper Corporation of the United States, based in Manhattan, from 1966 to 1981, when he retired.


Ottawa Gesture to Mohawks
LEAD: Canada announced today that it had bought a piece of land in an effort to help end a two-week armed standoff between the police and Mohawk Indians.
But a Mohawk negotiator, Mavis Etienne, called the purchase ''a drop in the bucket.'' The standoff began after the village of Oka, Quebec, tried to expand a golf course on what the Indians call ancestral land.


Some on House Panel Seek Bar to Northrop
LEAD: Members of a House subcommittee said today that the Northrop Corporation should be barred from doing business with the Pentagon because of contract violations involving several of its weapons programs.


Scooters Increase, And So Do State Laws
LEAD: Advocates and opponents of water scooters are disputing the crafts' safety, even as record numbers of the swift, agile boats ply waterways this summer.


Free Speech Doesn't Include Harassment
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chang Eliminates Agassi; Sampras Upsets McEnroe
LEAD: The $1.2 million Player's Limited International tournament became a little more limited today when it lost its marquee idol and its master craftsman in the space of two quarterfinal matches.


Gordon A. Ewing, 77, Ex-Broadcast Official
LEAD: Gordon A. Ewing, who directed United States radio programming in occupied Germany after World War II, died Tuesday at Thomas Hospital in Fairhope, Ala.
He was 77 years old and lived in Fairhope.
His family said he died of pneumonia.


News Summary
LEAD: International
2-5
OPEC agreed to raise oil prices, and analysts said the increases are likely to stick because of Iraq's willingness to act as a powerful enforcer of the deal.
The agreement means a modest rise in energy costs.
Page 1
Sanctions will be imposed on Iraq after a vote by the House and Senate.


No Community Guilt In Racial Murder
LEAD: To the Editor:


LOSING BID OFFERED 2 TESTS ON HUBBLE
LEAD: An unsuccessful bid for the contract to make the Hubble Space Telescope's mirrors called for a second company to double-check the grinding and polishing, a provision not offered by the company that eventually won the contract.


Columbus Gets New Sponsor's Support


Excluded From the House
LEAD: A listing yesterday of House members who have been disciplined by their peers omitted those whom the House refused to recognize as legitimate lawmakers and who were denied their seats.
This list gives their names and the reasons.
YEAR
MEMBER-ELECT
GROUNDS
1823
John Bailey (Ind.-Mass.)
Not a resident of district
he represented.


7 Years Later, McMartin Case Ends in a Mistrial
LEAD: The McMartin preschool child molesting case came to a conclusion today when a jury said it was ''hopelessly and irreversibly'' deadlocked in Raymond Buckey's retrial on charges of molesting three girls at the school.
The judge declared a mistrial.


Generic Case Sentencing
LEAD: A Federal judge on Thursday sentenced the former president of a New York generic drug company to two years in prison and a $50,000 fine for making payoffs to employees of the Food and Drug Administration.


Newman Decision Near
LEAD: Knick officials spent the day crunching numbers yesterday, trying to figure out whether to match Charlotte's offer to the free agent Johnny Newman or to let the scoring forward go to the Hornets without the possibility of getting compensation by trading him to another team.


USX Will Pay $34 Million For Wastewater Cleanup
LEAD: The USX Corporation has agreed to pay $34 million in costs and penalties for the cleanup of wastewater that was illegally dumped from its Gary, Ind., steel mill, Federal officials said today.


Letter: On Ecology;   Brazil's Small Share of the Greenhouse
LEAD: To the Editor:


Steinbrenner Likely To Testify on Spira
LEAD: The prosecutor in the Howard Spira extortion case said yesterday that he had yet to decide whether he would call George Steinbrenner as a witness.
But the attorney for Spira said he would call the Yankees' principal owner to testify about his relationship with Spira if the prosecution did not.


Siemens in Pact
LEAD: Siemens A.G. said it had agreed to develop and produce computer hardware in conjunction with Computer Elektronik Dresden G.m.b.H., a unit of VEB Kombinat Robotron Elektronik, an East German electronics group based in Dresden.
Siemens, the big West German electrical and electronics concern, said production of Siemens computers in the Dresden plant will begin on Oct.


A Rich Reward For Colorado Coach
LEAD: He had his University of Colorado team at the top of the national polls for most of last season, then took the undefeated Buffaloes to the Orange Bowl before taking it on the chin from Notre Dame.
Now the university is taking care of Bill McCartney for the rest of his coaching career with a 15-year contract worth nearly $2 million.


Liz Claiborne Sets Discount Increase
LEAD: Liz Claiborne Inc., one of the largest makers of women's clothes, said it would increase its discount for retailers who pay for goods within 10 days after the end of the month in which they receive shipment.
The company said the new discount would allow retail accounts to ''overcome some of the increased costs of business'' without raising prices to consumers.


Reporter's Notebook;   Discipline Within: Reserve vs. Rawness in Capitol
LEAD: The rare rebukes of Representative Barney Frank by the House of Representatives and Senator Dave Durenberger by the Senate this week revealed as much about the behavior of the institutions as that of the two lawmakers themselves.


OPEC IN AGREEMENT TO RAISE OIL PRICE BY CUTTING OUTPUT
LEAD: The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries reached an accord today calling for higher oil prices.
This time Iraq, which has emerged as a powerful enforcer, will try to make the increase take hold.


New York City Campaign Finance Audit Moves at a Good Pace
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mandela Urged to Drop Communist From Talks
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk has urged Nelson Mandela to exclude the leader of the South African Communist Party from negotiations on the nation's future, accusing the party of conspiracy to overthrow the white authorities.


AIDS Tests in Rape
LEAD: To the Editor:


James B. Smith Dies; Resort Owner Was 82
LEAD: James Barker Smith, a retired resort owner, died Thursday at a nursing home in Portsmouth, N.H.
He was 82 years old and lived in New Castle, N.H.
His daughter-in-law, Brenda Smith, said he died of lymphoma.
Mr.
Smith bought Wentworth by the Sea in New Castle in 1946, when it operated only in July and August.


In South Korea, Hope at Last In Budding Links With North
LEAD: When the Berlin wall fell last year, South Koreans sat transfixed, their eyes on Europe but their minds on their own border of barbed wire, mines and tank traps, and they glumly concluded that it could never happen here.
Now no one is quite so sure.


Eastern L.I. Spots a Dreaded Foe: The Brown Tide Surfaces Again
LEAD: After a two-year absence, a mysterious algal bloom that devastated the bay scallop industry in eastern Long Island has reappeared.


Compromise on Regulation Of Index Futures Advances
LEAD: A Treasury official said tonight that the Bush Administration would accept an agreement worked out among Republican and Democratic senators that would allow the Commodity Futures Trading Commission to retain most of its regulatory authority over stock index futures but would shift some power to both the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Federal


Oil Contracts Finish Lower After Rise on OPEC News
LEAD: An agreement by OPEC oil ministers to restrain crude production had little effect on wholesale prices yesterday, but some experts said motorists could feel pinched at the gasoline pumps by early next year if the group sticks with the pact.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, JULY 28, 1990
LEAD:
International


Bush Defends Little-Known Souter
LEAD: President Bush acknowledged today that his nominee for the Supreme Court was ''not the most well-known figure in the country,'' but he predicted that he would come through his Senate confirmation hearings in September with ''flying colors.''


Judge Souter's Future
LEAD: History suggests that if Judge David Souter goes on the Supreme Court there's a good chance he will still be there in the year 2025.


Whose Art Is It? A Dispute In Santa Fe
LEAD: A dispute over a fresco has polarized artists in Santa Fe, N.M., and once again raised questions about such issues as an institution's responsibility to an artist whose work it has commissioned and the ultimate ownership of public art.


Mental Patient Found Guilty In Pipe Killing of Counselor
LEAD: A 27-year-old mental patient has been found guilty of using a metal pipe to kill a counselor making a required visit to his apartment.


U.N. Sees AIDS Toll Surging Among Women and Infants
LEAD: At least three million women and children will die of AIDS in the 1990's, more than six times the number in the 1980's, the World Health Organization said in a report being published today.


Police Commissioner Named
LEAD: The former police chief of Corpus Christi, Tex., was named today as police commissioner of Yonkers, City Manager Neil DeLuca said.
The new commissioner, Robert K. Olson, was one of five finalists selected by the New York State Association of Chiefs of Police, Mr.
DeLuca said.


Citroen Model's Final Roll-Off
LEAD: An automotive legend was bid a quiet adieu today.
The last Deux Chevaux rolled off Citroen's assembly line here, ending 42 years of production.


Review/Jazz;   Swing Street And Images Of Basie
LEAD: The swinging drive of the music and the boisterous enthusiasm of the audience suggest Saturday night on 52d Street in the 1940's.
But it's actually 50 years later and 15 blocks south - the Monday night sessions of Roy Gerson's Swing Septet at Zanzibar and Grill, 550 Third Avenue, between 36th and 37th


Louisiana Abortion Bill Vetoed; Governor Calls It Too Restrictive
LEAD: After weeks of deliberation, Gov.
Buddy Roemer today vetoed legislation that would have severely restricted abortions in Louisiana, and angry legislators threatened to return to the capital and resurrect an even stricter abortion bill.


Bush Will Let Japanese Buy Hercules Unit
LEAD: President Bush said today that he would not block the sale of Semi-Gas Systems Inc. to a Japanese bidder even though the California company has a central role in the semiconductor industry's effort to overtake its Japanese rivals.
Semi-Gas Systems is a primary supplier of gas distribution and control systems to


Defense Rests Without Barry's Taking Stand
LEAD: The defense in the drug and perjury trial of Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. rested today, without putting the defendant on the stand.


17 Minutes Of Flying Fun
LEAD: Continental Express Airlines hung out a help-wanted sign today for stand-up comedians to entertain passengers on its 17-minute flights between Cleveland and Detroit.
The routines will provide


Korean Reactor Request
LEAD: South Korea, which is negotiating to buy a nuclear reactor from Canada, wants to acquire more of the units, the president of Canada's nuclear agency said today.
Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd. will submit a proposal next week to build a second 700-megawatt Candu reactor next to one in Wolsung on South Korea's southeastern coast.


Evolution in Europe;   Israeli-Soviet Trade Ties
LEAD: Israel and the Soviet Union agreed today to establish trade ties, Israeli officials said.
The president of the Soviet Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Vladislav Malkevitch, said trade between the countries, which do not have diplomatic relations, could top $1 billion in four years.
Direct trade stands at less than $10 million a year.


For Peru's New Chief, a Litany of Ills
LEAD: Alberto Fujimori, a political novice who is to take office as President of Peru on Saturday, faces the task of trying to save a nation traumatized by political terrorism, fiscal insolvency, galloping inflation and a drought that threatens the water and power supply.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Irwin and Pooley Share Buick Lead


Two Filipinos Rescued 11 Days After Quake
LEAD: Miners who heard cries of ''Help us!'' rescued two people on Friday from the rubble of a hotel that collapsed 11 days ago in an earthquake that killed more than 1,600 people.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Bemis Company, Minneapolis, a maker of industrial products, said it had entered into an agreement to acquire Milprint Inc., Milwaukee, a privately held maker of flexible packaging products.
Terms were not disclosed.


Florio Is Sued Over Ban on Some Weapons
LEAD: Gun owners sued Gov. Jim Florio today over a ban on some semiautomatic weapons.


Evolution in Europe;   Bulgarian Interior Minister Quits Amid Furor
LEAD: Interior Minister Atanas Semerdzhiyev resigned tonight after 1,000 demonstrators surrounded Parliament to protest a proposal that Todor Zhivkov, the deposed Communist dictator, be allowed to speak in closed session about his 35 years of authoritarian rule.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Thursday about Storage Technology Inc. misstated the year the company filed for bankruptcy protection and the year Ryal Poppa became chairman and chief executive.
The filing was in 1984; Mr.
Poppa assumed his new positions in 1985.


Inquiry Set On Suchard
LEAD: Swiss authorities have begun a formal inquiry into the possibility of insider trading in shares of Jacobs Suchard A.G. before the Swiss chocolate and coffee group agreed to be bought last month by the Philip Morris Companies for $3.8 billion.


Candelaria to Blue Jays
LEAD: The Minnesota Twins traded John Candelaria, a left-handed pitcher, to the Toronto Blue Jays yesterday for Nelson Liriano, a second baseman, and Pedro Munoz, a minor league outfielder.


Evolution in Europe: Moscow Journal;   Russian Finds a Haven In Her Solitary Museum
LEAD: For the average Muscovite, the art of surviving with assorted strange families in a communal apartment is merely surreal on a good day, making do with noisome juxtapositions.
But for Tatyana Kolodzei, who shares kitchen, toilet and corridors with an alcoholic in one bedroom and a transient day laborer in the other, the art is always avant-garde.


Milton Roy Sets Sundstrand Talks
LEAD: The Milton Roy Company, a waste-water equipment maker that recently received a $160 million buyout offer from the Sundstrand Corporation, said its board had authorized talks with Sundstrand about the unsolicited offer.


Deposit Insurance Rules
LEAD: Notices of new rules governing Federal insurance on deposits in commercial banks and savings institutions have been mailed out in monthly bank statements.


Patents;   Administration Backs Bill on Biotechnology
LEAD: The Bush Administration has agreed in principle with proposed legislation that would eliminate what biotechnology companies say is a legal loophole that allows foreign companies to evade some American patents.


Browns Officials Take Drug Tests
LEAD: Cleveland Browns coaches and front-office personnel were among those tested for drugs by the National Football League on Thursday, and so was the team president, Art Modell.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Science Times on Tuesday about fire ants misstated Dr.
Edward Vargo's affiliation at the University of Texas.
He works at the university's Brackenridge Field Laboratory.


DEMOCRATS FAVOR OUTLAWING PAC'S
LEAD: Democrats said today that they would press for the elimination of political action committees, which are increasingly associated in the public mind with the influence of money on politics, when the Senate takes up legislation to revise Federal campaigns.


Unusual Labor Tension at U.P.S.
LEAD: United Parcel Service of America Inc., with its almost egalitarian corporate culture and its deep roots as a high-paying union employer, might seem an unlikely target for a possible nationwide strike by the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.


Big Board Is Said to Favor Donaldson as Its Next Chief
LEAD: William H. Donaldson, a founder of the brokerage firm Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc., is the New York Stock Exchange's top choice to replace John J. Phelan Jr. as chairman at the end of the year, people familiar with the process said.


Dr. Albert Bowers, 60, Is Dead; Chemist Who Led Syntex Corp.
LEAD: Dr.
Albert Bowers, chairman and former chief executive of the Syntex Corporation, died Thursday at the University of California's San Francisco Medical Center in Palo Alto.
He was 60 years old and lived in Palo Alto.


Dollar Plummets as Traders Expect Interest Rates to Fall
LEAD: The dollar fell sharply yesterday as traders, with evidence of a further weakening in the economy, grew convinced that the Federal Reserve would push United States interest rates lower.


Mets Go To Top; Marshall Is Traded
LEAD: The hits fell in, the runs poured in, so it didn't take long for the verdict to come in.
The Mets, having spent the night circling the bases, couldn't help but be led to one conclusion: It not only felt good to be in first place in the National League East, it felt right.
And it felt, with the Cardinals crushed by 10-1 and the


Killer, 38, Is Executed in Florida
LEAD: A 38-year-old man convicted of stabbing, raping and robbing a woman in 1983 was executed today after the United States Supreme Court rejected his assertions that Florida's electric chair was not working properly.


Prices of Treasury Securities Climb
LEAD: Prices of all Treasury securities climbed and yields fell yesterday amid new signs that the economy is closer to a recession than data had previously indicated.


'Junk Bond' Deal Joined By Investor
LEAD: A Hong Kong businessman, Li Ka-shing, plans to spend $150 million for a half-interest in an investment group that has agreed to buy $3 billion in ''junk bonds'' from the troubled Columbia Savings and Loan Association in California, it was announced today.


Boy's Brother Was Target, Police Say
LEAD: Detectives say they believe the gunmen who fired more than 18 bullets through a door in a Brooklyn housing project on Thursday, killing a 3-year-old boy, were trying to intimidate the boy's 19-year-old half-brother, a convicted drug dealer.


Ertl Leads by 4 in L.P.G.A.
LEAD: Sue Ertl shot a four-under-par 67 and took advantage of a quadruple-bogey by Rosie Jones today to take a two-stroke lead after two rounds of the Ladies Professional Golf Association Championship.


A Rising AIDS Toll: Women and Children
LEAD: The World Health Organization estimates that at least three million women and children will die of AIDS in the 1990's; that estimate, which the W.H.O. calls conservative, is more than six times the number in the 1980's.
Several million other children will be orphaned by the disease.
Page 24.


Why Family Doctors Are Sent to the Country;   A Wasteful Policy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Retrial for 3 Merc Traders
LEAD: Three commodity traders accused of fraud and racketeering will be retried on March 5, Federal District Judge Ann C. Williams said this week.
The jury was deadlocked in the original trial.


Corrections Golf;   Bias at Private Clubs: A Test for Pro Golf
LEAD: America's private golf clubs, stubbornly resistant to change and isolated from social turmoil, are facing the most rigorous scrutiny in their history because of restrictive admission policies.


Ethiopia's Jews Gain From Amity With Israel
LEAD: To the Editor:


Yankees Sweep Doubleheader With Indians
LEAD: At the end of the 13th start since Andy Hawkins was a winning pitcher for the last time, the handshakes and pats he received from his Yankee teammates tonight were heartfelt and unconditional.


Brooklyn Mourns One of 3 Children Lost to Gunfire


Junior Is Frightful, Freckled And the Bane of His Seniors
We aren't all blessed with Wordsworth's sense of childhood as a romantic idyll, but even hack film makers who think a malevolent orphan is raw comic material might show more imagination than they do in ''Problem Child.'' Junior is a red-haired, freckle-faced 7-year-old, a ringer for Opie on television's ''Andy Griffith Show.'' Imagine what would have happened if Andy and Aunt Bea had abandoned Opie at birth, and the unloved boy had turned into a child who writes fan letters to a famous murderer.
That is the totally unfulfilled concept behind the movie.
Despite his strange attachment to a killer, Junior is mischievous in the way only derivative screenwriters and directors conditioned by sit-coms could possibly find amusing.
So Junior is enough to try the patience of a nun? ''Problem Child'' shows him infuriating nuns at an orphanage, sometimes by calling them penguins.
No one ever said he was original.
When he is adopted by a middle-class family, he sets fire to his room and tosses the cat around.
This behavior never seems dangerous, and it never seems funny.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Digital Audio Tape
LEAD: I marvel at the digital audio tape recorder I brought back from Tokyo last year, and at the portable DAT recorder I got there this year.


Review/Music;   A Rare 'Faust' by Schumann
LEAD: Even before the rains came this evening, Schumann's oratorio ''Scenes From Goethe's 'Faust,' '' for vocal soloists, double chorus, children's chorus and orchestra, seemed ticklish fare for the small stage and outdoor acoustics of the Venetian Theater at Caramoor.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary yesterday about Bartholomew J. Viviano, a lawyer, misidentified and incorrectly described a Manhattan law firm where he worked after graduating from law school in the 1930's.
The firm is Whitman &amp; Ransom; it continues to operate.


Robert S. Forman, 71, Lawyer on Long Island
LEAD: Robert S. Forman, a lawyer from Long Island, died on Wednesday at his home in Sands Point.
He was 71 years old and also lived in Palm Beach, Fla.


Speaker-Shopping in New York's Bazaar
LEAD: If visitors from outer space landed in midtown Manhattan, they could conclude from shop windows that the object of life on earth was to consume stereo cassette players, compact disk players, video cameras, television sets, radios, telephones, calculators, fax machines, hand-held computers and other electronic gadgets nestled among signs saying ''Sale!


David Goldway, 83; Led Marxist Journal
LEAD: David Goldway, chairman of the editorial board of Science &amp; Society, a quarterly journal of Marxist scholarship, died on Tuesday near his home in Truro, Mass.
He was 83 years old.


Shaw Relents, a Bit
LEAD: Bowing under the pressure of a $5,000-a-day fine, Brian Shaw has agreed to break his contract with an Italian team, but he still doesn't want to play for the Celtics, his lawyer said this week.


Mongolians Take Part in Multiparty Elections


U.S. Curtails 24-Hour Duty Of Its Flying Command Post
LEAD: In a sign of budget constraints and a cold war thaw, the Defense Department has stopped the round-the-clock flights of an airborne command post that for three decades has been a symbol of America's readiness to wage nuclear war.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the second-quarter earnings of Time Warner Inc. misstated the change in the company's operating income.
It rose 3.3 percent from the comparable period last year.


Saying 'I Do' to Cost More
LEAD: In New York City, where it already costs a lot to do almost everything, it will be more expensive to do one more thing: get married.
The city increased its fee for ceremonies performed by the City Clerk's office to $25, from $5, in a bill signed yesterday by Mayor David N. Dinkins.


BYELORUSSIA JOINS SOVEREIGNTY MOVE
LEAD: Another major Soviet republic, Byelorussia, approved a strongly worded declaration of sovereignty today, adding to the challenge facing the Soviet Government to accede to a vastly decentralized system.


U.S. Drops Computer Case Against Student
LEAD: Federal prosecutors in Chicago yesterday dropped felony charges against a 20-year-old college student in a computer crime case that has drawn national attention because of the civil liberties issues involved.


France Releases 5 Terrorists And Sends Them to Teheran
LEAD: Five men convicted for acts of terrorism in France were released and sent to Iran today in what appeared to be a crucial step in a broader agreement between the French and Iranian Governments.


Soviet Alternatives
LEAD: This is the Soviet Union's second city and none too pleased about it.
People claim that Leningrad, with a population of some five million, sends 80 billion rubles a year to Moscow, and gets 20 billion back.
The center deliberately puts Leningrad down and holds it back, they say, and they are just as aggrieved as people in minority


Religion Notes
LEAD: On Praying for a Son There are few things that connoisseurs of antiquity enjoy more than a modern discovery that confirms the wisdom of the past.
So, in recent weeks several students of the Talmud, the authoritative body of Jewish law completed in the sixth century, took pleasure in a report in the journal Nature about the discovery of a gene that determines maleness.


Senate Votes Farm Supports For $54 Billion Over 5 Years
LEAD: After more than a week of debate, the Senate approved legislation today to set the country's farm policy over the next five years.
The program, which is expected to cost $54 billion, was approved 70 to 21.


Evolution in Europe;   Top West German Anti-Terrorist Is Slightly Wounded in a Bombing
LEAD: West German terrorists set off a bomb by remote control next to a busy highway today just as Bonn's top anti-terrorist official was driving by.
The official was slightly wounded in the neck and arm.


New York City Schools Face $62.3 Million Budget Cut
LEAD: New York City school officials announced plans yesterday to cut $62.3 million in planned spending for the coming school year, a figure that they said is likely to reduce the teaching force in some places and further tighten the central bureaucracy by as many as 350 positions.


INSIDE
LEAD:
France Releases 5 to Iran


The Night Good Will Broke Out
LEAD: Every one of those $26 million that Ted Turner is losing on the Goodwill Games was worth it Thursday night at a ball park here.


Miss Walsh Wed To Andrew Rose
LEAD: Sarah Eva Walsh, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Walsh of Fishers Island, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Andrew Beirne Rose, the son of Beirne Waters Richmond of Sedona, Ariz., and R. Peter Rose of Oyster Bay, L.I.
The Rev.
Edward J. Wisneski and Canon Robert T. Hollet, an Episcopal priest, officiated at Our Lady of Grace Roman Catholic


Fashion;   Children's Wear That Bridges Seasons
LEAD: The children are back from camp or soon will be, trailing worn or outgrown play wear behind them.
Parents are not likely to invest in summer replacements, even if they could find them at this late date.
But among the back-to-school inventory are a lot of bright, lightweight transitional clothes suitable for the hot days and increasingly cooler nights of August and


Surgery for Gubicza
LEAD: If the Kansas City batters and baserunners had been as busy this year as the team physician, Steve Joyce, perhaps the Royals would not be at the bottom of the American League West.


Postings: Boerum Hill Houses;   Dream Made Real
LEAD: Since emigrating from his native Guyana 21 years ago, John Grant has built a thriving residential renovation business in Brooklyn while buying up empty lots in his Boerum Hill neighborhood and dreaming of the day when he could build homes from scratch.


Camp Honors Director's 20 Years of Sharing
LEAD: In her 20 years in Fresh Air Fund camps, Beverly McEntarfer has lived through a hurricane, a multitude of violent storms and a cabin fire.
She has had to retrieve hundreds of lost children, not to mention a few runaways.
And she has endured several broken bones, a nasty bout with a campwide epidemic of food poisoning and, she estimates, no less than 10,000 mosquito bites.


Upscale Ideas for the Summer Picnic Basket
LEAD: AS convenient as sandwiches may be to eat on a picnic, they are better at the beach or for lunch in the park than more refined picnic occasions, like an outdoor supper before a summer concert.
When wine and bottled water are served instead of beer and soft drinks and when linen napkins replace paper, the menu calls for something more stylish than the typical sandwich and potato salad.


'Night, La Guardia
LEAD: All the world loves the tale of a marooned traveler, but alas, those adventures aren't as picturesque as they used to be.
Today, any ordinary vacationer may become stranded in a place like Palau or a Portuguese coastal village, with little money, knowing no one, forced to pass the night in a rental car.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester Developer Fees in Lieu of Open Space
LEAD: A new state law that takes effect on Oct. 1 has broad implications for the acquisition of open space in Connecticut.
It enables communities to charge developers a fee instead of requiring them to donate parcels of land for preservation.


Review of Family Life Education Urged
LEAD: THE 10th anniversary of family life education in New Jersey schools has proved to be a quiet celebration, in stark contrast to the furor with which the program was introduced.
Too quiet, say its advocates, who are urging education policy makers, teachers and parents to take another look at family life programs in the state to see if they can be improved.


Trinidad and Tobago At A Glance
LEAD:
People
The nation has a population of about 1.3 million, all but 45,000 on Trinidad.
Most of the people are of African or East Indian origin.
Trinidadians of mixed race make up slightly more than 16 percent.
Whites make up 1.7 percent.
The two major folk traditions are Creole, a mixture of African elements influenced by Spanish, French and English culture, and East Indian.


Review/Pop;   Byrd and J.B. All-Stars: Funky Rhythm and Blues
LEAD: They go by various aliases: the Pee Wee Ellis Assembly, Maceo Parker and Roots Revisited, the J. B. Horns and, on Wednesday night at S.O.B.'s, Bobby Byrd and the J. B. All-Stars.
While the name and the lead singers change, the band has funk's Holy Grail at its fingertips when it knocks out the lean, punchy syncopations its leaders learned through years as James Brown's backing band.


Jeanette E. Heinz Weds Thomas King
LEAD: Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn., was the setting yesterday for the marriage of Jeanette Elisabet Heinz and Thomas Mackenzie King, both 1986 graduates of Stanford University.
The Rev.
John Bishop performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
King, 25 years old, is a daughter of Clifford Stanton Heinz of Newport Beach, Calif., and Barbro Engstrom Heinz Rudel of Stockholm and New York.


Lifestyle;   Modern Rapunzels Put Up Their Hair
LEAD: Snake through the crowds on Flatbush Avenue in Brooklyn on any Saturday, past the Sno-Kone vendors selling winter's taste in summer flavors, past the stores that sell shorts and dresses and blouses at two for $5.
Pass under a hand-painted sign and into a narrow three-story building so unprepossessing it gives no hint that you've arrived at the mecca of hair.


Property Tax
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Man Called Into Action When Election Losers Demand Recounts
LEAD: JOHN L. CARBONE is a practical man; he does not take sides in an election until after it is over.
But, oddly enough, he often sides with the loser.


Review/Cabaret Julius LaRosa Pays Homage To Golden-Age Lyricists
LEAD: ''Words are the most important thing to me in a song,'' declared Julius LaRosa early in the opening-night show on Tuesday of his three-week engagement at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza).
The singer, who was accompanied by Don Rebic (pianist), Art Koenig (bassist) and Don DiMarco (guitarist), went on to sing astutely chosen homages to the lyrics of Johnny Burke, Sammy Cahn, Mitchell Parish, Yip Harburg and Johnny


Backpacks That Become Luggage
LEAD: There is a new breed of luggage on airport conveyor belts and on the backs of budget travelers in European streets.
This is the ''travel pack'' or ''soft pack,'' which converts from a suitcase with a handle into a medium-sized backpack.
The crucial difference between this luggage and a rucksack or big athletic bag with webbed handles is that travel packs have frames that distribute the load on your back.


On Language;   When Parentheses Are Transgressive
LEAD: Rewriting the (Post)modern: (Post)colonialism / Feminism / Late Capitalism'' read the brochure advertising a conference that I attended at the University of Utah in March.
The program was full of fashionable academic jargon - phrases like ''reified theory,'' ''(post)structuralist tropics'' and ''the racial subject'' - all of it standard lexical fare in the arcane world of literary criticism.


The Last Best Site in Manhattan
LEAD: Call it Lincoln West, call it Trump City or call it the old Penn Central rail yards along the Hudson River.
Those 76 acres between 59th and 72d Streets constitute the finest remaining development site in Manhattan, a site again knotted in confusion and controversy.
It's a Gordian knot that can be cut only by the sword of city and state government.


Adventures in Style;   Have Parka, Will Travel
LEAD: Not so long ago, Justine Strasberg was a hard-working Manhattan art director, with tidy routines and not much time to play.
She liked her shoes polished and her shirts neatly done by the Chinese laundry around the corner.
She had camped out before, but not anything hard-core, not anything like this.


Topics of the Times;   Louisiana's Example
LEAD: Gov.
Buddy Roemer gave the Louisiana Legislature's abortion bill a more careful review than it deserved.
He found it wanting, devoid of minimum humane consideration for women.
He deserves respect for his courage in vetoing the bill in the intimidating climate created by anti-abortion politicians.


Question Of the Week;   Was Pete Rose's Sentence Fair?
LEAD: Pete Rose's sentence was certainly not unfair; in fact, it was rather light.
Didn't Leona Helmsley receive about eight times the sentence that Rose received for committing the same basic crime?
Giving Pete Rose a break in court just because he is a baseball hero is like giving an unqualified secretary a job just because she has a gorgeous body.


Canada Proposes Settlement in Mohawk Standoff
LEAD: After nearly three weeks of armed confrontation between the Quebec police and Mohawk Indians at two locations outside Montreal, the Canadian Government and the Quebec authorities have put forth a series of proposals to end the dispute.


LeMond Is Sore
LEAD: After spending three weeks mostly bent over on a saddle it's not surprising that a fellow might want to spend some time on his feet.
That, it turns out, is more or less what Greg LeMond has been wanting to do since winning his second straight Tour de France last Sunday.


Correction
LEAD: An article on June 17 about Budapest misstated the location of the junction of three subway lines.
A reader has written recently to point out that it is Deak Square, not nearby Vorosmarty Square.


Lou Whitaker, One of the Greats
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Learning Why to Say No to Drugs
LEAD: For the last three years a program has been trying to combat drugs by emphasizing human potential over abuse and devastation, and it appears to be working, its participants say.
Whether the participants are police officrs, teachers, parents or children, many echo the same feeling: hope and patience must conquer the curiosity induced by the drug pusher's outstretched hand.


Upscale Ideas for the Summer Picnic Basket
LEAD: AS convenient as sandwiches may be to eat on a picnic, they are better at the beach or for lunch in the park than more refined picnic occasions, like an outdoor supper before a summer concert.
When wine and bottled water are served instead of beer and soft drinks and when linen napkins replace paper, the menu calls for something more stylish than the typical sandwich and potato salad.


The Looting of Wedtech
LEAD:
TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE
The Outlandish Story of Wedtech.
By James Traub.
Illustrated. 379 pp. New York:
Doubleday. $21.95.
FEEDING THE BEAST
How Wedtech Became the Most Corrupt
Little Company in America.
By Marilyn W. Thompson.
Illustrated. 337 pp. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons.


Campus Life: Duke;   University Seeks To Raze a Symbol Of Tobacco Boom
LEAD: Duke University, named for the tobacco family whose wealth started it in the 1920's, is trying to get out from under one of the last reminders of this city's tobacco boom-town days: a building that it fell heir to in 1988 and that the community wishes to retain as a historic treasure.


Water Conservation Begins With Lawns
LEAD: GARDENERS in the Northeast are lucky.
There usually is enough water to go around.
But the Soil Conservation Service says that ''demand for water by humans is expected to double by the year 2000.''


Campus Life: Michigan;   Opening in Poland: Observation Post For Researchers
LEAD: While the recent upheavals in Eastern Europe have been watched with close attention here, most American academics are studying the transformations only from a distance.
To help make first-hand observation easier, the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan is opening a branch office in Warsaw, in conjunction with the Polish Government and the University of


A Cabal in the Kremlin
LEAD:
KHRUSHCHEV ON KHRUSHCHEV
An Inside Account of the Man and His Era.
By Sergei Khrushchev.
Edited and translated by William Taubman.
Illustrated. 423 pp. Boston:
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.


Water Conservation Begins With Lawns
LEAD: GARDENERS in the Northeast are lucky.
There usually is enough water to go around.
But the Soil Conservation Service says that ''demand for water by humans is expected to double by the year 2000.''


Ornithologist Escapes Harm in Capsizing
LEAD: Roger Tory Peterson, one of the nation's foremost ornithologists, said yesterday that he suffered ''the most critical incident of my life'' Thursday, when his boat capsized in rough waters off Maine.


Susan Ziegler to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John K. Ziegler of Chatham and Mantoloking, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Susan K. Ziegler and Albert Saltiel, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alberto Saltiel of Oakbrook, Ill.
Both are graduates of Ohio Wesleyan University.
Miss Ziegler, 26 years old, is a credit specialist for the Sanwa Business Credit Corportation in Chicago.


A Reckoning for the Utility High Rollers
LEAD: The utility industry has never been known as a haven for high rollers.
But in late 1986, when Keith L. Turley agreed to buy a Phoenix savings and loan institution, he was only topping off a buying binge started six years earlier by four of the brashest utility companies in the country, all of them in the Southwest.


Suzanne L. Siegel Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Alan H. Siegel of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter, Suzanne Lisa Siegel, and Gary Burton Zenkel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Zenkel of Greenwich, Conn.


Authorities in 2 States Call Album Obscene
LEAD: An Indiana judge has ruled the 2 Live Crew album ''As Nasty as They Wanna Be'' violates standards of decency and should not be sold to minors, and Dallas prosecutors have filed charges against two store chains for selling the album.


Must the U.S. Give Brazil and Iraq The Bomb?
LEAD: Iraq, with modern armed forces numbering a million and with a leader driven by dangerous ambitions, started a war with Iran, threatens Israel and has rattled its saber against tiny Kuwait.
Its President, Saddam Hussein, may not stop at threats if he can complete plans to build weapons of mass destruction.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended July 14
MANHATTAN
Chelsea
$322,000
133 West 17th Street
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,632-sq.-ft. prewar loft co-op; elevator, two exposures, high ceilings, common roof deck; maintenance $803, 46% tax-deductible (Broker: Eychner Associates)


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-17


Technology;   Heating, Cooking and Now - Driving
LEAD: As the nation's cities grapple with air pollution from automobile exhaust, natural gas - best known for heating homes and cooking dinners - is drawing increasing attention as a clean-burning alternative to gasoline and diesel fuel.
The General Motors Corporation said last week it would sell a minimum of 1,000 pickup trucks powered by natural gas starting next year, and United Parcel


Neal Walker Weds Miss MacDonald
LEAD: Kristin Marianne MacDonald and Neal Stephen Walker were married yesterday at St.
Mary Roman Catholic Church in Greenwich, Conn., by the Rev.
Martin Igoe.


Robin Wilde Married To Richard Lauchnor
LEAD: Robin Kim Wilde, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Van Dyke Wilde of Flemington, N.J., was married yesterday to Richard Alan Lauchnor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Charles Lauchnor of Schnecksville, Pa.
The Rev.
David E. Dietzel, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Packer Memorial Church at Lehigh University in Bethlehem,


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Tennis
U.S. and Soviet Union in Final: The United States, behind victories from Zina Garrison and Jennifer Capriati, advanced yesterday to the final of the Federation Cup in Norcross, Ga., but the anticipated rematch of last year's final against Spain will not take place.
That is because Arantxa Sanchez Vicario twisted her left ankle in her singles match, defaulted to her opponent and opened the way for the Soviet Union to win the doubles against Spain and reach today's final against the Americans.


BEST SELLERS: July 29, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow.
(Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney
tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death
while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: Would you like to have the opponent at your mercy, unable to undertake any sort of aggression while you maneuver to create one weak point after another in his position?
One of the best ways to accomplish this is to stick him with the bad bishop.


Christina Baker and David Kline Wed
LEAD: Christina Joy Baker, a writing teacher at the University of Virginia, was married yesterday in Bangor, Me., to David Franklin Kline, an English teacher at the St.
Albans School in Washington.
The Rev.
William S. Winston and the Rev.
James Curtis officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church.


Fighting Slump in Polls, Cuomo Stumps Statewide in Earnest
LEAD: Trying to rebound from a slight slump in the polls and insure another landslide victory, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has already started campaigning extensively throughout the state.


Gas Tax Hike Could Help Us Kick Auto Habit
LEAD: To the Editor:


Data Update
LEAD:
VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
June 90
June 89
Change
New York
404.5
543.7
-26%
New Jersey
135.7
246.7
-45%
Connecticut
96.2
138.0
-30%
*4*(Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information)


Leslie C. Shields Wed in Delaware
LEAD: Leslie Cunningham Shields, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nelson T. Shields of Greenville, Del., was married yesterday to Per Ivar Lundgaard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ivar A. Lundgaard of Kennett Square, Pa.
The Rev.
John L. O'Hear, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the bride's parents' home.


Paul M. Caliandro Is Married to Mary B. Uehling
LEAD: Mary Birgit Uehling, a transportation analyst for the Boston Metropolitan Area Planning Council, and Paul Michael Caliandro, the manager of accounting operations at the State Street Bank in Boston, were married yesterday at the First Parish Congregational Church in Manchester, Mass.
The bridegroom's father, the Rev.


Mutual Funds;   Mr. Smith Goes to Magellan
LEAD: Morris Smith, the new steward of the $14.3 billion Fidelity Magellan Fund, fills his small boxy office like a whirling dervish.
He watches three computer screens, confers with several people and riffles through a pile of papers.
Speaking at a rapidfire pace, he gives orders to the three traders who work exclusively for him.


To Reduce Violence, Decentralize Police;   Real and Deadly


Rival Proposals for Purchase of Jay Land
LEAD: A LONG-AWAITED decision by county legislators over acquisition of the Jay Property in Rye may face yet another delay, political leaders indicated last week, even though two proposals offering a choice of action are now officially before them.


Jasper Johns, Incessant Recycler of Images
LEAD: Writing about Jasper Johns, it is often irresistible to quote, yet again, the artist's famous sketchbook note: ''Take an object.
Do something to it.
Do something else to it.'' Johns has built an influential career on these legendary instructions to himself and they illuminate the basic tenets of his art with increasing accuracy.


Ideas &amp; Trends;   Now the U.S. Asks What Its Radiation Did in the Cold War
LEAD: Against the backdrop of jubilation and expectation following the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe, the United States is beginning to measure the painful human costs of the cold war in some American communities.


A Venerable Inn's Nouvelle Ways
LEAD: THE latest reincarnation of the venerable White Hart Inn's restaurant may be the best yet.
The inn, which is more than 100 years old, has recently changed owners and has had an elaborate refurbishing.
Of greater importance to those interested in fine food, the dining room has been overhauled and a new chef, Kevin


When Black Feminism Faces The Music, and the Music Is Rap
LEAD: Like many black feminists, I look on sexism in rap as a necessary evil.
In a society plagued by poverty and illiteracy, where young black men are as likely to be in prison as in college, rap is a welcome articulation of the economic and social frustrations of black youth.


Ideas &amp; Trends;   Science Learns to Catch a Polluting Car in the Act
LEAD: The fight for clean air has produced a new weapon, the environmental equivalent of a highway radar trap, that measures carbon monoxide from passing cars in a fraction of a second.
The original idea was to pick out ''super polluters,'' but some government officials are now thinking about new approaches to pollution control.


Kathleen Reilly to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Reilly Jr. of South Salem, N.Y., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Kathleen May Reilly and Mark Gross, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Gross of Sudbury, Mass.
The couple, both 27 years old, are 1985 graduates of Dartmouth College.
She works for her father as the executive director of the Richard J.


Dr. David Chernoff to Wed Jill Sperber
LEAD: October wedding plans for Jill A. Sperber and Dr.
David N. Chernoff, a son of Shulamith S. Chernoff of New Haven and the late Dr.
Hyman M. Chernoff, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Susan M. Sperber of New York and Dr.
Norman D. Sperber of San Diego.


The Executive Computer;   Liberating Machines From Keyboards
LEAD: One big obstacle to a wider adoption of computers is the keyboard. ''I had not even touched a computer before I came here, because I never learned how to type,'' confessed a man recently hired as a senior marketing executive by a large computer company.
He has now learned to type - and to use a computer.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A brief report in Tech Notes on June 3 about new propeller designs misattributed the propeller shown in the drawing.
A recent letter from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, for which the prototype was built, points out that the manufacturer is the General Electric Corporation, not Hamilton Standard.


Superiority Complex
LEAD:
WHY THE RECKLESS SURVIVE
. . . And Other Secrets of Human Nature.
By Melvin Konner.
306 pp. New York: Viking. $18.95.


Music in Brooklyn
LEAD: Il Piccolo Teatro dell'Opera will perform Benjamin Britten's opera ''A Midsummer Night's Dream,'' staged by Charles Jarden and conducted by Anton Coppola, at 8 o'clock tonight in the Prospect Park Band Shell in Brooklyn (Ninth Street and Prospect Park West entrance of the park, in the Park Slope section).


Germaine Smith Engaged to Wed
LEAD: September wedding plans for Bonnie Germaine Smith and Douglas Clark Proxmire a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Proxmire of Washington, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
R.
Clyde Smith of Dothan, Ala.


Give the Customer What He Wants
LEAD: When I used to visit suppliers, I generally started by discussing with the chief executive the development of our business together, how it was progressing, what problems they were meeting and how he thought we could improve matters.
I then used to go on the factory floor, and the first place I would ask to see would be the lavatories and washrooms.


Question Of the Week;   Was Pete Rose's Sentence Fair?
LEAD: Ours is a nation of law, and Rose's arrogance ignored the law, for which he should pay the same penalty as any citizen.


Jennifer Topor Is Married To Michael McDermott
LEAD: Jennifer Ann Topor, a painting specialist at the William Doyle Galleries, and Michael McDermott, a corporate bond salesman at J. P. Morgan Securities, both in New York, were married yesterday at Abbey Chapel of Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Mass.
The Rev.
Mark Stelzer performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.


Yanks' Demise: A Theory
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Knicks Won't Match Newman's Hornet Deal
LEAD: It took them to the last minute, but the Knicks finally ended the suspense over the future of Johnny Newman yesterday, by announcing that they had decided not to match the four-year, $5 million offer made by the Charlotte Hornets.


Revisions Sought in U.S. Food-Aid Program
LEAD: Each year the United States sends so much grain to Egypt that the farmers feed loaves of bread to their cows.


Brooklyn Museum Hours
LEAD: The Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Washington Avenue in the Crown Heights section, will reopen on Mondays starting on Labor Day, Sept. 3.
The hours will be 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. every day except Tuesday, when the museum is closed.


Children's Books
LEAD:
LAST SUMMER WITH MAIZON
By Jacqueline Woodson.
105 pp. New York: Delacorte Press.
$13.95. (Ages 10 to 14)


Efforts to Revamp Nation's Schools Spur Dispute at Governors' Meeting
LEAD: The National Governors' Association opened its annual meeting here today with a fight brewing among governors and lawmakers over the 10-month effort to establish national education goals and a common mechanism for measuring each state's progress.


Scenes From Morocco
LEAD: To the Editor:


Garbo, Paderewski and a Skeptic
LEAD: To the Editor:


Keeping Safe
LEAD: To the Editor: Further tips for ''Staying on the Safe Side'' (Travel, June 24):


A Voyage to the Scrap Heap
LEAD: The wrecked supertanker Mega Borg has begun a two-month trip to Pakistan, where it will be broken into scrap.
A tugboat towed the vessel from the Gulf of Mexico on Friday afternoon, the Coast Guard said.
The Mega Borg rested about 57 miles offshore since it was rocked by an explosion on June 8.
Four crew members were killed and a fire raged for several days aboard the ship, which spilled 3.9 million gallons of light crude oil into the gulf.


Economic Upheaval: The Toll in Poland; A special report:   EVOLUTION IN EUROPE;   For Poles, Road to Capitalism is Rough
LEAD: More than six months after the Government of Tadeusz Mazowiecki imposed Eastern Europe's most ambitious program to create a market economy, Poles are struggling to adjust to a system with new opportunities and new risks.


Barge Aground in East River
LEAD: A barge carrying more than 2 million gallons of gasoline ran aground last night on a small East River island off 96th Street, just north of Gracie Mansion, but was pulled away without any fuel leaking, the authorities reported.
A police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tima Mohrmann, said the barge was being pushed past Hell Gate by a tug of the Turecamo Coastal Harbor Towing Corp.


Mining for Knowledge in Africa
LEAD:
CAMPING WITH THE PRINCE AND OTHER TALES OF SCIENCE IN AFRICA
By Thomas A. Bass.
304 pp. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company. $20.95.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary last Sunday about Arthur Tremain Hertig, an embryologist, misstated the affiliation of a colleague, Dr.
John Rock.
Dr.
Rock, who died in 1984, was clinical professor of gynecology, emeritus, at Harvard University; he was not affiliated with the Carnegie Institution in Washington.


Dodging Hippos on the Zambezi
LEAD: Long after leaving, images of Africa take root in the memory.
For me, some that linger are braking for goats on a dirt road; brush fires that smell like perpetual autumn; driving through towns made up of ubiquitous landmarks - a gas station, a superette, a tearoom and a ''supermodern'' nightclub.
There is also the wonder David Livingstone called ''God's Highway'' - the Zambezi River.


FOCUS: Maine;   Phasing In a Ban on Cottage Conversions
LEAD: When Roger Timmons heard that the State of Maine planned to ban the conversion of summer homes into year-round dwellings in certain environmentally sensitive areas, he was plenty worried.


Trinidad Rebels Threaten to Kill Premier and 11 Other Hostages
LEAD: Representatives of the Government of Trinidad and Tobago were negotiating tonight with Muslim coup plotters who said they had wired the Prime Minister and 11 other hostages with explosives and would blow them up if loyal forces tried to free them.


Putting the Universe on Hold
LEAD: To the Editor:


Kenyan Human-Rights Lawyer Urges Economic Sanctions by U.S.
LEAD: A prominent Kenyan human rights lawyer has called on the United States to press for democratic changes in Kenya by imposing economic sanctions similar to those in effect against South Africa.


Correction
LEAD: Because of a computer error, a line was deleted from Flora Lewis's column in some copies on Saturday.
Readers wishing copies of the correct page may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Clinton, Conn.
$209,900
5 Christopher Lane
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 10-year-old gambrel colonial; slate foyer, room over garage w/skylights, wooded lot, 1 acre; taxes $2,460.
Southington, Conn.
$132,000
33 Whitney Avenue
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 37-year-old ranch; fireplace, new deck, new addition with family room, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,266.


Fake Mourners Shoot 5 at Gang Funeral
LEAD: At least five people were shot at a reputed Chinatown gang member's funeral in Linden, N.J., yesterday when men posing as mourners dropped their bouquets and opened fire with machine guns and a shotgun on a crowd of 100 people, the police said.


In the Context Of Religion
LEAD: To the Editor:


Evening Hours;   That Long-Ago Decade Known As the 90's
LEAD: More than 500 guests, invited to appear in summer whites at the Museum of the City of New York, observed the 100th anniversary of the Gibson girl on July 19.
They saw an exhibition of costumes from around 1890 and drawings by Charles Dana Gibson, and spread their picnic dinners throughout the museum.


Penny Scott Planning September Wedding
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Edward L. Scott Jr. of Short Hills, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Penelope Ann Scott, and Philip Alexander Moss, a son of Mrs.
Roland C. Sherrer Jr. of Salzburg, Austria, and New York, and Peter Bayard Moss of Chestertown, Md.


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   The Ambiance Is Right For a Little Romance
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Cafe des Artistes


Wedding in Philadelphia For Stephanie P. Coleman
LEAD: Stephanie Patryce Coleman, a daughter of Mrs.
John Konrad of Darien, Conn., and Fletcher Bennett Coleman, was married yesterday to James Carl Ruger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Worthington Ruger of Katonah, N.Y.
The Rev.
Ralph Waite, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Friends Meeting House in Philadelphia.


Smart Street
LEAD:
PARK AVENUE: Street of Dreams.
By James Trager. (Atheneum, $24.95.) It is to James Trager's credit that his detailed account of New York's plushest street breathes more life into the thoroughfare than is visible to the naked eye.
There are several Park Avenues in addition to the rich residential one.


Feeling the Pinch in a Shorter Season
LEAD: WHILE professional theaters await, on tenterhooks, the announcement of grants by the New Jersey State Council on the Arts, the consequences of cutbacks in general are already being felt by a number of summer theaters during the current shortened, uneven season.


Illness Doesn't Alter Essence of Lebow
LEAD: Fred Lebow leaned forward and stared at the greenish, semifrozen liquid that had been placed in a cup on the corner of his desk.


Four Cubans Give Up Refuge
LEAD: Four young Cubans who had taken refuge at the Italian Ambassador's residence in Havana gave up and returned home, the Cuban state television and the Italian Government said today.
Eighteen other Cubans remain at the Spanish Embassy, the only foreign mission still harboring refugees since a rash of requests for asylum began on July 9.


Confusion Reigns As Yankees Lose
LEAD: Confused and frustrated, Chuck Cary went to the mound for the Yankees in Cleveland Stadium tonight uncertain of which pitches he was going to throw, how often he was going to throw them, and who would get the credit or blame for their success or failure.
It should not come as a surprise that Chuck


A World Gone POW!
LEAD: Face it, our century's guiding spirit has become the comic strip.
The argot of POW! and ZAP! is an Esperanto available to all levels of society in all countries.
What Orfeo and Euridice were to older civilizations, Mickey and Minnie are to our culture.
It is difficult to sympathize with the hermetic sexual problems of Tristan and Isolde when one considers the grander issues of war, peace and political corruption confronted daily and often on Sunday, too, by Superman and Lois, Batman and Robin, Tracy and Tess.


The Language Thing
LEAD: Yes, the President talks funny.
Yes, he gets tangled in wayward clauses and preppy adverbs, dangling predicates and galloping gerunds.
Yes, he never met a pronoun he liked or a non sequitur he could resist.
And no, they are not saving space for George Bush, between Edmund Burke and Cato the Younger, in future editions of ''The World's Great Speeches.


U.S. Holds a 6-3 Lead After a Day of Cup Play
LEAD: All three of the world's international titles in golf - the Ryder Cup for professional men, the Walker Cup for amateur men and the Curtis Cup for amateur women - are held by Europeans, but the United States took a step toward regaining the Curtis Cup today.


Pamela T. Dey, Writer, to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Kinsley van Rensselaer Dey Jr. of Chapel Hill, N.C., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Pamela Tower Dey, and Matthew John Vossler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Vossler of Fairfield, Conn.


Upscale Ideas for the Summer Picnic Basket
LEAD: AS convenient as sandwiches may be to eat on a picnic, they are better at the beach or for lunch in the park than more refined picnic occasions, like an outdoor supper before a summer concert.
When wine and bottled water are served instead of beer and soft drinks and when linen napkins replace paper, the menu calls for something more stylish than the typical sandwich and potato salad.


A Tax Debate Revived
LEAD: The Bush Administration opened old political wounds this week when it proposed to limit the amount of state and local income taxes that taxpayers could deduct on their Federal returns.


To Reduce Violence, Decentralize Police
LEAD: To the Editor:


Students Tackle Complex Research
LEAD: FIVE years ago, Brian T. Jameson, a high school student in Wallingford, joined a science program that gave him a summer at Yale University for research on digestive diseases.
This summer, he has returned, now with a $2,000 grant from the American Gastroenterological Association, to examine DNA sequencing.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:
Driving Miss Daisy
1989. Warner. $92.95. Laser disk, $24.98. 1 hour, 39 minutes. Closed captioned. PG.
Alfred Uhry's play opens up on the screen with a ''singularly theatrical lightness of touch,'' carrying off most of its cinematic options with great style.
Jessica Tandy is a ''spectacular accumulation of tiny obsessions and misconceptions'' as the fiercely intelligent widow, ''sometimes hilariously wrong-headed but almost always self-aware.


More Out of Social Security From Those Who Can Afford It
LEAD: To the Editor:


Talking: Co-op Taxes;   Auxiliary Income Is Liable
LEAD: A long dormant tax threatens to gobble up a large portion of the auxiliary income that residential co-ops enjoy from such sources as interest on reserve fund accounts, operation of a laundry room or rental of professional or retail space.


Ku Klux Klan Stages Parade Through Palm Beach
LEAD: Thirty members of the Ku Klux Klan and white racist youth groups marched here this morning in front of 1,000 spectators, journalists and police officers.


Wall Street;   The Populist Investment of Choice: State Lotteries
LEAD: Forget penny stocks and junk bonds.
For many Americans, the most popular form of speculative investment is the purchase of a lottery ticket.
Thanks to them, state lottery programs earned $7.3 billion in profits on a record $18.8 billion in gross ticket revenues in the 1989 fiscal year, according to a survey just released by Saul F.


Madeleine Abler and Kent Calhoun Are Married
LEAD: At the Canyon Country Club in Armonk, N.Y., Madeleine Suzanne Abler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Abler of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Kent Sharpe Calhoun, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Sherwood Harold Calhoun.
Cantor Raymond Smolover officiated.


Shari Hoffman Plans October Wedding
LEAD: An October wedding is planned by Shari Michelle Hoffman and Jack P. Baron, the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence L. Hoffman of Scotch Plains, N.J., have announced.
Mr.
Baron is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Baron of Morris Plains, N.J.


Memories of the Good Life
LEAD:
THE RAIN CAME LAST &amp; OTHER STORIES
By Niccolo Tucci.
223 pp. New York: New Directions.
Cloth, $22.95. Paper, $10.95.


Campus Life: Michigan;   Critics Question A Plan to Send Students to Gaza
LEAD: A decision by the University of Michigan student assembly to allocate $1,000 to help send two students with a delegation to the West Bank and Gaza Strip has met with sharp opposition from another student political group as well as members of the university's board of regents.


How to Replace Ceiling Tiles
LEAD: ACOUSTICAL ceiling tiles, which are made of porous wood or mineral fibers, are commonly used both as new and replacement ceiling material.
Although easy to install and excellent for absorbing sound, such tiles are also soft, easily broken and often hard to clean.
Damaged or stained tiles generally must be replaced.


New Jersey Democrats Wary of Tax Issue
LEAD: Saying they are getting little help from Gov.
Jim Florio, who started it all, Democratic legislators are fighting a rear-guard grass-roots battle against a growing tax rebellion, and there are signs that some lawmakers are ready to concede ground in the face of a protest that will not go away.


To Reduce Violence, Decentralize Police;   Self-Contradictions
LEAD: To the Editor:


All About/The Shuttles;   Clipped Wings Along the Northeast Corridor
LEAD: It's Friday morning at La Guardia Airport and the shuttle business is even slower than usual.
Richard F. Cozzi, wrapping up his first week as president of the Trump Shuttle, glances about anxiously, as if hunting for more passengers.
A holiday that week has thinned the weekend rush; only a few people straggle into the Trumpterminal, ready to board a Trumpjet, sink into leather Trumpchairs and enjoy Trumpsnacks.


Gardening;   A Special Collection of Day Lilies
LEAD: If ever there was a flower for summertime, it has to be the daylily.
If ever there was a place to see them in full bloom, it is at the New York Botanical Garden.


Nick Pippin, 35, Dies; Founded AIDS Group
LEAD: Nick Pippin, an actor and the founder of the People With AIDS Theater Workshop, died on Friday at his home in midtown Manhattan.
He was 35 years old.


ART VIEW/Edgar Munhall;   Cezanne's Peak Exhibits the Art of Compassion
LEAD: For three days at the end of August last year a forest fire of epic force ravaged what must be the best-known natural totem of modern art - Mont Sainte-Victoire outside Aix-en-Provence, a site made familiar the world over by Paul Cezanne.
The fire destroyed three villages, as well as some 12,000 acres of woods, moors and vineyards.


Upscale Ideas for the Summer Picnic Basket
LEAD: AS convenient as sandwiches may be to eat on a picnic, they are better at the beach or for lunch in the park than more refined picnic occasions, like an outdoor supper before a summer concert.
When wine and bottled water are served instead of beer and soft drinks and when linen napkins replace paper, the menu calls for something more stylish than the typical sandwich and potato salad.


Campus Life: Syracuse;   A University Plays Host To Its Neighbors
LEAD: Thirty-one residents, as young as 6 and as old as 18, from housing projects in this city are learning about fitness and advanced education this summer.
But rather than sending them to camps, as in the past, the Syracuse Housing Authority has them working with a neighbor, Syracuse University.


She had a Crush on Them
LEAD:
A SENSIBLE LIFE
By Mary Wesley.
364 pp. New York:
Viking. $18.95.


Water Conservation Begins With Lawns
LEAD: GARDENERS in the Northeast are lucky.
There usually is enough water to go around.
But the Soil Conservation Service says that ''demand for water by humans is expected to double by the year 2000.''


Works in Progress;   Scoop du Jour
LEAD: In April, Pierre Bardina, a 24 year-old Frenchman, spent 111 1/2 consecutive hours in an aquarium in his hometown of Marseilles, a world record.
You might expect that someone willing to spend so much time submerged would be interested in keeping the available waters clean.
And indeed, Bardina, whose dual


Topics of the Times;   RefleXions
LEAD: What is it in popular culture that so exalts X?
The letter is becoming so popular as to invite confusion.
Nexus used to mean a connection between individuals of a group or members of a series.
Now, spelled Nexxus, it refers to a brand of hair-care products; and spelled Nexis, it's the name of the Mead Data Central


Holmes vs. Patterson
LEAD: It wasn't one of those monster boxing promotions with a multimillion-dollar guarantee and a network contract, so chances are you missed Larry Holmes in his last bout, an exhibition in Binghamton, N.Y., on June 23.


Anti-Walesa Faction in Solidarity Meets in Warsaw to Draft Strategy
LEAD: A new group drawn from the intellectual core of the Solidarity movement held its first national meeting today, a milestone in the division of Poland's once-united anti-Communist opposition into two competing political parties.


Voter Support for Tax Cut Grows in Massachusetts
LEAD: Fueled by widespread anger over Massachusetts' fiscal disarray, a tax-cutting proposal that would reduce the state's $13 billion budget by more than 10 percent is gaining strong voter support and sharply dividing politicians and business leaders.


Keeping Safe
LEAD: To the Editor: Your review of security problems in tourist cities around the world was on target in describing the activities of the ''bag hustlers'' who surround midtown transportation terminals and harass people waiting for a taxi.


Focus: Maine;   Phasing In a Ban on Cottage Conversions
LEAD: When Roger Timmons heard that the State of Maine planned to ban the conversion of summer homes into year-round dwellings in certain environmentally sensitive areas, he was plenty worried.


Having Children Without Marriage
LEAD: The June 10 ''Jerseyana'' article on Miss Mary Pomeroy's crisis pregnancy in 1874 speaks volumes about the decline of morality in America.


Review/Rock;   Country Blues and a Sense of Humor
LEAD: One of the many pleasures of watching John Hiatt in concert is in sharing his obvious enjoyment in making music.
Onstage, the Nashville-based singer and songwriter, who opened an engagement at the Bottom Line on Thursday evening, is an exuberantly antic figure who augments his raw-boned country-blues singing with a clownish sense of fun.


Buzzing the National Parks
LEAD: It is an early February morning at Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument in southern Arizona.
Several campers are sitting outside tents, listening to chirping desert birds, when a rumble begins to build and the ground starts to tremble.
A few seconds later, two American fighter planes, perhaps 200 feet off the desert floor, tear over the campground with an earsplitting roar.


Fashion;   Have Parka, Will Sparkle
LEAD: It's a long way from the Arctic to the runways of Europe.
But now the parka has re-emerged as a glamorous evening cover-up.
Parisian and Milanese designers seem to have become enraptured with the parka's shape and have interpreted it in the most lavish of fabrics for their fall collections.
It's an amusing idea - and also one that makes sense, since these new gussied-up versions are also warm and comfortable.


Edgy Toon Eases Into New System
LEAD: Al Toon, an athlete always in control - of his body, his surroundings, his opponents - has been worried.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''I've been advising members, at a more accelerated rate, about how they ought to conduct themselves.
I've said, 'I don't know how many more pictures I've got to paint for you.
We've got rules and we've got rules.
If you want to protect yourself, keep yourself well inside the parameters.' ''
- Robert H.


Q and A
LEAD:
The Right to Buy
Question: I am a tenant in a rent-controlled apartment in Queens.
The building has already been converted to a cooperative but I did not choose to buy my apartment under the original offering plan.
Now I would like to purchase the apartment next to the one that I occupy and perhaps rent it to relatives.


Enigma Nominated For the Supreme Court
LEAD: Judge David H. Souter, President Bush's nominee for the Supreme Court, unknown to the nation when Mr.
Bush chose him on Monday, is known now as an earnest, erudite, diligent New Hampshire man.


How to Replace Ceiling Tiles
LEAD: ACOUSTICAL ceiling tiles, which are made of porous wood or mineral fibers, are commonly used both as new and replacement ceiling material.
Although easy to install and excellent for absorbing sound, such tiles are also soft, easily broken and often hard to clean.
Damaged or stained tiles generally must be replaced.


Review/Dance;   Choreography Workshop Lets New Creators Shine
LEAD: The School of American Ballet's commendable New Choreography workshop, which presented its fourth annual program on Thursday afternoon at the Juilliard Theater, gives fledgling choreographers the opportunity to create ballets for young dancers enrolled in the school's summer session.
The project also necessarily forces the choreographers selected each year to work under the kind of conditions that are typical today - giving them just under five weeks to create the ballet, using unfamiliar dancers, though with a full production at the end.


Jennifer Marron Weds T. R. Eldridge
LEAD: Jennifer Ann Marron, the daughter of Donald B. Marron and Gloria Swope Marron, both of New York, was married yesterday to Thomas R. Eldridge, a son of Ann Eldridge Choate of Schenectady, N.Y., and the late Thomas S. Eldridge.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.


Fashion: On the Street;   When It's Too Hot To Fuss, They Don't
LEAD: When the weather turns sticky, women can always keep cool with unfussy, basic clothing.
It's a timeless, well-groomed, smooth style - in some circles, the ''Greenwich look'' - that high humidity won't wilt.


S. J. Ware to Marry Katherine L. Smith
LEAD: Leonard T. Smith of Rochester has announced August wedding plans for his daughter Katherine Ludlow Smith and Stephen Jordan Ware, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
Timmis Ware of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The prospective bride is also a daughter of the late Charlotte Smith.


Fashion;   Dresses That Make Versatility a Virtue
LEAD: The invitation is to a quiet little dinner in a restaurant or someone's home.
It won't be formal, but a suit seems too businesslike and pants somehow too casual.
What to wear?
The answer, of course, is a dress.
Nothing fussy or frilly, just a simple dress in a flattering color and a comfortable fabric.


A 5,000th Victory
LEAD: When John Campbell recorded his 5,000th career victory at the Meadowlands on Friday night, he became only the seventh driver in the history of the sport to reach that milestone.
The 35-year-old Campbell is a native of Ailsa Craig, Ontario, with career purse earnings of $85 million, a record.
The career leader in victories is Herve Filion, with more than 12,000, and he is still driving.


Postings: The Center at Woodbury;   Another Discount Complex
LEAD: Hoping to capitalize on the success of a retail magnet that has been attracting shoppers from across the region, a Fishkill, N.Y., development concern is planning a 20-store shopping center at the entrance to Woodbury Common, a complex of factory outlets about an hour's drive north of New York City in Orange County.


It's Anchors Away for Unschooled Sailors
LEAD: ''O.K., where are we?'' said Lennie Okoskin, 10 feet from the dock.
As captain for an hour of a 21-foot boat with a 200-horsepower engine, Mr.
Okoskin was a bit tense.
A few miles from the historic Montauk Lighthouse, he was making history of his own.
He was piloting a boat for the first time.


Votes in Congress;   Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
LEAD:
House
1.
Family Leave: Vote to override President Bush's veto of a bill requiring employers to grant workers time off without pay for births, adoptions or emergencies in the family.
Failed, with 232 votes in favor and 195 opposed (53 votes short of the two-thirds needed), July 25.
2.


Galicia's Hard-to-Come-by Barnacles
LEAD: Goose barnacles, bane of boatmen and certainly among the most unsightly creatures of the sea, are for all appearances inedible or, at the very least, thoroughly unappetizing.
From a pointy pearly white and hard-as-rock shell, percebes, as these barnacles are called in Spain, extend into blackened leathery necks.


Style Makers;   Viola Sylbert, Fur Designer
LEAD: Her first big success, in the 1960's, was a boxy coat of squares of rabbit fur outlined in leather bands.
Viola Sylbert also designed poor-boy sweaters, knitted shifts and leather jackets as a response to French ready-to-wear.


Christine DiBenedetto Weds
LEAD: Christine DiBenedetto, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. DiBenedetto 2d of Little Neck, Queens, was married last evening to Stuart Pearlman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aaron S. Pearlman of Dallas.
Rabbi Charles Davidson performed the interfaith ceremony at the Swan Club in Roslyn Harbor, L.I.
Mrs.


Consider Their Ways and be Wise
LEAD:
THE ANTS
By Bert Holldobler and Edward O. Wilson.
Illustrated. 732 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
The Belknap Press/Harvard University Press. $65.


Airliner Averts a Collision Over California
LEAD: The pilot of an American Airlines jet liner carrying 127 passengers was forced to take evasive action on Thursday to avoid a small plane heading into its flight path, the authorities said today.


Correction
LEAD: A letter to the editor on July 15 about college students' growing interest in dinosaurs referred incorrectly to the writer, Maurice B. Rosalsky of Englewood.
A retired professor of geology at City College in New York, he did not also teach at the University of Florida.


Testimony Begins in Lawsuit Over Effort to Aid Contras
LEAD: Testimony has begun in the Federal trial of a civil suit pitting Eugene Hasenfus, the only survivor of a plane crash that helped to expose the Iran-contra affair, against Richard V. Secord, a leading figure in the scandal.


Sexual-Attack Suspect Arrested In Cape May
LEAD: A man suspected in a series of aggravated sexual assaults in this resort town has been arrested, the police said today.


How to Fit In At Princeton
LEAD: Oh, what is so rare as a sensible building that is not too sensible, a lively building that is not too lively, a comfortable building that is not - no, wait a minute.
This building is just as comfortable as it ought to be, and pleasant to look at besides.
It is the new Computer Sciences Building at Princeton University, a campus that is rapidly becoming one of the nation's most ambitious architecturally, and it was designed by the New York firm of Kliment &amp; Halsband.


Gorbachev Rebuffed by Baltics on Unity and by Armenia on Guns
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev faced a double challenge today as rebellious Baltic republics refused to participate in talks on a new union treaty and Armenian nationalists rejected an order to disarm.


Northeast Notebook: Mashpee, Mass.;   Golf Projects Land in Rough
LEAD: Sentry Bank, one of Cape Cod's largest investors in real estate, has acquired through foreclosure a $20 million 18-hole championship golf course and clubhouse.
It also took possession of 122 residential lots laid out around the fairways as well as 10 unoccupied condominium units and permits to build 23 more.


Leave Census as is, Republicans Urge
LEAD: Republicans around the country are urging the Bush Administration not to make any statistical adjustment of census results to correct for an undercount of black and Hispanic residents.


Season's First Hurricane Is Born in Atlantic
LEAD: The first hurricane in the Atlantic in the new storm season was born today when a tropical storm's winds strengthened to 75 miles per hour, hurricane forecasters said.


Of Grants And Criticism
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Networks' New Advertising Dance
LEAD: Viewers of the new television series ''Northern Exposure'' on CBS Thursday evening could hardly miss the striking scenery and the quirky mooseburger meals depicted in the saga of a young New York doctor acclimating to a rugged Alaskan town.


Kirsten Morehouse To Wed in September
LEAD: Theodore C. Morehouse of Riverdale, the Bronx, and Mrs.
Fredric J. Klink of Norwalk, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kirsten Morehouse to Matthew Alden Kenney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert N. Kenney of Searsport, Me.
A September wedding is planned.


Namibia's Mighty Menagerie
LEAD: We had encountered most of the resident menagerie - lions, elephants, giraffes, zebras, warthogs and antelopes of all sizes from the lumbering eland to the delicate steenbok.
What we had missed was a rhinoceros.
In most other game parks, our search for this endangered creature would have been futile, but Etosha National Park in


MILITIA IN LEBANON DRIVES BACK ENEMY
LEAD: For the first time since heavy fighting broke out in southern Lebanon two weeks ago, pro-Iranian fundamentalists lost ground today in fierce gun battles with a rival Shiite Muslim faction, security officials said.
Sixteen people were reported killed and 50 others wounded.


A Bounty of Antiques in Provence
LEAD: With its centuries-old moss-covered water wheels, its streets lined with old houses, the Provencal village of L'Isle-sur-la-Sorgue encircled by the branches of the Sorgue River is as picturesque and sleepy as one would expect.


Variations on Ambiguity
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bursts of Solar Energy Endanger Power Lines
LEAD: Bursts of charged particles from the Sun sporadically cause huge surges of electric current through power lines on Earth, destroying transformers or tripping protective devices to take power lines and other equipment out of service and raising the possibility of widespread blackouts, utility experts say.


'Focus on Flowers'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Robber at Wrong End of His Gun
LEAD: A 71-year-old Queens man wrested a sawed-off shotgun from a 26-year-old armed robber yesterday morning and then caused the intruder to shoot himself with his own pistol, the police said.


THE PRIME OF PAT SCHROEDER
LEAD: Susan Ferraro's fine article ''The Prime of Pat Schroeder'' (July 1) reports that the nine-term Representative from Colorado is known on the Hill as the ''lone wolf'' of Congress.
From the listing of her many accomplishments and her obvious dedication to family issues and cutting of military waste, it would seem that we could use several hundred more such lone wolves in Washington.


The Brawley Battlefield
LEAD:
OUTRAGE
The Story Behind the Tawana Brawley Hoax.
By Robert D. McFadden, Ralph Blumenthal,
M. A. Farber, E. R. Shipp, Charles Strum and Craig Wolff.
408 pp. New York:
Bantam Books. $21.95.


Keeping Safe
LEAD: To the Editor: I suggest installing zippers on the inside pockets of jackets as a protection against pickpockets.
If possible, the wallet should be placed in a pocket lengthwise, with the opening at the top; since this is usually a tight fit, one must hold on to the jacket when taking out the wallet, which makes it very difficult for a pickpocket to get it out even without a zipper.


Track and Field: Solutions to the Crisis
LEAD: Make no mistake, track and field is a sport in crisis.
The public's confidence has been shaken by a seemingly never-ending series of controversies.
As it stands now, for instance, only a statistician with an assist from a surveyor and a meteorologist could tell you what the marathon records are today.


Steinbrenner Decision Tomorrow?
LEAD: Even before Commissioner Fay Vincent held his hearing, George Steinbrenner and his advisers indicated that they expected at least a two-year suspension for the Yankees' principal owner.
Now they expect to learn tomorrow if their expectations were correct.


On Screen They're Playing Politics
LEAD: Charles Dudley Warner was clearly a man before his time.
If the American author and editor hadn't died in 1900, he would probably be suspected of having Earl Long and Belle Starr in mind when he wrote:


Carey White Is Married To Christiana M. Carroll
LEAD: Christiana M. Carroll and Carey Lee White were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Joseph's on the Brandywine in Greenville, Del.
Msgr.
Paul J. Schierse performed the ceremony.


Not Enough Of Edberg
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Pipe Bomb on Israeli Beach Kills Canadian and Hurts 19
LEAD: A pipe bomb exploded today on a crowded Tel Aviv beach, killing a 17-year-old Canadian tourist and wounding 19 people, officials said.


The Rocky Road to HDTV
LEAD: To the Editor:


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
Never Learned the Game of Life


Japanese Dance Troupe To Visit City Center
LEAD: A performance by the Japanese avant-garde dance group Sankai Juku on Sept. 18 will open the 1990-91 season on the main stage at City Center, 131 West 55th Street.
The group, which last appeared at City Center in 1986, will present the New York premiere of ''Unetsu,'' by Ushio Amagatsu, a choreographer and a member of the troupe.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A chart last Sunday with the Mutual Funds column, about closed-end funds, misstated the closing price of General American Investors on Dec. 29, 1989.
It was 18 1/8, not 8 1/8.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   How Should PGA Tour Reevaluate Site Rules?
LEAD: The Times welcomes letters from readers.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
Letters should be addressed to The Editor, Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or return unpublished letters.


RELATIVES AND OTHER SABOTEURS
LEAD:
HOT FUDGE
Stories.
By Richard Spilman.
224 pp. New York:
Poseidon Press. $17.95.


Pamela Grindle, A Nurse, Is Wed
LEAD: Pamela Anne Grindle and Reuben Andrus Holden 5th were married yesterday at the Casino in Kennebunkport, Me., by the Rev.
Laman Bruner, an Episcopal minister.


Wall Street
LEAD: IS there anything harder for a company to endure these days than the debt burden of one of those giddy, high-priced buyouts of the past decade?
Yes - the debt burden of two of them.
Just ask anyone down in Richardson, Tex., who can remember what Spectradyne, the hotel-room movie service, was like before the Bass brothers and Marvin Davis, the


Question Of the Week;   Was Pete Rose's Sentence Fair?
LEAD: Pete Rose's sentence was much too short.
It should have been based on the damage he did to baseball's reputation, not on his own baseball records.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
JAY HOME REFURBISHED


Anything But Cancel
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Sign That Rents Will Go Up?
LEAD: ''Show me a business that hasn't had price increases,'' says Eric Doctorow, senior vice president of Paramount Home Video.
This month Paramount announced the forthcoming release of ''The Hunt for Red October,'' starring Sean Connery.
No retail price has been set (normally rental titles are around $90 to $92), but if there were one, dealers estimate it would be about $99.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: As a wearer of contact lenses, I have a problem.
If I blink too quickly, or if I feel I'm about to get poked in the eye, my contact lenses decide to change positions.
Usually they migrate to the white corners of my eyes, where they don't belong.
This is a painful event that leaves me both teary eyed and temporarily blind.


Currency;   Sinking Against the Mark
LEAD: The dollar moved into new territory last week.
First, it hit a two-and-a-half-year low against the German mark on Monday as the stock market plunged.
Then it fell further on Friday as the report on the American gross national product for the second quarter showed a very sluggish economy, one held above water only by the build-up of inventories.


Headliners;   Adding to the Mix
LEAD: Hong Kong has long been a mixture of Chinese and British styles and traditions but Dame Lydia Dunn has added another ingredient to the blend as the territory moves closer to becoming a part of China in 1997.
Dame Lydia, a 50-year-old executive director of a British-run Hong Kong conglomerate, Swire Pacific Ltd., was honored on the Queen's birthday list in June with a life peerage, an honor held by only two other Hong Kong residents, both men.


Kimberly Grillo to Wed in September
LEAD: Fred Grillo of Stonington, Conn., has announced September wedding plans for his daughter Kimberly Ann Grillo and David Hal Bernstein, the son of Diane Bernstein and Paul Bernstein, both of New York.


Taking the Measure of Tape Performance
LEAD: In choosing a brand of blank recording tape, viewers have little to guide them aside from each company's advertised claim to be the best.
Independent assessments of tape performance based on stringent laboratory measurements are needed to bring an element of reason to the competitive melee.


The Nation;   Ugly Reminders of the Oil That Went Underground
LEAD: Underground oil spills are difficult to photograph or visualize - no beaches covered with black goo, no sticky birds.
Yet even though they haven't received as much attention as the more dramatic above-ground spills, the subterranean accumulations probably pose as much of a threat to human health and are even tougher to clean up, environmentalists and government officials say.


'Metropolitan' Chronicles Preppy Angst
LEAD: John Whitney Stillman is keenly sensitive to hairline distinctions within New York's upper middle class.
In the eyes of this 38-year-old film maker, the difference between the East Side of Manhattan and the West Side - or between Edgartown and Chilmark on Martha's Vineyard - looms almost as wide as the rift between India and


Many Shrines for Worship
LEAD: Pete Rose might not be so worried about being elected to the Hall of Fame if he were a racing driver.
His chances would be better for numerical reasons alone: while major league ballplayers have to limit their aspirations to Cooperstown, racers can aim for any of six different halls of fame.


ROMANIA'S LOST CHILDREN
LEAD: James Nachtwey's photo essay on ''Romania's Lost Children'' (text by Kathleen Hunt, June 24) was striking and very sad, but I hope no one fails to see the relevance of this situation to our own in the United States.
To disallow a woman's right to abortion and to limit the availability of birth control can lead to tragedy, not just for the women forced to bear children or forced to undergo illegal and unsafe abortions, but also for the unwanted children.


Japan, at Asian Summit, Vows Non-Aggression


Victims' Parents Denounce Abuser's Release
LEAD: Parents in Great Neck, L.I., are upset at the recent release from prison of a teen-ager who was part of a group that sexually abused children during computer classes at the home of a former high school teacher there.


Mary Joan Scheid and Clark DesSoye Are Married
LEAD: Mary Joan Scheid and Clark James DesSoye were married yesterday at the Village Hall in Bronxville, N.Y., by George S. Pickwick, the Village Justice of Bronxville.
Mrs.
DesSoye, 37 years old, is the daughter of Mary Scheid of Canastota, N.Y., and the late John Scheid.
A magna cum laude graduate of Fordham University, she is a secretary at the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp;


Terrell Returns
LEAD: After Walt Terrell compiled a 2-7 record with a ballooning 5.88 earned run average, the Pittsburgh Pirates decided the right-hander was no longer major league material and released him after he refused a minor league assignment.


NONFICTION
LEAD:
THE GREENPEACE BOOK OF THE NUCLEAR AGE: The Hidden History, The Human Cost.
By John May. (Pantheon, Cloth, $24.95; Paper, $14.95.) Coal-mine collapses and oil spills are front-page stories; the world of nuclear weapons and power plants, writes John May, exists in secrecy. ''The Greenpeace Book of the Nuclear Age'' seeks to provide a compendium of 45 years of bad news.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Across New York Bay, A Place With No Future
LEAD: Standing in his workshop amid leather hides and metal hand tools, a man in a white linen shirt, worn blue work pants and hand-made shoes explains how he earns his daily bread: ''There are mostly farmers on Staten Island, not like the rich folks in Manhattan, so I make mostly farm shoes.'' He says he has never heard of refinements like left shoes and right shoes.


A Singer to Rival the Legends? Not Just Yet
LEAD: It's a good thing the Metropolitan does not have to put on an opera Sunday evenings.
On this past March 4, it would have had real trouble, because most of the roster was over at Alice Tully Hall.
Without even trying to look, I saw Carol Vaness, Marilyn Horne, Neil Shicoff, Aprile Millo and several others; it was about the starriest crowd I can remember sitting in.


A Few Words About Lasix
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


China Assails British Passport Plan for Hong Kong
LEAD: China said today that it would not accept a British plan to give passports to selected people from Hong Kong and attacked the move as a violation of the spirit of a Chinese-British accord on the territory's future.


The Maestro Is a Molester
LEAD:
NEMESIS
By Rosamond Smith.
276 pp. New York: A William Abrahams Book/
E. P. Dutton. $18.95.


1960's Troupe Celebrates 25 Years of Enthusiasm
LEAD: For those who were alarmed by the shaggy hair and radical politics on college campuses in the 1960's, the traveling musical troupe Up With People was a comforting reminder that some of America's youth, at least, had interests other than insurrection.


Death at Hands of Elusive Foe
LEAD: The sign at the rear of the Northside Bombers Boxing Club says ''In Harmony.'' When Charles Hamm, the 52-year-old plumber who has run the place since 1978, first saw the sign, he liked the sentiment so much that he made sure the lettered poster board ended up on that wall of his storefront gym.


Voorhees Is Realizing His Deferred Dream
LEAD: Although Vern Voorhees was 6 feet 2 inches, he was overweight at 240 pounds.
He smoked two packs of cigarettes a day.
He was a prime candidate for a heart attack, and when that heart attack came in 1980, when Voorhees was 40, it changed the life of his only child, Barry.


7 Are Killed in Military Helicopter Accidents
LEAD: An Army helicopter crashed in training exercises Friday night, killing five soldiers and injuring eight, the authorities said today.


Rising Political Discontent in Kenya Is Tarnishing Its Progressive Image
LEAD: Six months of growing political tension have further tarnished the faltering reputation of Kenya as an African nation with democratic inclinations and an economic strength lacking elsewhere on the continent.


Sports Violence Beyond Detroit
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


NO COUNTRY FOR WOMEN
LEAD:
LOST WEDDINGS
By Maria Beig.
Translated by Peter Blickle and Jaimy Gordon.
143 pp. New York:
Persea Books. $17.95.


Expanding The Field
LEAD: It's hard to follow sports when you can't see the players, but now those who are visually impaired are going to get a chance to participate in one of the hallmarks of fandom, through a line of Braille sports cards.


In the Fight Against Urban Despair, A Fresh Face and a Firm Grip
LEAD: AS a young caseworker in Manhattan in the mid-1960's, Audrey Rowe visited the home of a client, a high school dropout who lived with his mother.
Their small West Side apartment was strewn with garbage and overrun by roaches, Ms.
Rowe recalled, ''and the stench was enough to make you gag.''


Most Chileans Know Military Invented Plot
LEAD: To the Editor:


Amy C. Cox Married to David S. Prall
LEAD: Amy Caroline Cox, the daughter of Bernard S. Cox of Akron, Ohio, was married last evening to David Stuart Prall, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stuart E. Prall of Hewlett, L.I.
Cantor David Benedict officiated at the Union League Club in New York.


Amy Baldwin Strasenburgh MarriedTo Alexander H. Ware in Rochester
LEAD: Amy Baldwin Strasenburgh, a daughter of Ruth B. Strasenburgh and Robert J. Strasenburgh 2d, both of Rochester, was married yesterday to Alexander Hopper Ware, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Winslow Ware Jr. of Richmond.
The Revs.
Kenneth Howard, a cousin of the bride, and Thomas Richards officiated at the First Baptist Church of Rochester.


Partnerships for Third-World Growth
LEAD: ''The private sector should be an engine for growth and prosperity,'' declared Sam Nujoma, President of the world's newest nation, Namibia, in his inaugural address last March. ''We look forward to a good partnership between the state and private sectors, because only through working together will our economy prosper.


Tech Notes;   An Off-Road Rover - Far Off
LEAD: The Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., is testing a new ''off-road vehicle'' - designed for Mars. ''Robby,'' as it's called, has an articulated body, a variety of sensors and stereo television cameras.
The unmanned craft is designed to travel several kilometers a day.
Two navigation strategies are being tested.


Our Bargain Prices
LEAD: To the Editor:


Spike Lee and the 'Slavery' of the Blues
LEAD: In one of the earliest sequences of ''Mo' Better Blues,'' Spike Lee's new film about jazz, the camera lingers almost lecherously over the womanly curves of a trumpet and saxophone.
As simple as the shot seems at that moment, over the course of the movie it becomes a powerful and shifting metaphor, as Mr.


Yesterday's Playthings Meet the Old Toy Network
LEAD: Metal toys made between 1860 and 1940 - in painted cast iron, lithographed tin, enameled steel and die-cast metal - are among today's most popular collectibles.
They are also increasingly expensive.
This year prices skyrocketed for metal cars, trucks and steam engines at two record-breaking auctions in April and June held in New Hope,


HOPE AND HEARTBREAK
LEAD: It is chilling to think that $80 for a 96-hour work week is considered a virtual bonanza in the less-developed world - and that people are made to feel grateful for the opportunity to be thus exploited (''The Border Boom: Hope and Heartbreak,'' by Sandy Tolan, July 1).
Tolan's moving article reduces the complex and impersonal laws of the global economy to their proper dimension - the human one.


Jean Fourastie Is Dead; French Economist, 83
LEAD: Jean Fourastie, an economist who helped oversee the reconstruction of postwar France, has died.
He was 83 years old.


A. G. Moore Weds Carolyn A. Kuehn
LEAD: The marriage of Carolyn Armstrong Kuehn and Andrew Gibbs Moore, both 24 years old and 1988 graduates of Brown University, took place yesterday at the chapel of the Loomis Chaffee School in Windsor, Conn.
The Rev.
Rolf Buchmann, a Lutheran minister, officiated.
Mrs.
Moore, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.


REAGAN'S AMERICA: A CAPITAL OFFENSE
LEAD: The anti-Reagan forces will have to try harder.
Extremes of income and wealth are a fact of capitalism, but one that is really beside Phillips's point.
The Reagan era has brought the longest economic expansion in American history.
What matters is whether the vast majority of Americans benefited from the expansion.


Cocaine-Laced Drink Leaves Man in a Coma
LEAD: A man who drank from a soft drink bottle containing dissolved cocaine is in a coma today, and Federal officials are investigating for links to Colombian drug smugglers.
The officials said drug traffickers often smuggle cocaine by dissolving it in liquids.


Paris When It Sizzles
LEAD: AN AVAILABLE MAN.
By Patric Kuh. (Available Press/Ballantine, Paper, $8.95.) From the moment this first novel opens, one has the impression of having fallen into the clutches of a natural storyteller, a writer whose love object, in the end, is the city of Paris - Paris in summer, to be precise, sweltering and sinister, ravished by pleasure-hungry visitors and busloads of tourists who move through the streets ''like sharks through a sunken city.


Home on the Range
LEAD: In the late 1800's, a wanderer nicknamed Yonkel the Mahzik (Mischief) showed up at Ellis Island wearing the dark coat of an Orthodox Jew, long sideburns and cowboy boots.
An immigration official jostled him and Yonkel slugged the man and swore at him in a Russian-Texan drawl.
When it was discovered that this strange cowboy was a United States citizen who had fought in the Civil War, Yonkel was readmitted into the country.


How Many Bosses Does It Take . . .
LEAD: To the Editor:


Operatic Performances for Young and Old
LEAD: DO warm nights and Italian opera go together?
Yes, says the Opera Theater of Connecticut, which will offer a double bill of Mascagni's ''Cavalleria Rusticana'' and Leoncavallo's ''Pagliacci'' for a two-weekend run at Andrews Memorial Theater in Clinton.


Quayle Aide Named a Judge
LEAD: President Bush plans to nominate Diane Weinstein, counselor to Vice President Dan Quayle, as a judge of the United States Claims Court, the White House announced today.
She would succeed Randall R. Rader on the court, which hears claims against the Federal Government.
Her term would run for 15 years.


How to Replace Ceiling Tiles
LEAD: ACOUSTICAL ceiling tiles, which are made of porous wood or mineral fibers, are commonly used both as new and replacement ceiling material.
Although easy to install and excellent for absorbing sound, such tiles are also soft, easily broken and often hard to clean.
Damaged or stained tiles generally must be replaced.


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q. Our toilet takes a long time to flush and sometimes keeps on running.
The problem seems to be the float ball on the end of the float arm not clicking off when it gets to the top, and so the water keeps running into the tank.
What can I do to correct this?


Commercial Property: Midtown Hotel Renovations;  $52 Million Drake Project Adds 2 Elevator Shafts
LEAD: In Room 1510 at the Drake Hotel on Park Avenue, it is readily apparent that the current renovation is much more than cosmetic.
An entire chunk of floor is gone, leaving a 8-by-9-foot hole through which one can easily glimpse Room 1410.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in The Times Magazine on Jan. 28 about Russian nationalism mistranslated a comment from Valentin Rasputin, a Russian writer.


Water Conservation Begins With Lawns
LEAD: GARDENERS in the Northeast are lucky.
There usually is enough water to go around.
But the Soil Conservation Service says that ''demand for water by humans is expected to double by the year 2000.''


Karen D. Fessel To Marry in Fall
LEAD: An October wedding is planned by Karen Diane Fessel and Jeffrey Bruce Kirschenbaum, the son of Russell Kirschenbaum of Piedmont, Calif., and Susan Wolfe of Tiburon, Calif.
The prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Norbert Fessel of Barrington, R.I., have announced the engagement.


Campus Life: Texas;   Dean Delays Changes In a Disputed Course
LEAD: University of Texas officials have derailed plans to focus a first-year English composition course on civil rights and affirmative-action court cases.


A 3-Man Show at Blue Hill: Sculpture, Portraits and
LEAD: CHARLES SEARLES and Oliver Johnson are American blacks, Robergeau Duverger is from Haiti and all three are showing their work at the Blue Hill Cultural Center.
Unless a 1988 exhibition by contemporary Chinese artists can be counted, this is the first show based on ethnic identity that the center has staged in its seven-year career and one hopes it will be the last.


Lifestyle;   Nothing Borrowed, But All Was Blue
LEAD: The bride wore a white lace bathing suit, buoyancy compensator, mask and fins.
Her scuba tank and snorkel were rented rather than borrowed, but there was certainly an abundance of blue.


Transit Agency's Plan: Tokens Outside Subway
LEAD: Tired of waiting in long lines in the subway to buy tokens?


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
East Meadow
$225,000
706 Maxwell Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, family room, pool; taxes $5,700.
Freeport
$150,000
186 Whaley Street
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; fireplace, sunporch, beamed ceilings, basement; taxes $3,100.


Miss Hanna Wed To M. P. Morgan
LEAD: Katharine Mohr Hanna and Matthew Perry Morgan were married yesterday at the Trinity Parish Episcopal Church in Lenox, Mass., by the Rev.
Duncan R. McQueen.
Mrs.
Morgan is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Hanna Jr. of Old Chatham, N.Y.
Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Perry Morgan Jr. of Princeton, N.J., are the bridegroom's parents.


Caroline Killeen Plans to Marry
LEAD: A December wedding is planned by Caroline Killeen, a daughter of Mrs.
Donald W. Killeen of Longmeadow, Mass., and the late Mr.
Killeen, and Thomas Churchill Burke Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Burke of Hobe Sound, Fla., and Watch Hill, R.I.


Fire I. Election An All-Time Low
LEAD: As a former editor of The Fire Island News, a member of its founding staff in the 50's, an Ocean Beach resident and long-time observer of its politics, I found that the June 1 mayoral election hit an all-time low, even in this scrappy little village.
And The Fire Island News scored even lower.


Basketball Gold Is Still in Sight for U.S.
LEAD: The United States will not have a chance for revenge against the Soviet Union in the Goodwill Games basketball tournament, but Mike Krzyzewski is not complaining.


Piedmont's Many Pleasures
LEAD: Even if Piedmont did not have truffles, or one of the great national parks of Europe (Parco del Gran Paradiso), or the Borromean Islands, or the more refined and most varied regional cuisine in Italy, it would still be top of my list for travelers to Italy who have already made the grand tour between Rome and


Robin M. Lentz and Glenn S. Worgan Are Wed
LEAD: At St.
Thomas Episcopal Church in Whitemarsh, Pa., Robin M. Lentz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin R. Lentz of Ambler, Pa., was married yesterday to Glenn S. Worgan, a son of Joan B. Worgan of Erdenheim, Pa., and John Worgan of Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Anne Ritchings officiated.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Fajitas' Counterpoint: Sweet and Spicy, Tart and Tangy
LEAD: The popularity of fajitas is rising, though it is doubtful that those who first made them would recognize their modern permutations.


Black Women's Bumpy Path to Church Leadership
LEAD: Caroline Ann Knight was the assistant pastor at one of Harlem's major churches for nearly seven years when she began to look around for a church of her own, a path that many men before her had taken.
But Ms.
Knight found that none of the big Baptist churches in Harlem were willing to put a woman in the top job.


Still Under Par, Jones Takes L.P.G.A. Lead
LEAD: Rosie Jones overcame a bogey on the troublesome 16th hole today to shoot a one-under-par 70 and take a two-stroke lead over Cathy Johnston after the third round of the Ladies Professional Golf Association Championship.


Surprise No. 1 in All-Around
LEAD: With all the surprise of a late-night rerun, the Soviet Union's female gymnasts outclassed the field tonight at the Goodwill Games, taking the first two places in the all-around competition.


Left-Wing Press Feels New Squeeze in Turkey
LEAD: It is more than three months since anyone has seen Dogu Perincek in public, and his wife says he is prepared to remain one of Turkey's best-known fugitives indefinitely.


Goodbye to All That
LEAD:
THE END OF THE COLD WAR
European Unity, Socialism, and the Shift in Global Power.
By Bogdan Denitch.
123 pp. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Cloth, $25. Paper, $10.95.
THE COLD WAR IS OVER
By William G. Hyland.
222 pp. New York: Times Books. $18.95.
SOVIET UNION 2000
Reform or Revolution?


9 Million Americans Respond to Plight of a Sick Boy
LEAD: Craig Shergold, a 10-year-old English boy ill with a brain tumor, remarked last fall that he would like to break the world record for receiving get-well cards.
Nine million Americans have responded, answering messages sent through a loose network of facsimile machines, office memorandums, neighborhood conversations and community newspaper advertisements.


How Many Bosses Does It Take . . . To Mange One Worker?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bronx Bombers, Or Nonbombers
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Determining the Cost of Auto Insurance
LEAD: In the June 10 article ''Changes Readied for Auto Insurance,'' the new auto insurance laws were said to create ''objective criteria that will define a good driver'' and thus help determine fair premiums.
The plan calls for 75 percent of the drivers falling into a ''standard'' (good driver) category, 15 percent into a ''nonstandard'' category and 10 percent into an ''assigned risk'' class.


Photo: Martyn Fleming, left, and Steven Heathcote of the Australian Ballet duel as gladiators in Laszlo Seregi's production of ''Spartacus.'' (Tom Brazil)Review/Dance;   Hungarian Version Of Spartacus Tale
LEAD: Laszlo Seregi, Hungary's leading choreographer, created his own version of ''Spartacus'' to Aram Khachaturian's ballet score of the same title in 1968.
On Friday night, the Australian Ballet presented the United States premiere of Mr.
Seregi's ''Spartacus'' at the Metropolitan Opera House in a recent restaging that will be repeated this afternoon to end the company's engagement.


Manchester's Pop Music: Escapism Without Escape
LEAD: Blobby light-show shapes flicker and wobble on a screen.
Musicians, scruffy in blue jeans or gaudy in flower-patterned shirts, play their instruments and shamble around the stage.
Onstage and off, people flail the air in hippie dances.
But amid all the appearances of a festive 1960's revival, the lyrics (if any) are often grim, while the beat is likely to be pumped out by a drum machine.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Japan's Military: A New Role
Young Japanese are shunning careers in the Japanese military just as Tokyo has emerged as the world's third-largest military spender and its armed forces are struggling to redefine themselves.
Page 3.
Kenya's Tarnished Image
Six months of political tension have tarnished the reputation of Kenya as a nation with democratic inclinations and an economic strength lacking elsewhere in Africa.


MARKET WATCH
LEAD: When words don't persuade, a gun can help.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Coins, like people show the effects of age.
When roughly handled, coins pick up scars.
Exposure to the elements causes tarnishing and even mild acids will pit and erode a coin's surface.
Beware!
Any attempt to improve a coin's features, perhaps with a little scrubbing or buffing, can do more damage than benign neglect.


Business Diary
LEAD:
COMPANIES
The Power of the Pencil at Eastern
For an airline to boast of correcting vital maintenance and repair problems is hardly the path to recovery.
Who on Madison Avenue could craft a campaign around a message like this?
But claims of ''full corrective action'' were the essence of Eastern Airlines' response to an indictment last Wednesday on 60 counts of ignoring upkeep and falsifying records - ''pencil whipping,'' as it was called.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD:
OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY, by Arthur Lyons. (Mysterious Press, $4.95.) A bidding war over stolen artifacts convinces the private eye Jacob Asch that museum directors and art collectors aren't necessarily such cultured people after all. ''Mr.
Lyons has hit upon a subject worthy of his detective's intelligence in this art-is-hell caper,'' Marilyn Stasio said here last year.


Justice and Mercy
LEAD: Perhaps there comes a moment in the life of every woman when she yearns to telephone an 84-year-old man she has never met and ask, ''How could you do this to me?''


Secretly Linked to the Same Woman
LEAD:
FADO ALEXANDRINO
By Antonio Lobo Antunes.
Translated by Gregory Rabassa.
497 pp. New York: Grove Weidenfeld. $24.95.


Guardian of Parking for the Disabled
LEAD: When the police discovered that Pat Fletcher planned to patrol the parking lot outside the K Mart Shopping Plaza here to prevent able-bodied drivers from using spaces reserved for the disabled, they were skeptical.


About Cars;   How to Clean Up and Also Stay Happy
LEAD: Constant readers will recall that I have a couple of old Cadillacs, a red '65 convertible and a black '66 Coupe deVille, both of which I love dearly.
What they won't know is that like lots of car nuts, I have been under some pressure to get the family's fleet down to sensible size.


The World;   In Quebec, Yet Another Splintering
LEAD: In English-speaking regions of Canada, many spy an enticing irony in the crisis currently gripping Quebec.
In the midst of the French-speaking province's renewed debate over independence, it has found itself confronted by an angry minority of its own, Mohawk Indians.
Just as Quebecers have claimed to be a ''distinct society'' within Canada, so too are we, the Mohawks have proclaimed from the armed camps they have established across two highways near Montreal.


D. L. Jenkins Wed To Ms. Gerstman
LEAD: Ellen Kim Gerstman, the special events assistant at the School of American Ballet in New York, and David Larson Jenkins, a program representative at Columbia Artists Management in New York, were married last evening at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y., by Rabbi Lawrence Milder.


Headliners;   Staying Ashore
LEAD: The Exxon Valdez has a new name (Exxon Mediterranean) and a new paint job (bright red), and is back in the water again after a year of repairs.
Her former skipper, Joseph Hazelwood, will remain beached for a while longer.
Last week, an administrative law judge for the Coast Guard suspended his captain's license for nine months for his actions when the tanker ran aground off Alaska in 1989, causing the nation's worst oil spill.


A Gallery That's Almost a Museum
LEAD: THE gallery City Without Walls has been in business for 15 years.
During this time, it has undergone gentrification, having started as a rough-and-ready artists' collective in a loft on Halsey Street and being now a well-groomed alternative space in a Gateway Center storefront.


Dr. Katz Is Affianced
LEAD: September wedding plans for Dr.
Alyse Bryna Katz and Jay Evan Sicklick, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Elliot Sicklick of West Hartford, Conn., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Katz of New York.
Dr.
Katz, a resident in rehabilitation medicine at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, graduated magna cum laude from Boston University, where she also received a medical degree.


ROMANIA'S LOST CHILDREN
LEAD: I was overwhelmed by the pictures of the children in Romania.
As the mother of a multihandicapped daughter, I am fortunate to have help available at the Federal, state and local levels - physical therapy, vision therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, cognitive and social stimulation.
As a speech and language pathologist who works with children,


Style Makers;   Jane Perin and David Mowen, Beeswax Candle Makers
LEAD: There are candles from the supermarket, and then there are candles with cachet.
The candles of the moment may be the hand-rolled beeswax cylinders made by Buonanno-Perin in Manhattan.
They come in 12 sizes but only one color, natural cream; they have no added scent, only a faint honey-like fragrance, and they are dripless dinner-table quality.


The Judge Not Chosen Is Less of an Enigma
LEAD: President Bush interviewed her for the Supreme Court nomination for which he ultimately selected Judge David H. Souter.
John H. Sununu, the White House Chief of Staff, hinted that she might be nominated for the next Court vacancy.
But Federal Judge Edith H. Jones is not the type to let such heady attention affect her judicial demeanor.


Jill Kaplin Is Engaged To Wed Andrew Herz
LEAD: September wedding plans for Jill Kaplin and Andrew Herz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Herz of Larchmont, N.Y., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Maury Kaplin of Toledo, Ohio.


Ghosts Must Catch The Spirit of the Time
LEAD: Every age gets the ghostly lovers it needs.
At a decisive point in the 1947 film ''The Ghost and Mrs.
Muir,'' the audience finds itself hoping that Gene Tierney will break her engagement to George Sanders - she's the last to know he's a cad - and run into Rex Harrison's arms.
Now, it's true that the sea captain Harrison plays is a ghost, so technically he has no arms.


Campus Life: Oregon;   Family Housing Is Opened To Unwed Couples
LEAD: The University of Oregon has opened its family housing to unmarried heterosexual and homosexual couples with children, but has kept it closed to such couples without children.


Headliners;   Moving Up
LEAD: Bishop George Carey describes his career as ''rags to purple.'' The son of a hospital porter, he grew up in public housing in London and recalls sharing his brother's shoes.
Last week, Dr.
Carey, a bishop for less than three years, was named as the next Archbishop of Canterbury, the spiritual head of the Church of England and 70 million Anglicans around the world.


Miss Chandler, Banker, to Wed
LEAD: The engagement of Carole-Ann Chandler to Charles J. O'Shea 3d, a New York State Assemblyman from Long Island, has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Chandler of Garden City Park, L.I.
She and Mr.
O'Shea, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
O'Shea Jr. of Point Lookout, L.I., plan a September wedding.


There's Been a Change In the Weather
LEAD: On May 14, as a beloved broadcaster bade farewell to San Francisco, crestfallen viewers were taped vowing that they could not cope without him.
During KRON-TV's lavish 13-minute salute to Mark Thompson, the rock-concert promoter Bill Graham gratefully solicited Mr.
Thompson's advice about scheduling headliners, and San Francisco Giants slugger Will Clark begged him for hitting tips.


BASEBALL: Notebook;   The Race That Isn't a Race
LEAD: Sparky Anderson, the dean of major league managers, knows a pennant race when he sees one, but he's not sure what he sees when he looks at the American League East.


Question Of the Week;   Was Pete Rose's Sentence Fair?
LEAD: Pete Rose has used his status and his stats to engage in both unlawful and uncivil behavior.
He was always a bully on the field and now it appears that this arrogant bearing has undone his personal life.


;   In the Attic, A Raccoon Steals the Peace LL)By ROSE ZELMAN
LEAD: SOMETHING was wrong at our country house.
It was late spring and my husband and I had just spent the week in New York City.
For 38 summers we have split our time between our urban apartment and a suburban house, on a lovely, dead-end rural street, with a roaring brook for a backyard.


Robin V. Zirilli Is Married to Stephen Jay Obie
LEAD: Robin Virginia Zirilli, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. Zirilli of Montgomery, N.Y., was married yesterday to Stephen Jay Obie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Obie of West Haverstraw, N.Y.
The Rev.
Joseph G. Farias officiated at St.
Peter's Roman Catholic Church in Haverstraw.


Conviction Is Reversed in Child-Abuse Case
LEAD: The conviction of a man on 22 counts of sexually abusing four toddlers has been overturned by an appellate court, which ruled that the police had no right to view a videotape of the abuse seized from the defendant's car.


Cal-Ban Diet Tablets Present Health Hazard, U.S. Finds
LEAD: The Food and Drug Administration says Cal-Ban 3000 diet tablets and capsules can cause throat obstructions, and it wants the products removed from store shelves.


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q. Our toilet takes a long time to flush and sometimes keeps on running.
The problem seems to be the float ball on the end of the float arm not clicking off when it gets to the top, and so the water keeps running into the tank.
What can I do to correct this?


The Tourists Are in Europe and Things Are Looking Up
LEAD: By the year 2000, tourism may well be the world's biggest industry.
Since the monuments travelers want to see are pretty much fixed, tourists are paying more and more for the dubious pleasure of seeing one another.
For the last year, Martin Parr, a British photographer with an eye for the ordinary, has been documenting the thundering herd as homo touristus spreads across Europe.


ABORTION POLITICS ARE SAID TO HINDER USE OF FRENCH PILL
LEAD: The French developer of a pill that induces abortion has asserted that worldwide distribution of the drug is being blocked by fears of American reprisals against its manufacturer and the World Health Organization.


Jill Kransdorf to Wed
LEAD: October wedding plans for Jill Robyn Kransdorf and Gary Richard Baker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Stanley Baker of Boca Raton, Fla., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome I. Kransdorf of New York.
Ms.
Kransdorf, 26 years old, and her fiance, 28, are graduates of Ithaca College.
She is an account executive at Argenti, a sportswear manufacturer in New York.


Racism Issue Shakes World of Golf
LEAD: Reeling from criticism that it holds many of its most prestigious tournaments at private clubs with all-white memberships, golf has been caught in a moral issue so powerful that the social and political vacuum in which the game has long existed has probably been altered forever.
The statement last month by


Q and A
LEAD:
Convertibles in France


Miss Cox to Wed Philip Clippinger
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
John Avery of Princeton, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for Mrs.
Avery's daughter, Jenner Girard Cox, and Philip Edward Clippinger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald E. Clippinger of Princeton.


The Man Who Gave Us West Germany
LEAD:
LUCIUS D. CLAY
An American Life.
By Jean Edward Smith.
Illustrated. 835 pp. New York:
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $35.


HOPE AND HEARTBREAK
LEAD: If the maquiladora industry were to triple its Mexican workers' salary (to a breathtaking $1.65 an hour), it would mean that the average savings per worker per year would be reduced from roughly $16,000 to $13,800.
Would the investors who rely on the maquiladora industry settle for that?
Or is it inherent in capitalism that the affluence of some requires that others live in misery?


MUSEUMS AND POLITICS  Time to Go Back To the Ivory Tower
LEAD: To the Editor:


ROMANIA'S LOST CHILDREN
LEAD: Anti-abortionists arm themselves with photographs of dead fetuses as evidence of the callousness of those who would have an abortion, or perform one.
The photos of unwanted, institutionalized children in Romania are testimony to the far greater inhumanity of bringing children into the world without parents willing or able to care for them.


Computers Slowing the Pace of Permits
LEAD: AT 10 A.M., dozens of people are milling about the hallways on the fifth floor of 60 Hudson Street, the lower Manhattan office of New York City's Buildings Department.
Some are standing on lines, chatting.
Others are leaning against tables or sitting on the floor, reading newspapers or doing crossword puzzles.


Orchestrators Are Tired of Playing Second Fiddle
LEAD: When the ''City of Angels'' composer Cy Coleman accepted his Tony award for best score last month, he thanked his producer, his director, his cast, his designers, the ''most awesome music group that I've ever worked with, and the best band in a Broadway pit ever.''


Innovations Dot a Menu in Sag Harbor


Jane Barg Plans To Wed in August
LEAD: August wedding plans for Jane Barg and Lewis Asher Scheindlin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Scheindlin of Philadelphia, have been announced by Miss Barg's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Harold B. Barg of New York.


Pipeline Chief Is Hopeful Despite Delay in Approval
LEAD: ROBERT J. REID, the president of the gas-transmission company that expects to send a pipeline through seven western Connecticut communities, said he saw a silver lining in a regulatory agency's decision last week to delay the project.


Rocket in a 'Star Wars' Test Goes Awry and Is Destroyed
LEAD: An Aries rocket carrying electronic equipment to be tested for the ''Star Wars'' antimissile program went off course and was destroyed 31 seconds after it was launched, the authorities said Friday.


Bush's Supreme Court Red Herring
LEAD: In his surprise nomination of Judge David H. Souter to the Supreme Court seat left vacant by retiring Justice William Brennan Jr., President Bush portrayed himself as depoliticizing the appointment process, and the Court.
The President said that he applied ''no litmus test'' to the candidate's views on volatile issues.


Streetscapes: Euclid Hall;   A Derelict Dowager Making a Modest Comeback
LEAD: The 1903 Euclid Hall, covering the west blockfront of Broadway from 85th to 86th Streets, was among the most ambitious apartment houses of its time.


Karen Issokson and Marc Silver Are Betrothed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley E. Issokson of Hyannis, Mass., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Karen Lee Issokson and Marc Adam Silver, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lewis Silver of Secaucus, N.J.


Tamsy Smith to Wed G. W. Markham
LEAD: September wedding plans for Tamsy Rowena Smith and George Wild Markham, a son of Susan Moore Kirkpatrick of Delray Beach, Fla., and the late Dean F. Markham, have been announced by her parents, Col.
Allen D. Smith, U.S.A. retired, and Mrs.
Smith of Paige, Tex.
Miss Smith and her fiance, both 27 years old, graduated from Skidmore College.


Power Lines Stir Concern on Health Risk
LEAD: AMID growing concern over a possible link between electric power lines and cancer, New Jersey residents are mounting an increasingly vocal campaign against utility companies that want to string new wires throughout the state.


An Athlete of Perception
LEAD:
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES
By Diane Ackerman.
331 pp. New York: Random House. $19.95.


Spare That Tree or Else
LEAD:
GREEN RAGE
Radical Environmentalism and the Unmaking of Civilization.
By Christopher Manes.
291 pp. Boston:
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $18.95.


The World;   South Africa, Alone Again, Makes Way For Communism
LEAD: Communism may be crumbling around the world, but in South Africa it is undergoing a curious renaissance.
The South African Communist Party, which President F. W. de Klerk on Feb. 2 restored to legal status after 40 years as an banned organization, is launching itself as a full-fledged political party.


Headliners;   Lecturing on Lies and Rewriting History
LEAD: As many Europeans look toward what they hope will be a brighter future, President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia gave a pointed lecture last week to those with shadows in their past.


Miss Kolodzey Is Engaged
LEAD: Jody Kolodzey and John Francis Hogan, doctoral candidates at the University of Pennsylvania, she in folklore and he in English, plan to marry next year.
Miss Kolodzey, a daughter of Elizabeth J. Welman and George J. Kolodzey, both of Philadelphia, graduated from Temple University.
Mr.
Hogan, the son of Mr.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: There are some people - call them naive - who honestly believe that when someone greets them with ''how are you?'' that person is truly interested in the state of their health and fortune.
This, of course, is rarely the case.
How a once genuine inquiry has deteriorated into a rote phrase, generally uttered without feeling, meaning or caring, is a sad commentary on life today.


Headliners;   Violating Secrecy
LEAD: Oleg D. Kalugin may be the spy who talked too much.
Mr.
Kalugin, a recently retired senior officer of the K.G.B., caused a sensation in June when he told a gathering of Communist Party insurgents in Moscow that the state security police hadn't changed its ways despite all of the recent efforts to change its image.


The Impaired Should Not Suffer
LEAD: Re: '' 'These People' Are Ruining Our Lives? by Warren Goldstein (July 1): It is appropriate that Mr.
Goldstein's commentary appeared four days before July 4th, which is the celebration of our forefathers' signing of the Declaration of Independence, which declared the 13 Colonies independent of the oppressive rule of England's king.


Turin's Baroque Splendors
LEAD: Turin, the capital of a small state half on one side of the Alps, half on the other, where the ruler spoke French and most of but part of the population Italian, is an improbable place for some of the best architecture in Italy, especially since it was invaded with great regularity by French, Spanish and Austrian armies; and yet in the 17th and early 18th centuries it became home to two architects of genius, Guarino Guarini and Filippo Juvarra, brought there by successive Dukes of


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: The World Junior Team Championships for players no older than 25 are now played in odd-numbered years.
The first two, in 1987 and 1989, were played in Europe, and European teams were victorious.
The American teams that competed were unable to mount a serious challenge, but matters may be different next year.


The Man Who Would Be Feared
LEAD: Saddam Hussein emerged from last week's OPEC meeting more than ever a figure feared and respected by his Arab brethren.
The Iraqi President's threats against a tiny neighbor, Kuwait, expressed many things about him: his determination to lead the Arab world in what he sees as a just cause, his penchant for intimidating those who challenge him, and his willingness to carry a bluff to the edge of a precipice.


Miss Torre Weds Rick McConnell
LEAD: Angela Ann Torre and Rick M. McConnell were married yesterday at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bedford, N.Y., by the Rev.
Robert Weiss.
Mrs.
McConnell is a daughter of Helen M. Torre of Pound Ridge, N.Y., and Robert C. Torre of Bedford.
She graduated from Manhattanville College and was until recently an associate at Perez-Arton, an executive-search organization in New York.


Where a Boom May Not Be a Boon
LEAD: Expanded American trade and investment in the Soviet Union might prolong President Gorbachev's political life, but a number of American executives are beginning to sense that it could prove more a disaster than a boon for the American companies involved.


4,000 Mongolians Hold Rally On Eve of National Elections
LEAD: More than 4,000 youths rallied today on the eve of a second round of Mongolian elections, cheering candidates opposing the ruling Communists.


A Romantic Staging For 'As You Like It'
LEAD: The idyllic Forest of Arden, the setting of the pastoral part of ''As You Like It,'' has been variously assumed to be in England or between France and Belgium.
But exactly where, Shakespeare did not say.
Nor did he care, according to Isaac Asimov's ''Guide to Shakespeare.'' Why not, then, transpose the play's romantic entanglements to make-believe Irish woods and set its darker aspects in a nearby timeless town, instead of the 16th-century Usurper's Courts?


The Spin Doctors of Early Music
LEAD: What does early music have to do with history?
In theory, everything.
In fact, very little.
At the beginning, the movement was frankly antiquarian - a matter of reviving forgotten repertories and, with them, forgotten instruments and performing practices.
Nobody objected to that, nor did most musicians even pay much attention to it.


Omaha Grand Jury Sees Hoax in Lurid Tales
LEAD: Lurid reports of child sex abuse, drug trafficking, pornography and political intrigue that have held Omaha enthralled for nearly two years were a ''carefully crafted hoax,'' a county grand jury in Nebraska has concluded.
But two other inquiries are continuing, and the Nebraska State Senator who heads one of them has raised questions about the grand jury's conclusions.


The Unfathomable Fee
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Dance;   New Insights Into 'Giselle' From the Australian Ballet
LEAD: The Australian Ballet's ''Giselle'' is an absorbing piece of storytelling, full of vivid dramatic details that make the production - staged by the company director, Maina Gielgud, to the Adam score - freshly believable and affecting.
And Anna de Cardi and David McAllister, who stepped into the roles of Giselle and Albrecht on Wednesday night at the Metropolitan Opera


DANCE VIEW
LEAD: The Bolshoi Ballet season at the New York State Theater this month was much better than expected, not quite as excellent as hoped.
To say the company has been in transition is to say nothing new, as that has been the case for the last decade.


For Japan's Military, Some Second Thoughts About Where the Enemy Is
LEAD: For 100 years Japan's military elite has been trained on this island of British-style red-brick buildings and rolling green lawns.
First, it was for conquests in Asia, and over the last four decades for defending the Japanese islands against a possible Soviet invasion from the north.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   A Succulent Turkey Sate, With Soy and Peanut Butter
LEAD: Turkey breast is usually cooked in such a way that diners don't recognize what it is.
Sometimes it is mistaken for chicken, but most of the time it is mistaken for veal.


Washington Journal;   In a Public City, a Monument to Private Struggles
LEAD: The nation's capital is not exactly a spiritual city, but it has its spiritual corners.
It even has a small but valuable history of people close to power struggling with spiritual questions.
One of them was Henry Adams, whose extraordinary monument lies off one of the least beaten paths in Washington.


Phillies Extend Pirates' Losing Streak to 4
LEAD: Charlie Hayes and Von Hayes hit homers and Philadelphia scored the winning run when Pittsburgh couldn't turn a potential double-play grounder in the ninth inning.


Circuit Breakers: Maybe They Work, Maybe They Don't
LEAD: The embattled futures industry finally got a break last week, and it came in the guise of plummeting markets.


Postings: Council Spoof;   Playing The Game
LEAD: You will never find Councilopoly, the Land Use Game, on a store shelf next to Monopoly and Scrabble.
If it were to be played by the rules, it would take at least 50 days to finish.
And it would never be clear who won.


Review/Opera;   A Handel Hero Dabbles in Politics
LEAD: Updated operas - those old theatrical bodies dressed up in modern clothes - seem to come in two sizes: large and small.
Handel's ''Tamerlano,'' by the Measured Breaths Theater Company at the Cooper Square Theater on East Seventh Street, measures somewhere between small and medium.
Rather than dragging the director into the present with its compelling relevance, this production assumes newness as a virtue in itself and then searches for ways to justify it.


Our Animals, Our Selves
LEAD:
CREATED FROM ANIMALS
The Moral Implications of Darwinism.
By James Rachels.
245 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $19.95.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: G.M.
Chairman Roger B. Smith will drive the first Saturn car off the assembly line in Spring Hill, Tenn., the day before he retires.
Personal income and consumer spending for June.
Campeau annual meeting in Toronto, with no word from the company on whether Robert Campeau will attend.


They Expected Little and They Got It
LEAD:
UNHEARD MELODIES
By Warren Leamon.
214 pp. Atlanta: Longstreet Press. $16.95


Orchestra Making Its 10th Visit
LEAD: AT 8 P.M.
Saturday the New York Philharmonic is coming to Westchester Community College in Valhalla, as it has for the last nine summers.
This 10th anniversary visit, sponsored by the county and several corporations, also marks the first time a woman has conducted the Philharmonic here: on the podium will be Marin Alsop, the dynamic music director of the Eugene (Ore.) Symphony, the Long Island Philharmonic and her own Concordia Chamber


The Nation;   Blacks, Jews and 'This Thing That Is Suffocating Us'
LEAD: A black California official's comment earlier this month that leading Hollywood film and television studios and executives are guilty of ''Jewish racism'' set off the latest troubled round in the sometimes strained history of relations between blacks and Jews in the United States.


Dorothy Barclay and Peter Chynoweth Are Wed
LEAD: At the Pulaski (N.Y.) Congregational Church, Dorothy Graham Barclay, a first-grade teacher in the East Syracuse-Minoa, N.Y., school district, was married yesterday to Peter Michael Chynoweth, a district manager for Automatic Data Processing in Liverpool, N.Y.
The Rev.
James Tschudy performed the ceremony.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Weed; pull up unwanted plants, which usurp valuable soil moisture and add them to the compost.
Cut off faded flowers from petunias, snapdragons, geraniums, pansies, lilies, daylilies and balloonflowers to prevent seed pods from forming.
Mail hardy bulb orders for fall planting.


Pioneering Audio Design To a Consistently Musical Beat
LEAD: Despite its present multi-billion-dollar size, the audio industry started small - in the traditional American fashion of free enterprise and better mousetraps.


Golf Can Be Rescued From Shoal Creek
LEAD: In the old religion game, there is a saying that the most segregated hour in America is 11 o'clock on Sunday morning.


Liberian Rebels Close In on Leader's Fortress
LEAD: Rebel soldiers fought to within a mile of President Samuel K. Doe's fortified mansion today and battled pockets of Government troops for control of a hill overlooking the city center.


Havel and Waldheim
LEAD: Vaclav Havel has unburdened himself of a weight too heavy for anybody to carry this side of the grave - sainthood.


Golf Course Development Gets Rougher
LEAD: TO the 222 million Americans who do not golf, the line that forms before dawn at the Tamarack Golf Course in East Brunswick, N.J., may seem eerie, perhaps even cult-like.
But to many of the nation's 25 million golfers, such bleary-eyed rituals are par for the course.


Mimi Mackay Has Wedding
LEAD: Mimi Mackay, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey B. Mackay of Shorewood, Minn., was married last evening at her home in Excelsior, Minn., to Lawrence David Bartimer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herman Bartimer of New York.
Rabbi Max Shapiro performed the ceremony.


Read His Mind;   Bush's Enigmatic Choice for the High Court
LEAD: ''I DON'T want to ruin my reputation,'' Judge David H. Souter said to the reporters on Air Force One on Friday. ''I have two words to say: Hi and goodbye.''


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
FARMING AND CLIMATE


U.S. Soccer Group Loses a Sponsor
LEAD: Chiquita Brands Inc. has said it will stop sponsoring the United States Soccer Federation on Aug. 31, leaving the United States team with just two national sponsors.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
POPS GOES THE MUSIC


Managing;   Proper Conduct in the Workplace
LEAD: Several years ago, Borden Inc. asked a dozen or so employees to devise a smoking policy for the company's Columbus, Ohio, headquarters.
The group - comprised of smokers and nonsmokers, men and women, executives and secretaries, oldtimers and newcomers - set rules that were more restrictive than the smokers wanted but also stopped short of the total ban that many nonsmokers had been pushing.


Question Of the Week;   Was Pete Rose's Sentence Fair?
LEAD: No.
Federal judges have life tenure, so they can make decisions with as little pressure on them as possible.
Occasionally, they should be ready, willing, and able to hand down precedent-setting decisions.
In my opinion, the Rose case was one of them.
I would have leaned real hard on Pete, but no jail time.


Cards Halt Mets On Fatal Fastball
LEAD: The afternoon haze had dissolved into a premature twilight, the scoreboard lights had melted into a blur of zeros and the sense of restlessness and distraction that had long before swept through the crowd had now crept across the field and into the dugouts as well.
One swing of Willie McGee's bat, though, got matters focused in a hurry.


What Shakespeare Lacked
LEAD: To the Editor:


Man Buried Under Sidewalk
LEAD: A plumber working in a ditch was killed when the sidewalk above him caved in, burying him beneath the cement, the police said.
The plumber, Irving Carter, 48 years old, was asphyxiated at the bottom of a hole in the sidewalk in front of 313 Macon Street at 2:15 P.M. on Friday in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, the police said.


Appearances Worry Congress As S.&amp; L. Shadow Lengthens
LEAD: The months since the Senate Ethics Committee opened investigations into five Senators' intervention with Federal regulators on behalf of a savings and loan executive have created a climate of caution, very nervous caution, in Congress.


Laura A. Gussoff To Marry in Fall
LEAD: The engagement of Laura Anne Gussoff to Douglas Adam Brown, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald S. Brown of Richmond, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold M. Gussoff of Rye Brook, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.


Review/Opera;   Driving 'Turandot' In the Park
LEAD: The summer season of the New York Grand Opera in Central Park either ended on Thursday evening with a production of ''Turandot,'' or it didn't.
Before the performance, it was announced that the company was still trying to raise money to reschedule a performance of ''L'Elisir d'Amore,'' which was rained out on


The Tragedy of Detroit
LEAD: It was in the Fall of 1986 that I first saw the devil on the streets of Detroit.


Outdoors;   For Striped Bass, Try Live Alewife
LEAD: When shore fishing for striped bass in the Northeast slows down, as it always does in July and August, I begin thinking of using bait rather than lure or fly to woo those fish.


Food;   ODE TO SKEET'S
LEAD: Darlington, S.C., is a normally peaceful town of white-frame houses with big porches on the front and azalea bushes in the yards.
But every Labor Day, about 80,000 people show up on the outskirts to observe a Southern ritual called stock-car racing.
I travel to Darlington several times a year myself, though no longer on Labor Day.


Searching for Judge Souter
LEAD: To replace retired Justice William Brennan, President Bush has offered a mystery.
It's been a long time since the nation asked ''Justice Who?'' about a nominee.
Mr.
Bush virtually challenges the Senate - his constitutional partner in staffing the Court - to find out what it needs to know about David Hackett


September Bridal For Sarah Miller
LEAD: Sarah Catherine Miller and Christopher Mark Haun, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Haun of Harrington Park, N.J., are planning a September wedding.
The prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Scott Miller of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement.


7 Teen-Agers Held in Slashing on Subway
LEAD: Seven teen-agers were charged yesterday with slashing the neck of a subway rider on a Brooklyn train in which they had earlier intimidated other passengers, the Transit Authority police said.


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q. Our toilet takes a long time to flush and sometimes keeps on running.
The problem seems to be the float ball on the end of the float arm not clicking off when it gets to the top, and so the water keeps running into the tank.
What can I do to correct this?


Question Of the Week;   Was Pete Rose's Sentence Fair?
LEAD: The community-service sentence given to Rose was not fair.
Rose was banned permanently from baseball.
Yet part of his tax-felony sentence will be 1,000 hours of community service teaching baseball to deprived youth.
The art of teaching implies transmitting values and ethical standards to students as well as skills of play.


DANCE VIEW/Marina Dolganova-Balanenko;   For a Russian, Modern Dance Is a New World
LEAD: For three weeks this summer, she was the first Soviet journalist to visit the American Dance Festival, in Durham, N.C.
This essay, written for The Times, was translated by Lynn Visson.


Murrow, Advocacy and the Medium's Power
LEAD: Hero-worship is not among the afflictions common to journalists; their profession leads more often to exposing clay feet than shining up halos.
But as ''Edward R. Murrow: This Reporter'' confirms, when journalists do find a hero, particularly in their own ranks, they do not stint on homage.
At moments, the otherwise absorbing two-part portrait that begins tomorrow night at 9 on P


The World;   Romania Isn't Trusted, Within Or Without
LEAD: After decades of eerily quiet summers under the dictator Nicolae Ceausescu, Bucharest faces a long hot summer.
Tens of thousands of university students have taken to the streets to demand the release of a leader charged with inciting disorder at protests in June.
Huge lines for meat and cheese stretch from bare-shelved stores onto the scorching streets while consumers grumble about hefty price increases for gasoline and bottled drinking water.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Berkeley Heights
$215,000
53 Twin Falls Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; h/w floors, screened porch, full basement; taxes $6,547.
Livingston
$135,000
43 Lincoln Avenue
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; 1-car garage, full basement, eat-in kitchen; taxes $2,607.


New Accounting Proposal Create Nonprofit Anxiety
LEAD: When a wealthy businessman said in 1986 he would donate $1.5 million to Princeton University, the school, as is usual for a nonprofit organization, decided not to show the revenues on its books until it had collected the money.
It is a good thing, because the donor, Ivan F. Boesky, the Wall Street arbitrager, was subsequently arrested on insider trading charges, putting him in no position to follow through on his pledge.


Lifestyle;   Earth Issues Lure a New Breed of Young Worker
LEAD: Greg Terwilliger is one of a new breed of young environmentalists - a graduate of Landfill University and a sanitation man with a master's degree in business administration.


Review/Jazz;   Two Young Saxophonists With a Taste for the 60's
LEAD: Jazz's younger generation is obsessed with the 1960's, when the music reached its greatest harmonic and rhythmic complexity and then burst wide open into modal and free jazz.
Christopher Hollyday and Courtney Pine, two saxophonists in their 20's who have steeped themselves in the music of the mid-60's, are sharing a bill through tonight at the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street.


Willie Loman In Elsinore?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Keeping Safe
LEAD: To the Editor: On a recent trip to Russia, my husband and I gained first-hand knowledge about its ever-increasing criminal element.


Campus Life: Kansas;   Suit Charges School's Waste Tainted a Well
LEAD: A suit charging that chemicals from a University of Kansas radioactive waste dump have leached into the well water of a home bordering the dump was filed in Federal District Court in Kansas City, Kan., last week.


Fewer Relocations, and Each Costs More
LEAD: WHEN a 38-year-old engineer in Minneapolis was offered a new position in the New York City area, he hesitated, although professionally it was a big career advancement.


Modern Pantheon Saves History's Words
LEAD: THE rare book and manuscript collection of Yale University began in 1701 with a handful of books contributed by 10 ministers who met to found a college in the Colony of Connecticut.
Over the decades, streams of other such gifts followed.
Today, the Yale collection has expanded to some 500,000 volumes and more than a million manuscripts, which are now housed in a temperature- and light-controlled granite-and-marble building on the campus.


Jennifer D. Stiles Engaged to Wed
LEAD: September wedding plans for Jennifer Daggett Stiles and Joseph David Morris have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
H.
William Stiles Jr. of Port Jefferson, L.I.
Mr.
Morris is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Max Morris of Cliffside Park, N.J.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 29, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom
Clancy. (Berkley, $5.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan
fights Colombian drug lords.
2
35
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.
(Warner, $4.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis
among a big city's politicians and lawyers.


Postings: Helping Homeowners;   5 Banks Contribute
LEAD: Five big Japanese banks with New York City offices have contributed $20,000 each to Neighborhood Housing Services, a nonprofit housing group, to help it assist low-income homeowners throughout the city in maintaining their properties.


&gt;LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD: Paying to Play in the Hamptons


Lisa Hulshizer Married to Eric Swats
LEAD: Lisa Mueller Hulshizer and Eric Nichols Swats were married yesterday at the Stanwich Congregational Church in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Neely H. Towe officiated.


Virginia Keeny, a Lawyer, Is Married To Sean K. Smith, a Ph.D. Candidate
LEAD: Virginia Keeny, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Spurgeon M. Keeny Jr. of Washington, was married yesterday in Los Angeles to Sean Kenneth Smith, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Kenneth D. Smith of New York.
Judge William A. Norris of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit officiated at the Wattles Mansion.


Fujimori Promises a Renewal in Peru
LEAD: Alberto Fujimori today was inaugurated President of Peru, which looks to him to lead it out of the bleakest days in its history.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Mentors Are for Skewering
LEAD:
RAIN IN THE WIND
Four Stories.
By Saiichi Maruya.
Translated by Dennis Keene.
234 pp. New York:
Kodansha International. $18.95.


The Nation;   Criminal Charges Against Managers Send a Message On Airline Safety
LEAD: When a Federal grand jury in Brooklyn handed up a 60-count indictment against Eastern Airlines charging faulty maintenance practices, Andrew J. Maloney, the United States Attorney, said the charges were meant ''to send a signal, not just to Eastern but to the entire industry.''


Jamaica
LEAD: To the Editor: Like another reader who was disappointed in one of the summer music festivals (Letters on Travel, May 6), I want to describe my experience with Jamaica's Reggae Sunsplash two years ago.


Nicole Bachmann to Marry
LEAD: Nicole Diane Bachmann, a daughter of Margot Bachmann and Eric R. Bachmann, both of New York, and Dr.
Thomas Newman Fromson, a son of Marjorie Fromson of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late David Fromson, plan to marry in December.
Miss Bachmann, 32 years old, graduated from the Dalton School and Hamilton College and has a master's degree in special education from Columbia University.


REAGAN'S AMERICA: A CAPITAL OFFENSE
LEAD: What exquisite hindsight!
Kevin P. Phillips has discovered that Reaganomics was nothing more than a scheme to enrich the rich at the expense of the rest of us (''Reagan's America: A Capital Offense,'' June 17).
Pity that he didn't catch on in 1980 or 1984, when his now apparent distaste for the scheme might have had some influence.


Innocence Among the Palms
LEAD:
NOVEMBER 1948
By Carl Dawson.
176 pp. Charlottesville:
University Press of Virginia. $17.95.


Nancy Nolan Is Married
LEAD: Nancy Francelia Nolan, a daughter of Mrs.
Charles D. Nolan and the late Mr.
Nolan of Wayzata, Minn., was married there yesterday to Timothy Andrew O'Neill, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew B. O'Neill of Queensbury, N.Y.
The Revs.
Thomas Kelly and John French performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.


Travel Advisory
LEAD: Underwater Park In Hawaii Acts To Reduce Crowds


How to Replace Ceiling Tiles
LEAD: ACOUSTICAL ceiling tiles, which are made of porous wood or mineral fibers, are commonly used both as new and replacement ceiling material.
Although easy to install and excellent for absorbing sound, such tiles are also soft, easily broken and often hard to clean.
Damaged or stained tiles generally must be replaced.


Answering the Mail
LEAD: Q. Our toilet takes a long time to flush and sometimes keeps on running.
The problem seems to be the float ball on the end of the float arm not clicking off when it gets to the top, and so the water keeps running into the tank.
What can I do to correct this?


DATA BANK/July 29, 1990
LEAD:
$
New Orders for Durable Goods
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
-3.2
4.2
-4.1
Employment Cost Index
June '90
March '90
Dec. '89
Year over year, increase in percent
5.2
5.5
5.0
Gross National Product
II Q'90
I Q'90
IV Q'89
Annual rate, 1982 dollars in bilions
$4,163.1
$4,150.6
$4,133.2
Gross National Product
Annual rate, current dollars in billions
$5,451.6
$5,375.4
5,289.3
Lumber Production
May
April
March
Millions of Board Feet
4,040
4,121
4,300
Truck Production
July 15-21
July 8-15


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: Current events evoke the past: the unbundling of the Soviet-dominated Eastern Bloc intersects with the 50th anniversaries of the spread of Nazi domination in Eastern Europe.


World Markets;   The Greek Market Takes Its Turn
LEAD: In the months since the narrow victory last April of the conservative Government of Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis, the Athens stock market has soared.
The tiny Greek market is up 200 percent for the year, and it is the leading performer by far this year in the group that analysts class as emerging stock markets.


No-Hitter Eludes Garrelts Of Giants
LEAD: Scott Garrelts, bidding for baseball's record eighth no-hitter of 1990, lost it with two outs in the ninth inning on a single by Paul O'Neill as the San Francisco Giants beat the Cincinnati Reds, 4-0, today.


The Wrong Medicine
LEAD: The clear possibility of a recession has been raised by revised Government figures showing that the economy struggled only to a 1.2 percent annual growth rate in the second quarter.
So why are White House and Congressional negotiators urging each other on to a tax increase?


Outdoors: The Kingly Sport of Salmon Fishing
LEAD: FOR the last 20 years, I have never fished for Atlantic salmon more than once or twice a year, and it may be that my relatively rare encounters with that marvelous game and food fish account for the fierce anticipation that precedes each excursion.


Student Loan Move Studied
LEAD: A taxpayer bailout of a troubled guarantor of student loans would not cost more than $100 million, an Education Department official said last week.


Allied Stores' Debt Plan
LEAD: The Allied Stores Corporation has received bankruptcy court approval of an unusual borrowing arrangement to help it continue operations through its Chapter 11 reorganization.


Venezuela Lifts Gasoline Prices
LEAD: After months of wavering, the Venezuelan Government said last week that it would raise domestic gasoline prices.
A similar move last year brought rioting.


Daniel Wins Golf Title


Fire Guts 85-Year-Old School
LEAD: An early morning fire today gutted the 85-year-old Cos Cob Elementary school, town officials said.
First Selectman John Marginot said the damage was extensive.
A fire dispatcher said he had seen only one room left standing.
The school, which was built in 1905 and was used for kindergarten through fourth grade, will not be open in September.


Lower Interest Rates Called Likely
LEAD: A strikingly weaker view of the economy than the one that existed just a few short days ago has altered psychology in the credit markets, increasing the chances that interest rates will move lower in the weeks ahead, analysts say.


Urban League Leader Calls Equality Essential to U.S.
LEAD: Citing projections that members of minorities will make up a larger and larger part of the nation's work force, the president of the National Urban League said last night that the United States must grant them equality not merely out of a moral imperative but for ''its own economic self-interest.''


Labor Dept. Wants to Take On Job Bias in the Executive Suite
LEAD: Even as it is fighting Congress over a major civil rights bill, the Bush Administration says it is looking for a way to curb job discrimination in a realm that the Government has never really touched: the white male echelon that rules the nation's largest corporations.


Treasury's Only Sale Will Be of Bills Today
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are limited to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late Friday the rate on the Treasury three-month bill was 7.54 percent and, for a six-month bill, it was 7.42 percent.


U.S. and Asian Allies Deadlock Over Boat People
LEAD: Three days of talks between the United States and its Southeast Asian allies have failed to break a deadlock on how to treat thousands of Vietnamese refugees who continue to arrive on foreign shores every year.


Heritage and Pageantry At Powwow in Queens
LEAD: More than 300 years after the Matinecock Indians traded away much of what is now eastern Queens, dancers in buckskin pants and feather headdresses swayed to the rhythm of drums during the weekend against a backdrop of Little Neck Parkway traffic.


Patrick Butler, Foundation Official, 89
LEAD: Patrick Butler, who helped establish the Hazelden Foundation as an international leader in the treatment of alcoholism and drug addiction, died Saturday after a four-month illness.
He was 89 years old.


Evolution in Europe;   Hungary Averts A Direct Ballot For Presidency
LEAD: Called on for the second time in less than a year to vote on how they want to elect a president, Hungarians stayed away from the polls in droves today, dashing the hopes of former Communists for a foothold in national politics.


An Office That Has the Capital's Ear
LEAD: When Congress suspects that an Administration has ignored or covered up a problem, it dispatches a collection of faceless auditors to investigate.
Typically, the General Accounting Office finds the problem worse than anyone suspected.


Istanbul Journal;   Where 16 Synagogues Stand Among the Minarets
LEAD: The carved portals of the Holy Ark are virtually brand-new at the Neve Shalom synagogue.
So are the stained-glass panels above it and the marble tiles on the surrounding wall and on the pulpit floor.


Amy B. Brown Is Wed To Brian Mendelsohn
LEAD: Amy Benson Brown, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Brown of Lancaster, S.C., and Brian Mendelsohn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Mendelsohn of Moorestown, N.J., were married yesterday at the home of the bridegroom's parents by Judge Jay Yoccum of the Moorestown Municipal Court.


Chronicle
LEAD: Shortly before leaving for a vacation in England last week, a multimillionaire couple from Farmington, Pa., were intrigued by a newspaper article they read about the buying of British titles.
So after settling in at Claridge's in London, JOSEPH A. HARDY and his wife, DOTTIE, asked their tour guide about the possibility.


Reunified Germany Offers Hope for the Future;   Why Not Frankfurt?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reunified Germany Offers Hope for the Future;   War-Crimes Suspect
LEAD: To the Editor:


Radio Freelancers in Israel Paid By Government-Supported Studio
LEAD: For the last four years, the Israeli Foreign Ministry and a Jerusalem radio studio have run a covert program in which radio reporters were hired by the studio and given Government guidance on what they should report to radio stations around the world, participants in the program and other Government officials say.


GOVERNORS ASSAIL PROPOSAL FOR LID ON TAX DEDUCTIONS
LEAD: The nation's governors, Democrats and Republicans alike, today attacked a proposal to limit the amount of state and local income taxes that could be deducted on Federal tax returns as yet another attempt by the Bush Administration to push more of the burden of closing the budget gap onto states.


Watching the Work of Playing Music
LEAD: In 1983, the New York Philharmonic closed its season with a two-week series of Horizons concerts and symposiums, which explored recent scores of a lush, Romantic sort.
In the seasons that followed, neo-Romanticism remained the central focus, with other current styles added for perspective, but in 1987, the orchestra dropped the series.


Deadlock Is Broken on California's Budget
LEAD: The California Legislature, breaking a record 28-day deadlock, has sent Gov.
George Deukmejian a $55 billion budget and 18 related bills on fees, taxes, savings, budget cutting and prisons.


Lageman Making Noticeable Changes
LEAD: The Andrew Dice Clay T-shirt was gone today, but Jeff Lageman was still wearing the pony tail, the ripped blue jeans, riding his Harley Davidson and building his reputation as the unforgettable character of the Jets' camp.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
International Report


Reviews/Music;   Twists On Works Of Mozart
LEAD: Perversely yet predictably, the numbing sense of routine that has at times crept into the Mostly Mozart Festival over the years has particularly affected the most familiar works of Mozart himself, pieces like the ''Serenata Notturna'' (K. 239) and the Symphony No. 39, which opened and closed the concerts on Friday and Saturday evenings at Avery Fisher


Agreement on Monitoring 6 School Goals
LEAD: Governors at their annual meeting approved a plan today to monitor the progress of national education goals, but only after they were assured that the monitoring committee would include more governors.


Photo: Joe Falcon winning the mile ahead of Maurice Smith and Marcus O'Sullivan yesterday at the New York Games. (Michelle V. Agins) Track and Field;   Lewis Triumphant Despite the Winds
LEAD: Stiff winds slowed some record attempts, but Carl Lewis, Joe Falcon, Ana Quirot, Danny Everett and Greg Foster all turned in strong performances yesterday at the second New York Games, bolstering hopes for the meet's future.


On Your Own;   A 3-Piece Rowing Shell
LEAD: A boat designer from Noank, Conn., has created a rowing shell that can be split into three pieces so it can be carried and easily stored.
Robert Champlain, the shell's inventor, said his shell took about 10 minutes to put together.
Fully assembled, it is 20 feet 3 inches long.
When the three parts of the hull are put one inside the other, the unit is 7 feet long and 23 inches wide.


Golf;   U.S. Wins, 14-4, Taking Curtis Cup
LEAD: The United States recaptured the Curtis Cup, the most prestigious international event for female amateur golfers, with a 14-4 victory over the Britain-Ireland team today at Somerset Hills Country Club.


Most New York Teachers Back Power Sharing
LEAD: To the Editor:


Metro Matters;   Which Mayor Knows Best On the Boycott?
LEAD: Who's right about how best to end the boycott by black protesters against a Korean-owned grocery store in Brooklyn: Mayor David N. Dinkins or his predecessor, Edward I. Koch?


Peaceful Waters
LEAD: FOR the last month, 15 teen-age Soviet sailors have been getting a taste of sailing American-style from such bastions of capitalism as the Larchmont and Stamford yacht clubs.
At the same time, a similar number of American boys and girls from Westchester, Long Island and Connecticut have been competing in waters off the Soviet


Chronicle
LEAD: After five whirlwind days in Washington, JUDGE DAVID H. SOUTER, PRESIDENT BUSH'S nominee to the United States Supreme Court, got a lift home to New Hampshire aboard Air Force One as the President headed for his summer home in Kennebunkport, Me.


Brazil Shifts Debt's Priority
LEAD: President Fernando Collor de Mello says the Government will give precedence to economic recovery and growth over the payment of foreign debt, according to press reports published today.


Nose Gear Collapses at Kennedy Landing
LEAD: The nose gear of a Pan Am Express plane from Boston carrying 44 people collapsed as the plane landed at Kennedy International Airport yesterday, but there were no injuries, officials said.


Jennifer Ginsberg Weds P.E. Libre
LEAD: Jennifer Rachel Ginsberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert I. Ginsberg of Norwalk, Conn., was married yesterday to Dr.
Peter Eugene Libre, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Eugene P. Libre of Bethesda, Md.
Robert Gillette, a justice of the peace and leader of the Congregation for Humanistic Judaism of Fairfield County, officiated at the Unitarian Church in Westport,


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This case is important to the United States of America, because it shows that those who sit in the ivory tower of society, the bankers in the gray suits, they don't touch the dope, but they should know that if they violate the law and they are convicted, they're going to jail.''
- Mark Jackowski,a Federal prosecutorin Tampa.


Golf;   Player Makes a Stand
LEAD: In 1969, anti-apartheid demonstrators at the P.G.A.
Championship in Dayton, Ohio, threw a drink in Gary Player's face.
This year, Player is siding with the protesters.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Amoco Corp., Chicago, the chemical and fuel company, named James A. Maish president of the Amoco International Development Co.
William L. Wishlinski will replace him as president of the Amoco Chemical Co. in Europe.


Premier of Trinidad Offers to Quit if Rebels End Coup
LEAD: Trinidad and Tobago's security chief said today there was scant hope of an early breakthrough in negotiations for the release of Prime Minister Arthur N .R.
Robinson, who was taken hostage on Friday in a coup attempt by Muslim rebels and reportedly wired to explosives.


For Steinbrenner, Waiting May End Today;   Yanks' Profits Not Just Gravy
LEAD: George Steinbrenner's New York Yankees may by an artistic flop, but financially they not only lead the major leagues but also appear to have become the major source of cash to support Steinbrenner's foundering business empire.


Raise Taxes, or Punish Big Cities?
LEAD: Now that President Bush has grudgingly accepted the idea of tax increases, Congress at last is tackling the dirty job of proposing which taxes to hike and by how much.
Last week, the White House and senior Congressional Republicans floated a plan to limit the amount individuals can deduct for state and local income taxes.


Lebanon Battles Block Red Cross Ambulances
LEAD: Artillery exchanges between rival Muslim Shiite factions prevented Red Cross rescue teams from evacuating dead and wounded in southern Lebanon today as the main Amal militia force consolidated strategic positions it captured from the pro-Iranian opposition.


Evolution in Europe;   East Europe's Gypsies: Unwanted Refugees
LEAD: The week that the Calderash family decided the town of Lugoj,, in Romania, was too unsafe for gypsies, they sold their horses and pigs, packed some bags and boarded a bus going west.


Results Plus
LEAD:
Golf
Title for a Rallying Beck: Chip Beck, rallying from an eight-shot deficit, shot a 65 yesterday and won the Buick Open in Grand Blanc, Mich., when Hale Irwin missed a tying putt on the 72d hole.
Beck's 72-hole score was 272, 16 under par for four rounds over the 7,014-yard Warwick Hills Golf and Country Club course.


Student Dies; Whose Fault, Japanese Ask
LEAD: It was a few seconds before the start of high school, and as usual several students were dashing to arrive before the close of the entrance gate.
But this time, a 15-year-old girl fell, and a teacher slammed a heavy metal gate into her head.
She died later of a concussion.


British Esquire Planned
LEAD: A British edition of Esquire magazine will make its debut next March, the Hearst Magazine Company said last week.
Lee Eisenberg, Esquire's editor in chief, will be the new magazine's editor.
Esquire, a life-style magazine for men with a monthly circulation of 734,000, is also published under foreign licenses in West Germany, Hong Kong, Japan and Italy.


In Marrow Donor Lawsuit, Altruism Collides With Right to Protect Child
LEAD: A father's efforts to save his leukemia-stricken son with the bone marrow of the boy's half-siblings has ignited a court fight here and raised the question of whether society should compel to help others.


Review/Pop;   The Blue Nile's Mystical, Majestic Ballads
LEAD: In ''The Downtown Lights,'' one of several majestic ballads on the Blue Nile's recent album, ''Hats,'' Paul Buchanan, the Scottish folk trio's lyricist and lead singer, invites a companion to share his vision of the evening cityscape as a map of love.


Ban Lifted, Communists Gather in South Africa
LEAD: Despite the retreat of its ideological allies in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, the South African Communist Party re-launched itself as an open movement today - 40 years after it was outlawed as a threat to Afrikaner nationalism and white minority rule.


Goodwill Games;   Twin Swimmers in Harmony
LEAD: Sarah is more ambitious, wears more conservative clothes and feels more inhibited in large groups.
She also has more freckles.
Karen has a more sarcastic sense of humor, takes a more casual approach to life and is less sure about her future.
Her haircut is funkier.


5 Swimmers in Niagara Almost Take a Big Dip
LEAD: A quick dip could have been fatal for five French youths who went snorkeling Saturday about 150 feet from the brink of Niagara Falls, the police said.


Y.&amp; R. Fills Position In Government Relations
LEAD: Young &amp; Rubicam has named John Rindlaub, a senior vice president, as director of industry and government relations, a new position.
The agency noted the ''increasing pressure'' on advertisers from governmental bodies, and the recent naming of Alexander Kroll, its chairman and chief executive, as vice chairman of the American Association of Advertising


Chronicle
LEAD: ZSA ZSA GABOR spent the weekend in jail, but might have enjoyed it more if the meals had been catered and she'd been able to bring one of her fur coats.


Alaska Road's Opening Starts Battle
LEAD: The Mount McKinley Gold Camp looks more like a gravel pit than a campground, but it has an unusual attraction: It sits at the end of a forbidden 92-mile road that Alaskans have longed to drive.


Reunified Germany Offers Hope for the Future
LEAD: To the Editor:


North's Prosecutors, in Shift of Strategy, Consider an Appeal
LEAD: Stung by a Federal appeals court decision that set aside Oliver L. North's conviction on three charges and overturned another outright, Iran-contra prosecutors are increasingly pessimistic that they can meet the appellate panel's rigorous standards to prove that their case was not influenced by Mr.


On Your Own;   Fat-Tire Bikers Try to Behave
LEAD: THE scene is a hiker's nightmare.
You are taking a quiet walk in the woods on a summer afternoon.
Suddenly, a mountain biker comes barreling around the next bend in the trail, head down, feet hard on the pedals.
You shout to him to slow down.
He won't.


Tennis;   U.S. Tops Soviet Union To Win Federation Cup
LEAD: With Gigi Fernandez providing a fresh spark and Zina Garrison recovering from a loss in singles, the United States gained a 6-4, 6-3 doubles victory over the Soviet Union today to win its 14th Federation Cup tennis title in 28 years.


For Steinbrenner, Waiting May End Today;   Suspension Called Likely
LEAD: The ramifications of two December events six years apart will converge today when Commissioner Fay Vincent, barring a last-minute snag, announces his decision in the George Steinbrenner case.


Television;   Risks of Being Shot Down Are Rising for the Networks
LEAD: THE fall television season, always billed as a time of high promise, looms this year as a time of high risk for the networks.


Books of The Times;   On Putting Pen to Paper, Or Fingers to Keyboard
LEAD:
On Writing
Advice for Those Who Write to Publish (or Would Like To)
By George V. Higgins
227 pages. Henry Holt. $19.95.


Problems Could Delay Proposal By Oregon to Ration Health Care
LEAD: Oregon's effort to become the first state to ration government health care based on a list that gives priority to preventive measures has run into problems and could be delayed as long as a year.


Looting and 3 Fire Deaths Follow Blackout in Chicago
LEAD: Looting broke out overnight on the West Side after a fire at a generating plant left 40,000 customers without electricity, the authorities said today.


Review/Television;   CNN Documents 'a Fiscal Disaster'
LEAD: ''S.&amp; L.'s: The Full Story'' distributes blame evenfistedly among Democrats and Republicans, in the White House and in Congress, for what it calls ''a fiscal disaster.'' Tonight's punchy program, at 9 on CNN, is the first prime-time hour produced by the cable network's new special assignment division, headed by Pamela Hill, the former ABC


Raiders Seeking An Identity
LEAD: NOT long ago, the saying goes, the Los Angeles Raiders' arrival in town meant locking up your children.
The Raiders were nasty, dirty, physical and tough.
The Raiders, in their black and silver uniforms, exuded confidence from the moment they emerged from the tunnel until the final gun, and they were always entertaining, seemingly always on top.


Game Shows Return as Prime-Time Contestants
LEAD: During the 1950's, ''The $64,000 Question'' and ''Twenty-One'' were big hits on prime-time televison.
That era is long gone, but the appearance of ''Super Jeopardy'' and ''Monopoly'' on Saturday evenings this summer on ABC has rekindled hopes among some producers that game shows are coming back to prime time.


Reunified Germany Offers Hope for the Future;   Beyond Metternich
LEAD: To the Editor:


Evolution in Europe;   Private Lesson on Moscow Potholes
LEAD: The new governing powers of this abominably potholed city have rebuffed the state's sluggish road workers and hired an aggressive private contractor to repave Moscow's Ring Road as a kind of giant advertisement for can-do capitalism.


Calls for Economic Changes Rise Among Chinese Officials
LEAD: After a two-year freeze on the process of opening China's state-controlled economy to market forces, a growing number of Chinese economic officials are openly calling for a wave of changes, arguing that without further liberalization China's march toward development may reverse.


Americans Know Better
LEAD: To the Editor:


If You Wash Diapers
LEAD: To the Editor:


Reviews/Dance;   Australian Ballet Presents A Veteran as Spartacus . . .
LEAD: The Australian Ballet invited Gyorgy Szakaly, a principal dancer with the Hungarian State Ballet, to take on the title role of Laszlo Seregi's ''Spartacus'' on Saturday afternoon at the Metropolitan Opera House.


How Not to Honor Malcolm X
LEAD: An unusual coalition of preservationists, civil rights advocates and militant groups is threatening a worthwhile project that would benefit all New Yorkers.
At issue is the future of the Audubon Theater and Ballroom, where Malcolm X was assassinated 25 years ago.


On Hills, It Was Like Riding a Kangaroo
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sports of The Times;   The Fire This Times
LEAD: A DISCREET but firm sign at the driveway entrance to the resplendent Winged Foot Country Club in Mamaroneck, a leafy suburb of New York, reads ''Private.''


Strong, Silent Resurgence Of the Old Manual Mower
LEAD: Even as the price of gasoline-powered lawn mowers has dropped in recent years, more people have been turning to the old manual mower, apparently enjoying the exercise it affords and its quiet operation.


Golf;   Daniel Captures L.P.G.A. Crown
LEAD: Beth Daniel shot a 66 today to overcome a five-shot deficit and win the Ladies Professional Golf Association Championship, her first major title in 12 years on the tour.


Gooden Is Back In Top Form
LEAD: For Dwight Gooden, the moments of truth that would make up perhaps the most important 48 hours of his season began late last Friday afternoon, hidden from public view deep in the bullpen at Shea Stadium.


Overseeing East German Transition
LEAD: A year ago, Walter Romberg was a mathematics professor with an interest in economics.
Today, he is East Germany's Finance Minister, faced with melding his nation's moribund economy with West Germany's economic juggernaut.


Charles C. Bassine, Businessman, 81
LEAD: Charles C. Bassine, a businessman who was a benefactor and trustee of number of New York City hospitals, died on Friday at St.
Mary's Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 81 years old and lived in Palm Beach.
He died of cancer, his daughter said.
Mr.
Bassine was the former chairman of Spartan Industries, a sportswear company that merged with E.J.


Account
LEAD: * Polaroid Corp., to Siboney Advertising, New York, for Hispanic marketing.


Lender Backs Raynes Deal
LEAD: Martin J. Raynes, the New York real estate broker and converter of cooperatives, has reached a tentative agreement with his leading bank lender that will reduce his equity interest in the troubled Lincoln Towers, a huge cooperative conversion project on the West Side of Manhattan, bankers said yesterday.


A Crumbling Pool Divides a Neighborhood
LEAD: Larger than a football field and graced with majestic architecture, the McCarren Park swimming pool was considered a wondrous place when it opened in Brooklyn in 1936.


Review/Opera;   An East-West 'War and Peace' Is Part Lyricism, Part Realism
LEAD: Although the Goodwill Games have been a box-office misfortune so far, reportedly running more than $20 million in the red, at least one of this host city's gestures in behalf of East-West understanding has been an astonishing success.
The Seattle Opera's $2 million production of Prokofiev's rarely performed ''War and Peace,'' an ambitious effort to squeeze Tolstoy's sprawling novel into a theatrical frame, is playing to sold-out houses and earning roaring approval from audiences.


Evolution in Europe;   4 European Nations Planning a New Focus on North Africa
LEAD: Increasingly alarmed by the potential for unrest in North Africa, four southern European nations have begun organizing a major international initiative to bolster political stability and economic development in the Mediterranean region.


Sports World Specials
LEAD:
HARNESS RACING
Some Horseplay With a Twist


Ms. Magazine Returns With New Spirit, but Without Ads
LEAD: Ms. magazine is back.
Or, as the people at Ms. like to put it, the post-patriarchal magabook has arrived.


Reunified Germany Offers Hope for the Future;   The Constant Phoenix
LEAD: To the Editor:


Fleet of Foot Slowed by Winds as They Compete in New York Games


Bruno Kreisky, Austria's Leader For a Record 13 Years, Dies at 79
LEAD: Bruno Kreisky, who dominated Austria's public life as the nation's longest-serving Chancellor from 1970 to 1983, died yesterday at Lainz Hospital in Vienna.
He was 79 years old.





Another Survivor Is Rescued From Philippine Hotel Ruins
LEAD: Rescue teams recovered a man alive today from the ruins of an earthquake-shattered hotel in the Philippines.
He had been buried for 14 days, radio reports said.


Metro Datelines;   Gypsy-Cab Driver Fatally Shot in Bronx
LEAD: A Bronx gypsy-cab driver was shot and killed Saturday night when two men tried to rob him, the police said.


Metro Datelines;   Car in a Drag Race Kills 2 in Brooklyn
LEAD: One of two cars drag-racing on a street in the East New York section of Brooklyn went out of control last night and killed two men who were watching the race, the police said.


Hanoi Aide, Praising U.S., Sees Hope of Cambodia Pact
LEAD: Reacting to the American policy shift on Cambodia 11 days ago, Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam said today that he was optimistic about a settlement of the Cambodian conflict.
He said Hanoi agreed with Washington that the main issue now was how to get to ''free, fair and democratic elections under international supervision.


Where Price-Cutting Causes Pain
LEAD: The growling of lawn mowers, that ubiquitous sound of suburban summers, is music to the ears of executives at the Briggs &amp; Stratton Corporation, the world's largest maker of lawn mower engines.
Briggs engines made here have been the heart of American mowers for generations.


Siege at a London Nightclub
LEAD: A gunman took more than 100 hostages in a nightclub here early today and demanded to be flown to Beirut before surrendering 10 hours later, the police said.
The gunman was finally persuaded to leave his last six hostages and walk to the top of a flight of stairs, where officers were waiting, a police superintendent, Alex Edwards, said.


Ms. Ornstein Wed To Robert Carter
LEAD: Holly Anne Ornstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Ornstein of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Robert Mitchell Carter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Carter of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Judge Peter C. Dorsey of the United States District Court in Hartford, officiated at the Indian Harbor Yacht Club in Greenwich.


Absolute Power? Yes, Absolutely
LEAD: During a hearing before Commissioner Fay Vincent on July 6, George Steinbrenner engaged in a philosophical discussion with Vincent on the powers that enable a commissioner to investigate any act suspected to be ''not in the best interests of baseball,'' powers that have led to the commissioner's inquiry into the


Business Scene;   So Far, No Shock For Consumers
LEAD: AMERICAN consumers rarely cause a recession.
Even when their incomes are barely rising, which is the case today, they somehow manage to spend enough to keep the economy afloat.
Only a national shock seems to frighten them into cutting back so drastically that a recession becomes unavoidable.
And so far in 1990, that shock has not come.


Metro Datelines;   F.A.A. Investigating Stratford Airport
LEAD: The Federal Aviation Administration is investigating Sikorsky Memorial Airport after discovering what it said were serious violations in management and safety.


Barrie Goldstein Is Married To Justin Steffin Ebersman
LEAD: Barrie Lynn Goldstein, an assistant New York State Attorney General, was married yesterday to Justin Steffin Ebersman, the director of investment sales and a vice president of the Sulzberger-Rolfe real-estate company in New York.
Murray Kessler, a justice of the peace of New Milford, Conn., officiated at the couple's weekend home in Roxbury,


A Family Farm Since 1785 Holds On
LEAD: When Art and Phyllis Lain sell their last cows in August, their Orange County farm will be added to the statistics of former dairy farms.
Unlike the others, though, it will remain in agriculture, continuing as one of the oldest farms in the United States still being worked by the same family.


Review/Concert;   Where Chamber Music Is Learned and Performed
LEAD: For 40 summers, music's young professionals and advanced amateurs have been coming to the tiny campus of Marlboro College to get away from concert halls, managers, press agents and the people who write reviews like this one.


After Heady 1980's, Homeowners Face a Hangover of Foreclosure
LEAD: Mortgage foreclosures are soaring in the New York metropolitan region as growing numbers of property owners are overwhelmed by crushing real-estate debt.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of July 29:
MONDAY
Armstrong World Inds.
Baxter Intl.
Csldtd Freightways
Duke Pwr. Co.
Foster Wheeler Corp.
Georgia Pac. Corp.
Kennametal Inc.
Philadelphia Subn. Corp.
U.S. Surgical Corp.
United Technologies Corp.


Bridge
LEAD: A tough battle for the Spingold Knockout Team title was in prospect today at the conclusion of the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
Contending were teams led by Jim Cayne of Manhattan and John Mahaffey of Winter Park, Fla., and after 42 deals of a scheduled 64 Mahaffey led Cayne by 39 international match points.


Washington Talk;   Hot Words Of a Justice Are Hardly A Surprise
LEAD: It is so rare for a Supreme Court Justice to speak up in any manner about public affairs that jaws dropped last week when Justice Thurgood Marshall let loose with a string of acerbic comments on the latest Supreme Court nomination.


Yanks Take Two From the Indians
LEAD: Hours before the Yankees would complete a doubleheader sweep for the second time in three days, one potentially memorable instant at the conclusion of 3 hours and 40 minutes of slipshod baseball allowed the long-tormented fans of the Cleveland Indians to respond to the crack of Candy Maldonado's bat with a sound somewhere between a gasp and a shriek.


Tool Orders Rose 27.2% Last Month
LEAD: Reflecting a surge in exports, orders for American-made machine tools rose 27.2 percent in June from the level of May, the industry's trade association says in its monthly report.
But economists cautioned that the rise did not reflect significantly higher spending on capital improvements in the United


Airport Project Shows Hong Kong's Unease
LEAD: As planes land at Kai Tak airport here, they swoosh down close enough to the windows of buildings to make passengers feel like peeping Toms.


Gail Anne Berson Weds in Providence
LEAD: Gail Anne Berson, the executive director of admission and student aid at Wheaton College in Norton, Mass., was married yesterday to Jay Selwyn Goodman, a professor of political science at Wheaton.
Rabbi Leslie I. Gutterman officiated at Temple Beth El in Providence, R.I.


Mourners Returned Fire, Police Say
LEAD: Mourners at a gang member's funeral apparently shot back at the two or three men, believed to be from rival groups, who opened fire at graveside in what law-enforcement officials say is an escalating Chinatown feud.


Ex-Banker to Noriega Is Convicted In Scheme to Aid Drug Traffickers
LEAD: A former personal banker for the ousted leader of Panama, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, was convicted along with five other people today in a scheme to launder $32 million in profits for major Colombian cocaine traffickers.


Elections in Mongolia Challenge Communist Rule


Question Box
LEAD:
First on the Fourth


Stanhome's New Chief Began With Summer Job
LEAD: Alejandro Diaz Vargas, who first worked for Stanhome Inc. in a summer job in a distribution center in Puerto Rico, has been named the company's chief executive, arriving at the top post at the age of 45.


Reviews/Dance;   . . . And Newcomer to Role
LEAD: With his mop of blond curls and his relatively slight build, Greg Horsman would not seem a likely choice for the title role in ''Spartacus,'' the story of a larger-than-life hero who led a slave rebellion against the Romans in 74 B.C.
But Mr.
Horsman offered a thoroughly convincing interpretation of the character when the Australian Ballet presented ''Spartacus'' on Saturday night at the Metropolitan Opera House, in a production choreographed by Laszlo


People
LEAD: *
Michael Cannon has been appointed president and chief executive of FCB/Maqueda, Mexico.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-7


Nader Brings 'Community TV' to Buffalo
LEAD: When Buffalo's cable-television system agreed this year to carry a local low-power television station, Channel 58, one of the companies that provides the station with syndicated programming raised the rates it charged to reflect the larger audience.


Mortgage Rate Down
LEAD: Interest on fixed-rate mortgages averaged 9.98 percent last week, down from 9.99 percent the previous week, according to a national survey released last week by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
It was the second consecutive week that fixed-rate mortgages were below 10 percent.
The last time that occurred was in mid-January.


Sanders Refuses To Repay Falcons
LEAD: Upset by the confrontational posture of one of his two employers, Deion Sanders, the sometimes Yankee outfielder and at-other-times Falcons defensive back, said today he would not return a portion of his $2 million signing bonus to the Atlanta club if he decides to extend his baseball commitment into the football season.


Cuomo Assailed By Daily News On Labor Panel
LEAD: The Daily News criticized Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday in an editorial, saying he had ordered the creation of a ''completely unjustified'' fact-finding panel to look into the labor dispute at the newspaper.


Jonathan Miller Resigns As Director of Old Vic
LEAD: Dr.
Jonathan Miller will resign as the artistic director of the Old Vic when the current season ends in March, the owner of the theater has announced.


American League;   Red Sox Set Doubles Record
LEAD: Boston set an American League record with 12 doubles, 3 of them hit by Wade Boggs, who also drove in 4 runs, as the Red Sox beat the Detroit Tigers today, 13-3.


The Editorial Notebook;   Cracks in the Colossus
LEAD: Washington has staked a lot of money on big-science programs like the Freedom Space Station, the Superconducting Supercollider and the Human Genome Project.
These mighty ventures are cast in the mold of such past triumphs as the Manhattan Project to develop atomic weapons or Project Apollo to land men on the moon.


Hurricane Weakens to Storm
LEAD: The first hurricane of the 1990 Atlantic storm season, was downgraded to a tropical storm this evening as it headed toward open ocean.
Forecasters said the storm, Hurricane Bertha, could kick up high surf along the Southeast coast.
Born as a tropical depression off northeast Florida, Bertha grew quickly Saturday into a storm with winds of 75 miles an hour.


Rider Retains Jump Title
LEAD: Heisman and his rider, Michael Matz of Collegeville, Pa., won the $100,000 Crown Royal Grand Prix for show jumpers at today's closing session of the annual Hampton Classic Horse Show.
Matz also won the event last year, aboard Schnapps.


Queens Boy, 3, Killed by Car
LEAD: A boy celebrating his third birthday Saturday night was struck and killed by a car driven by a drunken driver in front of his home in Ozone Park, Queens, the police said.
The boy, Anthony Jabar, was pronounced dead at the scene at 104-53 124th Street.
The driver, Peter Soomdat, 19, of Jersey City N.J., was charged with driving while intoxicated, the police said.


Federal Beer Tax Hike Is Just Piling It On
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Modern-Dance Troupe in China Stretches the Limits of Tradition
LEAD: In the right hands, official restraint has long served as the subject of penetrating art, an old lesson that was taught with renewed poignancy here this week in the powerful debut of China's first modern-dance troupe.


India Trying To Shore Up Its Tourism
LEAD: The shutdown of the major tourist attractions in the Kashmir because of violence there and an overbooked domestic airline have forced the Indian Government to take new steps to bolster its tourist industry.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Busch Spots Fight Rise In Beer Tax
LEAD: ONE of the newest campaigns from Anheuser-Busch is steeped in ''America the beautiful'' sentiment, with shots of farmers walking through their fields and working men at lunch, as an announcer explains how the country was built by people willing to give their fair share.


Low-Budget Candidate Pressing Campaign in Connecticut
LEAD: Never mind that William J. Cibes Jr. had only $44 in his campaign account for governor as recently as the middle of this month, or that he thinks the state needs an income tax on wages to make wealthy people pay more, or that few Connecticut residents know who he is anyway.
Mr.
Cibes is the low-budget candidate who roared.


A Concert With a Backdrop of Green Leaves and Blue Skies
LEAD: Photo: City dwellers who strolled along Central Park West and 77th Street enjoying yesterday's sunny skies and humid temperatures were treated to an impromtu concert of rock music by a group of street musicians.
Today is expected to be humid again, with temperatures in the high 80's.
The statue at left is of Friedrich Heinrich Alexander von Humboldt, the German naturalist and explorer.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday
Personal Income . . . June
Tuesday
Farm Prices . . . June
New-Home Sales . . . June
Wednesday
Construction Spending . . . June
Leading Indicators . . .


Civilians Flee Monrovia as Rebels Advance


Native Americans Hold Annual Powwow in Queens


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Figure in Contra Aid Effort Says Bush Reportedly Knew of It in '86
LEAD: An organizer of the secret supply network for the Nicaraguan rebels says he was told that Vice President George Bush was informed of the illegal operation in 1986.
That assertion has been repeatedly denied, not only by Mr.
Bush, but also by several other participants in the operation.


Emigres in New York Trying To Reach Families in Trinidad
LEAD: New Yorkers with family and friends in Trinidad and Tobago said yesterday that they had spent the last three days hunched over telephones trying to make contact with loved ones in the island nation.


Slow Book Sales? Off to the Shops!
LEAD: Isabel Geffner spent two days at the Shakespeare &amp; Company bookstore on the Upper West Side of Manhattan last week, unpacking boxes of books, stocking shelves, setting up displays and fielding questions from customers about what to read on vacation and where to find a book entitled ''Sex After Sixty'' - a ''gift book,'' the customer stressed.


Accepting The Blame;   In a Scandal, Should The Top Heads Roll?
LEAD: In a number of recent cases involving questionable corporate practices, chief executives have chosen not to abide by Harry S. Truman's credo.
The buck stopped with someone lower down.


Desiree Coleman, Singer and Actress, Weds Mark Jackson, Basketball Player
LEAD: Desiree Coleman, a singer and actress, and Mark Jackson, the point guard with the New York Knicks, were married yesterday at the Allen African Methodist Episcopal Church in Jamaica, Queens.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Floyd H. Flake, the Democratic Representative from the Sixth Congressional District in Queens, who is the pastor of the Allen church, and the Rev.


Israel Seizes 8 Arabs In Bombing at Beach That Killed a Tourist
LEAD: The police in Tel Aviv arrested eight Palestinians from the occupied territories today on suspicion of planting a pipe bomb on a crowded beach that killed a young Canadian and wounded 18 other people on Saturday.


Sharon Steel Pact Reached
LEAD: Victor Posner, the Miami financier, has agreed to pay the Sharon Steel Corporation $7.5 million to settle legal actions against him by the company and its creditors, a Federal Bankruptcy Court trustee says.


Robin B. Cooper, A Student, Weds
LEAD: Robin Beth Cooper, a student at the Minnesota School for Professional Psychology in Minneapolis, and John Howland Fleming, an assistant professor of social psychology at the University of Minnesota, were married yesterday at the Sheraton Meadowlands in East Rutherford, N.J.
Rabbi Shimon Berris and the Rev.


The New Arrivals; Immigrants Reshape New York;   Young Immigrant Wave Lifts New York Economy
LEAD: For the fourth time in its history, New York City is being resettled and reshaped by migration.


President of Soviet Republic Seeks U.S. Business Deals
LEAD: Like a one-man chamber of commerce, the President of Kazakhstan, the second-largest republic in the Soviet Union, is trying to convince Americans that his mineral-rich region would be a good place to do business.


Goodwill Games;   Yugoslavia Tops U.S. in Final
LEAD: Yugoslavia's basketball team lost one player to a an apparent sprained ankle and two centers to personal fouls tonight but had enough poise and depth to defeat the United States, 85-79, in the final of the Goodwill Games tonight.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Negotiations in Trinidad
A Goivernment official said there was little hope for an early resolution in talks with rebels holding the Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago and others hostage in a coup attempt that began on Friday.
Page A7.
Bruno Kreisky Is Dead
Bruno Kreisky, who dominated Austrian public life from 1970 to 1983 as the nation's longest-serving Chancellor, and who gave his neutral nation a strong voice in foreign affairs, has died.


Decision on Steinbrenner;   A Finding Based On 2 Key Premises
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the text of the decision by Commissioner Fay Vincent in the matter of George Steinbrenner.
Commissioner's Decision


Our Towns;   Locking Up Town Openness With a Deadbolt
LEAD: Political squabbles in Milan used to be the generic small-town sort; the Democrats fought with the Republicans, the year-round folks fought with the weekenders and everyone fought about the leaky landfill.
That was before Vince Scelba was elected town supervisor.


Bat-Swinging Man Attacks 2 Strolling Inside Central Park
LEAD: A man and a woman were beaten by a man wielding a bat as they walked near Conservatory Pond in Central Park last night, the police said.


Gorbachev Must Hurry
LEAD: Mikhail Gorbachev pulled the plug that choked the Soviet system.
Now other people are swarming to the surface with ideas that go far beyond his program for reform.
They are no longer talking about reform, but about ''a fundamental new approach.''


Tough Abortion Law at Issue
LEAD: The fight over the toughest state abortion law in the nation entered Federal Court today as a group of doctors and abortion clinics asked a judge to throw out main sections of the law.


Stocks Up on Belief in an Interest Rate Cut
LEAD: A growing belief that the Federal Reserve may take steps to lower interest rates to revitalize the economy pushed stock prices higher yesterday.


The Message of Stray Bullets
LEAD: There is no evidence that Ben Williams, age 3, Yaritimi Fruto, age 1, or Veronica Corales, age 9, ever knew each other in life.
But the three New York City children are linked in death: during a single week, all were innocent victims of gunfire intended for others.


Fernandez At 6 Months
LEAD: Joseph A. Fernandez is running up against the jagged realities of the New York City school system.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Control Data Corp., Minneapolis, the computer maker, completed the sale of its printed circuits operation to Acsist Associates Inc. for undisclosed terms.


Squabbling Italian Coalition Holds On
LEAD: When Italy took over the six-month rotating presidency of the European Community on July 1, it looked as if the Government of Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti had found itself a model insurance policy.


Connie Chung to Scale Back Series
LEAD: In a setback for the third-ranked network's news division, CBS News announced yesterday that the newsmagazine series anchored by Connie Chung would be replaced on its fall prime-time schedule at Ms.
Chung's request.


Foes of Abortion View 'Right to Die' As Second Battle Over Life and Death
LEAD: Invoking a familiar refrain, the speaker at an anti-abortion convention here condemned ''the taking of innocent human life,'' and urged a passionate battle against what she said history would record as ''the most horrible story of the 21st century.''


When 'Bum' Becomes 'Bomb,' a Bus Becomes a Bedlam
LEAD: It all started when a passenger on a Greyhound bus shouted, ''There's a bum in the bathroom!''


Evolution in Europe;   Prague Priest Worries How Churches Will Use Liberty
LEAD: Last November, the Rev.
Vaclav Maly was a revolutionary.
Now he is a pastor.
Once a leading spokesman for the Civic Forum movement, which toppled Czechoslovakia's Communist Government, the young Roman Catholic priest passed up the prospect of a Government post to take charge of a parish in a working-class section of


Tisha B'av, a Fast Day, Helps Bridge Judaism's Secular and Religious Sides
LEAD: For some people Judaism is a culture; for others a religion.


Rising Incidence of Brain Tumors Is Drawing Attention and Concern
LEAD: A BRAIN tumor has long been the most terrifying of malignancies, feared for its lethality and its position at the source of all thought and emotion.
And now experts say the incidence of brain cancer may be on the rise.


Liberia Troops Accused Of Massacre in Church
LEAD: Hundreds of men, women and children who had taken refuge in a church here were massacred on Sunday evening, witnesses said today.
The witnesses said the slayings were carried out by troops loyal to President Samuel K. Doe, whose Government is under a ferocious rebel siege here in the capital. [In Washington, the Liberian Embassy denied any Government involvement in the killings, but the United States Government said it had confirmed that Liberian troops were responsible.


Macintosh Power For Non-Power Users
LEAD: WINDOWS 3.0, the new Microsoft graphical interface, gives high-end MS-DOS computers much of the power and ease of use of the Macintosh.
But what about those who don't use high-end computers?
To rephrase an early Mac slogan, what about the rest of us?
To find out, I installed Windows on a mid-level computer of the type still found in many homes and offices, and still selling in large, though decreasing, numbers: an AT-class machine (that is, one using the 80286 processor) with a 30-megabyte hard disk, V.G.A.


Changes by Moody's Affect $40 Billion in Municipal Debt
LEAD: Revisions of municipal bond ratings in the first half of the year have affected more than $40 billion in debt, Moody's Investors Service said yesterday.
The ratings on nearly $19.5 billion in debt from 102 issuers were upgraded, while those on almost $21 billion in debt of 84 issuers were downgraded.


Use Pentagon Cut For AIDS Vaccine
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Saturday about the second-quarter report on the gross national product misstated the change in personal income.
It rose at an annual rate of five-tenths of 1 percent in the quarter; it did not decline.


Steinbrenner's Control of Yanks Severed
LEAD: George Steinbrenner was banned yesterday from further involvement in the management of the New York Yankees because of his three-year association with, and $40,000 payment to, a man the commissioner of baseball called a ''known gambler.''


LTV Net Rises Sharply
LEAD: The LTV Corporation, the military contractor and steelmaker, said today that its second-quarter net earnings more than doubled.
The company, which is operating under bankruptcy court supervision, reported net income of $76.6 million, or 59 cents a share, compared with $30.3 million, or 21 cents a share, in the comparable period last year.


Decision on Steinbrenner;   What Led to the Downfall
LEAD: Here is how the relationship developed between George Steinbrenner and Howard Spira, leading to the decision yesterday to end Steinbrenner's control over the Yankees.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''I've changed his ownership interest from general partner to limited partner.
There has to be a new general partner selected reasonably soon and approved by me and the major league clubs.''
- Fay Vincent,the baseball commissioner,stripping George Steinbrenner of control of the Yankees.


Decision on Steinbrenner;   The Limits Of 'Limited'
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent's decision removing George Steinbrenner as general partner of the Yankees will strip Steinbrenner of much - but not all - of the power he now enjoys in running the team.


Review/Television;   How Police Chiefs See the Crime Problem
LEAD: Two of the three men who figure in ''Police Chiefs'' are reformers who see a connection between crime and poverty; the third is a hard-liner who proposes consigning antisocial types to an island or a desert surrounded by mines.
But it becomes only too plain in the course of tonight's documentary at 10 on Channels 13 and 49 that whatever their differences, police chiefs in many American cities are confronted with street crime that is out of their control.


Evolution in Europe;   Bulgaria's Ex-Dictator Says He Won't Testify Now
LEAD: The country's former Communist dictator, Todor Zhivkov, today indefinitely postponed his plans to appear this week before the national Parliament in an open televised session.


Campeau Plan Is Rejected
LEAD: Shareholders of the Campeau Corporation rejected a plan today that would have allowed the sale of its Canadian real estate and diverted proceeds to its troubled American retail subisidiaries, Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation.


Decision on Steinbrenner;   How the Commissioner Has Used His Power
LEAD: Here are the key disciplinary actions against owners, managers and players taken by the comissioner since the office was established in 1921.
Owners
1941:
Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis, the first commissioner, ordered Charles Adams, owner of the Boston Braves, to divest himself of either his baseball stock or his racing stable.


Psychologist Defended
LEAD: To the Editor:


No Joy For Yanks, Despite A Victory
LEAD: In the emotionally charged stands at Yankee Stadium, the noise began long before the home team would win a baseball game.
The radios had spread the words of the baseball commissioner Fay Vincent.
The news that George Steinbrenner had been forced to resign his role in running the team was quickly transformed into a celebration.


Review/Television;   What Works With Whom In Advertising
LEAD: The news from ''Sex, Buys and Advertising,'' tonight's NBC News Special, at 10 P.M., is as follows: Advertising is big business because ads sell merchandise; Hollywood stars earn millions for 30-second spots; agencies compete for clients and increasingly target special groups like Hispanic and teen-age audiences; you can't trust ads to tell the whole truth.


Boston Journal;   In Furor Over Photos, An Echo of City's Past
LEAD: ''Banned in Boston'' is a cliche with a long pedigree: It began with the Mayflower.


The Media Business: Advertising: Addenda;   Victoria Uses Old Charms On Readers
LEAD: AT a time when women's magazines have been particularly hard hit by a decline in advertising, there are a few publications that have not lost their charm.


Weaker Limit on PAC's Is Proposed
LEAD: Three days after Senate Democrats proposed banning campaign contributions by political action committees, the party's leaders in the House today unveiled a proposal that would only limit such donations.


Company News;   Varity Plans Move And Reverse Split
LEAD: The Varity Corporation, the 143-year-old Canadian manufacturer formerly known as Massey-Ferguson, said it plans to move its headquarters from Toronto to the United States.
Varity's chairman, Victor Rice, told shareholders at the annual meeting: ''More than 80 percent of our shareholders are U.S. residents; most of our North American employees are in the U.S., and U.S.-based customers will account for some 50 percent of our 1990 revenues.


UAL Stock Down by $6.125
LEAD: The UAL Corporation's stock price tumbled today amid indications that an employee group's $4.38 billion buyout plan had run into financing problems.


Evolution in Europe;   Germans Who Want Russians Out Vs. the Russians Who Want to Stay
LEAD: Like Soviet military installations everywhere in this country, the Soviet Army base for the 12th Guards tank division and fighter-bomber air regiment just outside this lake resort is surrounded by a whitewashed stone wall.
It runs for miles through the scrub pines, marred at its central point by the huge black graffiti letters spelling out ''Russen Raus.


Decision on Steinbrenner;   Spira Case Just One Chapter in Stormy, 17 1/2-Year Adventure
LEAD: It was 17 years and 6 months ago that George Steinbrenner began his chaotic reign as head of a group that bought the Yankees in the winter of 1973.
Not a day, it seems, has gone by without some kind of storm in his ownership.


Decision on Steinbrenner;   'I Have No Comment,' Says Spira
LEAD: The man whose barrage of wheedling phone calls led to the $40,000 payment that ended George Steinbrenner's control of the Yankees was uncharacteristically circumspect last night.


Decision on Steinbrenner;   Owner's Son Not New To Club
LEAD: Hank Steinbrenner, who may succeed his father, George Steinbrenner, as the principal owner and general partner of the Yankees, first emerged on the baseball scene at the end of the 1985 season, when he began attending Yankee staff meetings at Yankee Stadium and the club's planning meetings in Tampa,


Fujitsu To Buy ICL Stake
LEAD: In the biggest expansion by a Japanese computer company into Europe, Fujitsu Ltd. will pay $1.29 billion for 80 percent of ICL P.L.C., Britain's only manufacturer of mainframe computers, the two companies announced today.


British Legislator, Foe of I.R.A., Is Killed by a Bomb at His Home
LEAD: In the latest of a series of terrorist attacks in Britain, a Conservative member of the British Parliament who was an outspoken critic of the Irish Republican Army was killed today when a bomb planted in his car exploded at his home, the police said.


Sleuths Zero In on Cause of Telescope Flaw
LEAD: ARMED with solid clues, intriguing rumors and even tips from amateur astronomers, a small army of scientific sleuths is slowly closing in on the cause of the flawed mirrors in the $1.5-billion Hubble space telescope.


Finance/New Issues;   Westinghouse 5-Year Notes
LEAD: The Westinghouse Credit Corporation is offering $150 million in five-year notes through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


Shots Through Door Kill a Bronx Infant Playing in a Walker
LEAD: A 9-month-old boy playing in his walker was shot to death yesterday by a gunman who fired repeatedly through the door of the child's grandmother's apartment on the Grand Concourse in the Bronx.


A Gene Therapy Nears Approval
LEAD: THE first attempt to treat seriously ill children by inserting new genes in their blood cells neared final approval yesterday, as an important Federal subcommittee voted 12 to 1 in favor of the proposal.


Arkansas Set To Join S.E.C.
LEAD: The University Arkansas is expected to announce Wednesday that it is joining the Southeastern Conference after 76 years in the Southwest Conference.


Business and Health;   Medicaid Fight By Drug Makers
LEAD: THE Bush Administration wants to cut $300 million from the $5 billion for drugs that Federal and state governments plan to spend next year in the Medicaid program for the poor.
With matching cuts by the states, the estimated saving could be $536 million.


Rio Journal;   Brazil's Idol Is a Blonde, and Some Ask 'Why?'
LEAD: When Rosane Collor, the wife of Brazil's President, wanted to collect food for children's nurseries in Rio, she turned to Xuxa.


City Trees, Revisited
LEAD: Replacing trees with buildings and concrete can contribute to an increase in air pollution, a new study says.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Burial Workers Mourn at Grave Of Slain Girl, 9
LEAD: Grief is a familiar emotion among the century-old tombstones and plastic floral arrangements that line the grounds of the Cemetery of the Evergreens in Brooklyn.
But yesterday morning, when a white coffin containing the body of 9-year-old Veronica Corales was lowered into the earth, the heartbreak touched even the gravediggers.


A Modern Dance Duo Who Are on the Wall
LEAD: They met in dance class.
Shortly thereafter, they found themselves dangling together from the Bir Hakeim Bridge in Paris.


Careers;   Shortage of Skilled Workers Is Expected
LEAD: IN 1967, Herman Kahn, the late founder of the Hudson Institute research organization, took a look ahead in a prescient book titled ''The Year 2000.'' He accurately predicted that United States corporations would have increased needs for skilled employees and training programs, that Japan would play a leading world economic role, and that commerce and industry in this country would extend in unbroken lines along highways between major cities, like the route from Boston to


Roof Garden at the Met to Reopen; Visitors Can View Artworks and Sunsets


New Musicals Project Closes Down
LEAD: The New Musicals program at the State University College at Purchase, N.Y., has closed down because of disappointing revenues after presenting only one production, ''Kiss of the Spider Woman,'' its producers announced yesterday.


U.S. to Test New Atomic Waste Disposal Plan
LEAD: Researchers at the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant will test a method that uses microwaves for disposing of hazardous waste, officials said today.


At the Stadium, Applause From Fans But Not The Players


Clemens Defeats White Sox With 2d Shutout in a Row
LEAD: Roger Clemens worked out of early trouble and earned his second consecutive shutout tonight as the Boston Red Sox beat the Chicago White Sox, 3-0.


South Africa Is Cultivating Its Ties With Moscow
LEAD: An announcement that the Moscow Circus plans to tour here next year has dramatized the new relationship that South Africa is cultivating with the Soviet Union and some of its Warsaw Pact neighbors as a consequence of political changes in southern Africa and Eastern Europe.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Alpha Microsystems Inc., Santa Ana, Calif., a computer hardware and software company, appointed David A. Young vice president of finance and chief financial officer.


Man's Body Found in Rubble From Blast in North Carolina
LEAD: Investigators found a body of a man in the rubble of a gutted downtown block today while looking for clues to the cause of a weekend explosion that destroyed at least eight businesses, a Federal agent said.


Accountants Fear S.&amp; L. Backlash
LEAD: The nation's accountants may soon feel a backlash from the savings and loan crisis.


Ex-Guard Convicted For the Kidnapping Of a Federal Agent
LEAD: A former Mexican police officer was convicted today of kidnapping and other charges in the slaying of an American drug agent in Mexico, but was acquitted of murder.


PRESIDENT IS URGED TO COUNTERATTACK
LEAD: Republican Congressional leaders pleaded with President Bush today to help them repair the political damage caused by the disclosure of an Administration proposal to limit Federal deductions for state and local income taxes and to increase Federal taxes on alcohol.


Lining Up for Life
LEAD: What's unsettling about standing in line is the all-too-real possibility that somebody's going to sneak in ahead of you.
If what you're waiting for is a movie seat or a restaurant table, losing your place is only an annoyance.
If it's a heart or kidney, losing your place is sometimes the difference between life and death.


Steinbrenner Satisfied He Was Not Suspended
LEAD: George Steinbrenner, who was forced yesterday to resign his 17 1/2-year tenure as the Yankees' general partner, was described by his lawyer as ''satisfied with the resolution.''


Consumer Spending Up 1% in June
LEAD: Personal spending rose 1 percent in June, the strongest gain in five months, the Government said today.
The Commerce Department report suggested that consumers have been keeping the nation's weak economy out of a recession.


Copper Prices Off Sharply; Grains and Soybeans Mixed
LEAD: Copper futures prices fell sharply yesterday on the New York Commodity Exchange, ending a four-day rally amid speculation that London warehouse stocks of the metal have grown.


Teacher Corps Shows Hope, Not Arrogance;   How to Keep Them
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bridge
LEAD: An astonishing turnabout in the final 16 deals gave the victory in the Spingold Knockout Teams to the defending champions, headed by James Cayne of Manhattan, at the conclusion of the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals here Sunday night.


Chicago Continues Without Power


Tutu Protests Police Raid on Squatters


Samuel Umen, Rabbi, 73
LEAD: Rabbi Samuel Umen, a writer and teacher who held pulpits in Michigan and Maryland and at Temple Adath Yeshurun in Manchester, N.H., died Saturday at Elliott Hospital in Manchester, where he lived.
He was 73 years old.


Israel and Rights
LEAD: Israel was created in response to savage inhumanity, and more than most countries it avows humane ideals.
Perhaps understandably, then, any criticism of Israel for violating human rights touches sensitive feelings.
Some supporters find denial easier than looking at the facts.


Washington at Work;   The New Spokesman for the Republicans: a Tough Player in a Rough Arena
LEAD: Much of America watches the Sunday morning talk shows with brunch and coffee and considerable detachment.
But here in Washington the shows are a blood sport, and Charles Black entered the arena on Sunday morning with a grim and wary look.


Shanghai Stock Market
LEAD: China's first full-fledged stock market since the Communist takeover will open in Shanghai in December, a newspaper report said today.
A national securities exchange will open in a new building equipped with computer terminals linked to trading counters in the port city and around the country, the official Liberation Daily reported.


President Is Named For MIPS Computer
LEAD: MIPS Computer Systems Inc., which grew out of a Stanford University research project six years ago, hopes to become a company with $1 billion in sales this decade and has named Charles M. Boesenberg as president to help reach the goal.


Decision on Steinbrenner;   'The Best Interests of Baseball'
LEAD: Here are the pertinent clauses in the Major League Agreement from which the commissioner derives the power to gather information, to impose penalties and to make those penalties binding.
Article I: The Commissioner and His Function
Section 2 (b): To investigate, either upon complaint or upon his own initiative, any act, transaction or practice charged, alleged or suspected to be not in the best interests of the national game of


Corrections
LEAD: An article by The Associated Press yesterday about convictions in a money-laundering case misstated the role of one defendant in some copies.


Business Index
LEAD:
Companies


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page picture caption on Saturday about bias at private golf clubs misidentified Hall W. Thompson in some copies.
He is the founder, not the owner, of the Shoal Creek Country Club in Birmingham, Ala.


New York Limits Use of Sex History in Trials
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo signed legislation today that will make it harder for defense lawyers to ask questions about the sexual histories of crime victims like Marla Hanson, the slashed model, or Jennifer Levin, who was slain in Central Park.


Company News;   Guilty Plea On Billing By Ametek
LEAD: Ametek Inc., a military contractor, pleaded guilty today to two criminal charges of making false statements to the Federal Government and agreed to pay $5.2 million in civil and criminal fines to settle accusations that it had overbilled the Government for sonar systems used on Navy submarines.


Wang Has Loss in Quarter
LEAD: Wang Laboratories Inc. reported today that it had a quarterly loss of $496.7 million after the final costs of its corporate revamping wiped out earnings.


ACCORD IS STALLED IN TRINIDAD SIEGE
LEAD: Progress toward a peaceful settlement of a coup attempt by Muslim rebels was uncertain tonight after three days of tense negotiations mediated by a Anglican cleric.


White Sox Send Kittle To Orioles for Bradley
LEAD: The Chicago White Sox traded the first baseman Ron Kittle, their leading home-run hitter this season, to the Baltimore Orioles yesterday for the outfielder Phil Bradley.


Souter Is Linked to Anti-Abortion Brief
LEAD: In 1976, while David H. Souter was New Hampshire Attorney General, his office submitted a brief to a Federal appeals court arguing that the state should not provide Medicaid funds to pay for abortions, which the brief called ''the killing of the unborn.''


Herbert Jenkins, 83, Former Police Chief In Atlanta, Is Dead
LEAD: Herbert T. Jenkins Sr., the Atlanta Police Chief in the civil rights protests of the 1960's, died July 20 at his home in Atlanta.
He was 83 years old.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Explosion Is Feared In Atom Waste Tanks
In the most pessimistic study to date, a Government panel warned that an explosion could rupture tanks of radioactive waste at the Hanford nuclear reservation in Washington.


Evolution in Europe;   Ukraine Asks Moscow To Return Its Recruits
LEAD: The Ukraine, stepping up its defiance of Moscow, called today for the return of all Ukrainians doing compulsory service in the Soviet armed forces.


Astere Claeyssens, 66, Professor of English
LEAD: Astere E. Claeyssens, a professor of English at George Washington University, died Thursday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Chicago, where he was visiting.
He was 66 years old and lived in Washington.


Debate on Job-Bias Bill Turns to Issue of Damages
LEAD: As the House prepares to vote Wednesday on a bill to combat job discrimination, attention seems to be shifting from the divisive issue of quotas to the equally difficult notion of monetary damages for victims of intentional discrimination.


Rinfret Renews Call for Death Penalty
LEAD: Pierre A. Rinfret, the Republican gubernatorial candidate, used the killings of young innocent bystanders in New York City to lend some emotional power today to his call for the death penalty.


Kurri to Italian Team
LEAD: Jari Kurri, who helped the Edmonton Oilers win five Stanley Cups and became the most prolific scorer in the National Hockey League among European players, is off to Italy to play hockey.


By Design;   Lace, But Not the No-Frills Kind
LEAD: Even if she is dressed in jeans and a T-shirt, a Parisian woman is probably wearing something lacy underneath.
Lovely lingerie is one thing Frenchwomen consider a must.


Notebook;   Minor Surgery Sets Back Bavaro
LEAD: Mark Bavaro, the Pro Bowl tight end for the Giants who underwent serious surgery on his left knee in January, underwent another operation on that knee this morning.
The latest surgery was minor, and Coach Bill Parcells said Bavaro should be ready to resume practice in a week to 10 days.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Itching and Scratching


Chess
LEAD: There are a number of hurdles to be surmounted to win a tournament, and these days some of them are rather young.
There was a time when almost any opponent under 20 years old could be written off as a threat to a grandmaster, but with the vast improvement in the quality of chess publications and their proliferation among students everywhere, those days are gone forever.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
Apr.-June
Change
1990
From '89
Alexander &amp; Alexander Svcs.
$ 17,700,000
-30.0
Armstrong World Industries
44,800,000
-6.5
Baroid Corp.
13,200,000
+371.4
Cabot Corp.
16,300,000
+69.8
Circle K Corp.
(747,400,000)
-
Cyclops Industries
(11,300,000)
-
Foster Wheeler Corp.


Company News;   Arkla Will Merge With Diversified
LEAD: Arkla Inc., one of the nation's largest natural gas companies, will merge with Diversified Energies Inc., the parent of Minnegasco Inc., a Minneapolis-based natural gas distributor.
Under the agreement, shareholders of Diversified will receive between 1.575 and 1.752 shares of Arkla common stock for each Diversified common share.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline in some copies on Saturday about a study of the health effects of atomic testing in the 1950's referred incorrectly to the results of the study.
As the article stated, the study found a weak link between atomic fallout and leukemia, not a weak leak.


How Insurers Drove Up Costs of Health Care
LEAD: To the Editor:


Company News;   Trefoil to Buy Child World
LEAD: Trefoil Capital Investors L.P., a new investment partnership backed by Roy E. Disney, said today that it planned to acquire Child World Inc., the second-largest toy chain, after Toys ''R'' Us, in a deal worth about $157 million.


British Aerospace Deal
LEAD: British Aerospace P.L.C. said today that it had signed a deal with Oman for 16 Hawk jet fighters worth a total $:200 million, or $367.5 million.
The company said it would deliver the jets by 1994.
Oman had said it would buy an unspecified number of the planes but gave no details on the value of the order.


Morley R. Kare, 68, Physiologist Who Researched Taste and Smell
LEAD: Morley R. Kare, director and president of the Monell Chemical Senses Center, a research group in Philadelphia devoted to studying taste and smell, died yesterday at his home in Narberth, Pa.
He was 68 years old.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
8.00
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.50
7.54
7.81
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.37
7.42
7.45
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.28
8.35
7.65
30-YR.


Cambodian Ordeal Began in U.S. Policy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Famed 'Country Club Prison' Is to House Violent Inmates
LEAD: The nation's most famous minimum-security Federal prison, whose inmates have included Ivan F. Boesky and H. R. Haldeman, is being upgraded to a higher-security one.


Finance/New Issues;   Avco Financial
LEAD: Avco Financial Services Inc., a unit of Textron Inc., is offering $100 million in 8 7/8 percent notes due in 1995 through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.
The notes are offered at a price of 99.75 to yield 8.95 percent, or about 85 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.


Yankees, Sanders Have a Parting
LEAD: The brief, controversial and uncertain major league baseball career of Deion Sanders came to an abrupt halt yesterday when the Yankee organization ended contract negotiations that would have extended his commitment to baseball and could have led to a legal struggle.


John Inglis, 89, Dies; Led Accounting Firm
LEAD: John B. Inglis, a former chairman and senior partner in the accounting firm of Price Waterhouse, died on Saturday at a nursing home in Lake Forest, Ill.
He was 89 years old and had lived in Northbrook, Ill.


Growth in Jobs Shifts to Losses in New York Region
LEAD: After slowing to a crawl for more than two years, the regional economy has shifted into reverse, shedding 8,000 jobs in private industry in New York City and 7,000 such jobs in northeastern New Jersey in the five months ended in May.


After 60 Years, Scientists Return To Fossil 'Paradise' of the Gobi
LEAD: WITH the lowering of another cold war barrier, American paleontologists have roamed the Gobi Desert of Mongolia for the first time in six decades, finding a new reptile species related to the Komodo dragon, identifying promising sites for future excavations and recapturing some of the exotic flavor of the most celebrated fossil-hunting expedition of this century.


Lobbyist Is Refusing to Testify
LEAD: WASHINGTON, July 30 - Robert J. Thompson, a former aide to George Bush, says he will not appear Tuesday before a Senate subcommittee that is looking into his role in helping a businessman with a history of legal problems acquire 15 insolvent savings and loan associations from Federal regulators in 1988.


New Eye on Nature: The Real Constant Is Eternal Turmoil
LEAD: IN a revision that has far-reaching implications for the way humans see the natural world and their role in it, many scientists are forsaking one of the most deeply embedded concepts of ecology: the balance of nature.


The Media Business: Advertising: Addenda;   Accounts
LEAD: *
Escada Beaute Ltd., to Audour, Soum, Larue, Paris, the French affiliate of Scali, McCabe, Sloves, for Escada Fragrance perfume, with an estimated budget of $4 million.


Schools in Utah Sued On Graduation Prayer
LEAD: The American Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit today against two school districts that permit prayer at graduation exercises and other functions.


A Deer Comes Back From the Brink in India
LEAD: Sustained by conservation measures, the Indian brow-antlered deer, once thought to be extinct, is making a comeback in the humid marshes and unique wetlands of Keibul Lamjao, a small national park in the country's remote northeast.


Dollar Continues Its Decline On Signs of Slower Growth
LEAD: The dollar fell broadly against major foreign currencies yesterday, continuing a decline prompted by the latest signs of a weakening United States economy and the prospect of lower interest rates.


SAVINGS REGULATOR SEEKS $100 BILLION FOR BAILOUT IN '91
LEAD: The Government will need $100 billion from taxpayers in the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1 to continue its current pace of closing and selling off hundreds of failed savings and loans, L. William Seidman, the chairman of the Resolution Trust Corporation, told Congress today.


1.2 Million People See Van Gogh Exhibition
LEAD: The ''Vincent van Gogh Retrospective,'' an exhibition of nearly 140 works by the Dutch artist, drew a record 1.2 million visitors over four months, the show's organizers said today.
People camped out through the weekend in hopes of seeing the show before it closed on Sunday, the 100th anniversary of the artist's death.


Flower Sellers' Ruthless Competition
LEAD: At an intersection near Times Square, passers-by on either side of Broadway can follow the scent of flowers in every direction.
There are vendors with bouquet-laden shopping carts.
There's a couple who make flower arrangements under an umbrella.
There's a mobile fruit stand with a floral section.
There are arguments.


Governors' Idea Rejected
LEAD: A proposal by Democratic governors for a national commission to investigate the savings and loan crisis was rejected today by the White House. ''We do feel it is unnecessary to create another bureaucratic body,'' Stephen Hart, the White House deputy press secretary, said in Washington.
The governors' proposal expressed concern about the effort to solve the crisis and requested the creation of the panel.


Impersonator Wants To Portray Still Others, This Time, Onstage
LEAD: It shouldn't surprise anyone that David Hampton wants to be a professional actor, considering the success he has had as an amateur.
Posing as Sidney Poitier's son, he gained access to the homes of many prominent New Yorkers in 1983, and his deception inspired ''Six Degrees of Separation,'' John Guare's hit play, which opened in June at the Mitzi E.


Bobby Day, Band Leader, 60
LEAD: Bobby Day, a singer and band leader who recorded ''Rockin' Robin'' ''Little Bitty Pretty One'' and other doo-wop hits of the 1950's, died on Friday.
He was 60 years old.


Bond Prices Continue Strong Rise
LEAD: Continued strong demand for Treasury securities sent prices soaring and interest rates tumbling yesterday.


On Horse Racing;   One Survivor's Rain- and Jet Fuel-Streaked Saratoga Crystal Ball
LEAD: Saratoga Race Track in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., opens for the 122d time tomorrow afternoon, and one crystal ball says the meeting will unfold as follows:


Judge Asserts Cost of Barry Trial Could Have Been Courtroom Issue
LEAD: After six weeks of questioning 43 witnesses about accusations of drug use by Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr., prosecution and defense lawyers turned their attention today to finer legal points of the Mayor's trial, arguing about what instructions the court should give the jury before it begins its deliberations.


Wave Hill Gets Pledge to Restore Programs
LEAD: An anonymous donor has pledged $150,000 to Wave Hill, the park and cultural center in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, to help restore its concerts, dance series and art exhibitions, Wave Hill officials said yesterday.


News Analysis;   A New Fear of Japan
LEAD: Hardly a month goes by without a warning from a Western Government agency or university that the growing dependence on Japanese microelectronics in the 1980's was only a start.
In the 1990's, the theory goes, Japan will parlay the talents it used in largely dominating the making of advanced computer chips to displace - if not acquire - the


Steinbrenner Whine Fails 'Smell Test' Paris, in Perspective: Outdoors
LEAD: George Steinbrenner's reign of tyranny as the Yankees' principal owner was also a reign of propaganda.
Whatever the problem, he shouted loud enough and long enough that it was always somebody else's fault.
When the team stumbled, it had to be the fault of the dismissed manager, the dismissed pitching coach or the dismissed players.


Review/Ballet;   The Bolshoi Brings Out Its Rarefied 'Giselle'
LEAD: The Bolshoi Ballet did not perform ''Giselle'' during its recent season in New York.
But the company from Moscow, which is touring the United States through September, gave balletomanes in the Washington area a glimpse of its current version of the venerable Romantic ballet over the weekend.


The Media Business: Advertising: Addenda;   People
LEAD: *
Michael Ewing has been promoted to vice president and associate creative director at Lord Einstein O'Neill&amp; Partners.


U.S. Condemns Killings
LEAD: The White House today condemned the massacre of Liberian war refugees as a ''senseless act of terror'' and repeated earlier appeals for all sides in the civil war to negotiate an end to the fighting.


Teacher Corps Shows Hope, Not Arrogance
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
HORSE RACING
Tinchen's Prince in Front
Tinchen's Prince, ridden by Jacinto Vasquez, moved between horses deep in the stretch and prevailed over Herr Von Kaninchen by a half-length in the $88,200 Evan Shipman Purse yesterday, the feature race on the closing day of Belmont Park's summer season.


Ryan Trying Again
LEAD: After failing against the Yankees in a bid for victory No. 300 last Wednesday before a home crowd at Arlington Stadium, Nolan Ryan of the Texas Rangers is scheduled to try again tonight, against the Brewers at County Stadium in Milwaukee.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on July 23 about legislation to expand reporting requirements on foreign investors in the United States misidentified the Japanese company that bought a controlling stake in Rockefeller Center.
It is Mitsubishi Estate, not Mitsubishi


Drug Kingpins Must Pay the Ultimate Penalty for Their Crimes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Mets Maintaining Patience on Elster
LEAD: Bud Harrelson, the manager with the tough talk and the hard blue eyes, stood squinting into the sharp sunlight one evening recently as Kevin Elster swung a bat inside the practice cage nearby.


Paris, in Perspective: Outdoors to Outrageous
LEAD: French couture fashions in the week just past can be divided into two parts: clothes that can be worn in the street and clothes that are so ornate they should be sheltered by limousines, palaces and private homes.


Decision on Steinbrenner;   For Fans of Yankees, Decision Is a Winner
LEAD: The Yankees are in last place in the American League East, their best player, Don Mattingly, is on the 21-day disabled list, and last night, Deion Sanders, one of several young players the Yankees are hoping to rebuild with, left the team.


Hidden In a Gap In Rings Of Saturn
LEAD: SEEING ripples in the outermost major ring of Saturn, scientists predicted where they should find a small but previously unobserved moon whose gravity was causing the disturbance.
They looked through images from the Voyager 2 spacecraft, and there it was: a small, bright object no more than 12 miles wide, the 18th moon to be identified orbiting


America Is No. 1. It'll Stay No. 1.
LEAD: Since the late Reagan years, we've heard a media and political refrain: the U.S. is in decline; it has lost world political and economic leadership; Japan is the coming No. 1 power.


Ball to Pay $1 Billion To Make Acquisitions
LEAD: The Ball Corporation announced today that it would spend more than $1 billion to make acquisitions that would nearly triple its sales.


Company News;   Oshkosh Trucks
LEAD: The Oshkosh Truck Corporation said it would lay off 3 percent to 4 percent of its 2,000 employees to increase its competitiveness in the heavy-duty truck market.
The specialty-truck manufacturer reported a third-quarter loss of $2.5 million, compared with a profit of $4.5 million, or 50 cents a share, a year earlier.


William J. Kenney, Banker, 67
LEAD: William J. Kenney, a former senior vice president of the Bank of New York, died on Sunday at the Jersey Shore Medical Center in Neptune.
He was 67 years old and lived in Manhattan and Spring Lake, N.J.


Police Ignored Warnings on Age Of Jogger Suspect, Witnesses Say
LEAD: Defense witnesses testified yesterday that detectives questioned Yusef Salaam about an attack on a woman jogger in Central Park last year despite their repeated protests that he was only 15 years old and could not be questioned without a parent or guardian present.


Company News;   Rorer-Rhone Link
LEAD: Shareholders of the Rorer Group Inc. are expected to give approval on Tuesday to Rorer's merger with a subsidiary of Rhone-Poulenc S.A., the giant French pharmaceutical concern, to create one of the world's top 10 drug companies.
Approval of the $3.2 billion deal is assured because Rhone-Poulenc already controls 50.1 percent of Rorer, based in Fort Washington, Pa.


Martin's Widow Sues
LEAD: Billy Martin's widow, Jill, filed a lawsuit in Binghamton, N.Y., yesterday against the man who authorities say was driving the truck in which Martin, 61 years old, the former Yankee manager, was killed in an accident last Christmas night.


G.M. Greets 1st Saturn Car With a Closed Ceremony
LEAD: Eight years after committing the General Motors Corporation to a compact-car project called Saturn, Roger B. Smith drove the first customer-ready version of the car off an assembly line in Spring Hill, Tenn., today - the day before he is to retire as chairman.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the case of Oliver L. North referred incorrectly to a July 20 decision by a Federal appeals court.
The decision set aside Mr.
North's conviction on three charges in the Iran-contra case and overturned one of the three charges, not an additional charge, outright.


House Considers Restriction on Advertising by Telephone and Fax
LEAD: In a move to address the problems caused by new technology, the House of Representatives approved legislation on Tuesday to restrict the transmission of unsolicited advertisements by telephone and through facsimile machines.


Less Pie in the Star Wars Sky
LEAD: President Bush has decided to decide in 1993 whether to proceed with early deployment of space-based defenses.
That puts him in the imprudent position of having to choose before the new Star Wars system is adequately tested.


2 BARGES LEAK OIL IN HOUSTON CANAL
LEAD: The Coast Guard estimated today that 500,000 gallons of oil had spilled into Galveston Bay from two barges that collided with a tanker in the Houston Ship Channel over the weekend.


Finance/New Issues;   Large Loss For Circle K
LEAD: The Circle K Corporation, a convenience-store chain that sought bankruptcy protection last month, said today that it had a large loss in its fourth quarter, which ended on April 30.


Explosion Could Release Radiation at Hanford, U.S. Panel Warns
LEAD: In the most authoritative and pessimistic official study to date, a Government advisory panel led by a former chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission has warned that an explosion could rupture tanks that store millions of gallons of extremely radioactive waste at the Hanford nuclear reservation in Washington


Market Place;   Mutual Funds Are Resilient Despite Last Week's Plunge
LEAD: Mutual fund investors seem to have generally shrugged off last Monday's sharp break in the stock market, and cash continues to be drawn into stock funds, mutual fund executives said yesterday.


A Day of Fine Tuning on Vincent's Decision
LEAD: Commissioner Fay Vincent decided more than a week ago to permanently ban George Steinbrenner from running the Yankees.
At 9 A.M. yesterday he unveiled his decision to the Yankees' owner.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A2-7


Francis J. Little, 56, Orchestra's Director Of Public Relations
LEAD: Francis J. Little, the director of advertising and public relations for the New York Philharmonic, died early Monday morning at his home in Manhattan.
He was 56 years old.


Rebel Group in Trinidad: Fierce Offshoot of Islam
LEAD: Caribbean scholars and experts on Islam in the West Indies say the militant Muslim group that staged a coup attempt in Trinidad last week is one of many new religious movements that have emerged in the region in recent years, challenging governments and established religious organizations.


Jimmy DeSana Dead; Photographer Was 40
LEAD: Jimmy DeSana, a photographer known for his witty and occasionally gently erotic color images, died on Friday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 40 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Mr.
DeSana was born in Detroit on Nov. 12, 1949, and moved to New York City in 1973.


Cetus Drug Is Blocked By F.D.A.
LEAD: The Cetus Corporation suffered a setback today when an advisory committee to the Food and Drug Administration said it could not yet recommend that Cetus's flagship drug, interleukin-2, be approved for use.


Mary A. McCarthy, Professor, 41; Active in Father's Presidential Bid
LEAD: Mary Abigail McCarthy, a professor at Yale University Law School who was highly visible in the political campaign waged by Eugene J. McCarthy, her father, in 1968, died on Saturday at the Connecticut Hospice in Branford, Conn.
She was 41 years old and lived in Branford.


Army Discounts Spying by 6 Who Left West German Post
LEAD: Six soldiers absent without leave from an intelligence unit at an electronic eavesdropping post in West Germany are not spies for a foreign power and have been discharged, the Army said today.


Company News;   Bull's Losses Rise; Layoffs Scheduled
LEAD: The French computer company Groupe Bull S.A. said losses for the first six months of 1990 were three times larger than in the corresponding period last year.
It said in a statement that it planned to cut 3,000 jobs this year to streamline manufacturing and research operations in North America, Ireland and


Finance/New Issues;   GMAC in Pricing Of 8.75% Notes
LEAD: The General Motors Acceptance Corporation yesterday priced $300 million of 8.75 percent notes due in 1995 at a price of 99.649 to yield 8.84 percent through underwriters led by the First Boston Corporation.


Eastern's Woes Tied To Pressure
LEAD: Many Eastern Airlines maintenance supervisors, including those indicted last week on charges of falsifying records, were trapped between the airline's aggressive management and its militant unionized workers, interviews with people at many levels of the airline show.


Heat Is More Lethal When It Is Unusual, Researchers Find
LEAD: WHAT New Yorkers and other Northerners consider a heat wave often feels like a routine summer day to residents of Dallas or Phoenix or Jacksonville.
Now scientists say that such feelings are not just a matter of discomfort, but also of life and death.
Heat, they have found, generally begins killing people at lower temperatures in New York and other Northern cities than in the South and


The Textile Bill's Awful Bill
LEAD: The Senate has overwhelmingly approved a textile bill that would impose a vicious cost on U.S. consumers, violate existing American trade agreements and undermine international trade talks.
Three big strikes, yet the House is poised to approve similar legislation, perhaps this week.


Silverado Case Disclosure
LEAD: Neil Bush, the President's son, who is accused by regulators of conflict of interest as a former director of a failed savings and loan, continues to deny the allegations but has agreed on some facts in the case.


Frohnmayer Concedes Arts Agency Faces a Lag in Public Confidence
LEAD: John E. Frohnmayer, the chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, today acknowledged that both Congress and a substantial section of the American people have lost faith in his agency, but he insisted that new legislation or guidelines were not necessary to correct the situation.


More Firepower Than the Police


Entering the Kitchen
LEAD: SOME people say there is no such thing as a home computer, that it is a fiction on the order of Santa Claus, the Easter Bunny and No New Taxes.
A computer is a computer, they say, and it is becomes a home computer merely by operating in a house rather than in an office.


Chinatown's Old Gangs Give Way to Violence and Fear
LEAD: In Chinatown, once considered an oasis from many kinds of crime, residents and business owners are nervous these days about a recent surge in violence that they blame on Vietnamese gangs.


Children's TV Workshop Head to Step Down
LEAD: Joan Ganz Cooney, the founder of the Children's Television Workshop, announced yesterday that she would step down in October as the company's chairman and chief executive officer.
The workshop created ''Sesame Street,'' which became one of the world's most widely seen television programs.


Nassau, Sludge Scofflaw, Pays Big Fines
LEAD: Only nine local jurisdictions in the nation, all in the New York region, still dump sewage sludge in the ocean, and eight of them are on their way to complying with a Federal law that makes that illegal at the end of 1991.
All except Nassau County.
Every day that the county violates a compliance agreement it signed last year with the Environmental Protection Agency, it is fined $22,000.


Patterns
LEAD:
The Right Thing in Brooklyn


