Remaking the North Stars
LEAD: SHORTLY after he bought 51 percent of the Minnesota North Stars in June, Norman Green grew unhappy with Howard Baldwin.


Budget Accord Is Played Down
LEAD: While Administration and Congressional negotiators reached an 11th-hour budget deficit agreement yesterday, the pact had been expected and discounted late last week by the credit markets.


Devils May Finally Mesh, but Sabres Appear Smart Bet
LEAD:
PATRICK DIVISION


McIlvaine's Move Looks Inevitable
LEAD: With all the farewells and disappointments and unanswered questions of their final day at home this season, the Mets were certain yesterday that they were about to lose one of the chief architects of their team.
Joe McIlvaine, the vice president for baseball operations, is expected to join the San Diego Padres as president and general manager.


Wall St. Endures a Painful Quarter
LEAD: The stock market as a whole just finished one of its worst quarters ever.
Virtually the only companies to show gains in a period dominated by crisis in the Persian Gulf were in natural resources, particularly oil.


A Protected 'Greenway' Proposed Along the Hudson
LEAD: High on the lawn of Olana, a popular tourist attraction in the Hudson Valley, David S. Sampson looked south to a panorama of green on both sides of the Hudson River, framed by the Catskill Mountains to the west.


Giants Dispatch Cowboys To Go 4-0
LEAD: The Giants' defense was not as coldly efficient today as it was two weeks ago when it stifled the Dallas Cowboys in the Texas heat.
But it was good enough and the offense was creative enough to rout the Cowboys, 31-17.


Travelers Get U.S. Warning To Beware of Terrorist Peril
LEAD: After receiving intelligence reports about increased activity by suspected terrorists with links to Iraq, the State Department has issued an advisory warning Americans traveling in Europe and the Middle East to exercise caution.


Sports of The Times;   Reconstruction Looms for the Enigmets
LEAD: FOR the Mets, the end is also the beginning of a reconstruction era for the team that should be known as the Enigmets.


Chip Maker's New Product
LEAD: Advanced Micro Devices Inc. will introduce on Monday a microprocessor chip that incorporates almost all of the components of the circuit board used in the original PC-AT personal computer.


Sarah Leaf Weds S. J. D. Morrow
LEAD: Sarah Rebekah Leaf, the daughter of Susan P. Fox of Trenton, N.J. and Russell C. Leaf of Princeton Junction, N.J., was married yesterday to Stephen James Duncan Morrow, a son of Joyce A. Morrow of Kyneton, Victoria, Australia, and the late William J. Morrow.
Judge H. Jonathan Fox of the New Jersey Superior Court, the bride's stepfather, performed the ceremony at Prospect House in


Dr. Patrick Florio, 71, A Chemical Consultant
LEAD: Dr.
Patrick A. Florio, a chemical industry consultant and former executive of the American Hoechst Corporation, died on Sept. 21 in Wiesbaden, Germany.
He was 71 years old and lived in Short Hills, N.J.


Crime In Politics
LEAD: If Attorney General Dick Thornburgh were ever, unimaginably, charged with a crime, would he be content to be defended by a lawyer just six months out of law school?
A lawyer who had never before been in a trial?
A drunk?


Thomas P. Robinson, TV Executive, 85
LEAD: Thomas P. Robinson, a television executive who was involved in the industry since its early days, died on Friday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
He was 85 years old and lived in retirement in Tequesta, Fla.


Business and the Law;   Corporate Crime And Punishment
LEAD: THE Federal agency rewriting the rules for punishing corporations convicted of crimes has just come out with a set of principles that it hopes could become law sometime next year.


Review/Theater;   Where Brechtian Intellect Gives Way to Emotion
LEAD: In ''The Caucasian Chalk Circle,'' Bertolt Brecht dramatized the purest of heroic acts, as a servant, Grusha, sacrifices her own safety to preserve the life of an abandoned child.
The play is one of Brecht's most emotionally engaging works, a description not normally associated with this intellectual playwright.


Excerpts From Remarks by Leaders At U.N. World Summit for Children
LEAD: Following are excerpts from addresses by national leaders and the United Nations Secretary General today before the General Assembly at the World Summit for Children:
President Bush


Edward F. Kook, 87, Illuminator Who Lighted 1,000 Stage Works
LEAD: Edward F. Kook, the founder and longtime president of the Century Lighting Company, which brightened more than 1,000 Broadway plays, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
His death, at the age of 87, was caused by a heart attack, a family spokesman said.


Professors Vote To Reject Offer From Temple U.
LEAD: Striking professors at Temple University rejected a second contract offer tonight, raising the possibility that hundreds of classes could be canceled for the entire semester.


Nuclear Issue Slows U.S. Aid to Pakistan
LEAD: The United States has decided to withhold aid from Pakistan as it seeks new assurances from the Pakistani Government that it is slowing down its nuclear-weapons program, Administration officials said today.


Vatican Meeting Studies 'Burnout' Among Priests
LEAD: With prayers and admonitions from Pope John Paul II, 238 Roman Catholic bishops from around the world convened today for a synod to study the ''identity crisis'' and ''burnout'' said to be afflicting many of their priests.


River View Of Reality, Or a Dream
LEAD: Through the mist, 20-year-old Hamad Wajih could clearly see an Israeli border kibbutz only a mile or so away over the Jordan River.


Kenyan Bans a Journal That Upholds the Law
LEAD: The Government on Friday banned The Nairobi Law Monthly, a popular magazine, in a signal that President Daniel arap Moi is hardening his opposition to opening up the political system here.


Linda D. Chesis Is Married
LEAD: Linda D. Chesis, the daughter of Audrey Chesis of North Bergen, N.J., and the late Lawrence Chesis, was married yesterday to John P. Guiton, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jacques E. Guiton of New York.
M.
Michael Grupp, a leader of the Society for Ethical Culture, officiated at Le Refuge restaurant in New York.


Fordham Celebrates 150 Years


George L. Hubbell Jr.; Lawyer, 96
LEAD: George L. Hubbell Jr., a retired partner in the New York law firm of Cullen &amp; Dykman, died on Thursday at his home in Garden City, L.I., at the age of 96.
He died of pneumonia, a spokesman for the law firm said.


World Leaders Endorse Plan To Improve Lives of Children
LEAD: Leaders from more than 70 nations came together here today in an extraordinary show of concern for the world's poorest children.
They adopted a declaration and a plan of action committing them to drastically improving the lives of those children.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We are not the Radio City Rockettes that march in perfect precision.
Every fiber in my being wants to support it.


Poll Finds Strong Support for Bush's Goals, but Reluctance to Start a War
LEAD: Americans overwhelmingly support President Bush's goals in the Persian Gulf, but are not ready to start a war for them, according to a study of public opinion released today.


Ballet Theater Plans New 'Coppelia'
LEAD: A new production of ''Coppelia'' will be the highlight of American Ballet Theater's 1991 season.
The production will be staged by Enrique Martinez, who directed the company's previous production of the ballet.
Tony Straiges, the Tony Award-winning designer, will design the set, with costumes by Patricia Zipprodt and lighting by Thomas


Books of The Times;   Lust, Lunacy and Murder, All in a Normal Life
LEAD:
North of Hope
By Jon Hassler
518 pages. Ballantine Books. $19.95.


Turnpike Journal;   Born as Place to Rest, Town Doesn't
LEAD: ''Breezewood Town of Motels, Food, Fuel,'' the sign proclaims on Exit 12 of the Pennsylvania Turnpike.
And for most of the time since the nation's first superhighway opened 50 years ago, Breezewood has been delivering what it promises.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday
Construction Spending . . . Aug.
Tuesday
New-Home Prices . . . Aug.
New-Home Sales . . . Aug.
Wednesday
Car Sales . . . Aug.
Factory Orders . .


Unbeaten Raiders Top Bears, 24-10
LEAD: Aaron Wallace stripped the ball from the Bears' Jim Harbaugh, and Greg Townsend ran it in for a touchdown to highlight an outstanding defensive effort as the Los Angles Raiders defeated Chicago, 24-10, today in a battle of unbeaten teams.


Haiti's Election Needs Help
LEAD: Free elections earlier this year in Nicaragua, the Dominican Republic and even Panama provide clear evidence that democracy is following tortuous, but steadily progressive paths in the hemisphere.
Haiti is now moving toward an election in December, but to succeed it needs the full support of the international democratic community.


Metro Matters;   Note to the U.N.: Talk to Jonas And Jonathan
LEAD: As heads of state were arriving for the World Summit for Children at the United Nations over the weekend, Jonathan and Jonas Cosme were trying to hold their own.


Northern Bangladesh Floods Kill 14 and Strand Thousands
LEAD: Flooding in dozens of northern villages has killed 14 children, stranded tens of thousands of people and damaged crops across wide areas of Bangladesh in the last several days, news organizations reported today.


You Can Get Shot Outside of New York, Too;   Positive Examples
LEAD: To the Editor:


Chinese Medicine Proves Itself Where Western Medicine Fails
LEAD: To the Editor:


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: The Budget Agreement


Chronicle
LEAD: Caught in the middle of budget talks, SENATOR BOB DOLE didn't make it to the Armenian Assembly's tribute in his honor Saturday night in New York, but he delivered a telephone message pledging his support to the Republic of Armenia, which declared its independence from the Soviet Union in August.


Unexpected Success Overjoys the Pirates
LEAD: The scene was as warm and as genuine as the gentle September sunshine that had flooded the field all afternoon.


Runners Should Think Before Stretching
LEAD: MANY runners who experience chronic tightness in the muscles and joints perform stretching exercises incorrectly, leaving them continually vulnerable to injury and performance limitations, according to sports medicine experts.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Halt on Aid to Pakistan
The United States has decided to withhold aid from Pakistan as it seeks new assurances that Islamabad is slowing its nuclear weapons program, officials said.
Page A3.
Iraqi Suggests a 'Debate'
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, using both harsh and conciliatory language, suggested a ''debate'' with France on the gulf crisis.


On Dark Streets, 'Eyes and Ears' for the Law
LEAD: Night after night, resolve in their hearts and walkie-talkies in their hands, Ed Powell and James Burns set off on their self-appointed rounds.
On rooftops glittering with crushed crack vials, in dark hallways littered with soda cans, along streets strewn with empty-eyed and defiant boys, they patrol a neighborhood in crisis.


Ontario's New Premier Didn't Think He'd Win
LEAD: Robert Keith Rae has a bouncy, surprised enthusiasm that is understandable for a politician who has just won an election that he expected to lose.
In fact, the 42-year-old lawyer who will be sworn in Monday as Ontario's Premier is quite frank on that point.


6 KILLED IN CRASH DURING AEROBATICS
LEAD: At least six people were killed Saturday when an World War II-era airplane crashed into a lake after its pilot gave an impromptu aerobatics display before hundreds of spectators at a pilots' convention.


Where the Budget Agreement Would Be Felt the Most
LEAD:
The Military


MANY IN CONGRESS CRITICAL;   And the Victor Is: Bush?
LEAD: It was an unhappy looking group that assembled in the Rose Garden this afternoon.
In the politics of the moment, the budget deal does not give any of them, President Bush or the Congressional leaders, a winning hand.


Charles R. Marshall Jr.; Psychiatrist, 39
LEAD: Dr.
Charles R. Marshall Jr., a psychiatrist who was director of rehabilitation medicine at St.
Joseph Medical Center in Stamford, Conn., died on Thursday at his home in Greenwich, Conn., at the age of 39.


As Inmates Are Freed, Houston Feels Insecure
LEAD: On one steamy night after another, the doors of the Harris County Jail open to the jeers of protesters and the glare of television lights.
Photographs of murder victims are held up in anger.


Kurosawa Still Finding Unfamiliar Seas to Sail
LEAD: ''No, that's wrong!'' growled Akira Kurosawa as two giant fans sent clouds of brown dust into a farmhouse on the set of his latest movie.
The 80-year-old director leaped up and rearranged the machines for a different combination of wind, rain and dust in his artificial storm.


Ms. Siegel Wed To R. A. Ohringer
LEAD: Mindy Iris Siegel, a daughter of Mr. and.
Mrs.
Sidney H. Siegel of Stony Brook, L.I., was married yesterday to Richard Alan Ohringer, the son of Mildred Stavin of Rockville Centre, L.I., and the late Irving Ohringer.
Rabbi Robert Widom officiated at Temple Emanuel in Great Neck, L.I.


Bridge
LEAD: The United States seems to have the world's oldest bridge population.
The average of the members of the American Contract Bridge League is about 57.
It is therefore somewhat surprising that the only event in the world championships last month in Geneva in which Americans were not in serious contention was the Senior


Bush's Modulator of the Gulf Policy, And of What Not to Do or Say Now
LEAD: After the late-night call from the White House telling him that Iraq had invaded Kuwait, Brent Scowcroft, the President's national security adviser, had no doubt that the United States had to be prepared to go to war, if necessary, to stop Saddam Hussein.


For the Oilers, Defending a Title Will Require Rebuilding
LEAD:
SMYTHE DIVISION


Publishers of Trade Books Under Earnings Pressure
LEAD: ''If somebody asks me for a five-year plan, I can't do it,'' said Peter Mayer, the chief executive of Penguin Books. ''The books are not written yet.
It would be a fraud.''


Kremlin War of Words Is Aimed at 'Democrats'
LEAD: ''Democrats'' has become a dirty word on the front pages of several major Soviet newspapers in recent days as the orthodox Communist press casts about for scapegoats to blame for everything from empty shelves and rotting potatoes to putative coups d'etat.


It's All Over For Mets As Pirates Clinch Title
LEAD: It was the end, the final act, hail and farewell, and maybe even auld lang syne, all the emotions and eulogies rolled into one afternoon before 39,195 fans in Shea Stadium, watching as the Mets came crashing down in their 159th game of a season they were supposed to dominate, but didn't.


TV Rerun Ownership In Review
LEAD: The Government is moving toward loosening, and perhaps scrapping, longstanding rules that limit ownership by the three major television networks of programs they broadcast.


Red Sox Margin Is Cut to 1 Game
LEAD: The Toronto Blue Jays, finally breaking through against Boston's weak underbelly, an exhausted bullpen, pounded out 14 hits and scored a half-dozen runs against Red Sox relievers in a 10-5 romp at Fenway Park this afternoon to salvage one game of a three-game series.


Decision-Making Setup Revamped by Du Pont
LEAD: A management structure that lasted almost a century was demolished last week by Edgar S. Woolard Jr., chairman and chief executive officer of E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, when he abolished the exective committee as the company's crucial decision-making entity.


Battle Scars
LEAD: THE life of a jockey is typically fraught with danger and injury, but in the case of Chin Yang, 23, riding horses represents a considerable improvement on both counts.
Yang, the third-leading apprentice in the country in victories, emigrated from Laos as a child, where daily gunfire was the norm and shrapnel wounds were something one could get playing outside.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television;   PBS Is Luring Network and Cable Viewers
LEAD: HOW do you top ''The Civil War''?
Public television, which had an unanticipated audience bonanza last week with that acclaimed documentary, has taken its campaign to attract more viewers directly into the enemy camp: network television and cable.


A Walking, Talking Super Memento
LEAD: TO say that Terry Bradshaw talks with his hands is not to suggest that the CBS commentator doesn't have a clear, strong and sometimes booming voice or that he is not articulate to the point of occasional eloquence.


Harlem Cleric to Take Post With Episcopal Diocese of Los Angeles


Silent Farewell to Strawberry
LEAD: Long after the slimmest of hope left Shea Stadium at 4:27 yesterday afternoon, when the F to designate a final score brought the news of Pittsburgh's division clinching victory at St.
Louis, a quiet farewell to Darryl Strawberry was left behind.


You Can Get Shot Outside of New York, Too;   Flaw in Firearms Check
LEAD: To the Editor:


Don't Call 14 Carriers an Extravagance
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Rebel Faction in Liberia Declares All-Out War
LEAD: Strengthened by the capture of a large arms cache, the Liberian rebel faction of Prince Johnson declared all-out war today on the mainstream rebel movement of Charles Taylor and the remnants of the Government army.


Severed German Families, Starting Now to Mend
LEAD: For 40 years, the border that divided East Germany from West Germany cruelly divided thousands of German families.


Ball Parks Crumble, But Some Fans Stay On the Field Forever
LEAD: With the final out of the final inning of the last game ever to be played in Comiskey Park, fans here today bid farewell to more than just 81 summers of baseball memories.


You Can Get Shot Outside of New York, Too;   Civilian Among Police
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jets Trounce the Patriots, 37-13
LEAD: After the Jets brought him in as the second-youngest coach in the National Football League last February, Bruce Coslet decided to invest in the ability of younger players, and he cashed his first big dividend check today as his young team romped to a 37-13 victory over the New England Patriots.


Police Rule Out Pastor In Slaying of Intruder
LEAD: Detectives said yesterday that the pastor of a church in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn where a man was found shot to death on Saturday was not a suspect in the killing.


Review/Televison;   Lindbergh's Soaring and Plunge
LEAD: In the air, Charles A. Lindbergh was in control; it was on earth that he lost his footing. ''Lindbergh,'' the sensitively made documentary that opens a new season for ''The American Experience,'' tonight at 9 on Channels 13 and 49, tells the story of a hero who found himself at odds with most of his countrymen.


Patrick White, Australian Writer Who Won a Nobel, Is Dead at 78
LEAD: Patrick White, the Australian novelist who won the 1973 Nobel Prize in Literature and international acclaim as a harsh but authentic voice of his homeland, died at his residence near Sydney yesterday after an illness of several weeks.
He was 78 years old.


Lampoon Deal Altered
LEAD: J2 Communications has changed its offer for National Lampoon Inc. to keep the deal's value at $4.7 million in stock and warrants.
The adjustment was made to reflect changes in the companies' stock price since the deal was announced in March, said James P. Jimirro, J2's chairman and chief executive.


World Agencies Plan Aid to Soviets and China
LEAD: Even before the Soviet Union officially comes aboard, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund are preparing technical assistance and training for the huge job of transforming the Soviet economy from a centrally planned one to a market system.


Review/Rap;   M.C. Hammer, the Star And Onstage Impresario
LEAD: M.C.
Hammer has become pop's most successful rapper by rapping as little as necessary.
At the Brendan Byrne Arena here tonight, he was the center of an extravaganza of hyperactive dancing, familiar tunes, pounding rhythm and as much audience participation as a pep rally before the big game, with a full house joining in on slogans like ''You can't touch this,'' ''Uh-oh!


15th 52d Street Festival Is Packed, Man, but Fluid
LEAD: Gridlock?
Nightmare?
Traffic seizing up and choking New York City like a huge chicken bone in its throat?


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Chronicle column on Wednesday about the 25th-anniversary celebration for The Washingtonian magazine misstated Mortimer J. Zuckerman's residence.
He lives primarily in Manhattan, not Washington.
The report also misstated Lynn Cheney's tenure as chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities.


For Each Leader There Was a Child And an Encounter With New York
LEAD: At a World Summit for Children, the requisite prop for every world leader was a child.
They were all given the opportunity to pose for cameras hand-in-hand with a tiny, winsome constituent from their own country.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in The Home Section on Thursday about the Winslow Co-housing community near Seattle misstated the date of the presentation that led to its formation.
It was February 1989, not last February.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Motorists are advised to avoid the area from 42d to 57th Streets from First to Eighth Avenues as more than 70 heads of state, including President Bush, visit New York City.


Japan Toy Group Set
LEAD: Toy merchants in Japan formally created an association on Friday to help small toy stores survive competition from Toys ''R'' Us Inc. of the United States and other foreign retailers.
The Japan Association of Specialty Toy Shops, representing 520 small toy retailers, aims to protect its members from foreign competition, the association said.


IN INDIA'S DEBATE, CONVERGING ISSUES
LEAD: On the eve of a special session of Parliament likely to be the most turbulent that Prime Minister V. P. Singh has confronted in 10 months in office, a number of issues are converging into a debate on one fundamental question: What kind of democracy does Hindu India want?


Hungarian Step By Maxwell
LEAD: The Mirror Group, the British publishing company headed by Robert Maxwell, has bought a 40 percent stake in Budapest's evening daily Esti Hirlap, the newspaper reported today.


On the Lookout for a Lost Dad


UKRAINIANS RALLY AGAINST MOSCOW
LEAD: Tens of thousands of Ukrainian nationalists marched today through Kiev, the republic's capital, calling for greater independence from the central government in Moscow.


Steelers' Offense Is Still Faltering
LEAD: The quarterback, adapting to a ball-control style offense, recovered from one of the worst games of his career to direct three long scoring drives.
He hit short passes, long ones and used his running game to eat up yards and the clock today.


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Soviet Soldiers Help With Potato Harvest


Chronicle
LEAD: The Rape Crisis Intervention Program at Mount Sinai Medical Center is giving LINDA FAIRSTEIN an award on Thursday for her work as head of the sex-crimes unit in the Manhattan District Attorney's Office.
Her office prosecutes rape and other sex crimes and recently won conviction of three teen-agers in the Central Park jogger case.


Sheik of Few Words Gets Message Across
LEAD: Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah is a public relations firm's nightmare.
He hates to travel.
He speaks no English.
Even in his native Arabic, he is a most uncharismatic speaker.
He is usually described, charitably, as a painfully shy man of uncommonly few words.


A Veto Mr. Bush Can Still Avoid
LEAD: The House and Senate have reconciled minor differences and are ready to pass overwhelmingly the Civil Rights Act of 1990.
But they have major differences with the White House.
President Bush, still flinging an unjustified charge that it's a ''quota bill,'' threatens a veto.


Sony, Apple Negotiating Laptop Deal
LEAD: In a change in its manufacturing strategy, Apple Computer Inc. has entered negotiations with the Sony Corporation for Sony to produce an inexpensive notebook-computer version of the Macintosh, senior Sony officials said.


Susan Sofronas Wed to David Gnodde
LEAD: Susan Warren Sofronas, a daughter of Mr and Mrs.
George A. Sofronas of Pound Ridge, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Drury Gnodde, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Drury Gnodde of Johannesburg.
The Rev.
Roland M. Jones performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in New Canaan, Conn.


Review/Film Festival;   Moscow Without Tears, But Plenty of Humiliation
LEAD: From its first nighttime shot of a boisterous, glittering Moscow, Pavel Lungin's superb tragicomedy ''Taxi Blues'' presents a Soviet Union that is new to the screen.
Even without the rollicking byplay that temporarily unites the film's two central characters, a debauched Jewish musician and a bitter, tormented, vaguely anti-Semitic cabby, ''Taxi


SOVIETS FORGE TIE WITH SOUTH KOREA
LEAD: The Soviet Union established diplomatic relations with South Korea today, culminating a series of steps that began in June when the South Korean President, Roh Tae Woo, met with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev in San Francisco.


Europe Hesitates on Unity
LEAD: The Persian Gulf crisis, the unexpected cost of German unification and Margaret Thatcher's opposition are interrupting the European Community's headlong rush toward economic and monetary union.
Page D1.


M. D. D. White Weds Ms. McIntyre
LEAD: Carolyn Ella McIntyre, a daughter of Mary Malott of New York and Dr.
Francis E. McIntyre of Austin Tex., was married yesterday to Michael Desmond Delahaye White, a son of Sheila D. White of New York and the late Peter G. White.
The Rev.
Dr.
G.
Eric Pace, the director of the Universal Science of Mind Center in New York, officiated at the Water Club in New York.


Chairman Holds Key to MCA's Sale
LEAD: Several years ago, an investment banker, trying to sell the idea of a management buyout of MCA Inc., came to see Lew R. Wasserman, chairman of the $3.5 billion entertainment company.


MANY IN CONGRESS CRITICAL;   Deadline Extended
LEAD: President Bush and Congressional negotiators agreed today to a deficit-cutting plan that includes major increases in taxes after Mr.
Bush decided that the need for economic stability was worth the sacrifice of his main policies on taxation.


You Can Get Shot Outside of New York, Too
LEAD: To the Editor:


Martha Graham, at 96, Dares Something Different
LEAD: ''Graham laughs,'' the advertisements could read for the weeklong fall season of the Martha Graham Dance Company, which opens tomorrow night at City Center.
Miss Graham's lighthearted ''Maple Leaf Rag,'' to be performed for the first time at the opening gala, is a playful, almost giddy romp to the music of Scott Joplin.


Memories of Home Bind Mexican Film Star to His Fans
LEAD: The horse conquered the world, insisted Tony Aguilar, the singing star of countless Mexican westerns.
Over the weekend, Mr.
Aguilar and his horse settled for conquering the Bronx, as he presented his singing, broncobusting rodeo show to whooping, whistling crowds at the Kingsbridge Armory.


Excerpts From the United Nations Declaration on Children
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the declaration on children issued here today:


Running for Senate, Ex-Head of Klan Trails in Polls but Shakes Louisiana
LEAD: Outside, the air was roaring with the carnival rides and fireworks of the Southwest Louisiana State Fair and Trade Exposition, but inside a nearby auditorium David Duke was offering a ride of his own.


China's Premier Sees Progress on Cambodia
LEAD: Prime Minister Li Peng said today that significant progress had been made in reaching a political settlement in Cambodia and that Beijing was ready to repair ties gradually with Vietnam.


Gail A. Rosselot, Nurse, Is Married
LEAD: Gail Alison Rosselot, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward N. Rosselot Jr. of Titusville, Fla., was married yesterday to Dr.
Steven Herskovitz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Herskovitz of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel performed the ceremony at the James House in North Tarrytown, N.Y.


Now, to Meet the Deadlines
LEAD: Here are deadlines for Congress under today's budget agreement.
They need to be met to avoid the across-the-board spending cuts of $105.7 billion that would otherwise be required by the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit-reduction law.


Lawrence Kasha, Stage Producer, 57; Won Tony Awards
LEAD: Lawrence Kasha, a producer and director of Broadway shows who also acted and wrote for the stage, died on Saturday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 57 years old and lived in Beverly Hills, Calif.


Zoo's Gorilla Patriarch Is Dead
LEAD: Bongo, an African gorilla who played a major role in the breeding of gorillas here, has died of a lung infection at the Columbus Zoo, officials say.
Keepers found the 33-year-old silverback dead on Friday. ''If there was ever a gentle giant, it was Bongo,'' said the zoo's director, Jack Hanna. ''He was a major factor in helping us bring this zoo to where it is.


Japan's Ambiguous Economic News
LEAD: The latest economic news seems completely incongruous: the financial markets are reeling as stock prices continue their vicious yearlong plunge and interest rates soar to their highest levels in nearly a decade.
In the meantime, the economy is so vigorous the policy makers' biggest worry is how to rein it in.


A Promotion At The Times
LEAD: The appointment of James A. Cutie as vice president for marketing at The New York Times has been announced by Lance R. Primis, president and general manager of the newspaper.


Reebok Media Buying Shifts to Dewitt for U.S.
LEAD: Reebok International Ltd. announced on Friday that it was assigning responsibility for media buying for its domestic athletic shoe division to DeWitt Media in New York.
Media buying for the $40 million account had been at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston, which remains Reebok's primary agency.


Oldman Onscreen: The Psychopath In Perfect Accent
LEAD: Meet Jackie Flannery, the barely shaven, greasy-maned psychopathic thug in the black leather jacket.
He has rarely been seen without a beer in his hand, and he has a vicious penchant for kicking his victims when they're down.
Whether he's sucking the life out of a cigarette, or drawing alcoholic sustenance from a bag of beer, or careening drunkenly through a church, Jackie is John Q.


Hesitation Now Greets Europe's Unity Plans
LEAD: With the blame attributed to the Persian Gulf crisis, the unexpected cost of German unification and Margaret Thatcher's foot-dragging, the European Community is suddenly hesitating in what only weeks ago seemed to be a headlong rush toward economic and monetary union.


Zee Best Rallies To Take Hudson
LEAD: Zee Best rallied to win the featured Hudson Handicap yesterday at Belmont Park, but a more important performance came three races earlier in a race for 2-year-old maidens.


Patriot Shake-Up Promised
LEAD: The owner of the New England Patriots' football team yesterday promised ''mammoth changes'' for the team's management structure while angrily complaining he had not been informed by Patriot officials for several days about an incident in which Lisa Olson, a sports reporter for The Boston Herald, alleged she was subjected to sexual harassment by several naked players in the New England locker room on Sept.


End of an Old Ball Park
LEAD: THE last game in Comiskey Park, the oldest major league ball park in America, was played here yesterday afternoon, as the wrecking ball awaits, as it does not just for old ball parks, but for the rest of us, too.


Argentine Leader Sees Gulf Role As Best Way to Reverse Old Image
LEAD: President Carlos Saul Menem of Argentina, the only Latin American leader to order forces to join the blockade against Iraq, says he did so in the hope of presenting a new image of his country as a reliable partner.


The Phony War
LEAD: Between the Nazi conquest of Poland in 1939 and the attack on Norway and Denmark in the spring of 1940, the world experienced what was called a ''phony war.''


Long Road Trip
LEAD: IT cost him a girlfriend, some sore leg muscles and more than $4,000.
But after pedaling some 5,000 miles (and hitching rides for another 3,000 or so) Peter Nelson is convinced his five-month bicycle tour of the major league stadiums was worth it, if only because he got to see Comiskey Park in its last season and some other baseball shrines whose glory days may be numbered.


Question Box
LEAD:
No No-Hitters


Editors' Note
LEAD: An article on Sept. 23 described accusations by Judith Regan, a senior editor at Simon &amp; Schuster, that she was roughed up and insulted by police officers who were taunting her cabdriver.
The article reported her complaint that the officers made an anti-Semitic slur.


Market Place;   Insurance Stocks: Confidence Dims
LEAD: ALTHOUGH prices of some insurance stocks rebounded on Friday, investors' faith in the insurance industry has been as weak as it has been in the banking system in recent weeks.


Dinkins to Seek New Payroll Tax To Pay for Hiring More Officers
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins will propose paying about half the cost of hiring thousands of police officers through a new payroll tax to be levied on all workers drawing paychecks in New York City and their employers.


Teacher Talks Show Signs Of Settlement
LEAD: Shortly after the contract between New York City and its teachers expired at midnight, union officials announced early this morning that they were ''very close to an agreement'' with the city on a pay increase.


Tokyo and Moscow: Wary Courtship
LEAD: The Soviet Union and Japan are now sidling toward resolution of a longstanding territorial dispute and resumption of normal relations.
That, in turn, would enable the U.S. to reduce its military presence in the region.
It's therefore in America's interest to speed the reconciliation along - by urging Tokyo to extend an economic hand to


Budget Pact Called Test Of Theories
LEAD: The long-awaited agreement on the budget deficit, announced yesterday in Washington, might finally test the economic thinking that for a decade has driven the White House, Congress and millions of Americans to advocate a sharp reduction in the deficit.


Jennifer B. Kane Weds C. N. Crapo
LEAD: Jennifer Barrie Kane, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard J. Kane of Bayside, Queens, was married yesterday on the yacht Spirit of New York in New York Harbor to Christopher Neal Crapo, a son of Barbara J. Crapo of Bayside and Donald R. Crapo of Levittown, L.I.
Rabbi Dennis Math performed the ceremony.


Shouts of Revolt Rise Up In Congressional Ranks
LEAD: Even before President Bush and Congressional leaders had finished their sales pitch for the budget compromise, dozens of rank-and-file members today attacked it as unacceptable.
Republicans were angry about the tax increases, and Democrats derided the cuts in domestic spending.


Nancy Francello, Manager, Weds
LEAD: Nancy Elizabeth Francello, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack T. Robbins of Rocky Mount, N.C., was married yesterday to Adam David Schwabacher, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan D. Schwabacher of New York.
Judge Harold Tompkins of New York City Civil Court officiated at the home of the bridegroom's parents.


Starting Over at 70, Can a Publisher Succeed Again?
LEAD: The dingy Manhattan office, with its fluorescent lighting and peeling paint, has a forgotten air suggestive of the crumbling lairs of far-flung port officials in the novels of Joseph Conrad.
But as if in compensation for the dowdy sleepiness of his surroundings, the silver-haired man in residence seems almost preternaturally alive, bestriding his dusty space and talking with an intense animation that constantly shifts his strong features into some new expression of amusement, dismay or enthusiasm.


Souter in the Wings As Court Starts Term In Era of Transition
LEAD: The Supreme Court opens its 1990-91 term on Monday as an institution in transition, significantly changed by the unexpected midsummer retirement of its senior Justice, William J. Brennan Jr.
The full measure of change will not become apparent until Justice Brennan's all-but-certain successor, David H.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Sept. 30:
MONDAY
Carolina Fght Corp
Central Vt Publ Svc Corp
Homestake Mng Co
National City Corp (Cleve)
Nevada Pwr Co
Oxford Inds
Stride Rite Corp
TUESDAY
Central Ill Pub Svc Co
Pacific Enterprises


Jordan Attacks Pace of Refugees' Exit
LEAD: In a tent turned beige by the drifting sands, G. S. Chokra, an Indian diplomat, affixed his flowing signature to a river of passports, completing the official details required for his compatriots here to trade places in tents for places on planes home.


The Siege Is Only Eight Weeks Old
LEAD: Hardly a day passes without some worthy expert clamoring for decisive action, diplomatic or military, in the Persian Gulf.
But there's no such impatience reflected in public opinion polls or among leaders of the United Nations coalition against Iraq.
In terms of politics and policy, the purveyors of impatience are missing the point.


Kasparov to Play Under Russian, Not Soviet, Flag
LEAD: Gary Kasparov, the world chess champion, announced yesterday that when he defends his title in New York next Monday he will not play the match under the Soviet flag but rather under the white, blue and red colors of the Russian Republic.


Chronicle
LEAD: ROBERT GUTHRIE, JOSEPH P. COYLE and CHARLES EPSTEIN, three doctors doing research in mental retardation, will each get the Nancy and Daniel Weisman Award in New York on Oct. 16.
Dr.
Guthrie, professor emeritus at the State University of New York at Buffalo, is being honored for his work in preventing phenylketonuria, which can cause brain damage in babies.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.H.L.
Devils Edge Rangers: Brendan Shanahan scored with 1 minute 9 seconds left in the third period for the second New Jersey goal in less than three minutes, and the Devils registered a 4-3 comeback triumph over the Rangers last night at Madison Square Garden in the final exhibition game for both teams.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.


2 U.S. Pilots Killed as F-15's Crash During Saudi Exercise
LEAD: Two United States Air Force F-15 fighter planes crashed today during an exercise in Saudi Arabia, killing both pilots, the American military said.


6 Die in French Bus Plunge
LEAD: A bus carrying elderly French tourists veered off a highway and into a gully today, killing six passengers and injuring 24, the police said.
Thirteen of the injured were taken to nearby hospitals in the Eastern Pyrenees region of southernmost France.


Yet Poland Had Many Heroic Rescuers of Jews
LEAD: To the Editor:


New York Children Join In Exchanging of Ideas
LEAD: While the spotlight was on the presidents, prime ministers and other world leaders who gathered at the United Nations yesterday to discuss the plight of children, the youth of New York City were not left out.


Yanks Find Punch To Top Brewers, 7-2
LEAD: Don Mattingly and Jesse Barfield each drove in three runs this afternoon as the Yankees beat the Milwaukee Brewers, 7-2.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture on Sept. 10 with an article about a recent spate of biographical novels was published in error.
It showed Ilya Tolstoy, not his father, Leo Tolstoy.


Bookstores Heed Call on Civil War
LEAD: After taking public television by storm with the recent series on PBS, the Civil War is now cutting a swath through the nation's bookstores.
More than 75 stores nationwide already specialize in Civil War books, but now many general bookstores - including the Doubleday Book Shop on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan - are adding Civil


Shigatse Journal;   Lamas Seek the Holy Child, but Politics Intrude
LEAD: Perhaps he is crawling about a remote village somewhere on the slopes of Mount Everest, perhaps he is not even born yet, but a small Tibetan boy will be plucked from his home sometime over the next few years and proclaimed the reincarnation of one of Buddhism's holiest figures - and thus be given the chance to help determine the future of


Outdoors: Seeking The False Albacore
LEAD: A FROST, the second of the season, was on the grass when I went outside before sunrise on my way to meet Kib Bramhall in Oak Bluffs harbor on Martha's Vineyard, where we were to launch his boat and go fly fishing for false albacore.


Auburn Sees Value of Ties
LEAD: Pat Dye, the Auburn coach, was fit to be tied again.
In a home-stadium battle on Saturday night with Tennessee, their foremost Southeastern Conference rival, Dye's Tigers came from a 26-9 deficit to trail, 26-25.


New Designs for Your Court
LEAD: The company that in 1974 introduced a system for setting up backyard recreation centers has developed new designs for outdoor and indoor flooring.
Sport Court, based in Salt Lake City, has introduced safety floor tiles that it recommends for backyards and for gymnasiums and aerobic studios.
The Sport Court system allows homeowners set up areas for playing short-court tennis, a game with special racquets and balls; volleyball; basketball; badminton; roller skating and skateboarding.


Well-Known Bronx Woman Just Disappears
LEAD: Mary Beal is affectionately regarded in her Bronx neighborhood as the woman with the dogs.
She owns six, all mutts she rescued from the streets, crowned with names like Snooky, Snoopy and Sporty, and walked at least three times a day.


PAKISTAN BRINGS BHUTTO TO COURT
LEAD: Benazir Bhutto, who was ousted as Prime Minister last month, went before a special court today and professed her innocence on corruption charges.


Colts Upset Eagles
LEAD: On a team that hasn't won, when seconds remain and the game enters its final jeopardy, that team's players usually run and hide.
That is a primary reason why they flounder. ''But everybody wanted the ball right then in that situation,'' said Bill Brooks, the Indianapolis Colts' receiver, who was explaining the Colts' miraculous and courageous finish here today against the Philadelphia


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Promoting Reservists' Job Security
LEAD: REACTING to the crisis in the Middle East, Ross Roy Advertising in Detroit has created a public service campaign that urges the employers of the nearly 50,000 military reservists who have been called into active service to ''Be a hero - give your employees the freedom to protect ours.''


Rebel General Vows To Defeat Blockade Of His Beirut Forces
LEAD: Flashing a victory sign, Gen.
Michel Aoun, the rebel Christian army chief, vowed to thousands of supporters in East Beirut today that his forces would prevail against a tight blockade imposed by the pro-Syrian Government of President Elias Hrawi.


Review/Film;   Autistic Child as Catalyst For an Unlikely Romance
LEAD: Good intentions don't make good movies.


Ellen J. Mechlin Weds John B. Levitt
LEAD: Ellen Joan Mechlin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Mechlin of Hollis, Queens, was married yesterday to John Benjamin Levitt, a son of Elaine Levitt of New York and the late Dr.
Arnold E. Levitt.
Rabbi H. Joseph Simckes officiated at the Sands at Lido Beach, in Lido Beach, L.I.


Tokyo Stocks Fall Sharply
LEAD: Share prices in Tokyo extended their sharp declines in the early afternoon today, with the Nikkei average falling through 20,000 for the first time since February 1987.
Brokers blamed the heavy losses on last-ditch selling by individuals unloading margin positions.


Plans for a Sludge-Treatment Plant Erode the Tranquillity of Bay Park
LEAD: Don't call Vitantonio La Selva a nimby because he opposes the sewage sludge plant planned for his neighborhood.
His backyard, he likes to point out, already has the largest sewage-treatment plant in Nassau County.
And just next door are a generating plant, a landfill and an oil-transfer and storage station known locally as ''Oil City.


Group Seeks to Prevent Nuclear Space Probe
LEAD: An environmental group asked a Federal judge on Friday to stop next week's scheduled launching of the space shuttle Discovery with the nuclear-powered Ulysses probe in its cargo bay.


World's Markets Post Hefty Losses in Quarter
LEAD: Battered by higher oil prices and a weakening global economy, the world's major stock markets finished their worst quarter since 1974 on Friday.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-15
Concern for the poorest children in the world was expressed at the United Nations, where more than 70 world leaders adopted a declaration and a plan of action committing them to drastically improving the lives of those children.
Page A1


Brooklyn Project Shakes Hispanic-Hasidic Peace
LEAD: A square city block in Williamsburg, overgrown with tall grass and wild shrubs, has become a battleground between Hasidic Jews and Hispanic residents in a struggle for control in the deeply split Brooklyn neighborhood.


Review/Dance;   The American Mythology Through a Gallic Mirror
LEAD: Although a century of American dance is the theme of this year's International Dance Biennial in Lyons, the continuing three-week festival has invited French choreographers as well as Americans to participate.
Guy Darmet, the festival's artistic director, commissioned the pieces, stipulating only that their themes be related in some way to


Will the Children Really Be Helped?
LEAD: As the World Summit for Children ended here tonight, diplomats and public-health experts were asking whether the conference would produce tangible benefits for children, as its sponsors hoped.


Hussein Seeks a 'Debate' With France
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein said today that Iraq would seek to open a ''debate'' with France over the Persian Gulf crisis.
Passages of his speech implied that Iraq might be prepared to enter such talks with a less than unyielding stance.


Millard Is Sidelined
LEAD: The Minnesota Viking defensive tackle, Keith Millard, probably will be lost for the season after suffering major damage to his right knee against Tampa Bay on Sunday, according to a published report.
Millard, the 1989 National Football League defensive player of the year, was found to have torn ligaments and other damage and is tentatively scheduled for surgery today, The Star and Tribune of Minneapolis reported.


First and Last, Armed Forces Exist to Fight;   Citizens and Defense
LEAD: To the Editor:


Upjohn Gets Stake
LEAD: The Upjohn Company has acquired stock and options equal to a 5.6 percent stake in Clinical Technologies Associates Inc., an Elmsford, N.Y., pharmaceutical research concern.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Upjohn, based in Kalamazoo, Mich., disclosed that it had bought 87,000 Clinical shares in two private transactions for $11.562 a share.


U.S. Is Sued Over AIDS Benefits
LEAD: Hundreds of women, children, drug addicts and homeless people disabled by the AIDS virus are being improperly denied Federal benefits because the Government is using a flawed and outdated definition of the disease, a lawsuit filed yesterday in Federal court in Manhattan charged.


Allied Stores Suit Is Sought
LEAD: A committee representing the Allied Stores Corporation's bondholders asked a bankruptcy judge last week for permission to sue Allied's owners and banks for fraudulently taking money out of the company.


Market Place;   Golden Nugget's Bet on Boxing
LEAD: WHEN the heavyweight champion, Buster Douglas, defends his title against Evander Holyfield on Oct. 25 in Las Vegas, one of the biggest bettors will be Golden Nugget Inc., the hotel casino owner that is the fight's sponsor.


S.E.C. Swearing-In
LEAD: Richard Y. Roberts was sworn in today to fill a vacancy on the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Mr.
Roberts, 39 years old, a former top aide to Senator Richard C. Shelby, an Alabama Democrat, succeeds Joseph A. Grundfest, who left the five-member commission in January.
The S.E.C. regulates stocks and bonds markets, the exchanges that trade in them and other financial markets.


Fluttering Jays Lose and Feel the Heat
LEAD: Despite an early lead, the Toronto Blue Jays were unable to sustain the pace in the pressure-laden American League East division race and fell to Baltimore tonight, 6-3.
The loss was their fifth in their last six games.


The Reds' Mighty Quinn
LEAD: As a footnote to the Yankees' tumble into last place, the Cincinnati Reds will open the National League Championship Series against the Pittsburgh Pirates on Thursday night with a manager that George Steinbrenner twice dismissed, Lou Piniella, who was hired by a general manager, Bob Quinn, that the no longer principal owner demoted and demeaned.


Strawberry Says Door's Still Ajar for Mets
LEAD: Darryl Strawberry criticized the Mets' management and some of his teammates today, but he nonetheless seemed to be softening his attitude about leaving the team as a free agent this month. ''I'm not in any hurry to make the decision,'' he said. ''But I'd listen to the Mets first.''


America West In Airbus Deal
LEAD: America West Airlines agreed today to buy up to 118 Airbus Industrie A320's in a deal worth as much as $5 billion, which could pave the way for the fast-growing airline to bid for the Pan Am Corporation's lucrative Northeast shuttle.
It was disclosed last week that America West was in talks about buying the planes and about buying the shuttle, which flies between Washington, New York and


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: The Executive View - Budget Pact Regarded As Mixed for Business;   Gasoline: Charging Drivers, Helping Drillers
LEAD: The deficit-reduction plan agreed upon by President Bush and Congressional negotiators brought praise from the Business Roundtable as ''necessary'' and ''good for the country.'' While most businesses seem willing to accept new taxes if they would strengthen the economy by reducing the deficit, the impact of the pact would vary by industry.


America's Cup;   New Contender Entering the Defense Race
LEAD: William Koch, a new and potentially powerful player, has decided to form a group to enter the defense trials for the 1992 America's Cup races.


4th Defendant Goes on Trial in Bensonhurst Case


Fashion;   Knickers: They're Out of There!
LEAD: It sure has been an exciting season - from a fashion point of view.
The length of baseball trousers may not be the social and economic barometer that women's hemlines are, but there has definitely been an evolution in the last 70 years or so.
This was the year that spelled the death of knickers.


First and Last, Armed Forces Exist to Fight
LEAD: To the Editor:


ComFed Sues Ex-Workers
LEAD: A Massachusetts savings institution filed a lawsuit today against 34 former employees, contending that widespread misconduct aggravated the financial troubles of the struggling ComFed Savings Bank.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Iraq's unprovoked aggression is a throwback to another era, a dark relic from a dark time.
It has plundered Kuwait, terrorized innocent civilians, and held even diplomats hostage.


8 Historic Buildings Closed Because of Budget Shortfall
LEAD: Despite a weekend Federal budget agreement in Washington, eight buildings at Independence National Historic Park closed today to save money.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Calmat Co., Los Angeles, a cement and concrete company, said Onoda California Inc., a subsidiary of Onoda Cement Co. of Japan, had acquired from Calmat all of the stock of California Portland Cement Co. in exchange for 5.8 million Calmat shares held by Onoda.


Apple to Introduce Lower-Cost Line
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. will introduce new entry-level versions of its Macintosh computers on Oct. 15. ''With these new products, Apple will gain market share,'' said Michele Preston, an analyst for Cowen &amp; Company.
She said Apple could raise its market share to 12 to 13 percent with the lower-price products.


U.S. Is Said to Broach Waiver Of Arms Law to Aid Pakistan
LEAD: State Department officials have suggested that Congress approve temporary aid to Pakistan without a Presidential certification that Pakistan does not possess nuclear weapons, Congressional and Administration officials said today.


More on the Budget
LEAD: POLITICS: Some Republicans are rebelling against tax increases. Page A22.


Asbestos Case Lawyers Set
LEAD: A Federal court judge in Brooklyn has appointed two lawyers to represent all current and future asbestos victims with claims against Eagle-Picher Industries in negotiating with the company over a possible group settlement.


Review/Theater;   Stacy Keach's Gleeful Richard III
LEAD: Stacy Keach leaps into the role of ''Richard III'' with diabolical delight and the gleefulness of an actor who knows he has a captive audience.
A smile turns into a sneer as he begins his exploration at the Shakespeare Theater at the Folger in Washington.


Reviews/Music;   With the Nervis Brothers
LEAD: The Nervis Brothers, who played at Tramps on Saturday night, have about one and a half things going for them.
The one comes in the form of the great New Orleans drummer Ziggy Modeliste; the half comes in the form of a functional bar band that made a fair amount of noise, but not too much sense.


By Design;   Dress-for-Success Suit
LEAD: Don't dismiss the dress-for-success suit.
In several professions, it is still the key to looking equal to the job.
Lawyers, for instance, appear to be ready for battle when they are suited up.


New Marks Are Issued
LEAD: Germany's central bank, the Bundesbank, today began issuing new 100- and 200-mark banknotes that it said were virtually impossible to forge.


TRIAL UNDER WAY FOR INDIAN LEADER
LEAD: After a nine-month delay, the leader of the Navajo Nation and his son went on trial in tribal court here today on charges of soliciting up to $600,000 in bribes and kickbacks from businesses seeking favorable treatment from the tribal government.


Jordan Closes Border to Saudi-Bound Trucks
LEAD: Jordan closed its borders today to trucks bound for Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf in response to Saudi measures that have reportedly halted the flow of Jordanian truck traffic, Government officials said.


Croatia's Serbs Declare Their Autonomy
LEAD: In an atmosphere of rising ethnic tension, Serbs in the Yugoslav republic of Croatia today declared the republic's predominantly Serbian-populated counties to be autonomous.


Giants Welcome a Needed Rest
LEAD: The Giants may have a 4-0 record, but for the first time in this National Football League season they have many injuries.
They lost Odessa Turner, the starting split end, today for at least four weeks (Stacy Robinson will replace him on the roster).
Various dislocated bones, sprains and bruises from their latest game have slowed Carl Banks, Rodney Hampton, Reyna Thompson, Erik Howard and Jumbo


Oil Output Rise Barred in Texas
LEAD: The Texas Railroad Commission voted 2 to 1 today against raising oil production in the East Texas field by 8,000 barrels, to 15,000 barrels a day.
A commissioner said the extra oil was not needed despite the Persian Gulf crisis.


Goldman, Sachs 'Coach' Retiring After 33 Years
LEAD: After 33 years of working on Wall Street, the ''Coach'' has decided to pass his playbook on to a new generation.


15 Leftists and 2 Soldiers Killed In Clash in Peruvian Coca Region
LEAD: A clash in the Upper Huallaga River Valley of Peru has left 15 guerrillas of the leftist shining Path movement and 2 soldiers dead, the army reported today.


Tokyo Stocks Up By 13.24%
LEAD: Tokyo stocks posted their biggest single-day gains today, with the key Nikkei index up 13.24 percent The 225-stock average almost regained the nearly 15 percent it had lost over the previous five trading days.


Ipolera Journal;   Original Australians: Torn Between Two Worlds
LEAD: Goss's Bluff, which juts upward from an expanse of clay-red flatland, speckled with acacia trees, stringy grass and poached-egg daisies, is the original site of a clan of Australian aborigines who recently returned here after having been forced away for decades.


Rabbis Find Support On Mixed Marriage
LEAD: To the Editor:


Auto Workers Union Approves G.M. Accord
LEAD: The United Automobile Workers overwhelmingly approved a new three-year national contract with the General Motors Corporation, clearing the way for bargaining with the Ford Motor Company and the Chrysler Corporation.


Nets' Plan on Coleman? Ask the Pistons
LEAD: The Nets' inability to sign Derrick Coleman, the first player selected last June in the National Basketball Association draft, has led to reports of a possible trade of the former Syracuse University all-American for two members of the league champion Detroit Pistons.


New York City Workers Have Sacrificed More Than Enough
LEAD: To the Editor:


Democrats Raise Senate Funds
LEAD: Democratic candidates for the State Senate, who believe money is the chief variable in their quest to reverse the Republican Senate majority, raised an estimated $175,000 last night with some help from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: Lesson in Influence;   How Heating Oil Was Taxed
LEAD: When the budget deal was announced in the Rose Garden on Sunday, home heating oil was exempted from new taxes.
Today it is not exempt.
What happened?
Senator Lloyd Bentsen.
The senior Senator from Texas reopened the budget compromise to gain a two-cent-a-gallon tax on home heating oil, primarily affecting the Northeast, where most of the nation's home heating oil is used.


Toyota Effort Seeks to Show How It Cares About the U.S.
LEAD: IN a move clearly calculated to counteract the recent spate of anti-Japanese advertising, Toyota Motor Corporate Services of North America Inc. has begun an extensive campaign intended to convince Americans that Toyota cares about their country.


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: The Executive View - Budget Pact Regarded As Mixed for Business;   Airlines: Bigger Burden For Fliers
LEAD: The deficit-reduction plan agreed upon by President Bush and Congressional negotiators brought praise from the Business Roundtable as ''necessary'' and ''good for the country.'' While most businesses seem willing to accept new taxes if they would strengthen the economy by reducing the deficit, the impact of the pact would vary by industry.


Focus Is On Judge In Trial Of Museum
LEAD: The Mapplethorpe trial, a test case for current standards of obscenity, is by far the most controversial case that Judge F. David J. Albanese has heard in his nine years on the bench, Cincinnati lawyers say.


New York Police Seek 9,000 Officers
LEAD: After months of self-analysis, the New York City Police Department has called for expanding its forces by more than 9,000 officers - about a third already budgeted, a third coming from internal economies and replacement by civilian workers, and a third from money not yet found.


Court to Rule on I.R.S. Ban On Paper Losses by S.&amp; L.'s
LEAD: The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the Internal Revenue Code permits savings and loan institutions to create paper losses for Federal income tax purposes by swapping their portfolios of low-value mortgages for similar portfolios owned by other institutions.


A Book With Utter Nonsense That Makes Sense
LEAD: PETER McWILLIAMS is back, and it's about time.


Waves' Action Could Ease Global Warming
LEAD: GLOBAL warming might pump enough extra energy into the atmosphere to make winds blow faster over the ocean, whipping up the water so much that more salt particles would be thrown into the air, where they would create bigger clouds that in turn would counteract the warming, British scientists say.


Drop in 1990 Net Is Seen at Renault
LEAD: The French state-owned auto maker Renault S.A. will probably report a decline in earnings in 1990, its chairman, Raymond Levy, said at a news conference.
Mr.
Levy predicted Renault's profit would fall at least 8 percent from the 9.3 billion francs (about $1.76 billion) reported for 1989.


New York City Workers Have Sacrificed More Than Enough;   Beggars' License
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pro-Independence Rally Is Held in the Ukraine


Textron Unit In Army Deal
LEAD: Textron Lycoming said today that it had signed a $1 billion contract extension with the Army to build more than 2,000 gas turbine engines for tanks.


Mr. Dinkins's Grim Pay Precedent
LEAD: With tax revenues falling and the economy continuing to worsen, New York City can ill afford the Dinkins administration's proposed 5.5 percent wage increase for the city's teachers' union.
It sets a precedent for costly settlements with all of the other municipal labor unions and reinforces fears that the


Thatcher Seeks U.N. Order On Reparations to Kuwait
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain is pressing the Security Council to order Iraq to pay compensation to Kuwait for damage and looting by its occupation forces, British officials said today.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Washingtonians lined up yesterday to hear ROBERT REDFORD speak at the Smithsonian Institution.
Earlier in the day, he spoke at the National Press Club.
The subject at both places was the environment, and in the course of both talks Mr.
Redford urged the Government to be more aggressive in its environmental policies.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bausch &amp; Lomb Rochester, a maker of contact lenses, named Alexander Izzard and Manuel Sosa vice presidents.


Baghdad Can Pick Up the Tab
LEAD: It is a sound economic as well as moral principle that crime should not pay.
One goal of Iraq's invasion was to expand its claims to the oilfields in Kuwait and, if it could get away with it, claim Kuwait as a whole.
President Bush should announce to the world that when the United Nations policing action is over, Iraq will be required to pay the price of that policing.


Reviews/Music;   Bootsy Collins's Durable Funk
LEAD: Most pop music has its moment, then quickly fades into history.
It ages, especially in the eyes of an audience hungering for freshness.
But something odd has happened recently.
Hip-hop music, which survives on scavenging musical parts from the 1960's and 70's, has resuscitated the image of a handful of bands on the verge of pop extinction.


Reviews/Fashion;   Dresses for Individualists
LEAD: The desire to design a collection of custom clothes developed almost inevitably from Vera Wang's plans for opening a bridal salon.


Record Harvest in China
LEAD: China will harvest a record 422 million tons of grain this year, official reports said today.
The China Daily quoted Chen Yaobang, Deputy Minister of Agriculture, as saying that the grain crop would be 15 million tons higher than last year's record 407 million tons.
He said good harvests were also expected in cotton, edible oils and sugar.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-14
President Bush addressed the U.N. and said he was hopeful there might be a diplomatic solution to the Persian Gulf crisis.
His remarks seemed a step back from the tough tone of recent days.
Page A1


P.&amp;G. Hair Product Is Bought by DEP
LEAD: The Procter &amp; Gamble Company sold its Lilt hair-care product to the DEP Corporation of Los Angeles for an undisclosed price.
DEP's products include Lavoris mouthwash, Topol toothpaste and DEP hair-care products.
P.&amp;G. executives said Lilt, a hair permanent treatment, no longer fitted into the company's business growth plans.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Louisiana Senate race misidentified David Duke, a former Ku Klux Klan leader.


In Last Hours of 2 Germanys: Awaiting Unity and Revelry
LEAD: The two Berlins and the two Germanys began the final countdown today to the moment, at midnight Tuesday, when they will drop the ''East'' and the ''West'' from their names and once again become a single nation with a single capital.


Managers in Survey Pessimistic on Economy
LEAD: The nation's manufacturing economy, shaken by the oil crisis in the Persian Gulf, declined to its lowest level in nearly eight years last month, a survey of purchasing managers released yesterday found.
The survey indicated that production levels fell, new orders dropped and prices increased sharply from August to September.


Wal-Mart Agrees To Buy McLane
LEAD: Wal-Mart Stores Inc. agreed in principle to buy the McLane Company, a closely held distributor with headquarters in Temple, Tex.
Wal-Mart said McLane's owners would be offered the option of receiving unspecified amount of cash or shares of Wal-Mart's common stock.


On the Boards in Brooklyn, An Ark's Worth of Animals
LEAD: Four horses and a goat munched importantly the other day in a stable fashioned from dressing rooms of the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Majestic Theater.
Their human fellow cast members were trying out some tableaux from Martha Clarke's latest creation, ''Endangered Species,'' and Flora the elephant stood ready to enter center stage.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE BUDGET ACCORD
The White House and top Congressional Democrats teamed up to try to hold together a budget deal that faces spirited opposition from rank-and-file legislators in both parties. [Page A1.]
U.S. business is assessing the potential impact of a budget plan that raises taxes on the products of some industries and cuts Federal spending that is vital to the health of others.


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: Albany;   CUOMO CRITICIZES BUDGET AGREEMENT
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, a frequent detractor of the Bush Administration, denounced the Federal budget accord yesterday, saying it would shift costs to those who could least afford them.


S.E.C. Bill Is Passed By House
LEAD: The House of Representatives gave final approval today to changes in the laws governing violations of securities regulations, the second piece of major securities legislation to be passed in the last week.


Teachers' Roles Are Redefined In New Accord
LEAD: The new contract between New York City's teachers and the Board of Education is more than just a package of wage increases.
It also redefines important elements of a teacher's professional role.


Glazer Acquires 8.6% Tonka Stake
LEAD: Malcolm I. Glazer, who has previously bought stakes in corporations without gaining control, acquired an 8.6 percent stake in the Tonka Corporation and said he may seek control of the Minnetonka, Minn., toy concern.
Joseph M. Joyce, Tonka's vice president and general counsel, said he would not discuss Mr.


Patterns
LEAD:
War and Cleavage


Chess
LEAD: There are players who, for whatever reason, do not strive for the world championship.
One of these is the Soviet grandmaster Aleksandr Belyavsky.
But he does enjoy winning on the tournament circuit.


Campbell Consolidates
LEAD: The Campbell Soup Company is consolidating its worldwide biscuit and bakery operations into one organization and has named Richard A. Shea president of the new division.
Campbell's United States biscuit and bakery operations were previously grouped under Pepperidge Farm, while the international biscuit and bakery businesses were a division of Campbell International.


Sallie Mae to Resume Buying Of Its Stock and Warrants
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association yesterday announced its intention to resume buying back its stock on the open market, including the purchase of equity warrants.


No. 1 Belongs To Notre Dame
LEAD: Except for a consensus that Notre Dame is currently the best college football team in the land, today's initial rating of this season's teams by The New York Times computer bears little resemblance to the weekly rankings of the top 25 teams by The Associated Press and United Press International.


Seahawks Stop Bengals, 31-16
LEAD: Derrick Fenner scored three touchdowns, Dave Krieg passed for two and Rufus Porter inspired the defense tonight as Seattle beat previously unbeaten Cincinnati, 31-16.


Without LaFontaine, Islanders Have Doubts
LEAD: Where is Pat LaFontaine?
And once the Islanders finally find him and use a million-dollar salary overhaul to persuade him to return, when and where are they going to find him a stellar supporting cast?


BUSH, AT U.N., SEES HOPE IN DIPLOMACY IN THE GULF CRISIS
LEAD: Stepping back from the tough tone of recent days, President Bush told the constellation of world leaders gathered here today that he was hopeful that there may be a diplomatic solution to the Persian Gulf confrontation.


Oil Prices Plunge on Hint of Mideast Peace
LEAD: Crude oil prices dropped sharply yesterday on the hint of peace.


Gannett Unit Rejects Offer
LEAD: The Gannett Foundation said today that it had rejected a $540 million bid from the Gannett Company to buy its 10 percent block of the company's stock.


With Jets at 2-2, Coslet Is Looking for Some Consistency
LEAD: Consistency is one of the things Bruce Coslet the rookie coach is trying to instill in the Jets this year.


Notre Dame Ranks No. 1
LEAD: College football is a third of the way into the season and that means it is time for The Times's weekly computerized ranking to enter the debate over which are the top teams in the land.


The Souter Men's Club
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: The Executive View - Budget Pact Regarded As Mixed for Business;   Agriculture: Paring the Core Of U.S. Policy
LEAD: The deficit-reduction plan agreed upon by President Bush and Congressional negotiators brought praise from the Business Roundtable as ''necessary'' and ''good for the country.'' While most businesses seem willing to accept new taxes if they would strengthen the economy by reducing the deficit, the impact of the pact would vary by industry.


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: The Accountants;   Profession Sees Slight Pickup, but No Boom
LEAD: Accountants and tax advisers said yesterday that the budget accord would pry open some, but not many, loopholes that individuals and businesses could use to reduce their taxes.


Deal for Sprague Unit
LEAD: The Sanken Electric Company, a Japanese electronics company, signed a letter of intent last week to buy the Semiconductor Group of Sprague Technologies Inc. for $58 million.
The Semiconductor Group, based in Worcester, makes integrated circuits for computer disk drives and automotive components and has about 700 employees.


Submarine Builder in Connecticut Distributes Layoff Notices to 582
LEAD: Electric Boat of Groton, Conn., the nation's largest submarine builder, gave layoff notices yesterday to 582 salaried and hourly employees in response to expected cuts in military spending.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Sir DAVID LEAN, the British film director, plans to marry SANDRA COOKE, an interior designer in London.
It will be the fifth marriage for Sir David, who is 82 years old; Ms.
Cooke is 51.


Careers;   Shift Seen In Executive Benefit Plans
LEAD: ''GOLDEN parachutes'' for top managers are slowing in number, while stock options appear to be increasing, Towers Perrin, a benefits consulting firm, has found.


CSX Profits Rise 68%
LEAD: The CSX Corporation today reported a 68 percent increase in its third-quarter earnings, reflecting broad gains in the transportation company's railroad, barge and container shipping operations.
CSX reported a profit of $101 million, or $1.01 a share, compared with $60 million, or 58 cents a share, in the third quarter of last year.


Ambase to Sell Insurance Unit
LEAD: The Ambase Corporation said yesterday that it had settled the future of its insurance subsidiary by signing a definitive agreement to sell the unit, the Home Insurance Company, to an investment group for a total of $970 million.
The buying group includes


2 Men Get 6 to 18 Years for Rape in Brooklyn
LEAD: Two young men who admitted that they had raped and sodomized a 39-year-old woman and then thrown her from the roof of a four-story building in Brooklyn last year were sentenced yesterday to terms of 6 to 18 years in prison.


'Opportunities' for Peace in the Gulf
LEAD: Addressing the world's political leaders at the United Nations yesterday, President Bush sketchily but unmistakably outlined a sensible diplomatic solution for the Persian Gulf crisis.
His words provide a basis for talks, if Saddam Hussein has the sense to respond before it's too late.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
The Devil's Foot


New York Upheld on Testing Of Prison Guards for Drugs
LEAD: The United States Supreme Court refused today to hear a challenge to New York City's program of random drug testing for guards in the city's jails.


Now, Keep the Promises to Children
LEAD: Even for an institution jaded by diplomatic pomp and ceremony, the weekend's spectacle at the United Nations was extraordinary.
Presidents and prime ministers - more than 70 heads of state in all - came together for the largest global summit meeting in history and pledged to do better by the world's children.


U.S. Signs Trade Pact With Chile
LEAD: The United States and Chile signed an agreement today to monitor their growing trade and investment relationship and lay the groundwork for broader free trade under proposals made by President Bush last June.


Too Many Mammography Machines
LEAD: Mammograms would be cheaper and perhaps more effective in preventing breast cancer deaths if the United States had fewer mammography machines, researchers said today.


Allies Waive Occupation Rights, Clearing Way for German Unity
LEAD: The four victorious World War II allies formally suspended their rights and responsibilities over Germany and Berlin yesterday, leaving the two Germanys fully sovereign to unify on Wednesday.


Marion Rosenwald Ascoli, 88, Longtime Advocate for Children
LEAD: Marion Rosenwald Ascoli, a philanthropist who was a former chairwoman and president of the Citizens Committee for Children of New York, died yesterday at Phelps Memorial Hospital in Tarrytown, N.Y.
She was 88 years old and lived in Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.


INSIDE
LEAD:
High Court Takes Libel Case
The Supreme Court put an important libel case on its docket as it accepted 25 appeals and started a new term with one seat vacant.
Page A18.
90 Killed in China Crash
Hospital officials in Canton say 90 people died when an airliner crashed and rammed 2 other planes during an apparent hijacking.


Instead of Nuts, Bears Gather Foes in Trenton
LEAD: Of all the special interests battling for political advantage here, perhaps the group giving its supporters the biggest public relations headache is 225 or so black bears who have appeared in force on suburban streets just as animal-rights adovcates are trying to plead the bears' case before the Legislature.


U.C.L.A. Program Is Found Biased Against Asians
LEAD: The Education Department said today that an investigation had proved that a graduate mathematics program at the University of California at Los Angeles discriminated against Asian-Americans.


At the Met, 30 Centuries of Mexican Art
LEAD: An elegant crowd of 650 devotees of Mexican art drifted into the Metropolitan Museum of Art's Great Hall last night, past a five-ton pre-Columbian head and a mammoth Aztec serpent for a preview party of one of the largest and most ambitious exhibitions ever mounted by the museum.


Construction Spending Unchanged in August
LEAD: Construction spending stalled in August after posting its first gain in four months in July, the Government said today.
Only an increase in Government projects kept overall construction spending from declining.


Our Ally, the Killer
LEAD: Consider, please, this story of two Middle Eastern presidents:


Smurfit Plans to Build Paper Recycling Mill
LEAD: Plans for a mill in upstate New York that would recycle the equivalent of nearly 25 percent of the newspaper printed in the state have been announced by the Jefferson Smurfit Corporation of St.
Louis, the nation's largest producer of recycled newsprint.


Japanese-Americans To See Redress Checks
LEAD: The Government will start sending $20,000 checks to each of the surviving Japanese-Americans who were sent to internment camps in World War II.


Johnson Not Offered Contract by Celtics
LEAD: Dennis Johnson, a member of three National Basketball Association championship teams and a longtime defensive star, has lost his spot with the Boston Celtics as the team makes a push for younger players.


Evans Hit Helps Red Sox Clinch a Tie for Title
LEAD: Dwight Evans, as a youngster, felt privileged to play against the Cincinnati Reds in the 1975 World Series, generally considered by purists to be the most superb string of post-season games ever.


Under Baghdad's Iron Fist, Hint of Other Opinions
LEAD: A middle-level Iraqi official picked up his office telephone tonight, listened, and then smiled.
Then he turned to a Westerner waiting in the office and gave a thumbs-up sign.


Training for Urban Combat


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: The Executive View - Budget Pact Regarded As Mixed for Business;   Research: An Incentive For Spending
LEAD: The deficit-reduction plan agreed upon by President Bush and Congressional negotiators brought praise from the Business Roundtable as ''necessary'' and ''good for the country.'' While most businesses seem willing to accept new taxes if they would strengthen the economy by reducing the deficit, the impact of the pact would vary by industry.


Chinese Jet Crashes And Rams 2 Others, Killing at Least 90
LEAD: A Chinese airliner believed to have been hijacked slammed into two other planes on the ground at Canton airport today, killing at least 90 people, officials said.


Talking Business with Sir Derek Birkin of RTZ;   Uncertainty Seen In Metal Markets
LEAD: The mining and metal industry is even more closely tied than most businesses to general economic trends.
Its products tend to be priced daily by commodity traders around the world and, from aluminum to zircon, metals are used to make all manner of industrial goods.


Our Towns;   Send Your Tired And Your Poor (For a $6 Fee)
LEAD: The lucky people waited two hours in line here Sunday afternoon for the right to pay $6 a person for a 10-minute ferry ride to Ellis Island.
For Burt and Elly Goldstein and their family, that was two hours, plus $36. ''Plus $3 to park,'' said Mr.
Goldstein. ''It's not right,'' said Mrs.
Goldstein.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ANNE EISENHOWER and SUSAN EISENHOWER are scheduled to speak at Columbia University this afternoon when the university honors their grandfather by giving its Conservation of Human Resources Project a new name, the Eisenhower Center for the Conservation of Human Resources.
It was in 1950 that Dwight D.


The Budget: Ugly but Unavoidable
LEAD: The budget agreement between Congressional leaders and the Bush Administration cuts defense too little.
It increases energy taxes too little.
It taxes rich families too little.
Even so, the coarse compromise would cut the deficit by half a trillion dollars in five years and would accomplish that without savaging any one class, cohort or region.


Rob Moroso, Stock Car Driver, 22
LEAD: Rob Moroso, a stock car driver who was the 1989 Busch Grand National champion and a leading candidate for Winton Cup rookie of the year honors, died in an auto accident here Sunday night.
He was 22 years old and lived in Terrell, N.C.


David Carew Huntington, Art Historian, 67
LEAD: David Carew Huntington, an author and professor of art history, died Saturday at his home in Ann Arbor, Mich.
He was 67 years old and died of a heart attack, his son Caleb said.


At 9 Miles an Hour, It Was Midtown Traffic as Usual


Some Say Mining Company's Move Could Thwart U.S. Plan for Cleanup
LEAD: Seven years after it was designated one of the nation's most polluted industrial sites, Idaho's Silver Valley remains contaminated with vast amounts of lead, and Government officials say the companies responsible for the pollution are trying to avoid paying their share of the cleanup costs.


Rochester Murder Trial Begins


Spacecraft Passes a Critical Test
LEAD: THROUGH foresighted design, clever alterations of command circuits and a bit of luck, NASA engineers have kept the Magellan spacecraft orbiting Venus and off the long list of failures to befall American space endeavors this year.
Its survival, officials say, is the first critical test of the fault-tolerance principles on which the current generation of interplanetary spacecraft is built.


Precious Metals Plummet On Weakening Oil Prices
LEAD: Prices of precious metals plunged yesterday in heavy trading, with gold down $16 an ounce, silver falling to its lowest level since 1982 and platinum reaching a four-year low.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.12
9.08
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.18
7.13
7.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.21
7.16
7.92
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.60
8.68
8.34
30-YR.


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: The Executive View - Budget Pact Regarded As Mixed for Business;   Small Business: Backing Goods Over Services
LEAD: The deficit-reduction plan agreed upon by President Bush and Congressional negotiators brought praise from the Business Roundtable as ''necessary'' and ''good for the country.'' While most businesses seem willing to accept new taxes if they would strengthen the economy by reducing the deficit, the impact of the pact would vary by industry.


Disabled Youngsters Help Observe City's 'Children's Week'


Stocks Stage Rally, Interest Rates Ease And Oil Prices Drop
LEAD: Financial markets reacted swiftly to the last-minute Federal budget accord and President Bush's emphasis on a diplomatic solution in the Persian Gulf.


Supreme Court Roundup;   Justices to Hear Suit Over Quotations
LEAD: Adding an important libel case to the docket for its new term, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide how courts should handle libel suits brought by interview subjects who allege that they were were deliberately misquoted.


Clark Receives Fine
LEAD: Bill White, the National League president, suspended Jack Clark, the Padres' first baseman, for one game and fined him an undisclosed amount for his base-throwing tantrum over being called out on strikes in a game Sept. 26 at San Francisco.
Clark will miss today's game with the Dodgers. (AP)


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: Selling the Deal;   White House and Top Democrats Take Budget Accord to Congress
LEAD: Using the heaviest weapons in their arsenal, the White House and Congressional Democrats joined forces today to overcome spirited opposition from the rank and file to the sweeping five-year budget deal struck over the weekend.


Inquiry on Patriots
LEAD: Philip Heymann, a Harvard law professor who investigated the Nixon administration's involvement in the Watergate scandal, was named yesterday to hold an inquiry into a claim by a female reporter for The Boston Herald that New England Patriot players sexually harassed her.


United Thrives Amid Turmoil
LEAD: Given the environment in which it has been operating, the UAL Corporation could have become a basket case long ago.
As if four takeover bids and three chief executives in four years were not enough, the parent of United Airlines has recently been battered by the rising fuel prices and weakening traffic that have troubled the whole industry.


REPORT SAYS E.P.A. NEGLECTS ECOLOGY
LEAD: A report ordered by Administrator William K. Reilly says the Environmental Protection Agency has neglected the care of natural ecological systems by focusing instead on risks to human health, though the two are directly related and should be analyzed together.


Refugees Continue to Enter Jordan


Transcript of President's Address to U.N. General Assembly
LEAD: Following is a transcript of President Bush's address to the United Nations General Assembly today, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: Who Will Pay;   Tax Burden Expected to Fall On People of Moderate Means
LEAD: The substantial tax increases agreed to by Administration and Congressional negotiators over the weekend would be paid mostly by people of moderate means, despite various provisions aimed specifically at buyers of yachts and others with six-figure incomes, private specialists said today.


Police Raid on Reporter's Files Raises Concerns
LEAD: A police officer in Warren, Mich., obtained a search warrant and on Saturday raided a suburban newspaper reporter's files, confiscating a notebook that investigators said they needed in a homicide case.


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: The Opposition;   Rebellion Flares Among Republicans Over Accord
LEAD: Civil war broke out among Republicans today as dozens of House members insisted that White House lobbying would not stop them from seeking to thwart the budget package announced on Sunday.


Breeders' Cup Purse May Need a Raise
LEAD: Is it time to raise the purses for the Breeders' Cup?


Man Dead in Chinatown In Asian-Gang Gunfight
LEAD: A wild burst of gunfire involving rival Asian gangs on a crowded street in Chinatown left one man dead and two wounded yesterday, the police said.


OPEC Output Jumps by 10%
LEAD: The crude oil output of OPEC members surged about 10 percent last month, to an estimated 22.1 million barrels a day, as the group increased production to make up for supplies lost because of the embargo against Iraq and Kuwait.


Chrysler Incentives
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation extended its buyer incentives on new Dodge, Plymouth, Chrysler, Eagle, and Jeep cars and trucks through Dec. 16.
The program offers retail customers cash incentives of $300 to $2,500, depending on model and year, or financing at annual percentage rates ranging from 7.9 percent to 10.9 percent.


Belmont Handles A Bomb Threat
LEAD: Patrons at Belmont Park were evacuated from the grandstand to the clubhouse for more than an hour yesterday after the track switchboard received threatening phone calls and track investigators found a device made to look like a bomb on a stairwell.


Turner Broadcasting Fills 2 Top-Level Positions
LEAD: The Turner Broadcasting System announced several management changes yesterday, including the latest in a recent series of top-level departures.


Review/Television;   The Trade in Toxic Wastes
LEAD: The United States has found a way to rid itself of toxic wastes.
That's the good news from tonight's episode of ''Frontline.'' The bad news is for the people of the countries, most of them in the third world, to which the stuff is being exported. ''Global Dumping Ground,'' at 9 P.M. on Channels 13 and 49, reports on the international trade in poisonous materials.


Passage From 'Mein Kampf' Ignites Furor at Dartmouth
LEAD: The Dartmouth Review, a politically conservative student weekly, touched off widespread student and faculty protests on the New Hampshire campus over the weekend by printing an anti-Semitic passage from Hitler's ''Mein Kampf.''


Soviet Market Plan: Who's on First?
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's extraordinary powers for resuscitating the economy are a week old, and already at least one citizen, Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov, has found his stock rising, although mainly as a defender of the traditional central planning authority of Communism.


582 Are Laid Off At Electric Boat
LEAD: The Electric Boat shipyards gave layoff notices to 582 employees in Groton and Quonset Point, R.I., citing declining military orders and uncertainty about Federal military expenditures.
The layoffs, mainly of support personnel, represent less than 3 percent of the total work force of Electric Boat, a division of the General Dynamics Corporation.


Review/ Television;   Time to Let Go of Laura Palmer
LEAD: A question concerning commercial television: what do you do after you've broken most of the rules smothering prime-time programming?
The answer offered on Sunday evening by David Lynch and Mark Frost in the special two-hour return of ABC 's ''Twin Peaks'': you go on breaking the same rules and hope that your fans, not noticing, will continue to compare you with Luis Bunuel, Jean Cocteau and Federico Fellini.


Financial News Network Says It Faces Default
LEAD: Financial News Network Inc., the business news service that appears on many cable systems, announced yesterday that depending on how a dispute with auditors was resolved, it could be placed in default with banks on a $48.5 million line of credit.


Nynex Appoints Head For Its Brussels Unit
LEAD: The Nynex Corporation, hoping to develop communications business outside the United States, has set up the Nynex Network Systems Company, based in Brussels, and has named Charles J. Many as its president.


Corrections
LEAD: An answer in the Q&amp;A column of Science Times on Sept. 11 about treadmill exercise by a person with short legs and one with long legs included a misstatement from an academic expert about who would work harder.
The expert says further research has shown that the work would be the same for short and long legs, assuming equal efficiency and body weight.


White House Gets Bill Reducing Ads on Children's TV Programs
LEAD: The House of Representatives overwhelmingly approved legislation today to reduce the amount of television commercials on children's programming by almost two minutes each hour.


AIDS Research Finds 13 Vulnerable Spots In Virus Life Cycle
LEAD: MOLECULAR biologists and drug development experts have climbed rapidly from a valley of despair to a peak of expectation in their struggle to combat the AIDS virus.
The formidable virus once seemed almost beyond the reach of chemicals or vaccines.
But biologists are now confident they have identified 13 major chinks in its armor, each one of which may in time yield to therapeutic attack.


Bridge
LEAD: Many European experts have crossed the Atlantic in the past half century and another seems to be on the way.
Britain's Tony Forrester, who would be rated by many in the world's top 10 individual performers, expects to be a Connecticut resident by next summer.


Ruth C. Streeter, 94, Ex-Leader Of Women Reserves in Marines
LEAD: Ruth Cheney Streeter, who commanded the Marine Corps Women's Reserve in World War II, died on Sunday at her home in Morristown, N.J., two days before her 95th birthday.


Peace Troops in Monrovia
LEAD: Hundreds of troops from a West African peacekeeping force moved into central Monrovia today to try to establish a buffer zone between rival Liberian rebel factions and the remnants of the late President Samuel K. Doe's army.
The West African troops set up roadblocks and installed artillery units on rooftops in the city center.


COLTS MAKE THEIR COACH A MUCH HAPPIER MAN
LEAD: Ron Meyer raced off the field Sunday, congratulated his team, finished several radio and television interviews that were beamed back home to Indianapolis and was just now beginning to savor his Colts' surprising 24-23 victory over the Philadelphia Eagles at Veterans Stadium.


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: The Executive View - Budget Pact Regarded As Mixed for Business;   Defense: After Iraq, Shallower Cuts
LEAD: The deficit-reduction plan agreed upon by President Bush and Congressional negotiators brought praise from the Business Roundtable as ''necessary'' and ''good for the country.'' While most businesses seem willing to accept new taxes if they would strengthen the economy by reducing the deficit, the impact of the pact would vary by industry.


Black Woman's Book Starts a Predictable Storm
LEAD: A book written and published by a black Muslim woman that depicts black women as emotionally and mentally troubled has touched off a bitter controversy in black literary circles and the media over whether the book and the author are racist and whether they should even be covered in the press.


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: The Executive View - Budget Pact Regarded As Mixed for Business;   Alcoholic Beverages: Soft on Beer, Hard on Liquor
LEAD: The deficit-reduction plan agreed upon by President Bush and Congressional negotiators brought praise from the Business Roundtable as ''necessary'' and ''good for the country.'' While most businesses seem willing to accept new taxes if they would strengthen the economy by reducing the deficit, the impact of the pact would vary by industry.


Romania Still Persecutes Its Hungarians
LEAD: To the Editor:


Doctors Time Therapies To Body Rhythms
LEAD: AT 9 o'clock every night, a pump implanted under Harry Wynn's skin gears up for action.
For precisely six hours it pours normally toxic doses of drug into Mr.
Wynn's bloodstream to treat the kidney cancer the 74-year-old retired lawyer has battled intermittently for the last four years.


U.S. AND MOSCOW SEEK ANGOLA UNIT
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union, taking part directly in Angola's peace talks for the first time, have indicated their willingness to police a potential cease-fire and elections to end the 15-year civil war, American, Soviet and Angolan officials said today.


Gandhi Flip-Flops on Punjab and Singh Is Furious
LEAD: Prime Minister V. P. Singh's Government was faced unexpectedly with a new quandary today when Rajiv Gandhi, leader of the opposition, suddenly backed off from an agreement to support a constitutional amendment giving the federal Government the power to rule the troubled state of Punjab for another four years.


Gansler Stays as Coach
LEAD: Bob Gansler will be retained as coach of the United States national team, the new president of the United States Soccer Federation said yesterday.


Regan on S.&amp; L.'s: Too Many Curbs
LEAD: Donald T. Regan, an architect of the Reagan Administration's deregulatory policies, told Congress today that contrary to conventional wisdom, the savings and loan debacle resulted from too many restrictions on savings institutions, not too few.


NEW YORK AGREES TO RAISE OF 5.5% FOR CITY TEACHERS
LEAD: The Dinkins administration and New York's teachers' union announced tentative agreement yesterday on a $236 million one-year contract that provides raises of 5.5 percent.


Trial Opens on Sale of 2 Live Crew Album
LEAD: A jury on Monday began hearing the trial of a record store owner who is charged with selling an album of The 2 Live Crew to an undercover officer after a judge had ruled it obscene.


Friends of Slain Youth Testify at Trial of 4th Bensonhurst Defendant
LEAD: Testimony began yesterday in the trial of the man prosecutors say supplied bats to the crowd that chased Yusuf K. Hawkins before he was shot dead in Bensonhurst on Aug. 23, 1989.


Books of The Times;   Allusions and Subtext Don't Slow a Good Plot
LEAD:
The Music of Chance
By Paul Auster
217 pages. Viking. $18.95.


'Into the Woods' in London
LEAD: Stephen Sondheim's ''Into the Woods'' has opened at the Phoenix Theater in London to mixed reviews.
Michael Coveney of The Observer called the musical ''the most original, vivacious and idiosyncratic show in town,'' while several other critics asserted that its second act failed to live up to the promise of its first.


BankAmerica Deal Approved
LEAD: The Resolution Trust Corporation today approved the BankAmerica Corporation's purchase of the Arizona branches of the Merabank Federal Savings Bank in Phoenix, a failed institution that Federal regulators seized in January.
Bank of America Arizona, a


Polly Peck Stock Halt
LEAD: The steering committee of London's Stock Exchange said today that it would remove the shares of Polly Peck International P.L.C. from The Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index.
Trading in Polly Peck has been suspended since Sept. 20, when the company asked for a halt in trading after the shares fell 55 percent within hours.


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: The Taxpayers;   In Heartland, Accord Brings Sigh of Relief
LEAD: After anxiously watching for weeks while the long agony of budget negotiators played itself out in Washington, shoppers at a convenience store here in the heart of the country's heartland were left today with little more than a sense of relief.


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: The Talks;   Capital Gains and Circles Within Inner Circles: Behind the Budget Accord
LEAD: Ten days of tedious and seemingly unproductive bargaining at Andrews Air Force Base in early September laid the groundwork for the budget compromise that President Bush and Congressional leaders unveiled at the White House on Sunday.


Surviving a Ranger Cut
LEAD: Steven Rice, the 19-year-old right wing who was an outside shot a month ago to make the Rangers, yesterday survived the most recent cut and is likely to start the season with the team Thursday night in Chicago.


Dinkins's Moves: Costly Plan of Action
LEAD: On disparate fronts, Mayor David N. Dinkins has taken actions that may commit New York City to a costly round of wage settlements and will commit it to raising $649 million in new taxes and charges to hire thousands of police officers and expand other anticrime programs.


A Videotape Is Played Of Pan Am 103 Radar
LEAD: American and British relatives watched a video recording today of the last radar blips of Pan Am Flight 103, which ended with the explosion of a terrorist bomb that destroyed the plane.


Exxon, Blaming Coast Guard, Says U.S. Is Liable in Alaska Spill
LEAD: The Exxon Corporation has filed claims against the Federal Government for the costs of the 1989 Alaskan oil spill, saying the Coast Guard was responsible for the environmental disaster, Coast Guard officials said today.


Along the Baltic, It's Still Drab on Saturday Night
LEAD: The East German republic is fading away, to rise again at midnight Tuesday as part of a single Germany, much as it lived its 40 years -drably, without joy and preoccupied with material cares.


Privacy: The Tip of the Iceberg
LEAD: A GREAT debate is raging over ''Caller I.D.'' telephone services, which display the number of the calling telephone on a small liquid crystal display screen.
Some people say the service will enhance privacy by allowing the receiver to screen unwanted calls.
Others say Caller I.D. has the potential to erode privacy by, for example, forcing the caller to divulge an unlisted number.


Robert K. Greenleaf, 86, Pioneer Of Humanist Business Philosophy
LEAD: Robert K. Greenleaf, a management consultant who helped develop a humanistic philosophy for business people, died Saturday at his home in Kennett Square, Pa.
He was 86 years old and had suffered a series of strokes, his daughter, Madeline Jaynes, said.


Boys Will Be Forever
LEAD: Many people have been angered by the story of the New England Patriots football players displaying themselves naked to a female sports reporter in the locker room.


Humana May Buy Hospital
LEAD: Humana Inc., the nation's largest investor-owned hospital chain, said yesterday that it has offered to buy Michael Reese Hospital in Chicago, one of the largest American teaching hospitals, and the Michael Reese Health Plan Inc., a prepaid health plan with 240,000 members.


Seasons Sway Human Birth Rates
LEAD: SONGBIRDS mate in spring and their nestlings hatch en masse a month later.
Sheep conceive in fall, carry their young for six months, and by early spring the fields are alive with the sound of bleating lambs.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Miller Brewing Company, Milwaukee, a unit of Philip Morris Companies, will introduce a new low-calorie beer, Miller Reserve Light, with an ad campaign designed by the Milwaukee-based agency Frankenberry, Laughlin &amp; Constable.
The agency handles other accounts for Miller, as do Backer, Spielvogel Bates, New York, and Leo Burnett, Chicago.


Honored Principal Demoted Over Faked Tests and Records
LEAD: An elementary school principal recently honored by the White House has been demoted after investigators concluded that the school faked report cards, doctored achievement tests and inflated attendance records.


Queen Bess Island Journal;   On a Ravaged Coastline, The State Bird Hangs In
LEAD: On this scrap of island in Barataria Bay on Louisiana's Gulf Coast, a pelican egg lies bleaching in the sun, separated from its mother by waves that washed over its nest in a spring storm.
Chilled to the bone, the tiny bird died inside the shell, a victim of the forces that are causing this island and much of Louisiana's coastline to crumble into the water.


Devon Buys Rights To Jackets for Tickets
LEAD: Devon Direct Marketing and Advertising Inc. in Malvern, Pa., has bought exclusive rights to the ticket jackets of Trump Air, Trump Shuttle and Amtrak for media placement.


Seeking to Resolve Hostage Issue, Lebanese Militia Frees 40 Shiites
LEAD: A pro-Israeli Lebanese militia in southern Lebanon released 40 Shiite Muslim prisoners today in an apparent attempt to encourage Muslim fundamentalists to free Israeli and Western hostages.


Associates Corp.'s Notes Yield 8.87%
LEAD: Associates Corporation of North America, a subsidiary of the Ford Motor Company, is offering $300 million in notes, due in 1993, through Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.


The Hard Hit Family and Its Increased Costs
LEAD: Consumption figures are averages for each category.
Yearly tax totals are for 1991.
Cigarettes
Mr.
Hard Hit smokes 1.3 packs a day.
The 4-cent-a-pack tax increase would cost him $18.98.
Medicare
Grandma Hard Hit would find that her monthly premiums for coverage of doctors' fees would go from $28.60 to $54.30, or $308.40 more next year.


JVC and MCA in Venture
LEAD: The Victor Company of Japan, known as JVC, said today that it would create a new record company with the music division of MCA, the United States entertainment giant.


3 in Connecticut Focus on Taxes In a TV Debate
LEAD: Connecticut's three major candidates for governor attacked one another for 90 minutes tonight in a televised debate that centered on budgets and taxes, and specifically on the plans put forward by the Republican nominee.


Scores of Actors Flock to Tryouts For Ethnic Roles in 'Miss Saigon'
LEAD:
What's that I smell in the air?
The American Dream. . . .
On stage each night: Fred Astaire.
The American Dream.
- From ''The American Dream,'' in ''Miss Saigon.''


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: The Experts' View;   Aches Aside, An Eclectic Accord That Economists Say Seems to Fit
LEAD: ''There's a puff of smoke here and a glint of mirrors there,'' said one grudgingly satisfied Congressional staff member. ''But the budget deal is mostly made of beef.''


There Were Not Many Cars Going Pretty Much Nowhere
LEAD: So maybe it wasn't so bad yesterday after all.





France Denies Talking With Iraq Over Settlement of the Gulf Crisis
LEAD: France said today that it was not engaged in talks with Iraq, secret or otherwise, to resolve the Persian Gulf crisis.


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: The Executive View - Budget Pact Regarded As Mixed for Business;   Tobacco: Possible Push For Discounts
LEAD: The deficit-reduction plan agreed upon by President Bush and Congressional negotiators brought praise from the Business Roundtable as ''necessary'' and ''good for the country.'' While most businesses seem willing to accept new taxes if they would strengthen the economy by reducing the deficit, the impact of the pact would vary by industry.


Gen. Curtis LeMay, an Architect Of Strategic Air Power, Dies at 83
LEAD: Gen.
Curtis E. LeMay, the former Air Force chief of staff who was an architect of strategic air power and insisted that the nation be willing to use nuclear weapons when necessary, died yesterday in a California military hospital.
He was 83 years old and lived in Moreno Valley, Calif.


Transactions
LEAD:
BASKETBALL
BOSTON (NBA) - Announced they will not offer a contract to Dennis Johnson, guard.
KNICKS (NBA) - Signed Brian Quinnett, forward, to a two-year contract and Greg Grant, John Starkes and Tharon Mayes, guards, to one-year contracts.
Signed Earl Cureton, forward-center.
NETS (NBA) - Signed Chris Dudley, center, to a multiyear contract.


Criminal Justice: Hard Goal for Cuomo
LEAD: Mario M. Cuomo had been Governor for less than two weeks when, acting on an idea that had been kicking around for half a century, he created a new position of director of criminal justice to oversee the state's far-flung penal system.
Officials here interpreted this move, outlined in Executive Order 2, as a sign that Mr.


U.S.-Italian Airline Pact
LEAD: After 20 years of negotiations, Italy and the United States signed a memorandum last week that would allow Italy's flagship airline to land in additional American cities.
The Government-owned Alitalia airline will offer year-round service to Boston, Miami, Chicago, Washington and Philadelphia with the option to add four destinations soon.


South Africa Arrests 3 In Massacre on Train
LEAD: Three black men have been arrested in connection with the massacre of 26 black passengers on a commuter train last month, South Africa's Law and Order Ministry said today.


Review/Music;   Recital by Yevgeny Kissin, A Young Soviet Pianist
LEAD: In its 100-year history, Carnegie Hall has seen many a heralded debut, and has been the backdrop for the successes and disappointments that have followed as performing careers have run their course.
Listening to the 18-year-old Soviet pianist Yevgeny Kissin play his debut recital at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon, one felt something assuring in the continuity of this rite.


Newark Head Start Workers Strike Over Pay and Benefits
LEAD: About 2,000 Head Start students were without instructors today when school employees called a strike because of stalemated negotiations with the Newark Pre-School Council.


Many Questions Await Knicks as Camp Opens
LEAD: For a team that has made the playoffs for three consecutive seasons, the Knicks have crucial questions to address as they prepare to open training camp.


Hastening Infertility
LEAD: Animals that reproduce abundantly early in life accelerate the onset of infertility later in life, a process similar to that of aging, scientists say.


Israel Will Provide Gas Masks and Gear For All Its Residents
LEAD: The Israeli military announced today that it would begin distributing gas masks nationwide to the general public next week.


Agreement on U.S. Budget Causes the Dollar to Slide
LEAD: The deficit-reduction agreement reached in Washington sent the dollar lower against major foreign currencies yesterday.
Traders said the agreement was expected to produce a move to lower interest rates soon by the Federal Reserve.


E.P.A. Contract
LEAD: The Computer Sciences Corporation said it had won a contract that could be worth $347 million to provide computer services to the Environmental Protection Agency.
The company is already the agency's primary supplier of information systems, keeping track of records and preparing computer models predicting pollution patterns.


No. 50 Eludes Fielder As Tigers Beat Yanks
LEAD: Cecil Fielder did not hit a home run last night at Yankee Stadium.
The Yankees did not hit much of anything.


Study of Play Yields Clues To Success
LEAD: GAMES of ''house,'' mock battles of schoolyard Ninja Turtles and other diversions of young children have come under intense analysis as scientists studying the roots of social skills find that ability in interpersonal dealings can be crucial for academic achievement and success throughout life.


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: The Elderly;   Cost Increases for Medicare Recipients Stir Protests
LEAD: A bipartisan budget agreement that would significantly increase costs for 33 million Medicare beneficiaries stirred angry protests today from elderly people, who threatened to take political vengeance against members of Congress who support the measure.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The new top editor of Le Monde, the Paris newspaper, is DANIEL VERNET.
Mr.
Vernet, 45 years old, will succeed ANDRE FONTAINE, who is retiring at 69.


Volatile Date Passes Quietly As Police Patrol Tibet Capital
LEAD: Hundreds of police officers patrolled today through the center of Lhasa, the Tibetan capital, but despite calls for demonstrations no clashes or arrests were reported.
It was the second volatile date in less than a week to pass quietly.


Rates Fall as Fed Becomes Focus
LEAD: Long-term interest rates fell sharply and Treasury bond prices rose yesterday, in reaction to several positive developments, including the 11-hour agreement to cut the Federal budget deficit announced on Sunday.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Sept. 6 about the financial squeeze on Medicare misstated the limits on physicians' charges to Medicare patients.
Since 1987, Medicare has limited what a doctor may charge for each service to an amount based on that doctor's 1984 charges, plus a specified annual increase.


Chronicle
LEAD: When CLEVELAND AMORY founded the Fund for Animals in 1967, many veterinarians were not supportive of his crusades against killing baby seals and the ill treatment of laboratory animals. ''They thought we were troublemakers,'' Mr.
Amory recalled yesterday.


New-Home Sales Fall 1.4%; August Drop 6th in 8 Months
LEAD: Sales of new homes fell by 1.4 percent in August, the Commerce Department reported today.
Analysts said sales would have fallen further except for buyers who rushed to sign contracts out of fear that the Persian Gulf crisis would cause mortgage interest rates to rise.


Bitter Dispute Is Threatening Program for Marrow Donors
LEAD: A program that has the lofty goal of finding altruistic people to donate bone marrow to save the lives of dying patients has become enmeshed in a dispute that threatens its ability to function.


Drug Blast in Colombia Kills 9
LEAD: A cocaine-processing laboratory blew up today in a house next to a school in Medellin, killing 9 people and injuring 57 others, including 20 children at the school, officials said.


Fuel Stocks For Winter Called Good
LEAD: Supplies of all fuels except propane are likely to be adequate this winter, but prices for both home-heating oil and gasoline are likely to rise significantly, according to experts at a conference here on the winter fuel outlook.


Pepsico Increases Role In the Mexican Market
LEAD: Pepsico said yesterday that it had spent $300 million to buy a controlling interest in Mexico's largest cookie maker and would spend another $200 million to create a larger snack-food company in Mexico.


Knicks Return in Tip-Top Shape


The Pop Life
LEAD:
Bette Midler's Worlds


Joshua Torczyner, Diamond Dealer, 79
LEAD: Joshua Torczyner, a diamond dealer who helped smuggle Jews out of Germany during World War II, died Sept. 26 at the Care West Hospital in Burlingame, Calif.
He was 79 years old and lived in Burlingame.


Freeport-McMoran
LEAD: Freeport-McMoran Inc. said it had agreed in principle to raise its payments to settle lawsuits challenging the merger with the Freeport-McMoran Oil and Gas Company.
The original agreement was reached before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2, which sent oil prices soaring.
The company said it had agreed to increase the price for each Freeport-McMoran Oil and Gas share to $11 from $10.50.


Holyfield Knocks Out An Ex-Aide's Payday
LEAD: In June, when Evander Holyfield dismissed his manager, Ken Sanders, he said that Sanders would nonetheless get his 15 percent managerial share of Holyfield's $8.1 million purse for the Oct. 25 heavyweight title match against James (Buster) Douglas.


Soviet Oil Output Down
LEAD: A Soviet weekly business publication, Commersant, said today that the nation's oil industry was in a catastrophic state, with production and exports falling at the very moment world oil prices were soaring because of the Persian Gulf crisis.
Soviet crude output, hurt by equipment problems, is likely to fall to 4.14 billion barrels in 1990 from 4.25 billion in 1989, while exports for hard currency could drop to 260 million barrels from 308 million, Commersant said.


Mellon Receivables
LEAD: The Mellon Bank Corporation said that through its credit-card operation it had purchased about $110 million in credit-card receivables from the Ameritrust Corporation.
The sale is expected to result in a one-time pretax gain of $14.6 million for Cleveland-based Ameritrust.


Search for Copter Ends
LEAD: The search for three crew members of a Navy helicopter off the Oregon coast has been called off, the authorities said today.
The SC-60B Lamps Mark III helicopter was taking part in an American-Canadian military exercise when it crashed in good weather Sunday night off the coast of Cape Falcon, said a Navy spokesman.


Clifford Ettinger, Educator, 86
LEAD: Clifford Ettinger, a teacher and former supervisor of motion-picture production for the New York City Board of Education, died on Saturday at Danbury Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 86 years old and lived in Newtown, Conn.


Opposition to Affirmative Action Plan in India Spreads


Blue Jays Win, Then Get Some Good News
LEAD: The Toronto Blue Jays still weren't sure whether they should laugh or cry.


Senate Confirms Souter, 90 to 9, As Supreme Court's 105th Justice
LEAD: Ten weeks after President Bush nominated David H. Souter for the Supreme Court, the Senate voted overwhelmingly today to confirm the little-known New Hampshire judge as the Court's 105th Justice.


George A. Hornby, 78, A Book Designer, Dies
LEAD: George Arthur Hornby, a self-educated book designer and producer, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 78 years old.
He died of complications from a recent stroke, said a daughter, Ann Guilfoyle.


President of Alternative Dartmouth Weekly Quits
LEAD: The president of The Dartmouth Review, a politically conservative student weekly newspaper, resigned today, denouncing the paper and its editor in chief for publishing on its masthead an anti-Semitic passage from Hitler's ''Mein Kampf.''


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-21
Germany was reunited at midnight to a blend of pealing bells, Beethoven's ''Ode to Joy,'' the national anthem, scattered hoots and the jubilant blare of German oom-pah-pah.
Page A1


Bass Group Weighs Fight on La Quinta
LEAD: An investment group that includes members of the Bass family of Fort Worth said it was considering a proxy fight to remove the board of La Quinta Motor Inns, a hotel chain based in San Antonio.
The group, which includes the brothers Sid R. and Lee M. Bass, controls 14.8 percent of La Quinta's 13.1 million shares outstanding.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief report in the Company News columns of Business Day yesterday misstated the reason for a drop during the summer in the Tonka Corporation's stock price.
The company was having trouble meeting interest payments, but it did not miss one.


Sanders Becomes A Free Agent
LEAD: The opportunity to play professional football and baseball for teams situated in the same city is now a real possibility for Deion Sanders, the Atlanta Falcon cornerback and former Yankee outfielder, who yesterday became a baseball free agent when he rejected a waiver claim by the Chicago White Sox.


On New Era's Eve, Berlin Rejoices
LEAD: Giddy with the occasion, Peter and Gudrun Grabowski stepped onto Alexanderplatz, the broad square in the eastern half of the city that Berliners affectionately call the Alex, to join tens of thousands of others today who had come to celebrate the rebirth of a single Germany.


Miss Backman, Researcher, Wed
LEAD: Georganne Marla Backman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey L. Backman of Daly City, Calif., was married yesterday to James Garfinkel, a son of Barry H. Garfinkel and the late Patricia A. Garfinkel of New York.
Rabbi Shlomo Kugel performed the ceremony at The Columns in New York.


Gooden Finishes With Loss
LEAD: Dwight Gooden, the symbol of the Mets' inning past, made his final appearance of the season tonight and became the symbol of their losing present.
The Pittsburgh Pirates nailed him for nine hits and eight runs inside five innings, broke his winning streak at eight games and kept him from winning his 20th game of the season.


For Berkeley, Diversity Means Many Splinters
LEAD: The University of California at Berkeley last year became the first major research university in the country to fully integrate its student body, in the sense that no single ethnic or racial group constitutes a majority.


WINE TALK
LEAD: FOR a few days, it looked as if the scare was over.
A large amount of imported wine, mostly French, had been held up by American health authorities because it contained traces of a chemical fungicide not approved for use in the United States by the Environmental Protection Agency.


Chronicle
LEAD: PETER A. LUND has been named to the newly created position of executive vice president of the CBS Broadcast Group.
He will be second in command to HOWARD STRINGER, president of the group.


Apple Set To Offer New Line
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. in two weeks will introduce three computers with ''the most aggressive pricing Apple has ever had,'' the company's chairman and chief executive officer, John Sculley, said today.


Sam Wyche Needs Some Time Off
LEAD: Sam Wyche has a dirty mind.
He's also a bully.
Plus, he's a bad loser.
Other than that, he's a prince of a fellow.


Review/Dance;   French Jitterbugs Find a Future in Harlem's Past
LEAD: The band leader's name was Proust and the ball that the International Dance Biennial devoted to American jitterbugging promised to be a remembrance of Lindys past.


East Beirut Christians Mourn 25 Protesters
LEAD: Church bells tolled and black flags fluttered today across sections of East Beirut in mourning for 25 demonstrators who were killed Monday while protesting a siege by the pro-Syrian Government of President Elias Hrawi.


Lawyer in Pan Am Case Killed
LEAD: The inquiry into the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 was adjourned today after a Scottish lawyer representing the families of 90 American victims was killed in a car crash.
The lawyer, Michael Hughes, 37 years old, was working with an American lawyer, Lee S. Kreindler, representing the families.
He was killed Monday night on a motorway as he drove home to Glasgow, 70 miles north of Dumfries.


Behind Iraq's Resolve, A Militia of the Irregular
LEAD: At an age when most men think of guns only for hunting, Mohammed Shawkri dusted off his AK-47 rifle and his battlefront memories today.


LaFontaine Shows Up
LEAD: Pat LaFontaine rejoined the Islanders yesterday, but there was no announcement about the possible renegotiation of his contract.
He said his agent, Don Meehan, had been talking with Bill Torrey, the Islanders' general manager.
Neither Meehan nor Torrey returned telephone calls.


Children Are Focus Of Diet-Pill Issue
LEAD: AMERICA'S obsession with dieting is having a severe impact on children, a House subcommittee was told last week in hearings addressing the safety of nonprescription diet pills.


Teacher Pact: Bad Timing By City Hall?
LEAD: For City Hall, the settling of its labor contract with the teachers ahead of New York's other municipal unions was a classic case of bad timing, labor experts familiar with the negotiations said yesterday.


Dye Still in Hospital
LEAD: Pat Dye, the football coach at Auburn, who chose to go for a game-tying 1-point conversion rather than a possible game-winning 2-point score in the final moments of a 26-26 tie with Tennessee last Saturday night, entered East Alabama Medical Center in Opelika, Ala., on Sunday night after experiencing stomach pains.


MICROWAVE COOKING
LEAD: EVEN those who cook fairly often in the microwave oven retain the notion that while it is terrific for a meal for one or two, it is useless for a dinner party.
This is far from true, but it must be remembered that a microwave oven handles only one dish at a time and that the rest of the kitchen hasn't died while the microwave oven has been getting exercise, although it may be feeling slighted.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Sept. 28
Sept. 21
Sept. 29
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.2
6.9
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.9
2.9
Gasoline stocks
223.9
222.3
223.7
Distillate stocks
134.8
136.5
122.9
Crude imports, daily
5.0
5.7
6.3
Product imports, daily
2.4
1.5
1.8
Crude stocks
354.6
364.0
333.3
Crude production, daily
7.0
7.0
7.5
Refinery utilization (%)
91.2
92.8
89.4


Economic Scene;   Cleaner Air, Cooler Air
LEAD: COULD taxes on carbon dioxide emissions stop atmospheric warming that threatens to flood coastlines and turn farmland to desert?
Perhaps, concludes a study released last month by the Congressional Budget Office.
But even in the best of plausible worlds, taming the global economy's addiction to carbon fuels would cost trillions of dollars.


127 Killed in Jetliner Collision in China
LEAD: The death toll in China's worst air disaster on record rose this morning to 127 people killed and 46 seriously injured, but there were conflicting accounts of how the hijacked aircraft happened to crash in the southern Chinese city of Canton.


U.S. Expands Inquiry of College Bias
LEAD: In the aftermath of a Federal finding of discrimination against Asian-Americans seeking admission to the University of California at Los Angeles, the Department of Education plans to give closer scrutiny to the admission policies of more universities and colleges, officials said today.


In Virginia Beach, a Community Works;   Not Like South Africa
LEAD: To the Editor:


Senate Gives Bush Limited Backing on Gulf Policy
LEAD: The Senate overwhelmingly adopted a resolution today that supports the actions of President Bush in the Persian Gulf to date, commends him for working through the United Nations to impose economic sanctions on Iraq, but stops short of endorsing the use of military force.


City Hall's Program: Daring Agenda With Great Risks and No Guarantees
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins has done what few public officials have dared to do: Decided to fight crime through a challenging mix of policing and social-policy objectives that have eluded achievement for years.
And he has vowed to pay for them.


Telling the Public to Put Money Where Its Fear Is
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposed payroll tax would cost about 50 cents a week - $26 a year - for a person earning $26,000 a year in 1991 and 75 cents a week - $39 a year - in 1993.


Matsushita and Siemens To Split Computer Work
LEAD: The Matsushita Electric Industrial Company said today that it and Siemens A.G. had agreed to divide up the production of the personal computers the companies sell.


We Can't Do Worse By Legalizing Drugs
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Kenya, a New AIDS Drug Gets Mired in Politics and Financial Disputes
LEAD: Two months after an experimental AIDS drug was unveiled here with fanfare and nationalistic triumph, many Africans have voiced high hopes that it might offer relief from the devastating epidemic, and patients from neighboring countries and even the United States have flocked here in search of treatment.


Clashes at Obscenity Trial On What an Eye Really Sees
LEAD: As the first defense witnesses took the stand in the Mapplethorpe obscenity trial Monday and today, the clash between the art world and Cincinnati law-enforcement officials suddenly came into sharp focus.


IMMIGRATION BILL DEBATED IN HOUSE
LEAD: The House of Representatives began debate today on legislation that would significantly increase the number of skilled foreign workers who could move to the United States each year and increase the overall number of immigrants to this country by more than a quarter of a million people a year.


Corrections
LEAD: The Advertising column of Business Day on Monday, about a campaign to remind employers of their responsibilities to military reservists, misstated the number of reservists who have been called to active duty.
Although a mobilization of 50,000 has been authorized, only 26,806 have been called. in addition to 10,000 who have volunteered.


The Thin Blue Line: Widen It
LEAD: In the last few weeks, Mayor David Dinkins of New York bobbled his first big crisis.
The city was spooked by violent crime and the best he could do was mumble about a report to come in October from Police Commissioner Lee Brown.


Last of Door Ripped From Jetliner Is Retrieved From Ocean's Floor
LEAD: A submarine has retrieved the top half of the cargo door that ripped away from a United Airlines jetliner last year, sweeping nine people to their deaths, a Navy spokeswoman said today.


Limits on Deductions Could Raise Bill for Affluent
LEAD: For most individuals and couples earning more than $100,000 a year, the proposed budget package would mean a higher Federal tax bill because such items as mortgage interest and state and local income tax payments would no longer be fully deductible.


For Bellamy, Race for a Job Few Know
LEAD: Carol Bellamy is working hard these days to explain why she can do better as state comptroller than the incumbent, Edward V. Regan.
But she is working even harder to explain just what a comptroller does.


Mitterrand Ousts Justice Minister in Shuffle
LEAD: President Francois Mitterrand shuffled the Cabinet today, ousting a much-criticized Justice Minister as part of an effort to create a more politically popular Government.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, a biographical note on Thursday, with a symposium of commentaries about German reunification, referred incorrectly to some works of Martin Gilbert, a British historian.
He wrote six volumes of a biography of Churchill, not two.


Chronicle
LEAD: VARTAN GREGORIAN, the president of Brown University, has been chosen chairman of the MacDowell Colony, the retreat for artists and writers in Peterborough, N.H.
It has welcomed LEONARD BERNSTEIN, E. L. DOCTOROW and ALICE WALKER, among others, giving them pastoral seclusion in the company of their peers.


Several Germanys Since 1871, but Today's Is 'Very Different'
LEAD: As the two Germanys meld into one, the crucial question confronting Germans and, indeed, the rest of the world is this: Where does this newborn German entity stand in the vast and tragic sweep of German history?
How will Germany today compare with Germanys of the past?


Judge Orders a Special Hearing for Milken
LEAD: After almost four years under Government investigation, Michael R. Milken is going to have his day in court - although without the possibility of a full acquittal.


Farmers Markets: Good for Growers, Shoppers and Cities
LEAD: THE number of farmers' markets nationwide has almost doubled in the last decade, to 2,000 this year from 1,200 in 1980, according to Public Markets Collaborative, a group that works to establish and preserve markets.


Hedley Howell Rhys, Art Educator, 80
LEAD: Heley Howell Rhys, an educator and art historian, died Wednesday at the nursing center at the retirement community of Crosslands in Kennet Square, Pa., where he lived.
He was 80 years old and died of comlications of Parkinson's disease, his wife, Jean, said.


Dow Declines 10.64, Ending a Strong Rally
LEAD: After two days of extremely strong advances, the stock market rally fizzled yesterday.


At $220,000, Hardly Just a Copier
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation introduced yesterday what it describes as the most versatile office machine ever: a $220,000 copier that also receives electronic images of documents from remote computers, stores them, allows them to be edited and shared over computer networks, and generates documents of print-shop quality at high speed.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: MOST home cooks shy away from curry for fear it is too time consuming.
If you have your curry powder ready to go, however, and your ingredients at hand, it can be done in less than an hour.


50th Homer Eludes Fielder Again
LEAD: The fans were raucous and rowdy before one pitch was thrown last night at Yankee Stadium.
It was a mirage.
The cheering was staged and Cecil Fielder's pursuit of 50 home runs had not yet begun.
Tom Selleck was filming a scene for an upcoming movie and the fans were acting like fans.


Eugene M. Hanofee, Judge, 69
LEAD: Eugene M. Hanofee, a judge in Sullivan County for 13 years, died on Friday at Community General Hospital in Harris, N.Y.
He was 69 years old and lived in Liberty, N.Y.


About New York;   Summer's Game Comes to an End, But He Plays On
LEAD: Tonight, the New York Yankees will end their shabby season in last place.


May Offering Is Withdrawn
LEAD: The May Department Stores Company, one of America's largest retailers, said yesterday that it would eliminate the planned public offering of its Venture discount stores and instead authorized an exchange of Venture stock to holders of May stock.


Airbus Output
LEAD: The European aircraft consortium Airbus Industrie plans to double production by 1995.
In a newsletter, Airbus said it would raise monthly production to about 21 aircraft.
The company predicted the civilian aircraft market would rise from 7,500 planes in 1990 to 12,500 by 2008.
It said it was aiming to win about a third of the $700 billion market.


Results Plus
LEAD:
TENNIS
Americans Become Spoilers At Australian Indoor Tourney
Brad Pearce, David Pate and Scott Davis of the United States were spoilers yesterday, defeating seeded players in the Australian Indoor championships in Sydney.
Pearce unleashed some fierce passing shots to upset the 13th-seeded Australian, Darren Cahill, 6-4, 6-1.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
Markets


Accounts
LEAD: *
Thompson Medical Company, West Palm Beach, Fla., to Beber Siverstein McCabe &amp; Partners, Miami, for its Tempo antacid business.
Billings were not disclosed.


Cellular Merger
LEAD: Cellular Communications Inc. and the San Francisco-based Pacific Telesis Group have agreed to amendments to their previously announced plan for a merger and joint venture.
The amendments provide for New York-based Cellular to spin off to its shareholders its international operations and its long-distance and microwave business into two public companies.


Hopes Riding With Two Goalies
LEAD: A smile breaks out on Lou Lamortello's round face when he assesses the team he has assembled for his fourth year as president of the Devils.


Bush Delivers Pledge of Help
LEAD: President Bush hailed the German unification today as the end of East-West conflict and vowed that the United States would work to help Germany meet the challenges of the future.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Borden Inc., New York, named Judy Barker vice president of social responsibility.


Dollar Falls in U.S. Trading; Gold, Off Overseas, Is Higher
LEAD: The dollar dropped against all leading currencies in uneventful trading in the United States yesterday after moving mostly higher overseas.


Zulu Chief to Shun a Mandela Meeting
LEAD: Prospects for a reconciliation between the African National Congress and the conservative Zulu movement Inkatha faded today when the A.N.C. reported that Inkatha's leader, Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, would not attend a meeting of black homeland leaders at Nelson Mandela's home in Soweto this Friday.


G.E. Planning 500 Layoffs
LEAD: The General Electric Company said today that it would eliminate up to 500 jobs at its giant manufacturing complex here by the end of the year because of the weakening economy.


U.N.L.V. Ban Under Review
LEAD: The National Collegiate Athletic Association has agreed to reconsider its decision banning Nevada-las Vegas from defending its national basketball championship, university officials said today.


Washington's Men Did Not Eat Spam
LEAD: IT was Napoleon who said that an Army travels on its stomach.
That lesson became reality to George Washington at Valley Forge, when, said Dr.
Steven E. Anders, the historian of the Army Quartermaster Corps, he ''heard the troops mutinously chanting, 'No meat, no meat.' '' In Washington's day, the troops were allotted rations of bread, meat and beer or cider, but in hard times they were reduced to ''fire cake,'' a mixture of flour and water baked on a griddle.


Books of The Times;   Gunter Grass Dissents on Unity
LEAD:
Two States - One Nation?
By Gunter Grass
Translated by Krishna Winston with A. S. Wensinger. 123 pages.
A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $18.95.


Treasury Prices Post Small Gains
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities posted only modest advances yesterday, despite another big drop in oil prices.


Trenton Panel Seeks Changes In Health Care
LEAD: A commission appointed by Gov.
Jim Florio offered far-reaching proposals today to control medical costs and reshape the state's health care industry, including a plan for a new $450 million tax on employers to replace the current system of financing care for uninsured hospital patients.


Liberian Rebel Faction Retreats After Clash With African Force
LEAD: The five-nation West African force sent to impose peace in Liberia attacked one of two rebel forces today and forced it to retreat toward this capital's eastern suburbs.


People
LEAD: *
Tro Piliguian has been appointed chairman and chief executive of Ogilvy &amp; Mather, Canada.


One Big Store's Recession Jitters
LEAD: As an early morning drizzle began falling on the parking lot, William Senn, the manager of the big J. C. Penney store here, began another nervous day of coping with consumer lassitude.
He scolded an employee to restore a vanished sale sign in a display window -Who knew how many lost customers that could mean?


In Appeal for Support for Budget, President Calls Plan Best for Now
LEAD: Faced with a revolt in his party's Congressional ranks and wariness around the country, President Bush appealed on television tonight for public support of the budget compromise he and Congressional leaders struck last weekend.
He predicted ''economic chaos if we fail to reduce the deficit.''


Corrections
LEAD: A front-page article on Saturday about United States policy options in the Persian Gulf misidentified the Tunisian Foreign Minister.
He is Habib Boulares.


Preserving An Accord: A How-To
LEAD: In an effort to keep the budget agreement from unraveling and to preserve a semblance of the normal legislative process, Congressional leaders have devised a complicated procedure to translate the provisions of the agreement into law.


THOUSANDS INVADE, RWANDA REPORTS
LEAD: A Rwandan refugee serving as a Ugandan army officer led an invading force of thousands of fellow refugees into Rwanda, forcing its President to cut short a trip to Washington and rush home, reports from the two countries said today.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Bozell International has signed an exclusive partnership agreement with Tass, the official Soviet press agency, to support each other's public relations, advertising and marketing interests.


Big Companies May Benefit From Breaks for Small Ones
LEAD: Under the proposed budget accord, many large businesses that went private in leveraged buyouts in the 1980's could benefit from some of the tax breaks tentatively being set aside for qualified small businesses, several Wall Street experts said yesterday.


S.&amp; L. Criminal Inquiries Confirmed
LEAD: The disclosure of a list of 100 savings institutions selected by the Bush Administration for priority prosecution shows that criminal investigations are under way in a number of high-profile savings and loan institutions.
These include the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association in Denver, where Neil Bush, the


William T. Kirby Is Dead at 79; A MacArthur Foundation Leader
LEAD: William T. Kirby, who served as vice chairman and chairman of the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, died Monday at West Bend, Wis., apparently of a heart attack.
He was 79 years old and lived in Chicago.


USX Steel's New Head Sees Steady Demand
LEAD: In spite of the widespread predictions of a recession, Thomas J. Usher says the USX Corporation has not yet seen any noticeable slowdown in its steel business.
Nonetheless, Mr.
Usher, who was named president of the Pittsburgh-based company's steel unit last week, said that in his new role as head of the nation's largest steel producer he would continue to press for the kind of cost-cutting efforts that have helped U


Fuel Economy and Auto Safety Don't Mix;   Clean Air Bill
LEAD: To the Editor:


State Universities Are for Everyone, Not Just the Poorest;   Going Into Debt
LEAD: To the Editor:


JAPAN-KOREA PACT HAS TOKYO ASTIR
LEAD: An agreement last week between Japanese and North Korean leaders to open discussions on establishing diplomatic relations has stirred unusual confusion and criticism in Japan, embarrassing the Government of Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu.


Maxwell Plans Revamping
LEAD: The British publisher Robert Maxwell announced the reorganization of his publishing empire today, including plans to sell more than $700 million in assets and to take his Mirror Group Newspapers public.


C.D.'s, Bank Funds Steady
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were little changed for the week that ended yesterday.
Interest rates remain caught between inflation fears brought on by high oil prices on one hand and by a stalling economy on the other.


Hastings Loses Primary Race For Florida Secretary of State
LEAD: A former newspaperman foiled the bid of former Federal Judge Alcee Hastings for a political comeback today, capturing the Democratic nomination for Florida's secretary of state.


Asthma Deaths Are Found to Rise Steadily in U.S.
LEAD: Asthma deaths have risen steadily in the United States, with the highest rate found among black male children, and New York City and the Chicago area are largely responsible for the trend, researchers say.


U.S. Soccer Team To Play Soviets
LEAD: The United States soccer team announced today that it would play the Soviet Union's champion club, Spartak Moscow, on Oct. 27 at Blaine, Minn.


Sylvester, Ga.
LEAD: IF you pull onto the sandy shoulder of Route 82 in Worth County, Ga., between Albany and Sylvester, you will be in the vortex of the peanut harvest.
On both sides stretch fields where big farm machines pass in towers of dust, digging up the plants or putting them through a combine.
Moving slowly east and west are tractors and pickups hauling filled red wagons to drying sheds, or more likely in this drought season, directly to wholesalers.


Loews Asks U.S. To Extend Waiver
LEAD: The Loews Corporation, the theater, hotel and tobacco concern, asked the Federal Government to extend the company's clearance to raise its stake in the Champion International Corporation to more than 15 percent, from its current 10.9 percent.


The Saudis, the G.I.'s and the Common Cause: Allies, but at Arm's Length
LEAD: Almost two months after the King of Saudi Arabia asked American forces to defend his country, the attitude of Saudi citizens toward the swelling American military presence here seems supportive, yet decidedly ambivalent.


Rangers Reply
LEAD: Nolan Ryan will be back with the Texas Rangers next year, one of the the team's owners, George W. Bush, said yesterday.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:
Slow Growth in Soft Drinks


Struggles Are Similar To Those of the 70's
LEAD: Women began appearing on the sports staffs of the nation's newspapers and its radio and television stations as well as in the locker rooms of the major league teams in the 1970's.
A decade and a half later, according to the Association for Women in Sports Media, about 500 of the estimated 10,000 sports reporters and broadcasters are women, a number that has doubled over the last two years.


Authors Gather to Muse On the Sense of Place
LEAD: I discovered that my own little postage stamp of native soil was worth writing about, and that I would never live long enough to exhaust it.
William Faulkner


Notes From the Underground
LEAD: Friday, June 8: This morning I'm in line at the Fifth and 23rd BMT uptown token booth.


At 79, an Elite Unit Finds Its Specialty Is Outdated
LEAD: A truckload of vegetables hijacked in Brooklyn?
A 15th-century Fra Angelico stolen from a gallery in Manhattan?
A drug-related kidnapping in Harlem?


A Decision for Exit Visas Hastened East's Downfall
LEAD: A year ago today, on Oct. 3, 1989, the Communist leadership in East Germany allowed thousands of its citizens to leave Czechoslovakia for the West in an effort to stop the exodus of its citizens.
Instead, the Government of Erich Honecker only hastened its own downfall.


An Aspirin Every Other Day Is Found to Reduce Migraines
LEAD: Men who took one aspirin tablet every other day suffered from 20 percent fewer migraines, the painful and often debilitating headaches that afflict one in five adults in the United States, according to a new study.


Review/Film Festival;   A Finn's Films Start Morosely But End in Cockeyed Drollery
LEAD: For Aki Kaurismaki, the writer and director who has two films in the New York Film Festival, being laconical and deadpan is high art.
Is his native Finland as dreary as it seems in his movies, he was asked at a press conference?
Smoking a cigarette and drinking a bottle of beer, the director answered in a monotone, ''It's a wonderland.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;   Lobbying Is Recommended To Prepare for Europe 1992
LEAD: ADVERTISERS and agencies are being urged to start extensive lobbying campaigns to influence the regulation of advertising and marketing in Europe when trade barriers there are eliminated in late 1992.


Germans, First Class and Second
LEAD: Today, the two German states become one.
But will the two German peoples, having grown apart for 41 years, come together, and what values will they share?
Much of Europe's future hangs on that German question.
And only Germans can answer it.


Argentine Debt Payments
LEAD: It may be two years before Argentina can increase what bankers consider token payments on its $67 billion foreign debt, President Carlos Saul Menem said on Monday in an interview in New York.


Kasparov and Karpov Anticipate a Chess War
LEAD: Gary Kasparov, the chess champion of the world, and his challenger, Anatoly Karpov, came face to face at a news conference yesterday morning at the Hotel Macklowe in Manhattan, where they will carry their renowned dislike for each other to the playing board next Monday in a grudge match if there ever was one.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Amdura Corp., Denver, a hardware distribution company that is operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, said it had deferred a plan to sell three subsidiaries and was instead considering a plan to reorganize around its Crosby Group Inc., Harris Wase Management Group and Vac-Tec Systems Inc.


Chronicle
LEAD: DORIS DAY is making a comeback, 23 years after her last film and 17 years after her last television series.
The 66-year-old actress will star in the first of a series of television movies for ABC-TV, which will be broadcast in the 1991-1992 season.


Wallace Carroll, 82; Made Big Donation To Boston College
LEAD: Wallace Edward Carroll, an industrialist who last year made the largest private donation to Boston College in its history, died Saturday at his home in Lake Forest, Ill.
He was 82 years old and also had homes on Martha's Vineyard and in Palm Beach, Fla.


Salvadoran Company Wins Peace of Its Own
LEAD: In an echo of the explosive labor relations that fuel this country's civil war, a 1977 strike at a snack-food company here erupted into violence in which one employee was killed and several were wounded.
An owner was also shot and wounded.


Magazines in Ad Campaign
LEAD: Celebrating 249 generally successful years of American magazines and trying hard to mitigate the effects of the dreary 250th year, the Magazine Publishers of America announced the biggest print advertising campaign in its history yesterday.


Baker Agrees to Housing Aid for the Israelis
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said yesterday that in exchange for United States loan guarantees Israel had given new, wide-ranging assurances that it would not settle Soviet immigrants in the occupied territories.


EDUCATION: Supreme Court;   Segregation After Busing: A Puzzling Legal Issue
LEAD: The Supreme Court began today to grapple with the major legal issue left unresolved from the era of official school segregation: what a school system that was segregated by law decades ago must now do to free itself from the continuing supervision of the Federal courts.


Germany by the Numbers
LEAD: In some respects, the united Germany is less than the sum of its parts.
The statistical tale is told in charts and a map on page A16.


Sonia Yuspeh, Founder Of Ad Firm, Dies at 62
LEAD: Sonia Yuspeh, an advertising and marketing consultant, died on Sunday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 62 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Sick Tibetans Turn to Herbs Once Again
LEAD: When Wangdui Nobu suffered a stroke two months ago and left his village for medical treatment in the big city, his neighbors said he would never return.


President's Address to Nation on Federal Deficit and the Budget Agreement
LEAD: Following is a transcript of President Bush's speech last night from the Oval Office, as recorded by The New York Times.


DINKINS PROPOSES RECORD EXPANSION OF POLICE FORCES
LEAD: Seeking to take command of an issue that has shaken his leadership, Mayor David N. Dinkins announced a barrage of proposals yesterday to fight crime, including a record expansion of New York City's police forces and ambitious new corrections, youth and education programs.
The total cost would be $1.8 billion over the next four years.


T.W. Thompson, 63, Ex-Browns Linebacker
LEAD: Thomas Wright Thompson, a senior vice president with Shearson, Lehman Brothers and a former linebacker for the Cleveland Browns, died on Monday at the University of Maryland Hospital in Baltimore.
He was 63 years old and lived in Baltimore.
He died of cancer, his wife, Elizabeth, said.
Mr.
Thompson had been branch manager of the Baltimore office of Shearson, Lehman since January and was forced to leave in July because of his illness.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''In free self-determination, we want to achieve the unity in freedom of Germany.
We are aware of our responsibility for these tasks before God and the people.
We want to serve peace in the world in a united Europe.''
- President Richard von Weizsacker of Germany. [A1:6.]


Military Contractor Is Fined
LEAD: A manufacturer of the Army's main tactical field radio was ordered today to pay $3.8 million for conspiring to defraud the Government on military contracts by falsifying test results.


Certainteed Chief Takes Additional Job, at Norton
LEAD: Michel L. Besson, who has been running the Certainteed Corporation for its parent, Compagnie de Saint-Gobain, has taken on another assignment for the French industrial giant.


Market Place;   New Optimism Over UAL Deal
LEAD: JUST when the effort by three unions to buy the parent of United Airlines seemed doomed because of a lack of financing, the buyout group is creating new optimism among investors with a fresh proposal.
The new offer would be for a lower amount per share and would require proportionately less long-term bank financing than the existing offer.


Knicks Full of Optimism As They Open Training
LEAD: The Knicks arrived this morning for their first day of training camp, looking as if they had spent the summer wisely.
Everyone appeared to be in excellent shape.
They all spoke confidently.
And they all appeared eager to begin a season that the Knicks insist will be a successful one, regardless of what anyone else may think.


New Marlborough, Mass.
LEAD: THE two towering sugar maples that stand in front of the Old Inn on the Green are ablaze with color.
Inside the sturdy white wooden building, built around 1760, meals planned three months ago are being served.


Dozens Hurt as Crowd Storms Court Where Bhutto Faces Charges
LEAD: A mob broke down police barricades today and stormed the courtroom where former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto is to stand trial for corruption.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Air Crash Mystery in China
Did a cockpit struggle cause a hijacked Chinese plane to crash into a parked jet at Canton's airport, killing 127 people?
Chinese officials would not confirm the report.
Page A3.
South African Rift Persists
The leader of the Inkatha movement spurned a meeting with the African National Congress, dampening prospects for a reconciliation between the two warring groups.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Sept. 17 about the first meeting of the American Crossword Puzzle Academy and Hall of Fame misidentified the John Milton work that described Samson as ''eyeless in Gaza.'' It was ''Samson Agonistes,'' not ''Paradise Lost.''


State Universities Are for Everyone, Not Just the Poorest
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A chart yesterday calculating costs that would result from proposed Federal tax increases misstated the increase in monthly Medicaid premiums for doctors' fees.
They would rise to $54.30 from the current $28.60 over five years, not next year.


Fuel Economy and Auto Safety Don't Mix
LEAD: To the Editor:


Excerpts From Dinkins's Address: Mobilizing to Fight Crime
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the text of Mayor David N. Dinkins's speech on his anti-crime plan at City Hall yesterday:


Japan's Chief Said to Scold Aide for Slur Against Blacks
LEAD: Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan gave his new Justice Minister a stern warning for a racial slur against American blacks but will not demand his resignation, the Foreign Ministry's spokesman said today.


18 Arrested in Washington AIDS Protest


Talmage Journal;   Now, Buddhists Build, And Plan for Tolerance
LEAD: When residents of this tiny hamlet in southern Mendocino County heard about plans by the adjacent community to add 70 buildings and quadruple its population, they were worried not so much about increased auto traffic as about the lack of it.


Pivotal Moment for Bush
LEAD: With his speech tonight from the Oval Office, George Bush completed a fundamental transition: The President who succeeded for so long at giving Americans only good news is now telling them to prepare for economic pain at home and the possibility of war abroad.


Corral Journal;   Chile's Woodmen Fret at Cry 'Spare That Forest!'
LEAD: When the aging motor launch that links Corral to the outside world pulled into the harbor on its midday stop, most of those going aboard were men carrying bedrolls.


Elation, Frustration, and Still No Winner


Integrated Units Are Sought
LEAD: CRI Insured Mortgage Association Inc., Rockville, Md., said yesterday that it had started a tender offer for a majority of the units of four mortgage investment partnerships organized by the bankrupt Integrated Resources Inc.


Rig Count Off in Week
LEAD: The number of American rigs drilling for oil and natural gas fell by 8 last week, to 1,047, compared with 978 a year ago, Baker Hughes Inc., an oilfield services company, said on Monday.
The weekly rig count reflects the number of rigs actively exploring for oil and gas, not those producing oil and gas.


Japan's Past Weighs
LEAD: Japan is suddenly distressed to find it doesn't know what to do and think.
Some people call it profoundly painful and embarrassing.
Some are resentful at U.S. pressure, and the same people say that if America didn't insist, Japan wouldn't do anything.


Protecting Balloons at 120,000 Feet
LEAD: rrHigh-altitude scientific balloons, viewed as low-tech cousins of rockets, are undergoing major technical changes as they are called upon to perform more difficult tasks in a hostile environment.


A Nuveen Fund's Tax-Exempt Issue
LEAD: John Nuveen &amp; Company is offering $250 million in tax-exempt preferred stock from one of its sponsored funds, the Nuveen Investment Quality Municipal fund, through Merrill Lynch Capital Markets and Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
Each underwriter served as lead manager for two of the four series priced.


Book Notes
LEAD:
Three Popular Topics


Suns Seeking to Trade The Rights to Williams
LEAD: With contract negotiations at the breaking point, the Phoenix Suns yesterday put Jayson Williams, their first-round draft choice, up for grabs.


Black Fraternities and Sororities End a Tradition
LEAD: Like dozens of his black fraternity brothers gathered in a hotel on Detroit's waterfront, Greg Ferguson worried about the end of a way of life he had just come to know.
After weeks of physical and mental tests, he became a member of Omega Psi Phi Fraternity last year.


Hawaii Offering Of Airports Bonds
LEAD: A $200 million issue of tax-exempt airports system revenue bonds from Hawaii was tentatively priced yesterday with a maximum yield of 7.80 percent for bonds due in 2020 through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Review/Television;   Scatology, Drugs and Rock-and-Roll
LEAD: By far the most daring new series of the season, ABC's ''Cop Rock'' is already fending off rumors of rapid cancellation.
The ratings for the premiere last week were unimpressive, behind NBC's ''Hunter'' and just about even with a CBS biography of Mike Wallace.
All the more reason, then, for television buffs to waste no time and catch a show that no matter its faults, merits some serious sampling.


Saudi Urges Iraq to Quit Kuwait To Bolster Claims of Palestinians
LEAD: Saying the world is ''teetering between the drums of war and the bells of peace,'' the Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia urged Iraq today to give up Kuwait to strengthen the right of Palestinians to claim a homeland in Israeli-occupied territory.


TWO GERMANYS UNITE AFTER 45 YEARS WITH JUBILATION AND A VOW OF PEACE
LEAD: Forty-five years after it was carved up in defeat and disgrace, Germany was reunited today in a midnight celebration of pealing bells, national hymns and the jubilant blare of good old German oom-pah-pah.


As Trash Is Recycled, Where Can It All Go?
LEAD: Now that New Yorkers are getting the hang of separating their trash for recycling, the city is faced with a growing problem: how to process and market the tons of paper, glass, metal and plastic the Sanitation Department is collecting.


No Prosecution For Man's Role
LEAD: The Manhattan District Attorney yesterday dropped all charges against a man who was arrested while protesting the towing of a woman's car in midtown last month, and he said the Police Department was investigating the conduct of the officer who made the arrest.


Rinfret Urges Large Voter Turnout


Learning to Feed A Battalion or Two
LEAD: PVT.
Danyn Dubois is in training at this Army post 40 miles south of Richmond.
His weapon: A boning knife.
His mission: Fry a chicken.


MORE ON THE BUDGET
LEAD:
A SECOND LOOK: Some experts say the deficit will be cut less than predicted. Page D27.
TAX BREAKS: Big companies may benefit from provisions aimed at small ones. Page D29.
PLANNING AHEAD: How changes in deductions will affect some taxpayers. Page D29.


Michel Leiris, 89, French Writer On Surrealism and Anthropology
LEAD: Michel Leiris, a French anthropologist and Surrealist writer who attracted international attention by chronicling his own obsessions and fears, died Sunday in Saint-Hilaire, southwest of Paris.
He was 89 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Born in Paris in 1901, he was educated both at the Sorbonne and at the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes Scientifiques et Religieuses.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: TOTO, New York is a far cry from the Emerald City right now.
Yet on Sept. 17 - a Monday, you may recall - people looked up from these mean streets to behold - a rainbow!
For some, it was the first rainbow they had seen arcing over the city skyline, unless you count the ones on those souvenir coffee mugs in Times


Padres Hire McIlvaine To Be General Manager
LEAD: Joe McIlvaine, the former Mets executive, said today that a little voice told him it was time to leave New York for a better life style in California.


Joan M. Alvarez Television Producer, 68
LEAD: Joan M. Alvarez, a television producer who in 1979 shared an Emmy Award for a documentary titled ''Angela's Island,'' died Wednesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 68 years old.


Top Soviet General Tells U.S. Not to Attack in Gulf
LEAD: The head of the Soviet military said yesterday that the economic sanctions against Iraq were working and that no force should be used in the Persian Gulf unless it was approved by the United Nations.


Tokyo Stocks In Biggest One-Day Rise
LEAD: Reports of an easing in Persian Gulf tensions and intervention by the Government sent the stock market here exploding upward on Tuesday for its largest one-day gain, a 13.2 percent increase on the Nikkei average.


Bayonne Bridge Hit; Truck Traffic Barred
LEAD: Truck traffic was barred from the Bayonne Bridge between New Jersey and Staten Island last night after a crane being towed by a tugboat struck the center span of the bridge, Port Authority officials said.


Despite Disclaimer, Remark by Bush Adds Arab-Israel Issue to Gulf Picture
LEAD: President Bush's remarks at the United Nations on Monday suggesting that a resolution of the Persian Gulf crisis could pave the way for a settlement of the Arab-Israeli dispute has produced statements of concern by Israeli supporters but piqued the interest of America's Arab allies.


Xerox Researcher Expected To Head Chip Consortium
LEAD: Sematech, the Government and industry alliance formed two years ago to develop better ways to make computer chips, will announce today that William J. Spencer, the Xerox Corporation's senior technical officer, will be its new president and chief executive, according to industry executives.


Curbing Risky Behavior
LEAD: Pledging is not the only activity that has the attention of Greek-letter organizations these days.


Police Review Panel for Yonkers
LEAD: The new Yonkers Police Commissioner, Robert K. Olson, said today that he would establish a complaint-investigation committee and take other steps to improve the department's relations with the city's minority communities.


House Committee Approves Bill for Vote in Puerto Rico
LEAD: The House Rules Committee unanimously approved legislation today to let Puerto Rico vote on whether the island wanted statehood, independence or continuation of its commonwealth status.


ONE GERMANY
LEAD: Today, one of the richest capitalist countries has absorbed one of the richest formerly Communist countries to create a united Germany.
While some things like area, population and land area grow by simple arithmetic, quantifying other aspects of a united Germany is far more complicated.


Grains and Soybeans Rise As Cattle Finishes Lower
LEAD: Grains and soybeans were higher, cattle futures were lower and pork futures were sharply higher today in futures trading on commodities markets.


Bridge
LEAD: A successful defense in a pair event is very rare, but it happened Monday night at Temple Israel, at 112 East 75th Street in Manhattan.
A charity pro-am generated more than $15,000 for the Israel Cancer Research Fund to provide a fellowship for a research scientist.


Foreign Depositors Covered by F.D.I.C. at Failed Bank
LEAD: The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, treading carefully in a nervous financial market, acted recently to protect foreign depositors of a failed Washington bank from loss.
While the move followed an established policy of extending deposit insurance to cover dollars held in overseas branches of American banks, the F.D.I.C.


Governing America by Cabal
LEAD: Sixteen years ago, in an unusual stroke of good sense, Congress created an orderly Federal budget process.
It was never perfect, but then came the mammoth deficits of the Reagan years, which killed it.


Guinness Judge Rejects Appeal
LEAD: A judge today rejected Gerald Ronson's appeal of his $9.2 million fine in the Guinness case, saying rich men are not above the law's punishment.
Justice Denis Henry rejected


Lawmaker Who Broke Back Of Deadlock on the Budget
LEAD: There is nothing flashy about Representative Don J. Pease, the seven-term Ohio Democrat who came up with the tax proposal that broke the budget deadlock.


New York Picks Voting Machine Supplier
LEAD: After five years of political infighting and allegations of corruption and favoritism, the New York City Board of Elections voted yesterday to begin negotiations for a $50 million computerized voting system that would change the way votes are cast in the city.


Tax-Aid Plan for Small Business Called Complex
LEAD: The provision in the budget agreement offering hefty incentives for investment in small business is an unnecessarily complex way to entice individual investors back to the venture capital market and holds the potential for abuse, tax specialists said today.


Oil Prices Continue To Tumble
LEAD: Crude oil, gasoline and heating oil prices continued to tumble yesterday in futures trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Traders said the drop was a further reaction to conciliatory remarks on Monday by President Bush and President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, and the result of heavy selling by speculative traders who bought oil near $40 a barrel and are now fearful of further losses.


Review/Theater;   Dennehy, in 'Iceman Cometh,' Sells Salvation of the Damned
LEAD: Brian Dennehy, most visible these days on film as Harrison Ford's treacherous boss in ''Presumed Innocent,'' is one of those indelible character actors who could very profitably spend the rest of his career in the movies playing crusty Irish pols and cops.
But not unlike his most gifted predecessors in the same Hollywood niche, Charles Durning and the late Kenneth McMillan, Mr.


Temple Professors Narrowly Agree to End Strike
LEAD: Striking professors at Temple University agreed by a slim margin today to return to their jobs while their union appeals a judge's back-to-work order.


Former Papandreou Aide Is Jailed in Scandal
LEAD: A man who was once a top aide and deputy to former Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou was ordered jailed today on charges of involvement in a large-scale financial scandal.


Donation of Artwork to School Is Withdrawn
LEAD: The artist Judy Chicago withdrew her donation of ''The Dinner Party'' to the University of the District of Columbia today as a gesture of support for striking students who want 11 members of the school's 15-member board to resign.


Nikon Account Lost by Scali
LEAD: Scali, McCabe, Sloves has lost the estimated $10 million account for Nikon cameras.


D. Allan Locke, Accountant, 87
LEAD: D. Allan Locke, an accountant, died on Sept. 26 at the Harrwood Nursing Home in Fulton, N.Y.
He was 87 years old and lived in Fulton.


Democratic Leader's Response To President's Budget Address
LEAD: The following is a transcript of a statement by Senator George J. Mitchell, the Democratic majority leader, in response to President Bush's address, as recorded by The New York Times:


NAVAJO TRIAL TOLD OF HIRING REQUESTS
LEAD: The two first witnesses in the corruption trial of Peter MacDonald, the suspended chairman of the Navajo Nation, testified today that they were asked to hire his son as a consultant to streamline relations between their companies and the Indian tribe, the nation's largest.


Nynex Units Consolidating
LEAD: The Nynex Corporation announced yesterday that two of its subsidiaries - the New York Telephone Company and the New England Telephone and Telegraph Company - were combining their jointly owned purchasing company with their jointly owned product development and regulatory affairs company.


Real Estate;   Pennzoil's Big Ventures In Houston
LEAD: THE Pennzoil Company, a Houston-based natural resource concern and the largest seller of motor oil in the United States, has been bottom fishing in this city's troubled real estate market and is acquiring a large portfolio of properties.


Peter Herman Adler; TV Opera Pioneer And Conductor, 91
LEAD: Peter Herman Adler, a conductor who pioneered opera on television as artistic director of the NBC Opera Company and National Educational Television, died in his sleep early yesterday at the home of friends in Ridgefield, Conn.
He was 91 years old.


Manuscripts By Mozart To Be Sold
LEAD: The discovery of the manuscripts of two widely performed Mozart piano works was announced yesterday by Sotheby's in London.
Forgotten for decades in the safe of a seminary in Philadelphia, the manuscripts of the Fantasia in C minor and the Sonata in C minor were discovered on July 31 and sent to London where they are to be auctioned on Nov.


Savings Seen as Less Than Predicted
LEAD: Experts on the Federal budget said today that the deficit-reduction package announced Sunday would not save as much money as President Bush predicted, and they raised questions about the arithmetic used by the budget negotiators.


Chess Champions Go Brain to Brain in New York


U.S. CARRIER SAILS INTO PERSIAN GULF
LEAD: The United States bolstered its forces in the Persian Gulf yesterday with the arrival of the aircraft carrier Independence, and France fired warning shots at a freighter suspected of violating the United Nations embargo on Iraq.


G.M. Unit Delays Closing of Plant
LEAD: General Motors of Canada Ltd. said it would extend production at its Scarborough, Ontario, van plant for about a year.
The plant, which employs about 2,500 people, was to shut down in August 1992, and production was to be transferred to G.M.'s Truck and Bus Group plant in Flint, Mich.


Fuel Economy and Auto Safety Don't Mix;   Europe Can Do It
LEAD: To the Editor:


Carlos Nunez Tellez, Sandinista Leader, 39
LEAD: Carlos Nunez Tellez, a Government leader in Nicaragua in the 10 years of control by the leftist Sandinista Front, died today in Havana, the main Sandinista radio station, Radio Ya, said.
He was 39 years old.


Campaign Trail;   U.S. Turns Negative on Nasty Ads
LEAD: With 35 days to go until Election Day, the Federal Communications Commission indicated today that it would act to put a crimp in the spread of negative political advertising.


Key Congressman Urges Halt in Pakistan Aid
LEAD: The Administration's efforts to funnel short-term foreign aid to Pakistan despite its belief that Pakistan is developing nuclear weapons was dealt a setback today when a key Congressman said ending such aid was unavoidable.


For St. John's Athletes, Seminars on Sex Abuse
LEAD: Spurred to act by charges that five lacrosse players sexually assaulted another student at an off-campus residence last March, St.
John's University in Queens required all 500 members of its 23 sports teams - men and women - to attend the first of a series of seminars last night on the conduct of the student athlete.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.25
8.25
9.05
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.18
7.18
7.77
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.19
7.21
7.86
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.56
8.60
8.78
30-YR.


Review/Film Festival;   What They're Saying About Quincy Jones
LEAD: Quincy Jones, a man of vast personal charm and apparently phenomenal energy, can apply his clean, accessible production style to musicians as different as Frank Sinatra and Kool Moe Dee.
One of the dozens of stellar musical figures interviewed in ''Listen Up: The Lives of Quincy Jones'' explains it simply: ''He makes people sound better than they ever sounded before.


Female Reporters See Renewed Resistance
LEAD: Over the last decade, with both the law and league policy on their side, female sportswriters have gone about the business of reporting the news of sports from various locker rooms across the nation.
Although several were bodily tossed out of their workplace in the 1970's and one received a rat in a gift box from a disgruntled baseball player in 1986, female sportswriters were slowly accepted by the bulk of the establishment.


3 Convicted of Riot Charges in Howard Beach Case
LEAD: Three white men were convicted last night of riot charges in the latest trial stemming from an attack on three black men by a group of whites in Howard Beach, Queens.


Pastrami According to Jackie Mason
LEAD: JACKIE MASON could hardly contain himself.


In Virginia Beach, a Community Works
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dorothy P. Freeman, Donor of Wave Hill In Bronx, Dies at 99
LEAD: Dorothy Perkins Freeman, who in 1960 donated her family estate in the Riverdale section of the Bronx to New York City to establish the Wave Hill arboretum and cultural center, died on Sunday at Miles Memorial Hospital in Damariscotta, Me.
She was 99 years old and lived in Damariscotta.


Red Sox Say, 'Let's Play 162'
LEAD: For those who might think this is destined to be pertinent, Boston's Roger Clemens is scheduled to pitch Thursday, in Toronto, if a playoff game for the American League East title is necessary.


Prof. John C. Sim, 79, An Expert on the Press
LEAD: John Cameron Sim, a professor emeritus at the University of Minnesota who was an authority on community press and scholastic journalism, died Sept. 25 at a nursing home in Minneapolis.
He was 79 years old and lived in Minneapolis.


Scorned at Home, Maine Sea Urchin Is a Star in Japan
LEAD: A STRANGE kind of justice has been served to this rugged port city and the chain of remote island reefs that stretch up and down the Maine coast.


It's Small Consolation, But Viola Gets No. 20
LEAD: Yes, Frank Viola did win his 20th game of the season.
No, Dave Magadan did not win the National League batting title.
And yes and no, Darryl Strawberry ended his eighth season with the Mets but not necessarily his career with the Mets, and said the only things he wanted to do now were to go home and play with his children and attend the 10th reunion of his high school class in Los


No Contest Among Fetuses: Righties 212, Southpaws 12
LEAD: Lefties are by far in a minority, even before they are born, a study of thumb-sucking by fetuses suggests.


Insanity Defense Weighed in Fire Fatal to 87
LEAD: The lawyer for Julio Gonzalez, who is charged in the arson deaths of 87 people at the Happyland Social Club in the Bronx, filed a motion yesterday that could allow an insanity defense.


Quenneville Traded
LEAD: In the third deal completed between the two National Hockey League teams since March, the Hartford Whalers yesterday traded Joel Quenneville, a 32-year-old defenseman who was unprotected in Monday's waiver draft, to the Washington Capitals for future considerations.
Quenneville, who has played 457 games over seven seasons with Hartford, was named the


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Accel International Corp., Dublin, Ohio, an insurance holding company, named William B. Johnson vice president of claims.


Metro Matters;   What's a Mayor Supposed to Do? Give Assurances
LEAD: At a meeting Monday afternoon in Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's Manhattan office, a number of New York City's leading business executives voiced a complaint that some had harbored privately for weeks: they were troubled by what they considered Mayor David N. Dinkins's limp public responses to surging crime and to yawning budget deficits.


On Season's Last Day, A Number of Firsts
LEAD: The last day of the 1990 major league baseball season produced a flurry of statistical firsts yesterday:


Ryan's Coaching Job Is Safe for This Season
LEAD: The Philadelphia Eagles will be coached by Buddy Ryan at least until the end of the season, the team's owner said yesterday.


Why Do We Support Guatemala Killings?
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Right Place for Women
LEAD: Nobody wants to be in the locker room - it stinks - but being there is part of your function as a reporter.
Nowhere else are you going to catch the mood of the team better, the sense of personal drama.
There's plenty of time for anyone who chooses not to be naked to put something on.
A towel.
Shorts.


D'Amato Assails Nominee as U.S. Envoy to Burma
LEAD: President Bush's nominee as Ambassador to Myanmar, formerly Burma, has come under attack from Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, who is charging that the nominee spread false information about a Soviet role in a 1981 attempt to kill Pope John Paul II.


Oil Prices Rebound Nearly 10%
LEAD: Oil prices jumped nearly 10 percent yesterday in futures trading, regaining more than half the ground they had lost in the first two days of the week, on what traders acknowledged was minor news from the Middle East: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq had visited Kuwait.


2 S.I. Trash Haulers Get 12-Year Terms For Illegal Dumping
LEAD: Two owners of private carting companies were sentenced yesterday to 12 years and seven months in prison for dumping thousands of tons of medical waste, asbestos and other hazardous materials in an illegal landfill on Staten Island.


Liberian Rebel Faction Is Ousted From Capital
LEAD: The West African peacekeeping force in Liberia pushed Charles Taylor's rebels out of central Monrovia today in a drive to capture the capital's downtown airfield.


Koch Seems Formidable Conner Foe
LEAD: The defense of the America's Cup, seen six months ago as a lopsided affair with everything tilting in the direction of Dennis Conner's basket, may not be so lopsided anymore.


Air Traffic Up in Europe
LEAD: The Association of European Airlines said today that passenger traffic for its 21 member carriers rose by 10 percent in August, but called the growth profitless.


Store Owner Convicted of Obscenity in Album Sale
LEAD: The owner of a Florida record store was convicted of obscenity charges yesterday for selling a recording by the rap group 2 Live Crew that had been declared obscene by a Federal judge.


Trade Break for Soviets May Be Speeded by U.S.
LEAD: The Administration is considering whether to make Federal guarantees of commercial bank loans immediately available for Soviet purchases of American goods, even before the enactment of Soviet emigration law that President Bush has set as a condition for tariff concessions.


Lobbies Mobilize Force For Battle of the Decade
LEAD: The American Trucking Association has installed 10 extra phone lines and ordered its lobbyists to cancel autumn vacations.
Families U.S.A., a lobbying group for the elderly, has contracted with a computerized mail service to reach 11,000 of its most aggressive supporters.


Rival Networks Face Beloved Game Show On CBS: Baseball
LEAD: For the next two weeks, CBS is counting on ''The Show'' to be the show on television.


Review/Film Festival;   In the End, Literature Conquers All
LEAD: Movies about writers tend to fall to pieces when the writers start writing, at which point there's nothing much for the movie to do except hang around and wait for the writer's reviews to come in.
The act of writing is private, and whether it's done with a quill pen or a personal computer, it is singularly uninvolving to the looker-on.


Arabs at U.N. to Seek Debate Over Kuwait
LEAD: Arab foreign ministers agreed at a meeting here today to support Kuwait's demand for a General Assembly debate on the Iraqi invasion during the current session.


Gamble Quits As Colt's Chief
LEAD: The Colt's Manufacturing Company today announced the resignation of its president and chief executive, Richard F. Gamble, who helped arrange a state-backed buyout in March that ended a three-year strike at the gun maker.
The company said Ronald E. Stilwell, an 18-year veteran of Colt's who also participated in the management-led buyout, would be the new president.


Kuwait Left Behind, Ex-Hostages Struggle to Feet
LEAD: Grace Deem applied for welfare last week.
She walked into the welfare office in Angola, Ind., more than 8,000 miles from her home of nine years, wearing an outfit that was donated by a stranger because she had fled Kuwait with almost no clothing of her own.


Low Voter Turnout in Primaries, Once Again
LEAD: Less than 20 percent of those old enough to vote went to the polls in this year's primary elections, according to a study made public this week by an organization that monitors voter turnout.


Murdoch to Merge Papers
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch, the global media owner, said today that he would merge four of his Australian newspapers into two round-the-clock papers.


Hussein Visits Kuwait Force And Makes Defiant Speech
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein of Iraq made his first known visit to Iraqi troops in Kuwait today and used the occasion to reaffirm a defiant stance toward efforts to get him to withdraw from Kuwait.


MITTERRAND TO SEE 2 LEADERS IN GULF
LEAD: President Francois Mitterrand left today for a 36-hour trip to the Persian Gulf to visit French troops and meet with King Fahd of Saudi Arabia and the President of the United Arab Emirates.


Helen D. Johnson, Foundation Head, 70
LEAD: Helen D. Johnson, the retired president of the Charles E. Culpeper Foundation, died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 70 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Spring Lake, N.J.


Police Officer Shot After Stopping Driver in Brooklyn


Firefighter Rescues Newborn And 2 Others in Harlem Blaze
LEAD: A firefighter following the faint cries of a 3-day-old boy rescued the baby, the baby's mother and a man from a smoke-filled Harlem apartment building yesterday.


Washington Talk;   Iran-Contra Prosecutor Faces Agonizing Choice
LEAD: Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent counsel in the Iran-contra investigation, is confronting the kind of call that prosecutors hate to make: whether to close out his nearly four-year inquiry or to pursue more criminal charges.


Ruth Wittenberg Is Dead at 91; Led Fight for Village Landmarks
LEAD: Ruth Wittenberg, who led fights to preserve historic buildings in Greenwich Village, including the Jefferson Market Courthouse, died in her sleep on Monday at her home on West 10th Street, where she had lived for 65 years.
She was 91 years old.


Germans' Day of Exultation And Marlene Dietrich Too
LEAD: Hundreds of thousands of Germans marked the first national holiday of a united Germany today, flowing through the Brandenburg Gate and down the broad Unter den Linden in a vast, daylong celebration.


Among Farmers, Anger Greets Prospect of Cuts
LEAD: Members of the House and Senate Agriculture Committees began drawing up formulas today for cutting farm program spending $13 billion over the next five years as farmers across the country expressed frustration and anger over the prospect of a reduction in their incomes.


Currents;   What's in Brooklyn? Take a Walk
LEAD: DOWNTOWN Brooklyn is home to some of New York City's most riveting architectural wonders.


Mystery Still Shrouds Crash of Hijacked Chinese Airliner    There were conflicting accounts about the number of hijackers and whether a bomb exploded. (Associated Press)


New Layer of Budget Rules Arouses Skepticism From Experts
LEAD: For the past 15 years Congress has labored under a cumbersome budget process that ultimately failed to impose either the order, fiscal discipline or legislative power that lawmakers intended when they devised it.


Corrections
LEAD: A correction in this space yesterday about a chart of costs that would result from proposed Federal tax increases misidentified the program in which premiums for doctors' fees would increase.
The program is Medicare, not Medicaid; under the budget proposal, the monthly premium would rise to $54.30 from $28.60 over five years.


Sematech's New Chief Ready for Challenge
LEAD: The physicist chosen to replace the late Robert N. Noyce as head of the Sematech chip-making consortium said yesterday that the challenge of making the world's most advanced computer chips brought out the scientist in him, but that he was prepared for the equally difficult task of building national support for the effort to revitalize the


Long-Distance Bill Cleared
LEAD: The House of Representatives passed a bill today that would place new restrictions on companies that provide long-distance telephone service to hotels, hospitals and college campuses.


Deficit Pact Blurs Party Boundaries
LEAD: To break a decade of budget deadlock, President Bush and Congressional leaders swept away the normal process of budget making and produced a compromise that illustrates just how hazy the line between the two parties, and between the White House and Capitol Hill, has become in Washington.


Leningrad Journal;   Capitalism Checks In, Marxist Ghosts Check Out
LEAD: Out damned Marxist chintz!
Begone you dozing doorman of a bemedaled hero of the great patriotic war!


Close to Home
LEAD: AN American diplomat whom Iraq and Saudi Arabia are keeping busy these days gave an interview to my mother's local paper.
If it weren't for the goings-on, he said, he'd have been spending the last month swimming, sailing, clamming and browsing through the best sellers at the Rogers Free Library.
The Rogers Free Library!


Federated and Allied Outline Recovery Plan
LEAD: Eight and a half months after filing for bankruptcy protection, the corporate owners of Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus, Jordan Marsh and other big stores yesterday presented a sweeping business plan that they said was the first step toward becoming solvent by next year.


One Lane to Be Open On the Bayonne Bridge
LEAD: Only one lane of the four-lane Bayonne Bridge between New Jersey and Staten Island will be open to car and bus traffic during the next two to four weeks because of repairs, the Port Authority said yesterday.


Review/Cello;   Rostropovich In Recital At Carnegie
LEAD: We hear Mstislav Rostropovich far more frequently as a conductor than as a cellist these days, and when he appears as a cellist, it is usually as a concerto soloist rather than as a recitalist.
The recital that Mr.
Rostropovich and the pianist Lambert Orkis played at Carnegie Hall on Monday evening gave a listener reason to lament the rarity of his solo performances.


Louis Freddie Kohlman, Jazz Drummer, 75
LEAD: Louis Freddie Kohlman, a jazz drummer, died of cancer on Saturday at his home in New Orleans.
He was 75 years old.


Canned Ham Is Recalled
LEAD: Cameco Inc. of Verona, N.J., is recalling 90,000 pounds of imported canned ham that may contain food poisoning organisms, the Agriculture Department said today.
The product is labeled ''Cameco Cooked Ham,'' said Lester M. Crawford, administrator of the department's Food Safety and Inspection Service.


Review/Music;   Eras of 'Street Scene'
LEAD: One thing that makes Kurt Weill's ''Street Scene'' work as well as it does is the connection it makes between its time - the 1920's of the Elmer Rice play or the 1940's when Weill, Rice and Langston Hughes adapted the play as a musical theater work - and our own.
The characters' inner desires are no different from our own, and their concerns - crime, drugs, scandal, left-wing and right-wing politics and the weather - are thoroughly familiar.


A Latter-Day Victorian Studio By an Architect and Sculptor
LEAD: FROM the outside, the house seems to be wearing a hat, at a rakish angle, like a gangster.
The windows look like eyes and a nose.
The garage door could be a mouth and the molding above it, a mustache.
The facade of this 1,500-square-foot weekend house on two acres near Boston is an architectural self-portrait of its owners: James Kimo Safford Griggs, an architect, and his wife, Stefanie von


Saudis Tell of Iraq Hot-Line Drama
LEAD: Saudi officials have provided new information on why they sought American military assistance after Iraq invaded Kuwait.


Conviction in Dispute At Market in Boycott
LEAD: A Brooklyn woman has been convicted of trying to assault the wife of the owner of a Korean-American market that is the subject of a boycott.


Argentine Loan Status
LEAD: The International Monetary Fund has suspended payment of a $245 million loan to Argentina because the Government failed to achieve promised economic improvements in the third quarter, according to a report published today by El Cronista Comercial, a daily financial newspaper.
Argentina did not adequately cut its inflation rate - in double digits monthly from July through September - and the Government's surplus for the period turned out to be lower than promised, the newspaper said, citing sources in Washington.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: CHRISTOPHER BUCKLEY is a busy guy.
As editor of FYI, the new Forbes magazine, he commissioned an article by RICHARD M. NIXON on wines. (While Mr. Nixon misidentifies two as being first-growth Bordeaux, he discloses that Chateau Margaux is his favorite.) As an author, Mr.
Buckley's new novel, ''Wet Work,'' is to be published Feb.


U S Sprint Offering Home '800' Service
LEAD: U S Sprint introduced a new ''800'' service for residential customers, extending the toll-free numbers now limited to business telephones.
The service will offer an alternative to collect and operator-assisted calling, said Steve Akin, president of U S Sprint's Consumer Services Group.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Monday about Dr.
Charles R. Marshall Jr. misstated his profession.
He was a physiatrist, a specialist in physical medicine, not a psychiatrist.


Safeway Net Rises Sharply
LEAD: Safeway Inc., the Oakland, Calif., supermarket chain, today reported strong gains in earnings despite only moderate growth in sales in its third quarter.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The Hall of Fame ought to be in New York.''
- John Bowman, a baseball historian.
[B14:5.]


Tax Changes in the New Budget Plan: Revenue Gainers...
LEAD:
ENERGY
MOTOR FUELS - Gasoline, diesel, and other motor fuel taxes would increase by 5 cents per gallon on Dec. 1.
The tax would rise to 10 cents on July 1, 1991. 1991: $5.4 billion 1991-95: $45 billion.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS - tax of A 2 cents per gallon on petroleum products used as fuel would be imposed on refiners and importers starting January 1.


Israeli Bristles Over U.S. Loan-Guarantee Terms
LEAD: With American promises for $400 million in loan guarantees fresh in his pocket, Foreign Minister David Levy returned to Israel today bristling at the terms.


Dollar Off in World Trading With Lower Rates Foreseen
LEAD: The dollar declined on world currency markets yesterday amid expectations that interest rates would move lower.


LOCAL RACES HELP BRAZILIAN LEADER
LEAD: In a vote expected to strengthen Brazil's new President, Brazilians elected a new Congress today with a predominantly center-right cast, early returns and polls of voters indicated.


45 Return to the Place Where the Future Began
LEAD: Grown men do not often gather to pay homage to their junior high school, especially when it existed for only seven years.


Review/Television;   Black Sitcoms Steeped in Concept
LEAD: NBC's ''Cosby Show'' and Fox's ''In Living Color'' are very different half-hour comedy shows controlled primarily by black performers.
Bill Cosby's humor tends to be warm and gently didactic: eat your veggies; stay in school.
Keenen Ivory Wayans's approach is hip-hop brash and iconoclastic; neither whites nor blacks are exempt.


U.S. Sales Of Vehicles Down 3.7%
LEAD: United States vehicle sales dropped 3.7 percent in late September compared with a strong period a year ago, but analysts said today that the results were surprisingly strong in light of recent negative economic developments.


Greenspan on Deposit Insurance
LEAD: Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, advised Congress today to move carefully in revising the nation's battered deposit insurance system, particularly if the changes involve reducing the level of coverage.


Thailand's Cigarette Ban Upset
LEAD: In a significant trade victory for the White House, an international trade panel has determined that Thailand's ban on imported cigarettes is illegal, although it upheld a ban on advertising, United States trade officials said today.


Factory Orders Rose 1.8% in August
LEAD: Rising oil prices helped push up the value of orders to factories for manufactured goods by 1.8 percent in August, the Government reported today.
Analysts said the oil-inflated rise disguised the weakness in the industrial sector.


Boys Slain Over Gold Tooth
LEAD: Two teen-agers were shot to death and two were wounded in a fight over a gold false tooth that had dropped from a boy's mouth, the police said today.
An unidentified 16-year-old youth was arrested in the shootings at an apartment complex on Tuesday, the police said, but he was was not immediately charged.


State Urged to Consider Removing New York Telephone From Nynex
LEAD: The top lawyer at New York State's Public Service Commission recommended today that the agency consider forcing the Nynex Corporation to divest itself of the New York Telephone Company.


Critic's Notebook;   Politics and TV Ads, Positive or Negative
LEAD: New Yorkers in this election season are being spared the down-and-dirty television commercials that prevail in less happy states, but that is not to say that the quality of the campaign is high.
Insofar as an election threatens to invite public discussion of serious matters, that invitation is being avoided as successfully in New York as elsewhere.


Resentments Rekindled At Border With Poland
LEAD: It would take more than the midnight fireworks visible across the Neisse River to make the people of this Polish town happy about Germany's reunification.


As State Political Races Go, So Goes Power in Congress
LEAD: Joe Rocks, Republican State Senator from the Fourth District of Pennsylvania, is not what you would normally think of as a national political figure.
But this year he is being treated as one.


Ex-Officer Kills Holdup Suspect
LEAD: A retired police officer shot and killed a man who the police said was holding up a candy store in Washington Heights on Tuesday morning after the man grabbed his money and threatened the other customers at gunpoint.


How the Pirates and the Reds Line Up
LEAD:
Pittsburgh Pirates
Catchers (average, home runs, r.b.i.)
12Mike LaValliere (.258, 3, 31) The left-handed-hitting half of the catching platoon, he did not hit up to his efforts of his first three years with the Pirates.
11Don Slaught (.300, 4, 29) Better known for his hitting than his defense, he made a questionable trade - and the general manager who made it, Larry Doughty - look good.


Manila Faces a Downturn
LEAD: The Persian Gulf crisis, political instability and a series of natural disasters in the Philippines are threatening to wreck the country's economy, the Trade and Industry Secretary, Jose Concepcion, said today.


Rozier Is Waived
LEAD: Mike Rozier's five-year Houston Oiler career, which included two Pro Bowl appearances, is over.


Sex Poll Didn't Ask The Right Questions
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. AND SOVIETS REACH AGREEMENT ON NEW ARMS PACT
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union announced yesterday that they had reached agreement in principle on all the main points in a conventional-arms treaty that will require the Soviets to destroy thousands of tanks, artillery pieces and armored vehicles in Europe.


Treasury Securities End Mixed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were mixed in moderate trading yesterday, as long-term bonds and notes fell and short-term securities were little changed.


Lester Asher, 80, Dies; Was a Union Lawyer
LEAD: Lester Asher, a leading labor lawyer in Chicago, died Tuesday at Stratford Hospital in Stratford, Ontario, where he was vacationing.
He was 80 years old and lived in Chicago.


Russell Thacher, 71, Producer and Writer
LEAD: Russell Thacher, a film producer and writer, died on Monday at the U.C.L.A.
Medical Center in Los Angeles.
He was 71 years old and lived in Woodland Hills, Calif.
He died of complications after abdominal surgery, his family said.
With Walter Seltzer, Mr.
Thacher was co-producer of the films ''Soylent Green'' and ''The Last Hard Man.


Theodore J. Holmgren, Executive, 63
LEAD: Theodore J. Holmgren, a former senior executive of Curtice Burns Foods in Rochester, died on Sunday at Strong Memorial Hospital there.
He was 63 years old and lived in Pittsford, N.Y.


Agents Arrest Car Dealers In Money-Laundering Sting
LEAD: Posing as drug dealers and boasting of the illegal source of their cash, Federal agents bought almost $900,000 worth of luxury cars from five leading car dealerships in New York City in the last several weeks, Federal prosecutors said yesterday.


Throwing Out the First Puck
LEAD: No matter how you look at it, today is not a routine day on the calendar.
The major league baseball playoffs begin.
The athletes of the National Basketball Association enjoy the final day of their off season before the official opening of training camp.
The harvest moon shines full and bright.
And the pucks drop in earnest for the opening of the 1990-91 National Hockey League season.


New Charges, Denials
LEAD: Sports Illustrated and George Steinbrenner's lawyer made a renewed attack on baseball's investigation of the Yankee owner yesterday, but Commissioner Fay Vincent dismissed much of the criticism as ''misleading, factually flawed and damaging.''


Talking Deals;   What Humana Likes in Chicago
LEAD: EXUDING the self-confidence that delights its investors, Humana Inc. is plunging into the crowded and highly competitive Chicago health-care market.
Already the country's largest hospital chain, Humana announced a provisional agreement this week to buy one of Chicago's 20 health maintenance organizations and take over its main affiliate, the troubled Michael Reese


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about bank deposit insurance misstated the position taken by the American Bankers Association.
It does not support the extension of insurance to foreign deposits.


David Blumstein, 88, Retired Math Teacher
LEAD: David Blumstein, a mathematics teacher at James Madison High School in Brooklyn for 30 years and the former owner of summer camps in the Poconos, died on Monday at Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 88 years old and lived in Philadelphia.


Bond Deal Near Completion
LEAD: Lion Nathan Ltd. of New Zealand said today that it had settled all but the final financing details of its joint venture purchase of Bond Brewing Ltd.
The acquisition would make Lion the largest beverage company in Australia and New Zealand.


Seeking to Look Old
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Continental Bank Stake of Tisch Up
LEAD: Laurence A. Tisch and his family have increased their stake in the Continental Bank Corporation to 8.5 percent from 5.6 percent.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Tisch group said it might seek approval of the Federal Reserve Board to acquire more shares of the Chicago-based bank holding company.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart at the top of the Business Digest on Monday misstated the previous week's decline in the Dow Jones industrial average.
It was 59.90 points.


Tourist Found Robbery Suspect Instead of Aid
LEAD: When the sister-in-law of the Utah man who was stabbed to death last month in a Manhattan subway station ran up to two men seeking their help during the assault, she found to her horror that one of them was actually in on the robbery and grabbed her to prevent her from escaping, a prosecutor said yesterday.


The Richness of Black
LEAD: To The Home Section:


Where to Put the TV? Still No Easy Answer
LEAD: FROM the very moment its eerie gray screen weasled its way into the American home, the television set has been the focus of heated household debates worthy of Ralph and Alice Kramden.
The question of where to put it has caused domestic strife and challenged homeowners, interior decorators and furniture designers, who for some 40 years have been torn over whether to hide it or flaunt it.


Why Just the 'Keating Three'?
LEAD: The special counsel to the Senate Ethics Committee, Robert Bennett, has recommended that the Keating Five be reduced to the Keating Three.
He proposes that two of the five Senators under investigation for favors to Charles Keating, the California savings and loan operator, be cleared of misconduct charges.


Ousted Federal Judges Loses Race for Florida Nomination
LEAD: Former Judge Alcee Hastings lost a Democratic runoff for Florida secretary of state on Tuesday.


James Hardie Bid
LEAD: James Hardie Industries agreed to buy the GardenAmerica Corporation, a United States sprinkler system company, from the Black &amp; Decker Corporation for $40 million.
It said the deal, to be completed by Nov. 30, would double James Hardie's sprinkler activities in the United States.
GardenAmerica has annual sales in excess of $60 million.


Dinkins Prepares Hiring Freeze to Ease Budget Gap
LEAD: A day after Mayor David N. Dinkins presented his police hiring plan, the administration prepared yesterday for an immediate freeze on the hiring of many other New York City workers, except those who perform required functions, generate revenue or save money.


Books of The Times;   Authors, One Setting: Berlin Before the Wall
LEAD:
Battleground Berlin
Diaries 1945-1948
By Ruth Andreas-Friedrich
Translated by Anna Boerresen. 261 pages. Paragon House. $18.95.
Before the Wall
Berlin Days 1946-1948
By George Clare
288 pages. A William Abrahams Book/Dutton.
$19.95.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: As jurors review the Robert Mapplethorpe photographs that resulted in obscenity charges against a Cincinnati art gallery, the final showing of the exhibition, now in Boston, will be a benefit to raise money for the Robert Mapplethorpe AIDS Research Laboratory at New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston.


A New Fund From Goldman
LEAD: Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company said yesterday that it had formed a large fund to invest in debt-laden companies.


And in 1990 . . .
LEAD: As the regular baseball season ended, Boston won the American League East division title and Cecil Fielder of Detroit hit his 50th and 51st homers of the year.
Page D25.


Duke Library Gets D.M.B.&amp;B. Collection
LEAD: DUKE UNIVERSITY is substantially expanding the advertising research division of its library with the addition of a large collection of advertising material from D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles.


Focus on the Tax Package: Who Will Pay How Much?
LEAD: Since the President and Congressional leaders proposed a deficit-reduction package on Sunday night, a central political issue has been how the burden of proposed new taxes would fall on rich, poor and middle-income taxpayers.


English Journal;   Flood-Plagued Town Moving Up to Survive
LEAD: Imagine going back to visit your hometown - only to find that it isn't where you left it.


Calendar: Gardens, Antiques And Gems
LEAD: From Bonsai to Chrysanthemums, Enid A. Haupt Conservatory at the New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.


Currents;   That Gate In Berlin? Toy With It
LEAD: THOSE wishing to celebrate German reunification at home can construct their very own Brandenburg Gate in the living room.


I.M.F. Argentina Action
LEAD: The International Monetary Fund suspended a $240 million loan payment to Argentina in September because the country had not complied with I.M.F. conditions, monetary officials said yesterday.
The payment was an installment of a $1.3 billion loan to the South American country that the international lending agency approved in 1989.


School Board Sends Team To Local Panel
LEAD: The New York City Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, has sent in a team of managers to help straighten out the finances of Community School District 2 in Manhattan, where the superintendent, Anthony J. Alvarado, has been criticized for spending $31,000 on a car service over three years.


S.&amp;P. 500 Outdoes Money Managers
LEAD: After a punishing third quarter, the nation's money managers saw the estimated value of their portfolios decline an average of 14.5 percent in the first nine months of the year, according to CDA Investment Technologies, a Rockville, Md., firm that tracks money management performance.


U.S.-Canada Air Talks
LEAD: The United States and Canada have agreed to open talks that both nations said would greatly expand and deregulate airline service between the two countries.


One in 4 Young Black Men Is in Custody, a Study Says
LEAD: Nearly one out of every four young black men in New York State is under the control of the criminal-justice system on any given day, according to a report released today by two private groups that study correction policies.


Islam's Influence Weighed Differently Since Crisis


Children's-TV Bill Troubles White House
LEAD: The White House raised constitutional objections today to legislation that would restrict commercials on children's television programming, but officials left open the possibility that President Bush might allow the measure to stand in light of its overwhelming support in Congress.


Teen-Age Mother Slain On a Street in Brooklyn
LEAD: A teen-ager who had been carrying her week-old child down a street in Brooklyn was stabbed to death yesterday after a dispute with another teen-age girl, the police said.


Rwanda Invaders Said to Gain Ground
LEAD: A refugee army of more than 1,000 fighters belonging to the Tutsi tribe has advanced more than 25 miles into the Central African nation of Rwanda and cut off the Rwandan Army from vital fuel and ammunition depots, Administration officials said today.


Aeroflot May Shift A Hub to Miami
LEAD: Aeroflot, the Soviet national airline, may move its Latin American hub from Havana to Miami because of a fuel shortage in Cuba.
An airline executive in New York said the decision would be an economic one and emphasized that regular Moscow-Havana service would continue.


McIlvaine and Reputation, Good and Bad, Head West
LEAD: One day last month, while on a road trip with the Mets, Joe McIlvaine stood outside the team's hotel and, by happenstance, bumped into Darryl Strawberry, a player McIlvaine had known since Strawberry signed as a youngster out of California in 1980.


More on the Budget
LEAD: TAX CHANGES Comprehensive charts on the tax proposals. Page D22.


Voices of the New Germany: Hope, Guilt, Fear, Joy and Deep Satisfaction . . . In the Words of the Prominent, Glimpses of a Nation's Complex Feelings
LEAD: The feelings of the Germans toward their reunification have always been complex and contradictory.


Fund Yields Post 2d Rise
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were up for the week ended yesterday, the second consecutive gain.


Suspicious Pattern Cited In Senate Ethics Report
LEAD: The Senate Ethics Committee's special counsel concluded that there was substantial evidence that three Senators had engaged in a sustained effort to intervene improperly with Federal regulators on behalf of a campaign contributor who owned a troubled savings and loan, Congressional officials said today.


Chase Buying 2 Units Of Dollar Dry Dock
LEAD: The Chase Manhattan Corporation announced plans yesterday to acquire two branches with $330 million in deposits from the Dollar Dry Dock Bank.


Behind the Squiggles, the Secrets of a Culture
LEAD: They are the Picassos of the desert, erstwhile nomads who are inspired by this parched region of central Australia and have created a genre of abstract painting they call dreamtime art.


In Missouri, the 12-Hour Playday
LEAD: IT is 7 A.M., the start of a very long day in the basement of the Sycamore Hills Elementary School.
Thirty-five children, all 3 or 4 years old, are already hard at play, riding tricycles, chasing balls, reading books, dressing dolls.
They will be here until late afternoon, some until 6 o'clock.


Reviews/Music;   For Muti, Carnegie Hall Resonates as of Old
LEAD: Whatever complaints one might have about the acoustics in post-renovation Carnegie Hall - and although the criticism has abated, some problems remain - occasionally a performance comes along that makes the place resonate as it once did.
On Tuesday evening, Riccardo Muti and the Philadelphia Orchestra achieved that effect in the finale of the Tchaikovsky Fourth


Fall Colors Can Yield a Lively Mulch
LEAD: SIX years ago I indulged myself in one of the many mechanical, electric and electronic toys I justify as necessary tools.
My grown sons began at about that time to hail my increasing fascination with these devices as symptomatic, beginning with a microwave oven.


New England Is Happy, Temporarily
LEAD: Tom Brunansky has been with the Red Sox only long enough this season to sense the suffering they induce in the quivering hearts of New England.


Cooperstown? Hoboken? Try New York City
LEAD: In popular myth, baseball was invented in Cooperstown by Abner Doubleday.
Historians seeking the true progenitor have instead credited Alexander J. Cartwright, a New York bank clerk, who is said to have drawn up the rules and organized the first game in 1846 for the Knickerbocker Base Ball Club at the Elysian Fields in


Creditors Seek Revco Plan
LEAD: Three creditor groups of Revco D.S.
Inc. said today that they had asked a United States Bankruptcy Court to let them file a reorganization plan to help the drugstore chain emerge from bankruptcy.


Archivists Declare a Week for Peering Into the Past
LEAD: Dust off family bibles, sort out old photos and start interviewing relatives.
This is New York Archives Week.


Judge Orders Teacher To End Bible Readings
LEAD: A Federal district judge today temporarily barred a school district from allowing a fifth-grade teacher to read Bible stories to her pupils.


For Florio, a New Caution Is Emerging
LEAD: The administration of Gov.
Jim Florio has emerged from its summer of voter discontent talking a politics of consensus, a moderate kind of talk unheard in the State House just four months ago.


Board Chairman Quits at University in Capital
LEAD: The chairman of the board of trustees at the University of the District of Columbia today agreed to resign, meeting a major demand of the students who shut down the school's main campus a week ago.


The Civil Rights Sham of 1990
LEAD: The Speaker of the House has referred to the pending Kennedy-Hawkins bill (the Civil Rights Act of 1990) as the most important civil rights legislation in a quarter-century - presumably since the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Even President Bush has expressed a desire to sign a major civil rights act, and implicitly agreed that Kennedy


Mandela Group Softens Its Socialism
LEAD: The African National Congress has muted its longstanding calls for nationalization of industries and redistribution of wealth.
Instead, it is talking more of relying upon economic growth to deliver a more equitable share of South Africa's resources to the country's black majority.


Mutinous Troops Seize Barracks In a City in Southern Philippines
LEAD: Mutinous troops seized the Philippine Army headquarters in the southern city of Butuan on the island of Mindanao today.


Ars Gratia Populi
LEAD: Few have noticed, but in the controversy over the public funding of the arts, the conservative view has prevailed.
No longer will ''peer groups'' of artists solely determine which other artists are to receive taxpayer funds.


Currents;   Illinois Revives a Creation by Wright
LEAD: IN an era when too many windows and furnishings by Frank Lloyd Wright have hit the auction block, it is no small miracle: after a $5 million restoration by the state of Illinois, the Dana-Thomas house in Springfield - along with more than 100 pieces of original furniture and 450 art glass panels, doors, windows and light fixtures - was opened to the public last month.


Time Warner Is Reported In Talks on Canceled Book
LEAD: Reversing its earlier tough stance, Time Warner Inc. appears close to settling a bitter dispute with two of its former top journalists over the abrupt cancellation of a book they wrote, people close to the talks said yesterday.


Vitamin A Said to Cut Childhood Death Rate
LEAD: Weekly vitamin A supplements can cut the childhood death rate in half in parts of the world where malnutrition is widespread, a study shows.


Repointing Stone
LEAD: Q.Our house was built in 1892 and has a foundation made of granite with a grainy concrete as a bedding material between the stones (contractors have described this as ''mud'' concrete).
This material tends to flake and the powdery material builds up rapidly on the floor.
Can we repoint over this compound so as to make the basement clean and usable?


No Headline
LEAD: Eleanor Steber, a leading soprano at the Metropolitan Opera during the 1940's and 50's who was particularly noted for her Mozart and Strauss roles, died yesterday morning at the Attleboro Nursing Home in Langhorne, Pa.
She was 76 years old.
She died of congestive heart failure, said her representative, Martha Moore


Study Offers First Evidence That Cutting Cholesterol Levels Saves Lives
LEAD: A new study has provided the first evidence that lowering cholesterol levels saves lives in patients whose hearts are functioning normally.


Spurned by Fashionable Club, Four Win Revenge and Cash
LEAD: The nerds got their revenge today.


Judge Briefly Silences Politicians on Bond Act
LEAD: It was only temporary, but a state court judge accomplished a feat today that many in Albany have long considered impossible.
He silenced the state's top politicians.
A broad ruling issued last week by a State Supreme Court justice prohibited Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and members of his administration from taking any action to promote the 21st Century Environmental Quality Bond Act, including giving speeches and interviews.


Pathe MGM/UA Bid
LEAD: The financier Kirk Kerkorian, who owns about 80 percent of the stock of the MGM/UA Communications Company, and other shareholders voted on Tuesday to approve a $1.3 billion buyout offer from the Pathe Communications Corporation.


D'Amato Plan to Pay for Police With Capital Funds Spells Ruin
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Pop;   The Man Who Adores Waltzes
LEAD: Late in the first act of his new show at the John Golden Theater, Michael Feinstein declares that his favorite musical form is the waltz.


Ex-Official In Defense Of Record
LEAD: Edwin J. Gray, the chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board during the Reagan Administration, portrayed himself today as a besieged regulator who was ''consistently'' snubbed by the Treasury Secretary and the Federal budget director and overruled by the personnel director.


Stefano Casiraghi, 30, Husband Of Caroline of Monaco, Is Killed
LEAD: Stefano Casiraghi, the husband of Princess Caroline of Monaco, was killed yesterday when his speedboat flipped during a race on the French Riviera.
He was 30 years old.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
COMPANIES
State regulators should force Nynex to divest itself of the New York Telephone Company, the top lawyer at New York State's Public Service Commission said. [Page A1.]
Federated Department Stores and Allied Stores presented a plan they said would help make them solvent by next year.


Review/Theater;   First 'West Side Story' Stars Sing Together Again
LEAD: Remember the photograph on the cover of the original cast album of ''West Side Story?'' With her arms raised, a smiling Carol Lawrence leads an equally happy Larry Kert through the streets of Manhattan.
It is a youthful portrait exemplifying one aspect of the musical - an exhilarating merging of drama, music and dance.


Singapore Air In Boeing Deal
LEAD: Singapore Airlines Ltd. said it had signed a contract with the Boeing Company for up to 30 jumbo jets valued at $5.5 billion, completing a deal announced in January.


Parent &amp; Child
LEAD: TO celebrate their 50th wedding anniversary, Larry and Helen Kasman recently went on a cruise to Alaska with one of their grown daughters.
Mr.
Kasman, a retired pharmacist who lives in Manhattan and Coconut Creek, Fla., said he found that old father-daughter relationships die hard.


Financing Held Near At UAL
LEAD: The employee group seeking to buy the UAL Corporation for $3.82 billion has made big progress toward its goal by getting banks to commit to lend significantly more than the $2 billion they have been seeking for the buyout, several people familiar with the effort said yesterday.


Partisan Dispute Stalls Order On Cuomo Registration Plan
LEAD: Seven months after Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo approved a program to open voter registration posts at state offices, the plan has yet to be put into effect because of a political squabble between Democrats and Republicans on the New York State Board of Elections.


Affirmative Action - How to Make It Work?;   A Company Recasts Itself To Erase Bias on the Job
LEAD: When a black job candidate comes here to Corning Inc. for interviews, managers have a real incentive to hire him.
Raises and bonuses for the executives, most of whom are white men, depend largely on recruiting blacks and women and on their success in training and promoting them.


Strategy Delay For Davis Final
LEAD: The United States Tennis Association has neither selected its team nor chosen the surface for its final-round showdown against Australia in Davis Cup competition Nov. 30-Dec.2 at the Suncoast Dome in St.
Petersburg, Fla., but it has already recorded the sale of 10,000 tickets for the three days of the match.


In South Africa, at This Hour, Words Can Kill
LEAD: To the Editor:


Police Plan Facing Hurdle in Precincts: Cynicism
LEAD: Patrolling the Bushwick section of Brooklyn, Police Officer John Comiskey says his days are a depressing sequence of accidents, shootings, false alarms, domestic fights and screaming matches with bystanders when he arrests someone.
He has no love for the community, nor for his superiors, who he says discourage aggressive policing.


Young &amp; Rubicam Quits T.W.A. Account
LEAD: Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising, New York, resigned yesterday as agency of record for Trans World Airlines.
The account billed $45 million.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Top-seeded Stefan Edberg and third-seeded Ivan Lendl advanced to the third round of the Australian Indoor championship yesterday at Sydney, Australia.
Edberg, the Wimbledon champion and the top-ranked player in the world, beat Niclas Kroon, 6-3, 6-2.
Lendl defeated the Finnish teen-ager Aki Rahunen, 6-0, 3-6, 6-0.


U.S. Minesweepers Arrive in Persian Gulf


New York's Enduring Ethics Scandal
LEAD: The campaign laws are a disgrace and embarrassment; incumbents are favored unfairly by the state election law; the laws governing access to the primary ballot are completely at odds with the democratic principle of open elections; judges are elected in a manner that weakens the independence of the judiciary; personnel practices are tainted with politics.


College Presidents For Major Reform
LEAD: The powerful National Collegiate Athletic Association Presidents Commission decided today to support the far-reaching reform package schools will vote on next January at the N.C.A.A. convention.


Beijing and Singapore Agree To Set Up Diplomatic Links
LEAD: China announced tonight that it had established diplomatic relations with Singapore.
The announcement followed the restoration of relations with Indonesia.


Chartwell Group Splits With Avon
LEAD: Chartwell Associates L.P. said its representatives had resigned from the special committee of Avon Products Inc. because it believed that neither the special committee selected by the board nor Avon's senior management was working to enhance ''shareholder value.'' Chartwell, an investment group, has been pressing


Contrast in Paths to the Playoff for Reds and Pirates
LEAD: The only National League teams that did not win a division championship in the 1980's begin the pennant playoffs of the 1990's tonight.


Ex-Mental Patient Found Fit For Trial in Slaying of Dancer
LEAD: A former mental patient and drug dealer who has claimed to be God was found competent yesterday to stand trial on charges of killing and dismembering a Swiss dancer.


Charles Pfister, Interior Designer, 50
LEAD: Charles Pfister, a designer of furniture and interior furnishings, died Monday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 50 years old.


Dolphin's 'Fear' Gibe Is History for O'Brien
LEAD: It is rare that anybody ever talks about their running when Ken O'Brien and Dan Marino, the quarterbacks for the Jets and Dolphins, get together.


Gold and Oil Rise Sharply; Technical Factors Are Cited
LEAD: Gold and oil futures prices rose sharply yesterday in moves that analysts said were inspired more by technical factors than developments in the Persian Gulf.


Officer Shot in Gun Battle With Driver in Brooklyn
LEAD: A police officer chasing a fleeing motorist was shot three times yesterday during a ferocious gun battle on a Brooklyn street, the police said.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-17


Early Stock Gains Wane; Volume Off
LEAD: Stock prices rose sharply in early trading yesterday but began dropping by 12:30 and continued dropping for the rest of the day.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: CARMEN E. TURNER will become the under secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, the No. 2 position, in December.
She will leave her job as general manager of the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority to run the Smithsonian, which has 6,600 employees.
Ms.
Turner, 60, will be the institution's chief administrator, under ROBERT McC.


France Stops Issuing Lebanese Visas, Citing Army Blockade
LEAD: France stopped issuing visas to Lebanese today, apparently because of President Elias Hrawi's refusal to lift a blockade intended to end the rebellion by Gen.
Michel Aoun.


Palestinians Struggling To Rebuild Their Lives
LEAD: Two years ago, Issam F. Muala was studying civil engineering at a university in his hometown of Ramallah, on the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
Today, he is working in a small grocery store in Brooklyn.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Iraqi Leader, in Kuwait, Takes a Defiant Tone
On his first known visit to Iraqi troops in occupied Kuwait, President Saddam Hussein taunted President Bush.


Cray Shows New Computer Entry
LEAD: Cray Research Inc. introduced its initial entry into the minisupercomputer market, the Cray XMS System, which will be available next month.
Cray's chairman, John A. Rollwagen, said the addition of the Cray XMS was an important element of Cray's network supercomputing strategy.


Taking Care Of Antique Quilts
LEAD: AS recently as the early 1970's, antique quilts were often regarded as little more than household items, to be tossed into the washing machine and casually repaired.


Currents;   In Commuter Tunnel, Art at Every Stop
LEAD: SEATTLEITES are already referring to it simply as The Tunnel.
It is the five-station, 1.3-mile-long Metro bus tunnel, which opened Sept. 15.
A collaboration of artists, architects and engineers, it is not only a traffic reliever, but also the most ambitious public-art project in Northwest history.


Charles Ellis 2d, 71, Financial Executive At RCA Until 1982
LEAD: Charles C. Ellis 2d, a corporate financial officer who held posts with the RCA Corporation, Irving Trust and the Philco Finance Corporation, died last Wednesday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 71 years old and lived in Washington.


Tax Incentive for Small-Business Investment Called Inadequate by Some
LEAD: Insite Peripherals Inc., a San Jose, Calif., company developing a new kind of computer disk drive, has raised $19 million in financing and needs $10 million more.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Keefe Bruyette &amp; Woods Chooses a President
LEAD: Keefe Bruyette &amp; Woods Inc., a New York investment firm that specializes in analyzing bank securities, has named a new president, James J. McDermott Jr., as the firm's management shifts away from its founding members.


Review/Music;   Program From West Of Java
LEAD: ''Sunda: From Village to City,'' a program of Sundanese Indonesian music, dance and puppetry at Symphony Space on Sunday night, ambled along amiably, mixing all three elements until the divisions between them became irrelevant.
And in its careful sensuousness and irregularity, the music, from the western third of Java, reflected a preindustrial ease.


Art Books (Heavyweight Div.) Weigh In
LEAD: A STAPLE of the decorator, coffee-table books are by definition one of the more important accessories in any well-designed room.
Alone in front of the sofa, or piled high on draped and fringed tables, they can add just the right intellectual touch to the soigne interior.


2 Top Colts Are Sidelined
LEAD: Criminal Type and Eastern Echo, two of the nation's leading race horses, are both through racing for the year because of injuries and Eastern Echo will never race again.


Newark Visit Yields Millions For Youngest AIDS Patients
LEAD: Dr.
James M. Oleske, who believes compassion for AIDS victims in the United States has largely turned to contempt, today accepted a $2.25 million gift from a foundation based in Switzerland to finance research and an international pediatric AIDS training program.


Iowa Is Suing Kellogg on Ads
LEAD: The Iowa Attorney General's office has filed suit against the Kellogg Company, charging that health claims made in ads for three of its cereals are deceptive.


The Least Congress Can Do
LEAD: Congress failed to produce a budget before the new fiscal year began on Monday; indeed, it hasn't done much of anything all year.
Forced to extend the session to work on the budget, it now has time for other urgent business.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Chiquita Brands International Inc., Cincinnati, a food company, said its John Morrell &amp; Co. meatpacking and processing unit had purchased the Dinner Bell brand of processed meat products and a processing facility from Dinner Bell Foods Inc., Defiance, Ohio.
Terms were not disclosed.


Review/Dance;   Graham Meets Scott Joplin With a Bounce
LEAD: Martha Graham never cut her long hair while the American flapper of the 1920's was wearing her hair short.


9 Carpets Offer a Trip Through Islam Art
LEAD: An elaborate 17th-century Safavid carpet from Iran, a 15th-century Mameluke carpet from Egypt and a floral-design rug of the Ottoman empire period are among the items on view through next Feb. 24 in an exhibition at the Textile Museum here.


GREENSPAN CALLS BUDGET PROPOSAL A 'CREDIBLE' PLAN
LEAD: With a critical test vote on the budget compromise scheduled for Thursday and Congress in rebellion, President Bush and the Congressional leadership got a boost today when Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, endorsed the budget plan for the first time and implied that it would drive down interest rates.


Moody's Reduces Rating on Unisys
LEAD: A leading credit-rating agency downgraded the debt and preferred stock of the Unisys Corporation, saying the country's third-largest computer maker has dim prospects for sustaining any improved profits.
A Unisys spokesman, Peter Hynes, said the company was disappointed by the downgrade by Moody's Investor Services Inc.


Kaiser Steel Plans Public Stock Issue
LEAD: Kaiser Steel Resources Inc., the former steel producer that emerged from bankruptcy two years ago, plans to re-enter the public stock market on Oct. 16.
The company also announced a one-for-three reverse stock split to reduce the number of shares to be issued under the plan to 10 million from 30 million.


...And Revenue Losers
LEAD:
BUSINESSES
Enterprise Zones.
Provisions to develop businesses in areas in need of special assistance. 1991: 0 1991-1995: $1 billion.
Samll Corporations. (Firms with capitalization of under $50 million and actively in business. Excludes banks, insurance, securities, real estate and personal service companies).


Judge in Bush Case Faulted
LEAD: Some legal experts say the administrative law judge in the Government's conflict of interest case against Neil Bush went against professional ethics by talking to reporters about the case.


Red Sox And Jays Fight to End
LEAD: The last play unfolded over what seemed to be an eternity, enough time for every Red Sox player, coach and fan who knows the slightest bit about this team to see awful visions of another championship attempt dying a slow, painful death.


MCA's Stock Rises Again On Talk of Matsushita Offer
LEAD: The stock of MCA Inc. rose $3.875 a share yesterday, to $63.50, on continued speculation both in the United States and Japan that the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company was moving toward a buyout of MCA.
Volume was heavy, with 1.76 million shares traded.


E.E.C. in Farm Plan
LEAD: The European Community's executive commission reached a consensus today on a plan to cut farm support and protection.
A community spokesman declined to give details, but said the plan was agreed to by all 17 commissioners at a meeting that started late Wednesday.
He said a text would be published later today and that the unanimous vote implied that a compromise had been reached.


Standard Brands Plans by Latshaw
LEAD: The Kansas City investor John Latshaw, who controls 15 percent of the Standard Brands Paint Company, said he intends to explore ''one or more of several courses of action'' to increase the value of the Torrance, Calif., paint and home-decorating store chain.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.


College Football Plan Puts Games on TV
LEAD: To the Editor:


Milken Hearing Is Delayed
LEAD: A Federal disrict judge overseeing the case against Michael R. Milken yesterday postponed a hearing into the Government's allegations in its sentencing report that the former financier committed more crimes than the six securities law violations he admitted last April.


Home Improvement
LEAD: INSULATION is so useful in reducing household fuel costs, minimizing drafts and keeping room temperatures uniform that it is worth inspecting every year or two to make sure it is still in good shape.


CURATOR DEFENDS PHOTO EXHIBITION
LEAD: The man who brought the photographs of the late Robert Mapplethorpe to Cincinnati and threw the city into turmoil last spring took the witness stand today to defend the exhibition.


Editorial Director For Summit Books
LEAD: Robert Asahina, a senior editor at Simon &amp; Schuster, has been named to the new position of editorial director of Summit Books.
The announcement was made on Tuesday by James H. Silberman, the president and editor in chief of Summit, an independent imprint of Simon &amp; Schuster.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE#10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
9.00
8.25
8.65
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.17
7.18
7.79
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.18
7.19
7.88
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.58
8.56
7.80
30-YR.


Gorbachev Sends a Chief Adviser To Iraq in New Diplomatic Effort
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev opened a new diplomatic front in the gulf crisis today, dispatching one of his chief Middle East advisers to the region in the effort to persuade Iraq to restore Kuwait's independence.


D'Amato Plan to Pay for Police With Capital Funds Spells Ruin;   Upgrade Equipment
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Officials Call Arms Package for Saudis Vital
LEAD: In a departure from earlier explanations for selling weapons to Saudi Arabia, Bush Administration officials said today that a proposed $7.3-billion arms package for Riyadh was vital to a long-term strategy to deter attacks against the Saudis after the Persian Gulf crisis.


Market Place;   Bearish View Pays Off for Funds
LEAD: Mutual funds that based their investment decisions on a gloomy economic outlook outperformed the stock market in the third quarter.
Still, as the market fell, so did most equity funds, according to figures released yesterday by Lipper Analytical Services.


High Hopes of Blue Jays Come Back Down to Earth
LEAD: Jimmy Key had already been named by the Blue Jays to pitch the possible playoff game Thursday against Boston.
It was suggested by the manager, Cito Gaston, that he fly back this afternoon to Toronto to get extra rest.


Tigers' Fielder Makes History With 2 Homers to End With 51
LEAD: Cecil Fielder took a few strides out of the batters' box in the fourth inning last night at Yankee Stadium and raised his arms.
The ball he had just hit was deep enough to be a homer, that was certain.
In order to be Fielder's historic 50th homer, it had to stay fair.
The white ball rose higher and higher into the black sky and bounced off the front row of Section 32 in the left-field upper deck.


If Club Stays Healthy, Outlook Seems Bright
LEAD: A morning without warmth or promise had barely broken last Jan. 6 when Roger Neilson, the coach of the Rangers, sank into a chair in the old Union Station in St.
Louis.
It was cold and dim, the huge, largely empty hall populated only by odd, sourceless echos and infrequent shafts of sunlight.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of Succoth, the Jewish Feast of Tabernacles, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended today and tomorrow in New York City.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Japan Stock Futures Market Opens After a 2-Day Close
LEAD: Japan's stock-index futures market began to function again today after shutting down the previous two sessions, a closure that left a residue of anger among some foreign brokerages, particularly American securities firms that are the biggest users of the contracts.


ROMANIANS USING THE SECRET POLICE
LEAD: The President of Romania acknowledged today that his Government was using ''a few thousand'' members of the former Communist secret police to help maintain public order.


Personal Health
LEAD: ''What do you do about the gas?'' has become the most frequent response to current dietary advice to eat more fruits and vegetables, beans and peas, bran and whole grains.
Indeed, in this high-fiber era, flatulence may have supplanted excess stomach acid as America's primary digestive complaint and concern.


IMMIGRATION BILL APPROVED IN HOUSE
LEAD: The House today approved broad changes in the country's immigration law that seek to open the nation's doors to three-quarters of a million foreigners a year, particularly educated workers with technical and managerial skills.


Rules on Reviving the Dying Bring Undue Suffering, Doctors Contend
LEAD: Cardiac resuscitation is being widely misapplied and overused, doctors say, leading to costly and sometimes painful efforts on patients who are unlikely to benefit.


Unity in Pensive Key
LEAD: Germans, whether they had lived in East Germany or West Germany, woke up this morning in Germany, a country nobody had known since the end of World War II.


Bridge
LEAD: Those who write about bridge tend not to write about themselves, even when they are expert players.
This creates a problem for two British player-writers who scored a convincing victory in Geneva last month in the Paribas World Senior Pairs Championship, a new event for players age 55 and older.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in some copies on Tuesday about a preview party for an exhibition of Mexican art at the Metropolitan Museum referred incorrectly to a guest.
She is Barbaralee Diamonstein Spielvogel.


Review/Pop;   Isaac Hayes Brings Back 70's Sound
LEAD: ''I'm going to yank the strings of nostalgia,'' Isaac Hayes announced during his first set on Tuesday night at the Blue Note, and that's what he did.
He cruised through songs that made his albums from 1969 through the mid-1970's - among them ''Hot Buttered Soul'' and the soundtrack from ''Shaft'' - into prime make-out music.


The .300-100-100-30-50 Man
LEAD: Growing up with his two younger brothers, Barry Bonds hit baseballs that occasionally broke windows in his family's San Carlos, Calif., home.


Delhi Extending Direct Rule Over Punjab for Six Months
LEAD: Prime Minister V. P. Singh, failing to win the support of other parties for elections in Punjab, extended central Government rule over the state today for six more months beginning in November.


Correction
LEAD: Charts on Thursday showing new tax provisions in the proposed Federal budget misstated estimates of revenue gains or losses for four categories in some copies.
These are corrected figures.
Foreign Companies: Tax provisions and reporting requirements for fore9gn-owned domestic companies would be lightened.


KPMG Peat Marwick Elects U.S. Chairman
LEAD: As the head of the San Francisco office of Peat Marwick, Jon C. Madonna had the delicate task of merging his practice with that of the second-largest United States office of KMG Main Hurdman, a British-Dutch firm that merged with Peat in 1987.
Yesterday, his 1,850 partners elected him the next chairman of the American unit of KPMG Peat


With Ranks Depleted, Islanders Fall to Kings
LEAD: The Islanders opened their season here tonight against the Kings minus much of their already limited firepower, hoping that Pat LaFontaine could muster some scoring and that the defense could chill the explosive Kings.
Instead, LaFontaine didn't manage to score and the Kings skated freely and controlled the puck on both ends of the rink in a decisive 4-1 victory before 16,005 spectators at the


Senator Stages Startling Comeback In Bid for Re-election in Rhode Island
LEAD: It was not hard, six months ago, to compile a long list of reasons that Senator Claiborne Pell, the shy, aristocratic 71-year-old Democrat from Rhode Island who heads the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, was ripe for defeat in this fall's elections.


Transient Way of Life for Kuwaiti Refugees


Kenneth Cohen, Academy Official, 66
LEAD: Capt.
Kenneth Cohen, director of career development at the United States Merchant Marine Academy at Kings Point, L.I., died on Wednesday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 66 years old and lived in Jamaica, Queens.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.
Captain Cohen, who was born in Brooklyn and was a graduate of the acedemy, served in the United States merchant marine in World War II.


Sony-Hughes Deal
LEAD: Sony, the Japanese electronics giant, and Hughes Aircraft, a unit of the General Motors Corporation, plan to develop an audio-visual system that would allow airline passengers to watch movies on a personal video screen, order in-flight merchandise with a credit card and make telephone calls from their seats.


New York Ad Women Give Annual Awards
LEAD: The annual accolade of Women of the Year was given yesterday by Advertising Women of New York to Caroline R. Jones, who founded Caroline Jones Advertising in 1986, and Penney Hawkey, president and executive creative director of the Bloom Agency.


More Housing for Homeless
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday announced steps to speed up building transitional housing for the homeless, to reverse the return of families to city welfare hotels.


Keating Details His Debt
LEAD: Charles H. Keating Jr. asserted in a legal brief released today by the Government that he had a negative net worth of more than $4 million.


Deal Is Near For a Czech Auto Maker
LEAD: Renault and Volkswagen are in a neck-and-neck race to capture one of the rare beauties of Eastern European industry: Skoda, the respected Czechoslovak auto maker.


Pork Bellies Close Higher, But Three-Day Rally Eases
LEAD: A three-day surge in pork belly futures prices peaked yesterday on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange as buying interest caused by a Government report fell off.


Criticism Aimed At Statements On Immigrants
LEAD: Recent comments by a New York civil rights leader that ''foreigners'' and ''newcomers'' have taken away jobs from black Americans have revived tensions between black and Hispanic people.


Review/Dance;   Graham Troupe in a Poetic 'Dialogue'
LEAD: The Martha Graham Dance Company has danced on a high this week from the start.
Is it because the troupe is having an unusually brief season in New York City that the dancers are making the most of every moment onstage?


Bank of New York
LEAD: The Bank of New York has purchased Bank of New England Associates, the investment banking subsidiary of the Bank of New England, for an undisclosed price.
The subsidiary will be renamed Bank of New York Associates and will act as an intermediary in arranging mergers, acquisitions, private placements of debt, equity securities and financial restructuring services.


Harry C. Blaney, 86, A Theater Producer
LEAD: Harry Clay Blaney, a theater producer who was active in New York for more than three decades, died on Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 86 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of leukemia, said his son, Harry Clay Blaney 3d.
Mr.
Blaney, who came from a theatrical family that dated to the 1880's, ended his career as a Broadway producer in 1968 with ''Portrait of a Queen,'' a documentary-style play about Queen Victoria that starred Dorothy Tutin and that ran at the Henry Miller Theater for three months.


Smurfit May Enter Eastern Europe
LEAD: The Irish packaging company Jefferson Smurfit Group P.L.C. hopes to expand into Eastern Europe next year for the first time.
The company's chairman and chief executive, Michael Smurfit, said: ''We have a team visiting an East European country at the moment.
We see opportunities.''


Norbert Vesak, 53, Former Chief Of the Met Opera Ballet, Is Dead
LEAD: Norbert Vesak, a former director of the Metropolitan Opera Ballet and a choreographer for many American and Canadian dance companies, died on Tuesday.
He was 53 years old.


Review/Art;   Where the Physical and the Spiritual Both Meld and Clash
LEAD: When there is an attempt to introduce into one country the art of another, the results will inevitably be mixed.
And mixed the current shows of contemporary Mexican art in New York City surely are.
Some of the art is eminently dismissible, and some of the shows are put together without any sense of how to serve new Mexican art in a foreign land.


Stringent Rules on Death Penalty Added to Anti-Crime Bill in House
LEAD: The House of Representatives voted today to cut off many of the Federal appeals processes available to inmates on state death rows, to expand the number of Federal crimes punishable by death and to reduce the amount of evidence needed for a Federal judge to impose the death penalty.


Restaurants
LEAD: Dining rooms in New York City's better hotels today offer some singular appeals.
For one, if you drop your napkin on the floor, you can retrieve it without bopping your head against the adjacent table.
And chances are you will not be relegated to a newspaper-size table under pulsing speakers.
Space and comfort aside, you may even encounter some sophisticated contemporary cooking that is on a par with the better independent restaurants in town.


U.S.-Romanian Publication Set
LEAD: A youth publication with articles about United States culture is planned for distribution in Romania by USA Today and Centrade, a Houston-based trading and consulting firm.


Paying for Reagan
LEAD: There has been much soul-searching since Aug. 2 about failures of American policy that helped to encourage Saddam Hussein's aggression.
But not enough attention has been paid to the man whose folly led the way: Ronald Reagan.


No Downtown in Town: New Jersey of the Future?
LEAD: If, as planners predict, New Jersey continues to become more suburb than city, Edison is what much of the state may look like in years to come.


On Stage
LEAD: En Route From London Few things are certain in theater, and fewer still when plans involve transferring productions across the Atlantic.
However, if current talk translates into fact, at least half a dozen of this season's London shows will be in New York next year.


Corrections
LEAD: An answer in the Q&amp;A column of Science Times on Sept. 25 about asparagus misstated an affiliation of J. H. Fellman, a biochemist.
He is an emeritus professor of the Oregon Health Sciences University.


McDonnell Still Hopes To Profit From C-17
LEAD: The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said today that it still believed it could make money on the development of the Air Force's C-17 transport plane, despite what Government officials say has been poor management of the program.


Review/Cartoons;   When Tunes Are Loony
LEAD: Neither fish nor fowl but definitely a musical that could be called ''Hare'' is the attraction that opened last night at the Gershwin Theater under the title ''Bugs Bunny on Broadway.''


Arm Twisting in Capital Is Just Short of Physical
LEAD: Wednesday night, Representative Ralph Regula was undecided about how to vote on the bipartisan budget compromise.
This morning, his mind was made up: He was adamantly opposed.


Review/Music;   Barenboim at the Piano in 2 Reliable Concertos
LEAD: The New York Philharmonic's Pension Fund Benefit Concerts, the season's second of which was telecast on Wednesday evening as part of the ''Live From Lincoln Center'' series on PBS, follow a safe formula.
It was apparently determined long ago that both the benefit audience in Avery Fisher Hall and the listeners at home prefer to hear only the most familiar works played by the most familiar performers in a larger-than-life style.


Gingrich, in Duel With White House, Stays True to His Role as an Outsider
LEAD: In marching out of the White House and away from the Congressional leadership over the budget deal, Representative Newt Gingrich has picked up the only cloak that he seems truly comfortable wearing: renegade warrior, storming the barricades of politics as usual.


As Soviet Oil Becomes a Trickle, Havel Seeks Gorbachev Meeting
LEAD: The Czechoslovak Prime Minister met today with the Soviet Ambassador in an effort to resolve a crisis here as new measures were announced to stop panic buying of gasoline.


Reviews/Film Festival;   Going Mad Accompanied by a Hank of Hair
LEAD: Paul Cox's ''Golden Braid'' is so sincere that it deserves respect, yet so precious and absurd that it's probably best to get the unintentional laughter out of the way.
Bernard, a middle-aged clockmaker, is having an affair with a married Salvation Army soldier, yet feels he's cheating on her with a lovely, long golden braid he finds in an antique clock.


Dinkins Says He Is Considering Laying Off 15,000 City Workers
LEAD: In a stark indication of New York City's worsening fiscal condition, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he was considering the possible layoff of at least 15,000 city workers and cuts in services to save $800 million and help close growing budget gaps in the current and next fiscal years.


Europe Farm Subsidy Cuts
LEAD: The European Community said today that it was willing to trim costly export subsidies for farmers, although it still refused to embrace the sharp cuts demanded by the United States.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Monday about a sewage sludge treatment plant proposed for Bay Park, L.I., misidentified the Mayor of a neighboring village, East Rockaway.
He is Irving Shaw.


A Touch of the East Comes to the Bronx


Deceit, Danger and the Deficit
LEAD: The budget summit agreement confirms my conviction that these annual bipartisan love-ins aren't the cure - they're the cancer.
Regrettably, the press has been distracted by the antics of Representative Newt Gingrich's rump faction in the House Republican Caucus and has failed to report the real deceit and danger in this deal.


Reputed Mob Figure Found Shot to Death in His Cadillac
LEAD: Louis DiBono, described by law-enforcement officials as a member of the Gambino crime family, was found slain yesterday in an underground parking garage at the World Trade Center, the police said.


Death-Penalty Delay Doesn't Promote Justice;   Community and Crime
LEAD: To the Editor:


Using Wit In Selling Insurance
LEAD: THE Prudential Insurance Company of America's new marketing campaign is trying to sell insurance by admitting what most consumers have known all along - buying insurance is confusing, complicated and a little scary.


No Headline
LEAD: The operator of a pyramid investment scheme was sentenced on Wednesday to 22 months in prison, the Justice Department said.
Stuart Kalstein, who pleaded guilty to two Federal counts of wire fraud, took in more than $6 million from people he promised would receive 5 percent a month.
They were repaid with money from more recent investors.


Polly Peck to Sell A Del Monte Stake
LEAD: Polly Peck International P.L.C. plans to raise several million dollars by selling a minority stake in its Del Monte fresh fruit business, the company's chairman said.
The Del Monte shares would trade on the New York Stock Exchange, its chairman, Asil Nadir, was quoted today as saying in the British newspaper The Financial


Black &amp; Decker To Sell 4 Units
LEAD: The Black &amp; Decker Corporation, the tool and appliance giant, will sell four divisions for $150 million to meet payments on nearly $4 billion in debt taken on when it bought the Emhart Corporation.


5 Teen-Agers Wounded By Gunfire in New York
LEAD: Five teen-agers were wounded by gunfire in New York City on Wednesday, the police said yesterday.


Concern Over Image
LEAD: Nascar's public image has been tainted by news that Rob Moroso was drunk at the time of his fatal car accident last Sunday, another driver Geoff Bodine said yesterday.


Politics Denied in Greenspan Support
LEAD: By the standards of a Federal Reserve chief, whose public utterances so often verge on the Delphic, Alan Greenspan's vigorous support for the proposed budget package was unusual.


Knicks Sign Mustaf to 3-Year Pact
LEAD: Jerrod Mustaf spent Wednesday night driving to New York from his home in Maryland.
At the end of the road, Mustaf found new wealth, new teammates, and a new home with the Knicks.


Organist at Columbia
LEAD: The organist Talivaldis Deksnis from the Soviet Union will play works by Vasks, Garuta, Jermaks, Kenins, Bach, Franck and Messiaen in a recital tomorrow at 7 P.M. at St.
Paul's Chapel, Columbia University, Broadway at 116th Street.
Admission: $10.
Information: (516) 248-0919.


Bertha Lindsay, 93; Was the Last Eldress In the Shaker Society
LEAD: Bertha Lindsay, the last surviving eldress of the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Coming, known as the Shaker Society, died Wednesday at her home at Shaker Village in Canterbury, N.H.
She was 93 years old.


Hanoi Rice Officials Out
LEAD: The Vietnamese Government has removed the three top officials of the state grain body for making errors in managing the reserves, the official Communist newspaper Nhan Dan reported on Wednesday.
Among the problems, the publication said, were ''a shortage of rice in reserve; bad quality of rice; the trading, exchange and loaning of rice and many other supplies at variance with regulations.


Gorbachev Aide Meets Iraqi On Soviets Trapped in Gulf
LEAD: A Soviet envoy carried a message from President Mikhail S. Gorbachev to Baghdad and Japan's Prime Minister met with Iraq's No. 2 leader yesterday in new peace efforts in the Persian Gulf.


Misplay by Davis Helps Pirates Win Opener
LEAD: In all respects, it was a forgettable evening for the Cincinnati Reds, who spent every day of the six-month baseball season in first place but who broke down at critical times tonight when their first shot at the National League pennant went on the line.


Market Place;   Rating Wines As Investments
LEAD: INVESTING in wine has always been a bit like investing in art or classic cars: While there is a potential for huge returns, most participants are driven as much by passion as the profit motive.
That is just as well, given the anything-but-sure nature of the investment.


4,000 Years' Worth of This and That
LEAD: The International Antique Dealers Show - the first in New York in which every object offered is vetted for authenticity - is back for a rerun at the Seventh Regiment Armory.
The antiques bazaar, which opens tonight in previews and tomorrow to the public for a five-day run, returns for its second year with its much-praised global character intact.


Iraq Blockade, Babies And the Milk Dispute
LEAD: In the office of Dr.
Mohammed Tawal, the director of the largest children's hospital in Iraq, and in the conference room and secretary's office that adjoin it, there are 13 images of President Saddam Hussein.


Books of The Times;   The Costs of Fighting the Good Fight
LEAD:
My Son's Story
By Nadine Gordimer
277 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.95.


CUNY Head Weighs Requiring New General-Education Courses
LEAD: Arguing that too many students were entering the City University of New York unprepared, the system's new chancellor, Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds, said yesterday that she would seek to bar many students from most courses until they had completed new general education requirements.


At the Movies
LEAD:
Flight Training


Diner's Journal
LEAD: Chefs Cuisiniers Club The Chefs Cuisiniers Club was conceived as a sort of University Club of the spatula set, a place where men and women of similar backgrounds can drop in after their workday is done and relax while swapping tales of the range.
One difference, however, is that the public is allowed in, too.


Dan Herr Dies at 73; Led Catholic Group
LEAD: Dan Herr, board chairman of the Thomas More Association and publisher of The Critic, its cultural and literary magazine, died last Friday at Northwestern University Hospital in Chicago.
He was 73 years old and lived in Chicago.


School Finances Draw Criticism In Regan Audit
LEAD: State auditors charged yesterday that school administrators in Manhattan's District 2 engaged in a pattern of fiscal mismanagement, including double-billing, altered records and questionable bookkeeping practices intended to hide the board's spending.


Court Ruling Says Church Can Bar Play
LEAD: The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York has the right to suppress an Off Off Broadway play it finds offensive and evict its producers on the ground the play violates a theater lease giving the church censorship powers, a justice ruled yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


U.S. Computer Groups Join In Policy on Japanese Trade
LEAD: After more than a year of contentious deliberations, American computer companies and the makers of semiconductors that power computers have resolved their differences on a major issue of trade policy.
The result is expected to be continued pressure on Japan to open its $20 billion-a-year market in semiconductors to foreign competition.


Stonewalling on Murder
LEAD: The young woman was murdered 21 months ago, when she was a drama student just out of her teens.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation is sure it knows who did it, how and why.


Monroe Oppenheimer, New Deal Lawyer, 86
LEAD: Monroe Oppenheimer, a lawyer in the New Deal Administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt, died Tuesday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington.
He was 86 years old and lived in Washington.


Britain's Foreign Secretary Urges Israel to Make Peace
LEAD: The British Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, urged Israel today to negotiate a Middle East peace should Iraq withdraw from Kuwait.


Winner of City Hall Faces Big Tax on It
LEAD: Thousands of dollars in property taxes could turn the East St.
Louis City Hall into a white elephant for the man who won the building in a court settlement.


United German Parliament Meets in Berlin


U.S. BARS NEW AID IN A SUDAN FAMINE
LEAD: The Sudan, Africa's largest country, faces its third famine in six years.
But this time the United States has warned the Islamic fundamentalist Government that because it has blocked or diverted aid intended for the hungry in the rebellious south, any pleas for more help will be ignored.


Canned Ham Is Recalled
LEAD: Cameco Inc. of Verona, N.J., is recalling 90,000 pounds of imported canned ham that may contain food poisoning organisms, the Agriculture Department said Wednesday.
The product is labeled ''Cameco Cooked Ham,'' said Lester M. Crawford, administrator of the department's Food Safety and Inspection Service.


United German Parliament Assembles
LEAD: Germany's united Parliament held its first session in the old Reichstag today, and after the ritual tributes to union, the politicians plunged into the next major stage of reunification, the campaign for the Dec. 2 national elections.


Accounts
LEAD: *
The Comedy Channel, a Home Box Office cable program service, to Dale Pon Advertising, New York, with a budget of more than $6 million.
The account was previously handled by Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners, New York a division of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C.


BUDGET PLAN FAILS FIRST HOUSE TEST BY 254-179 MARGIN
LEAD: In a stunning defeat for President Bush and the Democratic leadership in Congress, the budget compromise they announced in the Rose Garden last weekend failed its first test early today in the House of Representatives.


Power Play of Devils Is Too Weak in Opener
LEAD: All the emphasis the Devils put on improving their power play during training camp was not visible tonight in their season opener.


Treasury Notes and Bonds Climb
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved higher and interest rates dropped in nervous trading yesterday, as dealers kept a close eye on a test vote of the Federal budget package in the House of Representatives.


Devils and Red Wings Tie in Season Opener, 3-3


Analysts and Arab Supporters Believe Military Action Will Be Used in Gulf
LEAD: While President Bush's remarks at the United Nations on Monday emphasized that the United States would welcome a diplomatic solution to the confrontation in the Persian Gulf, Administration analysts and Arab supporters of American policy continue to believe that a diplomatic solution to the crisis is unlikely.


Agatha Moran Leather, Teacher, 77
LEAD: Agatha Moran Leather, a retired teacher, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 77 years old and also had a home in Westhampton Beach, L.I.


Iraqi's Collapse Delays Address to U.N. Again
LEAD: Iraq's delegate to the United Nations tonight postponed an address to the General Assembly on the Persian Gulf crisis for the third time after he collapsed, suffering from a severe nosebleed, officials said.


Holiday Inn Adds To Y.&amp; R. Billings
LEAD: Executives at Young &amp; Rubicam can breath a little easier about the agency's decision on Wednesday to resign the $45 million Trans World Airlines account.
Yesterday, Y.&amp; R. retained the $25 million Holiday Inn account for its domestic business, which was in review, and the agency also added Holiday


After the Census, Hard Questions: Adjust the Count? How? When?
LEAD: As Representative Thomas C. Sawyer tells it, there should be only one consideration when the nation takes a census: Make it as accurate as possible.


Bank Inquiry In Australia
LEAD: Australia's Treasurer, Paul Keating, sharply criticized the country's banking industry today, saying banks were trying to recoup losses from bad loans by squeezing customers with high interest rates.


Beatrice Behrman, 95, Doll Maker Known as Madame Alexander
LEAD: Beatrice Behrman, an innovative doll maker who founded the Alexander Doll Company in Manhattan and owned it for 65 years, died on Wednesday at her home in Palm Beach, Fla.
She was 95 years old.
She died in her sleep, a spokesman for the company said.


Did You Catch What TV Missed?
LEAD: The final play of ESPN's first baseball season was a lot like the entire six months of ESPN's rookie year: exciting, different, challenging, inconclusive and frustrating.


Dinkins's Leadership: Strategy or Reaction?
LEAD: In only four days, Mayor David N. Dinkins gave the city's teachers a 5.5-percent pay increase, proposed a sweeping expansion of the police force and then said he was considering 15,000 layoffs.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
GOLF
Sizzling in Texas
Gary Hallberg and Emlyn Aubrey, a tour rookie, shot seven-under-par 63's yesterday and shared the first-round lead in the Texas Open in San Antonio.
Hallberg, twice a PGA Tour winner, and Aubrey, fresh out of Louisiana State, played bogey-free rounds and led by a shot over Mark O'Meara and Howard Twitty.


Sergei G. Lapin, 78, Diplomat, Journalist
LEAD: Sergei G. Lapin, a Soviet diplomat and journalist, died today, state television reported.
He was 78 years old.
In a career that spanned six decades, Mr.
Lapin served as head of two of the most powerful Soviet press organizations - the Gostelradio television and radio agency and the official Soviet press agency,


Rhode Island: Trying to Look Tough
LEAD: Scripts and photographs of television commercials from the Senate race.
CLAUDINE SCHNEIDER: Republican
BACKGROUND: Mindful of her opponent's popularity, Ms.
Schneider has been careful not to criticize Mr.
Pell directly, but her ads imply that she is tougher when it comes to crime, the Savings and Loan bailout and protecting Social Security benefits.


Mobil to Acquire Unit From Hanson
LEAD: Hanson P.L.C., the British industrial conglomerate with extensive holdings in the United States, said it had signed a definitive agreement to sell its Tucker Housewares unit to the Mobil Corporation for $185 million in cash.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Audi of America Inc., a unit of Volkswagen A.G., based in Troy, Mich., said it would raise the suggested retail price of its 1991 models an average of 3.5 perecent.


Dale Ellis Sentenced
LEAD: Dale Ellis, the SuperSonics guard convicted of drunken and reckless driving, was sentenced yesterday in Seattle to one day in jail, fined $500 and ordered to attend a driving school and perform 60 hours of community service.


Trump Files Payment Plan
LEAD: A plan to repay more than $54 million in overdue bills to subcontractors who worked on Donald J. Trump's Taj Mahal Casino Resort was filed today with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The Trump Taj Mahal partnership must disclose significant events to the the S.E.C. because of debt issued to investors.


China Has No Forced-Labor Exports
LEAD: To the Editor:


For Saudis, Little War Preparation but Much Placing of Blame
LEAD: War looms on the northern border where battalions of Saudi and foreign soldiers are preparing for battle.
But you would never know it by looking at daily life in most of the rest of Saudi Arabia.


Alexej Cepicka, Ex-Prague Minister, 80
LEAD: Former Defense Minister Alexej Cepicka, who was expelled from the Communist Party in the 1960's for his support of Stalinist policies, has died, the state press agency C.T.K. reported today.
He was 80 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about the impact of the Government's tax proposals on various industries misstated the percentage of furs sold in the United States for more than $5,000, the level at which an excise tax would be charged.
It is 40 to 50 percent, according to the Fur Information Council of America.


On Environment, Cuomo Goals Still Elusive
LEAD: The section on environmental protection in Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's first State of the State message, in 1983, was barely a page long and included proposals to modernize fish hatcheries and build more boat launches.


Frank Hohner, Harmonica Manufacturer, 81
LEAD: Frank Hohner, the former president of the American branch of H. Hohner Inc., the world's largest producer of harmonicas, died on Wednesday at a nursing home in Huntington, L.I.
He was 81 years old and lived in Oyster Bay, L.I.


UAL Financing Short of Goal
LEAD: An effort by United Airlines' unions to get banks to pledge much more than the amount needed to finance their bid to buy the UAL Corporation has fallen short of the goal, a banking official said yesterday.


Critics Choice
LEAD: The unpredictable Mark Morris is to bring his Brussels-based Monnaie Dance Group/Mark Morris to the Brooklyn Academy of Music tomorrow night for an engagement that may be rich in surprises.
Most may be choreographic.
But there will also be a surprise in casting.


Economic Scene;   U.S. Deficit Plan Appears Credible
LEAD: THE long struggle to cut the budget deficit continues, as the deal struck by White House and Congressional negotiators in the relative seclusion of Andrews Air Force Base failed its first test in the House yesterday.
The compromise was opposed by many conservative Republicans, angry with President Bush for abandoning his ''no new taxes'' campaign pledge, and by many liberal Democrats, rejecting the plea of their party leaders to accept a deal that would impose greater burdens on the poor and middle class than on the rich.


House Backs Auditor Bill
LEAD: The House of Representatives passed a bill yesterday that would require auditors to notify regulators of illegal acts that would materially distort a client's financial statements.


Pop/Jazz;   Adding Up The Decades For 2 Pianists
LEAD: The pianists Hank Jones and Kenny Barron, who are performing this weekend at Bradley's and the Village Vanguard, respectively, can amass a list of artistic associations that sounds like a jazz history book.
In 1944, for example, the Detroit-born Mr.
Jones arrived in New York City to play with the trumpeter Oran (Hot Lips) Page.


Oil Supplies Remain High
LEAD: Oil stocks held by the world's richest countries are higher than a year ago despite nine weeks with no supplies from Iraq and Kuwait, the International Energy Agency said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An entry in the Addenda listing of the Media Business page on Wednesday referred incorrectly to a Saatchi &amp; Saatchi executive.
He is Michael Jeary.


G.M. Plans To Cut Cost Of Saturn
LEAD: The General Motors Corporation announced an ''aggressive pricing and warranty'' strategy today for its Saturn line of compact cars, which will be shown publicly for the first time next week.


Review/Art;   High and Low Culture Meet on a One-Way Street
LEAD: FOR many months and several reasons, ''High and Low: Modern Art and Popular Culture,'' which opens Sunday at the Museum of Modern Art, has been widely anticipated.
Coming after a decade in which fine artists have mixed references to popular culture in new and provocative ways, this show could not have been better timed.


Agent's Starring Role: Corporate Go-Between
LEAD: Once again, Michael S. Ovitz, Hollywood's top talent agent and deal maker, is right where he likes to be: at the center of the action, trying to put together another of the complicated packages for which he is renowned.
This time, though, much more than a movie's success or an actor's career is at stake.


Settlement For Nynex And F.C.C.
LEAD: The Nynex Corporation today settled charges by the Federal Communications Commission, which had accused the company of padding its expenses and overcharging its telephone customers.
Nynex agreed to pay a $1.4 million fine and to lower its interstate access charges for one year by $35.5 million.


Dupree's Debut Is Postponed
LEAD: When the Los Angeles Rams signed Marcus Dupree to a two-year deal on Wednesday, speculation focused on whether the addition of Dupree would intensify competition among the backs and forge a true leader or whether he would simply be one more player shuttling in and out of the backfield.


Surveys Proliferate, but Answers Dwindle
LEAD: Market researchers are discovering that if you ask a simple question these days, you might not get any answer at all.


Price of Oil Eases by 39/ In Slow Day
LEAD: Oil prices eased back yesterday, reflecting what traders called a temporary respite from the wild swings on the futures market.


Rewriting the Budget's Wrongs
LEAD: The House's dumbfounding vote early this morning against the huge Federal budget compromise throws Washington and the U.S.
Government into turmoil.
It's far from clear that the $500 billion deficit reduction package, negotiated by Congressional leaders and the Bush Administration, can survive.


Program Trades Lift Stocks; Dow Up 27.47
LEAD: Stocks rallied yesterday on wave after wave of computerized program trading, with increasingly weary traders tagging the day as just another rally in what is clearly a bear market.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: More movement at the Smithsonian Institution: ANN R. LEVEN, the treasurer, will move to the National Gallery on Dec. 1.
Ms.
Leven, who will take the newly created job of deputy treasurer, has been at the Smithsonian since 1984.
She had been a vice president at Chase Manhattan Bank and, from 1972 to 1979, treasurer of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Sales in Germany Help Woolworth
LEAD: The Woolworth Corporation, the big retailer, said its September sales picked up from the prior month's pace because of robust business in Germany.
Harold E. Sells, Woolworth's chairman and chief executive, said at a retail industry conference in New York that demand in the newly united Germany would help compensate for a sluggish retailing environment at home.


Funds for AIDS Care
LEAD: To the Editor:


Editorial Notebook;   In Moscow, Also: Nimby
LEAD: In the Soviet Union, long synonymous with tough central control, the surge toward democracy raises tormenting questions of how to devolve power while maintaining order.
For Georgy S. Yusin, power to the people has spawned a different dragon: Nimby.


Polish Leader to Run for President Against Walesa, a Former Mentor
LEAD: Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki announced his candidacy for the Polish presidency today, in a contest that would pit him against his former ally and mentor, Lech Walesa.


Supreme Court Shouldn't Be Lifetime Job
LEAD: To the Editor:


Drexel Judge Steps Down
LEAD: The Federal judge overseeing the Drexel Burnham Lambert Group Inc. bankruptcy withdrew from the case yesterday because he is considering a job at a law firm that has represented a Drexel creditor.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MILOS FORMAN was honored with Eastman Kodak's Second Century Award, for bringing new talent to films.
As a director, Mr.
Forman has won two Academy Awards, for ''One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest'' in 1975 and ''Amadeus'' in 1984.
As an educator, he has been co-chairman of the film department at Columbia


Most Forces Remain Loyal to Aquino
LEAD: A military rebellion in two cities on the southern island of Mindanao entered its second day today with most of the country's armed forces remaining loyal to President Corazon C. Aquino.


U.S. Withdraws Nomination of Envoy to Myanmar
LEAD: The State Department said today it had withdrawn President Bush's nominee for Ambassador to Myanmar because the country, formerly known as Burma, had protested remarks that the candidate made at his confirmation hearing.


Our Towns;   Hovel to Hilton: 6 Young Africans Search for Home
LEAD: Three years ago, the six Kayulu children -Henry, Elode, Patrick, Nadine, Sondra and Natasha - lived in a hovel in Kinshasa, Zaire.
It had no kitchen or bathroom; they cooked on an open fire next to the outhouse.


Corrections
LEAD: Charts yesterday showing new tax provisions in the proposed Federal budget misstated estimates of revenue gains or losses for four categories in some copies.
Corrected figures appear today on page A24.


Occidental Settles Lawsuit
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Corporation said today that it had settled a price-fixing lawsuit by agreeing to pay $25.4 million over two years to the plaintiffs, which include the states of Kansas and Missouri.


Rumsfeld Becomes Chief At General Instrument
LEAD: Donald H. Rumsfeld signed on again yesterday as a chief executive, taking the reins at the General Instrument Corporation, a supplier to the cable television industry that was bought in August by Forstmann Little &amp; Company for $1.6 billion.


Amoco Gas Platform
LEAD: The British Government said today that it had ordered Amoco U.K. to improve work supervision on a North Sea gas platform or face criminal prosecution.
The action, which was taken on Sept. 17 by the Department of Energy, followed an inspection on the Amoco Alpha platform in the Leman field off the Norfolk coast, the department said.


Review/Art: Where the Physical and the Spiritual Both Meld and Clash;   Where to Go and When
LEAD: ''Mexico: A Work of Art,'' a citywide celebration of the cultural arts of Mexico, continues through the winter in New York, with a variety of events at numerous locations.
Here is a sampling of events this weekend.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted.
Today
VORPAL GALLERY, 411 West Broadway, near Spring Street.


A Stack of Messages;   First Said to Lack Leadership, Mayor Is Now Said to Go in Many Directions
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins demonstrated on three fronts this week the leadership that critics had repeatedly complained that he lacked.
But now he seems to be leading the city in several directions at once.


Bank Trust Funds Backed
LEAD: Robert L. Clarke, the Comptroller of the Currency, today defended a proposed regulation that would enable banks to compete with mutual funds.


Reviews/Film;   New Version Of a Classic
LEAD: ''Mendacity is the great sin that's destroying America,'' says an escaped convict played by Mickey Rourke.
He is being pursued by Lindsay Crouse, as an F.B.I. agent with a generic Southern accent, though the setting is Utah.
It sounds like a bad, newly discovered Tennessee Williams script, but it's not.


Volvo Appointments
LEAD: Volvo A.B.'s president, Christer Zetterberg, today was appointed chief executive of the Swedish vehicle maker effective Oct. 15, Volvo's chairman and current chief executive, Pehr Gyllenhammar, will have the title of executive chairman, Volvo said.
The company said Mr.
Gyllenhammar would devote his time to Volvo's alliance with Renault, the French auto maker, and to Volvo's strategic development.


Layoffs? Dinkins Lied, Irate Union Chief Asserts
LEAD: Two of Mayor David N. Dinkins's strongest political allies in the municipal unions reacted furiously yesterday to his announcement of possible massive layoffs, accusing him of betrayal for not forewarning or consulting them.


Review/Film;   A Writer's Awakening to the Erotic
LEAD: Of the two loud literary voices to be heard in ''Henry and June,'' Philip Kaufman's long, steamy and untethered account of the three-way romance involving the novelist Henry Miller, his wife, June, and the compulsive diarist Anais Nin, it is Nin's that emerges more clearly.
The raw, reckless immediacy of Miller's work has been overpowered by


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


INSIDE
LEAD:
The New Arms Accord:


Review/Television;   Slowly Killing Romania's Children
LEAD: The pictures are wrenching: puny infants, some with their hands bound, attracting flies.
Naked children jammed into filthy prisonlike areas.
Sickly looking boys and girls waiting to die.
Such are some of the images that will stay with you from ''20/20,'' at 10 tonight on ABC.


Libel Suit Uncovers Raw Nerve: Quotations
LEAD: What brought Janet Malcolm and Jeffrey M. Masson together eight years ago was a common fascination with Sigmund Freud and the history of psychoanalysis.
For more than 40 hours they talked of Freud as well as Freud's daughter, disciples and dogmas.


Review/Theater;   Back to the Classroom For a Frustration Lesson
LEAD: Act I of ''Stand-Up Tragedy,'' the new play by Bill Cain at the Criterion Center, is labeled ''First Semester'' in the Playbill.
Act II is ''Second Semester.'' Make no mistake about it: The audience is in school, and there's no use praying for early dismissal.


People
LEAD: *
DDB Needham Worldwide has made several executive appointments.
Daniel Rank has been named senior vice president in the Chicago office.
In New York, Neal Gomberg, David Nathanson and Deanna Cohen have been named senior vice presidents.


Vincent Chalk, 45; Won AIDS Job Ruling
LEAD: Vincent Chalk, the teacher who won an important legal ruling that protects the jobs of public employees who have AIDS, died on Tuesday at Coastal Community Hospital in Santa Ana, Calif.
He was 45 years old and lived in Long Beach, Calif.


Bass to Upgrade Holiday Inn Chain
LEAD: The British brewing company Bass P.L.C. said it planned to invest $1 billion in its Holiday Inn hotel chain in the next three years.
Bass's chairman, Ian Prosser, said the company would spend the money on improving facilities and ''developing new concepts and new ideas.'' His comments were prepared for a gathering of Holiday Inn franchise owners in New York and were made available in London, where


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about the World Summit for Children at the United Nations misstated child mortality figures.
The United Nations estimated that during the two-day meeting, 2,800 children would die from whooping cough, 8,000 from measles, 4,000 from tetanus, 5,500 from malaria, 22,000 from diarrhea and 12,000 from pneumonia.


CBS Is First to Revise Its Fall Lineup
LEAD: CBS yesterday became the first network to announce extensive changes in its fall prime-time schedule, adding two new series, dropping two and moving four others to new time periods.
The moves are intended to improve on the network's unexpectedly strong start in the television season.


Holiday Weekend Schedules
LEAD: Columbus Day is Monday. Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK


Dollar Falls as Gold Dips In U.S. After Rise Abroad
LEAD: The dollar dropped against all leading foreign currencies yesterday amid selling on the widespread assumption that United States interest rates will fall in the near future.


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Rowland Worldwide Inc., the public relations unit of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. has acquired Dyson Communications, a Swiss-based public relations consulting firm.
Terms were not disclosed.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A2-14
The Sudan faces a major famine for the third time in six years.
But this time the U.S. has warned the Islamic fundamentalist Government that pleas for help will be ignored.
Page A1
Sudan chief says he won't change aid or politics
A6


Witness in Obscenity Trial Calls Explicit Photographs 'Destructive'
LEAD: A prosecution witness in the Mapplethorpe obscenity trial testified today that sexually explicit photographs exhibited here last spring were ''destructive.''


Robinson Answers Giant Calls
LEAD: For three straight years, the Giants have waived Stacy Robinson on the final preseason roster cut.
For three straight years, they have brought him back early in the season because another wide receiver (Mark Ingram once and Odessa Turner twice) has been injured.


Polls Show Britain's Labor Party Able to Win
LEAD: The British Labor Party, holding its annual conference in the seaside resort of Blackpool this week, is being buoyed by opinion polls that place it in a stronger position than at any time in recent years to wrest power from the Conservatives.


A.M.A. Assails Tactics of Animals' Advocates
LEAD: The American Medical Association today accused animal rights groups of mounting a campaign of terrorism, with bombings, break-ins and hate mail, to try to prevent all medical research using animals.


How the Athletics and the Red Sox Line Up
LEAD:
OAKLAND ATHLETICS
Catchers (Average, home runs, r.b.i.)
36Terry Steinbach (.251, 9, 57) Finished strong, hitting .333 over his last 17 games.
Also developed into a threat with the bases loaded: 11 for 18, a .611 average, with 25 r.b.i.
27Ron Hassey (.213, 5, 21) Bob Welch's personal catcher.


Garst Seed to Buy Edward J. Funk
LEAD: The Garst Seed Company, a subsidiary of ICI of London, said it would buy Edward J. Funk &amp; Sons, adding soybeans to its product line and creating a business with more than $100 million in annual sales.
Funk, which sells Super Crost Seeds, is a subsidiary of British Petroleum P.L.C.
Terms of the purchase were not disclosed.


Rangers Have 79 More Games To Try to Get Everything Right
LEAD: There aren't many charms or advantages to a National Hockey League regular season that lasts 80 games just to eliminate fewer than a quarter of the teams from contention for the Stanley Cup.
But one of them is that it takes a long time for panic to set in.


AIDS and Folk Healing, a Zimbabwe Encounter
LEAD: The year-old boy shuddered with a baby cough as the doctor pressed a stethoscope against his thin little chest. ''This pneumonia is not responding well to treatment,'' Dr.
Geoff Foster said. ''Nowdays that almost always means AIDS.''


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
COMPANIES
Nynex settled F.C.C. charges that accused the company of padding its expenses and overcharging its telephone customers.
It agreed to pay a fine of $1.4 million and to lower its rates for interstate calls for one year by $35.5 million. [Page D1.]
G.M. announced pricing and warranty strategy for its Saturn line of compact cars.


Inquiry Asks Oil Records
LEAD: The Justice Department said today that it had ordered a large number of oil companies, independent refiners and gasoline marketers to turn over their production records to investigators.


Review/Film;   4 Chimps. One Man. That's It.
LEAD: In ''The Fifth Monkey,'' Ben Kingsley plays Cunda.
Cunda lives in the Brazilian jungle.
He catches snakes for a living.
He talks in simple sentences.
Sometimes only in phrases.


Bill Would Leave Kemp In Public Relations Slump
LEAD: If the Senate has its way, Housing Secretary Jack F. Kemp will soon be without a public relations staff.


TV Weekend;   Reynolds and a High-Powered Cast
LEAD: Back in 1974, in the movie ''The Longest Yard,'' Burt Reynolds played a former football pro who ends up in prison and puts together a squad of dirty players to defeat the warden's team.
It was Mr.
Reynolds at his charmingly swaggering best, a level he has since had trouble matching, especially in recent years.


Governors Say Budget Plan Shifts More Burdens to States
LEAD: Already struggling with declining economies and a hardening resistance to new taxes, many state officials around the nation say the proposal to reduce the Federal deficit that was defeated early this morning would have only made matters worse by expanding a decadelong shift of Federal responsibilities to state and local governments.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This is major step in the transfer of Federal responsibilities to the states, and many governors, if they haven't already discovered it, will make that painful discovery in the next year or two.''
- Gov. Buddy Roemer of Louisiana. [A1:5.]


Museum's New Sculpture Court Is Readied


Alliance Is Formed by Fiat and French Company
LEAD: Fiat, Italy's largest industrial group, and Compagnie Generale d'Electricite, France's largest electronics group, announced today that they were forming a far-reaching strategic alliance and that C.G.E. would acquire control of Telettra, Fiat's $1.4 billion-a-year telecommunications subsidiary.


New Hope for Residency Rule
LEAD: A residency requirement for newly hired New York City police officers has been proposed by mayors and defeated by unions for years, but city and state officials say the surge in concern over crime should give the idea a better chance as part of Mayor David N. Dinkins's new criminal-justice program.


Sudan Chief Says He Won't Change Aid or Politics
LEAD: Lieut.
Gen.
Omar Hassan Ahmed al-Bashir, who took control of the Sudan in a coup 14 months ago, says he has no plans to change his Government's handling of humanitarian aid or establish ''a Western, multi-party political system.''


Gorbachev Decides to Allow Negotiated Wholesale Prices
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev moved to increase the output of Soviet businesses today by allowing them - with certain restrictions - to negotiate their own wholesale prices.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Chemical Banking Corp., New York, made three promotions to executive vice president: Frank Lourenso, for its middle market group; Alan M. Silberstein, for its consumer banking group, and Thomas Jacob, for its national consumer services group.


Cool Uniforms Sold to Iraq
LEAD: British troops in the Persian Gulf are sweltering while Iraqi soldiers stay cool, because Iraq bought Britain's entire stock of desert uniforms.


Death-Penalty Delay Doesn't Promote Justice;   Beaten Children
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rwandan Forces Block Rebel Advance on Capital
LEAD: Rwandan Government forces firing helicopter-borne rockets and cannons blocked rebels advancing toward the central African nation's capital, a diplomat said today.


Ryan Stays a Ranger
LEAD: Calling it just a formality, General Manager Tom Grieve of the Texas Rangers announced yesterday that the team had exercised a $3.3 million contract option on 43-year-old Nolan Ryan for next season.(AP)


Apple and Toshiba Negotiating Pact
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. is negotiating with the Toshiba Corporation to develop low-priced computers, Toshiba officials said.
A Toshiba spokesman, Masao Mochizuki, said Apple recently proposed the alliance, but he declined to elaborate.
The announcement comes days after the Sony Corporation of Japan said it was discussing business ties with


Death-Penalty Delay Doesn't Promote Justice
LEAD: To the Editor:


Accusations over one firm's fees bring on a new war between the states.
LEAD: Two distinct parts of the country, ostensibly united but with their own customs and loyalties, coexist, at times uncomfortably.
The smaller, less-populated region feels the larger one is imposing its own, uncongenial way of life on it.
It bristles, then chafes, then rebels.
Skirmishing breaks out, with no end in sight.


Persian Gulf Confrontation Hasn't Hurt U.S. Economy, Not Yet
LEAD: To the Editor:


Decision on Dickerson Upheld by Tagliabue
LEAD: Commissioner Paul Tagliabue upheld yesterday the Indianapolis Colts' decision to put Eric Dickerson on the reserve-nonfootball injury list, leaving the team to decide when its star running back will be activated.


CUOMO AND FLORIO SEE HIGHER COSTS
LEAD: Officials in New York and New Jersey today attacked the Federal plan to reduce the budget deficit on several points, including shifts in the cost of health care and housing to their states.


An Amazing Farewell to Many Arms
LEAD: Never before will so many states have destroyed so many tanks, artillery pieces, aircraft and helicopters - without a war.
That's the remarkable result of an agreement in principle reached Wednesday between the main protagonists, the U.S. and the Soviet Union, in 23-nation talks to reduce conventional forces in


Exhibit A in Hubble Defense: Clearest Pluto Images
LEAD: The Hubble Space Telescope, its vision still slightly hazy because of a defective mirror, is sending astronomers valuable pictures of the near and far heavens, including new images of Saturn and Pluto, scientists said today.


Some of the Best Won't Be in the Running During a Major Weekend
LEAD: The most important weekend of racing so far this year begins tomorrow and inspires mixed feelings.
It is disappointing that several of the sport's best runners are sidelined or retired with injuries, but the races are now more competitive and more important than they might otherwise have been.


F.B.I. Is Assailed Over Gay Agent's Dismissal
LEAD: The lawyer for a homosexual Federal agent who was dismissed says his client's security clearance was revoked to provide a reason to get rid of him.


When Bream Connects, So Do Pirates
LEAD: Sid Bream's two-run home run in the fourth inning tonight pulled Pittsburgh into a 3-3 tie, but it did even more.
The home run made it obvious - perhaps even automatic - that the Pirates would beat the Cincinnati Reds in the first game of the National League pennant playoff.


Eric W. Stoetzner, 89, Ex-Times Ad Executive
LEAD: Eric W. Stoetzner, the director of foreign advertising at The New York Times for 20 years, died on Tuesday at Stamford Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 89 years old and lived in Stamford.


Abortion Rights Bill Advances
LEAD: A House subcommittee approved a bill today that would make a woman's right to an abortion part of Federal law.
The language of the bill was drawn from Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 Supreme Court decision that barred state laws banning abortion. ''It is clear from recent Supreme Court decisions that Roe is in jeopardy,'' said Representative Don Edwards, a California Democrat who is chairman of the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights.


Fisk Sends a Signal In Embrace of Evans
LEAD: At Fenway Park, where the past and the present intermingle, perhaps one scene Wednesday night vividly brought together all the heartache and the unquenchable hope the Red Sox invariably bring to each baseball season.


Newest U.S. Fuel Worry: Propane
LEAD: The lowest August inventory of propane in 20 years, an increase in demand for the fuel and bad memories of last winter have left some government and propane-industry officials predicting shortages in certain regions, including the Northeast.


Republican Quits Louisiana Race In Effort to Defeat Ex-Klansman
LEAD: The Republican nominee for the United States Senate in Louisiana pulled out of a primary election today as part of an extraordinary Republican effort to promote the victory of the Democratic incumbent, Senator J. Bennett Johnston Jr., over State Representative David Duke, a former Ku Klux Klan leader.


Steinbrenner in Court
LEAD: In a lawsuit filed in Manhattan Federal Court yesterday, George Steinbrenner accused a stenographer of tampering with sworn statements that he and other Yankees officials made during Commissioner Fay Vincent's investigation of Steinbrenner's ties to a gambler.


Columbia Seeking Bids
LEAD: Three weeks after Federal regulators blocked an earlier deal by the Columbia Savings and Loan Association to sell its $3 billion worth of high-yield ''junk bonds,'' the savings institution said on Wednesday that it was soliciting a new round of bids for the portfolio, this time under terms more acceptable to the


LOOSE BEAM FOUND IN SPACE SHUTTLE
LEAD: The space agency suffered another setback today when a toppled beam was found inside the space shuttle Atlantis.


The U. N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: GEORGE SOROS, the investment adviser who has become the philanthropist of Eastern Europe, will receive the Human Rights Award from the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights.


Reviews/Film Festival;   Scene: Black Middle-Class Home. Enter a Comic, Lost Demon.
LEAD: The kitchen looks used and the interior decoration is not especially modish.
Yet Charles Burnett's ''To Sleep With Anger'' seems at first to be taking place in that idealized black middle-class landscape identified with ''The Cosby Show.''


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.18
9.00
9.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.13
7.17
7.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.14
7.18
7.81
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.51
8.58
8.17
30-YR.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 522 money market mutual funds increased $865.4 million, to $409.96 billion, in the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 162 institutional funds increased by $586.9 million, to $99.03 billion.
The assets of the 255 general-purpose funds were up by $192.9 million, to $145.74 billion.


House Members Announce Compromise on Arts Money
LEAD: Seeking to avert a brawl on the House floor over the highly emotional issue of money for arts, Democratic and Republican negotiators announced a compromise today to extend the life of the National Endowment for the Arts for three years.


Financial Printers Have Suffered Since '87 Crash
LEAD: The financial printing industry has ridden the Wall Street business downturn like a hapless passenger on a falling airplane.
When Pandick Inc., one of the oldest and largest printers, filed for bankruptcy last month, the plane crash-landed.


Lack of Judges Could Impede Crime Strategy
LEAD: New York City's overburdened court system is emerging as a major impediment to the crime-fighting strategy outlined by Mayor David N. Dinkins this week.


Strict Rules Imposed for Sitting in Airline Exit Rows
LEAD: Federal rules taking effect on Friday will restrict airline seats near exits to people in good physical condition who speak and read English and are otherwise able to help evacuate the plane in an emergency.


Arms Control Catching Up
LEAD: The new agreement in principle on conventional arms has enabled arms control to catch up with the momentous political changes sweeping Europe.
With the continuing withdrawal of Soviet forces from Eastern European nations, the reunification of Germany and the decline of each superpower's military budget, the four-decade East-West military confrontation was already coming to an end.


Leland Holland, 63, Officer Held Hostage At Embassy in Iran
LEAD: Leland J. Holland, a retired Army colonel who was one of the 52 Americans held hostage for 444 days in Iran after the takeover of the United States Embassy in Teheran in 1979, died Tuesday at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington.
He was 63 years old and lived in Warrenton, Va.


Review/Art;   The Genius of Mexico, Before Its Long Sleep Under Spain and After
LEAD: THE impression unfolds by the time a viewer has passed the colossal sculptures on either side of the museum's lobby and admired the Olmec seated figure who presides over the entranceway to the exhibition.
By the end of the show - after the rooms of Mayan and Aztec sculptures and carvings and jewelry and the hundreds of paintings and objects spanning the period from the Spanish conquest in the 16th century to the middle of the 20th century - there can be no doubt: ''Mexico: Splendors of 30 Centuries,'' at the Metropolitan Museum of


New Jersey's Dumping Investigated by E.P.A.
LEAD: The Federal Environmental Protection Agency is investigating a complaint that large amounts of hazardous waste from New Jersey have been improperly dumped in landfills in New York and other states.


A STUDY SEES IRAQ FOLDING IN WEEKS
LEAD: Iraq could survive for a matter of weeks at most against the multinational force in the Persian Gulf, the International Institute for Strategic Studies said today.


Review/Film;   In 'Avalon,' a Journey to Baltimore and a Family's Dissolution
LEAD: IN the fond overflowing family album that is Barry Levinson's ''Avalon,'' the prevailing symbol of both unity and discord is a Thanksgiving turkey.
Or a ''toikey,'' as the participants put it, since the Krichinskys are an immigrant Jewish family in Baltimore and their every bantering, nit-picking conversation carries hints of the Old World.


Srinagar Journal;   In Kashmir's Enchanted Valley, War Breaks Spell
LEAD: Just before 4 P.M., traffic in the center of this tormented city comes to a standstill for about 20 minutes to let a few buses pass.
The buses take Hindu government employees from their sandbagged offices to their safe dormitories, separated from Muslim Kashmir by troops in battle gear.


Pork Bellies Continue Surge On Expectation of Shortage
LEAD: Pork belly futures prices aimed for near-records yesterday on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange as a perceived shortage led traders to believe that supplies might run out before next summer.


38 Soviet Athletes Fail Drug Tests
LEAD: The track and field athletes Natalya Yermolovich and Yelena Podkopayeva were among 38 Soviet athletes who tested positive for drugs, including steroids, a sports official said in an article published today.


Patents;   Preventing Radio Theft
LEAD: For car owners who have found it impossible to prevent thieves from stealing their radios, Gerald C. Levinson has a novel solution: Make the thieves think the radio has already been taken.
Mr.
Levinson, an inventor in Manhattan Beach, Calif., obtained a patent this week on a false front for radios that features a tangle of wires that appear to emerge from an empty hole in the dashboard.


New Safety Questions On McDonnell Fighter
LEAD: A Congressional committee raised new questions today about the safety of the AV-8B Harrier fighter-bomber, which is made for the Marine Corps by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.


Drexel Figure May Testify About Milken
LEAD: Frederick H. Joseph, the former chief executive of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., may be called by Government prosecutors to testify against Michael R. Milken, people involved in the inquiry said yesterday.


Honoring Top Relievers
LEAD: John Franco of the Mets and Bobby Thigpen of the Chicago White Sox are the winners of this year's Rolaids Relief Man awards, which go to the outstanding pitchers coming out of the bullpen in each league.


3-Nation Force Helps Rwanda Meet Tutsi Invaders
LEAD: Some 1,000 French, Belgian and Zairian paratroopers have taken up positions around Kigali, the capital of the Central African nation of Rwanda, to help defend the Government from an attacking refugee army of Tutsi tribesmen, United States officials reported today.


Treatment for a Met
LEAD: Mark Carreon, the Mets' outfielder, has been at the Smithers Center for Alcohol and Drug Treatment in Manhattan since late last month, but the team refuses to say what the treatment is for. ''It's a personal matter,'' said Jay Horwitz, a club spokesman.
Carreon is the fourth Met player to undergo the standard 28-day treatment program at Smithers, following Dwight Gooden, Darryl Strawberry and Mackey Sasser.(


Reds Bring Down Pirates By Cutting Down Runners
LEAD: The dialogue Andy Van Slyke conducted with himself as he raced from second base to third in the sixth inning summed up the plight of the Pittsburgh Pirates today.


The Budget Agreement;   Budget Boomerang
LEAD: In provoking what he planned as a one-week confrontation with Congress over the 1991 budget, President Bush instead brought Washington to the brink of a major crisis of confidence about his leadership and the ability of the nation's Government to make a budget.


How to Pass the Budget
LEAD: There is no tidy way for President Bush and Congressional leaders to recover from the stunning bipartisan defeat of the budget package Thursday night.
Like people in a small-town that has just been wiped off the map by a tornado, they just have to dig themselves out and start thinking about the first step.


New York City's Grim Task: Deciding Whom to Lay Off
LEAD: The municipal budget-cutting ax is often a blunt instrument, and never more so than when city employees -more than 15,000, according to the Dinkins administration - face the possibility of layoffs.


Bryan Burrough Book On American Express
LEAD: Bryan Burrough, the co-author with John Helyar of the best-selling book ''Barbarians at the Gate,'' has reached an agreement with HarperCollins for a book about American Express, based on his long article about the company in the Sept. 24 issue of The Wall Street Journal.
The agreement is for an advance of about $1 million.


Rank-and-File Rebuff to Censorship
LEAD: The officials prosecuting Cincinnati's Contemporary Arts Center and its director for displaying seven sexually explicit photographs by Robert Mapplethorpe appeared to have everything going for them.


Hewlett-Packard in a Realignment
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company announced a reorganization today intended to streamline its computer business and prepare for succession at the top.
The chief executive, John A. Young, will now share responsibilities with the chief operating officer, Dean O. Morton, in a newly created chief executive office.


Francis X. Houghton Ad Executive, 63
LEAD: Francis X. Houghton, an advertising executive, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 63 years old.


450 to 500 Face T.W.A. Layoffs
LEAD: In yet another sign of troubled times in the airline industry, Trans World Airlines Inc. said today that it was laying off between 450 and 500 staff and might cut some flights.
A T.W.A. spokesman, Donald


College Football; Today's Game;   Florida Powerhouses Have a Lot at Stake
LEAD: When Miami and Florida State have met on a football field in recent years, the winner has immediately been able to boast of a state championship and then seek to take over the entire country.


Pakistan Is Accused by India Of Shelling Kashmir Border
LEAD: The Indian Government accused Pakistan today of ''unprovoked and heavy shelling'' on the disputed border in Kashmir.


Earnest W. B. Lewis, Executive, 81
LEAD: Earnest W. B. Lewis, retired vice president and chief financial officer for the Westinghouse World Financial Corporation, died on Wednesday at Norwalk (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 81 years old and lived in Westport, Conn.
He died of heart failure, his daughter Glenna Kean said.
Mr.
Lewis joined Westinghouse Electric International in New York City in 1937 as treasurer.


BRITAIN WILL LINK VALUE OF CURRENCY TO EUROPE SYSTEM
LEAD: Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said today that Britain planned to link the value of the pound to other leading European currencies.
She had resisted such a move for years on the ground that it might restrict the freedom of her Conservative Government to fashion the nation's economic policies.


1,000 Artists In a Salute To Diversity
LEAD: Festival 2000, which begins on Saturday, is a rainbow coalition of 1,000 performing and visual artists from across the nation that for 23 days will salute the cultural diversity of both this city and the nation.


Edward F. Merrey, Lawyer, 79
LEAD: Edward F. Merrey, a lawyer in Paterson, N.J., for 54 years, died on Sept. 28 at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 79 years old and lived in Ridgewood.


Review/Theater;   When the Garden of Eden Is on the Lower East Side
LEAD: Late in her solo performance piece, ''World Without End,'' Holly Hughes reimagines the story of Adam and Eve as a semiautobiographical, hard-boiled B-movie set in the bohemian environs of the Lower East Side.
As the primal couple make love, Ms.
Hughes wonders aloud to her partner: ''Buddy, do you have any idea who I am?


Your Money;   Retirement Funds: Strategy Review
LEAD: For people who have followed prudent financial advice for years, saving for retirement in tax-deferred accounts, a question arises: When should the money be withdrawn?
In today's tax climate, experts who once favored keeping money in I.R.A.'s and 401(k) and Keogh plans as long as possible are beginning to favor earlier withdrawals.


Wall St. Overcomes Shock of Rejection Of the Deficit Pact
LEAD: Wall Street, long concerned over the nation's growing budget deficit, reacted calmly yesterday to the failure of the House of Representatives to agree to a deficit-reduction plan.


Overseer of Telescope Resigns
LEAD: The executive who oversaw the manufacturing of the Hubble Space Telescope has resigned from Hughes Danbury Optical Systems Inc., a month after the company was blamed for a flaw that blurred the telescope's view.


Recharging Made Easy And Faster
LEAD: Batteries have an annoying way of dying just when they are needed most.
Some batteries can be recharged.
But who thinks of that ahead of time?
And who is willing to carry around a large, awkward battery charger that can take up to 16 hours to recharge a battery?


MIPS Forecasts Possible Deficit
LEAD: MIPS Computer Systems Inc. said a shortage of critical components would cause a shortfall in anticipated revenues and a possible loss for the third quarter, which ended last Sunday.
Based in Sunnyvale, Calif., MIPS makes computers and computer components based on RISC, or reduced instruction set computing.


Curbs on Imports of Textiles And Shoes Vetoed by Bush
LEAD: President Bush vetoed a bill imposing tight quotas on imports of textiles and shoes today, saying the measure ''picks the pockets of United States consumers'' by drastically driving up prices to the tune of $2,600 a family over five years.


Pakistan Election Open to All Parties
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Wednesday about proposed limits on tax deductions referred incorrectly to the 33 percent rate that applies to a married couple earning $150,000.
It is the marginal rate, or the rate on the last dollar earned, not the effective rate.


Senator Staging Startling Comeback in Bid for Re-election in Rhode Island
LEAD: It was not hard, six months ago, to compile a long list of reasons that Senator Claiborne Pell, the shy, aristocratic 71-year-old Democrat from Rhode Island who heads the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, was ripe for defeat in this fall's elections.


Lucas Retires
LEAD: John Lucas, traded from the Houston Rockets to the Atlanta Hawks last week, has retired, the Hawks announced yesterday.


Kendra Ann Beard Is Wed
LEAD: Kendra Ann Beard, the manager of rules and competitions for the United States Golf Association in Far Hills, N.J., was married last evening to Jack David Graham, a producer at ABC Sports in New York.
The Rev.
Frank J. McNulty officiated at Our Lady of the Blessed Sacrament Roman Catholic Church in Roseland, N.J.


In the Bronx, a Ritual of Grief They Know by Heart
LEAD: In a Bronx neighborhood where drugs and crime are commonplace, two young people were shot on Thursday night, one fatally, when a car pulled up to a crowd of teen-agers and the driver opened fire.


Pitching, Defense and O'Neill Beat the Pirates
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds healed their game today, cutting down three baserunners, reviving their pitching and even unleashing the notorious Nasty Boys of the bullpen.
And combining all the resources that kept them in first place every day this season, they defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates, 2-1, to square the playoff for the National


Soviets Hopeful on Grain
LEAD: Despite labor problems and transportation shortages, this year's Soviet grain harvest may reach record levels, official figures showed today.
A report in the daily farming newspaper Selskaya Zhizn said the harvest had topped 1989's total production of 211 million metric tons.
By Oct. 1, 211.5 million tons had been harvested, 27.7 million more than had been harvested by the same date last year.


Recent Rate Policy of Fed
LEAD: Federal Reserve policy makers decided two weeks after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait to keep interest rates unchanged but to permit lower rates if economic conditions warranted, records released today show.


Strike in Costa Rica
LEAD: More than 70,000 service workers struck today to protest Government austerity measures that have increased the cost of living.
Employees stayed off the job at six of the main hospitals, schools, city governments, the health ministry, the National Bank and other institutions. ''So far, the strike is a big success,'' said Jose Joaquin Melendez, coordinator of the Permanent Workers' Council.


MacLean's Injury Status Is Reported Not Serious


William W. Weir, 97; Led Cyprus Academy
LEAD: William Wilbur Weir, former director of the American Academy on Cyprus and past editor of The Christian Statesman, died Sunday at the hospital unit of the Reformed Presbyterian Home in Pittsburgh.
He was 97 years old and lived in Beaver Falls, Pa.


Missing Forwards at Nets Camp
LEAD: Derrick Coleman, the Nets' power forward of the future, was not at Jadwin Gymnasium today for the opening of training camp.
Neither was Roy Hinson, the power forward of the present.


The Budget Agreement;   BUSH REJECTS STOPGAP BILL AFTER BUDGET PACT DEFEAT; FEDERAL SHUTDOWN BEGINS    Bush Aides' Big-Stick Tactics Drove Away Many in House
LEAD: By the day of the budget vote, it was already glaringly apparent to some White House officials and Republican strategists that the bad-cop, bad-cop routine of John H. Sununu and Richard G. Darman was not working.


2 Novelists Awarded Fiction Prizes in Ireland
LEAD: A. S. Byatt, an English novelist, has won the Irish Times-Aer Lingus International Fiction Prize for her novel ''Possession,'' which will be published in the United States this month by Random House.
The prize is worth $42,500.
Ms.
Byatt has written two other novels, as well as studies of the novels of Iris Murdoch and the poets Wordsworth and


National Review Losing Buckley As Chief Editor
LEAD: William F. Buckley Jr., the founder and ranking editor of National Review for 35 years, said last night that he would soon step down from his position and become the editor at large of the conservative biweekly magazine.


Yale Gets Gift of $20 Million From Bass Family (Again)
LEAD: Yale University today received a $20 million gift for the study of the humanities from the Bass family of Fort Worth - the family's second gift of $20 million to the school this year.


NS Group Grows
LEAD: NS Group Inc., a maker of specialty steel products, acquired $96 million in steel assets from Babcock &amp; Wilcox and PMAC Ltd.
The purchase includes operations in Koppel and Ambridge, Pa.
The company said the acquisition was being financed by PMAC and a $100 million credit line from the General Electric Company's GE Capital unit.


Travelers Cuts Dividend and Sees Big Loss
LEAD: In another sign of the deteriorating real estate market, the Travelers Corporation, an insurance company holding a sizable mortgage-loan portfolio, unexpectedly cut its dividend yesterday and said it planned to report a record $500 million loss in the third quarter and a loss for the year.


Prospect of New Officers Lifts the 34th Precinct's Spirits
LEAD: Capt.
Nicholas Estavillo, commander of the 34th Precinct in upper Manhattan, looked as pleased as a besieged general announcing the arrival of fresh troops as he told his top officers and staff members the good news this week - 138 new officers by 1993.


U.S. Fights to Hold Suspect in Agent's Death
LEAD: Justice Department lawyers say a Federal judge in Los Angeles committed serious errors when he ordered the release of a Mexican doctor who had been forcibly brought to the United States for trial in the murder of an American drug agent.


The Budget Agreement;   BUSH REJECTS STOPGAP BILL AFTER BUDGET PACT DEFEAT; FEDERAL SHUTDOWN BEGINS    Congress is Pushed
LEAD: Congress approved stopgap spending legislation last night to buy time to repair the wreckage left when the House rejected the budget compromise.
But the White House said President Bush, in an attempt to force Congress to pass a budget, would not sign the stopgap bill.


Men's Coach Reinstated
LEAD: Whoops.
Admitting a mistake he made last week, Howard Patterson, the chief executive officer of the United States Ski Team, has reinstated Georg Capaul as coach of the men's slalom and giant slalom teams.


Wyche Fined by N.F.L. For Barring Female Writer
LEAD: Four days after he violated the National Football League's media-relations policy for the third time by barring a female reporter from the Cincinnati Bengals' locker room, Coach Sam Wyche was hit yesterday with the largest fine ever imposed on an N.F.L. coach.
He was also warned that further violations of league policy would result in even more severe disciplinary action.


The Budget Agreement;   In the End, the Feeling The Budget Was Unfair
LEAD: All the months of high-level meetings that produced the budget deal, all the pleading by the White House and the Congressional leaders to get lawmakers to approve it, can seem a pale reality next to a furious switchboard at a Congressman's district office.


Yanks Drop 2 Veterans
LEAD: The Yankees made way for four rookies on their 40-man roster yesterday by releasing two veterans - Claudell Washington, an outfielder, and Wayne Tolleson, an infielder.


Patents;   Inventors May Face Higher Patent Fees
LEAD: Regardless of what President Bush and Congress ultimately decide about the budget, inventors will probably face much stiffer fees when they apply for patents.


Brig. Gen. John Groff Dies at 100; A Marine Hero of Belleau Wood
LEAD: Brig.
Gen.
John Groff, the oldest surviving general in the United States Marine Corps, died Tuesday at the Tri-City Hospital in Oceanside, Calif.
He was 100 years old.


In the Saudi Desert, Tents Are Home to High Technology


Penguins Outgun Capitals
LEAD: Kevin Stevens scored two goals, including the game winner with 7 minutes 15 seconds left, and added four assists as the Pittsburgh Penguins beat the Washington Capitals, 7-4, tonight in the season opener for both teams.


U.N. Foresaw Kuwait Strike; Warnings Were Not Heeded
LEAD: For several days before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2, officers serving with a United Nations force in southern Iraq reported apprehension that the military buildup had the hallmarks of a pending strike across the border, but the warnings were discounted, Western military officials in the region say.


Rangers Reconsidering A Physical Approach
LEAD: In a misleadingly close 4-3 loss to the Blackhawks in their season opener at Chicago Stadium on Thursday night, the Rangers were crunched so often into the end boards and the Plexiglas that they could all but taste the Windex.


Lilian T. Mowrer;Writer Was 101
LEAD: Lilian Thomson Mowrer, author of books about Europe on the eve of World War II, died Sunday at her home in Chicago.
She was 101 years old.


Bank Acts on Rumors
LEAD: An Australian bank today offered a reward of 10,000 Australian dollars (about $8,300) for information on the source of rumors that the bank was near collapse.
A spokesman for the Metway Bank, based in Brisbane, said he thought the bank had been the target of a deliberate and malicious campaign, which should not go unpunished.


Harcourt Brace
LEAD: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. disclosed that it was reviewing various transactions, including the sale of assets and businesses, to reduce its heavy debt load.
The Orlando, Fla. publishing and insurance company made the statement in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Harcourt Brace said it was also considering an exchange or tender offer for its debt securities, a recapitalization or additional borrowings.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Radiator Repair
LEAD: For many homeowners and apartment dwellers, enjoying cool fall weather is tempered by having to restart cantankerous hot water or steam radiators.
Poor or incomplete heating, minor leaks and noise are common symptoms.
These are usually easy to remedy, but if they persist, call a heating company or a licensed heating technician for service.


The Flight From Iraq and Kuwait Continues


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about the world chess championship next week between Gary Kasparov and Anatoly Karpov misidentified Mr.
Kasparov's homeland and misstated his proposal to alter the rules of the coming match.
He is from the Soviet republic of Azerbaijan, not Russia.


The Budget Agreement;   House Roll-Call Vote in Defeat of the Budget Compromise
LEAD: Following is the roll-call vote of 254 to 179 by which the House of Representatives on Thursday rejected a $500 billion deficit-reduction package written by President Bush and Congressional leaders.
Voting ''yes,'' to pass the package, were 108 Democrats and 71 Republicans.
Voting ''no'' were 149 Democrats and 105 Republicans.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


Computer Chip Set By Intel Awaited
LEAD: The Intel Corporation is expected to introduce a new chip set this month that combines the functions of many chips in one or two devices, a feature that should make it a big seller, industry sources and analysts said.
The chip set, which they said might be called Genesis, will be aimed at the notebook and laptop computer markets.


For Bonds, Calm After The Storm
LEAD: The Treasury securities market was buffeted by strong crosscurrents yesterday and ended with the shorter maturities posting moderate gains and the longer issues essentially unchanged.


Vocational Schools Train Millions for Life;   We Need Regulation
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dow Off 6.19 to 2,510.64 in Wild Day
LEAD: Stocks fluctuated wildly yesterday after Congress balked on the budget, President Bush warned that he would veto plans to delay drastic cuts and oil prices rose for a time above $38 a barrel.


When a Product Lets You Down, There Is Help
LEAD: The new car won't start, the dishwasher leaks and the mail-order sweater fell apart in a week.
The car dealer can't or won't help, the dishwasher manufacturer says it's not the fault of the product and the mail-order house refuses to respond.
Where can the consumer turn?


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, OCTOBER, 6, 1990
LEAD:
International


Unions at UAL Short of Goal
LEAD: The unions at United Airlines failed again yesterday to reach a goal of about $4 billion in commitments from banks to provide financing for their bid to buy the carrier for about $175 a share, or about $3.82 billion, a bank executive said yesterday.


Kirin Brewery In Tropicana Deal
LEAD: The Kirin Brewery Company said it would establish a joint venture with Tropicana Products Inc. to market orange juice and frozen fruit products in Japan.
Kirin, Japan's leading beer brewer, said the new company would begin marketing Tropicana items in the metropolitan Tokyo area in March.
The company tentatively is called Kirin


Argentine Phone Sale Is Snagged
LEAD: Argentina's efforts to sell the outdated, deficit-ridden telephone company hit a snag when the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation failed to provide the $2.2 billion worth of foreign debt paper needed by the Thursday night deadline to finance the Bell Atlantic Corporation's purchase of half of the company.


Fog Equipment Is Approved
LEAD: Alaska Airlines said today that it had received Federal Aviation Administration approval for new technology that will allow its planes to take off in dense fog.
Alaska Airlines said it was the first carrier to receive such authorization.


Medicare Maximums Were Fixed in 1984
LEAD: Contrary to ''Medicare's Woes Found Worsening'' (front page, Sept. 6), under Medicare, physician fees are already limited.
Physicians cannot choose to charge Medicare beneficiaries whatever they charge non-Medicare patients.
In 1984, the maximum allowable charge a physician could bill a Medicare patient was frozen, and since then, only minimal increases have been premitted.


Japan's Fiery Pussycat
LEAD: Face to face, he seems more of a pussycat than a fire-breathing dragon.
Shintaro Ishihara, the man who wrote ''The Japan That Can Say No,'' is angry now that the U.S. sent some marines to the Persian Gulf from a Japanese base without asking permission.
He claims it's a violation of the security treaty, which is false.


Review/Film;   Savagery Trails Drug Agent Back to Middle America
LEAD: At the start of ''Marked for Death,'' in which he plays a Federal drug agent, Steven Seagal does some not very pleasant things, like beating and bullying various drug dealers and shooting a half-naked prostitute in the back.
This creates the troubling suspicion that Mr.
Seagal, who seemed so likable in his earlier ''Hard to Kill'' because he hurt, maimed and assassinated only those responsible for decimating his family, is no longer Mr.


Florence Bonime Novelist, 83
LEAD: Florence Bonime, a novelist who taught fiction writing at the New School for Social Research for 10 years in the 1960's and 70's, died in her sleep on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 83 years old.


Japan's Trade Surplus Falls
LEAD: Rising imports and overseas tourism helped slash Japan's trade and services surplus by 72.5 percent in August from the corresponding month last year, the Finance Ministry said today.


West Coast Builder Cites Problems
LEAD: Leisure Technology, which builds retirement developments, said a real estate slump had caused severe financial difficulties and would prevent it from making a semiannual interest payment due Oct. 15 on $40 million of notes.


Claire M. D'Andrea Is Wed
LEAD: Claire Marie D'Andrea, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph A. D'Andrea of Purchase, N.Y., was married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Resurrection in Rye, N.Y., to David Sidney Oakley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney R. Oakley of Creedmoor, N.C.
Msgr.
Donald J. Pryor officiated.
Mrs.
Oakley, 27 years old, is a graduate of the University of Vermont.


Patents;   New Methods To Improve Hair Care
LEAD: The quest for better beauty products has always produced a steady stream of new chemicals and devices as interest regularly shifts with the winds of fashion and changing circumstances.
In the last few weeks, inventors have patented products intended to help cope with acid rain, air pollution and the growing pressures on women with fast-moving careers.


Religion Notes
LEAD: Rating the Raters For many Christian churches, the newly announced motion picture rating system that replaces the pornographic-charged ''X'' with a neutral-sounding ''NC-17'' had a familiar ring. ''As Isaiah says, they are calling evil good,'' said Dr.
Beverly J. Chain, director of communications for the United Church of


And Now: N.L.'s Lost Weekend
LEAD: And on the third day, the Pirates and the Reds will rest.
Which is normal.
But on the fourth day, they will also rest.
And that's not normal.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, an article yesterday about the United States Senate race in Rhode Island included several scrambled paragraphs in some editions.
A corrected version appears today on page 10.


Cincinnati Jury Acquits Museum In Mapplethorpe Obscenity Case
LEAD: A Cincinnati jury today acquitted the Contemporary Arts Center here and its director, Dennis Barrie, of obscenity charges stemming from an exhibition of photographs by Robert Mapplethorpe last spring.


East German Aides Ousted
LEAD: Control of East German industry was removed from officials appointed by the ousted Communist administration and handed over to Western businessmen on Thursday.


The Pound Rises Sharply On News of Links to Europe
LEAD: A surging British pound dominated foreign exchange trading yesterday as dealers scrambled to buy sterling after Britain announced that its currency would be formally linked to other major European currencies.


Elizabeth George Weds R. G. Marzulli
LEAD: Elizabeth Christine George and Robert Gerard Marzulli were married yesterday at St.
Demetrios Greek Orthodox Church in Jamaica, Queens.
The Revs.
Theodore Nedelson and Demetrios Antokas, priests of the Greek Christian Orthodox Church, officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Salvatore Riccardi, a Roman Catholic priest.


John Whittier, 71, Doctor and Expert On Geriatric Illness
LEAD: Dr.
John Rensselaer Whittier, an expert on Huntington's disease and illnesses affecting the elderly, died on Tuesday at Eastern Long Island Hospital in Greenport.
He was 71 years old and lived in Orient, L.I.


News Summary
LEAD: International
3-5
The value of the British pound will be linked to other major European currencies, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said.
She had resisted such a move on the grounds that it might restrict the freedom of her Conservative Government to fashion the nation's economic policies.


Help Filipinos Hold On
LEAD: Corazon Aquino has survived still another coup attempt by rebel Philippine soldiers.
But survival is just about all her once-promising Government has going for it as she concludes the fifth year of her six- year term.
All the same, bequeathing a restored democracy to her successor remains a significant and attainable goal.


Club Inspector for New York Is Charged with Taking Bribe
LEAD: An inspector assigned to the Mayor's Social Club Task Force was charged with accepting a $1,400 bribe, Investigation Commissioner Susan E. Shepard said yesterday.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Fresh Wild Mushrooms
LEAD:
Although some of the newer varieties of mushrooms are cultivated, others are gathered in the wild and command higher prices.


In a Party Split, Kemp Endorses Conservative's Bid for Governor
LEAD: Breaking with the Republican candidate for governor of New York, Jack F. Kemp, the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, last night endorsed Herbert London, the Conservative gubernatorial candidate.


Vocational Schools Train Millions for Life;   Cut Off The Money
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bridge
LEAD: American women, and particularly those from New York State, have been outstandingly successful at world level in the last 13 years.
They have won two Olympiad team titles out of a possible three, three Venice Trophy team titles out of a possible five, and all four Women's Pair Championships.
This was a total of 36 individual titles, with two-thirds of those going to the Empire


Bronx Community Reaches Out to Family of Slain Youth


Critic's Notebook;   Evolution of Questions As Film Festivals Pass
LEAD: Last year, the questions most often asked by foreign directors visiting the New York Film Festival had to do with New York City's homeless population.
This year, the favorite behind-the-scenes inquiry has involved nice places to buy baby clothes.
Whether or not either of those things indicates an important undercurrent in world of cinema, they do serve as reminders that the festival's livelier moments often take place offscreen.


Afghan Rebels Capture Provincial Capital
LEAD: The Afghan Government acknowledged today that rebels had captured Tarin Kot, a provincial capital in central Afghanistan, the first town to fall to the rebels since the Soviet Union withdrew its troops from Afghanistan in February 1989.


The Budget Crisis: Nothing Is Worse
LEAD: No air travel.
No F.B.I. agents.
No food inspections or drug enforcement.
No visitors to the Statue of Liberty or national parks.
And no one to write checks for Social Security, Federal pensions, Medicare and Medicaid.


Ford to Expand German Output
LEAD: Ford Werke, the German unit of the Ford Motor Company, said it would introduce extra shifts to expand output to meet high demand from what was formerly East Germany.


A Contract for 2 Novels Signed by Ivana Trump
LEAD: Ivana Trump has signed a two-book contract with Pocket Books, for two commercial novels to be written with the help of an author who will be named shortly.
Company officials would not comment on reports that the contract involved a total of $1 million.


Sudan Says It Won't Prevent U.N. Relief Flights to South
LEAD: The Sudanese Government said today it would not block United Nations food relief flights to the country's rebel-held south, the United Nations said in a statement.


Polly Peck Delay on Debt
LEAD: Polly Peck International P.L.C. secured a temporary moratorium today on repaying its debt, gaining time to cope with a liquidity squeeze, the company said.


Maastricht Journal;   The Dutch Forget the Work Ethic and Call In Sick
LEAD: The borders of Belgium and Germany lie just a few miles away and it is hard to tell where the Netherlands end and the neighbors begin: the same well-kept streets, windows dressed with impeccable curtains and potted plants, workers setting off early on bicycles or in late-model cars.


PRO FOOTBALL: Women in the Locker Room;   A Sportswriter's Place Is in the Locker Room
LEAD: A female reporter is in the New England Patriots' locker room interviewing a player, and, she says, several of his teammates make suggestive comments and gestures.


The Budget Agreement;   Four Who Voted No: Reasons and Recriminations
LEAD:
Romano L. Mazzoli
Democrat, Kentucky


Wall Street Talk in Moscow
LEAD: Representatives of Wall Street are in Moscow to help the Soviet Union revive a network of stock and commodity exchanges that have been outlawed for more than 70 years.


Review/Dance;   A Woman Looks in the Mirror of Self
LEAD: Some of Martha Graham's greatest works are her most enigmatic, and ''Herodiade,'' choreographed in 1944 to a commissioned score by Paul Hindemith, is a prime example.


HOLIDAY ON MONDAY
LEAD: Columbus Day will be celebrated on Monday. Hare are holiday schdules.
NEW YORK
Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.
Government offices: Federal, state and city offices are closed.
Post Office: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office openat 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.


At Tom's, Coffee And Civility As You Like It
LEAD: ''We've been here since the beginning of time,'' said Constantine Vlahavas, the extraordinarily friendly man known to everyone as Gus. ''We've been through it all.''


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about the choice of a new United States Ambassador to Myanmar, formerly Burma, misstated the involvement of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, who objected to the nomination of Frederick Vreeland.
The Senator is not a member of the Foreign Relations Committee.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This is a signal to everybody that before they start shutting down museums and telling people what they can say and what they can see, they better realize there is a protection out there, and it is the greatest document ever written.''
- H. Louis Sirkin, a winning lawyer in the Cincinnati obscenity case.


Jobless Rate Up Again, Adding to Recession Fears
LEAD: In a report that left few analysts doubting that recession was either imminent or already under way, Labor Department figures showed today that the number of jobs shrank in September while the unemployment rate rose for the third straight month, to 5.7 percent.


Union Heads Get Apology On Dinkins's Layoff Plan
LEAD: A day after he announced he might have to lay off 15,000 New York City workers to close yawning budget gaps, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday apologized to the union leaders who were among his strongest allies for failing to warn them that he intended to make the bad news public.


Moncrief Joins Hawks In Plans for Comeback
LEAD: Sidney Moncrief spent 10 seasons in the National Basketball Association, piling up 11,594 points for the Milwaukee Bucks, playing on five All-Star teams and winning two Defensive Player of the Year Awards.
Last season, he retired and so was his number with the Bucks, No. 4.
Yesterday, he began his comeback, but this time with the Atlanta


Rebel Leader Surrenders in Philippines
LEAD: The Government announced early today that a renegade colonel had surrendered, ending a military mutiny whose avowed goal was the independence of the southern island of Mindanao.


Oil Price Up $1.06 a Barrel On Harsh Words From Iraq
LEAD: The price of oil rose more than $1 a barrel yesterday on harsh words from Iraq, though it still closed lower for the week because of speculation that a diplomatic solution will be found to the Middle East crisis.


Ukrainians Disagree With Solzhenitsyn
LEAD: To the Editor:


Vocational Schools Train Millions for Life
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Many people who became government and world leaders - MARGARET THATCHER, WILLY BRANDT and TOSHIKI KAIFU among them - visited the United States thanks to the International Visitor Program of the United States Information Agency.
On Tuesday, BRUCE S. GELB, the agency's director, is to be the host at a 50th birthday party for the program at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Latest Shuttle Countdown Lifts Hope
LEAD: For the fifth time since April, the countdown for a space shuttle mission has reached the final hours.
Four times, the spaceships went nowhere, thwarted by a frustrating string of fuel leaks and other malfunctions.


Baker Reports 'Progress' on Strategic Arms Talks
LEAD: The United States and the Soviet Union have revived the stalled strategic arms talks and may be able to complete a pact reducing long-range arms before the end of the year, Secretary of State James A. Baker said yesterday.


Justice in Cincinnati
LEAD: The jurors in the Robert Mapplethorpe obscenity trial in Cincinnati sent a strong and sensible message yesterday to local prosecutors and to all those who've been posturing on the obscenity issue this year.


Woolrich to Lay Off Half of Work Force
LEAD: Woolrichi Inc., which primarily manufactures outdoor clothing, will lay off more than half its 2,600 employees nationwide because it has few orders for deliveries beyond December.


Tropical Storm Klaus Kills 6 And Is Renamed a Hurricane
LEAD: Tropical Storm Klaus gained strength off Antigua today and was upgraded to a hurricane after leaving six people dead and two missing in flooding on Martinique.


More on the Budget
LEAD:
FEELING OF UNFAIRNESS


Administrator Quits Philharmonic
LEAD: Albert K. Webster, the managing director of the New York Philharmonic since 1975, announced his resignation yesterday, as of Dec. 31.
No successor has been named.


The Budget Agreement;   Excerpts From House Budget Debate
LEAD: When the House of Representatives took up the deficit-reduction package devised by the White House and Congressional leaders, lawmakers voiced misgivings and support before defeating the package early today.
Following are excerpts from the debate.
The remarks of Thomas S. Foley, the House Speaker, were recorded by The New York Times courtesy of C-Span, and the other lawmakers' statements were provided by their Washington offices:


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Essence Magazine, the monthly for black women, is 20 years old.
BILL COSBY will lead the celebration at Radio City Music Hall on Oct. 19.


The Budget Agreement;   Futile Search for Votes Ends In Collapse of Budget Pact
LEAD: After a long day of making promises and making deals, weary House Democrats gathered around the Speaker, Thomas S. Foley, in his office about 8 P.M.
Thursday and faced the grim reality they had feared: They did not have the votes to pass the budget agreement.


X, Expunged
LEAD: The Motion Picture Association of America is saying goodbye to the letter ''X.'' The M.P.A.A. will keep looking for explicit sex and excessive violence in films.
But it will give such films a different rating, NC-17 - No Children Under 17 Admitted.


INSIDE
LEAD:
No Sign of Iraqi Mellowing


CHRONICLE
LEAD: When BEVERLY SILLS retired as head of the New York City Opera, Lincoln Center wanted to give her a present.
So its board pledged $25,000 for the Beverly Sills Award, a $5,000 award each year for five years to the City Opera companyh member of Ms.
Sills's choice.


Conviction in Child's Death
LEAD: A woman was convicted Wednesday of killing her 4-year-old son and now faces trial in Texas in the deaths of four other children, three of them her own daughters.
A Finney County District Court jury returned a first-degree murder verdict against the woman, Diana Lumbrera, 32, who moved here from Texas in 1985.


Keating Pleads Not Guilty To Bond Fraud Charges
LEAD: Charles H. Keating Jr. pleaded not guilty today to charges that he defrauded customers of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association by selling them ''junk bonds'' that plunged in value, eventually becoming worthless.


Susan Fisher Weds R. A. Greenwood
LEAD: Susan Grossman Fisher, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Grossman of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday at her home in New York to Robert Arthur Greenwood, a son of William Greenwood of Bradenton, Fla., and the late Mildred Greenwood.
Rabbi Richard S. Chapin performed the ceremony.


Sun Microsystems Puts Limits on Spending
LEAD: Confronted with growing business uncertainty and concerned that the country is heading toward recession, Sun Microsystems Inc., a maker of computer work stations, put tight spending controls and a hiring freeze into place this week.


Corrections
LEAD: The Weekend Traffic Alert yesterday misstated the day of the Pulaski Day Parade and the USO Anniversary Fair.
As noted today in the traffic alert on page 25, the Pulaski parade will take place tomorrow from noon to 3 P.M. between 26th and 52d Streets on Fifth Avenue; the USO fair will also be held tomorrow, from 11 A.M.


New Jersey Shifts Plan For 'At Risk' Students
LEAD: New Jersey's new school-financing law, which shifts state funds to poor districts from rich ones, eliminates state money for almost 300,000 pupils who need extra help in reading and math.


Edwin F. Russell, 80, Retired Lawyer, Dies
LEAD: Edwin Fortune Russell, a retired partner in the law firm of Cullen &amp; Dykman, died on Thursday at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 80 years old and lived in Bronxville.


Pretoria Lifts Curfew in Soweto, But Keeps it in 3 Other Townships
LEAD: The South African Government today lifted the night curfew imposed last week in Soweto, the country's largest township, but left it intact in three other townships afflicted by recent violence.


Howard Rejoins Workout
LEAD: Erik Howard, his sprained right ankle still swollen and sore but feeling better, returned to practice with the Giants today.


After a Stellar Season, Henderson Wants Big Prize for A's
LEAD: The legs that are expected to carry Rickey Henderson into baseball's record book early next season - and put Lou Brock behind him for good - will be in action tonight at Fenway Park when the Oakland Athletics and the Boston Red Sox open the American League Championship series.


Mortgage Rates Decline
LEAD: Fixed-rate mortgages averaged 10.08 percent this week, down from 10.22 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
It was the lowest average since Aug. 17, when rates reached 10.05 percent.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.25 percent.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Apollo Acquisitions of Florida II Inc., Sarasota, Fla., an investment company, said it would acquire Colorado Style Potato Chips of Europe Ltd., for undisclosed terms.


Diane Dougherty Weds J. G. Chachas
LEAD: Diane Young Dougherty, a television sales executive, and John Gregory Chachas, an associate at the First Boston Corporation, both of New York, were married in Washington yesterday afternoon at St.
Sophia's Greek Orthodox Cathedral by the Rev.
John Tavlarides.
The ceremony was followed by another marriage service last evening at the Metropolitan Memorial United Methodist Church in Washington, conducted by the Rev.


Patents;   A Compound to Avoid Constant Hair Resetting
LEAD: For people who tire of constantly resetting their hair, researchers at Helene Curtis Inc., obtained a patent this week for a new compound that the company said would keep hair in shape through as many as three washings.


Corrections
LEAD: A map on Sept. 27 with an article about an earthquake in Missouri located the city of Hannibal incorrectly.


Mubarak Says Israel and Iraq Had Secret Contacts
LEAD: An assertion by President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt that Israel has been secretly in contact with Iraq in recent weeks drew angry reactions from Israeli officials today, but no denials.


Where's Cuomo? He Called for More Police but Finds Dinkins's Tax Plan Hard to Swallow
LEAD: Three weeks ago, when Mayor David N. Dinkins appeared to be hesitating over how many new police officers to hire for New York City, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo stepped in and declared before a half-dozen television cameras that the Mayor was committed to hiring thousands.
Moreover, he said, he stood ready to support whatever taxes the


Half of Kuwaitis Replaced by Iraqis, Israelis Say
LEAD: Senior Israeli military officials asserted today that they had received detailed intelligence information convincing them that Iraq has already replaced more than half of Kuwait's citizens with Iraqi citizens.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL
Randolph Sets New Jersey Record
Randolph High School set a New Jersey state record last night by winning its 41st consecutive game, a 34-22 victory over East Orange in Randolph.
Mike Groh threw three touchdown passes and Justin Malinchak rushed for 115 yards to lead Randolph (2-0), which broke the 33-year-old record set by Memorial High School of West New York.


Man in Court Case on Suicide Dies
LEAD: A quadriplegic who did not want to outlive his terminally ill father died before the Nevada Supreme Court got a chance to rule on his request that he be allowed to end his life.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.93
8.18
8.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.04
7.13
7.59
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.08
7.14
7.63
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.50
8.51
8.06
30-YR.


Possible Misconduct Is Seen In Discovery of AIDS Virus
LEAD: The National Institutes of Health will open a full-scale investigation of possible misconduct in the laboratory of Dr.
Robert Gallo, one of America's most prominent AIDS researchers, Federal officials said today.


Do Higher Prices for Gasoline Mean Drivers Were Gouged?
LEAD: With gasoline prices soaring, oil companies have been repeatedly accused of price gouging.
But what is price gouging, and what protection do consumers have against it?


Iraq, at U.N., Accuses U.S. Of 'Western Imperialism'
LEAD: In a long-awaited address to the United Nations General Assembly, Iraq accused the United States and its allies today of starting a new era of ''Western imperialism'' in the Persian Gulf.
It offered no indication that it would withdraw from Kuwait.


Review/Film Festival;   A Tragedy at a Plant As Lived By Strikers
LEAD: Barbara Kopple is well remembered as the director of ''Harlan County, U.S.A.,'' her outstandingly fine and troubling 1977 documentary about a strike by coal miners against a power company in eastern Kentucky.
Now, in her account of another walkout, this time by factory workers at the George A. Hormel Company meatpacking plant in Austin, Minn., Ms.


Patents;   A Hair Curler Designed For Business Travel
LEAD: With the majority of women now holding jobs, many inventors have been working on beauty products that can accommodate hurried schedules and the demands of business travel.


Kuwaiti Oil: An Industry in Exile
LEAD: With the arrival this week of the first tanker carrying Saudi Arabian oil at one of his European refineries and with a lot more Saudi oil on the way, Nader H. Sultan, the president of Kuwait Petroleum International Ltd., is breathing much easier these days.


House Backs Appeal Of Death Sentences If Race Bias Is Issue
LEAD: The House of Representatives passed a major crime bill today after approving an amendment that would permit prisoners under death sentences to seek reversal of their sentences if they could produce evidence suggesting a pattern of racial discrimination in prior state cases.


Give Me Your Tired, Your Rusty . . .
LEAD: They arrived at the Unocal junkyard 120 a day, creaking, wobbling, belching acrid blue smoke.
A battered Chevy pickup with a door so corroded it threatened to fall off when slammed.
A tired Ford LTD that left a trail of black haze.


Belmont Set for Showcase Weekend
LEAD: Five Grade I stakes races at Belmont Park today and tomorrow will showcase many of the sport's top runners and determine the favorites for most of the Breeders' Cup races at Belmont on Oct. 27.


The Budget Agreement;   Government Starting Shutdown of Many Services
LEAD: Federal agencies and their employees tonight faced the realization that the unresolved budget crisis will halt many Government functions beginning Saturday morning, affecting virtually every American.


Books of The Times;   Intrigue Far From the Reservation
LEAD:
The Indian Lawyer
By James Welch
349 pages. W. W. Norton. $19.95.


Lawmaker Naps Through Vote
LEAD: Representative George Crockett, a Michigan Democrat who plans to retire this year, was the only House member to miss the vote early this morning on a budget agreement.
Joan Willoughby, an aide to the Congressman, said, ''He's 81 years old and he has two hearing aids and he didn't hear the bells'' announcing the vote.


Dean Witter Shift
LEAD: Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., a unit of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, has trimmed its retail high-yield ''junk bond'' trading operations, consolidating the unit into its investment-grade bond trading area, resulting in the loss of four trading jobs.
Jim Flynn, a Dean Witter spokesman, said the consolidation was effective on Wednesday.


To Beijing's Surprise, the Tibetans Are Still Restive
LEAD: Ever since Chinese troops ''liberated'' Tibet in 1950, the Communist authorities have tried to pressure Tibetans into submission.
But these days many Tibetans seem more eager than ever to pry themselves from the Chinese embrace, and there are signs that time is running against Beijing.


Silber Voters Showed Their Disillusionment
LEAD: To the Editor:


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD: BRIGHTEN THE CORNER WHERE YOU ARE, by Fred Chappell. (St. Martin's, $8.95.) This novel describes a typical day in the atypical life of a North Carolina science teacher who has a talent for finding magic in everything.
Last year our reviewer, Sharon Oard Warner, said Fred Chapell ''has concocted a tall tale that's part philosophy, part science lesson and part 'campfire powwow,' a story so ridiculous and endearing that excess becomes one of its chief virtues.


Visitors to the Capital Finding Much to Do but Not to Cheer
LEAD: The Federal Government went out of business today, and it was not immediately clear that everyone wanted it back.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


Judith Leibholz Weds
LEAD: Judith Ellen Leibholz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen W. Leibholz of Rydal, Pa., was married last evening to Oliver Lincoln Frankel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie Frankel of London.
Rabbi David Wice officiated at the College of Physicians in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Frankel, 28 years old, is a vice president in New York of the Industrial Bank of Japan.


Patience in the Persian Gulf, Not War
LEAD: THE crisis in the Persian Gulf is the first crisis of the post-cold-war era.
Thus, fortunately, it does not pose the danger of a U.S.-Soviet confrontation.
Nonetheless, if mishandled, the crisis could prompt devastating consequences for the world economy, perhaps result in massive Arab and American bloodshed, and almost inevitably generate major regional instability throughout the Middle


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Recent Sales
LEAD: Darien, Conn.
$485,000
67 Holly Lane
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 35-year-old colonial; screened porch, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $4,140.
Danbury, Conn.
$175,000
10 Jackson Drive
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 24-year-old ranch; family room, new roof, gutters and deck, 0.75 acre; taxes $1,944.


Lawmaker Naps Through Vote
LEAD: Representative George Crockett, a Michigan Democrat who plans to retire this year, was the only House member to miss the vote early Friday morning on the compromise budget package announced last Sunday.
Joan Willoughby, an aide to the Congressman, said, ''He's 81 years old and he has two hearing aids and he didn't hear the bells'' announcing the vote.


Northeast Notebook: Kennett Square, Pa.;   High-End Speculation
LEAD: Despite projections by real estate professionals that it will take more than five years to sell all the new million-dollar homes built in this southern Chester County community, a real estate developer has put up two estate-style homes on speculation and plans five more.


Drinking Water Will Be Purer, But at What Price?
LEAD: Can drinking water be too clean?


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 7, 1990
LEAD:
$
?
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
THE DARK HALF, by Stephen King. (Signet, $5.95.) A writer of horror tales kills off his pseudonym, who then goes on a rampage.
2
45
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and lawyers.


For Movie Molls It's Still Dirty Work
LEAD: Question.
What's a moll?
Don' worry abahd it, I looked it up in Brewer's Dictionary of Phrase and Fable, and the Brewer guy says: ''Moll, Molly.
An American term for a gunman's girlfriend.''


Mobile Hospital Set Up in Saudi Desert


Sports People;   Giants Coach Ailing
LEAD: On the Sunday the Giants have off, Romeo Crennel, their defensive line coach, will be in Pascack Valley Hospital in Westwood, N.J., where he was admitted on Friday night with pneumonia.


Hers;   True Blue
LEAD: I walked home from the vet that night, lugging Blue, sweating and puffing on the steaming concrete. ''God, is it only June?'' I wondered.
It felt like 100 degrees and there I was, weeping on Queens Boulevard.


When Singles Meet, They Do More Than Party
LEAD: IN the strobe lights of the Long Island Exchange at the Huntington Hilton, throngs of men and women danced to rock music while hundreds jammed the bars and aisles, watching the dance floor.


Pro Hockey;   Islanders' Start: Illness, Injury and a Loss
LEAD: Battered by suspensions, an injury, a mysterious illness, road-weariness, an unresolved contract dispute and an opening-game defeat, the Islanders faced the North Stars here tonight in their second game of the regular season.


The Perils of Equal Time
LEAD: To the Editor:


Weighing Balance Between War and Diplomacy
LEAD: Two months after Iraq invaded Kuwait, the Bush Administration's policy in the Persian Gulf hangs between war and peace, balancing on a few key issues that will determine whether the United States uses military force against Iraq.


WHY AMERICA FAILS ITS CHILDREN
LEAD: Small-scale local programs for troubled families, like the ones in Tacoma, Wash., and in New Haven, certainly should be encouraged.
However, the leadership and resources needed to make a substantial start on these problems must come from the Federal Government.


Yesterday's Boob Tube Is Today's High Art
LEAD: When ''Hill Street Blues'' became a hit on NBC in the early 1980's, Steven Bochco, its co-creator, did not figure in the network's efforts to lure viewers: the promotions trumpeted ''NBC's 'Hill Street Blues.' '' In 1986 Mr.
Bochco took a small step forward with his next big series, ''L.
A.
Law,'' which NBC advertised as being ''from the creators of 'Hill Street Blues.


The Uproar at Dartmouth: How a Conservative Weekly Inflamed a Campus
LEAD: For a decade, many students and professors at Dartmouth College have watched with quiet dismay - and occasional anger - as a handful of writers at a conservative weekly shaped a public perception of Dartmouth as hostile toward blacks, women and Jews.


Marsena Farris, Lawyer, Married
LEAD: Marsena Mabel Farris, the daughter of Constance Rowe Farris of Marco Island, Fla., and the late Melvin H. Farris, was married yesterday to Lawrence Sorensen, a son of Lillian C. Sorensen of Venice, Fla., and the late Charles Sorensen.
The Rev.
Edward C. Gibbs performed the ceremony at the Good Shepherd Lutheran Church in Bayside,


About Cars;   Let's See, 10 Percent of $190,100 Is ...
LEAD: Bill Hoglund and I were sitting in a Manhattan restaurant, talking about this and that - that being mostly cars - when the question first occurred to me.
This was some years ago and it seems obvious now, but then the question sort of bubbled up and surprised both of us.


Avianca Crash Leaves Questions on Response
LEAD: MONTHS after the crash of Avianca Flight 52 in Cove Neck, critics say that two significant weaknesses are emerging in Nassau County's Emergency Medical Services system: the lack of a full-time paid medical director and the county's multiple-dispatch system, in which both the police and the volunteer fire departments send ambulances to emergencies.


A Shudder of Insecurity Awakens the Caribbean
LEAD: When 113 members of a fringe Muslim group blew up police headquarters and held Trinidad and Tobago's Prime Minister, much of his Cabinet and several members of Parliament hostage for several days in July, the English-speaking Caribbean's relaxed aura of stability was again proven gauze thin.


The French, They are a Funny Race
LEAD:
FRAGILE GLORY
A Portrait of France and the French.
By Richard Bernstein.
349 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


College Football: East;   Late Duke Score Frustrates Army
LEAD: Randy Cuthbert scored on a 6-yard run with 2 minutes 48 seconds remaining today as the Duke Blue Devils' offense awoke from a 12-quarter slumber to beat Army, 17-16.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: From behind the crumpled folds of the fallen Iron Curtain come medals.
An interesting one has been issued by the State Jewish Museum in Prague to commemorate the 700th anniversary of one of the oldest synagogues in Europe, Prague's Altneuschul.


Question Of the Week;   Who Is the Best Coach In Pro Football?
LEAD: Based on longevity, the Dolphins' Don Shula.
Based on the most dramatic improvement over his predecessor, the Jets' Bruce Coslet.
Based on letting a great team live up to its potential, the Giants' Bill Parcells.
MARCIA ANDREAS
New York


In Danbury, a Casual Place Is Hopping
LEAD: DANBURY, the beneficiary of more than a few of the state's new restaurants in the past 10 years, has welcomed another newcomer.
Fox &amp; Fox, familiar to northwest Connecticut residents, has moved south from Gaylordsville into the heart of downtown Danbury.


Hollywood's War On Indians Draws to a Close
LEAD: The Hollywood Indian - a species as strange as any ever to have been born in the make-believe kingdom - has come a long way since its appearance on film as a bloodthirsty savage or babe in the woods who talked to the animals.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Sept. 23 about Carnegie Hall and other concert halls reversed the roles of the architects Louis Sullivan and Frank Lloyd Wright.
Wright, who designed the Auditorium Theater in Chicago, was Sullivan's student.


WHY AMERICA FAILS ITS CHILDREN
LEAD: I was touched by Brazelton's anecdote about the homeless father and nursing mother, until I asked myself, what responsible parents would opt to have a child in such circumstances?
A family is more than a tender bond between people.
It requires responsibility, planning and discipline.
HOPE EINSTEIN


Liberty Island Lockout: Tourists Feel Budget Cuts
LEAD: It was a glorious morning of limpid blue skies and a gentle breeze, but it was pretty much ruined for thousands of tourists who could not visit the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island in New York City yesterday because of the budget impasse in Washington.


Pianists Take Spotlight in New Season
LEAD: FIRST-RATE pianists from Brazil, Spain and the United States will be in the solo spotlight next weekend as three orchestras open the new season, while keyboard virtuosos from the Soviet Union and Cuba are featured in solo recitals.


No Headline
LEAD: J. K. McNamara Weds Laura Cass


Emily S. Brower, Consultant, Marries Richard P. Maisto, Brokerage Officer
LEAD: Emily Swope Brower, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Brock H. Brower of Princeton, N.J., and Washington, was married yesterday to Richard P. Maisto, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paschal L. Maisto of Morristown, N.J.
The Rev.
William Tully performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Washington Cathedral.


Legal-Aid Labor Dispute Could Cripple the Courts
LEAD: A labor dispute between the Legal Aid Society and the union representing its lawyers is threatening to paralyze the New York City courts just as they are gearing up to deal more aggressively with criminal cases.


Strategies in Selma
LEAD: To the Editor:


College Football: West/Southwest;   Arizona Intercepts U.C.L.A. by 28-21
LEAD: Darryl Lewis returned an interception 70 yards for a touchdown with 50 seconds remaining today to give Arizona a 28-21 victory over U.C.L.A.


The Gadfly Who Audits Philanthropy
LEAD: What Ralph Nader is to corporate America, Daniel Borochoff is fast becoming to the philanthropic world.
Just ask Mothers Against Drunk Driving.


Campus Life: Iowa State;   Whether to Toughen Standards for Athletes
LEAD: President Gordon Eaton of Iowa State University is expected to decide this month on a faculty report that includes a recommendation that athletes be required to meet tougher admissions standards than those created by the national organization governing college athletics.


Talking: Co-ops;   When A Sponsor Defaults
LEAD: About a year after some of the sponsors who converted rental apartment houses into cooperatives began to slip into default, shareholders in troubled buildings are finding ways out of the financial problems created by the sponsors' delinquencies.
The shareholders may suffer pain and expense in solving the problems, but their co-ops should be able to survive.


Mob Movies: An Offer We Can't Refuse
LEAD: Earlier this year, two men with a lot in common met accidentally in a New York restaurant.
What they talked about is not known.
But if they chose to discuss the effects of cinema upon the public imagination, they might have been amused to consider the disparate ways in which the public perceives them.


Review/Pop;   From Zaire To Paris And Back
LEAD: Soukous, the Zairean dance music that has been polished in Paris, takes one step toward internationalization and one toward re-Africanization in Kanza, a band that performed on Thursday night at S.O.B.'s.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our 19-year-old house needs a new roof and improved ventilation in the attic area.
This area only has gable vents now, and we want to add to this when the new roof is put on.
Are we better off with ridge-mounted roof vents or with a roof-mounted vent fan?


Workshops To Help Divorced Fathers
LEAD: A SERIES of free workshops intended to keep divorced or separated fathers from becoming ''disappearing dads'' will be held this fall in New London.
The evening workshops will stress the importance of fathers to their children's lives and will show participants how to maintain and even improve their relationships with their children after divorce.


Sheila Brand Marries Justin Larkman
LEAD: Sheila Valli Brand, a daughter of Mildred Brand of Middletown, N.Y., and the late Irwin H. Brand, was married yesterday to Justin Charles Larkman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David F. G. Larkman of Hamilton, Va.
The Rev.
L.
Paul Jaquith, a Methodist minister, officiated at the Stanhope Hotel in New York.


Fashion;   Hot Stuff to Wear on the Playground
LEAD: When you hear a child say ''slap me'' to a pal, fret not.
It's merely an invitation to share the latest in children's fashion: slap bracelets.
They're sold by street vendors and at clothing shops and candy stores frequented by those most likely to have $1 burning a hole in their pocket.


Are Plazas Public Boons, or Nuisances?
LEAD: In New York, a city of jostling crowds and manmade canyons, one might think the residents of the Parc Vendome condominium would have nothing but praise for the Sheffield Plaza, a bright public space just west of their building, on Ninth Avenue between 56th and 57th Streets.


College Football;   Luck Of Irish Runs Out
LEAD: Rick Mirer, the Notre Dame quarterback, reached deep for one more miracle but found that the well of dazzling tricks had run dry.


BUSINESS DIARY/September 30-October 5
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
Bitterness and Bravura as Washington Tries for a Budget
The House of Representatives went ahead and made President Bush's day early Friday.
Defying the President's heavy-handed lobbying - and taunts - the House, led by an unlikely coalition of conservative Republicans and liberal Democrats, rejected by a 254-to-179 vote a package unfurled in the Rose Garden last weekend to cut $500 billion from the Federal budget.


Review/Theater;   One Night, Near That Other Paris...
LEAD: One of the most instructive lectures that a popular English professor at the University of Texas used to give taught that literature knew no geography. ''People in Paris, Texas,'' the lesson went, ''experience the same joys and sorrows, cherish the same hopes and confront the same fears as people in Paris, France.


Cool-Weather Care for Potted Plants
LEAD: HOUSE plants should be inside now.
Although October has some balmy days, plants that live their lives in pots should be not be out in them.
They need a few weeks of transition after their summer vacation.


Irish-Americans Praise New Immigration Bill
LEAD: In the heavily Irish community of Woodside, Queens, they are already celebrating new immigration legislation approved in the House last week, as if it were raining green cards.


The Brandenburg Gate as an Arch of Joyful Triumph


2 Held in Anti-Semitic Graffiti
LEAD: Two teen-age boys were arrested on Friday and charged with desecration, criminal mischief and terroristic threats in connection with anti-Semitic graffiti at the Mount Hebron Cemetery, officials said.
The suspects, both students at Cedar Ridge High School in Old Bridge, were not identified because they are juveniles.


A Call for Sacrifice, and the Answer Is No
LEAD: Coalition government, or at least America's de facto version of it, collided with representative democracy on the floor of the House of Representatives early Friday morning, and after the crash the grand budget compromise so painfully wrought by top Congressional leaders and the Bush Administration lay in ruins.


Conservative Party Nominee Tries to Widen Niche in Rinfret's Wake
LEAD: While Pierre A. Rinfret has stood the gubernatorial campaign on its head by criticizing leaders of his own party almost as much as Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, another Republican has been standing on the sidelines taking potshots at Mr.
Rinfret, the Republican candidate for governor.


HARVARD CLEARED IN INQUIRY ON BIAS
LEAD: The Department of Education has concluded that Harvard University does not discriminate against Asian-Americans in its undergraduate admissions.


Data Bank/October 7, 1990
LEAD:
$
Construction Spending
Aug.
July
June
Monthly percent change
0.0
0.3
-0.6
New-Home Sales
Monthly percent change
-1.4
-0.2
4.3
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
1.8
1.5
-1.9
Cash Wheat Price
Oct. 5
Sept. 28
Sept. 21
No. 1 K.C., per bushel (weekly close)
$2.88
$2.90
$2.82
Employment
Sept.


Dressing Up Fish and Chicken for a Twirl on the Grill
LEAD: GRILLED fish is like a little black dress, a wardrobe staple that can be varied with accessories and seasonings.
Salsas, flavored butters, chutneys, cream or wine sauces can dress it up or down.
Grilled boneless chicken breasts can be treated much the same way.
A bright, robust combination of sweet and hot peppers, onion, tomatoes and herbs is one of those all-purpose adornments that can enhance simple grilled tuna or other grilled fish or chicken.


Defenders of Cup In Race on Design
LEAD: The sluggishness that marked the beginnings of the 1992 defense of the America's Cup has turned into a heated race among three United States yachting teams to build the fastest boat.
To that end, the lid is off design, but the cap is tight on secrecy.


PRETORIA PONDERS U.S. CONSTITUTION
LEAD: The American Constitution is being examined by the Government of President F. W. de Klerk as a possible model to carry South Africa beyond the end of apartheid.


Sarah Stoessel Marries Edward Heres
LEAD: Sarah L. Stoessel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Stoessel of Concord, Mass., was married yesterday to Dr.
Edward K. Heres, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herman Heres Jr. of Wayne, N.J., and Lake Worth, Fla.
The Rev.
David M. Barney, assisted by the Rev.
Richard S. DeVeer, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in


Wall Street;   The Stock the Market Sneered At
LEAD: To Wall Street, the Tandy Corporation has become the Rodney Dangerfield of the technology scene.
The Radio Shack people? (The sniggers start.) Selling computers to giant Japanese companies? (Roars of laughter.) And yet, the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company quietly announced last week that it will be selling, under its own brand name, a new ''notebook'' computer made by Tandy.


Review/Music;   Dynamism Tempered By Respect
LEAD: When the Italian-born Riccardo Chailly took over as music director of the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam last season, he became that ensemble's first non-Dutch leader in its 102-year history.
At the time of his appointment, it was said that the Concertgebouw was looking for someone more dynamic and charismatic than the solid but unspectacular Bernard Haitink, who had preceded him.


Children's TV, for Children
LEAD: George Bush can strengthen his claim to be the ''Education President'' by swiftly signing new legislation that would improve the quality of children's television programs.
Unfortunately, Mr.
Bush has misgivings about this eminently sensible bill.
If he can't bring himself to sign it, the least he could do is step aside - and let it become law without his signature.


WESTCHESTER OPINION For Gay People, Out of Sight, Out of Life
LEAD: AFTER World War II it was no longer acceptable to be anti-Semitic.
There is going to be similar upheaval when AIDS is cured.
But not right now.
Right now lesbian and gay people in Westchester County must hide.
And as a result, people die.


Campus Life: Dayton;   Condom Giveaway Leads to a Plan To Limit Products
LEAD: Administrators at the University of Dayton have proposed a policy that would prevent students from distributing or selling campus services and products that are not consonant with Roman Catholic doctrine or that are considered unsafe.


Tech Notes;   Fitting a PC's Circuitry on One Thumbnail-Sized Chip
LEAD: When the International Business Machines Corporation introduced its PC/AT personal computer in 1983 - incorporating Intel's powerful new 80286 computer chip - the machine was the sensation of the rapidly growing desktop computer business.
The AT was expensive and powerful, but it was also bulky.
The 80286 chip, which functions as the computer's brain, resided on one large circuit board about the size of a dinner plate.


Rating Novelists
LEAD: To the Editor:


Three Faces of Richard III In a One-Man Display of Evil


Question Of the Week;   Who Is the Best Coach In Pro Football?
LEAD: The best coach in pro football is the person lucky enough to be coaching the 49ers.
Be it Bill Walsh or George Seifert, any team with such stars as Rice, Montana, Craig, Taylor and Lott, is going to win many games, and isn't coaching about winning games?
YITZCHAK C. ENGELBERG
Far Rockaway,


Suspect Grabs Officer's Gun And Kills Himself at Bellevue
LEAD: A robbery suspect in police custody at Bellevue Hospital Center grabbed a police officer's gun and menaced the other patients in the emergency room before shooting himself to death yesterday afternoon, the police said.


How One Family's Mementos Made the Journey to Ellis Island
LEAD: FEELINGS of deep love and pride in his family led Stanley Mirel of Mahopac to answer a call for memorabilia he saw in a magazine several years ago.
The notice was from the Metaform Company of the Liberty/Ellis Island Collaborative, which was looking for immigration artifacts - dating from 1880 to 1920 - to include in the ''Treasures From Home'' exhibition the firm was designing for the new museum on Ellis


Campus Life: Paul Quinn;   Hoping to Grow, College Makes 100-Mile Move
LEAD: Paul Quinn College has packed its bags and moved north about 100 miles from Waco, Tex., replacing another predominantly black college.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption with a review of ''The Time of My Life'' by Denis Healey Sept. 23 misidentified the building Mr.
Healey was shown leaving.
It was the residence of Britain's Chancellor of the Exchequer, not the Prime Minister's house.


Women in the Locker Room;   Controversy in the C.F.L.
LEAD: The Winnipeg Blue Bombers of the Canadian Football League barred all members of the news media from their locker room after Friday night's game rather than allow a female radio reporter to enter.


A Village in China    A special report.;   Far from Tiananmen: TV and Contentment
LEAD: He has lived all his 18 years in this village, planting wheat, picking apples and cleaning the family outhouse to spread the muck on the fields, but now Gao Lu is planning an escape route: a glorious career in the army or in the People's Armed Police.


Teresa Petramala Wed To Thomas L. Waite
LEAD: Teresa Lucia Petramala, a news assistant at The New York Times, and Thomas Leonce Waite, a reporter for the Dow Jones International News Service, were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Chapel of Our Lady in Cold Spring, N.Y.
The Rev.
David M. Bossman officiated. .


Diaana Peyton Is Married
LEAD: Diana L. Peyton, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Murray S. Peyton of Pennington, N.J., was married yesterday to Eric J. Kollevoll, a son of Mrs.
Bernard R. Deschaine and Olav B. Kollevoll, both of Easton, Pa.
The Rev.
William A. McQuoid performed the ceremony at the Pennington Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.


Review/Opera;   Pavarotti In Cameo
LEAD: At 8:15 on Thursday evening, 45 minutes into a performance of Richard Strauss's ''Rosenkavalier'' that was to continue until 11:40 P.M., a couple behind this writer rose from their seats, stumbled over all intervening bodies and departed the Metropolitan Opera, not to return.


Stephanie Scherer Marries Eric Young
LEAD: Stephanie Susan Scherer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Scherer of New York, was married last evening to Eric David Young, a son of Paula Young of Oceanside, L.I., and Carl Young of White Plains.
Rabbi Gerald L. Zelizer performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.


Social Events
LEAD:
Auction Preview


Rebecca Gaskin Weds Yorke Lawson
LEAD: Rebecca Louise Gaskin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lewis J. Gaskin of Raleigh, N.C., was married in New York yesterday to Coleman Yorke Lawson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ferd Olbert Lawson Jr. of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Kenneth Jones performed the ceremony at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church.


HOLIDAY TOMORROW
LEAD: Columbus Day will be celebrated tomorrow. Here are holiday schdules.
NEW YORK
Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended.
Government offices: Federal, state and city offices are closed.
Post Office: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office openat 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.


Historic Bookends to Texas Blues


College Football;   Lions Come Up Short
LEAD: It took 14 quarters for the Columbia offense to wake up this season.
Even when it finally did, scoring 31 second-half points yesterday, it was too late to prevent another loss: this time to Lafayette, 41-34.


The Road to Ruin in New York
LEAD: Lurching.


Back Apologies With Money
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Syosset to Focus on 'Middle' Student
LEAD: EVERY school district throughout Long Island has both mandated and voluntary programs for gifted and talented students, children with learning disabilities and foreign students whose second language is English.


Erica Townsend Wed in Princeton
LEAD: Erica Wheatley Townsend, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E. Townsend of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Charles Francis Appel Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles F. Appel of Nutley, N.J.
The Rev.
Gregory Studerus performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Thomas Aquinas Institute Chapel in


On Language;   Shnorring the Burden
LEAD: The topic was burden-sharing, a locution used in the past to describe the allocation of reimbursement of some of the cost to America of the defense of Europe.
This year, however, the compound gerund is applied to the distribution of the cost of the campaign against Saddam Hussein.


Europe for Less: It Can Be Done;   Dublin Paris
LEAD: George Orwell used to sleep on bedbug-infested matresses while he was down and out in Paris, while Ernest Hemingway once caught pigeons in the Luxembourg Gardens and cooked and ate them, or so he said while living his movable feast.
You need not go to such extremes to have an inexpensive stay in Paris, for there still are many bargain hotels and restaurants and free things to do.


IN SHORT/FOOtBALL;   XXIV Years of Sundays
LEAD: It has become commonplace to imagine that every word written about the Super Bowl will be announced in stentorian tones, with a passel of buglers reaching the highest of C's in the background and a stadium full of devotees at solemn attention.
Add more Roman numerals than the Caesars ever counted and you have the gist of THE SUPER BOWL (Simon &amp; Schuster, $50), a coffeetable book modestly subtitled ''Celebrating a Quarter-Century of America's Greatest Game.


Dressing Up Fish and Chicken for a Twirl on the Grill
LEAD: GRILLED fish is like a little black dress, a wardrobe staple that can be varied with accessories and seasonings.
Salsas, flavored butters, chutneys, cream or wine sauces can dress it up or down.
Grilled boneless chicken breasts can be treated much the same way.
A bright, robust combination of sweet and hot peppers, onion, tomatoes and herbs is one of those all-purpose adornments that can enhance simple grilled tuna or other grilled fish or chicken.


Postings: Nassau Coliseum;   Home Sellathon
LEAD: Home sellers hoping to mass-market their properties without paying a broker's fee might consider a ''For Sale by Owner Real Estate Expo and Auction'' scheduled for next weekend at the Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum in Uniondale, L.I.
The hours are 10 A.M. to 10 P.M.
Saturday and 11 A.M. to 7 P.M Sunday.


Europe for Less: It Can Be Done;   Rome
LEAD: With the dollar at around 1,150 lire, the would-be visitor to Rome doesn't have an easy time finding relatively inexpensive accommodations.
A telephone canvass of 20 modest but reasonably comfortable hotels, each with two stars in Italy's official one-to-five-star rating system, showed that the prevailing price for a double room with private bath or shower in that category is $125 to $150 a night.


'Seventy Years on the Road to Nowhere'
LEAD:
THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION
By Richard Pipes.
Illustrated. 944 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $40.


Postings: Brooklyn 'Coke' Plant;   Bubbling Up
LEAD: When Eric S. Miller was a boy, he walked with his father, Arnold, past the Coca-Cola Bottling Company plant at 1900 Linden Boulevard, between Georgia and Sheffield Avenues, in the East New York section of Brooklyn. ''I gave my father a look like we were in Wonderland,'' he recalled, ''and said, 'Wouldn't it be nice if we were one day in that building?


Dressing Up Fish and Chicken for a Twirl on the Grill
LEAD: GRILLED fish is like a little black dress, a wardrobe staple that can be varied with accessories and seasonings.
Salsas, flavored butters, chutneys, cream or wine sauces can dress it up or down.
Grilled boneless chicken breasts can be treated much the same way.
A bright, robust combination of sweet and hot peppers, onion, tomatoes and herbs is one of those all-purpose adornments that can enhance simple grilled tuna or other grilled fish or chicken.


Athens by Bouzouki
LEAD: Among the things that most sun-and-sea tourists miss in Greece -the mountains, the forests, the unspoiled interior - is Athens by night in all its glitter.
The city offers much more than the traditional tourist spots in the Plaka, and it's said that in order to keep up with the night life Athenians ''sleep in the afternoons and take a little nap before breakfast.


When Hollywood Got Real
LEAD:
MEDIUM COOL: The Movies of the 1960s.
By Ethan Mordden. (Knopf, $24.95.) Ethan Mordden is what we don't have much of anymore, especially in film criticism.
He is an old-fashioned belletrist, with all the virtues and shortcomings. ''Medium Cool'' is a lively, knowledgeable and eminently readable guide to films of the 1960's, from ''Psycho'' to ''Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid.


Style Makers;   Mike von Joel, Publisher
LEAD: In his longish hair and silver rings you can still see a shadow of the King's Road hipster Mike von Joel was in the 1970's.
A graduate of the Winchester College of Art, Mr. von Joel decided in 1976 to start a magazine, The New Style, which promised readers ''the disgusting inside stories'' about fashion and the news media.


Lauren Kadane To Marry in May
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Hugh Price Lowenstein of New York and Tucker's Town, Bermuda, have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Lowenstein's daughter, Lauren Kelly Kadane, to Philippe de Lavalette, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard de Lavalette of New York and Paris.
A May wedding is planned.


4 Gay Men Beaten in 2 Attacks
LEAD: Four men were assaulted early yesterday morning in separate incidents in Manhattan that the police have classified as anti-homosexual bias.
None of the victims was seriously injured.


Time to Leave Planet of Jocks
LEAD: DEAR Fellow Scribes, None of us should go into the locker room.
It's the Planet of the Jocks.


Corrections
LEAD: The Practical Traveler column on Sept. 2 referred imprecisely to the current location of I.S.E.-Club Europa, an escorted tour company for students.
The president of I.S.E.-Club Europa has written to say that although I.S.E.
Flights has moved to Arizona, his company is still at 802 West Oregon Street, Urbana, Ill.


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption last Sunday with an article about independent television producers misstated the affiliation of one producer, Allan Burns.
He is with Grant/Tribune Productions.


Fashion;   A Kickier, Bigger Charivari
LEAD: Every few years Charivari opens a new boutique.
What started 23 years ago as a women's clothing store on Broadway at 85th Street has grown into a chain with six boutiques of men's and women's sportswear on Manhattan's West Side and two in Japan.
But now, instead of opening at a new location, Charivari has expanded into an empty space next door to its shop at 18 West 57th


Police Reinstate Rules on Bystander Arrests
LEAD: The New York City Police Department moved last week to quell a growing controversy over so-called onlooker arrests, by reissuing a set of 13-year-old guidelines on the legal rights of bystanders who peacefully criticize police operations.


Football;   Jets and Dolphins Plan to Go for Balanced Attack
LEAD: With the Jets' rookie coach, Bruce Coslet, and the Dolphins' grand old man of the National Football League, Don Shula, talking about balanced offenses for the game today in Miami, it appears that the passing shows the teams put on in their last eight meetings might be going the way of the drop-kick.


Freewheeling in Provence
LEAD: Though the hilltop towns of Provence show the world a stony face, there's something up there that incites people to indolence.
Give up exercise, it says.
Stuff your notions of self-improvement in a trunk and lose the key.
Silence the only witness with a nice apple tart.


Matter of Law, Not Opinion
LEAD: Somehow, I thought this was all over.
I thought that at long last everyone had read the Constitution and the Civil Rights law and realized that equal access for female sportswriters was not a matter of opinion but the law of the land.


Tara G. Goldberg To Marry in May
LEAD: The engagement of Tara Gwen Goldberg to Richard Aaron Weiss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald H. Weiss of Potomac, Md., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence T. Goldberg of Fort Lee, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.


Lawyers Critical of Massachusetts Tax on Services
LEAD: Lawyers and their clients are none too pleased over the recent move by Massachusetts to expand the 5 percent sales tax to nearly 600 additional services, including legal work performed for businesses.


Food;   Mash Appeal
LEAD: Growing up near the vineyards of California, I had little experience with whisky.
As an adult, I jumped straight into chardonnay, with only a brief flirtation with rum and Coke.
So it wasn't until some years ago, when I was cooking in Vicenza, near Venice, that bourbon and I got acquainted.
Northern Italy may seem an odd place to discover this native American spirit, but I was staying with a very grand septuagenarian - originally from Texas - who adored Jack Daniel's.


Europe for Less: It Can Be Done;   Amsterdam
LEAD: Take some carefully counted pennies, mix with a generous dose of music and art and sprinkle with lively, slightly accented conversation.
In an easygoing setting, let it rise for three or four days.
The recipe, so a proud citizen of Amsterdam insists, works wonders in the city, even in the winter.


Asian-Americans Pay for Academic Success
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A chart entry with the Travel Advisory column on Sept. 23, about airport departure taxes, misstated the amount charged international passengers departing from French airports.
It is 30 francs ($8.50), not 57.50 francs ($16.30).
The entry also misstated the payment method.
The tax is included in the price of an airline ticket, not paid at the airport.


Scot Working in Kuwait Dies
LEAD: A Scottish scientist working for the Kuwaiti Ministry of Health has died in Iraqi-held Kuwait, his family said today.
The family of William Atack, 46 years old, said in a statement that they had learned of his death from the British Foreign Office on Sept. 30 and added: ''It is understood that he took ill but did not recover.


Seeking Cash and Silent Victims, New York Thieves Prey on Asians
LEAD: As Min Su Yoo, a 42-year-old waiter who works in Chinatown, waited for the No. 6 train at the Canal Street subway station last month, two men dressed in jeans and dark jackets approached him, pulled out knives, and demanded his wallet.


The Nightmare Haunting Washington Is Set in Beirut, Not Vietnam
LEAD: While there has been much talk lately about how the experience of American troops in Vietnam is influencing policy makers in dealing with Iraq, the shadow of another military campaign may actually weigh more heavily on the minds of many American planners, as well as their allies in the Arab world and Israel.


Language Law Stirs Pride and Anger in Moldavia
LEAD: Luda Gryaznopolsky has lived in Moldavia all her life and never learned to speak the local language, Romanian.
She did not have to, because for the last half-century, since the Soviet Union annexed the territory in 1940, the way to get around and get ahead in this tiny republic tucked along the border of Romania was to speak


All About/The Spice Business;   Ancient Industry Catches Up With the Microwave Generation
LEAD: As 1992 nears and Americans prepare to celebrate 500 years since Columbus's voyage, they should prepare to pay tribute to spices.
When he bumped into America, after all, Columbus was on a mission for the King and Queen of Spain to locate a new and speedier route to a place called the Spice Islands, now part of


Review/Music;   Mozart Between Courses Of 'Lobster' and Strauss
LEAD: This week's New York Philharmonic subscription program at Avery Fisher Hall, which this writer encountered at the unlikely hour of 11 A.M.
Friday, sandwiched a Mozart violin concerto between two more extroverted scores: David Del Tredici's ''Lobster-Quadrille'' and Richard Strauss's ''Also Sprach Zarathustra.


Anne Hutchinson: Puritan Rebel and Westchester Pioneer
LEAD: IT was the most notorious murder in the history of Westchester, when the region included the Bronx and stretched northward as far as present-day Stamford.
The victim was Anne Marbury Hutchinson, a 52-year-old English immigrant, the mother of 14 children, who was banished from Massachusetts on charges of heresy, political anarchy and witchcraft.


Perspectives: Condos in Williamsburg;   Sales Experiment Finds the Market Slow
LEAD: Tucked away in a corner of the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, in a neighborhood that some officials describe as an Italian enclave, are 33 apartments that Elina Gonzalez-D'Annunzio is trying to sell as condominiums.


Sports People;   Clippers Sign Kimble
LEAD: After a bit of brinksmanship, Bo Kimble, the high-scoring former Loyola Marymount star who was the eighth pick in the June draft, has finally come to terms with the Los Angeles Clippers on a contract his agent said would provide Kimble with lifetime financial security.


Review/Cabaret;   A Singer's Personal Melange Of Memories and History
LEAD: One of several beautifully wrought anecdotes in Mary Cleere Haran's new cabaret act at the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel (59 West 44th Street) concerns the singer's late-blooming infatuation with Charles Boyer after seeing him in the film ''Hold Back the Dawn.'' The singer wittily analyzes his appeal, noting his ''deep, dark, stirring velvet voice, like a bass,'' and talks about having researched his life after being told he was a Nazi collaborator in World War II.


World Markets;   The Tokyo Market's Strange Rally
LEAD: The market's doldrums here have been called everything from a transition to a pause or a correction.
Last week, however, even the normally insouciant Japanese Finance Minister expressed alarm at what is, by any measure, a vicious bear market that is not just savaging share prices but is threatening the financial system and altering the views some hold of the Tokyo market.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our 19-year-old house needs a new roof and improved ventilation in the attic area.
This area only has gable vents now, and we want to add to this when the new roof is put on.
Are we better off with ridge-mounted roof vents or with a roof-mounted vent fan?


Dismembered Body Identified
LEAD: A dismembered body found near the Brooklyn Navy Yard has been tentatively identified as that of Mary Beal, 61 years old, of the Bronx, the police said yesterday.
They said the body parts were found in two bags on Sept. 15, the day she was reported missing.
Mrs.
Beal, a Yugoslav immigrant and widow, had moved to the Norwood section in the north-central Bronx 25 years ago.


A Disinvitation
LEAD: It's not that Louisiana State Representative David Duke can't take a hint - he just won't.
Local party leaders have done just about everything they could to discourage Mr.
Duke, a former Ku Klux Klan leader, from carrying the party banner in the senate primary this week.
Last week it came to the unthinkable: the party's chosen nominee, Ben Bagert, dropped out of the race to bolster the chances of the Democratic incumbent, Senator J.


Campus Life: North Carolina;   Analyzing Poetry With Assistance From Computers
LEAD: Forgetting to bring books to class is no longer a concern for University of North Carolina students in Richard Rust's English class.
His students are using the university's newest computer technology to analyze the works of America's greatest authors.


Postings: Piermont Recycling;   221 on Hudson
LEAD: When the Clevepak Company paper plant in Piermont, N.Y., shut down in 1983, it was a blow to the tiny Rockland County town.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


Review/Music;   The Art of Gagaku From Imperial Japan
LEAD: The term gagaku refers to a set of rituals, primarily musical and choreographic, that were inspired by now-extinct continental Asian practices and have flourished and mutated at the imperial court of Japan for a thousand years.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our 19-year-old house needs a new roof and improved ventilation in the attic area.
This area only has gable vents now, and we want to add to this when the new roof is put on.
Are we better off with ridge-mounted roof vents or with a roof-mounted vent fan?


A Painter's Tribute to Eliot's 'Quartets' Is on Display at Yale
LEAD: DAVID FINN is the head of Ruder &amp; Finn, a public-relations firm noted for its persistence.
He is known also for his photographs of Henry Moore's sculpture and for books on subjects ranging from ancient Egypt and Greece to the art of Western Europe.


Lifestyle;   Last Refuge for Kibitzers and Patzers
LEAD: A dozen knitted brows leaned over worn plastic chess sets at the Chess Shop in Greenwich Village on a rainy afternoon.
The players nodded in animated contemplation, clopping chess pieces against the boards and thwacking speed clocks.


Miss Sortor Wed To S. N. Lerangis
LEAD: Georgia Lynn Sortor, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold E. Sortor of Savannah, Ga., was married yesterday to Steven Nicholas Lerangis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas P. Lerangis of Freeport, L.I.The Rev.
Dr.
Herbert B. Anderson officiated at the Brick Presbyterian Church in New York.


'Godspell,' Early 70's Clap Along
LEAD: ''GODSPELL'' is passe.
Even as an evocation of a faddish, early 70's free-form soft-rock variation on a Bible-based theme, the show, which has the Gospel of St.
Matthew as its source, is in need of salvation.


Lisa M. Lindeman Married
LEAD: Lisa Michele Lindeman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil C. Lindeman of St.
Michaels, Md., was married there yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church to Edward Hobbs Luckett 2d, a son of Diana W. Luckett of Larchmont, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Luckett.
The Rev.
Donald F. Etherton officiated.
Mrs.
Luckett, 30 years old and a graduate of Colorado State University, is an advertising executive at Dupretti &amp; Associates, radio representatives in New York.


Jennifer E. Gillen To Wed This Year
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Gillen of Morristown, N.J., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Jennifer Elaine Gillen and Robert Quinto Scacheri, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Scacheri of Dover, Del.


Foreigners Flee Rwanda's Capital as Fighting Intensifies in North
LEAD: Heavy fighting between Government troops and invading rebels was reported today in Rwanda's countryside as hundreds of foreigners fled the capital of the central African nation.


Rating Novelists
LEAD: To the Editor:


Recycled Bromides For an Endangered Globe
LEAD:
CLASSICAL
Brian: Symphony No. 1, 'Gothic'
Various soloists and choirs; Czechoslovak Radio Symphony and Slovak Philharmonic Orchestras conducted by Ondrej Lenard.
Marco Polo 8.223280-281.
CD.
This is the biggest symphony of them all.
Longer, grander in conception and requiring even vaster forces than Mahler's ''Symphony of a Thousand,'' the ''Gothic'' is really two works in one, each of them massive.


Uruguay: Unlikely Capital For Antique-Car Sales
LEAD: Parked in the open door of a workshop on a nondescript Montevideo side street, the low-slung pale yellow car created its own Art Deco time warp.
Its cockpit-style dashboard, interior radiator, retractable headlights and front-wheel traction - decades ahead of their time - make Errett Lobban Cord's dream machine as alive today as it was when it drove the


Calls for Holy War Reveal Fissures In Islamic World
LEAD: When Saddam Hussein proclaimed that his confrontation with the Arab and Western countries that oppose his occupation of Kuwait was ''a holy war,'' the Iraqi leader's action testified not only to the power of Islam but also to its complexities and limits.


IN SHORT/FOOTBALL
LEAD:
NO MEDALS FOR TRYING: A Week in the Life of a Pro Football Team.
By Jerry Izenberg. (Macmillan, $18.95.) Last year the syndicated sports columnist Jerry Izenberg was given access by the New York Giants' coaching staff to their meetings and team preparation for the week preceding a crucial game with the Philadelphia Eagles on Dec.


A Call to Punish Patriot Players
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Meredyth L. Moredock Affianced to John M. Cole
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
M.
Jeffrey Moredock of Palos Verdes Peninsula, Calif., and Essex, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Meredyth Lynn Moredock, to John M. Cole, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Cole of Bethesda, Md., and Sea Island, Ga.
A December wedding is planned.


Question Of the Week;   Who Is the Best Coach In Pro Football?
LEAD: A pro football coach is limited by the talent he has available for his team, the amount of money the team owners are willing to spend, and the shifty prospects of the college draft.
Therefore, his talent should not be judged by how well his team is doing this year, or how many Super Bowls he has won.


Kessel and Cuomo Chided on Shoreham
LEAD: Richard Kessel, director of the New York Consumer Protection B oard, has given the most disgraceful performance of any politician that I have seen after having lived 27 years on Long Island.


Baseball;   For Welch, A Year of Strait A's
LEAD: The 27th victory of Bob Welch's incredible season had been computed and logged into a microchip's memory.
The game was over, the parking lot outside the Oakland Coliseum was empty, and now Welch was ready to walk quietly out the door and head across the San Francisco Bay for home.
But there were questions, questions.


An Exception Tests the Rule
LEAD: To the Editor:


PRESIDENT VETOES STOPGAP BUDGET; SHUTDOWN BEGINS
LEAD: President Bush began selectively shutting down the Federal Government today to build pressure on Congress for a budget deal, but even as he attacked Congress he said he would be ''flexible'' in the details of a deal he would accept.


WHY AMERICA FAILS ITS CHILDREN
LEAD: I wonder if it might be possible for the American Association of Retired Persons to launch a Grandparents Guardianship adjunct to its organization, along the lines of Plan International U.S.A. (formerly known as the Foster Parents Plan).


Computers Begin To Assume The Role of Critic
LEAD: Can you teach a computer to be a music critic?
Probably not, because computers can make only programmed (i.e., prejudiced) judgments, which is exactly what conscientious critics try to avoid.
But efforts are now under way to use computers to help evaluate musical performances.


Children's Books
LEAD:
RICE WITHOUT RAIN
FITGBy Minfong Ho.
236 pp. New York:
Lothrop, Lee &amp; Shepard. $12.95.
(Ages 12 and up)


WHAT HILL &amp; KNOWLTON CAN DO
LEAD: Your back-to-back positioning of ''Why Is America Failing Its Children?'' and ''What Hill &amp; Knowlton Can Do for You'' (by Jeffrey Goodell, Sept. 9) inadvertently demonstrated the disturbing behavior of those who help to widen the gap between the ''haves'' and ''have nots.''


Woman Is Killed in Bronx Drive-by Shooting
LEAD: A 20-year-old Bronx woman was shot in the head and killed early yesterday morning on a sidewalk in a housing project by a bullet the police believe was intended for someone else.


Horse Racing;   Meadow Star Steals The Show
LEAD: Flying Continental and Fly So Free won the richest races at Belmont Park yesterday, but the heroine of the year's best afternoon of racing was Meadow Star.


Meningitis Vaccine For Infants Is Approved
LEAD: A vaccine that prevents bacterial meningitis and other life-threatening diseases can now be given to infants as young as 2 months to protect them when they most need it.


Miss Labouisse Weds George Kostakos
LEAD: Nancy Labouisse, a daughter of Erica Cutler Labouisse of New Orleans and the late F. Monroe Labouisse Jr., was married yesterday to George Peter Kostakos, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter G. Kostakos of Utica, N.Y.
The Rev.
Hill C. Riddle officiated in the ceremony in Trinity Episcopal Church in New Orleans.


Fashion;   It's Hot!
LEAD: At first, it was just one shot of color.
The shock of something in brilliant purple, yellow, orange or acid green was stimulation enough.
But now that the eye - and the psyche - have adjusted to that fashion jolt, designers are going a step further.
Lots of the new holiday and resort styles combine, in one costume, two or more of these explosive colors.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our 19-year-old house needs a new roof and improved ventilation in the attic area.
This area only has gable vents now, and we want to add to this when the new roof is put on.
Are we better off with ridge-mounted roof vents or with a roof-mounted vent fan?


Easing an Overhead Garage Door
LEAD: STRUGGLING with a balky overhead garage door is a nuisance; worse, it can lead to back strain or a pulled muscle.


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD: King's Park
$273,000
17 Springbriar Boulevard
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; dining room, den, 2-car garage; taxes $5,900.
Nissequogue
$717,000
135 Valley Path
5-bedroom, 5-bath, 15-year-old contemporary; dining room, den, basement,inground pool, 2.6-acres, 2-car garage; taxes $11,600.


Why Did New York Hire 49,000 Workers in 7 Years?
LEAD: Whatever blame may eventually accrue to the administration of David N. Dinkins as it lurched and stumbled into the city's worst fiscal crisis in 15 years, the underlying municipal budget problems were not of Mr.
Dinkins's creation.


Appraising African Art Through Western Eyes


What Did Mossad Know, and When?
LEAD:
BY WAY OF DECEPTION
By Victor Ostrovsky and Claire Hoy.
371 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press. $22.95.


J. Murray Mitchell, Who Warned Of Global Warming, Is Dead at 62
LEAD: J. Murray Mitchell Jr., a leading government climatologist who warned for years of increasing evidence of global warming and of other human influences on the climate, died Friday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington after a long illness.
He was 62 years old and lived in McLean, Va.


Mets Shaking Up Their Coaching Staff
LEAD: Less than a week after ending their 1990 season in second place, the Mets have begun doing some spadework for 1991, hiring one new coach, reassigning three others and scheduling surgery for a couple of ailing pitchers.


Clothes Make The Reporter
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Follow-Up On the News
LEAD:
Suit Dropped On Frog Dissection


What Will It Take To Make Foot Patrol An Enticing Career?
LEAD: With New York's image tattered by a surge in violent crime, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown took a giant step toward overhauling the nation's largest police department last week by declaring that foot patrol officers would once again be the backbone of the force.


The Youngest Champ, the Dirtiest Game
LEAD:
UNLIMITED CHALLENGE
The Autobiography of Garry Kasparov
By Garry Kasparov with Donald Trelford.
Illustrated. 273 pp. New York:
Grove Weidenfeld. $19.95


Not a Sick Joke
LEAD: To the Editor:


Richard Schwarz, 39, Movie Theater Owner
LEAD: Richard Schwarz, a film archivist and owner of the Thalia, the now-defunct Upper West Side theater venerated by generations of classic movie lovers, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 39 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Football;   2 Networks Gain Viewers
LEAD: As the National Football League moves into the fifth Sunday of its regular season today, two of the networks that televise pre-game shows in the early afternoon report that ratings are up while one reports that ratings are down.


John C. Niles Is Wed To Cara M. Bertrand
LEAD: Cara Marie Bertrand, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles B. Bertrand of Bedford, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Cutler Niles, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Niles of Etna, N.H.
The Rev.
John Kauta, assisted by the Rev.
Charles S. Holmes, officiated at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bedford.


In Frankfurt, an Annual Fair for Publishers
LEAD: The day after the 42d annual Frankfurt Book Fair opened, Dieter Jungling's country and hometown officially ceased to exist.
In the hurly-burly of the publishing world's most important annual event, however, the fact that German unification had erased East Germany and East Berlin from the map was a historical sidelight.


Real Doctors Don't Sleep
LEAD: ONCE DURING MEDICAL school I actually fell asleep for a moment or so in the emergency room while holding a retractor during surgery on a knife wound.
I knew instantly that I could never be a real doctor.
Never mind that I hadn't been allowed a wink of sleep in 30 hours.
Never mind that holding a retractor - a diabolical device ostensibly used to pry open a surgical wound so that the surgeon can see what he is doing, but actually used, from its other end, for torturing medical students into permanent submission - is one of the most tedious tasks carried on inside a hospital.


Ms. Wagner Wed To E. B. Morley
LEAD: Katheryn A. Wagner, a daughter of Barbara Wagner of New Canaan, Conn., and Edward Wagner of Norwalk, Conn., was married yesterday to Edward B. Morley, a son of Marie Morley of Stamford, Conn., and Dr.
H.
Barclay Morley of Southport, Conn.
The Rev.
Roland Jones performed the ceremony at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in New


India-Based Groups Seek to Disrupt Bhutan
LEAD: The small Buddhist kingdom of Bhutan has become the target of a well-organized campaign, based in India, to stir up violent opposition to the country's moves to protect itself and its culture from illegal immigration.


Question Of the Week;   Who Is the Best Coach In Pro Football?
LEAD: Don Shula should be recognized as the best coach in pro football because of the titles that his teams have won in each of the past three decades.
Not only has Shula the most victories of any active coach (288) but he is also second only to George Halas's 325 victories as a head coach.


Europe for Less: It Can Be Done;   Budapest
LEAD: As Hungary lurches toward a market economy, Budapest's bargains are falling fast, both for those who live here and tourists passing through.
Still, it is possible to sit in a cafe, have a coffee and a cream cake and not feel - as you might, say, in Florence or Vienna - that you had just spent enough for a three-course meal.


Hearing The Cries Of Crack
LEAD: The future of America's cities is lying in isolettes in the neonatal intensive care unit of Bronx-Lebanon hospital.
The bright room is filled with baby misery: babies born months too soon; babies born weighing little more than a hardcover book; babies that look like wizened old men in the last stages of a terminal illness, wrinkled skin clinging to chicken bones; babies who do not cry because their mouths and noses are full of tubes.


New York, N.Y.
LEAD: To the Editor: In the article on New York City bars (''Drinking in the View,'' Travel, Sept. 9), William Grimes stated that the River Cafe ''sits solidly on firm ground.'' It ain't necessarily so because the restaurant itself is mounted on a barge.
ROBERTO J. PICK
Elmhurst, Queens


So It Parks Itself. Where?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sunday Breakfast Lives
LEAD: BREAKFAST USED TO BE THE kindest meal.
It was a mother's way to fortify a family to face the world.
It built champions.
The sizzle of bacon; the sight of eggs, cracked into a skillet and curling in a pool of bubbling butter; the aroma of nut-studded, sugar-strudeled coffee cake baking: these were the balms of well-being.


So It Parks Itself. Where?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   With Prix-Fixe Menus, The Choices Are Varied
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Here are some restaurants that offer prix-fixe menus.
Bellini by Cipriani


Bronx Mugging Victim Dies of Heart Attack
LEAD: A 65-year-old man suffered a fatal heart attack after being assaulted by two muggers on a Bronx street on Friday night, the police said yesterday.


Recycled Bromides For an Endangered Globe TV VIEW
LEAD: When it comes to the environment, public television carries on as though there were no tomorrow.
Which, granted, may be the point.


Miss Stewart Weds Thomas Crimmins
LEAD: Laura Whitney Stewart, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Stewart of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Thomas Holmes Crimmins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Artemas Holmes Crimmins Jr. of Riverside, Conn.
The Rev.
Charles Crawford Smith officiated at the Congregational Church in New Canaan.


Football;   Giants Offensive: Few Plays but Many Guises
LEAD: The Giants are one of only three undefeated National Football League teams, and they are sure to stay that way for at least one more week because they do not play this weekend.
Their unblemished record comes from a defense that is playing well in obvious ways and an offense that is playing well in often subtle ways, with new looks to confuse opposing defenses.


Rowing;   U.S. National Team Wins
LEAD: The Challenge of the Hudson Regatta attracted all of last year's collegiate and national team winners to the inaugural racing of the only rowing event in America dedicated to the preservation of the environment.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
LEAD:
Special Today:
Good Health/Magazine Part 2


CINCINNATI MUSEUM QUIET AFTER TRIAL
LEAD: It was eerily quiet in the stylish museum above the Walgreens Department Store in downtown Cincinnati today.
There were no crowds, no sheriff's deputies, little hint of the turmoil that has polarized this city in the seven months since the photographs of the late Robert Mapplethorpe were shown at the Contemporary Arts Center here.


Jordanians Resentful as Tourism and Business Fall
LEAD: Close by old columns that have soared since Roman times beneath a bowl of sky in this north Jordanian town, two men played slow chess, a policeman watched, half-interested, and Ibrahim Mustafa Smaaly, a vendor, counted his take for the day: three postcards at 50 cents each.


Europe for Less: It Can Be Done;   Vienna
LEAD: In the minds of many travelers, Vienna ranks alongside Geneva and Tokyo as one of the most expensive cities in the world.
In fact, recent travelers here have commented that it now seems cheaper than Italy.
One thing is sure: the closer to the city center, the higher the prices.


Grace Park Weds Carl Cordova 3d
LEAD: Grace Park, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Doo Ha Park of Irvington, N.Y., was married yesterday to Carl C. Cordova 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Carl Cordova of Richboro, Pa.
The Rev.
Dr.
Edmund Jones officiated at the Irvington Presbyterian Church.


Burr Leonard, Researcher, Is Married
LEAD: Burr Leonard, a daughter of Mrs.
Floyd M. Shumway of New Haven, Conn., and George B. Leonard of Mill Valley, Calif., was married yesterday to Carl Christoffer Diehl, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arno Diehl of Victoria, British Columbia, Canada.
The Rev.
Walter D. Kring, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Loeb Boathouse in Central


New York Welcomes New Jersey Plays
LEAD: TUESDAY'S opening of ''About Time,'' a play about how an octogenarian couple cope with aging, will mark the first serious new work of Off Broadway's fall season.
If Tom Cole's play, which was first seen in full-length form at the George Street Playhouse in New Brunswick, succeeds, it will join a select lineup of diverse hits that are enlivening Off Broadway theater and have emanated from New


Elizabeth Baldwin Wed in California
LEAD: Elizabeth Brooks Baldwin, a daughter of Geraldine W. Baldwin of Morristown, N.J., and Robert H. B. Baldwin of New York, was married yesterday in Santa Cruz, Calif., to Gary Lee Maushardt, a son of Mrs.
Eugene Robinson of Los Alamitos, Calif., and Loye O. Maushardt of Anaheim, Calif.
The Rev.
Emily Sanford, a minister of the Unity Temple in Santa Cruz, officiated at Chaminade at Santa


Obstacles Snag Renewal in New Rochelle
LEAD: TO hear city officials talk about it, their long-neglected downtown is a Sleeping Beauty.
And if Prince Charming hasn't actually planted the kiss that magically restores signs of life, they say, at least his car has been sighted in the parking lot.


Mutual Funds;   Strategies for a Bear Market
LEAD: With threats of recession looming and bears leaving pawprints on Wall Street, managers of mutual funds are maneuvering through treacherous territory.
How are they coping?
Many are buying again.
To be sure, cash reserves at stock funds remain larger than usual.
In August, the most recent period studied, cash made up 11.9 percent of the funds' portfolios, according to the Investment Company Institute.


Bear Market: Gentle Ben Or Real Grisly?
LEAD: Just as the world has accepted the fact of a bear market, Wall Street is facing a new puzzle: What kind of bear is it?


Cool-Weather Care for Potted Plants
LEAD: HOUSE plants should be inside now.
Although October has some balmy days, plants that live their lives in pots should be not be out in them.
They need a few weeks of transition after their summer vacation.


'Crooked Hearts' Probes the Pain of Family Life
LEAD: Every major United States studio rejected the idea of making Robert Boswell's 1987 first novel, ''Crooked Hearts,'' into a movie.
Too intelligent, too intellectual, too esthetic and too painful - those were the reasons given to the producer Dale Pollock when he went in search of backing for this story about a family in the midst of emotional crisis.


Jill Dell'Abate Marries Charles F. Mangold Jr.
LEAD: Jill Elisabeth Dell'Abate, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Dell'Abate of Pound Ridge, N.Y., was married yesterday to Charles Fritz Mangold Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mangold of Old Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
William J. Murphey performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Greenwich.


Question Of the Week;   Who Is the Best Coach In Pro Football?
LEAD: Don Shula, coach of the Miami Dolphins, and Chuck Noll, coach of the Pittsburgh Steelers, get my vote.
Between them, they have 43 combined years of head coaching experience.
They have gone to 10 Super Bowls, collectively winning 7.
RICHARD J. FOX
Little Neck, Queens


Sadly, a Salvadoran Will Leave His Country
LEAD: For 15 years, Roberto braved the horrors of this country's civil strife.
One by one, friends left or were kidnapped and killed.
But he stayed and built his businesses.


Soul Food Reconsidered
LEAD: PEOPLE CONCERNED WITH THEIR health think nothing of eating a variety of ethnic foods, such as Japanese, Middle Eastern and Indian.
But soul food?
After all, doesn't it conjure up images of fatty pork, chicken deep-fried in lard (pork fat) and high-cholesterol desserts like sweet potato pie?
Nutritionists have even gone as far as to hold soul food partially responsible for inflicting ill health on a whole race of people.


Currency;
LEAD:
$
Last
Previous
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
132.20
138.50
142.50
per Dollar
W.German Mark
1.53872
1.56170
1.8900
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1500
1.1542
1.1753
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.9455
1.8760
1.61128
U.S.


Russian Sees Hussein and Is Hopeful
LEAD: An envoy of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union said today that he was more hopeful of a peaceful settlement to the Persian Gulf crisis after two days of talks with President Saddam Hussein and other Iraqi leaders.


Campus Life: Northwestern;   New Policy Set To Curb Alcohol At Campus Parties
LEAD: To combat what administrators describe as a rise in violence and vandalism, Northwestern University has adopted a strict new alcohol policy that emphasizes supervising and monitoring student parties.


Sports People;   Safe Surroundings
LEAD: The way Dee Brown sees it, when you move into a new community, it's generally comforting to know it has enthusiastic police protection even if it's not quite as efficient as it might be.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption last Sunday about Scarsdale High School misidentified the adult shown with the football team.
He was Dick Paladino, the coach, not Ronald Bouchier, the athletic director.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Moldavia's Cultural Rebirth
As the Soviet region of Moldavia rediscovers its Romanian heritage, minorities feel pressure.
Page 14.
A Tiny Mosquito's Toll
An outbreak of encephalitis, spread by night-flying mosquitoes, is disrupting life in Florida.
Page 26.
Oakland 9, Boston 1


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: Maybe they're accidental and maybe they're preordained, but casual happenings do influence a good part of our lives.


Study Finds AIDS Risk for Men in Oral Sex
LEAD: A new analysis of the sexual behavior of dozens of men infected with the AIDS virus indicates that oral sex between men may be a greater factor in spreading the disease than many scientists assumed.


Knicks to Play in Europe
LEAD: The Knicks will fly to Spain after practice Sunday to begin preparing for the fourth annual McDonald's Open, to be held next Thursday and Saturday in Barcelona.


Why Not a Free Ukraine?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Good, Done
LEAD: Rarely these days does noblesse take its oblige as seriously as Countess Albina du Boisrouvray of France seems to.
The Countess was looking around last year for a medical facililty where children with AIDS were treated with an extra degree of empathy.
Then she heard about Dr.
James M. Oleske, who ran a financially strapped program that tried to do just that in Newark, N.J.


Sports of the Times;   What is She Doing Here
LEAD: Zeke Mowatt may not remember or may never have known that there was a time only a relatively short while ago when he would not have been allowed into a professional football locker room, except, of course, as an attendant to pick up soiled jockstraps, or to shine someone's football shoes.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
SPOTLIGHT ON DIVAS


WHAT HILL &amp; KNOWLTON CAN DO
LEAD: I was perhaps not as much puzzled as I was chagrined at the decision of the U.S.C.C. to retain the services of a public relations firm to promote its position on abortion.
It's not lost on me that some very large corporations find it necessary to turn to image-making institutions, but I find it distasteful that Catholic bishops are so devoid of confidence in their own ability to get the message out that they turn to a secular institution to do the job for them.


Wartime Memories Of a Train Station
LEAD: The article about the Little Silver railroad station (''Restoration Campaign: Little Depot That Would,'' Sept. 2) was of great interest to me.
I grew up in Monmouth County and know the Red Bank-Little Silver-Long Branch area very well.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   North of New York, Fall's Splendor Includes Color and Country Fare
LEAD: On almost every road north from the metropolitan New York area, the Virginia creepers and the sumacs are turning bright red and deep purple, harbingers of the fall foliage season.
Here and there a solitary sugar maple displays its vivid bronze and crimson, heralding the season's peak.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Rake.
Mow.
Plant hardy bulbs.
All house plants, except Christmas cactuses and possibly cool-weather plants such as gardenias and camellias should be indoors. (Cool nights will encourage bud set on Christmas cactuses.)
Juniper Bonsai


Campus Life: Cleveland State;   4-Month Sit-In Over an Official Ends, For Now
LEAD: After a four-month sit-in that resulted in the intervention of the Governor of Ohio, protests caused by the departure of a black vice president from Cleveland State University are over - at least for now.


BEST SELLERS: October 7, 1990
LEAD:
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
2
2
8
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $21.95.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.


Being Multilingual Has Its Rewards
LEAD: It was with interest that I read Edda Joan Tenret's article ''Bilingual At An Early Age'' (Opinion, Sept. 9).
My own life has shown how easy and rewarding it is to grow up speaking either two or three languages.


Review/Music;   A Program of Stand-Ins By Philharmonia Virtuosi
LEAD: ''EGBDF/ Previn/ Stoppard,'' said the ticket for the opening concert of Philharmonia Virtuosi's season on Tuesday evening at Town Hall, with obvious reference to ''Every Good Boy Deserves Favor,'' a brief but complex theater piece by the American composer Andre Previn and the British playwright Tom Stoppard, which unfolds around and dramatically involves an onstage orchestra.


Pirates' Owners Pleading Poverty
LEAD: The Pittsburgh Pirates won a division title and set an attendance record this season.
But financially, the Pirates' management says, the team is languishing in the second division, and could actually suffer from rather than be helped by its success.


NASA's Shuttle Rockets Into Orbit After a 5-Month Launching Drought
LEAD: Breaking a trouble-plagued five-month launching hiatus, the space shuttle Discovery rocketed into orbit today and dispatched the Ulysses spacecraft on a mission to explore for the first time the polar regions of the Sun.


Under My Skin
LEAD: So Frank is 75 this year, and what does that mean?
I remember what it meant when he was 68 in June 1984.
He was at Carnegie Hall singing ''Pennies From Heaven'' and ''Fly Me to The Moon'' and he was in great voice.
When he did ''Come Rain or Come Shine,'' a woman in a box called out to him, ''Frankie, baby, you're the best.


Campus Life: Berkeley;   Shock and Anxiety After a Killing And a Fatal Fire
LEAD: Shock, sadness and anxiety have swept this campus community after three students at the University of California died in a fraternity house fire and one was shot to death by a gunman who held 33 people hostage in an off-campus bar.


Mary Ward, Professor, Weds John Cole, Lawyer
LEAD: Mary J. Ward, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael A. Ward of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to John A. Cole, a son of Mrs.
Arthur R. Cole of Clovis, N.M., and the late Mr.
Cole.
The Rev.
John Scully officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of the Holy Family in New Rochelle.


Foes of Yonkers Housing Threaten Bank Boycott
LEAD: THE threat by opponents of court-ordered low-income housing in Yonkers to picket or boycott any bank that finances the construction has added new complexities to the bitterly disputed project and may force the developers to seek financial assistance from outside the state.


House Roll-Call in Vote Upholding Veto of Stopgap Budget
LEAD: The following is the 260-138 roll-call vote by which the House today fell six votes short of the two-thirds majority needed to override President Bush's veto of a measure that would have provided money for one week to reopen government agencies shut by the budget impasse.
A ''yes'' vote is a vote to override the veto.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Middletown
LEAD: Before the Colonies became the United States, Middletown was a major port city on the Connecticut River, its deep, wide channel accommodating ships bound for China, the West Indies, Europe and Africa.
Shipping, shipbuilding and farming made it one of the richest communities in the region.


By Word of Mouth, Dancers Find New Eloquence


Rumblings on the Right
LEAD: Chalk Van Niekirk, a retired tobacco farmer, wanted me to understand that he had no respect for President F. W. de Klerk.


Ms. McAvoy Weds Bart Landenberger
LEAD: Jennie Van Pelt McAvoy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward H. McAvoy of Tappan, N.Y., was married yesterday to Bart Lawrence Landenberger, a son of Jane Hamilton Landenberger of Bedford, N.Y., and the late John Landenberger.
The Rev.
Norman E. Thornton performed the Episcopal ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.


Commercial Property: Trade-Offs;   Delaying the Amenities-for-Building-Bonuses Pledge
LEAD: Dancers are supposed to have new rehearsal studios on West 55th Street, next to the City Center, but they do not.
Two blocks south, pedestrians are supposed to be making their way through a convenient arcade halfway between Seventh Avenue and the Avenue of the Americas, but they cannot.
And at Manhattan's tip, abandoned spaces in the Battery Maritime Building are supposed to be under reconstruction for use by the Dance Theater Workshop and Creative Time arts groups.


College Football;   Goodwin's Passes Find Mark
LEAD: Colgate thwarted a blitzing Yale defense in the second half today and trounced the Bulldogs, 30-7, for the Red Raiders' third straight victory over an Ivy League opponent.


With a New Look, Far Right Is Advancing in Austria
LEAD: The photograph shows three young, handsome Austrians with windblown hair and open collars, laughing at the camera as they pose for a picture high in the Alps.


'Buckwheat' Impostor Dupes Staff of '20/20'
LEAD: The executive producer of ABC's ''20/20'' acknowledged today that researchers for the television program were duped by an impostor claiming to be the actor who played a character in the ''Our Gang'' comedies.


King Kasparov
LEAD: For most of September, the world chess champion, Gary Kasparov, was sequestered, with his wife, his mother and an entourage of trainers, in a spacious beach house on a bluff above the south shore of Martha's Vineyard.
There, he was preparing for his fifth title match against his archrival, the former world champion Anatoly Karpov, which begins tomorrow afternoon in New York.


Despite Federal Shutdown, Large Loopholes Stay Open
LEAD: Lacking a law that allows it to spend money, the Government closed down most of its operations today, but left open loopholes big enough to fly a spaceship through.


Group to Share $10 Million In Settlement of Jet Accident
LEAD: The families of four people killed in the crash of a Continental Airlines jet in Denver in 1987 will share $10 million in an out-of-court settlement, a lawyer for the families said Thursday.


FATAL ACCIDENTS ARE DOWN AS U.S. BECOMES VIGILANT
LEAD: Gradually and with little fanfare, anxious Americans have reduced one measure of risk in their daily lives: In the last decade, the death rate from accidents has dropped 21 percent as more cautious conduct has been institutionalized in law and custom.


G.O.P. Nominee for California Governor Steers Careful Course to the Center
LEAD: The setting could not have been further from the urban scourge of crack babies.
But it was here in this wealthy coastal enclave that Pete Wilson, United States Senator and Republican candidate for governor of California, brought his oft-repeated message of compassion.


Phoebe Vaughn, Journalist, Weds
LEAD: Phoebe Hinman Vaughn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George A. Vaughn of Princeton, N.J., and Warwick, Bermuda, was married yesterday to Andrew Willard Outerbridge, a son of Mrs.
John H. Kaufmann of Somerset, Bermuda, and Colebrook, N.H., and Yeaton D. Outerbridge of Smith's Parish, Bermuda, and Jamestown, R.I.


IN SHORT/FOOTBALL
LEAD:
THE QUARTERBACKS: The Uncensored Truth About the Men in the Pocket.
By Mickey Herskowitz. (Morrow, $19.95.) This vigorous book is a collection of salty, wry profiles of 29 of the best quarterbacks to have played professional football over the past 40 years.
The sportswriter Mickey Herskowitz clearly possesses the two essential qualities for the project: he has a pitch-perfect ear for the tang of American talk and he regards football (rightly) as far more entertaining (and essential) than almost anything else in life.


Today's Kids Turn Off Fitness
LEAD: SHE IS A BUBBLY 10-YEAR-OLD with an almost invisible splash of freckles across her nose.
As she jokes and fools around with her friends, Melanie's eyes twinkle with delight, but she quickly collects herself as she describes the teasing she endures because she's overweight.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: For a country without any bridge tradition to stage its first National Championship with foreign participation is an exciting challenge.
To learn that it will also be that country's last because the country disappeared before play starts is certainly unique.
The first and last East German Championship will be played Nov.


Gangster Rap: Life and Music in the Combat Zone
LEAD: Someday - and it may be just a matter of weeks - people are going to be nostalgic for the 2 Live Crew.
The group's dirty jokes with a beat, musically mediocre and erotically unimaginative, raise relatively uncomplicated questions about whether crude locker-room humor - undeniably sexist, debatably brutal - should be accessible to adults.


Corrections
LEAD: An article last Sunday about Kakadu National Park misstated an address and a phone number for Australia's Northern Territory Tourist Commission.
The address is 489 Fifth Avenue, 31st floor, New York, N.Y. 10017; the telephone number is (212) 687-7810.


School Football;   Randolph Revels In Breaking Record
LEAD: Four days a week, John Bauer receives dialysis treatment for his kidneys.
Then after a four-and-a-half hour session, Bauer heads to the Randolph High School football field, where the team he coaches just eclipsed a New Jersey state record of 41 consecutive victories.


Angling for Grace
LEAD:
WHAT THE RIVER KNOWS
An Angler in Midstream.
By Wayne Fields.
252 pp. New York:
Poseidon Press. $18.95.


Baseball;   Greenwell's Pluck Crucial for Red Sox
LEAD: The left ankle is wrapped to the maximum, so much so that it barely allows the left foot to squeeze into the athletic shoe.


Voodoo Demographics
LEAD: To the Editor:


Debunking Columbus
LEAD:
THE CONQUEST OF PARADISE
Christopher Columbus and the Columbian Legacy.
By Kirkpatrick Sale.
453 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Football;   What a Difference a Year Makes
LEAD: When entering the Los Angeles Raiders' locker room from their practice field, the first cubicle one finds is Greg Townsend's, just inside the left corner.
Townsend is easy to spot, too.
At 6 feet 3 inches and 265 pounds, he could use two lockers.
After Thursday's practice, he was also easy to hear among the frolicking


Corrections
LEAD: A map caption last Sunday with an article about visitors to the Antietam battlefield referred incorrectly in some copies to the number killed in the Civil War battle there.
About 4,800 troops were killed.


Former Klan Figure Loses to Incumbent In Louisiana Voting
LEAD: Incumbent Senator J. Bennett Johnston Jr. defeated State Representative David Duke, a former Ku Klux Klan leader, tonight in a race that had become a troubling window on race relations in the United States.


Cady Lyons Married to Peter B. Taylor
LEAD: Catherine Niland Lyons, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel C. Lyons of Berlin, Vt., and Little Compton, R.I., was married yesterday to Peter Brodt Taylor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Donald Taylor of Dover, Mass., and Little Compton.
The Rev.
Edmund J. Fitzgerald officiated at St.
John the Baptist Roman Catholic Church in Westport, Mass.


Europe for Less: It Can Be Done;   Berlin
LEAD: Dollars evaporate fast these days in Berlin, swallowed by the gold fever of impending German reunification and the mark's might.
But even if coffee and a slice of apple strudel can easily cost $10 at the pricier cafes, a stay in Berlin doesn't have to be expensive.


Streetscapes: The Coney Island Pumping Station;   Restabling the Noble Steeds
LEAD: The entry in the 1989 edition of the American Institute of Architects Guide to New York City seemed like an epitaph. ''The streamlined but decaying remnant was once guarded by two pairs of prancing steeds, now removed to the Brooklyn Museum sculpture garden.
Too bad.
Coney needed to keep this piece of architectural history.


Dressing Up Fish and Chicken for a Twirl on the Grill
LEAD: GRILLED fish is like a little black dress, a wardrobe staple that can be varied with accessories and seasonings.
Salsas, flavored butters, chutneys, cream or wine sauces can dress it up or down.
Grilled boneless chicken breasts can be treated much the same way.
A bright, robust combination of sweet and hot peppers, onion, tomatoes and herbs is one of those all-purpose adornments that can enhance simple grilled tuna or other grilled fish or chicken.


The 60's Very Soul


Pakistan's Bomb: Proliferating Excuses
LEAD: Secretary of State Baker recently declared himself ready to ''mount a major effort'' to slow the spread of nuclear arms to states like Iraq.
But he won't convince Saddam Hussein or anyone else that he's serious if he doesn't halt U.S. aid to Pakistan.


A Boyfriend, a Bank Fraud and Greed Imperil Mexico's Economic Renewal
LEAD: For more than five years, wealthy clients of Maria del Carmen Badillo shared an amazing secret: annual returns of up to 200 percent on accounts she supervised as a money-market executive at Banco BCH, one of Mexico's major banks.


Sandol Seitz and Richard J. Allen Are Married
LEAD: Sandol E. Seitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles J. Seitz of Greenwich, Conn., was married at the Second Congregational Church there yesterday to Richard J. Allen, a son of Mrs.
Donald H. Weatherbe of Glastonbury, Conn., and the late Walter D. Allen Jr.
The Rev.
Robert S. Hundley officiated.
Mrs.


The Sound of Nineveh
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Little Help For Creation
LEAD: HAVING CHILDREN HAS never been easy for Fran and Sal Mastropolo of Ardsley, N. Y. Conceiving their first child, Paul, who is now 14, took more than a year, with one miscarriage along the way.
Their second, Daniel, now 3, took seven years, during which time Fran had two more miscarriages.
She took hormones designed to stimulate ovulation in addition to undergoing more than a dozen attempts at artificial insemination with


WHY AMERICA FAILS ITS CHILDREN
LEAD: As a member of the National Commission on Children, T. Berry Brazelton seems surprised that ''Americans have become numb to reports of the hopelessness of their children'' (''Why Is America Failing Its Children?'' Sept. 9).
Brazelton should know that such commissions are appointed as a palliative, a substitute for taking action.


Washington Students Agree to End Protest
LEAD: Students at the University of the District of Columbia agreed Friday to end a protest that has immobilized the school for 11 days, but they failed to win their chief demand: removal of most of the school's trustees.


Victoria Cleveland, Designer, Is Wed
LEAD: Victoria Tipton Cleveland was married yesterday at St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in New York to Robert Keith Lindgren.
The Rev.
Thomas D. Bowers performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Lindgren is the daughter of Nancy Morehead Stone of New York and the late Anthony B. Cleveland.
She is the stepdaughter of Timothy Stone.


Sports People;   Action in Athens?
LEAD: Atlanta may have beaten out Athens as the site of the centennial 1996 Olympic Games, but according to Juan Samaranch, the chairman of the International Olympic Committee, Athens, which was the site of the first modern Games in 1896, may yet end up with a piece of the 1996 action, a 26.2-mile piece.


CORECTIONS
LEAD: An article last Sunday about the role of slides in juried art exhibitions rendered the name of a photographer incorrectly.
He is Mark Sadan.


Cool-Weather Care for Potted Plants
LEAD: HOUSE plants should be inside now.
Although October has some balmy days, plants that live their lives in pots should be not be out in them.
They need a few weeks of transition after their summer vacation.


Dorothy Hoyt Is Married
LEAD: Dr.
Dorothy M. Hoyt, a daughter of Mrs.
C.
Douglas Hoyt of Fair Haven, N.J., and the late Dr.
Hoyt, was married yesterday to Richard W. Rehm, the son of Mrs.
Wendell Rehm of Shrewsbury, N.J., and the late Mr.
Rehm, by the Rev.
George Willis Jr. at St.
George's by the River Episcopal Church in Rumson, N.J.


Aquino Proclaims Victory Over Captured Mutineer
LEAD: As the leader of an army mutiny on the southern island of Mindanao was brought under guard to the capital today, President Corazon C. Aquino proclaimed the failure of the rebellion as a victory for constitutional rule.


An Opera of - Gasp! - Old-Fashioned Family Values


Fashion: On the Street;   Cowabunga! Dressing Up Turtle-Style
LEAD: What does the up-to-the-moment 7-year-old wear these days?


Ms. Marsh Is Wed to S. G. Heaver Jr.
LEAD: Melissa Caroline Marsh, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Marsh of Marblehead, Mass., was married yesterday to Stephen Goodenow Heaver Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Heaver of Baltimore.
The Rev.
William M. Dunning, assisted by the Rev.
Lance A. B. Gifford, performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of St.


Data Update
LEAD:
VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
%Q%YAug. 90
Aug. 89
Change
New York
330.2
527.0
-37%
New Jersey
150.2
245.0
-39%
Connecticut
71.6
135.4
-47%
*4*(Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information)


Men's Style;   Bright Flights of Fancy
LEAD: A little, they say, goes a long way; but when color is the issue, a long way may not be quite far enough.
Or so it must have seemed to the handful of new-guard designers who alter the course of men's fashion each season.
When they showed their fall collections, those at the leading edge jolted observers with high-voltage colors, the likes of which are seldom seen on fashion runways.


Miss Rice Weds H. C. McDuff 3d
LEAD: Luanne Rice and Henry Charles McDuff 3d were married yesterday at their home in Niantic, Conn., by the Rev.
David W. Good, a Congregational minister.


Taking Care;   The New-Age Dentistry
LEAD: WHEN TODAY'S ADULTS WERE children, it was a popular pastime to portray what the city of the future would be like - air cars gliding serenely between strange-looking buildings towering over clean streets where vehicular traffic moved efficiently.
On a separate level, pedestrians would stroll unmolested by fumes, cars or criminals.


Aha! The Blue Jays' Bedeviler Is Really Sparky Anderson
LEAD: Sparky Anderson, who is a veteran of division winners in both leagues, thinks he might have the solution to the problems the Toronto Blue Jays have in not winning the American League East championship when they're supposed to win it.


Amy Freundlich Is to Wed in June
LEAD: The engagement of Amy Suzanne Freundlich to Mitchell Cole Sussis, a son of Irving Sussis and Lynn Sands, both of New York, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar F. Freundlich of West Orange, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.


Revival of 'Godspell' at Candlewood
LEAD: ''GODSPELL'' is passe.
Even as an evocation of a faddish, early 1970's free-form soft-rock variation on a Bible-based theme, the show, which has the Gospel of St.
Matthew as its source, is in need of salvation.


Why European Ads are More Amusing
LEAD: American visitors to Europe are often forcibly struck by the differences between European and American advertising.
European advertisements are thought to employ more original techniques.
Even more important, there is often a distinct difference in tone.
Advertisements in Europe seem to address consumers as intelligent people with minds of their own.


Katherine Ann Boyle Marries Thomas A. Sobolik
LEAD: Katherine Ann Boyle, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Boyle of Des Moines, was married yesterday to Thomas A. Sobolik, a son of Virginia E. Sobolik of Lake Ariel, Pa., and Donald E. Sobolik of Dingman's Ferry, Pa.
The Rev.
James Gilliom, a United Church of Christ Minister, officiated at the Plymouth Congregational Church in Des Moines.


House Sale Affected By Radon
LEAD: THE potential health risks posed by radon, a colorless, odorless gas that can collect in the home, may have become another item on the checklist of things that must be handled before a house sale is closed and the keys turned over.


For the Children's Sake, Resume Breastfeeding
LEAD: To the Editor:


New York, N.Y.
LEAD: To the Editor: As Andrew L. Yarrow tells us, ''The chief down side to the Empire State Building and World Trade Center observatories is the crowds . . .
On recent midweek summer visits, the ground-level wait for each building was 40 minutes'' (''Above It All,'' Travel, Sept. 9).
Tourists and New Yorkers alike put up with high prices and the threat of crime in order to enjoy the beauties and pleasures of the city.


Big, Beautiful and Endangered
LEAD: What weighs about six tons, stands roughly 12 feet high and has an appendage comprising 100,000 muscles that can hold two gallons of water and can detect odors five miles away?
You guessed it: the African elephant, the largest land mammal on earth.
These huge creatures, which can kill a man as effortlessly as a man can kill an insect, are the subject of ELEPHANTS OF AFRICA (Safari Press, P.O.


One Corner of the Serenissima
LEAD: The Venetian neighborhood that I think of as ''mine'' (foreigners are often arrogantly proprietory about Venice) is Dorsoduro, which begins at the foot of the Accademia bridge.
Long before the Accademia Gallery opens its doors at 9 in the morning and the first tourists begin to trickle over the bridge into the Campo della Carita, this part of Venice is pulsing with activity.


Chicago Journal;   100th Birthday Marked: Read All About It!
LEAD: Of all the tales of its first 100 years, few stories about Chicago's City News Bureau have been told as often and with as much relish as the one about the cub reporter who broke the news of Pearl Harbor.


Israel
LEAD: To the Editor: Debra Karp of White Plains asked about Jewish weddings in Israel (Q &amp;A, July 22).
Though the answer was technically correct, it did not cover the full gamut available.


Easing an Overhead Garage Door
LEAD: STRUGGLING with a balky overhead garage door is a nuisance; worse, it can lead to back strain or a pulled muscle.


IN SHORT/NONFICTION
LEAD:
COMPUTER ETHICS: Cautionary Tales and Ethical Dilemmas in Computing.
By Tom Forester and Perry Morrison. (MIT, $19.95.) Because computers have made their way into nearly every corner of our lives, the professionals who design computers may unwittingly possess as much control over our future as elected officials.


Dazzlers From Navajo Looms
LEAD: Navajo blankets - status symbols woven to warm and to dazzle - are among the world's most memorable textiles.
A selection of these boldly graphic tribal works appears in ''Art From the Navajo Loom: The William Randolph Hearst Collection,'' through December at the Textile Museum here.
The show is the most comprehensive exhibition of these 19th- and 20th-century artifacts to be held in the East in many years.


Rejects' Revenge
LEAD: In the heyday of the New York City club scene, menacing but chic bouncers would eye the crowd, using some mysterious inner logic to decide who was fashionable enough to get in.
In recent years the custom seems to have spread to Los Angeles, which prides itself on a more relaxed social atmosphere.
But some of the excluded are fighting back.


Votes in Congress;   Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
LEAD:
Senate
1.
Souter Confirmation: Vote to confirm David H. Souter as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.
$
1
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Y
Lieberman (D)
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
N
Lautenberg (D)
N
New York
D'Amato (R)
Y
Moynihan (D)
Y


Do 'Fitness' Programs Make You Less Fit?
LEAD: TO HEAR SOME ZEALOTS TALK, all you have to do to get fit is to make time for an exercise or sports regime.
But what about fitness programs that make you less fit, that cause injuries so painful that giving up your favorite sport may be the only way to cure them?


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: Forbes publishes annual listing of 400 wealthiest Americans.
New York Stock Exchange hosts session for Soviets on how to run a stock exchange.
TUESDAY: Deadline for employee group to obtain financing for $4.38 billion buyout of UAL.
WEDNESDAY: Greyhound Lines bankruptcy hearing.


Easing an Overhead Garage Door
LEAD: STRUGGLING with a balky overhead garage door is a nuisance; worse, it can lead to back strain or a pulled muscle.


College Football: Midwest;   Colorado Prevails On Its Final Play
LEAD: A backup quarterback, Charles Johnson, ran 1 yard for a touchdown on the final play - possibly on an extra down - as Colorado slipped by Missouri, 33-31, this afternoon.


A Soviet Bank Takes Up Capitalism
LEAD: From its base in the heart of London's financial district, a Soviet-owned bank that has never had to worry much about making money is trying to turn itself into a profitable institution by helping the Soviet Union become a capitalist country.


Review/Music;   Classical Crossover&lt;
LEAD: A grim evening seemed to lie ahead when the Frankfurter Kurorchester took the stage of the Great Hall at Cooper Union on Thursday evening for its United States debut.
For a concert that promised repertory ranging from Bach and Debussy to the Beatles and Tom Waits, four musicians appeared, the three men in white tie and tails.


Cool-Weather Care for Potted Plants
LEAD: HOUSE plants should be inside now.
Although October has some balmy days, plants that live their lives in pots should be not be out in them.
They need a few weeks of transition after their summer vacation.


For Some Vietnamese in U.S., War goes On
LEAD: Manh Nguyen, the manager of a Vietnamese television news program in San Jose, Calif., recently tried to organize a panel discussion on relations between Washington and Hanoi.
He found, to his disapppointment but not surprise, that no local Vietnamese would speak publicly in favor of normalization.


East End Avenue
LEAD: To the Editor:


Noted With Pleasure
LEAD:
A Fugue of Swans


Miss Fairchild, Student, to Wed
LEAD: Eileen Corroon Fairchild of Palm Beach, Fla., and Robert F. Fairchild of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Stephanie Boyd Fairchild to Roger Parkman Griswold Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Griswold of Irvington, N.Y.
A May wedding is planned.


An Age of Business Opportunity Dawns in East Germany
LEAD: To the Editor:


Penguins Top Capitals, 7-4


Results Plus
LEAD:
Tennis


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: It's a great thing to get back to the fundamental simplicities of the game, but the trouble is, they are not so simple.
Oh, yes, the simple themes that are taught to beginners are entirely valid for anyone - grandmasters and world champions included - but the path to applying them is fraught with complexity.


A-Fuel Rods Pose Problem at Indian Point 3 Plant
LEAD: Workers using a crane to open the nuclear-reactor vessel at the Indian Point 3 plant on Thursday accidentally lifted two bundles of highly radioactive fuel, and are not certain how to lower them again without damaging them.


IN SHORT/FOOTBALL
LEAD:
FRIDAY NIGHT LIGHTS: A Town, a Team, and a Dream.
By H. G. Bissinger. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) ''The idea had been rattling in my head since I was thirteen years old,'' H. G. Bissinger tells us in the preface to ''Friday Night Lights,'' ''the idea of high school sports keeping a town together, keeping it alive.


December Bridal For Miss Chorney
LEAD: December wedding plans for Jacqueline Eve Chorney and Matthew Miller, the son of Marianne Miller of Greenwich, Conn., and Tilden E. Miller of New York, have been made known by the future bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Chorney of Denver.


R. E. Mallozzi 3d Weds Miss Howland
LEAD: Elizabeth Marion Howland, a daughter of Dr.
Peter A. Howland of New York and Mrs.
Rushton W. Skakel of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Robert E. Mallozzi 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mallozzi Jr. of Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Mark A. Connolly officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Martin Hitchcock, at St.


Corrections
LEAD: An article last Sunday about shopping in Moscow misstated the Russian word for a foldable shopping bag used by Soviet citizens.
It is avoska.


Hong Kong Pushes First Direct Vote for Legislature
LEAD: The Hong Kong Government recently extended its six-week voter registration drive by four more weeks in an attempt to attract more interest in the first direct election of legislators in the British colony's 150-year-old history.


Cooper's Noble Indians Were Savages
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Life: Wisconsin;   Students Turn Out And Light Up At Drug-Law Rally
LEAD: Threats of a police crackdown did not stop many students of the University of Wisconsin at Madison from turning out - and some from lighting up - to protest marijuana laws on university and State Capitol grounds last Sunday.


Children's Books: Bookshelf
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


The Four Bikers of the Apocalypse
LEAD:
GOOD OMENS
The Nice and Accurate Prophecies of
Agnes Nutter, Witch.
By Neil Gaiman and
Terry Pratchett.
354 pp. New York:
Workman Publishing.
$18.95.


Fabric Treasures in London
LEAD: A corner of London long treasured as a source for decorative antiques has become a trove for 18th- and 19th-century printed furnishing fabrics, all reproduced from original antique scraps by the dealers who discovered them.


Managing;   The Benefit of Legal Advice
LEAD: When Larry Emmons needed a lawyer to help with the purchase of his home, he called an 800-number telephone hotline.
Referred to an attorney nearby, he got more than five hours of legal advice without ever seeing a bill.


Who Gets Fiscal Control of New York?
LEAD: Mounting concern over New York City's fiscal problems has prompted state and city leaders to start to jockey for control over the city's troubled finances.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International/3-23


Cambodian Dance: Grace and Tragedy
LEAD: Legend has it that Cambodia was born when a heavenly dancer, or apsara, named Mera made love with the hermit Kumpu.
Ever since, dance has been at the very core of Cambodian identity.
In the first cultural exchange between the United States and Cambodia since 1971, the war-scarred inheritors of this ancient tradition, the Classical Dance Company of Cambodia, will perform at the Joyce Theater Tuesday through


Fund Campaign for Soviet Jews in Israel Is Gaining
LEAD: The campaign to raise private American contributions for the resettlement of Soviet Jews in Israel, an effort that got off to a rocky start in January, has overcome earlier controversies and is well on the way to reaching its goal of $420 million by year's end.


Q and A
LEAD:
Sharing the Rent
Question: My family and I rent two bedrooms of a three-bedroom apartment that is one full floor of a private home.
The other bedroom was leased to a single woman.
We paid $475 of the $750-a-month rent and she paid the rest.
Recently she moved out, leaving the third bedroom empty.


Teamsters, Angry at Dinkins, Authorize Strike Against City
LEAD: In a fierce rebuke to the New York City administration he helped elect, Barry Feinstein, the municipal labor leader, yesterday won the sweeping endorsement of his shop stewards for a possible strike by 12,000 city workers, and he denounced the Dinkins administration for what he called inconsistent and amateurish labor negotiations.


A Tenor Who Helped to Set The Standard
LEAD: Between them, Enrico Caruso (1873-1921) and Beniamino Gigli (1890-1957) set the standard for operatic tenors in the mainstream repertory in the first half of this century.
Their recorded legacy endures; later this year, there will be a comprehensive Caruso collection from RCA on compact disks, while EMI has already released a bountiful package to celebrate the Gigli centennial.


Baghdad's U.S. Hostages: Escape Plans and Anger
LEAD: Tom Graham, a Texan who is one of about 1,000 American men held as hostages in Iraq and Kuwait, broke from his dishwashing chores here the other day to ponder the issue that dominates almost all conversations among Westerners in Iraq: a possible United States attack.


A Haitian Mayor's Credo: No Work, No Pay
LEAD: Squatters can sometimes be seen bathing in rain puddles as flies swarm around mountains of refuse rotting under the sun in this capital's downtown streets.


Mosquitoes' Threat Disrupting Florida Nightlife
LEAD: Phyllis Capece, a nurse, forfeited four hours' pay and showed up at the game with her beeper.
Her husband, Pete, left his athletic store, Active Feet, three hours early.
Matt Parris, a college freshman in Orlando, cut his English class and made the 90-mile drive home in record time.
Mary Ann Driskell was stuck: she had to babysit.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
HIGHLAND FLING


Youths on Rampage in Berlin
LEAD: Youths, some masked, went on a rampage early today, smashing shop windows and vandalizing cars in Berlin, the police said.
At least 60 youths rampaged through four districts in west Berlin, a police spokesman said.


Evening Hours;   Opening-Night Galas And a Birthday
LEAD: The Museum of Modern Art unveiled an exhibition, ''High and Low Modern Art and Popular Culture,'' on Wednesday at a black-tie dinner.
That night, Steuben Glass held a preview of its Elizabethan Collection at its Fifth Avenue store, as a benefit for the Shakespeare Globe Center U.S.A.
And Charivari celebrated the expansion of its store at 18 West 57th Street.


12 Die in Religious Riots in Southern India
LEAD: At least 12 people were killed today, six of them shot by the police, as religious riots broke out in southern India, officials said.


Courting Capriati
LEAD: While tennis's 14-year-old phenom, Jennifer Capriati, was off helping the former First Lady Nancy Reagan with her Just Say No anti-drug campaign this weekend in Los Angeles, the sport's establishment was busy figuring out how not to say no to Capriati, who is in some danger of not qualifying for the Virginia Slims Championships next month at Madison Square Garden Only the top 16 female players in the world receive invitations to the event.


The Learning Disabled: Challenge to Identify
LEAD: ANN ''noticed something'' about the way her 5-year-old was learning basic concepts.


Pastimes: Gardening;   Some Plants Can Be Aggressive
LEAD: Beware of certain plants.
They may look superb.
But then they start to grow to the point where they become nuisances.
Instead of enjoying this exuberance, gardeners wonder how to get rid of them.


Cleaner Charcoal Grilling Sought in California
LEAD: Air quality officials in the Los Angeles area have ordered the makers of charcoal lighter fluid to devise a cleaner-burning product by 1992 or face having the barbecue fuel banned.


College Football: South;   Auburn Survives a Scare
LEAD: Auburn avoided a huge upset today when Jim Von Wyl kicked his third field goal of the day, a 30-yarder, with three seconds remaining to beat Louisiana Tech, 16-14.


Works in Progress;   Back to Their Sunday Best
LEAD: Since 1986, Yves Boiret, the Inspector General of French Historical Monuments, has been directing the restoration of the great Cathedral Notre Dame de Reims.
Though the general structure is, as 700-year-old edifices go, fundamentally stable, old age, weather and pollution have combined to ravage many of the nearly 500 sculptures - ranging from 15-foot representations of kings to small stone faces - that adorn the exterior.


Arts Presentation Grants for 6 Colleges
LEAD: The Association of Performing Arts Presenters has awarded nearly $600,000 to performing arts organizations at six American colleges and universities under the Lila WallaceReader's Digest Arts Partners Program.
These are the recipients: Buffalo State College in Buffalo, for a modern-dance suite with choreography, music and storytelling by American


Europe for Less: It Can Be Done;   Madrid
LEAD: Madrid no longer offers the bargains it used to.
A booming economy, membership in the European Community and the strong peseta have pushed prices up to levels comparable to Paris or London.
Gone are the luxurious four-star accommodations (out of a Government scale of five stars) for around $100 a night, as they could three or four years ago.


Europe for Less: It Can Be Done
LEAD: By now, everyone must know that Europe is expensive.
Americans coming home with empty pockets from European vacations this summer have spread the word.
Everything, truly everything, is cheaper in the United States, they report, so be warned.
Those heading for Europe this fall have a choice: spend more than you expect or enjoy a more modest vacation.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Fairfield Gets a Retail-Movie Complex
LEAD: For almost 70 years the enormous Bullard Company foundry on Black Rock Turnpike in the Town of Fairfield clanged with the production of industrial machinery.


SPIES &amp; THRILLERS
LEAD: Ever since Homer we have been getting sea stories, and here are several new ones, starting with THE COFFIN SHIP by Peter Tonkin (Crown, $19.95).
It's about a supertanker that ferries oil out of the Persian Gulf.
A coffin ship is one that sets out on a long voyage in an unseaworthy condition.
The ship is called


Thinly Disguised Hostility
LEAD: To the Editor:


Paris
LEAD: Paris seems in a hurry to prevail as Europe's cultural capital.
Whoever said that the city had turned into a backwater of the arts should be having second thoughts.
Glossier and more opulent than ever, Paris has been dedicating more money and more space to the latest or finest in sculpture, furniture, painting and photography.


Palestinians Wait to Swallow Up Jordan
LEAD: To the Editor:


Drawing the Past Is Like Describing an Elephant


Residential Auctions More Popular
LEAD: RESIDENTIAL real-estate auctions, traditionally perceived as the last resort of desperate developers, are fast becoming an acceptable, sometimes preferable sales strategy, real-estate experts say.


Irene Dougherty, Engineer, Marries in Baltimore
LEAD: Irene Marie Dougherty, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Louis J. Dougherty of Woodcliff Lake, N.J., was married yesterday to Stephen Mark Knott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Knott of Baltimore.
The groom's uncle, the Rev.
Francis X. Knott, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Loyola College Alumni Chapel in


Review/Dance;   A Soviet Folk Troupe With Bounce of Its Own
LEAD: Lezginka, a company from Daghestan in the Soviet Union, is something new and welcome on the folk-ensemble horizon.
It may, initially, resemble more familiar dance companies from Georgia, where fierce men with cartridges on their chests strut on their toes and the women, braids to their waists, float gracefully across the floor.


Cloth Diapers Don't Help the Environment
LEAD: In a recent letter to the New Jersey editor entitled ''A Cup of Coffee, an Idea on Recycling,''the author suggested that an appropriate environmental alternative to a plastic foam coffee cup is a ceramic mug and that a canvas or string grocery bag is better than a brown paper bag.


In Domestic Soviet Trade, Russia Has the Most Chips
LEAD: Casting himself as headmaster to the overexcited students of Capitalism 101, Mikhail S. Gorbachev has ordered a recess while the experts decide how Soviet markets are to be liberated and when.
But in the view of many Western analysts, class discipline cannot be restored for long.


Design;   Risky Business
LEAD: As showrooms are being readied for the international Home Furnishings Market in High Point, N.C., talk in the industry centers around the poor housing market, slow sales in retailing and the uncertain economy in general. ''Most manufacturers are running scared because business has been so bad,'' says Carl Levine, senior vice president of home furnishings at Bloomingdale's.


The Hidden Pep in America's Economy
LEAD: In their determination to sharply cut the budget deficit during the next five years, Congressional leaders and the President may be ignoring or overlooking important strengths in the American economy that over the long term could lessen the need for such drastic medicine.


Indulging in Hearty German Favorites
LEAD: COOL autumn breezes are blowing aside old summer standbys like seafood salads and grilled vegetables, whetting appetites for stick-to-the-ribs fare.


SOVIET H-BOMB LAG IN 1950'S REPORTED
LEAD: A cornerstone of conservative cold-war ideology has crumbled with the publication of two Soviet scientific papers showing that the Soviet Union was not the first country to explode a hydrogen bomb small enough to be flown to a target.


Baseball;   Trade Worked Out For Myers
LEAD: ''How are things back in New York?'' Randy Myers asked a reporter at the National League playoff.


Capitalist Queen
LEAD: I wouldn't stay in a hotel run by Communists; why should you?
If only Leona Helmsley could have seen the two dowdy Leningrad hotels operated by the party for its own V.I.P.'s, she undoubtedly would have made some changes.
One can only imagine what she would have said about the traditionally surly service meted out by employees who didn't have to worry much about getting tipped or fired.


Through West Indian Eyes
LEAD: ''When I was a child I liked to read.
I loved 'Jane Eyre' especially and read it over and over.
I didn't know anyone else who liked to read except my mother, and it got me in a lot of trouble because it made me into a thief and a liar.
I stole books, and I stole money to buy them. . . .
Books brought me the greatest satisfaction.


Easing an Overhead Garage Door
LEAD: STRUGGLING with a balky overhead garage door is a nuisance; worse, it can lead to back strain or a pulled muscle.


The man Who Kept the Secret
LEAD:
From the OSS to the CIA.
By Joseph E. Persico.
Illustrated. 601 pp. New York: Viking. $24.95.


Singing Crew Members Enliven a Pumpkin Sail
LEAD: PUMPKINS, pops and pianists are in the concert spotlight this week.
Edibles will come ashore with the singing crew members of the good ship Clearwater when the yearly Pumpkin Sail and Festival begins next Sunday at Riverfront Park in Rensselaer, N.Y., the sloop thereafter making its gradual way downriver to its final stop at New York City's Jefferson Pier, with several nearby stops in between.


Overacheiver - and Learning to Deal With It, Man
LEAD: Not long after ''The Simpsons'' became the television sensation of the year and Bart Simpson T-shirts began turning up across America, Matt Groening, the syndicated cartoonist and the creator of the show, received an affectionate letter from Mrs.
Hoover, his first-grade teacher back in Portland, Ore.


Sports People;   Coaches Honored
LEAD: Three men, including Herb Brooks, the coach of the United States team that won the gold medal in the 1980 Winter Olympics, have been inducted into the United States Olympic Hall of Fame in Eveleth, Minn.
The others were Willard Ikola, a longtime high school coach in Edina, Minn., who played goal for the United States' silver-medal winner in the 1956 Olympics, and Connie Pleban, who coached the United States team to a silver medal in the 1952 Olympics.


Miss Roggemann, A Teacher, Weds
LEAD: Rebecca Lynne Roggemann, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Roggemann of Weston, Mass., was married yesterday to Adam Lee Werblow, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick W. Werblow of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
Howard Fish, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Castle Hill estate in Ipswich,


Ex-Rulers of Kuwait to Meet With Exiles
LEAD: The Crown Prince of Kuwait said today that his Government-in-exile would confer next week with more than 450 prominent Kuwaiti exiles on alternatives for their Iraqi-occupied country.


New York, N.Y.
LEAD: To the Editor: When my wife and I and our two small children (2 and 4) visited New York in April, we didn't stay in any of the hotels you listed (''Mid-Priced Perches,'' Travel, Sept. 9) but in a bed and breakfast apartment on the ground floor of a lovely town house on East 89th Street, a stone's throw from Gracie Mansion.


A Scandal Of Artificial Insemination
LEAD: EVERY YEAR MORE THAN 80,000 women are inseminated artificially with sperm from men they do not know.
In their attempt to have a baby, they may unknowingly be putting themselves at risk of contracting infectious diseases, such as AIDS and hepatitis, and the baby at risk of genetic defects.


Mountain Biking High
LEAD: SHERI TAYLOR SILENTLY pedals her mountain bike up a steep road carved into the side of a sandstone cliff.
Long afternoon shadows play across the jagged red and green rocks that line her path, like sentinels in a forbidden planet landscape.
She is deep inside the canyonlands of southeastern Utah.
At the top of the climb and hardly out of breath,


Mary Alison Pyne Is Married on L.I.
LEAD: Mary Alison Pyne, a daughter of Eben W. Pyne and the late Hilda Holloway Pyne of Old Westbury, L.I., was married yesterday to Donald Bruce McNaughton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce A. McNaughton of Setauket, L.I.
The Rev.
Charles G. Newbery performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown in Locust Valley, L


Amsterdam's Late-Night Party
LEAD: They ask: What does the Netherlands have that America doesn't have?
I say: wooden shoes.
They say: We've stopped wearing lumber.
I say: silver skates and red shoes and little mermaids and ugly ducklings and boys with their fingers in the dikes.
They wearily shake their heads.
Shrugging, I say: O.K., then I give up.


WHY AMERICA FAILS ITS CHILDREN
LEAD: Why is America failing its children?
Children can't vote.
Children don't have PAC's.
Children don't have the money to lobby.
Neither do the parents of poor children.
Remember Michael S. Dukakis?
The first national candidate to mention ''maternal and child health'' and ''adequate prenatal care'' on national television, to my knowledge.


Question Of the Week;   Who Is the Best Coach In Pro Football?
LEAD: John Robinson of the Los Angeles Rams.
After excelling at U.S.C., he made the difficult transition to coaching pro athletes.
He has adapted his style to his teams' strengths: a running game when he had Eric Dickerson, a passing game now with Jim Everett.
ANDREA GUROWSKI
Rochester


College Football;   Miami Romps in Ground Attack
LEAD: Threatened with the possibility of their worst start since 1979, the Hurricanes of the University of Miami underwent a transformation this afternoon.
The school that won three national championships in the 1980's by turning the forward pass into an art form today resorted to an approach that has worked in other places since the Stone


Ashley Merriam Engaged to Lieut. James Pyatt
LEAD: The engagement of Ashley Jean Merriam to Second Lieut.
James Lloyd Pyatt of the Army has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Brower A. Merriam of Stamford, Conn.
A January wedding is planned.


Alan Polley Wed To Ms. Meshirer
LEAD: Randie S. Meshirer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton S. Meshirer of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., was married yesterday to Alan S. Polley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley H. Polley of Palm Springs, Calif.
The Rev.
Ann F. Tyndall, a Unitarian minister, officiated at Tarrytown House in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Man Is Charged in Arson at Act-Up Office
LEAD: A man with two prior arrests for arson was charged with setting the fire that caused more than $100,000 damage to the building where the gay-rights group, Act-Up or Aids Coalition to Unleash Power, has its headquarters.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: Those who feel that choosing a color film is already much too complicated will find no solace in Agfa's recent announcement of a new family of color-print films.
Dubbed the Triad system, the three Afgacolor films offer photographers the ability to match color intensity to subject matter.


Yet Another Deadline in the Battle for UAL
LEAD: Only ''Friday the 13th'' has produced more nasty sequels than the battle over UAL Inc., the parent of United Airlines.
The airline is faring well, but speculators are suffering as UAL stock careens toward its next deadline - on Tuesday.


Early Signs of Air Fare Wars Within Europe
LEAD: A New York investment banker, Hugo Heath, says he hasn't recovered yet from his flight from Amsterdam to Copenhagen last month.
While the flight wasn't extraordinary, the price tag certainly was.
Mr.
Heath paid $700 round trip for the one-hour flight - $150 more than his discount round-trip ticket from the United States to Europe.


Q and A
LEAD:
New York Apartments


How It Feels to Cease to Be
LEAD:
HOURGLASS
By Danilo Kis.
Translated by Ralph Manheim.
274 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.95.


Review/Pop;   Heavy Metal From Seattle
LEAD: Heavy metal, the mastodon of rock styles, has entered a spurt of evolution: splitting into subgenres, annexing bits of other styles, looping back to its past, reshuffling new and old.
Alice in Chains, a four-man band from Seattle that performed on Wednesday night at the Cat Club, is part of a wave of


Foreclosures of All Sizes Are Mounting
LEAD: AMONG Westchester properties that have recently been forced into foreclosure are a $1 million house in Harrison, one costing $1.5 million in Scarsdale, a 1,850-dwelling condominium project in Yonkers that is $28 million in arrears, and a $75,000 house in Yonkers.


Men Who Do Well
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lori Risa Banner Is Married
LEAD: Lori Risa Banner, a daughter of Seymour W. Banner of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., and the late Adele Banner, was married last evening at the Union League Club in New York to Barry David Kupferberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Siegmund Kupferberg of Sands Point, L.I.
Rabbis Edward Schecter and Donna Berman officiated.


Cuban Communist Party Is Moving to Slash Its Bureaucracy by Half
LEAD: Cuba's ruling Communist Party has moved to streamline its bloated bureaucracy, slashing national and provincial party posts by 50 percent and reorganizing the powerful Central Committee Secretariat.


Russian Soul Gets a New Voice at the Keyboard
LEAD: Word of mouth in music may not be as fast as a computer chip, but it is a scientific fact that when an extraordinary talent appears, the entire musical world on the five continents seems to know about it in a matter of days.
Reviews come out.
One musician tells another, who tells his friends.
Thus it was with Yevgeny Kissin, the young Russian pianist who made his New York debut with the New York Philharmonic on Sept.


Sex Asks Its Due at Vatican Synod on Priests
LEAD: Despite admonitions from church leaders that the topic was out of bounds, the troublesome theme of sex and the priesthood has insistently emerged in the first days of a monthlong synod of Roman Catholic bishops that began here this week.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Potatoes, Then a Bit Of Chicken
LEAD: Those who prefer meat to potatoes may find this meal a little backward.
It calls for only about five ounces of chicken per person, but with a hefty serving of sweet potatoes and apples.


Zambian Police Block Forming of New Party
LEAD: Riot police wielding batons and shields prevented pro-democracy campaigners from meeting today to establish Zambia's first legal opposition party in 17 years.


Technology;   Kodak's Hybrid: Compact Disks and Photographic Film
LEAD: The Eastman Kodak Company is concerned that the all-electronic still cameras being introduced by Japanese consumer electronics companies could seriously erode its domination of the $15 billion film and photofinishing industry.
It is rushing to bring out a system that uses traditional photographic film and allows consumers to retain their current cameras but also convert pictures to video images that can be manipulated electronically.


David L. Hurwitz, 62, Lawyer in Manhattan
LEAD: David Lyman Hurwitz, a lawyer and partner in the Manhattan firm of Hurwitz &amp; Vail, died on Friday in New York Hospital.
He was 62 years old and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.


Sports People;   Bonner Sidelined
LEAD: The Sacramento Kings, who signed four first-round draft choices, will start the season with only three.
Anthony Bonner, the last of the four picks, and No. 23 over all, has a stress fracture in his left foot and will be out for about six weeks.


Winslow Ames, Writer And Museum Head, 83
LEAD: Winslow Ames, an art historian who wrote widely about drawings, architectural history, decorative arts and genealogy, died on Wednesday at the South County Hospital in Wakefield, R.I.
He was 83 years old and lived in Saunderstown, R.I.


Review/Film Festival;   A Schoolgirl Seeks Her Nation's Past
LEAD: In the opening sequence of Michael Verhoeven's satiric German comedy, ''The Nasty Girl'' (''Das Schreckliche Madchen''), it's made clear that the good citizens of Pfilzing aren't keen about examining the past.


Cult Leader's Son Sentenced
LEAD: Damon Lundgren, the 19-year-old son of a cult leader, was sentenced Friday to a minimum 120 years in prison for the slayings of four members of a family, killings he attributed to his father.
Judge Paul H. Mitrovich of Lake County Common Pleas Court ordered the teen-ager to serve consecutive sentences for his role in the kidnapping and shooting deaths of Dennis Avery and Mr.


Correction
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Sept. 30 about the candidates in the Third Congressional District reversed their positions on the death penalty.
Rosa L. DeLauro, the Democrat, said she opposed capital punishment except for drug-ring leaders who commit capital crimes.
Thomas Scott, the Republican, said he supported a death penalty for people convicted of mass murder, murder of police officers and firefighters, rape-murder, arson-murder or murder for hire, and for drug-ring leaders who murder law-enforcement officers, try to murder them or order their murder to obstruct an investig


Lynn Loftus Wed To F. S. Elliott 3d
LEAD: Lynn Margaret Loftus, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas P. Loftus of New York, was married yesterday to Frederic Sutton Elliott 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliott Jr. of Rumson, N.J.
The Rev.
Walter F. Modrys performed the ceremony at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New York.


Acting as the State's 'Efficiency Expert'
LEAD: STANLEY C. VAN NESS is no stranger to state government or to the complexities of the machinery that propels it.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
Matuure Cheers


NASA's Failures End As Discovery Lifts Off
LEAD: Ending a string of frustrating failures, NASA succeeded in sending the shuttle Discovery into space, and the orbiter's crew later dispatched the spacecraft Ulysses on a mission that will take it around Jupiter on its way to explore the poles of the Sun.


For Cuomo, Just Winning Won't Help A 1992 Bid
LEAD: With the election only a month away, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York explained his strategy in a stage whisperrecently: ''Shhh.
Don't say a word.
Let them talk.''


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: Columbus Day - the real Columbus Day - comes on Friday, a reminder that Columbus Year is only two years away: 1992 marks the 500th anniversary of the arrival of the Nina, the Pinta and the Santa Maria in the Western Hemisphere.


The Astronauts of the Discovery Mission
LEAD:
Richard N. Richards
Mission Commander


Florie Seery Weds Marc Bryan-Brown
LEAD: Florence Ranney Seery, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Seery of Huntington Station, L.I., was married yesterday at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in New York to Marc Bryan-Brown, a son of Deirdre Bryan-Brown of Shillingford, Oxfordshire, England, and Dr.
Christopher Bryan-Brown of New York.


Dr. Havens Weds Dr. P. J. Weiden
LEAD: Dr.
Jennifer Falk Havens and Dr.
Peter Joseph Weiden, psychiatrists, were married yesterday at the Riverdale Presbyterian Church in Riverdale, the Bronx, by the Rev.
George Todd.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of Nancy T. Gerlach of Philadelphia and Dr.
Leston Havens of Cambridge, Mass.


Infant Cousin of Mandela Killed by a Grenade
LEAD: An infant cousin of Nelson Mandela was killed and her parents were wounded in an attack on their home in Soweto early this morning.


Harry J. Halperin, 90, A Lawyer in New York
LEAD: Harry J. Halperin, a prominent New York lawyer for 66 years, died on Friday night at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 90 years old.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK: Next Week;   Who Should Win M.V.P., Cy Young Awards?
LEAD: Replies for publication should be no more than 300 words and addressed to Sunday Sports Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Letters should include the writer's name, address and telephone number.
We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.


East End Avenue
LEAD: To the Editor:


Prosecutors for Unified Germany Seize Former Communist Officials
LEAD: Prosecutors in the united Germany appear to be moving quickly to bring to justice leading figures of the Communist Government of the former East Germany.


Bringing Him Back Alive
LEAD:
OMEROS
By Derek Walcott.
325 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.


Question Of the Week;   Who Is the Best Coach In Pro Football?
LEAD: Not only are the Raiders undefeated this season but they are also unbeaten at the Coliseum since Coach Art Shell took over.
He is doing the most with his talent, and has revived an old Raider trademark of rejuvenating players that are over the hill.
MOSHE SZLECHTER
Brooklyn


Leslie Deborah Middlebrook, Singer Is Married to Lee Moore, an Actor
LEAD: Leslie Deborah Middlebrook, a singer and actress, and Lee Moore, an actor, were married yesterday at the First Congregational Church in Washington, Conn., by the Rev.
Richard C. Sears, a United Church of Christ minister.
The bride is a daughter of Georgianna S. Middlebrook of Washington, Conn., and the late Robert W.


Campus Life: Colgate;   Trustees Adopt Stricter Rules For Fraternities
LEAD: Trustees of Colgate University have approved major changes in residential life, including alcohol-free fraternity and sorority rushing.


Beyond Venice by Vaporetto
LEAD: That Venice is sinking is not news.
But that it seemed to be in danger of being left high and dry came as a surprise to many when, earlier this year, pictures of forlorn-looking, waterless canals hit the world's front pages.
In reality a drop in water level during the winter is as much a seasonal event as the acqua alta (high water), which on occasion floods the Piazza San Marco and other low-lying squares and streets.


Athletes Need Some Privacy
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Shelley Lynn Sporleder Marries Michael J. Carr
LEAD: Shelley Lynn Sporleder, a daughter of Joan D. Francis of Solana Beach, Calif., and Edward Sporleder of Atlanta, was married yesterday to Michael John Carr, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard T. Carr of Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
The Rev.
Canon Dan Gerrard and the Rev.
Charles S. Foss officiated at St.
James by-the-Sea Episcopal Church in La Jolla,


Review;   Review/Dance Graham On Symbol And Myth
LEAD: Since Martha Graham made her choreographic debut in 1926, she has created works in an extraordinary variety of styles, each of which has amazed some dancegoers and annoyed others.
The Martha Graham Dance Company offered examples of several of these styles on Friday night at the City Center.


Don't Blame the Rules, Learn the Game
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Agency Loses Boston Deportation Case
LEAD: Two years after dozens of Hispanic people were rounded up at a racetrack, lawyers say they have won a major victory over government officials who tried to deport the people without proving they were illegal aliens.


The Executive Computer;   Fresh Momentum for Unix, but Still Hurdles to Clear
LEAD: When Steven P. Jobs founded Next Computer Inc. four years ago, part of his premise was that the Unix operating system would dominate the office desktop computing market in the 1990's much as the Microsoft Corporation's DOS operating system governed the personal computer market in the last decade.


To Fight Guns, Call 202-225-5604
LEAD: ''Go to your telephone.
Call this number. . . .'' That's Mayor David Dinkins's advice to New Yorkers who want to help him fight crime in the city.
The number rings in the office of House Speaker Thomas Foley, who can diminish lethal gunplay by pushing the House to act on two gun bills.


In a Decade, Government Has Closed Down 3 Times
LEAD: Federal operations have shut down three times in the last decade because of Congress's failures to pass an operating budget for a new fiscal year.
The previous closures lasted a day or less before the budget impasse was resolved.


Writer on Handicapped Skips the 'Middle'
LEAD: In reply to Jane Goldblatt's ''What the Handicapped Learn in School'' [Letters, Sept. 16] :


Europe for Less: It Can Be Done;   London
LEAD: Americans visiting London might understandably feel like bit players in a movie called ''The Incredible Shrinking Dollar.'' But amid the daunting prices are bargains that provide interesting twists to the plot.


New York, N.Y.
LEAD: To the Editor: The article on lodging in New York City neglected to mention a significant option for those on limited budgets: the 92d Street Y's de Hirsch Residence.
Available to college-age students for stays of a few weeks to a few years, it offers safe, inexpensive lodging.


The Songs of Therapy
LEAD: IT IS TIME FOR MUSIC IN PATTI Wagner Tinder's classroom on the leafy campus of the New York Institute for Special Education in the Bronx.
It's time for the ''hunga-bunga-bunga'' song, a thumping blues melody that Tinder made up a week earlier when two students barreled in shouting ''hunga-bunga-bunga'' over and over.


Rushing MarkIn a 73-18 Rout
LEAD: Stacey Robinson set a National Collegiate Athletic Association quarterback rushing record with 308 yards and scored five touchdowns in leading Northern Illinois (3-3) to a 73-18 romp over Fresno State.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
DOG SHOW


Romania Decides to Dismiss Officials in Weak Industries
LEAD: The Government has decided to fire thousands of managers of failing state-owned industries, Economics Minister Eugen Dijmarescu said today.


Suzanne L. Siegel Wed in Scarsdale
LEAD: Suzanne Lisa Siegel, the daughter of Charlotte and Alan H. Siegel of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Gary Burton Zenkel, a son of Lois and Bruce Zenkel of Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Jack Stern Jr. performed the ceremony, assisted by his son Rabbi David Stern and Cantor Stephen Merkel, at the Westchester Reform Temple in


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Lord help the President when he has to make that decision.
But he should know, as far as


Venture Capital's Assault on The Genetic Code


Russell Davis Is Wed To Patricia S. Lippe
LEAD: Patricia Stuyvesant Lippe and Russell Davis were married yesterday at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
The Revs.
Diane Berke and Jon Mundy, ministers of the Interfaith Fellowship, officiated.


What Did One Comic Say to the Other? Read On
LEAD: Veterans of acclaimed one-man shows in New York, Jackie Mason and Calvin Trillin will be back on stage this week and next for fresh runs in new solo performances.
On Thursday, Mr.
Trillin, the author, raconteur, writer for The New Yorker and columnist for The Nation, will open Off Broadway in ''Calvin Trillin's Words, No Music'' at the American Place Theater on 46th Street.


Pro Hockey;   Devils Setting Out to Take Early Stand
LEAD: John McMullen, the Devils' owner, spent lavishly last season to bring three defensemen from the Soviet Union to New Jersey and had high expectations for his team.
But, to his dismay, the Devils were eliminated in the first round of the playoffs.


Lonesome Jane
LEAD:
BUFFALO GIRLS
By Larry McMurtry.
351 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster.
$19.95.


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
New Tours In Hawaii To View Lava


Pride of the Dukakises
LEAD: To the Editor:


On Ill Health and Air Pollution
LEAD: AT THE FAIRVIEW LAKE Y.M.C.A. camp near the Delaware Water Gap in rural New Jersey, children come from the New York suburbs for a few weeks of fresh air and exercise.
They rise early to swim, ride horses, learn archery and play soccer and softball.
The camp is many miles from any industry, and there might seem no healthier place for youths to spend a summer.


Sports of the Times;   Can Joe Mac Find Happiness in the Sun?
LEAD: So Joe McIlvaine is leaving New York to become the general manager in the alleged good vibrations of San Diego.
He says he is tired of the personal backbiting and wanted his children to grow up in a better environment than suburban New York.


Photographs of Lives Caught in Poverty
LEAD: WHEN last seen by the reviewer, Helen M. Stummer's black-and-white prints of slum life were hanging alongside another show, of manipulated color photography.
It was a case of reality's putting art to shame for its frivolity.


IN SHORT/FOOTBALL
LEAD:
BUILDING A CHAMPION: On Football and the Making of the 49ers.


Rioting Laborers Disrupt Osaka In Protests over Police Corruption
LEAD: Police officers fought with rioting workers in this western Japanese city late today as protests over what the workers describe as police corruption entered a fifth day.


Focus: Lake Tahoe;   Resorts' Residential Listings Growing
LEAD: ''Whenever the Bay area gets a cold we get pneumonia,'' observed Doug Rosner, owner-broker of Century 21 South Tahoe Realty.


Bringing Him Back Alive
LEAD:
THE ILIAD
By Homer.
Translated by Robert Fagles.
Introduction and notes by Bernard Knox.
Maps. 683 pp. New York:
Viking. $35.


No Headline
LEAD: Ms. Storin Weds Craig Summerhill


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ended Sept. 22


Manhattan Days, Prairie Days
LEAD:
THE LIGHT POSSESSED
By Alan Cheuse.
325 pp. Salt Lake City:
Peregrine Smith Books/Gibbs Smith. $19.95.


Sipping and Snacking at Cozy Taverns
LEAD: In the 15th century, Venetian dining - backed by the enormous wealth of the city's bankers and spice traders - had a reputation for excellence and sophistication.
Nowadays, except for some famous and expensive restaurants and a few moderately priced trattorias, the food is often disappointing.


Asian Games;   Chinese Athletes Stun Their Foes
LEAD: For a country that has lately grown accustomed to the agony of defeat, the Asian Games under way here have been a rare joy.
China has rebounded from its disappointing performance in the 1988 Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, to overwhelm nearly all comers and stack up an enormous number of gold medals.


The Cure for the Deficit Isn't More Taxes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Excerpts From President's News Conference
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference today in front of the White House.
OPENING STATEMENT


Postings: North Side of East 96th;   A 421a Qualifier
LEAD: New York City developers who complain about their problems in getting construction loans these days could borrow a page from the Relatedfinancing for its new rental project by making a silk purse out of what some builders would have called a sow's ear of a location: the north side of East 96th Street.


Correction
LEAD: A front-page chart in this section last Sunday with an article about the global economy carried an incorrect scale for the Nikkei index of 225 stocks.
The figure 10,500 should have been 15,000; 20,500 should have been 25,000; 30,500 should have been 35,000.


The Differing Eyes of the Beholders
LEAD: Somewhere some First Amendment expert must be wondering what would happen if the rap group 2 Live Crew adorned its next album cover with a Robert Mapplethorpe photograph.


A German Film Director Muses On His Country's Past and Future
LEAD: ''I am so happy just to imagine it,'' said the German film director Michael Verhoeven, musing about the reunification revelry that was sweeping his country last week.
He'd had to miss the celebrations in Berlin so he could be present at the New York Film Festival showing of his new dark comedy, ''The Nasty Girl,'' which tells some hard truths about the


Tokyo Stocks Up at Midday
LEAD: Tokyo stocks were sharply higher at midday today on optimism over the yen's strength and the easing of short-term interest rates.
Investors were buying up high-technology blue-chip stocks, as well as and interest-sensitive large capital issues in moderate trading, brokers said.


Markets Closed For Holidays
LEAD: Most domestic markets for Treasury bills, notes and bonds will be closed today in observance of the Columbus Day holiday.
But commodity, stock and corporate bond markets will be open.
In Canada, all financial markets will be closed for a national holiday.


U.N. Plan: Best Hope for Cambodia
LEAD: The agreement by the U.N.
Security Council's five permanent members on a framework for a settlement of the Cambodian conflict, and the plan's adoption by the four Cambodian factions, does not mean the millenium has arrived in that benighted country.
It does mean that, at long last, there are grounds for genuine hope that the Khmer Rouge can be prevented from returning to power and that the


Review/Dance;   Mark Morris Interprets Handel
LEAD: ''L'Allegro, il Penseroso ed il Moderato,'' a glorious outpouring of dance invention and humanistic imagery to the Handel score of the same title, is the best thing Mark Morris has done in a relatively short career as a choreographer.


AFTER A SUCCESS, NASA AIMS TO COPE
LEAD: As the space shuttle Discovery orbits Earth and the Ulysses spacecraft speeds away on its solar research mission, space agency officials are trying to cope with careless workmanship and the unsolved fuel leaks that have grounded another shuttle, not to mention the uncertainties of the Government's budget dispute.


Soccer Balls Sustain Pakistan Town
LEAD: On a warm day, when the rains have cleared the air, many boys might be out kicking around a soccer ball.
In Sialkot, where sporting goods are a cottage industry, Shahid Amanatulli and many of his friends sit in the shade with a master craftsman learning how to stitch a ball.


Miss Silverstein Weds Ronald Charles Gelb
LEAD: Nanci Ann Silverstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Silverstein of Sands Point, L.I., was married in New York yesterday to Ronald Charles Gelb, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur Gelb of Lexington, Mass., by Rabbis Martin Rozenberg and Cary D. Yales at the Central Synagogue.


New Eastern Commercials Drop Executive's Star Role
LEAD: EASTERN AIRLINES begins a campaign this week that will not feature Martin R. Shugrue Jr., the court-appointed trustee who has been the star of its advertising for the last four months.


The Soviet Conservative Is a Communist
LEAD: To the Editor:


Holly Ann Bernson Weds James Matthew Bogin
LEAD: Holly Ann Bernson, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Eugene Bernson of Norwalk, Conn., was married at Temple Shalom there yesterday to James Matthew Bogin, a son of Merle G. Bogin of New York and Bruce M. Bogin of St.
Cyprien, France.
Rabbi Larry J. Halpern and Cantor Mark Lipson officiated.


Jennifer Mackenzie, a Therapist, Weds
LEAD: Jennifer Evans Mackenzie, the daughter of Elizabeth Diggs of New York and Chatham, N.Y., and Will Mackenzie of Los Angeles, was married yesterday to Charles Loughridge Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Loughridge of Livingston, Mont.
The Rev.
Charles A. Baldwin, a Congregational minister, officiated at the bride's mother's home in


Reports Are in Conflict on a Hostage Release
LEAD: Contradicting Western and Syrian assessments, Lebanese newspapers reported over the weekend that the release of some Western hostages may be imminent.
One newspaper said today that an Anglican Church envoy held in Lebanon, Terry Waite, would be freed ''in the next few days.''


Grade Schools Need Math Specialists
LEAD: To the Editor:


Free-Market Lessons Of Chile's 'Chicago Boys'
LEAD: After facing critics and doubters for years, the economists and others who made Chile's free-market revolution are now being sought by many countries to share their experiences and advise on topics like privatization, debt management and fighting poverty.


Bills Hand Raiders Their First Loss
LEAD: The Buffalo Bills returned a blocked kick for a touchdown in the fourth quarter for the second consecutive week, highlighting a 24-point rally for a 38-24 victory tonight over the previously unbeaten Los Angeles Raiders.


2 Knicks Aiming to Get Along
LEAD: FROM the moment they became teammates last season, they were thrust into an awkward situation that neither man wanted.


Theus Taking Aim At Shooting Role
LEAD: Every basketball team needs a designated shooter, a player who can make a shot in a critical stage of the game as coolly as he might sink it in his own driveway.


Scott Matheson, 61, Ex-Governor And Leading Democrat in Utah
LEAD: Scott M. Matheson, Governor of Idaho from 1977 to 1985, died yesterday at the University of Utah Health Sciences Center in Salt Lake City.
He was 61 years old and lived in Salt Lake City.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on Friday showing tax provisions in the proposed Federal budget misstated the estimate of changes in revenue in 1991 because of proposed revisions affecting foreign-owned companies.
It is estimated that revenue would increase less than $50 million, not decline $5 billion..


CONGRESS LEADERS SCRAMBLE TO FORGE NEW BUDGET DEAL IN MOVE TO BREAK DEADLOCK
LEAD: Congressional leaders cobbled a new deficit-reduction plan together Sunday and took it before their colleagues in a scramble to end the budget deadlock and get the Federal Government back in full operation by the start of the workweek on Tuesday.


Corrections
LEAD: A report last Monday about the marriage of Carolyn E. McIntyre to Michael D. D. White misstated the site.
It was Water's Edge at the East River Yacht Club in Long Island City, Queens.


3 Are Rescued by Firefighters From Brooklyn House Blaze
LEAD: Firefighters rescued a 2-year-old child, his mother and his grandmother from a burning house in Brooklyn yesterday, fire officials said.


Police Plan Puts Safety In Numbers
LEAD: A request from Mayor David N. Dinkins to his Police Commissioner two months ago seemed simple: Rather than just agreeing to hire 5,000 more police officers, as many crime-stung New Yorkers and politicians were demanding, why not survey the department to see what was really needed?


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Becker Defeats Edberg: Boris Becker used a powerful serve and the memory of his last meeting with Stefan Edberg to defeat the world's top-ranked player, 7-6, 6-4, 6-4, yesterday in the final of the Australian indoor championship in Sydney.
The second-seeded Becker, who lost to Edberg in the Wimbledon final this year, won $130,000.


Mormons Speak Out on Abortion and Drugs
LEAD: Mormon Church leaders today spoke out against abortion, homosexuality and drug addiction as ''morally and spiritually dangerous.''


Nutrasweet Decision
LEAD: Canada's Competition Tribunal ruled last week that the Nutrasweet Company, a wholly owned Canadian subsidiary of the Monsanto Company, could no longer demand that its customers buy all their aspartame exclusively from Nutrasweet.
Competitors, including Tosoh Canada Ltd. of Japan, had complained that Nutrasweet had a monopoly of 95 percent of the artificial sweetener used in soft drinks and diet food in Canada.


Outdoors: Bracing To Hunt Turkeys
LEAD: FALL turkey hunting begins in portions of New York State today and the Department of Environmental Conservation in the state is predicting that this season's harvest will be above last fall's when 3,125 of the birds were shot.


Hammering Tennis Balls
LEAD: A basic tool, the hammer, has inspired the Wilson Sporting Goods Company to design a tennis racquet that will work in a similar way.
By shifting weight from the shaft and throat into the upper frame, Wilson has produced a design that it says will deliver more power than other racquets.


Officials in New Haven Clash on Yale Tax Deal
LEAD: City aldermen are heading toward a showdown with Mayor John C. Daniels over an agreement with Yale University that the Mayor hailed as historic but they call a giveaway.


Unser Takes Title Despite a Crash
LEAD: Al Unser Jr. was waiting in the treatment room at Easton (Pa.) Hospital today when he officially clinched his first CART PPG Cup Indy-car championship.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Oct. 7, 1990:
MONDAY
Mercury Fin Co
Travelers Corp
TUESDAY
Arco Chem Co
ITT Corp
Diversified Ener Minn
Procter &amp; Gamble Co
Hillenbrand Inds Inc
Weyerhaeuser Co
WEDNESDAY
AAR Corp
Super Valu Stores Inc
Bard CR Inc
Tokheim Corp
CBI Inds Inc
Walgreen Co
CBS Inc
Woolworth Corp


Miss Flinn Weds Paul B. Queally
LEAD: Anne-Marie Flinn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Flinn of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Paul Brian Queally, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis X. Queally of Jupiter, Fla.
Msgr.
John Barry officiated at St.
Aloysius Roman Catholic Church.


Aeroflot and Eastern Talk
LEAD: Aeroflot, the Soviet national airline, is negotiating with Eastern Airlines to buy or lease 13 wide-body jets in a deal that could be worth more than $150 million.


Florence Griffith Joyner Has Some Great Expectations
LEAD: DESPITE that teary retirement announcement she made more than 18 months ago, Florence Griffth Joyner is pondering a return to track and field after the birth of her first child next month and some experience with the joys of motherhood.


Elizabeth Heffernan Weds
LEAD: Elizabeth Heffernan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Heffernan of Wyckoff, N.J., was married yesterday to Lee Mark Fassler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Fassler of New York.
Judge Marilyn C. Clark of New Jersey Superior Court officiated at the Stony Hill Inn in Hackensack, N.J.
Mrs.
Fassler, 24 years old, and her husband, 24, are 1988 graduates of the University of Rhode Island.


Business Scene;   A Lot of Spending In a Weak Period
LEAD: THE economy is growing weaker.
The Northeast is in recession.
Housing prices are off everywhere.
Unemployment is up.
Household income is slipping and retail sales are sluggish.
But in all this gloom, a few sectors of the economy still hold their own, and chief among them is capital spending.


Chronicle
LEAD: BOBBY SHORTis writing a book, with the encouragement of GERALDINE STUTZ. ''It's a history, with pictures, of the great black women who left America and went to Europe and became great stars,'' Mr.
Short said in an interview. ''I've always been fascinated by these glamorous ladies - Adelaide Hall, Valaida Snow, Elisabeth Welch and of course Josephine Baker.


Books of The Times;   Odds, Luck and Bare-Faced Lying
LEAD:
Big Deal
A Year as a Professional Poker Player
By Anthony Holden
306 pages. Viking. $19.95.


Magazine Publishers Re-energizing in Arizona
LEAD: Determinedly flaunting their optimism while soft-pedaling fears about the health of their industry, the nation's magazine publishers are assembling for the American Magazine Conference at this luxurious resort where the McDowell Mountains meet the Sonoran Desert.


A Little Racial Justice in the House
LEAD: The House has taken a modest step to combat racism in the administration of the death penalty.
It has enlarged its rabid election-year crime bill to include the Racial Justice Act, to allow judges in capital cases to consider whether death sentencing in their jurisdictions displays an unacceptable racial pattern.


Review/Television;   When Boys Will, of Course, Be Boys
LEAD: Suppose you're a male teen-ager and aspire to be Big Man in High School.
Helpful tips can be found on at least two new prime-time series, NBC's ''Ferris Bueller'' (Mondays at 8:30 P.M.) and Fox's ''Parker Lewis Can't Lose'' (Sundays at 7:30 P.M.).


Officials' Convictions Vacated
LEAD: A Federal judge has reversed the corruption convictions of Mayor Nicholas Cicco and Councilman Vincent Tabbachino of Guttenberg.
Judge John Lifland of Federal District Court overturned on Friday all felony charges in the 12-count indictments against the men.
Mr.
Cicco and Mr.
Tabbachino were accused of forcing municipal employees to work for the Democratic organization in Guttenberg to keep their jobs.


Anchorage Journal;   Alaska Gasps Over Sale Of Oil Cleanup Leftovers
LEAD: Alaskans are bracing for the biggest shopping event in state history: a multimillion-dollar sale of 50 acres of surplus gear left over from the cleanup of the Exxon Valdez oil spill.


Wendi Lowenstein Weds Eric Jacobson
LEAD: Wendi Melissa Lowenstein, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel Lowenstein of Deal, N.J., was married yesterday to Eric Jacobson, the son of Malcolm Jacobson of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Arline Jacobson.
Rabbi Sidney Schulman performed the ceremony at the Hollywood Golf Club in Deal.


Census Appeal in Peril in Western New York
LEAD: A botched job by a planning agency hired to do a census recount may cost 52 western New York municipalities the chance to gain millions of dollars in Federal aid, officials said.


J. Murray Mitchell, Climatologist Who Foresaw Warming Peril, 62
LEAD: J. Murray Mitchell Jr., a leading government climatologist who warned for years of increasing evidence of global warming and other human influences on the climate, died at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington on Friday after a long illness.
He was 62 years old and lived in McLean, Va.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary on Wednesday about Peter Herman Adler, a conductor, omitted a survivor.
He is Mr.
Adler's nephew, Henry Basch of Princeton, N.J.
In some copies the headline misstated Mr.
Adler's age; it was 91.


The Curse of Who?
LEAD: A COCKEYED optimist in Fenway Park on Saturday night carried a hand-printed red-and-white sign (the colors of his beloved Bosox) through the aisles in the box seats. ''Every 72 Years - Like Clockwork,'' the sign read.


Sumitomo Chief Quits Over Scandal
LEAD: A simmering stock scandal reached the highest levels of the financial industry here today, with the chairman of the giant Sumitomo Bank announcing he would resign to take responsibility after an official of his bank was implicated in a plan to provide illegal loans to a corporate raider.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about New York City's recycling program misstated the volume of waste the city expects to recycle by mid-1994.
It is one million tons a year.


Smith's Running Paces Cowboys
LEAD: Emmitt Smith, a rookie, rushed for 121 yards and scored on a fourth-quarter 14-yard run, rallying the Dallas Cowboys to a 14-10 victory today over the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.


It Wasn't Your Average October Weekend


Penguins' Barrage Deflates Devils, 7-4
LEAD: The Devils fell completely apart in the late stages of the third period tonight, allowing four goals in 2 minutes 27 seconds, including three goals in 75 seconds.


When You Believe In Lies
LEAD: If you want to know why we have a paralyzing budget crisis, you have to go back to the golden days of Reaganism.
That was the early 1980's, when the smiling President was telling us that we could cut taxes and still have it all.


Alison Friedman Weds D.A. Miller
LEAD: Alison Jennifer Friedman and Ens.
Daniel Alexander Miller of the Navy were married last evening at Temple Emanu-el in New York.
Rabbis Richard S. Chapin and David M. Posner officiated.Mrs.
Miller is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel S. Friedman of New York.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.


U.S. Sales Contingent on New Debt Ceiling
LEAD: Treasury financings this holiday-shortened week are confined to tomorrow's auction of three- and six-month bills and Wednesday's auction of seven-year notes.


Who Will Enforce Nursing Home Rules?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ms. Zelman Wed To D.J. Friedman
LEAD: Elizabeth S. Zelman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Zelman of Edgewater, N.J., was married yesterday to David J. Friedman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
S.
William Friedman of Rye Brook, N.Y.
Cantor Theodore Aronson officiated at Temple Sharey Tefilo-Israel in South Orange, N.J.


Metro Matters;   Slicing Columbus Into Two Pieces: Person and Event
LEAD: ''It is a great pity,'' The New York Times lamented on Sept. 15, 1892, ''that the weather yesterday should have interfered with the pageant projected for the laying of the cornerstone of the monument to Columbus.
Our Italian citizens are not very numerous in comparison, but they know more about getting up processions than all the rest of us put together, whatever our origin may be.


Examination Gloves Don't Fully Protect Against AIDS Virus
LEAD: To the Editor:


Computers Bring Higher Quality to Forgers' Work
LEAD: Counterfeiters and forgers are taking advantage of the growing ability of personal computers and printers to produce sophisticated-looking documents, security experts and banking officials say.


Review/Theater;   Billie Holiday In the Last Months Of Her Life
LEAD: Among show-business legends who have inspired posthumous stage and film impersonations, Billie Holiday has proved to be one of the most stubbornly inimitable.
Perhaps because her life and her art embodied such extreme contradictions - she was simultaneously regal and coarse, strong and victimized - those who have chosen to portray the singer have usually emphasized only one aspect of a complex personality.


Reporter's Notebook;   Debate Brings Delay and Disruption
LEAD: The Government is shut down.
The election is four weeks away.
The President is enraged about the budget.
The Congressional elevator operators are disgruntled about working overtime.
The weather is unseasonably pleasant.


Florida Police Are Criticized For Tactics Using Blackface
LEAD: An undercover drug operation in which white detectives wore blackface makeup resulted in 30 arrests but was branded as racist by black community leaders.


Hail To Ginglock
LEAD: Do not be embarrassed by the closing of the Statue of Liberty for a little while; she will understand.


Papers on Murder Suspect Lead to 2d Body
LEAD: A Florida man charged in the shooting death of a West Side bar patron was carrying identification belonging to another man, whom the police discovered shot to death in his Brooklyn apartment on Saturday night, a police spokesman said.


Asbestos Payments Frozen
LEAD: A Federal judge in New York has again extended a freeze on payments to asbestos disease victims by the Manville trust pending completion of a court-ordered reorganization.


Venezuela Improving Oil Quality
LEAD: Stacks of pipes near well-drilling rigs here point to a transformation in oil production in Venezuela, the nation with the largest proven oil reserves in the Americas.


Jane Forster Weds Howard Berman
LEAD: Jane E. Forster, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Forster of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Howard Berman, a son of Marion Berman of Woodland Hills, Calif., and the late Seymour Berman.
Rabbi Bruce Cole officiated at the couple's summer home in Quogue, L.I.


Matching Passion of a Defender to the Cool of a Challenger
LEAD: It will be a clash between two playing styles that recur so often in chess history that they seem imbedded in the very essence of the game: the impassioned, combinative attacker who thrives on complexity pitted against the cool connoisseur of delicate positional relationships.


Bronx Man Charged in 4 Armed Robberies
LEAD: A man was charged on Saturday with committing four robberies at gunpoint within half an hour on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, the police said.


Iraqi Pullout? Election in Kuwait? Prospects Worry Hawks
LEAD: Administration officials and foreign diplomats have been discussing what to do if President Saddam Hussein of Iraq astounds policy planners by suddenly reversing course and agrees to withdraw his forces from Kuwait, Arab and European diplomats say.


Miss Travers Is Wed to R. A. Masinter
LEAD: Constance Lynn Travers, a daughter of Mrs.
W.
Rodman Smythe and Arthur H. Travers, both of Boulder, Colo., was married yesterday in California to Robert Andrew Masinter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar M. Masinter of White Plains.
Judge John A. Flaherty of Superior Court in Santa Clara County officiated at the Thomas Fogarty Winery in Portola


School Gets Police Unit After Bias-Tied Attack
LEAD: A special police patrol will be placed at Junior High School 194 in Whitestone, Queens this week after a racial attack last week in which a group of white students carrying baseball bats assaulted five black students at the school, the police said yesterday.


Higbee Officers Shifted In Streamlining Move
LEAD: In a move to eliminate a layer of middle management, the owners of the Higbee Company, the Cleveland chain of 14 department stores, have announced that Jim B. Wilson has been named chairman and H. Gene Nau president.
Three other positions were eliminated.


Chronicle
LEAD: PIERRE CARDIN, the French designer who became famous by putting his name on just about everything including automobiles, furniture and clocks, is getting a full-scale retrospective at London's Victoria and Albert Museum.
It covers his clothing design from 1950 to 1990.
The show opens Wednesday and runs until Jan.


New Winds for a Trumpeter From Cuba
LEAD: After years of tugging on the short leash of the Cuban Government before finally defecting to the United States in July, Arturo Sandoval, the trumpeter who was until recently his country's pre-eminent jazz artist, is a man in a great hurry.


Klaus Tilmes, Economist, Weds Ms. Heslin, Intern
LEAD: Sheila Nora Heslin, a daughter of Margaret C. Heslin of Mahopac, N.Y., and the late Eugene F. Heslin, was married yesterday in Mahopac to Klaus Tilmes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hans-Walter Tilmes of St.
Tonis, Germany.
The Rev.
Joseph P. Tierney officiated at St.
John the Evangelist Roman Catholic Church.


4 Editors Appointed at Times
LEAD: Four appointments to senior editing positions at The New York Times have been announced by Max Frankel, the paper's executive editor.


Chronicle
LEAD: The only piece of artwork the actress KATHARINE HEPBURN ever donated for charity failed to bring a high enough bid to sell at an auction in New Haven to benefit a 24-hour wildlife shelter.


Jack Klein Wed To Ms. Goldman
LEAD: Carol Landow Goldman, an insurance broker, and Jack Klein, a retired executive, were married yesterday by Rabbi David Widom at Temple Emanuel in Great Neck, L.I.
The bride is the daughter of Frances L. Landow of Far Rockaway, Queens, and the late Harry Archie Landow.
The bridegroom is a son of the late Mr.


A Russian Holds Forth On Reform
LEAD: Stanislav S. Shatalin, one of the principal authors of the celebrated and contentious ''500 days plan'' to rescue the Soviet Union from economic decline, briefly broke away from high-level meetings in Washington and New York today to revert to his old profession.


Notre Dame Loss May Shuffle Polls
LEAD: Top-ranked Notre Dame suffered one of the most painful upset losses in its prestigious football history Saturday to a determined Stanford team that had lost three of its first four games.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators this week.
MONDAY
None
Tuesday
Consumer Borrowing
Aug.
Wednesday
None
Thursday
Producer Prices
Sept.
Retail Sales
Sept.


He's the One for Autographs
LEAD: THERE'S nothing like the prospect of rubbing elbows with a gaggle of sports legends to prompt well-heeled sports fans to open their wallets or whip out their corporate checkbooks.


Go for Wand Zips to 4 3/4-Length Victory
LEAD: Go for Wand confirmed her place in racing history by turning in the fastest nine furlongs on the dirt ever recorded by a filly while winning the $279,500 Beldame Stakes yesterday at Belmont Park.


Bed Adds to Dinkins Woes
LEAD: If the head that wears the crown of New York City lies uneasy these days, it does so under a new Federal-style headboard that adorns Mayor David N. Dinkins's bed.


Nurse Infected by AIDS Is Embraced by Town
LEAD: When Barbara Fassbinder received the crushing news that she had contracted the AIDS virus in a nursing accident, one of her first concerns was how friends and neighbors here in rural northeastern Iowa might take it.


New Proposal's Lack of Detail Leaves Room to Compromise
LEAD: The bipartisan budget plan that Congressional leaders outlined to rank-and-file lawmakers today would mean less severe cuts in the Medicare program than the plan rejected by the House early Friday.
It would also leave room for a deal in which taxes on capital gains would be cut in exchange for raising income tax rates for the wealthy.


Dinkins Joins With Deputies For More Cuts
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins and his top deputies and aides huddled at Gracie Mansion yesterday, discussing New York City's deepening fiscal problems and how best to explain them to the public after a troubled week of seemingly conflicting signals from City Hall.


ISRAEL'S CITIZENS RECEIVE GAS MASKS
LEAD: The Israeli military today began handing out the first gas masks and chemical-warfare defense kits that it plans to distribute to each of Israel's 4.5 million citizens in the next two months.


Metromedia Purchase
LEAD: The Orion Pictures Corporation, a New York-based producer and distributor of motion pictures, said Friday that the Metromedia Company had exercised warrants to buy almost 4.2 million Orion common shares at $6 each.
The $25.9 million purchase gives Metromedia, based in Secaucus, N.J., a 23.8 percent stake in Orion.


Review/Music;   Mahler and Schumann By the Concertgebouw
LEAD: The last visit to Carnegie Hall by the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam with its former music director, Bernard Haitink, five years ago, produced two performances that stick in the memory as imposing wholes, grand conceptions polished to the finest detail: Berlioz's ''Symphonie Fantastique'' and Mahler's Seventh Symphony.


Polish-Americans Have Their Day on Fifth Avenue


Tourists Lose Weekend, Others Their Patience
LEAD: The Government took a second day of leave from fiscal normality today, disrupting the holiday weekend for tourists and probably costing more than was saved by shutting down for lack of a budget.


David Kies Weds Anne H. Monteith
LEAD: Anne H. Monteith, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Monteith of Philadelphia, was married there yesterday to David M. Kies, the son of the late Lillian Kies and the late Saul Kies, both of New York.
He is the stepson of Sarah A. Kies of New York.
Rabbi Robert A. Alper performed the ceremony at the Sugar Loaf Estate in


Miss Hakula Weds W. H. Williams 3d
LEAD: Marion Elsie Hakula, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
George Hakula of East Dennis, Mass., was married yesterday to Dr.
Wilfred Hamilton Williams 3d, the son of Mrs.
Edward G. King Jr. of New Orleans, and the late Wilfred H. Williams Jr. of Minneapolis.
The Rev.
Jonathan A. Ahnquist officiated at the First Lutheran Church in West Barnstable,


International Growth
LEAD: THE institution of two international events involving amateur golfers from the metropolitan area this fall reflects the game's growth and popularity among amateurs in the United States and overseas.


EXECUTIVES CHANGES
LEAD: *
California Amplifier Inc., Camarillo, Calif., a producer of microwave amplifiers for satellite communication antenna systems, named Michael R. Ferron chief financial officer.


Gertrude Karp Is Married
LEAD: Gertrude Karp and Morton Gladstone were married yesterday at the Water Club in New York by Rabbi Amy Ehrlich.
The bride, who was a widow, is a real-estate investor.
She is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Dochter of New York.
The bridegroom, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Gladstone of New York, is the founder and a vice president of Sales Direction, a division of Kraft Hardware in New York.


Four Agencies Selected For Olympics Campaign
LEAD: NBC and the Cablevision Systems Corporation selected four agencies to handle the advertising and promotion for the estimated $40 million 1992 Olympics pay-per-view campaign.


Bhutto's Trial Becomes Main Issue in Election
LEAD: In a country with problems of runaway population growth, environmental destruction, the abuse of women, child labor and a foundering economy, the principal issue in the national election campaign is none of these, but rather whether Benazir Bhutto is guilty of the Government's charges against her.


Karen Moscou and Andrew Ansel Are Married
LEAD: Karen Beth Moscou, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph J. Moscou of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Andrew Marc Ansel, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert D. Ansel of Oakland, Calif.
Rabbi Jack Stern Jr. performed the ceremony at the Westchester Reform Temple.


CONGRESS PRESSING COLLEGES TO GIVE FIGURES ON CRIMES
LEAD: Congress is nearing passage of a law that would require colleges and universities to tell prospective students and their parents the graduation rates and crime statistics on their campuses.


Sheik Rashid of Dubai, Emirates' Co-Founder
LEAD: Sheik Rashid bin Said al-Maktum, co-founder of the United Arab Emirates and ruler of Dubai, died today, the state television announced.
Reference works say he was born in 1914, but a family member said he was 84 years old.


Jets Let the Dolphins Get Away
LEAD: Not so long ago, the Jets and Dolphins produced games that turned defensive players into helpless pursuers and forced scoreboards to register the rising numbers at the pace of a pinball machine.
But today, the decisive moments had as much to do with stalled drives and important defensive plays.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Israelis Get Gas Masks
Israel's military began handing out the gas masks and chemical-warfare defense kits that it plans to distribute to each of Israel's 4.5 million citizens in the next two months.
Page A6.
Fiscal Huddle in New York
Mayor David N. Dinkins and several of his top deputies and aides met at Gracie Mansion in hope of finding a way to articulate the city's deepening budget problems.


Question Box
LEAD:
Yankee Series Foes
Q.
Are there any National League teams that have never lost a World Series to the Yankees?
A.
Only the ones that have never played them, such as the Mets, San Diego, Houston, Montreal and Atlanta, the last three of which have never played in a World Series at all.
When the Yankees began their stretch of 33 American League pennants in 61 years from 1921 through 1981, the National League had eight franchises, and each one eventually suffered at least one Series defeat to the Yankees, sometimes even after moving to another city.


Winslow Ames, Writer And Museum Head, 83
LEAD: Winslow Ames, an art historian who wrote widely about drawings, architectural history, decorative arts and genealogy, died on Wednesday at the South County Hospital in Wakefield, R.I.
He was 83 years old and lived in Saunderstown, R.I.


Broadway and Chess World: It's Not Just Another Opening
LEAD: Broadway's latest production opens today with no actors, no script and a $100 top ticket price.
If all goes well, the audience will sit in silence for five hours watching two men brood at a table over action so subtle that most patrons will have to catch it on giant-screen monitors and wear earphones to hear piped-in experts explain it all.


Financing Of UAL Bid Hits Snag
LEAD: The unions seeking to buy the parent of United Airlines said yesterday that they had failed to persuade enough banks to finance their bid, forcing them to present a bid with less cash than the $2 billion they had sought.


Bridge
LEAD: A tournament played three weeks ago in Port Chester, N.Y., was either the smallest or the biggest in its category, according to the way you look at it.
With just 29 tables in play in two days it was the smallest regional ever played, but it broke new ground: it was restricted to junior players, age 25 and under.


Candidates in California Clash In Exchange Over Governorship
LEAD: The two major candidates for governor clashed sharply in their first debate tonight, saying California was a troubled state in need of new leadership but offering different prescriptions for the future.


Socialists Win Austrian Elections
LEAD: The governing Socialist Party won the Austrian parliamentary elections today.
Its conservative partner, the People's Party, lost sharply but is being invited to continue in the coalition.


Crime Can't Be Worse; Business Can't Be Better
LEAD: Before Mary Fiedorek moved into the five-story brownstone she bought on the Upper West Side of Manhattan last winter, she had iron grilles installed on every window, including two skylights.


Corrections
LEAD: The Advertising column of Business Day on Thursday, about the Duke University library's advertising archives, described them incorrectly.
The J. Walter Thompson Archive is separate from other materials, including the collection being donated by D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles.
The column also misstated the purpose of a $100,000 gift from the J.


Barriers Are Seen to Reviving Nuclear Industry
LEAD: Experts say many changes will be needed to revive the withering nuclear industry and that the number of changes necessary is growing.


ECONOMIC PULSE/The Industrial Midwest    A special report;   Midwest's Heartbeat Still Heard In the Steady Hum of Factories
LEAD: In the bleak winter of 1982-83, one of every four workers in this aging industrial city was out of work, and Rockford had the country's highest unemployment rate.
Like other factory cities across the Midwest, crippled by competition from foreign producers of steel and machine tools and automobiles,


Bengals Dispute: It's Curtains
LEAD: Sam Wyche said here today that he had fought a fight he believed in, that it had been an expensive fight and a lonely one, too.
He said his intent was never to keep female reporters out of the Cincinnati Bengals' locker room, but instead was to devise an alternative way for them to do their jobs without naked athletes strolling in front of them.


Pressure and Success On the Rise at Virginia
LEAD: THE Saturday before - that never-to-be-forgotten afternoon when the University of Virginia began a one-game winning streak over Clemson after 29 consecutive defeats - goal posts had tumbled down at Thomas Jefferson's University.


Ms. Morrow Wed To T. A. Spitzer
LEAD: Elena Janice Morrow, a daughter of Judith and Leon Morrow of Jericho, L.I., was married last evening to Theodore Alexander Spitzer, the son of Nessa and William Spitzer of Chevy Chase, Md., by Cantor Susan Roemer at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.


Y. Ping Sun Wed To David Leebron
LEAD: Y. Ping Sun, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Yonggen Sun of Shanghai, was married yesterday to David W. Leebron, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman D. Leebron of Narberth, Pa.
Rabbi Elliot J. Holin performed the ceremony at Prospect House in Princeton, N.J.


Carnival Cruise's Chief Adds Chairman's Title
LEAD: Ted Arison, an immigrant from Israel who founded Carnival Cruise Lines Inc. in 1974 with one ship, is turning over the title of chairman to his son, Micky, 41 years old, the company's president and chief executive.


Cigarette Makers Try To Brake a Slide
LEAD: Here in tobacco country, the notion that Washington is almost certain to raise Federal taxes on cigarettes has some people smiling.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
COMPANIES
United Airlines' unions said they had failed to persuade enough banks to finance their bid for the airline's parent company, forcing them to present a bid with less cash than the $2 billion they had sought. [Page D1.]
Ford and the United Automobile Workers union reached a tentative wage agreement that covers 100,000 workers.


Cabinet Changes in Libya
LEAD: Libya's Prime Minister and Foreign Minister were replaced today in a major Cabinet shuffle attributed to a people's conference meeting west of the capital, Tripoli.
The official Libyan press agency reported that Abu Said Omar Bourda replaced Omar al-Montasser as Prime Minister.
Mr.
Montasser was named Planning and Economy Minister.


Inez Pagnotta Is Married
LEAD: Dr.
Inez Lilla Pagnotta, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gaetano Pagnotta of Brooklyn, was married yesterday at Blessed Sacrament Roman Catholic Church in New York to Dr.
Andrew Leonard Macina Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Macina of Great Neck, L.I.
The Rev.
Leonard F. Badia officiated.
The bride, who is keeping her name, graduated from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and Albany Medical College.


Approve DDI, DDC
LEAD: To the Editor:


FINANCE BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Black Hole in Television;   Nielsen's 'People Meter' Has Engendered A Revolution by Showing a Fall in Viewers
LEAD: Like Galileo's observation that the earth revolves around the sun, the A. C. Nielsen Company's report of an unexpectedly sharp drop in the national television audience last winter has altered the accepted view of reality.
And like the telescope Galileo used, a new instrument - the ''people meter'' - provided the new information.


Facing Their Own Recession, Regional Stages Tighten Belts
LEAD: At the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven, they've shortened their rehearsal periods, cut down their casts and dropped their play-reading and seminar series.


Fifth Account Lost by Chiat
LEAD: Chiat/Day/Mojo in New York suffered another blow Friday when it lost the Royal Caribbean Cruise Ltd. account after a two-month review.
This is the agency's fifth major loss this year.


Islanders Heading Home With a Victory
LEAD: With five days off before their home opener next Saturday night, the Islanders didn't want to return from a three-game road trip with an 0-3 record to meditate upon during a week of practice.
And they played their best game of the season tonight against the Chicago Blackhawks, a good team that had taken the ice with a 2-0 record and a loud, capacity crowd urging it on.


No Paradox Exists
LEAD: To the Editor:


Europeans Near Pact With Japan
LEAD: The European Community's executive branch is close to reaching an agreement with Tokyo to restrict Japanese car imports for five years, but Europe's auto makers are battling to scuttle the accord because they think it is not nearly tough enough.


Jennifer Cunningham Weds Eric Schneiderman
LEAD: Jennifer Edith Cunningham, the daughter of Janice P. Cunningham of Middletown, Conn., and the late P. Jerome Cunningham, was married yesterday to Eric Tradd Schneiderman, the son of Abigail Heyward of Los Angeles and Irwin Schneiderman of New York.
Justice Felice K. Shea of State Supreme Court in Manhattan performed the ceremony at the Columns in New


Prescription for Growth: Books on Health
LEAD: As the cold and flu season approaches, many book buyers may seek relief in the ''Mayo Clinic Family Health Book.''


At Muir Woods, Ire for Lawmakers Amid Awe for Redwoods
LEAD: Tacked on a barricade at an empty parking lot at a national park just north of here was a sign reading: ''Muir Woods is closed for lack of a budget.''


Robbery Suspect Kills Himself in a Bellevue Unit
LEAD: A robbery suspect waiting for treatment in Bellevue Hospital Center's emergency room on Saturday grabbed a revolver from his police guard and killed himself after waving the gun at doctors and patients, the police said.


Seoul Ousts 2 Top Aides For Spying on Civilians
LEAD: President Roh Tae Woo dismissed his Defense Minister and head of military counterintelligence today following allegations that the armed forces have been illegally spying on prominent civilians.


University Links Its Future To a New Face in Hartford
LEAD: Administrators at the University of Connecticut well remember the euphoria of Husky fever that swept through the campus and much of the state last spring as the men's basketball team clinched its first-ever Big East championship.
It was just about the same time that the janitorial staff stopped cleaning most buildings because of state budget cutbacks.


Shlomo Freifeld, Rabbi, 66
LEAD: Rabbi Shlomo Freifeld, dean of the Sh'or Yoshuv Institute of Jewish Studies in Far Rockaway, Queens, died on Saturday at his home in Far Rockaway.
He was 66 years old.


Ivies Overpowered By Patriot League
LEAD: When Ivy League officials, including the eight university presidents, encouraged the founding of the Colonial League in 1984, they hardly intended to create a monster.


Soybean Meal to Soviets
LEAD: The Soviet Union has bought an additional 205,000 metric tons of United States soybean meal under a long-term grain agreement, the Agriculture Department said Friday.
It was the second meal order last week, with 150,000 tons announced Wednesday.
Officials said both orders are for delivery through Dec.


Family, TV, Pancakes: Giant Enjoys a Week Off
LEAD: Bart Oates generally works weekends.
He has been the Giants' starting center for their last 84 nonstrike games.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-7
South Korea's defense minister and a top general were dismissed.
The general's command had been accused of involvement in the surveillance of politicians and other civilians.
Page A7


Accounts
LEAD: *
Fujisankei Communications International Inc., New York, to Deutsch, New York for the Ultima Exodus and Ultima Quest video games accounts.
The total budget is $2.5 million.


Number of Inmates in U.S. Reaches Record
LEAD: The number of inmates in state and Federal prisons rose 42,862 in the first half of 1990 as the nation's prisoner population reached a record 755,425, the Justice Department said today.


Amy R. Forbes and Andrew D. Murr Are Married
LEAD: Amy Ruth Forbes, a lawyer, and Andrew David Murr, a Newsweek correspondent, both in Los Angeles, were married last evening at the Music Center of Los Angeles.
Judge Dorothy W. Nelson of the United States Court of Appeals in Los Angeles performed the ceremony.


Chronicle
LEAD: The team from ''Adam Smith's Money World'' - the public television business program - has returned from a month in the Soviet Union, where they filmed an hourlong special.
GEORGE J. W. GOODMAN, a.k.a.
Adam Smith, said that his team used Soviet crews and equipment and that in exchange the Soviets got 78 tapes of old ''Money Worlds'' to be broadcast on prime Soviet time beginning Nov.


A Budget Solution Is Expected
LEAD: Beyond the political theater over the Federal budget lies one stark deadline for the credit markets: the United States Government will be in default on its debt obligations if a budget accord is not reached by Thursday.


Rocking, Rolling, Raking It In
LEAD: WITH a client list that has included Joe Montana, Joe McIntyre, Larry Bird, Donnie Wahlberg, Carl Yastrzemski, Jordan Knight, Vinny Testaverde, Danny Wood, Doug Flutie and Jonathan Knight, it would seem that Bob Woolf will represent just about anybody.


Ford and Auto Union Reach Contract Agreement
LEAD: The United Automobile Workers union and the Ford Motor Company reached a tentative labor agreement today covering nearly 100,000 workers in the No. 2 auto maker's operations in the United States.


Wendy Wolff, a Law Student, Marries Frederick Robert Paprin, a Publisher
LEAD: Wendy Jane Wolff, a law student, and Frederick Robert Paprin, the publisher of The News in Wyckoff, N.J., were married yesterday in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
The Rev.
Donald W. Kimmick, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Charles Lippman conducted the ecumenical ceremony at the Beach Point Club.The bride, who is keeping her name, is the daughter of Mr.


Once Again, Networks Face A Fall Without a New Hit
LEAD: THE networks promised that this television season would wipe out the memory of last fall's embarrassing batting average, when prime-time television failed to produce a new hit.


Juan Jose Arevalo Is Dead at 86; Guatemala President in Late 40's
LEAD: Juan Jose Arevalo Bermejo, a former President of Guatemala whose Government modernized many of the country's institutions in the 1940's and launched a short-lived effort at broad social reform, died late Saturday in Guatemala City, members of his family said yesterday.
He was 86 years old.


Irene Hegeman Weds Eric A. Richard
LEAD: Irene Marion Hegeman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew S. Hegeman of Eastport, L.I., was married yesterday to Eric Alan Richard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Richard of Warwick, R.I.
The Rev.
Carl Sharon, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at the Marquand Chapel of the Yale University Divinity School in New


Review/Music;   Ensemble Translating the Nonclassical
LEAD: The Turtle Island String Quartet of Oakland, Calif., is among many young ensembles that have taken on the challenge of translating jazz, bluegrass and other nonclassical idioms into a vocabulary that one associates with some of the greatest works of Beethoven and Mozart.


Animals' Day at St. John the Divine


Mangweni Journal;   Out of Mozambique's Fire and Into a Frying Pan
LEAD: The parched land of KaNgwane is one of South Africa's poorest regions, but to the Mozambican refugees who cross the border fleeing war and hunger, it shimmers with the illusion of opportunity.


Elizabeth A. Boey Weds Frank Chau
LEAD: Dr.
Elizabeth Ann Boey, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Chew Wan Boey of Stony Brook, L.I., was married yesterday to Frank Chau, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kwing Tong Chau of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Thomas Murtagh performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady Queen of Martyrs Church in Forest Hills, Queens.


Short of Oil and Supporters, Jordan Orders Fuel Savings
LEAD: With fast-dwindling oil reserves and a deepening trade battle with its increasingly hostile neighbors, Jordan has ordered a series of sharp austerity measures designed to reduce the nation's fuel consumption by at least 20 percent.


Review/Television;   CBS's 'America Tonight' in the Magazine Style
LEAD: The Middle East, known for its exports to the United States of oil and trouble, has also produced two network news programs.
ABC's ''Nightline'' started up about 10 years ago in response to the taking of American hostages in Iran; and last week, aroused by the Iraqi crisis, CBS delivered ''America Tonight.


U.S. Is Faulted for Role in Water Quality
LEAD: To hear several residents of Quinlan, Tex., tell it, Federal and state health agencies are hardly concerned about the quality of the drinking water there.


Who Will Pay for the Gulf Crisis?
LEAD: There's increasing reason to hope that Saddam Hussein will have to withdraw from Kuwait and accept restrictions on Iraq's military power, either because of the embargo or battlefield defeat.
One way or the other, the United States will pay the biggest share of the costs, in blood and treasure.
That's unfair and unacceptable.


Editorial Notebook;   What Shall We Do With Lenin?
LEAD: Some post-cold-war notes from a visit to the Soviet Union:


People
LEAD: *
Stephen A. Novick has been promoted to co-creative director at Grey Advertising, New York.


Boston Bullpen Falters Again
LEAD: The disease that has afflicted the Boston bullpen became an epidemic tonight.
Jeff Reardon, the commander of the Red Sox relief corps, did not pitch in Oakland's Saturday night massacre of the bullpen, but he appeared tonight and gave up the two runs that turned a 2-1 deficit into a 4-1 loss.


COLUMBUS DAY OBSERVED TODAY
LEAD:
NEW YORK
Parade: Fifth Avenue closed to traffic from 11:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. from 44th Street to 86th Street.
Parking: Alternate-side rules suspended
Government offices: Federal, state and city offices are closed.
Post Office: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.


Deborah Maisel Weds T. G. Echikson
LEAD: Deborah Rosalind Maisel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Maisel of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to Thomas Glenn Echikson, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alan B. Echikson of Short Hills, N.J.
Rabbi Barry Green and Cantor Norman Summers officiated at the Mountain Ridge Country Club in West Caldwell, N


Free-Market Diversity
LEAD: To the Editor:


China Output Up 7.5%
LEAD: Chinese industrial production rose 7.5 percent, or $35.03 billion, in September, the official New China News Agency said.
During the first nine months of the year, output totaled $297.66 billion, a 3.1 percent increase from last year.
China produced $24.36 billion in industrial goods for export between January and September, a 37.1 percent rise over the period last year.


Ms. Mosseri-Marlio Is Wed to Reto Wey
LEAD: Anne Mosseri-Marlio, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard Mosseri-Marlio of Marion, Mass., and Curacao, Netherlands Antilles, was married yesterday to Reto Wey, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Heinrich Wey-Benz of Lucerne, Switzerland.
The Rev.
James P. Conn, a Methodist minister, and the Rev.
Patrick Mooney, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the home of the bride's maternal grandparents, Mr.


The Civil War in Us
LEAD: We are drawn to the Civil War because it is the 20th century as coming attraction.


Hong Kong Empire's 'Junk' Tactic
LEAD: Li Ka-shing has built a multibillion-dollar fortune and a business empire by trusting his instincts rather than the crowd's.
But for all his contrarian savvy, his attempt to burst into the United States by purchasing the $3 billion ''junk bond'' portfolio of the Columbia Savings and Loan Association is raising more eyebrows here than cheers.


Louisiana Tally Is Seen as a Sign Of Voter Unrest
LEAD: A day after J. Bennett Johnston was elected to a fourth term in the United States Senate, the talk here was of the degree of support for the man he beat, David Duke, a State Representative and former Ku Klux Klan leader.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief article in Business Day Friday about the settlement of a price-fixing lawsuit in Kansas and Missouri misstated the amount to be paid by the Occidental Petroleum Corporation.
It is $24.5 million.


Rangers Set Sights On Replacing Kisio
LEAD: For the Rangers, an organization not unaccustomed to fatalism, the season is all of two games old and already the catalogue of calamity is lengthy.
Topping the list: zero points have been earned and a pair of significant injuries suffered.


Karen Polley Hall Marries Steven James Halls
LEAD: Karen Polley Hall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard T. Hall of Riverside, Conn., was married at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church there yesterday to Steven James Halls , a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Halls of Minneapolis.
The Rev.
Philip E. Perkins officiated.


Pirate Outfielders Quiet at the Plate
LEAD: Bobby Bonilla considered the depressing fact that the hardest-hitting outfield in the National League was a quiet 5 for 23 in the first two games of the playoff and said: ''It hasn't happened yet.''


Soviets Would Return 2 of 4 Isles to Japan
LEAD: The Soviet Union was reported today to have offered to return to Japan two of the four small islands claimed by Tokyo in a bitter territorial dispute that has blocked improvement of relations between the two countries.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Yes, there is great confusion here in the House of Representatives.''
Rep. Sonny Callahan,
Republican of Alabama.
[A14:4.]


William Mortensen, 87; Ran Hartford Arts Center
LEAD: William H. Mortensen, a college dropout who became a millionaire philanthropist, a State Senator, the Mayor of Hartford, a candidate for governor and the director of Connecticut's most important center for the performing arts, died on Saturday at his summer home in Old Saybrook.
He was 87 years old and lived in Stuart,


Sheila P. Prendergast, an Accountant, Weds Matthew G. Murphy, a Banker
LEAD: Sheila Patricia Prendergast, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Prendergast of Wyckoff, N.J., was married yesterday to Matthew George Murphy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Murphy of Flushing, Queens.
The Rev.
Joseph A. O'Hare and the Rev.
Gerard C. Reedy performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Fordham


Vote on Budget Measure in the Senate
LEAD: Following is the 66-to-33 roll-call by which the Senate early today approved legislation on a $500-billion, five-year deficit-reduction plan.
A yes vote was a vote to approve the measure and a no vote was a vote to reject it.
Voting yes were 42 Democrats and 24 Republicans.
Voting no were 13 Democrats and 20 Republicans.


Prices of Soybeans Higher As Rain Slows Harvesting
LEAD: Prices of soybean futures soared as much as 17 cents a bushel yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade amid heavy speculative buying spurred by harvest delays in the soggy Midwest.
Grain futures also advanced.
Soybeans settled 5 1/4 cents to 17 cents higher, with the contract for delivery in November up 17 cents, at $6.34 a bushel;


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
N.A.
7.93
N.A.
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
N.A.
7.04
N.A.
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
N.A.
7.08
N.A.
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
N.A.
8.50
N.A.
30-YR.


Careers;   Plan to Turn Engineers Into Teachers
LEAD: IN the 1960's and early 1970's, when employment was relatively stable, many big companies like the Digital Equipment Corporation worked on the theory that they would not have mass dismissals or voluntary early retirements during economic downturns or corporate reshufflings.
Now, it is a different story.


High-Tech Credit Fraud
LEAD: The Toronto police said last Friday that they had cracked an international high-technology credit card fraud ring that uses electronically doctored credit cards.


Control Board Is Re-emerging As Power Focus
LEAD: As word of New York City's financial distress circulates from the corridors of government to the financial marketplace, an almost forgotten state agency is re-emerging as a major focus of power in the city's future.


On Horse Racing;   Pondering Go for Wand's Chances Against Males
LEAD: Can Go for Wand beat males in the Breeders' Cup Classic on Oct. 27 and will she get a chance to try?
In the wake of last weekend's major races at Belmont Park, that has become the question of this racing season.


As Session Nears End, Revisers of the Clean Air Act Deadlock Over a New Proposal
LEAD: A Congressional conference committee rewriting the Clean Air Act is deadlocked over a proposal to limit state enforcement of auto emission standards, raising the possibility that Congress will not finish the bill this year, some Senate conferees say.


After 3 Years, Gains in 'Decade of the Child' Are Isolated
LEAD: When Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo presented his first Decade of the Child awards last month, it was a celebration of small and poignant victories over the unfathomable plagues of modern childhood.


Tokyo Journal;   Emperor's Ceremonial Bed Still Keeps Its Secrets
LEAD: Most Japanese seem less than obsessed by the debate over whether Emperor Akihito becomes a deity next month when he is formally elevated to the Chrysanthemum Throne.


Putting Condoms in Schools Isn't Enough;   Won't Increase Activity
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Top Hewlett Official Is Named Octel Chief
LEAD: The Octel Communications Corporation, a fast-growing leader in supplying computerized phone-answering and routing systems for businesses, has named Douglas C. Chance, an executive at the Hewlett-Packard Company, as its new president and chief executive.


In Baghdad, Few Signs of War Ahead
LEAD: The moon was rising over the oldest part of Baghdad when Saad Aziz arrived at the Maqha teahouse for a game of tawle, an Iraqi board game with links to backgammon.
The game is a weekly event for Mr.
Aziz and his friends, played after the group of men, Arab Christians, attend evening Mass at a church nearby.


By Design;   Oxfords: Chic, Not Sexy
LEAD: They're sensible.
They're sturdy.
And they're certainly not sexy.
But suddenly they're chic.


Review/Fashion;   Milan Shows: Lots of Color and Skin
LEAD: Gianni Versace dazzled believers with a brilliant ready-to-wear collection Sunday night that encapsulated the trends of the season.
Searing color, reasonably snug fit and short, short, short: these are the cheerful ways in which he and other Italian designers are responding to the economic woes of client countries.


J. Teengs Gerritsen, 82, Fighter Against Nazis
LEAD: Johannes Teengs Gerritsen, a Dutch businessman who fought the German occupation of the Netherlands in World War II, died of a heart attack on Sunday after a car crash in The Hague.
He was 82 years old and lived in Wassenaar, a suburb of The Hague.


Review/Recital;   Alfredo Kraus, From Arias to Zarzuela
LEAD: Of the many remarkable qualities Alfredo Kraus brings to the recital and opera stage, one that consistently occasions comment is the youthful power, flexibility and clarity of his sound.
Since that is the surface rather than the substance of what he has to offer, it makes sense to get it out of the way quickly.


Report Cites F.B.I.'s Following of Terrorist Suspects
LEAD: A Congressional study has found that Federal agents monitored religious services, political lectures and street demonstrations attended by people suspected of having ties to international terrorist groups.


U.S. Issues Off in Foreign Trading
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities dipped and interest rates rose slightly in thin trading overseas yesterday, as market participants in the United States took Columbus Day off.


Jazz Highlights Series Opens on Thursday
LEAD: Highlights in Jazz, a monthly series of concerts, will be presented at the Pace Downtown Theater, 3 Spruce Street, beginning Thursday at 8 P.M.
Past concerts in the 20-year-old series had been held in the Loeb Student Center at New York University.


Germans Face Rise in Jobless
LEAD: Nearly a half-million people were jobless in East Germany as the two Germanys united, the Federal Labor Office reports.


Hard Tests Seen for British Despite European Linkup
LEAD: Although the British pound jumped and the London stock market soared in response to Britain's formal entry into the European Monetary System, some economists warned yesterday that the euphoria might not be long-lived and that the British economy still faced difficult tests.


Democracy Diminished
LEAD: Senate Republicans have quietly killed legislation aimed at boosting participation in American elections.
The key provision of the so-called ''motor-voter'' bill would have required states to allow people to register when they apply for or renew a driver's license.
That could add millions of new registrants to the voting rolls.


U.S. Urged To End Hanoi Trade Curb
LEAD: As Washington's diplomatic relations with Hanoi begin to thaw, the Administration is under increasing pressure to end the 15-year-old trade embargo that excludes American business from the country that many economists and business executives say could become Asia's next industrial tiger.


Make Art, and Peace, Not Trouble
LEAD: In the 15 months since Jesse Helms and other senators began their carrying on about ''obscene'' and ''indecent'' art, the National Endowment for the Arts has ignited hot heads and even hotter talk.
This week, Congress finally gets the chance to debate the N.E.A.'s future temperately and intelligently.


Business and Health;   Giving the Poor Private Insurance
LEAD: SUPPORT is growing in Washington and a number of states for taxpayer-supported subsidies to help buy private health insurance for low-income people.
In a provision in last week's defeated budget proposal, which Congressional aides say is being retained, the Bush Administration said the states should help low-income families pay for insurance premiums so they would not need direct assistance from


Scattered Military News Lifts Oil by 96/, to $38.95
LEAD: With little diplomatic news from the Persian Gulf, oil prices moved up again on scattered military news in light trading yesterday, a holiday for some.


M.I.T. Vice President To Head Harvard Coop
LEAD: The Harvard Cooperative Society, which with six stores is the largest college bookstore operation in the nation, has named William R. Dickson as its new chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Dickson, 55, is senior vice president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


Donors Putting Issue to Bed
LEAD: Mayors make their own beds and have to lie in them.
Mayor David N. Dinkins had a headboard made -reportedly to the tune of $11,500 -and though he plans to lie beneath it, he does not plan for the city to pay for it, his office said yesterday.


In the Gulf, Allies Are Doing Their Part
LEAD: Americans once more are laying their lives on the line to snatch somebody else's oil out of the fire.
And their allies once more are getting a free ride.
Right?
No, nothing is further from the truth.


Cardinal Post for Dent
LEAD: Bucky Dent, dismissed as the Yankee manager earlier this season, was one of four coaches named to the St.
Louis Cardinals' staff yesterday by Manager Joe Torre.
Dent will be the third-base coach. (AP)


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Tired in the Morning
Q.
Why do some people wake up tired after a full night's sleep but feel better as the day wears on?
A. ''The way a person feels when waking up from sleep, day or night, depends largely on the sleep stage the person was in just before waking up,'' said Dr.
Charles Pollak, director of the Institute of Chronobiology and head of the Sleep-Wake Disorder Center of the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, Westchester Division, White Plains, N


Betty Walberg, 69, A Musical Arranger For Choreographers
LEAD: Betty Walberg, a composer, arranger and pianist for ballet, Broadway and modern-dance choreographers, including Jerome Robbins, died Wednesday in Santa Barbara, Calif.
She was 69 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Miss Walberg, a lecturer in the division of dance at the University of California at Santa Barbara, worked on many Broadway shows.


The Arab Nightmare
LEAD: Almost every day, a particularly important falsehood keeps popping up about the choice facing the United States in the Iraqi crisis.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-14
At least 19 Palestinians were killed and more than 100 wounded during an hourlong battle outside Al Aksa Mosque between Israeli policemen and thousands of Arabs hurling rocks and bottles at Jews praying at the Western Wall below.
Page A1


American Building Ends Stock Talks
LEAD: The stock of American Building Maintenance Industries plunged after the company said its two principal shareholders, Theodore and Sydney Rosenberg, had ended talks with a potential buyer for their American Building shares.
The shares fell $4.875 today, to $25.50, on the New York Stock Exchange, where the company's 16.1 percent decline was the second worst of the day.


14 Computer Companies Push for Standard
LEAD: Fourteen computer companies are forming a group to push for the adoption of a single computer standard.


Upshaw Speaks Out
LEAD: Gene Upshaw, the executive director of the National Football League players' union, said yesterday that a separate area apart from the locker room should be provided for the news media after games splayers would not be required to participate in media interviews unless fully clothed.


Himalayas' Rise Overturns Ideas About Peak-Building
LEAD: LIKE adolescents, the Himalaya Mountains are young and fast and restless, and their bodies just will not stop growing.


Karpov and Kasparov Draw In First Championship Game
LEAD: Gary Kasparov almost overreached himself last night in the opening game of the 1990 World Chess Championship in the Hudson Theater at the Hotel Macklowe in Manhattan.
But he rescued a draw from his challenger, Anatoly Karpov, by recovering a lost pawn when both Soviet grandmasters were running short of time.


Results Plus
LEAD:
HORSE RACING
Grass Mark for Expensive Decision
Expensive Decision set the world record for a mile on the grass yesterday while holding off Who's to Pay and Great Commotion in a tight photo-finish to win the $95,700 Kelso Handicap at Belmont Park.
Expensive Decision's time of 1:32.52 over the hard Widener turf course bettered the grass mark of 1:32 3/5 set by Royal Heroine at Hollywood Park in 1984, and was the third-fastest mile run over any surface, after Dr.


Control Data Unit To Martin Marietta
LEAD: The Martin Marietta Corporation will purchase the Control Data Corporation's reconnaissance systems business segment for an undisclosed price, the companies said.
The Air Force must approve the transaction.


The Playoffs: How It Happened;   When Smith Pitches, Reds Swing for Fences
LEAD: When Zane Smith joined the Pittsburgh Pirates in August, he became a different pitcher, a winning pitcher.
He shrugged off his 45-66 career record and reeled off 6 victories, 2 defeats and a 1.30 earned run average.
He did not, however, leave behind his penchant for throwing home run pitches to the Cincinnati


After Budget Trauma, Still More Trauma Lies Ahead
LEAD: For all the trauma that Congress has put itself through in the past four days to produce a budget, the real struggle lies ahead.


More Women Own Concerns
LEAD: The number of United States businesses owned by women climbed by 57 percent between 1982 and 1987, the Census Bureau reported last week.


Corrections
LEAD: An obituary yesterday about Scott M. Matheson referred to him incorrectly in some copies.
From 1977 to 1985 he was Governor of Utah, not of Idaho.


Review/Music;   Cast Changes in 'La Boheme' at City Opera
LEAD: Though several important roles in the New York City Opera's production of ''La Boheme'' changed hands on Sunday afternoon, the performance gave the impression of settled and generally good routine.
This was not entirely surprising, since most of the newcomers were City Opera veterans.


The Playoffs;   Red Sox Look for Extra Effort
LEAD: In the aftermath of their Game 2 victory Sunday night, the Oakland Athletics boarded a widebody jet and soared home on the wings of a two-game lead in the American League Championship Series.


John D. Betz, 72, Dies; Waste Water Official
LEAD: John D. Betz, former chief executive officer of Betz Laboratories Inc., a leader in waste water treatment, died Saturday at his home here.
He was 72 years old.


Boldness in Brazil Needs a Boost
LEAD: Brazil's congressional election last week was no routine midterm vote.
President Fernando Collor de Mello came to power in March with an ambitious program of radical, free-market reform but without a strong party behind him to enact the required legislation.
Now the voters have turned sharply against his opponents from the Socialist left.


Oil-Price Drop Seen by Yamani
LEAD: Saudi Arabia's former oil minister, Sheik Ahmed Zaki Yamani, said today that the price of crude oil should drop to $15 to $18 a barrel, less than half of today's price, once the Persian Gulf crisis was defused.


Shearson No. 1 in Poll
LEAD: The American Express Company's Shearson Lehman Brothers unit was named yesterday by Institutional Investor magazine as the winner of its 1990 All-America Research Team poll of top investment analysts.
Shearson displaced its rival, Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.


500 Saudi Militiamen Graduate, With Esprit
LEAD: Accompanied by a marching band, bright banners and a fly-by of whirling helicopters, the first class of Saudi volunteer militiamen in this region graduated here today in a flurry of enthusiasm, but seemingly limited military preparedness.


Books of The Times;   Slowly Dawning Doubt On Narrator's Veracity
LEAD:
Spider
By Patrick McGrath
221 pages. Poseidon Press. $18.95.


Newark's Rise as a Global Airport
LEAD: Scandinavian Airlines System flew out of John F. Kennedy International Airport for 40 years, but as of Sept. 30 it had moved all 20 of its weekly flights to Newark International Airport.


Kauric's Kick Polishes Off Browns' 4th-Quarter Rally
LEAD: Jerry Kauric kicked a 30-yard field goal as time expired to give the Cleveland Browns a 30-29 victory over the Denver Broncos tonight at Mile High Stadium.


Review/Opera;   The West, As Wild As Puccini Imagined It
LEAD: The production of ''Moses und Aron'' at the New York City Opera, postponed from last year's strike-shortened season, is not the only loose thread the company's new general director, Christopher Keene, has picked up from the Beverly Sills regime.


R.J. Reynolds Deal
LEAD: The RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation said its R.J.
Reynolds Tobacco International Inc. unit had bought Club, the third-largest cigarette brand in eastern Germany.
The brand holds a 15 percent share of the former East German market.
Terms of the purchase were not disclosed.
R.J.
Reynolds's German subsidiary has been selling the Club cigarettes since March.


For a Political Neophyte, the Preacher's Approach
LEAD: The trouble with the United States, said John R. Silber, the resolutely unorthodox Democratic nominee for governor of Massachusetts, is too much prosperity and too much materialism.


Suspect in Record Highs: New Gauge
LEAD: All sorts of explanations have been offered for record high temperatures across the country - the greenhouse effect, the growth of cities, even chance.
But the National Weather Service is examining an additional theory: the thermometers were wrong.


Swedish Company To Sell Operations
LEAD: Swedish Match N.V. agreed to sell almost all of its worldwide match and disposable lighter businesses for $277.5 million to a consortium of investors operating under the name Nederlight N.V.
Swedish Match said it intends to change its name to Wilkinson Sword to reflect its continuing business: the European and United States operations of the Wilkinson


Review/Dance;   Baryshnikov Takes A New Direction With Morris Troupe
LEAD: The news from Paris is that Mikhail Baryshnikov has asked to dance in ''Giselle'' with the Paris Opera Ballet.
The news from Brooklyn on Sunday night, when he performed with Mark Morris's admirable modern-dance troupe and offered a glimpse of his own new small company's programming, is that he is obviously redefining himself as a dancer.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Aker Drilling, a company spun off from Aker A.S., a Norwegian engineering concern, said it would purchase all of the assets of Transocean Drilling, a drilling service company, for $210 million.


Germans Ratify Agreement
LEAD: Germany's upper house of Parliament today formally ratified the ''two-plus-four'' treaty with the World War II Allies.
The treaty, approved on Friday by the lower house of the German Parliament, gives Germany back its sovereignty, which was lost when Nazi Germany was defeated in 1945.
The Allies - the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain and France - must still formally ratify the accord.


Putting Condoms in Schools Isn't Enough;   'Full and Holy Rite'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Jets Show Little in the Late Stages
LEAD: In the interest of making games shorter, the National Football League has taken three minutes away from halftime this season.
Brian Washington, a second-year strong safety for the Jets, suggests that killing the remaining 12 minutes may produce a few victories for him and his teammates.


Columbus's Nationality Perplexes Paradegoers
LEAD: Christopher Columbus may have been born in Genoa but there were a few onlookers at yesterday's Columbus Day parade who still wondered why the event had attracted so many Italian-Americans.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Auto Suture Company U.S.A., a unit of the United States Surgical Corp., Norwalk, Conn., promoted Judith M. Stant to vice president and general manager.


Gasoline Price Rise
LEAD: Uncertainty about possible war in the Persian Gulf and fear of crude oil shortages sent retail gasoline prices up by an average of 6 cents a gallon in the last two weeks, the Lundberg Survey, which gathers industry data, said.


Excitement for Fans as a Silent Struggle Begins
LEAD: In a babel of gossipy excitement suggestive of an old-time political convention - the kind where they didn't know the outcome in advance - chess fans from across New York and journalists from around the world converged on a midtown Manhattan hotel-theater yesterday to savor the first game of the 1990 World Chess


Algebraic Notation of Moves In Chess and How It Works
LEAD: Algebraic notation is widely preferred among chess players around the world and has been officially recommended by the International Chess Federation.


McDonald's Has First China Outlet
LEAD: The McDonald's Corporation, the American fast-food chain, opened its first restaurant in China.
China is the 53d country in which McDonald's has opened an outlet.


Bertelsmann Acquisition
LEAD: Bertelsmann A. G., the German media giant, has acquired the top book publisher in former East Germany, the company said today.


Critic's Notebook;   Louisville Takes Clowning Seriously
LEAD: The breadth of clowning from 16th-century Italian zanni to 20th-century American zanies like Bill Irwin was explored this weekend with wit and erudition in Commedia dell'Arte and the Comic Spirit at the Actors Theater of Louisville.


The Playoffs;   Two Unlikely Homers Give Reds the 2-1 Edge
LEAD: Their names are Billy Hatcher and Mariano Duncan, and they hit a total of 15 home runs for the Cincinnati Reds this season.
And in the playoff for the National League pennant, they had zero hits before today's game.


New Orleans Teachers Accept New Contract, Ending Strike
LEAD: Thousands of public school teachers voted to accept a new contract Sunday night and return to classrooms today, ending a three-week strike, but some teachers said they felt betrayed.


Kremlin Denies It's Offering To Return Two Isles to Japan
LEAD: The Soviet Union denied a Japanese report that it had offered to return two of four Pacific islands seized from Japan in World War II, the official press agency Tass said today.


Review/Television;   Looks at Saddam Hussein And Savings-and-Loans
LEAD: CNN's ''Special Assignment'' team has been busy in recent weeks with two subjects that warrant national scrutiny, the confrontation in the Persian Gulf and the collapse of many savings-and-loan institutions.
Given the vagaries of the cable network's scheduling, the reports are easy to miss, yet worth catching for the background and analysis they offer of problematic situations.


Confluence Marked by Empty Seats
LEAD: No wonder the Pirates cannot afford an extra administrator to peruse the fine print.
They can't make much money if they can't sell out the ball park for a championship game.


Sworn In as 105th Justice, Souter Says Shock Recedes
LEAD: David Hackett Souter was sworn in today as the nation's 105th Supreme Court Justice in a brief White House ceremony, acknowledging that he had only recently begun to emerge from the state of shock that overtook him when he was nominated to the Court 11 weeks ago.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Friday about the Nynex Corporation referred incompletely to a consent decree that settled charges brought against Nynex by the Federal Communications Commission.
Although Nynex agreed to pay $1.4 million to the Government, it did not acknowledge any wrongdoing.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball
LOS ANGELES (NL) - Announced that Don Aase, pitcher, has become a free agent by not accepting assignment to Albuquerque of the Pacific Coast League.
Basketball
BOSTON (NBA) - Announced the retirement of Johnny Most, radio announcer.
Named Doug Brown radio color commentator.


Countdown to Crisis: Reaching a 1991 Budget Agreement
LEAD:
Jan. 29, 1990 - President Bush sends a $1.2 trillion budget to Capitol Hill for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1.
The President says his plan will leave a $64.7 billion deficit.
March 5 - Congressional Budget Office issues its own analysis of the President's budget and predicts that the deficit will be about $131 billion.


Benetton to Make Clothes in Armenia
LEAD: The Italian casual-wear manufacturer Benetton Group S.p.A. said it had entered a joint venture to produce clothes in Armenia for sale in the Soviet Union.
Under the agreement, Benetton, based in Milan, and the Armenian Ministry of Light Industry each will invest $4 million to set up production of cotton Benetton products at an


Dow Up 13.12 as Profit Taking Cuts Gains
LEAD: Congressional resolve to break the budget deadlock lifted stocks sharply yesterday in the first hour of trading, but prices fell almost as sharply as investors rushed in to snap up profits.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The condition of EZRA TAFT BENSON, the 91-year-old president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was given as satisfactory yesterday at LDS Hospital in Salt Lake City, where he is recovering from two operations on his brain, a hospital spokesman said.
Until yesterday, his condition was given as serious.


Next Bold Step Toward Fusion Proposed
LEAD: ON a grassy site here surrounded by cornfields and dense woods, not far from Princeton University, scientists want to build a machine of vast complexity and cost that they hope will lead to a powerful new source of energy half a century from now.


Sonics and Payton Talk
LEAD: The Seattle SuperSonics were expected to resume contract talks today with Gary Payton, the former Oregon State playmaker who was the second player selected last June in the National Basketball Association draft.


As Its Virtues Emerge, The Potato Goes Global
LEAD: NATURAL nutritional goodness, agronomic adaptability and culinary versatility combined with human scientific ingenuity are rapidly moving the simple potato into center stage in the fight against world hunger.


Baker Urges Israeli Restraint
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today that Israel had to be better prepared to handle the sort of disturbances that had erupted in Jerusalem, and he expressed Washington's condolences to all the victims of the violence.


Realty Slump Traps Some as Buyers Nibble Warily
LEAD: During the giddy 1980's, restaurants from Columbus Avenue to TriBeCa reverberated with customer boasts of shrewd real-estate deals and tales of manic co-op profits.
But the binge in housing prices did not bring universal cheer.
For many people, high rents and heavy mortgages cast an anxious pall.
Economists worried that the escalating cost of housing put New


How to Make Bicycling to Work Feasible
LEAD: To the Editor:


Poland Arrests 2 Police Generals In '84 Killing of Reformist Priest
LEAD: The police have arrested two Polish secret-police generals in connection with the slaying in 1984 of a well-known Solidarity priest, the Rev.
Jerzy Popieluszko, the Government said today.


Market Place;   The Insurers' Realty Burden
LEAD: INSURANCE stocks plummeted again yesterday amid widening investor fears that the real estate problems disclosed on Friday by the Travelers Corporation were industrywide.
While analysts argued that investors had overreacted, they said some price adjustment had been justified given the other insurers' substantial real estate holdings.


Putting Condoms in Schools Isn't Enough;   None Too Soon
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:
2 Americans Share Nobel Prize in Medicine
Two American physicians who pioneered organ and tissue transplants, helping tens of thousands of patients, were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.
One of them, Dr. Joseph E. Murray of


Government Overreaches in Milken Case
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dow Jones Net Down by 17.4% in Quarter
LEAD: Dow Jones &amp; Company, publisher of The Wall Street Journal, said yesterday that its net income declined by 17.5 percent in the third quarter as the acquisition of Telerate Inc. weighed on profits.


U.S. View of Soviet Market
LEAD: Trading on a Soviet stock exchange could start next year, but foreigners will probably remain on the sidelines until the ruble is convertible, the chairman of the New York Stock Exchange said today.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief report in the Company News columns of Business Day on Sept. 27 described the Smith Corona Corporation incorrectly.
It is not a subsidiary of Hanson P.L.C., although Hanson does own 48 percent of its stock.


Review/Music;   Rarities of the Chamber Symphony
LEAD: The New York Chamber Symphony has come a long way in quality and renown since 1977, when Gerard Schwarz pulled it together as a freelance band to play a concert of Bach's ''Brandenburg'' Concertos at the 92d Street Y. The next year, the orchestra became the 92d Street Y's resident ensemble, and since then Mr.


Italian or Spaniard, Columbus Is Honored


Shift at Sports Illustrated Set
LEAD: The magazine unit of Time Warner Inc. yesterday named Mark R. Mulvoy publisher of Sports Illustrated.
Mr.
Mulvoy, who is 49 years old, has been the weekly magazine's managing editor for six years.


A Poem in Homage To an Unwanted Man
LEAD: In Derek Walcott's new 325-page poem, ''Omeros,'' the principal characters are Achille, Hector and Helen, and other characters also have names taken from the ''Iliad'' and ''Odyssey'' of Homer.
Much of the action, which occurs in the Caribbean, but also in North America, Africa and Europe through many centuries, gains resonance from its references to incidents in those epics.


6 Students Commit Suicide To Protest Indian Jobs Plan
LEAD: At least six students committed suicide today to protest a job quota program that reserves half of the Government's jobs for lower-caste Hindus, news reports said.


College Football;   Big East Conference Invites Miami to Join
LEAD: The Big East Conference today extended an invitation to the University of Miami to become its 10th member.


Infant Boy Survives Heart Peril
LEAD: An infant who had a usually fatal heart defect healed by himself, amazing doctors who thought a transplant was the only way to save his life.


Bradley Foe Sees Her Chance in Tax Issue
LEAD: Christine Todd Whitman, the Republican candidate for the United States Senate in New Jersey, smiled patiently as a stream of bleary-eyed commuters whisked past her into the Jersey City PATH station, taking little notice of the woman who hopes to unseat Bill Bradley, the state's most popular elected official.


Inquiry on Hornets
LEAD: Gary Bettman, the N.B.A.'s vice president and general counsel, said yesterday the league was ''looking into'' an accusation by Arn Tellem, the agent for the former Illinois star, Kendall Gill, that Tellem was physically abused by Allan Bristow, the Charlotte Hornets' vice president, during contract negotiations.


Corroon Deal Wins Approval
LEAD: Shareholders of the Corroon &amp; Black Corporation voted yesterday in favor of a merger with Willis Faber P.L.C.


Trying to Reclaim the Rain Forest
LEAD: FROM a 45-foot-high observation tower, the American ecologist surveyed a landscape that is increasingly common in Eastern Amazonia: white Nelore cows dotting fields of African coloniao grass that stretched to a distant horizon of rain forest.


Bulgarian Strategy Is Made in U.S.
LEAD: A group of American experts has taken on the moribund economy of newly democratic Bulgaria and has drawn up a plan for transforming it into a supply-side, free market.


IMPASSE ON BUDGET IS ENDED; STOPGAP SPENDING MEASURE AVERTS FEDERAL SHUTDOWN
LEAD: Ending the latest budget showdown, President Bush and Congressional leaders agreed Monday night on stopgap spending legislation that averted a suspension of most Government services this morning.


Lower Bid For UAL Is Expected
LEAD: Three unions are expected to present to the UAL Corporation's board today an offer to buy the parent of United Airlines for about $160 a share, or a total of $3.5 billion.
Of that, only about $70 a share will be in cash, while the rest will mostly be in notes secured by airplanes, a person involved in the union bid said yesterday.


House Roll-Call Vote Backing Plan to Cut the Budget Deficit
LEAD: Following is the roll-call vote of 250 to 164 by which the House of Representatives today adopted a budget for the 1991 fiscal year that promises $500 billion in deficit reduction over the next five years.
A ''yes'' vote is a vote for the budget outline.
Voting ''yes'' were 218 Democrats and 32 Republicans.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: JONATHAN MILLER, artistic director of the Old Vic Theater in London since January 1988, resigned after DAVID MIRVISH, the Canadian owner of the theater, announced Saturday that the last two productions of the season would be scrapped.
The plays, ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' and ''The Park,'' a modern version of the same play by Botho Strauss, were in rehearsal under the director Steven Pimlott, with previews scheduled for Dec.


With Shuttle Back in Space, NASA Returns to Leak Problem
LEAD: The weekend launching of the shuttle Discovery has put a relieved NASA back into space after an embarrassing hiatus.
But now the space agency must turn again to the mysterious hydrogen leaks that have plagued its other two shuttles.


What a Direness There Was
LEAD: Gleanings from a weekend of listening to the House of Representatives talk budget talk: 1.
The situation is dire, maybe catastrophic. 2.
The direness is the fault of former President Reagan.
He told us it was ''morning in America'' when it was really late Saturday night and everybody had had three drinks too many and was refusing to go home to bed.


Melvin M. Payne, 79, Chairman Of National Geographic Society
LEAD: Melvin M. Payne, chairman emeritus of the board of the National Geographic Society, died Saturday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 79 years old and lived in Bethesda, Md.


Hotel Pair Lets Share Offer Lapse
LEAD: Hotel Investors Trust and the Hotel Investors Corporation which trade as a pair, said they had allowed the offer of $5.25 a share for their shares to lapse because they were worried that the First West Capital Corporation would be unable to complete the offer on stated terms.
The EIE International Corporation of Japan withdrew its bid of $5 a share for Hotel Investors because it was unwilling to be involved in a bidding war.


Rig Count Up in Week
LEAD: The number of working oil and natural gas rigs in the United States rose by 17 last week, to a total of 1,064, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
The Houston-based toolmaker said 960 rigs were working across the country a year ago. ''Seasonally, this is the time when the rig count rises,'' said I. C.


Opening Windows On World Of Data
LEAD: IN the world of computer programs, there is no end of ways to organize information.
A database manager might be used to keep track of customers.
It might also be used to maintain a personal phone directory, or a separate program could be called upon for that task.
A spreadsheet, aside from its ability to manipulate numbers, also organizes them - income and expenses for the month, for example.


Cambodian Dancers Seek Asylum
LEAD: Four members of a Cambodian dance troupe have requested political asylum in the United States.
The company is on a monthlong tour of the country.


2 American Transplant Pioneers Win Nobel Prize in Medicine
LEAD: The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine has been awarded to two Americans who proved to a doubting world that it was possible to transplant organs to save the lives of dying patients.


Pound Rises Sharply Again; Dollar Ends Broadly Lower
LEAD: The British pound took center stage again in foreign exchange yesterday, while the dollar weakened against all major currencies amid continued economic jitters.


Richard Louie, 51, Smithsonian Official
LEAD: Richard Louie, an associate director of the Freer Gallery of Art and the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery of the Smithsonian Institution system, died on Sunday in the Washington Hospital Center after being struck by a car on Saturday in Arlington, Va.
He was 51 years old and lived in Arlington.
Mr.
Louie became assistant director of the Freer in 1978 and participated in the planning and financing of the Sackler in the 1980's.


Frank P. Camastro, Magazine Publisher, 50
LEAD: Frank P. Camastro, publisher of Motor Magazine, died on Tuesday.
He was 50 years old and lived in Bayside, Queens.
He apparently had a heart attack and was pronounced dead at Bellevue Hospital, a spokesman for the family said.


Romanian Diplomat Pushed Into Exile in U.S.
LEAD: Mircea Raceanu, freed nine months ago from a death row cell in a Bucharest penitentiary, is living here today as a kind of political exile.
He says his life has been threatened at home in Romania.


Sales Strong for Jersey Nordstrom's
LEAD: Nordstrom Inc.'s store here, its first in the New York metropolitan area, appears to be off to a strong start in its first month, industry analysts and company executives say.


North Fork Set To Add Eastchester
LEAD: The North Fork Bancorp Inc. said it had agreed to acquire the Eastchester Financial Corporation of White Plains for $15.50 a share, or a total of about $62 million.
The agreement resurrects at a lower price an earlier agreement.


Review/Television;   A Case of Illicit Love and Illegal Drugs
LEAD: ''Bangkok Hilton'' was Australia's highest rated mini-series for 1989, winning Nicole Kidman an award for most popular actress.
The six-hour production may be seen in two parts, at 8:05 P.M. today and tomorrow, on Turner Broadcasting's TBS cable channel.


Britain Pushing Electric Stocks
LEAD: Britain offered the lure of discounts on electricity bills last week in its campaign to attract buyers for shares in the $9.5 billion sale of 12 state-owned electricity utilities.


Nicholls and Gartner Get Rangers on the Right Track
LEAD: There were spotlights shining to begin with, red lights then flashing throughout, and so when it was over there was for the Rangers at last the chance to see the season in an acceptable light.


Democratic Leaders Divided on China Trade
LEAD: Democratic leaders in Congress are divided over whether to deny China favorable treatment on trade or to fashion more moderate legislation that may prove acceptable to the Bush Administration.


2 Die in U.S. Jet Crash; 8 in Copter Missing
LEAD: Two United States pilots died today in a jet crash in Saudi Arabia, and the Navy searched for two helicopters and eight crew members missing in the North Arabian Sea, military officials said.


Gold Reserves Up
LEAD: The Battle Mountain Gold Company said it had found about 4.1 million ounces of proven and probable gold reserves and 26.8 million ounces of silver reserves at its 51 percent owned Kori Kollo Gold project in Bolivia.
The company said the latest projections represent a significant increase over its earlier estimates at the property.


No Hoops?
LEAD: Mike Epter's basketball hoop is not quite a human being, but for him the difference is negligible: ''I know it's not a person, but if you think of it as one, you would have to admit that it has its rights.'' Last week Garden City, L.I., asserted its rights, banning all freestanding basketball hoops from the well-to-do village of 6,000 houses.


Andre Grabar, 94, Professor and Expert On Byzantine Art
LEAD: Andre Grabar, an internationally known expert on Byzantine art, died on Friday at his home in Paris.
He was 94 years old.


STOPGAP SPENDING MEASURE AVERTS FEDERAL SHUTDOWN;   Helter-Skelter Day Reflects Miscalculations at the Top
LEAD: It was the sort of day for the Bush Presidency that can only be described as cheesy.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Saturday about the Federal budget crisis reversed the identities of two Representatives.
George J. Hochbrueckner was second from the left and Jim Olin was third from the left.


Putting Condoms in Schools Isn't Enough
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Site of Ageless Piety and Modern Strife
LEAD: A 35-acre plateau in the eastern half of the ancient walled city of Jerusalem has been a site of nationalist and religious struggles for more than 20 years.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
President Bush and Congressional leaders agreed on stopgap spending legislation that averted a suspension of most Government services.
The agreement came shortly before the Senate adopted the broad outline of a budget identical to the one the House approved earlier in the day. [Page A1.


Soviet Coast Guard Seizes A Greenpeace Ship in Arctic
LEAD: The Soviet coast guard boarded and seized a Greenpeace anti-nuclear protest ship today near the Arctic island of Novaya Zemlya after firing warning shots, the official press agency Tass said.


Ford's Truck Outlook
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company expects the United States market for commercial trucks, including medium- and heavy-duty models, will remain slow at least through the end of the year, a manufacturing executive said today. ''It looks as if we're still in a slow period that will last several more months, certainly through year-end,'' George Kormanis, manager of Ford's Kentucky truck plant, said in an interview.


Brazil Sees Inflation Cut
LEAD: The Government of Brazil is expecting monthly inflation to fall below 10 percent in October after prices did not rise in the final week of September, the newspaper O Globo reported on Saturday.


Sheep Curb In Australia
LEAD: The Australian Government approved tough new curbs today on farmers aimed at forcing them to trim the country's sheep population of 180 million.


Our Towns;   Sign or Sit Out: School Drug Pact Angers Athletes
LEAD: When school started this year, Richard Cooney, the East Hampton High School athletic director, called a mandatory meeting for all athletes and parents to announce a ''new quality of life contract.'' Any athletes caught drinking, using drugs or smoking cigarettes - even in their living rooms - would agree to be suspended for 20 percent of the season.


Esiason's Fakes Keep The Rams Off Balance
LEAD: After the Rams' defense had been ripped by the Cincinnati Bengals on Sunday, the Rams found out what most of the rest of the National Football League and particularly the Bengals' divisional opponents already knew: that Boomer Esiason is the league's unparalleled play-action-fake passer.


Gorbachev Can Test Henry George's Theory
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ROSALYNN CARTER will be joining her husband in academia.
Yesterday Emory University in Atlanta named the former First Lady a distinguished fellow in the new Rosalynn Carter Honorary Fellows in Public Policy and Global Affairs program in the university's Institute for Women's Studies.
Her husband, former President JIMMY CARTER, is university distinguished professor at


Minority Police Hiring Stirs Anger in Denver
LEAD: Denver's efforts to improve race relations by increasing the number of black police officers have generated ill feelings among whites and blacks alike.


Motorola And Hitachi In Settlement
LEAD: Motorola Inc. and Hitachi Ltd. said today that they had reached a settlement in their dispute over chip patents.
While terms of the settlement were not disclosed, it will remove the threat that Motorola might have to halt shipments of its 68030 microprocessor, which serves as the central chip in computers made by Apple Computer, Hewlett-Packard, Next Inc.


New York City's Budget Problems Threaten to Raise Borrowing Cost
LEAD: New York City's economic weakness and budget problems are starting to spill over into the financial markets, which may make it increasingly costly for the city government to issue bonds to raise needed funds.


Adjustable Compass Guides Birds
LEAD: SCIENTISTS have uncovered another secret in the mystery of how birds migrate thousands of miles and always find their way: new research shows that birds can calibrate their innate sense of magnetic north with the movement of celestial objects across the sky.


College Football;   Ga. Tech Moves Up to No. 1
LEAD: A potential game-winning touchdown pass that Notre Dame's Derek Brown dropped in the end zone at the close of Stanford's 36-31 upset Saturday sent the Irish from a consensus No. 1 to No. 7 in the United Press International poll, No. 8 in the Associated Press poll and entirely out of The New York Times's computer ranking of the top 20.


Minnesota Journal;   Land of 10,000 Lakes Now Mired in Weeds
LEAD: These are times of troubled waters in the land of 10,000 lakes.
In an attack on Minnesota's most cherished natural resource, an aquatic weed has invaded dozens of popular lakes, choking pristine waters with a dense green glop.


Team for John Andretti
LEAD: John Andretti will drive for the new Jim Hall-VDS Indy-car team next season, it was announced yesterday in New York.
Andretti, the 27-year-old nephew of Mario Andretti, drove this season for the Porsche team, which is disbanding.


War for the Desktop
LEAD: STANDARDS make life easier.
In this country, most automobiles run on unleaded gasoline and have the steering wheel on the left.
Most video cassette players are based on the VHS video format.
Most facsimile machines adhere to the Group 3 standard, allowing any two machines to send and receive data.


Californians to Decide on 'Nickel-a-Drink' Rise in Alcohol Taxes
LEAD: Voters in California will decide next month whether to impose steep new taxes on wine, beer and hard liquor to support alcohol-abuse and mental-health programs.


Interco Had Loss in Quarter
LEAD: Interco Inc., a maker of footwear and furniture struggling under huge debt, reported a second-quarter loss today of $35.3 million.


No Progress On Coleman
LEAD: Derrick Coleman missed his fourth consecutive day of training camp today as his agent and the Nets continued haggling over a contract.


Top Soviet Committee Faces Irrelevance
LEAD: The once-mighty Central Committee of the Soviet Communist Party, meeting today to discuss strategies for the country's survival, came face to face with its own looming irrelevance.


Review/Theater;   Clarke's Beastly Humans and Beguiling Beasts
LEAD: Flora, a charming half-grown elephant with Dumbo-sized ears, is not the only thing that is elephantine about ''Endangered Species,'' the Martha Clarke theater piece that has opened the Next Wave Festival at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
In this show, a few unobjectionable, ecologically sound old-wave ideas - war is hell, man is cruel, animals are nice - have been inflated past the bursting point by grand scenic effects, a large cast of humans and circus animals, fractionalized quotations from Walt Whitman and, presumably, big bucks.


Philips Making a Digital-Analog Recorder
LEAD: Philips N.V., the Dutch electronics company that created the cassette tape, announced yesterday that it was developing a digital tape recorder that will also be able to play conventional analog cassette tapes.


Flight of the Bee
LEAD: New research on the bumblebee, an insect so poorly designed for flight that engineers have joked it could not actually get off the ground, may be shattering an aerodynamic theory that flying animals and insects have an optimal cruising speed.


Patterns;   By Woody Hochswender
LEAD:
Some Aren't Crying


New York Housing Slump
LEAD: The tumble in New York City housing prices, after years of growth, has dislocated the market, disrupted lives and disconcerted people.
Page B1.


Bridge
LEAD: Some celebrities enjoy an occasional social game of bridge, which takes them totally away from their normal preoccupations.
One player is Beverly Sills, for whom a couple of hours at the card table represents a brief interruption in a lifelong devotion to opera.


Greece Is Warning Albania On Killing of 2 Ethnic Greeks
LEAD: Greece's Government today strongly protested an incident in which two Albanians of Greek origin were said to have been shot while trying to escape Albania and their bodies put on public display.


Corrections
LEAD: The Eating Well column in The Living Section on Sept. 19, about yogurt, misstated the relationship between lactose and lactase.
Lactase, an enzyme, is necessary for the breakdown of lactose into simpler, more digestible sugars.
Lactase is not a product of lactose digestion.


Ford to Shut Down 2 Plants in Ohio
LEAD: The Ford Motor Company will close two plants in northern Ohio next week because of a shortage of dealer orders, the United Automobile Workers and company officials said.


Trial of a Supremacist Is Opened in Portland
LEAD: Amid threats of demonstrations and under heavy police security, the trial began today in a $10 million lawsuit against Tom Metzger, a white supremacist accused of inciting the bludgeoning death of a black man.


In Poll, Both Bush and Congress Faulted for Crisis
LEAD: A majority of Americans blame President Bush and Congress equally for the difficulties in dealing with the Government budget deficit, and they overwhelmingly say the current crisis is due to ''political bickering'' in Washington, according to a CBS News Poll.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We're not just dealing with numbers.
We're not just dealing with programs.
We're dealing with real human beings and their families and their hopes and fears and concerns.''
- Senator George J. Mitchell, the Democratic leader. [A20:1.]


Caste Plays a Surprising Role In Muslim Pakistan's Election
LEAD: In the rural hinterlands of Punjab, the province whose voters have the numerical power to determine which party wins the Pakistani election on Oct. 24, an unlikely factor plays a role in a party's choice of candidates: caste.


19 Arabs Killed in Battle With Jerusalem Police
LEAD: At least 19 Palestinians were killed and more than 100 wounded today during an hourlong battle outside Al Aksa Mosque between Israeli policemen and thousands of Arabs hurling rocks and bottles at Jews praying at the Western Wall below.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about appointments of editors at The New York Times misstated the year in which Paul Goldberger, the new cultural news editor, won the Pulitzer Prize for architecture criticism.
It was 1984.


Putting Condoms in Schools Isn't Enough;   Parental Rights
LEAD: To the Editor:


D. J. Dozier Reporting To Mets' Florida Camp
LEAD: D. J. Dozier, a former all-America running back for Penn State, reported to the Mets' Instructional League camp in Florida yesterday to continue his new baseball career although he is still under contract to the Minnesota Vikings.


Big 3 of Long-Distance Slug It Out
LEAD: The nation's three big long-distance telephone companies have sharply increased spending on advertising and marketing this year and are going after one another this fall with television and print campaigns whose tone is becoming nastier.


Craig Out Indefinitely
LEAD: Roger Craig tore a knee ligament in San Francisco's victory over the Houston Oilers on Sunday and the running back will be out indefinitely.


Guatemala's Campaign Trail: Murder Shadows Candidates
LEAD: Celso Milagro, who was running for Mayor, died on a cobblestone street here, holding the hand of his 3-year-old daughter.


Sabyasachi Mukharji, India's Top Justice, 63
LEAD: Sabyasachi Mukharji, the Chief Justice of India's Supreme Court, has died in London of heart-related complications, the authorities here said today.
He was 63 years old.


Brazil Uncovers Plan by Military To Build Atom Bomb and Stops It
LEAD: Brazil's new Government has uncovered a 15-year-old secret military program to make an atom bomb, the nation's top science official says.


Anticipating Growth, Continental Buys Jets
LEAD: Continental Airlines said today that it had ordered 25 new Boeing 757 jets, with an option for 25 more, in anticipation of long-term growth.


Teen-Agers Seek a Path Back From the Edge
LEAD: The wind rushed through the trees of a Harlem park the other day, knocking a few acorns to the ground and startling Nierobie Hardy to his feet.
He jerked his head around, as if searching the shadows for a sniper.


Debra Broutman, Artist, Married
LEAD: Debra Lynn Broutman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry L. Broutman of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Stephen Adam Topping, a son of Audrey M. Topping of New York and Ira J. Topping of Fresh Meadows, Queens, and Pompano Beach, Fla.
Rabbi David E. Greenberg performed the ceremony at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N


Ahmed Kadry, 59; Egyptian Art Official
LEAD: Ahmed Kadry, chairman of the Eqyptian Antiquities Organization from 1982 until his abrupt dismissal in 1988, died Thursday in Pittsburgh.
He was 59 years old.
Friends said he had liver cancer and was awaiting a transplant.
Mr.
Kadry, an army officer who took part in the 1952 coup that toppled King Farouk and installed Lieut.


NEW SOUTH AFRICA IS AT A ROADBLOCK
LEAD: Disagreement over whether right-wing whites inside South Africa's security apparatus are orchestrating the recent violence among blacks has strained the Government's working relationship with the African National Congress and slowed efforts to start full-scale negotiations on the nation's future.


College Football;   Colorado Victory Stands
LEAD: A play that should never have been run cost Missouri a victory and seven Big Eight football officials an indefinite suspension.


Dr. H.L. Ginsberg, 87, Is Dead; Noted Biblical Expert and Author
LEAD: Dr.
H.
L.
Ginsberg, a biblical scholar and an authority on ancient Ugaritic literature, died on Thursday at Cabrini Hospital.
He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Still a Hot War Over Bases
LEAD: The cold war is over.
The Pentagon is scaling down.
But Congress still resists closing bases.


Transactions
LEAD:
BASEBALL
CLEVELAND (AL) - Named Mickey White director of scouting.
BASKETBALL
MINNESOTA (NBA) - Waived Glenn Puddy, center, and Brian Rowsom, forward.
SEATTLE (NBA) - Reached agreement in principle with Gary Payton, guard and first-round draft choice, from Oregon State.
FOOTBALL


Dow Drops By 78.22 on Iraqi Threat
LEAD: New threats by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq toppled stocks yesterday in the wake of new fears that war in the Persian Gulf could be nearer.


Evans Rankled But Respectful
LEAD: When Oakland's Dennis Eckersley struck out Boston's Dwight Evans in the ninth inning today, it matched what happened when the friends and former teammates opposed each other in Game 2 on Sunday.
But once again, Eckersley's way of celebrating big strikeouts rankled Evans.


4 Inquiries Cite Naval Academy For Rife Sexism
LEAD: Fourteen years after the first 18-year-old women started the rigors of plebe summer at the United States Naval Academy, a ''considerable segment'' of midshipmen, faculty and staff believe women have no place there, according to an internal Academy review made public today.


A Defendant Testifies on Bensonhurst
LEAD: Charles Stressler, the first defendant in the Bensonhurst murder trials to take the stand in his own defense, told the court yesterday that he had delivered a box of baseball bats to the group of white youths who attacked the four black teen-agers that night.
But he said the bats were only for self-defense.


Surgery on an Injured Knee Puts Cadigan Out for Year
LEAD: Dave Cadigan's worst fears about the injury he suffered in Sunday's game against the Dolphins in Miami were realized yesterday when the Jets' starting right guard was told that he needed surgery for a torn anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee and would be out for the rest of the season.


No Polly Peck Aid
LEAD: Turkey has ruled out a rescue plan for the British conglomerate Polly Peck International P.L.C., and a bailout by Turkish banks is unlikely, Government officials and bankers said today.
Last Friday, Asil Nadir, Polly Peck's chairman, secured a one-week freeze on the company's debts from 60 creditor banks.


Teaching Ex-Soviet Jews to Be Jewish
LEAD: American yeshivas and Hebrew schools are transforming thousands of immigrant Jewish children bred in the atheistic culture of the Soviet Union into observant Jews, carrying more than a few parents along in the process.


Market Place;   Two-Year Options Off to Slow Start
LEAD: SUFFERING from a decline in trading activity, the nation's options markets have begun trading a new product - options that do not expire for almost two years.


Crafting Jewelry for the Tourist Trade
LEAD: ON one wall of Vicky Chignall's jewelry workshop, nestled in the green hills of the farming country northwest of Nairobi, hang ropes of red beads, some of them centuries old.
Along another wall are rows of boxes, each containing ornamental metal leaves, cowrie shells, blue Venetian beads, turquoise cylinder beads used in the slave trade and antique


For G.I.'s, Rock and Rap in the Desert
LEAD: The United States armed forces started live radio broadcasts in Saudi Arabia today with a disk jockey's greeting: ''Good Morning Saudi Arabia!''


Baseball Fails to Improve CBS Ratings
LEAD: CBS's enormous investment in Major League Baseball - more than $1 billion for four years of the playoffs and the World Series - did not have an immediate payoff in the ratings last week, the first week the network carried postseason baseball.


New York's Fears Won't Wait
LEAD: Next month: That's when the Dinkins administration says it will get around to answering fears about New York City's fiscal stability by issuing a modification of its financial plan.
Next month?
What makes City Hall think a worried financial world will wait?


Arthur H. Schwartz, 86, Lawyer And Prohibition-Era Prosecutor
LEAD: Arthur H. Schwartz, a lawyer who prosecuted mobsters and bootleggers during Prohibition and who later became a top New York State Republican official, died on Monday at Dobbs Ferry (N.Y.) Community Hospital.
He was 86 years old and lived in Dobbs Ferry.


Hijacking Prompts Beijing Shake-Up
LEAD: The Government acknowledged problems today in its handling of a hijacking last week in which 128 people were killed, and it suggested that it would dismiss some relatively low-ranking officials at the airport and airline involved.


Ms. Doi's Advantage
LEAD: In Japanese politics, it's an advantage, not a handicap, to be a woman, says Takako Doi. ''You have no fame, no social status, no special connections to worry about, so you can be clean.''


Bank Fund And C.D. Yields Drop
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts at banks and savings institutions fell slightly in the week ended yesterday.


Thriving Cooperatives
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Critically Ill Hospital Keeps Ear on U.S. Budget Talks and Eye on Creditors
LEAD: In the tiny West Texas town of Alpine, in a nondescript single-story building that does not even have a sign out front, the abstractions of the Washington budget battle are colliding with reality.


New Sallie Mae Note Offering
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, yesterday priced $650 million in floating-rate notes due April 11, 1991, at a price of par to yield 45 basis points more than the 91-day Treasury equivalent yield.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


One Step at a Time
LEAD:
Sunday, Sept. 30
About 2 P.M. - In the Rose Garden, President Bush and Congressional leaders announce they have reached agreement on a budget package.
5:29 P.M. - House passes stopgap spending bill, good until Oct. 5, to keep the Government running in the absense of a 1991 budget.
About 7 P.M.


Foyt Retiring, Maybe
LEAD: A. J. Foyt, the four-time Indianapolis 500 winner, said yesterday that the 1991 season would probably be his last as a driver.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Rising Violence And the Justice System
Faced with the growth of violent crime and the political pressures of even faster-growing citizen fears about crime, the nation's police officers, prosecutors, wardens and researchers are designing an array of new strategies that are already beginning to reshape American criminal justice.


Rivals of Weicker Ask: Could He Govern Alone?
LEAD: When Lowell P. Weicker Jr. began his independent campaign for governor of Connecticut in March, his Democratic and Republican opponents dismissed it as a political Pet Rock, a novelty whose popularity would fade by fall.


Ehrlich Bober Closes Main Securities Unit
LEAD: The Ehrlich Bober Financial Corporation said yesterday that it was closing, effective immediately, its principal subsidiary, the investment banking and broker/dealer unit, Ehrlich Bober &amp; Company.


AQUINO UNTOPPLED, AT LEAST FOR NOW
LEAD: The political scene in the Philippines is a little bit like California's seismic situation: there are regular tremors, and each rumbling provokes new doubts about if and when ''the big one'' will strike.


2 Women Are Injured When Man Hurls Acid
LEAD: A man carrying a coffee can filled with an acid-like liquid threw it at two women walking from work along East 58th Street yesterday evening, critically injuring one of them, the police said.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: An avid polo player, KERRY PACKER, Australia's richest man, suffered a heart attack Sunday while playing polo and was taken to a hospital in Sydney, where he remains under care.
Last month, Australian Business Magazine, which is part of his media empire, estimated his worth at $1.7 billion.


Gold Prices Drop Sharply As Soviet Selloff Is Feared
LEAD: Gold prices declined sharply today on New York's Commodity Exchange because of fears of a huge Soviet gold selloff, analysts said.


Computer Factory
LEAD: The Bay Street Group Ltd., the San Francisco investment group that has offered to acquire Computer Factory Inc. for $34.6 million in cash, said that if its offer succeeded, it might sell all or a substantial portion of the personal computer retail chain.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Bay Street said it had talked with various parties about selling certain Computer Factory assets.


Educators Fear Nebraska Taxpayers' Revolt Could Scuttle Finance Law
LEAD: In a taxpayer revolt worrisome to those trying to improve education, Nebraska voters have forced the state's new education finance legislation onto the Nov. 6 ballot for a referendum on repealing it.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: KEN KESEY and his family gathered for the installation of a sculpture memorializing his son, Jed, and a wrestling teammate in a ceremony Monday atop Mount Pisgah near Eugene, Ore., The Associated Press reported.
Jed Kesey and his teammateon the University of Oregon wrestling team, Lorenzo West, were killed six years ago when the team's van plunged off a highway.


Publishers Are Urged to Shift Focus
LEAD: Something seems to be missing at the American Magazine Conference here.
What is missing, oddly enough, is a sense that this conference is about magazines.


Metropolitan Diary
LEAD: THEY gathered, creatures great and small, furry and scaly, on the lawn beside St.
Luke's School in Greenwich Village for the annual Blessing of the Animals.
Cats, dogs, birds, turtles, lizards, guinea pigs, all manner of pets were there along with the children, their parents and teachers.


Supreme Court Roundup;   Souter Takes His Seat As Nation's 105th Justice
LEAD: Justice David H. Souter assumed his seat on the Supreme Court today after taking the oath of office in a courtroom filled with New Hampshire friends and Washington dignitaries.


Frozen Pizzas To Feed a Nation Of Homebodies
LEAD: BELT-tightening and pizza-eating go hand in hand.
Not that pizza is diet food - although it can be - but it is budget food.
For the manufacturers of frozen pizzas, hard times can mean increased sales.


Prices of Treasury Issues Plunge
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities plummeted and interest rates rose sharply yesterday, as market participants saw rising oil prices, a weaker dollar and a continuation of the Federal budget negotiations as strong reasons to sell securities.


U.S. Sports Prominent on Japanese Shopping Lists
LEAD: From baseball to auto racing to golf, the games Americans play and watch have become the focus of a recent wave of Japanese buying interest in the United States.
The buying activity appears to be part of an effort by the Japanese to expand their financial interest here to include their passion for


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-11


Iraqi President Renews Threat to Attack Israel
LEAD: President Saddam Hussein reacted today to the shooting deaths of Palestinian protesters in Jerusalem by threatening to attack Israel if it persists in occupying Arab lands, and implying that the attack could be carried out with long-range Iraqi missiles.


Bush Assails Israeli Lack of 'Restraint'
LEAD: President Bush rebuked Israel today for not acting ''with more restraint'' in quelling Palestinian unrest in Jerusalem on Monday.


60-Minute Gourmet
LEAD: THE scallop season is in full swing in the Northeast.
Far off the coast, sea scallops are harvested in giant refrigerated boats.
In the bays from Cape Cod to Long Island Sound, the prized bay scallop is making a valiant if minor comeback.
I recently purchased a pint of bay scallops at my local fish store on eastern Long Island for $18.


Mayweather Is a Real Foot Soldier
LEAD: Every time Mike Mayweather, an all-America candidate, runs over another white line for Army this fall he puts Glenn Davis, Chris Cagle, Pete Dawkins and other Black Knights of the past further in his dust.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
MARKETS
Oil prices soared to record levels, closing for the first time above $40 a barrel on renewed fears of war. [Page A1.]
Stocks fell sharply, with the Dow plunging 78.22, to 2,445.54.
It was the sharpest decline in more than two months. [D1.]
Prices of Treasury securities plummeted.


Obscenity Jurors Were Pulled 2 Ways
LEAD: Jurors in the Mapplethorpe obscenity trial walked into the jury room in Cincinnati last Friday near the close of the two-week trial, regretting that the prosecution had not given them more evidence to go on, two jurors said today in telephone interviews.


Bridge
LEAD: When all seems lost, a totally ridiculous play, whether made accidentally or deliberately, can sometimes serve to befuddle a sleepy opponent.
The diagramed example occurred at Chautauqua, N.Y., a summer center for arts, music and education, which has a bridge program organized by Sarah Mann and Harry


Fullwood Traded
LEAD: Brent Fullwood's often disappointing career with the Green Bay Packers ended yesterday when the team traded their No. 1 pick of 1987 to the Cleveland Browns for a future draft choice.
Had the Packers been unable to trade Fullwood, he would have been waived.


Police Enforce an Angry Calm in Israel
LEAD: As clouds of tear gas and pillars of black smoke from burning tires hung in the air over much of Jerusalem, angry Palestinians protested and Israeli leaders held themselves blameless today in the Old City violence that took at least 19 and as many as 24 Arab lives on Monday.


The Myth of Classnessness
LEAD: This country is in shackles, its thought, character and public policy locked in distortion and lies.
The deceit stands at the root of Federal and state budgetary chaos and corrodes every aspect of national life.
It causes the chief executive to expatiate on the defense of ''our life style'' - our life style - as though the way of life of the privileged were universal.


LIBYA NOW LINKED TO PAN AM BLAST
LEAD: Newly uncovered evidence in the terrorist bombing of a Pan American jumbo jet in December 1988 indicates for the first time that Libyan intelligence agents may have assembled and planted the bomb that destroyed the plane, American Government investigators involved in the inquiry said this week.


ABOUT EDUCATION
LEAD: Americans like to be No. 1 in worldwide competitions.
But in their service to young children, they lag behind many other nations.
A new study of child care in 14 countries should give political and educational policy-makers in the United States valuable information on how to catch up.


Red Scares and False Alarms
LEAD: What Marxists used to call the dustbin of history is proving a grab-bag of surprises in the Soviet Union.
Newly released materials from Nikita Khrushchev's memoirs and a brace of scientific papers throw fresh light on the Soviet nuclear program and the Cuban missile crisis.


Rev. Henry Bovenkerk, Former Missionary, 85
LEAD: The Rev.
Henry G. Bovenkerk, a Presbyterian minister and former missionary to Japan, died on Sunday at Muhlenberg Hospital in Plainfield, N.J.
He was 85 years old and lived in Westfield, N.J.


No Reprieve for Honorariums
LEAD: In July, the Senate voted to denounce Dave Durenberger of Minnesota for disguising honorariums as book royalties.
The same Senate may now adjourn without doing anything about the even bigger scandal: the honorariums themselves.


Man Is Held in Bus Hijacking
LEAD: A barefoot man armed with a knife hijacked a school bus today after forcing the driver off but was caught after the bus struck an automobile, the police said.
There were no reports of injuries to either the hijacker or the 8 to 10 bus passengers, who ranged from kindergartners to fifth graders.
The suspect, who was not identified, was taken to the Mecklenburg County mental health center.


First Payments Are Made to Japanese World War II Internees    From the left were Kisa Iseri of Oregon and Hau Dairiki and Manoru Eto of California. (Associated Press)


Court to Study Regulations That Help Hospital Unions
LEAD: In a case likely to affect the course of labor-management relations at thousands of hospitals, the Supreme Court agreed today to review a National Labor Relations Board regulation that enhanced the power of unions to organize hospital workers.


Bernstein Retires From Performing, Citing Poor Health
LEAD: Leonard Bernstein, the most prominent American conductor of his time, announced through a spokeswoman yesterday that he was retiring from the concert stage, effective immediately, because of poor health.


John Stewart Bell Is Dead at 62; Physicist Tested Particle Actions
LEAD: John Stewart Bell, whose test for one of the most bizarre aspects of quantum physics led to its apparent confirmation, died last week at a hospital in Geneva.
He was 62 years old.


Review/Film;   Japanese Dirty Word Connects 4 Sketches
LEAD: In ''To Hell With English!,'' the best of the four revuelike sketches that make up ''Bakayaro!
I'm Plenty Mad,'' a drone in the teeming corporate beehive of Tokyo learns that he is to be assigned to his company's Chicago office and is told he must learn English immediately.


Brazil Hopes For Lasting Debt Accord
LEAD: Seeking to leave behind a decade of capital flight and debt-induced economic stagnation, Brazil's new Government opens talks today in New York over the nation's $60 billion commercial debt, the third world's largest.


Terreri and Devils Turn Back Stars
LEAD: The Devils were efficient in virtually every department and at every position tonight, from the special teams to the goaltending.


4,900 Layoffs At Philips Unit
LEAD: The Dutch electronics giant Philips N.V. said today that it would lay off 4,900 people in its computer division.
The jobs being lost in


After a Near-Perfect Flight, Shuttle Is Readied for Return
LEAD: The five astronauts of the space shuttle Discovery prepared today to return to Earth on Wednesday, ending a four-day mission that is being hailed as one of the smoothest flights ever.


Pirates Are Running Out of Chances
LEAD: After Bobby Bonilla took what he called ''a real long walk'' back to the Pittsburgh dugout from third base in the eighth inning, he sat down next to Carmelo Martinez. ''Do you know who threw the ball?'' Martinez asked Bonilla. ''Larkin, I guess,'' Bonilla replied, meaning Barry Larkin, the shortstop.


Souter Assumes His Seat on the Supreme Court


Given His Chance, Randolph Provides
LEAD: Willie Randolph has been here before, but that doesn't mean the wide-eyed wonder is gone.


Cigna Unit-Atwood
LEAD: A unit of the Cigna Corporation, the Philadelphia insurer, has acquired 8.9 percent of Atwood Oceanics Inc., the Houston oil drilling concern.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, the subsidiary, the Philadelphia Investment Corporation of Delaware, said it had bought the Atwood shares to provide Atwood with cash to finance limited partnerships in which the companies own interests.


Jeri Cohen Weds F. J. Forestieri 2d
LEAD: Jeri Cohen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton V. Cohen of Allentown, Pa., was married yesterday to Frank Joseph Forestieri2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Forestieri of Waccabuc, N.Y.
Judge John A. K. Bradley of New York City Civil Court performed the ceremony at Civil Court in Manhattan.


Ewing, in Barcelona, Looks to '92 Olympics
LEAD: As the Knicks prepared to take part in the first international basketball tournament in the 17,500-seat arena built here for the 1992 Olympics, the team's starting center, Patrick Ewing, said today that he hoped the arena's debut would prove to be a preview for him as well as for the Palau d'Esports Sant


Youth Shot to Death in South Bronx Is Buried


F.B.I. MAN GUILTY OF SOVIET SPYING
LEAD: The only agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation who has ever been charged with spying against the United States was convicted a second time today.


From Fordham To Nets?
LEAD: When Danny O'Sullivan accepted a basketball scholarship to Fordham University four years ago, he was offered what seemed like sound advice.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
CCL Industries said it had bought all outstanding shares of Korex Co., Detroit, which makes detergents, for about $19.5 million, including the assumption of debt.


Nebraska Governor Curbs Campaign After Threat
LEAD: Gov.
Kay A. Orr said today that her life had been threatened as a result of her refusal to block a proposed radioactive-waste warehouse.
Because of the threat, she said, she will not campaign for re-election in the bitterly divided county where the warehouse would be built.


Air Force Study Critical Of Conduct by Northrop
LEAD: The Air Force said today that it had found wide-ranging and systemic flaws in the basic business practices of the Northrop Corporation, one of the nation's largest military contractors.


Books of the Times;   An American Writer and the Passions in His Art
LEAD:
Theodore Dreiser
An American Journey 1908-1945
By Richard Lingeman
544 pages. Illustrated. G. P. Putnam's Sons. $39.95.


John Lennon's 50th Birthday Is Celebrated


Food Notes
LEAD:
Fresh Isn't Always Better


$750 Million Issue Is Offered by Sears
LEAD: A $750 million issue of pass-through certificates offered by Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company and its wholly owned subsidiary Sears Receivables Financing Group Inc. was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.


Liberia Peace Force Growing
LEAD: A West African peacekeeping force in Liberia will grow to 9,000 so that an interim government can assume control, an official of the interim government said today.
There are now between 6,000 and 7,000 troops in Monrovia sent by the Economic Community of West African States as part of a five-nation peacekeeping force.


House Ready to Take Up Arts Endowment Fight
LEAD: After months of public debate about what constitutes obscenity in art and what artworks deserve Federal grants, the battle is expected to spill onto the floor of the House of Representatives this week.


General Cinema Sells Cadbury Stake
LEAD: The General Cinema Corporation sold its stake in Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C., the British candy and soft-drink company, and said the sale would result in an after-tax gain of more than $80 million, or about $1.10 a share, in its fourth quarter.
General Cinema said it had sold its entire investment in Cadbury except for 13.2 million shares being held in escrow in connection with its outstanding 5 percent exchangeable debentures that are due in 2002.


Payton and Sonics Reach Accord on Pact
LEAD: The Seattle SuperSonics said last night that they had reached an agreement in principle to sign Gary Payton, their top draft choice.


Dollar Ends Mostly Lower In Worldwide Trading
LEAD: The dollar finished mostly lower on world markets yesterday, but selloffs in other currencies prevented its decline from deepening.


Review/Fashion;   Dressing a la Milan: Mostly Short Hems
LEAD: Most designers have been eager to introduce their ready-to-wear collections early in the spring showing, so there has been a noticeable letdown after the weekend rush.


A.B. Tatistcheff, 86, Leading Interpreter In U.S. Treaty Talks
LEAD: Alexis B. Tatistcheff, an economist and language expert who served as an interpreter for the State Department, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: SYLVIA FINE KAYE, a songwriter and the widow of Danny Kaye, has given the couple's collections of films, scripts, recordings and memorabilia to the Library of Congress.
Married for nearly 40 years, Mrs.
Kaye and her husband, who died in 1987, collaborated on hundreds of songs, shows and television projects.


A.T.&amp;T. May be Affected By Visa Credit Card Change
LEAD: Visa U.S.A. yesterday announced changes in regulations of its credit cards that could upset A.T.&amp;T.'s hugely successful new credit card program and protect the large banks that dominate the business.


Athletics Have Become a Team on the Move
LEAD: Tony La Russa, at times, has a world-weary face when he feels obliged to dispel some myths about the Oakland Atheltics, myths propagated by those who look at Jose Canseco, Mark McGwire &amp; Co. and assume: ''Dynasty built by way of the three-run home-run.''


Traders Bid for Reserve Oil
LEAD: The list of bidders for five million barrels of crude oil being auctioned from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve includes at least five companies that are commodity traders, and not crude oil refiners.


Key Events in the Bidding for United Airlines
LEAD: Missing


Council in Washington Limits Mayor's Power
LEAD: The District of Columbia Council today passed emergency legislation restricting Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s spending authority in his last weeks in office.


U.S. Faces a $2 Billion Loss On Unauthorized Iraq Loans
LEAD: Congressional investigators said today that the Federal Government stood to lose $2 billion because it had guaranteed unauthorized loans to Iraq made by the Atlanta branch of an Italian bank.


A's and Reds Are One Away From Pennants
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds moved to within one victory of capturing their ninth pennant tonight when they defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates, 5-3, won for the third straight time and took a lead of three games to one in the National League playoff.


Saudis Say Jerusalem Killings Could Weaken Alliance Against Iraq
LEAD: Saudi Government officials expressed concern today that the killing of at least 19 Palestinians in Jerusalem could have the effect of weakening the international alliance against Iraq.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
Who Said What


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.12
N.A.
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.18
N.A.
7.63
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.21
N.A.
7.66
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.66
N.A.
8.08
30-YR.


Director Leaves Parking Bureau After 3 Years
LEAD: The director of the city's embattled Parking Violations Bureau resigned yesterday, saying that he had accomplished all that he set out to do when he took the position nearly three years ago.


Glossary of Budget Terms
LEAD: Gramm-Rudman-Hollings.
Known by the names of its Senate sponsors, this law requires that the deficit be cut to specific levels each year until it reaches zero.
If Congress and the White House cannot agree on a plan that brings the deficit in on target in any given year, automatic across-the-board spending cuts are to take place, a process called sequestration.


Wine Talk
LEAD: LATE-harvest wines, with the exception of Chateau d'Yquem and a handful of other Sauternes, tend not to be taken seriously.
With Yquem selling for upwards of $150 a bottle these days, it has to be taken seriously, but most wines in this rather special category are simply ignored.


Correction
LEAD: An article on Monday about budget problems at the University of Connecticut misidentified a graduate student who spoke about higher education as an issue in Connecticut's race for governor.
He is Peter Rowe.


About New York;   In the Bronx, An Amerasian Finds His Roots
LEAD: As people of different races clash in the United States' largest city, small rays of hope are precious.
Hence, this story about a child of a long ago Asian war and an immensely caring black couple in the Bronx.


Performance Art, With Food as Star
LEAD: ACROSS the country, epicurean shindigs tend to elicit an automatic ball-gown-and-sparkle response.
But most of the 200 people who attended the Gastronomic Gala at the Westbeth Theater in lower Manhattan last Thursday night were wearing rumpled oxford cloth shirts or black turtlenecks and tweed jackets.


Court Denies Bhutto Respite From Trial
LEAD: Benazir Bhutto's legal defense team failed today to persuade the judge of a special tribunal to postpone hearings on corruption charges against the former Prime Minister until after national elections on Oct. 24 so that she could concentrate on her political campaign.


Charles L. Sanders, Magazine Editor, 58
LEAD: Charles L. Sanders, the managing editor of Ebony magazine since 1968, died at Michael Reese Hospital in Chicago on Thursday.
He was 58 years old.


H. Gregory Thomas, Chanel Executive, 82
LEAD: H. Gregory Thomas, retired president of Chanel Inc., the United States branch of the French fragrance concern, died yesterday at the Lakeland Regional Medical Center in Florida.
He was 82 years old and lived in Masarkytown, Fla.


A Cable TV Company Promotes Its Image
LEAD: TELE-COMMUNICATIONS Inc., the nation's largest operator of cable television systems, has turned to Hal Riney &amp; Partners, San Francisco, for a warmly lit, feel-good campaign intended to improve its standing with the public.
The ads will begin later this month on all the company's cable systems and on broadcast stations in 24 states.


Unit for GMC Formed By McCann-Erickson
LEAD: McCann-Erickson has formed a Detroit-area agency exclusively for GMC Trucks, a division of the General Motors Corporation.
The agency, which will be known as McCann-Erickson/SAS, Troy, will handle the national account, previously handled by McCann's Detroit office, as well as all television advertising for the regional dealers.


Motorola Net Disappoints; Stock Slides
LEAD: Motorola Inc., one of the world's largest producers of communications equipment and semiconductors, announced a smaller than expected increase in third-quarter profits yesterday, and the company's stock fell sharply.


Accounts
LEAD: *
Men's Health magazine, a publication of Rodale Press Inc, Emmaus, Penn., to Baron &amp; Zaretsky, New York, with a budget of more than $1 million.


Eating Well
LEAD: RESEARCHERS say there is increasing evidence that some powdered infant formulas are deficient in a key ingredient babies need for optimal development, but the experts emphasize that this is not a cause for panic.


Paris Subway, Like New York's, Had to Turn Itself Around;   Riding Shotgun
LEAD: To the Editor:


Alaska Oil Spending To Increase
LEAD: The companies that own Alaska's giant Prudhoe Bay oilfield said today that they would spend $1.1 billion on new equipment to slow the decline in North Slope oil production.


Paris Subway, Like New York's, Had to Turn Itself Around
LEAD: To the Editor:


Guatemala Arrests Five in Killing of an American
LEAD: At least five soldiers have been detained in the killing of an American innkeeper, a case the Bush Administration has called an important test of the justice system of Guatemala and its relations with the United States.


N.A.S.D. Ruling on ASK
LEAD: ASK Computer Systems Inc. said today that it had been advised by the National Association of Securities Dealers that as a condition of its continued listing, the proposed sale of about 5.6 million shares of common stock to the Electronic Data Systems Corporation, a General Motors subsidiary, and the Hewlett-Packard


The Rozelle Trophy
LEAD: Pete Rozelle, who retired as commissioner of the N.F.L. on Nov. 5, 1989, after 30 years service, will have his name on the trophy that will be awarded each year to the most valuable player in the Super Bowl.


New Strategies to Fight Crime Go Far Beyond Stiffer Terms and More Cells
LEAD: Faced with the growth of violent crime and the political pressures of even faster-growing citizen fears about crime, the nation's police, prosecutors, wardens and researchers are designing an array of new strategies that are already beginning to reshape American criminal justice.


10 Wounded By a Gunman In the Bronx
LEAD: Ten people, including a 9-year-old boy and seven teen-age girls, were wounded in the Bronx last night when a man who had apparently been arguing with his girlfriend pulled a gun and began firing, the police said.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the Jewish holiday of Shemini Atzereth, which concludes the harvest festival of Succoth, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City tomorrow.
On Friday, those rules will be suspended for Simhath Torah, which ends the annual cycle of the public reading of the Torah.


Kenya Undermined, at the Top
LEAD: Kenya's highhanded President, Daniel arap Moi, appears to have learned little from the collapse of one-party absolutism in Eastern Europe or from the pro-democracy ferment elsewhere in Africa.
After threatening to crush opponents ''like rats,'' he arrested two former Cabinet ministers who dared call for a multiparty system.


Chrysler's Message to Union: Pact Like G.M.'s Is Too Costly
LEAD: Lee A. Iacocca, chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, plans to tell the United Automobile Workers union on Thursday that the company cannot afford a labor agreement like those negotiated with the General Motors Corporation and the Ford Motor Company.


New Pumps to Help Conserve Oil
LEAD: With the price of crude oil reaching $40 a barrel, industrial manufacturers are re-examining ways to cut their energy costs.
One important tactic could be the installation of a new generation of more efficient pumps in their plants.


Army Limits Night Maneuvers in Effort to Prevent Accidents in Gulf
LEAD: In an effort to stem the growing number of accidents in the Persian Gulf, the Army has put new restrictions on night operations by Army helicopters, the Pentagon said today.


Borrowing Growth Dips
LEAD: Americans cut the growth of their installment credit in half in August, the Government said today.


RWANDANS REPORT GAINS ON INVADERS
LEAD: Government troops are making headway against a rebel invasion force in northeast Rwanda and life in this capital is returning to normal, military sources and residents said today.


Review/Dance;   Party and Performance By Mexican Troupe
LEAD: When members of Ballet Folklorico de Mexico left the stage of Carnegie Hall on Monday night and paraded into the aisles, it was clear that this was not just a dance performance.
It was a big party, one that came to a joyous conclusion when the dancers tossed colored streamers at spectators.


Big Conviction in Recruit Scandal
LEAD: Hisashi Shinto, once one of Japan's most powerful business figures, was convicted of accepting bribes today in the first big court case to emerge from a scandal that rocked Japan's political world.


Book Notes
LEAD:
Brando's Story


From Tuna Fishing to Big Game
LEAD: After an unusual Sunday off, the Giants went back to work today, preparing for their game next Sunday against the Redskins in Washington.


Public Service Stressed At a Troubled School
LEAD: When 15-year-old Staci Manago first learned she was one of 50 students chosen for the Academy of Public Service at Anacostia High School, she thought it must have something to do with the military.


Peachtree Refinancing
LEAD: Equitable Real Estate Investment Management Inc. and the Portman Companies announced yesterday that they had reached an agreement in principle to refinance the 2.4-million-square-foot Peachtree Center in Atlanta.
The Portman Companies, a leading Atlanta-based developer, has been strained by heavy debt burdens in recent months and is negotiating with creditors to restructure much of its obligations.


Rockets Let Lloyd Go
LEAD: The Houston Rockets have renounced their rights to Lewis Lloyd, the 6-foot-6-inch guard who played sparingly last season after sitting out almost two years for violating the National Basketball Association anti-drug program. (AP)


Dinkins Was Told of Risk in Teacher Pact
LEAD: The 5.5 percent raise that Mayor David N. Dinkins gave New York City's teachers came over the fierce objections of top city budget officials, who warned it might have serious consequences for the city's fiscal health, interviews with officials who took part in the negotiations reveal.


American Air Plans Job Cuts
LEAD: American Airlines has sent layoff notices to about 40 employees in a plan to eliminate 1,000 jobs and reduce costs, the airline said today.


Bankers Trust Picks Unit Chief
LEAD: C. Edward Midgley, a veteran of Wall Street and the corporate board room, has joined the Bankers Trust Company as head of its corporate finance group.


WARNING IS ISSUED TO NEW YORK CITY ON BOND RATINGS
LEAD: In a sign of concern about New York City's fiscal condition, the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation warned yesterday that the city's credit rating on its bonds might fall and that it must revise its financial plan ''in line with the realities'' of a slipping economy.


People
LEAD: * Robert Schwartz has been appointed senior vice president at Ayer, New York.


Westchester Organic Co-op
LEAD: To The Living Section:


Memorial for Whitman
LEAD: A memorial for Alden Whitman, a retired reporter for The New York Times who pioneered in writing personalized obituaries, will be held on Tuesday at 6 P.M. at the Century Club, 7 West 43d Street.
Mr.
Whitman died on a visit to Monte Carlo on Sept. 4 at the age of 76.


EXECUTIVES
LEAD: *
Kinney Shoe Corp., New York, a subsidiary of Woolworth Corp., New York, named Floyd R. Huff executive vice president.
His replacement as senior vice president for athletic-related sales is LaMoine Adams.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The criminal justice system is just a concentrated stew of all our larger social problems.
And it's time that mainstream


Top-Level Appointment Is Made at Maybelline
LEAD: Maybelline Inc., the beauty-products company recently acquired by Wasserstein, Perella Partners L.P., has named Robert N. Hiatt as president and chief executive.


Lenny Bruce Died for the Constitution
LEAD: To the Editor:


Small Traders Give Polish Economy a Facelift
LEAD: Off to one side of the towering Stalinist building that is Warsaw's Palace of Culture, a gift made by Moscow in the 1950's as a token of Communist solidarity, huddle hundreds of wooden stalls laden with everything from furs to frying pans.


Michelangelo, Renaissance Man of the Brain, Too?
LEAD: Michelangelo has long been known for his exacting mastery of human anatomy, although he often exaggerated or emphasized parts of the body in his paintings and sculptures to suit his esthetic aims.


63 Arrested at Construction Site in Queens
LEAD: Sixty-three members of a group that seeks construction jobs for its members were arrested yesterday after taking over the site of a hotel-construction project in Flushing, Queens, the police said.


Moynihan Revives Call to Cut Deductions for Social Security
LEAD: Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan tried today to inject new life into his proposal for a cut in Social Security payroll deductions, but for much of the day the New York Democrat was a solitary figure as he lectured a chamber devoid of fellow senators.
Even Mr.
Moynihan admitted that his cause seemed less than compelling to his colleagues.


Myron Natwick, 100; Animated Betty Boop
LEAD: Myron (Grim) Natwick, the animator who gave life to the cartoon character Betty Boop, a curvaceous flapper with a Kewpie doll face whose favorite refrain was ''Boop-boop-a-doop,'' died on Sunday at Santa Monica Hospital Medical Center.
He was 100 years old.
He died of complications from pneumonia, a hospital spokesman said.


Union Bids for UAL Rejected by Directors
LEAD: An audacious and persistent drive by three unions to buy the UAL Corporation apparently ended yesterday when the company's board turned down two offers because they did not have financing and were lower than an offer the directors had accepted in the spring.


Scott Bartlett Film Maker, 47
LEAD: Scott Bartlett, an educator and independent film maker, died Sept. 29 at Pacific Presbyterian Medical Center in San Francisco.
He was 47 years old and lived in San Francisco.


Exiles From Kuwait Debate Looser Rule By the Emir's Family
LEAD: As hundreds of prominent Kuwaiti exiles prepare to gather this weekend to discuss their country's future, a strenuous debate has broken out among them about the need for a more democratic form of government.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
N.H.L.
Blues Top Penguins
Geoff Courtnall tapped in a pass from Adam Oates for his second goal of the game with 5 minutes 18 seconds to play, giving the St.
Louis Blues a 4-3 victory over the Pittsburgh Penguins last night in St.
Louis.
Courtnall was waiting at the right side of the net and Oates made a perfect feed as the Blues capped a wild finish.


Dinkins's New House Rule
LEAD: Trying to put the controversy over his new headboard to rest, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he would require all future work at Gracie Mansion, except routine maintenance, to be approved by a deputy mayor.
He also ordered an audit of the last 10 years of work done there.


Douglas Defeated in House Deal
LEAD: Back in February, flush with his upset victory over Mike Tyson, James (Buster) Douglas fantasized about being certified as a bona-fide celebrity by Robin Leach's television program, ''Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous.''


San Francisco Journal;   A License Plate Debate: Italian Slurs or Pride?
LEAD: Like many of the proud sons and daughters of Palermo, Naples and Genoa, Dominic Troncale is not shy about advertising his ethnic heritage.
He wears a shirt that says ''Full-Blooded Italian.''


Pratt in Deal With G.E. Unit
LEAD: Pratt &amp; Whitney and GE Aircraft Engines, sometimes fierce competitors in the jet-engine industry, will join together to study the possibility of developing a propulsion system for supersonic commercial aircraft, the companies announced today.


A's and Reds Are One Away From Pennants
LEAD: Perhaps this is the time for some historical perspective.


Stein Asks Dinkins to Rescind Teachers' Accord
LEAD: City Council President Andrew J. Stein called on Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday to consider rescinding the proposed New York City teachers' contract, assailing it as ''extremely irresponsible'' and ''fiscal folly.''


Inspirational Black History Draws Academic Fire
LEAD: Reaching for ways to inspire black students, a growing number of educators are trying to tell them more about their own ancestors, bringing tales of African kings and little-known black inventors, scientists and artists into the classroom.


Closing at Preston
LEAD: The Preston Corporation said it would close its Reeves Transportation Company and Pioneer Transportation Systems Inc. units and take a related $17 million charge in its third quarter.
The company said the units would not accept any new business after Wednesday but would honor existing arrangements.


Bobsled for Walker
LEAD: Herschel Walker, the Minnesota Vikings running back, took a break from the National Football League yesterday and became eligible for world competition on the United States bobsled team, nearly breaking a track record during push training at the Olympic run in Lake Placid, N.Y.


U.S. Presses the U.N. to Condemn Israel
LEAD: The United States, apparently trying to maintain the support of Arab countries opposed to Iraq, asked the United Nations Security Council tonight to approve a resolution condemning Israel for excessive use of force in killing at least 19 Palestinians on Monday.


Carter Hawley to Sell Thalhimer's
LEAD: Carter Hawley Hale Stores, the West Coast's largest department-store operator, agreed yesterday to sell its Thalhimer Brothers subsidiary to the May Department Stores Company for about $325 million in cash and a possible $15 million in additional proceeds.


Davis Cup Details Almost Set
LEAD: Two important components for the United States Davis Cup final match against Australia at the Florida Suncoast Dome, Nov. 30-Dec. 2, will be announced tomorrow at a United States Tennis Association news conference in St.
Petersburg, Fla.


Judges Offer Plan to Speed Felony Trials
LEAD: New York State's top court officials said yesterday that they would create new sections of existing New York City courts to speed the handling of gun-possession, murder and other violent-crime cases.


Review/Opera;   In 'Godunov,' a Boris Who Out-Booms the Bells
LEAD: Any basso who takes on the title role in ''Boris Godunov'' at the Metropolitan Opera does so in the presence of formidable ghosts.
Peering over his shoulder will be intimidating figures with names like Chaliapin, Pinza, Kipnis and London.
Paata Burchuladze, who portrayed the demented czar on Monday evening in the season's first performance of Mussorgsky's opera, did not immediately insinuate himself into that hallowed company.


His Arm, His Career, His Heart
LEAD: The other members of the Boston Red Sox had arrived earlier, walking across the right-field grass toward their dugout and up the tunnel to their clubhouse while the Oakland Athletics took batting practice.
But now, about two and a half hours before yesterday's third American League Championship Series game, Roger Clemens emerged alone through the door in the green outfield fence.


BUSH HINTS AT RISE IN TOP TAX RATES, THEN BACKS AWAY
LEAD: President Bush said for the first time today that he might agree to an increase in income tax rates for wealthy Americans as part of a budget compromise, but he later abandoned that position under strong pressure from Republican senators.


Welfare Agency Faulted in Closing Cases
LEAD: The Human Resources Administration, which oversees welfare payments and benefits in New York City, takes almost 15,000 families off the welfare rolls each month for administrative reasons like missed appointments with caseworkers and lack of proper documentation, a private report has found.


Prosecutors Said to Shorten Milken Pre-Sentencing Case
LEAD: Federal prosecutors will not present evidence against Michael R. Milken in one of the four transactions that are part of the former financier's pre-sentencing hearing, people involved in the case said yesterday.


Critic's Notebook;   When the Inside of the Outside Proves Empty
LEAD: Something is very wrong when a film's style can be peeled whole from the story, like the rind of a Sunkist orange, leaving the story more or less undamaged or, at least, what it would have been like without the fancy packaging.


No Taxes Needed in Savings and Loan Bailout
LEAD: To the Editor:


Economic Scene;   Adam Smith, Meet Northrop Frye
LEAD: MOST economists earn their bread by discovering more and more about less and less.


VCR Still a Mystery? Try Talking to It
LEAD: Japan's largest consumer electronics company has yet another idea for making videocassette recorders easier to program.
The Matsushita Electric Industrial Company has developed a machine that converses with the user.


60 Die in India Protest
LEAD: More than 60 people were killed tonight when a passenger train was set ablaze in southern India in a protest by members of an extreme leftist group, news reports said.


Naples Journal;   The Innocent Die as Crime Reaches New Ferocity
LEAD: Andrea Esposito's tumbledown life, all 12 years of it, came shattering to an end on a barroom floor.


Excerpts From the Bush News Conference on the Budget and the Mideast
LEAD: Following are excerpts from a transcript of President Bush's news conference today, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company:
OPENING STATEMENT


Thailand Lifts Cigarette Ban
LEAD: Thailand has lifted a long-standing ban on foreign cigarette imports after a GATT ruling that the practice was illegal, a Government spokesman said today.


No Taxes Needed in Savings and Loan Bailout;   Lending and Spending
LEAD: To the Editor:


PRICE OF OIL JUMPS PAST $40 A BARREL
LEAD: Oil prices soared to record levels yesterday on renewed fears of war in the Middle East, closing for the first time above $40 a barrel.


Food Label Bill Imposes Rigid Orthodoxy
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE BUDGET AGREEMENT: The Patrician's Way;   Bush Passion for Secrecy Runs Afoul Of Public's Passion for Open Debate
LEAD: Playing beneath the surface of President Bush's words about the budget crisis today was a flicker of impatience.
It was a characteristic reaction for a patrician politician who was bred to believe in the Establishment way of operating, that important decisions are best made behind closed doors with a group of men who share the same goals and assumptions.


For Many Americans, A Car Is a Necessity
LEAD: To the Editor:


John B. Goodwin Sr., Executive Recruiter, 85
LEAD: John B. Goodwin Sr., an executive recruiter for financial institutions, died yesterday at Stamford Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 85 years old and lived in Darien, Conn.


Oklahoma City Journal;   Police Officers Step In On Truant Officer Beat
LEAD: It was midmorning and Sgt.
Douglas Hawkins of the Oklahoma City police had just heard over his radio that the day's first cases were about to arrive.


CLOSE TO HOME
LEAD: I HAVE come from where clothing, linens and leather goods gather for the last roundup.
Corralled in stores on the main street of an old New England town, they are stared at, pawed over, sometimes even purchased by an army of men and women in sensible shoes.
Nikes and Adidas and Reeboks, these shoes are, worn not for running and jogging but to encompass the corn, the bunion and the flattened arch.


Life Insurers Jolted By Sharp Downturn In Real Estate Value
LEAD: With real estate values going downhill and banks nationwide struggling to avoid being buried in the slide, anxieties are focusing on another group of lenders: life insurance companies.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-15
A U.N. resolution condemning Israel for the deaths of at least 21 Arabs in Jerusalem appears closer to being formed after a policy shift by the Bush Administration.
Page A1


Frames Without the Art (Technically, Anyway)
LEAD: TO celebrate the opening of its new framing and furniture restoration store, Lowy East, the long-established Lowy company is presenting ''Historical Perspectives: The Frame, 1450-1950,'' an exhibit of about 30 antique frames.
They happen to be empty, which allows the impressive array of frames to stand on their own as rare art works, with price tags to match.


Grain and Soybean Prices Off After Weather Forecast
LEAD: Grain and soybean futures prices closed mostly lower yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade.


At Issue in the Sentencing Hearing
LEAD: In the pre-sentencing hearing of Michael R. Milken, the Government plans to present evidence about what it contends are illegal actions in three transaction.
The accusations have all been denied by the defense.
They involve these charges:
WICKES COMPANIES


Syrian Chief Risks Anger at Home Over Policies
LEAD: As he positions himself in a hazardous and uncharted era, President Hafez al-Assad is courting the disapproval of many Syrians by moving away from the harsh anti-Americanism that once underpinned his claim to pre-eminence in the Arab world, diplomats and other specialists say.


3 Bears Find a Place For Play in Central Park
LEAD: SOON after his wife, Pat, died in January 1988, Samuel N. Friedman, an executive in a furniture company, met John Manship, the son of Paul Manship, the sculptor who is probably best known for his heroic sculpture of Prometheus that is a focus of Rockefeller Center. ''John showed me one of his father's bronzes - a trio of big bears - and I thought it was terrific,'' said Mr.


Portman Mortgage Holders To Control Atlanta Project
LEAD: John C. Portman Jr., the Atlanta architect and developer, said today that he would surrender to mortgage holders a controlling interest in the Peachtree Center office complex here, the keystone of his worldwide real estate holdings.


Metro Matters;   Why Dinkins Seems to Draw So Many Critics
LEAD: One year ago, David N. Dinkins was just weeks away from a historic victory as New York City's first black mayor.
That his margin would be the narrowest in any of the city's mayoral elections since 1905 made his election no less conclusive, though there were concerns that the questions about his personal finances that nearly cost him the race had also drained the reservoir of credibility and good will that help any official govern.


The $290,000 Job Nobody Wants
LEAD: WANTED: Top-notch policy maker with firm grasp of accounting theory/ business practice.
Needed to make accounting rules for Corporate America.
Bucolic Connecticut setting, three-and-a-half-year commitment preferred.
Starting salary $290,000.


Looking Beyond the Buffoonery In a Classic Farce by Moliere
LEAD: ''It is an odd calling,'' wrote Jean Baptiste Poquelin, ''to make decent folk laugh.'' However odd it may be, Poquelin did a particularly good job of it under his better-known pseudonym, Moliere, writing classic comedies that poked fun at the follies, vices, hypocrites and hypocrisy of his less-than-perfect society.


First Fidelity Payment Approved
LEAD: A Federal judge in Newark has approved a plan for distributing $30 million to shareholders of the First Fidelity Bancorporation, a New Jersey banking company, and 25 law firms that represented the shareholders in a class-action lawsuit.
The banking company agreed earlier this year to pay $30 million to settle claims that in 1988 it improperly concealed problems with bad loans.


People
LEAD: *
Marjorie Levin has joined Wells, Rich, Greene, New York, as vice president and director of sales promotion.


Youth Gets Prison Sentence For Rape on Brooklyn Roof
LEAD: A 17-year-old Brooklyn youth was sentenced yesterday for his part in the rape of a woman who was also robbed and thrown from the roof of a four-story building last year.


A's Win the Pennant as Red Sox Lose Loudly
LEAD: Dave Stewart threw a four-hit victory and Roger Clemens threw a second-inning temper tantrum yesterday as the Oakland Athletics beat the Boston Red Sox, 3-1, to win the American League pennant and advance to the World Series for the third straight year.


Mother Gets 2 Months To Treat Daughter, 7
LEAD: A Chinese woman who has fought state attempts to use surgery to treat her 7-year-old daughter has won the right to try traditional Chinese medicine but may be forced to agree to surgery later.


Ex-Suspect in Slaying Sentenced in Robbery
LEAD: A black man once suspected of killing a pregnant white woman and wounding her husband after the couple left a Boston hospital last fall has been sentenced to 12 to 25 years in prison for robbery.


Pop Radio Merger Deal
LEAD: The Heritage Media Corporation said today that the shareholders of the Pop Radio Corporation at a special meeting on Monday had approved a $20.50-a-share merger agreement between the two companies.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Heritage said 92.1 percent of the shares entitled to take part had voted in favor of the merger.


A U.S. Jet Crashes, Killing 2, In 4th Gulf Aircraft Accident
LEAD: An Air Force jet crashed yesterday in Saudi Arabia, killing both crew members.


The Umpire Upstaged The Game
LEAD: It's one of baseball's oldest sayings: If you don't notice the umpire, he's doing a good job.


Nathan Witkin, Rabbi For Military, Dies at 88
LEAD: Rabbi Nathan Witkin, who served for three decades as a chaplain ministering to United States armed services personnel and their families in the Canal Zone. died Tuesday at Sarasota Memorial Hospital in Florida.
He was 88 years old and had lived in retirement in Sarasota since 1978.


Layoffs by Hasbro
LEAD: Hasbro Inc., the nation's largest toy maker, said it had laid off 90 workers.
Hasbro said it had made the cuts because of the ailing economy and its need to remain competitive.
The company, which employs 8,000 worldwide, said administrative costs had grown at a greater rate than sales.
The layoffs affected workers in marketing, research and development, sales and administration.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
8.00
8.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.20
7.18
7.71
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.22
7.21
7.68
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.76
8.66
8.12
30-YR.


INSIDE
LEAD:
German Counterspy a Spy
A counterintelligence officer in West Germany who ran East German double agents has confessed to working for the other side himself.
Page A9.
No Coffee Risk Found
A new study offers the most convincing evidence yet that drinking coffee does not lead to heart disease, public health experts say.


Study Disputes Coffee's Tie to Heart Disease Risk
LEAD: Contradicting other recent findings, a large new study has found that drinking coffee does not make people more likely to develop heart disease.


Matich Selected by Jets To Replace Cadigan
LEAD: Working on the theory that it would be better to go with what they have than try to acquire an offensive lineman from somewhere else, the Jets today named Trevor Matich to step into the starting right guard position opened by the season-ending knee injury to Dave Cadigan.


21 South Africans Are Released Under Political-Prisoner Amnesty
LEAD: The Government released 21 political prisoners today, and the African National Congress, while welcoming the move, responded by insisting that all political prisoners still behind bars be released immediately.


SPY FOR BONN SAYS HE'S DOUBLE AGENT
LEAD: A senior West German counterintelligence officer who used to run East German double agents has confessed to being a double agent himself, the Federal Prosecutor's Office announced today.


Reviews/Music;   Czech Philharmonic With Its New Leader
LEAD: The conductor Jiri Belohlavek's association with the Czech Philharmonic goes back to the early 1970's, when he spent two years with it as an assistant conductor.
He has returned to the orchestra frequently since then, and he led it in a memorable performance of Smetana's ''Ma Vlast'' when the orchestra last visited New York


An Engine Out, New York's Plane Makes Another Sudden Landing
LEAD: Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine became the latest official to experience an emergency landing on the troubled state plane today after a cockpit warning light indicated there was a fire in the right engine.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Sept. 13 about a study on AIDS patients by the New York City Task Force on Single-Disease Hospitals omitted the names of three members of the panel.
They are Dr.
Thomas Killip of Beth Israel Medical Center; Dr.
Sheila M. Rothman of Columbia University, and Dr.
Eileen A. Tynan, the panel's executive director.


At Least 4 Are Killed by Police in Bangladesh Protest


Sony to Help Make Times Square Brighter
LEAD: The Camel may puff and the neon signs may glow, but they will seem like faded soldiers in the world of display advertising come November when the Sony Corporation erects a two-story video screen at One Times Square as part of the continuing redevelopment effort.


Account From Spain On Jackson
LEAD: Does Mark Jackson want the Knicks to trade him?
Does he feel powerless to unseat Maurice Cheeks as the Knicks' starting point guard?
Or was something lost in translation when Jackson spoke to a contingent of Spanish reporters?


Hard Work Found Not to Harm Pregnancy
LEAD: Long hours and hard, stressful work do not adversely affect the outcome of a pregnancy, a study has found.


Senate Kills Moynihan's Proposal To Reduce Social Security Taxes
LEAD: The Senate today killed a proposal for a Social Security tax cut that Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan had made something of a personal cause for nearly a year.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day yesterday about the criminal case against Michael R. Milken, the former financier, misstated the likelihood that the judge in the case will interview one of the key prosecution witnesses.
Federal District Judge Kimba M. Wood can ask for testimony from Ivan F. Boesky, the former arbitrager, even if Government prosecutors do not call him for their presentation.


Costly New Drug Vital to Parkinson Patients
LEAD: To the Editor:


Max Bloom, 81, Judge; Led the Liberal Party
LEAD: Max Bloom, a retired associate justice of the Appellate Division of the New York State Supreme Court and a founder of the state's Liberal Party, died yesterday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 81 years old and lived in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.


Yale Students to Protest Racist Acts on Campus
LEAD: A group of Yale University graduate students is organizing two daylong moratoriums on classes to protest recent racist acts on campus, including an anonymously circulated hate letter and derogatory graffiti.


3 Are Indicted In Embezzling Of Elderly Aid
LEAD: The fiscal officer of a private agency serving poor elderly East Harlem residents was indicted yesterday on charges of embezzling almost $1 million in public funds to buy vintage automobiles and gamble in Atlantic City.


It's a Boy! It's a Girl! It's Time To Shop
LEAD: CONSIDER the newborn infant. So small. So wrinkled. Above all, so helpless.


House Fails to Overturn Bush Veto of Import Bill
LEAD: The House failed today to overturn President Bush's veto of a bill cutting imports of textiles, apparel and shoes.


Safety Class for Young Sitters
LEAD: For years, young baby sitters received on-the-job training.
But now some teen-agers are taking a course that teaches them everything from how to handle a medical emergency to more routine child-care skills like feeding, disciplining and toilet training.


Putting a Shine On Handbags
LEAD: FASHION models may have been the first to use the sleek aluminum photographic-equipment cases as luggage.
Now, Zero-Halliburton, of Pacoima, Calif., has introduced two new versions of its lightweight carrying cases.
They happen to be handbags.


Royals' Executive Joins Braves' Front Office
LEAD: John Schuerholz, who has headed baseball operations for the Kansas City Royals for the last decade, was named the executive vice president and general manager of the Atlanta Braves yesterday.


La Quinta Is Urged To End Rights Plan
LEAD: Industrial Equity (Pacific) Ltd., which controls 15 percent of the stock of La Quinta Motor Inns Inc., said the San Antonio-based hotel chain should rescind its shareholder rights plan.
The plan - commonly known as a ''poison pill'' - was adopted last month.


Speedy Turcotte Sparks Rangers
LEAD: Pure speed, a relentless offensive greed and a gloriously gifted touch.
They are Darren Turcotte's talents.
And for another night, they were the difference in a game.


Houston Industries
LEAD: Houston Industries, an electric utility holding company, adopted an employee stock ownership plan that will buy about 10 million of the company's 128 million shares outstanding.
The company said it had adopted the plan to finance its obligations to make matching contributions under an employee savings plan.


Housing Program Aids Poor and Near Poor
LEAD: To the Editor:


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Asea Brown Boveri A.B., the Swiss maker of power and automation equipment, said it would sell its Sprout-Bauer unit to Maschinenfabrik Andritz Actiengesellschaft of Austria.
Terms were not disclosed.


In a Worried Economy, Impasse Adds to Unease
LEAD: The budget stalemate, coinciding with the Persian Gulf confrontation, is worsening the economic slump and increasing the chances of another jolt to the financial markets, various analysts say.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Miscellany
LEAD: *
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Co.
P.L.C., London, sold its Gartner Group Inc. unit, a supplier of information and product data, to Information Partners L.P., a Boston-based limited partnership.
Under the agreement, Gartner Group's managers and Information Partners will pay Saatchi $6.5 million.


Italian Communists Remodeling at Last
LEAD: After nearly a year of intense soul-searching, the Italian Communist Party today joined the political changes that have swept across Europe and gave itself a new name, a new symbol and, it hopes, a new chance to improve its sagging electoral fortunes.


By the Way, Stewart Leads A's Into Series
LEAD: In the heat of the afternoon, while Roger Clemens threw a temper tantrum and the Boston Red Sox became unraveled, Dave Stewart kept his cool.


BMW, the Motorcycle, Gears Up for a Big Run
LEAD: TURNING attention to its neglected stepchild, BMW is trying to pep up its motorcycle division by hiring a new advertising agency, raising ad expenditures tenfold and adding cheaper entry-level vehicles to its high-performance line.
With new management from Germany in place, the company's American division is introducing a new ad campaign later this month by Burkhardt &amp; Christy Advertising Inc.


Kasparov Wins on 44th Move In 2d Game of Championship
LEAD: Gary Kasparov brilliantly showed why he is so feared last night as he won the second game of the 1990 World Championship Chess Match against Anatoly Karpov at the Hudson Theater in the Hotel Macklowe in Manhattan.
After excellent preparation, he launched a sacrifice that set off a smashing attack.


Pennsylvania Campaign Fizzles, but Not Quietly
LEAD: At the outset, the race for Pennsylvania governor had promised to be an interesting, perhaps nasty, conflict between a tenacious incumbent and a fiery challenger whose views on abortion and taxes clashed not only with each other's but also with the traditions of their respective parties.


Shift Urged In Banking
LEAD: The banking industry needs fundamental change to stay competitive with foreign financial institutions, according to a draft report from a House Banking Committee study group. ''It is clear that the relative competitive position of U.S. banks has deteriorated significantly as the U.S. banking system has remained static in a changing world,'' the report said.


U.N. Journal;   In a Polyglot Place, the Most Welcome of Voices
LEAD: The United Nations building would be little more than a glass Tower of Babel without them.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Cheque Products, a division of American Express Co., New York, appointed Carl B. Lehmann senior vice president.


An Idea With Legs
LEAD: In 1940, Nelson Rockefeller invited 130 Latin American journalists to visit the United States, just to see how this country lived and worked.
Mr.
Rockefeller, then Coordinator of Commercial and Cultural Affairs for the American Republics, could hardly have guessed that his idea would ultimately bring 100,000 visitors from Latin


Big Board In Soviet Pact
LEAD: The New York Stock Exchange signed an agreement today with the Soviet Union to help introduce financial markets here.


2 Men Are Arrested in the Shooting of 10 in a Bronx 'Turf' Brawl
LEAD: Two young men were arrested yesterday in the shooting of 10 people, most of them teen-agers, outside a Bronx housing project on Tuesday night, when a ''territorial dispute'' between two groups of youths turned into a brawl, the police said.


Congressional Negotiators Agree On New Curbs on Car Emissions
LEAD: Staff members of the House-Senate conference committee rewriting the Clean Air Act reached agreement today on an array of new standards for reducing air pollution from motor vehicles that will begin to take effect in the mid-1990's.


Evergreens To Counter Winter Blahs
LEAD: THE trees are letting go of their leaves, and soon the radiance of fall will fade.
But it is still possible to plant the evergreens that provide the silhouettes and tones to counter winter's gloomy grays.


Psychiatrist Testifies in Surrogate Birth Case
LEAD: A psychiatrist testified Tuesday that the relationship between a child and the woman who gave birth to him should be paramount in determining whether a surrogate mother or a childless couple should be awarded custody of the child.


Irene Mayer Selznick Dies at 83; Producer of Broadway 'Streetcar'
LEAD: Irene Mayer Selznick, who produced Broadway plays that included the 1947 hit ''A Streetcar Named Desire,'' died yesterday at the Pierre Hotel, where she lived.
She was 83 years old.


Dynamics Corp. And Gabelli in Deal
LEAD: The Dynamics Corporation of America agreed to allow Mario J. Gabelli's Gamco Investors Inc. and Gabelli Funds Inc. to acquire up to 25 percent of Dynamics, or 970,350 of its shares.
The Gabelli entities now own on behalf of their clients about 19.6 percent of the shares.
Under the agreement, the shares will be bought for investment purposes.


If Today Is Thursday It's Designer's Saturday
LEAD: Designer's Saturday, the annual event that is the equivalent of a debutante ball for interior designers, architects and home furnishings showrooms, starts today.


Review/Theater;   'About Time,' A Couple With a Past
LEAD: Onstage in ''About Time,'' James Whitmore and Audra Lindley are an endearing couple, as they act their way through and around the slight play that Tom Cole has created for them.
Portraying two people generically identified as Old Man and Old Woman, they chat, argue and begin to ameliorate their differences.


Silver Reaches 13-Year Low; Big Supply and Mideast Cited
LEAD: Silver prices fell yesterday to their lowest level in more than 13 years, after oil prices fell as anxiety over tension in the Middle East influenced currency and commodity markets.


Ornamental Gourds Have Uses, Too
LEAD: THE American Gourd Society held its 28th annual World's Largest Gourd Show in Mount Gilead, Ohio, last week.
More than a thousand gourd growers, craft artists and collectors showed up to celebrate the wonders and uses of these ancient inedible plants, which are colorful, hard-shelled and often highly ornamental.


Rap Group's Lawyer Challenges Selection of Jury
LEAD: The lawyer for the rap group 2 Live Crew has challenged Florida's method of jury selection at the group's trial on obscenity charges, contending that the method would produce predominantly white middle-aged jurors who would not be representative of the community.


Principal Puts a Halt To Slap-Bracelet Fad
LEAD: Children in this suburb of New York will just have to suffer being unfashionable, at least during school hours, because the slap-bracelet has been banned at two elementary schools.


Robert F. Murphy, 66, Professor Of Anthropology and an Author
LEAD: Robert Francis Murphy, a professor of anthropology at Columbia University, died on Monday at his home in Leonia, N.J.
He was 66 years old.


U.N. APPEARS CLOSE TO A RESOLUTION REBUKING ISRAELIS
LEAD: After a significant policy shift by the Bush Administration, the United Nations Security Council appeared to be moving toward agreement tonight on a resolution condemning Israel for the deaths of at least 21 Arabs in Jerusalem on Monday and giving the Council a new role in the future of the Israeli-occupied territories.


Take Plain Brown Paper, Add Some Gold Trim . . .
LEAD: ALL Manolo Blahnik, the London-based shoe designer, wanted for his Manhattan boutique at 15 West 55th Street was a ''clean, anonymous environment.'' He got that and a little bit more.


China's Prime Minister Losing His Hold?
LEAD: To the Editor:


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE AGAINST APARTHEID - 10:30 A.M.


300 Due in U.S. From Iraq on Evacuation Flight
LEAD: An Iraqi airliner chartered by the United States made a stopover here early today carrying what American diplomats said could be the last group of American citizens from Kuwait to be evacuated aboard a special flight.


Senate Panel Approves a Major Cut in AIDS Relief for Cities
LEAD: In a tangle that pitted one needy group against another, the Senate Appropriations Committee today approved less than 20 percent of the money authorized for disaster relief to the cities hardest hit by the AIDS epidemic.


Review/Film;   It's Dark. It's Night. It's Deadpan.
LEAD: On a long, dark night of the soul, of the sort that can be photographed so nicely in black and white, three wanderers roam the streets of Berlin.
Chief among them is a young man named Jack (Noah Taylor) who has just arrived from Leningrad, where his love of Russian literature has led him to tackle an elderly woman and stage epileptic seizures.


The Next Best Thing To 'Rockaby Baby'?
LEAD: EVEN insomniacs who normally wouldn't find anything to smile about when it comes to sleep might respond to Count Sheep, a series of books and a 30-minute tape that are meant to alleviate sleepless nights.


A More Pessimistic View of Bank Deposit Insurance Fund
LEAD: New projections by the Bush Administration show the fund insuring bank deposits shrinking to less than half its current size within three years, a senior House Banking Committee member said today.


Dawson Trip Veto
LEAD: Andre Dawson, the Chicago Cubs' outfielder with fragile knees, has been denied permission to join an all-star team that is scheduled to leave in three weeks on a 10-day tour of Japan.


TV Directors, an Unsung Group, Sing the Praises of Continuity
LEAD: For Joel Zwick, the change was something like trading in a Maserati for a 10-year-old station wagon.
Sure, it starts up every morning and is loaded with personality, but sometimes it leaves an oil spot on the driveway.


Livery-Cab Driver Shot Dead; 31st New York Victim in '90
LEAD: A livery-cab driver was shot dead early yesterday in Brooklyn, the 31st livery- or gypsy-cab driver killed in New York City this year, the police said.


700 Jobs To Be Cut By Saks
LEAD: Saks Fifth Avenue, which has been owned by a Middle East financial company since last spring, announced a five-year strategic program yesterday that calls for a cut of 700 jobs, capital investments of $250 million and plans for an additional chain of small fashion specialty shops.


Europe Stalls On Farm Policy
LEAD: The European Community today failed for the second time this week to endorse a plan designed to break a deadlock with the United States over farm-subsidy policy.


Review/Fashion;   Italian Designers Take Some Odd Turns
LEAD: Fashion took some odd turns in the spring ready-to-wear shows Tuesday night.
First Gianfranco Ferre, who doubles as the designer of Christian Dior's couture collection in Paris, showed styles of such surpassing opulence that they reminded old-timers of overdone fancy-dress balls in Venice and Biarritz in the 1950's.


Bush Trips, Capital Reels
LEAD: The headlines around the country today used words like ''flip-flop,'' ''waffle,'' ''blink,'' ''retreat,'' ''zigzag'' and ''fickle'' to describe George Bush's erratic course on taxes - none of them exactly calculated to please the President, who is as eager as his predecessors to be seen as a strong leader.


Redskin Backup Could Mean Woes for Giants
LEAD: The Giants are preparing for a game Sunday against a Washington Redskins backup quarterback who has started only once in the National Football League.
History says the Giants should be concerned.


Market Place;   Pain of Leverage In Unlikely Spot
LEAD: GIBSON GREETINGS INC., the nation's No. 3 maker of greeting cards and top producer of Christmas gift-wrapping paper, now knows the pain, as well as the joys, of leverage.


Here's to Queen Catherine, Who Gave Queens a Name
LEAD: For admirers of royalty, Queens has never offered much.
Donald Manes, the King of Queens?
Prince Donald of Trump?


Underwriting Angola's Agony
LEAD: Angola's civil war lingers on, a stubborn relic of the cold war - despite efforts by Moscow and Washington to end it.
Fifteen bloody years have claimed 200,000 lives.
The warring camps say they're willing to submit to elections, but cannot agree on when and how.
The least Congress can do is give President Bush the authority to suspend covert aid to Angola's rebels the moment Angola's


In San Juan, Question Is No Longer If but When
LEAD: Heartened by the House's approval of a referendum that would enable this island of 3.6 million people to redefine its relationship with the United States, political leaders here said today that the long-awaited vote was inevitable and the only question now was when.


A Tax Cut That Deserves to Die
LEAD: President Bush's obsessive campaign to cut the capital gains tax may finally have been buried by his fellow Republicans.


BHUTTO UNDER FIRE AS ELECTION NEARS
LEAD: Two weeks before scheduled national elections, the Government arrested the husband of Benazir Bhutto today, thus striking another blow against her campaign to regain the post of Prime Minister from which she was removed in early August.


Bridge
LEAD: The state of Iowa, with a relatively small bridge population, has rarely made an impact on the national scene.
But it did in Boston in July, when the Iowa team of Judy Hughes, Karen Miller, Robert Seaholm, John Morano, Guy Chakraborty and Kris Maillacheruvu won the Non-Life Master Team Championship, an event that had begun at grass-roots level 10 months earlier.


Chip Indicator Shows Decline
LEAD: The semiconductor industry's key business indicator fell in September to its lowest level since last November, another sign that business conditions in the industry are getting softer.


Review/Music;   Jane Jarvis At Zinno
LEAD: When the pianist Jane Jarvis played her first engagement at Zinno, the restaurant at 126 West 13th Street, seven years ago, her bassist was Milt Hinton, one of the jazz greats.
Since then Mr.
Hinton has been with her for at least part of the time during her appearances at Zinno and he is once again her partner this week through tomorrow night.


Teamster Chief Won't Seek Re-election in '91
LEAD: William J. McCarthy, president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, announced today that he would not run for re-election in next year's Government-supervised elections, the first in which the union's leaders will be chosen directly by the rank and file.


Miami Votes to Accept Big East's Bid
LEAD: The future of the Big East Conference was solidified this afternoon when the University of Miami's board of trustees voted unanimously to have the school become the conference's 10th member and agreed to immediately pursue a football relationship with the three other members that compete at the major college level.


Schick Shows Its New Razor
LEAD: The Warner-Lambert Company, whose Schick brand is a distant No. 2 to Gillette, introduced a new razor yesterday that it hopes will challenge Sensor, Gillette's successful new razor.
The new Schick razor, called


Review/Dance;   Gentle Artistry of a War-Torn Land
LEAD: The Classical Dance Company of Cambodia triumphed over turmoil to present a program on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater that was an extraordinary example of choreographic refinement.


Oil Spill Equipment Is Auctioned


New Cup Chairman
LEAD: The United States Soccer Federation president, Alan Rothenberg, has been named chairman of the World Cup 1994 Organizing Committee, the Soccer Federation announced yesterday.


Britons Said to Train Khmer Rouge Forces
LEAD: A television documentary has reported that British soldiers have been training the Communist Khmer Rouge guerrillas of Cambodia.


Sox Complain as Clemens Is Biggest Out
LEAD: Roger Clemens, the Boston Red Sox pitcher who usually prefers to let his pitching do all his talking, let loose a stream of profanity today in the second inning of Game 4 of the American League Championship Series.
To Clemens's shock and to the dismay of his teammates, the home-plate umpire Terry Cooney considered himself the target and threw Boston's top pitcher out of a game the team had to win in order to stave off being swept by the Oakland


Gas-Electric Hybrid Cars Can Be Built Now;   The Mini-van Loophole
LEAD: To the Editor:


Space Shuttle Back From Near-Flawless Mission
LEAD: The space shuttle Discovery made a picture-perfect landing at sunrise here today, ending a nearly flawless four-day mission that raised the spirits of space agency officials.


Troops Hone Their Skills in the Desert


New Advisory On Bond Rating
LEAD: A day after one Wall Street credit-rating agency threatened to lower New York City's bond rating if it did not act aggressively to close budget gaps, another agency said yesterday that the city's recent actions had been responsible for ''increasing the level of concern'' about its credit rating.


At the Circus
LEAD: Not since the tall ships has there been national esprit as great as that inspired by the budget negotiations.
In bank lines, drugstores, supermarkets and parking lots Americans have gathered in a spirit of grand unanimity to discuss the possibility that the people who run the Government are completely out to lunch.


Months of Surveillance Lead Agents to $13 Million Tied to Drugs
LEAD: For months, agents of the New York Drug Enforcement Task Force periodically checked out a big gray-shingled ranch house on Long Island.
The blinds were usually down and no one seemed to be home.


To Furbelows and Nudity: Basta!


Soviets Seek Meeting of U.N. Military Panel
LEAD: The Soviet Union is seeking a meeting of the military chiefs of staff of the five World War II victors with permanent Security Council seats to discuss the Persian Gulf crisis, a senior Soviet diplomat says.


House Votes Bill For Puerto Rico To Decide Status
LEAD: The House of Representatives today passed a bill calling for a referendum next year under which the people of Puerto Rico, governed for nearly a century by the United States, could choose statehood, independence or a continuation of their commonwealth status.


Sales of Trump's Book Are Lagging
LEAD: Donald J. Trump's new book, ''Surviving at the Top,'' has not survived at the top very long, and some booksellers believe its publisher, Random House, printed far too many copies of the book.


Chronicle
LEAD: MATTHEW KENNEDY, the ninth of 11 children of ETHEL KENNEDY and the late Robert F. Kennedy, will marry VICTORIA ANNE STRAUSS a fellow law student at the University of Virginia.
The wedding is scheduled for July in Philadelphia.


New Babylon Is Stalled By a Modern Upheaval
LEAD: More than 2,500 years ago, a fabulous city rose here on a bend in the Euphrates River.
Under King Nebuchadnezzar, Babylon and its hanging gardens became as fabled, and as much a seat of imperial power, as Rome became later.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''We are sick and tired of Washington. It's the same spectacle of inaction.''
- Rimmer deVries, chief economist at J. P. Morgan. [D23:1.]


Commodities Trader Starts His Own Firm
LEAD: Gene D. Donney, former president and chief executive of Elders Futures Inc., a commodity futures trading company, has set up his own commodities research and portfolio management firm and claims a unique status for it.


Seagull Energy in Deal With Pickens Group
LEAD: Mesa L.P., the partnership headed by the corporate raider T. Boone Pickens, agreed today to sell a portion of its oil and gas properties and undeveloped land to the Seagull Energy Corporation in a deal that could reach $476 million.


Final Chapter in Milken Inquiry
LEAD:
John K. Carroll
Prosecutor


Of Stones And Walls
LEAD: On the eve of the Hebrew holy time called Succoth, as thousands of Jews prayed at the sacred site known as the Western Wall, a double desecration took place.


University Officials From 22 Lands Give Environment Pledge
LEAD: Underlining ''the urgent need to move toward an environmentally sustainable future,'' a group of university presidents from around the world have pledged to greatly increase the amount their schools teach about environmental issues, and urged other universities to do the same.


Coleman's Agent Expresses Optimism
LEAD: Derrick Coleman's agent is flying into New Jersey to meet with Nets' executives today and he is optimistic that the two sides will finally be able to agree on a contract for the team's No. 1 draft pick.


Chronicle
LEAD: Amid the predictable visits she makes to promote British industry, the Princess Royal, a k a PRINCESS ANNE, will have lunch today at the new headquarters of the Seamen's Church Institute in Manhattan.


Final Chapter in Milken Inquiry
LEAD: The final chapter in the four-year investigation of Michael R. Milken begins today with a hearing to address a crucial question: Were the crimes of the former financier part of a wide scheme to manipulate markets illegally for his own gain, or were they simply isolated cases of going too far to help a client?


Tax-Exempt Yields Fall
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down for the week ended yesterday, while yields on taxable money market funds were unchanged.


Review/Dance;   A Demanding Graham Role
LEAD: The Martha Graham Dance Company's final two days in a week of packed houses at the City Center brought major cast changes in ''Herodiade'' and a single performance of Miss Graham's ''Temptations of the Moon.'' After Takako Asakawa's earlier performance as the heroine who confronts destiny in ''Herodiade,'' Christine Dakin and Terese


Brazil Opens Debt Talks
LEAD: In a meeting in New York that lasted less than an hour, Brazil and its bank creditors reopened formal debt negotiations yesterday.
But neither party disclosed a plan to mend a rift that began more than a year ago.
Brazil, the developing world's biggest debtor, has not paid interest on its medium- and long-term bank debt since July 1989 and has accumulated arrears of more than $8 billion.


Davis Cup Dispute Heating Up
LEAD: Geoff Pollard, the president of Tennis Australia, said yesterday that the International Tennis Federation had lost control of the Davis Cup final between the United States and Australia, to be held in St.
Petersburg, Fla., Nov. 30-Dec. 2.
He said the United States Tennis Association had failed to adhere to an extended deadline for announcing the court surface for the final.


Hess and Gabon Form Oil Venture
LEAD: The Amerada Hess Corporation said it had formed a joint venture with the Government of Gabon that had purchased a 10 percent interest in the Rabi-Kounga oilfield in Gabon.
The cost of the acquisition to Amerada Hess, based in New York, was $300 million.
The joint venture company is 67 percent owned by Amerada Hess and 33 percent owned by Gabon, a republic in western equatorial


Drabek, Bonilla Combine To Keep Pirates Alive
LEAD: Doug Drabek, the man who pitches the Pittsburgh Pirates out of losing streaks, pitched them out of a big one tonight and even pulled them back from the brink of losing the playoff for the National League pennant.


Rwandans Report Killings of Suspected Rebel Sympathizers
LEAD: Rwandan peasants accused of supporting a rebel invasion force have been massacred by Government troops and members of the majority Hutu tribe, villagers fleeing to Uganda said today.


Given Choice, Suffolk May Take Tax Rise
LEAD: Last month, faced with a possible $103 million gap in his 1991 budget, Suffolk County Executive Patrick G. Halpin took an unusual step in these difficult economic times: He did not propose raising taxes.


Air Canada Layoffs And Route Cuts Set
LEAD: Air Canada will lay off about 2,900 of its 23,000 employees and cut routes to Europe and the Far East because of rising fuel costs and fewer passengers, the airline announced.


Dow Falls 37.62 Points In Wild Day
LEAD: Stock prices fell yesterday after fluctuating wildly amid nervousness over inaction in the Persian Gulf, inaction on the deficit, depressing earnings and an almost daily diet of Middle East rumors.


Israelis and Americans Reach a Point Where Their Interests May Veer Off
LEAD: The decision of the Bush Administration to sponsor a United Nations resolution condemning Israel for excessive use of force in Jerusalem has brought into stark relief the strains being put on the United States-Israel relationship as a result of Washington's need to maintain an Arab alliance against Iraq.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Economy


Upstate Banks in Talks
LEAD: The National Savings Bank of Albany said today that it was holding talks with the Trustco Bank Corporation of Schenectady, N.Y., about a possible business combination.
A National Savings Bank spokesman said the talks were preliminary and any proposal would have to be acted upon by the board, which will meet on Tuesday.


Noisy Escape Attempt Foiled
LEAD: An attempted jailbreak was foiled when the two inmates trying to escape made so much racket that other prisoners complained to guards, who caught the men in a crawl space, officials said.
The two were using a piece of metal to chip through an eight-inch-thick concrete wall at the Okanogan County Jail on Monday night when they woke up other prisoners, an official said Tuesday.


Treasury Issues Decline Sharply
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities moved sharply lower and interest rates rose again yesterday, pushed by continuing concerns about the Middle East and the Federal budget as well as a disappointing auction of seven-year Treasury notes.


11 Buyers Are Selected in Reserve Oil Auction
LEAD: The Energy Department said today that it had selected 11 companies to buy nearly four million barrels of crude oil from the nation's Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
It also said that about a million barrels also included in the auction had not been sold because bids for various blocks of that oil were either too low or had not been submitted.


A Jazz Fixture of No Fixed Style
LEAD: If American culture has promised anything, it is diversity, and Muhal Richard Abrams has always taken advantage of America's palate.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LEAD: A FEW intelligent lighting choices around the house or apartment can conserve energy (and money) with no risk of inconvenience or eyestrain.
In most cases, it is just a matter of choosing the right bulbs.


Israel Picks Panel to Investigate Killing of 21 Arabs
LEAD: The Government appointed a high-level commission today to investigate the violence in Jerusalem's Old City on Monday in which soldiers shot and killed at least 21 Palestinians.


BUSH SHIFTS STAND ON TAX RISE AGAIN; CONGRESS BAFFLED
LEAD: The White House shifted course again today on tax policy, baffling the Congressional tax committees and leaving Congressional leaders confused about which way to turn.


The Stuff Of Dreams, Printed On Sheets
LEAD: WICKER, maps, native American blankets, Russian rugs, psychedelic colors of the 60's and the striated green of malachite have found their way onto bed sheets, judging from visits to bed, bath and linen showrooms on the Avenue of the Americas during the trade's market week, which ends tomorrow.
Gingham is back for those with simpler, homier tastes.


Partial Acquittals In Sundstrand Case
LEAD: A Federal judge acquitted three former executives of the Sundstrand Corporation on charges of lying to the Government in connection with the military contractor's admitted Pentagon fraud scheme.
The judge is expected to rule on the remaining charges of conspiracy and scheming to conceal the conspiracy next week.


For Cuomo Bashing, Just Call 1-900-Rinfret
LEAD: Trying to counter Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's $2 million advertising blitz and his own fund-raising difficulties, Pierre A. Rinfret yesterday began a modest $52,000 advertising campaign, but with a twist.


Clarke's 'Species' to Close
LEAD: ''Endangered Species,'' a theater piece created and directed by Martha Clarke, is to close at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Majestic Theater, after the evening performance on Sunday.
It had been scheduled to run until Nov. 4.
To exchange unusable tickets, call (718) 636-4100.
Refunds can be obtained only by mailing the tickets back to the academy at 30 Lafayette Avenue, Brooklyn, N.Y.


In Guatemala, a Taste for Strongmen Lingers
LEAD: When the tanks rumbled into the streets last year, the prominent right-wing lawyer Carlos Acevedo was photographed with soldiers taking part in the coup attempt.
When it failed, he represented the plot's leaders in court.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
LEAD: THE 6-year-old boy loved watching professional football.
He noticed that when players like something a teammate has done, they sometimes quickly pat him on the rump.
So when his first-grade teacher did something that the boy really appreciated, he acknowledged it by casually walking over and patting her.


Pension Shift For Teachers Is Questioned
LEAD: Most of the funds used to pay for a new 5.5 percent contract for New York City teachers will come from a pension change based on earnings projections that are unusually optimistic for a public employee pension plan, experts said yesterday.


Nucor Expansion
LEAD: The Nucor Corporation said it plans to build a $300 million steel mill that could produce a million tons of sheet steel a year.
The company said options had been obtained on sites near Blytheville and Osceola, Ark., in the northeastern part of the state, and a decision should be made in three months.


Books of The Times;   Enduring a Dickensian Childhood
LEAD:
A Hole in the World
An American Boyhood
By Richard Rhodes
271 pages. Illustrated. Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Justices Listen to Arguments On Fetal-Protection Policy
LEAD: One of the most important sex discrimination cases in recent years came before the Supreme Court today as the Justices heard arguments on whether employers can legally exclude all fertile women from jobs involving exposure to substances likely to harm a developing fetus.


Fryar Is Arrested
LEAD: A scuffle outside a nightclub in Providence, R.I. early this morning ended with the New England Patriots' Hart Lee Dykes hospitalized with an eye injury and Irving Fryar, his teammate, booked on a weapons charge.


Face Up to the Fairness Issue
LEAD: The American people voted in 1988 for a reduction in the rate of growth of government and taxes.
They did not vote to mortgage their future to the whims of undisciplined politicians.
They did not vote for ostrich politics and depression-inducing economics.


U.S.-Canada Stock Plan
LEAD: In a first step toward developing a cross-border securities market, the Securities and Exchange Commission today approved for comment a revised plan to make it easier for Canadian companies to sell stock to United States investors and vice versa.


Gulf Impact: Hurting U.S. Over Time
LEAD: The dramatic political changes in the Middle East in the two months since Iraq's seizure of Kuwait are likely to advance American interests in the region in the short run, but over time could threaten them, Middle East experts say.


Caterwauling
LEAD: In New York City lives a person who has never been wakened by a sanitation truck in full grind, a car alarm in full throat or an Uzi at full blast.
Instead she sleeps the sleep known only to those who live in the back of their buildings.
Not only that but her building backs onto gardens, which means that the loudest noise she ever hears is that of bluejays quarreling over a tree.


Oil Down $1.71 After Big Swings
LEAD: Oil prices fell yesterday after bouncing up and down on war worries and then on rumors that Saddam Hussein had been assassinated.


Israel's Second Blunder
LEAD: In Israel, Sunday's bloody blunder has now been magnified by a brazen one.
The first brought death to at least 21 Palestinians when Israeli police fired live ammunition into rioting crowds - a startling use of deadly force.
The second, the Israeli Government's cold reaction to the tragedy, does violence to its credibility.


Guerrillas in India Burn Train, Killing 47, Press Reports Say
LEAD: Left-wing guerrillas bolted the doors of a coach of a speeding train and set it on fire, killing 47 passengers, news reports said today.


Teledyne Net Plunges 79%
LEAD: Teledyne Inc. said today that its third-quarter earnings plunged 79 percent as slowdowns in the military, aviation and electronics industries affected its sales.


Gas-Electric Hybrid Cars Can Be Built Now;   For Health's Sake Too
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Move in U.N. to Condemn Israel Angers Jewish Groups
LEAD: Leaders of American Jewish groups expressed anger yesterday at the decision of the Bush Administration to sponsor a United Nations resolution that would censure Israel for the shooting deaths of at least 21 Palestinians on Monday in disturbances in Jerusalem.


Review/Music;   Folk Roots From Korea
LEAD: A folk orchestra playing new music implies contradictions, but the Choongang Traditional Korean Orchestra stayed close to its roots when it performed on Monday night at Alice Tully Hall.
The 42-piece orchestra is conducted by Bum Hoon Park, a professor of music at Choongang University in Seoul, South Korea.


Chronicle
LEAD: For her 90th birthday yesterday, HELEN HAYES traveled to Washington, where she was born and where her theatrical career began in 1906 at the Columbia Theater.
She was her own guest of honor at a dinner to benefit the Helen Hayes Awards, which she gives annually to people in the theater in Washington.


Parking Rules
LEAD: Because of the Jewish holiday of Shemini Atzereth, which concludes the harvest festival of Succoth, alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City today.
Those rules will also be suspended tomorrow for Simhath Torah, which ends the annual cycle of the public reading of the Torah.


U.S. Financial Industry Could Use a Road Map
LEAD: To the Editor:


Westinghouse Profit Rises
LEAD: The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said today that its earnings rose nearly 9 percent in the third quarter as the company's broadcasting, electronics and energy divisions posted gains.


Havens for Youths in Anti-Crime Plan
LEAD: In Seth Sackey's Harlem neighborhood, drug dealers sit on his church steps on Sunday morning.
Munesu Chinhenzva never talks to police officers because she believes that drug dealers shot her 15-year-old girlfriend for doing so.
The girls on Tiffany Crouell's block on 115th Street told her to try crack to lose weight.


Calendar: Folk Art, New Art And Quilts
LEAD:
Japanese Art, Paine Webber Art Gallery, 1285 Avenue of the Americas (52d Street); (212) 713-2885.


Japan's Urban Underside Erupts, Tarnishing Image of Social Peace
LEAD: On the surface, most Japanese view their country as a classless society prizing harmony and consensus among its many contending forces.
Every once in a while, however, an incident occurs that exposes stresses, conflicts and anti-social behavior underneath the placid exterior.


Gas-Electric Hybrid Cars Can Be Built Now
LEAD: To the Editor:


Despite Feud, Gwynn Says He'll Play With Clark
LEAD: Despite having one of ''the most difficult years of my life,'' which included harsh criticism from his San Diego Padres teammate Jack Clark, Tony Gwynn says he is prepared to play with Clark next year.


Chronicle
LEAD: JIMMY CONNORS will not be playing tennis for a while after undergoing surgery on his left wrist on Tuesday.
The operation, at the Santa Barbara (Calif.) Cottage Hospital, was to reconstruct a tendon, said Dr.
RICHARD SCHEINBERG, his orthopedic surgeon.
The left-handed tennis star, who was treated as an outpatient, will wear a cast for about six weeks.


Corrections
LEAD: A headline yesterday about the Supreme Court referred to Justice David H. Souter incorrectly in some copies.
He is the nation's 105th Supreme Court Justice, not the 205th.


Suit Is Settled By MGM/UA
LEAD: MGM/UA has settled a $200 million shareholders' lawsuit for $35 million, and the troubled entertainment company said on Tuesday that it would file suit against insurers that it said had forced MGM/UA into the settlement.


Intel Blocks Use Of '386' Label
LEAD: The Intel Corporation said it had been granted a temporary restraining order barring Advanced Micro Devices Inc. from using the number ''386'' on any of its products.
The order remains in effect until Monday, when a judge may rule on Intel's request to keep the Sunnyvale, Calif., chip maker from using the number, which


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
Accumulation on the Roof
Q.
I have a large tin roof that is covered with tar and stone.
There is a lot of moss growing on this roof from the humus produced by fallen leaves.
I am afraid that this moss and earth will build up to the point where the extra weight will become too heavy for the roof.


Socialists Ponder a Changed World
LEAD: Buoyed by the collapse of one of its oldest foes, the Communist movement, but uncertain about its own role in the post-cold-war world, the Socialist International gathered in New York this week to set a course for the future.


Silversmiths Exhibit Wares in Boston
LEAD: With the mass production of sterling silver objects in the late 19th century, silversmithing gradually shifted from being one of America's more important crafts to a peripheral one.
Now, in an exhibition in Boston called ''Reflections of the Past and Present: Contemporary American Silver,'' silversmiths from around the country are reasserting themselves as artisans.


INDONESIA MILITARY WEIGHING ITS ROLES
LEAD: The Indonesian military is undergoing an unusual period of self-examination.


Lobbyists Flock to Capitol to Save Their Projects
LEAD: Lawmakers sometimes describe them as vultures, but the hundreds of lobbyists who jammed the long marble corridor on the first floor of the Capitol today and perched beneath the bronze statutes of statesmen from bygone eras were more like a flock of hungry pigeons.


Survey Gives Magazines Edge vs. TV
LEAD: Magazine publishers winding up the three-day American Magazine Conference here got some good news today.
Preliminary results of a reader survey show that in 8 of 10 households, at least one person buys and reads magazines.


Surviving a Short Stay: White Decor Helps
LEAD: SOME people have trouble moving from one place to another.
Others can pick up, reorganize and move all their belongings to a new location with very little effort.


Barbara Boggs Sigmund, Mayor Of Princeton and Ex-Teacher, 51
LEAD: Barbara Boggs Sigmund, the Mayor of Princeton and a member of one of the nation's best-known political families, died of cancer yesterday at her home in Princeton, N.J.
She was 51 years old.


Remotes: On Fast Forward
LEAD: THERE is something peculiar about the latest generation of audio and video equipment: the more it is used, the less it is touched.
The buttons and knobs are still there, but they are vestigial.
Nearly everything is operated using remote controls.


CBS Earnings Fall 30%; Sports Costs Cited
LEAD: CBS Inc. announced yesterday that its net income had fallen 30 percent in the third quarter.


Dinkins's Troubles Are Tied To Aides' Conflicting Advice
LEAD: When Mayor David N. Dinkins announced last week that he might have to lay off at least 15,000 city workers, his chief political aide and longtime adviser, Deputy Mayor Bill Lynch, learned that such a specific warning was in a news release only after it was issued.


Appeal Refused For Keating
LEAD: The California Supreme Court declined today to hear an appeal by Charles H. Keating Jr., who seeks reduction of his $5 million bail.


THE PLAYOFFS: How It Happened;   In Strategy Battle, Leyland by a Decision
LEAD: If all a manager had to do was write out a lineup each night, the job wouldn't be much fun.
It's the decisions he has to make during a game that makes a manager's job more intriguing than an accountant's or a salesman's.


Vietnam Says 38 Expatriates Tried to Topple Government
LEAD: Vietnam charged 38 men with treason or other acts of subversion in Supreme Court today.
Prosecutors said that they got help from Thai intelligence and Vietnamese in the United States to try to overthrow the Government.


Marvel Entertainment Names a New President
LEAD: The Marvel Entertainment Group, publisher of Spider-Man, the Incredible Hulk and other comic books, has named Terry C. Stewart president and chief executive.


Love of Chess Lacking on TV Networks
LEAD: In an age when synchronized swimming and marathon walking can find ample space on the buffet table of daily television, chess fans are wondering why there has been barely a sound bite for the 1990 World Championship, which opened this week in New York.


Tokyo Stocks Decline Sharply
LEAD: Japanese stocks dropped sharply today.


Expansion Too Pricey for Some
LEAD: When Milwaukee withdrew its application for a National Hockey League expansion franchise this week, nine groups in eight cities were left vying for the six remaining openings.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization


Plan Offered to Fix Indian Point Fuel Rods
LEAD: The New York Power Authority said yesterday that it had developed a plan to safely cut loose two highly radioactive fuel bundles that are dangling over the core of the Indian Point 3 nuclear plant in Buchanan, N.Y., after they were inadvertently hoisted out of place.


Personal Health
LEAD: With all the fuss that is being made these days about cholesterol, it is easy to lose sight of the fact that this fatty substance is far from the only cause of heart attacks.


For Bush, the Campaign Must Go On
LEAD: Jesse Helms has not been very supportive of his President this year.
The conservative Republican Senator has crossed swords with President Bush on an education bill, a textile bill, the Clean Air Act, a hate-crimes bill and several foreign service appointments.


Growing Concern Over Pelvic Infection in Women
LEAD: Pelvic inflammatory disease, an infection of a woman's fallopian tubes or uterus, strikes many more women than previously believed, and now must be counted as the most important sexually transmitted disease affecting women, excepting only AIDS, public health officials say.


Rhone-Poulenc to Cut 3,500 Jobs in Brazil
LEAD: The giant French chemical and pharmaceutical company Rhone-Poulenc S.A. said today that it would slash 3,500 jobs from its Brazilian work force because Government austerity measures there were crimping business activity.


Corrections
LEAD: The headline of an obituary on Oct. 5 about Leland Holland, one of the 52 Americans held hostage in the American Embassy in Iran for 444 days, misstated his age.
He was 63 years old.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
8.00
8.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.15
7.20
7.72
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.16
7.22
7.66
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.77
8.76
8.06
30-YR.


Plea in Tokyo Stock Trial
LEAD: Mitsuhiro Kotani, a stock trader at the center of a widening financial scandal, pleaded not guilty today as his trial began here on charges that he manipulated the shares of a leading company in a conspiracy involving a number of individuals, banks and securities firms.


Orange Juice Price Falling As U.S. Predicts Big Crop
LEAD: Orange juice futures traders braced for a price collapse after the Government yesterday projected a 50 percent increase in Florida orange production this season, barring another significant freeze.


Girl, 2, Is Reported Abducted in Queens
LEAD: The police searched a Jamaica, Queens, neighborhood last night for a 2-year-old girl and the woman they believe abducted her from her godmother earlier in the day, the police said.


Thousands Rally in Prague to Denounce Communists
LEAD: Tens of thousands of demonstrators jammed the Old Town Square here today to denounce the Communist Party, which has begun to reassert itself politically for the first time in a year.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Gascony


Rangers' So-So Record Could Be Worse
LEAD: The Rangers have won as many games as they have lost, an accomplishment that in the National Hockey League over a full season would establish a team as a legitimate contender for the Stanley Cup.
To a man, though, the Rangers maintain that they aren't fooled by the N.H.L.'s minimal standards or by their own subpar efforts in the season's first week.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Aetna Life Insurance Co., Hartford, said it had completed its purchase of 20 percent of the Bay Pacific Health Corp., San Bruno, Calif., a health-care organization.
Terms were not disclosed.


G.M. Rolls Out New Saturn Line
LEAD: Saturn, the General Motors Corporation's new small-car division, shipped the first 1,000 cars from its assembly complex here.
The vehicles are destined for California, where they will go on sale Oct. 25.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article on Sept. 27 about the United States Davis Cup team misstated the date when the United States last played in the Cup final.
The United States, which last won the Cup in 1982, played and lost to Sweden in the 1984 final.


Oil Rises $1.73 a Barrel, To Record High of $40.42
LEAD: Oil prices jumped back over $40 a barrel yesterday to a new record close in hectic futures trading.
Analysts blamed dwindling United States stockpiles, looming cold weather and a British warning of a Persian Gulf conflagration.


On Stage
LEAD:
New Life for Hemingway Play


At the Movies
LEAD:
Sorvino the Don


Trump Move On Casinos
LEAD: Donald J. Trump is seeking to restructure $100 million in casino bank loans, a Trump official said yesterday, just two months after a bank rescue package was stitched together to keep his real estate and casino empire from unraveling.


Critic's Choice
LEAD: What Diamanda Galas has to say, sing and scream in her ''Plague Mass'' is neither comforting nor entertaining, but it is hard to imagine a listener walking away from it unmoved.
The plague in question is AIDS, and in the work's first three sections, collectively called ''The Masque of the Red Death,'' Ms.


North Korea Releases 2 Japanese; 'Humanitarian' Gesture Is Praised
LEAD: North Korea today released two Japanese sailors seized as spies seven years ago, prompting Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu and other Japanese politicians to praise the totalitarian Government in Pyongyang for its ''humanitarian consideration.''


Winning a Race Comes Down to Status in the End
LEAD: A lot of handicappers and trainers are saying that post position will be so crucial as to determine the outcome of this year's Breeders' Cup Classic on Oct. 27.
Past performances suggest otherwise.


Church Leaders Voice Doubts on U.S. Gulf Policy
LEAD: Protestant and Roman Catholic leaders are beginning to raise moral questions about American policy in the Persian Gulf, edging away from the general support they voiced for it two months ago and opening up a gap with their Jewish counterparts.


For Children
LEAD:
Shows, Nature, Museums


Israelis Starting To Doubt Story Of a Staged Riot
LEAD: Several thousand Orthodox Jews, enveloped in religious fervor, danced and sang holding Torah scrolls at the base of the Western Wall tonight, celebrating the end of a religious holiday as hundreds of Israeli soldiers stood guard from all sides.


Rafsanjani Allies Win Voting For Religious Experts' Panel
LEAD: Candidates allied with President Hashemi Rafsanjani won nearly all seats today on a panel of religious experts in elections in which many of their opponents were excluded.


Business Digest
LEAD:
The Economy


Mediobanca Buys Continental Stake
LEAD: Italy's leading merchant bank, Mediobanca, emerged as a backer of the Pirelli group in its bid for the German tire company Continental.
Mediobanca's annual report disclosed it had bought 5 percent of Continental for $92 million on June 30.


Our Towns;   Compost Battle: Who Protects Environment?
LEAD: Coleman Station Road, a two-hour drive from New York City, is a scenic mix of farmers, country people and well-to-do second-home residents.
Usually they go their own way, but awhile back they united to form Citizens for North East, a group concerned with ''good government and local environmental issues.


Harold Gottfried, 77, Discount Merchandiser
LEAD: Harold Gottfried, an accountant who was a leader in mass discount merchandising, died on Tuesday in Manhattan, where he lived.
He was 77 years old.


Milken's Pre-Sentencing Hearing Opens


Buckley vs. Weicker (Round 2)
LEAD: William F. Buckley Jr., who urged fellow Republicans to vote against Lowell P. Weicker Jr. two years ago in the liberal Republican's unsuccessful bid for a fourth Senate term, has begun a second offensive against Mr.
Weicker, now an independent candidate for governor.


Holyfield Lines Up Foreman Bout
LEAD: Forty-one-year-old George Foreman, a heavyweight champion of the 1970's, will get another shot at the title if Evander Holyfield beats the current champion, James (Buster) Douglas, on Oct. 25, Holyfield's camp said yesterday.


Changes at the Top Of Aubrey G. Lanston
LEAD: Aubrey G. Lanston &amp; Company, a Government securities brokerage house, announced yesterday that its chairman and chief executive, John B. Ford, plans to retire at the end of the year and that he will be succeeded by Richard M. Kelly.


The Media Business;   Turner Broadcasting In Middle-Age Malaise
LEAD: Four years after teetering on the brink of financial disaster, Turner Broadcasting System Inc. has moved into a comfortable middle age.
But, as many other maturing companies have learned, middle age is bringing other worries at Turner, which became a billion-dollar company for the first time last year.


Study Raises the Estimate of Inherited Intelligence
LEAD: A study of twins reared apart has come up with one of the highest estimates yet for the heritability of intelligence, as judged by test scores.


Dick Jorgensen, Football Official, 56
LEAD: Dick Jorgensen, a field official in the National Football League for 23 years, died of cancer Wednesday.
He was 56 years old.


Suspect Is Guilty in Beating
LEAD: A suspect in the slayings of five college students has been convicted of beating his grandmother, despite her testimony that her injuries came from a fall.
The suspect, Edward Lewis Humphrey, 19 years old, was found guilty Wednesday of battery on a person over 65.


Estelle Stein Hartman; Volunteer, 96
LEAD: Estelle Stein Hartman, a volunteer in organizations in the Hartford area, died on Monday at her home in West Hartford, Conn.
She was 96 years old.


Chicago Receives $40 Million To Make Schools More Public
LEAD: To bolster one of the nation's most ambitious efforts at improving urban schools, the MacArthur Foundation will give $40 million over 10 years to develop closer links between Chicago's local schools and their surrounding communities, the philanthropy announced yesterday in Chicago.


Auctions
LEAD:
Early Daguerreotype


Dramatists Threaten Regional Theaters
LEAD: The Dramatists Guild announced yesterday that it would withhold all works by its members from production at any theater belonging to the League of Resident Theaters, an organization of 68 nonprofit regional theaters across the country.
The action is effective immediately.


Chang and Agassi On Davis Cup Team
LEAD: Michael Chang, Andre Agassi, Rick Leach and Jim Pugh were selected yesterday as the United States team that will play Australia in the Davis Cup final, and red clay was chosen as the surface for the competition.
The matches will be played Nov. 30-Dec. 2 at the Suncoast Dome in St.
Petersburg, Fla.


Soviet Rocket Is Lost in Blast
LEAD: A Soviet booster rocket, carrying what an American specialist believes was a spy satellite, exploded seconds after liftoff last week, the Soviet press agency Tass said today.


Anatole Broyard, 70, Book Critic And Editor at The Times, Is Dead
LEAD: Anatole Broyard, a book critic, essayist and editor for The New York Times for 18 years until his retirement in June 1989, died yesterday morning at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute in Boston.
He was 70 years old and lived in Cambridge, Mass.


Topics of The Times;   An Overdue Squeeze on Slorc
LEAD: Burma has changed its name to Myanmar.
Its military regime has changed its name to the Slorc, for State Law and Order Restoration Council.
And its elections in May, which gave a huge mandate to the opposition National League for Democracy, have changed nothing at all.
But the United States does not have to be a helpless onlooker as the


Businesses Must Do Their Part to Fight Drugs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: Articles yesterday and on Wednesday about Pakistani politics incorrectly rendered the surname of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's husband.
He is Asif Ali Zardari.


3 ON FISCAL BOARD PRESS FOR ACTION ON DINKINS BUDGET
LEAD: Reflecting their heightened concern over New York City's fiscal condition, members of the State Financial Control Board urged Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday to act more swiftly to detail his plans for keeping the city's budget balanced, participants in the meeting said.


Penalty Is Revised
LEAD: The Association of Tennis Professionals Tour said yesterday that it had revised its punishment of Thomas Muster of Austria, who in late August was fined $20,000 and given a 10-week suspension for violating the tour's code of ethics.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: Parking: Alternate-side rules will be suspended today for the Jewish holiday of Simhath Torah, which ends the annual cycle of the public reading of the Torah.


Review/Fashion;   Armani: Dresses Need Shorts
LEAD: Giorgio Armani showed a four-star collection Wednesday night, bringing the spring and summer ready-to-wear openings to a rousing conclusion.


Lebanon Officially Asks Syria for Military Help to Oust Aoun
LEAD: Frustrated by the ineffectiveness of a siege against the rebel Christian chief, Michel Aoun, the Government of President Elias Hrawi has officially asked for Syrian military intervention to oust the renegade general from sectors he controls in East Beirut.


The Poisoned Stream
LEAD: Every time I visit the United Nations the same two sensations take hold - fascination and nausea.


Downgradings at Record
LEAD: The credit quality of American corporations declined at a record pace in the first three quarters of this year, Moody's Investors Service Inc. has reported, with a third of the downgradings affecting financial institutions like banks, savings and loans and insurance and finance companies.


U.S. Is Trying to Avoid a Council Fight on Israel
LEAD: American diplomats are working frantically to prevent a developing split over the Palestinian issue in the United Nations Security Council from causing severe damage to the anti-Iraq alliance.


Malcolm Smith, 86, An Investment Banker
LEAD: Malcolm Smith, a financier and an investment banker, died on Tuesday at his home in Greenwich, Conn., at the age of 86.


BATTLE AT THE U.N.
LEAD: The Palestine Liberation Organization is straining the American-led international coalition against Iraq by pressing ahead with its own Security Council resolution condemning Israel.


Coleman Awaits Word That Ink on Deal Is Dry
LEAD: Derrick Coleman has packed his bags, sorted out his bank accounts and said some good-byes.
He is prepared to board a flight from Detroit to Newark sometime today or tomorrow and slip into a Nets uniform.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD: International
A3-13


A pre-emptive strike against Laurence Tribe, by those who do not care to call him 'Mr. Justice.'
LEAD: It can only be described as a dia-Tribe.


Hudson Riverkeeper Seeks Funds
LEAD: The Hudson Riverkeeper Fund is seeking donations for its fourth annual fund-raising auction in Cold Spring, N.Y., on Oct. 28, according to its president, Robert Boyle.


Study Says Recycling Effort Could Fail in New York
LEAD: New York City's recycling program is a costly disappointment that is unlikely to succeed unless residents increase their recycling rate and labor practices are made more efficient, the Sanitation Department said yesterday.


Latin American Works In N.Y.U. Book Fair
LEAD: The fourth annual Latin American Book Fair will be held today through Sunday at New York University.
Books, magazines and other materials from more than 200 publishers and distributors throughout Latin America, Spain and the United States will be on display.
Since this year's fair focuses on Mexican publishing, more than 75


Chemical Bank Cuts Its Dividend As Bad Real Estate Loans Sour
LEAD: The Chemical Banking Corporation announced a sharp cut in its stock dividend yesterday and a loss for the third quarter, joining a growing list of large banking companies whose problems with real estate loans have led to reduced payments to shareholders.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday in The Home Section about a new shoe boutique in New York City misidentified the man in the picture.
He was the boutique's designer, Michael Formica, not its owner, Manolo Blahnik.


In Albany, It's Politics a la Rinfret


Afoot, and Not So Far Afield
LEAD: BROAD, fine-sanded beaches lie just to the east of Times Square.
Not far to the north, geologic forces have squeezed the earth, giving rise to hills swaddled in greenery and tempering now into burnt orange, yellow and red.
Wetlands are found to the west and south, marshy expanses that this season are the welcome resting points for migratory birds in the millions: mallards, pintails and canvasbacks; geese, scoters and goldeneyes.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Curson and Friends


Arnold Olsen, Montana Politician, 73
LEAD: Arnold Olsen, a former Congressman who was one of Montana's most durable Democratic politicians, died at a nursing home in Helena, Mont., on Tuesday after a long illness.
He had been comatose since July.
He was 73 years old.


The Media Business;   MTV to Provide Programming for Soviets
LEAD: MTV, the cable music video channel, announced yesterday that it had signed an agreement with the Soviet television company Gostelradio to provide the main Soviet television channel with a weekly hour of MTV programming starting today.


In Spain, Knicks Are Shaky But Hold On
LEAD: The Knicks opened their preseason schedule in this improbable site on the Mediterranean today by squeezing out an overtime victory over a determined Italian team that dogged the heels of the American players throughout the game.


Review/Art;   Virtuoso Italian Drawings From the 18th Century
LEAD: A small yet stunningly diverse show of 18th-century Italian drawings is now on view at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The 116 sheets by around 40 artists, all from the museum's permanent collection, are ripe with a virtuosity, even a decadence, that is to be expected from Italian art in the twilight of its greatness.


Magnavox Guilty Plea
LEAD: The Magnavox Government and Industrial Electronics Company, a supplier of military electronics equipment, pleaded guilty in Federal court in Boston yesterday to a charge that it unlawfully acquired and conveyed confidential Government documents about an Air Force procurement contract.


Moving Sharks: Not Just Another Day At the Office    The new tank has three viewing panels to direct attention to the three main shark types: top, middle and bottom dwellers. (John Sotomayor/The New York Times)


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Blues, Solo


Experts Say Space Junk May Create Peril by 2000
LEAD: Unless concerted action is soon taken, low orbits around the Earth could become so clogged with space junk by the turn of the century that they will be too dangerous for satellites and manned spacecraft to use, Federal experts said yesterday.


Stocks Slip in Tokyo
LEAD: Stock prices edged down in Tokyo today.
At the close of trading, the 225-share Nikkei stock index was down 195.47 points, to 22,390.16. ''The market wants to do better,'' said Gregory Bundy, head of equity trading at Merrill Lynch Japan Inc. ''As soon as we get some positive news out of New York, we should see this market charting some gains.


Market Place;   Apple Risks Profits on New Line
LEAD: Apple Computer Inc. will introduce three of the most important new computers in its history Monday.
Industry analysts expect these lower-priced Macintosh computers to revive the company's flagging revenue growth and increase its market share in the personal computer business.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption yesterday with an article about possible tax increases in Suffolk County misidentified the man speaking in some copies.
He was Joseph R. Caputo, the County Comptroller, not Patrick G. Halpin, the County Executive.


Finance/New Issues;   Sallie Mae Offering Totals $200 Million
LEAD: The Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, is offering $200 million in fixed-rate notes due in 1995 through Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.


My Very Small Step for Womankind
LEAD: I dug out the yellowed newspaper clippings last week. ''Woman Reporter Gets the Bare Facts.'' ''Locker-Room Lib Breaks Ice; Hockeymen Flee.'' ''NHL 'Cover-up': Woman in Locker Room.''


Jesse Mintus, 78, Dies; Headed Health Group
LEAD: Jesse Mintus, a former executive director of the Queens County Mental Health Association, died on Tuesday at Calvary Hospice in the Bronx.
He was 78 years old and lived in the Bronx.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: MARGARET THATCHER turns 65 years old tomorrow and will spend her birthday at the Conservative Party Conference in Bournemouth, England.
When she arrived there yesterday, according to Reuters, she indicated that she hoped to be Prime Minister when she was 70.


Roger Foster, 89, Dies; Former S.E.C. Counsel
LEAD: Roger S. Foster, a lawyer with the Securities and Exchange Commission who became its general counsel in the late 1940's, died Tuesday at his home in Brookmont, Md.
He was 89 years old.
His family said he died of cardiac arrest.


Keep Our Powder Dry
LEAD: As they move into the third month of their shared response to Saddam Hussein's aggression, the governments of the U.S., most Middle Eastern countries and most members of the U.N.
Security Council deserve applause.
Together they have established a winning position.
Unless they become divided in ways that none can desire, the


Economic Scene;   A Terrible Time For a Deadlock
LEAD: PRESIDENT BUSH's flip-flop on whether or how to raise taxes to reduce the widening budget deficit - leaving the problem for Congress to work out as he hits the campaign trail - is a stunning blow to public confidence in the nation's leadership.
It could scarcely have come at a worse time, with the economy sliding toward recession, the markets in turmoil, the dollar falling to new lows, speculators driving oil prices up, down and up, and the United States carrying the heaviest military burdens in the Persian Gulf.


KEY ARMORED UNITS REACH SAUDI SOIL
LEAD: IN SAUDI ARABIA, Oct. 11 - Two of the most potent armored units in the United States Army have begun rolling ashore here in what American officials say is the last major step in preparing for battle with Iraq.


No Timetable for Lynn
LEAD: Mike Lynn, the Minnesota Vikings' general manager, who on Wednesday was named to replace Tex Schramm as president of the World League of American Football, said yesterday that he would do everything within his power to insure a smooth transition for the Vikings, who are off to a 1-4 start this season.


Rwanda Says Its Army Didn't Kill Civilians
LEAD: The Rwandan Government said today that its army had not massacred civilians in northeast Rwanda where it is combating a rebel invasion, Western diplomats said.


So You Want a Black Director for Your Movie?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Devils Collapse in Third Period
LEAD: It is perhaps too early to detect a pattern, but the Devils have experienced a third-period collapse in each of the games they have played on the road this season.


Boy Wounded By Stray Bullet
LEAD: A 12-year-old boy was wounded by a stray bullet as he stood on a Brooklyn corner yesterday afternoon, the police said.
The boy, who was not identified, was shot in the left leg at the corner of Irving Avenue and Palmetto Street in Bedford-Stuyvesant, said Detective Joseph Gallagher, a police spokesman.


U.S. Effort On Computer For Israel
LEAD: State Department and Commerce Department officials are pushing to loosen restrictions on the power limits of computers that can be sold to an Israeli military research laboratory that may be making nuclear weapons.


Spurs Sign Schintzius
LEAD: Dwayne Schintzius, the San Antonio Spurs' first-round choice in the 1990 National Basketball Association draft, has agreed to contract terms, the club announced yesterday.
He will start practice with the team today, the Spurs said.
Details of the agreement were not revealed.


Europe Jobless Rate Up
LEAD: Unemployment in the European Community rose one-tenth of 1 percent, to 8.4 percent, in August from the previous month, the European Community Executive Commission said this week.
The rise was the first in the 12-nation trade bloc since February.
Overall unemployment in August 1989 was at a rate of 9.2 percent.


Macy Units To Be Sold In G.E. Deal
LEAD: R. H. Macy &amp; Company said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its consumer credit business to the General Electric Company, allowing the department store chain to erase about $1.5 billion in debt from its balance sheet.
Macy remains heavily in debt from a management buyout in 1986.


Apple Harvest Festival
LEAD: Decorated pumpkins, cider-making, corn husk dolls and old-fashioned games will be among the attractions at the Apple Harvest Festival and Birdseed Sale at the New Pond Farm Education Center in West Redding, Conn., tomorrow from 11:30 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Bongo the Clown, a juggler and magician, will appear.


Amid Many Mirages, Russians Feel Lost
LEAD: Two items on Moscow Radio: The first, an old chestnut, announces that workers at a factory in Smolensk have donated a day's wages to veterans of the Great Patriotic War.
The second describes the dismantling of yet another Lenin statue, in yet another Soviet city.


Extra Games: Baseball's Gift to Fans
LEAD: Out where KDKA and WLW butt wattage, we now have a series.
Two old river towns going into a sixth game.
Baseball.


William Henry Harrison; Ex-Congressman, 94
LEAD: William Henry Harrison, a five-term Republican Congressman who was a descendant of two Presidents, died of heart failure Monday at Palms of Pasadena Hospital in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
He was 94 years old.
Mr.
Harrison was first elected to the House of Representatives in 1950.
He served there through 1954, when he lost a race for the


N.F.L. Matchups;   Rison Is Blooming In New Falcon Offense
LEAD: At Michigan State, Andre Rison spent much of his career in the shadow of Mark Ingram, now a Giants receiver.
Last year, in his first pro season, Rison was one of three Indianapolis Colts to catch 50 or more passes.
Rison was the 22d player selected and the second receiver chosen behind Hart Lee Dykes in the 1989 draft.


Councilman Morgan, A Microbiologist, 70
LEAD: Councilman Morgan, a microbiologist, educator and former administrator at the National Academy of Sciences, died on Wednesday at Anne Arundel Hospital in Annapolis, Md.
He was 70 years old and had moved to Annapolis from Teaneck, N.J., about a year ago.


More Bailout Aid Sought
LEAD: Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady is asking Congress to provide $40 billion more for the savings and loan bailout.
Without the money, rescues of the institutions ''will virtually cease within the next two months,'' he said in a letter released today.


Company News;   Enron Names New President
LEAD: The Enron Corporation, operator of the nation's largest natural gas transmission system, said yesterday that it had named Richard D. Kinder president and chief operating officer.


Republican Calls Democrat a Liar In Nasty Race for Texas Governor
LEAD: The Republican nominee for governor, upset that his opponent linked him with a Federal investigation into drug-money laundering, called her a liar to her face today and refused to shake hands.


A Mistrial After Scream Disrupts Court
LEAD: A mistrial was declared yesterday in the fourth Bensonhurst murder trial after a juror suddenly screamed in court at the victim's father, claiming he was staring at her.


Decision Mixed Over Intel Chip
LEAD: Hopes of obtaining the rights to the Intel Corporation's flagship 386 microprocessor remained slimly alive today at Advanced Micro Devices Inc. after the arbitrator hearing a contract dispute between the two companies issued a ruling containing some good news and some bad news for each company.


Britain Sees Gulf Blockade Deadline
LEAD: The British Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, said today that the American-led forces arrayed against Iraq in the Persian Gulf would have to decide ''in a matter of weeks'' whether economic sanctions should give way to war to force President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to pull his troops out of Kuwait.


Putting Idealism to Work;   The Community Service Investment
LEAD: A visionary piece of legislation has survived Washington's budget chaos and is making its way toward the President's desk.
The Community Service Act of 1990 calls for very little money, and dollar for dollar it is one of the wisest expenditures this Congress has yet suggested.


Dr. Dane G. Prugh Is Dead at 72; Studied Child Reactions to Illness
LEAD: Dr.
Dane G. Prugh, a psychiatrist who studied the effects of illness and hospitalization on children, died Saturday at the Mount San Antonio Gardens retirement community in Claremont, Calif., where he lived.
He was 72 years old.
His family said he died of kidney failure.


The Empty Pulpit
LEAD: The budget charade that has dominated Washington for weeks has diminished almost all of its participants.
That includes the majority of both parties in the House who, without offering any serious alternative, rejected a budget compromise engineered by their leaders.
But the roll of dishonor is headed by George


Business People;   A President Is Named By Morrison Knudsen
LEAD: Gunnar E. Sarsten, known for diversifying and tripling the size of the engineering company he headed, has been named president and chief operating officer of the Morrison Knudsen Corporation.


Review/Piano;   Daniel Barenboim Unravels 33 Changes
LEAD: Lives there a music lover whose heart does not sink just a little when a pianist sits down to the task of unraveling Beethoven's ''Diabelli'' Variations?
Experience has taught that the 33 extraordinary changes rung on its ordinary little theme can easily exhaust an audience's patience: the end generally comes like a release from duty, not an epiphany.


So You Want a Black Director for Your Movie?;   A Piano Lesson
LEAD: To the Editor:


Facing Yonkers Housing Foes, Banks Balk
LEAD: Five years after a Federal judge ordered Yonkers to desegregate by building low-income housing in white neighborhoods, public opposition remains so potent that banks, apparently fearing picketing or boycotts, are balking at financing the construction.


Review/Photography;   In Winokur's Portraits, You Are What You Own
LEAD: Ever since Neil Winokur's portraits overflowed the boundaries of the single photograph, beginning with his ''Totems'' of the mid-1980's, he has implied that one's identity and one's possessions are synonymous.
To judge from his work, which treats human faces like still-life subjects and vice versa, portraiture is at root a materialistic enterprise, not a psychological one.


So You Want a Black Director for Your Movie?;   Japanese 'Medea'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Only 4 Embassies Hold Out In Kuwait as Food Dwindles
LEAD: One by one, the foreign embassies defying Iraqi orders to shut down their operations in occupied Kuwait are closing for lack of water, electricity and food.


Klan Is Told to Stop Imitating 'Mister Rogers' on the Phone
LEAD: A Federal district judge has ordered the Missouri Knights of the Ku Klux Klan to stop playing racist telephone recordings that imitate the children's television program ''Mister Rogers's Neighborhood.''


TV Weekend;   A Garcia Marquez Tale
LEAD: Having basked in the limelight for a few days with its original production of ''The Civil War,'' public television now returns to business as usual.
That means tight budgets, which in turn spell more international co-productions and acquisitions.
Not insignificantly, two of this weekend's major PBS presentations come with English subtitles, fully so in ''Miracle in Rome,'' at 9 tonight on Channel 13 and partly in the four-part ''The Ginger Tree,'' the first installment of which is to be shown at 9 P.M.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: On the eve of the premiere of her first feature film in 11 years, SOPHIA LOREN is to receive a lifetime achievement award today at the Chicago International Film Festival, when her new movie, ''Saturday, Sunday and Monday,'' has its premiere.


Quebec Indians Ponder True Cost of Electricity
LEAD: Chief Robbie Dick has seen the future and he wants no part of it.
Neither do most of the 500 Cree Indians he represents in this remote northern Quebec village on the eastern shore of Hudson Bay.


As Fiscal Ills Grow, Dinkins And Unions Prepare to Talk
LEAD: Under the growing urgency of New York City's fiscal troubles, the Dinkins administration and union leaders are preparing for intensified contract talks in a drive to settle municipal labor contracts next week.


Results Plus
LEAD:
GOLF
U.S.
Beaten in Dunhill The defending champion United States was eliminated by France, 2 1/2- 1/2, in the first round of the Dunhill Cup yesterday in St.
Andrews, Scotland.
Also out was second-seeded Australia, which lost to New Zealand.
The unseeded French team of Marc Farry, Jean Van de Velde and Emmanuel Dussart led from the very first hole to beat Mark Calcavecchia, Curtis Strange and Tom Kite.


Wendy's Is Open To Takeover Bids
LEAD: Wendy's International Inc., the fast-food restaurant company, is interested in being taken over, its chief executive, James Near, said. ''We are a possible takeover target,'' he continued. ''If the time comes and the deal is right, then it can happen.'' He added in a telephone interview that there were no current bidders for the chain.


Murray Bowen Dies; Psychiatrist Was 77
LEAD: Murray Bowen, a psychiatrist who was a leader in the use of family therapy to treat mental illness, died Tuesday at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 77 years old.
He died of lung cancer, a spokeswoman for Georgetown University Medical Center said.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Nobel Prize for Octavio Paz
Octavio Paz, a writer of vivid surrealistic verse and social essays, became the first Mexican to win the Nobel Prize in Literature.
Page C33.
Still No Yonkers Housing
Opposition to court-ordered low-income housing in Yonkers remains so potent that banks are balking at financing the construction.


A Slugger Improving His Past
Whatever you think of remade movies, they can usually be counted on to remake one film at a time. ''Mr.
Destiny'' patches together ''It's a Wonderful Life'' and ''Back to the Future,'' tossing in bits of ''Field of Dreams'' and ''The Natural.'' While ''Mr.
Destiny'' is not technically a remake of anything, it's hard to find a glimmer of originality, much less wit or emotion.
James Belushi plays a junior executive who believes that if he had not struck out and lost a championship baseball game in high school, his life would have been infinitely better.
Michael Caine, in the Clarence the Angel role, is a bartender who concocts a drink that changes the past and therefore the present.
Though Mr.
Caine has star billing, he cannot be on screen for more than 10 minutes scattered throughout the film.


Quiet for 4 Years, Board Is Child of Crisis
LEAD: The State Financial Control Board, which has been all but dormant and forgotten in the budgetary quietude of recent years, was created in 1975 to impose fiscal austerity on New York City - then at the brink of bankruptcy - and see it through its worst financial crisis in history.


Octavio Paz, Mexican Poet, Wins Nobel Prize
LEAD: Octavio Paz, a writer of vivid surrealistic verse and penetrating social essays, won the Nobel Prize in Literature today, becoming the first Mexican writer to win literature's highest award.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
AIM Telephones Inc., Parsippany, N.J., a maker of private telephone systems, appointed Maurice P. Rodrigue president and chief executive, succeeding William C. Christopoulos, who resigned.
Ronald Teixeira was named executive vice president and chief operating officer.


THE BUDGET BATTLE: Washington Talk;   Modifying Medicare: No Dice Once Again
LEAD: Of all the fiscal powders that turned the recent budget summit to budget bomb, perhaps none proved more explosive than the plan to cut Medicare.
In the resulting detritus lie lessons of budgetary politics.


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 519 money market mutual funds increased $1.48 billion, to $411.35 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 159 institutional funds increased by $967.4 million, to $99.85 billion.


Heath to Meet With Hussein
LEAD: Former Prime Minister Edward Heath of Britain said today that he would visit Baghdad to meet President Saddam Hussein of Iraq on a humanitarian mission.
He said he would see Mr.
Hussein on Sunday in a bid to help Westerners who remain confined in Iraq after Baghdad's invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2. ''President Saddam Hussein is expecting me and discussions have been arranged,'' Mr.


Morris H. Hansen, 79, Census Statistician
LEAD: Morris Howard Hansen, an internationally known statistician who was former associate director for research and development at the United States Bureau of Census, died Tuesday at Georgetown University Medical Center in Washington.
He was 79 years old and lived in Rockville, Md.


Bush to Visit Latin America
LEAD: The White House announced today that President Bush will visit Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Uruguay and Venezuela from Dec. 2 to Dec. 8 on a trip to improve ties with Latin America that was put off last summer because of budget negotiations.
Mr.
Bush will also meet with President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico in Monterrey, Mexico, on Nov.


Donald Royce Is Dead; Rear Admiral Was 98
LEAD: Donald Royce, a retired rear admiral of the United States Navy who held high posts in aeronautical engineering, died Sunday at the Powhatan Nursing Home in Falls Church, Va.
He was 98 years old and lived in McLean, Va.


UAL Offers Employees 20% Stake in the Airline
LEAD: Two days after its board rejected the latest union buyout offer, the UAL Corporation, parent of United Airlines, said yesterday that it planned to beef up its employee stock purchase program to let employees buy up to 20 percent of the airline.


Robert DeBragga, 50, A Marketing Executive
LEAD: Robert DeBragga, a marketing executive who was told in 1978 that he was terminally ill with cancer but who lobbied for the next 12 years for improved cancer therapy and more treatment options, died on Friday at his home in Stonington, Conn.
He was 50 years old.


California Is Poised to Let Paralegals Go It Alone
LEAD: California appears poised to become the first state to grant independent paralegals - those who work for themselves, not for a law firm -the right to practice law in limited situations.


Umpires: Clemens Made Threat
LEAD: Richie Phillips, the executive director of the major league umpires' association, said today that he was told by two umpires that Roger Clemens told Terry Cooney he was ''going to get him'' after he was ejected from Wednesday's American League playoff game.


Drive Mounted for Environment Vote
LEAD: Amid signs that a far-reaching environmental measure on the California ballot is faltering, three national leaders of the environmental movement declared today that the state faced an environmental crisis.
They announced the start of a door-to-door drive for the measure.


Transactions
LEAD:
Baseball


Dow Slides 42.82 Points, To 2,365.10
LEAD: Stocks fell again yesterday, partly in reaction to a 63 percent dividend reduction by Chemical Banking, the nation's sixth-largest banking company.
The Dow Jones industrial average ended the day down 42.82, at 2,365.10, a 17-month low.


2 Witnesses Fail to Link Charges to Milken
LEAD: Government witnesses in the criminal case against Michael R. Milken testified yesterday in public for the first time, providing details of numerous transactions between Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and the stock trading firm of Ivan F. Boesky, the fallen arbitrager.


A's Savor Another Pennant and Brush Off Clemens Incident
LEAD: The stillness in the clubhouse seemed kind of eerie Wednesday afternoon, as if the Oakland A's had disappeared somewhere between the field and the frenzy.
But as time passed, players slowly emerged from behind large green doors, soaked and sweaty and wearing the looks of satisfaction that have become so familiar in the post-season.


Air Force Halts Gulf Training Flights
LEAD: The Air Force temporarily halted all training flights in the Persian Gulf on Wednesday after a series of aircraft accidents in the region, the Pentagon disclosed today.


How the Survey Was Conducted
LEAD: The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews conducted Oct. 8 to 10 with 960 adults around the United States, excluding Alaska and Hawaii.


Northern Ireland Doesn't Need Reuniting
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Dance;   San Francisco Ballet Presents 3 Premieres
LEAD: The San Francisco Ballet, which has been radically transformed since Helgi Tomasson became artistic director in 1985, opened on Tuesday night at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts with three East Coast premieres.
These were ''Rodin,'' a work created in the Soviet Union by Leonid Yakobson; ''Handel - a Celebration'' by Mr.


Report of Layoffs At Burger King
LEAD: Burger King, the fast-food chain, is planning ''substantial layoffs'' nationwide, according to a report today in The Miami Herald.
Quoting unnamed Burger King employees and restaurant franchise owners, the newspaper said reports were circulating within the company that between 300 and 400 workers would be affected.


Grand Jury to Resume in Teaneck Shooting
LEAD: A New Jersey judge yesterday lifted his order halting the state's second grand jury investigation into the shooting of 16-year-old Phillip Pannell by a Teaneck police officer in April.


Books of The Times;   From the Caribbean To a Land of Strangers
LEAD:
Lucy
By Jamaica Kincaid
164 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $16.95.


Washington at Work;   Now, Kemp Struggles To Keep H.U.D. Going
LEAD: Jack F. Kemp, the nation's barnstorming Housing Secretary, likes this saying: ''We're open for business - but not business as usual.'' Lately, however, some of Mr.
Kemp's critics complain that his department is not open for business at all.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Sept. 27 about Philadelphia's fiscal problems misstated the number of homes burned in the police confrontation with the radical group Move in 1985.
Sixty-one homes were destroyed, not 250.


Youth Project Working On Lower East Side
LEAD: To the Editor David S. Liederman (letter. Sept. 19) suggests formation of a ''cadre of trained youth workers willing to hit the streets to work directly with kids in their own neighborhoods.'' Such a cadre exists on New York's Lower East Side, where the Andrew Glover Youth Program has sent youth workers onto the streets for more than 13 years.





Reviews/Film;   Taxidermy and Temptations: Dennis Hopper's Dark World
LEAD: It goes without saying that there is no one quite like Dennis Hopper, an actor with an incomparable ability to bewilder, amuse and generally rattle an audience simply by presenting himself on screen.
It is also beginning to go without saying that the films Mr.
Hopper has directed, from his 1969 ''Easy Rider'' to his 1988 ''Colors'' to his current ''Hot


New Budget Ideas Offered as Tug-of-War Goes On
LEAD: The budget impasse grew even more complex today as Congressional Democrats and Republicans pushed rival plans, and conflicting statements at the White House added to the air of confusion.


Keating Again Asks for Lower Bail
LEAD: Rejected three times in state courts, lawyers for Charles H. Keating Jr. asked a Federal judge today to reduce the jailed financier's $5 million bail.


Surprising Flight Disclosed 135 Million Years Ago: A Bird
LEAD: Paleontologists have assembled the nearly complete skeleton of a 135-million-year-old sparrow-sized creature and found that the earliest known modern birds were skilled fliers, not just gliders or land-dwelling animals, as some scientists have contended.


Tumbling Stocks
LEAD: A 42-point drop in the Dow yesterday extended a broad three-month market slump.
Page D1.


Sony Discman's Output Doubled
LEAD: The Sony Corporation has doubled production of its portable CD players for data for the second time in two months to meet strong demand in Japan, a company spokesman said.
Sony introduced the Discman, which uses three-inch compact disks, on July 1.
Production has been raised to 20,000 players a month.


Pentagon Finds an Odd Ally in Iraq for Budget-Cutting Talks
LEAD: Because of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the Defense Department has emerged so far from the chaotic budget process with more modest cuts in military spending than seemed likely in early summer.


Frank McCreery, 72, Aircraft Manufacturer
LEAD: Frank E. McCreery, a former chief executive of Rohr Industries, a manufacturer of aircraft components, died Sunday at Alvarado Hospital in San Diego.
He was 72 years old and lived in Poway, Calif.


Kientzheim Journal;   In Verdant Alsace, East Meets West and Loves It
LEAD: By now the Alsatian shopkeeper has learned to say ''ringo taruto,'' the Japanese term for apple tart, and the girls from Tokyo and Yokohama have acquired a taste for foie gras and quiche Lorraine.


Suspect Arrested in Chinatown Shooting


A.T.&amp; T. Offers New PC Chip
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company introduced an inexpensive chip today designed to give personal computers new capabilities for speech, music processing and graphics.


When a Teen-Ager Just Doesn't Fit In
When a young woman is named Dinky, you have to wonder: did the name cause her dinkiness or did a dinky nature give rise to the name?
And when a movie fails to explain that name, is it a realistic touch - people don't discuss what they take for granted - or just a sloppy loophole? ''Welcome Home, Roxy Carmichael'' has enough realism and sloppiness to admit both possiblities.
Its most certain feature is Winona Ryder's delicate, mature performance, which overcomes a hodegepodge of small-town cliches.
The title character is a major gimmick, an unseen icon whose famous image hovers over Clyde, the Ohio town she left behind.
Ms.
Ryder plays the 15-year-old outcast named Dinky Bossetti, Roxy's spiritual daughter and perhaps her biological child as well.
Though ''Roxy Carmichael'' is never as fresh or powerful as it might have been, it is a sweetly engaging film in the Barry Levinson school: just when you think it might fall into a bottomless pit of sentimentality, it stops short.


Rinfret and Republicans Join for a Show of Unity
LEAD: Amid celebrity defections and escalating intraparty strife, the leaders of the New York Republican Party staged an awkward show of unity today with a gubernatorial candidate who has spent much of his campaign calling them names.


Restaurants
LEAD:
Mondrian


Cuomo Warns the State Is 'In for a Period of Pain'
LEAD: As New York City's financial outlook grows bleaker, officials in Albany, including Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, are warning that the state is also facing a dark financial future and that layoffs and tuition increases are likely.


Wally Moses, 80, Baseball Player


In a Survey, Americans Wish a Pox On Both Congress and the President
LEAD: Four weeks before the midterm elections, the American public is in a discontented mood, with 60 percent saying they disapprove of the way Congress is doing its job and more than two-thirds saying it is time to replace most members of Congress, a New York Times/ CBS News Poll has found But people still look more kindly on their own members of Congress than on Congress in general, and the forces protecting incumbent House members are formidable, from superior war chests to the perquisites of office.


Robert L. White, Ex-Head of Kent State, 81
LEAD: Robert L. White, who was president of Kent State University when National Guardsmen shot to death four students and wounded nine during a protest against the Vietnam War, died Wednesday at Robinson Memorial Hospital in Ravenna, Ohio.
He was 81 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Mr.
White's career at the university spanned 44 years.


Hewlett-Packard To Close 4 Days
LEAD: The Hewlett-Packard Company said it would close most of its United States operations for four days at the end of December to reduce operating expenses.
Some of the computer company's international operations may close in the holiday period as well.


Topics of The Times;   Hello, Columbus
LEAD: Cristoforo Colombo - or was he Cristobal Colon? - first landed in the New World 498 years ago today.
Americans who trace their roots to Italy and Spain both claim him, and virtually everyone celebrates him.


Arrest in Dykes Case
LEAD: Providence police arrested a nightclub bouncer last night on charges that he assaulted Hart Lee Dykes of the New England Patriots outside a night club in that city early Wednesday morning.
William Earley, 35, was arrested at a house in Portsmouth, R.I., shortly after he called to give himself up, the police said.


Sales Softened in September at the Nation's Largest Retailers
LEAD: Providing further evidence of economic weakness, the nation's largest retailers yesterday reported generally soft sales for September, mostly below the year-to-date pace and with especially disappointing results in stores that were open at least a year.


The Credit Markets;   Treasuries Drop in Volatile Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities fell again in volatile trading yesterday, pushed lower by the same unsettling melange of factors that have dominated trading for some time.


No Beer at Raiders Game Sunday
LEAD: Beer won't be sold Sunday at the Seattle Seahawks-Los Angeles Raiders football game at the Los Angeles Coliseum, a Coliseum Commission panel announced today.


So You Want a Black Director for Your Movie?;   Welcome to Hollywood
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Will Interview Dancers Of Cambodia on Defecting
LEAD: The State Department said today that it had demanded that a group of Cambodian dancers on tour in the United States be interviewed by the Immigration and Naturalization Service to determine if more of them may want to defect.


Putting Idealism to Work;   Still Time for the Police Corps
LEAD: High-quality police recruits at a bargain rate - that's the promise of a measure imbedded in a crime bill the Senate passed last summer.
Residents of New York and other crime-beset cities have special reason to hope it survives a conference with the House.


EGYPT VOTE ISSUE: A NEW ASSEMBLY?
LEAD: As President Hosni Mubarak promised a ''new era'' in his country's politics, Egyptians voted today in a referendum that could lead to early elections.


Review/Theater;   A New 'Miser' That Clears The Sinuses
LEAD: The spitting up of phlegm may not be everyone's idea of a laugh riot, but it is unmistakably the comic peak in the Circle in the Square's catch-as-catch-can revival of ''The Miser.''


So You Want a Black Director for Your Movie?;   An Honor Roll
LEAD: To the Editor:


Senators Reach Agreement To End Cable TV Impasse
LEAD: Legislation to regulate the cable television industry, considered all but dead when it was blocked on the Senate floor two weeks ago, may be resurrected with a last-minute deal reached today.


At Gaelic Park, the Contest For Control Is Off the Field
LEAD: Hard by a Bronx subway yard, men battle each autumn Sunday in a game so ancient it is played in Gaelic myths.
But this fall in America's proudest home of Irish sports, the fighting has not ended with the games.


The Israeli Tragedy
LEAD: The killing of Palestinians on the Temple Mount in Jerusalem was more than just another turn in an endless cycle of violence.
The event, and Israeli handling of it, have terrible implications for Israel's future.


Free Speech and Civil Rights Clash in Racism Trial
LEAD: Six years after winning a lawsuit in Alabama that literally bankrupted a major faction of the Ku Klux Klan, civil rights lawyers who brought that case are waging a similar battle here in search of an even bigger damage award.
This time they are trying to ruin the leaders of the White Aryan Resistance, a loosely knit group of several thousand white supremacists and skinheads who advocate racial separatism and anti-Semitism.


Chrysler Offers New Leasing Plan
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation introduced a program under which monthly payments to lease most new vehicles for 24 months are less than the monthly payments on a 60-month loan for the purchase of the vehicle.
The company said the Chrysler Gold Key lease program includes a range of 1990 and 1991 models, covering 24-, 36- and 48-month lease periods.


To Some Rape Victims, Justice Is Beyond Reach
LEAD: Prostitutes and drug addicts are being raped with increased frequency and brutality in the menacing corners of American cities and towns, but they rarely report the assaults, often disappear during an investigation or are disregarded by the criminal justice system.


Dollar Posts Broad Decline And Gold Prices Are Mixed
LEAD: The dollar fell against most major currencies on concern about the health of United States banks and the belief among foreign traders that the United States is headed for a sharp recession.


Discontent as Elections Near
LEAD: More than 60 percent of Americans disapprove of how Congress is doing its job, according to a New York Times/CBS News Poll.
Page A21.


Heads of 3 Parties in Puerto Rico Urge Senator to Press Status Vote
LEAD: Leaders of Puerto Rico's three main political parties appealed today to a leading Senator to reverse his position and let the full Senate vote this year on legislation authorizing a referendum on the island's future political status.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''It's very hard to explain to white people what we mean by 'Land is part of our life.' We're like rocks and trees.''
- Chief Robbie Dick of the Cree Indians in Great Whale, Quebec.
[A10:1.]


Let Oil States Pay With Excess Profits
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHRONICLE
LEAD: ALAN CRANSTON last night, the payoff for his bet with EDWARD M. KENNEDY.
Senator Kennedy called Senator Cranston last Friday, on the eve of the American League playoffs between the Oakland A's and the Boston Red Sox, to make the wager.


Review/Film;   A World War II Bomber Crew's Perilous Final Mission
LEAD: ''Memphis Belle'' is about the officers and crew of one United States Air Force B-17 bomber, called Memphis Belle, on its 25th and final mission, a daylight raid over Germany on May 17, 1943.
It is fiction of an earnest sort, remarkable only for the way in which the air battles of nearly a half-century ago have been re-created with such seeming authenticity.


Pop/Jazz;   Q. Where's the Blues? A. Where Isn't It?
LEAD: As the third annual edition of the touring extravaganza called Benson &amp; Hedges Blues pulls into New York City today and settles in for a 10-day run, two things about the music being showcased are clear.
One is that the blues is more popular than it's been in years.
The other is that nobody - not even the people who play it - is quite sure where to draw the line between what is and isn't the blues.


Sale of Xerox Unit
LEAD: Crum &amp; Forster Inc., the Xerox Corporation's insurance subsidiary, said it had signed a definitive agreement to sell the Navco Corporation, an auto insurance specialty company, to the General Motors Corporation's Motors Insurance Company subsidiary, for about $250 million.
Navco, based in St.
Louis, provides personal car insurance.


Mud-Slinging Elevated to an Art Form
LEAD: HERE is what political analysts today call ''negative campaigning'': an advertisement by the incumbent Governor of Michigan suggesting that his Republican opponent supports big business.


Missouri Seeks to Quit Case of Comatose Patient
LEAD: The State of Missouri, which fought all the way to the Supreme Court to prevent the removal of a feeding tube from a comatose patient, has asked to be allowed to withdraw from new court proceedings on the case.


Ozone Hole Reopens Over Antarctica
LEAD: A gaping hole in earth's protective ozone layer has again opened over Antarctica, and scientists reported yesterday that the depletion of ozone there seemed to be nearly as severe as it was in the worst previous years, 1987 and 1989.


Storms Pummel Florida's Gulf Coast and Carolinas


Leader of Panama Invasion, Ill With Leukemia, Is Retiring
LEAD: Gen.
Maxwell Thurman, the field commander who led the invasion of Panama last December, is retiring, the Pentagon has announced.


The Media Business;   Wider Reach Granted for 'Wireless Cable'
LEAD: The Federal Communications Commission moved today to give more channels and more power to ''wireless cable'' companies, which broadcast programs on microwave frequencies and are trying to become low-cost rivals to cable television systems.


Piniella Stands Behind Questionable Strategy
LEAD: Lou Piniella, who kept the Cincinnati Reds in first place for every day of his first season as manager this year, took his ball club back home today, still needing one more victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates to win the National League pennant.
But for perhaps the first time since he left the Yankees, the volatile


The Bolshoi Spins Off A Troupe
LEAD: Yuri Grigorovich, the artistic director of the Bolshoi Ballet of Moscow, announced yesterday that he had formed a new touring company, named the Bolshoi Ballet Grigorovich Company, which is to make its debut next month.
The group, of 60 young dancers, is the only major dance troupe in the Soviet Union to exist entirely independent of state subsidy; instead, it will derive its income from performances and touring seasons.


The Favorite Player Of Taylor and Landeta
LEAD: Three weeks ago, Bill Walsh, the former coach turned television analyst, asked Coach Bill Parcells of the Giants for advice.
Walsh wanted to know which Giants, aside from the Lawrence Taylor and Phil Simms types, he should focus on in the telecast of the game between the Giants and the Miami Dolphins.


Walter J. Vetro, Monsignor, 73
LEAD: Msgr.
Walter J. Vetro, founder and chairman of the St.
Nicholas Neighborhood Preservation Corporation in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, died on Monday in the rectory of St.
Nicholas Roman Catholic Church, where he lived.
He was 73 years old.


Church Loses Bid to Bar Play It Contends Is Blasphemous
LEAD: A legal move by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York to stop an Off Off Broadway play that the church considers blasphemous from being performed in a church-owned building was rejected yesterday by a Manhattan justice.


Offstage in Budget Drama, a Battle to Sway Bush
LEAD: At times during the last three days, it seemed that George Bush was speaking with different voices about his intentions on the budget, that he was suffering from a political split personality.
As it turned out, he was.


Charger Worries Lageman
LEAD: With the season-ending knee injury to the right guard Dave Cadigan, a lot of attention has been focused on the Jets' offense this week.
But Jeff Lageman, the Jets' right defensive end, has been focusing on the San Diego Chargers' offense.


House Approves Compromise Bill To Continue the Arts Endowment
LEAD: After hours of emotional debate over what is art and what is pornography, the House of Representatives tonight overwhelmingly approved a bill to extend the life of the National Endowment for the Arts for three years and leave judgments about obscenity to the courts.


Brazil Proposes $60 Billion Shift
LEAD: The Government of Brazil proposed today to convert $60 billion of its debt to private foreign creditors into medium- and long-term government bonds.


Illinois Journal;   Where an Irish Name Wins Everyone's Vote
LEAD: This is the County of Cook, not Cork.
And contrary to rumor, the election ballots in Illinois next month will not be printed in Gaelic.


Where Rivals for Congress Run Against Government
LEAD: It could make one woozy to be a voter in the 12th Congressional District this year, where two candidates for the House are scrambling to out-anti-government one another.


Tennessee Suspends 3 Players
LEAD: Three players on the Tennessee football team were suspended indefinitely this morning after a female student made allegations that they sexually assaulted her in the school's athletic dormitory.


After Court Rebuke, Refac Hints at a Retreat on Suits
LEAD: In the wake of a stinging rebuke from a Federal appeals court here, the Refac Technology Development Corporation signaled a retreat today in its efforts to sue thousands of companies over patent infringement.


Tektronix Layoffs
LEAD: Tektronix Inc. said it would sell or shut down its unprofitable work-station business within 60 days, and the company gave layoff notices to about 175 employees.
If it can find a buyer for the business, many of those workers would be re-employed, a company spokesman, Doug Babb, said.
More than 2,000 other Tektronix employees have been laid off since the beginning of the year.


Software Issue Kills Liberal Amendment To Copyright Laws
LEAD: A long campaign by writers and publishers for a bill that would allow authors to quote liberally from letters, diaries and other unpublished material has collapsed in Congress just as a compromise appeared to have been reached.


Barry Seeks Retrial, Charging Influencing of Jurors
LEAD: Saying that Federal marshals might have influenced jury deliberations, the lawyer for Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. today asked for a new trial on his conviction of possessing cocaine.


Stocks Rise After News On Mideast
LEAD: After three days of pounding that pushed the market to its lowest level in almost a year and half, stock prices rose yesterday following upbeat Middle East news and rumors.


Software Issue Kills Liberal Amendment To Copyright Laws
LEAD: A long campaign by writers and publishers for a bill that would allow authors to quote liberally from letters, diaries and other unpublished material has collapsed in Congress just as a compromise appeared to have been reached.


2 U.S. Satellites Are Lofted
LEAD: An Ariane rocket carrying two telecommunications satellites built by the Hughes Aircraft Company, a unit of the General Motors Corporation, blasted off tonight from this remote South American launch site.
The unmanned Ariane 44-L rocket, powered by four strap-on liquid-fuel boosters, lifted off its launching pad on schedule at 7:58 P.M.


Leonard Krieger, 72, A Leading Expert On Modern Europe
LEAD: Leonard Krieger, a historian and an authority on the emergence of the modern European state who in 1962 was the first scholar given the rank of University Professor by the University of Chicago, died yesterday at a Chicago hospital.
He was 72 years old and lived in Chicago.


Tennessee Suspends 3 Players
LEAD: Three players on the Tennessee football team were suspended indefinitely this morning after a female student made allegations that they sexually assaulted her in the school's athletic dormitory.


Why Risk Capital?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Eli A. Freydberg, Executive, 87
LEAD: Eli A. Freydberg, a former executive with Consolidated Foods, died on Thursday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 87 years old and lived in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.


Alitalia Adds To Airbus Order
LEAD: The Italian national airline, Alitalia, ordered 20 Airbus passenger jetliners, bringing its total order for the new model to 60 aircraft, including 20 that are optional.
Jean Pierson, administrator of Airbus Industrie, the European aircraft consortium, said the 40 firm orders were valued at $3.1 billion.


Steinbrenner's Supporters Dealt a Steback by Court
LEAD: As George Steinbrenner's attorneys made yet another move against Commissioner Fay Vincent, a Federal appeals court here handed two Steinbrenner supporters another setback.


Miller to Open Brewery in Ohio
LEAD: A brewery built in 1983 by the Miller Brewing Company but that never opened will be producing beer by next July, the company said.
Preparation for producing canned beer at the $411 million brewery near Trenton in southwest Ohio will begin in January, with bottle and keg lines to follow, a spokesman, Richard


Barnet Halperin, Physician, 83
LEAD: Dr.
Barnet Halperin, a physician who practiced in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn for more than half a century, died on Wednesday at his home in Forest Hills, Queens.
He was 83 years old.


Steinbrenner's Supporters Dealt a Steback by Court
LEAD: As George Steinbrenner's attorneys made yet another move against Commissioner Fay Vincent, a Federal appeals court here handed two Steinbrenner supporters another setback.


Oil Prices Up $1.46 in Week But End Below $40 a Barrel
LEAD: After zig-zagging most of the day on rumors about the Middle East, oil for November delivery finished the week yesterday at $39.69 a barrel, up 73 cents from the Thursday close, on the New York Mercantile Exchange.


Your Money Some Tax Breaks On Falling Stocks
LEAD: For many investors, it may be time to trim the sails.
Since stocks and bonds have taken a pounding in recent weeks, many portfolios have losers.
While the sentiment may be to hold on, what can be salvaged represents a tax loss.


Review/Jazz;   The Sound of the Big Bands Inspires Some New Riffs
LEAD: The American Jazz Orchestra took a leap into contemporary jazz when it opened its season on Thursday night at the Great Hall of Cooper Union.
The program was composed, arranged and conducted by Muhal Richard Abrams, the winner of the first Jazzpar (a Danish award intended to be the jazz equivalent of the Nobel Prize) and included the American premieres of six pieces Mr.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Wednesday about a funeral for Alvin Rivera, a 15-year-old who was killed in a random shooting, misstated the youth's home address.
It was 540 Southern Boulevard in the Bronx.


A Month's Reprieve for Polly Peck
LEAD: After a three-week cash crisis that has raised concern among investors, large international banks and the British and Turkish Governments, Polly Peck International P.L.C. won a monthlong reprieve today from its lenders.
The embattled fruit, electronics and services conglomerate was one of Britain's fastest-growing companies in the 1980's.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Wednesday about a funeral for Alvin Rivera, a 15-year-old who was killed in a random shooting, misstated the youth's home address.
It was 540 Southern Boulevard in the Bronx.


Silver Prices Rebound a Bit; Some See Bottom of a Slide
LEAD: Silver prices rose yesterday after hitting a 14-year low that some analysts said might have marked the bottom of a steep slide.


George E. Hamilton Jr., Art Gallery Chief, 95
LEAD: George E. Hamilton Jr., a Washington lawyer who practiced for nearly seven decades and who was a past president of the Corcoran Gallery of Art, died Thursday at his home in Washington.
Mr.
Hamilton was 95 years old.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: One of the earliest talk show hosts of radio and television, TEX McCRARY turned 80 today.
With his wife, JINX FALKENBURG, he started ''The Tex and Jinx Show'' in 1946.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: DR.
DAVID A. KESSLER is PRESIDENT BUSH's nominee for Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, the White House said Thursday.
Dr.
Kessler is medical director of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York and teaches food and drug law at Columbia University Law School.
He holds a medical degree from Harvard and a law degree from the University of


Carter Hawley Called Late in Bill Payments
LEAD: Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., the West Coast's largest department store company, is feeling pressure from some credit agencies, who say the company is late paying bills.
The agencies are warning clients to be cautious when supplying Carter Hawley Hale stores with goods.


With Simple Pawn Move, Kasparov Rewrites the Book
LEAD: It might have been the war room on Doomsday: a huge screen showing the deployed forces, an expert at a display board analyzing strategic options, an anxious crowd tracking the attack and defense in the dim light, the nerve-racking tensions of an unfolding battle.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: HUME CRONYN and JESSICA TANDY finally won permission to build an apartment above their garage in Easton, Conn.
In August, the town Zoning Board of Appeals turned down their request, but the board reversed itself Thursday.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Lower-Rate Credit Cards
LEAD:
Holders of standard bank credit cards who maintain a revolving credit balance and pay an average annual rate of 18.72 percent or more can switch to lower-rate cards to get substantial monthly savings.
Now is a good time to change, because this is the last year that interest rates paid on credit cards will be allowed as a deduction on itemized returns.


Italian Driver Injured
LEAD: The Formula One driver Allessandro Nannini of Italy lost part of his arm in a helicopter crash yesterday near his home at Belriguardo, on the outskirts of Siena, Italy.
The 31-year-old driver for the Benetton-Ford team was taken to a Florence hospital, where doctors attempted to reattach his right forearm.


Despite Changes, Bush Rules Out Rights Measure
LEAD: Backers of a major civil rights bill have made a number of last-minute concessions to secure White House support, but the Bush Administration rejected the revisions today, saying the bill still would force employers to adopt quotas.


Review/Jazz;   Homage To Post-Bop
LEAD: For her first set as a quartet leader at the Village Vanguard, the bastion of small-group jazz, the pianist Geri Allen staked out her own kind of jazz tradition on Tuesday.
She played pieces by Thelonious Monk and Herbie Nichols and tributes to Eric Dolphy, paying homage to modernist jazz composers who were masters of spiky harmony, eccentric timing and sidelong melodies.


Spending Cut by Dow Jones
LEAD: Dow Jones &amp; Company, publisher of The Wall Street Journal, is freezing capital spending and salaries and imposing other cutbacks to cope with weak financial results and the sluggish economy.


Press Secretary To Cuomo Plans To Resign Soon
LEAD: In the first of what is expected to be several departures from the Cuomo administration in the coming months, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's press secretary and close adviser, Gary G. Fryer, said yesterday that he would leave his post after the election.


A Car Is Rated Most Trouble-Free, But How Good Is That?
LEAD: The advertisement says that J. D. Power and Associates ranks the car as ''the most trouble-free'' in its class.
That's good for the prospective buyer, right?
Well, maybe.
Or maybe it's just good for the automobile maker who is choosing to advertise only part of the information the Power survey provided.


Stocks Rise After News On Mideast
LEAD: After three days of pounding that pushed the market to its lowest level in almost a year and half, stock prices rose yesterday following upbeat Middle East news and rumors.


Masur Will Replace Bernstein for 'Elijah'
LEAD: Kurt Masur will conduct the New York Philharmonic in four performances of Mendelssohn's ''Elijah'' in December.
Mr.
Masur, who will become the Philharmonic's music director in the fall of 1992, is replacing Leonard Bernstein, who was originally scheduled to conduct the performances but announced his retirement this week because of poor health.


Senate Votes Open Aid For Cambodian Rebels
LEAD: The Senate today approved $20 million in new American humanitarian aid to Cambodians, an apparent replacement for the previous policy of covert aid to rebels fighting the Vietnamese-backed Government.


Metro-North Studying A New Hudson Bridge
LEAD: In 1982, the State Bridge Authority announced plans to build a new Hudson River bridge to ease congestion at the present Mid-Hudson Bridge here in Poughkeepsie. ''New Bridge Called Certain'' read the headline in The Poughkeepsie Journal.


Senate Votes Open Aid For Cambodian Rebels
LEAD: The Senate today approved $20 million in new American humanitarian aid to Cambodians, an apparent replacement for the previous policy of covert aid to rebels fighting the Vietnamese-backed Government.


Four Years After Birth, Should 'the Bubble' Burst?
LEAD: As members of Congress strain to produce a budget agreement, a tax-code anomaly called ''the bubble'' has become a fixation for lawmakers, and one of the questions asked most often on Capitol Hill these days is whether to pop it.


Leonard Krieger, 72, A Leading Expert On Modern Europe
LEAD: Leonard Krieger, a historian and an authority on the emergence of the modern European state who in 1962 was the first scholar given the rank of University Professor by the University of Chicago, died yesterday at a Chicago hospital.
He was 72 years old and lived in Chicago.


Eric Show a Free Agent
LEAD: Eric Show, the winningest pitcher ever for the San Diego Padres, has become a free agent.
The 34-year-old right-hander was set loose Thursday when the Padres elected to exercise a $250,000 buyout clause in his contract rather than pick up Show's $1.1 million for 1991.
Show picked up his 100th career victory by defeating the Los Angeles Dodgers in his team's Oct.


Joseph R. Concilio, Accountant, 47
LEAD: Joseph R. Concilio, a certified public accountant and former executive with NBC, died on Thursday at Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan.
He was 47 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: George Washington Bridge: One westbound lane on the lower level will be closed until 6 A.M. on Monday.
Major delays expected.


Editorial Notebook;   Racial Boycotts, Then and Now
LEAD: One morning, when I was a boy in Nuremberg, Germany, I heard a commotion on the street.
I looked out the window and saw a jeering mob in front of the jewelry store across from our apartment on Koenigstrasse, a main shopping avenue.


Review/Theater;   A Beckett Heroine Laughs as She Suffers
LEAD: Despite her cheerful demeanor, Winnie in ''Happy Days'' (revived at the CSC Repertory Theater) knows the limits and defeats of her life.
Her way to endure the day, and the day after that, is ''laughing wild amid severest woe.'' Laughter shares the stage with sorrow.


Nuclear Weapon Is Tested
LEAD: A nuclear weapon was detonated underground today, delivering a blast that registered 5.7 on the Richter scale and was felt 105 miles from ground zero.
The weapon was up to 10 times more powerful than the bomb that destroyed Hiroshima.
The test was the seventh of the year and the third in three weeks at the Nevada Test Site.


Nets Seeking Answers
LEAD: The Nets will have 19 players in uniform when they open their exhibition season tonight against Washington in New Haven and begin their search for answers to the questions plaguing the team.
But last night, the most urgent question remained unresolved: When are the Nets going to sign Derrick Coleman, the No.


Strangely, Piniella's Decisions Pay Off and Leyland's Don't
LEAD: In switching his starting pitcher from a left-handed starter, Zane Smith, to a right-handed reliever, Ted Power, Manager Jim Leyland of the Pittsburgh Pirates said, ''We're not trying to pull something weird here.''


KLM Airlines To Cut 500 Jobs
LEAD: KLM Royal Dutch Airlines announced it was cutting 500 jobs and warned that rising jet fuel prices and a weak dollar could wipe out profits this year.
The company may also cut part of its foreign network as part of a $231 million cost-cutting plan in the next three years, a KLM spokesman, Hugo Baas, said.


Graduation, at Last


What? Increase Defense Spending?
LEAD: How does a ceiling become a floor?
By overturning the House.
At least it does if you are John P. Murtha, the Pennsylvania Democrat who is chairman of the House defense appropriations subcommittee.
He has just arranged that the Government spend an additional $5.3 billion for defense next year beyond the amount the House had previously voted to spend.


Transactions
LEAD: Baseball SAN DIEGO (NL) - Named John Barr assistant general manager.
Dismissed Tom Romenesko, director of player development, and Dick Dent, trainer.


Beliefs
LEAD: It was once the case that when a nation went to war, religion, too, signed on for the duration.
But during the Vietnam War and the drawn-out conflicts in Central America, America's religious leaders split.
Some blessed the Government's ventures, while many were active in anti-war organizations.


Dinkins Announces Reductions Of $2.3 Billion in Capital Budget
LEAD: In perhaps the most telling sign of the fiscal problems that are ahead for New York City, the Dinkins administration yesterday said that it would cut $2.3 billion from the nearly $16 billion it planned to spend on capital programs in the next three years.


Tunisians Discussed Gulf Solution in Baghdad
LEAD: To the Editor:


INSIDE
LEAD:
Egyption Official Slain


Limit Banks' Use of Insured Deposits
LEAD: To the Editor:


Can You Say Salary Cap? For Drexler, It's $8 Million
LEAD: The Portland Trail Blazers have extended the contract of the guard Clyde Drexler by one year in an agreement that he says will pay him more than $8 million for the 1995-96 season.
The salary is believed to be the highest ever for one season for an athlete in a team sport.


Asahi Breweries
LEAD: Asahi Breweries of Japan revised a $787 million deal to buy a big slice of Elders IXL, the world's fourth-largest brewer.
Asahi, Japan's second-largest brewer, still plans to buy 19.9 percent of Elders but will not buy all the shares from the Australian company's debt-laden parent, Harlin Holdings.


Lebanese Christian General Flees Compound Under Syrian Bombing
LEAD: Under heavy bombardment by Syrian forces, the leader of Lebanon's Christian militia left his fortified headquarters and went to the French Embassy today, asking for a cease-fire, his radio station said.


Intel Profit Rises; Loss For Rival
LEAD: The Intel Corporation and Advanced Micro Devices Inc., Silicon Valley's feuding semiconductor companies, today reported vastly different financial results for the third quarter.
Intel's profits more than doubled while Advanced Micro suffered a large loss.


German Interior Minister Is Shot at Political Rally
LEAD: Wolfgang Schauble, the German Interior Minister and one of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's closest advisers, was shot and seriously wounded tonight at a campaign rally, his ministry reported.


Budget Fight: Stakes High; Numbers Clash
LEAD: On the very same day last week that Mayor David N. Dinkins announced that he was considering 15,000 layoffs to close $1.7 billion in budget gaps over two years, Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman painted a much grimmer picture of the city's fiscal health.


John P. Fadden, Athletic Trainer, 91
LEAD: John P. Fadden, a trainer at Harvard for more than 50 years whose patients also included such notables as Babe Ruth, Ted Williams, Bob Cousy, Arthur Fiedler and John, Robert and Edward Kennedy, died of prostate cancer Wednesday at the Neville Manor nursing home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 91 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about diplomats in Kuwait incompletely listed the embassies that remain open there in defiance of Iraq.
The Canadian Embassy, with five diplomats, also remains open, in addition to the embassies of the United States, France, Britain and Indonesia.


Cooney Showed Courage
LEAD: In the hallowed Halls of Congress on Thursday morning, the Representative from the First District of Massachusetts, Silvio O. Conte, a Republican, stood up and called Terry Cooney ''loony'' for evicting Roger Clemens - ''Clem,'' as he called him - from a baseball game the other day.


Taxi Commission Investigates Medallion Pricing and Loans
LEAD: The New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission and three other city agencies are investigating complaints that taxi-medallion brokers and lenders are selling the medallions at prices far above the prevailing market rate to unsuspecting buyers.


J. W. (Bill) Fisher Is Dead at 76; Industrialist and Arts Supporter
LEAD: J. W. (Bill) Fisher, an industrialist and philanthropist who was internationally known for his interest in the performing arts, died Thursday at his home in Marshalltown, Iowa.
He was 76 years old and died of a respiratory ailment, a funeral home representative said.


Jordan King to Meet With Iraqi
LEAD: King Hussein said today that he would meet here on Saturday with Iraq's Foreign Minister, Tariq Aziz, to discuss the latest peace efforts in the Persian Gulf.


Waiting for Bush To Lead Us on Oil
LEAD: To the Editor:


Nets Seeking Answers
LEAD: The Nets will have 19 players in uniform when they open their exhibition season tonight against Washington in New Haven and begin their search for answers to the questions plaguing the team.
But last night, the most urgent question remained unresolved: When are the Nets going to sign Derrick Coleman, the No.


Intel Profit Rises; Loss For Rival
LEAD: The Intel Corporation and Advanced Micro Devices Inc., Silicon Valley's feuding semiconductor companies, today reported vastly different financial results for the third quarter.
Intel's profits more than doubled while Advanced Micro suffered a large loss.


KLM Airlines To Cut 500 Jobs
LEAD: KLM Royal Dutch Airlines announced it was cutting 500 jobs and warned that rising jet fuel prices and a weak dollar could wipe out profits this year.
The company may also cut part of its foreign network as part of a $231 million cost-cutting plan in the next three years, a KLM spokesman, Hugo Baas, said.


FNN Ousts Chief Financial Officer
LEAD: Financial News Network, the cable television business news service embroiled in an accounting dispute with its auditor for several weeks, said yesterday that its chief financial officer had been dismissed for taking unauthorized compensation.


Bensonhurst Defendant Faults Mistrial
LEAD: Charles Stressler, the defendant in the latest Bensonhurst murder trial, said yesterday that he felt cheated when a mistrial was declared on Thursday.


E.M.S. Director Resigns His Post Amid Criticism
LEAD: Thomas B. Doyle, executive director of New York City's Emergency Medical Service since August 1988, resigned yesterday, weeks after he was criticized over his handling of a reported stabbing during a job action at Rikers Island.


Bensonhurst Defendant Faults Mistrial
LEAD: Charles Stressler, the defendant in the latest Bensonhurst murder trial, said yesterday that he felt cheated when a mistrial was declared on Thursday.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: One of the earliest talk show hosts of radio and television, TEX McCRARY turned 80 today.
With his wife, JINX FALKENBURG, he started ''The Tex and Jinx Show'' in 1946.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Lower-Rate Credit Cards
LEAD:
Holders of standard bank credit cards who maintain a revolving credit balance and pay an average annual rate of 18.72 percent or more can switch to lower-rate cards to get substantial monthly savings.
Now is a good time to change, because this is the last year that interest rates paid on credit cards will be allowed as a deduction on itemized returns.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Wednesday about unauthorized Government-guaranteed loans to Iraq by the Atlanta branch of Banca Nazionale del Lavorno, an Italian bank, misstated the amount the Government could lose from the loans.
It is $400 million to $600 million, not $2 billion.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
ASK Computer Systems Inc., Mountain View, Calif., extended until next Friday its offer for common shares of Ingres Corp.
ASK said it had received more than 4.3 million, or about 38 percent, of Ingres's shares so far.


Carter Hawley Called Late in Bill Payments
LEAD: Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., the West Coast's largest department store company, is feeling pressure from some credit agencies, who say the company is late paying bills.
The agencies are warning clients to be cautious when supplying Carter Hawley Hale stores with goods.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: BARBARA ORBISON, widow of the rock singer Roy Orbison, is collaborating with STEVE TISCH on a movie about her husband's life.
He died of a heart attack in 1988, when he was 52.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: DR.
DAVID A. KESSLER is PRESIDENT BUSH's nominee for Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, the White House said Thursday.
Dr.
Kessler is medical director of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York and teaches food and drug law at Columbia University Law School.
He holds a medical degree from Harvard and a law degree from the University of


Review/Jazz;   The Sound of the Big Bands Inspires Some New Riffs
LEAD: The American Jazz Orchestra took a leap into contemporary jazz when it opened its season on Thursday night at the Great Hall of Cooper Union.
The program was composed, arranged and conducted by Muhal Richard Abrams, the winner of the first Jazzpar (a Danish award intended to be the jazz equivalent of the Nobel Prize) and included the American premieres of six pieces Mr.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This is Beirut on the Potomac; there are more warring factions than I can count.
If we're going to keep rethrashing issues and continuing to put the party in a position where we're certifiably giving huge tax breaks for the rich, I don't want to add to the confusion.''
- Representative Marge Roukema, Republican of New Jersey.


Request Backed On Bailout Aid
LEAD: The Senate Banking Committee today approved a $57 billion financing request from Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady that would continue the savings and loan rescue program through next September.


Patents;   Europe Still Uncertain About Harvard's Mouse
LEAD: After long deliberation, the European Patent Office's appeals board has decided to duck the question of whether Harvard University's genetically engineered mouse qualifies for a European patent.


Hazard to Babies' Hands
LEAD: Government officials have issued warnings about baby strollers that have caused severe injuries to children's hands.


Egypt's Parliament Speaker Is Assassinated by Gunmen
LEAD: The Speaker of Egypt's Parliament was assassinated today outside a luxury hotel by the Nile.
Police officials and witnesses said gunmen on motorcycles sprayed his chauffeured sedan with automatic-rifle fire before disappearing into the warrenlike streets of the Egyptian capital.


Rangan Journal;   In Rural Tibet, a Little Wealth Brings Contentment
LEAD: Punjiong knows all about children, because she has had 11 of them, and she is an expert at sticking cow pies on the walls of her house to dry them into fuel.
But she acknowledges that she is a bit weak on technology.


Waiting for Bush To Lead Us on Oil
LEAD: To the Editor:


2 U.S. Satellites Are Lofted
LEAD: An Ariane rocket carrying two telecommunications satellites built by the Hughes Aircraft Company, a unit of the General Motors Corporation, blasted off tonight from this remote South American launch site.
The unmanned Ariane 44-L rocket, powered by four strap-on liquid-fuel boosters, lifted off its launching pad on schedule at 7:58 P.M.


Patents;   Europe Still Uncertain About Harvard's Mouse
LEAD: After long deliberation, the European Patent Office's appeals board has decided to duck the question of whether Harvard University's genetically engineered mouse qualifies for a European patent.


181-1 Shot Captures Meadowlands
LEAD: Great Normand became the longest shot ever to win a race at the Meadowlands and probably the longest ever to win a Grade I stakes race anywhere when he pulled away on a sloppy track to win tonight's $500,000 Meadowlands Cup at odds of 181-1.


Allied-Signal In Valeo Deal
LEAD: Valeo, a French car components maker, said it had agreed to sell its brake linings business to Allied-Signal Automotive, part of Allied-Signal Inc., for 385 million francs, or about $106 million, effective Dec. 1.
The business consists of two factories - one in the Calvados region of France and the other in Spain near Madrid - and a technical and administrative center near Paris.


British Airways and Aeroflot Discuss Starting an Airline
LEAD: British Airways, an airline renowned for service, and Aeroflot, a carrier known for the lack of it, said yesterday that they were discussing the creation of an international airline.


News Summary
LEAD: International
2-7
The United States and other nations were reported to be closer to a compromise Security Council resolution that would condemn Monday's violence in Jerusalem, but with language that could be accepted by Washington and avoid a split in the international coalition against Iraq.


Note and Bond Prices Rise Sharply
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds rebounded strongly yesterday, while bills posted only minimal changes.


A's Start Preparations: Workout and Healing
LEAD: On their first day back to business, the Oakland Athletics did the two most important things they hope to do while they wait for the World Series: they played and they recovered.


Making Execution Humane (or Can It Be?)
LEAD: As death rows around the nation swell with inmates, prison officials are grappling with a new question: How to execute a condemned criminal professionally and humanely?


Homecoming for Trottier
LEAD: Thirty minutes before the Penguins-Blackhawks game Thursday night, several young men gathered at the front of the second balcony in Chicago Stadium, high above one net, to watch the warmup drills of the Pittsburgh players.


Kuwaiti Exiles Reunite in an Imperfect Harmony
LEAD: Hundreds of Kuwaiti exiles flocked to this Red Sea city today, anxious to demonstrate national unity in the face of the Iraqi occupation and avoid a squabble over demands by one faction that the ruling Sabah family commit itself to democracy in a liberated Kuwait.


Dollar Ends Day Mixed; Trading Termed 'Nervous'
LEAD: The dollar finished mixed yesterday in trading that currency dealers said was influenced by many factors, from uncertainty about the Federal budget negotiations to falling oil prices.


Illinois High Court Bars Black Slate From Ballot
LEAD: To the relief of local and state Democratic Party leaders, the Illinois Supreme Court today upheld a lower court ruling barring a third-party slate of black candidates from appearing on next month's Cook County election ballot.


Cincinnati Wins Pennant


Producer Prices Up Sharp 1.6%
LEAD: A record surge in gasoline prices helped push the nation's Producer Price Index up by a sharp 1.6 percent in September, the Labor Department said today.


Outlook Rather Glum Among Executives
LEAD: The top executives of several dozen of America's largest corporations, gathered here for the twice-yearly meeting of the Business Council, are nervous to gloomy about the economy and appalled by the discord in Washington over how to cut the Federal budget deficit.


New Assistant Coach For Knight and Indiana
LEAD: Norm Ellenberger just wanted to talk fishing, but Bobby Knight ended up luring him to Indiana.
Ellenberger, who spent the last three college basketball seasons working for Don Haskins at Texas-El Paso, said Thursday that he had accepted a job as an assistant coach at Indiana.


Carolina Race Is Winning the Wallets of America
LEAD: It is billed as the ultimate struggle for the soul of the South, but the Senate contest in North Carolina pitting Senator Jesse Helms against Harvey Gantt is also turning into a relentless struggle for the wallets of the nation.


Afghan Guerrillas Attack Kabul, Meeting Air and Artillery Strikes
LEAD: Afghan rebels have opened a two-pronged attack on Kabul, and Government troops are fighting back with air and artillery strikes, officials and diplomats said today.


Jordan King to Meet With Iraqi
LEAD: King Hussein said today that he would meet here on Saturday with Iraq's Foreign Minister, Tariq Aziz, to discuss the latest peace efforts in the Persian Gulf.


Tunisians Discussed Gulf Solution in Baghdad
LEAD: To the Editor:


Despite Changes, Bush Rules Out Rights Measure
LEAD: Backers of a major civil rights bill have made a number of last-minute concessions to secure White House support, but the Bush Administration rejected the revisions today, saying the bill still would force employers to adopt quotas.


Afghan Guerrillas Attack Kabul, Meeting Air and Artillery Strikes
LEAD: Afghan rebels have opened a two-pronged attack on Kabul, and Government troops are fighting back with air and artillery strikes, officials and diplomats said today.


Budget Fight: Stakes High; Numbers Clash
LEAD: On the very same day last week that Mayor David N. Dinkins announced that he was considering 15,000 layoffs to close $1.7 billion in budget gaps over two years, Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman painted a much grimmer picture of the city's fiscal health.


New Assistant Coach For Knight and Indiana
LEAD: Norm Ellenberger just wanted to talk fishing, but Bobby Knight ended up luring him to Indiana.
Ellenberger, who spent the last three college basketball seasons working for Don Haskins at Texas-El Paso, said Thursday that he had accepted a job as an assistant coach at Indiana.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Egyption Official Slain


Neighbors Reject New York's Sacrifice of Tompkins Sq. Park
LEAD: To the Editor:


Elliott Appears an Unlikely Starter for Giants
LEAD: Jumbo Elliott and Rodney Hampton sat out the Giants' two-hour practice today, and they seemed unlikely to play Sunday in the big game against the Redskins in Washington.


Dollar Ends Day Mixed; Trading Termed 'Nervous'
LEAD: The dollar finished mixed yesterday in trading that currency dealers said was influenced by many factors, from uncertainty about the Federal budget negotiations to falling oil prices.


Lebanese Christian General Flees Compound Under Syrian Bombing
LEAD: Under heavy bombardment by Syrian forces, the leader of Lebanon's Christian militia left his fortified headquarters and went to the French Embassy today, asking for a cease-fire, his radio station said.


Elliott Appears an Unlikely Starter for Giants
LEAD: Jumbo Elliott and Rodney Hampton sat out the Giants' two-hour practice today, and they seemed unlikely to play Sunday in the big game against the Redskins in Washington.


Olya Margolin, Jewish Women's Leader, 81
LEAD: Olya Margolin, the Washington representative of the National Council of Jewish Women for more than 30 years before her retirement in 1978, died yesterday at the Washington Hospital Center.
She was 81 years old and lived in Washington.


Dinkins Announces Reductions Of $2.3 Billion in Capital Budget
LEAD: In perhaps the most telling sign of the fiscal problems that are ahead for New York City, the Dinkins administration yesterday said that it would cut $2.3 billion from the nearly $16 billion it planned to spend on capital programs in the next three years.


Genome Project Maps Paths of Diseases and Drugs
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Car Is Rated Most Trouble-Free, But How Good Is That?
LEAD: The advertisement says that J. D. Power and Associates ranks the car as ''the most trouble-free'' in its class.
That's good for the prospective buyer, right?
Well, maybe.
Or maybe it's just good for the automobile maker who is choosing to advertise only part of the information the Power survey provided.


Alitalia Adds To Airbus Order
LEAD: The Italian national airline, Alitalia, ordered 20 Airbus passenger jetliners, bringing its total order for the new model to 60 aircraft, including 20 that are optional.
Jean Pierson, administrator of Airbus Industrie, the European aircraft consortium, said the 40 firm orders were valued at $3.1 billion.


About New York;   Soviet Economy Saved by Dentist! (Hey, He Tries)
LEAD: The worst of this city's slums and the stagnating Soviet Union have a lot in common.
At least that is the view of an uncommon New Yorker dedicated to reviving both.


The Golden Door, Ajar
LEAD: Congress, having transformed the law on illegal immigration in 1986, is on the verge of another remarkable achievement: the first major reform of legal immigration in 25 years.


Spending Cut by Dow Jones
LEAD: Dow Jones &amp; Company, publisher of The Wall Street Journal, is freezing capital spending and salaries and imposing other cutbacks to cope with weak financial results and the sluggish economy.


Beliefs
LEAD: It was once the case that when a nation went to war, religion, too, signed on for the duration.
But during the Vietnam War and the drawn-out conflicts in Central America, America's religious leaders split.
Some blessed the Government's ventures, while many were active in anti-war organizations.


The Golden Door, Ajar
LEAD: Congress, having transformed the law on illegal immigration in 1986, is on the verge of another remarkable achievement: the first major reform of legal immigration in 25 years.


Review/Jazz;   Homage To Post-Bop
LEAD: For her first set as a quartet leader at the Village Vanguard, the bastion of small-group jazz, the pianist Geri Allen staked out her own kind of jazz tradition on Tuesday.
She played pieces by Thelonious Monk and Herbie Nichols and tributes to Eric Dolphy, paying homage to modernist jazz composers who were masters of spiky harmony, eccentric timing and sidelong melodies.


Patents;   Rise Feared In Foreign Injunctions
LEAD: Although Motorola Inc. and Hitachi Ltd. settled their bitter patent dispute this week over computer chips, some lawyers think the battle foreshadows a day when foreign companies use their patents to shut down American companies with court injunctions.


Eric Show a Free Agent
LEAD: Eric Show, the winningest pitcher ever for the San Diego Padres, has become a free agent.
The 34-year-old right-hander was set loose Thursday when the Padres elected to exercise a $250,000 buyout clause in his contract rather than pick up Show's $1.1 million for 1991.
Show picked up his 100th career victory by defeating the Los Angeles Dodgers in his team's Oct.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, OCTOBER 13, 1990
LEAD:
Companies


Four Years After Birth, Should 'the Bubble' Burst?
LEAD: As members of Congress strain to produce a budget agreement, a tax-code anomaly called ''the bubble'' has become a fixation for lawmakers, and one of the questions asked most often on Capitol Hill these days is whether to pop it.


Note and Bond Prices Rise Sharply
LEAD: Prices of Treasury notes and bonds rebounded strongly yesterday, while bills posted only minimal changes.


Review/Television;   In Which an Unhappy Wife Is Unhappier as a Concubine
LEAD: The ''Masterpiece Theater'' four-part production of ''The Ginger Tree'' on PBS is an ambitious undertaking with few rewards.
The first installment is to be shown at 9 P.M.
Sunday on Channel 13.


New Cars, Rebates And Warranties
LEAD: The 1991 automobile models have arrived amid economic conditions gloomy enough to dishearten buyers.
But a silver lining for consumers is the significant cash rebates that have been available on many new models since Sept. 26, the day they were introduced.


Producer Prices Up Sharp 1.6%
LEAD: A record surge in gasoline prices helped push the nation's Producer Price Index up by a sharp 1.6 percent in September, the Labor Department said today.


Review/Music;   Adapting Europe's Glories
LEAD: If two of Wednesday's three pieces at the New York Philharmonic were by American composers, they left an impression of a concert two-thirds European.
At Avery Fisher Hall, Leonard Slatkin conducted William Schuman's ''Credendum (Article of Faith),'' the Barber Piano Concerto and Saint-Saens's ''Organ'' Symphony.


French Troops on Patrol in the Saudi Desert


Metro-North Studying A New Hudson Bridge
LEAD: In 1982, the State Bridge Authority announced plans to build a new Hudson River bridge to ease congestion at the present Mid-Hudson Bridge here in Poughkeepsie. ''New Bridge Called Certain'' read the headline in The Poughkeepsie Journal.


A Big Jump in Prices
LEAD: A record 20.6 percent surge in gasoline prices helped push the Producer Price Index up 1.6 percent in September.
Coming on top of a hefty jump in August, producer prices had their biggest two-month rise in 10 years.
Business Day, page 33.


Soviets Jail Man for Anti-Semitic Threats
LEAD: Ruling under a new law and in the face of hecklers, a Soviet court ordered two years in jail today for a leader of Pamyat, a Russian nationalist group that disrupted a public meeting here last January with anti-Semitic threats.


George E. Hamilton Jr., Art Gallery Chief, 95
LEAD: George E. Hamilton Jr., a Washington lawyer who practiced for nearly seven decades and who was a past president of the Corcoran Gallery of Art, died Thursday at his home in Washington.
Mr.
Hamilton was 95 years old.


Parting of Ways for Penn State-Syracuse Rivalry
LEAD: For the players it is another game, albeit an important one, but for a trio of Syracuse supporters, it is the wrong ending to a precious rivalry that began in 1922.


Text of Council's Resolution
LEAD: Following is the text of the resolution approved tonight by the 15-member Security Council:
THE SECURITY COUNCIL, RECALLING its Resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980), REAFFIRMING that a just and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict must be based on its Resolution 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) through an active negotiating process which takes into account the right to security for all states in the region, including Israel, as well as the legitimate political rights of the Palestinian people, TAKING into consideration the statement of the Secretary


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.87
8.00
8.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.15
7.15
7.20
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.16
7.22
7.66
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.66
8.77
7.81
30-YR.


Reds Pitch Their Way to Pennant on 1-Hitter
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds won their first National League pennant in 14 years tonight when they stopped the Pittsburgh Pirates on one hit, edged past them by 2-1 and advanced to the World Series next Tuesday against the Oakland Athletics.


Senate Supports Parental Notice for Abortions
LEAD: The Senate voted today to require that a teen-age girl notify a parent before obtaining an abortion in any hospital or clinic that receives Federal funds, a category that involves virtually all such centers.


Bhutto Campaign Is Reeling Under Foes' Attacks in Court
LEAD: As a bitter election campaign enters its final two weeks, Benazir Bhutto's effort to regain leadership of the country is reeling under a Government onslaught in which her husband has been arrested on kidnapping charges while a special tribunal is weighing whether or not to disqualify her from running in the elections or holding public office.


U.P.I. Planning Layoffs
LEAD: United Press International said today that it would dismiss an unspecified number of employees and concentrate on 15 populous states but added that it would keep bureaus in ''virtually every state'' and had no plans to close any bureaus soon.
The news service announced last month that it was closing bureaus in five states.


Graduation, at Last


Rangers Shut Out Canadiens
LEAD: There was less than a minute to go, but the Rangers had lost none of their fury or concentration.
Skates flashed, sticks clashed, goaltender pads were flying.
Their triumph was safe, but it would be 59, 58, 57 seconds before the tumblers would fall in place and an accomplishment of memorable perfection would be unlocked for the taking.


HOUSE DEMOCRATS BACK DEFICIT PLAN FOR TAXES ON RICH
LEAD: House Democrats on Friday embraced a deficit-reduction plan intended to portray their party as the champion of the poor and middle class, while a battered White House sought to reassert some influence over the budget process.


Masur Will Replace Bernstein for 'Elijah'
LEAD: Kurt Masur will conduct the New York Philharmonic in four performances of Mendelssohn's ''Elijah'' in December.
Mr.
Masur, who will become the Philharmonic's music director in the fall of 1992, is replacing Leonard Bernstein, who was originally scheduled to conduct the performances but announced his retirement this week because of poor health.


Making Execution Humane (or Can It Be?)
LEAD: As death rows around the nation swell with inmates, prison officials are grappling with a new question: How to execute a condemned criminal professionally and humanely?


Philadelphia Companies Will Prepay Taxes
LEAD: Several of the largest employers here have agreed to prepay $50 million in taxes on wages to help the financially strapped city government.


Genome Project Maps Paths of Diseases and Drugs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Neighbors Reject New York's Sacrifice of Tompkins Sq. Park
LEAD: To the Editor:


About New York;   Soviet Economy Saved by Dentist! (Hey, He Tries)
LEAD: The worst of this city's slums and the stagnating Soviet Union have a lot in common.
At least that is the view of an uncommon New Yorker dedicated to reviving both.


A Successor To McIlvaine
LEAD: Gerry Hunsicker, the director of minor league operations for the Mets, will be promoted Saturday to take over many of the duties held for the last five years by Joe McIlvaine, who resigned two weeks ago as vice president for baseball operations.


Israel, Facing Rebuke, Criticizes U.N.
LEAD: Emerging from two days of holiday silence, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir and other Government leaders reacted angrily today to the effort in the United Nations Security Council to approve a resolution condemning Israel for the shooting of 21 Palestinians outside Al Aksa Mosque on Monday.


Olya Margolin, Jewish Women's Leader, 81
LEAD: Olya Margolin, the Washington representative of the National Council of Jewish Women for more than 30 years before her retirement in 1978, died yesterday at the Washington Hospital Center.
She was 81 years old and lived in Washington.


South Korea's Wall
LEAD: South Koreans are watching Germany unite with a mixture of yearning and apprehension.
The tail end of Europe's political hurricane is only a brisk breeze here.
There's little to celebrate yet.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Medical Insurance Claims
LEAD: When an insurance company refuses to pay for a medical expense or denies part of a claim you believe should be paid in full, one expert offers this advice: ''The insurance company owes the claim unless it can affirmatively demonstrate why it should not be paid.''


Bally to Miss Debt Payment
LEAD: The Bally Manufacturing Corporation, the casino owner that has been struggling with a mountain of debt, said today that it would miss a casino debt payment and that it was weighing asset sales.


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Medical Insurance Claims
LEAD: When an insurance company refuses to pay for a medical expense or denies part of a claim you believe should be paid in full, one expert offers this advice: ''The insurance company owes the claim unless it can affirmatively demonstrate why it should not be paid.''


Barnet Halperin, Physician, 83
LEAD: Dr.
Barnet Halperin, a physician who practiced in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn for more than half a century, died on Wednesday at his home in Forest Hills, Queens.
He was 83 years old.


John H. Talbott, 88, Medical Researcher, Teacher and Author
LEAD: Dr.
John Harold Talbott, a researcher, educator and author, died Wednesday at a care community where he lived in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 88 years old and died of lymphoma, said his son, Dr.
John A. Talbott of Baltimore.


Health Officials Say 'Harmless' Snakes May Be Venomous
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health issued a warning yesterday to anyone who recently bought what appeared to be a harmless garter snake: Don't touch it.
It may just be a venomous Oriental water snake.


Hoping to Rebound, Tories End Parley
LEAD: In their 597th week in government, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and her Conservative Party tried here this week to win back enough political popularity to make it a couple of hundred weeks more.


Helping Break the Ice in Korea
LEAD: North Korea has started to break out of its long, icy alienation from the West.
Kim Il Sung, the only leader the North has ever had, recently welcomed a high-level Japanese delegation as ''old friends'' and agreed to talks on establishing diplomatic ties.


2 Officers Held on Charges Of Selling Illegal Handguns
LEAD: Two New York City police officers were arrested Thursday on Federal charges of trying to sell illegal 9-millimeter handguns to street criminals, according to court documents unsealed yesterday.
One of the officers was also accused of selling cocaine and marijuana.


Review/Music;   Adapting Europe's Glories
LEAD: If two of Wednesday's three pieces at the New York Philharmonic were by American composers, they left an impression of a concert two-thirds European.
At Avery Fisher Hall, Leonard Slatkin conducted William Schuman's ''Credendum (Article of Faith),'' the Barber Piano Concerto and Saint-Saens's ''Organ'' Symphony.


French Troops on Patrol in the Saudi Desert


Curbs on Interstate Garbage Die in Talks on Capitol Hill
LEAD: A move to curb the interstate shipment of garbage was defeated today, allowing New Jersey to retain its right to ship its garbage to Indiana.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, OCTOBER 13, 1990
LEAD:
Companies


Confronting the Rising Cost of Recycling
LEAD: New York City's recycling program is in deep trouble, and its survival depends largely on whether the city can rein in collection costs while encouraging more New Yorkers to cooperate.


Outlook Rather Glum Among Executives
LEAD: The top executives of several dozen of America's largest corporations, gathered here for the twice-yearly meeting of the Business Council, are nervous to gloomy about the economy and appalled by the discord in Washington over how to cut the Federal budget deficit.


Limit Banks' Use of Insured Deposits
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rangan Journal;   In Rural Tibet, a Little Wealth Brings Contentment
LEAD: Punjiong knows all about children, because she has had 11 of them, and she is an expert at sticking cow pies on the walls of her house to dry them into fuel.
But she acknowledges that she is a bit weak on technology.


Iraq Warns It Might Delay Soviet Workers' Departure
LEAD: Iraq warned the Soviet Union today that it could delay the departure of some of the 5,000 Soviet citizens still in Iraq, in effect making them hostages, if Moscow supplied the United States with information about Iraq's Soviet-supplied weapons and defense abilities.


Review/Television;   In Which an Unhappy Wife Is Unhappier as a Concubine
LEAD: The ''Masterpiece Theater'' four-part production of ''The Ginger Tree'' on PBS is an ambitious undertaking with few rewards.
The first installment is to be shown at 9 P.M.
Sunday on Channel 13.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Chronicle column on Thursday about Helen Hayes omitted the name of the organization that gave her an award the previous day, her 90th birthday, at a dinner in Washington.
It was the Washington Theater Awards Society.


After Court Rebuke, Refac Hints at a Retreat on Suits
LEAD: In the wake of a stinging rebuke from a Federal appeals court here, the Refac Technology Development Corporation signaled a retreat today in its efforts to sue thousands of companies over patent infringement.


E.M.S. Director Resigns His Post Amid Criticism
LEAD: Thomas B. Doyle, executive director of New York City's Emergency Medical Service since August 1988, resigned yesterday, weeks after he was criticized over his handling of a reported stabbing during a job action at Rikers Island.


Karpov Found All Exits Shut
LEAD: The fine points of Mr.
Kasparov's play in Game 2 are going to be debated for weeks and, in private, Mr.
Karpov and his analysis team will be searching for a way out.
Here are two critical moments, where both players had major alternatives to consider.
In each case, the champion had spectacular ripostes for what could have confronted him.


John Barr Joins Padres
LEAD: John Barr, director of scouting for the Baltimore Orioles for the last two years, was named yesterday as assistant general manager of the San Diego Padres.
The move to San Diego reunites Barr with Joe McIlvaine, the former Mets executive hired Oct. 2 as the Padres' general manager.
Barr, 33 years old, spent three years in New York working under McIlvaine as an administrative assistant in scouting and minor league operations.


A Big Jump in Prices
LEAD: A record 20.6 percent surge in gasoline prices helped push the Producer Price Index up 1.6 percent in September.
Coming on top of a hefty jump in August, producer prices had their biggest two-month rise in 10 years.
Business Day, page 33.


5 Die in Indian Job Strife
LEAD: Two students committed suicide and three people were killed in clashes in north India over a Government plan to reserve more jobs for lower-caste Hindus, officials and news agencies said today.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Wednesday about unauthorized Government-guaranteed loans to Iraq by the Atlanta branch of Banca Nazionale del Lavorno, an Italian bank, misstated the amount the Government could lose from the loans.
It is $400 million to $600 million, not $2 billion.


Silver Prices Rebound a Bit; Some See Bottom of a Slide
LEAD: Silver prices rose yesterday after hitting a 14-year low that some analysts said might have marked the bottom of a steep slide.


2 Officers Held on Charges Of Selling Illegal Handguns
LEAD: Two New York City police officers were arrested Thursday on Federal charges of trying to sell illegal 9-millimeter handguns to street criminals, according to court documents unsealed yesterday.
One of the officers was also accused of selling cocaine and marijuana.


Iraq Warns It Might Delay Soviet Workers' Departure
LEAD: Iraq warned the Soviet Union today that it could delay the departure of some of the 5,000 Soviet citizens still in Iraq, in effect making them hostages, if Moscow supplied the United States with information about Iraq's Soviet-supplied weapons and defense abilities.


South Korea's Wall
LEAD: South Koreans are watching Germany unite with a mixture of yearning and apprehension.
The tail end of Europe's political hurricane is only a brisk breeze here.
There's little to celebrate yet.


Karpov Found All Exits Shut
LEAD: The fine points of Mr.
Kasparov's play in Game 2 are going to be debated for weeks and, in private, Mr.
Karpov and his analysis team will be searching for a way out.
Here are two critical moments, where both players had major alternatives to consider.
In each case, the champion had spectacular ripostes for what could have confronted him.


Asahi Breweries
LEAD: Asahi Breweries of Japan revised a $787 million deal to buy a big slice of Elders IXL, the world's fourth-largest brewer.
Asahi, Japan's second-largest brewer, still plans to buy 19.9 percent of Elders but will not buy all the shares from the Australian company's debt-laden parent, Harlin Holdings.


What? Increase Defense Spending?
LEAD: How does a ceiling become a floor?
By overturning the House.
At least it does if you are John P. Murtha, the Pennsylvania Democrat who is chairman of the House defense appropriations subcommittee.
He has just arranged that the Government spend an additional $5.3 billion for defense next year beyond the amount the House had previously voted to spend.


Corrections
LEAD: An article yesterday about diplomats in Kuwait incompletely listed the embassies that remain open there in defiance of Iraq.
The Canadian Embassy, with five diplomats, also remains open, in addition to the embassies of the United States, France, Britain and Indonesia.


Review/Theater;   A Beckett Heroine Laughs as She Suffers
LEAD: Despite her cheerful demeanor, Winnie in ''Happy Days'' (revived at the CSC Repertory Theater) knows the limits and defeats of her life.
Her way to endure the day, and the day after that, is ''laughing wild amid severest woe.'' Laughter shares the stage with sorrow.


In Relief of C-Span
LEAD: I'm an American so I watch the Academy Awards on television.
I watch Miss America and the Super Bowl.
In the fall I watch baseball.
This is what Americans do: Academy Awards, Miss America, Super Bowl, autumn baseball.


Can You Say Salary Cap? For Drexler, It's $8 Million
LEAD: The Portland Trail Blazers have extended the contract of the guard Clyde Drexler by one year in an agreement that he says will pay him more than $8 million for the 1995-96 season.
The salary is believed to be the highest ever for one season for an athlete in a team sport.


Where Rivals for Congress Run Against Government
LEAD: It could make one woozy to be a voter in the 12th Congressional District this year, where two candidates for the House are scrambling to out-anti-government one another.


U.P.I. Planning Layoffs
LEAD: United Press International said today that it would dismiss an unspecified number of employees and concentrate on 15 populous states but added that it would keep bureaus in ''virtually every state'' and had no plans to close any bureaus soon.
The news service announced last month that it was closing bureaus in five states.


German Interior Minister Is Shot at Political Rally
LEAD: Wolfgang Schauble, the German Interior Minister and one of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's closest advisers, was shot and seriously wounded tonight at a campaign rally, his ministry reported.


Bally to Miss Debt Payment
LEAD: The Bally Manufacturing Corporation, the casino owner that has been struggling with a mountain of debt, said today that it would miss a casino debt payment and that it was weighing asset sales.


N. Mitchel Jason, Physician, 68
LEAD: N. Mitchel Jason, a physician and former chief of urology at Huntington Hospital on Long Island, died on Tuesday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 68 years old and lived in West Palm Beach.
He died of cardiac arrest, his wife, Dorothy, said.
Dr.
Jason joined the staff of Huntington Hospital in 1954 after completing his residency at Brooklyn Jewish Hospital.


Kodak Told It Must Pay $909 Million
LEAD: In the largest award ever in a patent-infringement case, a Federal judge ruled yesterday that the Eastman Kodak Company must pay the Polaroid Corporation $909.4 million for infringing Polaroid's patents for instant photography.


Taxi Commission Investigates Medallion Pricing and Loans
LEAD: The New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission and three other city agencies are investigating complaints that taxi-medallion brokers and lenders are selling the medallions at prices far above the prevailing market rate to unsuspecting buyers.


A Month's Reprieve for Polly Peck
LEAD: After a three-week cash crisis that has raised concern among investors, large international banks and the British and Turkish Governments, Polly Peck International P.L.C. won a monthlong reprieve today from its lenders.
The embattled fruit, electronics and services conglomerate was one of Britain's fastest-growing companies in the 1980's.


Hazard to Babies' Hands
LEAD: Government officials have issued warnings about baby strollers that have caused severe injuries to children's hands.


Resistance To NC-17 Rating Develops
LEAD: Despite widespread acceptance of the new NC-17 rating for adult films by movie producers, distributors and exhibitors, the Motion Picture Association of America's revised film rating system is encountering opposition from religious and community groups around the country.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Lendl-Edberg Showdown in Toyko
Ivan Lendl had 12 service aces in a victory over Scott Davis and Stefan Edberg struggled through a third-set tie breaker to defeat Jakob Hlasek yesterday to set up a semifinal confrontation between the two in the Seiko Super tournament in Tokyo.
Edberg, seeded first, beat Hlasek, 6-4, 3-6, 7-6, and Lendl, seeded third, defeated Davis, 7-6, 6-2, on the artificial courts of the Tokyo Metropolitan Gymnasium.


Israel, Facing Rebuke, Criticizes U.N.
LEAD: Emerging from two days of holiday silence, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir and other Government leaders reacted angrily today to the effort in the United Nations Security Council to approve a resolution condemning Israel for the shooting of 21 Palestinians outside Al Aksa Mosque on Monday.


HOUSE DEMOCRATS BACK DEFICIT PLAN FOR TAXES ON RICH
LEAD: House Democrats on Friday embraced a deficit-reduction plan intended to portray their party as the champion of the poor and middle class, while a battered White House sought to reassert some influence over the budget process.


Soviets Jail Man for Anti-Semitic Threats
LEAD: Ruling under a new law and in the face of hecklers, a Soviet court ordered two years in jail today for a leader of Pamyat, a Russian nationalist group that disrupted a public meeting here last January with anti-Semitic threats.


Philadelphia Companies Will Prepay Taxes
LEAD: Several of the largest employers here have agreed to prepay $50 million in taxes on wages to help the financially strapped city government.


U.S. VOTES TO CENSURE ISRAEL IN PALESTINIAN RIOT DEATHS; JOINS UNANIMOUS U.N. ACTION
LEAD: Ending a tense debate, the United Nations Security Council voted unanimously tonight to adopt a compromise resolution condemning Israel for the violence on Monday in Jerusalem.


Decision by Thornburgh Ends Trial of Ex-Agent
LEAD: In a decision that, in effect, ends the only prosecution of a former Central Intelligence Agency official charged in the Iran-contra affair, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh today reaffirmed a legal finding prohibiting the disclosure of classified information in the case.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.87
8.00
8.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.15
7.15
7.20
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.16
7.22
7.66
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.66
8.77
7.81
30-YR.


Why Risk Capital?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Egypt's Parliament Speaker Is Assassinated by Gunmen
LEAD: The Speaker of Egypt's Parliament was assassinated today outside a luxury hotel by the Nile.
Police officials and witnesses said gunmen on motorcycles sprayed his chauffeured sedan with automatic-rifle fire before disappearing into the warrenlike streets of the Egyptian capital.


Books of The Times;   A Reporter as a Cold War Casualty
LEAD:
The Polk Conspiracy
Murder and Cover-Up in the Case of CBS News Correspondent George Polk
By Kati Marton
369 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.95.


Missing Girl Found in Queens
LEAD: A 2-year-old girl who was abducted in Jamaica, Queens, on Thursday was found safe in front of a motel near John F. Kennedy International Airport early yesterday, the police said.
The girl, Shakima Harkles, was shopping with her godmother when the woman discovered her missing.
About 1:30 A.M. yesterday, a Port Authority police Officer, Donald Firehock, saw the child and Rachel Forestal, 24, of 550 Fulton Street, Hempstead, L.I.


Cork Popping of Another Kind


With Simple Pawn Move, Kasparov Rewrites the Book
LEAD: It might have been the war room on Doomsday: a huge screen showing the deployed forces, an expert at a display board analyzing strategic options, an anxious crowd tracking the attack and defense in the dim light, the nerve-racking tensions of an unfolding battle.


Joseph R. Concilio, Accountant, 47
LEAD: Joseph R. Concilio, a certified public accountant and former executive with NBC, died on Thursday at Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan.
He was 47 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Homecoming for Trottier
LEAD: Thirty minutes before the Penguins-Blackhawks game Thursday night, several young men gathered at the front of the second balcony in Chicago Stadium, high above one net, to watch the warmup drills of the Pittsburgh players.


Confronting the Rising Cost of Recycling
LEAD: New York City's recycling program is in deep trouble, and its survival depends largely on whether the city can rein in collection costs while encouraging more New Yorkers to cooperate.


Tektronix Layoffs
LEAD: Tektronix Inc. said it would sell or shut down its unprofitable work-station business within 60 days, and the company gave layoff notices to about 175 employees.
If it can find a buyer for the business, many of those workers would be re-employed, a company spokesman, Doug Babb, said.
More than 2,000 other Tektronix employees have been laid off since the beginning of the year.


Retail Sales Lifted Strongly By Car-Buying and Gas Rise
LEAD: Rebounding automobile purchases and surging gasoline prices gave retail sales a strong 1.1 percent gain in September, the Government said today.


Not All Smiles at the Endowment
LEAD: Propped against a television set in one of the offices at the National Endowment for the Arts today was a picture of St.
Jude, patron saint of hopeless causes.
Its presence symbolized both the faith that sustained the agency through 18 months of trauma and the hope that the House of Representatives vote on


Storms Batter the East Coast From Georgia to Delaware
LEAD: A hurricane and the remnants of two tropical storms battered the East Coast yesterday from Georgia to Delaware, with gale-force winds whipping the Outer Banks of North Carolina and up to a foot of rain falling in South Carolina and Georgia.


Reds Pitch Their Way to Pennant on 1-Hitter
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds won their first National League pennant in 14 years tonight when they stopped the Pittsburgh Pirates on one hit, edged past them by 2-1 and advanced to the World Series next Tuesday against the Oakland Athletics.


In Relief of C-Span
LEAD: I'm an American so I watch the Academy Awards on television.
I watch Miss America and the Super Bowl.
In the fall I watch baseball.
This is what Americans do: Academy Awards, Miss America, Super Bowl, autumn baseball.


Bhutto Campaign Is Reeling Under Foes' Attacks in Court
LEAD: As a bitter election campaign enters its final two weeks, Benazir Bhutto's effort to regain leadership of the country is reeling under a Government onslaught in which her husband has been arrested on kidnapping charges while a special tribunal is weighing whether or not to disqualify her from running in the elections or holding public office.


John P. Fadden, Athletic Trainer, 91
LEAD: John P. Fadden, a trainer at Harvard for more than 50 years whose patients also included such notables as Babe Ruth, Ted Williams, Bob Cousy, Arthur Fiedler and John, Robert and Edward Kennedy, died of prostate cancer Wednesday at the Neville Manor nursing home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 91 years old.


Retail Sales Lifted Strongly By Car-Buying and Gas Rise
LEAD: Rebounding automobile purchases and surging gasoline prices gave retail sales a strong 1.1 percent gain in September, the Government said today.


Storms Batter the East Coast From Georgia to Delaware
LEAD: A hurricane and the remnants of two tropical storms battered the East Coast yesterday from Georgia to Delaware, with gale-force winds whipping the Outer Banks of North Carolina and up to a foot of rain falling in South Carolina and Georgia.


Review/Music;   10th Season Of Offering New Works
LEAD: Confusion and poverty are the customary watchwords for this city's independant orchestras.
The Riverside Symphony, which played Prokofiev, Sibelius and Robert Helps at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday night, suffers from neither.


Corrections
LEAD: A report in the Chronicle column on Thursday about Helen Hayes omitted the name of the organization that gave her an award the previous day, her 90th birthday, at a dinner in Washington.
It was the Washington Theater Awards Society.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: BARBARA ORBISON, widow of the rock singer Roy Orbison, is collaborating with STEVE TISCH on a movie about her husband's life.
He died of a heart attack in 1988, when he was 52.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: HUME CRONYN and JESSICA TANDY finally won permission to build an apartment above their garage in Easton, Conn.
In August, the town Zoning Board of Appeals turned down their request, but the board reversed itself Thursday.


Books of The Times;   A Reporter as a Cold War Casualty
LEAD:
The Polk Conspiracy
Murder and Cover-Up in the Case of CBS News Correspondent George Polk
By Kati Marton
369 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.95.


Allied-Signal In Valeo Deal
LEAD: Valeo, a French car components maker, said it had agreed to sell its brake linings business to Allied-Signal Automotive, part of Allied-Signal Inc., for 385 million francs, or about $106 million, effective Dec. 1.
The business consists of two factories - one in the Calvados region of France and the other in Spain near Madrid - and a technical and administrative center near Paris.


Barry Seeks Retrial, Charging Influencing of Jurors
LEAD: Saying that Federal marshals might have influenced jury deliberations, the lawyer for Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. today asked for a new trial on his conviction of possessing cocaine.


Oil Prices Up $1.46 in Week But End Below $40 a Barrel
LEAD: After zig-zagging most of the day on rumors about the Middle East, oil for November delivery finished the week yesterday at $39.69 a barrel, up 73 cents from the Thursday close, on the New York Mercantile Exchange.


Nuclear Weapon Is Tested
LEAD: A nuclear weapon was detonated underground today, delivering a blast that registered 5.7 on the Richter scale and was felt 105 miles from ground zero.
The weapon was up to 10 times more powerful than the bomb that destroyed Hiroshima.
The test was the seventh of the year and the third in three weeks at the Nevada Test Site.


Decision by Thornburgh Ends Trial of Ex-Agent
LEAD: In a decision that, in effect, ends the only prosecution of a former Central Intelligence Agency official charged in the Iran-contra affair, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh today reaffirmed a legal finding prohibiting the disclosure of classified information in the case.


British Airways and Aeroflot Discuss Starting an Airline
LEAD: British Airways, an airline renowned for service, and Aeroflot, a carrier known for the lack of it, said yesterday that they were discussing the creation of an international airline.


Uruguay and Banks Reach Accord on Debt
LEAD: Uruguay and its commercial bankers announced an initial agreement yesterday to reorganize the country's $1.6 billion in foreign bank loans, including provisions to reduce the country's debt.


Health Officials Say 'Harmless' Snakes May Be Venomous
LEAD: The New York City Department of Health issued a warning yesterday to anyone who recently bought what appeared to be a harmless garter snake: Don't touch it.
It may just be a venomous Oriental water snake.


Curbs on Interstate Garbage Die in Talks on Capitol Hill
LEAD: A move to curb the interstate shipment of garbage was defeated today, allowing New Jersey to retain its right to ship its garbage to Indiana.


Editorial Notebook;   Racial Boycotts, Then and Now
LEAD: One morning, when I was a boy in Nuremberg, Germany, I heard a commotion on the street.
I looked out the window and saw a jeering mob in front of the jewelry store across from our apartment on Koenigstrasse, a main shopping avenue.


Kodak Told It Must Pay $909 Million
LEAD: In the largest award ever in a patent-infringement case, a Federal judge ruled yesterday that the Eastman Kodak Company must pay the Polaroid Corporation $909.4 million for infringing Polaroid's patents for instant photography.


J. W. (Bill) Fisher Is Dead at 76; Industrialist and Arts Supporter
LEAD: J. W. (Bill) Fisher, an industrialist and philanthropist who was internationally known for his interest in the performing arts, died Thursday at his home in Marshalltown, Iowa.
He was 76 years old and died of a respiratory ailment, a funeral home representative said.


257 Kuwait Evacuees Land at Raleigh Airport
LEAD: Evacuees from Kuwait arrived here today telling of the continued availability of food in spite of the embargo and a harrowing bus ride at the beginning of their journey home in which Iraqi soldiers tried to ''break us down mentally.''


U.S. VOTES TO CENSURE ISRAEL IN PALESTINIAN RIOT DEATHS; JOINS UNANIMOUS U.N. ACTION
LEAD: Ending a tense debate, the United Nations Security Council voted unanimously tonight to adopt a compromise resolution condemning Israel for the violence on Monday in Jerusalem.


Rangers Shut Out Canadiens
LEAD: There was less than a minute to go, but the Rangers had lost none of their fury or concentration.
Skates flashed, sticks clashed, goaltender pads were flying.
Their triumph was safe, but it would be 59, 58, 57 seconds before the tumblers would fall in place and an accomplishment of memorable perfection would be unlocked for the taking.


Request Backed On Bailout Aid
LEAD: The Senate Banking Committee today approved a $57 billion financing request from Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady that would continue the savings and loan rescue program through next September.


Italian Driver Injured
LEAD: The Formula One driver Allessandro Nannini of Italy lost part of his arm in a helicopter crash yesterday near his home at Belriguardo, on the outskirts of Siena, Italy.
The 31-year-old driver for the Benetton-Ford team was taken to a Florence hospital, where doctors attempted to reattach his right forearm.


Carolina Race Is Winning the Wallets of America
LEAD: It is billed as the ultimate struggle for the soul of the South, but the Senate contest in North Carolina pitting Senator Jesse Helms against Harvey Gantt is also turning into a relentless struggle for the wallets of the nation.


Cork Popping of Another Kind


257 Kuwait Evacuees Land at Raleigh Airport
LEAD: Evacuees from Kuwait arrived here today telling of the continued availability of food in spite of the embargo and a harrowing bus ride at the beginning of their journey home in which Iraqi soldiers tried to ''break us down mentally.''


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''This is Beirut on the Potomac; there are more warring factions than I can count.
If we're going to keep rethrashing issues and continuing to put the party in a position where we're certifiably giving huge tax breaks for the rich, I don't want to add to the confusion.''
- Representative Marge Roukema, Republican of New Jersey.


'Cosby' Over 'Simpsons'In Thursday's Ratings
LEAD: ''The Cosby Show'' beat ''The Simpsons'' in the ratings on Thursday night, the first time the two shows have gone head to head with new episodes.


Review/Music;   10th Season Of Offering New Works
LEAD: Confusion and poverty are the customary watchwords for this city's independant orchestras.
The Riverside Symphony, which played Prokofiev, Sibelius and Robert Helps at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday night, suffers from neither.


181-1 Shot Captures Meadowlands
LEAD: Great Normand became the longest shot ever to win a race at the Meadowlands and probably the longest ever to win a Grade I stakes race anywhere when he pulled away on a sloppy track to win tonight's $500,000 Meadowlands Cup at odds of 181-1.


5 Die in Indian Job Strife
LEAD: Two students committed suicide and three people were killed in clashes in north India over a Government plan to reserve more jobs for lower-caste Hindus, officials and news agencies said today.


John H. Talbott, 88, Medical Researcher, Teacher and Author
LEAD: Dr.
John Harold Talbott, a researcher, educator and author, died Wednesday at a care community where he lived in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 88 years old and died of lymphoma, said his son, Dr.
John A. Talbott of Baltimore.


Miller to Open Brewery in Ohio
LEAD: A brewery built in 1983 by the Miller Brewing Company but that never opened will be producing beer by next July, the company said.
Preparation for producing canned beer at the $411 million brewery near Trenton in southwest Ohio will begin in January, with bottle and keg lines to follow, a spokesman, Richard


Not All Smiles at the Endowment
LEAD: Propped against a television set in one of the offices at the National Endowment for the Arts today was a picture of St.
Jude, patron saint of hopeless causes.
Its presence symbolized both the faith that sustained the agency through 18 months of trauma and the hope that the House of Representatives vote on


Traffic Alert
LEAD: George Washington Bridge: One westbound lane on the lower level will be closed until 6 A.M. on Monday.
Major delays expected.


Transactions
LEAD: Baseball SAN DIEGO (NL) - Named John Barr assistant general manager.
Dismissed Tom Romenesko, director of player development, and Dick Dent, trainer.


A Successor To McIlvaine
LEAD: Gerry Hunsicker, the director of minor league operations for the Mets, will be promoted Saturday to take over many of the duties held for the last five years by Joe McIlvaine, who resigned two weeks ago as vice president for baseball operations.


Parting of Ways for Penn State-Syracuse Rivalry
LEAD: For the players it is another game, albeit an important one, but for a trio of Syracuse supporters, it is the wrong ending to a precious rivalry that began in 1922.


Yankees' Pitching Coach Is Out
LEAD: Billy Connors, the Yankees' pitching coach for the last two seasons, said yesterday that he had been told that his services were no longer needed and that he was being replaced by the bullpen coach, Mark Connor.
There were also unconfirmed reports that the Yankees planned to replace the hitting coach, Darrell


Press Secretary To Cuomo Plans To Resign Soon
LEAD: In the first of what is expected to be several departures from the Cuomo administration in the coming months, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's press secretary and close adviser, Gary G. Fryer, said yesterday that he would leave his post after the election.


Eli A. Freydberg, Executive, 87
LEAD: Eli A. Freydberg, a former executive with Consolidated Foods, died on Thursday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 87 years old and lived in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.


John Barr Joins Padres
LEAD: John Barr, director of scouting for the Baltimore Orioles for the last two years, was named yesterday as assistant general manager of the San Diego Padres.
The move to San Diego reunites Barr with Joe McIlvaine, the former Mets executive hired Oct. 2 as the Padres' general manager.
Barr, 33 years old, spent three years in New York working under McIlvaine as an administrative assistant in scouting and minor league operations.


Senate Supports Parental Notice for Abortions
LEAD: The Senate voted today to require that a teen-age girl notify a parent before obtaining an abortion in any hospital or clinic that receives Federal funds, a category that involves virtually all such centers.


Patents;   Rise Feared In Foreign Injunctions
LEAD: Although Motorola Inc. and Hitachi Ltd. settled their bitter patent dispute this week over computer chips, some lawyers think the battle foreshadows a day when foreign companies use their patents to shut down American companies with court injunctions.


News Summary
LEAD: International
2-7
The United States and other nations were reported to be closer to a compromise Security Council resolution that would condemn Monday's violence in Jerusalem, but with language that could be accepted by Washington and avoid a split in the international coalition against Iraq.


World Bank May Grant Teheran First Loan Since 1979 Revolution
LEAD: The World Bank is expected to lend as much as $300 million to Iran next year, in the bank's first loan to the Teheran Government since before the 1979 Islamic revolution, American officials and banking specialists said today.


Bridge
LEAD: When a bunch of New York experts are gathered together they are usually out for each other's blood, technically speaking.
An exception is the annual Experts Night at the Harmonie Club, 4 East 60th Street, when the atmosphere is social and the stars of yesteryear mingle with their juniors.


Your Money Some Tax Breaks On Falling Stocks
LEAD: For many investors, it may be time to trim the sails.
Since stocks and bonds have taken a pounding in recent weeks, many portfolios have losers.
While the sentiment may be to hold on, what can be salvaged represents a tax loss.


Hoping to Rebound, Tories End Parley
LEAD: In their 597th week in government, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and her Conservative Party tried here this week to win back enough political popularity to make it a couple of hundred weeks more.


Cooney Showed Courage
LEAD: In the hallowed Halls of Congress on Thursday morning, the Representative from the First District of Massachusetts, Silvio O. Conte, a Republican, stood up and called Terry Cooney ''loony'' for evicting Roger Clemens - ''Clem,'' as he called him - from a baseball game the other day.


Text of Council's Resolution
LEAD: Following is the text of the resolution approved tonight by the 15-member Security Council:
THE SECURITY COUNCIL, RECALLING its Resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980), REAFFIRMING that a just and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict must be based on its Resolution 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) through an active negotiating process which takes into account the right to security for all states in the region, including Israel, as well as the legitimate political rights of the Palestinian people, TAKING into consideration the statement of the Secretary


World Bank May Grant Teheran First Loan Since 1979 Revolution
LEAD: The World Bank is expected to lend as much as $300 million to Iran next year, in the bank's first loan to the Teheran Government since before the 1979 Islamic revolution, American officials and banking specialists said today.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
ASK Computer Systems Inc., Mountain View, Calif., extended until next Friday its offer for common shares of Ingres Corp.
ASK said it had received more than 4.3 million, or about 38 percent, of Ingres's shares so far.


Uruguay and Banks Reach Accord on Debt
LEAD: Uruguay and its commercial bankers announced an initial agreement yesterday to reorganize the country's $1.6 billion in foreign bank loans, including provisions to reduce the country's debt.


N. Mitchel Jason, Physician, 68
LEAD: N. Mitchel Jason, a physician and former chief of urology at Huntington Hospital on Long Island, died on Tuesday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 68 years old and lived in West Palm Beach.
He died of cardiac arrest, his wife, Dorothy, said.
Dr.
Jason joined the staff of Huntington Hospital in 1954 after completing his residency at Brooklyn Jewish Hospital.


Kuwaiti Exiles Reunite in an Imperfect Harmony
LEAD: Hundreds of Kuwaiti exiles flocked to this Red Sea city today, anxious to demonstrate national unity in the face of the Iraqi occupation and avoid a squabble over demands by one faction that the ruling Sabah family commit itself to democracy in a liberated Kuwait.


FNN Ousts Chief Financial Officer
LEAD: Financial News Network, the cable television business news service embroiled in an accounting dispute with its auditor for several weeks, said yesterday that its chief financial officer had been dismissed for taking unauthorized compensation.


Missing Girl Found in Queens
LEAD: A 2-year-old girl who was abducted in Jamaica, Queens, on Thursday was found safe in front of a motel near John F. Kennedy International Airport early yesterday, the police said.
The girl, Shakima Harkles, was shopping with her godmother when the woman discovered her missing.
About 1:30 A.M. yesterday, a Port Authority police Officer, Donald Firehock, saw the child and Rachel Forestal, 24, of 550 Fulton Street, Hempstead, L.I.


Yankees' Pitching Coach Is Out
LEAD: Billy Connors, the Yankees' pitching coach for the last two seasons, said yesterday that he had been told that his services were no longer needed and that he was being replaced by the bullpen coach, Mark Connor.
There were also unconfirmed reports that the Yankees planned to replace the hitting coach, Darrell


Cincinnati Wins Pennant


Illinois High Court Bars Black Slate From Ballot
LEAD: To the relief of local and state Democratic Party leaders, the Illinois Supreme Court today upheld a lower court ruling barring a third-party slate of black candidates from appearing on next month's Cook County election ballot.


A's Start Preparations: Workout and Healing
LEAD: On their first day back to business, the Oakland Athletics did the two most important things they hope to do while they wait for the World Series: they played and they recovered.


Strangely, Piniella's Decisions Pay Off and Leyland's Don't
LEAD: In switching his starting pitcher from a left-handed starter, Zane Smith, to a right-handed reliever, Ted Power, Manager Jim Leyland of the Pittsburgh Pirates said, ''We're not trying to pull something weird here.''


Resistance To NC-17 Rating Develops
LEAD: Despite widespread acceptance of the new NC-17 rating for adult films by movie producers, distributors and exhibitors, the Motion Picture Association of America's revised film rating system is encountering opposition from religious and community groups around the country.


Bridge
LEAD: When a bunch of New York experts are gathered together they are usually out for each other's blood, technically speaking.
An exception is the annual Experts Night at the Harmonie Club, 4 East 60th Street, when the atmosphere is social and the stars of yesteryear mingle with their juniors.


New Cars, Rebates And Warranties
LEAD: The 1991 automobile models have arrived amid economic conditions gloomy enough to dishearten buyers.
But a silver lining for consumers is the significant cash rebates that have been available on many new models since Sept. 26, the day they were introduced.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
TENNIS
Lendl-Edberg Showdown in Toyko
Ivan Lendl had 12 service aces in a victory over Scott Davis and Stefan Edberg struggled through a third-set tie breaker to defeat Jakob Hlasek yesterday to set up a semifinal confrontation between the two in the Seiko Super tournament in Tokyo.
Edberg, seeded first, beat Hlasek, 6-4, 3-6, 7-6, and Lendl, seeded third, defeated Davis, 7-6, 6-2, on the artificial courts of the Tokyo Metropolitan Gymnasium.


'Cosby' Over 'Simpsons'In Thursday's Ratings
LEAD: ''The Cosby Show'' beat ''The Simpsons'' in the ratings on Thursday night, the first time the two shows have gone head to head with new episodes.


Helping Break the Ice in Korea
LEAD: North Korea has started to break out of its long, icy alienation from the West.
Kim Il Sung, the only leader the North has ever had, recently welcomed a high-level Japanese delegation as ''old friends'' and agreed to talks on establishing diplomatic ties.


Arts Face Lean Times as Patrons Retrench
LEAD: BATTERED by cutbacks in corporate contributions and audience belt-tightening, arts groups are facing hard times.


Let Arms-Sale Profits Aid Poor Countries
LEAD: To the Editor:


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about the spice business gave incorrect consumption totals.
Figures should have been in millions of pounds, not in billions.


Baseball;   Managers' Consensus: Game 2 Was Critical
LEAD: Jim Leyland, the Pittsburgh Pirates' manager, said the second game was the key to the National League championship series.
Lou Piniella, the Cincinnati Reds' manager, called the second game the turning point.


Barbara Brenner To Wed in March
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Morton R. Brenner of White Plains have announced the engagement of their daughter Barbara Jill Brenner to Scott Laurence Commer, a son of Richard Commer of Westport, Conn., and Linda Commer of Stockbridge, Mass.
A March wedding is planned.


Text of Resolution Adopted by U.N. Council
LEAD: Following is the text of the resolution approved on Friday night by the Security Council:


An Immigrant's Pain in Concrete
LEAD: ''I DIDN'T plan to be a writer,'' said Pietro Di Donato, the author of 50 short stories and 6 books, including the 1939 best seller ''Christ in Concrete.''


Log Rides on the Long Island Expressway?


The Cop and the Cartel
LEAD:
A FAINT COLD FEAR
By Robert Daley.
450 pp. Boston:
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95.


The Pedestrian Sneaker Makes a Comeback
LEAD: They are advertisements with a wink.
A playful young mother lies on her back and balances her giggling tot on her ankles and feet, which are clad in plain white canvas sneakers.
The caption: ''Keds introduces weightlifting shoes.''


Too Ugly to Go to School
LEAD:
SPOOK
By Steve Vance.
234 pp. New York:
Soho Press. $18.95.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD:
Additional titles of interest:


Livery-Cab Driver Hit by a Blast From a Shotgun in a Gang Attack
LEAD: A livery-cab driver was seriously wounded by a shotgun blast early yesterday when he tried to help another driver who was being assaulted by a gun-wielding gang on a Bronx street, the police said.


Question Of the Week;   Who Should Win M.V.P., Cy Young Awards?
LEAD: M.V.P.: George Brett.
At age 37, he led the A.L. in batting and doubles.
Bobby Bonilla.
No explanations needed.
Cy Young: It will be Welch, but it should be either Clemens or Eckersley.
In the N.L., who was better from June on than Gooden (16-1)?
However, Drabek will get it.
LEONARD GINSBERG


Michele Schultz Is Wed
LEAD: Dr.
Michele Ann Schultz was married last evening at Congregation B'nai Israel in Rumson, N.J., to Andrew Brett Robins.
Rabbi Jack Rosoff officiated.
The bride, 26 years old, is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sidney Schultz of Lincroft, N.J.
The bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Robins of West Orange, N.J.


Mixed Response Over Campaign To End Smoking
LEAD: The sweeping anti-smoking campaign started recently by Mayor David N. Dinkins is being hailed by health groups, derided by tobacco lobbyists and greeted with a wait-and-see chorus from other groups.


Man's Best Friend a Therapist, Too
LEAD: THE two West Highland terriers, Bonnie and Clyde, cuddled on the laps of each of the eight patients in the Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Center at Brunswick Hospital in Amityville.


Chronology of 15 Years Of Civil War in Lebanon


Too Obnoxious to Live
LEAD:
FORCED ENTRY
By Stephen Solomita.
255 pp. New York:
G. P. Putnam's Sons.
$19.95.


Tenderhearted Men
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ed Woolard Walks Du Pont's Tightrope
LEAD: A big part of the future of America's largest chemical company can be found on a conveyor belt in an old warehouse here.


Douglas Edwards, First TV Anchorman, Dies at 73
LEAD: Douglas Edwards, who in 1948 became network television's first anchorman, died yesterday in Sarasota, Fla., where he lived.
He was 73 years old.


From the Folks Who Brought Us Winter
LEAD:
THE ICE-SHIRT
By William T. Vollmann.
Illustrated. 415 pp. New York:
Viking. $19.95.


What's Adultery? A Little Sex, A Lot of Politics
LEAD: What Jane Austen did for marriage in the 19th century, film makers are doing for adultery today.
In the past few weeks alone, eight films from seven countries have offered a view of infidelity around the world.
It is an unmistakable sign of a turbulent social era.


Fashion;   For the Not-So-Formal Evening, Options Beyond T-Shirts and Jeans
LEAD: Men after dark often have a hard time finding the right look.
Even for stylish men, going out can be a hassle when the evening calls for the kind of in-between dressing - not formal but not strictly casual - that is the mode at art openings, previews and fashion events.


Let Arms-Sale Profits Aid Poor Countries
LEAD: To the Editor:


'Civil War' Deserves Emmy for Pseudohistory
LEAD: To the Editor:


Baseball;   Managers' Consensus: Game 2 Was Critical
LEAD: Jim Leyland, the Pittsburgh Pirates' manager, said the second game was the key to the National League championship series.
Lou Piniella, the Cincinnati Reds' manager, called the second game the turning point.


Barbara Schwartz Is Wed
LEAD: Barbara Frances Schwartz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Schwartz of New York, was married last evening to David Lewis Gold, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Fred M. Gold of Binghamton, N.Y., by Rabbi Elihu Schagrin at the Pearl River (N.Y.) Hilton.
Mrs.
Gold, a summa cum laude graduate of Duke University, received an M.B.A.


THE BUDGET BATTLE: Washington Talk;   House Republicans Try, As Always, to Matter
LEAD: The House Republicans' defection from the White House put them at the center of budget politics last week.
This week, they were back on familiar turf: shoved to the sidelines, spurned by the White House and shut out by the Democrats.


Tenderhearted Men
LEAD: To the Editor:


A View of Communism, as the Chinese See It
LEAD: A university teacher described this scene in his home the other day: As the television announcer bragged about the economic gains since 1949, his father-in-law nodded approvingly and said: ''My, just look at that progress!''


Question Of the Week;   Who Should Win M.V.P., Cy Young Awards?
LEAD: Rickey walks away with the A.L. prize (then steals second, third and home).


Maryclare White Marries
LEAD: Maryclare Carroll White and Laurent Marteau were married yesterday at St.
John's Roman Catholic Church in Darien, Conn., by the Rev.
Pierre A. Botton.
Mrs.
Marteau, a graduate of Wheaton College with an M.B.A. from New York University, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Joseph White of New Canaan, Conn.


Meanwhile, the Bad News From Albany Is Released Quietly
LEAD: So loud was the clamor of bad news from New York City last week that the pessimistic din in Albany was barely audible.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Englewood Cliffs
$710,000
52 Cambridge Place
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 30-year-old split level; new kitchen, pool, family room with stone fireplace; taxes $3,200.&gt;
Fair Lawn
$185,300
32-14 Nicholson Drive
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; pool, new kitchen, full basement; taxes $2,802.


Evening Hours;   Celebrations Recall the Past and Look Ahead
LEAD: The Irvington Institute for Medical Research celebrated its 75th anniversary with a dinner dance in the Grand Ballroom of the Plaza on Thursday.


Music Professor, Trained for Classics, Loves to Croon Those Pop Standards
LEAD: WITH a Latin swing to his hips, Richard Lalli sings: ''I hate to be pedantic, but it drives me nearly frantic, when I see that unromantic sycophantic lot of sluts forever wriggling their guts.
It drives me absolutely nuts.'' His performance of Noel Coward's song ''Nina'' would probably give his music professors conniptions.


13 Are Killed in El Salvador In Blast of Water and Rocks
LEAD: A geyser-like blast of boiling water and hot rocks leveled homes and killed at least 13 people today in a western Salvadoran village.


Apes and Us Together
LEAD:
OTHER ORIGINS
The Search for the Giant Ape in Human Prehistory.
By Russell Ciochon, John Olsen and Jamie James.
Illustrated. 262 pp. New York:
Bantam Books. $22.95.


For Both Candidates, Tocci Record Is Issue
LEAD: ASSEMBLYMAN Ronald C. Tocci's first bid for elected office was ''certainly badly timed,'' he recalled last week. ''It was 1972 and I was running for State Assembly,'' he said. ''It was the year Nixon trounced McGovern and Democrats went down everywhere.''


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
ONE FELL SLOOP.
By Susan Kenney. (Viking, $16.95.) Forgive the puns, the novel's title being the least painful, with its double - no, triple - meaning.
Ignore the parenthetical remarks that pockmark, and often pothole, every page.
Overlook the repeated descriptions of the heroine's lover, with his ''tall, broad figure'' and his ''much-too-clever, faunlike face.


View of Sport;   Fifth Down or Not, It's Over When It's Over
LEAD: Yogi Berra said it ain't over til it's over.


Campus Life: Princeton;   New Dorm Locks To Foil Intruders? Students Object
LEAD: Many students at Princeton University are objecting to new electronic locks at all entrances to Forbes College, one of the university's five freshman and sophomore residential halls.


Renegade Lebanese General Ends Revolt and Surrenders
LEAD: Gen.
Michel Aoun, the leader of the Christian military forces that opposed the Lebanese Government for 11 months, surrendered today after Syrian air and ground attacks forced him to seek safety in the French Embassy.


Bankers Hoping for End To Steep Decline in Profits
LEAD: AS Connecticut banks release their third-quarter financial results this month, industry experts say the long slide in profits should be halted although perhaps not reversed.


For Both Candidates, Tocci Record Is Issue
LEAD: ASSEMBLYMAN Ronald C. Tocci's first bid for elected office was ''certainly badly timed,'' he recalled last week. ''It was 1972 and I was running for State Assembly,'' he said. ''It was the year Nixon trounced McGovern and Democrats went down everywhere.''


Apes and Us Together
LEAD:
OTHER ORIGINS
The Search for the Giant Ape in Human Prehistory.
By Russell Ciochon, John Olsen and Jamie James.
Illustrated. 262 pp. New York:
Bantam Books. $22.95.


Tenderhearted Men
LEAD: To the Editor:


Campus Life: Princeton;   New Dorm Locks To Foil Intruders? Students Object
LEAD: Many students at Princeton University are objecting to new electronic locks at all entrances to Forbes College, one of the university's five freshman and sophomore residential halls.


View of Sport;   Fifth Down or Not, It's Over When It's Over
LEAD: Yogi Berra said it ain't over til it's over.


ISRAELIS PROMISE NO HELP FOR U.N.
LEAD: When the United Nations mission arrives in Jerusalem to examine the circumstances surrounding the shooting of 21 Palestinians last week, the Israeli Government will greet it with unbridled hostility.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
COME A TIDE
By George Ella Lyon.
Illustrated by Stephen Gammell.
Unpaged. New York:
Orchard Books. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


Data Bank/October 14, 1990
LEAD:
$
Consumer Borrowing
Aug.
July
June
Monthly percent change
3.4
7.8
0.2
Producer Price Index
Sept.
Aug.
July
Monthly percent change
1.6
1.3
-0.1
Sales at Retail Outlets
Monthly percent change
1.1
-0.4
0.5
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
Oct.


Question Of the Week;   Who Should Win M.V.P., Cy Young Awards?
LEAD: Roger Clemens deserves a third Cy Young over Bob Welch because Clemens had to pitch himself out of trouble, since no one else on the Red Sox miserable relief staff could.
With the Oakland bullpen, Clemens could have won 30.
JOHN ANZALONE
Saratoga Springs, N.Y.


Ann Tobin Is Married
LEAD: Ann Tobin and W. Allen Churchill were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Incarnation in New York.
The Rev.
J.
Douglas Ousley officiated.
Mrs.
Churchill, 52 years old, is a daughter of Edward J. Tobin of Whitestone, Queens, and the late Elizabeth K. Tobin.
A graduate of the University of Washington, with an M.B.A.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Englewood Cliffs
$710,000
52 Cambridge Place
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 30-year-old split level; new kitchen, pool, family room with stone fireplace; taxes $3,200.&gt;
Fair Lawn
$185,300
32-14 Nicholson Drive
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; pool, new kitchen, full basement; taxes $2,802.


The Fourth Time's the Charm at the Lyons Biennial
LEAD: This city, known for its cuisine, always has been a place to eat.
Now it is also a place to dance.
The festival devoted to American modern dance, ballet and folk forms that has just been presented by the fourth Lyons International Dance Biennial has not only been huge but also immensely successful.


The Executive Computer;   On the Font Battlefront, an Uneasy Truce Raises Hopes
LEAD: An uneasy truce has developed in the computer industry's dispute over type formats.
Coming a year after the so-called font wars erupted, the relative peace is welcome news to personal computer users who are planning to move to Windows 3.0, Macintosh System 7.0, which is scheduled for release soon, and other graphics-based operating systems that allow a variety of type sizes and styles to be used within a document or application.


Campus Life: Hofstra;   Students Protest A Limit on Ads For Alcohol
LEAD: To promote what it calls ''responsible'' drinking, Hofstra University has moved to limit advertising of alcohol on campus and in campus publications.


Q and A
LEAD:
Succession Rights
Question: I have been living in a rent-stabilized apartment since 1980.
In 1988, my building was converted to a co-op.
Recently, my apartment was bought by new owners who were not aware that for the past two years my brother has also been a tenant in the apartment.
His name was not on the renewal lease I signed in August.


Corrections
LEAD: In the Style Makers column last Sunday, the picture credit with the photograph of Januwa Moja, who makes clothing influenced by African tribal designs, misidentified the photographer.
It was Richard A. Green, not Kim Garnick.


Dispelling the Gloom Over the Economy
LEAD: THE prevailing mood was gloom as several hundred business leaders in the county gathered this month to hear Rosemary Scanlon, chief economist of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, andWilliam T. Knowles, chairman and chief executive officer of National Westminster Bancorp and chairman of the Regional Plan


Miss McKenna, Legal Aide, Weds
LEAD: Lauren P. McKenna, a legal assistant in the Philadelphia law firm of Fox, Rothschild, O'Brien &amp; Frankel, was married yesterday in Pearl River, N.Y., to Damian Morabito, the executive vice president of the Morabito Development Company, a family-owned real estate company in Pottstown, Pa.
The Rev.
Betty B.


College Football;   Spartans Topple Michigan
LEAD: A disputed but unsuccessful Michigan pass for a 2-point conversion, with 6 seconds to play, gave Michigan State a 28-27 victory this afternoon, leaving the Wolverines with a bitter ending to the week in which they had been voted the No. 1 team in the country.


Ms. Oliver Weds Steven Sartorius
LEAD: Deborah Bray Oliver was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Steven James Sartorius.
The Rev.
Sue Anne Morrow, a United Methodist minister, performed an Episcopal ceremony at the American Boychoir School.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Oliver of San Marino, Calif.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr.


Up in the Air Against His Will
LEAD: These days, I am on the road during the week, but I always have to get back to New York on the weekend to work.
So I spend a lot of time in the lines at the airline counters.
Most people who have to go somewhere in America nowadays wait in those same lines.
I can remember when people in those lines laughed and chatted, anticipating the exciting trips they were about to make up above the clouds.


Fashion;   Even for Wagner, Short Is In at the Opera
LEAD: The soprano Birgit Nilsson was once asked what a singer needed most to perform Wagnerian opera. ''Comfortable shoes,'' she said.


The Socialists' New Class Struggle: How to Survive Communism's Fall
LEAD: The world's most prominent Socialists - the council of the Socialist International - convened in New York last week with certain misgivings.
After all, Americans have not been particularly cordial to Socialism since the days of Eugene V. Debs; in fact, they put him in jail.
Norman Thomas, the most illustrious American


Dr. Andrea Glass Marries
LEAD: Dr.
Andrea Leslie Glass and Dr.
David Matthew Sacknoff, senior medical residents at Lenox Hill Hospital, were married last evening at the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York by Rabbi Philip Graubart.
The bride, the daughter of Judith E. Glass of Huntington, L.I., and Don B. Glass of Englewood, N.J., graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and New York Medical College.


A City Carousel
LEAD: ''The magic is back'' reads a poster announcing today's reopening of the colorful hand-carved carousel in Brooklyn's Prospect Park.
And the vibrant result of the yearlong face-lift is magical indeed.


Sports People;   Umpires for Series
LEAD: Their task perhaps eased by the absence of Roger Clemens and the Red Sox, Larry Barnett of the American League, a 21-year veteran, and Frank Pulli of the National League, a 19-year man, were named yesterday to head the umpiring crew for the World Series.
Jim Quick and Randy Marsh of the National League and Ted Hendry and Rocky Roe of the American League also will be on the six-man crew.


WHEN LIFE IS TOXIC
LEAD: As a ''conventional'' physician who rejects the diagnosis of multiple chemical sensitivities as unscientific and unproved, I would refer your readers to a paper published Aug. 16 in The New England Journal of Medicine.
The paper describes a study in which clinical ecologists administered either a suspected environmental toxin or a salt solution to patients.


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   Where to Seek a Meal Downtown
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Here are some places to dine in lower Manhattan.
Le Lucky Strike


Q and A
LEAD:
Horseback Riding in Japan


The Socialists' New Class Struggle: How to Survive Communism's Fall
LEAD: The world's most prominent Socialists - the council of the Socialist International - convened in New York last week with certain misgivings.
After all, Americans have not been particularly cordial to Socialism since the days of Eugene V. Debs; in fact, they put him in jail.
Norman Thomas, the most illustrious American


The Shalt Nots
LEAD: Like the chorus at a revival meeting, four children are sitting in the back seat of the car, swinging and swaying and singing along with Tom Chapin, longtime folkie and inveterate environmentalist: ''Someone's gonna use it after you.
Someone needs that water when you're through.'' These are the adults of the 21st century, and they know all the shalt nots by heart.


Max Kennedy to Wed Victoria Strauss
LEAD: July wedding plans for Victoria Anne Strauss and Matthew Maxwell Taylor Kennedy, a son of Mrs.
Robert F. Kennedy of McLean, Va., and the late Mr.
Kennedy, have been made known by Ms.
Strauss's parents, Bonnie Strauss Gould of Los Angeles and Benjamin Strauss of Haverford, Pa.


Sports People;   Umpires for Series
LEAD: Their task perhaps eased by the absence of Roger Clemens and the Red Sox, Larry Barnett of the American League, a 21-year veteran, and Frank Pulli of the National League, a 19-year man, were named yesterday to head the umpiring crew for the World Series.
Jim Quick and Randy Marsh of the National League and Ted Hendry and Rocky Roe of the American League also will be on the six-man crew.


Campus Life: Texas;   A Loud Demand For a Place On a Male Squad
LEAD: Cheering for University of Texas teams has always come easy for Candace Brister.
She is so noisy at the school's sporting events that her friends call her ''the human microphone.''


Postings: Full-Nesters;   Playground Time
LEAD: The glacial-rock formations that gave Martin Ginsburg the idea of calling his condominium development in Greenburgh, N.Y., the Boulders do not, at first sight, suggest an easy playing field for children.
But then, Mr.
Ginsburg explains, the idea was for the Boulders to attract empty-nesters who would move into his quarter-million-dollar-and-up condominiums only after their kids had grown up and left home.


National Attention On Spirited Contest
LEAD: NOT every Congressional race can feature a visit from Robert Redford and a stopover by President Bush.
But such political ammunition is being hauled out in the Fifth District battle between a popular three-term Waterbury Alderman, Gary A. Franks, the Republican candidate, and a former Congressman and television newscaster, Toby Moffett, the


Doing Something About How We Drive
LEAD: In her New Jersey Opinion piece, ''Changing Our Driving Habits'' (Sept. 9), Linda Muhlhausen says it is time for us to start thinking about the way we drive.
She's absolutely right - and some of us have started thinking.


Review/Music;   Schumann And Antics Of a Sad Poet
LEAD: One hears much lamentation these days to the effect that the art of lieder is either moribund or dead.
Although that may seem an alarmist view, it could certainly be argued that fewer singers are devoted to the art than in the past; that today's large concert halls are not the ideal places for performances so intimate, and that the form appeals, increasingly, to an audience with very specialized tastes.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I had new cedar shingles put on my roof last year.
I now seem to be getting different opinions on what to do with these shingles.
Some say to apply a water-base sealer, some say an oil-base sealer, and some say to leave the shingles as is.
What do you think?


Fine Law Needs Fine-Tuning
LEAD: The success of New York City's new campaign financing system in last year's mayoral election set a worthy example for Congress.
That makes the City Council's sluggish response to proposed refinements all the more disappointing.


Dan Quayle's Fortunes
LEAD: Emerging from weeks of near invisibility, Vice President Dan Quayle has been unable to escape the old questions about his qualifications, influence and political future, particularly as they apply to 1992.
Page 26.


Thefts
LEAD: To the Editor: In reference to John D. Mitchell's letter (Travel, Sept. 2), I, too, was assaulted by the prettiest pickpocket in Milan.
Disarmed by a sleepless flight and the excitement of returning to Italy, I let this red-chiffoned, nursing mother distract me with her proffered paper under which her fingers unzipped three inches of my waist pouch.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
JOYCE ANN BROWN: Justice Denied.
By Joyce Ann Brown with Jay Gaines. (Noble Press, 213 West Institute Place, Suite 508, Chicago, Ill. 60610, Paper, $11.95.) In 1980, Joyce Ann Brown walked into a nightmare from which she did not emerge for nine years.
Arrested and convicted of robbery and murder in connection with the holdup of a Dallas furrier, Ms.


WHEN LIFE IS TOXIC
LEAD: Reinhold points out in his article that 70 to 80 percent of patients seeking treatment for environmental illness are women with histories of psychological problems.
That women may be more chemically sensitive should come as no surprise: women bear most of the chemical exposure of contraception, in the form of the pill and spermicidal jellies and foams.


Dinkins Aide Denies Image of 'Confusion'
LEAD: The Dinkins administration has a firm grip on New York City's fiscal and labor problems, despite the impression of ''some confusion,'' an aide to the Mayor told municipal union officers yesterday.


Letting All Schools Share in the Dream
LEAD: The article ''Schools Preparing for Changes in Financing'' (Sept. 2) filled in many of the cracks in the current controversy over rich school-poor school educational financing.


Gayle Pollard and Michael Terry Wed
LEAD: Gayle Frances Pollard, an editorial-page writer for The Los Angeles Times, was married yesterday in Washington to Michael Woodford Terry, a sportswriter for The San Bernardino (Calif.) Sun.
The Rev.
Charles R. Stith, a United Methodist minister, officiated at the Notre Dame Chapel on the Dumbarton campus of Howard


Review/Recital;   A Tenor Comfortably Challenged
LEAD: Carnegie Hall did well, in planning its grand centennial season, not to overlook the intimate.
One promising series in Weill Recital Hall, more modest than its title, ''Great Singers,'' implies, got off to a splendid start on Friday evening with the New York City debut recital of the American tenor John


Nets Stopped By Rain
LEAD: A basketball game postponed by rain?
Unless it is played outdoors, it could never happen.
Try again.
Anything is possible with the Nets, including the cancellation of a game because of precipitation.


If Only Ducks Were Sold in Parts
LEAD: NO one thinks twice about buying chicken in parts, but few places will sell you duck legs or breasts separately.
This is too bad, for when it comes to cooking duck, most people do it one way: in the oven.
The problem with roasting is that when the legs are done, the breast is often dry.
If the breast is pink, the legs are red.


Unhealthy Patriotism
LEAD: Ignoring a wise Defense Department policy against giving cigarettes to soldiers, the RJR Nabisco and Philip Morris tobacco companies recently donated about 10,000 cartons for distribution to U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia.
Air Force base officials say they were unaware of the ban when they loaded the cigarettes on military aircraft.


Social Events
LEAD:
Look Who's Cooking


Campus Life: Brown;   Parties On Ethnic Themes are Halted
LEAD: After a complaint about a ''South of the Border'' Mexican party, the mostly white residential fraternities and sororities at Brown University have voted to end ethnic-minority theme parties.


Postings: Downtown Architecture;   History on View
LEAD: To illustrate the architectural development of lower Manhattan, the historian Andrew S. Dolkart assembled 120 objects: renderings, lithographs, etchings, models, furniture and a gargoyle from the Woolworth Building.
They are on view through Friday in the Whitney Museum of American Art Downtown at Federal Reserve Plaza, 33 Maiden Lane, at Nassau Street.


Dr. D. M. Dorfman Weds Eve LaPlante
LEAD: Eve LaPlante, the daughter of Virginia W. LaPlante of Brookline, Mass., was married yesterday on the Headlands in Rockport, Mass., to Dr.
David Michael Dorfman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Dorfman of New York.
Associate Justice Rudolph Kass of the Massachusetts Court of Appeals officiated.


Results Plus
LEAD:
Boxing


An Ambitious Troupe With Talent on Hand
LEAD: THE name a Small Company in America defines only two aspects of this theater group in Sea Cliff.
As its current production of two one-act American operas proves, the company has big ambitions and the talent to move ahead.


Miss Bruckmann Wed in New York
LEAD: Elizabeth Follmer Bruckmann and Terrence Michael McShane were married yesterday at the Brick Presbyterian Church in New York.
The Rev.
Herbert B. Anderson and the Rev.
James M. English, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: Photokina, the every-other-year trade show in Cologne, Germany, took place at the beginning of this month, which helps explain why practically every camera and film maker has introduced at least one new product this fall.
As usual, the major news was revealed prior to the event.
What follows is a summary of the latest and newest culled from a multitude of press briefings and releases.


Raising the Architectural Ante In California
LEAD: Few careers in architecture are as vexing as that of Michael Graves.
From academic modernist in the 70's to post-modernist superstar in the 80's, he could turn in the 90's into a venerable elder statesman or a tired has-been.
It's a matter not only of Mr.
Graves's architecture but of our architectural culture, of which his career has for years been a kind of crucible.


Dan Quayle's Fortunes
LEAD: Emerging from weeks of near invisibility, Vice President Dan Quayle has been unable to escape the old questions about his qualifications, influence and political future, particularly as they apply to 1992.
Page 26.


Cottage Rentals
LEAD: To the Editor: Regarding cottage rentals in Britain and the Cotswolds in particular: It is true that a British-based company known as Heart of England Cottages is now defunct, having been sold to the Cottage Directory, based in Britain.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
JOYCE ANN BROWN: Justice Denied.
By Joyce Ann Brown with Jay Gaines. (Noble Press, 213 West Institute Place, Suite 508, Chicago, Ill. 60610, Paper, $11.95.) In 1980, Joyce Ann Brown walked into a nightmare from which she did not emerge for nine years.
Arrested and convicted of robbery and murder in connection with the holdup of a Dallas furrier, Ms.


Democratic Plan to Tax Wealthy Has Democratic Hurdle in Senate
LEAD: Despite broad support among Democratic lawmakers for a House deficit plan that would raise taxes for the wealthy, Democratic Senate leaders are committed to blocking it when it reaches the Senate.


The Cry Could Be, 'Mangia! Mangia!'
LEAD: AURELIO'S PASTA CAFE in Lake Ronkonkoma is a nifty new spot that will delight the whole family.
Portions are big enough to fill up teen-agers, and dad will not faint when the bill arrives.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I had new cedar shingles put on my roof last year.
I now seem to be getting different opinions on what to do with these shingles.
Some say to apply a water-base sealer, some say an oil-base sealer, and some say to leave the shingles as is.
What do you think?


Paul Simon's Journey To Brazil and Beyond
LEAD: In the opening moments of Paul Simon's extraordinary new album, ''The Rhythm of the Saints,'' the only sounds to be heard are the booming rhythms of the Brazilian drum corps Olodum.
The beat quickly swells into a high-stepping cadence, joined by an instrumental fragment borrowed from the Silhouettes' 1957 doo-wop hit, ''Get a Job.


Linda Head Weds R. M. Flanagan
LEAD: Linda Head, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Glenn O. Head of Madison, N.J., was married yesterday in Nantucket, Mass., to Robert Michael Flanagan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Flanagan of Winthrop, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
Wiliam Bearden, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church, assisted by the Rev.


T. C. Nelson Weds Anna Spangler
LEAD: Anna Wildy Spangler and Thomas Craig Nelson, 1988 graduates of the Harvard Business School and partners in the Wakefield Group, a venture capital firm in Charlotte, N.C., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Stephen Elkins-Williams performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Chapel of the Cross in Chapel Hill, N


Not the Cheapest Form of Transportation
LEAD: To the Editor:


College Football: Local;   Hofstra Steamrolls To 7th Victory
LEAD: Wayne Morris, Al Hagofsky and Brian McGee each scored two touchdowns as undefeated Hofstra, No. 1 in the East in Division III of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, crushed Catholic University, 43-6, yesterday afternoon in Washington.


Campus Life: Swarthmore;   Governing Board Lifts the Curtain On Its Decisions
LEAD: In an effort to demystify decision-making at Swarthmore College, the school's board of managers last weekend opened its doors for the first time to designated student and faculty observers.


Boilerplate
LEAD: To the Editor:


What's Happened to Heroes Is a Crime
LEAD: ''All the heroes dyin' like flies / they say it's a sign a' the times.'' Sam Shepard wrote that dirge back when he was just a Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright, before he became a movie star and something of a popular hero himself.
It is still my favorite word on the heroic condition, although from time to time someone will issue a snappy update on the subject.


WHEN LIFE IS TOXIC
LEAD: You gave an accurate picture of what life is like for someone with M.C.S.
But you did not describe what it's like for the family of such a person - the strain of living with an always increasing set of rules, the guilt when you cause a loved one to suffer because a rule was forgotten or because no rule yet existed.


Accord Expected Soon on Farm Bill With $13 Billion in Savings
LEAD: The House and Senate conference committee that is writing a new farm bill is close to agreeing to significant changes in the Government's commodity price support program that would save more than $13 billion over the next five years.


W. A. Compton, 79, A Doctor Who Rose To Head Miles Labs
LEAD: Walter Ames Compton, a medical doctor who became a prominent pharmaceutical researcher and head of Miles Laboratories, one of the nation's leading manufacturers of health care products, died at the age of 79 on Thursday at his home in Elkhart, Ind.


Call of the Wildmen
LEAD: It was Spring in the Emerald Hill country of North Texas, a region of rolling fields clotted with purple asters, mustard and black-eyed Susans.
Signs that hung beside the white-rail fences of prosperous-looking ranches boasted of the breeds of cattle raised there, Brangus and Herefords and Santa Gertrudis.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD: AN AMERICAN ROMANCE, by John Casey. (Avon, $9.95.) In his first novel, the author of ''Spartina'' told the story of Mac and Anya, two outsiders in love who go to Iowa for a brief attempt at regional theater and life on a commune.
When it was published in 1977, John Leonard said in The Times: ''It respects characters.


Accord Expected Soon on Farm Bill With $13 Billion in Savings
LEAD: The House and Senate conference committee that is writing a new farm bill is close to agreeing to significant changes in the Government's commodity price support program that would save more than $13 billion over the next five years.


KIDS AND SCHOLARS AT WORK
LEAD: What a wonderful feeling of nostalgia I had when I opened the pages of Bruce Weber's article ''Shhh!
Kids and Scholars at Work'' (Sept. 23).
The Hunts Point branch of the New York Public Library was where, more than 30 years ago, I first developed a love of books.
How well I still remember the day when I was old enough to get a card to the adult section of the library and was able to go downstairs and browse in the cavernous and hushed room, with shelves full of books that reached from the ceiling to the floor.


Change in California Loosens Congressman's Grip
LEAD: When George E. Brown Jr. first entered Congress 27 years ago, orchards of oranges covered the Inland Empire of Southern California, the air was so clear one could see the San Gabriel Mountains on most days and Democratic victories were as reliable as the warm desert sun.


Novels You Can Sink Your Teeth Into
LEAD: Anne Rice, best-selling author of ''The Vampire Chronicles'' and other fictional excursions into the bizarre and fantastic, likes to give tours of her large, antebellum mansion in New Orleans. ''There's the fireplace where Rowan and Lasher sat on Christmas morning,'' she says matter-of-factly, a smile tugging at her lips.


Where and How to Insulate
LEAD: MOST homes have insulation in the attic and walls, it having been included during construction or added later.
Insulation between an unheated basement or crawl space and the main floor is important, too; in winter, unheated areas beneath rooms can act like a block of ice.


Catherine A. Gehrig, Scientist, Is Wed
LEAD: Catherine Anne Gehrig, a research scientist at the Science University of Tokyo, and Arturo Claudio Georges Chavez-Pirson 4th, a scientist at Nippon Telephone &amp; Telegraph in Tokyo, were married yesterday in Centerport, L.I.
The Rev.
Robert L. Hayden officiated at Our Lady Queen of Martyrs Roman Catholic


Stalking Fate With a School Bell and Clock
LEAD: Among the more irritating creatures in a world full of them are those theatergoers who tell you, just after the curtain has come down, ''You really should have seen the London production.'' Or, ''It was a lot better before the producer moved it uptown.'' Or, ''Trust me.
With the original lead, it was a different show entirely.


Gregory Keller Weds Sally Kingsberg
LEAD: Sally Anne Kingsberg and Gregory Edward Keller were married last evening at the East River Yacht Club in Long Island City, Queens, by Rabbi Lawrence Raphael.
Mrs.
Keller is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Kingsberg of New York.
The bridegroom is the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward Keller of Mukilteo,


College Football: Midwest;   Penalty Makes Indiana Take Tie
LEAD: A holding penalty cost Indiana a go-ahead touchdown with less than two minutes to go today, and the Hoosiers had to settle for a 27-yard field goal by Scott Bonnell and a 27-27 tie with Ohio State.


Gold and the Yen Continue to Slide
LEAD:
$
Last Week
Prior Week
Year Ago
Japanese Yen
129.10
132.201
142.05
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5245
1.5372
1.8720
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1471
1.1500
1.1738
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.9670
1.9455
1.5820
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$388.00
$394.00
$364.80
Republic National Bank


Baseball: On To The Series;   Henderson Reflects on '87 Piniella
LEAD: The wounds are finally healed.


Alice Blum Weds J. G. Pollard 4th
LEAD: Alice Packard Blum and John Garland Pollard 4th were married yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Salisbury, Conn., by the Rev.
Dr.
Charles A. Bevan Jr.
Mrs.
Pollard is the daughter of John Robert Halsey Blum of Lakeville, Conn., and the late Susanne Delatour Blum.
The bridegroom is the son of Mrs.


Video Prepares For Life Minus A Few X's
LEAD: For video the new NC-17 rating designated by the Motion Picture Association of America is made to order.
The rating replaces the X, which, multiplied to XXX, had been usurped by pornographers. ''Under the old guidelines, the triple X confused the public about what the X was intended to mean,'' says Jack Messer, president of the Video Software Dealers Association.


Reversal of Image: Watching Someone Playing Yourself
LEAD: When I attended the premiere of ''Reversal of Fortune'' at the recent Toronto Film Festival, I anticipated few surprises.
The new movie, directed by Barbet Schroeder, is based on my own book about how my students and I had reversed Claus von Bulow's conviction for twice trying to kill his wife.
My son Elon, who works in the film business, had come up with the idea of making a movie out of the von


Fair Days in Palm Springs
LEAD: ''The desert,'' observed J. Smeaton Chase, a British inhabitant of what was then the tiny village of Palm Springs, ''is the opposite of all that we naturally find pleasing.''


Fashion: On the Street;   Put It On, Play Ball Or Tune In
LEAD: With the World Series only two days away, it seems appropriate that at this moment a very hot fashion item is the baseball cap, though one with a difference.


Tenderhearted Men
LEAD: To the Editor:


Verse Prize
LEAD: After years in which the awarding of the Nobel Prize in Literature has been followed by grumbling over the recipient's obscurity, the world of letters was all smiles last week when the name Octavio Paz popped out of the envelope.
Mr.
Paz, whose half-century of poetic exploration of the Mexican soul is marked by a sensuous surreality, has for years been regarded as one of the greats for whom the Nobel was more or less inevitable.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: Owney was a mostly terrier mutt who was found as a puppy amid the post bags in Albany, N.Y., in 1888.
He was adopted by the postal workers, and in nine years he circled the United States and indeed the world as an unofficial postal mascot.


Where and How to Insulate
LEAD: MOST homes have insulation in the attic and walls, it having been included during construction or added later.
Insulation between an unheated basement or crawl space and the main floor is important, too; in winter, unheated areas beneath rooms can act like a block of ice.


'L'Atalante,' a Slow Boat Bound for Lasting Fame
LEAD: When Jean Vigo's ''Atalante'' opens Friday at the Lincoln Plaza, a new generation of Americans will finally have the chance to see the film that Francois Truffaut, among other directors, called ''a masterpiece'' - but in a restored print rather than one of the cut versions that have been circulating since 1934.


Turn the Pages, and a Life Unfolds
LEAD: THE morning of my 59th birthday dawned hot and humid, the summer air heavy and still, and the only sound the monotonous droning of my neighbor's pool pump.
I woke early, (as I often do these days), made myself some coffee and took down the old brown leatherette-covered photograph album from the high closet shelf in the guest room.


Mazeroski's Moment
LEAD: Of the millions of youths who dreamed about it, of the hundreds of thousands who played professional baseball, of the thousands who made it to the major leagues, only one player has ever hit a home run to win the seventh game of a World Series.


If Only Ducks Were Sold in Parts
LEAD: NO one thinks twice about buying chicken in parts, but few places will sell you duck legs or breasts separately.
This is too bad, for when it comes to cooking duck, most people do it one way: in the oven.
The problem with roasting is that when the legs are done, the breast is often dry.
If the breast is pink, the legs are red.


Review/Music;   Calamity Jane and Other Voices
LEAD: For some years now, Dora Ohrenstein has been known but not quite known as the soprano soloist in the Philip Glass Ensemble.
Because of the nature of Mr.
Glass's Minimalist style, in which Ms.
Ohrenstein is called upon to vocalize wordlessly amid highly amplified instrumental lines, her musical and theatrical gifts have remained largely depersonalized.


Be a Competitor
LEAD: To the Editor:


Maryclare White Marries
LEAD: Maryclare Carroll White and Laurent Marteau were married yesterday at St.
John's Roman Catholic Church in Darien, Conn., by the Rev.
Pierre A. Botton.
Mrs.
Marteau, a graduate of Wheaton College with an M.B.A. from New York University, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Joseph White of New Canaan, Conn.


Stuart Dale Weds Lynn A. Pantano
LEAD: Lynn Anne Pantano, a daughter of Mrs.
Lester L. Coleman and Carl A. Pantano, both of New York, was married yesterday to Stuart Charles Dale, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard G. Dale of Medfield, Mass.
The Rev.
Henry A. Boyle performed the ceremony at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in York.


Pro Basketball;   Knicks Win Title In Spain
LEAD: In 1493, Columbus returned here to tell the King he had discovered the riches of the New World, and almost five centuries later, the New York Knickerbockers tonight showed Barcelona an example of those riches: a professional basketball team from America paid $12 million a year and earning its money.


If Only Ducks Were Sold in Parts
LEAD: NO one thinks twice about buying chicken in parts, but few places will sell you duck legs or breasts separately.
This is too bad, for when it comes to cooking duck, most people do it one way: in the oven.
The problem with roasting is that when the legs are done, the breast is often dry.
If the breast is pink, the legs are red.


Letting All Schools Share in The Dream
LEAD: As a public librarian of a library serving a distressed area, I was interested in the article ''Schools Preparing for Changes in Financing. ''


Campus Life: Stanford;   Giving Benefits And Apartments To Gay Couples
LEAD: After more than a year of debate, Stanford University has granted unwed students, including homosexual couples, access to dormitories and other benefits until now reserved for married students.


Homes and Offices for Sterling Forest?
LEAD: The long-delayed effort to develop Sterling Forest - 18,000 acres of woods, wetlands, streams and lakes that sprawl across southern Orange County 50 miles northwest of Manhattan - is gaining momentum as the owner moves to make the most of that region's economic boom.


An Aversion to Taxing Taxable Substances
LEAD: Canadians routinely pay more than $30 for a carton of cigarettes.
Italians pay more than $5 for a gallon of gasoline.
Danes not only pay $1.50 plus deposit for a store-bought bottle of beer but face such high prices for cigarettes - close to $4 a pack - that a Danish embassy spokesman, Bent Skou, says ''nobody in his right mind'' buys a whole carton at once.


Alice Blum Weds J. G. Pollard 4th
LEAD: Alice Packard Blum and John Garland Pollard 4th were married yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Salisbury, Conn., by the Rev.
Dr.
Charles A. Bevan Jr.
Mrs.
Pollard is the daughter of John Robert Halsey Blum of Lakeville, Conn., and the late Susanne Delatour Blum.
The bridegroom is the son of Mrs.


Behind the Painted World of 'Once On This Island'
LEAD: In a time when sets for Broadway musicals can bump and grind with expensive mechanical wizardry and special effects, the design for ''Once on This Island'' is notable for its almost total reliance on extreme simplicity and hand-painted surfaces.
The set for this fable-like Caribbean musical, which arrives on Broadway at the Booth Theater on Thursday, consists primarily of three walls and a floor painted with motifs of tropical vegetation.


Fashion: On the Street;   Put It On, Play Ball Or Tune In
LEAD: With the World Series only two days away, it seems appropriate that at this moment a very hot fashion item is the baseball cap, though one with a difference.


Fair Days in Palm Springs
LEAD: ''The desert,'' observed J. Smeaton Chase, a British inhabitant of what was then the tiny village of Palm Springs, ''is the opposite of all that we naturally find pleasing.''


THE WORLD: Japan's Shrewd New Investment Strategy . . .;;   . . . Moves Beyond Rockefeller Center and Pebble Beach
LEAD: If all goes as planned in the next few weeks, E.T., the cuddly extra-terrestrial, will have a new parent.
Matsushita, the giant consumer electronics maker known in the United States as Panasonic, is negotiating what may be a $7 billion takeover of MCA, the owner of Universal Studios and one of the recording industry's biggest labels.


A Plan for Boffo Box Office
LEAD: To the Editor:


General Managers Emerging as Baseball's Latest Fall Guys
LEAD: Joe Burke, a career baseball executive who is president of the Kansas City Royals, captured the development succinctly.


Votes in Congress
LEAD:
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Deficit-cutting Budget: Vote on passage of a House passed bill on a proposed budget with broad outlines for deficit reduction, but with few specifics on tax increases or spending cuts.
Approved 66 to 33, Oct. 9.
2.


A Fresh Look Graces Larger Quarters
LEAD: AT a time when restaurant closings seem to be a fact of business life, it is refreshing to see a new restaurant succeed.
Nantucket Cafe opened its doors more than three years ago in a minuscule spot in New Canaan and evidently filled such a need for an informal place serving pleasant, reasonably priced food that it burst its seams and sought larger quarters.


A Japanese Group Disrupts the Sale of a Book
LEAD: The distribution of a much-debated book about Japan written by a Dutch journalist has been disrupted here after the country's largest minority group protested.


Magical Memory Tour
LEAD:
WHEN THE WORLD WAS WHOLE
Three Centuries of Memories.
By Charles Fenyvesi.
Illustrated. 266 pp. New York:
Viking. $19.95.


Streetscapes: The Alley at 4 East 43d Street;   An 1864 Stable-Path Survivor
LEAD: The Mehlin Piano building, an odd little, mid-block structure at 4 East 43d Street facing onto a deep, narrow alley, was acquired last spring by a developer as part of an assemblage reaching to the northeast corner of 42d Street and Fifth Avenue.


A Time of Confusion Draws the Arab World Into Soul-Searching
LEAD: From Algeria to Bahrain, public opinion in the Arab world is undergoing the most troubled soul-searching it has experienced in modern times.
The massacre at Muslim holy sites in Jerusalem last Monday, in which the Israeli police killed at least 21 Palestinians during a riot, has further inflamed Arab emotions already driven to new peaks by the Gulf crisis.


OUT OF SIGHT
LEAD: IN ANY NEW YORK APARTMENT, STORAGE IS THE KEY,'' explains Fred Imberman, one of the owners of the Kentshire Galleries, a Manhattan antiques shop. ''This was originally a formal dining room, but then we had two kids and began running out of space.'' With the help of the New York decorator Hariet Eckstein and Ray Coggins, an antiques dealer in Westbury, England, the room was reconfigured to include a library as well.


'Rational' Research Spending
LEAD: To the Editor:


Coverage for Trip Cancellation or Medical Crises
LEAD: World uncertainties are causing travelers to seek ways to avoid or reduce their losses if a trip is canceled, or even if the travelers themselves decide that a plan no longer sounds safe or like fun.
This coverage is widely available in addition to the more important parts of travel insurance, which older people in particular should have: for medical protection, theft and other contingencies.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Stack's, one of New York's premier coin dealers will celebrate its 55th anniversary with an auction of the Allen F. Lovejoy collection of dimes.
Mr.
Lovejoy began his collection in the 1930's and preceeded to garner dimes of each date and mint from 1796 to 1940.


Wall Street;   Those Dow 'Bargains' Are Getting Even Cheaper
LEAD: After the panicky 190-point sell-off of Oct. 13, 1989, some people thought the 30 stocks that make up the Dow Jones industrial average looked very cheap.
Well, most of those stocks are even cheaper now.


2 People Injured in Subway In Separate Attacks Friday
LEAD: Two people were injured in separate attacks at subway stations in Manhattan and Brooklyn on Friday, the police said.


A Tale of Pulp and Passion: The Jim Thompson Revival
LEAD: In ''Bad Boy,'' a memoir of his early years, the crime-fiction writer Jim Thompson tells of a West Texas deputy sheriff who pursued him when, as a young man, he neglected to pay a fine for getting drunk and disturbing the peace.
Alone with him on the vast prairie, the deputy becomes a creature of menace:


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ending Sept. 29
MANHATTAN
Battery Park City
$509,000
380 Rector Place
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. condo in a 5-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, terrace, harbor view; common charge $986, taxes $500 (Broker: Battery Park City Realty/Tabak Real Estate)


What on Earth Is the Guggenheim Up To?
LEAD: The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York City is to all outward appearances on hiatus, closed to visitors for another year, until construction ends on an annex.
But in fact a kind of revolution is under way there, one that could have an impact well beyond the walls of Frank Lloyd Wright's spiral building - one that it is no exaggeration to say could alter the way art museums across the country do business and visitors experience these places.


Technology;   Coming Soon: Data You Can Look Under and Walk Through
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation's organizational chart fills an 80-page book for just the top 650 positions.
But at Xerox's computer science laboratory here, all those pages can be displayed on a single computer screen.


Question Of the Week;   Who Should Win M.V.P., Cy Young Awards?
LEAD: Cecil Fielder and Ryne Sandberg.
The unwritten rule that the m.v.p. has to come from the pennant winner is unfair.
For Cy Young, Doug Drabek and Roger Clemens.
RICHARD IRVING
New York


Heather Stiers Weds Jonathan A. Dorn
LEAD: Heather Allison Stiers, a daughter of the Rev.
Dr.
Brenda J. Stiers and the Rev.
Dr.
Thomas Lowell Stiers of Riverside, Conn., was married yesterday to Jonathan Andrew Dorn, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jacob Dorn of Dayton, Ohio.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas Duggan, a Presbyterian minister who is the bride's godfather, performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Greenwich,


Screams Beneath the Snow
LEAD:
THESE DAYS
New Poems.
By Frederick Seidel.
50 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Cloth, $18.95. Paper, $9.95.


Fund Wants to Help Campers Track Careers
LEAD: The Fresh Air Fund, which has sent disadvantaged New York City children on vacations since 1877, has begun a capital fund drive to meet a new challenge: a career-awareness summer camp and school program.


Philadelphia Journal;   Cries of Poverty in Cradle of Liberty
LEAD: Stepping into history, possibly to escape the drone of Federal deficit reports, tourists stream into the Cradle of Liberty here at the rate of 14,177 visitors a day.


Monster of Irony
LEAD: To the Editor:


Traffic Alert
LEAD: George Washington Bridge:


Olympics;   Koreas Gain an Accord On Unifying 2 Teams
LEAD: North and South Korea have agreed in principle to field a single Olympic team for the 1992 Summer Games in Barcelona and for other international sports events.


A Japanese Group Disrupts the Sale of a Book
LEAD: The distribution of a much-debated book about Japan written by a Dutch journalist has been disrupted here after the country's largest minority group protested.


Putting the Heat on Global Warming
LEAD: CONNECTICUT has become the first state in the country to pass legislation aimed at reducing the possibility of a global warming.
Scientists have predicted that increased concentrations of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere from fossil-fuel emissions may alter the earth's climate.


Commercial Property: Office Report Card;   New York's Business Conditions Get a 'Poor' Rating
LEAD: In the eyes of executives around the country, New York City has grown markedly worse this year as a place to locate offices, according to a new survey.


A Labyrinthine Real Estate Deal
LEAD: The Loan to Codina-Bush: The Houston group, in turn, lends the money to Jeb Bush, the 37-year-old son of the President, and Armando Codina, who own a partnership called 1390 Brickell, which has an option to buy a Miami office building at that address.
Mr.
Bush owns 20 percent and Mr.
Codina owns 80 percent.


In Some Fights, Quitting Is Harder Than Joining In
LEAD: Of the panoply of issues the United States and the Soviet Union still face if they are to put the Cold War completely behind them, none appear more nettlesome than resolving the longstanding civil wars fought by their clients in Afghanistan, Angola and Cambodia.


Managing;   The Multimedia Benefits Kit
LEAD: Dianne H. McGowan, an assistant vice president at Citicorp, used a worksheet to test several medical plans. ''Turned out that a cheaper plan is actually better at my salary,'' she said.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: Business inventory figures for August.
Opening of contract negotiations between United Steelworkers and USX Corp.
I.B.M. announces third-quarter earnings.
Michael Milken's hearing continues.
Pretrial conference in Charles Keating case.
Early October auto sales.
Apple introduces new inexpensive line of computers.


About Men;   Not Exactly The Best Man
LEAD: There ought to be a rule, a matter of social etiquette, entered into any updated guide to planning wedding parties.
It should read something like this:


Room to Grow
LEAD: Thirteen-year-old freddy victoria had outgrown his room.
What the Riverdale Country School eighth grader needed now was more space for working and less for playing.
A proper desk and bookshelves were crucial; so was storage.
Esthetically, the young Victoria had definite tastes, too. ''I wanted my room to look very different from the rest of the apartment,'' he explains.


Rebel Military Leader Gives Up in Lebanon
LEAD: Gen.
Michel Aoun, who led Christian military forces against Lebanon's Syrian-backed Government for 11 months, surrendered after Syrian air and ground attacks.


Patricia Kopec Is Married
LEAD: Patricia Talt Kopec and Herbert J. Kett were married in New York yesterday at St.
Patrick's Cathedral by the Rev.
Louis I. Newman.
Mrs.
Kett is the president of the Buchanan Pharmacy in Peekskill, N.Y., and an adjunct professor of jurisprudence at the Albany College of Pharmacy.
She and the bridegroom are former chairmen of the New York State Board of Pharmacy.


Some Plants Are Doubly Rewarding
LEAD: EERYONE likes to have a double dividend.
And some plants are worth the gardener's time and investment for their flowers in spring as well as their showy foliage or berries in fall.


Janis A. Carbone Is Wed in Jersey
LEAD: Janis Ann Carbone, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Carbone of Scotia, N.Y., was married yesterday in Westfield, N.J., to Daniel Leonard Richards, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard L. Richards of Amherst, Mass.
The Rev.
Thomas R. G. Evans performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church of Westfield.


Museum Show of State Talent
LEAD: ALTHOUGH teapots by craft artists are not expected to hold hot water these days, and contemporary art quilts rarely warm chilled toes, the decades-old maxim ''Form follows function'' still possesses an underpinning of truth in the craft world.
Clay continues to be shaped into vessels; fabrics are cut, stitched and quilted, while molten glass is blown into glistening bowls.


Debra Cherney, Lawyer, Married
LEAD: Debra Lynn Cherney and Hartley Todd Bernstein were married last evening at the Tower Suite in New York.
Cantor Wayne Siet and Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum of FederAL District Court, Manhattan, a cousin of the bride, officiated.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Cherney of Merrick, L.I.


College Football;   Spartans Topple Michigan
LEAD: A disputed but unsuccessful Michigan pass for a 2-point conversion, with 6 seconds to play, gave Michigan State a 28-27 victory this afternoon, leaving the Wolverines with a bitter ending to the week in which they had been voted the No. 1 team in the country.


Psst! Anybody Have a Dream Sailboat?
LEAD: YOU see, I cannot use my real name. People would think I'm a wimp.


Pro Basketball;   Knicks Win Title In Spain
LEAD: In 1493, Columbus returned here to tell the King he had discovered the riches of the New World, and almost five centuries later, the New York Knickerbockers tonight showed Barcelona an example of those riches: a professional basketball team from America paid $12 million a year and earning its money.


WHEN LIFE IS TOXIC
LEAD: Reinhold points out in his article that 70 to 80 percent of patients seeking treatment for environmental illness are women with histories of psychological problems.
That women may be more chemically sensitive should come as no surprise: women bear most of the chemical exposure of contraception, in the form of the pill and spermicidal jellies and foams.


Japan's Shrewd New Investment Strategy . . .
LEAD: From time to time over the last five years, economists played an intellectual game of calculating what might happen if Japanese institutions halted their massive purchases of United States Treasury bonds, issued to finance the yawning Federal budget deficits.
It seemed a flight of fancy, since Japan's appetite for the securities seemed so vast.


Ann Elizabeth Halan Weds L. Crawford Brickley Jr.
LEAD: Ann Elizabeth Halan and L. Crawford Brickley Jr., associates in the New York law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts, were married yesterday at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Edward J. Howley and the Rev.
Edward Danks, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony.


Tenderhearted Men
LEAD: To the Editor:


Stretching Space
LEAD: Space is like money. no matter how much you have, it never seems to be enough.
Rooms have a magical way of shrinking as we demand more of a dwelling than was originally intended.
Families grow, office clutter comes home to roost, possessions multiply while the dimensions of their surroundings do not.


Question Of the Week;   Who Should Win M.V.P., Cy Young Awards?
LEAD: Cecil Fielder and Ryne Sandberg.
The unwritten rule that the m.v.p. has to come from the pennant winner is unfair.
For Cy Young, Doug Drabek and Roger Clemens.
RICHARD IRVING
New York


Sports People;   Dickerson Signs
LEAD: In what might be the most important huddle of the season for the Indianapolis Colts, officials of the National Football League team and Eric Dickerson met most of yesterday outside Indianapolis.
When they broke up, player and team had patched up their differences and the bickering running back had signed a four-year contract extension.


Laurels for Video Recorders
LEAD: Pinpointing superior design is the aim of the annual Grand Prix Awards sponsored by Audio-Video International, a prominent trade journal.
An earlier column discussed the winning television sets.
The spotlight now turns to the video recorders singled out for their special merit in a nationwide poll of video dealers.


Last Major Wetlands on Barnegat Bay Gaining Protection
LEAD: THE last major expanse of privately held salt marshes and sandy wooded uplands along upper Barnegat Bay - the home to a host of endangered wildlife and plants - is close to obtaining Federal protection from most development.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: Radar Detectors Banned;   If Your Car Is Your Castle, Can It Be Besieged?
LEAD: Over the years since the national 55-mile-an-hour speed limit was imposed, it has been lifted to 65 in some states and has come to be commonly flouted in others, particularly with the proliferation of radar detectors.
Though few states have seen fit to outlaw the devices, which warn drivers when they are coming under police radar surveillance, one of the nation's largest auto insurers, the Geico


BEST SELLERS: October 14, 1990
LEAD:
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
2
2
8
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $21.95.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.


Ed Woolard Walks Du Pont's Tightrope
LEAD: A big part of the future of America's largest chemical company can be found on a conveyor belt in an old warehouse here.


Final Bow?
LEAD: For many people who hoped to catch one more performance by Leonard Bernstein before he put away his baton, this has been a year of disappointments.
In May, poor health caused him to cancel his appearance at the Spoleto U.S.A.
Festival in Charleston, S.C.
Then he withdrew from the Pacific Music Festival in Japan.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   In Yonkers, Art With a River View
LEAD: Although it is the fourth largest city in New York, Yonkers is forever living in the shadow of New York City, its huge neighbor immediately to the south.


Where and How to Insulate
LEAD: MOST homes have insulation in the attic and walls, it having been included during construction or added later.
Insulation between an unheated basement or crawl space and the main floor is important, too; in winter, unheated areas beneath rooms can act like a block of ice.


Gold and the Yen Continue to Slide
LEAD:
$
Last Week
Prior Week
Year Ago
Japanese Yen
129.10
132.201
142.05
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5245
1.5372
1.8720
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1471
1.1500
1.1738
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.9670
1.9455
1.5820
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$388.00
$394.00
$364.80
Republic National Bank


A KUWAITI PRINCE SEES WIDER RIGHTS
LEAD: The Crown Prince of Kuwait suggested today that the country's defunct Parliament would be revived and free elections held if Kuwait is liberated from Iraqi troops.


Novels You Can Sink Your Teeth Into
LEAD: Anne Rice, best-selling author of ''The Vampire Chronicles'' and other fictional excursions into the bizarre and fantastic, likes to give tours of her large, antebellum mansion in New Orleans. ''There's the fireplace where Rowan and Lasher sat on Christmas morning,'' she says matter-of-factly, a smile tugging at her lips.


A Dissent on Deficit Cure
LEAD: To the Editor:


Joint Venture
LEAD: The doormat outside of number 36 is the only clue. indeed, unsuspecting visitors would believe that these adjoining houses are exactly as they were meant to be - two separate homes.
But when the artist Frank Faulkner bought this 1840's building in upstate New York, he knew he needed lots of space in which to live and paint.


In U.S. Schools, A War of Words
LEAD: In a well-worn classroom at the San Fernando Elementary School, 30 miles north of Los Angeles, Aracelis Tester, a second-grade teacher, is reading ''Cuidado, un Dinosaurio!'' - ''Watch Out, a Dinosaur!'' - with her diminutive pupils.
This could just as well be Mexico City or San Salvador, Grenada or Seville: a roomful of Hispanic children and a Hispanic teacher speaking


Talking: Parking;   Making Space for Everyone
LEAD: The scramble for parking spaces appears to be reaching crisis proportions in many suburban condominiums and cooperatives.
Most seriously affected are larger developments where it is easier to hide space-stealing and those built before zoning codes were changes to require at least one space for each unit.


Foyt Takes Turn and Wants to Return
LEAD: There is a two-letter abbreviation for American motorsports: A.J.


Volume Buys
LEAD: Playing symphonic music on a stereo system in your living room can defy the natural order of things.
You have a hundred musicians fiddling, blowing and banging away in an area barely big enough for a small dinner party.
Acoustically, this arrangement just doesn't add up.
After all, the music was meant to be appreciated in a space large enough to hold an orchestra and perhaps a couple of thousand listeners.


Cambodians' Hosts Fight State Dept. on Defections
LEAD: A lawyer representing the American hosts of a troupe of Cambodian dancers says he will file a lawsuit if the Government insists on interviewing the dancers to see if they wish to seek political asylum here.


East Breathes Easier as Storms' Threat Pales
LEAD: The final blow of a one-two-three punch, which could have clobbered the East Coast with three hurricanes in a week if several things had gone slightly differently, failed to land yesterday as hurricane Lili lost strength and turned out to sea.


Mutual Funds;   What Investors Want to Know
LEAD: The bear market, the looming recession and the crisis in the Persian Gulf have made everyone jumpy.
Investors in mutual funds are showing their anxiety by monitoring their accounts more closely than usual: Telephone calls from investors surged in August and are still coming in at higher-than-normal levels at many funds, marketers at many large fund groups say.


Review/Theater;   Hypocrisies in the Name of Love
LEAD: Politics and business have long been known to make very strange bedfellows, but they are nothing compared with the bizarre alliances formed in the name of love.
And no playwright in the past century, or very likely any other, has been so adept at exposing the absurdities of our most cherished romantic notions as George Bernard Shaw.


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
Travelers Face Shortage of Blood Serum


Log Rides on the Long Island Expressway?


Horse Racing;   Buy the Firm Wins In Muddy Athenia
LEAD: Buy the Firm completed a dreary afternoon of heavy favorites, romping through the mud at Belmont Park yesterday to beat just three rivals and win the $87,750 Athenia Handicap.


Dawn C. F. Smith to Wed This Fall
LEAD: Dawn Carol Fabiola Smith and Elbert L. Robertson are planning a November wedding.
Miss Smith, 29 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Smith of Ocala, Fla.
Mr.
Robertson, 33, is the son of Beatrice Robertson of Summit, Miss., and the late Elbert Robertson.


THE MAN BEHIND IRAQ'S SUPERGUN
LEAD: If the details presented in Kevin Toolis's article ''The Man Behind Iraq's Supergun'' (Aug. 26) are correct, King Hussein of Jordan is akin to the boy who killed his parents and then threw himself on the mercy of the court because he was an orphan.


A Writer's Resort
LEAD: Though Tobias Smollett dismissed Scarborough in ''Humphrey Clinker'' as ''a paltry town'' that is romantically situated ''along a cliff that overhangs the sea,'' this North Sea fishing village settled by the Vikings has charmed, soothed, revivified and occasionally oppressed legions of visitors and residents, some of them celebrated.


Paris
LEAD: To the Editor: Finding a reasonably priced restaurant with excellent food in the heart of Paris is almost a contradiction in terms.
However, three trips to Paris in the last year demonstrate that a few steps from the main avenues are some first-rate eateries.


Hoping for a Role in the Nutcracker


Old Torment Revives in Italy: the Moro Killing
LEAD: Ghosts from Italy's most traumatic episode of political terrorism have suddenly emerged to torment the national soul once again.


Japan's Ronin
LEAD: To the Editor: Japan's legendary 47 Ronin are not buried on Koyasan as stated in James Sterngold's interesting article ''At the Center of Spiritual Japan'' (Travel, Aug. 26) but at Sengakuji Temple in Tokyo.
Relics of the Ronin are preserved in the temple museum.


Church Leaders Declare A 'Holy War' on Drugs
LEAD: Churches have been havens in New York's poorer neighborhoods from the drug war raging on its ever-more violent streets.
This weekend, 200 pastors and lay members of the United Methodist Church spent the weekend discussing how they can do even more.


Campus Life: Bucknell;   Feminist Graffiti Prompt Debate On Free Speech
LEAD: Concern for private property is clashing with concern for free speech at Bucknell University as a result of feminist graffiti that began appearing on campus sidewalks in the spring.


Style Makers;   John Frieda, Hairdresser
LEAD: A good hair style is more than a good cut, says John Frieda, who has three salons in London and recently opened one in New York.


Fashion;   For the Not-So-Formal Evening, Options Beyond T-Shirts and Jeans
LEAD: Men after dark often have a hard time finding the right look.
Even for stylish men, going out can be a hassle when the evening calls for the kind of in-between dressing - not formal but not strictly casual - that is the mode at art openings, previews and fashion events.


Chipping Away at the Disk Drive
LEAD: COMPUTER chip makers have long been hoping that silicon chips would one day supplant disk drives.
The Intel Corporation last week moved a step in that direction by introducing a card packed with memory chips that it hopes will be used in place of disk drives on laptop and notebook computers.
Unlike the semiconductor memory chips built into computers, the 16 chips embedded into Intel's memory card do not lose their data when the power is turned off.


Stop Mowing, Start Digging
LEAD: Any of us have had an extra-room dream.
Perhaps it has not been examined in the great psychoanalytic case histories; it is more likely to have been discussed by architects and decorators whose clients have experienced it.
In this particular fantasy, the dreamer opens a door to a vast and beautiful space that has gone undetected all the years he has suffered in his cramped abode.


BHUTTO FOES PRESS PUNJAB CAMPAIGN
LEAD: In an effort to give momentum to a slow-start campaign and prove that the political opposition to Benazir Bhutto is united, Prime Minister Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi and his colleagues hit the road today in a gigantic motorcade through Punjab, the province that will determine the outcome of elections later this month.


Pro Football;   Giants, Redskins Plan Few Surprises
LEAD: The Giants are one of only two unbeaten teams (the other is the San Francisco 49ers) in the National Football League.
They lead their division by one game over the Washington Redskins.


'Phone My Wife. They Finally Got Me.'
LEAD:
LOUD AND CLEAR.
By Lake Headley with William Hoffman. (Donald Hutter/Holt, $22.50.) Just before noon on June 2, 1976, Don Bolles, a 47-year-old investigative reporter for The Arizona Republic, stepped into his automobile in the parking lot of the Clarendon Hotel in downtown Phoenix, where he had been lured by a small-time criminal and sleazy informant named John Adamson.


Gender Differences in the Locker Room
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lou Piniella Both Managed and Won
LEAD: In his previous stint in another town, he always seemed to be waiting for the phone to ring.
Or the other shoe to drop.
Or the sky to fall.


Transcripts of Statements by the U.S. and British Delegates
LEAD: Following are transcripts of the statements made on Friday night by the United States Representative to the United Nations, Thomas R. Pickering, and the President of the Security Council, Sir David Hannay of Britain:
PICKERING STATEMENT


Why Radio Plays Baseball Better Than TV
LEAD: ''Gibson has his lead off first.
The pitch to Scioscia is lined deep to left center.
Bonds and Van Slyke are racing back, racing, racing, and it's Van Slyke who makes a stumbling, remarkable catch, falling to the warning track but holding the ball!
Gibson, around second, is in trouble.
Van Slyke is up and throws a strike to Jay Bell who whirls, and with crucial accuracy duplicates Van Slyke's perfect peg, to double up Gibson by a wide and humiliating four or five feet!


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I had new cedar shingles put on my roof last year.
I now seem to be getting different opinions on what to do with these shingles.
Some say to apply a water-base sealer, some say an oil-base sealer, and some say to leave the shingles as is.
What do you think?


Kathy Norton and John McGowan Are Married
LEAD: Kathy Ann Norton, a daughter of Mrs.
T.
Philip Norton of Bel Air, Md., and the late Mr.
Norton, was married yesterday to John Joseph McGowan, a son of Mrs.
John J. McGowan of Wayland, Mass., and the late Mr.
McGowan.
The Rev.
Charles L. Lafferty officiated at St.
Ignatius Roman Catholic Church in Bel


Homes and Offices for Sterling Forest?
LEAD: The long-delayed effort to develop Sterling Forest - 18,000 acres of woods, wetlands, streams and lakes that sprawl across southern Orange County 50 miles northwest of Manhattan - is gaining momentum as the owner moves to make the most of that region's economic boom.


WHEN LIFE IS TOXIC
LEAD: The several case studies of people with multiple chemical sensitivities, described in Robert Reinhold's article ''When Life Is Toxic'' (Sept. 16), show not so much the pathos of their condition as the eccentricities, the socially aberrant personalities that result.
Reinhold goes to considerable lengths to report their bizarre coping strategies (eating bear meat, wearing ''Canary Clothes'') and the equally bizarre


Mazeroski's Moment
LEAD: Of the millions of youths who dreamed about it, of the hundreds of thousands who played professional baseball, of the thousands who made it to the major leagues, only one player has ever hit a home run to win the seventh game of a World Series.


Putting the Heat on Global Warming
LEAD: CONNECTICUT has become the first state in the country to pass legislation aimed at reducing the possibility of a global warming.
Scientists have predicted that increased concentrations of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere from fossil-fuel emissions may alter the earth's climate.


Votes in Congress
LEAD:
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Deficit-cutting Budget: Vote on passage of a House passed bill on a proposed budget with broad outlines for deficit reduction, but with few specifics on tax increases or spending cuts.
Approved 66 to 33, Oct. 9.
2.


OUT OF SIGHT
LEAD: IN ANY NEW YORK APARTMENT, STORAGE IS THE KEY,'' explains Fred Imberman, one of the owners of the Kentshire Galleries, a Manhattan antiques shop. ''This was originally a formal dining room, but then we had two kids and began running out of space.'' With the help of the New York decorator Hariet Eckstein and Ray Coggins, an antiques dealer in Westbury, England, the room was reconfigured to include a library as well.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


Wave of Political Killings Has Claimed 16 Turks
LEAD: A wave of political killings has baffled the police and revived bitter memories of extremist street violence that shook Turkey before an army crackdown in 1980.


SWEPT AWAY
LEAD: THIS SPACE WAS ORIGINALLY A DINGY HALLWAY AND NONDESCRIPT room in the designer Tom Britt's Manhattan apartment. ''I wanted to make it a guest room, but didn't want to spend the money on construction or on reparing the damaged walls to ready them for a good paint job,'' Britt explains. ''Tenting was the most econcomical solution.


Looking Ahead
LEAD:
MONDAY: Business inventory figures for August.
Opening of contract negotiations between United Steelworkers and USX Corp.
I.B.M. announces third-quarter earnings.
Michael Milken's hearing continues.
Pretrial conference in Charles Keating case.
Early October auto sales.
Apple introduces new inexpensive line of computers.


Murder Most Tidy
LEAD:
AGATHA CHRISTIE
The Woman and Her Mysteries.
By Gillian Gill.
243 pp. New York: The Free Press. $22.50.


MENEM'S REFORMS PROVOKE BACKLASH
LEAD: For a President who likes to duck his bodyguards, drive his own car, frequent the nightspots and soccer stadiums and generally mix with the throngs, the reviews that Carlos Saul Menem gets from the people these days are disquieting.


Developers Shrink Stake in 5th Avenue Tower
LEAD: Two of New York's high-flying real-estate developers have been squeezed out of one of their most ambitious projects, a 53-story office tower at Fifth Avenue and 56th Street, real-estate executives say.


Douglas Edwards, First TV Anchorman, Dies at 73
LEAD: Douglas Edwards, who in 1948 became network television's first anchorman, died yesterday in Sarasota, Fla., where he lived.
He was 73 years old.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
DEADLY TRIPLETS: A Theatre Mystery and Journal.
By Adrienne Kennedy. (University of Minnesota, $14.95.) For her first novel, the talented playwright Adrienne Kennedy has had the intriguing idea of infusing her theatrical experiences in London with a Gothic sensibility and transforming them into a mystere a clef.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There's a trigger-quick readiness to think something terrible is about to happen again.
In everybody, there's an anxiety that wasn't there before.''
- Jane Burka
of Berkeley, Calif.,
a year after the earthquake.
[1:4.]


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about the spice business gave incorrect consumption totals.
Figures should have been in millions of pounds, not in billions.


Barbara Brenner To Wed in March
LEAD: Dr. and Mrs.
Morton R. Brenner of White Plains have announced the engagement of their daughter Barbara Jill Brenner to Scott Laurence Commer, a son of Richard Commer of Westport, Conn., and Linda Commer of Stockbridge, Mass.
A March wedding is planned.


An Immigrant's Pain in Concrete
LEAD: ''I DIDN'T plan to be a writer,'' said Pietro Di Donato, the author of 50 short stories and 6 books, including the 1939 best seller ''Christ in Concrete.''


It's a Bear All Right, but How Big a Bear?
LEAD: Since shortly before Saddam Hussein invaded Iraq, the Dow Jones Industrial Average has fallen about 600 points - from a high of nearly 3000, to the 2400 range.
By any standard, such a bruising tumble can only result from a brush with the bear.
But how long will the bear market stalk Wall Street?
How far will the Dow fall?


A 50th Birthday For Edsel Ford's Continental
LEAD: ''The Continental, introduced in 1939, was one of the most graceful automotive designs ever executed, a fitting aesthetic sign-off for the age of the American classic car.''


Tenderhearted Men
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week;   Who Should Win M.V.P., Cy Young Awards?
LEAD: Rickey walks away with the A.L. prize (then steals second, third and home).


13 Are Killed in El Salvador In Blast of Water and Rocks
LEAD: A geyser-like blast of boiling water and hot rocks leveled homes and killed at least 13 people today in a western Salvadoran village.


Pro Hockey;   Devils Undefeated Playing at Home
LEAD: Because one team settled for the perfunctory in all but the third period, the other's persuasiveness throughout the evening produced the most logical of outcomes.
It was a largely sour performance by the Calgary Flames but a restorative one for the Devils, who used a 5-3 victory tonight at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena to keep themselves undefeated on the home front (3-0-1).


Lisa Biagiarelli and Dave Pelland Are Married
LEAD: Lisa Anne Biagiarelli was married yesterday at St.
Emery's Roman Catholic Church in Fairfield, Conn., to Dave Pelland.
Msgr.
Bernard S. Scanlon and the Rev.
Robert Nemeth officiated.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is the daughter of Anne Biagiarelli of Easton, Conn., and the late Peter A. Biagiarelli.


Q and A
LEAD:
Horseback Riding in Japan


Pro Hockey;   Injuries Mar Trottier's Return
LEAD: For Islander fans, it was nice while it lasted, and the good part lasted for about half an hour.


English Cleric Braces for Women's Ordination
LEAD: Dr.
Graham Leonard, the Bishop of London, resents being called a ''dinosaur,'' part of the price he has paid in the Church of England for leading the party against ordination of women as priests.


Sports People;   Back With Yanks?
LEAD: He was popular with the Yankee players, his fellow Yankee coaches and the Yankee fans.
But in August 1989 Frank Howard was dismissed by George Steinbrenner along with two other coaches and the team's manager of the moment, Dallas Green, in the move that brought Bucky Dent to the team's revolving helm.


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: Photokina, the every-other-year trade show in Cologne, Germany, took place at the beginning of this month, which helps explain why practically every camera and film maker has introduced at least one new product this fall.
As usual, the major news was revealed prior to the event.
What follows is a summary of the latest and newest culled from a multitude of press briefings and releases.


DELEGATES AT U.N. CALL FOR A ROLE IN MIDEAST PEACE
LEAD: In voting unanimously to condemn Israel for the violence on Monday in Jerusalem, the United Nations Security Council has averted a split in the coalition challenging Iraq's occupation of Kuwait.
But diplomats said today that the action might lead to another test of that coalition's solidarity later this month.


You Lived Through the 80's and Forgot to Get Rich?
LEAD:
THE IMPERIAL MIDDLE
Why Americans Can't Think Straight About Class.
By Benjamin DeMott.
264 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company.
$18.95.


By the Board
LEAD: For all of the excitement attending a world championship chess match, the fact is that in recent years most of the games have ended, just like tick-tack-toe, in draws.
Little wonder, then, that the grandmaster analysts who assembled in New York City last week for the start of the match between the champion, Gary Kasparov, and Anatoly Karpov (at left) were as animated as Superbowl fans by the end of the second game.


Disabled People Say Home Care Is Needed to Use New Rights
LEAD: Brimming with joy and hope, Tony Young watched President Bush sign a far-reaching law in July granting civil rights protections to people with physical and mental disabilities.


Heart Like a Car
LEAD:
THE PICTURE MAKERS
By Emily Ellison.
252 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company. $18.95.


A Savings and Loan Bailout, and Bush's Son Jeb
LEAD: After Jeb Bush, a son of the President, and a partner bought a Miami office building using money an associate had borrowed from a local savings and loan, the Federal Government wound up repaying most of the loan.


After 2 Years Backstage, Quayle Woos the Public
LEAD: Dan Quayle has emerged from weeks of near invisibility during the Persian Gulf crisis to try to assert himself on the Federal budget and to bolster his political fortunes by collecting chits on the Republican fund-raising circuit.


A Portrait of the Critic as a Young Boy
LEAD:
WARRENPOINT
By Denis Donoghue.
Illustrated. 194 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Works in Progress;   Picassos of Pachydermia
LEAD: Certain artists can be fairly described as heavy.
Suti, for example.
The 6,500-pound African elephant wielding her trunk in the photograph above is one of three elephants in Chicago's Lincoln Park Zoo, all of whom have exhibited an inclination toward, if not exactly a talent for, painting. (Suti's work is shown below left; below right, a distinctly different sample from Bozie, an Asian elephant.) ''In the wild, animals will spend most of their time foraging for food,'' says Dr.


Business Diary/October 7-12
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
After a Week of Negotiations, the Budget Gap Narrows
After topsy-turvy budget negotiations all week, Congress and the White House narrowed their differences.
Higher gasoline taxes seem inevitable; lower capital gains tax and steeper tax rates for the rich, improbable.
Another truth emerged: The cost of financing the deficit will balloon before the Government can meet its debt-reduction goal of $500 billion.


Remembering a Tortured Child Who Lived in the Streets of Guatemala City
LEAD: The marble tombstone erected here last week for Nahaman Carmona Lopez says more about his death than his short life: ''I only wanted to be a child and they wouldn't let me.''


A Town Full of Miracles
LEAD:
THAT TIME IN MALOMBA
By James Hamilton-Paterson.
180 pp. New York:
Soho Press. $18.95.


Turn the Pages, and a Life Unfolds
LEAD: THE morning of my 59th birthday dawned hot and humid, the summer air heavy and still, and the only sound the monotonous droning of my neighbor's pool pump.
I woke early, (as I often do these days), made myself some coffee and took down the old brown leatherette-covered photograph album from the high closet shelf in the guest room.


Mexico
LEAD: To the Editor: Travelers are advised that the electrical power in Mexico is the same as in the United States and that they can bring their traveling appliances.
There is, however, a problem, which we encountered on a recent trip to Manzanillo and Ixtapa.


Virginia Governor Baffles Democrats With Crusade for 'New Mainstream'
LEAD: With the fervor of an evangelist and with his eyes seemingly on a larger prize, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder has embarked on a nationwide crusade for the political moderation that helped him become the first black ever elected chief executive of an American state.


Review/Music;   Schumann And Antics Of a Sad Poet
LEAD: One hears much lamentation these days to the effect that the art of lieder is either moribund or dead.
Although that may seem an alarmist view, it could certainly be argued that fewer singers are devoted to the art than in the past; that today's large concert halls are not the ideal places for performances so intimate, and that the form appeals, increasingly, to an audience with very specialized tastes.


Catherine A. Gehrig, Scientist, Is Wed
LEAD: Catherine Anne Gehrig, a research scientist at the Science University of Tokyo, and Arturo Claudio Georges Chavez-Pirson 4th, a scientist at Nippon Telephone &amp; Telegraph in Tokyo, were married yesterday in Centerport, L.I.
The Rev.
Robert L. Hayden officiated at Our Lady Queen of Martyrs Roman Catholic


Lifestyle;   Grand Old Club Awaits A Grand New Unveiling
LEAD: For more than a year, the grand palazzo-style building at 1 East 60th Street in Manhattan has been hidden by scaffolding, like a pretty girl with braces on her teeth, as restoration crews erased decades of grime and paint from its marble facade.


Leafy Refuges Near Jakarta
LEAD: Low-Lying Jakarta is not noted for its salubrious climate, especially in the hot season from May to September, and things were considerably worse during the early days of Dutch occupation.
Starting around 1730, the capital (then known as Batavia) was devastated by a series of malarial epidemics, and for the better part of a century - until the population began moving out of its original walled center - both rulers and ruled filled the local cemeteries in appalling numbers.


The Pedestrian Sneaker Makes a Comeback
LEAD: They are advertisements with a wink.
A playful young mother lies on her back and balances her giggling tot on her ankles and feet, which are clad in plain white canvas sneakers.
The caption: ''Keds introduces weightlifting shoes.''


Mixed Response Over Campaign To End Smoking
LEAD: The sweeping anti-smoking campaign started recently by Mayor David N. Dinkins is being hailed by health groups, derided by tobacco lobbyists and greeted with a wait-and-see chorus from other groups.


Disabled People Say Home Care Is Needed to Use New Rights
LEAD: Brimming with joy and hope, Tony Young watched President Bush sign a far-reaching law in July granting civil rights protections to people with physical and mental disabilities.


The Perils of Giving Driving Tests
LEAD: ANOTHER day, another group of nervous novice drivers for Martin Stoller.
In his state-issued blue and gray uniform, personally accessorized by the new fashion pouch he wore on his waist, Mr.
Stoller stood on a side street in Garden City Park.
Stretched before him was a line of 20 cars with motors revving and drivers waiting.


Tense Talks at Chrysler
LEAD: Claiming the company has no money to meet union wage demands is a time-honored tactic of collective bargaining.
But this time there seems to be little doubt that Chrysler Corporation management is telling autoworkers the truth about its precarious position.


Doing In Filthy Jack
LEAD:
A CITY OF STRANGERS
By Robert Barnard.
287 pp. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons. $18.95.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A picture caption last Sunday with an article about anti-sense products misidentified a man in the Gilead Sciences Inc. laboratory in Foster City, Calif.
He is Brian Froehler, a senior scientist with Gilead, not Michael Riordan, president of the company.


Pro Football;   Jets Favored, Coslet Squirms
LEAD: While the other teams in their division all have byes this weekend, the Jets have to report to work today against the San Diego Chargers at Giants Stadium.
But that's not why Coach Bruce Coslet feels a bit out of place.


Economy and Mideast Standoff Bring a Drop in Bush's Standing
LEAD: Support for President Bush's commitment of American troops in the Persian Gulf has begun to erode in recent days as Americans grow frustrated with the standoff in the desert and increasingly worried about the sagging economy at home, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll has found.


To Be Young Again at 78: A Carousel Is
LEAD: Four-year-old Hannah Goodwin happily bobbed up and down on her pale gray horse, but 3-year-old Jonathan Hausch preferred the bright orange lion with the bushy mane to his colorful wooden steed.


Coverage for Trip Cancellation or Medical Crises
LEAD: World uncertainties are causing travelers to seek ways to avoid or reduce their losses if a trip is canceled, or even if the travelers themselves decide that a plan no longer sounds safe or like fun.
This coverage is widely available in addition to the more important parts of travel insurance, which older people in particular should have: for medical protection, theft and other contingencies.


History Lessons
LEAD: In design, luxury takes many forms.
At times, sheer grandeur has been the ideal, and we have fallen under the spell of rare woods, extravagant marbles and glimmering gold leaf.
In other, perhaps more spiritual, times, harmony and proportion have been valued more highly than costly materials.
But today, ask a resident of New York, London, Tokyo or any high-density city to define luxury, and the answer will be the same.


Managing;   The Multimedia Benefits Kit
LEAD: Dianne H. McGowan, an assistant vice president at Citicorp, used a worksheet to test several medical plans. ''Turned out that a cheaper plan is actually better at my salary,'' she said.


Movies That Fit Like a Glass Slipper
LEAD: Forty years and a sexual revolution separate Cinderella's fairy godmother singing ''Bibbidi, bobbidi, boo'' from Richard Gere offering Julia Roberts $3,000 to spend a week with him.
But Disney's classic animated CINDERELLA (1950, $29.95) is simply an older sister of PRETTY WOMAN (1990, Touchstone, $19.99), the film about a sweet-natured streetwalker that has made more than $170 million at the box office and has just become available on video.


Data Bank/October 14, 1990
LEAD:
$
Consumer Borrowing
Aug.
July
June
Monthly percent change
3.4
7.8
0.2
Producer Price Index
Sept.
Aug.
July
Monthly percent change
1.6
1.3
-0.1
Sales at Retail Outlets
Monthly percent change
1.1
-0.4
0.5
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
Oct.


Review/Music;   Remembering Britain's Finest Hour
LEAD: Fifty years ago, Britain's Royal Air Force and the German Luftwaffe fought for air supremacy over the British Isles.
The British prevailed despite being outnumbered three to one.
To commemorate the Battle of Britain the BBC Concert Orchestra, the Central Band of the Royal Air Force, the BBC Singers and a handful of soloists put together an extravagant program of period pieces, marches, patriotic choral settings, music from war movies and new works.


The Wild Country of Anza Borrego
LEAD: When residents of the Palm Springs resort belt become jaded by the manicured golf courses, the palatial hotels and the opulent shopping streets, they sometimes talk of moving to a more pristine corner of California's arid zone.
Often as not, the Shangri-La they have in mind is just over the Santa Rosa Mountains, among the 600,000 wilderness acres of Anza-Borrego Desert State


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: Owney was a mostly terrier mutt who was found as a puppy amid the post bags in Albany, N.Y., in 1888.
He was adopted by the postal workers, and in nine years he circled the United States and indeed the world as an unofficial postal mascot.


Pro Hockey;   Devils Undefeated Playing at Home
LEAD: Because one team settled for the perfunctory in all but the third period, the other's persuasiveness throughout the evening produced the most logical of outcomes.
It was a largely sour performance by the Calgary Flames but a restorative one for the Devils, who used a 5-3 victory tonight at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena to keep themselves undefeated on the home front (3-0-1).


Postings: Full-Nesters;   Playground Time
LEAD: The glacial-rock formations that gave Martin Ginsburg the idea of calling his condominium development in Greenburgh, N.Y., the Boulders do not, at first sight, suggest an easy playing field for children.
But then, Mr.
Ginsburg explains, the idea was for the Boulders to attract empty-nesters who would move into his quarter-million-dollar-and-up condominiums only after their kids had grown up and left home.


WHEN LIFE IS TOXIC
LEAD: As a ''conventional'' physician who rejects the diagnosis of multiple chemical sensitivities as unscientific and unproved, I would refer your readers to a paper published Aug. 16 in The New England Journal of Medicine.
The paper describes a study in which clinical ecologists administered either a suspected environmental toxin or a salt solution to patients.


2 Top Editors Leave Omni to Protest Ad on Cover
LEAD: Two top editors of Omni magazine have resigned because they said the magazine had published an advertisement on the cover of its November issue.


Meeting the Parents in 'Greetings'
LEAD: ARE things not working for you?
Are you misunderstood?
Do you need a better understanding of others?
Are you carrying around a little or a load of guilt, hostility, prejudice?
Are you being controlled by those old demons?


Baseball: On To The Series;   It's Rest, Regroup For Reds
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds took the day off today to savor their first National League pennant in 14 years, but they planned to regroup Sunday to prepare for the biggest hurdle of all: the Oakland Athletics, whom the Reds will play here Tuesday in Game 1 of the 87th World Series.


Some Plants Are Doubly Rewarding
LEAD: EERYONE likes to have a double dividend.
And some plants are worth the gardener's time and investment for their flowers in spring as well as their showy foliage or berries in fall.


College Football: South;   Tennessee Trounces Florida
LEAD: Dale Carter's 91-yard return of the second-half kickoff ignited a 28-point third quarter - which included a rare touchdown pass by the tight end - and Tennessee beat Florida, 45-3, in a Southeastern Conference showdown of top 10 teams tonight.


INSIDE
LEAD:
A Savings Industry Bailout, And the President's Son Jeb
After Jeb Bush and a partner bought a Miami office building using money an associate had borrowed from a local savings and loan, the institution failed and the Government repaid most of the loan.
Page 28.
Le Duc Tho Dies at 79


No Headline
LEAD: Last month the Japanese Justice Minister, Seiroku Kajiyama, said that prostitutes in a neighborhood ''ruin the atmosphere,'' just as, in his view, blacks ruin white neighborhoods in the United States.
American officials reacted with predictable, but largely misplaced, rebukes.


Source Reduction And Choice
LEAD: While I strongly agree with Judy Keenan that the Legislature in New Jersey has been uninformed and misguided in its handling of recycling in this state (''Cutting Down on Trash,'' Opinion page, Sept. 2), I cannot agree with her conclusion that source reduction is the Legislature's bailiwick.


You Lived Through the 80's and Forgot to Get Rich?
LEAD:
THE IMPERIAL MIDDLE
Why Americans Can't Think Straight About Class.
By Benjamin DeMott.
264 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company.
$18.95.


Style Makers;   Marilynn Lampert-Arm, Concert Gown Designer
LEAD: This fall Eugenia Zuckerman, the flutist, will appear on stage in a froth of violet chiffon floating over a princess-line dress of plum crepe de chine.
A cocoon-like jacket of chiffon tops a skirt flaring out to a full circle.


On Language;   Larger Than Life
LEAD: Charlton Heston was on the phone. ''I'm having an argument with Michael Korda about the copy on the dust jacket of my book, 'Beijing Diary,' '' he began, in the most sonorous voice you ever heard.
Mr.
Korda, author of ''Success,'' ''Power'' and other books (he hasn't used ''Happiness'' yet - presumably, a non-selling title), is editor in chief of Simon &amp;


Sports People;   Back With Yanks?
LEAD: He was popular with the Yankee players, his fellow Yankee coaches and the Yankee fans.
But in August 1989 Frank Howard was dismissed by George Steinbrenner along with two other coaches and the team's manager of the moment, Dallas Green, in the move that brought Bucky Dent to the team's revolving helm.


2 Violent Incidents Raise Racial Tension in Durban
LEAD: A spate of seemingly inexplicable violence, in which 8 whites were stabbed in one incident and 33 blacks subsequently shot in another, has heightened racial suspicions this week in this port city on the Indian Ocean.


Yachting;   Powerboat Racers Ponder the Risks
LEAD: Competitors on 35 offshore powerboat teams are feeling a heightened sense of danger today as they prepare for the national championship in Marathon, Fla.
Their uneasiness stems from the death two weeks ago of Stephano Casiraghi, husband of Princess Caroline of Monaco, who was killed while racing a 42-foot powerboat on the Mediterranean


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I had new cedar shingles put on my roof last year.
I now seem to be getting different opinions on what to do with these shingles.
Some say to apply a water-base sealer, some say an oil-base sealer, and some say to leave the shingles as is.
What do you think?


Miss Bruckmann Wed in New York
LEAD: Elizabeth Follmer Bruckmann and Terrence Michael McShane were married yesterday at the Brick Presbyterian Church in New York.
The Rev.
Herbert B. Anderson and the Rev.
James M. English, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated.


Music Professor, Trained for Classics, Loves to Croon Those Pop Standards
LEAD: WITH a Latin swing to his hips, Richard Lalli sings: ''I hate to be pedantic, but it drives me nearly frantic, when I see that unromantic sycophantic lot of sluts forever wriggling their guts.
It drives me absolutely nuts.'' His performance of Noel Coward's song ''Nina'' would probably give his music professors conniptions.


College Football: West/Southwest;   Texas Stuns Oklahoma Again
LEAD: Peter Gardere hit Keith Cash with a 16-yard touchdown pass on fourth-and-7 with two minutes to play, rallying Texas (3-1) to a 14-13 upset of fourth-ranked Oklahoma (5-1) today.


Heroes Against AIDS, Sung and Unsung
LEAD: Robert Gallo, a leading biologist at the National Institutes of Health, won international fame in 1984 when he co-discovered the AIDS virus and developed the test for detecting its presence.
Last week, the agency opened a formal inquiry into that discovery after a panel found evidence of ''possible misconduct.


As a Climax Looms, One Has to Wonder: Was There a Plot?
LEAD: The budget melodrama that has riveted Washington for the past five months may finally be reaching a climax.
Here is a plot summary and brief guide to what may happen next:


Autumn Recitals Begin At Caramoor Estate
LEAD: CARAMOOR is beginning its third season of fall recitals at the landmark estate in Katonah on Saturday at 8:30 P.M., when the superb American baritone William Parker offers songs of Schubert, Liszt and Poulenc, accompanied by the pianist Levering Rothfuss.


Wall Street;   The Granada Empire's Tangled Web
LEAD: In a market that has been pulverizing newly issued shares, Granada Biosciences and the Granada Foods Corporation, both of Houston, have beaten the odds.
Both went public at $7 a share in January.
As of Friday, Granada Foods was holding its own, while Granada Biosciences had actually advanced - 27 percent to 8 7/8 a share.


New Symphony Forms in Tarrytown
LEAD: SEVENTY-FIVE years of music making have produced the county's newest orchestra, the Fine Arts Symphony.
It expects to make its debut next month.


Ms. Payson Weds In Great Neck
LEAD: Michele R. Payson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin D. Payson of Kings Point, L.I., was married last evening to Mark Rosenfield, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mashe Rosenfield of Liverpool, England.
Rabbis Mordecai Waxman and Gerald Zelizer officiated at Temple Israel in Great Neck, L.I.


Taking a Fall
LEAD: In the world of big business, they didn't come any bigger than Hisashi Shinto when he was chairman of Nippon Telephone and Telegraph, the world's largest company.
Then came the Recruit scandal, which not only brought down a government but also laid low Mr.
Shinto.
After a 20-month trial on bribery charges, he was convicted and sentenced last week to two years in jail and fined $170,000.


W. A. Compton, 79, A Doctor Who Rose To Head Miles Labs
LEAD: Walter Ames Compton, a medical doctor who became a prominent pharmaceutical researcher and head of Miles Laboratories, one of the nation's leading manufacturers of health care products, died at the age of 79 on Thursday at his home in Elkhart, Ind.


Letting All Schools Share in The Dream
LEAD: As a public librarian of a library serving a distressed area, I was interested in the article ''Schools Preparing for Changes in Financing. ''


Agreement on Judicial Candidates
LEAD: ALTHOUGH six judges are to be elected on November's ballot, four of the contests have already been settled.
The Democrats and Republicans have cross-endorsed two candidates for State Supreme Court and one for re-election to Family Court, and have agreed on one candidate for Surrogate Court.


Neil Jordan Gets Back to Making Home Movies
LEAD: Lorraine Pilkington steps up to the shrine in a church here and lights a candle.
She has been lighting candles for some minutes now, the way you do when you're in a movie and the director keeps demanding retakes.
After each shot, she looks toward Neil Jordan with an expression of hope and bemusement, wondering if this time, at last, the director will say ''O.K., that's a wrap'' or whatever it is these movie people say.


Marianne Tracy Has a Wedding
LEAD: Marianne Kathleen Tracy and Richard Mark Vandervoorn were married yesterday at St.
Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church in New York by the Rev.
S.
B.
Matarazzo.


Regina L. DeFeo Weds F. J. Wahl
LEAD: Regina Louise DeFeo, the manager of marketing analysis at Tiffany &amp; Company, and Frederick John Wahl, a vice president at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, were married yesterday at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard performed the ceremony.


In Budget Chaos, Democrats See Chance of 'Normal' Off-Year Victory
LEAD: This campaign has been strangely episodic, as if some bored voter were zapping the remote control each time a plot line or theme emerged.
There was the early positioning around abortion in the spring, the exchanges of accusations over the savings and loan scandal in early summer, the rallying 'round the flag as the Persian Gulf crisis erupted in


Verse Prize
LEAD: After years in which the awarding of the Nobel Prize in Literature has been followed by grumbling over the recipient's obscurity, the world of letters was all smiles last week when the name Octavio Paz popped out of the envelope.
Mr.
Paz, whose half-century of poetic exploration of the Mexican soul is marked by a sensuous surreality, has for years been regarded as one of the greats for whom the Nobel was more or less inevitable.


Church Leaders Declare A 'Holy War' on Drugs
LEAD: Churches have been havens in New York's poorer neighborhoods from the drug war raging on its ever-more violent streets.
This weekend, 200 pastors and lay members of the United Methodist Church spent the weekend discussing how they can do even more.


For a Bold Approach to Parking
LEAD: An article in the Sept. 23 issue [''At Larchmont Station, Angry Out-of-Towners'']  once again pointed out the problem of parking at Metro-North stations, particularly in Larchmont.


NATIONAL NOTEBOOK: Fort Worth;   Sundance Units All Preleased
LEAD: The brothers began developing down town Fort Worth 10 years ago with the renovation of the six-block historic area called Sundance Square.
The two-to-four-story turn-of-the-century brick buildings were renovated for shops and restaurants on the ground floor and offices above.
They also built two 30-story office towers and the Worthington Hotel in the six-block area.


In Praise of Scouts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Commercial Property: Office Report Card;   New York's Business Conditions Get a 'Poor' Rating
LEAD: In the eyes of executives around the country, New York City has grown markedly worse this year as a place to locate offices, according to a new survey.


A Very Good Painter Confronts a Great One
LEAD: One of the most exciting juxapositions of paintings to be seen in a New York City museum at the moment unfolds in the third gallery of the Burgoyne Diller retrospective at the Whitney Museum of American Art.
The exhibition, organized by Barbara Haskell, lays out in detail (and for the first time in a New York museum) the 30-year career of America's foremost follower of Neo-Plasticism, as the purified abstraction of Mondrian and the de Stijl artists was called.


General Managers Emerging as Baseball's Latest Fall Guys
LEAD: Joe Burke, a career baseball executive who is president of the Kansas City Royals, captured the development succinctly.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED: Multiple Murder and the Elusive Search for Justice in an American Town.
By Alan Gelb. (Dutton, $19.95.) The frustrating thing about nonfiction is that sometimes reasonable questions - like, why would a successful high school senior murder his family? - simply do not have reasonable answers.


Speaking of Violence and Law
LEAD: Lawyers for the plaintiffs in a suit that opened in Oregon last week are hoping to drive home their argument that one person's right to free speech should never supercede another person's right to life.
But the wrongful-death civil suit against the father and son who lead the White Aryan Resistance may turn out a bit more complex than that.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Stack's, one of New York's premier coin dealers will celebrate its 55th anniversary with an auction of the Allen F. Lovejoy collection of dimes.
Mr.
Lovejoy began his collection in the 1930's and preceeded to garner dimes of each date and mint from 1796 to 1940.


Edward L. Jackson Wed To Denise Lynn Holness
LEAD: Denise Lynn Holness, the daughter of Mrs.
Lenward L. Holness of Crestwood, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Holness was married yesterday at the First Presbyterian Church in New York to Edward Lawrence Jackson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Lloyd Jackson of Orlando, Fla.
The Rev.
John B. Macnab officiated.
Mrs.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
LEAD:
Additional titles of interest:


Roni Tynes to Wed Marshall Field 6th
LEAD: The engagement of Roni Tynes to Marshall Field 6th, the son of Mr.
Field 5th of Lake Forest, Ill., and Mrs.
Samuel M. V. Tatnall of Bedford, N.Y., has been announced by the prospective bride's mother, Terry Jo Tynes of Utopia, Tex.
A spring wedding is planned.


Life Savings During Wartime
LEAD: ''The crisis,'' screamed the cover of Time magazine a few weeks ago: ''What to Do With Your Money.'' Imagine that: what to do with my money.
Saddam Hussein had invaded Kuwait; America was rushing troops to Saudi Arabia.
And someone was going to tell me where to put my money.


The Cop and the Cartel
LEAD:
A FAINT COLD FEAR
By Robert Daley.
450 pp. Boston:
Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95.


Livery-Cab Driver Hit by a Blast From a Shotgun in a Gang Attack
LEAD: A livery-cab driver was seriously wounded by a shotgun blast early yesterday when he tried to help another driver who was being assaulted by a gun-wielding gang on a Bronx street, the police said.


Policing the Force
LEAD:
COP HUNTER
By Vincent Murano with William Hoffer.
320 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster.
$19.95.


Four Artists Find Animals Can Be Herded Onto Walls
LEAD: A FAVORITE fall pastime among those visiting Litchfield County is watching cows in their pastures.
But these days, not all of the cows are outdoors.
Herds of them, along with horses, sheep, dogs and crows, can be found adorning the walls of an art gallery in New Milford.


Joint Venture
LEAD: The doormat outside of number 36 is the only clue. indeed, unsuspecting visitors would believe that these adjoining houses are exactly as they were meant to be - two separate homes.
But when the artist Frank Faulkner bought this 1840's building in upstate New York, he knew he needed lots of space in which to live and paint.


Elsa Delgado Is Married
LEAD: Dr.
Elsa M. Delgado, a research fellow in ophthalmology at the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary, and Dr.
Keith B. Raskin, a hand and microsurgeon, were married last evening at the Rainbow Room Pavilion in New York by Rabbi Joel Goor.
The bride, 29 years old, is the daughter of Dr.
Lucie Delgado and Dr.


Meanwhile, the Bad News From Albany Is Released Quietly
LEAD: So loud was the clamor of bad news from New York City last week that the pessimistic din in Albany was barely audible.


Perspectives: Modulars;   The Navy Yard Hosts a Housing Factory
LEAD: The huge space known as Building 294A at the Brooklyn Navy Yard industrial center has seen assorted ship builders and repairers come and go.
Now it is lending the services of its overhead cranes to residential construction.


Lori Pollan and Allan Bahn Are Married in Connecticut
LEAD: Lori Pollan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Pollan of New York and Sharon, Conn., was married last evening to Allan Bahn, the son of Sarah Bahn of Brookline, Mass., and the late Joseph Bahn.
Rabbi Elliot Stevens officiated at the bride's parents' home in Sharon.


Unhealthy Patriotism
LEAD: Ignoring a wise Defense Department policy against giving cigarettes to soldiers, the RJR Nabisco and Philip Morris tobacco companies recently donated about 10,000 cartons for distribution to U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia.
Air Force base officials say they were unaware of the ban when they loaded the cigarettes on military aircraft.


Social Events
LEAD:
Look Who's Cooking


If Only Ducks Were Sold in Parts
LEAD: NO one thinks twice about buying chicken in parts, but few places will sell you duck legs or breasts separately.
This is too bad, for when it comes to cooking duck, most people do it one way: in the oven.
The problem with roasting is that when the legs are done, the breast is often dry.
If the breast is pink, the legs are red.


Patricia Kopec Is Married
LEAD: Patricia Talt Kopec and Herbert J. Kett were married in New York yesterday at St.
Patrick's Cathedral by the Rev.
Louis I. Newman.
Mrs.
Kett is the president of the Buchanan Pharmacy in Peekskill, N.Y., and an adjunct professor of jurisprudence at the Albany College of Pharmacy.
She and the bridegroom are former chairmen of the New York State Board of Pharmacy.


On Slides and Art: Further View
LEAD: I am moved to respond to the article ''The Role Slides Play in Judging Art'' [Sept. 30] , since my work was mentioned and I have also given thought to this very matter.


Q and A
LEAD:
Succession Rights
Question: I have been living in a rent-stabilized apartment since 1980.
In 1988, my building was converted to a co-op.
Recently, my apartment was bought by new owners who were not aware that for the past two years my brother has also been a tenant in the apartment.
His name was not on the renewal lease I signed in August.


Ellen G. Glazer and Paul Feinsot Wed
LEAD: Ellen Gaye Glazer, the daughter of Barbara Glazer of Hartsdale, N.Y., and Dr.
Louis Glazer of Memphis, was married last evening in New York to Paul Feinsot, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Aaron Feinsot of New York.
Rabbi David M. Posner officiated at Delmonico's restaurant.
Mrs.
Feinsot graduated from New York University and is a law student at Hofstra University, where she is an editor of The Property Law Journal.


Postings: Warren Township Project;   A Colonial-Style Office Condo
LEAD: Despite a weak market, developers in Warren Township, N.J., are pressing ahead with a new office condominium, and finding strong interest among buyers.


If Only Ducks Were Sold in Parts
LEAD: NO one thinks twice about buying chicken in parts, but few places will sell you duck legs or breasts separately.
This is too bad, for when it comes to cooking duck, most people do it one way: in the oven.
The problem with roasting is that when the legs are done, the breast is often dry.
If the breast is pink, the legs are red.


Paul Simon's Journey To Brazil and Beyond
LEAD: In the opening moments of Paul Simon's extraordinary new album, ''The Rhythm of the Saints,'' the only sounds to be heard are the booming rhythms of the Brazilian drum corps Olodum.
The beat quickly swells into a high-stepping cadence, joined by an instrumental fragment borrowed from the Silhouettes' 1957 doo-wop hit, ''Get a Job.


A Portrait of the Critic as a Young Boy
LEAD:
WARRENPOINT
By Denis Donoghue.
Illustrated. 194 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.


Chipping Away at the Disk Drive
LEAD: COMPUTER chip makers have long been hoping that silicon chips would one day supplant disk drives.
The Intel Corporation last week moved a step in that direction by introducing a card packed with memory chips that it hopes will be used in place of disk drives on laptop and notebook computers.
Unlike the semiconductor memory chips built into computers, the 16 chips embedded into Intel's memory card do not lose their data when the power is turned off.


Computers Are Aiding Emergency Responses
LEAD: WITH the implementation of a statewide 911 emergency system this year, an increasing number of police and fire departments and other agencies are installing computer systems to help them respond more effectively.
The systems store and display information about streets and even individual buildings in a community.If a fire is reported at a factory, for instance, the computer can display a floor plan plus a list of hazardous materials and recommended protective measures.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
TEAM ART


In Budget Chaos, Democrats See Chance of 'Normal' Off-Year Victory
LEAD: This campaign has been strangely episodic, as if some bored voter were zapping the remote control each time a plot line or theme emerged.
There was the early positioning around abortion in the spring, the exchanges of accusations over the savings and loan scandal in early summer, the rallying 'round the flag as the Persian Gulf crisis erupted in


Bankers Hoping for End To Steep Decline in Profits
LEAD: AS Connecticut banks release their third-quarter financial results this month, industry experts say the long slide in profits should be halted although perhaps not reversed.


Lou Piniella Both Managed and Won
LEAD: In his previous stint in another town, he always seemed to be waiting for the phone to ring.
Or the other shoe to drop.
Or the sky to fall.


Some Plants Are Doubly Rewarding
LEAD: EERYONE likes to have a double dividend.
And some plants are worth the gardener's time and investment for their flowers in spring as well as their showy foliage or berries in fall.


Marianne Tracy Has a Wedding
LEAD: Marianne Kathleen Tracy and Richard Mark Vandervoorn were married yesterday at St.
Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church in New York by the Rev.
S.
B.
Matarazzo.


After the Volcano Exploded
LEAD: A STAR among volcanoes, Krakatoa, in Indonesia, erupted in 1883.
The explosions were heard thousands of miles away; a tidal wave 120 feet high devastated the shores of neighboring islands, Java and Sumatra, killing 36,000 people.


THE BUDGET BATTLE: Washington Talk;   House Republicans Try, As Always, to Matter
LEAD: The House Republicans' defection from the White House put them at the center of budget politics last week.
This week, they were back on familiar turf: shoved to the sidelines, spurned by the White House and shut out by the Democrats.


Philadelphia Journal;   Cries of Poverty in Cradle of Liberty
LEAD: Stepping into history, possibly to escape the drone of Federal deficit reports, tourists stream into the Cradle of Liberty here at the rate of 14,177 visitors a day.


Sports People;   Dickerson Signs
LEAD: In what might be the most important huddle of the season for the Indianapolis Colts, officials of the National Football League team and Eric Dickerson met most of yesterday outside Indianapolis.
When they broke up, player and team had patched up their differences and the bickering running back had signed a four-year contract extension.


Sports of the Times;   Gunslinger in the A's Bullpen
LEAD: OAKLAND, Calif.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Todt Hill
LEAD: At 410 feet above sea level, Staten Island's Todt Hill is the highest natural point on the Eastern Seaboard south of Maine.
Its spectacular, panoramic vista takes in the New York City skyline, the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, New York Harbor and the New Jersey shore.


Linda Head Weds R. M. Flanagan
LEAD: Linda Head, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Glenn O. Head of Madison, N.J., was married yesterday in Nantucket, Mass., to Robert Michael Flanagan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Flanagan of Winthrop, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
Wiliam Bearden, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church, assisted by the Rev.


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
Travelers Face Shortage of Blood Serum


A Little Lonelier Than in 70's, New York Faces Fiscal Crisis
LEAD: Fifteen years after its costly and humiliating brush with bankruptcy, New York City is edging into fiscal straits that seem painfully familiar.


Susan A. Roberts Marries Charles S. Levy in Capital
LEAD: Susan Ann Roberts, the senior assistant administrator at the Washington (D.C.) Hospital Center, and Dr.
Charles Steven Levy, chairman of the infectious diseases section there, were married yesterday at the Hay Adams Hotel in Washington.
The Rev.
D.
Mark Cooper, a Lutheran minister, performed the ecumenical ceremony.


Horse Racing;   Buy the Firm Wins In Muddy Athenia
LEAD: Buy the Firm completed a dreary afternoon of heavy favorites, romping through the mud at Belmont Park yesterday to beat just three rivals and win the $87,750 Athenia Handicap.


Kate Fansler Among the Foxes
LEAD:
THE PLAYERS COME AGAIN
By Amanda Cross.
229 pp. New York:
Random House. $17.95.


World Markets;   A Mixed Blessing for the Pound
LEAD: The British pound's entry last week into the European Monetary System has altered the outlook for equities in London.
Investors, says Mark Brown, the chief United Kingdomstrategist for UBS Phillips &amp; Drew in London, will be ''paying more for less.''


Remembering a Tortured Child Who Lived in the Streets of Guatemala City
LEAD: The marble tombstone erected here last week for Nahaman Carmona Lopez says more about his death than his short life: ''I only wanted to be a child and they wouldn't let me.''


Japanese Pickles or Preserves: So Nice With Rice
LEAD: The heart of a traditional Japanese meal is a bowl of hot, freshly cooked rice and a side dish of tsukemono, or pickled vegetables.
Tsukudani, which are varieties of fish, shellfish and seaweed that have been preserved by slow cooking in soy sauce and sugar, are also a popular accompaniment to rice.


Mutual Funds;   What Investors Want to Know
LEAD: The bear market, the looming recession and the crisis in the Persian Gulf have made everyone jumpy.
Investors in mutual funds are showing their anxiety by monitoring their accounts more closely than usual: Telephone calls from investors surged in August and are still coming in at higher-than-normal levels at many funds, marketers at many large fund groups say.


Some Plants Are Doubly Rewarding
LEAD: EERYONE likes to have a double dividend.
And some plants are worth the gardener's time and investment for their flowers in spring as well as their showy foliage or berries in fall.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I had new cedar shingles put on my roof last year.
I now seem to be getting different opinions on what to do with these shingles.
Some say to apply a water-base sealer, some say an oil-base sealer, and some say to leave the shingles as is.
What do you think?


A Dissent on Deficit Cure
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE MAN BEHIND IRAQ'S SUPERGUN
LEAD: If the details presented in Kevin Toolis's article ''The Man Behind Iraq's Supergun'' (Aug. 26) are correct, King Hussein of Jordan is akin to the boy who killed his parents and then threw himself on the mercy of the court because he was an orphan.


A KUWAITI PRINCE SEES WIDER RIGHTS
LEAD: The Crown Prince of Kuwait suggested today that the country's defunct Parliament would be revived and free elections held if Kuwait is liberated from Iraqi troops.


A Proliferation of Claims by Victims of Nazis
LEAD: After years of dwindling usefulness, Israeli organizations devoted to helping survivors of Nazi crimes win restitution from West Germany are overwhelmed with thousands of claims against the former state of East Germany.


Pro Hockey;   Injuries Mar Trottier's Return
LEAD: For Islander fans, it was nice while it lasted, and the good part lasted for about half an hour.


Old Torment Revives in Italy: the Moro Killing
LEAD: Ghosts from Italy's most traumatic episode of political terrorism have suddenly emerged to torment the national soul once again.


Psst! Anybody Have a Dream Sailboat?
LEAD: YOU see, I cannot use my real name. People would think I'm a wimp.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
Imagining Our Ancestors


DELEGATES AT U.N. CALL FOR A ROLE IN MIDEAST PEACE
LEAD: In voting unanimously to condemn Israel for the violence on Monday in Jerusalem, the United Nations Security Council has averted a split in the coalition challenging Iraq's occupation of Kuwait.
But diplomats said today that the action might lead to another test of that coalition's solidarity later this month.


Cambridge
LEAD: For more than 300 years, Cambridge has pictured itself as the center - if not the birthplace - of American intellectual life.
Its name invoked eminence, and the graduates of Harvard, Radcliffe and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology reflected back its glory.


Sports People;   Cowens Is Back
LEAD: What the Boston Celtics could use to help restore their dynastic domination of the National Basketball Association is another Dave Cowens, a center with the skills of the seven-time All-Star who was the N.B.A.'s co-rookie of the year in 1971 and the league's most valuable player in 1973, and who later served as player-coach in the 1978-79 season.


Heart Like a Car
LEAD:
THE PICTURE MAKERS
By Emily Ellison.
252 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company. $18.95.


Minnesota's Artful Indian Crafts
LEAD: Minnesota's Native American population is largely invisible to travelers.
Since little effort is made to promote local Indian culture, it is not surprising that few tourists visit the 11 reservations (4 Dakota, 7 Ojibway), attend annual powwows, or see anything for sale other than occasional tourist trinkets.


Question Of the Week;   Who Should Win M.V.P., Cy Young Awards?
LEAD: Without Darryl Strawberry the Mets would have been nowhere.
He'll be bypassed again, but he deserves the award.
The N.L.
Cy Young belongs to Doug Drabek, hands down.


Question Of the Week;   Who Should Win M.V.P., Cy Young Awards?
LEAD: In the National League, Barry Bonds for the m.v.p.
He hit .301 with 114 r.b.i.'s, 33 home runs, 104 runs, 52 steals, a slugging percentage of .565, 93 walks and 156 hits; without him the Pirates would have ended up watching CBS put up salary graphics for Strawberry and Canseco.


Edward L. Jackson Wed To Denise Lynn Holness
LEAD: Denise Lynn Holness, the daughter of Mrs.
Lenward L. Holness of Crestwood, N.Y., and the late Dr.
Holness was married yesterday at the First Presbyterian Church in New York to Edward Lawrence Jackson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Lloyd Jackson of Orlando, Fla.
The Rev.
John B. Macnab officiated.
Mrs.


Corrections
LEAD: In the Style Makers column last Sunday, the picture credit with the photograph of Januwa Moja, who makes clothing influenced by African tribal designs, misidentified the photographer.
It was Richard A. Green, not Kim Garnick.


A 50th Birthday For Edsel Ford's Continental
LEAD: ''The Continental, introduced in 1939, was one of the most graceful automotive designs ever executed, a fitting aesthetic sign-off for the age of the American classic car.''


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article on the Technology page on Sept. 30 about small satellites misstated the affiliation of R. Gilbert Moore.
He is an adjunct professor of physics at Utah State University, not the University of Utah.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
Eating Out


Stretching Space
LEAD: Space is like money. no matter how much you have, it never seems to be enough.
Rooms have a magical way of shrinking as we demand more of a dwelling than was originally intended.
Families grow, office clutter comes home to roost, possessions multiply while the dimensions of their surroundings do not.


In Hollywood, Big Just Gets Bigger
LEAD: The growing foreign investment in the American entertainment industry, far from being a challenge to this country's longstanding dominance of the business, reflects a worldwide belief that only Hollywood can meet the rapidly expanding global demand for films, television shows and recorded music.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
MOSTLY MUSICALS


Morocco, a U.S. Ally, Links Gulf Crisis and Israel
LEAD: In what seems a sign of a rift within the group of Arab countries that back the United States military buildup in the Persian Gulf region, King Hassan II of Morocco has asserted that there is a ''moral linkage'' between the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the Arab-Israeli issue.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
DEADLY TRIPLETS: A Theatre Mystery and Journal.
By Adrienne Kennedy. (University of Minnesota, $14.95.) For her first novel, the talented playwright Adrienne Kennedy has had the intriguing idea of infusing her theatrical experiences in London with a Gothic sensibility and transforming them into a mystere a clef.


Supreme Court Should Protect Economic and Civil Liberties
LEAD: To the Editor:


Paris
LEAD: To the Editor: Finding a reasonably priced restaurant with excellent food in the heart of Paris is almost a contradiction in terms.
However, three trips to Paris in the last year demonstrate that a few steps from the main avenues are some first-rate eateries.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD: AN AMERICAN ROMANCE, by John Casey. (Avon, $9.95.) In his first novel, the author of ''Spartina'' told the story of Mac and Anya, two outsiders in love who go to Iowa for a brief attempt at regional theater and life on a commune.
When it was published in 1977, John Leonard said in The Times: ''It respects characters.


Why Radio Plays Baseball Better Than TV
LEAD: ''Gibson has his lead off first.
The pitch to Scioscia is lined deep to left center.
Bonds and Van Slyke are racing back, racing, racing, and it's Van Slyke who makes a stumbling, remarkable catch, falling to the warning track but holding the ball!
Gibson, around second, is in trouble.
Van Slyke is up and throws a strike to Jay Bell who whirls, and with crucial accuracy duplicates Van Slyke's perfect peg, to double up Gibson by a wide and humiliating four or five feet!


T. C. Nelson Weds Anna Spangler
LEAD: Anna Wildy Spangler and Thomas Craig Nelson, 1988 graduates of the Harvard Business School and partners in the Wakefield Group, a venture capital firm in Charlotte, N.C., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Stephen Elkins-Williams performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Chapel of the Cross in Chapel Hill, N


Reversal of Image: Watching Someone Playing Yourself
LEAD: When I attended the premiere of ''Reversal of Fortune'' at the recent Toronto Film Festival, I anticipated few surprises.
The new movie, directed by Barbet Schroeder, is based on my own book about how my students and I had reversed Claus von Bulow's conviction for twice trying to kill his wife.
My son Elon, who works in the film business, had come up with the idea of making a movie out of the von


Review/Ballet;   Students in Dances Choreographed by Dancers
LEAD: The Barnard College Dance Department, which has often presented examples of various dance forms, offered its first all-ballet program on Thursday afternoon at the Minor Latham Playhouse.
The event featured students in works by experienced ballet dancers who have begun to pursue choreographic careers.


Heather Stiers Weds Jonathan A. Dorn
LEAD: Heather Allison Stiers, a daughter of the Rev.
Dr.
Brenda J. Stiers and the Rev.
Dr.
Thomas Lowell Stiers of Riverside, Conn., was married yesterday to Jonathan Andrew Dorn, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jacob Dorn of Dayton, Ohio.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas Duggan, a Presbyterian minister who is the bride's godfather, performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Greenwich,


Samuel Brownell, 90, Ex-Education Official, Dies
LEAD: Samuel M. Brownell, a one-time Nebraska high school teacher who became the United States Commissioner of Education in the 1950's and later served as Superintendent of Schools in Detroit, died Friday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
He was 90 years old and lived in New Haven.


German Held in Attack on Minister


Volume Buys
LEAD: Playing symphonic music on a stereo system in your living room can defy the natural order of things.
You have a hundred musicians fiddling, blowing and banging away in an area barely big enough for a small dinner party.
Acoustically, this arrangement just doesn't add up.
After all, the music was meant to be appreciated in a space large enough to hold an orchestra and perhaps a couple of thousand listeners.


Murder Most Tidy
LEAD:
AGATHA CHRISTIE
The Woman and Her Mysteries.
By Gillian Gill.
243 pp. New York: The Free Press. $22.50.


Le Duc Tho, Top Hanoi Aide, Dies at 79
LEAD: Le Duc Tho, the chief North Vietnamese negotiator at the Paris talks that led to the 1973 Vietnam cease-fire agreement and the withdrawal of the last American troops from Vietnam, died yesterday at Army Hospital 108 in Hanoi, the press attache of the Vietnam's United Nations mission, Le Dong, said yesterday.


Room to Grow
LEAD: Thirteen-year-old freddy victoria had outgrown his room.
What the Riverdale Country School eighth grader needed now was more space for working and less for playing.
A proper desk and bookshelves were crucial; so was storage.
Esthetically, the young Victoria had definite tastes, too. ''I wanted my room to look very different from the rest of the apartment,'' he explains.


Wave of Political Killings Has Claimed 16 Turks
LEAD: A wave of political killings has baffled the police and revived bitter memories of extremist street violence that shook Turkey before an army crackdown in 1980.


In U.S. Schools, A War of Words
LEAD: In a well-worn classroom at the San Fernando Elementary School, 30 miles north of Los Angeles, Aracelis Tester, a second-grade teacher, is reading ''Cuidado, un Dinosaurio!'' - ''Watch Out, a Dinosaur!'' - with her diminutive pupils.
This could just as well be Mexico City or San Salvador, Grenada or Seville: a roomful of Hispanic children and a Hispanic teacher speaking


Too Obnoxious to Live
LEAD:
FORCED ENTRY
By Stephen Solomita.
255 pp. New York:
G. P. Putnam's Sons.
$19.95.


Israelis Jail Officer Who Declined to Serve
LEAD: An Israeli officer who told his soldiers his conscience would not permit him to serve in the occupied Gaza Strip was jailed for 35 days beginning today.


Students Collaborate on an AIDS Montage
LEAD: JUST after the fall semester began at the State University of New York here, Michael Horn, a junior in the film department, threw a party.
He invited 14 members of the university's senior acting company and 14 people with AIDS or with positive HIV test results.


Recession Signs
LEAD: To the Editor:


He Shot the Corpse
LEAD:
THE LAST FRAME.
By Jim Wright. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $16.95.) It takes an intimate knowledge of the newspaper business to create an authentic tough-guy news photographer like Will Carver.
Accused of dressing like an overturned dumpster and living life hiding behind his camera, the hero of Jim Wright's first novel, ''The Last Frame,'' leaps moral quandaries and midlife crises in a single bound.


Campus Life: Southwestern;   Forging Links Across 60 Years Of College Life
LEAD: At Southwestern University in the 1920's, female dormitory residents usually observed a 9 P.M. bedtime.
But on some nights shortly after the lights-out call, a little trouble would start brewing on the quiet Methodist campus.


The Fourth Time's the Charm at the Lyons Biennial
LEAD: This city, known for its cuisine, always has been a place to eat.
Now it is also a place to dance.
The festival devoted to American modern dance, ballet and folk forms that has just been presented by the fourth Lyons International Dance Biennial has not only been huge but also immensely successful.


Cutting the Cord
LEAD: One of the more unusual approaches to saving household space is to take all the furnishings out of a room and hang them on your body.
This is the idea behind the new portable home office: If the equipment fits, wear it.


Make Room For Daddy
LEAD: The birth of our second child was an event we anticipated with joy.
We had a daughter, and now we were about to have a son.
The family would be complete.
How could it be otherwise?
Middle-class Manhattanites are almost as inflexible about family size as the Chinese: They are allowed one child; we are allowed two.


Tenderhearted Men
LEAD: To the Editor:


Eastern European Thinkers in a Czech Castle
LEAD: With help from a New York-based research group, a 14th-century Czechoslavak castle is being turned into an incubator to nurture a new generation of Eastern European politicians, entrepreneurs and scholars.


College Football: South;   Tennessee Trounces Florida
LEAD: Dale Carter's 91-yard return of the second-half kickoff ignited a 28-point third quarter - which included a rare touchdown pass by the tight end - and Tennessee beat Florida, 45-3, in a Southeastern Conference showdown of top 10 teams tonight.


Hoping for a Role in the Nutcracker


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner;   Where to Seek a Meal Downtown
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Here are some places to dine in lower Manhattan.
Le Lucky Strike


Max Kennedy to Wed Victoria Strauss
LEAD: July wedding plans for Victoria Anne Strauss and Matthew Maxwell Taylor Kennedy, a son of Mrs.
Robert F. Kennedy of McLean, Va., and the late Mr.
Kennedy, have been made known by Ms.
Strauss's parents, Bonnie Strauss Gould of Los Angeles and Benjamin Strauss of Haverford, Pa.


English Cleric Braces for Women's Ordination
LEAD: Dr.
Graham Leonard, the Bishop of London, resents being called a ''dinosaur,'' part of the price he has paid in the Church of England for leading the party against ordination of women as priests.


National Attention On Spirited Contest
LEAD: NOT every Congressional race can feature a visit from Robert Redford and a stopover by President Bush.
But such political ammunition is being hauled out in the Fifth District battle between a popular three-term Waterbury Alderman, Gary A. Franks, the Republican candidate, and a former Congressman and television newscaster, Toby Moffett, the


Campus Life: Hofstra;   Students Protest A Limit on Ads For Alcohol
LEAD: To promote what it calls ''responsible'' drinking, Hofstra University has moved to limit advertising of alcohol on campus and in campus publications.


Japan's Ronin
LEAD: To the Editor: Japan's legendary 47 Ronin are not buried on Koyasan as stated in James Sterngold's interesting article ''At the Center of Spiritual Japan'' (Travel, Aug. 26) but at Sengakuji Temple in Tokyo.
Relics of the Ronin are preserved in the temple museum.


A City Carousel
LEAD: ''The magic is back'' reads a poster announcing today's reopening of the colorful hand-carved carousel in Brooklyn's Prospect Park.
And the vibrant result of the yearlong face-lift is magical indeed.


Raising the Architectural Ante In California
LEAD: Few careers in architecture are as vexing as that of Michael Graves.
From academic modernist in the 70's to post-modernist superstar in the 80's, he could turn in the 90's into a venerable elder statesman or a tired has-been.
It's a matter not only of Mr.
Graves's architecture but of our architectural culture, of which his career has for years been a kind of crucible.


Democratic Plan to Tax Wealthy Has Democratic Hurdle in Senate
LEAD: Despite broad support among Democratic lawmakers for a House deficit plan that would raise taxes for the wealthy, Democratic Senate leaders are committed to blocking it when it reaches the Senate.


Style Makers;   John Frieda, Hairdresser
LEAD: A good hair style is more than a good cut, says John Frieda, who has three salons in London and recently opened one in New York.


Thefts
LEAD: To the Editor: In reference to John D. Mitchell's letter (Travel, Sept. 2), I, too, was assaulted by the prettiest pickpocket in Milan.
Disarmed by a sleepless flight and the excitement of returning to Italy, I let this red-chiffoned, nursing mother distract me with her proffered paper under which her fingers unzipped three inches of my waist pouch.


Life Savings During Wartime
LEAD: ''The crisis,'' screamed the cover of Time magazine a few weeks ago: ''What to Do With Your Money.'' Imagine that: what to do with my money.
Saddam Hussein had invaded Kuwait; America was rushing troops to Saudi Arabia.
And someone was going to tell me where to put my money.


Cambridge
LEAD: For more than 300 years, Cambridge has pictured itself as the center - if not the birthplace - of American intellectual life.
Its name invoked eminence, and the graduates of Harvard, Radcliffe and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology reflected back its glory.


Four Walls and a Door
LEAD: There was a time when architects almost never talked of rooms, but prattled on forever about spaces, as if this distinction somehow elevated their work beyond the mundane confines of everyday existence.
Rooms, after all, were the province of decorators and other sentimental folk.
Architects had a more noble calling: the Making of


Campus Life: Southwestern;   Forging Links Across 60 Years Of College Life
LEAD: At Southwestern University in the 1920's, female dormitory residents usually observed a 9 P.M. bedtime.
But on some nights shortly after the lights-out call, a little trouble would start brewing on the quiet Methodist campus.


Kohl's Party Favored in Voting in the East Today
LEAD: Voters in regional elections on Sunday in what used to be East Germany are expected to give a strong indication of how the east, and possibly the entire nation, will go seven weeks from now in the first all-German elections in 57 years.


The Passions of Young 'Sirin'
LEAD:
VLADIMIR NABOKOV
The Russian Years.
By Brian Boyd.
Illustrated. 607 pp. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press. $25.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I had new cedar shingles put on my roof last year.
I now seem to be getting different opinions on what to do with these shingles.
Some say to apply a water-base sealer, some say an oil-base sealer, and some say to leave the shingles as is.
What do you think?


Doing Something About How We Drive
LEAD: In her New Jersey Opinion piece, ''Changing Our Driving Habits'' (Sept. 9), Linda Muhlhausen says it is time for us to start thinking about the way we drive.
She's absolutely right - and some of us have started thinking.


Leafy Refuges Near Jakarta
LEAD: Low-Lying Jakarta is not noted for its salubrious climate, especially in the hot season from May to September, and things were considerably worse during the early days of Dutch occupation.
Starting around 1730, the capital (then known as Batavia) was devastated by a series of malarial epidemics, and for the better part of a century - until the population began moving out of its original walled center - both rulers and ruled filled the local cemeteries in appalling numbers.


How's the Stereo Set Feeling? Test Records Furnish Clues
LEAD: Things tend to fall apart as they age.
Unlike the collapse of the proverbial one-horse shay, it usually doesn't happen all at once.
But even the minor ravages of time gradually add up, and after years of faithful service, a stereo system may not sound as good as it once did.


Penn State Wins As a Series Ends
LEAD: Syracuse pursued Penn State through a long afternoon but never caught up today in the last scheduled game between these emotional rivals.
The Nittany Lions, who never made a damaging mistake, scored 10 points in the fourth quarter to win, 27-21, before a crowd of 86,002, the third largest ever at Beaver


Corrections
LEAD: A report on Sept. 30 about the engagement of Melanie Borden Falk to Roderick Ian Vere Nicoll misidentified the bank of which the prospective bride's stepfather, William J. McDonough, was vice chairman until his recent retirement.
It is the First National Bank of Chicago.


European Visitors, Season Openers
LEAD: TOURING groups from England and Sweden highlight this week in music, as do season openers in Stamford, Norwalk, New Haven and Chester.
The Jorgensen Auditorium, at the University of Connecticut, Storrs, will be the site of the first visit to Connecticut of a string octet from the Academy of St.
Martin in the Fields, in London.


Sarah Bittle Wed To John H. Dritz
LEAD: Sarah Elizabeth Bittle, a daughter of Sandra Peterson of Iowa Falls, Iowa, was married in Des Moines last evening to John Harris Dritz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael A. Dritz of Armonk, N.Y.
Rabbi Steven Fink performed the ceremony at the Marriott Hotel.


Autumn Recitals Begin At Caramoor Estate
LEAD: CARAMOOR is beginning its third season of fall recitals at the landmark estate in Katonah on Saturday at 8:30 P.M., when the superb American baritone William Parker offers songs of Schubert, Liszt and Poulenc, accompanied by the pianist Levering Rothfuss.


QUESTION OF THE WEEK
LEAD: The Question of the Week, formerly a weekly feature, will now appear occasionally, dealing with a salient current issue in sports.
The Mailbox will continue to run each week.


Question Of the Week;   Who Should Win M.V.P., Cy Young Awards?
LEAD: M.V.P.: George Brett.
At age 37, he led the A.L. in batting and doubles.
Bobby Bonilla.
No explanations needed.
Cy Young: It will be Welch, but it should be either Clemens or Eckersley.
In the N.L., who was better from June on than Gooden (16-1)?
However, Drabek will get it.
LEONARD GINSBERG


Question Of the Week;   Who Should Win M.V.P., Cy Young Awards?
LEAD: In the American League, Rickey Henderson.
He led the league in on-base percentage (.439), runs scored (119), stolen bases (65); was second in batting (.325) and slugging average (.577); fourth in walks with 97 and sixth in home runs with 28.
Roger Clemens (21-6) deserves the Cy Young.
Bob Welch (27-7) allowed more than a run per nine innings more than Clemens, and Clemens had 82 more strikeouts (209 to 127) and 23 fewer walks (54 to 77) than Welch.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: A picture caption last Sunday with an article about anti-sense products misidentified a man in the Gilead Sciences Inc. laboratory in Foster City, Calif.
He is Brian Froehler, a senior scientist with Gilead, not Michael Riordan, president of the company.


The Perils of Giving Driving Tests
LEAD: ANOTHER day, another group of nervous novice drivers for Martin Stoller.
In his state-issued blue and gray uniform, personally accessorized by the new fashion pouch he wore on his waist, Mr.
Stoller stood on a side street in Garden City Park.
Stretched before him was a line of 20 cars with motors revving and drivers waiting.


Wall Street;   Those Dow 'Bargains' Are Getting Even Cheaper
LEAD: After the panicky 190-point sell-off of Oct. 13, 1989, some people thought the 30 stocks that make up the Dow Jones industrial average looked very cheap.
Well, most of those stocks are even cheaper now.


Ethnic Rivalries Push Yugoslavia to Edge
LEAD: Intensifying conflicts and rivalries among Yugoslavia's republics are bringing the country dangerously close to the breaking point, say people who favor the process as well as those who fear it.


He Almost Got Away
LEAD:
DEATH SENTENCE
The Inside Story of the John List Murders.
By Joe Sharkey.
Illustrated. 305 pp. New York:
Signet. Paper, $4.95.


Meeting the Parents in 'Greetings'
LEAD: ARE things not working for you?
Are you misunderstood?
Do you need a better understanding of others?
Are you carrying around a little or a load of guilt, hostility, prejudice?
Are you being controlled by those old demons?


Evening Stars
LEAD:
ANCHORS
Brokaw, Jennings, Rather and the Evening News.
By Robert Goldberg and Gerald Jay Goldberg.
Illustrated. 399 pp. New York:
Birch Lane Press/Carol Publishing Group. $19.95.


Some Plants Are Doubly Rewarding
LEAD: EERYONE likes to have a double dividend.
And some plants are worth the gardener's time and investment for their flowers in spring as well as their showy foliage or berries in fall.


Screams Beneath the Snow
LEAD:
THESE DAYS
New Poems.
By Frederick Seidel.
50 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Cloth, $18.95. Paper, $9.95.


A Savings and Loan Bailout, and Bush's Son Jeb
LEAD: After Jeb Bush, a son of the President, and a partner bought a Miami office building using money an associate had borrowed from a local savings and loan, the Federal Government wound up repaying most of the loan.


Arts Face Lean Times as Patrons Retrench
LEAD: BATTERED by cutbacks in corporate contributions and audience belt-tightening, arts groups are facing hard times.


Closter Journal;   A Harvest That Helps the Needy
LEAD: THE autumn sun beat down on Mary Crain, but that didn't seem to matter because there was the smell of harvest in the air.
At her feet, a bushel of just-picked green and red peppers gave off a fragrance not found in supermarkets.


Samuel Brownell, 90, Ex-Education Official, Dies
LEAD: Samuel M. Brownell, a one-time Nebraska high school teacher who became the United States Commissioner of Education in the 1950's and later served as Superintendent of Schools in Detroit, died Friday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
He was 90 years old and lived in New Haven.


A Town Full of Miracles
LEAD:
THAT TIME IN MALOMBA
By James Hamilton-Paterson.
180 pp. New York:
Soho Press. $18.95.


Gayle Pollard and Michael Terry Wed
LEAD: Gayle Frances Pollard, an editorial-page writer for The Los Angeles Times, was married yesterday in Washington to Michael Woodford Terry, a sportswriter for The San Bernardino (Calif.) Sun.
The Rev.
Charles R. Stith, a United Methodist minister, officiated at the Notre Dame Chapel on the Dumbarton campus of Howard


Take 6 Spreads the Gospel - Pure and A Cappella
LEAD: With a harmonic blend of jazz, pop and church-inspired traditions, the a cappella gospel singers Take 6 have single-handedly revived the creative joy of the vocal group.


Stalking Fate With a School Bell and Clock
LEAD: Among the more irritating creatures in a world full of them are those theatergoers who tell you, just after the curtain has come down, ''You really should have seen the London production.'' Or, ''It was a lot better before the producer moved it uptown.'' Or, ''Trust me.
With the original lead, it was a different show entirely.


Where and How to Insulate
LEAD: MOST homes have insulation in the attic and walls, it having been included during construction or added later.
Insulation between an unheated basement or crawl space and the main floor is important, too; in winter, unheated areas beneath rooms can act like a block of ice.


2 Violent Incidents Raise Racial Tension in Durban
LEAD: A spate of seemingly inexplicable violence, in which 8 whites were stabbed in one incident and 33 blacks subsequently shot in another, has heightened racial suspicions this week in this port city on the Indian Ocean.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I had new cedar shingles put on my roof last year.
I now seem to be getting different opinions on what to do with these shingles.
Some say to apply a water-base sealer, some say an oil-base sealer, and some say to leave the shingles as is.
What do you think?


A Romance With Japan Teaches Some Hard Lessons
LEAD: It is in the course of a conversation about her role as concubine that Mary McKenzie - once of Scotland, now of Tokyo and heroine of the Masterpiece Theater presentation of ''The Ginger Tree'' - learns an essential lesson from her lover about the gulf that separates the Japanese from most everyone else.


Always the Man on the Spot
LEAD:
UNDER THE GYPSY MOON
By Lawrence Thornton.
212 pp. New York:
Doubleday. $18.95.


INSIDE
LEAD:
A Savings Industry Bailout, And the President's Son Jeb
After Jeb Bush and a partner bought a Miami office building using money an associate had borrowed from a local savings and loan, the institution failed and the Government repaid most of the loan.
Page 28.
Le Duc Tho Dies at 79


A Dissent
LEAD: To the Editor:


Dr. Gail Sorrel Weds Gary Mosk
LEAD: Dr.
Gail Patrice Sorrel and Gary Alan Mosk were married last evening at the Jewish Community Center in Harrison, N.Y., by Cantor Raymond Smolover.
Mrs.
Mosk is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome M. Sorrel of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Mosk of West Hills, Calif.


Kate Fansler Among the Foxes
LEAD:
THE PLAYERS COME AGAIN
By Amanda Cross.
229 pp. New York:
Random House. $17.95.


Students Collaborate on an AIDS Montage
LEAD: JUST after the fall semester began at the State University of New York here, Michael Horn, a junior in the film department, threw a party.
He invited 14 members of the university's senior acting company and 14 people with AIDS or with positive HIV test results.


Pro Basketball;   Cavaliers' Success Hits New Heights
LEAD: Not too long ago, the Cleveland Cavaliers were the joke of the National Basketball Association.
They finished the 1986-87 season with a 31-51 record.
And their payroll was as modest as their accomplishments: $4.8 million for the 1986-87 season, including $150,000 for an insecure rookie from Tulane named John (Hot Rod)


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LEAD:
MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED: Multiple Murder and the Elusive Search for Justice in an American Town.
By Alan Gelb. (Dutton, $19.95.) The frustrating thing about nonfiction is that sometimes reasonable questions - like, why would a successful high school senior murder his family? - simply do not have reasonable answers.


Postings: Downtown Architecture;   History on View
LEAD: To illustrate the architectural development of lower Manhattan, the historian Andrew S. Dolkart assembled 120 objects: renderings, lithographs, etchings, models, furniture and a gargoyle from the Woolworth Building.
They are on view through Friday in the Whitney Museum of American Art Downtown at Federal Reserve Plaza, 33 Maiden Lane, at Nassau Street.


Movies That Fit Like a Glass Slipper
LEAD: Forty years and a sexual revolution separate Cinderella's fairy godmother singing ''Bibbidi, bobbidi, boo'' from Richard Gere offering Julia Roberts $3,000 to spend a week with him.
But Disney's classic animated CINDERELLA (1950, $29.95) is simply an older sister of PRETTY WOMAN (1990, Touchstone, $19.99), the film about a sweet-natured streetwalker that has made more than $170 million at the box office and has just become available on video.


Roni Tynes to Wed Marshall Field 6th
LEAD: The engagement of Roni Tynes to Marshall Field 6th, the son of Mr.
Field 5th of Lake Forest, Ill., and Mrs.
Samuel M. V. Tatnall of Bedford, N.Y., has been announced by the prospective bride's mother, Terry Jo Tynes of Utopia, Tex.
A spring wedding is planned.


Boxing;   Doubts Still Follow Douglas


Data Update
LEAD:
MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Aug. 90
July 90
Aug. 89
Nation
$97,000
$98,300
$95,800
Northeast
144,900
146,900
149,000
Midwest
75,000
76,000
71,900
South
86,900
88,800
87,100
West
141,600
139,700
147,100
*4*(Source: National Association of Realtors)


Video Prepares For Life Minus A Few X's
LEAD: For video the new NC-17 rating designated by the Motion Picture Association of America is made to order.
The rating replaces the X, which, multiplied to XXX, had been usurped by pornographers. ''Under the old guidelines, the triple X confused the public about what the X was intended to mean,'' says Jack Messer, president of the Video Software Dealers Association.


The Wild Country of Anza Borrego
LEAD: When residents of the Palm Springs resort belt become jaded by the manicured golf courses, the palatial hotels and the opulent shopping streets, they sometimes talk of moving to a more pristine corner of California's arid zone.
Often as not, the Shangri-La they have in mind is just over the Santa Rosa Mountains, among the 600,000 wilderness acres of Anza-Borrego Desert State


Postings: Slipping Slates;   Mansard Problem
LEAD: The cooperative apartment building at the northeast corner of Madison Avenue and 90th Street, a Beaux-Arts beauty, is remarkably well preserved for its 89 years.
Recently, though, slates started slipping from its mansard roof, creating a hazard as well as spoiling its ornate appearance.


College Football: East;   Pitt Breezes by Rutgers
LEAD: Glenn Deveaux scored on three short runs, Alex Van Pelt hit Olanda Truitt with two scoring passes and Pittsburgh blocked a punt to end a late-game rally in a 45-21 victory over Rutgers today.


Contemporary Objects Use Icons of Past
LEAD: ''SPIRIT images'' borrowed from petroglyphs and ancient ceremonial artifacts lend the stamp of tradition to an assortment of pottery, baskets, jewelry and wall pieces by 25 artists at the Craftsman's Gallery here.


Katharine Lewis Married in Boston
LEAD: Katharine Folsom Lewis, a daughter of Jane D. Lewis of Tenafly, N.J., and Dr.
John L. Lewis Jr. of New York, was married yesterday in Boston to Patrick Kevin Armstrong, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
D.
Colm Armstrong of Braintree, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
Rhys Williams, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the First Lutheran Church.


Miss Nugent Wed In Massachusetts
LEAD: Pamela Susan Nugent, a daughter of Ara L. Nugent of Fair Haven, N.J., and Robert S. Nugent of Little River, S.C., was married yesterday in Lincoln, Mass., to Robert Benjamin Czekanski, a son of Sophie Czekanski of Chicopee, Mass., and the late Benjamin Czekanski.
The Rev.
Margaret B. Gunness officiated at St.


Neil Jordan Gets Back to Making Home Movies
LEAD: Lorraine Pilkington steps up to the shrine in a church here and lights a candle.
She has been lighting candles for some minutes now, the way you do when you're in a movie and the director keeps demanding retakes.
After each shot, she looks toward Neil Jordan with an expression of hope and bemusement, wondering if this time, at last, the director will say ''O.K., that's a wrap'' or whatever it is these movie people say.


A Time of Confusion Draws the Arab World Into Soul-Searching
LEAD: From Algeria to Bahrain, public opinion in the Arab world is undergoing the most troubled soul-searching it has experienced in modern times.
The massacre at Muslim holy sites in Jerusalem last Monday, in which the Israeli police killed at least 21 Palestinians during a riot, has further inflamed Arab emotions already driven to new peaks by the Gulf crisis.


Ruling Sets Off Money Rush In California Governor Race
LEAD: A California court's rejection of the state's limits on campaign contributions has led to a scramble for money and given new momentum to the Democratic candidate for governor, former Mayor Dianne Feinstein of San Francisco.


Regina L. DeFeo Weds F. J. Wahl
LEAD: Regina Louise DeFeo, the manager of marketing analysis at Tiffany &amp; Company, and Frederick John Wahl, a vice president at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, were married yesterday at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard performed the ceremony.


No Lenin, No Marx and, Just Maybe, No Communist Party in Prague
LEAD: In his faded jeans and blue, short-sleeved polo shirt sporting a ''Levis'' label, Vasil Mohorita, a tall 38-year-old, looks nothing like his grizzled, somber-suited predecessors.


For a Bold Approach to Parking
LEAD: An article in the Sept. 23 issue [''At Larchmont Station, Angry Out-of-Towners'']  once again pointed out the problem of parking at Metro-North stations, particularly in Larchmont.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: Two of the three most coveted titles in world play are the Olympiad Teams and the Open Pairs.
In the past 15 years United States representatives have won three titles out of a possible eight.
But matching this record, and beating all the European countries put together, is Brazil.


If Only Ducks Were Sold in Parts
LEAD: NO one thinks twice about buying chicken in parts, but few places will sell you duck legs or breasts separately.
This is too bad, for when it comes to cooking duck, most people do it one way: in the oven.
The problem with roasting is that when the legs are done, the breast is often dry.
If the breast is pink, the legs are red.


Seattle Induces Office Builders to Include Child Care
LEAD: The city of Seattle is beginning to get experience with the use of zoning incentives that encourage builders to provide day-care centers for the young children of office workers.
The results so far suggest advantages, but at a substantial cost to users for a substantial benefit to builders.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
SAVING THE FALCONS


Economy and Mideast Standoff Bring a Drop in Bush's Standing
LEAD: Support for President Bush's commitment of American troops in the Persian Gulf has begun to erode in recent days as Americans grow frustrated with the standoff in the desert and increasingly worried about the sagging economy at home, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll has found.


Iraq Children in Anti-Embargo March to Embassies
LEAD: Thousands of children carrying empty milk bottles marched to the United States and British Embassies today chanting ''Down with Bush!
Long live Saddam!'' to protest the trade blockade against Iraq.


Tense Talks at Chrysler
LEAD: Claiming the company has no money to meet union wage demands is a time-honored tactic of collective bargaining.
But this time there seems to be little doubt that Chrysler Corporation management is telling autoworkers the truth about its precarious position.


Pro Football;   Jets Favored, Coslet Squirms
LEAD: While the other teams in their division all have byes this weekend, the Jets have to report to work today against the San Diego Chargers at Giants Stadium.
But that's not why Coach Bruce Coslet feels a bit out of place.


In the Mideast, Does Democracy Have a Chance?
LEAD: In Dec. 22, 1989, at an excruciatingly boring meeting of Arab and European foreign ministers in Paris, the French delegate, Roland Dumas, was handed a telegram. ''Ceausescu has fallen!'' he exclaimed.
The Europeans burst into applause, shattering the tedious formality of the occasion.
In the back rows, junior Arab diplomats and advisers joined the cheering - until they realized that their ministers, sitting up front, had remained dour and quiet.


College Football;   Ga. Tech Outlasts Clemson
LEAD: Georgia Tech and Clemson played one of those top-this-if-you-can football games today in which every big play was followed by another big play.
Surely the spirited, colorful and record crowd of 46,066 donning bright yellow and orange was weary and so were both teams when with 59 seconds left, Clemson's Chris Gardocki booted a 60-yard field-goal attempt.


Gregory Keller Weds Sally Kingsberg
LEAD: Sally Anne Kingsberg and Gregory Edward Keller were married last evening at the East River Yacht Club in Long Island City, Queens, by Rabbi Lawrence Raphael.
Mrs.
Keller is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Kingsberg of New York.
The bridegroom is the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward Keller of Mukilteo,


On Language;   Larger Than Life
LEAD: Charlton Heston was on the phone. ''I'm having an argument with Michael Korda about the copy on the dust jacket of my book, 'Beijing Diary,' '' he began, in the most sonorous voice you ever heard.
Mr.
Korda, author of ''Success,'' ''Power'' and other books (he hasn't used ''Happiness'' yet - presumably, a non-selling title), is editor in chief of Simon &amp;


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: It should be clear-cut but it isn't. ''Friend'' means different things to different people.
The word is basically a loose cannon.
As the saying goes, there are friends and then there are friends.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Burritos With a Twist
LEAD: People who have been making burritos for years will wonder at the strange-sounding combination of ingredients offered in this one-dish recipe.
Certainly this is not a traditional filling, even if the ingredients have a decided southwestern accent.


Speaking of Violence and Law
LEAD: Lawyers for the plaintiffs in a suit that opened in Oregon last week are hoping to drive home their argument that one person's right to free speech should never supercede another person's right to life.
But the wrongful-death civil suit against the father and son who lead the White Aryan Resistance may turn out a bit more complex than that.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ending Sept. 29
MANHATTAN
Battery Park City
$509,000
380 Rector Place
2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. condo in a 5-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, terrace, harbor view; common charge $986, taxes $500 (Broker: Battery Park City Realty/Tabak Real Estate)


Baseball: On To The Series;   It's Rest, Regroup For Reds
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds took the day off today to savor their first National League pennant in 14 years, but they planned to regroup Sunday to prepare for the biggest hurdle of all: the Oakland Athletics, whom the Reds will play here Tuesday in Game 1 of the 87th World Series.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: George Washington Bridge:


Supreme Court Should Protect Economic and Civil Liberties
LEAD: To the Editor:


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
MOSTLY MUSICALS


Baseball;   Mets Move Hunsicker To Key Executive Post
LEAD: The Mets today formally named their director of minor league operations, Gerry Hunsicker, as the ''man on the fast track'' who would replace Joe McIlvaine as their chief baseball executive and perhaps as the heir apparent to Frank Cashen as general manager.


Fashion;   Metropolitan Nights
LEAD: Virtue is clad in puffed sleeves and pearls, while its dark opposite, of course, wears black.
In the movie ''Metropolitan,'' a bittersweet recollection of New York's debutante scene in the late 1960's, a group of young socialites dresses according to character.
The vamps are sheathed in velvet, but most of the other women persist in wearing coquettish party frocks.


After 2 Years Backstage, Quayle Woos the Public
LEAD: Dan Quayle has emerged from weeks of near invisibility during the Persian Gulf crisis to try to assert himself on the Federal budget and to bolster his political fortunes by collecting chits on the Republican fund-raising circuit.


Surviving the English Countryside
LEAD:
LONGSHOT
By Dick Francis.
320 pp. New York:
G.P. Putnam's Sons. $19.95.


Agreement on Judicial Candidates
LEAD: ALTHOUGH six judges are to be elected on November's ballot, four of the contests have already been settled.
The Democrats and Republicans have cross-endorsed two candidates for State Supreme Court and one for re-election to Family Court, and have agreed on one candidate for Surrogate Court.


Barbara Schwartz Is Wed
LEAD: Barbara Frances Schwartz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Schwartz of New York, was married last evening to David Lewis Gold, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Fred M. Gold of Binghamton, N.Y., by Rabbi Elihu Schagrin at the Pearl River (N.Y.) Hilton.
Mrs.
Gold, a summa cum laude graduate of Duke University, received an M.B.A.


Renegade Lebanese General Ends Revolt and Surrenders
LEAD: Gen.
Michel Aoun, the leader of the Christian military forces that opposed the Lebanese Government for 11 months, surrendered today after Syrian air and ground attacks forced him to seek safety in the French Embassy.


Elsa Delgado Is Married
LEAD: Dr.
Elsa M. Delgado, a research fellow in ophthalmology at the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary, and Dr.
Keith B. Raskin, a hand and microsurgeon, were married last evening at the Rainbow Room Pavilion in New York by Rabbi Joel Goor.
The bride, 29 years old, is the daughter of Dr.
Lucie Delgado and Dr.


Enter the Dollar, Stage Left, Falling, Falling
LEAD: In the fall of 1990, there has been no shortage of crises, with great attention being paid to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the budget deadlock, the plight of the banks and the plunging stock market.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
LIMITED PARTNER.
By Mike Lupica. (Villard, $18.95.) Mike Lupica, a columnist for the daily sports newspaper The National, is back with his third mystery featuring Peter Finley, a street-smart, wisecracking New York television journalist.
In ''Limited Partner,'' Finley decides to launch an investigation after his friend Bobby Wyman is found dead of a drug overdose.


Pro Hockey;   Flyers Rally to Defeat Jets, 4-3
LEAD: Kjell Samuelsson scored his first goal of the season late in the third period tonight to help the Philadelphia Flyers defeat the Winnipeg Jets, 4-3, for their third victory in a row.


Campus Life: Texas;   A Loud Demand For a Place On a Male Squad
LEAD: Cheering for University of Texas teams has always come easy for Candace Brister.
She is so noisy at the school's sporting events that her friends call her ''the human microphone.''


Two-Front Campaign;   For Mr. Bush, Holding Together Fragile Coalitions Is Getting Harder
LEAD: George Bush doesn't much care for self-analysis - he said the other day he didn't want ''to get stretched out on the couch too far'' - but he admits that he likes foreign affairs much better than domestic policy.


Results Plus
LEAD:
Boxing


Lori Pollan and Allan Bahn Are Married in Connecticut
LEAD: Lori Pollan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Pollan of New York and Sharon, Conn., was married last evening to Allan Bahn, the son of Sarah Bahn of Brookline, Mass., and the late Joseph Bahn.
Rabbi Elliot Stevens officiated at the bride's parents' home in Sharon.


Pro Hockey;   Rangers Bulldoze Past the Capitals
LEAD: For the Rangers, the evolutionary process is far from complete.
The triumphs, however, are no longer ones of mere survival.
Instead, the Rangers have been winning with authority, and last night, their 5-2 victory over the Capitals approached dominance.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
LEAD:
Special Today:
Home Design/Magazine Part 2


Le Duc Tho, Top Hanoi Aide, Dies at 79
LEAD: Le Duc Tho, the chief North Vietnamese negotiator at the Paris talks that led to the 1973 Vietnam cease-fire agreement and the withdrawal of the last American troops from Vietnam, died yesterday at Army Hospital 108 in Hanoi, the press attache of the Vietnam's United Nations mission, Le Dong, said yesterday.


Ms. Oliver Weds Steven Sartorius
LEAD: Deborah Bray Oliver was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Steven James Sartorius.
The Rev.
Sue Anne Morrow, a United Methodist minister, performed an Episcopal ceremony at the American Boychoir School.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Oliver of San Marino, Calif.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr.


NOTED WITH PLEASURE
LEAD:
Imagining Our Ancestors


A Proliferation of Claims by Victims of Nazis
LEAD: After years of dwindling usefulness, Israeli organizations devoted to helping survivors of Nazi crimes win restitution from West Germany are overwhelmed with thousands of claims against the former state of East Germany.


Miss Jones Weds T. D. Cunningham 3d
LEAD: The marriage of Pamela Jones, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Winthrop Jones of Lebanon, N.J., to Thomas D. Cunningham 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cunningham of Bedford, N.Y., took place yesterday in Gladstone, N.J.
Canon John T. Morrow officiated at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.


Lisa Leffert Wed To Lee Schwamm
LEAD: Lisa Rae Leffert and Lee H. Schwamm, who expect to graduate from the Harvard University Medical School in June, were married last evening at the Rosecliff estate in Newport, R.I., by Rabbi Leslie Gutterman.


Dr. D. M. Dorfman Weds Eve LaPlante
LEAD: Eve LaPlante, the daughter of Virginia W. LaPlante of Brookline, Mass., was married yesterday on the Headlands in Rockport, Mass., to Dr.
David Michael Dorfman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Dorfman of New York.
Associate Justice Rudolph Kass of the Massachusetts Court of Appeals officiated.


Pro Hockey;   Flyers Rally to Defeat Jets, 4-3
LEAD: Kjell Samuelsson scored his first goal of the season late in the third period tonight to help the Philadelphia Flyers defeat the Winnipeg Jets, 4-3, for their third victory in a row.


Sports People;   Cowens Is Back
LEAD: What the Boston Celtics could use to help restore their dynastic domination of the National Basketball Association is another Dave Cowens, a center with the skills of the seven-time All-Star who was the N.B.A.'s co-rookie of the year in 1971 and the league's most valuable player in 1973, and who later served as player-coach in the 1978-79 season.


Tenderhearted Men
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tenderhearted Men
LEAD: To the Editor:


Susan Bernhardi, Lawyer, Marries
LEAD: Susan Mary Bernhardi, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Bernhardi of Seaford, L.I., was married last evening in New York to David Evan Sternberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Julius R. Sternberg of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert Allman , a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Bennett Hermann performed an interdenominational ceremony at the Westbury.


Jogger Knocked Down; Attack Is Called Racial
LEAD: A jogger from Los Angeles, in New York on her honeymoon, was knocked to the ground in Central Park yesterday by three girls in what the police are calling a racial-bias incident.


Question Of the Week;   Who Should Win M.V.P., Cy Young Awards?
LEAD: In the National League, Barry Bonds for the m.v.p.
He hit .301 with 114 r.b.i.'s, 33 home runs, 104 runs, 52 steals, a slugging percentage of .565, 93 walks and 156 hits; without him the Pirates would have ended up watching CBS put up salary graphics for Strawberry and Canseco.


Morocco, a U.S. Ally, Links Gulf Crisis and Israel
LEAD: In what seems a sign of a rift within the group of Arab countries that back the United States military buildup in the Persian Gulf region, King Hassan II of Morocco has asserted that there is a ''moral linkage'' between the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the Arab-Israeli issue.


A View of Communism, as the Chinese See It
LEAD: A university teacher described this scene in his home the other day: As the television announcer bragged about the economic gains since 1949, his father-in-law nodded approvingly and said: ''My, just look at that progress!''


Kay D. Hughes Is Married
LEAD: Kay D. Hughes, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lambert Hughes of Buffalo, was married yesterday to Richard M. Zwirn, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Zwirn of New York.
The Rev.
Malcolm Brown, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the couple's home in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
The bride, 32 years old, received B.S.


Too Ugly to Go to School
LEAD:
SPOOK
By Steve Vance.
234 pp. New York:
Soho Press. $18.95.


In Hollywood, Big Just Gets Bigger
LEAD: The growing foreign investment in the American entertainment industry, far from being a challenge to this country's longstanding dominance of the business, reflects a worldwide belief that only Hollywood can meet the rapidly expanding global demand for films, television shows and recorded music.


Fund Wants to Help Campers Track Careers
LEAD: The Fresh Air Fund, which has sent disadvantaged New York City children on vacations since 1877, has begun a capital fund drive to meet a new challenge: a career-awareness summer camp and school program.


Ann Tobin Is Married
LEAD: Ann Tobin and W. Allen Churchill were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Incarnation in New York.
The Rev.
J.
Douglas Ousley officiated.
Mrs.
Churchill, 52 years old, is a daughter of Edward J. Tobin of Whitestone, Queens, and the late Elizabeth K. Tobin.
A graduate of the University of Washington, with an M.B.A.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: Radar Detectors Banned;   If Your Car Is Your Castle, Can It Be Besieged?
LEAD: Over the years since the national 55-mile-an-hour speed limit was imposed, it has been lifted to 65 in some states and has come to be commonly flouted in others, particularly with the proliferation of radar detectors.
Though few states have seen fit to outlaw the devices, which warn drivers when they are coming under police radar surveillance, one of the nation's largest auto insurers, the Geico


Miss Mather Wed To R. E. Ix Jr.
LEAD: Dorothy MacGregor Mather and Ramond Edward Ix Jr. were married yesterday at the Memorial Episcopal Church of the Good Shepherd in Philadelphia by the Rev.
Dr.
Maurice A. Coombs, who was assisted by the Rev.
James W. Moore, a Roman Catholic priest.
Mrs.
Ix is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E.


Monster of Irony
LEAD: To the Editor:


If You're Thinking of Living in: Todt Hill
LEAD: At 410 feet above sea level, Staten Island's Todt Hill is the highest natural point on the Eastern Seaboard south of Maine.
Its spectacular, panoramic vista takes in the New York City skyline, the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, New York Harbor and the New Jersey shore.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, a caption on the Highlights of the Week page and the Tuesday Highlights page of the Television section today list an incorrect time for an NBC movie, ''Danielle Steel's Fine Things.'' It can be seen Tuesday night beginning at 8.


Sports of the Times;   Gunslinger in the A's Bullpen
LEAD: OAKLAND, Calif.


A Land of Immigrants Gets Uneasy About Immigration
LEAD: The incidents span a decade and a continent: Gulf Coast fishermen in Texas harass Vietnamese competitors who are catching more shrimp.
A Florida supermarket manager suspends a cashier for speaking Spanish at work.
Residents of a Maryland community protest the establishment of a Japanese junior college near the Chesapeake Bay.


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bluepoint
$126,000
6 Mark Drive
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, basement, expandable attic, 1-car garage; taxes $3,000.
Massapequa
$189,000
111 Nassau Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.


Japanese Pickles or Preserves: So Nice With Rice
LEAD: The heart of a traditional Japanese meal is a bowl of hot, freshly cooked rice and a side dish of tsukemono, or pickled vegetables.
Tsukudani, which are varieties of fish, shellfish and seaweed that have been preserved by slow cooking in soy sauce and sugar, are also a popular accompaniment to rice.


Letting All Schools Share in the Dream
LEAD: The article ''Schools Preparing for Changes in Financing'' (Sept. 2) filled in many of the cracks in the current controversy over rich school-poor school educational financing.


Boilerplate
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bronzes Conjure Up Images of a Fabled Past
LEAD: The ancient bronze objects on view at the Merrin Gallery, 724 Fifth Avenue at 56th Street, have more in common than the material from which they were made.
The 44 objects presented in ''Bronze!,'' running from Thursday through Nov. 10, include portrait heads, mythological figures, lamps, ax heads, vessels, amulets and furniture fragments.


Felice Oper Marries Chad Schmerler
LEAD: Felice Beth Oper, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Oper of Pittsburgh, was married in New York last evening to Charles David Schmerler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Schmerler of Tenafly, N.J.
Rabbi Reuven Siegel performed the ceremony at the Union League Club.
The bride, 28 years old, is keeping her name.


Baseball: On To The Series;   Henderson Reflects on '87 Piniella
LEAD: The wounds are finally healed.


Two Sculptors Share Thorpe Gallery
LEAD: ITS 15th anniversary imminent, Thorpe Intermedia Gallery, on Route 340 here, is celebrating with a show by Sister Adele Myers and David Weinrib that should be titled ''Together Again.'' During the 1980's the artists collaborated as the gallery's co-directors.


Be a Competitor
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Little Lonelier Than in 70's, New York Faces Fiscal Crisis
LEAD: Fifteen years after its costly and humiliating brush with bankruptcy, New York City is edging into fiscal straits that seem painfully familiar.


Hunters Paid to Stalk Animals in Captivity
LEAD: Fish and game agents have raided a game preserve where hunters paid up to $4,000 to stalk and kill bears and cougars in a fenced area the size of a football field, the authorities say.
The officials said the 200 to 300 animals killed in the shooting sprees at the game preserve had been raised in captivity.


Some Plants Are Doubly Rewarding
LEAD: EERYONE likes to have a double dividend.
And some plants are worth the gardener's time and investment for their flowers in spring as well as their showy foliage or berries in fall.


German Held in Attack on Minister


World Markets;   A Mixed Blessing for the Pound
LEAD: The British pound's entry last week into the European Monetary System has altered the outlook for equities in London.
Investors, says Mark Brown, the chief United Kingdomstrategist for UBS Phillips &amp; Drew in London, will be ''paying more for less.''


A Hopelessly Trendy Killer
LEAD:
THE MURDERER NEXT DOOR
By Rafael Yglesias.
282 pp. New York:
Crown Publishers. $19.95.


After the Volcano Exploded
LEAD: A STAR among volcanoes, Krakatoa, in Indonesia, erupted in 1883.
The explosions were heard thousands of miles away; a tidal wave 120 feet high devastated the shores of neighboring islands, Java and Sumatra, killing 36,000 people.


Some Plants Are Doubly Rewarding
LEAD: EERYONE likes to have a double dividend.
And some plants are worth the gardener's time and investment for their flowers in spring as well as their showy foliage or berries in fall.


Cutting the Cord
LEAD: One of the more unusual approaches to saving household space is to take all the furnishings out of a room and hang them on your body.
This is the idea behind the new portable home office: If the equipment fits, wear it.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: Incisive end-game play was Bent Larsen's strongest weapon in his victory in the Watson, Farley &amp; Williams International Chess Challenge in New York, Sept. 14-25.
The 55-year-old Danish grandmaster continues to turn his longtime penchant for pawn play into points.


3 Arab States Still Pursuing Peaceful Iraqi Pullout
LEAD: King Hussein of Jordan conferred today with Iraq's Foreign Minister about the continuing diplomatic effort by some Arab states to persuade President Saddam Hussein to withdraw peacefully from Kuwait.


Sports People;   Then Jack Said . . .
LEAD: San Diego fans who have been following the everlastingly unfolding developments of the Jack and Tony Show may have to look elsewhere for a rip-roaring feud to tide them over until spring training.
This one seems to be fizzling fast.


'L'Atalante,' a Slow Boat Bound for Lasting Fame
LEAD: When Jean Vigo's ''Atalante'' opens Friday at the Lincoln Plaza, a new generation of Americans will finally have the chance to see the film that Francois Truffaut, among other directors, called ''a masterpiece'' - but in a restored print rather than one of the cut versions that have been circulating since 1934.


A Tale of Pulp and Passion: The Jim Thompson Revival
LEAD: In ''Bad Boy,'' a memoir of his early years, the crime-fiction writer Jim Thompson tells of a West Texas deputy sheriff who pursued him when, as a young man, he neglected to pay a fine for getting drunk and disturbing the peace.
Alone with him on the vast prairie, the deputy becomes a creature of menace:


The Blood Covered His Rack of Lamb
LEAD:
WHISKEY RIVER
By Loren D. Estleman.
262 pp. New York:
Bantam Books. $17.95.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:
The Cook, the Thief, His Wife and Her Lover
1990. Vidmark. $89.95. LD, $39.95. CC. 2:03 unrated; 1:35 R.
Peter Greenaway's elegant, brutal film explores what would happen to love and the social order if the most crass, sadistic people were to gain power.
In a milieu of sophisticated taste, the thief, who talks and acts as if he has crawled out of a sewer, dines nightly at a restaurant with his henchmen while his wife disports with a bookish fellow behind the scenes on the premises.


Susan A. Roberts Marries Charles S. Levy in Capital
LEAD: Susan Ann Roberts, the senior assistant administrator at the Washington (D.C.) Hospital Center, and Dr.
Charles Steven Levy, chairman of the infectious diseases section there, were married yesterday at the Hay Adams Hotel in Washington.
The Rev.
D.
Mark Cooper, a Lutheran minister, performed the ecumenical ceremony.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. I had new cedar shingles put on my roof last year.
I now seem to be getting different opinions on what to do with these shingles.
Some say to apply a water-base sealer, some say an oil-base sealer, and some say to leave the shingles as is.
What do you think?


Arrogant Blindness
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ellen G. Glazer and Paul Feinsot Wed
LEAD: Ellen Gaye Glazer, the daughter of Barbara Glazer of Hartsdale, N.Y., and Dr.
Louis Glazer of Memphis, was married last evening in New York to Paul Feinsot, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Aaron Feinsot of New York.
Rabbi David M. Posner officiated at Delmonico's restaurant.
Mrs.
Feinsot graduated from New York University and is a law student at Hofstra University, where she is an editor of The Property Law Journal.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   Burritos With a Twist
LEAD: People who have been making burritos for years will wonder at the strange-sounding combination of ingredients offered in this one-dish recipe.
Certainly this is not a traditional filling, even if the ingredients have a decided southwestern accent.


Homage to 50 Years of Live Opera Finds Its Producer
LEAD: WHEN Texaco decided to present a special series of programs to commemorate its 50 years of sponsoring live radio broadcasts from the Metropolitan Opera, the Harrison-based company had no trouble finding a producer.
It was agreed that probably only one person in the country had the knowledge and background - not to mention the personal record collection - to do the job: George


Seattle Induces Office Builders to Include Child Care
LEAD: In four other cities that give developers density bonuses for child care -- Irvine, Calif., Portland, Ore., Cincinnati and Hart ford -- proposed projects have been put on hold until sluggish real estate markets im prove.


Cut the Deficit, Not the Dividend
LEAD: After years of pretending that the Federal budget deficit wasn't much of a problem, Congress is poised to plunge fanatically in the other direction, as though it had no other duty than deficit reduction.
But Americans can walk and chew gum at the same time.
They need to see the deficit reduced, but they also need to invest in disadvantaged children, rebuild dilapidated infrastructure and save the despoiled environment.


Miss DiGiacomo Wed to David Ganek
LEAD: Danielle DiGiacomo and David Kent Ganek, 1985 graduates of Franklin and Marshall College, were married yesterday at the Metropolitan Club by Rabbi David Posner.
Mrs.
Ganek, 26 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank DiGiacomo of Paris.
Mr.
Ganek, 27, is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Ganek of New


Chronology of 15 Years Of Civil War in Lebanon


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: The ritual has begun: rake or blow leaves off the lawn; start a new compost pile.
Finish planting of container-grown perennials and evergreens.
Bulb planting goes on.
Keep mowing as long as the grass is growing.
Water evergreens and young fruit trees.
Allow some leaves to accumulate over flower borders as a mulch.


Does the Start Foretell the Finish?
LEAD: Well begun is half done.
That scrap of folk wisdom was imprinted on my tiny tabula rasa one dreary afternoon in childhood by a penmanship tyrant who required that it be copied out a hundred times in a fine, round Palmer Method hand.
Experience has taught, however, that such copybook rules are more often hopeful than true.


Postings: Warren Township Project;   A Colonial-Style Office Condo
LEAD: Despite a weak market, developers in Warren Township, N.J., are pressing ahead with a new office condominium, and finding strong interest among buyers.


Ex-Kennedy Aides Ask Release of '62 Crisis Papers
LEAD: Nine former Kennedy Administration officials have joined in a legal challenge to the State Department over the department's refusal to release nearly 700 documents about the 1962 Cuban missile crisis.


Yet Another 'Me and My Girl'
LEAD: THERE is no jollier musical around than ''Me and My Girl.'' For a peripatetic critic who has not only endured but also enjoyed four productions of the revamped 1937 show in six weeks, not to mention four visits to the Broadway production (1986-89), is there any other musical around?
Intimations of overexposure aside, ''Me and My Girl'' -now at the Darien Dinner Theater - is reaffirming and unfailingly winning, even in productions that do not measure up to a considerable built-in appeal of a beguiling score and an endearing book.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
TEAM ART


On Wednesday He Does His Ears
LEAD:
IN PRAISE OF THE STEPMOTHER
By Mario Vargas Llosa.
Translated by Helen Lane.
Illustrated. 149 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $18.95.


Computers Are Aiding Emergency Responses
LEAD: WITH the implementation of a statewide 911 emergency system this year, an increasing number of police and fire departments and other agencies are installing computer systems to help them respond more effectively.
The systems store and display information about streets and even individual buildings in a community.If a fire is reported at a factory, for instance, the computer can display a floor plan plus a list of hazardous materials and recommended protective measures.


Campus Life: Illinois;   Vote of Confidence For Campus 'Chief' Indians Oppose
LEAD: Chief Illiniwek still reigns as the mascot of the University of Illinois, but the American Indians and others who find the symbol offensive say they will continue the fight, despite a vote of confidence in its favor.


Recession Signs
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week;   Who Should Win M.V.P., Cy Young Awards?
LEAD: Without Darryl Strawberry the Mets would have been nowhere.
He'll be bypassed again, but he deserves the award.
The N.L.
Cy Young belongs to Doug Drabek, hands down.


Can Dinkins Afford To Confront Problems Only When He Must?
LEAD: If there is a moment that risks defining the mayoralty of David N. Dinkins, it is now.
Can the calm and cautious clubhouse politician who waited and worked so long to lead New York City now shake the swirl of problems that has swamped him, and seize his city's helm?


The Big Business of 'Smalls'
LEAD: They are definitely no bigger than a breadbox.
Most sell for less than $2,000, and some for under $50.
They tend to be between 70 and 200 years old.
And if they fulfill these criteria, they can be just about anything, from a silver nutmeg grater to a matchbox made out of the remnants of a samurai sword.


He Shot the Corpse
LEAD:
THE LAST FRAME.
By Jim Wright. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $16.95.) It takes an intimate knowledge of the newspaper business to create an authentic tough-guy news photographer like Will Carver.
Accused of dressing like an overturned dumpster and living life hiding behind his camera, the hero of Jim Wright's first novel, ''The Last Frame,'' leaps moral quandaries and midlife crises in a single bound.


A Savage and Demeaning Ritual
LEAD:
PLEDGING ALLEGIANCE
The Last Campaign of the Cold War.
By Sidney Blumenthal.
386 pp. New York: HarperCollins. $22.95.


Make Room For Daddy
LEAD: The birth of our second child was an event we anticipated with joy.
We had a daughter, and now we were about to have a son.
The family would be complete.
How could it be otherwise?
Middle-class Manhattanites are almost as inflexible about family size as the Chinese: They are allowed one child; we are allowed two.


Eastern European Thinkers in a Czech Castle
LEAD: With help from a New York-based research group, a 14th-century Czechoslavak castle is being turned into an incubator to nurture a new generation of Eastern European politicians, entrepreneurs and scholars.


Music's New Catatonia: Don't Bother Getting Up
LEAD: Galaxie 500 is named after a 1960's-model Ford, but the songs on the Boston band's third album, ''This Is Our Music,'' seldom exceed the pace of heavy traffic.
It's music to sit still by.
Dean Wareham's thin, tentative voice can inflate without warning into an eerie falsetto.
His lyrics reflect a reluctance to participate, an unsureness about even the most casual social situations.


KIDS AND SCHOLARS AT WORK
LEAD: What a wonderful feeling of nostalgia I had when I opened the pages of Bruce Weber's article ''Shhh!
Kids and Scholars at Work'' (Sept. 23).
The Hunts Point branch of the New York Public Library was where, more than 30 years ago, I first developed a love of books.
How well I still remember the day when I was old enough to get a card to the adult section of the library and was able to go downstairs and browse in the cavernous and hushed room, with shelves full of books that reached from the ceiling to the floor.


Defense Calls No Witnesses In Trial of Ex-Navajo Leader
LEAD: The prosecution rested its case Friday in the bribery and kickback trial of the suspended chairman of the Navajo tribe, Peter MacDonald, and his son, and defense lawyers said they would call no witnesses.


Mike Milken: Robin Hood or Sheriff of Nottingham?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Woman Wins Contest Then Is Disqualified
LEAD: A woman named as the winner of a $10 million prize in a contest sponsored by McDonald's and the NBC television network was disqualified because a daughter who does not live with her is a McDonald's cashier.


Review/Ballet;   Students in Dances Choreographed by Dancers
LEAD: The Barnard College Dance Department, which has often presented examples of various dance forms, offered its first all-ballet program on Thursday afternoon at the Minor Latham Playhouse.
The event featured students in works by experienced ballet dancers who have begun to pursue choreographic careers.


THE WORLD: Japan's Shrewd New Investment Strategy . . .;;   . . . Moves Beyond Rockefeller Center and Pebble Beach
LEAD: If all goes as planned in the next few weeks, E.T., the cuddly extra-terrestrial, will have a new parent.
Matsushita, the giant consumer electronics maker known in the United States as Panasonic, is negotiating what may be a $7 billion takeover of MCA, the owner of Universal Studios and one of the recording industry's biggest labels.


Technology;   Coming Soon: Data You Can Look Under and Walk Through
LEAD: The Xerox Corporation's organizational chart fills an 80-page book for just the top 650 positions.
But at Xerox's computer science laboratory here, all those pages can be displayed on a single computer screen.


Doing In Filthy Jack
LEAD:
A CITY OF STRANGERS
By Robert Barnard.
287 pp. New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons. $18.95.


On Slides and Art: Further View
LEAD: I am moved to respond to the article ''The Role Slides Play in Judging Art'' [Sept. 30] , since my work was mentioned and I have also given thought to this very matter.


Man's Best Friend a Therapist, Too
LEAD: THE two West Highland terriers, Bonnie and Clyde, cuddled on the laps of each of the eight patients in the Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Center at Brunswick Hospital in Amityville.


BEST SELLERS: October 14, 1990
LEAD:
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
2
2
8
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $21.95.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.


'Civil War' Deserves Emmy for Pseudohistory
LEAD: To the Editor:


Boxing;   Doubts Still Follow Douglas


Israelis Jail Officer Who Declined to Serve
LEAD: An Israeli officer who told his soldiers his conscience would not permit him to serve in the occupied Gaza Strip was jailed for 35 days beginning today.


Lighten Up
LEAD: LUXURY IS HIGH CEILINGS AND A LOW OVERHEAD,'' says the decorator Tom Scheerer.
In Manhattan, both are rare.
Which is why Scheerer, a partner of Bilhuber Inc., a New York-based design company, decided to redecorate rather than move out of his East Side studio.
Three years ago, the space had glazed aubergine walls, an 18th-century screen and, in the middle of the room, a bed that doubled as a sofa.


CORRECTIONS
LEAD: An article on the Technology page on Sept. 30 about small satellites misstated the affiliation of R. Gilbert Moore.
He is an adjunct professor of physics at Utah State University, not the University of Utah.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
LEAD:
Eating Out


He Almost Got Away
LEAD:
DEATH SENTENCE
The Inside Story of the John List Murders.
By Joe Sharkey.
Illustrated. 305 pp. New York:
Signet. Paper, $4.95.


No Lenin, No Marx and, Just Maybe, No Communist Party in Prague
LEAD: In his faded jeans and blue, short-sleeved polo shirt sporting a ''Levis'' label, Vasil Mohorita, a tall 38-year-old, looks nothing like his grizzled, somber-suited predecessors.


Up in the Air Against His Will
LEAD: These days, I am on the road during the week, but I always have to get back to New York on the weekend to work.
So I spend a lot of time in the lines at the airline counters.
Most people who have to go somewhere in America nowadays wait in those same lines.
I can remember when people in those lines laughed and chatted, anticipating the exciting trips they were about to make up above the clouds.


Where and How to Insulate
LEAD: MOST homes have insulation in the attic and walls, it having been included during construction or added later.
Insulation between an unheated basement or crawl space and the main floor is important, too; in winter, unheated areas beneath rooms can act like a block of ice.


Minnesota's Artful Indian Crafts
LEAD: Minnesota's Native American population is largely invisible to travelers.
Since little effort is made to promote local Indian culture, it is not surprising that few tourists visit the 11 reservations (4 Dakota, 7 Ojibway), attend annual powwows, or see anything for sale other than occasional tourist trinkets.


Question Of the Week;   Who Should Win M.V.P., Cy Young Awards?
LEAD: In the American League, Rickey Henderson.
He led the league in on-base percentage (.439), runs scored (119), stolen bases (65); was second in batting (.325) and slugging average (.577); fourth in walks with 97 and sixth in home runs with 28.
Roger Clemens (21-6) deserves the Cy Young.
Bob Welch (27-7) allowed more than a run per nine innings more than Clemens, and Clemens had 82 more strikeouts (209 to 127) and 23 fewer walks (54 to 77) than Welch.


Review/Recital;   A Tenor Comfortably Challenged
LEAD: Carnegie Hall did well, in planning its grand centennial season, not to overlook the intimate.
One promising series in Weill Recital Hall, more modest than its title, ''Great Singers,'' implies, got off to a splendid start on Friday evening with the New York City debut recital of the American tenor John


Nets Stopped By Rain
LEAD: A basketball game postponed by rain?
Unless it is played outdoors, it could never happen.
Try again.
Anything is possible with the Nets, including the cancellation of a game because of precipitation.


Museum Show of State Talent
LEAD: ALTHOUGH teapots by craft artists are not expected to hold hot water these days, and contemporary art quilts rarely warm chilled toes, the decades-old maxim ''Form follows function'' still possesses an underpinning of truth in the craft world.
Clay continues to be shaped into vessels; fabrics are cut, stitched and quilted, while molten glass is blown into glistening bowls.


Some Plants Are Doubly Rewarding
LEAD: EERYONE likes to have a double dividend.
And some plants are worth the gardener's time and investment for their flowers in spring as well as their showy foliage or berries in fall.


Baseball;   Mets Move Hunsicker To Key Executive Post
LEAD: The Mets today formally named their director of minor league operations, Gerry Hunsicker, as the ''man on the fast track'' who would replace Joe McIlvaine as their chief baseball executive and perhaps as the heir apparent to Frank Cashen as general manager.


Closter Journal;   A Harvest That Helps the Needy
LEAD: THE autumn sun beat down on Mary Crain, but that didn't seem to matter because there was the smell of harvest in the air.
At her feet, a bushel of just-picked green and red peppers gave off a fragrance not found in supermarkets.


Why All the Hoopla?
LEAD: To the Editor:


If Only Ducks Were Sold in Parts
LEAD: NO one thinks twice about buying chicken in parts, but few places will sell you duck legs or breasts separately.
This is too bad, for when it comes to cooking duck, most people do it one way: in the oven.
The problem with roasting is that when the legs are done, the breast is often dry.
If the breast is pink, the legs are red.


Fine Law Needs Fine-Tuning
LEAD: The success of New York City's new campaign financing system in last year's mayoral election set a worthy example for Congress.
That makes the City Council's sluggish response to proposed refinements all the more disappointing.


Sarah Bittle Wed To John H. Dritz
LEAD: Sarah Elizabeth Bittle, a daughter of Sandra Peterson of Iowa Falls, Iowa, was married in Des Moines last evening to John Harris Dritz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael A. Dritz of Armonk, N.Y.
Rabbi Steven Fink performed the ceremony at the Marriott Hotel.


European Visitors, Season Openers
LEAD: TOURING groups from England and Sweden highlight this week in music, as do season openers in Stamford, Norwalk, New Haven and Chester.
The Jorgensen Auditorium, at the University of Connecticut, Storrs, will be the site of the first visit to Connecticut of a string octet from the Academy of St.
Martin in the Fields, in London.


Review/Music;   Calamity Jane and Other Voices
LEAD: For some years now, Dora Ohrenstein has been known but not quite known as the soprano soloist in the Philip Glass Ensemble.
Because of the nature of Mr.
Glass's Minimalist style, in which Ms.
Ohrenstein is called upon to vocalize wordlessly amid highly amplified instrumental lines, her musical and theatrical gifts have remained largely depersonalized.


Seattle Induces Office Builders to Include Child Care
LEAD: The city of Seattle is beginning to get experience with the use of zoning incentives that encourage builders to provide day-care centers for the young children of office workers.
The results so far suggest advantages, but at a substantial cost to users for a substantial benefit to builders.


How's the Stereo Set Feeling? Test Records Furnish Clues
LEAD: Things tend to fall apart as they age.
Unlike the collapse of the proverbial one-horse shay, it usually doesn't happen all at once.
But even the minor ravages of time gradually add up, and after years of faithful service, a stereo system may not sound as good as it once did.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
SAVING THE FALCONS


'Phone My Wife. They Finally Got Me.'
LEAD:
LOUD AND CLEAR.
By Lake Headley with William Hoffman. (Donald Hutter/Holt, $22.50.) Just before noon on June 2, 1976, Don Bolles, a 47-year-old investigative reporter for The Arizona Republic, stepped into his automobile in the parking lot of the Clarendon Hotel in downtown Phoenix, where he had been lured by a small-time criminal and sleazy informant named John Adamson.


Text of Resolution Adopted by U.N. Council
LEAD: Following is the text of the resolution approved on Friday night by the Security Council:


In Some Fights, Quitting Is Harder Than Joining In
LEAD: Of the panoply of issues the United States and the Soviet Union still face if they are to put the Cold War completely behind them, none appear more nettlesome than resolving the longstanding civil wars fought by their clients in Afghanistan, Angola and Cambodia.


What's Adultery? A Little Sex, A Lot of Politics
LEAD: What Jane Austen did for marriage in the 19th century, film makers are doing for adultery today.
In the past few weeks alone, eight films from seven countries have offered a view of infidelity around the world.
It is an unmistakable sign of a turbulent social era.


Stop Mowing, Start Digging
LEAD: Any of us have had an extra-room dream.
Perhaps it has not been examined in the great psychoanalytic case histories; it is more likely to have been discussed by architects and decorators whose clients have experienced it.
In this particular fantasy, the dreamer opens a door to a vast and beautiful space that has gone undetected all the years he has suffered in his cramped abode.


BHUTTO FOES PRESS PUNJAB CAMPAIGN
LEAD: In an effort to give momentum to a slow-start campaign and prove that the political opposition to Benazir Bhutto is united, Prime Minister Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi and his colleagues hit the road today in a gigantic motorcade through Punjab, the province that will determine the outcome of elections later this month.


Transcripts of Statements by the U.S. and British Delegates
LEAD: Following are transcripts of the statements made on Friday night by the United States Representative to the United Nations, Thomas R. Pickering, and the President of the Security Council, Sir David Hannay of Britain:
PICKERING STATEMENT


Transfusion Confusion
LEAD:
SAFE BLOOD
Purifying the Nation's Blood Supply in the Age of AIDS.
By Joseph Feldschuh with Doron Weber.
218 pp. New York:
The Free Press.
$19.95.


Gender Differences in the Locker Room
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LEAD:
COME A TIDE
By George Ella Lyon.
Illustrated by Stephen Gammell.
Unpaged. New York:
Orchard Books. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


Dr. Gail Sorrel Weds Gary Mosk
LEAD: Dr.
Gail Patrice Sorrel and Gary Alan Mosk were married last evening at the Jewish Community Center in Harrison, N.Y., by Cantor Raymond Smolover.
Mrs.
Mosk is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome M. Sorrel of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Mosk of West Hills, Calif.


The Executive Computer;   On the Font Battlefront, an Uneasy Truce Raises Hopes
LEAD: An uneasy truce has developed in the computer industry's dispute over type formats.
Coming a year after the so-called font wars erupted, the relative peace is welcome news to personal computer users who are planning to move to Windows 3.0, Macintosh System 7.0, which is scheduled for release soon, and other graphics-based operating systems that allow a variety of type sizes and styles to be used within a document or application.


Laurels for Video Recorders
LEAD: Pinpointing superior design is the aim of the annual Grand Prix Awards sponsored by Audio-Video International, a prominent trade journal.
An earlier column discussed the winning television sets.
The spotlight now turns to the video recorders singled out for their special merit in a nationwide poll of video dealers.


Michele Schultz Is Wed
LEAD: Dr.
Michele Ann Schultz was married last evening at Congregation B'nai Israel in Rumson, N.J., to Andrew Brett Robins.
Rabbi Jack Rosoff officiated.
The bride, 26 years old, is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sidney Schultz of Lincroft, N.J.
The bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Robins of West Orange, N.J.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 14, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE DARK HALF, by Stephen King. (Signet, $5.95.) A writer of horror tales kills off his pseudonym, who then goes on a rampage.
2
46
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and lawyers.


A Plan for Boffo Box Office
LEAD: To the Editor:


East Breathes Easier as Storms' Threat Pales
LEAD: The final blow of a one-two-three punch, which could have clobbered the East Coast with three hurricanes in a week if several things had gone slightly differently, failed to land yesterday as hurricane Lili lost strength and turned out to sea.


Janis A. Carbone Is Wed in Jersey
LEAD: Janis Ann Carbone, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Carbone of Scotia, N.Y., was married yesterday in Westfield, N.J., to Daniel Leonard Richards, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard L. Richards of Amherst, Mass.
The Rev.
Thomas R. G. Evans performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church of Westfield.


Contemporary Objects Use Icons of Past
LEAD: ''SPIRIT images'' borrowed from petroglyphs and ancient ceremonial artifacts lend the stamp of tradition to an assortment of pottery, baskets, jewelry and wall pieces by 25 artists at the Craftsman's Gallery here.


Katharine Lewis Married in Boston
LEAD: Katharine Folsom Lewis, a daughter of Jane D. Lewis of Tenafly, N.J., and Dr.
John L. Lewis Jr. of New York, was married yesterday in Boston to Patrick Kevin Armstrong, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
D.
Colm Armstrong of Braintree, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
Rhys Williams, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the First Lutheran Church.


An Aversion to Taxing Taxable Substances
LEAD: Canadians routinely pay more than $30 for a carton of cigarettes.
Italians pay more than $5 for a gallon of gasoline.
Danes not only pay $1.50 plus deposit for a store-bought bottle of beer but face such high prices for cigarettes - close to $4 a pack - that a Danish embassy spokesman, Bent Skou, says ''nobody in his right mind'' buys a whole carton at once.


Take 6 Spreads the Gospel - Pure and A Cappella
LEAD: With a harmonic blend of jazz, pop and church-inspired traditions, the a cappella gospel singers Take 6 have single-handedly revived the creative joy of the vocal group.


Final Bow?
LEAD: For many people who hoped to catch one more performance by Leonard Bernstein before he put away his baton, this has been a year of disappointments.
In May, poor health caused him to cancel his appearance at the Spoleto U.S.A.
Festival in Charleston, S.C.
Then he withdrew from the Pacific Music Festival in Japan.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 14, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE DARK HALF, by Stephen King. (Signet, $5.95.) A writer of horror tales kills off his pseudonym, who then goes on a rampage.
2
46
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and lawyers.


Review/Theater;   Hypocrisies in the Name of Love
LEAD: Politics and business have long been known to make very strange bedfellows, but they are nothing compared with the bizarre alliances formed in the name of love.
And no playwright in the past century, or very likely any other, has been so adept at exposing the absurdities of our most cherished romantic notions as George Bernard Shaw.


Always the Man on the Spot
LEAD:
UNDER THE GYPSY MOON
By Lawrence Thornton.
212 pp. New York:
Doubleday. $18.95.


Miss Nugent Wed In Massachusetts
LEAD: Pamela Susan Nugent, a daughter of Ara L. Nugent of Fair Haven, N.J., and Robert S. Nugent of Little River, S.C., was married yesterday in Lincoln, Mass., to Robert Benjamin Czekanski, a son of Sophie Czekanski of Chicopee, Mass., and the late Benjamin Czekanski.
The Rev.
Margaret B. Gunness officiated at St.


Campus Life: Stanford;   Giving Benefits And Apartments To Gay Couples
LEAD: After more than a year of debate, Stanford University has granted unwed students, including homosexual couples, access to dormitories and other benefits until now reserved for married students.


Evening Stars
LEAD:
ANCHORS
Brokaw, Jennings, Rather and the Evening News.
By Robert Goldberg and Gerald Jay Goldberg.
Illustrated. 399 pp. New York:
Birch Lane Press/Carol Publishing Group. $19.95.


Cambodians' Hosts Fight State Dept. on Defections
LEAD: A lawyer representing the American hosts of a troupe of Cambodian dancers says he will file a lawsuit if the Government insists on interviewing the dancers to see if they wish to seek political asylum here.


Ethnic Rivalries Push Yugoslavia to Edge
LEAD: Intensifying conflicts and rivalries among Yugoslavia's republics are bringing the country dangerously close to the breaking point, say people who favor the process as well as those who fear it.


Fashion;   Metropolitan Nights
LEAD: Virtue is clad in puffed sleeves and pearls, while its dark opposite, of course, wears black.
In the movie ''Metropolitan,'' a bittersweet recollection of New York's debutante scene in the late 1960's, a group of young socialites dresses according to character.
The vamps are sheathed in velvet, but most of the other women persist in wearing coquettish party frocks.


Hanoi's Foreign Minister Works the U.S. Circuit Seeking End to Trade Ban
LEAD: Like a salesman opening up a new territory, Nguyen Co Thach, Vietnam's peripatetic Foreign Minister, is knocking on doors and seeking friends among America's members of Congress, diplomats, scholars and bankers, in the hope of ending Washington's trade embargo against his country.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut;   Recent Sales
LEAD: Larchmont, N.Y.
$497,000
28 Colonial Avenue
5-bedroom, 4 full and 2 half-bath, 57-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, glass-enclosed porch, professional suite; taxes $9,378.
Rye Brook, N.Y.
$710,000
1 Brookside Way
5-bedroom, 5-bath, 26-year-old contemporary; 2 kitchens, family room, patio, indoor pool, sauna, deck; taxes $11,732.


What on Earth Is the Guggenheim Up To?
LEAD: The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York City is to all outward appearances on hiatus, closed to visitors for another year, until construction ends on an annex.
But in fact a kind of revolution is under way there, one that could have an impact well beyond the walls of Frank Lloyd Wright's spiral building - one that it is no exaggeration to say could alter the way art museums across the country do business and visitors experience these places.


SWEPT AWAY
LEAD: THIS SPACE WAS ORIGINALLY A DINGY HALLWAY AND NONDESCRIPT room in the designer Tom Britt's Manhattan apartment. ''I wanted to make it a guest room, but didn't want to spend the money on construction or on reparing the damaged walls to ready them for a good paint job,'' Britt explains. ''Tenting was the most econcomical solution.


College Football: Midwest;   Penalty Makes Indiana Take Tie
LEAD: A holding penalty cost Indiana a go-ahead touchdown with less than two minutes to go today, and the Hoosiers had to settle for a 27-yard field goal by Scott Bonnell and a 27-27 tie with Ohio State.


MENEM'S REFORMS PROVOKE BACKLASH
LEAD: For a President who likes to duck his bodyguards, drive his own car, frequent the nightspots and soccer stadiums and generally mix with the throngs, the reviews that Carlos Saul Menem gets from the people these days are disquieting.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   In Yonkers, Art With a River View
LEAD: Although it is the fourth largest city in New York, Yonkers is forever living in the shadow of New York City, its huge neighbor immediately to the south.


College Football: East;   Pitt Breezes by Rutgers
LEAD: Glenn Deveaux scored on three short runs, Alex Van Pelt hit Olanda Truitt with two scoring passes and Pittsburgh blocked a punt to end a late-game rally in a 45-21 victory over Rutgers today.


Postings: Slipping Slates;   Mansard Problem
LEAD: The cooperative apartment building at the northeast corner of Madison Avenue and 90th Street, a Beaux-Arts beauty, is remarkably well preserved for its 89 years.
Recently, though, slates started slipping from its mansard roof, creating a hazard as well as spoiling its ornate appearance.


WHEN LIFE IS TOXIC
LEAD: The several case studies of people with multiple chemical sensitivities, described in Robert Reinhold's article ''When Life Is Toxic'' (Sept. 16), show not so much the pathos of their condition as the eccentricities, the socially aberrant personalities that result.
Reinhold goes to considerable lengths to report their bizarre coping strategies (eating bear meat, wearing ''Canary Clothes'') and the equally bizarre


A Romance With Japan Teaches Some Hard Lessons
LEAD: It is in the course of a conversation about her role as concubine that Mary McKenzie - once of Scotland, now of Tokyo and heroine of the Masterpiece Theater presentation of ''The Ginger Tree'' - learns an essential lesson from her lover about the gulf that separates the Japanese from most everyone else.


New Yorkers, etc.
LEAD: It should be clear-cut but it isn't. ''Friend'' means different things to different people.
The word is basically a loose cannon.
As the saying goes, there are friends and then there are friends.


In the Mideast, Does Democracy Have a Chance?
LEAD: In Dec. 22, 1989, at an excruciatingly boring meeting of Arab and European foreign ministers in Paris, the French delegate, Roland Dumas, was handed a telegram. ''Ceausescu has fallen!'' he exclaimed.
The Europeans burst into applause, shattering the tedious formality of the occasion.
In the back rows, junior Arab diplomats and advisers joined the cheering - until they realized that their ministers, sitting up front, had remained dour and quiet.


Dawn C. F. Smith to Wed This Fall
LEAD: Dawn Carol Fabiola Smith and Elbert L. Robertson are planning a November wedding.
Miss Smith, 29 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Smith of Ocala, Fla.
Mr.
Robertson, 33, is the son of Beatrice Robertson of Summit, Miss., and the late Elbert Robertson.


The Passions of Young 'Sirin'
LEAD:
VLADIMIR NABOKOV
The Russian Years.
By Brian Boyd.
Illustrated. 607 pp. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press. $25.


Debra Cherney, Lawyer, Married
LEAD: Debra Lynn Cherney and Hartley Todd Bernstein were married last evening at the Tower Suite in New York.
Cantor Wayne Siet and Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum of FederAL District Court, Manhattan, a cousin of the bride, officiated.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Cherney of Merrick, L.I.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: Two of the three most coveted titles in world play are the Olympiad Teams and the Open Pairs.
In the past 15 years United States representatives have won three titles out of a possible eight.
But matching this record, and beating all the European countries put together, is Brazil.


Kohl's Party Favored in Voting in the East Today
LEAD: Voters in regional elections on Sunday in what used to be East Germany are expected to give a strong indication of how the east, and possibly the entire nation, will go seven weeks from now in the first all-German elections in 57 years.


Two-Front Campaign;   For Mr. Bush, Holding Together Fragile Coalitions Is Getting Harder
LEAD: George Bush doesn't much care for self-analysis - he said the other day he didn't want ''to get stretched out on the couch too far'' - but he admits that he likes foreign affairs much better than domestic policy.


Corrections
LEAD: A report on Sept. 30 about the engagement of Melanie Borden Falk to Roderick Ian Vere Nicoll misidentified the bank of which the prospective bride's stepfather, William J. McDonough, was vice chairman until his recent retirement.
It is the First National Bank of Chicago.


Japan's Shrewd New Investment Strategy . . .
LEAD: From time to time over the last five years, economists played an intellectual game of calculating what might happen if Japanese institutions halted their massive purchases of United States Treasury bonds, issued to finance the yawning Federal budget deficits.
It seemed a flight of fancy, since Japan's appetite for the securities seemed so vast.


Penn State Wins As a Series Ends
LEAD: Syracuse pursued Penn State through a long afternoon but never caught up today in the last scheduled game between these emotional rivals.
The Nittany Lions, who never made a damaging mistake, scored 10 points in the fourth quarter to win, 27-21, before a crowd of 86,002, the third largest ever at Beaver


Campus Life: Bucknell;   Feminist Graffiti Prompt Debate On Free Speech
LEAD: Concern for private property is clashing with concern for free speech at Bucknell University as a result of feminist graffiti that began appearing on campus sidewalks in the spring.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-21


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
LIMITED PARTNER.
By Mike Lupica. (Villard, $18.95.) Mike Lupica, a columnist for the daily sports newspaper The National, is back with his third mystery featuring Peter Finley, a street-smart, wisecracking New York television journalist.
In ''Limited Partner,'' Finley decides to launch an investigation after his friend Bobby Wyman is found dead of a drug overdose.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There's a trigger-quick readiness to think something terrible is about to happen again.
In everybody, there's an anxiety that wasn't there before.''
- Jane Burka
of Berkeley, Calif.,
a year after the earthquake.
[1:4.]


QUESTION OF THE WEEK
LEAD: The Question of the Week, formerly a weekly feature, will now appear occasionally, dealing with a salient current issue in sports.
The Mailbox will continue to run each week.


Tenderhearted Men
LEAD: To the Editor:


Ann Elizabeth Halan Weds L. Crawford Brickley Jr.
LEAD: Ann Elizabeth Halan and L. Crawford Brickley Jr., associates in the New York law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts, were married yesterday at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in Darien, Conn.
The Rev.
Edward J. Howley and the Rev.
Edward Danks, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony.


Miss McKenna, Legal Aide, Weds
LEAD: Lauren P. McKenna, a legal assistant in the Philadelphia law firm of Fox, Rothschild, O'Brien &amp; Frankel, was married yesterday in Pearl River, N.Y., to Damian Morabito, the executive vice president of the Morabito Development Company, a family-owned real estate company in Pottstown, Pa.
The Rev.
Betty B.


Iraq Children in Anti-Embargo March to Embassies
LEAD: Thousands of children carrying empty milk bottles marched to the United States and British Embassies today chanting ''Down with Bush!
Long live Saddam!'' to protest the trade blockade against Iraq.


Surviving the English Countryside
LEAD:
LONGSHOT
By Dick Francis.
320 pp. New York:
G.P. Putnam's Sons. $19.95.


Lisa Biagiarelli and Dave Pelland Are Married
LEAD: Lisa Anne Biagiarelli was married yesterday at St.
Emery's Roman Catholic Church in Fairfield, Conn., to Dave Pelland.
Msgr.
Bernard S. Scanlon and the Rev.
Robert Nemeth officiated.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is the daughter of Anne Biagiarelli of Easton, Conn., and the late Peter A. Biagiarelli.


Miss DiGiacomo Wed to David Ganek
LEAD: Danielle DiGiacomo and David Kent Ganek, 1985 graduates of Franklin and Marshall College, were married yesterday at the Metropolitan Club by Rabbi David Posner.
Mrs.
Ganek, 26 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank DiGiacomo of Paris.
Mr.
Ganek, 27, is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Ganek of New


Change in California Loosens Congressman's Grip
LEAD: When George E. Brown Jr. first entered Congress 27 years ago, orchards of oranges covered the Inland Empire of Southern California, the air was so clear one could see the San Gabriel Mountains on most days and Democratic victories were as reliable as the warm desert sun.


Homage to 50 Years of Live Opera Finds Its Producer
LEAD: WHEN Texaco decided to present a special series of programs to commemorate its 50 years of sponsoring live radio broadcasts from the Metropolitan Opera, the Harrison-based company had no trouble finding a producer.
It was agreed that probably only one person in the country had the knowledge and background - not to mention the personal record collection - to do the job: George


College Football;   Ga. Tech Outlasts Clemson
LEAD: Georgia Tech and Clemson played one of those top-this-if-you-can football games today in which every big play was followed by another big play.
Surely the spirited, colorful and record crowd of 46,066 donning bright yellow and orange was weary and so were both teams when with 59 seconds left, Clemson's Chris Gardocki booted a 60-yard field-goal attempt.


Does the Start Foretell the Finish?
LEAD: Well begun is half done.
That scrap of folk wisdom was imprinted on my tiny tabula rasa one dreary afternoon in childhood by a penmanship tyrant who required that it be copied out a hundred times in a fine, round Palmer Method hand.
Experience has taught, however, that such copybook rules are more often hopeful than true.


WHEN LIFE IS TOXIC
LEAD: You gave an accurate picture of what life is like for someone with M.C.S.
But you did not describe what it's like for the family of such a person - the strain of living with an always increasing set of rules, the guilt when you cause a loved one to suffer because a rule was forgotten or because no rule yet existed.


A Victorian Spa Town In the Yorkshire Hills
LEAD: Readers of James Herriot's ''All Creatures Great and Small'' and other books know the lovely North Yorkshire town of Harrogate as ''Brawton,'' the quiet spa where his country veterinarian could seek escape on his one free day a week.
Harrogate today luxuriates in what Herriot has called ''the gentle air of Victorianism.


Ruling Sets Off Money Rush In California Governor Race
LEAD: A California court's rejection of the state's limits on campaign contributions has led to a scramble for money and given new momentum to the Democratic candidate for governor, former Mayor Dianne Feinstein of San Francisco.


A Writer's Resort
LEAD: Though Tobias Smollett dismissed Scarborough in ''Humphrey Clinker'' as ''a paltry town'' that is romantically situated ''along a cliff that overhangs the sea,'' this North Sea fishing village settled by the Vikings has charmed, soothed, revivified and occasionally oppressed legions of visitors and residents, some of them celebrated.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.


Lisa Leffert Wed To Lee Schwamm
LEAD: Lisa Rae Leffert and Lee H. Schwamm, who expect to graduate from the Harvard University Medical School in June, were married last evening at the Rosecliff estate in Newport, R.I., by Rabbi Leslie Gutterman.


Olympics;   Koreas Gain an Accord On Unifying 2 Teams
LEAD: North and South Korea have agreed in principle to field a single Olympic team for the 1992 Summer Games in Barcelona and for other international sports events.


Streetscapes: The Alley at 4 East 43d Street;   An 1864 Stable-Path Survivor
LEAD: The Mehlin Piano building, an odd little, mid-block structure at 4 East 43d Street facing onto a deep, narrow alley, was acquired last spring by a developer as part of an assemblage reaching to the northeast corner of 42d Street and Fifth Avenue.


'Rational' Research Spending
LEAD: To the Editor:


Pro Basketball;   Cavaliers' Success Hits New Heights
LEAD: Not too long ago, the Cleveland Cavaliers were the joke of the National Basketball Association.
They finished the 1986-87 season with a 31-51 record.
And their payroll was as modest as their accomplishments: $4.8 million for the 1986-87 season, including $150,000 for an insecure rookie from Tulane named John (Hot Rod)


Four Walls and a Door
LEAD: There was a time when architects almost never talked of rooms, but prattled on forever about spaces, as if this distinction somehow elevated their work beyond the mundane confines of everyday existence.
Rooms, after all, were the province of decorators and other sentimental folk.
Architects had a more noble calling: the Making of


Rebel Military Leader Gives Up in Lebanon
LEAD: Gen.
Michel Aoun, who led Christian military forces against Lebanon's Syrian-backed Government for 11 months, surrendered after Syrian air and ground attacks.


A Dissent
LEAD: To the Editor:


Data Update
LEAD:
MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Aug. 90
July 90
Aug. 89
Nation
$97,000
$98,300
$95,800
Northeast
144,900
146,900
149,000
Midwest
75,000
76,000
71,900
South
86,900
88,800
87,100
West
141,600
139,700
147,100
*4*(Source: National Association of Realtors)


It's a Bear All Right, but How Big a Bear?
LEAD: Since shortly before Saddam Hussein invaded Iraq, the Dow Jones Industrial Average has fallen about 600 points - from a high of nearly 3000, to the 2400 range.
By any standard, such a bruising tumble can only result from a brush with the bear.
But how long will the bear market stalk Wall Street?
How far will the Dow fall?


Pro Football;   Giants, Redskins Plan Few Surprises
LEAD: The Giants are one of only two unbeaten teams (the other is the San Francisco 49ers) in the National Football League.
They lead their division by one game over the Washington Redskins.


Foyt Takes Turn and Wants to Return
LEAD: There is a two-letter abbreviation for American motorsports: A.J.


Developers Shrink Stake in 5th Avenue Tower
LEAD: Two of New York's high-flying real-estate developers have been squeezed out of one of their most ambitious projects, a 53-story office tower at Fifth Avenue and 56th Street, real-estate executives say.


Enter the Dollar, Stage Left, Falling, Falling
LEAD: In the fall of 1990, there has been no shortage of crises, with great attention being paid to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the budget deadlock, the plight of the banks and the plunging stock market.


Fashion;   Even for Wagner, Short Is In at the Opera
LEAD: The soprano Birgit Nilsson was once asked what a singer needed most to perform Wagnerian opera. ''Comfortable shoes,'' she said.


An Ambitious Troupe With Talent on Hand
LEAD: THE name a Small Company in America defines only two aspects of this theater group in Sea Cliff.
As its current production of two one-act American operas proves, the company has big ambitions and the talent to move ahead.


Cottage Rentals
LEAD: To the Editor: Regarding cottage rentals in Britain and the Cotswolds in particular: It is true that a British-based company known as Heart of England Cottages is now defunct, having been sold to the Cottage Directory, based in Britain.


Dinkins Aide Denies Image of 'Confusion'
LEAD: The Dinkins administration has a firm grip on New York City's fiscal and labor problems, despite the impression of ''some confusion,'' an aide to the Mayor told municipal union officers yesterday.


Virginia Governor Baffles Democrats With Crusade for 'New Mainstream'
LEAD: With the fervor of an evangelist and with his eyes seemingly on a larger prize, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder has embarked on a nationwide crusade for the political moderation that helped him become the first black ever elected chief executive of an American state.


Mexico
LEAD: To the Editor: Travelers are advised that the electrical power in Mexico is the same as in the United States and that they can bring their traveling appliances.
There is, however, a problem, which we encountered on a recent trip to Manzanillo and Ixtapa.


Lifestyle;   Grand Old Club Awaits A Grand New Unveiling
LEAD: For more than a year, the grand palazzo-style building at 1 East 60th Street in Manhattan has been hidden by scaffolding, like a pretty girl with braces on her teeth, as restoration crews erased decades of grime and paint from its marble facade.


Campus Life: Swarthmore;   Governing Board Lifts the Curtain On Its Decisions
LEAD: In an effort to demystify decision-making at Swarthmore College, the school's board of managers last weekend opened its doors for the first time to designated student and faculty observers.


Ex-Kennedy Aides Ask Release of '62 Crisis Papers
LEAD: Nine former Kennedy Administration officials have joined in a legal challenge to the State Department over the department's refusal to release nearly 700 documents about the 1962 Cuban missile crisis.


Campus Life: Brown;   Parties On Ethnic Themes are Halted
LEAD: After a complaint about a ''South of the Border'' Mexican party, the mostly white residential fraternities and sororities at Brown University have voted to end ethnic-minority theme parties.


As a Climax Looms, One Has to Wonder: Was There a Plot?
LEAD: The budget melodrama that has riveted Washington for the past five months may finally be reaching a climax.
Here is a plot summary and brief guide to what may happen next:


Jogger Knocked Down; Attack Is Called Racial
LEAD: A jogger from Los Angeles, in New York on her honeymoon, was knocked to the ground in Central Park yesterday by three girls in what the police are calling a racial-bias incident.


Campus Life: Illinois;   Vote of Confidence For Campus 'Chief' Indians Oppose
LEAD: Chief Illiniwek still reigns as the mascot of the University of Illinois, but the American Indians and others who find the symbol offensive say they will continue the fight, despite a vote of confidence in its favor.


The Big Business of 'Smalls'
LEAD: They are definitely no bigger than a breadbox.
Most sell for less than $2,000, and some for under $50.
They tend to be between 70 and 200 years old.
And if they fulfill these criteria, they can be just about anything, from a silver nutmeg grater to a matchbox made out of the remnants of a samurai sword.


Wall Street;   The Granada Empire's Tangled Web
LEAD: In a market that has been pulverizing newly issued shares, Granada Biosciences and the Granada Foods Corporation, both of Houston, have beaten the odds.
Both went public at $7 a share in January.
As of Friday, Granada Foods was holding its own, while Granada Biosciences had actually advanced - 27 percent to 8 7/8 a share.


On Wednesday He Does His Ears
LEAD:
IN PRAISE OF THE STEPMOTHER
By Mario Vargas Llosa.
Translated by Helen Lane.
Illustrated. 149 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $18.95.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
ONE FELL SLOOP.
By Susan Kenney. (Viking, $16.95.) Forgive the puns, the novel's title being the least painful, with its double - no, triple - meaning.
Ignore the parenthetical remarks that pockmark, and often pothole, every page.
Overlook the repeated descriptions of the heroine's lover, with his ''tall, broad figure'' and his ''much-too-clever, faunlike face.


Evening Hours;   Celebrations Recall the Past and Look Ahead
LEAD: The Irvington Institute for Medical Research celebrated its 75th anniversary with a dinner dance in the Grand Ballroom of the Plaza on Thursday.


Music's New Catatonia: Don't Bother Getting Up
LEAD: Galaxie 500 is named after a 1960's-model Ford, but the songs on the Boston band's third album, ''This Is Our Music,'' seldom exceed the pace of heavy traffic.
It's music to sit still by.
Dean Wareham's thin, tentative voice can inflate without warning into an eerie falsetto.
His lyrics reflect a reluctance to participate, an unsureness about even the most casual social situations.


Kay D. Hughes Is Married
LEAD: Kay D. Hughes, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lambert Hughes of Buffalo, was married yesterday to Richard M. Zwirn, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Zwirn of New York.
The Rev.
Malcolm Brown, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the couple's home in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
The bride, 32 years old, received B.S.


Works in Progress;   Picassos of Pachydermia
LEAD: Certain artists can be fairly described as heavy.
Suti, for example.
The 6,500-pound African elephant wielding her trunk in the photograph above is one of three elephants in Chicago's Lincoln Park Zoo, all of whom have exhibited an inclination toward, if not exactly a talent for, painting. (Suti's work is shown below left; below right, a distinctly different sample from Bozie, an Asian elephant.) ''In the wild, animals will spend most of their time foraging for food,'' says Dr.


2 People Injured in Subway In Separate Attacks Friday
LEAD: Two people were injured in separate attacks at subway stations in Manhattan and Brooklyn on Friday, the police said.


A Hopelessly Trendy Killer
LEAD:
THE MURDERER NEXT DOOR
By Rafael Yglesias.
282 pp. New York:
Crown Publishers. $19.95.


About Men;   Not Exactly The Best Man
LEAD: There ought to be a rule, a matter of social etiquette, entered into any updated guide to planning wedding parties.
It should read something like this:


Hunters Paid to Stalk Animals in Captivity
LEAD: Fish and game agents have raided a game preserve where hunters paid up to $4,000 to stalk and kill bears and cougars in a fenced area the size of a football field, the authorities say.
The officials said the 200 to 300 animals killed in the shooting sprees at the game preserve had been raised in captivity.


History Lessons
LEAD: In design, luxury takes many forms.
At times, sheer grandeur has been the ideal, and we have fallen under the spell of rare woods, extravagant marbles and glimmering gold leaf.
In other, perhaps more spiritual, times, harmony and proportion have been valued more highly than costly materials.
But today, ask a resident of New York, London, Tokyo or any high-density city to define luxury, and the answer will be the same.


ISRAELIS PROMISE NO HELP FOR U.N.
LEAD: When the United Nations mission arrives in Jerusalem to examine the circumstances surrounding the shooting of 21 Palestinians last week, the Israeli Government will greet it with unbridled hostility.


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Bluepoint
$126,000
6 Mark Drive
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, basement, expandable attic, 1-car garage; taxes $3,000.
Massapequa
$189,000
111 Nassau Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.


Woman Wins Contest Then Is Disqualified
LEAD: A woman named as the winner of a $10 million prize in a contest sponsored by McDonald's and the NBC television network was disqualified because a daughter who does not live with her is a McDonald's cashier.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, a caption on the Highlights of the Week page and the Tuesday Highlights page of the Television section today list an incorrect time for an NBC movie, ''Danielle Steel's Fine Things.'' It can be seen Tuesday night beginning at 8.


3 Arab States Still Pursuing Peaceful Iraqi Pullout
LEAD: King Hussein of Jordan conferred today with Iraq's Foreign Minister about the continuing diplomatic effort by some Arab states to persuade President Saddam Hussein to withdraw peacefully from Kuwait.


College Football: Local;   Hofstra Steamrolls To 7th Victory
LEAD: Wayne Morris, Al Hagofsky and Brian McGee each scored two touchdowns as undefeated Hofstra, No. 1 in the East in Division III of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, crushed Catholic University, 43-6, yesterday afternoon in Washington.


Style Makers;   Marilynn Lampert-Arm, Concert Gown Designer
LEAD: This fall Eugenia Zuckerman, the flutist, will appear on stage in a froth of violet chiffon floating over a princess-line dress of plum crepe de chine.
A cocoon-like jacket of chiffon tops a skirt flaring out to a full circle.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: NEW VIDEO RELEASES
LEAD:
The Cook, the Thief, His Wife and Her Lover
1990. Vidmark. $89.95. LD, $39.95. CC. 2:03 unrated; 1:35 R.
Peter Greenaway's elegant, brutal film explores what would happen to love and the social order if the most crass, sadistic people were to gain power.
In a milieu of sophisticated taste, the thief, who talks and acts as if he has crawled out of a sewer, dines nightly at a restaurant with his henchmen while his wife disports with a bookish fellow behind the scenes on the premises.


Kathy Norton and John McGowan Are Married
LEAD: Kathy Ann Norton, a daughter of Mrs.
T.
Philip Norton of Bel Air, Md., and the late Mr.
Norton, was married yesterday to John Joseph McGowan, a son of Mrs.
John J. McGowan of Wayland, Mass., and the late Mr.
McGowan.
The Rev.
Charles L. Lafferty officiated at St.
Ignatius Roman Catholic Church in Bel


Yachting;   Powerboat Racers Ponder the Risks
LEAD: Competitors on 35 offshore powerboat teams are feeling a heightened sense of danger today as they prepare for the national championship in Marathon, Fla.
Their uneasiness stems from the death two weeks ago of Stephano Casiraghi, husband of Princess Caroline of Monaco, who was killed while racing a 42-foot powerboat on the Mediterranean


Stuart Dale Weds Lynn A. Pantano
LEAD: Lynn Anne Pantano, a daughter of Mrs.
Lester L. Coleman and Carl A. Pantano, both of New York, was married yesterday to Stuart Charles Dale, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard G. Dale of Medfield, Mass.
The Rev.
Henry A. Boyle performed the ceremony at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in York.


Call of the Wildmen
LEAD: It was Spring in the Emerald Hill country of North Texas, a region of rolling fields clotted with purple asters, mustard and black-eyed Susans.
Signs that hung beside the white-rail fences of prosperous-looking ranches boasted of the breeds of cattle raised there, Brangus and Herefords and Santa Gertrudis.


Miss Mather Wed To R. E. Ix Jr.
LEAD: Dorothy MacGregor Mather and Ramond Edward Ix Jr. were married yesterday at the Memorial Episcopal Church of the Good Shepherd in Philadelphia by the Rev.
Dr.
Maurice A. Coombs, who was assisted by the Rev.
James W. Moore, a Roman Catholic priest.
Mrs.
Ix is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles E.


Heroes Against AIDS, Sung and Unsung
LEAD: Robert Gallo, a leading biologist at the National Institutes of Health, won international fame in 1984 when he co-discovered the AIDS virus and developed the test for detecting its presence.
Last week, the agency opened a formal inquiry into that discovery after a panel found evidence of ''possible misconduct.


A Very Good Painter Confronts a Great One
LEAD: One of the most exciting juxapositions of paintings to be seen in a New York City museum at the moment unfolds in the third gallery of the Burgoyne Diller retrospective at the Whitney Museum of American Art.
The exhibition, organized by Barbara Haskell, lays out in detail (and for the first time in a New York museum) the 30-year career of America's foremost follower of Neo-Plasticism, as the purified abstraction of Mondrian and the de Stijl artists was called.


From the Folks Who Brought Us Winter
LEAD:
THE ICE-SHIRT
By William T. Vollmann.
Illustrated. 415 pp. New York:
Viking. $19.95.


A Land of Immigrants Gets Uneasy About Immigration
LEAD: The incidents span a decade and a continent: Gulf Coast fishermen in Texas harass Vietnamese competitors who are catching more shrimp.
A Florida supermarket manager suspends a cashier for speaking Spanish at work.
Residents of a Maryland community protest the establishment of a Japanese junior college near the Chesapeake Bay.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: Incisive end-game play was Bent Larsen's strongest weapon in his victory in the Watson, Farley &amp; Williams International Chess Challenge in New York, Sept. 14-25.
The 55-year-old Danish grandmaster continues to turn his longtime penchant for pawn play into points.


In Praise of Scouts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Felice Oper Marries Chad Schmerler
LEAD: Felice Beth Oper, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Oper of Pittsburgh, was married in New York last evening to Charles David Schmerler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Schmerler of Tenafly, N.J.
Rabbi Reuven Siegel performed the ceremony at the Union League Club.
The bride, 28 years old, is keeping her name.


By the Board
LEAD: For all of the excitement attending a world championship chess match, the fact is that in recent years most of the games have ended, just like tick-tack-toe, in draws.
Little wonder, then, that the grandmaster analysts who assembled in New York City last week for the start of the match between the champion, Gary Kasparov, and Anatoly Karpov (at left) were as animated as Superbowl fans by the end of the second game.


Defense Calls No Witnesses In Trial of Ex-Navajo Leader
LEAD: The prosecution rested its case Friday in the bribery and kickback trial of the suspended chairman of the Navajo tribe, Peter MacDonald, and his son, and defense lawyers said they would call no witnesses.


Two Sculptors Share Thorpe Gallery
LEAD: ITS 15th anniversary imminent, Thorpe Intermedia Gallery, on Route 340 here, is celebrating with a show by Sister Adele Myers and David Weinrib that should be titled ''Together Again.'' During the 1980's the artists collaborated as the gallery's co-directors.


Review/Music;   Remembering Britain's Finest Hour
LEAD: Fifty years ago, Britain's Royal Air Force and the German Luftwaffe fought for air supremacy over the British Isles.
The British prevailed despite being outnumbered three to one.
To commemorate the Battle of Britain the BBC Concert Orchestra, the Central Band of the Royal Air Force, the BBC Singers and a handful of soloists put together an extravagant program of period pieces, marches, patriotic choral settings, music from war movies and new works.


Bronzes Conjure Up Images of a Fabled Past
LEAD: The ancient bronze objects on view at the Merrin Gallery, 724 Fifth Avenue at 56th Street, have more in common than the material from which they were made.
The 44 objects presented in ''Bronze!,'' running from Thursday through Nov. 10, include portrait heads, mythological figures, lamps, ax heads, vessels, amulets and furniture fragments.


Taking a Fall
LEAD: In the world of big business, they didn't come any bigger than Hisashi Shinto when he was chairman of Nippon Telephone and Telegraph, the world's largest company.
Then came the Recruit scandal, which not only brought down a government but also laid low Mr.
Shinto.
After a 20-month trial on bribery charges, he was convicted and sentenced last week to two years in jail and fined $170,000.


2 Top Editors Leave Omni to Protest Ad on Cover
LEAD: Two top editors of Omni magazine have resigned because they said the magazine had published an advertisement on the cover of its November issue.


A Victorian Spa Town In the Yorkshire Hills
LEAD: Readers of James Herriot's ''All Creatures Great and Small'' and other books know the lovely North Yorkshire town of Harrogate as ''Brawton,'' the quiet spa where his country veterinarian could seek escape on his one free day a week.
Harrogate today luxuriates in what Herriot has called ''the gentle air of Victorianism.


College Football: West/Southwest;   Texas Stuns Oklahoma Again
LEAD: Peter Gardere hit Keith Cash with a 16-yard touchdown pass on fourth-and-7 with two minutes to play, rallying Texas (3-1) to a 14-13 upset of fourth-ranked Oklahoma (5-1) today.


Miss Jones Weds T. D. Cunningham 3d
LEAD: The marriage of Pamela Jones, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Winthrop Jones of Lebanon, N.J., to Thomas D. Cunningham 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cunningham of Bedford, N.Y., took place yesterday in Gladstone, N.J.
Canon John T. Morrow officiated at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.


Arrogant Blindness
LEAD: To the Editor:


Susan Bernhardi, Lawyer, Marries
LEAD: Susan Mary Bernhardi, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Bernhardi of Seaford, L.I., was married last evening in New York to David Evan Sternberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Julius R. Sternberg of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Robert Allman , a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Bennett Hermann performed an interdenominational ceremony at the Westbury.


Can Dinkins Afford To Confront Problems Only When He Must?
LEAD: If there is a moment that risks defining the mayoralty of David N. Dinkins, it is now.
Can the calm and cautious clubhouse politician who waited and worked so long to lead New York City now shake the swirl of problems that has swamped him, and seize his city's helm?


Not the Cheapest Form of Transportation
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Cry Could Be, 'Mangia! Mangia!'
LEAD: AURELIO'S PASTA CAFE in Lake Ronkonkoma is a nifty new spot that will delight the whole family.
Portions are big enough to fill up teen-agers, and dad will not faint when the bill arrives.


Lighten Up
LEAD: LUXURY IS HIGH CEILINGS AND A LOW OVERHEAD,'' says the decorator Tom Scheerer.
In Manhattan, both are rare.
Which is why Scheerer, a partner of Bilhuber Inc., a New York-based design company, decided to redecorate rather than move out of his East Side studio.
Three years ago, the space had glazed aubergine walls, an 18th-century screen and, in the middle of the room, a bed that doubled as a sofa.


A Savage and Demeaning Ritual
LEAD:
PLEDGING ALLEGIANCE
The Last Campaign of the Cold War.
By Sidney Blumenthal.
386 pp. New York: HarperCollins. $22.95.


To Be Young Again at 78: A Carousel Is
LEAD: Four-year-old Hannah Goodwin happily bobbed up and down on her pale gray horse, but 3-year-old Jonathan Hausch preferred the bright orange lion with the bushy mane to his colorful wooden steed.


Policing the Force
LEAD:
COP HUNTER
By Vincent Murano with William Hoffer.
320 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster.
$19.95.


Magical Memory Tour
LEAD:
WHEN THE WORLD WAS WHOLE
Three Centuries of Memories.
By Charles Fenyvesi.
Illustrated. 266 pp. New York:
Viking. $19.95.


Sports People;   Then Jack Said . . .
LEAD: San Diego fans who have been following the everlastingly unfolding developments of the Jack and Tony Show may have to look elsewhere for a rip-roaring feud to tide them over until spring training.
This one seems to be fizzling fast.


Ms. Payson Weds In Great Neck
LEAD: Michele R. Payson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin D. Payson of Kings Point, L.I., was married last evening to Mark Rosenfield, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mashe Rosenfield of Liverpool, England.
Rabbis Mordecai Waxman and Gerald Zelizer officiated at Temple Israel in Great Neck, L.I.


Where and How to Insulate
LEAD: MOST homes have insulation in the attic and walls, it having been included during construction or added later.
Insulation between an unheated basement or crawl space and the main floor is important, too; in winter, unheated areas beneath rooms can act like a block of ice.


Mike Milken: Robin Hood or Sheriff of Nottingham?
LEAD: To the Editor:


What's Happened to Heroes Is a Crime
LEAD: ''All the heroes dyin' like flies / they say it's a sign a' the times.'' Sam Shepard wrote that dirge back when he was just a Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright, before he became a movie star and something of a popular hero himself.
It is still my favorite word on the heroic condition, although from time to time someone will issue a snappy update on the subject.


Behind the Painted World of 'Once On This Island'
LEAD: In a time when sets for Broadway musicals can bump and grind with expensive mechanical wizardry and special effects, the design for ''Once on This Island'' is notable for its almost total reliance on extreme simplicity and hand-painted surfaces.
The set for this fable-like Caribbean musical, which arrives on Broadway at the Booth Theater on Thursday, consists primarily of three walls and a floor painted with motifs of tropical vegetation.


The Blood Covered His Rack of Lamb
LEAD:
WHISKEY RIVER
By Loren D. Estleman.
262 pp. New York:
Bantam Books. $17.95.


A Fresh Look Graces Larger Quarters
LEAD: AT a time when restaurant closings seem to be a fact of business life, it is refreshing to see a new restaurant succeed.
Nantucket Cafe opened its doors more than three years ago in a minuscule spot in New Canaan and evidently filled such a need for an informal place serving pleasant, reasonably priced food that it burst its seams and sought larger quarters.


No Headline
LEAD: Last month the Japanese Justice Minister, Seiroku Kajiyama, said that prostitutes in a neighborhood ''ruin the atmosphere,'' just as, in his view, blacks ruin white neighborhoods in the United States.
American officials reacted with predictable, but largely misplaced, rebukes.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-21


Business Diary/October 7-12
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
After a Week of Negotiations, the Budget Gap Narrows
After topsy-turvy budget negotiations all week, Congress and the White House narrowed their differences.
Higher gasoline taxes seem inevitable; lower capital gains tax and steeper tax rates for the rich, improbable.
Another truth emerged: The cost of financing the deficit will balloon before the Government can meet its debt-reduction goal of $500 billion.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
LEAD:
Special Today:
Home Design/Magazine Part 2


Source Reduction And Choice
LEAD: While I strongly agree with Judy Keenan that the Legislature in New Jersey has been uninformed and misguided in its handling of recycling in this state (''Cutting Down on Trash,'' Opinion page, Sept. 2), I cannot agree with her conclusion that source reduction is the Legislature's bailiwick.


Last Major Wetlands on Barnegat Bay Gaining Protection
LEAD: THE last major expanse of privately held salt marshes and sandy wooded uplands along upper Barnegat Bay - the home to a host of endangered wildlife and plants - is close to obtaining Federal protection from most development.


Pro Hockey;   Rangers Bulldoze Past the Capitals
LEAD: For the Rangers, the evolutionary process is far from complete.
The triumphs, however, are no longer ones of mere survival.
Instead, the Rangers have been winning with authority, and last night, their 5-2 victory over the Capitals approached dominance.


Where and How to Insulate
LEAD: MOST homes have insulation in the attic and walls, it having been included during construction or added later.
Insulation between an unheated basement or crawl space and the main floor is important, too; in winter, unheated areas beneath rooms can act like a block of ice.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut;   Recent Sales
LEAD: Larchmont, N.Y.
$497,000
28 Colonial Avenue
5-bedroom, 4 full and 2 half-bath, 57-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, glass-enclosed porch, professional suite; taxes $9,378.
Rye Brook, N.Y.
$710,000
1 Brookside Way
5-bedroom, 5-bath, 26-year-old contemporary; 2 kitchens, family room, patio, indoor pool, sauna, deck; taxes $11,732.


Hanoi's Foreign Minister Works the U.S. Circuit Seeking End to Trade Ban
LEAD: Like a salesman opening up a new territory, Nguyen Co Thach, Vietnam's peripatetic Foreign Minister, is knocking on doors and seeking friends among America's members of Congress, diplomats, scholars and bankers, in the hope of ending Washington's trade embargo against his country.


Transfusion Confusion
LEAD:
SAFE BLOOD
Purifying the Nation's Blood Supply in the Age of AIDS.
By Joseph Feldschuh with Doron Weber.
218 pp. New York:
The Free Press.
$19.95.


Talking: Parking;   Making Space for Everyone
LEAD: The scramble for parking spaces appears to be reaching crisis proportions in many suburban condominiums and cooperatives.
Most seriously affected are larger developments where it is easier to hide space-stealing and those built before zoning codes were changes to require at least one space for each unit.


Why All the Hoopla?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Question Of the Week;   Who Should Win M.V.P., Cy Young Awards?
LEAD: Roger Clemens deserves a third Cy Young over Bob Welch because Clemens had to pitch himself out of trouble, since no one else on the Red Sox miserable relief staff could.
With the Oakland bullpen, Clemens could have won 30.
JOHN ANZALONE
Saratoga Springs, N.Y.


New Symphony Forms in Tarrytown
LEAD: SEVENTY-FIVE years of music making have produced the county's newest orchestra, the Fine Arts Symphony.
It expects to make its debut next month.


Four Artists Find Animals Can Be Herded Onto Walls
LEAD: A FAVORITE fall pastime among those visiting Litchfield County is watching cows in their pastures.
But these days, not all of the cows are outdoors.
Herds of them, along with horses, sheep, dogs and crows, can be found adorning the walls of an art gallery in New Milford.


The Shalt Nots
LEAD: Like the chorus at a revival meeting, four children are sitting in the back seat of the car, swinging and swaying and singing along with Tom Chapin, longtime folkie and inveterate environmentalist: ''Someone's gonna use it after you.
Someone needs that water when you're through.'' These are the adults of the 21st century, and they know all the shalt nots by heart.


Perspectives: Modulars;   The Navy Yard Hosts a Housing Factory
LEAD: The huge space known as Building 294A at the Brooklyn Navy Yard industrial center has seen assorted ship builders and repairers come and go.
Now it is lending the services of its overhead cranes to residential construction.


Dispelling the Gloom Over the Economy
LEAD: THE prevailing mood was gloom as several hundred business leaders in the county gathered this month to hear Rosemary Scanlon, chief economist of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, andWilliam T. Knowles, chairman and chief executive officer of National Westminster Bancorp and chairman of the Regional Plan


Dr. Andrea Glass Marries
LEAD: Dr.
Andrea Leslie Glass and Dr.
David Matthew Sacknoff, senior medical residents at Lenox Hill Hospital, were married last evening at the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York by Rabbi Philip Graubart.
The bride, the daughter of Judith E. Glass of Huntington, L.I., and Don B. Glass of Englewood, N.J., graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and New York Medical College.


If Only Ducks Were Sold in Parts
LEAD: NO one thinks twice about buying chicken in parts, but few places will sell you duck legs or breasts separately.
This is too bad, for when it comes to cooking duck, most people do it one way: in the oven.
The problem with roasting is that when the legs are done, the breast is often dry.
If the breast is pink, the legs are red.


Cut the Deficit, Not the Dividend
LEAD: After years of pretending that the Federal budget deficit wasn't much of a problem, Congress is poised to plunge fanatically in the other direction, as though it had no other duty than deficit reduction.
But Americans can walk and chew gum at the same time.
They need to see the deficit reduced, but they also need to invest in disadvantaged children, rebuild dilapidated infrastructure and save the despoiled environment.


Where and How to Insulate
LEAD: MOST homes have insulation in the attic and walls, it having been included during construction or added later.
Insulation between an unheated basement or crawl space and the main floor is important, too; in winter, unheated areas beneath rooms can act like a block of ice.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: The ritual has begun: rake or blow leaves off the lawn; start a new compost pile.
Finish planting of container-grown perennials and evergreens.
Bulb planting goes on.
Keep mowing as long as the grass is growing.
Water evergreens and young fruit trees.
Allow some leaves to accumulate over flower borders as a mulch.


Yet Another 'Me and My Girl'
LEAD: THERE is no jollier musical around than ''Me and My Girl.'' For a peripatetic critic who has not only endured but also enjoyed four productions of the revamped 1937 show in six weeks, not to mention four visits to the Broadway production (1986-89), is there any other musical around?
Intimations of overexposure aside, ''Me and My Girl'' -now at the Darien Dinner Theater - is reaffirming and unfailingly winning, even in productions that do not measure up to a considerable built-in appeal of a beguiling score and an endearing book.


Alcoa's Profit Declines 43%
LEAD: Alcoa said Friday that its third-quarter profits declined nearly 43 percent, reflecting decreases in orders and aluminum prices.


Hans Namuth, Photographer, Is Dead at 75
LEAD: Hans Namuth, a photographer and film maker best known for his portraits of American artists, died on Saturday in East Hampton, L.I.
He was 75 years old and lived in New York City and Water Mill, L.I.


Rule of Thumb for Negotiating A Budget: 'Don't Tax Friends'
LEAD: While the big battles over Medicare, capital gains and income tax rates have been blocking a budget agreement between Congress and the White House, dozens of backroom deals and horse trades on lesser matters have helped shape the deficit reduction packages lawmakers will vote on this week.


Battle Over Assault Weapons Bill
LEAD: If the sponsors of a bill to ban assault weapons have their way, the bill will not come to a vote in the House this year.


A Classic Matchup Loses a Bit of Luster
LEAD: WHEN the preliminary entries for the seven Breeders' Cup races on Oct. 27 close this afternoon, the names of the best colts in American racing this year will be missing.


U.S. Plans Farm Trade Concession
LEAD: In an effort to find a compromise with the European Community over the sticky issue of farm subsidies, the United States will present a plan in Geneva on Monday that modifies its call for an end to such aid.


Yanks Add Nettles To Coaching Staff
LEAD: There was only one real surprise yesterday when the Yankees officially announced Manager Stump Merrill's coaching staff for the 1991 season.
Graig Nettles, the Yankees' vacuum-gloved third baseman of the 1970's and early 1980's, who had an antagonistic relationship with George Steinbrenner, will be the first-base coach.


What Kind of People Are We?
LEAD: The budget deficit facing Mayor David Dinkins has been estimated at between $1.5 and $2.5 billion for next year.
While the city's budget appears to be huge - $29 billion in its fiscal year 1992 - in fact, only $20 billion are city funds.
The rest are Federal and state monies over which the Mayor has little control.


Lake Ranco Journal;   Pollution in Paradise: Can Salmon Be the Cause?
LEAD: Lake Ranco seems an almost perfect place, where dairy herds graze in scenes of pastoral splendor, wildflowers spill into the narrow dirt roads, and the lake water is so clear and clean that some people still drink it.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-13
Israel denounced the U.N. resolution to send a delegation to investigate the deaths of 21 Palestinians at Al Aksa Mosque in Jerusalem last week.
The Government said it would not cooperate with the investigation.
Page A1


Fined Abortion Clinic Closes
LEAD: The best-known abortion clinic here has closed after the authorities seized its equipment for its failure to pay Federal fines.
Federal prosecutors sued the Delta Women's Clinic in July 1989, saying that three doctors had illegally prescribed sedatives and painkillers.
In March, United States District Judge Adrian Duplantier ordered fines of $337,000 against the clinic, which opened in 1973.


Ethnic Enmity Governs A New Soviet Republic
LEAD: It has no borders, no money and no legal authority, but the Trans-Dniesterian Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic already has a Parliament.


Question Box
LEAD:
Never Behind in Series


This Is One Party I Think I'll Miss
LEAD: The following letter was sent to the German Ambassador to Poland, Guenter Knackstedt, on October 1, 1990 in response to an invitation to celebrate German unification.


Metro Matters;   Many Efforts To Fight Crime; Few to Stop It
LEAD: When New York City's Commission on the Year 2000 was drafting its recommendations several years ago, demographers were perplexed by one nagging question: Where had the city's young black and Hispanic men gone?


Miss Rubinson, A Buyer, Marries
LEAD: Heather Linn Rubinson, a daughter of Dr.
Kalman Rubinson of New York and the late Irene Rowe Rubinson, was married yesterday to Michael Warren Schechter, the son of Ruth Canaan of Great Neck, L.I., and Marvin L. Schechter of Old Westbury, L.I.
Rabbi Lawrence M. Colton performed the ceremony at the Tower Suite in New


Miss Rubinson, A Buyer, Marries
LEAD: Heather Linn Rubinson, a daughter of Dr.
Kalman Rubinson of New York and the late Irene Rowe Rubinson, was married yesterday to Michael Warren Schechter, the son of Ruth Canaan of Great Neck, L.I., and Marvin L. Schechter of Old Westbury, L.I.
Rabbi Lawrence M. Colton performed the ceremony at the Tower Suite in New


Comparing Tax Provisions in the Budget Plans
LEAD: Highlights of the major tax proposals under consideration by Congress.
All are aimed at cutting the Federal deficit by $40 billion in fiscal year 1991, which began on Oct. 1 and by $500 billion over five years.
Some variations in revenue projections reflect minor differences in the plans.
BUDGET SUMMIT PLAN


Far to the East of Moscow, A Brazen Rush to Capitalism
LEAD: The islanders call their beloved outsider ''E.
T.,'' for Valentin Fyodorov has proved to be a boon-producing alien, rocking the governance of Sakhalin Island with strange events in defiance of the law to make people imagine themselves more and more in a free-market world apart from the rest of the Soviet Union.


Rosanne Underweiser, Lawyer, Weds
LEAD: Rosanne Underweiser, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin P. Underweiser of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Ira E. Silfin, a son of Irene Silfin of Plainview, L.I., and the late Howard Silfin.
Rabbi Jack Stern Jr. and Cantor Steven Merkel performed the ceremony at the Westchester Reform


Soviet Buses to Carry Colgate Toothpaste Ads
LEAD: The Colgate-Palmolive Company has become the first company to buy space for toothpaste ads on Soviet buses.
The New York-based consumer products company signed a contract for the ads with Transportation Displays Inc., a company that places ads in transit locations.


Roosevelt Aide Called an Unwitting Spy
LEAD: A new book by a prominent Soviet K.G.B. defector names Harry L. Hopkins, an architect of President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal and his closest personal adviser, as an unwitting ''agent of major significance'' for the Soviet Union.


G.O.P. Senators See Politics In Pace of Keating 5 Inquiry
LEAD: In rare public criticism of the panel that polices their behavior, several Republican Senators have suggested that the Senate Ethics Committee has let politics interfere with its investigation of five lawmakers for their links to the savings and loan debacle.


Miss Light Wed To D. F. Abrams
LEAD: Wendy Ellen Light, a daughter of Gerald P. Light of Floral Park, Queens, and the late Mary Light, was married yesterday to Danal Frederic Abrams, a son of Dr.
Martin W. Abrams and Lynn Epstein Abrams, both of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson officiated at Temple Beth-el in Great Neck.


Chessmanship: The Fine Art Of Sounding Like a Master
LEAD: As soon as Gary Kasparov moved his king's pawn to start the second game of the World Chess Championship, the kibitzers thought something was up.
They had been expecting an opening on the queenside.
Clearly this called for instant analysis.
So, as the players quickly proceeded with the Flohr-Zaitsev Variation, the kibitzers next door at the Hotel Macklowe sought out Eric Schiller, an American player.


For 2 Producers, Their Way Is the Right Way
LEAD: In 1986, the producers Steve Golin and Joni Sighvatsson, frustrated by the slow pace and high cost of making movies the Hollywood way, founded Propaganda Films and vowed to take a different approach.
Having just foisted ''Hard Rock Zombies'' and ''American Drive In'' on an indifferent public, they were certain they were capable of bigger and better things, if only they could be free to follow their own instincts.


Bring on C.S.C.E.
LEAD: Upon hearing that the transcendentalist Margaret Fuller had said ''I accept the Universe,'' the historian Thomas Carlyle delivered this withering put-down: ''By God, she'd better!''


3.1 Quake Strikes California
LEAD: A mild earthquake struck the northern San Francisco Bay area about 7 P.M. on Saturday.
There were no reports of damage or injuries.
A spokesman for the United States Geological Survey said the earthquake registered 3.1 on the Richter Scale of ground motion and was centered 5 miles southwest of Vallejo, which is 20 miles north of Oakland.


High Pakistan Court Upholds Dismissal of Bhutto
LEAD: A high court in Lahore today upheld President Ghulam Ishaq Khan's dismissal of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's Government on Aug. 6.


Alison D. Keel Is Wed To Stephen E. Kimmel
LEAD: Alison Dixon Keel, the daughter of Susan T. Danin of Chapel Hill, N.C., and Dr.
William A. Keel of Fountain Valley, Calif., was married yesterday to Dr.
Stephen Edward Kimmel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard M. Kimmel of Upper Montclair, N.J.
Rabbi Joshua S. Chasan and Cantor Adina Klein officiated at Congregation Shomrei Emunah in Montclair, N


Iran and Iraq Resume Ties
LEAD: Iran and Iraq resumed direct diplomatic relations today and reopened their embassies, the Iranian Foreign Ministry said.
A ministry statement quoted by the Iranian press agency said that the Iraqi charge d'affaires began his assignment in Teheran today and that an Iranian charge d'affaires would leave for Baghdad shortly.


Venezuela Pushing 'Liquid Coal'
LEAD: With oil prices surging, some electric power company managers are seeing some relief through the huge bitumen reserves here in eastern Venezuela.


Miss Greenberg, Lawyer, Married
LEAD: Pamela Ellen Greenberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur L. Greenberg of Cherry Hill, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Mark Philip Gold, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Gold of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Raphael Gold, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Metropolis Country Club in White


A Cost-Free Boost for Justice
LEAD: Here's a way for New York City to improve supervision of convicts once released, speed processing of criminal cases and free up thousands of jail cells - all without spending a cent.
It requires only a modest change in Probation Department procedure.


Northrop Planning Fight on Fraud
LEAD: The chairman of the Northrop Corporation says the company is taking strong action to prevent further cases of military contract fraud, but members of a House subcommittee are skeptical about the steps working.


Discount Brand Promotion Likely if Beer Taxes Rise
LEAD: IF Congress raises the excise tax on beer, which appears likely, that means brewers may be pushed into uncharted territory and forced to promote discount brands with more advertising.


Rachel Shatz, Urban Planner, Weds
LEAD: Rachel Elizabeth Shatz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton L. Shatz of Rowayton, Conn., was married yesterday to William W. Dunnell 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dunnell 3d of North Andover, Mass.
Cantor Mark Lipson performed the ceremony at the Chieftains estate in Greenwich, Conn.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: IAN WOODNER is an architect by training but a collector by passion.
And he's being honored as a collector tomorrow, with the Citation of Merit from the National Arts Club.
He has a collection of drawings that has been exhibited in the world's great museums.
He also collects Odilon Redon, the French Symbolist, and


With Big Plays in a Big Game, Giants Beat Redskins
LEAD: From the beginning, when the Redskins seemed invincible, until the end, whtn the Giants proved invincible, it was a typical Giants-Redskins game.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: IAN WOODNER is an architect by training but a collector by passion.
And he's being honored as a collector tomorrow, with the Citation of Merit from the National Arts Club.
He has a collection of drawings that has been exhibited in the world's great museums.
He also collects Odilon Redon, the French Symbolist, and


Books of The Times;   How Youth Could Pay A Debt to Civilization
LEAD:
Gratitude
Reflections on What We Owe to Our Country
By William F. Buckley Jr.
169 pages. Random House. $16.95.


Bronx Woman Killed as Shots Erupt on Street
LEAD: A 50-year-old woman, playing dominoes with friends on a sidewalk table in the Bronx, was shot and killed yesterday morning when a gunfight erupted on a nearby corner and a man sprayed the street with semiautomatic fire, the police said.


Gulf Situation Called Key to Interest Rates
LEAD: Credit analysts say that despite mounting evidence of a recession, long-term interest rates are likely to remain mired around 9 percent for some time, unless the confrontation in the Middle East is suddenly resolved.


Tipping New York Senate Balance: Abortion Issue May Carry Weight
LEAD: Anita Maxwell, a Democratic candidate for the State Senate, said with a smile that it might seem a bit incongruous for her to be campaigning at a Planned Parenthood clinic here last week.


Former East Germans Vote, And Kohl Is the Big Winner
LEAD: Voters electing new state legislatures in what used to be East Germany overwhelmingly chose Christian Democrats today, handing Chancellor Helmut Kohl a resounding political victory.


Eileen Cernese Is Married
LEAD: Dr.
Eileen Linda Cernese and Jeffrey Alan Klein were married last evening at the Oceanside (L.I.) Jewish Center by Rabbi Morris Friedman.
The bride, 30 years old, is a daughter of Miriam Cernese of Brooklyn and the late William Cernese.
She is a fellow in nephrology at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.


Abused Children Find the Strength to Testify Against Their Father
LEAD: The nine children of Herman and Frances McMillan lived in a one-bedroom apartment within sight of Yankee Stadium, but they didn't know a thing about baseball.
For that matter, they barely knew what daylight was all about: looking out the window was forbidden by their father.


Michele Wolk and Allan Mordkoff, Lawyers, Wed
LEAD: Michele Wolk, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Allan Wolk of New York, was married yesterday to Allan Robert Mordkoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Mordkoff of Port Jefferson Station, L.I.
Rabbi Steven Graber officiated at the Marvello Country Club in Stony Point, N.Y.


New Commuters to New York City: Pupils
LEAD: Since Byron and Sarah Walker started commuting to Manhattan together three years ago, each has had to make certain adjustments.


April Rooker Is Married
LEAD: April Ashley Richards Rooker, the daughter of Carolyn K. Hodges of Darien, Conn., and Dr.
Donald W. Rooker of Atlanta, was married yesterday to Mark Steven Gronich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Gronich of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Melvin Hawthorne, a Baptist minister, officiated at the Estherwood mansion in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


Home Schooling Offers Parents a Viable Education Alternative
LEAD: To the Editor:


White House Urges Decrease In Short-Term Interest Rates
LEAD: The White House chief of staff, John H. Sununu, said today that he hoped the Federal Reserve would cut short-term interest rates sharply should an agreement be reached with Congress to reduce the Federal budget deficit.


Very Weak Ad Sales Trouble TV Networks
LEAD: Coming on the heels of disappointing ratings at the start of the new television season, the broadcast networks now appear to be facing the weakest fourth-quarter market for advertising in at least the last decade.


Honoring Investing That Paid
LEAD: For the last few years George Soros, a Wall Street financier, has quietly bankrolled the democratic movements and leaders who today are struggling to reshape the political landscape of Eastern Europe.


Montana and Rice Sparkle
LEAD: The Atlanta Falcons enjoy living on the edge.
They wear black and they are proud.
Their take no prisoners slogan mirrors the image of Jerry Glanville, who has already brought the Falcons a long way in a short span.


Menotti and Spoleto Split On Issue of Artistic Control
LEAD: Gian Carlo Menotti, the 79-year-old founder of the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. in Charleston, S.C., said yesterday that he had resigned as the festival's artistic director, but would return if its board gave him unchallenged artistic control.


Spanish Papers Thrive as Hispanic Market Surges
LEAD: The Spanish-language newspaper market in the United States seems like a pinata being whacked on all sides by entrepreneurs and media companies.
All are eager to reap the profits from the surging Hispanic population, which may reach 30 million by the turn of the century.


Montana and Rice Sparkle
LEAD: The Atlanta Falcons enjoy living on the edge.
They wear black and they are proud.
Their take no prisoners slogan mirrors the image of Jerry Glanville, who has already brought the Falcons a long way in a short span.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''You can get away with saying that a move gives 'a spatial edge' or 'a powerful attacking position' as long as you don't specify what edge or what attack.
Or you can just generalize with something like, 'Black seems rather defensive here.'


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption on Saturday about the mistrial in the latest Bensonhurst trial reversed the identities of the two men shown in some copies.


Poles Negotiate A Soviet Barter
LEAD: Poland will send thousands of tons of food and tobacco to the Soviet Union to help alleviate shortages there, in exchange for natural gas Poland needs badly, officials said Friday.


Times They Are A-Changin': It's Dylan at West Point
LEAD: It could have been just another Bob Dylan concert, complete with sneering, pointed lyrics, jamming electric guitars and a few reflective ballads.
But this time the hall was packed with future Army commanders.


At the United Nations, One Seat for Korea
LEAD: To the Editor:


Correction
LEAD: A picture caption on Saturday about the mistrial in the latest Bensonhurst trial reversed the identities of the two men shown in some copies.


Dividend Meetings
LEAD: Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Oct. 15:
MONDAY
Alltel Corp
Dana Corp
Eastern Utils Assoc
Goodrich BF Co
Lilly Eli &amp; Co
Southern Co
Weis Mkts Inc
TUESDAY
Amer Cap Mgmt &amp; Resh
American Cyanamid Co
Bearings Inc Delaware
Federal Natl Mtg Assn
Honeywell Inc
ICM Ppty Invs Inc
K Mart Corp
Lubys Cafeterias Inc
Mellon Bk Corp
Reliance Group Hldgs Inc
Ryder System Inc
Salomon Bros Fd Inc
Schwab Charles Corp
Scott Paper Co
Security Pac Corp
Southern Ind Gas &amp; Elec Co
Teco Energy Inc
Texas Inds


Bid for Mayor In '93 Likely, Stein Forecasts
LEAD: Seizing on Mayor David N. Dinkins's recent troubles as an opportunity to express his own ambitions, City Council President Andrew J. Stein said in a television interview broadcast yesterday that there was a ''good chance'' he would run for mayor in 1993.


Lebanese General Seeking Exile As Syria Tightens Grip on Beirut
LEAD: As thousands of Syrian troops tightened their grip on sectors of East Beirut that they entered on Saturday, the defeated Christian chief, Gen.
Michel Aoun, remained stranded today at the French Embassy here, waiting while France negotiates with the Lebanese Government to allow the general safe passage into exile.


Jets Ravaged by Chargers, 39-3
LEAD: There were 13,580 no-shows announced at Giants Stadium for the Jets' game against the San Diego Chargers today if you don't count the Jets' offense, their defense and their special teams units.


Dorothy Powell Is Wed
LEAD: Dorothy Powell and Robert Rosenwasser were married yesterday at Loews Glenpointe Hotel in Teaneck, N.J., by Rabbi Fredric Dworkin.
Mrs.
Rosenwasser, 61 years old, is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Greenberg of New York.
A graduate of Hunter College, she retired as a social worker for the Bureau of Child Welfare in New York.


INSIDE
LEAD:
U.S. Softens on Trade Issue
The United States plans to offer a compromise on the sticky issue of farm subsidies, which are popular in Europe but which the Administration has fought to eliminate.
Page D1.
New Tone in Political Ads
Negative political advertisements still proliferate on television, but authenticity is what consultants and candidates say they are trying to communicate this year.


New Bank in Leningrad
LEAD: The first Soviet commercial bank to be controlled by Communist Party workers has been set up in Leningrad, a Communist official, Arkadi Krutikhin, said Friday.
Mr.
Krutikhin, administrator of the regional Leningrad Party Committee, said the bank would start with a capital base of three million rubles ($5.1 million at the official exchange rate) drawn from the party's dues and budget.


Miss Greenberg, Lawyer, Married
LEAD: Pamela Ellen Greenberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur L. Greenberg of Cherry Hill, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Mark Philip Gold, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Gold of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Raphael Gold, an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Metropolis Country Club in White


'We Know What's At Stake'
LEAD: ''I believe the rights to property should be retained,'' Joe Slovo said. ''It would be absurd for us to move into a post-apartheid society trying to eliminate the private sector, foreign investment and so on.
We know that they aren't charities and they need security, they need the feeling that what they've got they're going to keep.


Review/Television;   2 Cable Movies of Substance
LEAD: When it comes to made-for-television movies, cable companies are increasingly getting out in front of the commercial networks in terms of tackling content that goes beyond business as usual.
Network schedules these days are clogged with two-hour movies that seem intended primarily to be alternative showcases for the stars of weekly series.


'We Know What's At Stake'
LEAD: ''I believe the rights to property should be retained,'' Joe Slovo said. ''It would be absurd for us to move into a post-apartheid society trying to eliminate the private sector, foreign investment and so on.
We know that they aren't charities and they need security, they need the feeling that what they've got they're going to keep.


Warming Is Killing Coral Reefs, Scientists Say
LEAD: Warming trends are causing the deterioration of the world's coral reefs, a panel of research scientists told a Senate committee last week.


High Pakistan Court Upholds Dismissal of Bhutto
LEAD: A high court in Lahore today upheld President Ghulam Ishaq Khan's dismissal of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's Government on Aug. 6.


G.O.P. Senators See Politics In Pace of Keating 5 Inquiry
LEAD: In rare public criticism of the panel that polices their behavior, several Republican Senators have suggested that the Senate Ethics Committee has let politics interfere with its investigation of five lawmakers for their links to the savings and loan debacle.


Miss Light Wed To D. F. Abrams
LEAD: Wendy Ellen Light, a daughter of Gerald P. Light of Floral Park, Queens, and the late Mary Light, was married yesterday to Danal Frederic Abrams, a son of Dr.
Martin W. Abrams and Lynn Epstein Abrams, both of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson officiated at Temple Beth-el in Great Neck.


3.1 Quake Strikes California
LEAD: A mild earthquake struck the northern San Francisco Bay area about 7 P.M. on Saturday.
There were no reports of damage or injuries.
A spokesman for the United States Geological Survey said the earthquake registered 3.1 on the Richter Scale of ground motion and was centered 5 miles southwest of Vallejo, which is 20 miles north of Oakland.


Alison D. Keel Is Wed To Stephen E. Kimmel
LEAD: Alison Dixon Keel, the daughter of Susan T. Danin of Chapel Hill, N.C., and Dr.
William A. Keel of Fountain Valley, Calif., was married yesterday to Dr.
Stephen Edward Kimmel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard M. Kimmel of Upper Montclair, N.J.
Rabbi Joshua S. Chasan and Cantor Adina Klein officiated at Congregation Shomrei Emunah in Montclair, N


Market Place;   Heritage Media's Bid for POP Radio
LEAD: IT takes a gutsy investor to step in and buy a stock just as a takeover seems to be falling apart.
Or one who knows more than the public.


Roosevelt Aide Called an Unwitting Spy
LEAD: A new book by a prominent Soviet K.G.B. defector names Harry L. Hopkins, an architect of President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal and his closest personal adviser, as an unwitting ''agent of major significance'' for the Soviet Union.


Susan Carol Cohn Marries A. I. Meyer in New Jersey
LEAD: Susan Carol Cohn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Cohn of Edison, N.J., was married yesterday to Arnold Ira Meyer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Emanuel Meyer of Philadelphia.
Rabbi Barry R. Friedman and Cantor Bruce M. Benson officiated at Temple B'nai Abraham in Livingston, N.J.


Far to the East of Moscow, A Brazen Rush to Capitalism
LEAD: The islanders call their beloved outsider ''E.
T.,'' for Valentin Fyodorov has proved to be a boon-producing alien, rocking the governance of Sakhalin Island with strange events in defiance of the law to make people imagine themselves more and more in a free-market world apart from the rest of the Soviet Union.


Islanders Plagued by Injuries and Suspensions
LEAD: The Islanders, who played in a figurative fog Saturday night, practiced in a literal one today at Cantiague Park.


This Is One Party I Think I'll Miss
LEAD: The following letter was sent to the German Ambassador to Poland, Guenter Knackstedt, on October 1, 1990 in response to an invitation to celebrate German unification.


Metro Matters;   Many Efforts To Fight Crime; Few to Stop It
LEAD: When New York City's Commission on the Year 2000 was drafting its recommendations several years ago, demographers were perplexed by one nagging question: Where had the city's young black and Hispanic men gone?


Miss Sellnow Marries A. L. Krieger
LEAD: Stephanie Sellnow and Arthur Louis Krieger were married yesterday at Halloran House in New York.
Rabbi Thomas K. Weiner and Cantor Richard Botton officiated.


Oilers Get Revenge But Don't Flaunt It
LEAD: The Houston Oilers enjoyed the present too much to think about the past today.


What Kind of People Are We?
LEAD: The budget deficit facing Mayor David Dinkins has been estimated at between $1.5 and $2.5 billion for next year.
While the city's budget appears to be huge - $29 billion in its fiscal year 1992 - in fact, only $20 billion are city funds.
The rest are Federal and state monies over which the Mayor has little control.


Lake Ranco Journal;   Pollution in Paradise: Can Salmon Be the Cause?
LEAD: Lake Ranco seems an almost perfect place, where dairy herds graze in scenes of pastoral splendor, wildflowers spill into the narrow dirt roads, and the lake water is so clear and clean that some people still drink it.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-13
Israel denounced the U.N. resolution to send a delegation to investigate the deaths of 21 Palestinians at Al Aksa Mosque in Jerusalem last week.
The Government said it would not cooperate with the investigation.
Page A1


Fined Abortion Clinic Closes
LEAD: The best-known abortion clinic here has closed after the authorities seized its equipment for its failure to pay Federal fines.
Federal prosecutors sued the Delta Women's Clinic in July 1989, saying that three doctors had illegally prescribed sedatives and painkillers.
In March, United States District Judge Adrian Duplantier ordered fines of $337,000 against the clinic, which opened in 1973.


NWA Options On Cost Cuts
LEAD: The machinists' union at Northwest Airlines said Friday that it was considering a company proposal that it choose between laying off workers or taking a 10 percent pay cut for six months.


William Knapp, 70, Ex-New Yorker Editor
LEAD: William R. Knapp, a retired senior editor of The New Yorker magazine and a former town official in Westport, Conn., died on Friday at his home in Westport at the age of 70.


Important Intel Chip Improved
LEAD: In a significant advance for the production of small ''notebook'' computers, the Intel Corporation said today that it had developed a vastly shrunken, power-saving version of the chips that form the processing power of some of the most advanced personal computers.


Rule of Thumb for Negotiating A Budget: 'Don't Tax Friends'
LEAD: While the big battles over Medicare, capital gains and income tax rates have been blocking a budget agreement between Congress and the White House, dozens of backroom deals and horse trades on lesser matters have helped shape the deficit reduction packages lawmakers will vote on this week.


Battle Over Assault Weapons Bill
LEAD: If the sponsors of a bill to ban assault weapons have their way, the bill will not come to a vote in the House this year.


Deals
LEAD:
Baseball


Less-Costly Apple Line To Be Presented Today
LEAD: Answering criticism that its products are overpriced, Apple Computer Inc. will introduce three new versions of its Macintosh today, with the least expensive carrying a list price of $999.


At the United Nations, One Seat for Korea
LEAD: To the Editor:


1989 Ruling Spurs New Tack in Civil Rights Suits
LEAD: In response to a 1989 Supreme Court decision, courts across the country are reopening old civil rights cases and allowing white men to challenge the hiring and promotion of blacks under court decrees issued up to 20 years ago.


Economic Calendar
LEAD: Listed below are the target dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday
Inventory Sales . . . Aug.
Tuesday
None
Wednesday
Housing Starts . . . Sept.
Industrial Production . . . Sept.
Capacity Utilization . . . Sept.


Bid for Mayor In '93 Likely, Stein Forecasts
LEAD: Seizing on Mayor David N. Dinkins's recent troubles as an opportunity to express his own ambitions, City Council President Andrew J. Stein said in a television interview broadcast yesterday that there was a ''good chance'' he would run for mayor in 1993.


Lebanese General Seeking Exile As Syria Tightens Grip on Beirut
LEAD: As thousands of Syrian troops tightened their grip on sectors of East Beirut that they entered on Saturday, the defeated Christian chief, Gen.
Michel Aoun, remained stranded today at the French Embassy here, waiting while France negotiates with the Lebanese Government to allow the general safe passage into exile.


The No. 1 Ranking Up for Grabs Again
LEAD: The ball was on the artificial surface in the north end zone at Michigan Stadium.
Players and fans in Michigan State green were rushing onto the field to celebrate, even with 6 seconds to play.
And the penalty flag that the Michigan receiver Desmond Howard desperately searched for and the Spartan defensive back Eddie


What's in a Name? For Some Publishers, Celebrity Novels
LEAD: The celebrity memoir is a staple of publishing, and some publishers are now getting ready to bet millions of dollars that the public will also buy novels by celebrities, even those that are actually written by other people.


Celtics Experiencing Change
LEAD: FOR so many years, the Boston Celtics were the organization against which all other National Basketball Association franchises were measured.
They won championships.
They had mystique.
They had stability.
That tradition makes the whirlwind off-season events involving the Celtics more startling than if they had occurred with another franchise.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''You can get away with saying that a move gives 'a spatial edge' or 'a powerful attacking position' as long as you don't specify what edge or what attack.
Or you can just generalize with something like, 'Black seems rather defensive here.'


With Few Planes, Kuwaitis Try to Revive an Airline Without a Country
LEAD: At the well-appointed Park Avenue offices of Kuwait Airways in Manhattan, reservation agents wait with little to do, and computer screens once brimming with information are blank.
But executives say they are ready to revive the only national airline without a nation.


British Curbs On Inflation
LEAD: Britain's Chancellor of the Exchequer, John Major, says that he will keep tough curbs on the economy to fight inflation despite hopes that the pound's entry into Europe's currency system would provide some relief.


Times They Are A-Changin': It's Dylan at West Point
LEAD: It could have been just another Bob Dylan concert, complete with sneering, pointed lyrics, jamming electric guitars and a few reflective ballads.
But this time the hall was packed with future Army commanders.


Lots of Words, but Are They True?
LEAD: ACROSS Manhattan, in a variety of luxurious apartments, similar scenes are played out night after night.
The sun is setting, cocktails are being served and the battered spirits of weary book publishers are being revived by a combination of alcohol, flirtation and chat.
And, as the noise level rises, the publishing rumor mill begins to whir.


Honoring Investing That Paid
LEAD: For the last few years George Soros, a Wall Street financier, has quietly bankrolled the democratic movements and leaders who today are struggling to reshape the political landscape of Eastern Europe.


Jets Ravaged by Chargers, 39-3


Randy A. Gilman, Gemologist, Weds
LEAD: Randy Allyn Gilman, a daughter of Mrs.
Herbert Gilman of West Hartford, Conn., and the late Mr.
Gilman, was married yesterday at the Pierre in New York to Henri Zvi Bolimovsky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Moisha Bolimovsky of Tel Aviv.
Rabbi Sol Roth and Cantor Joseph Malovany performed the ceremony.


Randy A. Gilman, Gemologist, Weds
LEAD: Randy Allyn Gilman, a daughter of Mrs.
Herbert Gilman of West Hartford, Conn., and the late Mr.
Gilman, was married yesterday at the Pierre in New York to Henri Zvi Bolimovsky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Moisha Bolimovsky of Tel Aviv.
Rabbi Sol Roth and Cantor Joseph Malovany performed the ceremony.


Home Schooling Offers Parents a Viable Education Alternative
LEAD: To the Editor:


White House Urges Decrease In Short-Term Interest Rates
LEAD: The White House chief of staff, John H. Sununu, said today that he hoped the Federal Reserve would cut short-term interest rates sharply should an agreement be reached with Congress to reduce the Federal budget deficit.


Abused Children Find the Strength to Testify Against Their Father
LEAD: The nine children of Herman and Frances McMillan lived in a one-bedroom apartment within sight of Yankee Stadium, but they didn't know a thing about baseball.
For that matter, they barely knew what daylight was all about: looking out the window was forbidden by their father.


Michele Wolk and Allan Mordkoff, Lawyers, Wed
LEAD: Michele Wolk, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Allan Wolk of New York, was married yesterday to Allan Robert Mordkoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Mordkoff of Port Jefferson Station, L.I.
Rabbi Steven Graber officiated at the Marvello Country Club in Stony Point, N.Y.


New Commuters to New York City: Pupils
LEAD: Since Byron and Sarah Walker started commuting to Manhattan together three years ago, each has had to make certain adjustments.


Tipping New York Senate Balance: Abortion Issue May Carry Weight
LEAD: Anita Maxwell, a Democratic candidate for the State Senate, said with a smile that it might seem a bit incongruous for her to be campaigning at a Planned Parenthood clinic here last week.


Former East Germans Vote, And Kohl Is the Big Winner
LEAD: Voters electing new state legislatures in what used to be East Germany overwhelmingly chose Christian Democrats today, handing Chancellor Helmut Kohl a resounding political victory.


Eileen Cernese Is Married
LEAD: Dr.
Eileen Linda Cernese and Jeffrey Alan Klein were married last evening at the Oceanside (L.I.) Jewish Center by Rabbi Morris Friedman.
The bride, 30 years old, is a daughter of Miriam Cernese of Brooklyn and the late William Cernese.
She is a fellow in nephrology at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: As thanks for his sensitive portrayal of their people, the Sioux Nation will adopt KEVIN COSTNER as a brother of Sinte Gleska College, where he and his crew were given a crash course in Lakota, the Sioux language.
As the co-producer, director and star, Mr.
Costner shot most of his new film, ''Dances with Wolves,'' around South Dakota, the heart of Sioux country.


Review/Television;   The Political Journey Of an Archetypal Loner
LEAD: The rises and falls and falls and rises of Richard M. Nixon have been so chronically chronicled that three more hours may not seem strictly necessary.
Still, the fascination remains, like an old wound that the body politic cannot leave alone, and there is always a new generation to be edified or mortified by the man's career.


Bronx Woman Killed as Shots Erupt on Street
LEAD: A 50-year-old woman, playing dominoes with friends on a sidewalk table in the Bronx, was shot and killed yesterday morning when a gunfight erupted on a nearby corner and a man sprayed the street with semiautomatic fire, the police said.


5 Years After Duvalier, Haiti Is Still in Shambles
LEAD: Like many other people in business here, Richard Morse pegged his hopes on plans for democratic elections in 1987 that were meant to put a definitive end to the long Duvalier family dictatorship.


Chessmanship: The Fine Art Of Sounding Like a Master
LEAD: As soon as Gary Kasparov moved his king's pawn to start the second game of the World Chess Championship, the kibitzers thought something was up.
They had been expecting an opening on the queenside.
Clearly this called for instant analysis.
So, as the players quickly proceeded with the Flohr-Zaitsev Variation, the kibitzers next door at the Hotel Macklowe sought out Eric Schiller, an American player.


On His Centennial, They Still Like Ike
LEAD: They came to Gettysburg this weekend as they had come when Dwight D. Eisenhower lived in retirement here, this time to honor the man with the big grin on the 100th anniversary of his birth.


Rachel Shatz, Urban Planner, Weds
LEAD: Rachel Elizabeth Shatz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton L. Shatz of Rowayton, Conn., was married yesterday to William W. Dunnell 4th, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dunnell 3d of North Andover, Mass.
Cantor Mark Lipson performed the ceremony at the Chieftains estate in Greenwich, Conn.


The Editorial Notebook;   Crime in New York, Compared
LEAD: The season's crime news has generated a spasm of self-doubt for New Yorkers, driving some to seek comfort from statistics suggesting that other cities have more crime.
They can't find much.


With Big Plays in a Big Game, Giants Beat Redskins
LEAD: From the beginning, when the Redskins seemed invincible, until the end, whtn the Giants proved invincible, it was a typical Giants-Redskins game.


Go Ahead Penn State, Gloat!
LEAD: Besides his weekly call-in radio show, Joe Paterno takes other pulse readings for perceptions of Penn State football.


With Few Planes, Kuwaitis Try to Revive an Airline Without a Country
LEAD: At the well-appointed Park Avenue offices of Kuwait Airways in Manhattan, reservation agents wait with little to do, and computer screens once brimming with information are blank.
But executives say they are ready to revive the only national airline without a nation.


More on the Budget
LEAD:
The 3 Plans: Comparing tax provisions and the revenue gains from the three budget proposals.
Table, page B8.
The Impact: Political battle over who bears the burden. Page B9.
The Voters: Frustration with politicians is a factor in Congressional races. Page B8.


Lawyer's Threat of Mistrial Splits Defense in Jogger Case
LEAD: One of the two defense lawyers in the second Central Park jogger trial has threatened to move for a mistrial if the other defense lawyer tries to subject the woman who was raped and beaten to an aggressive cross-examination.


Bridge
LEAD: One of the oldest competitors at the World Championships in Geneva last month was Dave Treadwell of Wilmington, Del.
Playing with Jim Becker of Manhattan in the Open Pairs, he celebrated his 78th birthday with skillful play on the diagramed deal.


Dana J. Larson Is Wed To Adam Howard Sher
LEAD: Dana Jean Larson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
William Larson of Williamsville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Adam Howard Sher, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Sher of New York, by Rabbi Joseph Gelberman at the Hasbrouck House Inn in Stone Ridge, N.Y.
The bride, 31 years old and a Middlebury College graduate with a master's in education from Columbia University, studies meditation at the SYDA Foundation, a retreat in South Fallsburg, N.Y.


1989 Ruling Spurs New Tack in Civil Rights Suits
LEAD: In response to a 1989 Supreme Court decision, courts across the country are reopening old civil rights cases and allowing white men to challenge the hiring and promotion of blacks under court decrees issued up to 20 years ago.


Ike's Foreign Policy Wasn't Always Open
LEAD: To the Editor:


Liberia War Meeting Is Canceled
LEAD: An emergency summit meeting of West African leaders to discuss Liberia's civil war has been canceled, the Ivory Coast Government said today.


Outdoors: A Gem in the New Hampshire Rough
LEAD: SOME things don't change and Cole Pond is one of them.


The No. 1 Ranking Up for Grabs Again
LEAD: The ball was on the artificial surface in the north end zone at Michigan Stadium.
Players and fans in Michigan State green were rushing onto the field to celebrate, even with 6 seconds to play.
And the penalty flag that the Michigan receiver Desmond Howard desperately searched for and the Spartan defensive back Eddie


Illegal Lottery Tax
LEAD: To the Editor:


Syracuse Track Team's Bus And Luggage Stolen by Driver
LEAD: A group of Syracuse high school students visiting New York City were left stranded in the rain when their bus driver abondoned them and stole their luggage, officials said.


Lisa Ellen Lempel, an Attorney, Weds E. G. Sander, N.Y. Rent Administrator
LEAD: Lisa Ellen Lempel, a lawyer, and Elliot Gene Sander, the New York State Rent Administrator, were married last evening at Temple Sharay Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.
Cantor Henry Herman officiated.


Flooding Forces L.I.R.R. to Close Part of One Line
LEAD: A section of the Port Jefferson branch of the Long Island Rail Road was closed yesterday after a flood basin collapsed under Saturday's heavy rains, unleashing a wave that dug a six-foot hole under the tracks and flooded a nearby road.


Bush Discovers Free Speech on Kids' Ads
LEAD: To the Editor:


Some Find Signal For a New Order
LEAD: The surrender of Gen.
Michel Aoun in the face of a Syrian military assault on his East Beirut bunker Saturday makes the Lebanese Army militia leader the first Arab political domino to tumble as a result of the 10-week-old Persian Gulf crisis.


Where First an Op-Ed Page Was Seen
LEAD: To the Editor:


IMAGES OF REALISM IN CAMPAIGN ADS
LEAD: If there is a different theme to the political advertising on television this year, it is the importance of seeming earnest.


Both Kabul and Rebels Report Battle Gains
LEAD: Muslim guerrillas said today that they had captured strategic security outposts and killed more than 200 Afghan troops in their latest attempt to capture the capital, Kabul.


Jean Hammond Bender Is the Bride Of Craig Sabina in Saratoga Springs
LEAD: Jean Hammond Bender, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew Bender 4th of Albany, was married yesterday to Craig William Sabina, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Sabina of Denver.
Mayor Almeda C. Dake of Saratoga Springs, N.Y., officiated at the Canfield Casino in Saratoga Springs.


Disney Adding Book Unit In Bid to Be a Top Publisher
LEAD: The Walt Disney Company plans to establish a unit to publish books for adults as part of a long-term plan to become a leading book publisher.


Judith LaBella Is Married
LEAD: Judith LaBella of Bloomfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Henry Kornhauser of New York by Mayor Timothy McDonough of Hope, N.J., at Water's Edge at the East River Yacht Club in Long Island City, Queens.
Mrs.
Kornhauser, 49 years old, owns Sam &amp; Judi's Restaurant in East Newark, N.J.
Her first marriage ended in divorce, as did her husband's.


Ms. Cannon Wed To D. J. Spielvogel
LEAD: Pat Cannon, the daughter of Maxine Berry Cannon of Binghamton, N.Y., and the late Charles E. Cannon, was married yesterday to David Joseph Spielvogel, a son of Roslyn Bremer Spielvogel and Carl Spielvogel, both of New York.
Rabbi Michael Robinson performed the ceremony at the Bear Mountain Inn in Bear Mountain State Park, N


A Familiar Campaign Trail Is Harder to Navigate
LEAD: In the past two months, Representative William G. Hefner, who has represented this area of small textile towns and farms for eight terms, has been unable to get home to campaign much.
The budget debates and standoffs have kept him busy in Washington, so television advertisements stressing his work for farmers, the textile industry and the military have taken the place of personal contact in his re-election campaign.


Mr. Bush, Against the Tide
LEAD: By overwhelming margins, very likely sufficient to override a Presidential veto, Congress is on the verge of approving the Civil Rights Act of 1990.
President Bush, still sloganeering about a ''quota bill,'' threatens to veto the bill.
His position is not supported by the evidence.
An override would be just punishment.


The Giant Fan Who Can't Yell
LEAD: TWO rows behind a corner of the end zone not far from the Giants' sideline, he sat there in a pale blue shirt, clenching his fist whenever the Giants scored.
But he wasn't yelling for the Giants as he once did at Yankee Stadium when he was younger.
He wasn't yelling because he can't.


On His Centennial, They Still Like Ike
LEAD: They came to Gettysburg this weekend as they had come when Dwight D. Eisenhower lived in retirement here, this time to honor the man with the big grin on the 100th anniversary of his birth.


A Surrender in Beirut
LEAD: The surrender of Gen.
Michel Aoun, the Christian rebel commander in Beirut, may be a signal of the new political order forged by the crisis in the Persian Gulf.
Page A13.


The Editorial Notebook;   Crime in New York, Compared
LEAD: The season's crime news has generated a spasm of self-doubt for New Yorkers, driving some to seek comfort from statistics suggesting that other cities have more crime.
They can't find much.


Ailing Harbaugh Leads Bears' Romp
LEAD: Jim Harbaugh, playing with a cracked rib, passed for two touchdowns and ran for another tonight, leading the Chicago Bears to a 38-9 victory over the Los Angeles Rams.


Navajo Bribery Case Almost Ready for Jury
LEAD: After nine days of testimony in a trial that had been expected to last four to six weeks, the case of Peter MacDonald, the Navajo tribal leader accused of bribery, is expected to go to the jury on Monday.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: As thanks for his sensitive portrayal of their people, the Sioux Nation will adopt KEVIN COSTNER as a brother of Sinte Gleska College, where he and his crew were given a crash course in Lakota, the Sioux language.
As the co-producer, director and star, Mr.
Costner shot most of his new film, ''Dances with Wolves,'' around South Dakota, the heart of Sioux country.


Ms. Grossman Weds Dr. Gary Alweiss
LEAD: Gayle Amy Grossman, a medical student at Harvard University, and Dr.
Gary Steven Alweiss, a neurologist, were married yesterday at Temple Israel in Great Neck, L.I., by Rabbi Mordechai Waxman.


China Opens Grain Market
LEAD: In one of its few efforts this year to overhaul its economy, China opened a national wheat market last week to replace central allocation of the nation's 85-million-ton annual wheat harvest.


In 47th District, It's a Race for State Senate


At Guggenheim, Changing the Changes
LEAD: A dramatic change in plans has been proposed for the new annex of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
The change, which gives much bolder emphasis to the facade, is highly unusual for a building already under construction.
But for this particular structure, which was sent back to the drawing board once by critics' objections and attended by years of hotly debated passage through New York City agencies, such an additional change in mid-construction comes as a bombshell.


Get New York's Fat Out of the Fire
LEAD: How can New York City's government climb out of the current fiscal mess?
By promptly taking two steps: First, keep matters from getting worse by delaying further labor negotiations immediately.
And second, find a way to withhold part of the alarmingly large raise granted the teachers' union.


Leonard Bernstein, 72, Music's Monarch, Dies
LEAD: Leonard Bernstein, one of the most prodigally talented and successful musicians in American history, died yesterday evening at his apartment at the Dakota on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
He was 72 years old.


Voter Registration Try Ends in a Cuomo Loss
LEAD: Voter registration for next month's elections in New York State is over, along with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's unsuccessful attempt to require state agencies to take an active role in helping register voters.


Warming Is Killing Coral Reefs, Scientists Say
LEAD: Warming trends are causing the deterioration of the world's coral reefs, a panel of research scientists told a Senate committee last week.


Poor Medical Care Is Blamed For Death of an Attica Inmate
LEAD: An Attica Correctional Facility inmate, James Charles, who died after a scuffle with prison guards in May, received inadequate medical attention before his death, a state prison official said.


INSIDE
LEAD:
U.S. Softens on Trade Issue
The United States plans to offer a compromise on the sticky issue of farm subsidies, which are popular in Europe but which the Administration has fought to eliminate.
Page D1.
New Tone in Political Ads
Negative political advertisements still proliferate on television, but authenticity is what consultants and candidates say they are trying to communicate this year.


Hampson's Giovanni, A Man He Knows And Doesn't Like
LEAD: ''The man is mad,'' is how the baritone Thomas Hampson describes Don Giovanni, the role he is singing at the Metropolitan Opera this month. ''He is unraveling, and he knows it.
And in the opera's final scenes, he is confronted with the universal of mortality.
For me, that confrontation shows as much of the human condition and the human experience as it is possible to show, theatrically.


Janice Stacy Weider Wed
LEAD: Janice Stacy Wieder, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin R. Wieder of Dongan Hills, S.I., was married yesterday to Jay Martin Lippman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Lippman of New York.
Rabbis Martin J. Zion and Gerald Sussman performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in New York.
Mrs.
Lippman, a graduate of Northwestern University and Brooklyn Law School, is a lawyer with the Legal Aid Society in New York.


Ann Kirschner Weds D. P. Hawkins
LEAD: Ann Judith Kirschner, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul A. Kirschner of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to David Peter Hawkins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Hawkins of Ridgewood, N.J.
Jean Kotkin, a leader of the Ethical Culture Society, officiated at La Belle Epoque in New York.


Crux of Tax Debate: Who Pays More?
LEAD: As the budget fracas continued last week, often in a cloud of confusion, perhaps the clearest point of contention became the question of who should bear the greatest financial burden of increased taxes: rich or poor or the people in between.


Dr. Niusia Shimrat, 71, A Child Psychologist
LEAD: Dr.
Niusia Shimrat, a child psychologist with Mount Sinai Medical Center for two decades before retiring in 1985, died on Saturday at the Perlow Hospice of Beth Israel Medical Center.
She was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Janice Stacy Weider Wed
LEAD: Janice Stacy Wieder, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin R. Wieder of Dongan Hills, S.I., was married yesterday to Jay Martin Lippman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Lippman of New York.
Rabbis Martin J. Zion and Gerald Sussman performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in New York.
Mrs.
Lippman, a graduate of Northwestern University and Brooklyn Law School, is a lawyer with the Legal Aid Society in New York.


ISRAEL'S CABINET DENOUNCES STUDY BY U.N. INQUIRERS
LEAD: The Israeli Cabinet today officially denounced the United Nations decision to send a delegation to investigate the deaths of 21 Palestinians at Al Aksa Mosque last week and declared that it would not cooperate with the mission.


At the United Nations, One Seat for Korea;   Seoul's Sea Change
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss Sellnow Marries A. L. Krieger
LEAD: Stephanie Sellnow and Arthur Louis Krieger were married yesterday at Halloran House in New York.
Rabbi Thomas K. Weiner and Cantor Richard Botton officiated.


Hindu Revivalist's Challenge To Muslim Shrine Stirs Fears
LEAD: With the beat of drums, the bold dashes of saffron belts and headbands and the sight of sword-brandishing men, Lal Kishen Advani, India's most prominent right-wing leader, brought his revivalist campaign against a Muslim shrine at a Hindu holy site to a crucial phase today.


A Tradition for Tampa Raises Questions of Bias
LEAD: For 86 years, the biggest annual event here has been the Gasparilla parade, a winter extravaganza that features 500 of the city's most powerful men - bankers, lawyers, heads of government agencies -swaggering through the streets dressed up as gun-toting pirates.
Mayor Sandy Freedman made the parade part of her pitch to the National Football League for Super Bowl X


Susan Carol Cohn Marries A. I. Meyer in New Jersey
LEAD: Susan Carol Cohn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Cohn of Edison, N.J., was married yesterday to Arnold Ira Meyer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Emanuel Meyer of Philadelphia.
Rabbi Barry R. Friedman and Cantor Bruce M. Benson officiated at Temple B'nai Abraham in Livingston, N.J.


Iran and Iraq Resume Ties
LEAD: Iran and Iraq resumed direct diplomatic relations today and reopened their embassies, the Iranian Foreign Ministry said.
A ministry statement quoted by the Iranian press agency said that the Iraqi charge d'affaires began his assignment in Teheran today and that an Iranian charge d'affaires would leave for Baghdad shortly.


Fire at Lebanese Consulate
LEAD: A fire broke out on the ground floor of the Lebanese Consulate in Manhattan last night, injuring six people, the Fire Department said.
The fire, at a renovated brownstone at 9 East 67th Street, was reported at 8:22 P.M. by Said Genayel, a consulate employee.
Fire marshals were investigating the blaze because of the ''nature of the occupancy,'' said Jim Powell, a Fire Department spokesman.


Yes, Francesca, There Are Fish, Real Fish, in the Hudson
LEAD: Francesca Bynes always knew the Hudson River was home to sandwich wrappers, wood chips, castoff soda cans and other refuse.


Beat Thirst While Biking
LEAD: A new bicycle drink sack allows you to sip compressed liquids from a tube while riding.
The device, designed to replace the conventional water bottle, releases beverages from an expandable sack through a one-way valve.


EXECUTIVES PLAN FOR A RECESSION
LEAD: Corporate leaders at a conference here urged consumers to remain confident in the American economy, while their companies are laying plans to cope with a possible recession.


William Knapp, 70, Ex-New Yorker Editor
LEAD: William R. Knapp, a retired senior editor of The New Yorker magazine and a former town official in Westport, Conn., died on Friday at his home in Westport at the age of 70.


ARAFAT OPTIMISTIC ON GULF SOLUTION
LEAD: Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, said today that he was optimistic about prospects for a political solution to the Persian Gulf crisis after his latest talks in Baghdad with President Saddam Hussein.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: Economy


Shark Hunters Encircle A Brooding Tarkanian
LEAD: IN the hallway that leads to his imposing office at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas, there's a miniature street sign that proclaims the premises Shark Street USA, a domain of champions.
But lately the bold, bald head shark himself, Jerry Tarkanian, has felt more like a guppy trapped inside a very transparent, very small fishbowl.


Shark Hunters Encircle A Brooding Tarkanian
LEAD: IN the hallway that leads to his imposing office at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas, there's a miniature street sign that proclaims the premises Shark Street USA, a domain of champions.
But lately the bold, bald head shark himself, Jerry Tarkanian, has felt more like a guppy trapped inside a very transparent, very small fishbowl.


Jean Hammond Bender Is the Bride Of Craig Sabina in Saratoga Springs
LEAD: Jean Hammond Bender, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew Bender 4th of Albany, was married yesterday to Craig William Sabina, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Sabina of Denver.
Mayor Almeda C. Dake of Saratoga Springs, N.Y., officiated at the Canfield Casino in Saratoga Springs.


Syracuse Track Team's Bus And Luggage Stolen by Driver
LEAD: A group of Syracuse high school students visiting New York City were left stranded in the rain when their bus driver abondoned them and stole their luggage, officials said.


ARAFAT OPTIMISTIC ON GULF SOLUTION
LEAD: Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, said today that he was optimistic about prospects for a political solution to the Persian Gulf crisis after his latest talks in Baghdad with President Saddam Hussein.


Hindu Revivalist's Challenge To Muslim Shrine Stirs Fears
LEAD: With the beat of drums, the bold dashes of saffron belts and headbands and the sight of sword-brandishing men, Lal Kishen Advani, India's most prominent right-wing leader, brought his revivalist campaign against a Muslim shrine at a Hindu holy site to a crucial phase today.


Business and the Law;   U.S. Treatment Of Milken Brother
LEAD: WHEN Michael R. Milken entered a Federal District courtroom in Manhattan last week for the start of his pre-sentencing hearing, he was accompanied by his brother, Lowell, who was once indicted on racketeering charges but is now a free man.


Bring on C.S.C.E.
LEAD: Upon hearing that the transcendentalist Margaret Fuller had said ''I accept the Universe,'' the historian Thomas Carlyle delivered this withering put-down: ''By God, she'd better!''


Kathryn Turck Is Married
LEAD: Kathryn Mary Turck, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Delaney of Lakewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Stephen Jon Rose, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold J. Rose of Dorset, Vt.
Rabbi Burt A. Siegel and the Rev.
Fanny Erikson, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated in the ceremony at Delmonico's restaurant in New York.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The incoming chairman of the New York Stock Exchange took to the pulpit at a Manhattan cathedral on Sunday to denounce the materialism of the 1980's and the gap between rich and poor.


In 47th District, It's a Race for State Senate


A Tradition for Tampa Raises Questions of Bias
LEAD: For 86 years, the biggest annual event here has been the Gasparilla parade, a winter extravaganza that features 500 of the city's most powerful men - bankers, lawyers, heads of government agencies -swaggering through the streets dressed up as gun-toting pirates.
Mayor Sandy Freedman made the parade part of her pitch to the National Football League for Super Bowl X


Expanded Compaq Laptop Expected
LEAD: A year after it began selling small, lightweight ''notebook'' computers, the Compaq Computer Corporation has developed a model that matches the speed and power of the most popular larger desktop machines.
Compaq is expected to introduce its machine, named the LTE 386/20, on Monday.


U.S. Aides Say Move by Israel Hampers Relations
LEAD: Administration officials say they are deeply concerned that Israel's decision to reject a United Nations inquiry into the shooting of 21 Palestinians in Jerusalem last week could worsen already tense American-Israeli relations and continue to divert attention from the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.


Fatal Clash in The Old City: A Special Report:   MIDEAST TENSIONS;   How Passion and Violence Brought Grief to Jerusalem
LEAD: Israel's commission of inquiry into the shootings near Al Aksa Mosque started its work today facing two conflicting stories, one from Arabs and the other from Jews, as well as complete disagreement over who is to blame for the death of 21 Palestinians.


Fire at Lebanese Consulate
LEAD: A fire broke out on the ground floor of the Lebanese Consulate in Manhattan last night, injuring six people, the Fire Department said.
The fire, at a renovated brownstone at 9 East 67th Street, was reported at 8:22 P.M. by Said Genayel, a consulate employee.
Fire marshals were investigating the blaze because of the ''nature of the occupancy,'' said Jim Powell, a Fire Department spokesman.


EXECUTIVES PLAN FOR A RECESSION
LEAD: Corporate leaders at a conference here urged consumers to remain confident in the American economy, while their companies are laying plans to cope with a possible recession.


Ms. Grossman Weds Dr. Gary Alweiss
LEAD: Gayle Amy Grossman, a medical student at Harvard University, and Dr.
Gary Steven Alweiss, a neurologist, were married yesterday at Temple Israel in Great Neck, L.I., by Rabbi Mordechai Waxman.


Senate Rivals in New Jersey Clash on State Taxes
LEAD: The Republican Senate challenger, Christie Whitman, continued to press Bill Bradley last night to take a stand on New Jersey's record $2.8 billion tax increase in their first campaign debate, and the Senator continued to accuse her of pandering to public anger over the issue.


A European Slump Hits U.S. Computer Makers
LEAD: A growing number of American computer companies can no longer count on gaudy sales figures in Europe to compensate for slow growth at home, according to some analysts anxiously awaiting third-quarter earnings figures.


Results Plus
LEAD:
Tennis
Lendl Topples Becker: Ivan Lendl finished off Boris Becker with two passing shots in a final-set tie breaker yesterday and won the Seiko Super tournament in Tokyo.
Lendl won, 4-6, 6-3, 7-6, in a match that was delayed an hour at the start while the police searched for a bomb after a telephoned warning.


Review/Theater;   Calvin Trillin in 'Words, No Music'
LEAD: Calvin Trillin is the Buster Keaton of performance humorists.
As droll as he is deadpan, he never once suggests that he thinks he is as funny as we know he is.
He lets the audience do the laughing as he ambles onstage at the American Place Theater and begins his mirthful commentary.


A Surrender in Beirut
LEAD: The surrender of Gen.
Michel Aoun, the Christian rebel commander in Beirut, may be a signal of the new political order forged by the crisis in the Persian Gulf.
Page A13.


Mr. Bush, Against the Tide
LEAD: By overwhelming margins, very likely sufficient to override a Presidential veto, Congress is on the verge of approving the Civil Rights Act of 1990.
President Bush, still sloganeering about a ''quota bill,'' threatens to veto the bill.
His position is not supported by the evidence.
An override would be just punishment.


Redskin Turnovers Make the Difference
LEAD: All week, Bill Belichick pounded the statistics into the heads of the Giants' defensive players, the unit he coordinates: the Washington Redskins have not committed a turnover this season, he said, and they are 12-1 over the last two years in games in which they have a turnover edge. ''We've got to make big plays,'' he told them.


Both Kabul and Rebels Report Battle Gains
LEAD: Muslim guerrillas said today that they had captured strategic security outposts and killed more than 200 Afghan troops in their latest attempt to capture the capital, Kabul.


Ike's Foreign Policy Wasn't Always Open
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Commitment to Healing Shoulders
LEAD: JUST as the knee was the joint of the 1970's and 1980's in sports injury circles, the shoulder promises to be the joint of the 1990's.
In response to the demand from professional and recreational athletes, doctors, therapists and trainers have been working on new techniques to repair and rehabilitate shoulder joints after injury.


Reds Confident Despite Odds
LEAD: Eric Davis, the symbol and probably the hope of the Cincinnati Reds, stood alongside the batting cage near home plate two days before the World Series and admitted that his wrenched left shoulder ''limits me, probably by 70 percent of my normal power.''


Utilityman Makes Sure A's Have Heart
LEAD: Let's face it.
In the moments that matter, you are not likely to see Mike Gallego step up to the plate in the ninth inning, waggle his bat once or twice and send a pitch soaring into the nighttime sky.
That is the kind of stuff that is left to Jose Canseco or Mark McGwire or perhaps even to Rickey


Poor Medical Care Is Blamed For Death of an Attica Inmate
LEAD: An Attica Correctional Facility inmate, James Charles, who died after a scuffle with prison guards in May, received inadequate medical attention before his death, a state prison official said.


Fatal Clash in The Old City: A Special Report:   MIDEAST TENSIONS;   How Passion and Violence Brought Grief to Jerusalem
LEAD: Israel's commission of inquiry into the shootings near Al Aksa Mosque started its work today facing two conflicting stories, one from Arabs and the other from Jews, as well as complete disagreement over who is to blame for the death of 21 Palestinians.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The incoming chairman of the New York Stock Exchange took to the pulpit at a Manhattan cathedral on Sunday to denounce the materialism of the 1980's and the gap between rich and poor.


Flooding Forces L.I.R.R. to Close Part of One Line
LEAD: A section of the Port Jefferson branch of the Long Island Rail Road was closed yesterday after a flood basin collapsed under Saturday's heavy rains, unleashing a wave that dug a six-foot hole under the tracks and flooded a nearby road.


Bush Discovers Free Speech on Kids' Ads
LEAD: To the Editor:


Liberia War Meeting Is Canceled
LEAD: An emergency summit meeting of West African leaders to discuss Liberia's civil war has been canceled, the Ivory Coast Government said today.


Lawyer's Threat of Mistrial Splits Defense in Jogger Case
LEAD: One of the two defense lawyers in the second Central Park jogger trial has threatened to move for a mistrial if the other defense lawyer tries to subject the woman who was raped and beaten to an aggressive cross-examination.


Lisa Ellen Lempel, an Attorney, Weds E. G. Sander, N.Y. Rent Administrator
LEAD: Lisa Ellen Lempel, a lawyer, and Elliot Gene Sander, the New York State Rent Administrator, were married last evening at Temple Sharay Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.
Cantor Henry Herman officiated.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
LEAD: Treasury financings this week are confined to the bill market, beginning with today's auction of three- and six-month bills.
On Thursday the Treasury will auction a record $10.75 billion in one-year bills to raise $975 million in new cash.


Ethnic Enmity Governs A New Soviet Republic
LEAD: It has no borders, no money and no legal authority, but the Trans-Dniesterian Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic already has a Parliament.


Shanghai Center Opens
LEAD: Shanghai's largest and most elaborate hotel and office complex opened on Friday after nearly five years of delays, cost overruns and political turmoil.
The new Shanghai Center was developed by the Portman Companies of Atlanta, the Kajima Corporation of Japan, the American International Group of New York and the Shanghai Exhibition Center.


Carson City Gains A Quick Victory
LEAD: Carson City, who outran a quick field of older sprinters to win the Fall Highweight Handicap last month, did the same thing to an even quicker field yesterday at Belmont Park to win the $114,000 Boojum Handicap.


ISRAEL'S CABINET DENOUNCES STUDY BY U.N. INQUIRERS
LEAD: The Israeli Cabinet today officially denounced the United Nations decision to send a delegation to investigate the deaths of 21 Palestinians at Al Aksa Mosque last week and declared that it would not cooperate with the mission.


Crux of Tax Debate: Who Pays More?
LEAD: As the budget fracas continued last week, often in a cloud of confusion, perhaps the clearest point of contention became the question of who should bear the greatest financial burden of increased taxes: rich or poor or the people in between.


A Cost-Free Boost for Justice
LEAD: Here's a way for New York City to improve supervision of convicts once released, speed processing of criminal cases and free up thousands of jail cells - all without spending a cent.
It requires only a modest change in Probation Department procedure.


Leonard Bernstein, 72, Music's Monarch, Dies
LEAD: Leonard Bernstein, one of the most prodigally talented and successful musicians in American history, died yesterday evening at his apartment at the Dakota on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
He was 72 years old.


Voter Registration Try Ends in a Cuomo Loss
LEAD: Voter registration for next month's elections in New York State is over, along with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's unsuccessful attempt to require state agencies to take an active role in helping register voters.


Senate Rivals in New Jersey Clash on State Taxes
LEAD: The Republican Senate challenger, Christie Whitman, continued to press Bill Bradley last night to take a stand on New Jersey's record $2.8 billion tax increase in their first campaign debate, and the Senator continued to accuse her of pandering to public anger over the issue.


Judith LaBella Is Married
LEAD: Judith LaBella of Bloomfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Henry Kornhauser of New York by Mayor Timothy McDonough of Hope, N.J., at Water's Edge at the East River Yacht Club in Long Island City, Queens.
Mrs.
Kornhauser, 49 years old, owns Sam &amp; Judi's Restaurant in East Newark, N.J.
Her first marriage ended in divorce, as did her husband's.


Some Find Signal For a New Order
LEAD: The surrender of Gen.
Michel Aoun in the face of a Syrian military assault on his East Beirut bunker Saturday makes the Lebanese Army militia leader the first Arab political domino to tumble as a result of the 10-week-old Persian Gulf crisis.


April Rooker Is Married
LEAD: April Ashley Richards Rooker, the daughter of Carolyn K. Hodges of Darien, Conn., and Dr.
Donald W. Rooker of Atlanta, was married yesterday to Mark Steven Gronich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Gronich of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Melvin Hawthorne, a Baptist minister, officiated at the Estherwood mansion in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.


Reds Confident Despite Odds
LEAD: Eric Davis, the symbol and probably the hope of the Cincinnati Reds, stood alongside the batting cage near home plate two days before the World Series and admitted that his wrenched left shoulder ''limits me, probably by 70 percent of my normal power.''


Dana J. Larson Is Wed To Adam Howard Sher
LEAD: Dana Jean Larson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
R.
William Larson of Williamsville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Adam Howard Sher, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Sher of New York, by Rabbi Joseph Gelberman at the Hasbrouck House Inn in Stone Ridge, N.Y.
The bride, 31 years old and a Middlebury College graduate with a master's in education from Columbia University, studies meditation at the SYDA Foundation, a retreat in South Fallsburg, N.Y.


Hans Namuth, Photographer, Is Dead at 75
LEAD: Hans Namuth, a photographer and film maker best known for his portraits of American artists, died on Saturday in East Hampton, L.I.
He was 75 years old and lived in New York City and Water Mill, L.I.


At the United Nations, One Seat for Korea;   Seoul's Sea Change
LEAD: To the Editor:


Rosanne Underweiser, Lawyer, Weds
LEAD: Rosanne Underweiser, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin P. Underweiser of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Ira E. Silfin, a son of Irene Silfin of Plainview, L.I., and the late Howard Silfin.
Rabbi Jack Stern Jr. and Cantor Steven Merkel performed the ceremony at the Westchester Reform


Ann Kirschner Weds D. P. Hawkins
LEAD: Ann Judith Kirschner, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul A. Kirschner of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to David Peter Hawkins, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Hawkins of Ridgewood, N.J.
Jean Kotkin, a leader of the Ethical Culture Society, officiated at La Belle Epoque in New York.


Dorothy Powell Is Wed
LEAD: Dorothy Powell and Robert Rosenwasser were married yesterday at Loews Glenpointe Hotel in Teaneck, N.J., by Rabbi Fredric Dworkin.
Mrs.
Rosenwasser, 61 years old, is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Louis Greenberg of New York.
A graduate of Hunter College, she retired as a social worker for the Bureau of Child Welfare in New York.


Citicorp Seems Optimistic
LEAD: Citicorp plans no dividend cut or huge addition to its reserves to cover loan losses anytime soon, the banking company's chairman, John S. Reed, said this weekend.


Ailing Harbaugh Leads Bears' Romp
LEAD: Jim Harbaugh, playing with a cracked rib, passed for two touchdowns and ran for another tonight, leading the Chicago Bears to a 38-9 victory over the Los Angeles Rams.


A Familiar Campaign Trail Is Harder to Navigate
LEAD: In the past two months, Representative William G. Hefner, who has represented this area of small textile towns and farms for eight terms, has been unable to get home to campaign much.
The budget debates and standoffs have kept him busy in Washington, so television advertisements stressing his work for farmers, the textile industry and the military have taken the place of personal contact in his re-election campaign.


Navajo Bribery Case Almost Ready for Jury
LEAD: After nine days of testimony in a trial that had been expected to last four to six weeks, the case of Peter MacDonald, the Navajo tribal leader accused of bribery, is expected to go to the jury on Monday.


Where First an Op-Ed Page Was Seen
LEAD: To the Editor:


IMAGES OF REALISM IN CAMPAIGN ADS
LEAD: If there is a different theme to the political advertising on television this year, it is the importance of seeming earnest.


Mortgage Rates Mixed
LEAD: Fixed-rate mortgages averaged 10.22 percent last week, up from 10.08 percent the previous week, according to a national survey released on Friday by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders asked an average initial rate of 8.24 percent, down from 8.25 percent the week before.


Tokyo Stocks Close Higher
LEAD: Tokyo stocks closed higher today on a stronger yen and firmer bond prices, as investors bought up domestic demand-linked issues that were seen as benefiting from the Japanese currency's rise.
Some financial issues, considered oversold during recent declines, also posted strong gains, brokers said.


Yes, Francesca, There Are Fish, Real Fish, in the Hudson
LEAD: Francesca Bynes always knew the Hudson River was home to sandwich wrappers, wood chips, castoff soda cans and other refuse.


Comparing Tax Provisions in the Budget Plans


Review/Opera;   A Lady-in-Waiting Goes Slumming in 'Martha'
LEAD: When it comes to getting no respect, Rodney Dangerfield is a novice and a piker compared to the 19th-century German composer Friedrich von Flotow.
Poor Flotow took another pie in the face on Saturday evening with a new production of his only remembered opera, ''Martha,'' at the New York City Opera.


U.S. Aides Say Move by Israel Hampers Relations
LEAD: Administration officials say they are deeply concerned that Israel's decision to reject a United Nations inquiry into the shooting of 21 Palestinians in Jerusalem last week could worsen already tense American-Israeli relations and continue to divert attention from the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.


Ms. Cannon Wed To D. J. Spielvogel
LEAD: Pat Cannon, the daughter of Maxine Berry Cannon of Binghamton, N.Y., and the late Charles E. Cannon, was married yesterday to David Joseph Spielvogel, a son of Roslyn Bremer Spielvogel and Carl Spielvogel, both of New York.
Rabbi Michael Robinson performed the ceremony at the Bear Mountain Inn in Bear Mountain State Park, N


Get New York's Fat Out of the Fire
LEAD: How can New York City's government climb out of the current fiscal mess?
By promptly taking two steps: First, keep matters from getting worse by delaying further labor negotiations immediately.
And second, find a way to withhold part of the alarmingly large raise granted the teachers' union.


Illegal Lottery Tax
LEAD: To the Editor:


More on the Budget
LEAD:
The 3 Plans: Comparing tax provisions and the revenue gains from the three budget proposals.
Table, page B8.
The Impact: Political battle over who bears the burden. Page B9.
The Voters: Frustration with politicians is a factor in Congressional races. Page B8.


Account
LEAD: *
Nautilus Acquisition Corp., Independence, Va., to Campbell-Mithun-Esty, New York, for the Nautilus fitness equipment business, with a budget of around $3 million.


Kathryn Turck Is Married
LEAD: Kathryn Mary Turck, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Delaney of Lakewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Stephen Jon Rose, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold J. Rose of Dorset, Vt.
Rabbi Burt A. Siegel and the Rev.
Fanny Erikson, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated in the ceremony at Delmonico's restaurant in New York.


Dr. Niusia Shimrat, 71, A Child Psychologist
LEAD: Dr.
Niusia Shimrat, a child psychologist with Mount Sinai Medical Center for two decades before retiring in 1985, died on Saturday at the Perlow Hospice of Beth Israel Medical Center.
She was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Polly Peck Sells Stake
LEAD: Polly Peck International P.L.C., the troubled British conglomerate controlled by Asil Nadir, has sold its 93 percent stake in a hotel in northern Cyprus for $12 million, a senior official said today.
Nazif Borman, the Finance Minister of the self-proclaimed Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, said his Government had bought the stake in the Salamis Bay Hotel for $:6.15 million, or about $12 million.


Coming to the Plate, One Family's Ethos
LEAD: When Paul O'Neill steps to the plate for the Cincinnati Reds tonight, he will embody the hopes of most of the 52,000 fans at Riverfront Stadium and, for at least one pitch, he will be the focal point of over 50 million televisions across America.
He will also be at the center of our family's field of dreams.


Books of The Times;   The West the Way It Was, or Should Have Been
LEAD:
Buffalo Girls
By Larry McMurtry
351 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster.
$19.95.


Resorts Plans Sale Of Bahamas Units
LEAD: Resorts International Inc. announced it had hired Salomon Brothers Inc., the investment firm, to help sell three hotels and a casino in the Bahamas.
Resorts said it expected the sale of its Paradise Island properties to generate between $250 million and $300 million.


Surgery for Mets' Innis
LEAD: Jeff Innis, the Mets' 28-year-old relief pitcher, underwent arthroscopic surgery on his right elbow yesterday at Roosevelt Hospital.
The Mets said that Dr.
James C. Parkes, the club's orthopedic surgeon, had removed chips, cartilage and spurs.
Innis, who returned to his home in Jupiter, Fla., was expected to be ready to pitch by spring training.


Global Climate Changes Seen As Force in Human Evolution
LEAD: IN an outpouring of analysis that reaches far beyond the study of fossils, scientists are sketching out the influential roles played by climate and ecology in shaping human evolution.
In particular, two notable periods of worldwide climatic cooling that occurred within about the last six million years may have touched off critical ecological changes that forced the separation of hominids from apes and, later, of the human line from other hominids.


Crowding in New York High Schools Is Wildly Uneven, Panel Says
LEAD: Students are so unevenly spread through the city's high schools that some schools are operating at a spacious 65 percent of capacity while others are holding classes in storage rooms, cafeterias and even bathrooms, a report released yesterday said.


Dickerson Can Play
LEAD: Eric Dickerson passed a physical examination yesterday and was cleared to begin practicing today with the Indianapolis Colts, a team he once vowed would never again list him on its roster.


Sticky Blood Newly Linked To Heart Risk
LEAD: FOR years, cardiologists had a nagging sense that a big piece of the puzzle of why people have heart attacks was missing.


Seoul Opposition Chief Is Weakened by Fast
LEAD: The South Korean opposition leader, Kim Dae Jung, was admitted to a hospital today on the eighth day of a hunger strike meant to press the Government to meet his political demands.


3 Are Found Shot in Apparent Gang Execution
LEAD: Three men believed to be members of a Vietnamese gang called Born to Kill were found shot to death in an execution-style slaying yesterday, in what law-enforcement officials said was the latest in a series of gang-related shootings that have spread from Chinatown.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
The nation's leading banks, concerned about their own deteriorating finances, are making fewer loans to corporate America.
The slowdown weakens the economy and could precipitate or lengthen a recession that many economists say has begun. [Page A1.]
Domestic car sales rose 1.9 percent in early October, but sales of light trucks fell 10.7 percent.


Upjohn's Profits Up 10.7%
LEAD: The Upjohn Company said today that its earnings rose 10.7 percent in the third quarter, mainly because of increases in profits for its core pharmaceutical business, the company said today.


A Claim, but Scant Proof, On Milken Stock Charge
LEAD: A former trader with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. said yesterday that Michael R. Milken ''without a doubt'' was linked to a stock manipulation in 1986, but he testified that he never heard the former financier give explicit instructions to undertake the illegal action.


New Digital Computer Uses Standard Design
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation plans to introduce a computer for small businesses today that contains the latest-generation Intel Corporation 486 microprocessor.


Berlin Wall Benefits Charity
LEAD: Pieces of the Berlin wall, which symbolized Europe's division in the cold war, have been sold for $1.4 million to benefit charities in eastern Germany, the news agency A.D.N. said today.
About 100 concrete slabs of the largely demolished wall have been sold worldwide since May, the agency quoted Willfried Angerstein, secretary of a Government-appointed board of trustees overseeing the operation, as saying.


Search Is Pressed for Cairo Official's Killers
LEAD: The search for the killers of the Speaker of Egypt's Parliament continued for a fourth day with hundreds of suspects rounded up today, including Iraqis, Palestinians and Jordanian militants.


Dow Gains 18.32, With the Focus on I.B.M.
LEAD: Stocks shook off a sharp decline yesterday, largely because of widespread feelings that I.B.M., one of the most widely watched issues, was doing well.


People
LEAD: *
William A. Oswald has been named president and chief operating officer of BBDO, Detroit.


Plant's Long, Mysterious Journey
LEAD: A RARE plant found only on two groups of islands more than 3,000 miles apart made one of the longest journeys by a species of flowering plants, scientists say.
The most likely explanation, they say, is that birds transported the plant's seeds.


Earnings Rise 27% At I.B.M.
LEAD: I.B.M. reported yesterday that its earnings rose nearly 27 percent for the third quarter, but financial analysts said they were concerned about declining international and personal-computer sales.


Vehicle Sales Weaken, Falling 2.5%
LEAD: Domestic car sales rose 1.9 percent in early October, but sales of light trucks fell 10.7 percent, resulting in an overall decline of 2.5 percent in sales of American-built vehicles.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-20


Senate Panel Adopts Tax Change On Gifts of Art and Manuscripts
LEAD: A provision worth millions of dollars in donations to the nation's museums and libraries and millions of dollars in tax breaks to the wealthy Americans who have historically been their benefactors has been adopted by the Senate Finance Committee.


Talking Business with Fisher of Motorola;   Building a Dream On Wireless Gear
LEAD: Motorola Inc., one of the world's largest producers of semiconductors and wireless communications equipment, including beepers, cellular telephones and two-way radios, just posted lower-than-expected third-quarter earnings and settled a semiconductor patent battle with Hitachi Ltd.
And on Oct. 3, McCaw Cellular Communications Inc.


Apple by Apple
LEAD: AFTER months of speculation, Apple Computer Inc. finally unveiled three new models of the Macintosh yesterday, including the first Macintosh to carry a list price of less than $1,000 and a low-cost color Macintosh.


Thornburgh Again Supports Stiffer Corporate Sentences
LEAD: Attorney General Dick Thornburgh said today that he had urged the United States Sentencing Commission to adopt guidelines that would result in tougher sentences for corporations convicted of white-collar crimes and other offenses.


Banks Cut Business Lending, Hurting Weakened Economy
LEAD: The nation's major banks, concerned about their own deteriorating finances, are making fewer loans to corporations.


PLANT SAID TO FOUL GRAND CANYON AIR
LEAD: A new study has concluded that sulfur dioxide from a huge coal-burning power plant 16 miles from the Grand Canyon contributes significantly to the haze that blankets the canyon for much of the year.


Inflation Hits Government and Taxpayer Alike
LEAD: To the Editor:


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
PRO FOOTBALL
Eagles 32, Vikings 24: Rich Gannon and Cris Carter threatened to turn a tough rivalry into a homecoming in Philadelphia last night, but Seth Joyner, William Frizzell and some funny bounces spoiled it.
Philadelphia (2-2) beat Minnesota (1-5) by scoring twice in a 59-second span late in the fourth quarter to overcome deficits of 12 points at halftime and 9 with four minutes to go.


Inflation Hits Government and Taxpayer Alike;   Don't Limit Donations
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Series: Tonight and Yesterday
LEAD: This being America, most of the citizenry has memories of a World Series.
Other than wars and political conventions, the World Series is probably the oldest established floating national event we have.


Gulf Quiet, Oil Falls by $1.74 a Barrel
LEAD: The oil market, which alternates between believing that no news is good news and fearing that silence is ominous, took the former tack yesterday, and oil fell nearly $2 a barrel on world markets.


U.S. Optimistic That Oil Windfall Will Make Iran Honor Embargo
LEAD: Bush Administration officials say they are optimistic that Iran, enjoying an economic and diplomatic windfall from the Persian Gulf crisis, will continue to abide by the United Nations embargo on Iraq.


SINGAPOREAN CITES SIREN SONG OF TV
LEAD: On the day that The Asian Wall Street Journal decided to stop circulation in Singapore because of press restrictions, Singapore's Prime Minister, Lee Kuan Yew, blamed television reporting for the deaths near Tiananmen Square in Beijing in June 1989.


Synovus Is Backed By Bankers First
LEAD: The Bankers First Corporation signed a letter of intent to sell its Athens Federal Savings Bank to the Synovus Financial Corporation, a commercial banking company, for about $36 million.
Synovus will pay about $20 million in cash and the rest in common stock, based on the average closing price of Synovus common for a 20-day period preceding the closing of the transaction.


U.S. and Israel in Collision Over Reaction to U.N. Vote
LEAD: Israel and Washington appeared to be on a collision course today as President Bush declared that he wanted to see Israel drop its opposition to a United Nations mission being sent to Jerusalem to investigate the killing of 21 Palestinians last week.


Bally Chief Rejects Bankruptcy Step
LEAD: The new interim chief executive officer of the Bally Manufacturing Corporation said bankruptcy was not an option for the financially troubled gaming and recreation company. ''As far as I'm concerned, that word isn't in my vocabulary,'' said Arthur Goldberg, who took over the company on Friday when Bally's chairman, Robert E.


Japan's Trade Surplus Falls
LEAD: Robust domestic demand and higher oil prices helped to trim Japan's bulging trade surplus in September, the Government said today.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Avery International Corp., Pasadena, Calif., a maker of adhesives, and Dennison Manufacturing Co., Framingham, Mass., an office products company, said they plan to close their merger by Thursday if the Justice Department completes its antitrust review.


Richard Cassidy, 56, Consulting Executive
LEAD: Richard J. Cassidy, a communications consultant and former director of community services and special events at St.
Patrick's Cathedral, died on Friday at his home in Keyport, N.J.
He was 56 years old.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption in some copies yesterday about Bob Dylan's concert at the United States Military Academy referred incorrectly to Roy Cougle, who was at the right.
He is a fan who attends many Dylan concerts, not a member of Mr.
Dylan's staff.


Investor Seeks More of Henley
LEAD: Libra Investment Ltd., a Swiss investment firm controlled by the Lebanese investor Toufic Aboukhater, said it would seek Government antitrust clearance to raise its stake in the Henley Group Inc. to 49.9 percent from about 25 percent.


James River Officials Assume New Duties
LEAD: The two executives who founded the James River Company in 1969 and built it into a leader of the paper industry are taking on new roles in what the company termed a management transition plan.


Review/Television;   Japan on the Rise, Partly by Accident
LEAD: ''Power in the Pacific'' is an uncommonly sophisticated documentary about America's role, not always clearly planned out, in creating a new center of power in the Far East.
The locus, of course, is Japan, and this four-part series tells of the calculations and miscalculations that brought that country from devastation to prosperity in a few decades, and its impact on the Pacific


The Bad Bugs
LEAD: People keep writing to ask if I survived the bee sting reported here on Aug. 29.
The answer is yes, but these letters are troubling.
Do my published columns since Aug. 29 read like something written by a deceased person?


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Saturday about the Refac Technology Development Corporation misidentified the company represented by Breton Bocchieri, a lawyer.
It was the Kawasaki Motors Corporation U.S.A., not Hitachi.


Review/Television;   A Warning to the Young On Dangers of Steroids
LEAD: In prime time, teen-agers are generally preoccupied with dating and being cool.
School is boring and parents are silly.
In its eagerness to entertain, commercial television has few qualms about being superficial in its selling of role models.
But then, network executives are quick to point out, there are those occasional afternoon specials intended specifically for young audiences.


Bridging Blight in New Rochelle
LEAD: Davids Island, a spot of land in New Rochelle Harbor, full of promise for development, may forever remain untouched because of a misguided ruling by Gov.
Mario Cuomo's Secretary of State, Gail Shaffer.
In objecting to a practical proposal for a 1,750-unit housing development on the island, Ms.
Shaffer blights the hope New Rochelle sees in it for reviving its failing economic fortunes.


EVOLUTION IN EUROPE
LEAD: Hungary's ruling center-right coalition, in power for less than six months, took a beating in local elections on Sunday.


An Old Refrain, Crime, Sounded In New Contests
LEAD: Early in his standard campaign speech, Clayton Williams, the Republican candidate for governor of Texas, vows to double prison capacity and expand use of the death penalty.


Legislator Can Stand the Heat
LEAD: A state legislator, campaigning door-to-door on Sunday, helped put out a house fire with a garden hose.
The legislator, State Representative Bob Ream, a Democrat seeking re-election, said he saw smoke coming out of a house.
No one was home.


'Les Miserables' Delayed
LEAD: ''Les Miserables,'' the musical which has moved from the Broadway Theater to the Imperial Theater, 249 West 45th Street, has postponed its first performance there from Wednesday to Thursday evening.
Those with tickets for the canceled performance may exchange them or get a refund at the box office or by writing to ''Les Miserables,'' Post Office Box 998, New York, N.Y.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: LAURIE ANDERSON, CALVIN TRILLIN, WALLACE SHAWN and SPALDING GRAY have something in common: they perform solo.
And on the weekend, they're getting together to reinforce their right to do it freely.


Report Notes Doubt Over Iraq's Weaponry
LEAD: Much of Iraq's military equipment may be obsolete by Western standards, but modifications and chemical weapons make it an unpredictable potential foe, Jane's Defense Weekly reported today.


U.S. Urges Britain to Ease Bid for Reparations by Iraq
LEAD: The United States is urging Britain to tone down a resolution it plans to introduce in the Security Council that would require Iraq to pay compensation for damage resulting from the invasion of Kuwait, diplomats say.
They say Washington fears that the third world would demand similar action against Israel for its occupation of land claimed by


School Boards Compare Notes on U.S. Goals
LEAD: For three days, the 700 members of the National School Board Association who have been meeting here grappled with just how their districts are going to carry out the six national education goals that President Bush and the nation's governors agreed on last February.


Going Back to Basics
LEAD: BEGINNERS are back in style with writers and publishers of books about personal computing.


Q&amp;A
LEAD:
As the World Turns


2d Prison Term for Biaggi
LEAD: Former Representative Mario Biaggi has begun serving an eight-year prison term for his racketeering conviction in the Wedtech scandal, his lawyer said yesterday.
Mr.
Biaggi, who turns 73 later this month, reported Friday to the Fort Worth Metropolitan Correctional Center in Texas, his lawyer, James LaRossa, said.


Mergers Around World Down Sharply
LEAD: Mergers and acquisitions around the world dropped sharply in the third quarter, partly because of the economic uncertainty created by the threat of a recession in the United States and Britain, the Iraqi crisis and the doubling of oil prices.


Treasuries Inch Up in Light Day
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities moved slightly higher, and interest rates inched lower, in quiet trading yesterday, as credit market participants shrugged off a big drop in the price of leading commodities, including oil.


Delivery Vans in Fuels Test
LEAD: The Federal Express Corporation said today that it had agreed to participate in what California officials said was the most comprehensive study yet of vehicles using less-polluting alternative fuels.


Inspectors Try to Close Play Opposed by Church
LEAD: Moments before a play condemned by the Roman Catholic Church as blasphemous was to be performed Friday night, the New York City Buildings Department tried to padlock the theater.


Lower Production Planned by Deere
LEAD: The Deere Company said it planned to cut back production of its agricultural machinery to compensate for a 34 percent drop in retail sales in September compared with a year earlier.
To avoid building up inventories and to minimize work force reductions, Deere said it would reduce production schedules and shut some factories for one or two weeks.


Northeast Utilities
LEAD: A judge struck down state approval for Northeast Utilities to issue $500 million in bonds to help pay for its $2.3 billion takeover of the bankrupt Public Service Company of New Hampshire, owner of the Seabrook nuclear plant.
Merrimack County Superior Court Judge Kenneth McHugh said approval of the bonds by the state's Industrial Development Authority, Gov.


Yields Increase On Bank Issues
LEAD: With banks vulnerable to poor earnings and reductions in their credit ratings, there are clear signs that investors are demanding higher interest rates on some securities.


LAWMAKERS OFFER AN ARRAY OF PLANS TO CUT THE DEFICIT
LEAD: Filling in details of a comprehensive plan to reduce the Federal budget deficit, Congressional committees recommended cuts today in programs from veterans' benefits to student loans and proposed increases in a wide variety of fees.


Careers;   More Loyalty To Employees Is Predicted
LEAD: LOYALTY, once prized by both companies and employees, has been shaken in recent years.
There is no doubt that the many layoffs and downsizings have made workers much more skeptical about corporate America's interest in their welfare.


Celestial X-Rays
LEAD: An astronomy satellite launched in June has transmitted its first detailed X-ray images of celestial objects, demonstrating flawless performance as it began an 18-month survey of extremely high-energy phenomena over the entire sky.


Study in India Jungle Halted After Tigers Die
LEAD: DENOUNCING the role of research in wildlife conservation, the government in the southern state of Karnataka has closed an Indo-American project using radio collars to study the behavior of tigers, leopards and wild dogs.


Taiwan Sees Trade Growth
LEAD: Taiwan expects to be among the world's 10 largest trading nations by 1996 when its foreign trade is expected to hit nearly $200 billion, the Board of Foreign Trade said Sunday.


Chess Game Adjourned After Some Daring Play
LEAD: Daring, defiant play by Gary Kasparov got him what was very likely a winning endgame last night in the third game of the World Chess Championship at the Hudson Theater at the Hotel Macklowe in Manhattan, but shortly before the game was adjourned he erred, lost a pawn and threw the issue into doubt.


Michigan Gets Apology
LEAD: Gary Moeller, the Michigan football coach, said yesterday that Dave Parry, the supervisor of Big Ten officials, had apologized to him for a bad call that sealed the Wolverines' 28-27 loss to Michigan State, costing them the No. 1 national ranking in the news-agency polls.


The Wanderings of a Gigantic Iceberg Uncover Polar Currents
LEAD: AN iceberg the size of Long Island that broke away from Antarctica three years ago appears to have bogged down in pack ice, but during its 1,250-mile trip, the floating island has given scientists a wealth of data about some of the polar ocean currents believed to influence global climate.


U.S. Renews Hope for Afghan Peace
LEAD: Bush Administration officials say they hope that the current Afghan rebel offensive near Kabul will spur the Soviet-backed Government to push for a peace settlement, but they doubt it will succeed in overthrowing President Najibullah.


Romania Move on Currency
LEAD: Romania will devalue its national currency by almost half and remove subsidies on most consumer goods beginning on Nov. 1, a Government official said today.


Jets and Raiders Swap 2 Injured Players
LEAD: Bruce Coslet, coach of the Jets, said today that he wouldn't make any wholesale lineup changes in the wake of his team's 39-3 loss to the San Diego Chargers on Sunday.
But the club did make a minor deal with the Los Angeles Raiders involving players on injured reserve lists.


Alexander Zakin, 87, A Piano Accompanist
LEAD: Alexander Zakin, a Russian-born pianist who was the longtime accompanist of the violinist Isaac Stern, died on Friday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
His family said he died of heart failure.
Mr.
Zakin performed with Mr.
Stern in concerts around the world from 1940 to 1977, and they made several dozen recordings together.


McLane Chief Pleased With Sale to Wal-Mart
LEAD: Drayton McLane Jr. of Temple, Tex., seems to be sitting pretty.
Mr.
McLane is selling the privately held McLane Company to Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the successful discount chain.
In addition to becoming vice chairman of Wal-Mart and sitting at the side of Sam Walton, he will remain president and chief executive of his own company, which will be an autonomous subsidiary.


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1990
From '89
Archer-Daniels-Midland Co.
$ 107,700,000 -
8.1
Boise Cascade Corp.
13,900,000
-77.9
Bruno's Inc.
15,400,000
+20.3
Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co.


Eugene Sachs, Professor, 57
LEAD: Dr.
Eugene Sachs, who taught psychology at Queens College since 1964, died on Saturday at his home in Jamaica, Queens.
He was 57 years old.


Review/Fashion;   In London, 60's Return, but Softer
LEAD: The most talked about fashion show of the moment is, ironically, Pierre Cardin's 40-year retrospective at the Victoria and Albert Museum.
The 1960's is a major movement in fashion everywhere today, but especially here.
Cardin's space-age designs from the decade when he moved from conventional to futuristic designs provide key source material.


Peace, Prized
LEAD: The man and the moment came together, and what a moment it was.
As the fervor for freedom last year leaped from Poland and Hungary to Czechoslovakia and East Germany, Mikhail Gorbachev stayed the hand of those who wanted to crush it.
He thereby allowed Europe to be transformed, peacefully.
That alone would justify the Nobel Peace Prize he was awarded yesterday.


Tribute for an Old-Time Bluesman Who Stays New
LEAD: When John Lee Hooker ambles onto the stage at Madison Square Garden tonight to sing, the audience will hear five and a half decades of blues experience.
They will also hear the music of the Mississippi Delta, which has become the sound of the international mainstream in the form of rock-and-roll.


Cut the Defense Budget
LEAD: At a meeting with some war hawks several weeks ago, one of them told me that ''We owe Saddam Hussein a favor.
He saved us from the peace dividend.'' That was no favor.
Unless there is a war, the major cost of the risky new venture in the Middle East is the failure to reduce our defense budget in response to the dramatic developments of the past year.


New York Municipal Labor Talks Entering Hoped-For Home Stretch
LEAD: New York City's municipal labor talks today enter what both sides hope is the home stretch, in which the negotiators are supposed to go into a room and not emerge until they reach an agreement.


Dr. Harold Fisher, 85, An Optometrist, Dies
LEAD: Dr.
Harold M. Fisher, a former president of the New York State Optometric Association and of the American Academy of Optometry, died on Friday at the Southwestern Vermont Medical Center in Bennington.
He was 85 years old and lived in Grafton, Vt.


Review/Ballet;   San Franciscans' Centennial 'Sleeping Beauty'
LEAD: ''The Sleeping Beauty,'' one of the most beloved works in the balletic repertory, is a hundred years old this year.
In honor of that anniversary, the San Francisco Ballet has staged an elaborate new production of the classic, for which Tchaikovsky wrote one of his greatest scores.
Much of the San Francisco version's choreography is based on that which Marius Petipa devised in St.


The Wrong Russian
LEAD: This certainly was the year for the Nobel people to honor the peace hero of the Soviet Union - but they picked the wrong Russian.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Sunday about auditions for ''The Nutcracker'' in New York misidentified the school that held the auditions.
It was the School of American Ballet, not the American Ballet Theater School.


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Sunday about a visit to Cairo by Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd of Britain misidentified the man at the right in some copies.
He was Foreign Minister Esmat Abdel-Meguid of Egypt, not President Hosni Mubarak.


Municipal Credit Ratings Lower
LEAD: Municipal credit quality continued to erode in the third quarter of this year, analysts at the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation report, but the pace was much slower than earlier quarters.


CBS Records Changes Name
LEAD: The Sony Corporation's CBS Records Inc. will change its name to Sony Music Entertainment Inc., the record company said yesterday.


Inventories Rise by 0.5%, Sales by 2.1%
LEAD: Business inventories rose five-tenths of a percent in August, while sales advanced 2.1 percent, the Government said today.
Analysts said that while the inventory growth bears watching, it was not at a dangerous level.


Prague Reformers Reject Havel's Choice to Lead
LEAD: In a surprise move, the Civic Forum, the mass movement that formed itself around Vaclav Havel during last year's ''velvet revolution,'' has elected Finance Minister Vaclav Klaus as its first chairman.


As Korean Leaders Meet, North Seems Increasingly Isolated
LEAD: Six weeks after the start of a new high-level discussion between North and South Korea, a senior South Korean delegation traveled to the North this morning amid signs that Seoul was prepared to offer some limited new concessions to its longtime Communist enemy.


King Hussein on Kuwait and Dashed Hope
LEAD: He is chain-smoking again, and says it is impossible to sleep more than four hours a night.
To relieve the pressure, he has taken to riding around his palace on a BMW motorcycle.
While his eyes can sparkle at times, he looks at other times as if he is carrying the cares of 200 million Arabs on his shoulders.


New York City Moves Against Cigarette Machines
LEAD: New York took a major step yesterday toward becoming the first large city in the United States to ban cigarette vending machines from most public places.


Right to Life Candidate Says He's Real Republican in Race
LEAD: Three New York Republicans are candidates for governor and one of them asserts in his literature that he is ''the only real Republican running.''


Inflation Hits Government and Taxpayer Alike;   The Commuter's Share
LEAD: To the Editor:


Home Loan Banks
LEAD: The Office of Finance for the Federal Home Loan Banks plans to announce today the interest rates for a two-part bond offering totaling $855 million.
The financing, which will be done through various securities dealers, consists of $455 million in one- year bonds due Oct. 25, 1991, and $400 million in two-year bonds, which are due Oct.





Cheney Says Forces in Gulf Are 'in for Long Haul'
LEAD: Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney said today after conferring for an hour with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher that the allied forces arrayed against Iraq in the Persian Gulf were ''in for the long haul.''


Gorbachev Gets Nobel Peace Prize For Foreign Police Achievements
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union was named the 1990 winner of the Nobel Peace Prize today in recognition of his initiatives in promotion of international peace, including championing political change in Eastern Europe and helping to end the cold war.


Australia Cuts Rates
LEAD: Australia's central bank moved today to cut official interest rates on the money markets by one percentage point, to 13 percent, in the fifth easing of monetary policy this year.


Senate and White House Near Pact on Child Care, Lawmakers Say
LEAD: The Senate and the White House are near an agreement on a $13 billion child care bill that would provide matching money to states seeking to set up programs to train professionals and to subsidize state-regulated day care centers, Senate leaders said today.


1515 Broadway In Chapter 11
LEAD: A partnership known as 1515 Broadway Associates L.P., whose sole investment is an office building in Times Square, said today that it had filed for protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


Inflation Hits Government and Taxpayer Alike;   Who's Rich?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Power Shortage Becomes Factor
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics said today that Jose Canseco had largely recovered from his injuries and would open the World Series with his home-run power restored.
But the Cincinnati Reds reported that Eric Davis was still suffering from his injuries and might be switched to the leadoff spot in the batting order to minimize the demands on his home-run power.


On America's Podiums, Colleagues Pay Tribute
LEAD: As the music world reacted in stunned sadness yesterday to the death of Leonard Bernstein, plans for various kinds of tributes began to take shape.
In addition to a concert at Carnegie Hall on Nov. 14, the 47th anniversary of Bernstein's last-minute debut with the New York Philharmonic, several more immediate memorials are to be offered.


Saddam Hussein Is Nothing Like Saladin
LEAD: To the Editor:


Shevardnadze Promises to Consult Parliament on Gulf Involvement
LEAD: Under fire from parliamentary critics for risking a military entanglement in the Persian Gulf, Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze promised today that the Soviet Government would not commit troops to the region without prior approval from the legislature.


Patterns
LEAD:
An Outrageous Winner


Banks Have Weak Quarter; Morgan Gains
LEAD: Several large banking companies reported weaker profits for the third quarter yesterday because of losses on commercial real estate and a paucity of new lending opportunities.
An exception, though, was J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, which rarely makes loans for commercial real estate.


The Last Days of Leonard Bernstein
LEAD: Although Leonard Bernstein, the famed American composer and conductor who died on Sunday evening in his Manhattan apartment, had been ill for months, he remained alert and inquisitive and looked forward to resuming his composing and perhaps even his conducting careers.


Dear Tom Foley
LEAD: We would like to tell you, Mr.
Speaker, about a woman named Juanita Rodriguez and an 8-year-old named John Thomas Jones.
Both of them were killed in New York City.
We're upset about the way they died and determined to prevent more such deaths.
But we urgently need your help.


Supreme Court Roundup;   Review of Georgia Judgeships Upheld
LEAD: In an important ruling under the Voting Rights Act, the Supreme Court today unanimously upheld a lower Federal court's decision that Georgia's system for electing state judges is subject to Justice Department approval as not discriminating against minority voters.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''With or without war, nothing will return to what it was.''
- King Hussein of Jordan.
[A1:2.]


Joseph DePietro, Physician, 93
LEAD: Dr.
Joseph DePietro, a physician and a founder of the American College of Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology, died on Saturday at Booth Memorial Hospital in Queens.
He was 93 years old and lived in Beechhurst, Queens.


Market Place;   Retailing Stocks Especially Volatile
LEAD: AS the Christmas selling season inches closer, the current sticky trend in retailing raises more than the usual curiosity about which companies are likely to be winners or losers in the year's most important sales period.


Corrections
LEAD: A brief report in some copies of the Sports section on Sunday, about the case of Stephen Larkin, who has been prevented from playing high school football because of a heart problem, misstated the action of a Federal court.
It acknowledged a notice of appeal; it did not rule.


Maurice Handel, 91, Cantor and Performer
LEAD: Cantor Maurice Handel, who officiated at synagogues in New York, Los Angeles and St.
Paul for more than 35 years, died on Oct. 7 at the Kingsbrook Jewish Medical Center in Brooklyn.
He was 91 years old and lived in the Sheepshead Bay section of Brooklyn.


16 Dead in Beirut Power Struggle After Christian General Gives Up
LEAD: The Syrian thurst into East Beirut that brought Gen.
Michel Aoun's surrender has unleashed a power struggle in conquered areas that so far has left 16 people dead, the police said today.


100,000 Ukrainians March, Insisting That Leaders Quit
LEAD: About 100,000 Ukrainian students marched through the center of Kiev today demanding the resignation of the republic's Communist government.


Eristus Sams, Civil Rights Advocate, 77
LEAD: Eristus Sams, a former Mayor of Prairie View who led an effort to win students the right to vote, died of a heart attack Thursday at his home here.
He was 77 years old.


Key to the 49ers' Lesson Plan: Get Rice the Ball
LEAD: Last year, while most of the San Francisco 49ers were relishing a new beginning without Bill Walsh, their former coach, Jerry Rice was wondering how much Walsh's departure would affect his career.
Early in the season, Rice wasn't getting the football nearly enough for his liking, and some of his teammates recall that he exchanged harsh words with Mike


A South Africa Color Bar Falls Quietly
LEAD: Racial discrimination became illegal today in parks, swimming pools, libraries, toilets and other publicly owned places across South Africa.


Kuwaiti Exiles Denounce the P.L.O.
LEAD: Kuwaiti exiles ending a three-day meeting strongly denounced the Palestine Liberation Organization today for its support of Iraq and called upon the United Nations Security Council to ''use all available means'' to liberate their country.


Choose One: Your Left Arm or $9 Million
LEAD: To the Editor:


Accounts
LEAD: *
Walkers Shortbread Ltd., Aberlour-on-Spey, Scotland, to Cox Landey &amp; Partners, with an undetermined budget.


Futures Index Tumbles as Prices Plunge
LEAD: Prices of precious metals, along with those for crude oil and petroleum byproducts, were battered yesterday.
Combined with declines in the basic farm foods and fibers, which have been tumbling since midyear, the decreases helped to send a key barometer of inflation skidding and improved the sentiment of investors in the stock and bond markets.


Track Faces A Fading Night Life
LEAD: For more than a decade after opening its doors in 1976, Meadowlands Race Track offered something completely different in the New York area every fall: nighttime thoroughbred racing, a game with a look and feel of its own and an appeal so strong that some in the racing industry predicted racing under lights was the way of the future.


New York Announces Car Makers' Refunds
LEAD: In what is believed to be the largest refund by automakers in the nation's history, New York State Attorney General Robert Abrams today announced a settlement with 12 major car manufacturers that will provide up to $100 million in refunds to consumers.


Troops and Equipment Continue to Arrive in Saudi Arabia


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
7.87
8.62
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.18
7.15
7.50
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.22
7.15
7.52
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.66
8.66
7.96
30-YR.


Conservatives Win in Athens, Defeating Mercouri for Mayor
LEAD: The conservative Government scored a clear victory in the capital and came out ahead in Greece's second largest city in local elections on Sunday.


Citibank Uses 'Personal' Tone
LEAD: Citibank released a new campaign last night with a new theme: ''Not just banking, Citibanking.''
The campaign, developed by


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher, But Loses Ground to Yen
LEAD: The dollar finished higher yesterday against all leading currencies except the Japanese yen.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Ruling on Judicial Elections
The Supreme Court unanimously upheld a ruling that Georgia's system for electing state judges is subject to Justice Department review to assure it is not discriminatory.
Page A24.
An Apartheid Pillar Falls
Racial discrimination in parks, pools and other public places officially became illegal in South Africa.


Pilots' Association Taking to the Airwaves
LEAD: CONCERNED that the airline pilot's image has taken a beating, the pilots' union will soon begin a series of television and radio spots aimed at bolstering its public perception.


For CBS's First Series: Expect a Bounty of Cameras
LEAD: If President Bush wants the republic to ''read his lips'' again, the perfect photo opportunity will come Wednesday night, when he visits Riverfront Stadium in Cincinnati for the second game of the World Series between the Reds and the Oakland A's.


An Orthodox Synagogue Perseveres in the South Bronx
LEAD: Each Saturday in the Longwood section of the South Bronx, a handful of elderly Jews slowly converges on the Intervale Jewish Center, uncertain whether enough men will gather to worship at the temple to provide a minyan, the quorum of 10 men needed to perform a full service.
If not, Moishe Sacks, who serves as the temple's rabbi, will settle for nine and throw open the doors to the wooden ark, where the Torah is stored, and declare that


Knicks' Walker Out Up to 10 Days
LEAD: Kenny Walker of the Knicks will be sidelined for a week to 10 days because of a strained left knee he suffered Saturday in Barcelona, Spain, during the Knicks' 117-101 victory over POP 84 Split in the McDonald's Open.


Soviets Expel the Crew Of a Greenpeace Ship
LEAD: A Greenpeace crew detained by the Soviet Union for nearly a week was expelled on Saturday after their ship was seized off an Arctic island, State Department officials said today.


A Chip Maker's Profit on Patents
LEAD: Texas Instruments Inc. has become, in the eyes of its competitors, the schoolyard bully of the electronics industry.


Japan Routes To U.S. Airlines
LEAD: Five United States airlines have been authorized to open passenger and air-cargo service to Tokyo and other cities in Japan, the Department of Transportation said today.
Three air carriers - United


Bridge
LEAD: Four decades ago B. Jay Becker and Sam Stayman were often team-mates - they won two world championships together - and more often opponents.
Becker died three years ago, but Becker-Stayman confrontations still occur occasionally.


Detroit Journal;   Ripples of Controversy After a Chimp Drowns
LEAD: On a crisp fall day, with crowds of children around the chimpanzee house, the Detroit Zoo seems an oasis from the troubles of this city.
But while the zoo may offer peace, its director has become a magnet for controversy.


U.S. Group Leaving for Iraq Hopes to Meet With Hussein
LEAD: An American delegation from an international interfaith group, the Fellowship of Reconciliation, plans to leave on a nine-day peace mission to the Middle East tomorrow and hopes to meet President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.


Copter Preparing for Presidential Campaign Swing Crashes During a Drill


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bulgari Corp. of America, Rome, named Massimo Macchi general manager for United States operations.
He will be based in New York.


Budget Turmoil Leaves G.O.P. Bereft and Besieged
LEAD: The political turmoil in the Republican Party caused by the Federal budget impasse has left its leaders openly feuding over strategy and struggling to preserve the party's identity just three weeks before the November elections.


Giants (5-0) Are So Good, Parcells Almost Smiles
LEAD: Bill Parcells is so wound up in trying to make and keep the Giants a winning team that he seldom becomes emotional.
Hours after the Giants' Super Bowl victory four seasons ago, he was somber and deep in thought, already worrying about the next season.


Review/Cabaret;   An Ingenue Grows Up
LEAD: Not many singers meld a Broadway theatricality and a folk-pop torchiness with the naturalness and personality of Jill O'Hara, the former Broadway ingenue who has matured into one of the most arresting younger cabaret performers to be seen in New York City this season.


Review/Theater;   A Nightmarish Vision Of Urban America As Assembly Line
LEAD: When the American theater dusts off forgotten Broadway hits from the 1920's and 30's, it is usually with the hope of finding a charming period piece, like Paul Osborn's ''Morning's at Seven'' or the Ben Hecht-Charles MacArthur ''Johnny on a Spot,'' that might give hardy perennials like ''The Front Page'' and ''You Can't Take It With You'' a run for the box-office gold.


How Viewers Grow Addicted To Television
LEAD: THE proposition that television can be addictive is proving to be more than a glib metaphor.
The most intensive scientific studies of people's viewing habits are finding that for the most frequent viewers, watching television has many of the marks of a dependency like alcoholism or other addictions.


Woman Who Accused Flake Is Killed in an Auto Accident
LEAD: Thelma Singleton-Scott, a former church secretary who accused Representative Floyd H. Flake of seducing her into an adulterous affair, died Sunday night in a car accident on Rockaway Boulevard in Queens, the police said.


In Comptroller's Race, Bellamy and Regan Take Off Kid Gloves
LEAD: The genteel veneer over the race for state comptroller is eroding.
Carol Bellamy, the Democratic challenger, is questioning the effectiveness of Edward V. Regan, the Republican incumbent, and he is challenging her independence.


Hearing Held On Keating
LEAD: Charles H. Keating Jr. declared his innocence today before a preliminary hearing on charges that the former chief executive of the American Continental Corporation bilked investors out of more than $250 million.


Fannie Mae Will Provide $14.1 Billion for Mortgages
LEAD: The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, announced yesterday that it had made separate agreements with six mortgage banking companies, whereby Fannie Mae would provide $14.1 billion in financing for about 170,000 single-family home mortgages throughout the United States.


U.S. AID JUDGMENT UPSETS PAKISTANIS
LEAD: The United States decision to suspend military aid to Pakistan because of strong suspicions that Islamabad is developing nuclear weapons has aroused a debate here that focuses less on this country's arms policies than on the extremely delicate issue of America's supposed ''big brother'' role.


Senators Vow to Form Plan Less Favorable to Wealthy
LEAD: With their rank-and-file members smelling the political blood of Republicans, Senate Democratic leaders promised at a strategy session today that they would work in negotiations with the House to develop a budget plan more advantageous to the poor and the middle class and less favorable to the wealthy than the one the Bush Administration wants or the one that will go before the


EVOLUTION IN EUROPE: Gorbachev's Prize;   Soviet Leader Is Regarded as a Hero Everywhere but in His Own Country
LEAD: Mikhail S. Gorbachev today became the second Soviet champion of democratic reform to win the Nobel Peace Prize, and the second to be denied a national celebration in this country so often out of step with the world's enthusiasm.


U.S. Fund Set Up to Pay Civilians Injured by Atomic Arms Program
LEAD: Ending years of struggle in the courts and in Congress, President Bush today signed the first law that compensates American civilians injured or killed by radiation from the United States program to build and test atomic weapons.


Gay Couples Told to Get Back in the Closet
LEAD: To the Editor:


Torborg and Lasorda Talk of Power, Punch and Title Predictions;   Reds Scouting Report
LEAD: First, an opinion from a man with lots of them.


ISRAELI COMMITTEE BACKS SETTLEMENT IN EAST JERUSALEM
LEAD: A committee of the Israeli Cabinet has decided to encourage an increase in the settlement of Soviet Jews in Jerusalem's annexed eastern section, despite a commitment to the United States not to.


Elizabeth P. Firestone, Collector, 93
LEAD: Elizabeth Parke Firestone, widow of the industrialist Harvey S. Firestone Jr. and a collector of 18th-century decorative arts, died Saturday at Newport Hospital in Rhode Island.
She was 93 years old and lived in Newport.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Mrs.
Firestone was an honorary trustee of the Founders Society Detroit Institute of Arts and was a connoisseur of 18th-century French art.


Torborg and Lasorda Talk of Power, Punch and Title Predictions;   A's Scouting Report
LEAD: Just before the final game of the 1990 baseball season, Jeff Torborg, the manager of the Chicago White Sox, glanced at the scoreboard just when the American League West standings were being shown.


Rio Journal;   Forbidden Love and Politics Mingle, Explosively
LEAD: Tales of forbidden love are making Brazilian politics as torrid this season as the coming Southern Hemisphere summer.


Rwandan Army Says Rebels Were Defeated in Northeast
LEAD: The Rwandan Army ousted rebels from a district center in the northeast in fierce fighting over the weekend, an army spokesman said today.


Anthony D'Elia, Administrator, 70
LEAD: Anthony D'Elia, executive director of the Adirondack Park Local Government Review Board, died of bone-marrow cancer on Saturday at Champlain Physicians Hospital in Plattsburgh.
He was 70 years old and lived in Loon Lake.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: Retired, frail but still fiery, NICHOLAS GEORGESCU-ROEGEN, the 82-year-old professor emeritus of economics at Vanderbilt University, has received one of the highest awards that can be accorded by his native country: induction into the Romanian Academy.


Dinkins Offers A Plan to Help Small Business
LEAD: The Dinkins administration yesterday announced a plan to help small businesses, including many owned by women and minorities, get millions of dollars in loans and city contracts.


Unisys-Navy Pact
LEAD: The Unisys Corporation said its Defense Systems unit had received a fixed-price contract from the Navy with a basic value of $170.2 million.
The pact is for upgrade kits for the MK-92 fire control system for Navy ships and for several new MK-92 systems for foreign allies.
The company said the contract called for deliveries from 1992 to 1994.


Reader's Digest Editor to Retire
LEAD: The Reader's Digest Association Inc. said yesterday that Kenneth O. Gilmore would step down at the end of the year as editor in chief of Reader's Digest because of poor health.


Newark Task Force Focuses on Catching Fugitives
LEAD: A new Federal, state and local task force is picking up fugitives who have walked away from prosecution for serious crimes and who have been ignored by an overloaded court system here.


Bernstein Memorial
LEAD: Funeral services for Leonard Bernstein will be private, said his spokeswoman, Margaret Carson.
He will be buried in the Bernstein family plot in Greenwood Cemetery in Brooklyn, she said.
The conductor and composer died of a heart attack on Sunday at the age of 72.


The Musician
LEAD: Leonard Bernstein had 72 years of life.
They weren't nearly enough for all he wanted to do, all he could have done, all he should have done. ''Should'' because talents like his impose enormous responsibilities.
If he didn't wholly fulfill all of them the fault wasn't his.
Time got in the way.


Remembering a Musician's Musician
LEAD: Igor Stravinsky called him ''a department store of music,'' butLeonard Bernstein had one permanent place of business.
It was the New York Philharmonic.


Inflation Hits Government and Taxpayer Alike;   Relief for Singles
LEAD: To the Editor:


Our Towns;   New Arena Sport: A Frenzied Pitch To Sell Homes
LEAD: Last weekend, Enzo Morabito, a real-estate salesman, rented Nassau Coliseum, home of the New York Islanders pro hockey team, for ''the first-anywhere Sell by Owner Real Estate Expo.'' About 150 homeowners, anxious to sell in the current stone-dead market, paid as much as $300 each for a booth to show off photos and videos of their homes.


By Design;   Chic Bangles and Cuffs
LEAD: Slap-bracelets may be running into a safety snafu, but cuffs and bangles are high style.
One or two of these sizable bracelets clasped around each wrist adds immeasurable chic to any of the simple outfits of the day.
They do, however, take some getting used to - and not every woman can wear them.
There is no way to keep cuffs from sliding right off exceptionally narrow wrists and hands.


Teeth Carry Clues to Diet Of the Extinct
LEAD: BY examining the microscopic scratches and gritty plant remains embedded in fossil teeth, scientists have developed what they believe is a promising new technique for identifying the diets of extinct animals.
The research could produce for the first time direct evidence of what the animals, including early human ancestors, ate and how this affected their lives and fate.


Marriage Is Lifesaver For Men After 45
LEAD: ''MARRIAGE, if one will face the truth, is an evil, but a necessary evil,'' said the Greek comic playwright Menander.
Indeed, for middle-aged men, it may be a lifesaver.


Man Charged in Slaying of a Bronx Woman
LEAD: A 19-year-old man was charged yesterday in the death of a woman who was shot when a gunfight erupted near the sidewalk table in the Bronx where she was playing dominoes.


Polaroid's Stock Price Falls Sharply
LEAD: The Polaroid Corporation's stock tumbled more than 20 percent yesterday, as investors showed their disappointment in the news late Friday that the company would receive hundreds of millions of dollars less in damages than had been expected from the infringement of its instant photography patents by the Eastman Kodak


A Weak Economy Buffets Two Commuter Railroads
LEAD: Hit hard by a weakened regional economy, two of the major commuter railroads in the New York metropolitan region find themselves with shrinking tax subsidies, disappointing ridership and rising expenses that could threaten service and lead to higher fares.


Piggott Back on Track At the Age of 54
LEAD: Lester Piggott, at age 54, resumed his riding career yesterday with a near victory at Leicester, England, in his first race after five years' retirement and a one-year jail term for tax fraud.
The 11-time British champion jockey, riding Lupescu, fought a neck-and-neck battle against Sumonda, the favorite, in the Hare Maiden Fillies Stakes.


House Passes Second Bill On Grants
LEAD: For the second time in less than a week, the House voted tonight to scrap strict anti-obscenity restrictions on the National Endowment for the Arts and to penalize grant recipients who are subsequently convicted of violating obscenity laws.


Former Emerson Chief Ordered to Pay Drexel
LEAD: Stephen L. Lane, the former president and chief executive of the Emerson Radio Corporation, and his wife, Trina, were ordered by an arbitration panel yesterday to pay more than $6 million to Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. to settle a dispute over losses they incurred in the 1987 stock market crash.


Strong Overseas Sales Spur 25% Jump in Pepsico Profits
LEAD: Citing strong performances in its foreign soft-drink and restaurant businesses, Pepsico said yesterday that its net profit in the third quarter rose 25 percent.


Penn Central Bids For Auto Insurers
LEAD: The Penn Central Corporation offered $408 million to buy a group of automobile insurance companies from the American Financial Corporation.
American Financial is privately owned by the Lindner family and owns 41.6 percent of Penn Central's common shares.
Carl H. Lindner is principal shareholder and chairman of American Financial and is chief executive of Penn


Leif Andreas Larsen, Norwegian War Hero, 84
LEAD: Leif Andreas Larsen, a World War II resistance fighter and one of the most highly decorated naval heroes in Norway, died from a stroke on Friday, news reports here said.
He was 84 years old.


A Choirboy, Crossfire, And Tragedy Comes Again
LEAD: To the other children who sang in the Antioch Church of Christ Choir in Brooklyn, 8-year-old John Thomas Jones was known as Johnny T - a boy who made up for being deaf in one ear by having a powerhouse of a voice.


Itel in Sale to G.E.
LEAD: The Itel Corporation agreed to sell certain container leasing and services assets to the GE Capital Corporation, a unit of the General Electric Company, for about $825 million.
The sale will result in an earnings gain for Itel of about $250 million, Itel said.
It said the proceeds would be sufficient to pay down its container debt and to pay for a previously announced purchase of 18.7 million Itel shares from the Henley Group Inc.


New Law Will Expand TV Captions for the Deaf
LEAD: More than a decade after television stations began broadcasting coded signals that can be translated into subtitles, Congress has passed legislation that will enable millions more viewers who are deaf or hard of hearing to take advantage of the technology.


Virginia Rises to The Top In Polls
LEAD: The University of Virginia was named college football's top team by both The Associated Press and United Press International weekly polls yesterday, elevating the Cavaliers to the No. 1 position in the rankings for the first time ever.


Using Body's Controls To Develop New Class Of Immune Boosters
LEAD: A NEW class of drugs is trickling into the marketplace, to the enthusiasm of researchers who hope the drugs will change the face of medicine.


China's Census Shows Population at 1.13 Billion
LEAD: The most comprehensive census in Chinese history has established that the nation's population is a bit more than 1.13 billion, officials closely involved say.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a production error, the continuation of a front-page article yesterday about free-market economics on Sakhalin Island in the Soviet Far East included a scrambled passage in some copies.
The 11 lines at the top of the second column, beginning ''the mainland'' and ending ''should have been given,'' belonged in the middle of the second column, after the line ending ''which relies on.


Matsushita May Buy U.S. Chip Plant
LEAD: In the midst of its discussions about aquiring one of Hollywood's biggest studios, the Matsushita Electric Industrial Corporation said today that it also had another target in mind: one of the American electronics industry's more advanced manufacturing plants.


Hearing Set on Possible Jury Misconduct in Drug Agent Case
LEAD: A Federal judge in Los Angeles said Monday that he would conduct a hearing into allegations of jury misconduct in the convictions of four men linked to the torture and slaying of an American drug agent in Mexico.


Steinbrenner Law Firm Tied to Spira Case
LEAD: A lawyer employed by the firm that represents George Steinbrenner has become involved in the Government's case against Howard Spira because of a telephone conversation he taped with Spira last March that reportedly contained comments by Spira about shaking people down.


Agricultural Trade Snag
LEAD: The United States is not alone in its determination to walk away from global trade talks if the European Community continues to block a broad agreement to cut farm subsidies, the United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, said today.


U.S. Will Allow 6,000 More Refugees Next Year
LEAD: President Bush has authorized an increase to 131,000 from 125,000 in the total number of refugees the United States will accept in the coming year, including an additional 10,000 Soviet refugees whose entry will be financed by the Federal Government, the White House announced today.


Otavio Gouveia de Bulhoes, Economist, 84
LEAD: Otavio Gouveia de Bulhoes, a Finance Minister under Brazil's former military leadership and a major force in national economic planning for nearly five decades, died Saturday of respiratory failure.
He was 84 years old.


Another Change at Top At Fieldcrest Cannon
LEAD: Fieldcrest Cannon Inc., the maker of bedroom and bathroom textiles, rugs and carpets, has made another change in its top management, choosing James M. Fitzgibbons as chairman and chief executive.
He succeeds Joseph B. Ely 2d, who is retiring from the company.


Sundstrand Fraud Case
LEAD: A Federal judge today acquitted three former Sundstrand Corporation executives of wrongdoing in a scheme by the aerospace contractor to defraud the Pentagon.


Five Big Drug Companies Show Strong Income Gains
LEAD: Riding high in the face of economic weaknesses that have reduced profits in other industries, five major pharmaceutical companies reported strong gains in quarterly earnings yesterday.


Charles S. Garland Jr.; Investment Executive, 63
LEAD: Charles S. Garland Jr., managing director of the Baltimore securities firm of Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons, died Saturday at his home in Baltimore.
He was 63 years old.
His family said he died of cancer.


Robert Leonard; Voice Teacher, 49
LEAD: Robert Leonard, a voice teacher whose pupils included opera and theater singers, died Thursday in London.
He was 49 years old and had homes in London and New York.
Friends in New York said Mr.
Leonard died of tuberculosis.
Among his students were June Anderson, Michele Lagrange, Ashley Putnam, Patti LuPone, Kevin Kline and Linda Ronstadt.


Macalester's Endowment Rises to $320 Million
LEAD: Macalester College in St.
Paul, Minn., has almost quintupled its endowment, moving into the ranks of the nation's liberal arts colleges with the largest endowments, including Swarthmore, Wellesley, Amherst and Williams.


The Status of Some of the Major Pieces of Legislation Before Congress
LEAD:
Child Care


Digging Into the Greek Tragedy of George Polk
LEAD: In Greece, she has provoked a storm.
On one side, the conservative president of parliament has accused her of ''vulgar lies'' and is threatening to sue her.
On the other, a former Socialist minister says he will use her book to seek a retrial in the case of George Polk, the distinguished CBS foreign correspondent murdered in northern Greece in 1948.


Old Marxist Returns, With Hope for South Africa
LEAD: In the world of emerging political movements Joe Slovo is an anachronism, an avuncular white man lionized in South African black townships as a symbol of resistance against apartheid, a committed Marxist with an ideology that many thought had collapsed with the Berlin wall and a politician glad-handing his way across South


Review/Recital;   Russian Works for Piano
LEAD: Vladimir Viardo's three-recital survey of the Russian literature for solo piano, which the Soviet artist initiated on Monday evening at Alice Tully Hall, began on an unscheduled somber note.
In homage to Leonard Bernstein, the Soviet musician prefaced his program with Scriabin's Prelude in E minor (Op.


Camera Class Puts Life Of Homeless in Focus
LEAD: Claire Flanders, a professional photographer, and 10-year-old Charlene Williams huddled together over a magnifying glass, scanning a contact sheet of photographs taken by Charlene.


Citicorp Earnings Drop 38%
LEAD: Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company, announced a 38 percent decline in its earnings for the third quarter yesterday, with strong profits in consumer banking but large losses in real estate lending.


Corrections
LEAD: A listing of dividend meetings in Business Day on Monday misstated the date for Ryder System Inc.
It is Friday; it was not yesterday.


His Long Timeout Over, Rohan Tries to Revive Columbia Basketball
LEAD: Imagine this: A former basketball coach nearing retirement who has absolutely nothing left to prove is offered his old job 16 years after he decided to step down.
The school won only 4 of 26 games the previous season and has not had a winning season in almost a decade.


Top Executive Ousted At New Haven Register
LEAD: The top executive at The New Haven Register was dismissed Monday night by the paper's owner, the Journal Register Company, after he resisted the second round of layoffs in a month, reportedly on the ground that they would seriously damage the newspaper.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD: The Economy


Rinfret's No. 2 Hopes for Nibble from Voters
LEAD: Some politicians give out campaign buttons or bumper stickers when they take to the hustings.
George F. T. (Geff) Yancey Jr. hands out cheese.


Bluefish Fans Know This: The Only Good Fish Is a Fresh Fish
LEAD: ONE of the joys of a New England fall is to fish for bluefish.
Very often, I drag net from the shore to pick up the four- to five-inch specimens we call snapper blues.
These tiny fish are terrific pan-fried or sauteed.


Classic Oversubscribed;#25 Entered for 14 Spots
LEAD: Swelled by a record 25 entrants for the $3 million Classic and a huge contingent of European imports, the seven Breeders' Cup races at Belmont Park on Oct. 27 attracted 110 preliminary entries yesterday.


Campaign Trail;   Trapped on Capitol Hill, Democrats Fight by TV
LEAD: ''Where we are is hell, and where hell is, there must we ever be,'' as Mephistopheles puts it in ''Doctor Faustus.'' So it is with members of the House and Senate and the 1990 campaign.
The campaign is where the lawmakers are, and the lawmakers are trapped on Capitol Hill by the budget impasse.


Census Spot-Checks Disclose Mistakes in Cities' Counting
LEAD: Early spot-checks by Census Bureau workers have found that some cities, including New York and Boston, have made the same kinds of mistakes that the bureau has been accused of making: putting some houses where they do not exist.


Charlie Hustle: Only Human
LEAD: As the World Series began last night at Cincinnati's Riverfront Stadium, on Pete Rose Way, Charlie Hustle was in uniform, olive-green khaki pants and shirt, and he was wearing his number.
Peter Edward Rose, formerly No. 14 of the Cincinnati Reds, is temporarily Federal prisoner No. 01832-061 at the minimum-security prison at Marion,


To Oslo, Via Vilnius
LEAD: Few Champagne corks popped in Lithuania at the news of Mikhail Gorbachev's Nobel Peace Prize.


The City and Its Labor Unions Begin Contract Negotiations


The People's Shilling
LEAD: To the Editor:


Can a Mall at a Toxic Dump Revive an Ailing Syracuse?
LEAD: Just moments from the heart of downtown oozes Oil City, an industrial wasteland of oil tanks, junkyards, toxic dumps and corroded buildings hugging the shore of Onondaga Lake, itself a hazardous waste site.


Ideas That Changed Wall St. And Fathered Mutual Funds
LEAD: Few Nobel awards in economics, it is safe to say, will be as enthusiastically received within the profession as this year's award to Harry M. Markowitz, Merton H. Miller and William F. Sharpe.


300 Are Laid Off By Burger King
LEAD: The Burger King Corporation has laid off 300 employees nationwide and plans to close more than a third of its field offices in a move to streamline the company and pay more attention to franchisees.


Coke Bottler's Net Up 80.8%
LEAD: Coca-Cola Enterprises, the world's largest Coca-Cola bottler, said yesterday that third-quarter profits rose 80.8 percent, to $15 million, or 13 cents a share, from $8.3 million, or 6 cents a share, in the comparable period a year earlier.


G.E.'s Net Rises 9% In Quarter
LEAD: Although its performance was hampered by the weakening of the economy, the General Electric Company said yesterday that its net income climbed 9 percent in the third quarter, to $1.03 billion, from $945 million in the 1989 period.


Chronicle
LEAD: PETER USTINOV was knighted yesterday, an occasion that he viewed with irreverance.
After his visit to Buckingham Palace, Sir Peter said, ''The Queen said she was glad, and I said I was touched.''


Del Monte President Gets Chief's Post, Too
LEAD: Del Monte Foods said yesterday that it had promoted its president, A. Ewan Macdonald, to the additional position of chief executive.
He succeeds Robert J. Carbonell, 63, who will continue as chairman.


Early Release Possible
LEAD: Bruce Kimball, the former Olympic diver, has served 21 months of a 17-year prison term on two manslaughter convictions caused when his car killed two people and injured five others after crashing into a crowd in Brandon, Fla., in 1988.
Tests showed that Kimball had a level of alcohol twice that of legal drunkenness.


Quotations of the Day
LEAD: ''The evidence is irrefutable.


Girl, 13, Hit by Stray Bullet
LEAD: A 13-year-old girl was hit in the stomach by a stray bullet accidentally fired through the floor by two young men playing with guns in a three-family house at 9535 Lefferts Boulevard in Richmond Hill, Queens, the police said.
The girl, whose name was withheld by the police, was in stable condition at Jamaica Hospital.


Quake-Damaged City a Year Later: A Slow Recovery Amid Grim Ruins
LEAD: The downtown of this seaside city still resembles a war zone - empty lots surrounded by cyclone fences.
Frustrated with the pace of recovery from the huge earthquake a year ago, townspeople compare what remains of the Pacific Garden Mall to downtown Beirut.


Richard J. Hummler A Variety Editor, 47
LEAD: Richard J. Hummler, the theater editor and critic of Variety, a weekly newspaper of the entertainment industry, was found dead yesterday afternoon at his home in Manhattan.
He was 47 years old.


Economic Scene;   Russia Rules, But Gently
LEAD: STANISLAV SHATALIN, principal economic adviser to Mikhail Gorbachev, finished a whirlwind tour of America last week.
And while the visit was unofficial - Mr.
Shatalin was a guest of Belka International, an American consulting firm serving Western business in the Soviet Union - his comments in an interview suggested that he was not about to say anything that would embarrass his besieged employer.


Labor Talks Begin With Charges of Meddling
LEAD: Negotiations between New York City and its labor unions began yesterday on a bitter note with union leaders assailing what they called meddling by two prominent public figures.


Jorge Bolet, Pianist, Is Dead at 75; Specialist in Romantic Literature
LEAD: Jorge Bolet, a Cuban-born virtuoso considered one of the leading contemporary exponents of Romantic pianism, died early Tuesday afternoon at his home in Mountain View, Calif., south of San Francisco.
He was 75 years old.


Dow Drops by 35.15, Despite Late Rally
LEAD: Stocks fell sharply yesterday as oil prices rose, but rallied slightly in the final 15 minutes on a report that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq might accept a diplomatic solution to the gulf crisis.


Singapore Recruiting
LEAD: A group of employers in Singapore, seeking to ease a shortage of skilled workers, will send recruiters abroad next spring to interview Singapore natives and other Asians studying in British and North American universities.
Officials estimate that up to 80,000 workers are needed to supplement Singapore's work force of 1.2 million.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.93
8.00
8.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.17
7.18
7.52
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.20
7.22
7.53
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.60
8.65
8.00
30-YR.


Nasty Boys Making Their Farewells
LEAD: No matter what happens in this World Series, take a good look at the Nasty Boys.
They won't be back, at least in their present form.


More Woes at Sumitomo
LEAD: The giant Sumitomo Bank Ltd., whose chairman, Ichiro Isoda, resigned last week in the wake of a stock manipulation scandal involving a branch manager, received more setbacks today.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
American Capital and Research Corp., Farifax, Va., an environmental consulting company, named Marilyn F. Meigs vice president and director of government relations for its ICF Kaiser Engineers subsidiary.


Downers
LEAD: A New Yorker for whom the simple explanation never suffices has been wondering why she's been so down lately.
Way down.
It's too early in the season for anyone to be afflicted with SADD - that curious mood disorder that's said to arrive when the sun is low in the sky - and she is unaware of any curious conjunction of the planets.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Archer Communications Inc., Calgary, Alberta, said Warner Brothers Records will issue an album in November using Archer's patented Qsound process.


U.S. Asking U.N. Chief to Send His Inquiry Team to Israel Quickly
LEAD: The Bush Administration is urging Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations to send a fact-finding mission to Jerusalem soon, despite Israel's objections.
In doing so, Washington is trying to head off a possible new campaign to condemn Israel here, an effort that would further deflect attention from the Persian


Securities Laws Are Toughened
LEAD: President Bush this week signed two bills giving Federal securities regulators significant power to detect and crack down on fraud in the nation's financial marketplace.
The bills were an attempt by


Cracking the Coalition
LEAD: The deaths of 21 Palestinians from Israeli police gunfire have made it clear that the U.S. could not keep Arab nations in its shaky Middle East military coalition if it launched a military offensive against Iraq and Saddam Hussein.


Profits Up at Microsoft and Down at Lotus
LEAD: The Microsoft Corporation today reported strong gains in revenues and earnings, while the Lotus Development Corporation reported declining earnings on essentially flat sales, which it attributed to upgrading its most popular product.


Corrections
LEAD: A chart on Monday showing how taxes would change for various incomes under three Federal budget proposals misidentified the kind of taxes involved.
The percentage changes were for all Federal taxes, not just income taxes.


A Highly Touted Ranger Import Is Making Little Impact
LEAD: There are moments, a couple of months worth of moments, when Milo Horava's difficulty with the English language is as much a blessing as a burden.
What joy, after all, there would be in discovering all the different words for disappointment, what thrill there would be in mastering the conjugation of the verb to regret.


FOOD NOTES
LEAD:
Celebrating the Harvest


Cureton Taking His Chances With Knicks
LEAD: The Knicks have a major problem as they open the preseason portion of their National Basketball Association schedule against the Philadelphia 76ers on Thursday night in Albany.
They have 15 players on the roster, 13 of whom have guaranteed contracts.
By the start of the regular season, Nov. 2, the team must cut down to 12.


Tokyo Journal;   Tatami or Colonial, a House Is Wishful Thinking
LEAD: Hiroshi Akizuki, a 27-year-old computer programmer, wandered into a Queen Anne-style model house with his girlfriend the other day, peered up the giant central staircase, inspected the elegant brick fireplace in the parlor and pondered the question of whether he would ever live like this.


GORBACHEV OFFERS HIS PLAN TO REMAKE SOVIET ECONOMY, BUT INCLUDES NO TIMETABLE
LEAD: After months of wavering, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev sent the Soviet Parliament a compromise economic reform program today that calls for dismantling the state's economic monopoly, but set no timetable.


Creditor Ends Campeau Pact
LEAD: The Campeau Corporation, the Canadian owner of Federated Department Stores and Allied Stores, said yesterday that the Edward J. DeBartolo Corporation, a big developer that lent the Canadian company $480 million in 1988, had refused to renew an agreement not to seize collateral from Campeau without prior notice.


The Pop Life
LEAD:
Vanilla Ice Crosses Over


Romania in Deal With Caterpillar
LEAD: Caterpillar Inc. plans to sell 212 earth-moving machines to the Romanian Government for use in coal mining.
Caterpillar released few details, but an analyst said the deal could be worth $50 million.


Hospital Cuts Aren't Hurting Care for Elderly, Study Says
LEAD: A comprehensive national study has found that measures to limit Federal health costs have not reduced the quality of hospital care for the elderly, as many experts had feared.


Kuwaitis Tell of New Round of Terror
LEAD: Kuwaitis who have managed to leave their country in recent days say Iraqi security officers have been executing Kuwaiti prisoners in the presence of their families in what appears to be a new round of terror.


Jerusalem Mayor Splits With Israel on Inquiry
LEAD: A few small cracks are beginning to appear in Israel's blanket rejection of the United Nations mission charged with investigating the shooting deaths of 21 Palestinians at Al Aksa Mosque last week.


Police Dramas on TV Were Always Popular; Now They're Real
LEAD: Police work is portrayed on television more often than any other profession.
It has been that way since the cowboys rode off into the television sunset.


3d Chess Game a Draw After Early Fireworks
LEAD: Anatoly Karpov and Gary Kasparov struggled through 13 moves of a thorny, problem-ridden endgame to a draw last night in the third game of their World Championship Chess Match in Manhattan.


Revenue Bonds For Illinois Project
LEAD: The Village of Hoffman Estates in Cook and Kane Counties in Illinois has tentatively priced $111.5 million in tax-increment revenue bonds through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Manuscript From 1513 Is Returned to Germany
LEAD: A second manuscript from the Quedlinburg treasures, missing since the closing days of World War II in Europe, has been returned to Germany by an anonymous collector.
The manuscript is in Berlin undergoing restoration, a spokesman for a private German foundation said yesterday.


Grand Met and Elders Blocked on Beer Deal
LEAD: Britain today blocked a venture between Grand Metropolitan P.L.C. and Elders IXL Ltd., but the Government gave the companies time to come up with a scaled-down proposal that would not threaten competition in the beer industry.


Mack Trucks' Chief to Resign
LEAD: Ralph E. Reins will resign as chairman, president and chief executive of Mack Trucks Inc., a company spokesman said today.


Brazilian Airline In Boeing Order
LEAD: The Brazilian airline Varig has placed orders for as many as 26 Boeing aircraft in a deal valued at up to $2.6 billion, the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group said.
The order came a day after United Airlines placed what could be the largest commercial aircraft order in history: $22 billion for as many as 128 planes.


Hackett Stars in Goal; Sutter Sparks Offense
LEAD: The struggling Islanders played like world-beaters tonight.
The struggling Winnipeg Jets played as if they would rather be watching the World Series on television.
The result was a 4-1 Islander victory that featured notable performances by several members of the home team.


Foreign Workers Leaving Eastern Germany
LEAD: When she thinks back to her days in Dresden in the 1970's as an electrical-engineering student, Nguyen Lien's eyes glow.


Albany Panel Urges Only a Tiny Phone Rise
LEAD: A panel of administrative judges for the state board that regulates New York's utilities recommended today that an $830 million rate increase sought by New York Telephone be denied and a much smaller increase be granted instead.


Daniel Guilet, Violinist, Is Dead; Beaux Arts Trio Founder Was 91
LEAD: Daniel Guilet, a violinist who was concertmaster of the NBC Symphony Orchestra under Arturo Toscanini and a founding member of the Beaux Arts Trio, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 91 years old.


For the Two Pennant Winners, The Arrival of Another Flag
LEAD: It was the Admiral who said why don't we run this one up the flag pole and see if anyone salutes.
But by the time Don Fehr of the Major League Baseball Players Association snapped to attention and Commissioner Fay Vincent gave the order to advance, it was Tony Angilecchia and his staff at the Nu-Look Cleaners in Cincinnati who ended up doing the patriotic scut work: sewing American flags on the upper right chest of the home white and visiting gray World Series uniforms worn by the Reds and the Oakland


Review/Music;   Bob Dylan and His Ever-Changing Oldies
LEAD: In three years of continuous touring, Bob Dylan has been retraining his audience along the lines of the Grateful Dead's Deadheads.
Fans have learned to expect uneven but improvisatory concerts in which some songs are throwaways, some are near misses, a few are set pieces and some glean new insights from well-worn words and music.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Net Dips at United Telecom; GTE, Southwest Bell in Rise
LEAD: United Telecom, which owns 80.1 percent of U S Sprint, reported a small drop in third-quarter earnings yesterday, while GTE and Southwestern Bell posted earnings increases that were slightly higher than expected.


Agency Reports Little Oversight Of Adult Homes
LEAD: New York State authorities failed for 12 years to eliminate widespread abuses in private adult homes for the mentally ill, and the state has no idea how $150 million in public money is being spent annually in these institutions, a state monitoring agency asserted yesterday.


Noble Pretzels for a Penny
LEAD: To The Living Section:


EATING WELL
LEAD: UNTIL the 1980's, calcium was viewed as a rather pedestrian nutrient.
But that all changed when health experts said eating more calcium could prevent osteoporosis, a debilitating condition resulting from a progressive loss of bone.
Osteoporosis affects 25 million people in the United States, 80 percent of them women.


Reds 7, Athletics 0
LEAD: Yes, it was a mismatch.


Brazil Won't Sign Atom Pact But Plans Curbs, Aide Says
LEAD: Brazil intends to tighten civilian control over its nuclear sites and restrict exports of nuclear materials and advanced military technology, but it will not sign the 20-year-old nonproliferation treaty that requires adherents to forsake the development of atomic weapons, a senior Brazilian Government official said today.


Profits Rise in Media Field
LEAD: Three media companies - McGraw-Hill, Media General and Multimedia - reported stronger profits yesterday compared with the corresponding quarter a year ago.


Chronicle
LEAD: Four educators and health professionals have won the Charles A. Dana Awards for Pioneering Education.
Dr.
NORBERT HIRSCHHORN, a public-health consultant, helped develop oral rehydration therapy, used for children suffering from acute diarrhea.
Dr.
JOHN W. FARQUHAR, professor of disease prevention at Stanford University Medical School, is being honored for demonstrating the effectiveness of health education campaigns on heart disease.


Questioning Completed In One Milken Charge
LEAD: The last witness to testify in the first part of the pre-sentencing hearing of Michael R. Milken implied yesterday that a Government witness had lied in his earlier testimony.


About New York;   On Baseball, Too, A Maven Seeks The Last Word
LEAD: The last time we saw David Shulman, a little over a year ago, he was kibitzing the National Scrabble Championship.
As always, he had proffered a fragment of knowledge.
He suggested that the word ''Manhattan'' was an Indian phrase meaning ''the place where we all get drunk.''


Volvo Cutbacks
LEAD: The Swedish auto maker Volvo A.B. said it wanted to cut production of its main large models by about 7 percent, or 18,200 cars, in 1991 from this year's level because of declining sales forecasts.
A Volvo spokesman said the cuts would be in the 700 and 200 series, while production of the new 900 series would continue as planned.


French Defy Lebanon; Aoun Kept in Embassy
LEAD: Lebanese Government troops ringed the French Embassy in East Beirut today after France said it would not hand over a renegade Christian general, Michel Aoun, to the Lebanese authorities to stand trial.


Flea Markets Mean Lost Sales-Tax Revenue
LEAD: To the Editor:


HOUSE APPROVES DEMOCRATIC PLAN TO REDUCE DEFICIT
LEAD: Eleven days after it rejected the budget compromise struck by President Bush and Congressional leaders, the House of Representatives voted tonight for a new Democratic plan that would sharply raise the income taxes of the wealthy.


Big Snake Alert Defanged
LEAD: The New York City Health Department admitted yesterday that a citywide serpent alarm it issued on Friday was a case of, well, mis-snaken identity.


William Minshall, 79, Ex-Ohio Congressman
LEAD: William E. Minshall, who served as a Republican Congressman from Ohio for 20 years before he retired in 1974, died Monday at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 79 years old.


Harnessing Hundreds of Computers to Improve Speed and Efficiency
LEAD: In the 1960's and 1970's, dozens or hundreds of users shared a single large computer - one computer, many users.
In the 1980's, the growing availability of inexpensive microprocessors ushered in another era -one computer, one user.
Now researchers at more than four dozen laboratories and universities in the United States and


Cheney Begins Soviet Visit


'Baby Boomers' Donate More, a Survey Says
LEAD: Americans in the 25-to 44-year age group have substantially increased their contributions of money and volunteer time to charities, belying the popular perception that they are an ego-centered generation, a new survey shows.


Davis Does an Effective Job of Destroying the Doubts
LEAD: Eric Davis, the stoic left fielder of the Cincinnati Reds, always ponders one of his sensational nights at the plate as if it were a humiliating four-strikeout affair, holding his emotions and thoughts very close to his heart.


Maine Asks U.S. to Deny License to Dam Owners
LEAD: Gov.
John R. McKernan of Maine broke off talks today with the owners of the Edwards Dam, one of the oldest hydroelectric dams in the state, and asked Federal officials to deny the owners' request for relicensing.


Two Airlines to Raise Fares Again
LEAD: Continental Airlines and Northwest Airlines announced another round of fare increases yesterday to help offset the soaring cost of aviation fuel.
If the increases stick, airline fares will have risen at least 15 percent in the two months since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, one of the steepest rises in the industry's history over such a short period.


Sallie Mae Named in Suit
LEAD: Two former managers of the Student Loan Marketing Association, which is known as Sallie Mae, have filed suit charging that the big purchaser of student loans engaged in loan fraud and a cover-up.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation said it was investigating the charges.


Court Says Job Hazards May Be a Crime
LEAD: New York State's highest court ruled yesterday that state prosecutors can file criminal charges, including murder and assault, against employers for injuring their employees at work.


Oil Price Up 94/ a Barrel, To $38.89
LEAD: Oil prices rose yesterday in a volatile session as traders bought contracts before the release of a closely watched industry report on the nation's energy supplies.
The gain of almost $1 nearly halved Monday's steep fall.


Oops, It's Not Like Old Times As Stewart Hits a Roadblock
LEAD: Dave Stewart had won his last six post-season starts, limiting the opposition to 1.88 earned runs per nine innings.


3 U.S. Economists Win Nobel
LEAD: The Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science was awarded today to three Americans whose pioneering work provided new tools for weighing the risks and rewards of different investments and for valuing corporate stocks and bonds.


Jersey to Propose Locker-Room Ban
LEAD: Reacting to the recent national controversy over female sportswriters in locker rooms, a New Jersey legislator proposed today to prohibit all news media interviews for 30 minutes after the conclusion of sporting events.


A Lawmaker Breaks Ranks Over Fairness
LEAD: ''I was with two groups of conservative Republicans in rural Vermont last weekend,'' said Representative Peter Smith, a Republican who represents the entire state. ''I asked them whether anyone opposed creating a new tax bracket for people who earned more than $150,000 a year.
Nobody raised his hand.


John Adams Bross, 79, Lawyer and U.S. Aide
LEAD: John Adams Bross Sr., a lawyer and former Federal aide, died yesterday at his home in McLean, Va.
He was 79 years old and also had a home in Peterborough, N.H.


Colts Sign Ferguson
LEAD: The Indianapolis Colts have reached an agreement with the veteran quarterback Joe Ferguson as a backup to the starter, Jack Trudeau, Coach Ron Meyer said yesterday.
The quarterback move was prompted by injuries to the rookie Jeff George and the veteran Mark Herrmann.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
LEAD: IT may just be my personal preferences at work, but it seems that pork is making a comeback among American home cooks.
For one thing, the pork industry has made great strides in producing a leaner product.
And it has effectively conveyed that message to the consumer.


Japan's Leadership Backs Plan to Send Soldiers to the Gulf
LEAD: The Japanese Cabinet approved a plan today to send troops to the Persian Gulf in the country's first military foray abroad since the end of World War II, but it immediately ran into a storm of opposition at home and among Japan's Asian neighbors.


Doing Summer Right
LEAD: It was disconcerting to learn the other day that some of the discomfort everybody suffered last summer was caused not by heat or humidity but by a newfangled thermometer.
The thermometer, the Weather Service has explained, suffered from what it calls aspiration problems brought on by a faulty fan.


Sweetbreads: Loved But Misunderstood
LEAD: SOMETIMES people have no idea what they are eating, and more often than not it is probably better that they not ask.


State of Art Machines Cut Mammogram Fee
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Storm Wider Than Earth Forms Abruptly Over Saturn
LEAD: A gargantuan storm one and a half times as wide as the Earth has developed in Saturn's atmosphere, and the Hubble Space Telescope may be used to watch it, astronomers said today.


Senate Roll-Call on the Civil Rights Bill
LEAD: Following is the 62-to-34 roll-call vote by which the Senate tonight approved a civil rights bill to combat job discrimination.
A yes vote was a vote to approve the bill; a no vote was a vote against it.
Voting yes were 53 Democrats and 9 Republicans.
Voting no were no Democrats and 34 Republicans.


Albert J. Harris, 82, Professor of Education
LEAD: Albert J. Harris, an education professor and a leader in the teaching of reading, died on Monday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 82 years old and lived in West Palm Beach, Fla., and New Rochelle, N.Y.


Afghan Guerrillas Occupy a 2d Provincial Capital
LEAD: Fighting between the Soviet-backed Government and fundamentalist Muslim guerrillas has flared up in southeastern Afghanistan, and there were reports today that Kalat, the capital of Zabul Province, has fallen to the rebels.


Professors With Influence Far Beyond Their Schools
LEAD:
Harry M. Markowitz
City University of New York


A Crime Victim Asks, 'Where Is Justice?'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Holes in the Fish Safety Net
LEAD: While meat and poultry have long been subject to mandatory Federal inspection, there is no comparable program to protect the public from contaminated fish - despite a marked rise in fish consumption by consumers seeking to cut down on dietary fat.
Legislation set for a vote today in the House would begin to close this gaping hole in the food safety net.


WINE TALK
LEAD: FOR many years, there was an excellent Greek restaurant on Eighth Avenue between 43d and 44th Streets, just around the corner from my office.
It was called the Parthenon, and some of the freshest fish in New York came from its kitchen.
For the regulars there was always a simple oinos lefkos, an expensive Greek white wine, with just the right acidity to match the oil in the fish.


England Loses Miami-Arkansas
LEAD: The Miami Hurricanes' 1991 season opener against Arkansas will not be played in Manchester, England, as had been scheduled.


3 Strong California S.&amp; L.'s Raise Loan-Loss Reserves
LEAD: Three of the nation's largest and healthiest savings institutions said today that they were substantially increasing their reserves for possible losses on real estate loans.


Corrections
LEAD: The Publishing column of the Media Business page on Monday misstated the title of Peter Osnos at Random House.
He is the associate publisher, not associate editor.


Giants' Banks Sidelined After Wrist Surgery
LEAD: Carl Banks, the Giants' Pro Bowl outside linebacker, underwent surgery today on his dislocated left wrist.


Excerpts From Gorbachev's Economic Program
LEAD: Following are excerpts from the proposed economic program submitted today to the Soviet legislature by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, as translated by The New York Times:


Iraq's Seesaw Diplomacy: Threats and Entreaties
LEAD: Saddam Hussein is sending decidedly mixed political signals about his intentions toward Kuwait, thus causing Arab and Western moods and expectations to shift and complicating efforts by the United States and its allies to forge a coherent strategy for getting Iraqi forces out of Kuwait.


Political Careerism Is the Bane of True Democracy
LEAD: To the Editor:


Cold Days? Warm Stew, Hot Debate
LEAD: LIKE stubborn leaves finally falling, cooks drift into the season of slow cooking.
Cool weather sends society scurrying from the campfire to the fireplace.
A communal cauldron full of slow-simmered stew seems to swing gently over any thought of dinner.
Yet cooks stickle against the stew state of mind.


Crowder of Devils Not the Retiring Type; The Forward Makes His Presence Felt
LEAD: Thirteen months after he gave up on hockey, Troy Crowder of the Devils has become an enforcer in the National Hockey League as well as a player with skills good enough to enable him to take a regular shift.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about fighting in Lebanon reversed the descriptions of East and West Beirut.
East Beirut is predominantly Christian, West Beirut mainly Muslim.


Art Blakey, Jazz Great, Is Dead; A Drummer and Band Leader, 71
LEAD: The drummer and band leader Art Blakey, one of the most influential figures in jazz for the last 40 years, died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center.
He was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Action in Congress
LEAD:
AGRICULTURE Negotiators approved a package of $13.6 billion in cuts in farm programs.
JOB BIAS The Senate approved a major rights bill, but it faces a Presidential veto.
CHILD CARE Senate leaders reached agreement with the House on a $15 billion plan.
CAMPAIGN FINANCE Prospects for tightening the system of financing campaigns are dim.


Chronicle
LEAD: A. S. BYATT won Britain's most prestigious literary award yesterday for ''Possession,'' her novel of two young scholars whose research uncovers a clandestine affair between two fictional Victorian poets.


Book Notes
LEAD:
Paz a Known Quantity


Marguerite Wagstaff, Painter, Is Dead at 91
LEAD: Marguerite Falkenburg Wagstaff, a painter and a former tennis champion in Brazil, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 91 years old.
She died of pneumonia, her family said.
Mrs.
Wagstaff, who was known as Mickey, met her first husband, Eugene Falkenburg, on a tennis court in Spain, where he was chief engineer for Westinghouse.


Obscenity or Art? Trial on Rap Lyrics Opens
LEAD: The obscenity trial of the rap music group 2 Live Crew began here today, with the volatile ingredient of race added to already complex arguments about artistic freedom and a community's right to restrict sexual material.


Guatemalan Church Fights Evangelical's Rise
LEAD: The campaign for the presidential election in November has intensified a bitter theological battle here that pits Christian against Christian in a war for this country's nine million souls.


Bank Yields Are Mixed In Week
LEAD: Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were narrowly mixed for the week ended yesterday.


China's No. 2 Didn't Invoke Jack Kennedy
LEAD: If Dan Quayle ever gets annoyed at the jokes made about him, he should hear what is said about China's Vice President.


Occidental Net Rises Slightly
LEAD: The Occidental Petroleum Corporation said today that its net income rose a mere nine-tenths of 1 percent, to $109 million, or 36 cents a share, in the third quarter, compared with $108 million, or 39 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.
The earnings a share figures reflect an increase in the number of shares to 295 million, from 275 million.


Honeywell Posts Profit
LEAD: Honeywell Inc. today reported a 12.2 percent earnings increase in the third quarter on a strong gain in its space and aviation business.
Including a $3.3 million loss from the spinoff of a large portion of its defense business, the controls maker posted profits of $83.5 million, or $2.21 a share, in the quarter, compared with $74.4 million, or $1.73 a share, for the comparable period a year earlier.


Douglas Campbell, World War I Air Ace And Executive, 94
LEAD: Douglas Campbell, the first American-trained air ace in World War I, who was later a general manager of Pan American Grace Airways, died yesterday at his home in Cos Cob, Conn.
He was 94 years old.


Senate Passes Rights Bill, but Vote Is Not Enough to Override Veto
LEAD: The Senate approved the final version of a major civil rights bill tonight but not by enough votes to overturn a threatened veto by President Bush.


Bridge
LEAD: At the World Championships in Geneva last month, players of different nationalities were for the first time permitted to be partners in the minor events.
Two of the few who took advantage of this were Jean Besse of Switzerland and Boris Schapiro of Britain, who have both played major roles in the game's history.


Fooling Around With Taxes
LEAD: The House is on the verge of passing a $500 billion deficit reduction package.
But it is hard to take the bill seriously.
It includes amendments imposing stiff tax increases, aimed at the rich, that are unlikely to pass the Senate and that President Bush is sure to veto.


Boris B. Piotrovsky, Archeologist; Director of the Hermitage Was 82
LEAD: Prof.
Boris B. Piotrovsky, the director of the Hermitage in Leningrad, died of a cerebral hemorrhage in that city on Monday, the Soviet press agency Tass reported.
He was 82 years old.


India Temporizes, Violently, in Kashmir
LEAD: To the Editor:


U.S. Decides Not to Reopen Plant That Makes Plutonium for Bombs
LEAD: In an announcement that effectively takes the Government out of the business of making plutonium for nuclear bombs, Energy Secretary James D. Watkins said yesterday that his department would not reopen a chemical processing plant near Richland, Wash., for weapons work.


Two Raiders Stay Put
LEAD: As the National Football League trading deadline passed yesterday, the Los Angeles Raiders' running back Marcus Allen and the backup quarterback Steve Beuerlein, both rumored to be going elsewhere, stayed put.
But Vann McElroy, a two-time Pro Bowl performer who was a Raider for nine years, did not.


Reappraising Home Ec
LEAD: To The Living Section:


IRAQIS ARE HINTING AT A COMPROMISE; U.S. REJECTS TERMS
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq had indicated tentative interest in a compromise settlement of the Kuwait crisis but that Washington considered the terms unacceptable and continued to insist that Iraq withdraw from Kuwait before any talks begin.


Late Rally Lifts Treasury Issues
LEAD: A late rally pushed up prices of Treasury securities and moved interest rates lower at the end of a generally slow session yesterday.


Chronicle
LEAD: CARLOS SANTANA sued the Miller Brewing Company and its advertising agency for producing a television commercial that he said imitates his version of ''Black Magic Woman,'' a signature song.
While Mr.
Santana did not write the song, he popularized it in the late 1970's and has sung it on several albums.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-15
A slower pace for economic reform in the Soviet Union was endorsed by President Gorbachev in a compromise program for dismantling the state's economic monopoly he sent to the Soviet Parliament.
Page A1


Florida Reports First Death From Encephalitis Epidemic
LEAD: The recent epidemic of St.
Louis encephalitis has claimed its first fatality in Florida, the state's first death caused by the virus in 13 years, a state health official said today.


Market Place;   Contrarian Bets On Soviet Future
LEAD: THERE have been shortages from cigarettes to bread.
The troubled Government is still seeking the right plan for a quick, but still painful, transition from the centrally run Communist economy to a market system.
And the staying power of Mikhail S. Gorbachev, despite his Nobel Peace Prize, is in doubt.


Bush, a Washington Insider, Stumps As an Outsider Against Washington
LEAD: Twenty days before his first set of midterm Congressional elections, George Bush has settled on a message: the President of the United States is campaigning as an outsider against Washington.


Dollar Low Against Mark; Strength Is Shown by Yen
LEAD: The dollar sank on foreign exchange markets yesterday, reaching new lows against the German mark and tumbling against the Japanese yen.


One Team Does Dominate in Game 1: the Reds
LEAD: The Oakland Athletics, heavily favored for one more coronation as the ruling family of baseball, suffered a rude jolt tonight when the Cincinnati Reds rose up, hammered Dave Stewart for four innings and bushwhacked the Athletics, 7-0, in the opening game of the 87th World Series.


A's ('Yes, We Lost') Look to the Future
LEAD: With the calm to be expected of reigning World Series champions, the Oakland Athletics didn't make excuses and were already looking to Game 2 after having been shut out by the Reds, 7-0, in tonight's opener.


Regan Sees Large Rise In Budget Gap
LEAD: Providing the first hard evidence of how severely the state's fiscal fortunes may be sliding, the State Comptroller, Edward V. Regan, announced yesterday that New York State ran up a budget gap of almost $250 million for the first half of the fiscal year.


Catalyst Selling Energy Unit Stake
LEAD: The Catalyst Energy Corporation, a privately owned power producer, hired Lehman Brothers to seek a buyer for its 83.5 percent stake in the United Thermal Corporation, a producer and distributor of steam and heat.
Catalyst was taken private in a 1988 leveraged buyout led by Thomas B. Pickens 3d, the youngest son of T.


U.S. Petroleum Data
LEAD: In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 12
Oct. 5
Oct. 13
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.0
7.0
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.9
2.9
Gasoline stocks
225.9
225.7
225.2
Distillate stocks
135.9
133.3
120.3
Crude imports, daily
5.0
5.5
6.5
Product imports, daily
1.3
1.6
1.9
Crude stocks
343.3
349.5
342.8
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.0
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
85.8
87.6
87.4


Kansas Journal;   Russians and Americans Bury an Era
LEAD: The Russians are conquering the hearts of people in America's heartland, if the warm receptions given so far to a Soviet delegation here for a weeklong series of conferences with American citizens are any indication.


In Cities of Iraq, Food Abounds, Not Spare Parts
LEAD: More than two months after the United Nations imposed a trade embargo on Iraq, Baghdad and other large cities are enjoying an unexpected bounty of fruit, vegetables and canned goods.
As a result, diplomats here believe it will be many months, perhaps a year or more, before food shortages begin to put pressure on the Government of President Saddam Hussein.


Merrill Lynch Net Up; Schwab Has Big Gain
LEAD: Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the nation's largest broker, yesterday reported a 12.4 percent rise in its third- quarter earnings from last year.
The company said, however, that the Middle East crisis and ''inconclusive Federal budget deliberations'' led to declines in investment banking activity and retail commissions.


INSIDE
LEAD:
3 Nobel Laureates In Economic Science
Three Americans were awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science for investment theories.


Douglas Aircraft Cutting 1,200 Jobs
LEAD: The Douglas Aircraft Company will lay off 1,200 workers at its Long Beach and Torrance, Calif., operations this year.
An executive of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation unit said the company also wants to cut its work force by an additional 1,500 workers in 1991.


Gold Prices Plummet Again On Mine Companies' Woes
LEAD: Gold prices dropped again yesterday, with the latest burst of selling attributed largely to mining companies that are selling future bullion output because of their increasing inability to obtain bank financing.


Administration Is Lobbying To Dilute El Salvador Aid Cut
LEAD: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and other senior Administration officials are making a strenuous, 11th-hour lobbying effort to persuade the Senate to water down legislation that would cut military aid to El Salvador by half.


Korea Talks Resume; Seoul Sees Reasons for Caution
LEAD: The Prime Ministers of North and South Korea today formally began their second round of negotiations to reduce tensions as South Koreans cautioned against expecting any sort of breakthrough on the military and political issues dividing them.


Desert-Warfare Training


Dukakis Still Buoyant Despite Tough Times
LEAD: This has not been a good year for Gov. Michael S. Dukakis.


Learning to Turn Dimes Into Millions
LEAD: A TALL, regal woman with a shock of white hair and a swath of Joan Crawford-red lipstick swept into the ballroom of the Plaza Hotel at 6:30 P.M.
Monday, a cyclone of Fracas perfume in her wake.
Elaine Whitelaw, the grande dame of the March of Dimes, had arrived.
She was wearing a shimmering silver and black striped dress and carrying an unlighted Camel filter cigarette.


Quebec Hydropower Battle Entangles Utilities in U.S.
LEAD: New York and New England power officials have become reluctant participants in a dispute over whether one of Canada's biggest utilities should expand its generating capacity.


Plan Would Revise Farm Subsidies
LEAD: House and Senate conferees reached agreement today on a $41 billion, five-year farm policy that changes the structure of commodity price supports and includes the strongest environmental provisions of any farm legislation in history.


EARLIER HARM SEEN IN GLOBAL WARMING
LEAD: After two years of study, an international group of scientists working under United Nations auspices has found that global warming could cause serious environmental damage starting in the early years of the next century, long before the maximum temperature levels predicted by many scientists are reached.


Goldsmith And Hanson Plan Swap
LEAD: Hanson P.L.C. said yesterday that it had agreed with Sir James Goldsmith to swap its 49 percent interest in the Newmont Mining Company for Cavenham Forest Industries.
Cavenham, a large United States forest products company, is controlled by the British-French financier.


Agricultural Trade Snag
LEAD: The United States is not alone in its determination to walk away from global trade talks if the European Community continues to block broad agreement to cut farm subsidies, the United States trade representative, Carla A. Hills, said today.


Review/Film;   Exploring the Underside of the Upper Class
LEAD: ''That was my body,'' says the voice of the comatose Sunny von Bulow (Glenn Close) on the sound track at the beginning of ''Reversal of Fortune.'' Looking as still as death but serene and, somehow, very rich, she lies in bed in a hospital room, attached to machines that efficiently feed and cleanse her system.


Dole, in Twist of Fate, Leads Charge for Bush, The Rival He Scorned
LEAD: On the private balcony that adjoins his office and commands a sweeping view of Washington's monuments, Bob Dole is squinting into the autumn sun and plotting a budget strategy to save face for George Bush's White House.


Policing the World
LEAD: A peculiar convergence of critics on the left and right has begun to emerge as Americans digest the enormity of the Persian Gulf crisis.
It came as such a surprise and built up so rapidly that many thought it a passing storm at first, a nasty adventure like Panama that could be put in its place and then out of mind.


Marshfield, Vt.
LEAD: WHEN Katherine Clark and her husband, Steven Wallach, entertain weekend house guests, they call ahead to Rainbow Sweets Cafe to reserve extra cherry-cheese Danish pastries, which are made only on Sunday mornings.
They ''come out of the oven at 9:15 and are gone by 10,'' Ms.
Clark said.


Results Plus
LEAD:
TENNIS
Annacone Advances: Despite more than a few patchy moments, Paul Annacone advanced to the second round of the A.T.P. tournament yesterday in Vienna.
Annacone, who won the trophy last year, beat Jerry Tarango, 7-5, 7-6, and will next oppose the top-seeded Thomas Muster of Austria.
Annacone made a comeback in the second set to swing a 4-0 deficit to a tie breaker, which he finally won, 10-8.


METROPOLITAN DIARY
LEAD: SHE was an up-to-date Little Red Riding Hood.
She was young - no more than 20 - and truly lovely.
Instead of a picnic basket, she carried a briefcase, as she hurried down the marble corridor of a midtown office building about 5 P.M., high heels clicking.


Raines Wants Trade
LEAD: Tim Raines, who has spent a dozen seasons in a Montreal Expo uniform, has informed General Manager David Dombroski that he would not object to a trade to one of five National League teams that play on natural grass: the Mets, the Atlanta Braves, the Chicago Cubs, the Los Angeles Dodgers and the San Diego


Student Protest Movement Expands, and Its Voice Is That of the Consumer
LEAD: It was a situation guaranteed to warm the heart of any campus radical of the 1960's.


Deployment, Fast; Procurement, Hasty
LEAD: The Pentagon has spent $2.6 trillion in tax dollars over the past decade.
What have Americans been getting for their money?
Many weapons needed for security, to judge from the Persian Gulf crisis.
But also some that can only make taxpayers wonder how much has been well spent.


Pontiac, Mich.
LEAD: THE vicissitudes of the United States auto industry have been tough on once-thriving factory towns like Pontiac.
Not many people test Pontiac's seemingly lifeless downtown, a 40-minute drive from downtown Detroit.


Stovall Gets Job At Louisiana Tech
LEAD: Jerry Stovall, the former all-American at Louisiana State who was dropped as head football coach at the school seven years ago, was named athletic director at Louisiana Tech University in Ruston yesterday.


Dinkins Orders Agencies to Draft Plans for $1 Billion in Cutbacks
LEAD: The Dinkins administration told city agencies yesterday to prepare to cut more than $1 billion in programs and services from their operating budgets over the next 21 months to help close expected budget gaps.


Fuel Rods Dropped at Indian Point But Tests Show No Radiation
LEAD: Technicians at the Indian Point 3 power plant accidentally dropped a highly radioactive bundle of nuclear fuel about 10 feet yesterday, and immediately evacuated the reactor building as a precaution.
But tests of air and water in the building did not show any release of radiation, so workers re-entered the building last night and began securing the fuel.


India Temporizes, Violently, in Kashmir;   Strength in Secularism
LEAD: To the Editor:


Hortense Hirsch, 103, a Volunteer In Health and Civic Organizations
LEAD: Hortense Hirsch, a volunteer for social-welfare, educational and civic organizations and a trustee of Mount Sinai Medical Center for more than half a century, died on Tuesday at her suite in the Pierre Hotel in Manhattan.
She was 103 years old.
During a career as a volunteer that began in the early years of the century, she was active in many organizations, including the Welfare and Health Council, now the Community Council of Greater New York; the National Urban League and the American Red


On the Fiscal Stage, Rohatyn's Star Dims Among His Old Fans
LEAD: In New York City, certain word associations are inevitable: bagels, lox; Russian, Tea Room; fiscal crisis, Felix G. Rohatyn.
As the city once again faces economic hard times, the eminent investment banker's predictions (dire) and remedies (bitter) have returned him to center stage.
As one former City Hall official put it, somewhat sourly, ''The cat is back.


Q&amp;A


New Dow Jones Chief Has an Impish Streak
LEAD: Over his lengthy career at Dow Jones &amp; Company, Peter R. Kann has made a lot of mischief, and he just hasn't been able to help it.


Thomas F. Brigance Dies at 70; Designed Sophisticated Swimwear
LEAD: Thomas Franklin Brigance, a sportswear and swimwear designer for four decades, died on Sunday in his Manhattan apartment.
He was 77 years old.


Meat Stolen at Soup Kitchen
LEAD: Thieves broke into the Community Soup Kitchen on Monday night and stole 120 pounds of roast beef that was meant to feed lunch to more than 250 poor people. ''Stealing food from a soup kitchen,'' said William A. Sherry, a member of the soup kitchen's board. ''How low can you get?'' But the robbers left behind a small blessing.


Currents; From Styles To Storeful Of Diversity


Bridge


Now Reverse the Trend of Nullifying the Death Penalty


MacMillan Bloedel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MacMillan Bloedel (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
719,400,000
818,000,000
Net inc
6,200,000
65,400,000
Share earns
.03
.60
9mo sales
2,307,600,000
2,487,000,000
Net inc
65,000,000
207,100,000
Share earns
.54
1.92


'Productivity Gain' in Pact With Teachers Is Optional
LEAD: A concession won by the New York City Board of Education in its contract with the teachers union - a speedier system for disciplining teachers - is not compulsory, officials have acknowledged.
It is an option that teachers can choose.


Talking Deals;   Utility Merger Hits an Obstacle
LEAD: AN agreement to take the Public Service Company of New Hampshire out of bankruptcy by merging it with another utility has hit a snag, with longtime opponents of Public Service and its troubled Seabrook nuclear plant saying they have found a way to scuttle the arrangement.


House Openly Debates C.I.A. Aid in Angola
LEAD: The House conducted a rare and bitter public debate today over a major Central Intelligence Agency program as critics of American-backed guerrillas in Angola sought unsuccessfully to end the agency's $60 million in annual support for the rebels.


Brazil Comes Clean About Its Bomb


Stocks Close Mostly Lower; Dow Up 6.68
LEAD: Nervousness over quarterly earnings, conflicting news on the Persian Gulf and the budget impasse combined yesterday to drive stock prices through a choppy day.


HomeFed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* HomeFed Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,857,000
23,914,000
Per share
.09
1.10
9mo net loss
71,787,000
b82,520,000
Per share
-
3.82
b-Net income


Worthen Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Worthen Banking Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,329,000
2,805,000
Per share
.49
.26
9mo net inc
14,552,000
7,045,000
Per share
1.33
.64


Home Building Off 8th Month in Row
LEAD: Construction of new homes fell in September for the eighth straight month, the Commerce Department said today.
The slide is the longest in more than 30 years, as activity slowed to a recession-era pace.


Cambodia Troupe's Star Dancer Stays in U.S.
LEAD: The star performer in a Cambodian dance troupe decided yesterday to stay in the United States after discussions with the State Department and the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
But 31 other members of the group left John F. Kennedy Airport to return to Phnom Penh.


Accord on Military Would Curb 'Star Wars' and Stealth Bomber
LEAD: House and Senate negotiators today approved a $288 billion military budget for the 1991 fiscal year that limits financing for the Stealth bomber and cuts nearly $2 billion from the Bush Administration's request for the ''Star Wars'' program.


Square D Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Square D Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
428,575,000
403,533,000
Net inc
31,914,000
c30,729,000
Share earns
1.30
1.24
Shares outst
23,269,000
25,074,000
9mo sales
1,223,599,000
1,213,569,000
Net inc
b93,255,000
c90,530,000
Share earns
3.80
3.61
Shares outst
23,269,000
25,074,000


Citizens Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
7,500,000
7,800,000
Per share
.53
.57
9mo net inc
22,820,000
25,194,000
Per share
1.59
1.74


A Fullback Grows in Florida


VIRGINIA EXECUTES KILLER OF DEPUTY
LEAD: The killer of a sheriff's deputy was executed in Virginia tonight after the United States Supreme Court denied a stay and Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder declined a request for clemency.


How House Voted on a Plan By Democrats to Cut Deficit
LEAD: Following is the roll-call vote of 227 to 203 by which the House of Representatives on Tuesday approved a Democratic deficit-reduction plan.
A ''yes'' vote is a vote to pass the bill.
Voting ''yes'' were 217 Democrats and 10 Republicans.
Voting ''no'' were 40 Democrats and 163 Republicans.
X denotes those not voting.


Keystone Consolidated Ind reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Consolidated Ind (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
71,366,000
70,539,000
Net inc
b3,062,000
c2,290,000
Share earns
.54
.41
9mo sales
237,431,000
230,487,000
Net inc
b16,164,000
c9,303,000
Share earns
2.87
1.69


National Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Commerce Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,514,000
6,003,000
Per share
.62
.57
Shares outst
10,509,000
10,571,000
9mo net inc
18,521,000
16,871,000
Per share
1.76
1.60
Shares outst
10,505,000
10,558,000


Putnam Trust Co. of GreenFwich reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Putnam Trust Co. of GreenFwich
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,130,000
876,000
Per share
.39
.31
Shares outst
2,882,000
2,870,000
9mo net inc
3,391,000
3,174,000
Per share
1.18
1.11
Shares outst
2,878,000
2,866,000


Vietnam Agrees to Expand Efforts on U.S. Missing
LEAD: The Vietnamese Foreign Minister agreed today to expand efforts to identify and return to the United States the remains of American servicemen still unaccounted for after the Vietnam War, moving the United States and Vietnam a step closer to normal diplomatic relations.


Sumitomo Bank of Calif.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sumitomo Bank of Calif.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
11,700,000
8,960,000
Per share
1.42
1.09
9mo net inc
32,580,000
24,640,000
Per share
3.96
3.23


1st Bancorp (Ind) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* 1st Bancorp (Ind)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
202,000
84,000
Share earns
.52
.22


Reds Stun A's Again, Winning in 10 for 2-0 Lead


House Approves Pact Relaxing Czech Trade
LEAD: The House tonight unanimously approved a trade agreement between the United States and Czechoslovakia that would reduce tariffs and increase business ties and tourism between the two countries.


Summit Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summit Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
33,010,000
b20,624,000
Per share
-
1.03
9mo net loss
13,919,000
bc31,684,000
Per share
-
1.55
b-Net income
c-Included accounting change that reduced net income by $9,226,000, or 47 cents a share.


RESULTS PLUS


Hawaiian Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawaiian Electric (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
243,549,000
240,039,000
Net inc
16,597,000
18,598,000
Share earns
.77
.88
9mo rev
735,311,000
657,008,000
Net inc
41,723,000
50,949,000
Share earns
1.94
2.44


Judge Declines To Raise Fines Against Nassau
LEAD: A Federal judge today declined a Federal Government request that he find Nassau County in contempt or increase the penalties it must pay for violating an agreement to build a sewage-sludge treatment plant by the end of 1991.


Reserve Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Reserve Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1990
1989
Revenue
2,342,775
2,265,304
Net loss
348,036
b318,045
Share earns
-
.16
Shares outst
2,050,669
1,986,465
9mo rev
7,028,102
7,175,205
Net loss
398,747
b759,818
Share earns
-
.38


First Citizens Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Citizens Bancshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
8,108,000
7,128,000
Per share
.87
.75
9mo net inc
23,183,000
20,619,000
Per share
2.49
2.17


CCB Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CCB Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,195,000
5,583,000
Per share
1.02
1.11
9mo net inc
15,217,000
15,886,000
Per share
3.00
3.16


Smith Corona Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Smith Corona Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
118,700,000
152,200,000
Net inc
6,700,000
16,300,000
Share earns
.22
.54


NCNB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NCNB Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
56,973,000
143,584,000
Per share
.51
1.45
Shares outst
101,862,000
95,730,000
9mo net inc
334,459,000
310,910,000
Per share
3.15
3.30
Shares outst
101,566,000
89,617,000


Prime Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Prime Bancshares Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
520,000
608,000
Per share
.30
.35
9mo net inc
1,600,000
1,300,000
Per share
.95
-
Share earnings are not shown for year-ago 9-month period; the bank converted from mutual to stock ownership in July 1989.


BSD Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BSD Bancorp Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,157,000
c1,056,000
Per share
.31
.30
9mo net inc
b3,426,000
c2,550,000
Per share
.92
.73
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $52,000, or 1 cent a share.


Technitrol Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Technitrol Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
20,231,000
21,397,000
Net inc
937,000
1,533,000
Share earns
.47
.78
Shares outst
1,978,053
1,966,193
9mo sales
66,160,000
70,188,000
Net inc
3,967,000
5,627,000
Share earns
2.01
2.86
Shares outst
1,978,053
1,966,193


Bo Jackson Back With Raiders


P.L.O. Alone and Troubled After Its Efforts in Gulf Fail
LEAD: Ten weeks after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the Palestine Liberation Organization is in turmoil, unable to show any results for its mediation effort, isolated from Western governments and its former Persian Gulf benefactors and angry over new violence against its followers in the Israeli-occupied territories.


Review/Theater; Passing the Troubles To the Younger Irish


Halloween Chic: Venetian Masks And Pretty Faces


Oil Prices Tumble $2.17, To Below $37
LEAD: Oil prices tumbled yesterday as the stalemate continued in the Persian Gulf.
The decline occurred despite a report that the nation's oil inventories were falling.


Critic's Notebook; Presidential Popularity And the Role Of the Media


Kent Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kent Electronics Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1990
1989
Sales
17,735,000
11,540,000
Net inc
932,000
715,000
Share earns
.23
.19
6mo sales
33,628,000
21,693,000
Net inc
1,837,000
1,373,000
Share earns
.46
.37


Paper Maker Posts Decline
LEAD: The Georgia-Pacific Corporation said today that its third-quarter profits dropped 46.6 percent as its interest expense soared and its building products business weakened.


Hawkeye Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hawkeye Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,927,000
5,191,000
Per share
.40
.42
9mo net inc
14,782,000
14,611,000
Per share
1.20
1.18


Stanley Works reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stanley Works (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1990
1989
Sales
492,300,000
487,700,000
Net inc
b27,700,000
c29,000,000
Share earns
.65
.65
Shares outst
42,119,000
44,338,000
9mo sales
1,475,300,000
1,459,800,000
Net inc
b80,800,000
c84,400,000
Share earns
1.90
1.94
Shares outst
42,400,000
43,401,000


Kaman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kaman Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
203,347,000
190,163,000
Net inc
4,906,000
bc10,501,000
Share earns
.27
-
9mo rev
614,276,000
597,822,000
Net inc
14,010,000
c3,225,000
Share earns
.77
.18
b-Net loss


President Is Appointed By Nycom Information
LEAD: Steven G. Chrust, a former Wall Street analyst of telecommunications stocks, was named president of Nycom Information Services Inc. yesterday.


Navajo Leader Is Guilty In a Tribal Bribery Trial
LEAD: Peter MacDonald Sr., the suspended leader of the Navajo Nation, the country's largest Indian tribe, was found guilty today in Navajo tribal court on 41 of 42 counts of accepting bribes, violating the tribe's ethics laws and conspiracy.


Great Country Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Country Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1990
1989
Net loss
908,000
4,021,000


Tougher Policy in Effect


NCNB's Net Tumbles 60.3%
LEAD: The NCNB Corporation today reported sharply lower third-quarter earnings, citing problem loans and deterioration in the economy.


First Tennessee National reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Tennessee National (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
14,942,000
14,066,000
Per share
.94
.89
9mo net inc
34,603,000
16,033,000
Per share
2.17
1.01


Terzian's Knee Injured


Paul W. Bell, School Superintendent, 57
LEAD: Paul W. Bell, superintendent of the Dade County public schools for the last seven months, died of heart failure Tuesday at Baptist Hospital.
He was 57 years old.


Hako Minuteman Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hako Minuteman Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,852,000
8,003,000
Net inc
607,000
727,000
Share earns
.17
.20
9mo sales
23,073,000
24,754,000
Net inc
1,749,000
2,331,000
Share earns
.48
.64


Review/Theater; Some New Barbs From Jackie Mason


Republic New York Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic New York Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
54,700,000
b155,400,000
Per share
1.43
-
9mo net inc
151,800,000
b69,800,000
Per share
4.17
-
b-Net loss


Berkeley Journal;   All Clowns? This Candidate Really Is
LEAD: The candidate for City Council in Berkeley's Fifth District gives red rubber noses to campaign donors, organizes children's juggling workshops rather than the usual get-out-the-vote events and chides his opponent because she ''hasn't been to jail once.''


Why Puerto Ricans Want Statehood


Philadelphia Utility Awards 2 Offerings
LEAD: The Philadelphia Electric Company priced $200 million in first and refunding mortgage bonds yesterday in two separate transactions through competitive bidding.


Branford Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Branford Savings
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
7,972,000
b250,000
Share earns
-
.16
9mo net loss
7,765,000
b1,365,000
Share earns
-
.88
b-Net income
Latest quarter included a special addition of $8.7 million to the company's loan loss reserve.


Money-Fund Yields Down
LEAD: Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were down for the week that ended yesterday.


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Gas &amp; Electric (NYSE)
12mos Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,164,777,000
8,485,124,000
Net inc
873,781,000
336,009,000
Share earns
1.82
.56
Shares outst
425,838,000
416,413,000


Earnings at AMR Fell 52.1% in Third Quarter
LEAD: The AMR Corporation, parent of American Airlines, reported yesterday that third-quarter earnings fell 52.1 percent.


Dollar Plunges Against Yen; Gold Prices Move Higher
LEAD: The dollar fell sharply against the Japanese yen yesterday and finished mixed against other leading currencies in busy trading.


Northrop Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Northrop Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,277,400,000
1,245,600,000
Net inc
42,400,000
21,500,000
Share earns
.90
.46
9mo sales
3,968,700,000
3,923,400,000
Net inc
167,700,000
b46,900,000
Share earns
3.57
-


Nobels Given in Physics and Chemistry
LEAD: The Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded yesterday to two scientists from the United States and one from Canada whose experiments confirmed the existence of quarks, tiny packets of energy that are fundamental building blocks of all matter.
An American was also awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for developing new ways to synthesize complex molecules ordinarily found only in nature.


Tax Or Spend?


Notes Are Priced By Export Lender
LEAD: The Private Export Funding Corporation, which makes medium- and long-term loans to foreign companies so they can finance purchases of United States manufactured goods and services, yesterday priced $100 million in secured notes, due 1997, through underwriters led by J. P. Morgan Securities Inc.


Review/Concert; A Soviet Violist Stars With Bow and Baton


Vote in House on Legislation to Combat Job Discrimination
LEAD: Following is the roll-call vote of 273 to 154 by which the House of Representatives today approved a civil rights bill to combat job discrimination.
A ''yes'' vote is a vote for the bill.
Voting yes were 239 Democrats and 34 Republicans.
Voting no were 15 Democrats and 139 Republicans.
X denotes those not voting.


EVOLUTION IN EUROPE: Soviet Plan in the Middle;   With His Caution on Economy, Gorbachev May Find Political Center Is a Whirlwind
LEAD: Since late July, when President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Boris N. Yeltsin agreed to join forces in devising an economic program, hopes have soared for a grand political coalition that would lead this country peacefully away from the brink of chaos.


New Rule On Benefits Approved
LEAD: In a move that financial experts say will eventually slash millions of dollars from corporate earnings, the board that makes the nation's accounting rules voted yesterday to require employers to subtract from each year's earnings reports a portion of the costs of the health benefits that they have promised to future retirees.


Arlen Goldberg Is Wed to Miss Kramer


Market Place;   The Merc's New Nikkei Futures
LEAD: THE Chicago Mercantile Exchange, in its latest bid to provide the broadest array of tools to help investors control risk, introduced a new futures contract last month based on the level of the Japanese stock market.
Market professionals say the new contract could be a welcome addition to the investment scene given the increasing amount of investment in Japanese stocks by institutional investors in this country.


PDA Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PDA Engineering (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,150,000
6,487,000
Net inc
416,000
339,000
Share earns
.09
.08
Shares outst
4,575,000
4,244,000


Daisy Wilson Cave, The Last Surviving Confederate Widow
LEAD: Daisy Wilson Cave, the last known Confederate widow of the Civil War, died Saturday at a nursing home here.
She was estimated to have been 97 to 105 years old.


Supporters Vow To Save Compromise On Arts Endowment


Bancorp of Mississippi reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp of Mississippi (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,844,000
3,186,000
Per share
.81
.66
9mo net inc
10,419,000
9,623,000
Per share
2.18
2.01


Snap-On Tools Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Snap-On Tools Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1990
1989
Sales
227,889,000
212,577,000
Net inc
25,210,000
23,351,000
Share earns
.61
.57
Shares outst
41,187,000
41,015,000
9mo sales
707,755,000
271,117,000
Net inc
83,493,000
82,036,000
Share earns
2.03
2.00
Shares outst
41,187,000
41,015,000


Grand Valley Gas Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grand Valley Gas Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1990
1989
Revenue
16,145,423
21,840,330
Net inc
617,548
417,154
Share earns
.10
.07


Hotelecopy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hotelecopy Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,410,000
1,498,000
Net loss
342,000
b212,000
Share earns
-
.21
b-Net income


An Old Tax on the Upper Income Takes Center Stage
LEAD: As Congress works over the tax code in its rush to complete a budget agreement, a provision of current law called the alternative minimum tax is a favored target of opportunity among lawmakers who would give the very wealthy a big tax break and lawmakers who would slap them with a big new tax.


Life Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Life Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
38,222,000
32,129,000
Net inc
3,569,000
3,218,000
Share earns
.26
.24
Shares outst
13,894,000
13,586,000
9mo rev
111,942,000
101,587,000
Net inc
10,519,000
9,916,000
Share earns
.77
.73
Shares outst
13,720,000
13,611,000


Expansion Is Not Taken Lightly


People's Savings Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* People's Savings Financial
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
234,000
699,000
Per share
.12
.28
9mo net inc
1,592,000
2,042,000
Per share
.77
.84


Fox Stations Will Buy Warner Cartoons
LEAD: Affiliates of the Fox network said today that they had agreed to buy three new cartoon programs from the Warner Brothers studio.
Industry executives said the deal would provide added competition to the Walt Disney Company in the fast-growing market for children's afternoon television shows.


First Federal Savings Bank of Tennessee reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal Savings Bank of Tennessee
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
247,200
288,118
Per share
.48
.56


3 SENATORS MADE EXTREME EFFORTS FOR S.&amp; L. FIGURE
LEAD: Three United States Senators made extraordinary efforts to help Charles H. Keating Jr. protect his failing savings and loan institution and had more frequent contact with him over a longer period than had been thought, documents being examined by the Senate Ethics Committee show.


Conferees Back Stiff Curbs on Chemical Emissions
LEAD: Leaders of the House-Senate conference committee that is rewriting the Clean Air Act moved a step closer to a final package today when they agreed on new requirements for reducing emissions of toxic chemicals from chemical plants, coke ovens, incinerators and other industrial polluters.


Lattice Semiconductor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lattice Semiconductor Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 29
1990
1989
Revenue
18,025,000
8,434,000
Net inc
3,307,000
1,320,000
Share earns
.29
.17
Shares outst
11,402,000
7,629,000
6mo rev
34,636,000
15,542,000
Net inc
6,219,000
2,228,000
Share earns
.57
.29
Shares outst
10,919,000
7,619,000


First Bank System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Bank System Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
35,300,000
b6,100,000
Per share
.39
.01
9mo net inc
93,700,000
b109,400,000
Per share
1.14
1.54
b-Included a restructuring charge of $37.5 million for the quarter and 9 months.


Nothing, and Nobody, Can Save the Athletics


Civil Rights Bill Clears House
LEAD: The House approved a bill to fight job discrimination.
The measure now goes to President Bush, who has threatened to veto it.
Page D25.


Standard Pacific L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Pacific L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
90,136,000
132,139,000
Net inc
9,233,000
20,601,000
Per unit
.34
.75
Units outst
27,140,453
27,234,191
9mo rev
300,036,000
315,076,000
Net inc
44,824,000
b70,281,000
Per unit
1.63
2.56
Units outst
27,159,812
27,229,973


CFSB Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CFSB Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
578,000
b2,387,000
Per share
.36
-
9mo net inc
1,147,000
b3,678,000
b-Net loss
Per share information is only available for the current quarter since CFSB converted from mutual to stock form on June 22.


One Year Later, Bay Fans Still Can't Forget 5:04 P.M.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
The board that makes the nation's accounting rules voted to proceed with requirements for employers to state on earnings reports the costs of health benefits promised to retirees. [Page D1.]
Bush decided to let a bill that limits commercials on children's television programs become law without his signature.


Talks by I.B.M. and Motorola On Advanced Chip Collapse
LEAD: Negotiations between Motorola Inc. and the I.B.M.
Corporation to license the computer maker's most advanced memory-chip technology have collapsed, dashing some people's hopes of an American alliance that would strengthen the nation's semiconductor industry.


Society for Savings Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Society for Savings Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
3,554,000
b9,067,000
Per share
-
.76
9mo net inc
2,407,000
40,728,000
Per share
.20
3.42
b-Net income


Great Lakes Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Lakes Chemical (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
268,108,000
228,708,000
Net inc
35,429,000
31,655,000
Share earns
1.01
.90
9mo rev
776,944,000
566,130,000
Net inc
104,272,000
91,461,000
Share earns
2.97
2.62


Illinois Central Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Illinois Central Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
130,300,000
125,800,000
Net inc
8,900,000
b1,000,000
Share earns
.37
-
9mo rev
416,200,000
-
Net inc
33,800,000
-
Share earns
1.43
-
b-Net loss


Dinkins's Latino Chief, Feeling Stymied, Quits
LEAD: The director of the city's Office of Latino Affairs resigned yesterday, saying he could not continue in the $65,000-a-year job because it did not come with enough access to the Mayor.


Imperial Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imperial Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,808,000
6,589,000
Per share
.64
.62
Shares outst
10,615,418
10,649,445
9mo net inc
19,144,000
17,778,000
Per share
1.80
1.68
Shares outst
10,652,408
10,592,785


Maytag Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Maytag Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
781,430,000
796,459,000
Net inc
22,915,000
29,304,000
Share earns
.22
.28
Shares outst
105,598,000
106,117,000
9mo sales
2,332,034,000
2,288,577,000
Net inc
85,975,000
91,656,000
Share earns
.81
.89
Shares outst
105,606,000
103,075,000


Ameriana Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ameriana Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
637,000
572,000
Per share
.34
.30
9mo net inc
1,922,000
1,634,000
Per share
1.01
.86


United Technologies Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Technologies Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,346,300,000
4,750,300,000
Net inc
b239,800,000
196,700,000
Share earns
1.90
1.46
Shares outst
121,189,000
129,439,000
9mo rev
15,837,600,000
14,479,500,000
Net inc
581,800,000
517,700,000
Share earns
4.59
3.91
Shares outst
120,767,000
130,475,000


Milwaukee Woman Missing From Prison Is Seized in Canada
LEAD: Milwaukee's most celebrated killer and fugitive, Lawrencia (Bambi) Bembenek, was arrested here today, ending three months of freedom with the fiance she met in prison.


Washington Mutual Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Mutual Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
b32,548,000
c7,329,000
Per share
-
.45
9mo net loss
b13,822,000
c19,636,000
Per share
-
1.27
b-After a special provision of $45.7 million for the quarter and 9 months, representing a change in reserving methodology, net of taxes.


Ads Aimed At Children Restricted
LEAD: President Bush decided today to let a bill that limits television commercials on children's programming become law without his signature.
He withheld his official seal of approval because of First Amendment concerns.


Alaska Is Top Oil State
LEAD: Alaska has surged ahead of Texas as the nation's leading oil producer, topping the two million barrels-a-day mark for the first time since Prudhoe Bay production began to decline in 1988, state officials said this week.
Texas, with daily output of 1.7 million barrels, is now the No. 2 producer.
Last summer, Alaska's crude oil production dropped to a low of 1.6 million barrels a day.


BUDGET MEASURE CLEARS 2 HURDLES IN SENATE VOTES
LEAD: After Senate leaders from both parties struggled all day to line up votes, their budget package passed its first critical tests late tonight.


Mr. Dinkins Faces Fiscal Reality


Bancorp Hawaii reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bancorp Hawaii (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
24,895,000
21,054,000
Per share
1.38
1.29
9mo net inc
70,347,000
58,724,000
Per share
4.12
3.64
The latest quarter and 9 months' results reflected the acquisition of Firstfed America Inc.


Support Groups May Do More in Cancer Than Relieve the Mind
LEAD: Psychological support not only helps cancer patients deal with the emotional distress of their illness but may also strengthen their immune systems, new studies suggest.


Vatican Approves 2 Married Priests in Brazil
LEAD: A Roman Catholic Cardinal attending the worldwide synod of bishops has disclosed that two married men in Brazil became priests with papal approval.


Currents; Signs of the Other 90's


Cervical Cancer Linked To Smoking in a Study
LEAD: Cigarette smoking has emerged as a powerful influence in the development of cervical cancer as well as distorted cells that are precursors of malignancy, researchers say.


Dr. Death and His Wonderful Machine


Union Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Pacific Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,853,000,000
1,579,000,000
Net inc
161,000,000
137,000,000
Share earns
1.61
1.35
9mo rev
5,363,000,000
4,754,000,000
Net inc
442,000,000
428,000,000
Share earns
4.41
3.98
Shares outst
100,300,000
107,400,000


Germans Puzzle Over Defeat of Kohl's Foes
LEAD: The overwhelming victory of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Party on Sunday in the former East German part of the country has raised questions about why the Social Democrats did so badly in what was considered a leftist stronghold.


Home Improvement


Profits Up at Bristol-Myers
LEAD: The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company said yesterday that it had record sales and earnings in the three months that ended on Sept. 30.


Trouble or a Challenge? The Whitney and Its Image


Ukraine Bows to Student Protests On Charter Backing Sovereignty
LEAD: The Ukrainian Parliament bowed to protests by students today and voted to adopt a new constitution to support the Soviet republic's declaration of sovereignty.


A Housing Solution


Hard Cash Talks Loudly in Land of Grumbles
LEAD: Redoubtable Muscovites bored with the Kremlin's agonizing over economic reform are taking their forbidden dollars out of hiding and openly putting their money on the free market at hard-currency stores long restricted to the city's Western residents.


In Saudi Arabia, a Regiment Digs In, and Waits


Another Worry for Baghdad: Kurdish Nationalists at the Back Door
LEAD: As President Saddam Hussein masses troops in Kuwait and southern Iraq, Iraqi security commanders are watching for fresh signs of dissent and rebellion on the country's vulnerable northern flank, in the deserts and valleys of Kurdistan.


CHRONICLE


Investor Acquires 9.6% of Worthen
LEAD: Abdullah Taha Bakhsh, a Saudi Arabian investor, has acquired a 9.6 percent stake in the Worthen Banking Corporation, a bank holding company based in Little Rock, Ark.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr.
Bakhsh said he had purchased the Worthen stock only as an investment.
Curt Bradbury, Worthen's chairman and chief executive, said he welcomed Mr.


Philip Morris Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Philip Morris Cos. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
12,818,000,000
11,086,000,000
Net inc
937,000,000
748,000,000
Share earns
1.01
.81
Shares outst
925,000,000
927,000,000
9mo rev
36,946,000,000
33,116,000,000
Net inc
2,660,000,000
2,083,000,000
Share earns
2.88
2.25
Shares outst
925,000,000
926,000,000


Orange Juice Contracts Skid After Brazilians Cut Prices
LEAD: Orange juice futures prices dropped to new four-year lows yesterday amid speculation that Brazilian processers would dump more frozen concentrate onto the United States market in a shakeout stemming from a large Florida crop forecast.


Old Spaghetti Warehouse reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Old Spaghetti Warehouse (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 29
1990
1989
Revenue
10,255,169
8,306,885
Net inc
791,218
569,448
Share earns
.24
.23


He Took The Journal in New Directions
LEAD: Slim, dapper and understated, Warren H. Phillips presided for 33 years over a sharp expansion of both The Wall Street Journal and its parent, Dow Jones &amp; Company, while insisting that the company remain true to the principles with which the newspaper was founded 101 years ago.


Silvana Darlington Weds R. W. Safrin


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
6.50
7.93
8.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.19
7.17
7.51
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.21
7.20
7.53
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.60
8.60
8.01
30-YR.


Mr. Lincoln's Side In Budget Conflict


HDM Campaign Fights Crime in New York City
LEAD: HDM New York has joined New York City's aggressive war on crime with a pro bono campaign for Crime Stoppers.
It represents the New York City Police Department and Police Foundation's latest attempt to take on the silence of crime witnesses.


Metro Matters;   Cuomo Tactics: Avoiding Curse Of Incumbency
LEAD: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York is defying the odds against incumbents this year because: (a) - Republicans miscalculated by presuming that he was invulnerable. (b) - Even after serving for 15 years in state government, he manages to be regarded as a political outsider. (c) - The anti-incumbent tide may be greatly exaggerated.


Ashton-Tate Has a Profit
LEAD: The Ashton-Tate Corporation, a computer software company based in Torrance, Calif, said today that it had returned to profitability after a long string of losses.


Oregon Metallurgical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oregon Metallurgical (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
23,946,000
30,062,000
Net inc
2,340,000
3,329,000
Share earns
.22
.36
Shares outst
10,465,000
9,320,000
9mo sales
73,271,000
86,971,000
Net inc
7,247,000
b23,318,000
Share earns
.69
2.50
Shares outst
10,452,000
9,313,000


Wheelabrator Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wheelabrator Technologies (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
301,700,000
234,700,000
Net loss
b115,300,000
c15,600,000
Share earns
-
.40
9mo rev
853,300,000
715,900,000
Net loss
b82,500,000
c42,200,000
Share earns
-
1.09


House Passes Rights Bill on Job Bias; White House Vows Veto
LEAD: The House of Representatives today gave final passage to a civil rights bill intended to fight job discrimination, setting the stage for a confrontation with President Bush, whose veto threat leaves him in a political bind less than three weeks before the Congressional elections.


Fleet/Norstar Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fleet/Norstar Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
38,458,000
96,392,000
Per share
.33
.86
9mo net inc
434,000
278,978,000
Per share
-
2.51


2 Sooners Convicted


Union Pacific's Profit Up 17.5%
LEAD: The Union Pacific Corporation reported a 17.5 percent increase today in its third-quarter profit, spurred by record volume on its railroad subsidiary.


Cooks to Replace Injured Banks


Review/Dance; Energetic as Usual, Works by Molissa Fenley


Illinois Tool Works reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Illinois Tool Works (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
647,275,000
546,924,000
Net inc
46,212,000
40,887,000
Share earns
.84
.76
9mo rev
1,867,580,000
1,613,544,000
Net inc
136,708,000
122,319,000
Share earns
2.52
2.29
Shares outst
54,782,000
53,616,000


Washington Water Power Co. reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Washington Water Power Co. (NYSE)
12mos Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
549,133,000
506,439,000
Net inc
b89,541,000
c72,905,000
Share earns
3.54
2.74
Shares outst
22,658,000
22,316,000
b-Included $13,465,000 gain on disposal of discontinued operations as well as income from discontinued operations of $2,892,000, or 72 cents a share.


Shelton Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Shelton Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
265,000
287,000
Per share
.24
.25


In Connecticut, A Big Silence On Prison Crisis
LEAD: Detailed proposals about crime and punishment have been few and far between in Connecticut's race for governor.
Many people inside the state's overwhelmed criminal-justice system say the relative silence has raised the level of campaign honesty.


C&amp;S/Sovran Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* C&amp;S/Sovran Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
33,911,000
130,661,000
Per share
.23
.94
Shares outst
132,968,000
135,454,000
9mo net inc
221,931,000
374,367,000
Per share
1.59
2.71
Shares outst
132,814,000
135,218,000


Great Bay Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Bay Bankshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
2,029,000
b1,091,000
Per share
-
.35
Shares outst
2,735,890
3,160,547
b-Net income


Faldo Is Honored


Tin Ceilings: Not Gone or Forgotten


10-Year-Old Bronx Girl Is Found Dead a Week After Disappearing
LEAD: The weeklong search for Jessica Guzman, a 10-year-old Bronx girl whose disappearance mobilized hundreds of people in her crime-ridden neighborhood, ended yesterday along the Bronx River Parkway.
A passing parks worker found her body there in a stand of trees.


ABC Plans to Close 3 U.S News Bureaus


Signet Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Signet Banking Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,500,000
27,800,000
Per share
.17
1.04
9mo net inc
34,600,000
90,600,000
Per share
1.30
3.33


United Technologies Up
LEAD: The United Technologies Corporation said today that net income in the third quarter rose 22 percent, thanks in large part to a $46.5 million gain from the sale of its majority interest in two Italian automotive companies, Diavia and Aura.
Without the gain, earnings would have risen 7.5 percent.
Net earnings for the third quarter totaled $239.8 million, or $1.90 a share, on revenues of $5.3 billion, compared with earnings of $196.7 million, or $1.46 a share, on revenues of $4.8 billion in the same period last year.


Grove Bank for Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grove Bank for Savings
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
147,000
360,000
Per share
.10
.24
9mo net inc
578,000
1,284,000
Per share
.39
.87


Stone &amp; Webster Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stone &amp; Webster Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
62,857,000
74,721,000
Net inc
b673,000
c6,245,000
Share earns
.05
.42
Shares outst
15,122,000
15,142,000
9mo rev
198,595,000
221,766,000
Net inc
b6,910,000
c19,218,000
Share earns
.46
1.27
Shares outst
15,138,000
15,164,000


Superior Surgical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Superior Surgical (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
28,071,450
26,927,796
Net inc
1,927,349
1,723,379
Share earns
.89
.76
9mo sales
90,674,448
85,452,907
Net inc
6,311,366
5,180,083
Share earns
2.90
2.28


Rangers Win With Two in 3d


5 Senators Agree on Futures Trading
LEAD: After two months of negotiations, five key Senators agreed to a compromise proposal today that would allow the Commodity Futures Trading Commission to retain control over futures trading but give the Federal Reserve Board authority to set margins on trades.


Review/Music; Susan Palma, a Flutist Who Spans Many Idioms


What Children Need


Agency's Flaws Linked to Extinction of Endangered Species
LEAD: An internal investigation by the Interior Department has found that the Government's program to protect endangered animals is so mismanaged that hundreds of threatened species face extinction without any Federal effort to save them.


Personal Health
LEAD: It is the rare child who does not know that brushing one's teeth every day is an essential part of dental health, and most nights most children probably do brush their teeth before going to bed.


Pittsburgh &amp; West Virginia Railroad reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pittsburgh &amp; West Virginia Railroad
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
229,000
229,000
Net inc
211,000
211,000
Share earns
.14
.14
9mo rev
688,000
690,000
Net inc
627,000
627,000
Share earns
.42
.42


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Shared responsibility for war is what the Founding Fathers intended.''
- Senator Claiborne Pell, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
[A12:4.]


Maurice Chambers, Shoe Executive, 74, Is Dead After Stroke
LEAD: Maurice R. Chambers, a retired shoe manufacturing executive, died Sunday at Bethesda-Dilworth Memorial Hall in St.
Louis.
He was 74 years old and lived in St.
Louis.


Republic Health Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Republic Health Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1990
1989
Revenue
117,542,000
112,325,000
Net inc
1,419,000
c24,355,000
Share earns
.24
-
Yr rev
481,254,000
466,591,000
Net loss
b101,245,000
69,620,000
b-Included non-recurring charges of $80,544,000, which included losses of $74,299,000 related to the sale and anticipated sales of certain facilities, and $6,245,000 associated with Republic Health's recapitalization.


Critic's Notebook; Cincinnati Trial's Unanswered Question


In Legal Moves, Battered Community Wins Bank's Aid
LEAD: For years, many of the people of East Harlem have deposited their money in the Banco de Ponce branch on 116th Street.
Now, some of them say, their battered community's commitment to the bank will finally be returned.


Payco American Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Payco American Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
559,000,000
540,000,000
Net inc
1,488,000
1,100,000
Share earns
.15
.11
9mo rev
1,882,000,000
1,647,000,000
Net inc
4,335,000
3,214,000
Share earns
.43
.32
Revenue represents accounts received for collection.


U.S. Sealift Deficiencies Exposed in Gulf Crisis


Bunnies Diaper Maker To End Benefit Claim
LEAD: New York and nine other states reached an agreement with American Enviro Products Inc., makers of Bunnies Biodegradable Disposable Diapers, in which the company will stop its advertising claims that the product benefits the environment.
The company will also pay a $50,000 penalty and has created a product that is less harmful to the environment because it is lighter and would take up less room in a landfill, said Edward Barbini, a spokesman for New York's Attorney General, Robert


TUTU TO CONVENE A BLACK SUMMIT
LEAD: Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu announced today that he would convene an urgent meeting of leaders of South African black political groups to develop unity among competing factions and coordinate their strategy for negotiations with the white minority Government.


U.S. Output Climbed 0.2% In September
LEAD: Industrial production rose two-tenths of 1 percent in September, the Government reported today, with a 7.5 percent spurt in automobile production masking an underlying manufacturing weakness.


Pancho's Mexican Buffet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pancho's Mexican Buffet Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
19,291,000
17,955,000
Net inc
910,000
712,000
Share earns
.21
.15
Shares outst
4,326,000
4,885,000
Yr sales
71,305,000
65,970,000
Net inc
2,620,000
3,050,000
Share earns
.57
.63
Shares outst
4,599,000
4,875,000


Stricken Children's Medicine: Circus


Vitran Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vitran Corp.
Qtr to Aug 31
1990
1989
Revenue
25,600,000
22,200,000
Net inc
203,000
c169,000
Share earns
.04
.03
9mo rev
79,300,000
46,500,000
Net inc
b2,330,000
c745,000
Share earns
.42
.13
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $517,000, or 9 cents a share, from gains on the sale of property.


Computer Package Offered by NCR
LEAD: The NCR Corporation has unveiled a package of products designed to allow computers to be tied together more easily.
NCR billed the ''networking'' products as the third stage of the rollout of its new computing strategy.


National Health Labs reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Health Labs (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
126,000,000
100,900,000
Net inc
20,200,000
14,900,000
Share earns
.20
.15
Shares outst
99,066,000
99,000,000
9mo sales
375,500,000
294,700,000
Net inc
61,600,000
47,800,000
Share earns
.62
.48
Shares outst
99,042,204
99,000,000


U.S. Sealift Deficiencies Exposed in Gulf Crisis; Mariners' 'Road Test'


Avery-Dennison Merger Approved
LEAD: The United States Justice Department has approved a $300 million merger between the office supply companies Avery International and Dennison Manufacturing.
The merger is expected to increase the annual revenue of the companies, which have been suffering from depressed earnings.
Avery's chairman and chief executive, Charles D.


Gilbert Sherman, Dentist, 83
LEAD: Dr.
Gilbert Sherman, a retired dentist and a former dental director of the Nassau County Departments of Health and of Social Welfare, died on Saturday at Morristown Memorial Hospital in Morristown, N.J.
He was 83 years old and lived in Madison, N.J., and in Pompano Beach, Fla.


CHRONICLE


Germantown Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Germantown Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b2,414,000
c2,340,000
Per share
.60
.58
9mo net inc
b10,038,000
c6,775,000
Per share
2.49
1.68
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $434,000, or 11 cents a share, for the quarter and $2,380,000, or 59 cents a share, for the 9 months.


D.H., as in Designated Hee-haw


Miami to Abolish Athletic Dorms


Continental Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continental Bank Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
40,400,000
c65,200,000
Per share
.58
1.04
9mo net inc
b40,400,000
c204,900,000
Per share
.24
3.28
b-Included a loss of $15.6 million from discontinued operations.


BRITAIN IS UNABLE TO SWAY ISRAELIS
LEAD: Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd of Britain said today that he had failed to budge Israeli leaders from their refusal to receive a United Nations mission examining the deaths of 21 Arabs in Jerusalem last week.


Soap in Hydraulic Systems Of Planes Found by Airline
LEAD: Northwest Airlines grounded a dozen DC-9's today after discovering the hydraulic systems of some had been mistakenly filled with a mixture of liquid hand soap and hydraulic fluid, the company said.


Head of Dow Jones Sets His Retirement
LEAD: Warren H. Phillips, the longtime chairman, chief executive officer and guiding spirit of Dow Jones &amp; Company, announced yesterday that he would step down as chief executive of the publishing and information company on Jan. 1 and retire on July 1, soon after he turns 65.


Soldiers Have Some Beefs for the Boss
LEAD: The men of the headquarters supply platoon of the Second Squadron of the Army's Fourth Cavalry Regiment had a few things they wanted to get off their chests.


Parent &amp; Child


Pacific Telesis Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pacific Telesis Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,468,000,000
2,368,000,000
Net inc
285,000,000
278,000,000
Share earns
.72
.68
Shares outst
401,566,000
410,231,000
9mo rev
7,275,000,000
7,118,000,000
Net inc
834,000,000
920,000,000
Share earns
2.09
2.23
Shares outst
405,063,000
413,217,000


At Indian Point, No Second-Guessing After an Accident With Nuclear Fuel
LEAD: Technicians at the Indian Point 3 nuclear power plant probably did everything they could to avoid dropping a fuel assembly, according to experts at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, both of which supervised the work.


Fighting Erupts in the Salvadoran Capital
LEAD: Fighting broke out between leftist guerrillas and Government troops in San Salvador tonight and loud explosions were heard in several sections of the city.


Israel's Friends, and Enemy


Game 4 Adjourns as Kasparov Attacks Wildly but Survives
LEAD: Gary Kasparov threw himself with the wild abandon of a berserker at Anatoly Karpov last night in Game 4 of the World Chess Championship Match in Manhattan and was lucky to survive a picket fence defense by the challenger.
The game was adjourned in a position where the champion could force a draw by perpetual check.


South Carolina National reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* South Carolina National (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
17,641,000
14,521,000
Per share
.82
.67
9mo net inc
b46,769,000
44,879,000
Per share
2.18
2.07
b-After income of $6,052,000 from an adjustment in accounting.


Sentex Sensing Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sentex Sensing Tech
Qtr to Aug 31
1990
1989
Revenue
1,479,100
1,072,045
Net inc
98,687
122,161
Shares outst
74,527,081
74,527,081
9mo rev
1,611,053
1,201,479
Net inc
328,052
176,140
Shares outst
74,527,081
74,527,081


Delphine Seyrig, 58; Actress Performed In European Films
LEAD: Delphine Seyrig, an actress and feminist whose celebrity stemmed from her first film performance, in ''Last Year at Marienbad'' in 1961, died on Monday in Paris.
She was 58 years old.


Florida Federal Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida Federal Savings
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
6,742,000
7,152,000


Nobel Winner Salves a Bruised Baruch
LEAD: The award of a Nobel Prize to a faculty member would bring pride and joy to any campus but for Baruch College, the award of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science on Tuesday to Dr.
Harry M. Markowitz had a special poignancy.


Books of The Times; A Father, His Sons and Their Clinic


It's a Touch of Revenge As Devils Top Capitals


Rijo Ignored a Blister


Bear Stearns's Profits Off 18.6% in Quarter
LEAD: Citing a ''difficult environment'' that had hurt commissions, net interest income and risk arbitrage revenues, Bear Stearns Companies yesterday reported that first-quarter earnings were down 18.6 percent from the prior year's quarter and revenues fell 3.2 percent.


DEALS


Loctite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Loctite Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
138,890,000
114,914,000
Net inc
17,613,000
14,423,000
Share earns
.97
.80
9mo sales
412,011,000
352,202,000
Net inc
51,032,000
44,669,000
Share earns
2.81
2.48


New Prague Forum Chief Looks to the Right
LEAD: Finance Minister Vaclav Klaus of Czechoslovakia, newly elected chairman of the Civic Forum, said today that he intended to move the mass organization founded by President Vaclav Havel in last year's anti-Communist revolution ''to the right'' and described himself as ''very conservative.''


Floyd Newman, 99, Oil Chief Who Gave Millions to Cornell
LEAD: Floyd R. Newman, an industrialist who gave millions of dollars to Cornell University, died Oct. 10 at Medina Community Hospital in Ohio.
He was 99 years old and lived in Medina.


Constant Jacquet, 64, A Church Statistician
LEAD: Constant Herbert Jacquet Jr., an expert on statistics on religious groups, died Tuesday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Myers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Myers Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
50,828,889
47,894,012
Net inc
2,381,245
2,296,281
Share earns
.33
.31
Shares outst
7,312,695
7,293,355
9mo sales
148,665,975
141,587,886
Net inc
7,479,038
6,503,447
Share earns
1.02
.89
Shares outst
7,308,184
7,283,587


For Adobe, Whether Humble or Fashionable, It's Mud to Mud


Gasoline Price Near Peak
LEAD: The nationwide price of a gallon of self-serve regular unleaded gasoline has reached an average of $1.379, up 30.4 cents since Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the American Automobile Association said today.
The highest price on record is $1.388, before the 1981 Easter weekend, the automobile group said on Tuesday.


Security Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Financial
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
635,334
435,912
Per share
.53
.36
9mo net inc
1,656,049
1,429,039
Per share
1.37
1.18


INSIDE
LEAD:
Four Win Nobel Prizes
Two scientists from the United States and one from Canada were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for experiments with fundamental particles.
An American was the laureate in chemistry for developing ways to synthesize complex molecules.
Page A20.
Dow Jones Chief to Retire
Warren H.


Oil Lifts Prices in Japan
LEAD: More expensive oil pushed Japan's wholesale prices in September to the sharpest gains in a decade, increasing concern that the inflation outlook could be worsening.
The domestic component of Japan's wholesale price index rose five-tenths of 1 percent in September from August, the Bank of Japan said on Tuesday, the highest since August 1980, when the rate also rose five-tenths of a percent.


Events: Homes of Brooklyn and Hoboken


Currents; For Designer, An Inspiring Subway Ride


Philip Morris Profits Rise More Than 25%
LEAD: The Philip Morris Companies, the world's largest packaged-goods concern, said yesterday that earnings in the third quarter totaled a record $937 million, or $1.01 a share.


Herley Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Herley Industries Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
4,015,710
2,564,402
Net inc
171,014
88,153
Share earns
.06
.03
Yr sales
12,767,736
10,208,994
Net inc
384,979
260,807
Share earns
.14
.09


Ryan's Family Steak Houses Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ryan's Family Steak Houses Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 3
1990
1989
Revenue
71,458,000
62,960,000
Net inc
6,029,000
5,844,000
Share earns
.12
.11
Shares outst
52,153,000
53,024,000
9mo rev
207,865,000
178,550,000
Net inc
18,707,000
16,125,000
Share earns
.36
.31
Shares outst
52,601,000
52,804,000


G.I.'s in the Saudi Desert Are Fitter Now, but Still Have Lessons to Learn
LEAD: In the light of the setting desert sun, one of the United States Army's best armored units raced across the sand in a whine of engines and billowing outriders of smoke and dust.


Ames to Reduce Corporate Staff
LEAD: Ames Department Stores Inc., the ailing discount chain that filed for bankruptcy protection earlier this year, said it would lay off 250 corporate employees and close offices in West Hartford and Syracuse.
The company said it had eliminated 200 corporate positions through attrition over the last four months.


Pepsico Stock Is Downgraded
LEAD: Two securities analysts yesterday downgraded their assessments of Pepsico, a strong stock performer and a favorite of institutional investors.


In Land of Big Bucks, Even Bigger Bucks
LEAD: NOT only has the cost of making movies risen sharply, but the budgets for advertising them have soared as well.


Kroger Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 6
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kroger Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Oct 6
1990
1989
Sales
5,974,326,201
5,533,949,052
Net inc
464,420
b5,301,953
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
84,616,317
81,211,797
9mo sales
15,275,472,093
14,450,620,583
Net inc
15,457,185
b26,798,673
Share earns
.18
-
Shares outst
84,616,317
81,211,797


Evergreen Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Evergreen Bancorp Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,374,000
2,414,000
Share earns
.50
.52
9mo net inc
6,973,000
7,625,000
Share earns
1.49
1.66


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Aerovias de Mexico S.A. de C.V., which operates under the trade name Aeromexico, and Polaris Aircraft Leasing Corp., a subsidiary of G.E.
Capital, said they had formed a joint venture leasing company to be owned equally by the partners.


Youth Shot on IND Platform
LEAD: A 15-year-old boy was shot in the right shoulder yesterday afternoon by another youth who tried to steal a gold chain from his neck as he stood on a subway platform in the Bronx, the transit police said.
The wounded youth, who was not identified, was in serious but stable condition at North Central Bronx Hospital.


Marble Financial Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marble Financial Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
11,323,000
b827,000
Per share
-
.26
9mo net loss
8,635,000
b735,000
Per share
-
.23
b-Net income
The latest quarter and 9-month results included a charge of $2 million from tentative settlement of litigation.


Reds 5; Athletics 4
LEAD: A day after the mighty Oakland A's suffered an embarrassing 7-0 loss to the Reds in a Game 1 blowout, World Series drama returned to Cincinnati.


Borg Is Considering Professional Comeback


Central Jersey Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Jersey Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,386,000
4,870,000
Per share
.28
.55
9mo net inc
7,729,000
14,541,000
Per share
.91
1.64


Dinkins Links Teacher Raise To Albany
LEAD: Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that if the State Legislature did not approve changes in pension earnings assumptions to finance almost half of a 5.5 percent raise for teachers, New York City would not be liable for making up the difference.


Queens Bakery Owner Is Slain in Ambush
LEAD: A woman who owns two Queens bakeries was ambushed in her car and shot to death at a stoplight on Tuesday night, the police said.
Another woman in the car was seriously wounded.


Wanted: Correction Officers


Treasury Issues Little Changed
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities were little changed in slow trading yesterday, as dealers wrestled with a number of conflicting developments.


Pioneer Savings Bank-Wash.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer Savings Bank-Wash.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,785,000
b10,167,000
Per share
.49
1.88
Shares outst
5,714,002
5,415,384
9mo net inc
7,988,000
bc3,189,000
Per share
1.40
-
Shares outst
5,699,705
-


Inland Steel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Inland Steel Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
959,638,000
981,204,000
Net loss
2,208,000
b18,272,000
Share earns
-
.43
9mo sales
2,963,293,000
3,193,156,000
Net inc
36,522,000
112,989,000
Share earns
.55
3.04
Shares outst
31,071,000
34,992,000


CHRONICLE


Rig Count Off in Week
LEAD: The number of working oil and natural gas rigs in the United States dipped last week by to a total of 1,056, Baker Hughes Inc. reported this week.
In the corresponding week a year ago, there were 981 working rigs.
Baker Hughes has kept track of the rig count, the widely watched index of drilling activity, since 1940.


St. Jude Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St. Jude Medical Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
41,193,000
35,447,000
Net inc
15,686,000
12,072,000
Share earns
.33
.25
9mo sales
132,512,000
112,115,000
Net inc
48,791,000
38,158,000
Share earns
1.02
.80


SENATORS DEMAND ROLE IN APPROVING ANY MOVE ON IRAQ
LEAD: Expressing concern that the United States could go to war against Iraq while Congress is in recess next month, members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee demanded today that the Bush Administration obtain Congressional approval before initiating any military action.


Valmont Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valmont Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 29
1990
1989
Sales
210,622,000
186,388,000
Net inc
2,476,000
4,146,000
Share earns
.21
.36
Shares outst
11,699,000
11,644,000
9mo sales
639,709,000
575,458,000
Net inc
12,307,000
14,398,000
Share earns
1.05
1.24
Shares outst
11,725,000
11,584,000


Currents; Architects Of Future?


Independent Bank Corp. of Ionia, Mich.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independent Bank Corp. of Ionia, Mich.  (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b1,044,000
676,000
Per share
.42
.27
9mo net inc
b2,046,000
1,995,000
Per share
.82
.80
b-Included a gain of $265,000 on the sale of its credit cart portfolios for the quarter and an extraordinary loss of $92,000 from partial redemption of convertible debentures for the 9 months.


Park Avenue Show House Shows How


Television Commissions Works by Playwrights


Cairo's Major Daily Calls Jordan's King A Party to Invasion
LEAD: Egypt's most prominent newspaper assailed King Hussein of Jordan today as as a co-conspirator with President Saddam Hussein of Iraq in the invasion of Kuwait.


Fourth Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fourth Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,059,000
8,393,000
Per share
.22
.48
9mo net inc
13,327,000
25,452,000
Per share
.74
1.47


Lotus Settles Copyright Case
LEAD: The Lotus Development Corporation said today that it had reached an out-of-court settlement with Paperback Software International and Stephenson Software Ltd. for the violation of Lotus's copyrights on its 1-2-3 spreadsheet software.
Paperback agreed to pay


First Africanized Bees Are Trapped in U.S.
LEAD: The first known swarm of Africanized bees has entered the United States from Mexico, and the bees were trapped and destroyed, officials said Wednesday.


Los Angeles Forms An Offshoot Orchestra


Seeing Bedford-Stuyvesant Brownstones


Nashua Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nashua Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 28
1990
1989
Sales
162,551,000
143,417,000
Net inc
8,153,000
6,419,000
Share earns
1.26
.67
Shares outst
6,481,000
9,560,000
9mo sales
452,679,000
420,919,000
Net inc
16,804,000
13,670,000
Share earns
2.09
1.43
Shares outst
8,031,000
9,578,000


Hindu Fundamentalist Threatens India's Government Over Temple
LEAD: A right-wing party of Hindu nationalists threatened tonight to bring down the Government of Prime Minister V. P. Singh by withdrawing its vital parliamentary support if its fundamentalist campaign was stalled.


Michigan National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Michigan National Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
8,373,000
b116,607,000
Per share
.56
7.54
9mo net inc
45,377,000
b163,064,000
Per share
3.02
10.57
b-Included a $225 million pre-tax gain on the sale of the corporation's credit-card portfolio.


Many Fans Prefer a Mixture Of Night and Day Ball Games


Overconfidence, Not Jets, May Be Bills' Big Worry


Handgun Bill To Be Delayed
LEAD: Congressional action on legislation that would require a seven-day waiting period to buy handguns will be put off until next year, Speaker Thomas S. Foley said today.
The legislation is known as the Brady bill for the former White House press secretary, James Brady, who was shot and disabled by John W.


Security Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Security Federal Savings Bank (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
402,937
282,461
Per share
.28
.19


Sun Energy Partners L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sun Energy Partners L.P. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
340,000,000
290,000,000
Net inc
50,000,000
10,000,000
Per unit
.13
.03
Avg units
394,500,000
371,600,000
9mo rev
940,000,000
894,000,000
Net inc
101,000,000
b134,000,000
Per unit
.26
-
Avg units
387,400,000
363,200,000


MCI Accused By A.T.&amp;T.
LEAD: The American Telephone and Telegraph Company today accused the MCI Communications Corporation and other long-distance companies of trying to steal its customers, but MCI said the problem had been exaggerated and was mostly due to honest mistakes by its sales staff.


Healthsouth Rehabilitation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Healthsouth Rehabilitation (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
63,176,000
37,003,000
Net inc
3,271,000
2,114,000
Share earns
.25
.20
Shares outst
13,197,000
10,776,000
9mo rev
184,496,000
104,723,000
Net inc
8,755,000
5,627,000
Share earns
.75
.53
Shares outst
11,714,000
10,654,000


Judge Upholds Landmark Status of Interior of Four Seasons
LEAD: The Four Seasons restaurant's striking interior architecture - its sweeping expanse of wide staircases, bronze railings, hanging sculptures and soaring balconies - can be preserved as a New York City landmark, a Manhattan judge ruled yesterday.


SouthTrust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SouthTrust Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
18,751,000
18,373,000
Per share
.69
.69
Shares outst
27,180,000
26,646,000
9mo net inc
50,410,000
53,618,000
Per share
1.86
2.02
Shares outst
27,164,000
26,605,000


MCI Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCI Communications Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,003,000,000
1,667,000,000
Net loss
168,000,000
b165,000,000
Share earns
-
.62
9mo rev
5,677,000,000
4,761,000,000
Net inc
172,000,000
c450,000,000
Share earns
.59
1.69


Federal Budget Puts Wild Card Into Ohio Race
LEAD: With a base of support in this largely ethnic, racially diverse and heavily unionized city, George Voinovich, a Republican who is a popular former Mayor, seemed to start the campaign for governor of Ohio already holding the Democratic trump card.


Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk Journal;   Chekhov Among Outcasts: An Island Remembers
LEAD: ''Arrived in good condition. Send telegrams to Chekhov.''


Great Western Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Western Financial Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
37,000,000
68,000,000
Share earns
.29
.52
9mo net inc
189,000,000
177,000,000
Share earns
1.47
1.37


Highland Buys Stake in Remy
LEAD: The Highland Distilleries Company P.L.C. said today that it was taking a 30 percent stake in Remy Cointreau of France, blending the assets of Scotland's best-selling whisky maker with a world leader in cognac, champagne and liqueurs.


Nichols Institute reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nichols Institute (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
44,789,000
32,766,000
Net inc
1,955,000
1,288,000
Share earns
.14
.11
Shares outst
14,402,000
11,715,000
9mo rev
129,320,000
95,488,000
Net inc
5,620,000
3,401,000
Share earns
.41
.32
Shares outst
13,761,000
10,785,000


A.T.&amp;T. in Venture To Lay Cable to Japan
LEAD: The largest international telephone companies in the United States and Japan announced plans yesterday to link the two countries in 1996 with a high-capacity undersea cable of radically new design.


Coke's Net Up 9.1%; Sales Overseas Cited
LEAD: The Coca-Cola Company, the world's largest soft-drink company, said yesterday that third-quarter earnings rose to a record $394.2 million, or 58 cents a share.
The 9.1 percent rise slightly exceeded analysts' expectations.


Parker Hannifin reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Parker Hannifin (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
615,591,000
572,421,000
Net inc
23,902,000
b23,361,000
Share earns
.49
.48
Shares outst
48,812,675
48,842,581
b-Included income from discontinued operations of $1,452,000, or 3 cents a share.


Policy Management Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Policy Management Systems (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
87,503,000
66,155,000
Net inc
9,489,000
6,893,000
Share earns
.49
.41
9mo rev
253,083,000
191,289,000
Net inc
27,180,000
18,580,000
Share earns
1.41
1.17


Currents; A Life in Arts and Crafts On View in Philadelphia


Central Bancshares of the South Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Bancshares of the South Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
12,330,000
9,692,000
Per share
.59
.45
Shares outst
20,753,000
21,545,000
9mo net inc
35,697,000
31,067,000
Per share
1.70
1.44
Shares outst
20,946,000
21,539,000


PROFITS SCOREBOARD
LEAD:
Net
Percent
Income
Change
$
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1990
From '89
Ameritech
$ 311,200,000
+7.6
AMR Corp.
65,600,000
-52.1
Bear Stearns Companies
18,000,000
-18.6
BellSouth Corp.
402,900,000
-0.4
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
International
A3-15


Environmental Bond Passage in Doubt
LEAD: With less than three weeks to go until Election Day, strong opposition by upstate New York residents to the $2 billion environmental bond issue has put government and private supporters on the defensive and passage of the measure in doubt.


First Alabama Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Alabama Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
18,227,000
15,899,000
Per share
.56
.48
9mo net inc
51,280,000
46,955,000
Per share
1.56
1.42


Bronx Ballot: An Insurgent's Odyssey
LEAD: There is no better way to appreciate the absurdities of New York City's election system than from the outside looking in.
This is a position that Agustin Alamo, a 45-year-old teacher, has occupied with tedious and undesired frequency for 10 years.


Knicks, Back in U.S., Routed By Philadelphia in Albany


MCI Posts Large Loss In Quarter
LEAD: The MCI Communications Corporation posted a large third-quarter loss yesterday because of a one-time charge against earnings, while three of the seven Bell regionals reported small changes in sales and earnings.


Times Weekly's Plans
LEAD: The New York Times announced two programs yesterday to broaden the audience for its Large Type Weekly.
Random House Inc. the nation's largest publisher of general-interest books, will market its new large-print publications with The Times.
Eschenbach Optik of America, a distributor of products for the visually impaired, will become The Times's agent in the ophthalmic market and provide subscription information in the offices of eye-care professionals.


Sealed Air Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sealed Air Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
100,662,000
92,490,000
Net inc
2,430,000
1,039,000
Share earns
.28
.12
Shares outst
8,741,000
8,236,000
9mo sales
305,117,000
287,273,000
Net inc
8,305,000
5,925,000
Share earns
.95
.72
Shares outst
8,727,000
8,217,000


Fernandez Laughs at Rumors of Move to Spain


JAPANESE OFFERS APOLOGY FOR SLUR
LEAD: Japan's Justice Minister said today that he wanted to send ''my deepest apologies to the American people'' for comparing foreign prostitutes in Tokyo to American blacks who move into white neighborhoods and ''ruin the atmosphere.''


Mets' Johnson Is Set For Shoulder Surgery


CHRONICLE


Gateway Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gateway Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
940,000
1,552,000
Share earns
.24
.40
9mo net inc
3,344,000
4,311,000
Share earns
.87
.12


Bears With Furniture


Job Cut Write-Off Looms for Citicorp
LEAD: Citicorp, the nation's biggest bank group, told analysts that its job cuts would total in the thousands and cautioned that the cost of the layoffs has yet to be taken.
The analysts said the job cuts in the continuing program will probably total 5,000, at a cost of $100 million.


Torchmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Torchmark Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
461,165,000
410,333,000
Net inc
61,151,000
54,922,000
Share earns
1.15
1.02
Shares outst
51,788,000
52,120,000
9mo rev
1,334,148,000
1,221,183,000
Net inc
181,980,000
159,999,000
Share earns
3.39
2.94
Shares outst
52,171,000
52,505,000


People
LEAD: *
Karlyn Armstrong has been appointed vice president of DDB Needham Worldwide, Chicago.


Thermwood Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thermwood Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
2,517,310
2,918,466
Net inc
77,027
134,311
Share earns
.01
.02
Yr sales
9,714,929
10,135,052
Net inc
118,687
501,766
Share earns
.02
.10


LSB Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* LSB Bancshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,003,000
969,000
Per share
.37
.36
9mo net inc
3,056,000
2,871,000
Per share
1.13
1.06
Per share earnings restated to reflect 5-for-4 stock split paid April 16.


Koreas Revert to Form: Squabbling
LEAD: At a new round of talks to ease mutual tensions, leaders of North and South Korea dropped their earlier civil tone on Wednesday and accused each other of bad faith.
But the negotiators agreed later to continue their discussions in Seoul in December.


CommerceBancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CommerceBancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
950,000
867,000
Per share
.46
.47
9mo net inc
2,695,000
2,625,000
Per share
1.28
1.48


Champagne Taking an Elite Turn
LEAD: Nearly a decade ago, the centuries-old Champagne houses of France, beset by sluggish sales, decided that their business needed a bit more of the hustle and flash of modern marketing.
Slick promotional campaigns featuring long-legged blondes and golden bubbles were created to lift Champagne sales.
No longer, Champagne executives decreed, would their prestigious drink be restricted to what the


5 at Prairie View Are Arrested


Stepfathers: The Shoes Rarely Fit


People's Savings (Brockton) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* People's Savings (Brockton)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
95,000
b455,000
Per share
-
.20
9mo net loss
3,668,000
b951,000
Per share
-
.41
b-Net income


Accounts
LEAD: *
Quality Bakers of America Cooperative Inc., Greenwich, Conn., to GSD&amp;M, Austin, Tex., for its Sunbeam and Sunbeam Lite breads business, with undisclosed billings.
The account was previously handled by Buntin Advertising, Nashville.


PNC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PNC Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
55,893,000
126,918,000
Per share
.59
1.33
9mo net inc
239,257,000
375,974,000
Per share
2.52
3.98


Northrop Net Nearly Double
LEAD: The Northrop Corporation said today that its earnings for the third quarter nearly doubled from the corresponding period last year, although the company's future remained clouded by the diminishing prospects for its biggest program, the B-2 Stealth bomber.


Wallenberg Reported Shot in '47
LEAD: A former K.G.B. official says he saw records indicating that Raoul Wallenberg, a Swedish diplomat who saved thousands of Jews in World War II, was executed at least 43 years ago, The Times of London said today.


An Ex-Cook Becomes President of Shoney's
LEAD: Shoney's Inc. named as its president and chief operating officer yesterday James W. Arnett, who started as a cook in the Nashville-based restaurant chain.


New York Unearthed at a New Museum


Currents; For Yard's Eyesore, An Eye-Deceiver


Sundstrand Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sundstrand Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
384,200,000
366,600,000
Net inc
b32,500,000
c26,000,000
Share earns
.88
.70
9mo sales
1,160,700,000
1,091,300,000
Net inc
b80,400,000
c90,200,000
Share earns
2.17
2.26
Shares outst
37,025,000
36,972,000


Imcera Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Imcera Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
375,700,000
315,200,000
Net inc
18,000,000
b7,500,000
Share earns
.78
.27
Shares outst
22,900,000
21,502,000
b-Included an after-tax charge of $1.7 million from compensation plans tied to the price of its common stock.


Bhutto Facing New Misconduct Charges
LEAD: The President of Pakistan filed new allegations of misconduct today against former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto.


'Desert Rats' Join the Buildup
LEAD: The first units of the British Seventh Armored Brigade flew into Saudi Arabia today to join the buildup of military forces here in preparation for possible war with Iraq.


Correction
LEAD: An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page yesterday misstated the new titles of two BBDO executives in New York.
Bruce Meyers has been named director of strategy and business development, and Anthony Lenge director of finance and operations.


Unquenchable Folklore


Precision Castparts reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Precision Castparts (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
130,000,000
110,900,000
Net inc
8,000,000
7,200,000
Share earns
.46
.43
Shares outst
17,300,000
17,000,000
6mo sales
259,800,000
222,500,000
Net inc
15,400,000
14,900,000
Share earns
.89
.88
Shares outst
17,300,000
17,000,000


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Bekins Van Lines, Hillside, Ill., a subsidiary of Bekins Co., Glendale, Calif., promoted John Ainlay to vice president of operations in its household goods division.


Net Off 4.5% At Gannett
LEAD: The Gannett Company today reported a 4.5 percent decline in earnings for the third quarter of 1990, primarily because of lower retail newspaper and classified advertising sales.


Modine Manufacturing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Modine Manufacturing Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 26
1990
1989
Sales
118,608,000
110,609,000
Net inc
7,151,000
5,163,000
Share earns
.48
.35
6mo sales
232,959,000
216,457,000
Net inc
13,855,000
11,523,000
Share earns
.93
.77


Man Is Acquitted in Hunting Death
LEAD: A hunter who mistook a woman for a deer, shooting and killing her as she walked behind her home, was found not guilty of manslaughter today in a case that has inflamed debate about a sport deeply rooted in this largely rural state.


Summit National Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Summit National Bank
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
74,000
256,000
Per share
.11
.37
9mo net loss
1,520,000
b691,000
Per share
-
.99
b-Net income


La Petite Academy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* La Petite Academy (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
49,291,000
42,819,000
Net inc
1,527,000
1,243,000
Share earns
.10
.08
9mo rev
150,225,000
128,161,000
Net inc
6,708,000
5,349,000
Share earns
.42
.34


Callable Bonds For Farm Credit
LEAD: The Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation yesterday priced $100 million in callable consolidated systemwide bonds, due 1993, through Lehman Brothers.


April Deal for Hatcher Paying Off in October


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Quilts, Indian Artworks And Shaker Furnishings
LEAD: At the nation's most important Americana fair, vintage versions of the Stars and Stripes brighten several booths, Uncle Sam appears as a whirligig, and an all-wire, eight-foot-high Statue of Liberty is a turn-of-the-century topiary form.


The New York Times Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* The New York Times Co. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
420,734,000
415,340,000
Net inc
b9,173,000
c210,779,000
Share earns
.12
2.68
Shares outst
76,185,000
78,000,000
9mo rev
1,320,785,000
1,298,715,000
Net inc
b52,589,000
c285,607,000
Share earns
.69
3.63
Shares outst
76,400,000
78,420,000


Correction
LEAD: An obituary on Wednesday about Richard J. Hummler, the theater editor of Variety, misstated his marital status.
He and Marilyn L. Stasio were separated, not divorced.


Witnesses Fail to Link Milken to Wrongdoing
LEAD: At Michael R. Milken's pre-sentencing hearing yesterday, Government witnesses testified about a number of unethical and possibly illegal actions involving executives of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
But they did not tie Mr.
Milken to any of those activities.


Wilmington Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wilmington Trust (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
17,383,000
15,544,000
Per share
1.00
.87
Shares outst
17,435,000
17,715,000
9mo net inc
48,028,000
42,072,000
Per share
2.76
2.37
Shares outst
17,433,000
17,733,000


Lafarge Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lafarge Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
538,724,000
501,107,000
Net inc
54,388,000
61,289,000
Share earns
1.06
1.22
Shares outst
51,448,000
50,316,000
9mo sales
1,207,901,000
1,102,988,000
Net inc
43,341,000
79,620,000
Share earns
.84
1.59
Shares outst
51,595,000
50,093,000


Freddie Mac Reports Loss
LEAD: The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, an important home-financing concern, today announced $124 million in losses on its mortgage portfolio in the July-September quarter.


New York Lost 34,000 Jobs Over Summer
LEAD: New York City lost 34,000 jobs this summer, according to the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics, and may be headed for its worst year since the dark days of the mid-1970's.


American Petrofina Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Petrofina Inc. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,054,643,000
711,875,000
Net inc
26,452,000
15,056,000
Share earns
1.71
.98
9mo rev
2,783,521,000
2,278,186,000
Net inc
106,475,000
b105,665,000
Share earns
6.88
6.96


Benefit Book Sale
LEAD: Thousands of new and used books and records will be on sale this weekend at the Hudson Guild, 441 West 26th Street.
Proceeds will benefit the guild, a 95-year-old social-service agency that helps families in the Chelsea area.
Hours are 1 to 8 P.M.; tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.


Diner's Journal
LEAD:
Book-Friends Cafe


Mobil Accepts Safety Adviser
LEAD: Mobil Oil, settling a lawsuit aimed at its suburban Los Angeles refinery, agreed to inspections by an independent safety adviser.
Page D1.


Salomon Unit Chosen
LEAD: The Resolution Trust Corporation said today that it had selected Salomon Asset Management Inc., a subsidiary of Salomon Inc., to serve as its adviser for selling high-yield ''junk bonds.'' The Government inherited the high-yield portfolio from failed savings and loans institutions.
Resolution Trust's inventory of junk bond instruments has a face value of about $3.3 billion and includes 439 issues held by 30 institutions that have been taken over by regulators.


HarperCollins Reports Profit
LEAD: HarperCollins, the book publishing subsidiary of the News Corporation, which is headed by Rupert Murdoch, said yesterday that its operating profit for the year that ended on June 30 was $119 million on revenue of $1.13 billion.


Less Time, More Music In Met Museum Series
LEAD: The Metropolitan Museum of Art has been presenting concerts since the 1940's, first in its Great Hall and in the John Pierpont Morgan Wing, then in the Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium, which opened in 1954, and more recently in some of its galleries when the programs have demanded something more expansive than a concert hall setting.


Ethics Panel Puts Focus On 3 Senators' Activities
LEAD: Facing growing political pressure to act, the Senate Ethics Committee began deliberating today over a recommendation that the panel proceed to a full-scale investigation of three Senators who helped an important campaign contributor.


Wherein a Law Firm Gets Caught in Its Own Publicity Ploy
LEAD: Only a few years ago, law firms with embarrassing internal problems hunkered down and circled the wagons until the trouble passed.
But the New York law firm of Patterson, Belknap, Webb &amp; Tyler recently demonstrated how completely things have changed.


SUPERCOMPUTERS BACKED FOR BRAZIL
LEAD: House and Senate lawmakers took a step today toward allowing sales of American supercomputers to Brazil, a move that has been opposed by critics of Brazil's past military ties with Iraq.


Franco Autori, 87, Conductor, Is Dead
LEAD: Franco Autori, a conductor who worked for a time with the New York Philharmonic, died on Tuesday at his home in Tulsa, Okla., the Associated Press reported.
He was 87 years old.


This Time, Testaverde Will Be on His Turf
LEAD: On Oct. 7, Vinny Testaverde of Tampa Bay faced his former college coach, Jimmy Johnson of Dallas, for the first time, and the Cowboys edged the Buccaneers, 14-10.
Only two weeks later, Testaverde will get another shot when Dallas (2-4) meets Tampa Bay (4-2) on Sunday in the Cowboys' first trip ever to Tampa


Vladimir B. Adzemovic, Banker, 63
LEAD: Vladimir B. Adzemovic, a banker and president of the lay committee of the Serbian Orthodox Cathedral of St.
Sava on West 26th Street in Manhattan, died on Monday at his home on Staten Island.
He was 63 years old.


Lockheed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lockheed Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,319,000,000
2,208,000,000
Net inc
86,000,000
bc31,000,000
Share earns
1.36
-
9mo sales
6,989,000,000
6,859,000,000
Net inc
236,000,000
c111,000,000
Share earns
3.73
1.78


Owens &amp; Minor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Owens &amp; Minor Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
310,045,000
261,298,000
Net inc
2,489,000
1,340,000
Share earns
.29
.16
Shares outst
8,529,000
8,392,000
9mo sales
903,322,000
675,845,000
Net inc
5,985,000
2,237,000
Share earns
.70
.27
Shares outst
8,509,000
8,398,000


St. Paul Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* St. Paul Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,263,000
5,149,000
Per share
.52
.42
9mo net loss
b9,218,000
c15,741,000
Per share
-
1.28
b-After an extraordinary credit of $1,470,000 from the repurchase of notes.


Digital Equipment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Equipment Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,093,370,000
3,131,190,000
Net inc
26,177,000
150,783,000
Share earns
.21
1.20
Shares outst
123,774,888
125,768,130


Group Says Press Freedom Is Declining in Britain
LEAD: An international human rights organization said in a report today that the Government had dramatically eroded press freedom in Britain over the last year and greatly increased its powers of censorship.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The Nation Foundation and the Playboy Foundation, an odd couple on the face of it, are teaming up for a colloquium on censorship at the Donnell Library on Oct. 24. ''We have the First Amendment in common,'' said VICTOR NAVASKY, The Nation's editor and moderator of the program.


Schlumberger Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schlumberger Ltd. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,323,755,000
1,106,352,000
Net inc
147,419,000
114,219,000
Share earns
.62
.48
Shares outst
238,488,000
238,332,000
9mo rev
3,837,581,000
3,484,970,000
Net inc
420,729,000
b323,369,000
Share earns
1.77
1.36
Shares outst
237,987,000
237,889,000


Brokerage Earnings Weaken
LEAD: Soft investment-banking business hurt third-quarter earnings at both Paine Webber and Primerica, parent of Smith Barney, Harris Upham, but the downturn at Primerica was more than offset by healthy returns from its insurance business.


First Hawaiian reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Hawaiian (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
18,482,000
14,746,000
Per share
.60
.55
9mo net inc
51,767,000
42,696,000
Per share
1.84
1.59
Per share figures reflected a 100 percent stock dividend paid in November 1989.


Raise in Dispute as New York City Negotiates 3d Day With 2 Unions
LEAD: New York City's municipal labor talks ground through their third day yesterday as city and union officials shuttled in and out of the presidential suite on the 21st floor of the Sheraton Centre Hotel in Manhattan.


Colgate-Palmolive Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colgate-Palmolive Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,457,879,000
1,259,935,000
Net inc
84,436,000
76,724,000
Share earns
1.20
1.06
Shares outst
66,198,000
67,882,000
9mo sales
4,211,897,000
3,753,297,000
Net inc
247,587,000
217,523,000
Share earns
3.29
2.98
Shares outst
66,053,000
68,463,000


Panama Uncovers Plot to Topple President
LEAD: Panama's Government said today it had uncovered evidence of a plot to topple President Guillermo Endara that was to start with a takeover by rebel police units of the northwestern province of Chiriqui.


SCEcorp reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SCEcorp (NYSE)
12mos Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,062,931,000
6,823,581,000
Net inc
722,801,000
766,075,000
Share earns
3.31
3.51
Shares outst
282,472,000
218,460,000


Devils Setting Out to Gain An Early Jump on First
LEAD: Although it is still October and April is a long way off, first place is always important to teams in the Patrick Division.


Claude Arpels Is Dead; Jeweler in U.S. Was 79
LEAD: Claude Arpels, who headed the American operations of the Van Cleef &amp; Arpels jewelers, died on Monday in Switzerland, his family said today.
He was 79 and lived in Manhattan.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: OSBORN ELLIOTT has been elected chairman of the Citizens Committee for New York City, which helps to better neighborhoods.
He is not actually a new chairman;he had held the post for five years after it was founded in 1975 by Senator Jacob K. Javits.


Payco American Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Payco American Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
26,545,000
24,302,000
Net inc
1,488,000
1,100,000
Share earns
.15
.11
9mo rev
81,075,000
72,100,000
Net inc
4,335,000
3,214,000
Share earns
.43
.32
Revenue represented accounts received for collection.


Arab League Rebuffs P.L.O.; Won't Condemn U.S.
LEAD: A ministerial meeting of the 21-nation Arab League was thrown into disarray today after the Palestine Liberation Organization led a walkout to protest the refusal of a majority to condemn United States policy toward Palestinians.


National Westminster Banorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Westminster Banorp Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
36,268,000
113,503,000
9mo net loss
126,455,000
55,518,000


State Grounds a Family's Barges It Says Fouled New York Harbor
LEAD: New York State yesterday shut down what it said was the worst polluter of New York Harbor, a labyrinthine network of oil- and sludge-hauling companies owned by a single family from New Jersey and New York.


Six Men Wrestling With the Budget
LEAD:
Senator Lloyd Bentsen...Chairman, Senate Finance Committee...Texas Democrat... his main effort will be to get a bill out of conference that can be supported by both Republican and Democratic members of the Senate...he personally has no objection to higher tax rates, but would like to maintain tax breaks for oil and gas producers.


Storage Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Storage Technology (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 28
1990
1989
Revenue
265,172,000
232,599,000
Net inc
b15,955,000
8,263,000
Share earns
.48
.32
Shares outst
33,465,000
25,857,000
9mo rev
801,448,000
682,677,000
Net inc
b35,888,000
c25,453,000
Share earns
1.15
.98
Shares outst
31,275,000
25,999,000


Review/Film;   Tom Selleck In 'Quigley Down Under'
LEAD: Tom Selleck has such a friendly, easygoing manner that it's hard to know why he fades into the woodwork whenever he appears on the big screen.
The qualities that make him such a natural television star become remarkably unhelpful against the larger backdrop of a feature film.


New York Times Co. Posts 43.9% Drop in Operating Net
LEAD: The New York Times Company reported yesterday that income from current operations fell 43.9 percent in the third quarter, to $9.2 million, or 12 cents a share.
That compared with operating income of $16.4 million, or 21 cents a share, in the corresponding quarter last year.


Wheat and Cattle Prices Up, But Corn and Pork Decline
LEAD: Increased export business pushed wheat prices higher yesterday, and consumer demand for beef raised cattle prices.


Milton Sherman, Executive, 65
LEAD: Milton Sherman, an advertising executive and an authority on Shaker furniture, died on Saturday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 65 years old and lived in Armonk, N.Y.


AmSouth Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AmSouth Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
19,433,000
19,959,000
Per share
.83
.82
Shares outst
23,407,000
24,309,000
9mo net inc
58,735,000
61,958,000
Per share
2.49
2.55
Shares outst
23,550,000
24,277,000


Washington Talk;   F.B.I. Hoping to Erase Poor Image on Racism
LEAD: Ask top officials at the Federal Bureau of Investigation what most worries the nation's premier law-enforcement agency, and they are likely to admit that the public enemies these days include not only drugs, corruption and organized crime, but also racism.


For U.S. Park Information
LEAD: For tourists worried about which parks and museums will be closed if the Federal Government runs out of money this weekend, the National Tour Association has an answer: a toll-free information number.
A spokesman said the association, which represents hotels, airlines and bus touring companies, will pool information from Federal, state and local sources to benefit travelers.


Burmese Regime Sentences 2 Dissidents, Diplomat Says
LEAD: The Burmese military government, making its toughest move since the opposition won a landslide election victory in May, has sentenced two dissident leaders to seven years in prison, a diplomat said today.


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trinity Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
317,800,000
314,400,000
Net inc
9,300,000
11,300,000
Share earns
.44
.61
Shares outst
21,200,000
18,400,000
6mo rev
600,900,000
626,000,000
Net inc
15,200,000
25,100,000
Share earns
.72
1.36
Shares outst
21,200,000
18,400,000


'No Fighting,' Holtz Says, but He Adds 'Unless'
LEAD: Nearly a year after establishing a strict, highly publicized stance against fighting, Lou Holtz, the Notre Dame football coach, has appeared to revise his policy.


Charles G. Daley, 80, Prosecutor and Lawyer
LEAD: Charles G. Daley, a lawyer who served under Thomas E. Dewey in racketeering investigations in the 1930's, died on Sunday at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 80 years old and lived in Bronxville.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
823,000,000
743,000,000
Net inc
b35,000,000
38,000,000
Share earns
.83
.89
Shares outst
42,056,000
42,258,000
9mo sales
2,342,000,000
2,129,000,000
Net inc
b106,000,000
126,000,000
Share earns
2.51
2.99
Shares outst
42,066,000
42,176,000


Scientists Offer Two Explanations Of Dark Streaks on Neptune Moon
LEAD: After a year analyzing data and photographs from the Voyager 2 spacecraft, scientists are not sure they can explain the strange streaks that appear like dark brush strokes on the bright canvas of Triton, the large icy moon of Neptune.


EG&amp;G Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* EG&amp;G Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
687,038,000
426,056,000
Net inc
18,388,000
16,490,000
Share earns
.65
.57
9mo sales
1,860,184,000
1,227,686,000
Net inc
52,916,000
50,659,000
Share earns
1.85
1.73


Union Camp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Camp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
707,774,000
667,320,000
Net inc
51,588,000
76,045,000
Share earns
.75
1.11
9mo sales
2,124,321,000
2,085,320,000
Net inc
177,425,000
237,192,000
Share earns
2.58
3.45


Amex-Europe Trading Accord
LEAD: The American Stock Exchange announced agreements yesterday with the European Options Exchange and the Paris Bourse that expand the number of international products that can be traded in New York.
In one deal, the American


Review/Film;   The Zombies Return, in Living (or Is It Dead?) Color
LEAD: Who would have imagined, back in 1968, that this would become a landmark in the history of American film: seven people hole up in a farmhouse and fight off flesh-eating zombies.
It's not ''Citizen Kane,'' but so what?
George A. Romero's cheap little ''Night of the Living Dead'' may not have the heft of art, but it is an undisputed pop-culture classic.


4 Charged in Deaths of 3 Vietnamese Youths
LEAD: Four men were arrested yesterday and charged with the execution-style murder of three Vietnamese youths on Monday in a Manhattan parking lot, the police said.


Thomas R. Adam, 90, Expert on Colonialism
LEAD: Thomas R. Adam, a professor of political science at New York University from 1945 until he retired in 1968, died on Saturday at St.
Barnabas Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 90 years old and had lived at the Mosholu Parkway Nursing Home in the Bronx for three years.


Firstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Firstar Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
25,176,000
22,204,000
Per share
1.04
.95
9mo net inc
72,750,000
64,639,000
Per share
3.08
2.76


Self-Inflicted Wounds
LEAD: The Israeli Government's behavior toward the United States over the last two weeks appears to be based on a delusion.
That is the belief that Israel can deceive the American Government, provoke it, injure its interests - and still get uncritical American support for whatever Israel wants.


Panel of Scientists Dismisses Warning of Missouri Quake
LEAD: Projections of a major earthquake in the Midwest in early December are without scientific basis, a group of scientists said today.


GATX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* GATX Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
224,800,000
181,400,000
Net inc
20,800,000
17,800,000
Share earns
.91
.83
9mo rev
628,500,000
506,400,000
Net inc
58,600,000
50,500,000
Share earns
2.52
2.56
Year-ago results are restated.


Thomas Murton, 62, a Penologist Who Advocated Reforms, Is Dead
LEAD: Thomas Murton, an outspoken advocate of prison reform who attracted national attention in 1968 when he accused Arkansas trusties and guards of abusing convicts, died on Oct. 10 at the Veterans Afffairs Medical Center in Oklahoma City.
He was 62 years old.


Study of Indians' Remains: Science or Sacrilege?
LEAD: A small bag full of charred prehistoric bone chips locked inside the evidence cabinet of a district attorney is the focus of the latest and most peculiar twist in a nationwide debate over the status of American Indian relics.


House-Senate Panel Prepares for Endurance Test
LEAD: In the wild and woolly no-holds-barred world of House-Senate conferences, a budget reconciliation conference is in a class by itself.


Revision for Williams
LEAD: The Portland Trail Blazers have reached an agreement extending the contract of Buck Williams by one year, the team announced yesterday.
Terms of the contract were not disclosed, but the extension was believed to have included a substantial raise in salary for the 1993-94 season, the final year of the contract.


No Buts or Ifs, Principal Plans a Dress Code
LEAD: Some of the teachers do not wear neckties.
But Frank Mickens, the principal of Boys and Girls High School in Brooklyn, a school once known more for fighting than for fashion, will soon require all male students to wear ties daily.


New York State Electric &amp; Gas reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New York State Electric &amp; Gas (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,485,533,000
1,414,091,000
Net inc
159,828,000
159,021,000
Share earns
2.55
2.56
Shares outst
57,777,000
56,920,000


Eastern Reports Success With Fares
LEAD: Eastern Airlines has told its unsecured creditors that its new fares have been a success with business travelers and could enable the troubled carrier to survive, a spokeswoman said. ''The corporate fares are going over very well with business travelers,'' the spokeswoman, Karen Ceremsak, said.


High Hopes of Defeating Simon Are Being Deflated
LEAD: At a meeting a year ago, two of the biggest names in the Republican Party's stable of consultants, Robert Teeter and Roger Ailes, told Representative Lynn Martin of Illinois that if she could raise the money, she could unseat Senator Paul Simon, the avuncular incumbent whose liberalism seemed to make him an inviting target.


Bowater Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bowater Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1990
1989
Sales
346,558,000
360,067,000
Net inc
23,659,000
35,458,000
Share earns
.63
.95
9mo sales
1,027,152,000
1,082,343,000
Net inc
b60,068,000
112,353,000
Share earns
1.57
3.00


The Tumbling Dollar Hits A Low Against the Mark
LEAD: The dollar tumbled yesterday, breaking though the 1.50 level against the German mark and ending at its lowest level since the mark was created 42 years ago.


Intertan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intertan Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
157,579,000
141,971,000
Net loss
b1,263,000
c3,699,000
Share earns
-
.42
Yr rev
710,173,000
662,864,000
Net inc
b23,937,000
d40,701,000
Share earns
2.69
4.62
b-After an extraordinary loss of $876,000 for the quarter and an extraordinary credit of $579,000, or 7 cents a share, for the year.


Wings Demote Hanlon
LEAD: Glen Hanlon, the veteran Detroit Red Wings goaltender who won a reputation as a steady player with a ready wit, has been sent down to the minors.
The only surprise was that it took so long.


Uncovered Short Sales Rise 11.6% on Big Board
LEAD: The latest figure is equivalent to nine-tenths of 1 percent of the total shares listed on the Big Board.
Amex Short Sales Also at Record High


Review/Art;   In the Arena of the Mind, at the Whitney
LEAD: ''Mind Over Matter: Concept and Object'' is a good exhibition for the Whitney Museum of American Art to have done.
Most of its six artists are known in New York, but they continue to play to small audiences because of the difficulty and limits of their work.
By exhibiting them as a group, the Whitney is not so much confirming their importance as recognizing the significance of the ideas


Penguin to Raise Prices Next Year by 4/ a Book
LEAD: Penguin USA said yesterday that it would raise prices next year on all its mass market books, but by just 4 cents a book.
Books that now cost $3.95 will be priced at $3.99; $4.95 books will be $4.99, and so on.


Bell Atlantic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bell Atlantic Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,098,700,000
2,909,400,000
Net inc
358,400,000
344,100,000
Share earns
.91
.86
Shares outst
393,400,000
399,300,000
9mo rev
9,192,800,000
8,559,900,000
Net inc
1,076,500,000
1,016,600,000
Share earns
2.73
2.57
Shares outst
393,600,000
395,400,000


Profits Down at Digital and Apple
LEAD: The Digital Equipment Corporation and Apple Computer Inc. reported yesterday that their earnings had fallen in the latest quarter.
Digital's earnings plunged nearly 83 percent, while Apple's were down just under 39 percent.


Rivers on Waivers
LEAD: The San Antonio Spurs placed the guard David Rivers on waivers Wednesday, reducing the team's roster to 14 players.
Rivers, a former reserve with the Clippers and the Lakers, had averaged 7.3 points in three exhibition games. (AP)


Review/Fashion;   Young French Designers Stretch Fashion's Rules
LEAD: In the opening days of the French ready-to-wear collections, before the big guns of fashion take the stage, a number of lesser-known designers hold shows.
Some choose odd, out-of-the-way places to parade their styles - a smoky garage, or the Eskimo room of a museum - while others stick to the tents erected in a courtyard outside the


Pinnacle West Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pinnacle West Capital Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
474,591,000
463,296,000
Net inc
b56,948,000
c5,072,000
Share earns
.66
.06
Shares outst
86,752,868
86,719,568
9mo rev
1,248,947,000
1,195,976,000
Net inc
b72,152,000
c14,716,000
Share earns
.83
.17
Shares outst
86,746,331
86,720,219


Outwitting Ducks and Other Waterfowling Endeavors on L.I.
LEAD: The South Shore Waterfowlers Association of Long Island is holding its 10th annual duck boat show and waterfowl calling contest from 9 A.M. to noon on Nov. 11 at the Heckscher State Park Boat Basin in East Islip.


Norwest Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Norwest Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
71,500,000
52,100,000
Per share
.70
.50
9mo net inc
209,900,000
175,200,000
Per share
2.03
1.68
Norwest said results included those of First Interstate Corp. of Wisconsin, which merged with Norwest effective May 1, and has been accounted for as a pooling of interests.


ASSAILING BEIJING, HOUSE VOTES A RISE IN CHINA'S TARIFFS
LEAD: Protesting the continued restrictions on political dissent in China, the House of Representatives voted today to raise tariffs on billions of dollars of Chinese apparel, toys and other exports to this country and to set tougher conditions for tariff breaks for China next year.


Illinois
LEAD:
Senate Race
Incumbent, Paul Simon, 61, Democrat
Challenger, Lynn Martin, 50, Republican
Analysis
Ms.
Martin has sought to portray Mr.
Simon as a big-spending liberal, while depicting herself as fiscally responsible.
Mr.
Simon, still in his first term in the Senate, was originally regarded as vulnerable, but a lack of money has prevented Ms.


First Fidelity Bancorp-N.J.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Fidelity Bancorp-N.J.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
70,072,000
b54,411,000
Per share
1.14
.87
9mo net loss
59,180,000
c182,642,000
Per share
-
2.97
Shares outst
59,018,481
58,019,862
b-After extraordinary tax loss carryforwards of $1,750,000.


Intergraph Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Intergraph Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
256,297,000
211,543,000
Net inc
12,069,000
16,387,000
Share earns
.25
.31
Shares outst
48,799,000
53,673,000
9mo rev
740,441,000
616,419,000
Net inc
b43,581,000
c56,342,000
Share earns
.88
1.03
Shares outst
49,721,000
54,817,000


Dana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dana Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,201,300,000
1,120,300,000
Net inc
16,800,000
29,600,000
Share earns
.41
.72
9mo sales
3,791,900,000
3,741,700,000
Net inc
71,500,000
111,400,000
Share earns
1.75
2.73


Keating Freed on $300,000 Bail Under Ruling by a Federal Judge
LEAD: A Federal judge today reduced Charles H. Keating Jr.'s bail to $300,000, from $5 million, and hours later the former savings and loan official was freed, having spent a month in a county jail.


Santa Fe Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Santa Fe Pacific Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
713,600,000
733,800,000
Net inc
b5,500,000
33,800,000
Share earns
.04
.21
Shares outst
160,400,000
159,600,000
9mo rev
2,118,400,000
2,146,100,000
Net loss
b57,200,000
cd224,000,000
Share earns
-
1.40
Shares outst
158,600,000
159,400,000


Meadow Star Running for a Cause
LEAD: There is a new reason to root for Meadow Star to keep on winning.
From now on, she is running for homeless and troubled children.


A Saudi Oil Windfall? If Prices Remain High and Fields Intact
LEAD: Whether Saudi Arabia reaps a windfall from the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait depends on two big ifs - if its oilfields are undamaged by war and if oil prices stay high.


Boy Held in 12 Cab Holdups
LEAD: A 14-year-old Queens youth, a suspect in at least 12 recent armed robberies of livery-cab drivers in the borough, was arrested yesterday after he was spotted in Corona by a driver who said the youth had held him up.
The suspect, Shaheed Whiting of 34-73 111th Street, and a friend still being sought are accused of robbing the drivers at knifepoint over the last month and stabbing one driver twice in the leg, said Officer Alfonso Delligatti of the 115th Precinct.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: When JAN TRISKA steps onto the stage at Yale Repertory Theater next week, he will be playing a familiar role.
VACLAV HAVEL created Leopold Nettles, the highly autobiographical lead character in ''Largo Desolato,'' and Mr.
Triska and Mr.
Havel, the playwright and President of Czechoslovakia, have been best friends for 35 years.


Schering-Plough Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Schering-Plough Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
793,800,000
743,700,000
Net inc
140,000,000
114,000,000
Share earns
.62
.51
9mo sales
2,552,900,000
2,381,000,000
Net inc
434,500,000
360,200,000
Share earns
1.92
1.60
Shares outst
226,700,000
225,400,000


Drug Maker On L.I. Is Fined
LEAD: A drug company based on Long Island was fined $1 million today for making illegal cash payoffs to Federal drug reviewers and other law violations that were turned up in a two-year investigation of the generic drug industry.


Stuart Greenspan, 44, Art Writer and Editor
LEAD: Stuart Greenspan, a writer on art and a former magazine editor, died on Monday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 44 years old, and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, said his father, Nathan.
A familiar figure in the auction world, Mr.
Greenspan was editor in chief of the magazine Art &amp; Auction from 1983 to 1987, and then became a contributing editor.


Morrison Knudsen reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Morrison Knudsen (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
404,560,000
589,000,000
Net inc
8,177,000
7,897,000
Share earns
.70
.69
9mo rev
1,184,137,000
1,620,535,000
Net inc
b22,916,000
21,481,000
Share earns
1.96
1.88


Berlitz Planning School in Moscow
LEAD: Berlitz International Inc. said it would open a language training school in the Soviet Union for the first time since the 1917 Bolshevik revolution.
The Berlitz-Sovincentr Language School in Moscow will be a joint venture between Berlitz and the Soviet Chamber of Commerce.


7 Held in Mob Extortion of Clothiers
LEAD: Two years ago, prosecutors established a dummy garment-manufacturing company in a factory on the edge of Chinatown.
Their aim: to investigate persistent reports that organized-crime figures had a stranglehold over the trucking business in Manhattan's garment industry.


Channing as Narrator
LEAD: Carol Channing will narrate Prokofiev's ''Peter and the Wolf'' in the opening concert of the Little Orchestra Society's 42d season of children's concerts, tomorrow at 11 A.M. and 1 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The program, which is to be conducted by Dino Anagnost, also includes Gail Kubik's symphonic setting of the Dr.


Seafirst Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Seafirst Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
39,488,000
38,156,000
9mo net inc
98,670,000
97,380,000
Seafirst is a unit of BankAmerica Corp.


Soviet Circus Members Ask Political Asylum
LEAD: Fourteen members of a Soviet circus stranded in an Atlanta suburb since May have filed for political asylum, their lawyer says.


BankAmerica Profits Rise
LEAD: The BankAmerica Corporation, the nation's second-largest bank-holding company, reported today that third-quarter earnings rose 11.4 percent despite an increase in the money put aside for problem loans.
The company, based in San


Plastic Plus, Or the Art Of the Bag
LEAD: THEY were the lap dogs of the 50's.
But by the time the decade was over, they had all run away from home.


Savings Bailout May Be Hindered By Political Impasse Over Money
LEAD: The Government bailout of the savings and loan industry may be forced to slow substantially for lack of money because neither the Bush Administration nor Congress wants to be seen as endorsing new spending for the effort right before the November elections.


Prosecutor's Apparent Suicide Tied to Slaying of Informer
LEAD: The death of an assistant district attorney is being investigated as an apparent suicide, with friends saying he blamed himself for leading killers to a murder witness because of a mix-up by the police.


It's All Right to Laugh, Obscenity Jury Is Told
LEAD: Jurors in the 2 Live Crew obscenity case, who have sat stone-faced during the trial but were seen laughing in the hall, have been told they can laugh in court, too.


Restaurants
LEAD:
The Four Seasons


Gillette Profits Rise 41.4%
LEAD: The Gillette Company, at last seeing profits from its expensive introducton of the Sensor razor earlier this year, said yesterday that third-quarter profit rose 41.4 percent, to $92.2 million, or 80 cents a share.
The earnings were in line with analysts' expectations.


First Fidelity Profit Up 29%
LEAD: The First Fidelity Bancorporation, the largest banking company in New Jersey, yesterday announced profits of $70.1 million in the third quarter, its most profitable quarter in two years.


Kennametal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kennametal Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
152,138,000
135,669,000
Net inc
6,920,000
6,478,000
Share earns
.66
.62


Miscellany
LEAD: *
A new London-based agency has been formed by a former Saatchi &amp; Saatchi managing director and joint chief executive, Paul Bainsfair, with John Sharkey and David Trott.
The agency, Bainsfair, Sharkey, Trott, will be part of the network of the French company BDDP International.


A.T.&amp;T. and 3 Regional Bells Post Slightly Higher Profits
LEAD: A.T.&amp; T. reported a 1.9 percent increase in third-quarter earnings yesterday despite a much higher tax liability.
Three Bell regionals also posted slightly higher earnings.


American Telephone &amp; Teleraph Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Telephone &amp; Teleraph Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,355,000,000
8,896,000,000
Net inc
712,000,000
699,000,000
Share earns
.65
.65
Shares outst
1,091,000,000
1,078,000,000
9mo rev
27,272,000,000
26,811,000,000
Net inc
2,037,000,000
1,992,000,000
Share earns
1.87
1.85
Shares outst
1,088,000,000
1,077,000,000


Review/Film;   A Tokyo of the Future In Vibrant Animation
LEAD: Katsuhiro Otomo's ''Akira,'' which opens today at the Film Forum, is a phenomenal work of animation with all the hallmarks of an instant cult classic.
Its post-apocalyptic mood, high-tech trappings, thrilling artwork and wide array of bizarre characters guarantee it a place in the pantheon of comic-strip science fiction.


Library of Congress Adds 25 Titles to National Film Registry
LEAD: The Library of Congress announced today this year's selection of 25 American films to be included in the National Film Registry of works that are considered ''culturally, historically or esthetically significant.''


Newhall Land &amp; Farming reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newhall Land &amp; Farming (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
48,719,000
73,816,000
Net inc
8,571,000
b28,433,000
Share earns
.23
.72
Shares outst
37,383,000
39,630,000
9mo rev
142,038,000
141,143,000
Net inc
28,172,000
b39,922,000
Share earns
.75
1.01
Shares outst
37,749,000
39,578,000


Seth Morgan, 41, Dies in Crash; His Novel, 'Homeboy,' Won Praise
LEAD: Seth Morgan, who won acclaim last spring for his first novel, ''Homeboy,'' which drew on his experiences in the drug culture of San Francisco and in prison, was killed early Wednesday morning when the motorcycle he was driving struck a dividing post on a bridge in New Orleans, the police said.


The U.N. Today
LEAD:
General Assembly
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE - 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
SPECIAL CEREMONY TO COMMEMORATE WORLD FOOD DAY - 10:30 A.M.


West One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* West One Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
12,091,000
8,630,000
Per share
.95
.68
9mo net inc
31,327,000
25,209,000
Per share
2.46
1.99


Substitute At Helm of Syracuse Offense
LEAD: Marvin Graves, Syracuse's freshman quarterback whose quickness and speed are so impressive, has a badly bruised shoulder and is unlikely to play against Rutgers tomorrow in the Carrier Dome.


Militant Students in Ukraine Force the Party Into Retreat
LEAD: A missing force in Soviet politics, student militancy, has coalesced with a vengeance here in the Ukraine, pushing the Communist-dominated Parliament into deep retreat and forcing the nationalist movement to put a more aggressive edge on its agenda.


Beverly Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Beverly Enterprises Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
540,366,000
533,722,000
Net inc
5,660,000
929,000
Share earns
.08
.01
Shares outst
72,000,000
53,623,000
9mo rev
1,563,060,000
1,568,407,000
Net inc
9,638,000
b106,371,000
Share earns
.14
-
Shares outst
67,545,000
53,603,000


Macy Will Report Deeper Losses for the Fourth Quarter and the Year
LEAD: R. H. Macy &amp; Company's fourth-quarter loss deepened to $80 million, from $57.3 million a year earlier, and its losses for the full fiscal year ended July 28 more than tripled, to $215.3 million, from $63 million the year before, according to statements relayed to credit agencies and confirmed yesterday by sources close to Macy.


May I Quote You in Some Way or Other?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bush Says He Will Press Lenders To Widen Aid to Eastern Europe
LEAD: Pledging to help Eastern European countries cope with the rising energy costs resulting from the Persian Gulf crisis, President Bush said today that he would work to arrange an additional $5 billion in international loans to those financially strapped nations.


Black &amp; Decker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Black &amp; Decker Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,274,100,000
1,048,700,000
Net inc
18,200,000
b29,000,000
Share earns
.30
-
Shares outst
61,600,000
59,200,000
9mo rev
3,502,100,000
2,467,000,000
Net inc
44,300,000
b8,300,000
Share earns
.73
-
Shares outst
60,900,000
59,200,000


Fujitsu Introduces Portable Computer
LEAD: Fujitsu Ltd. displayed a notebook-sized personal computer that is the lightest ever made in Japan and that the company hopes will win it a prime spot in the computer industry's fast-growing portable market.
The machine weighs 2.2 pounds.
Fujitsu and the Poqet Computer Corporation of the United States, in which it has a majority stake, have developed a one-pound model for the American market, a


Addicted Parents' Children Pose Foster-Care Challenge
LEAD: New York City's neediest children, the growing numbers of youngsters born to drug-addicted mothers, are in danger of suffering long-term emotional problems because the city's foster-care system is unable to move quickly to arrange permanent homes, child-welfare advocates said at a symposium yesterday.


Mattel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mattel Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1990
1989
Sales
490,373,000
410,049,000
Net inc
47,815,000
38,037,000
Share earns
.95
.76
9mo sales
1,042,380,000
877,619,000
Net inc
76,530,000
58,928,000
Share earns
1.51
1.19


Western Digital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Western Digital Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 29
1990
1989
Revenue
255,819,000
225,282,000
Net inc
1,654,000
b2,690,000
Share earns
.06
-
Shares outst
29,321,000
29,180,000
b-Net loss
Year-ago periods ended Sept. 30.


Amoco's Profits Rise 57.7%; Surge Reflects Asset Sale
LEAD: The Amoco Corporation said yesterday that its quarterly earnings rose 57.7 percent from the 1989 period.
The profit surge reflected an unusual gain of $149 million derived from the sale by Amoco of its refining and marketing company in Britain, not sharply higher crude oil prices.
Operating profits fell.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.93
6.50
8.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.26
7.19
7.56
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.20
7.21
7.57
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.54
8.60
7.94
30-YR.


Florida Progress Corp. reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Florida Progress Corp. (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,997,400,000
1,839,800,000
Net inc
160,000,000
192,300,000
Share earns
3.13
3.77
Latest share earnings included a 32- cent charge representing a reserve for the disposition costs and potential losses associated with the sale of the firm's Talquin Corp.


Fruit of the Loom reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Fruit of the Loom (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
355,600,000
333,300,000
Net inc
23,600,000
19,400,000
Share earns
.38
.32
9mo sales
1,122,300,000
994,900,000
Net inc
73,700,000
52,900,000
Share earns
1.19
.86


Reflecting Oil Cost, Trade Deficit Hits $9.3 Billion
LEAD: The United States trade deficit continued to worsen in August, rising 2.4 percent, to $9.3 billion, the largest imbalance since January, the Commerce Department reported today.
The increase chiefly reflected the higher cost of imported oil resulting from the crisis in the Persian Gulf.


For Dow Chemical, The Good Times Stall
LEAD: In the last few years, the Dow Chemical Company has ridden a wave of expansion, driven by a strong market for chemicals.
But now the wave may have crested for the nation's second-largest chemical company.
A number of analysts contend that the company took on too much and will be paying too dearly.


The Anti-Tax Offensive of the 1980's Is Over, or So the Democrats Believe
LEAD: As Congress moved toward completion of a budget package today, the Democrats who control both the Senate and the House of Representatives cast their bets that the Reagan era was really over.


Surgery for Evans
LEAD: Dwight Evans, who just completed his 18th season with the Boston Red Sox, had minor arthroscopic surgery yesterday to remove scar tissue from under his right kneecap.
Evans was slowed during the past season by back problems.
The knee surgery was performed at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center in


Simmons Move On Lockheed
LEAD: The Dallas investor Harold C. Simmons said today that he was considering seeking control of the Lockheed Corporation but cautioned that he had not made a final decision.


At the Movies
LEAD:
A Dream Fulfilled


Berlin Arrests 4, Alleging $328 Million in Swindles
LEAD: The German authorities have arrested four people they say are connected with a major series of swindles that have cheated the Bonn Government out of at least $328 million since July, a Government prosecutor announced today.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Consumer Prices Up 0.8%
Oil prices accounted for more than half the rise in the Consumer Price Index last month, but economists saw some encouraging signs.
Page D1.
Initiative on El Salvador
The United States and the Soviet Union urged the Salvadoran Government and the leftist guerrillas to intensify their negotiations.


BankAmerica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* BankAmerica Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b283,000,000
c254,000,000
Per share
1.26
1.16
Shares outst
212,914,000
201,486,000
9mo net inc
b828,000,000
c833,000,000
Per share
3.66
4.07
Shares outst
211,991,000
194,558,000


How Many in the Keating Crew?
LEAD: The Senate Ethics Committee will soon disclose whether the ''Keating Five'' will be reduced to a smaller group of Senators accused of ethical improprieties in a major savings and loan scandal.
Each Senator's involvement was different and each is entitled to an unbiased hearing, but if the committee plans to exonerate any of the


Bradley's Star Appeal Lingers, Easing Way in Senate Race
LEAD: Bill Bradley seems genuinely hurt that Senate staff members, in a recent Washington survey, said he was the nation's most overrated Senator.


Confusion on Who Are Victims of AIDS
LEAD: To the Editor:


THE SENATE PASSES A BUDGET ACCORD BY 54-TO-46 VOTE
LEAD: With bipartisan support, the Senate approved a comprehensive budget package early this morning that would raise the taxes or cut the benefits of nearly all Americans.


Pizza Hut Plans Brazil Expansion
LEAD: Pizza Hut Inc. plans to open at least 100 new restaurants in Brazil in an agreement signed with a South American investor, a spokesman said.
The financial terms of the agreement signed on Wednesday with Ricardo Mansur, a prominent Sao Paulo business executive, were not announced.


UST Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UST Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
196,916,000
173,717,000
Net inc
59,045,000
51,533,000
Share earns
.52
.44
Shares outst
113,422,000
116,894,000
9mo sales
563,222,000
504,429,000
Net inc
168,553,000
145,515,000
Share earns
1.48
1.25
Shares outst
114,118,000
116,736,000


Ogilvy Wins In Kraft Shift Of Accounts
LEAD: IN a surprise move, Kraft General Foods has realigned the agency roster for some of its leading brands.


Lewis Veraldi, Auto Executive, 60
LEAD: Lewis Veraldi, a retired Ford Motor Company executive who helped create the futuristic look of the Taurus and Mercury Sable, died of a heart attack Saturday at William Beaumont Hospital.
He was 60 years old.


A Budget Status Report
LEAD:
Proposals Almost Certain to Emerge From Congress
Cigarette Tax: Increase of 8 cents (4 cents in 1991, 4 cents in 1993), to 24 cents.
Alcohol Tax: An increase of 16 cents a six-pack, to 32 cents.
10 Percent Luxury Tax: Applies to purchase price above the following thresholds: cars, $30,000; boats, $100,000; jewelry, $5,000.


Trinova Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trinova Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
472,572,000
456,221,000
Net inc
8,720,000
b29,679,000
Share earns
.30
-
Shares outst
29,553,000
34,217,000
9mo sales
1,458,971,000
1,436,428,000
Net inc
41,014,000
c12,010,000
Share earns
1.33
.35
Shares outst
30,875,000
34,210,000


Where Best to Sate 101 Food Hankerings
LEAD: IN Garrison Keillor's old radio program, ''A Prairie Home Companion,'' there used to be a fictitious advertisement for Ralph's Pretty Good Grocery that went, ''If you can't find it at Ralph's, you can probably do without it.'' That might well apply to people looking for their favorite dishes in New York


Dow Soars 64.85 Points, To 2,452.72
LEAD: Stable oil prices carried the stock market sharply higher yesterday, with transportation stocks a big beneficiary.


Southern N.E. Telecommuniations reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southern N.E. Telecommuniations (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
407,900,000
423,900,000
Net inc
b15,200,000
42,800,000
Share earns
.26
.69
Shares outst
61,837,000
61,897,000
9mo rev
1,213,200,000
1,247,900,000
Net inc
b90,900,000
148,000,000
Share earns
1.49
2.37
Shares outst
62,160,000
62,315,000


Critic's Choice
LEAD: People don't play the piano the way they used to do.
Oral tradition tells us this.
Distant old recordings back it up.
Up until World War II, style tended to begin and end with the personality of the pianist.
A lot of music was manhandled in these fits of egocentricity, but there was a freedom - indeed, an extravagance - of expression at some distance from the freeze-dried correctness we tend to come in contact with today.


MCA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MCA Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,061,297,000
894,422,000
Net inc
61,416,000
b50,824,000
Share earns
.71
.69
Shares outst
91,999,828
73,298,561
9mo rev
2,924,185,000
2,426,024,000
Net inc
137,775,000
b120,137,000
Share earns
1.70
1.64
Shares outst
81,210,911
73,194,740


Textron Posts Gain in Profits
LEAD: Textron Inc. reported today that its third-quarter earnings increased nearly 12 percent, largely on improvements in its aerospace business.


China Buys U.S. Wheat
LEAD: China has bought an additional 299,740 metric tons of United States wheat under a price subsidy program, the Agriculture Department said today.
F.
Paul Dickerson, general sales manager for the department's Foreign Agricultural Service, said three private exporting companies had made the deals under the department's Export Enhancement Program.


AmeriTrust Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* AmeriTrust Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
14,000,000
30,000,000
Per share
.33
.78
Shares outst
37,368,700
38,300,100
9mo net loss
19,200,000
b88,200,000
Per share
-
2.37
Shares outst
37,360,700
37,182,100


Caterpillar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Caterpillar Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,715,000,000
2,578,000,000
Net inc
54,000,000
108,000,000
Share earns
.54
1.07
9mo sales
8,452,000,000
8,188,000,000
Net inc
199,000,000
390,000,000
Share earns
1.97
3.85


WON'T CONDEMN U.S.;   Iraq Offers Cheaper Oil
LEAD: In efforts to gain political ground by economic means, Iraq sought to beat one embargo today and the Arab League moved to enforce another.


Harsco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harsco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
414,339,000
300,900,000
Net inc
18,102,000
14,566,000
Share earns
.69
.55
9mo sales
1,254,129,000
1,025,918,000
Net inc
53,068,000
15,518,000
Share earns
2.02
.59


Gartner Takes on Role As Rangers' Rescuer
LEAD: Mike Gartner smiled discreetly as the personal production portfolio was laid out before him for his inspection and remarks.


Waste Management Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Waste Management Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,585,343,000
1,186,729,000
Net inc
b166,229,000
151,779,000
Share earns
.35
.33
Shares outst
476,625,000
460,799,000
9mo rev
4,220,582,000
3,264,403,000
Net inc
b489,128,000
409,232,000
Share earns
1.04
.89
Shares outst
472,559,000
458,036,000


Georgia Gulf Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Georgia Gulf Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
232,739,000
251,239,000
Net inc
23,179,000
46,065,000
Share earns
.69
1.85
Shares outst
33,794,131
24,891,744
9mo sales
703,100,000
861,288,000
Net inc
76,272,000
150,747,000
Share earns
2.55
5.89
Shares outst
29,857,705
25,576,721


Athletics Are Looking Much Better on Paper Than on the Diamond
LEAD: For the second time in three years, the best team in baseball has lost the first two games of the World Series.
But are the Oakland Athletics the best team in baseball?


Bausch &amp; Lomb reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bausch &amp; Lomb (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
357,021,000
319,472,000
Net inc
38,233,000
33,306,000
Share earns
1.27
1.10
9mo sales
1,024,160,000
913,886,000
Net inc
92,205,000
79,929,000
Share earns
3.06
2.65


Britain's 'Desert Rats' Deploy in the Gulf


Chrysler Mini-van
LEAD: The Chrysler Corporation's successful mini-van officially became a part of the permanent collection of the Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn, Mich., taking its place among automotive milestones like the Model-T and the vehicle used by astronauts to traverse the moon.
Chrysler Motors' chairman, Bennett E.


A Renault Executive Is Taking Over Mack
LEAD: Mack Trucks Inc., the money-losing heavy-duty diesel truck manufacturer owned by the French auto maker Renault is switching to a French chief executive.
Mack, based in Allentown, Pa., announced yesterday that Elios Pascual had been named to the post.


Court Urged by U.S. To Refuse Request For New Barry Trial
LEAD: Federal prosecutors called on a United States District Court today to deny Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.'s request for a new trial on his recent conviction for drug possession.


Nynex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nynex Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,395,100,000
3,308,900,000
Net inc
296,700,000
288,700,000
Share earns
1.50
1.47
Shares outst
197,900,000
197,000,000
9mo rev
10,164,100,000
9,842,800,000
Net inc
888,700,000
851,300,000
Share earns
4.47
4.32
Shares outst
198,700,000
197,000,000


Central &amp; South West Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central &amp; South West Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
866,000,000
764,000,000
Net inc
145,000,000
133,000,000
Share earns
1.46
1.34
9mo rev
2,074,000,000
1,938,000,000
Net inc
336,000,000
292,000,000
Share earns
3.33
2.85


Lawmakers Drop Appropriation For Los Alamos Plutonium Lab
LEAD: A House-Senate conference committee today eliminated money for a new $385 million plutonium processing laboratory that the Department of Energy has proposed building at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico.


Grey New York Wins T.C.B.Y.
LEAD: Grey Advertising, New York, was awarded the business for T.C.B.Y.
Systems Inc., a yogurt franchise company.


Our Towns;   How to Finish A Census Count: Just Make It Up
LEAD: Terry Ghazey and Mary Beth Scully used to believe in the census.
They started working in the district office here last winter.
Mrs.
Ghazey at one point made three visits after dark to a motel for the homeless to try and count everyone.
In time she was promoted to supervise 100 enumerators.


Jets' Newest Player Feels Sting of Losing to Bills, Too
LEAD: Even though he didn't arrive in training camp until today, Dennis Price, the newest member of the Jets, already has something in common with his new teammates.


Out of Favor


To Rescind Teacher Raise Would Be Admission of Impotence
LEAD: To the Editor:


ITT Earnings Rise 1.4%
LEAD: The ITT Corporation, the diversified New York-based international concern, reported yesterday that its net income rose 1.4 percent in the third quarter, to $224 million, or $1.73 a share, from $221 million, or $1.55 a share, a year earlier.
The increase in per-share earnings was aided by the company's share-repurchase program.


BRIEFS
LEAD:
Debt


Money Fund Assets Up
LEAD: The assets of the nation's 519 money market mutual funds increased by $3.76 billion, to $415.11 billion, for the week that ended Wednesday.
The Investment Company Institute said yesterday that the assets of the 159 institutional funds increased by $2.48 billion, to $102.33 billion.
The assets of the 255 general-purpose funds were up by $625.4 million, to $146.78 billion.


A Small Price for Fine Art
LEAD: Tax breaks for the very rich aren't easy to defend, especially in the current Congressional climate.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York knows that; he has endured endless flak for proposing a tax break for some wealthy families who give artwork to nonprofit organizations.


MCA's Profit Rose 20.9% in Third Quarter
LEAD: MCA Inc. said today that its third-quarter net income had risen 20.9 percent, paced by gains in music and broadcasting earnings.


Books of The Times;   America's Top-Secret Sky Watch
LEAD:
Out There
The Government's Secret Quest for Extraterrestrials
By Howard Blum
300 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster.
$19.95.


Textron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Textron Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1990
1989
Revenue
1,899,300,000
1,741,200,000
Net inc
66,600,000
59,500,000
Share earns
.75
.66
Shares outst
88,766,000
90,754,000
9mo rev
5,772,300,000
5,415,500,000
Net inc
204,900,000
b182,100,000
Share earns
2.28
2.06
Shares outst
89,743,000
88,500,000


Consumer Prices Rise 0.8% Again
LEAD: With sharply climbing oil prices accounting for more than half the increase, the Consumer Price Index rose eight-tenths of 1 percent in September for the second straight month.
That raised the inflation rate so far this year to 6.6 percent.


Dow Chemical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dow Chemical Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
4,919,000,000
4,250,000,000
Net inc
284,000,000
589,000,000
Share earns
1.04
2.19
Shares outst
270,000,000
269,600,000
9mo sales
14,626,000,000
13,336,000,000
Net inc
1,110,000,000
2,060,000,000
Share earns
4.09
7.61
Shares outst
269,900,000
270,900,000


AIDS in Africa: Experts Study Role of Promiscuous Sex in the Epidemic
LEAD: When a man here talks about going to ''le deuxieme bureau,'' the second office, he means he is going to visit a mistress, perhaps at a place like the Hotel Bikoumou.
It is one of the many small hotels that have prospered in this capital by renting rooms for two hours at a time.


Viewing Chaos in the Capital, Americans Express Outrage
LEAD: What will happen when Don Campbell, a 67-year-old farmer from Williamsville, Ill., enters the voting both in November?


New Jump in Gasoline Price Feared
LEAD: Even as crude oil prices descend from the $40 range, gasoline prices seem poised for another significant increase, industry experts say.


Review/Theater;   Caribbean Rhythms and the Blues
LEAD: ''Once on This Island,'' first produced by Playwrights Horizons, has reopened at the Booth Theater, 222 West 45th Street.
Following are excerpts from Frank Rich's review, which appeared in The New York Times on May 7.


Thiokol Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thiokol Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
292,546,000
267,820,000
Net inc
11,543,000
8,936,000
Share earns
.60
.46
Shares outst
19,176,000
19,329,000
The company said that some figures have been restated in 1989.


Great Lakes Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Great Lakes Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
3,400,000
3,000,000
Per share
.69
.76
9mo net inc
9,900,000
9,600,000
Per share
2.32
2.44


Hong Kong Prison Term
LEAD: A former chairman of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange was sentenced today to four years in prison for corruption.


Portland General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Portland General Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
188,002,000
181,154,000
Net inc
31,900,000
b4,114,000
Share earns
.69
.09
Shares outst
46,136,530
46,114,348
9mo rev
612,829,000
573,954,000
Net inc
70,774,000
b42,024,000
Share earns
1.53
.91
Shares outst
46,129,964
46,110,059


New Bond Request By Trump
LEAD: Donald J. Trump is offering bondholders of his Taj Mahal casino new high-yield ''junk bonds'' in lieu of a coming interest payment and is trying to keep more than 80 percent of the equity in the casino while reducing the interest rate on $675 million of its bonds, the Trump Organization disclosed yesterday.


To Fix the Budget Mess, Restore Pre-'86 Taxes;   New Revenue Sources
LEAD: To the Editor:


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Clayton's Big Band


Rwanda Accepts Cease-Fire Plan
LEAD: President Juvenal Habyarimana of Rwanda said today that he had accepted a Belgian plan calling for neutral troops to supervise a cease-fire between his army and rebels invading from Uganda.


Colgate Net Up 10% in Quarter
LEAD: The Colgate-Palmolive Company, a leading maker of consumer products, yesterday reported strong gains in third-quarter sales and earnings, attributing the improvement to new markets and the impact of a weak dollar.
Colgate, which is based in


Thomson TV Plant Still Going Strong
LEAD: The Thomson Consumer Electronics Corporation celebrated the production of the 50-millionth RCA color television set by heralding the company's big assembly plant here as ''the color TV capital of the world.'' Bernard Isautier, the new chairman of the French-owned Thomson, challenged the workers at the world's largest television assembly operation to meet the challenges of global competition.


Japanese Banker to Head A Morgan Stanley Unit
LEAD: The Morgan Stanley Group said yesterday that it had hired a Japanese banker, Takeo Kani, to be chairman of Morgan Stanley Japan Ltd. and general manger of the firm's Tokyo securities branch.


Compromise May Limit Free Mailings in House
LEAD: A compromise plan by Democrats and Republicans in the House would force members to reveal how much taxpayers' money they spend on mailings to their home districts.


Economic Scene;   If a Recession, How Serious?
LEAD: IT is probable, but not yet certain, that the United States is in a recession.


U.S. and Soviets Jointly Urge Settlement in Salvador
LEAD: In their first coordinated effort to end the civil war in El Salvador, the United States and the Soviet Union called today on the Salvadoran Government and the leftist guerrillas to intensify their negotiations to reach a cease-fire and political compromise.


Eaton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eaton Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
869,100,000
864,100,000
Net inc
b35,800,000
c40,000,000
Share earns
1.01
1.04
Shares outst
35,319,000
38,404,000
9mo sales
2,763,500,000
2,791,200,000
Net inc
b143,100,000
c170,600,000
Share earns
3.99
4.54
Shares outst
35,857,000
37,555,000


U.S. Presence in Gulf Also Keeps Out Sheep
LEAD: Along with holding off Iraqi soldiers, the United States operation in Saudi Arabia is shielding the desert from another force that each year devastates Saudi rangeland: millions of Iraqi sheep.


Paul Seabury, 67, U.S. Authority On Foreign Policy and Educator
LEAD: Paul Seabury, a professor of political science who was an authority on American foreign policy and the author or co-author of a dozen books, died Wednesday at Doctors Hospital in Pinole, Calif.
He was 67 years old and lived in Berkeley, Calif.


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''There is only one route to peace and reconciliation in our country and that is through peaceful negotiation.
The door is now fully open and I am appealing to all leaders and all South Africans to accept the challenge of this open door.''
- President F.W. de Klerk of South Africa. [A3:1.]


Sports of The Times;   Billy Bates Joins Cookie, Gionfriddo
LEAD: The World Series moves westward to Oakland, but before we depart from the Queen City of the Ohio, it is well worth going over Wednesday night's game, which just might be a raggedy classic of sorts.


At Land's Edge, a Contentment of Light and Shape
LEAD: SOUTH COVE, a three-acre, sea-shell-shaped public park on the Hudson River in Battery Park City, overflows with a quiet power so potent that first-time visitors can take the taste and feel of it home with them, and run it over in their minds, like a vivid childhood memory.
A weekend visit to South


Nominees for the National Book Awards
LEAD: Two first novels and a novel completed in 1948 but published only last year are among the five finalists for the 1990 National Book Award in fiction.
The finalists also include Joyce Carol Oates, who won the award in 1970.


La Russa and Canseco Check Their Swings
LEAD: It was clearly a difference of opinion late Wednesday night, but today - with the Oakland Athletics reeling in a one-sided World Series - Tony La Russa and Jose Canseco met behind closed doors and then attempted to play down their disagreement.


To Fix the Budget Mess, Restore Pre-'86 Taxes
LEAD: To the Editor:


Coleman's Stance With Nets Becomes Pay Me or Trade Me
LEAD: Derrick Coleman's agent said yesterday that he had asked the Nets to sign his client to a five-year, $15 million contract soon or trade him to another team.
Coleman is threatening to sit out the National Basketball Association season or play professionally in Europe.


An Agency's Contracts: Friendship Pays
LEAD: The New York City Board of Elections has squandered millions of dollars on contracts with companies that have financial and political ties to party leaders, from a long-term lease on a decrepit warehouse to an extravagant system of repairing voting machines.


Political Might of Elderly Is Felt Again in Senate
LEAD: Elderly people have once again demonstrated their political power by persuading Congress to abandon proposals for sharp increases in the fees they pay for Medicare.
But most of the elderly will still be obliged to pay more for their Federal health insurance coverage under legislation emerging from Capitol


Market Place;   Michelin Facing Problems as No. 1
LEAD: WHEN a company becomes No. 1 in the world, it is usually good news, but the financial markets have not seen it that way for Michelin, the French tire maker.
Michelin became the world leader in tire sales last May through its $1.5 billion acquisition of the Uniroyal-Goodrich Company, but since then its stock has tumbled.


Ball Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ball Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
351,800,000
321,200,000
Net inc
19,400,000
13,200,000
Share earns
.83
.52
9mo sales
1,055,200,000
915,700,000
Net inc
47,400,000
35,900,000
Share earns
1.99
1.49
The company said share earnings were calculated after preferred dividends of $1.4 million and $4 million in the 1990 quarter and 9 months, respectively, and $1.3 million in both the 1989 quarter and 9 months.


Plan Would Raise Pay of Federal Workers
LEAD: Federal workers' pay would be increased by as much as 5 percent a year through 1994 and employees living in high-cost cities would receive extra compensation under an agreement by House and Senate negotiators.


BUSINESS DIGEST
LEAD:
The Economy


Independence Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Independence Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,479,000
4,359,000
Per share
.50
.40
Shares outst
11,016,000
10,985,000
9mo net inc
17,836,000
11,192,000
Per share
1.62
1.04
Shares outst
11,036,000
10,757,000


Wilhelm Magnus, Professor, 83
LEAD: Dr.
Wilhelm Magnus, who retired as a professor at the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences of New York University in 1973, died on Monday at his home in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He was 83 years old.


Review/Film;   'White Palace': Love And the Class Struggle
LEAD: Sex and snobbery form the foundation for ''White Palace,'' the story of a haughty 27-year-old and a slatternly hamburger-joint waitress 16 years his senior.
The audience is expected to make significant character judgments based on the fact that Max (James Spader) has an orderly, well-appointed apartment and an extensive wardrobe, whereas Nora (Susan Sarandon) dresses tartily and throws Ring


Top 5 in U.N. Council Near Accord Over Claims Against Iraq
LEAD: The five permanent Security Council members are close to agreement on a plan inviting governments to prepare lists of financial claims against Iraq arising out of its occupation of Kuwait as well as lists of human rights violations by Iraqi forces there.


Amoco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Amoco Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,927,000,000
6,608,000,000
Net inc
b530,000,000
c336,000,000
Share earns
1.04
.65
Shares outst
506,589,000
515,374,000
9mo rev
22,434,000,000
19,940,000,000
Net inc
b1,375,000,000
c1,291,000,000
Share earns
2.70
2.50
Shares outst
508,763,000
516,558,000


Review/Art;   Combustible Paintings Of a Brooding Legend
LEAD: It can be amazing to see the paintings of an artistic legend come to life, suddenly acquiring a born-yesterday freshness.
This is what happens at the Mary Boone Gallery in SoHo, where 10 paintings by the Abstract Expressionist Clyfford Still, several borrowed from museums, are on view.


Total Petroleum (North Aneria) Ltd.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Total Petroleum (North Aneria) Ltd.(A)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
746,300,000
584,300,000
Net inc
36,800,000
10,400,000
Share earns
1.07
.30
9mo rev
1,863,800,000
1,565,000,000
Net inc
41,700,000
38,500,000
Share earns
1.21
1.27


Korea Sees Outflow
LEAD: Foreign companies are leaving South Korea to escape rising wages, which have weakened the country's competitive edge, the nation's central bank contended today.


Soviet Aide Who Met the Iraqis Talks in Washington About Gulf
LEAD: A senior Soviet official who recently met with President Saddam Hussein of Iraq discussed the Persian Gulf crisis with top American officials today, but offered no indication that he had brought a new proposal for ending Iraq's occupation of Kuwait.


Oil Prices Increase After Israeli-Palestinian Clash
LEAD: After falling sharply early in the day, oil prices reversed course yesterday to close slightly higher on news that Israeli troops had wounded at least 55 Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.


Languid Murder by Phone
''The Kill-Off'' is perfectly Pinteresque, slow and filled with longueurs.
Unfortunately, Maggie Greenwald's film is based on a down-and-dirty 1950's crime novel by Jim Thompson.
Nothing could suit his swift, tangled story less than Ms.
Greenwald's languid treatment.
At the center of the loosely adapted plot is a middle-aged gossip, bedridden by choice, who uses the phone as a deadly weapon.
Almost everyone in her off-season resort town has a great reason to kill her: her young husband, who falls for a chubby prostitute-turned-stripper; a bar owner with a nasty secret; the local drug dealer, who is corrupting the bar owner's daughter.
That's a lot of lurid drama for one little town, but it is tossed away by Ms.
Greenwald's flaccid script and scenes so badly paced that the actors seem to be holding their breath between lines, waiting for their next cues.


Baxter International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baxter International Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,020,000,000
1,808,000,000
Net inc
135,000,000
102,000,000
Share earns
.46
.34
9mo sales
5,926,000,000
5,438,000,000
Net loss
b138,000,000
c307,000,000
Share earns
-
1.03


Texas Urges Quick Action to Halt Honeybees
LEAD: Efforts to quarantine, search and destroy the Africanized honeybee are in full swing as state and Federal officials scramble to halt the newly arrived intruders' spread into the United States.


U S West Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* U S West Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,482,600,000
2,323,000,000
Net inc
302,600,000
258,100,000
Share earns
.77
.69
Shares outst
392,195,000
372,350,000
9mo sales
7,319,500,000
7,151,200,000
Net inc
850,900,000
766,300,000
Share earns
2.22
2.08
Shares outst
383,666,000
367,569,000


Gillette Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Gillette Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,026,300,000
921,600,000
Net inc
92,200,000
65,200,000
Share earns
.80
.57
9mo sales
3,102,500,000
2,766,500,000
Net inc
261,300,000
205,300,000
Share earns
2.25
2.02
Shares outst
97,021,000
96,694,000


To Fix the Budget Mess, Restore Pre-'86 Taxes;   Portent in the Rough
LEAD: To the Editor:


Primerica Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Primerica Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,502,500,000
1,470,000,000
Net inc
94,000,000
78,300,000
Share earns
.82
.80
Shares outst
116,900,000
98,800,000
9mo rev
4,499,400,000
4,110,100,000
Net inc
274,100,000
193,100,000
Share earns
2.38
1.98
Shares outst
117,300,000
99,100,000


Bach by Tureck
LEAD: The pianist and Bach specialist Rosalyn Tureck will play Bach's ''Goldberg'' Variations in the main sanctuary of Temple Emanu-El, Fifth Avenue at 65th Street, on Sunday at 4 P.M.
Admission is free.
Information: 744-1400.


Desoto Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Desoto Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
107,734,000
103,259,000
Net inc
902,000
b10,169,000
Share earns
.23
-
9mo rev
342,246,000
323,422,000
Net inc
7,344,000
b8,560,000
Share earns
1.81
-
b-Net loss and included a restructuring charge of $12.5 million.


Lloyd H. Bailer, Economist and Arbitrator, 76
LEAD: Lloyd H. Bailer, an economist and arbitrator, died at his home in Brentwood on Tuesday after suffering a series of strokes.
He was 76 years old.


Gay Organization Sees Upsurge in Violence
LEAD: The New York City Council President, Andrew J. Stein, and leaders of the gay and lesbian community said yesterday that figures compiled by a gay organization show an upsurge in violence against gay men and lesbians.


Mobil Settles California Suit Over Toxic Acid at Refinery
LEAD: The Mobil Oil Corporation said today that it had settled a lawsuit directed at its refinery in suburban Los Angeles by agreeing to reformulate a highly toxic acid used in the plant or ban its use and to allow inspections by an independent safety adviser.


B. P. Asset Sale For $217 Million
LEAD: The British Petroleum Company agreed to sell the companies holding its exploration and production interests in New Zealand to Fletcher Challenge Ltd. for about $217 million.
The company said the interests included an 18.75 percent stake in the offshore Maui field and a 37.5 percent ownership in the onshore Kapuni field.


Romania Chief Acts To Speed Transition To Market Economy
LEAD: Prime Minister Petre Roman, saying only shock therapy can save Romania, introduced a package of laws today intended to speed the country's transition to a market economy.


Super Food Services reports earnings for Year to Aug 25
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Super Food Services (NYSE)
Year to Aug 25
1990
1989
Sales
1,776,740,000
1,691,577,000
Net inc
17,182,000
15,935,000
Share earns
1.60
1.47


Richard S. Miller, 68, Yale Ecology Professor
LEAD: Richard Samuel Miller, an ecologist and a professor emeritus at Yale University's School of Forestry, died last Friday at Yale-New Haven Hospital.
He was 68 years old and lived in North Branford, Conn.


De Klerk Lifts Emergency Rule in Natal Province
LEAD: President F. W. de Klerk lifted emergency rule in Natal today, following up on its removal in South Africa's other three provinces last June.


U.S. Reserve To Pump Oil
LEAD: The Strategic Petroleum Reserve will pump 75,000 barrels of crude oil on Friday from one of its Louisiana salt domes, the first shipment of oil in a test of the system ordered three weeks ago by President Bush, the Energy Department said today.


Marion Merrell Dow Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Marion Merrell Dow Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
625,000,000
566,000,000
Net inc
134,000,000
120,000,000
Share earns
.47
.43
Shares outst
282,000,000
278,000,000
9mo sales
1,832,000,000
1,700,000,000
Net inc
375,000,000
324,000,000
Share earns
1.33
1.16
Shares outst
281,000,000
278,000,000


Grim Crossroads: Rape, Retardation and Abortion
LEAD: Debra Lynn Thomas does not understand that she was raped, that she is pregnant as a result of that rape, and that her baby is due in about three months.
With the mental ability of an infant, Miss Thomas, who is 32 years old, does not even know what pregnancy is.


Dolphins Overcome Themselves
LEAD: Stingy defense and Mark Higgs's touchdown on a blocked punt helped the Miami Dolphins overcome five turnovers tonight as they handed New England its fourth consecutive loss, 17-10.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
BOXING
Nunn Flattens Curry to Keep Title
Michael Nunn overpowered Donald Curry with a storm of blows and then floored the challenger in the 10th round last night to retain his International Boxing Federation middleweight title in Paris.
Nunn caught the tiring Curry in a corner with a flurry of 15 blows without a reply.


Coniston Settles Rift With UAL Managers
LEAD: Coniston Partners L.P., a New York investment group that owns 11.8 percent of the UAL Corporation and that has threatened to oust the company's board, made peace yesterday with the airline concern.


BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Baker Hughes Inc., Houston, which services the oil and gas industry, said it had acquired Chemlink Inc., an oilfield and industrial chemicals company.
Terms were not disclosed.


Paine Webber Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Paine Webber Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
720,651,000
719,392,000
Net inc
9,566,000
16,832,000
Share earns
.15
.41
Shares outst
25,050,000
26,483,000
9mo rev
2,280,526,000
2,124,111,000
Net inc
34,995,000
41,098,000
Share earns
.70
.85
Shares outst
25,139,000
27,358,000


Two-Month Sales Weak at K Mart
LEAD: The K Mart Corporation, one of the nation's largest retailers, posted weak sales in August and September in the wake of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the company's chief financial officer, Thomas F. Murasky, said on Wednesday at a meeting of financial analysts.
Total sales rose 11.1 percent in August and 10.2 percent in September over a year earlier.


Proposal by Gorbachev Wins Committee Votes
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's economic plan sailed through parliamentary committees today after a presidential adviser insisted that it would not inhibit individual republics from creating free markets at their own pace.


Review/Photography;   Reminders of the 60's In Collage and Montage
LEAD: In the 1960's, the West Coast generated its own brand of Pop Art.
Artists like Wallace Berman, Bruce Conner and Edward Kienholz, while less attuned to Madison Avenue than their New York City counterparts, nonetheless brought artifacts of popular culture into play in their work.
They did so largely through a process of accumulation, in a style that came to be known as California Assemblage.


These Bills Defraud the Working Poor
LEAD: With only hours to go before the Government is due to shut down again, House and Senate budget negotiators are racing to present a budget to the President for signature.
Unless they are careful, however, they will end up balancing the budget at least partly on the backs of people who work full time but are still below the poverty line.


To Fix the Budget Mess, Restore Pre-'86 Taxes;   No Investment Rise
LEAD: To the Editor:


TWO KOREAS AGREE TO FURTHER TALKS
LEAD: Senior negotiators from North and South Korea said today that they had again failed to reach agreement on any steps to reduce mutual tensions, but that there was reason to hope that an accord could be worked out in the future.


Lewis Has Surgery On His Right Knee
LEAD: Carl Lewis, the holder of the world record for the 100-meter dash, has undergone arthroscopic surgery on his right knee, and the procedure will delay his training schedule for the 1991 outdoor season, one of his coaches said yesterday in Houston.


Offer by Bonneau For Foster Grant
LEAD: The Bonneau Company, a leader in the sunglasses business, has offered to pay $9 million for the assets of the Foster Grant Corporation, including its name and trademark.
Foster Grant, which rode to prominence with ads asking what star was behind its sunglasses, sought protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code in


Jordan Olivar, 75, College Football Coach
LEAD: Jordan Olivar, former head football coach at Yale, Villanova and Loyola Marymount, died of lung cancer Wednesday at his home in Inglewood, Calif.
He was 75 years old.


Reds' Mission Not So Impossible Now
LEAD: The 87th World Series headed for Oakland today with the Cincinnati Reds two games up on the defending champion Oakland Athletics, and halfway toward completing one of the long-shot upsets in modern baseball.


Apple Computer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Apple Computer Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 28
1990
1989
Sales
1,354,090,000
1,383,747,000
Net inc
98,476,000
b161,080,000
Share earns
.81
1.24
Shares outst
122,318,000
129,910,000
Yr sales
5,558,435,000
5,284,013,000
Net inc
474,895,000
b454,033,000
Share earns
3.77
3.53
Shares outst
125,813,000
128,669,000


Traffic Alert
LEAD: George Washington: Eastbound traffic will be severely disrupted today through 6 A.M.
Monday because of lane-closings.


UJB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* UJB Financial (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
19,800,000
b31,400,000
Per share
-
.69
9mo net inc
11,300,000
94,100,000
Per share
.22
2.08
b-Net income


Review/Music;   Boston Symphony Pays Tribute to Bernstein
LEAD: Of all the individuals and organizations that have been dedicating programs to Leonard Bernstein's memory, none can claim a longer and closer association with him than the Boston Symphony Orchestra.
The first orchestra concert he ever attended was played by the Boston Pops.
The first concert he conducted was in Boston, on the Esplanade.


Keystone Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Keystone Financial
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
8,256,000
7,400,000
Per share
.57
.51
9mo net inc
23,998,000
21,820,000
Per share
1.65
1.48


S.&amp; L. Outflow Slowed in May
LEAD: Net withdrawals from the nation's savings and loan associations slowed to $7 billion in May after soaring to a record $15.1 billion a month earlier, the Government said this week.


Gain for Tokyo Stocks
LEAD: A stronger yen and hopes for peace in the Middle East pushed stocks higher in Tokyo early today, but by the close much of the gain had evaporated.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues, which at midday was up 483.47 points, or 2 percent, closed at 24,481.49, for a gain of 114.41.


Cardinals Cashing In After Gamble in Draft
LEAD: At San Jose State, Johnny Johnson acquired a reputation for unreliability.
He missed football practices.
He missed team meetings.
He missed weight-training sessions.
The coach finally dismissed him from the team.


Progressive Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Progressive Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
348,000,000
354,800,000
Net inc
18,100,000
23,700,000
Share earns
.76
.90
Shares outst
23,800,000
26,400,000
9mo rev
1,035,500,000
1,057,300,000
Net inc
82,300,000
77,700,000
Share earns
3.34
2.91
Shares outst
24,600,000
26,700,000


Baxter Net Rises 32%
LEAD: Baxter International Inc., the giant medical-supply company, today reported a 32 percent increase in third-quarter profits, citing strong overseas markets.


Prices of Treasury Issues Rise
LEAD: Prices of Treasury securities rose and interest rates fell yesterday, as a better-than-expected report on inflation and an early drop in oil prices inspired buying.


Israel Retracts Pledge to U.S On East Jerusalem Housing
LEAD: Foreign Minister David Levy today retracted a commitment made to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d that Israel would not settle more Soviet immigrants in East Jerusalem.


Pop/Jazz;   Very Private Jill O'Hara Once Again Goes Public
LEAD: When Jill O'Hara strides to the tiny stage of Dannys' Skylight Lounge, the back-room cabaret at the Grand Sea Palace restaurant, it's hard to imagine that this vivid, confident performer in a bright red gown used to be so shy that she could barely bring herself to do an interview.


Game 4 of Chess Match Ends in Draw
LEAD: At 12:26 yesterday morning, almost two hours after play in Game 4 of the World Championship Chess Match had ended Wednesday night, Ron Henley, one of Anatoly Karpov's seconds, telephoned his draw offer to the champion, but it wasn't until 10:54 A.M. that Gary Kasparov saw fit to register his acceptance.


Home Shopping Network Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Home Shopping Network Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1990
1989
Sales
244,586,000
187,446,000
Net inc
b1,670,000
c26,101,000
Share earns
.02
-
Yr sales
1,008,272,000
774,342,000
Net inc
b38,754,000
c14,939,000
Share earns
.42
-


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL
A3-17
Trade tariffs on Chinese exports were increased by the House as a protest against the restrictions on political dissent in China.
The Bush Administration has said it would be unwise to punish China now.
Page A1


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
LEAD: *
Hancock Fabrics Inc., Tupelo, Miss., named Jack W. Busby Jr. executive vice president and director of retail operations.


People
LEAD: *
Steve Davis has been named general manager of J. Walter Thompson, Chicago.
Paul Mead was promoted to chief financial officer of J. Walter Thompson North America, based in Toronto.


Shattered by Girl's Death, Neighbors Seek Answers
LEAD: In the hours after 10-year-old Jessica Guzman's body was found by a roadside, one week after she disappeared, a group of mothers began climbing the stairs of her Bronx housing project to collect flower money.
And as neighbors stuffed $1 and $5 bills into their glass jar, the women left a message.


Calfed Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Calfed Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
b92,300,000
c22,200,000
Share earns
-
.83
9mo net loss
b126,400,000
c58,800,000
Share earns
-
2.23
b-Included losses from discontinued operations of $41,100,000 and $35,000,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Indonesia's Muslims See Gulf Complications
LEAD: This is the largest Muslim country in the world, with more of the faithful than all the Arab countries combined.
It is also one of the most relaxed and least doctrinaire, with Islam keeping a careful line between faith and ideology, between influence and political activity.


Vaulx-en-Velin Journal;   Arab Youths of France: Their Anger Boils Over
LEAD: The Mas-du-Taureau section here, a predominantly North African neighborhood, has had quite a facelift: there are newly planted chestnut trees, a new library and day-care center and a fresh coat of salmon-colored paint on the six-story apartment buildings.


NEW DEFENSE CHIEF IS NAMED IN PRAGUE
LEAD: President Vaclav Havel today named his Deputy Foreign Minister to be Defense Minister a day after dismissing his predecessor, apparently in response to protests against the presence of Communists or former Communists in high office.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1990
From '89
American Tel. &amp; Tel. Co.
$ 712,000,000
+1.9
Amoco Corp.
530,000,000
+57.7
Apple Computer Inc.
98,500,000
-38.9
Arco Chemical Co.
56,000,000
-40.4
Bell Atlantic Corp.
358,400,000
+4.2
Caterpillar Inc.


Sounds Around Town
LEAD:
Haran's Songs


Leon Olinger, Psychiatrist, 82
LEAD: Dr.
Leon Olinger, a psychiatrist who was a former assistant director of Brooklyn State Hospital, died yesterday at his home in Wilmette, Ill,, where he had lived in retirement for the last four years.
He was 82 years old.


First Security Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Security Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
11,363,000
11,804,000
Per share
.83
.87
9mo net inc
36,569,000
33,394,000
Per share
2.67
2.47
The results were restated to reflect merger March 2 with United Savings Bank, Salem, Ore.


Breaking the Litter Habit
LEAD: Fifteen years after the last fiscal crisis, New York City's budget crunch has once again reduced the number of Sanitation Department street cleaners to a mere corporal's guard.
To offset the loss, Mayor Dinkins recently sent out a notice with each of the city's 250,000 payroll checks asking the recipient to pick up someone else's litter at least once a day.


McClatchy Newspapers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* McClatchy Newspapers (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
107,031,000
94,876,000
Net inc
7,511,000
8,759,000
Share earns
.26
.31
Shares outst
28,577,000
28,531,000
9mo rev
309,724,000
279,126,000
Net inc
17,691,000
23,597,000
Share earns
.62
.83
Shares outst
28,570,000
28,517,000


Public Service of Colorado reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Public Service of Colorado (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
347,317,000
382,989,000
Net inc
34,259,000
23,539,000
Share earns
.58
.39
Shares outst
53,802,000
52,570,000
9mo rev
1,214,779,000
1,317,237,000
Net inc
106,736,000
106,689,000
Share earns
1.82
1.85
Shares outst
53,438,000
52,495,000


New York City's Elections Board: Who They Are
LEAD:
Jeannette Gadson: Joined board in 1990... represents Brooklyn Democratic organization ...
Assemblywoman and former executive secretary to former Councilman Samuel D. Wright ...now district manager of Community Board No. 16 in Brooklyn.
George M. Spanakos: Joined board in 1989...represents Brooklyn Republican organization....lawyer...former law secretary in State Supreme Court.


Arco Chemical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arco Chemical Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
681,000,000
632,000,000
Net inc
b56,000,000
94,000,000
Share earns
.58
.98
9mo rev
2,071,000,000
2,057,000,000
Net inc
bc283,000,000
330,000,000
Share earns
2.95
3.44


United Banks of Colorado reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Banks of Colorado (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
13,600,000
5,300,000
Per share
.83
.31
Shares outst
15,402,000
15,469,000
9mo net loss
71,500,000
b13,800,000
Per share
-
.79
Shares outst
15,354,000
15,302,000


ITT Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* ITT Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
5,032,000,000
4,922,000,000
Net inc
224,000,000
221,000,000
Share earns
1.73
1.55
Shares outst
127,971,000
139,553,000
9mo sales
15,191,000,000
14,967,000,000
Net inc
874,000,000
665,000,000
Share earns
6.61
4.65
Shares outst
127,971,000
139,553,000


U. S. Trade Plan Criticized
LEAD: A top European Community official today criticized as unrealistic an American trade proposal for sharp cuts in Government payments to farmers.


Mexican Phone Sale
LEAD: Sixteen companies, including a dozen foreign concerns, qualified to bid for the Government-owned Telefonos de Mexico in a sale that could bring Mexico more than $4 billion, the Finance Ministry said late Wednesday.


At U.S. Embassy in Iraq: Rituals and Precautions
LEAD: At the United States Embassy, it has become an almost daily ritual: crowds of protesters bused in by the Government from across Baghdad to shout slogans against President Bush, against America and against what the demonstrators have been told is an American policy of starving Iraq because of its occupation of


TV Weekend;   NBC's Game: Lansbury vs. Baseball
LEAD: One way or another, television viewers will be able to have their regular Angela Lansbury fix on Sunday.
If the World Series does not go to five games, CBS will be offering ''Murder, She Wrote'' at 8 P.M., as usual.
On the offensive, no matter what happens, NBC is counterprogramming, also at 8, ''The Love She Sought,'' a two-hour movie starring Ms.


On Stage
LEAD:
A Question on 'Funk'


750 Reported Killed in Lebanese General's Defeat
LEAD: At least 750 people were killed in the Syrian-led offensive that toppled Michel Aoun, the Christian militia chief, and in reprisals after the attack on Saturday, military and hospital officials said today.


MacArthur Was Right
LEAD: The United States is working hard, doing its very best, to persuade Japan to make a momentous decision.
If Japan finally agrees, generations to come will remember and study the great historic moment - and will curse the day.


Mapco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mapco Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
701,600,000
530,300,000
Net inc
24,800,000
22,400,000
Share earns
.81
.58
Shares outst
30,600,000
38,500,000
9mo rev
1,944,700,000
1,533,700,000
Net inc
102,900,000
86,200,000
Share earns
3.23
2.20
Shares outst
31,900,000
39,100,000


Davox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Davox Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
9,336,000
8,790,000
Net inc
69,000
b332,000
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
28,295,000
25,702,000
Net loss
522,000
2,221,000
b-Net loss


A Powerful Storm Sweeps New York Area
LEAD: Heavy rains and winds of up to 65 miles an hour slammed into the metropolitan area on Thursday, damaging hundreds of homes.
Houses in Belle


Standard Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Standard Federal Bank (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
9,900,000
9,300,000
Per share
.32
.30
9mo net inc
29,500,000
35,600,000
Per share
.96
1.15


Walker Is Unhappy
LEAD: Herschel Walker, acquired by the Minnesota Vikings in a blockbuster trade last year, says he is frustrated and confused over his role in the offense and is tired of being a million-dollar decoy.


Norway Sets Currency Link
LEAD: Norway's Finance Ministry said today that it would link its currency, the crown, to the European Currency Unit, or ECU, on Monday at a central parity of 7.9940 crowns per ECU.
''By unilaterally linking the


Mr. Bush's Loaded Label for Fairness
LEAD: Once again the Senate and House have passed, by strong majorities, a compromise Civil Rights Act of 1990.
An earlier version was modified, mainly through Republican efforts, in an attempt to appease the Bush Administration, which persists in calling the measure a ''quota bill.'' Yet President Bush, still in the grip of that loaded label, talks of a veto.


CNS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* CNS Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,905,495
1,275,199
Net inc
57,057
b257,526
Share earns
.01
-
9mo sales
5,239,155
4,251,612
Net inc
136,995
b632,593
Share earns
.03
-
b-Net loss


Builders Transport Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Builders Transport Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
60,665,000
58,437,000
Net loss
b9,325,000
c589,000
Share earns
-
.14
Shares outst
4,926,720
4,239,382
9mo rev
185,497,000
173,699,000
Net loss
b7,690,000
c84,000
Share earns
-
.02
Shares outst
4,923,519
4,230,815


200 Birds Shot for Study of Valdez Spill Losses
LEAD: More than 200 wild seabirds were deliberately killed this summer, mostly in Alaska's national wildlife refuges, by researchers seeking evidence in the Government's case against the Exxon Corporation in last year's oil spill, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service said yesterday.


Oriole Homes Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oriole Homes Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
21,188,165
22,542,630
Net inc
1,098,310
1,224,033
Share earns
.29
.32
Shares outst
3,793,970
3,830,812
9mo rev
67,397,172
72,249,163
Net inc
3,586,381
b4,587,473
Share earns
.95
1.20
Shares outst
3,796,119
3,836,848


Meredith Profits Jump on One-Time Gains
LEAD: The Meredith Corporation said today that its earnings increased sixfold in the first quarter of its fiscal year, reflecting one-time gains from asset sales.


After the Killing in Lebanon
LEAD: At terrible cost, and with Syrian arms, Lebanon's makeshift Government has ended a rebellion by Christian hard-liners led by Gen.
Michel Aoun.
Some 750 people were killed in the latest battle in a 15-year civil war that has left Beirut a charred ruin.
If there is a peace of sorts, it remains a harsh one imposed from the outside by Syria; hopes for achieving something more depend on what Lebanon has sadly lacked - realism and moderation.


Kasparov Timeout Delays 5th Chess Game
LEAD: Gary Kasparov, the defending chess champion, yesterday used one of the three timeouts each player is allowed, putting off the fifth game of the World Championship Chess Match in New York City.


Cirrus Logic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cirrus Logic Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
34,566,000
18,032,000
Net inc
4,420,000
3,357,000
Share earns
.28
.22
6mo rev
65,610,000
32,820,000
Net inc
8,624,000
5,858,000
Share earns
.55
.41
Shares outst
15,802,000
14,425,000


RB&amp;W Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RB&amp;W Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 29
1990
1989
Sales
43,439,000
43,414,000
Net inc
129,000
b1,014,000
Share earns
.03
.20
9mo sales
133,034,000
146,076,000
Net loss
3,207,000
bc4,308,000
Share earns
-
.85
b-Included a tax benefit from tax- loss carryforward of $300,000, or 6 cents a share, and $1,239,000, or 24 cents a share, for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Chittenden Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chittenden Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
3,840,000
1,461,000
9mo net loss
2,601,000
b2,634,000
Per share
-
.56
b-Net income


Court in Romania Suspends Ex-Secret Police Chief's Trial
LEAD: A military court today decided to suspend the trial of the late Communist dictator Nicolae Ceausescu's secret police chief because of insufficient evidence.


Citizens First Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Citizens First Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
10,109,000
b9,226,000
Per share
-
.43
9mo net loss
38,067,000
b27,731,000
Per share
-
1.29
b-Net income


Derailment Causes Toxic Spill in South Carolina


Sportscene Restaurants reports earnings for Year to Aug 26
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sportscene Restaurants
Year to Aug 26
1990
1989
Revenue
26,842,000
17,809,000
Net inc
1,720,000
915,000
Share earns
1.05
.32
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Warner-Lambert
LEAD: Shares of the Warner-Lambert Company rose yesterday after the company told analysts late Thursday that its Cognex treatment for Alzheimer's disease had received a ''fast track'' approval rating from United States regulators.
Warner-Lambert's shares rose $2.125 yesterday, to $64.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.


American Medical Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Medical Electronics
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
5,417,636
2,224,397
Net inc
b1,211,722
c137,789
Share earns
.26
.03
9mo rev
14,467,402
7,134,044
Net inc
b2,518,784
c530,465
Share earns
.56
.12
b-Included extraordinary tax credits of $430,592, or 9 cents a share, for the quarter and $889,348, or 20 cents a share, for the 9 months.


Lifeline Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lifeline Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
8,178,000
6,119,000
Net inc
705,000
110,000
Share earns
.19
.03
9mo rev
23,250,000
16,817,000
Net inc
1,922,000
b351,000
Share earns
.53
-
b-Net loss


Patents;   Chemical Decoys Said To Fight TB Strains
LEAD: A medical researcher in Denver, P. R. J. Gangadharam, won patent approval this week for a drug that he said uses chemical decoys to attack drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis.


Olin Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Olin Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
656,000,000
580,000,000
Net inc
15,000,000
24,000,000
Share earns
.65
1.15
Shares outst
19,100,000
19,900,000
9mo sales
1,952,000,000
1,909,000,000
Net inc
76,000,000
93,000,000
Share earns
3.66
4.52
Shares outst
19,100,000
20,300,000


California Microwave Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Microwave Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
35,652,000
31,333,000
Net inc
1,485,000
1,394,000
Share earns
.18
.17


Varity of Canada In Penalty Accord
LEAD: The Varity Corporation has agreed to pay $37 million (Canadian) in termination pay and Government job loss penalties arising from the failure of its main subsidiary.
The agreement with the Canadian Automobile Workers union and the federal and Ontario governments also opens the door for the farm equipment manufacturer to move its headquarters to the United


Scan-Optics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Scan-Optics Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,198,000
8,593,000
Net inc
202,000
b5,269,000
Share earns
.03
-
9mo rev
31,979,000
29,840,000
Net inc
519,000
b8,229,000
Share earns
.08
-
b-Net loss


Nissan Examines Expansion in U.S.
LEAD: The Nissan Motor Manufacturing Corporation U.S.A. has bought options on about 900 acres in Tennessee and Alabama for a plant to build engines, a company executive said.
The sites under consideration would be used to build components for the Japanese car maker, which builds Sentras and light pickup trucks at its Smyrna, Tenn., plant., near


Review/Music;   The Shanghai Symphony
LEAD: The Shanghai Symphony's appearance at Carnegie Hall last Sunday night was more a progress report than a recitation of accomplishments.
This is an orchestra with a will to play well but not yet the means.
The problems, at least for the moment, are not so much cultural distance from European music.


Meredith Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meredith Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
179,411,000
173,095,000
Net inc
b60,936,000
c9,317,000
Share earns
3.62
.50
Shares outst
16,843,000
18,667,000
b-After income from discontinued operations of $52,022,000, or $3.09 a share, which included gain of $49,305,000, or $2.93 a share, from the sale of printing operations.


U.S. TO SEND TANKS FROM NATO TO GULF
LEAD: The Pentagon said today that it was shipping 400 to 500 of its top battle tanks to Saudi Arabia from storage depots in Germany.


For the Athletics, a Flub in the Field and Pitching to Match
LEAD: The surprising inning that determined the outcome of the surprising third game of the surprising World Series turned on a ground ball that Mark McGwire, the Oakland first baseman, could not field.


Flight International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flight International
Qtr to July 31
1990
1989
Revenue
11,484,454
13,825,752
Net loss
1,968,333
887,195


MIPS Computer Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* MIPS Computer Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
37,485,000
27,068,000
Net inc
143,000
1,820,000
Share earns
-
.09
Shares outst
25,364,000
19,400,000
9mo rev
109,296,000
70,120,000
Net inc
7,660,000
592,000
Share earns
.30
.03
Shares outst
25,411,000
19,027,000


Conflicitng Accounts of Words in Congress
LEAD: The printed record is a transcript of what members of Congress wish they had said.
The videotapes are records of what members actually said and how they said it.


Alexander E. Barkan Dies at 81; Labor Federation Political Chief
LEAD: Alexander E. Barkan, retired political director of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations, died Thursday at Sibley Hospital in Washington.
He was 81 years old and lived in Bethesda, Md.


Review/Fashion;   In Paris, the Expected and Unexpected
LEAD: The first days of the spring and summer showings covered every predictable shade of fashion opinion, as well as some unpredictable ones.


Oglebay Norton Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oglebay Norton Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
59,347,000
52,210,000
Net inc
3,755,000
1,459,000
Share earns
1.47
.55
Shares outst
2,551,453
2,639,996
9mo rev
134,051,000
127,209,000
Net inc
3,431,000
2,917,000
Share earns
1.34
1.13
Shares outst
2,568,081
2,582,425


Congressional Attempt to Impose Higher Tariffs on China Collapses
LEAD: A Congressional move to impose higher tariffs on China involving billions of dollars of exports collapsed today when the Senate missed a voting deadline, thereby enabling China to continue getting low duties at least through the end of next June.


Loss Leaves Islanders Alone in Patrick Cellar
LEAD: Considering that it was an early-season battle to escape last place in the Patrick Division, the game here tonight between the Islanders and the Washington Capitals was better than might have been expected.


Flowers Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 22
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Flowers Industries Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 22
1990
1989
Sales
188,908,000
193,103,000
Net inc
4,406,000
b238,000
Share earns
.13
.01
b-After an extraordinary charge of $4,955,000.


Cheney May Seek Veto Unless Pentagon Is Heeded on Arms Budget
LEAD: Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has informed Congress that he plans to recommend a veto of the $288 billion military budget bill unless lawmakers change it to take account of Defense Department objections, Pentagon officials and lawmakers said today.


National Banc of Commerce reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Banc of Commerce
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,459,000
1,667,000
Per share
.24
.27
Shares outst
6,115,000
6,200,000
9mo net inc
3,647,000
4,478,000
Per share
.60
.80
Shares outst
6,153,000
5,608,000


Review/Music;   Slatkin Leads Philharmonic In a Tribute to Bernstein
LEAD: By all reports, Leonard Bernstein didn't like the mornings, but on Friday the New York Philharmonic got him up early - wherever he may be - and serenaded their late laureate conductor with some of his own music.


Don't Let Redwoods Fall to Corporate Greed
LEAD: To the Editor:


Transactions
LEAD:
Football


Demagoguery at Dartmouth
LEAD: The leaders of our colleges and universities, including Dartmouth, bear a high responsibility to their students and to society.
By precept and example, they must inculcate in a future generation an understanding of the principles of truth and justice, which are the essential basis of the liberal community.


Giants Are Planning to Bring Collins Back
LEAD: The Giants are ready to activate Mark Collins on Saturday for Sunday's game here against the Phoenix Cardinals.
Collins, the starting left cornerback, has been on injured reserve for four weeks with a sprained right ankle.


INSIDE
LEAD:
Gorbachev Plan Approved


National Sanitary Supply Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National Sanitary Supply Co.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
69,106,000
69,168,000
Net inc
1,398,000
1,542,000
Share earns
.23
.25
9mo sales
199,029,000
198,085,000
Net inc
3,033,000
3,476,000
Share earns
.50
.57


Legg Mason Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Legg Mason Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
61,929,000
62,001,000
Net inc
3,475,000
3,429,000
Share earns
.41
.40
6mo rev
122,067,000
121,404,000
Net inc
6,655,000
6,483,000
Share earns
.78
.75
The latest periods' earnings included $1.8 million, or 21 cents a share, from gains on the company's previously reported sale of 240,616 shares of Environmental Elements Corp.


Jane B. Ross, Anthropologist, 44
LEAD: Dr.
Jane Bennett Ross, an anthropologist, died on Oct. 11 at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
She was 44 years old and lived in Manhattan.


Central Illinois Public Service Co.  reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Central Illinois Public Service Co.  (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
607,502,000
593,115,000
Net inc
73,701,000
68,539,000
Share earns
1.99
1.83
Year-ago results are restated.
On October 1, Central Illinois Public Service Co.


DH Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* DH Technology (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,333,000
10,798,000
Net inc
1,265,000
1,559,000
Share earns
.25
.31
9mo rev
31,812,000
30,749,000
Net inc
4,747,000
4,241,000
Share earns
.94
.85


Lamson &amp; Sessions reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lamson &amp; Sessions (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
83,966,000
82,294,000
Net inc
1,453,000
1,225,000
Share earns
.11
.09
Shares outst
13,186,000
13,191,000
9mo rev
244,430,000
262,313,000
Net inc
3,561,000
8,053,000
Share earns
.27
.62
Shares outst
13,201,000
12,645,000


The Century Club's Hard Decision To Raise Cash by Selling a Painting
LEAD: The Century Association's decision to sell its prized painting, William Sidney Mount's ''Power of Music,'' came after some lively battles over the wisdom of sacrificing art to save a building.


National City Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* National City Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,135,000
1,281,000
Per share
.25
.28
9mo net inc
3,423,000
b6,785,000
Per share
.76
1.50
b-Included gain of $3,093,000, or 68 cents a share, from sale of a subsidiary.


Review/Music;   Not Your Usual Guitarist
LEAD: The obscure Chicago blues guitarist Jimmy (Fast Fingers) Dawkins showed up at Manny's Carwash on Oct. 12, turned his back on the audience for a good portion of his show, played furiously and then left.
Mr.
Dawkins, a shadowy figure better known in Europe than in America, is a brutal guitarist.
And unlike most of the blues shows that roll through town, Mr.


First Constitution Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Constitution Financial (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
12,906,000
10,943,000
9mo net loss
71,285,000
1,260,000
Some year-ago periods' figures have been restated.


Continuum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Continuum Co.  (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
23,447,000
19,339,000
Net inc
1,966,000
634,000
Share earns
.22
.07
6mo rev
45,021,000
36,648,000
Net inc
3,451,000
337,000
Share earns
.39
.04


Solitron Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Solitron Devices (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1990
1989
Sales
7,487,000
9,148,000
Net inc
b1,800,000
228,000
Share earns
.41
.05
Shares outst
4,391,773
4,391,773
6mo sales
15,163,000
18,668,000
Net loss
b2,027,000
738,000
Shares outst
4,391,773
4,391,773


Glimmer of Hope in Patz Case Dimmed by Child Molester's Plea Bargain
LEAD: Federal prosecutors indicated yesterday that they had failed to pressure the prime suspect in the 1979 disappearance of 6-year-old Etan Patz into disclosing details of the case in exchange for leniency in a 1986 child molestation case in Pennsylvania.
The suspect, Jose Ramos, was led from court in Warren County, Pa., after pleading guilty yesterday to one count in the 1986 case.


Allied Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Allied Bankshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,009,000
902,000
Per share
.21
.17
9mo net inc
2,920,000
2,958,000
Per share
.58
.56


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* PPG Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,471,700,000
1,360,100,000
Net inc
b107,100,000
c106,700,000
Share earns
1.00
.97
Shares outst
106,500,000
110,100,000
9mo sales
4,521,600,000
4,309,900,000
Net inc
b373,400,000
c363,800,000
Share earns
3.47
3.25
Shares outst
107,500,000
111,900,000


Cable TV Regulation Bill Dead for Now, Senators Say
LEAD: Despit a flurry of last-minute deal-making today in the Senate, sponsors of legislation to regulate the cable television industry pronounced their on-again, off-again measure dead for this session of Congress and blamed the White House.


Cognex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cognex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,255,387
4,347,269
Net inc
1,765,104
1,255,043
Share earns
.40
.32
9mo rev
17,129,736
11,281,614
Net inc
4,658,842
2,581,967
Share earns
1.08
.71


American Brands reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Brands (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,866,900,000
3,062,900,000
Net inc
b230,800,000
166,400,000
Share earns
1.16
.86
Shares outst
195,445,542
190,312,719
9mo rev
10,023,000,000
9,031,400,000
Net inc
b584,600,000
458,800,000
Share earns
2.97
2.38
Shares outst
192,951,786
188,144,333


Texas Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Texas Instruments (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,680,000,000
1,571,000,000
Net loss
7,000,000
b65,000,000
Share earns
-
.67
Shares outst
81,620,398
85,042,728
9mo rev
4,808,000,000
4,798,000,000
Net inc
17,000,000
256,000,000
Share earns
-
2.70
Shares outst
81,562,482
84,864,051


TAX RISE FOR RICH IS SEEN AS A PART OF A BUDGET DEAL
LEAD: President Bush went to Capitol Hill today to rally Republicans around a plan that would cut the Federal budget deficit without raising income tax rates.
But House and Senate negotiators predicted that a final budget deal would likely include some increase in income taxes on the wealthy, as well as a rise in gasoline taxes.


Is D.H. Out of Order? The designated hitter may be an endangered species.


Duke Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duke Power Co.  (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,718,260,000
3,602,009,000
Net inc
579,995,000
473,612,000
Share earns
2.61
2.08


American Management Sysems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* American Management Sysems (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
67,470,000
56,421,000
Net inc
3,494,000
2,394,000
Share earns
.31
.22
9mo rev
189,050,000
164,136,000
Net inc
6,880,000
1,888,000
Share earns
.57
.17


Thomas &amp; Betts reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Thomas &amp; Betts (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
148,576,000
131,318,000
Net inc
b5,096,000
12,084,000
Share earns
.30
.71
Shares outst
17,050,000
17,004,000
9mo sales
453,385,000
404,880,000
Net inc
b35,602,000
41,638,000
Share earns
2.09
2.45
Shares outst
17,037,000
16,993,000


Jason Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jason Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
32,354,000
27,346,000
Net inc
1,167,000
551,000
Share earns
.21
.10
9mo sales
94,968,000
78,959,000
Net inc
3,574,000
2,630,000
Share earns
.63
.47


Paper Ties Terrorist Group to Egypt Killing
LEAD: Six followers of the Palestinian terrorist group led by Abu Nidal were responsible for the killing of the Speaker of the Egyptian Parliament last week, the semiofficial Al Ahram newspaper reported today.


Photo Control Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Photo Control Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,667,721
4,170,011
Net inc
116,432
212,079
Share earns
.08
.15
9mo sales
10,032,058
10,888,739
Net inc
91,487
440,202
Share earns
.06
.31


For an Expert on Tax Code, Bradley Is Strangely Silent
LEAD: At a time when Washington's politicians and New Jersey's voters are gagging over taxes, Senator Bill Bradley, the architect of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, is barely uttering a word here on the very issue that gained him national attention four years ago.


Vanfed Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vanfed Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
368,000
b133,000
Per share
.32
-
9mo net inc
1,102,000
427,000
Per share
.95
.37
b-Net loss


Senate Ties Airline Fee to Noise Rules
LEAD: The Senate early today passed far-reaching legislation that couples new local fees on airline passengers with a new national policy on airport noise.


Waltham Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Waltham Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
403,000
107,000
Per share
.14
.03
Shares outst
2,917,900
3,140,650
9mo net inc
1,322,000
1,054,000
Per share
.45
.33
Shares outst
2,921,431
3,220,614


Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
984,019,000
509,764,000
Net inc
32,199,000
29,017,000
Share earns
1.12
1.10
9mo sales
2,225,667,000
1,456,286,000
Net inc
85,638,000
75,431,000
Share earns
2.97
2.86
Shares outst
28,847,663
26,347,401


CHRONICLE
LEAD: The Soviet President, MIKHAIL GORBACHEV, took time out from grappling with the country's economic crisis yesterday to meet JANE FONDA and TED TURNER, in the Kremlin.
They were in Moscow for yesterday's Soviet premiere of ''Gone With the Wind,'' to which Mr.
Turner owns the rights.


KEY RATES
LEAD:
Previous
Year
In percent
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.87
7.93
8.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.23
7.26
7.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.19
7.20
7.56
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.47
8.54
7.97
30-YR.


People's Bank (Conn.) (O) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* People's Bank (Conn.) (O)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
29,179,000
b8,974,000
Per share
-
.28
9mo net loss
35,832,000
b28,853,000
Per share
-
.89
b-Net income


Fear of Sludge Backup Protected Harbor Polluters
LEAD: Oil and sludge barges owned by a local family were allowed to keep operating despite a 20-year record of flagrant environmental abuse because of bureaucratic oversights by law-enforcement officials and because of fears that other companies could not haul the sludge, New York and New Jersey officials said yesterday.


Sweep? Reds Overpower A's as Sabo Belts Two
LEAD: No one said a word about a dynasty.
Not tonight.
By the time Randy Myers threw the pitch that ended the game and all but ended the World Series, there was only a sense that the Oakland Athletics were about to fade quietly, that they were no dynasty after all.


Foothill Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Foothill Group Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
22,808,000
23,283,000
Net inc
b1,824,000
1,823,000
Share earns
.19
.18
9mo rev
59,382,000
74,581,000
Net loss
b47,000
c8,474,000
Share earns
-
.84
b-Included an extraordinary credit of $398,000, or 4 cents a share.


For Stewart, It's Win at Home or Go Home
LEAD: Well, you must admit, Dave Stewart does have a unique way of looking at things.


First World Cheese Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First World Cheese Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
34,245,216
29,887,651
Net inc
50,765
99,440
Share earns
.01
.02
9mo sales
108,680,476
80,720,703
Net inc
1,746,459
1,729,801
Share earns
.35
.34


Meridian Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Meridian Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
38,483,000
b22,552,000
Per share
-
.57
9mo net inc
3,903,000
68,385,000
Per share
.10
1.75
b-Net income
The latest quarter included a $17.5 million after-tax charge in connection with the sale of Meridian's title insurance operations.


NESB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* NESB Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
9,544,000
29,077,000
9mo net loss
34,020,000
33,401,000


Bush Describes Himself as 'Determined' on Kuwait
LEAD: President Bush said today that he was as determined as ever to force President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait.


California Biotech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* California Biotech Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
3,733,000
2,498,000
Net loss
1,061,000
2,945,000
9mo rev
9,458,908
8,062,000
Net loss
3,923,000
7,356,000


Pirelli in Talks On Soviet Deal
LEAD: Pirelli of Italy is negotiating a joint venture to produce car tires in the Soviet Union, a Moscow-based Pirelli official said.
Finding quality tires is difficult in the Soviet Union, where motorists drive on poorly maintained streets full of bumps and potholes.
Soviet-made tires have a reputation of shredding easily and have a short lifespan.


Mark Twain Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Mark Twain Bancshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
4,093,000
3,887,000
Per share
.52
.50
9mo net inc
11,025,000
11,610,000
Per share
1.38
1.48


Review/Music;   Leningrad Chamber Group
LEAD: For anyone who has heard a school band wheeze through a work of some ''distinguished'' alumnus, that quaint old notion took on vibrant new meaning at Town Hall on Tuesday evening with the appearance of the Chamber Orchestra of the Leningrad Conservatory, on its first American tour.


Welfare Construction Unit Refurbished Kitchen for Koch
LEAD: The little-known New York City construction unit that built an expensive bed headboard for Mayor David N. Dinkins did more than $700,000 worth of other work on favored projects for City Hall officials since 1979, city records show.


Elco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Elco Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
40,401,000
36,494,000
Net inc
848,000
b2,428,000
Share earns
.17
.51
b-Included a gain of $1,224,000, or 23 cents a share, from an accounting adjustment.


Irwin Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Irwin Financial
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,194,882
966,128
Per share
1.28
1.03
9mo net inc
3,412,830
2,761,294
Per share
3.65
2.93


Provident Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Provident Bankshares (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,007,000
956,000
Per share
.17
.16
9mo net loss
4,907,000
b3,963,000
Per share
-
.65
b-Net income


A. Schulman Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* A. Schulman Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1990
1989
Sales
175,049,000
142,605,000
Net inc
10,911,000
8,668,000
Share earns
.54
.43
Shares outst
20,111,336
20,097,162
Yr sales
681,052,000
626,084,000
Net inc
36,096,000
30,812,000
Share earns
1.79
1.53
Shares outst
20,106,156
20,092,955


Patents;   A New Way To Grow Skin In Laboratory
LEAD: A husband-and-wife team won patent approval this week for a new method of growing human skin and other tissues in a laboratory.


Commerce Bancorp N.J.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commerce Bancorp N.J.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,012,000
1,628,000
Per share
.16
.46
9mo net inc
4,307,000
4,753,000
Per share
.81
1.35
Shares outst
3,904,309
2,959,710


Tunisians, Seeking Roots, Turn Toward Iraq
LEAD: The contrasting Western and Muslim faces of this former French protectorate mix comfortably in the bustling streets of downtown Tunis as car horns honk over the sound of midday prayers and girls in tight jeans move past women draped in traditional Arab gowns.


Prices of U.S. Bonds Continue to Rise
LEAD: Prices of Treasury bonds continued to climb yesterday, largely as a result of plunging oil prices.
The price of crude dropped more than $3 a barrel, which was attributed to remarks by a leading Iraqi official that indicated a willingness to seek a peaceful solution to the Persian Gulf crisis.


Chips &amp; Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chips &amp; Technologies (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
59,543,000
70,945,000
Net inc
734,000
9,113,000
Share earns
.05
.58
Shares outst
14,646,000
15,715,000
The company said it repurchased $10.9 million of its common stock in the latest quarter.


Radius Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Radius Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
31,391,000
23,054,000
Net inc
2,043,000
1,752,000
Share earns
.16
.15
Shares outst
12,758,000
11,391,000
Yr sales
110,601,000
81,953,000
Net inc
6,242,000
6,119,000
Share earns
.53
.56
Shares outst
11,875,000
10,867,000


High School Buildings, and Structure
LEAD: A task force appointed by New York City's Schools Chancellor, Joseph Fernandez, concludes that a slowdown in construction and poor management of space has caused overcrowding in many high schools.
The panel recommends a number of short-term and long-term solutions.
Fine, but while Mr.
Fernandez is at it, the whole structure of high school education needs thorough review.


Stone Container Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Stone Container Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,428,600,000
1,373,300,000
Net inc
19,700,000
70,400,000
Share earns
.17
.17
9mo sales
4,312,000,000
3,880,600,000
Net inc
86,000,000
220,800,000
Share earns
1.43
3.68


Mexico City Journal;   Miss the VW Bug? It Lives Beyond the Rio Grande
LEAD: Like the hardy insects that are predicted to survive a nuclear war, the Volkswagen Beetle may never die.


Birtcher Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Birtcher Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,169,000
2,201,000
Net inc
327,000
277,000
Share earns
.06
.06
Shares outst
5,220,000
4,832,000
The company said increased sales in the quarter reflect the acquisition of Birtcher Electro Medical Systems Inc.


Burritt Interfinancial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burritt Interfinancial
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
4,404,000
b1,538,000
Per share
-
.44
9mo net loss
1,667,000
b4,016,000
Per share
-
1.15
b-Net income


News Summary
LEAD: International
2-6
Iraq will begin rationing gasoline next week, the Baghdad Government said.
The announcement is a sign that after 11 weeks the United Nations sanctions are beginning to damage the Iraqi economy.
Page 1
President Bush remains determined to force President Saddam Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait.


Excel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Excel Industries (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
66,985,000
60,508,000
Net inc
789,000
716,000
Share earns
.12
.11
9mo sales
205,654,000
213,802,000
Net inc
5,501,000
6,385,000
Share earns
.85
.99


Sunlite Inc.  reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sunlite Inc.
Year to June 30
1990
1989
Net inc
474,074
b3,211,693
Share earns
.19
1.30
b-Reflected the sale of the company's downtown Atlanta property for $7.7 million in cash less a 2-percent commission.


Helix Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Helix Technology Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 28
1990
1989
Sales
14,072,000
12,414,000
Net inc
375,000
496,000
Share earns
.15
.20
9mo sales
37,520,000
40,536,000
Net inc
704,000
2,427,000
Share earns
.28
.97


Drive to Organize Virginia Food Stores Is a Pivotal Test of Labor's Future
LEAD: A young woman in a cashier's smock walks out of a Farm Fresh supermarket and ambles by Juanita Fridley and Chad Young, union organizers, who are sitting on a bench against the wall of the store.
The woman buys a Pepsi from a machine and, warily, she walks back toward the organizers.
She lets them catch her eye.


Bronx Girl Was Asphyxiated
LEAD: The Medical Examiner's office ruled yesterday that a 10-year-old Bronx girl found dead in a stand of trees along the Bronx River Parkway on Wednesday was suffocated or strangled.


Suffield Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Suffield Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
9,138,000
b13,000
9mo net loss
14,542,000
b1,001,000
Per share
-
.17
b-Net income


Waste Recovery Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Waste Recovery Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,042,751
917,439
Net loss
219,581
736,215
9mo rev
2,997,816
3,028,813
Net loss
1,168,299
2,030,059


Orbital Sciences Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Orbital Sciences Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
26,393,000
22,059,000
Net inc
502,000
b1,911,000
Share earns
.05
-
9mo rev
75,865,000
56,795,000
Net loss
535,000
5,435,000
b-Net loss


Religion Notes
LEAD: Scolding U.N.
From Pulpit In hundreds of Orthodox Jewish congregations around the country, rabbis will give sermons this morning in protest against the United Nations resolution condemning Israel for its handling of recent violence in Jerusalem.
The incidents near holy sites left 21 Palestinians dead.


Watch for Ickey Shuffle
LEAD: He has been sidelined since he suffered a knee injury Sept. 17, 1989, against the Pittsburgh Steelers, but now Ickey Woods can't wait to start running and dancing again.
Nor can the Cincinnati Bengals, who plan to activate the fullback for the game Monday night in Cleveland.


ASK Computer
LEAD: Judge William Allen of Delaware Chancery Court reaffirmed his previous decision to allow ASK Computer Systems Inc.'s proposed sale of 30 percent of its stock to the Hewlett-Packard Company and the Electronic Data Systems Corporation.
Judge Allen said in a four-page ruling that he had found no persuasive reason to block the deal, intended to help finance ASK's planned acquisition of the Ingres Corporation.


Digital Metcom reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Digital Metcom
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,564,432
2,850,124
Net inc
236,472
102,789
Share earns
.01
.01
Shares outst
21,143,483
19,832,205
9mo sales
11,045,662
8,205,803
Net inc
595,486
522,581
Share earns
.03
.03
Shares outst
20,418,503
19,240,538


Penwest Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Penwest Ltd. (OTC)
Qtr to Aug 31
1990
1989
Sales
24,826,000
19,731,000
Net inc
b2,237,000
1,872,000
Share earns
.29
.25
Yr sales
91,998,000
79,826,000
Net inc
b8,214,000
c33,310,000
Share earns
1.09
4.08
Shares outst
7,515,000
8,164,000


Cyberoptics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cyberoptics Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,032,100
1,013,000
Net inc
40,200
96,100
Share earns
.02
.04
9mo rev
3,217,000
2,914,000
Net inc
191,300
321,400
Share earns
.08
.13


Berlin Police Raid Ex-Communists After Moscow Is Sent $63 Million
LEAD: The German police raided the headquarters of the former East German Communist Party on Thursday night as part of an investigation of charges that the party hurriedly transferred $63 million to Moscow, a state security official announced today.


CHRONICLE
LEAD: As head of the Office of Financial Services and the chairwoman of both the Financial Services Corporation and New York City Industrial Development Agency, LERESSA R. CROCKETT has not been one of Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS's high-profile commissioners.


RAC Mortgage Investment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RAC Mortgage Investment Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
34,122,000
31,772,000
Net inc
3,374,000
896,000
Share earns
.24
.06
Shares outst
13,942,326
14,450,100
9mo rev
107,433,000
81,375,000
Net inc
9,297,000
b2,491,000
Share earns
.65
-
Shares outst
14,238,903
14,450,100


Constar International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Constar International (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
126,658,000
135,510,000
Net inc
1,609,000
3,865,000
Share earns
.22
.60
Shares outst
7,368,000
6,455,000
9mo sales
376,044,000
412,735,000
Net inc
9,855,000
11,321,000
Share earns
1.32
1.78
Shares outst
7,421,000
6,369,000


Debate Over Federal Tire Ratings Just Keeps Rolling Along
LEAD: Fall is tire-buying time, and as shoppers search for quality and long wear, Federal officals, tire-industry executives and consumer advocates are still arguing over what buyers should be told.


Aaron Rents Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Aaron Rents Inc.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
35,533,000
35,661,000
Net inc
890,000
93,000
Share earns
.20
.02
6mo rev
71,322,000
71,891,000
Net inc
1,520,000
1,053,000
Share earns
.34
.23


Midway Air Leaving Philadelphia
LEAD: Less than a year after it began an ambitious plan to make Philadelphia a hub, Midway Airlines Inc. said today that it was abandoning the effort and selling the operations to USAir Inc.
In doing so, Midway, already troubled by high jet fuel costs, will lay off more employees, end 60 flights by April 30 and retreat to its home base of


Barry Ends Bid for Retrial on Drug Conviction
LEAD: Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. today withdrew a request for a new trial on his conviction for cocaine possession, clearing the way for sentencing on Oct. 26.


Pulitzer Publishing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pulitzer Publishing Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
97,693,000
94,610,000
Net inc
1,424,000
3,214,000
Share earns
.13
.31
9mo rev
296,979,000
292,025,000
Net inc
6,927,000
13,181,000
Share earns
.66
1.26


Dollar Strengthens in U.S. After Weakening in Europe
LEAD: The dollar finished mostly stronger in domestic trading yesterday after weakening in Europe, but foreign exchange brokers said it remained wobbly because of American economic uncertainty.


Commonwealth Edison Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Commonwealth Edison Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,724,107,000
1,767,456,000
Net inc
333,966,000
361,129,000
Share earns
1.48
1.59
9mo rev
3,949,155,000
4,440,256,000
Net inc
b42,707,000
658,197,000
Share earns
-
2.74


Bourque Sidelined
LEAD: The Boston Bruin defenseman Ray Bourque will miss about two weeks of play with a right shoulder sprain, the team said yesterday.
Bourque, the team captain, suffered the injury on Wednesday in a game with Vancouver when he was skating along the boards and his right arm was pulled up and out in an awkward position.


Zenith Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zenith Electronics Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 29
1990
1989
Sales
342,300,000
376,800,000
Net loss
11,600,000
c24,100,000
Shares outst
26,700,000
26,700,000
9mo sales
1,032,100,000
1,105,700,000
Net loss
b37,800,000
c41,100,000
Shares outst
26,700,000
26,700,000


World Series
LEAD: What Cincinnati did to Oakland in Cincinnati twice, Cincinnati did to Oakland in Oakland last night.


General Kinetics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Kinetics Inc.
Qtr to Aug 31
1990
1989
Revenue
5,161,935
3,618,207
Net inc
404,107
136,513
Share earns
.40
.16


Affiliated Publications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Affiliated Publications Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
130,404,000
126,964,000
Net inc
4,036,000
8,481,000
Share earns
.06
.12
9mo rev
396,196,000
396,313,000
Net inc
17,910,000
b2,879,000
Share earns
.26
.04


Tandycrafts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tandycrafts Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
26,197,000
25,576,000
Net inc
58,000
342,000
Share earns
.02
.12
Shares outst
2,603,000
2,767,000
The company said that although sales were up for the quarter, changes in sales mix and operating margin adversely affected net income.


Precious Metals Up Again; Copper Increases Sharply
LEAD: Prices of precious metal futures rose for the third straight day yesterday, partly offsetting recent steep losses as a sharp drop in oil prices stirred speculation that interest rates might fall.


Nichols (S.E.) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 4
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Nichols (S.E.)
Qtr to Aug 4
1990
1989
Sales
11,492,000
51,452,000
Net loss
b21,543,000
d1,810,000
Share earns
-
.38
6mo sales
38,012,000
105,398,000
Net loss
c25,031,000
5,687,000
b-Reflected provision of $15.5 million for reorganization costs in connection with Chapter 11 filing Aug.


b-Included a pre-tax charge of $14.8 million in connection with the disposition of certain operations and assets.
LEAD:
c-After income of $48.1 million, or 39 cents a share, from an adjustment in accounting.


Books of The Times;   Fable and Cruel Fact in Guatemala
LEAD:
After the Bombs
By Arturo Arias
Translated by Asa Zatz. 221 pages. Curbstone Press. $19.95.


Triad Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Triad Systems Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
41,124,000
42,431,000
Net inc
2,518,000
1,315,000
Share earns
.20
.12
Shares outst
13,594,000
11,632,000
Yr rev
144,687,000
147,996,000
Net inc
3,581,000
5,695,000
Share earns
.31
.63
Shares outst
13,325,000
10,318,000


Chart House Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chart House Enterprises
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
41,304,000
37,741,000
Net inc
2,253,000
b402,000
Share earns
.28
.07
9mo rev
116,356,000
107,473,000
Net inc
6,138,000
b2,486,000
Share earns
.76
.46
b-After an extraordinary charge of $1,525,000 which reflects a prepayment penalty of $2.5 million in connection with the early retirement of high- coupon, fixed-rate debt, which was partly offset by certain tax benefits.


Bridge
LEAD: A most unusual playing possibility was noted by Guy Dupont, a French journalist, during the world championships in Geneva last month.
A player of world renown missed the critical move on the diagramed deal, which is not easy to see even with all the cards in view.
It occurred in the Louis Vuitton Team Championships, in a match between an American team and a


Silicon Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Silicon Graphics (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
115,802,000
86,431,000
Net inc
9,598,000
5,209,000
Share earns
.44
.29
Shares outst
22,541,000
18,070,000


Tickets;   Madison Sq. Garden Planning $70 Seats To Pay for Face Lift
LEAD: The owners of Madison Square Garden, which is in the process of an unexpectedly costly overhaul, are preparing a plan for luxury courtside and rinkside seats that could cost as much as $70 apiece for Knicks and Rangers games in the 1991-92 season, according to former executives at the Garden.


Ziegler Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ziegler Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
6,586,000
6,729,000
Net inc
59,000
437,000
Share earns
.03
.16
9mo rev
21,546,000
21,076,000
Net inc
1,237,000
1,717,000
Share earns
.47
.64


Guardian Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Guardian Bancorp (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,056,370
1,344,700
Per share
.59
.41
9mo net inc
5,414,873
3,772,935
Per share
1.53
1.13


A Notable Mix Makes Hoboken Shelter a Model Program
LEAD: To the Editor:


CHRONICLE
LEAD: BEVERLY SILLS told an array of politicans, pundits and religious leaders on Thursday night that while ''you shouldn't throw artists in jail'' for creating what some consider obscene works, she is not too happy about the tone of some modern expressions.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: George Washington Bridge:


Midlantic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Midlantic Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
159,042,000
c66,100,000
Per share
-
1.72
9mo net loss
b182,408,000
c187,206,000
Per share
-
4.90
b-Included pre-tax gains of $52,285,000 from sale of credit card accounts and receivables and $15,337,000 from sale of automobile and home loan asset backed certificates.


Heritage Bankcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Heritage Bankcorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
917,000
573,000
Per share
.43
-
Year-ago quarter's per share earnings were not shown; company went public in August 1989.


Some Captives Moved, Lebanese Say
LEAD: American and British hostages held by pro-Iranian extremists have been moved from Beirut's southern slums to Iranian-controlled sites in the Bekaa region of eastern Lebanon, Lebanese military intelligence officials said today.


New England Electric System reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* New England Electric System (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
476,250,000
414,607,000
Net inc
b162,687,000
33,043,000
Share earns
2.55
.57
Shares outst
63,985,710
58,643,980
9mo rev
1,383,608,000
1,214,064,000
Net inc
b229,364,000
95,967,000
Share earns
3.60
1.65
Shares outst
63,641,220
58,306,888


A Lantern-Jawed Comedian Travels the Literary Circuit
LEAD: Jay Leno's new book, ''More Headlines,'' has been copyrighted in the name of a mysterious entity called Big Dog Productions Inc.
That's the name printed on the title page.
So just what is this big dog? ''Well, there is no anthropomorphic dog running things,'' he said the other day. ''That's me, the big dog.


Sisters Have Special Duty to Reflect Catholic Abortion Position
LEAD: To the Editor:


Tennessee Drops Assault Inquiry
LEAD: The University of Tennessee today dropped an investigation into the alleged sexual assault of a female student by three football players.
The case was dropped at the woman's request, university officials said.


Post Office Sends Faxes, Too
LEAD: Self-service facsimile machines have been installed in about 300 post offices around the country in a yearlong pilot program.


Pioneer Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pioneer Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
14,738,000
15,487,000
Net inc
2,355,000
3,658,000
Share earns
.38
.60
9mo rev
45,997,000
45,216,000
Net inc
10,558,000
10,431,000
Share earns
1.72
1.71


Excerpts From Gorbachev's Speech On His Plan for a Market Economy
LEAD: Following are excerpts from President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's speech to the Supreme Soviet today, as translated by The New York Times.


Vicor Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Vicor Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
9,737,000
6,662,000
Net inc
1,424,000
558,000
Share earns
.15
.06
9mo rev
25,820,000
21,806,000
Net inc
3,310,000
1,903,000
Share earns
.35
.20


Court Bars Former Dictator From Elections in Guatemala
LEAD: An appeals court eliminated a former dictator, Efrain Rios Montt, from the November presidential election today by ruling that his past activities disqualified him.


Worldwide Computer Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Worldwide Computer Services (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
4,331,115
4,384,114
Net inc
90,713
31,339
Share earns
.05
.02
Shares outst
1,938,956
1,753,356
9mo sales
13,165,796
13,481,076
Net inc
287,744
217,463
Share earns
.15
.12
Shares outst
1,903,492
1,782,788


Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Valley Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
7,846,475
7,738,392
Per share
.65
.65
9mo net inc
22,694,000
21,954,000
Per share
1.89
1.85


Dow Jumps 68.07 Points In 2d Big Rise
LEAD: Wall Street traders, investors and speculators were all smiles yesterday.
A big drop in oil prices, bold new Iraqi peace feelers and strong signs of an imminent budget agreement combined to lift stocks sharply for the second consecutive day.


Bank of New England Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank of New England Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
123,158,000
b42,745,000
Per share
-
.61
Shares outst
69,512,000
69,254,000
9mo net loss
203,056,000
b121,564,000
Per share
-
1.73
Shares outst
69,458,000
69,236,000


E-Town Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* E-Town Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
20,224,131
18,172,191
Net inc
2,381,533
1,573,275
Share earns
.89
.62
9mo rev
58,163,815
51,824,242
Net inc
5,861,117
3,931,972
Share earns
2.15
1.50


First Gubernatorial Debate Focuses on Budget Trouble
LEAD: Meeting tonight for the first debate of the gubernatorial campaign, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his three opponents scoffingly questioned one another's competence to handle what they all agreed were the daunting fiscal problems facing New York State.


Profits Scoreboard
LEAD:
$
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept. 1990 Change from '89
Alaska Air Group Inc.
$ 19,700,000-
16.2
American Brands Inc.
230,800,000+
38.7
Burlington Northern Inc.
58,000,000-
20.5
Centel Corp.
20,900,000-
89.7
Itel Corp.
7,400,000-
30.2
Kellogg Co.
162,300,000+
31.8
Newell Co.


Senate Votes to Cut Salvador Aid In a Major Policy Defeat for Bush
LEAD: In an important foreign policy defeat for the Administration, the Senate overwhelmingly voted tonight to cut military aid to El Salvador by 50 percent in 1991, largely in response to the killing of six Jesuit priests last year.


Arrow Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Arrow Financial
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
2,591,000
2,605,000
Per share
.56
.57
9mo net inc
7,419,000
7,259,000
Per share
1.61
1.59


Preston Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Preston Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
171,517,000
155,170,000
Net loss
b19,455,000
c161,000
Share earns
-
.03
Shares outst
5,758,701
5,798,554
9mo rev
499,916,000
464,177,000
Net loss
b18,433,000
c3,371,000
Share earns
-
.58
Shares outst
5,758,701
5,807,191


Colonial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Colonial Group Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
19,939,000
18,591,000
Net inc
2,939,000
3,141,000
Share earns
.37
.39
9mo rev
58,001,000
56,440,000
Net inc
8,904,000
9,064,000
Share earns
1.12
1.13


Bad Loans Up in New England Bank Loss
LEAD: The Bank of New England Corporation, one of the nation's weakest large banking companies, yesterday announced a loss of $123.2 million in the third quarter as bad real estate loans in the sour New England economy continued to grow.


Albany International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Albany International (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
136,174,000
120,998,000
Net inc
1,273,000
9,966,000
Share earns
.05
.40
9mo sales
401,205,000
369,514,000
Net inc
7,491,000
32,259,000
Share earns
.30
1.29


Gorbachev's Economic Plan Approved
LEAD: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev won an overwhelming parliamentary mandate today for his plan to transform the destitute Soviet state from a Communist to a market economy.


Tellabs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tellabs Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 28
1990
1989
Sales
49,982,000
39,860,000
Net inc
942,000
533,000
Share earns
.07
.04
9mo sales
150,855,000
125,502,000
Net inc
5,615,000
5,889,000
Share earns
.44
.47


Adaptec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Adaptec Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 28
1990
1989
Revenue
35,182,000
26,498,000
Net inc
4,453,000
3,033,000
Share earns
.43
.36
Shares outst
10,443,000
8,483,000
6mo rev
67,636,000
49,700,000
Net inc
8,920,000
5,035,000
Share earns
.85
.61
Shares outst
10,454,000
8,281,000


Doctor Convicted in Killing Of Family Asks For New Trial
LEAD: Saying the Government had suppressed evidence, a lawyer for a Green Beret doctor who was convicted more than 10 years ago of killing his wife and two daughters asked a Federal court today to grant his client a new trial.


Southwestern Bell Retirement Offer
LEAD: The Southwestern Bell Corporation's Southwestern Bell Telephone Company unit said it plans to offer incentives for up to 1,600 managers who voluntarily choose to retire or leave the company before the end of the year.
Incentives will vary by length of employment, with a maximum payout of one year's salary to managers having more than 20 years of service, Southwestern


Centel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Centel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
334,661,000
302,212,000
Net inc
b20,937,000
c203,052,000
Share earns
.24
2.34
Shares outst
83,959,000
86,819,000
9mo rev
990,447,000
880,835,000
Net inc
b50,350,000
c215,735,000
Share earns
.59
2.45
Shares outst
83,802,000
87,672,000


Review/Music;   Irish Fiddling In Curlicues
LEAD: Fractal-geometry theorists have proved that natural contours like coastlines and mountain paths approach infinite length as the details of their kinks and curves are examined closely.
The Sligo style of traditional Irish fiddling holds a similar paradox; the melodies take on all sorts of stutters and slides and turns and passing notes, so that a straightforward tune is, at the same time, a wildly convoluted zigzag.


Knowledgeware Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Knowledgeware Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
23,517,000
12,754,000
Net inc
2,532,000
2,031,000
Share earns
.20
.20
Shares outst
12,415,000
10,031,000


First Interstate of Iowa reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Interstate of Iowa (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,063,000
3,137,000
Per share
.09
.26
9mo net inc
6,279,000
9,544,000
Per share
.52
.80


Review/Music;   Christian Rock in Tight Leather Pants
LEAD: Among best-selling heavy-metal bands, only one would wrap a song around the idea, ''I don't need a one-night stand.'' That band is Stryper, the Christian rock band that howled and stomped on Oct. 12 at the Ritz.


Interstate Power Co. reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Interstate Power Co. (NYSE)
12mo Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
269,288,000
270,173,000
Net inc
26,063,000
b27,033,000
Share earns
2.46
2.55
b-Included $1,856,000, after taxes, reflecting partial recovery of a debt previously writtten off.


Southwestern Public Service Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Southwestern Public Service Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Aug 31
1990
1989
Revenue
211,907,000
226,774,000
Net inc
34,911,000
33,937,000
Share earns
.81
.78
Shares outst
40,918,000
40,918,000
Yr rev
769,451,000
798,782,000
Net inc
119,045,000
107,842,000
Share earns
2.73
2.45
Shares outst
40,917,908
40,917,908


Don't Let Redwoods Fall to Corporate Greed;   A Global Resource
LEAD: To the Editor:


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Guidepost;   Feed the Birds
LEAD:
The birds that haven't flown South, the ones that will stay all winter, can be encouraged to visit if the right foods are put out for them.
Once feeding is started, keep it up daily until spring.
If you take a winter vacation, get a neighbor to fill in for you.
Avoid peanut butter and millet, and clean feeders often so the food does not become moldy.


Detection Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Detection Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
7,542,000
5,392,000
Net inc
544,000
473,000
Share earns
.21
.17
6mo sales
14,022,000
10,411,000
Net inc
997,000
910,000
Share earns
.38
.33


Napa Valley Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Napa Valley Bancorp
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,062,000
926,000
Per share
.34
.30
Shares outst
3,178,452
3,122,838
9mo net inc
2,518,000
2,937,000
Per share
.80
.95
Shares outst
3,161,537
3,115,657


Mr. October, The Pressure And Canseco
LEAD: Near the Oakland Athletics' dugout, Willie Randolph smiled when he noticed an old Yankee teammate, Reggie Jackson.


Capstead Mortgage reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Capstead Mortgage (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
7,201,000
4,739,000
Share earns
.58
.55
9mo net inc
21,818,000
13,710,000
Share earns
1.75
1.58


Medalist Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Medalist Industries (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
31,486,000
35,793,000
Net inc
573,000
765,000
Share earns
.24
.33
9mo sales
87,259,000
94,347,000
Net inc
1,890,000
1,261,000
Share earns
.81
.54


Review/Pop;   After Several Generations, Blues Comes in All Colors
LEAD: The first two shows of the Benson &amp; Hedges Blues '90 series last weekend at the Beacon Theater produced a decent amount of good music and loads of clues to the nature of the blues today.
Ranging from Ry Cooder's spectacular re-imagining of American vernacular music to the Saturday-night functionalism of Elvin Bishop to Bo Diddley's extravagant neo-primitivism, it was clear that what is labeled as blues comes in all colors and sizes.


Bank South Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Bank South Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
13,874,000
b12,240,000
Per share
-
.36
Shares outst
34,118,391
33,960,395
9mo net loss
10,788,000
b33,455,000
Per share
-
.99
Shares outst
34,126,758
33,880,805


Your Money;   Taxes Complicate 'Junk Bond' Loss
LEAD: With the pounding the ''junk bond'' market has taken this year, many investors now hold high-yield, high-risk securities that are worth far less than they paid for them.
And in the fourth quarter, a paper loss always raises the question of whether to sell in order to lower taxable income, and, if one still likes the holding, of whether to invest the proceeds in a similar but not identical security.


Corporate Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corporate Software Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
47,398,000
31,658,000
Net inc
495,000
339,000
Share earns
.10
.07
9mo sales
142,698,000
93,690,000
Net inc
2,805,000
2,298,000
Share earns
.54
.45


Kellogg Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kellogg Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
1,351,600,000
1,195,400,000
Net inc
162,300,000
b123,100,000
Share earns
1.34
1.02
9mo sales
3,818,000,000
3,563,500,000
Net inc
394,300,000
bc412,300,000
Share earns
3.26
3.38


Princeton Diagnostic Labs reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Princeton Diagnostic Labs (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,100,000
1,700,000
Net inc
15,000
b97,000
9mo rev
6,200,000
5,300,000
Net inc
172,000
b12,000
Share earns
.06
-
b-Net loss


Zenith Reports $11.6 Million Deficit
LEAD: The Zenith Electronics Corporation yesterday reported a third-quarter loss of $11.6 million on sales of $342.3 million.
The consumer electronics maker, based in Glenview, Ill., said the slowdown in the economy had resulted in reduced sales of picture tubes for television manufactuers and videocassette recorders.


Conflicitng Accounts of Words in Congress
LEAD: The printed record is a transcript of what members of Congress wish they had said.
The videotapes are records of what members actually said and how they said it.


COMPANY BRIEFS
LEAD: *
Chinese Petroleum Corp., a Taiwanese state-owned company, said it had canceled plans to bid for Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc. of Houston.


Onbancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Onbancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
11,148,000
9,296,000
Net inc
3,932,000
2,817,000
Share earns
.51
.46
9mo rev
32,094,000
28,007,000
Net inc
11,002,000
8,053,000
Share earns
1.46
1.32
Shares outst
7,540,184
6,121,136


Corrections
LEAD: An article on Tuesday about budget problems at the Metro-North Commuter Railroad and the Long Island Rail Road misstated restraints placed on their spending in 1991.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which supervises the railroads, has told them to limit spending increases to 3.7 percent in 1991, not to cut spending by 3.7 percent.


United Missouri Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Missouri Bancshares
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
9,081,000
10,009,000
Per share
.73
.77
9mo net inc
28,791,000
b30,021,000
Per share
2.30
2.28
b-After income of $2,462,000, or 19 cents a share, from an adjustment in accounting.


Frontier Adjusters reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frontier Adjusters
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,190,712
898,714
Net inc
268,218
190,314
Share earns
.06
.05


First Federal S &amp; L Assn -East Hartford reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Federal S &amp; L Assn -East Hartford
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
400,000
395,000
Share earns
.17
.17
9mo inc
1,640,000
1,130,000
Share earns
.69
.48


Fewer Cars at Independent Pumps
LEAD: The business of gasoline retailing has been turned on its ear since Iraq invaded Kuwait.
Thousands of independent service stations, which have historically attracted customers by offering gasoline for a few pennies less than rivals flying the flags of oil giants like Chevron and Texaco, have been forced in the last few months to raise prices faster than the major brands.


Power Still Out To Many Homes After the Storm
LEAD: Hundreds of homes throughout the New York City metropolitan area were still without electricity or telephone service yesterday, as utility crews worked to repair lines downed by the powerful storm that slammed into the region Thursday night.


Spectran Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Spectran Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
2,950,238
2,002,006
Net inc
304,969
b58,942
Share earns
.07
-
9mo sales
7,199,826
5,503,300
Net inc
459,599
b439,246
Share earns
.10
-
b-Net loss


Lincoln Telecommunications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Lincoln Telecommunications (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
43,451,000
42,693,000
Net inc
6,474,000
6,629,000
Share earns
.39
.39
9mo rev
130,120,000
125,810,000
Net inc
18,765,000
18,272,000
Share earns
1.12
1.08


Asahi Gets Cut In Elders Price
LEAD: Australia's privately held Harlin Holdings has accepted about $150 million less than originally negotiated in a deal to sell a stake in Elders IXL to Japan's Asahi Breweries.


About New York;   Keeping Faith In a Love Affair With Animals
LEAD: This is a story of a relatively small abomination, the burning of an old school bus.
The bus belonged to Norman and Jude Sunden of the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn.
He drove a cab before devoting his life to animals.
She was a secretary for a beeper service.


6 Nursing Programs Cancelled
LEAD: In a slap at the New York City school system, State Education Commissioner Thomas Sobol yesterday rescinded the registrations of practical nursing programs at all six high schools that offer them and ordered the programs to close by September.


SPX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SPX Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
176,951,000
154,707,000
Net inc
4,500,000
b6,300,000
Share earns
.33
.41
Shares outst
13,815,000
15,208,000
9mo sales
545,907,000
482,576,000
Net inc
18,600,000
b79,300,000
Share earns
1.35
5.60
Shares outst
13,792,000
14,156,000


Itel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Itel Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
566,700,000
543,000,000
Net inc
7,400,000
10,600,000
Share earns
.12
.18
Shares outst
47,500,000
51,200,000
9mo rev
1,706,100,000
1,571,000,000
Net inc
20,200,000
23,500,000
Share earns
.32
.37
Shares outst
48,300,000
50,500,000


Crown Central Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Crown Central Petroleum Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
501,091,000
319,449,000
Net inc
2,383,000
8,786,000
Share earns
.24
.88
9mo rev
1,451,551,000
906,989,000
Net inc
18,708,000
17,869,000
Share earns
1.90
1.93


Alaska Air Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Alaska Air Group (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
295,650,000
268,920,000
Net inc
19,742,000
23,505,000
Share earns
1.35
1.48
Shares outst
13,348,000
15,908,000
9mo rev
789,794,000
693,210,000
Net inc
27,288,000
40,450,000
Share earns
1.66
2.55
Shares outst
13,790,000
15,891,000


Zycad Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Zycad Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,964,000
7,551,000
Net inc
174,000
b430,000
Share earns
.01
-
Shares outst
15,156,000
15,211,000
9mo rev
22,167,000
23,713,000
Net loss
18,498,000
c74,000
Shares outst
15,133,000
15,211,000


Cellular Phone Deals for Alert Buyers
LEAD: Purchases of cellular telephones continue to climb rapidly, and their prices are falling with almost equal speed.
As what was once a luxury becomes affordable for many Americans, competition among manufacturers and among providers of service is becoming more intense.


Harrier Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Harrier Inc.
Year to June 30
1990
1989
Revenue
806,950
2,164,244
Net loss
b5,269,606
c193,278
Share earns
-
.04
b-Included a $1.4 million writeoff of a net license right receiveable.
The writeoff reflects a change in the amount and manner of payment for the Harrier diesel cleaner under a license agreement signed in September 1988 and amended in March 1990.


Duriron Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Duriron Co.  (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
72,181,000
67,157,000
Net inc
5,181,000
4,430,000
Share earns
.42
.35
9mo sales
218,952,000
211,004,000
Net inc
15,021,000
14,778,000
Share earns
1.20
1.18
Year-ago results are restated to reflect acquisition of Automax Inc.


Reading Lips of the Rich: Spending, Not Taxes, Is the Problem
LEAD: As the halls of Congress reverberated with partisan slogans about ''soaking the rich'' and ''making the rich pay a fair share of taxes,'' some of America's millionaires were shaking their heads and saying that Washington politicians were all wet.


Oil Lowest In a Month, Down $3.01
LEAD: Oil prices fell to their lowest level in a month yesterday, as oil traders' fear of war was overtaken by a belief that shooting is less likely and by prospects that supplies have just about recovered from the effect of the United Nations embargo of Iraq and Kuwait.


Manischewitz Agrees To Pact on Buyout
LEAD: The B. Manischewitz Company, the maker of matzohs and other kosher foods, agreed yesterday to a buyout led by Kohlberg &amp; Company and Manischewitz's management.


Atlanta-Sosnoff Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Atlanta-Sosnoff Capital (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
2,413,000
2,677,000
Net loss
b1,027,000
c1,742,000
Share earns
-
.19
9mo rev
7,460,000
8,506,000
Net inc
b756,000
d4,738,000
Share earns
.09
.54
b-After extraordinary credits of $2,000 and $551,000, or 6 cents a share, for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Devils Battle the Rangers And Wind Up in First Place
LEAD: The intensity was so high and the hitting so fierce, one could have easily mistaken tonight's first confrontation of the season between the Devils and the Rangers for a Stanley Cup playoff clash.


SCI Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* SCI Systems (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
289,355,000
288,897,000
Net inc
3,562,000
b9,214,000
Share earns
.17
-
b-Net loss


Wrapped in U.S. Flag, Madonna Raps for Vote
LEAD: Madonna, the crucifix-and-lingerie pop idol who has rapped for people with AIDS, the environment and other causes, waves the American flag for freedom of speech in her latest public-service video and wiggles in red panties, bra and combat boots to get out the vote next month.


Hatcher and the Reds Roll Merrily Along
LEAD: Well, at least the Oakland Athletics got Billy Hatcher out for a change.


One Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* One Bancorp (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
23,680,000
48,476,000
9mo net loss
b36,085,000
c74,456,000
b-After an extraordinary gain of $29,716,000, or $3.63 a share, from the retirement of notes.
c-After an extraordinary gain of $801,000, or 10 cents a share, from the retirement of debentures.


Hudson Esplanade For City's Waterfront
LEAD: To the Editor:


General Automation reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Automation (AMEX)
Year to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
39,248,000
41,448,000
Net loss
b221,000
b1,639,000
b-After extraordinary tax credits of $594,000, or 6 cents a share, for the latest year and $348,000, or 6 cents a share, for the year-earlier period.


Otter Tail Power Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Otter Tail Power Co. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
41,911,000
39,318,000
Net inc
5,313,000
5,666,000
Share earns
.42
.43
9mo rev
130,953,000
129,556,000
Net inc
19,425,000
20,259,000
Share earns
1.55
1.56


Canadians In Kuwait Quit their Embassy
LEAD: Canada announced today that its five remaining diplomats had abandoned the country's embassy in Kuwait and had arrived in Baghdad.


Emulex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Emulex Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
34,136,000
28,759,000
Net inc
1,428,000
176,000
Share earns
.14
.02
Shares outst
10,409,880
11,084,731


Newell Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Newell Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
281,104,000
296,777,000
Net inc
27,408,000
24,540,000
Share earns
.45
.41
9mo sales
801,019,000
844,381,000
Net inc
73,552,000
55,701,000
Share earns
1.21
.92
The company said 1990 sales were reduced by the divestiture of its Wm.


Pretend Along
LEAD: Question: Since almost all of them are sure to be re-elected in a few weeks, why are members of Congress carrying on as though anybody gives a hoot how they vote on a budget?


Environmental Elements reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Environmental Elements (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
25,058,000
13,879,000
Net inc
b1,909,000
c273,000
Share earns
.28
.06
Shares outst
6,663,000
4,959,000
6mo sales
46,413,000
29,212,000
Net inc
b3,350,000
c3,284,000
Share earns
.57
.66
Shares outst
5,964,000
4,959,000


Robert J. Hume, Accountant, 78
LEAD: Robert J. Hume, a certified public accountant who was an executive with Cowles Communications for almost 30 years, died on Monday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 78 years.


General Datacomm Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* General Datacomm Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
51,620,000
49,346,000
Net loss
b1,157,000
e6,159,000
Yr rev
201,546,000
201,218,000
Net inc
c159,000
de8,999,000
Share earns
.01
-
b-Included a pretax restructuring charge of about $3.2 million.


Defense Worrying Holtz as Hurricanes Roll In
LEAD: Since Lou Holtz arrived here nearly five years ago to become the head football coach of the Fighting Irish of Notre Dame, the overwhelming majority of his time during practices has been spent at the offensive end of the field, terrorizing quarterbacks with his suggestions.


Corrections
LEAD: An article in Business Day on Sept. 13 about a claim filed by Stephen L. Lane against Drexel Burnham Lambert to recover money lost in commodities trading by his wife, Trina, who was then a Drexel broker, misstated the length of time the Lanes have been married.
It is 19 years.


First Community Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* First Community Bancorp Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
772,000
1,835,000
Per share
.19
.47
9mo net inc
3,964,000
5,112,000
Per share
1.09
1.30


US West NewVector reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* US West NewVector (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
72,641,000
49,265,000
Net inc
181,000
b2,531,000
9mo rev
201,254,000
131,396,000
Net loss
6,803,000
c8,225,000
b-Net loss
c-Included an accounting adjustment gain of $3,007,000, or 6 cents a share.


Random House Buys Murdoch's Memoirs
LEAD: Random House said on Tuesday that it had acquired the United States and Canadian rights to the autobiography of Rupert Murdoch, the Australian-born entrepreneur who has built a small newspaper business into one of the world's largest media corporations.


Politics of Voting Machines: 6-Year Fight for $300 Million
LEAD: Sid Davidoff was no political novice.
But when he saw New York State Assembly bill A-10238 in 1984, he says, he could not believe his well-traveled eyes.


Dep Corp. reports earnings for Year to July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Dep Corp. (OTC)
Year to July 31
1990
1989
Sales
105,200,000
94,700,000
Net inc
b1,900,000
c1,500,000
Share earns
.32
.26
b-Included a gain of $1,181,000, or 20 cents a share, net of taxes, relating to the retirement of debt and a pretax charge of $457,000 relating to the closing of the company's U.K.


Pistons Reach Accord With Vinnie Johnson
LEAD: Vinnie Johnson agreed to contract terms with the Detroit Pistons yesterday, ending weeks of negotiations, team officials said in Auburn Hills, Mich.


Canadian Satellite Communiations Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Canadian Satellite Communiations Inc.
Year to Aug 31
1990
1989
Revenue
40,178,000
36,431,000
Net inc
8,193,000
3,981,000
Share earns
.80
.39
Results are in Canadian dollars.


Right Mgmt Consultants reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Right Mgmt Consultants
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,483,000
5,654,000
Net inc
345,000
317,000
Share earns
.13
.12
Shares outst
2,661,774
2,670,468
9mo rev
23,090,000
16,530,000
Net inc
1,452,000
896,000
Share earns
.55
.34
Shares outst
2,661,073
2,657,530


Circon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Circon Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
12,807,000
11,728,000
Net inc
249,000
11,000
Share earns
.05
-
9mo sales
39,910,000
36,596,000
Net inc
b1,334,000
157,000
Share earns
.24
.03
b-Included an extraordinary gain from restructuring of debt of $724,000.


Raymond Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Raymond Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
35,531,026
37,363,493
Net inc
664,389
b3,067,369
Share earns
.11
-
9mo rev
110,431,662
123,967,995
Net inc
1,842,274
b2,342,675
Share earns
.31
-
b-Net loss and included losses from discontinued operations of $949,335 and $1,616,045, for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Kansas City Southern Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kansas City Southern Industries (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
136,200,000
128,700,000
Net inc
13,800,000
b9,600,000
Share earns
1.32
.91
9mo rev
395,800,000
377,400,000
Net inc
32,000,000
b26,400,000
Share earns
3.05
2.52


Kohlberg, Kravis Official Tells of a Hidden Milken Stake
LEAD: An executive with Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company testified yesterday that for years he was not informed that investment partnerships affiliated with Michael R. Milken had obtained a multimillion-dollar stake in a 1985 buyout by the firm.
He said that information should have been disclosed because Mr.


IRAQ RATIONS FUEL AS U.N. SANCTIONS HINDER REFINERIES
LEAD: In a sign that after 11 weeks the United Nations sanctions are beginning to damage the Iraqi economy, the Baghdad Government announced today that it would begin rationing gasoline next week.


Loss Posted By Texas Instruments
LEAD: Texas Instruments Inc., one of the nation's largest makers of computer memory chips, said today that it lost $7 million in the third quarter, compared with a profit of $65 million, or 67 cents a share, in the period a year ago.
Revenue rose 7 percent, to $1.68 billion from $1.57 billion.


Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
286,585,000
297,651,000
Net inc
b24,496,000
c46,538,000
Share earns
4.31
8.61
Shares outst
5,114,583
5,114,583
9mo sales
830,506,000
886,293,000
Net inc
b98,587,000
c149,845,000
Share earns
17.83
27.86
Shares outst
5,114,583
5,114,583


Multibank Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Multibank Financial Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
3,480,000
b3,276,000
Per share
-
.35
9mo net loss
12,636,000
b17,334,000
Per share
-
1.86
b-Net income
The latest quarter included a writedown of $2,494,000 to the company's investment portfolio.


Hilb, Rogal &amp; Hamilton reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Hilb, Rogal &amp; Hamilton
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
21,548,000
20,343,000
Net inc
1,734,000
1,551,000
Share earns
.21
.19
9mo rev
64,845,000
63,742,000
Net inc
5,475,000
b5,630,000
Share earns
.66
.69
b-Included a tax credit of $370,000, or 5 cents a share.


Reviews/Music;   The Fiddle, hye Absurd And Humor
LEAD: Jon Rose is an Australian violinist and composer with a taste for the absurd.
In his curriculum vitae, which served as program notes for his concert on Wednesday evening at the Kitchen, he asserted - among many other things - that he had been a fighter ace in the Imperial Japanese Air Force in World War II, had climbed Mount Everest, had won a Nobel Peace Prize for a book about Yehudi Menuhin and had given violin lessons to the Beatles.


Congress Sets Tentative Pact on Immigration Rise
LEAD: Congressional negotiators said tonight that they had reached a tentative agreement on a bill that would allow a substantial increase in legal immigration to the United States.


Van Dorn Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Van Dorn Co. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
74,299,059
78,087,121
Net inc
137,714
2,314,132
Share earns
.02
.28
Shares outst
8,348,326
8,334,737
9mo sales
244,818,580
246,910,232
Net inc
5,144,128
4,675,327
Share earns
.62
.56
Shares outst
8,345,332
8,332,356


Crisis Impelling the Saudis To Debate War and Allies
LEAD: As the immediate shock of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait recedes with the summer heat, a significant debate is under way among Saudis about this nation's relationships with other Arabs and the prospects of war with Iraq.


775 Jail Beds To Be Added In New York
LEAD: With New York City's jail population reaching an all-time high this week, city officials, raising the specter of an early release of prisoners, gained permission today to add 775 slots to the jail system.


Union Planters Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Union Planters Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,115,000
b14,785,000
Per share
.26
-
9mo net inc
16,884,000
b4,333,000
Per share
.87
-
b-Net loss
Year-ago periods were restated to reflect the acquisition of National Commerce Corp.


BUSINESS DIGEST: SATURDAY, OCTOBER 20, 1990
LEAD:
The Economy


TORIES LOSE SEAT IN SPECIAL VOTING
LEAD: The prospect that Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher would gamble on calling and winning a general election next year has receded sharply after a stunning loss by her Conservative Party on Thursday in voting to fill a vacancy in Parliament.


Corken International Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Corken International Corp.
Year to June 30
1990
1989
Sales
13,360,000
11,445,000
Net inc
1,278,000
1,137,000
Share earns
.43
.38


Genicom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Genicom Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
58,890,000
60,698,000
Net inc
836,000
b2,706,000
Share earns
.08
-
9mo rev
193,640,000
197,678,000
Net inc
1,073,000
b3,639,000
Share earns
.10
-
b-Net loss


Convex Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Convex Computer Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
53,258,000
41,237,000
Net inc
5,015,000
3,075,000
Share earns
.23
.16
Shares outst
22,103,000
19,026,000
9mo rev
153,844,000
111,940,000
Net inc
13,395,000
7,742,000
Share earns
.65
.41
Shares outst
20,552,000
18,834,000


Offshore Pipelines Inc. reports earnings for Year July 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Offshore Pipelines Inc. (NYSE)
Year July 31
1990
1989
Revenue
125,573,000
103,924,000
Net loss
2,891,000
b3,888,000
Share earns
-
1.02
Shares outst
4,178,000
4,033,000
b-Net income


In China, Peasant Anger With Regime Mounts
LEAD: To the Editor:


La Quinta Inns And Bass at Odds
LEAD: An investment group that includes members of the Bass family of Fort Worth requested that the board of La Quinta Motor Inns Inc. allow its shareholders to vote on the company's ''poison pill'' anti-takeover plan.
The Bass group controls 14.9 percent of the La Quinta's shares.
They are stymied from buying additional shares of the San


Soviet Capitalism? First, Stability
LEAD: The biggest news in Mikhail Gorbachev's newest economic reform plan may not be economic at all but political.
What started out as a 500-day plan to overturn Communism and install capitalism is now an 000-day plan, without deadlines or even a timetable.
And his program makes clear that he's ready to rule by decree, if necessary, to restore order and compel change.


Heavyweight Winner to Face Tyson
LEAD: The major governing bodies in boxing- the World Boxing Association, the World Boxing Council and the International Boxing Federation - have agreed that the winner of the heavyweight title fight Thursday between the champion, James (Buster) Douglas, and Evander Holyfield must fight Mike Tyson next.


Ashland Coal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Ashland Coal (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
98,637,000
73,521,000
Net inc
6,535,000
4,782,000
Share earns
.40
.28
9mo rev
300,863,000
230,367,000
Net inc
21,212,000
b15,903,000
Share earns
1.30
.95
b-Reflects a second-quarter income tax adjustment of $728,000 and after- tax interest income of $269,000 on a related refund.


Corrections
LEAD: A film review of ''The Kill-Off'' in Weekend yesterday misstated its rating.
The movie is unrated; it does not have an R rating.


Frankford Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Frankford Corp.
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
1,171,000
1,676,000
Per share
.40
.58
Shares outst
2,892,620
2,899,094
9mo net inc
2,407,000
4,544,000
Per share
.83
1.57
Shares outst
2,892,404
2,890,182


Art Blakey Tribute
LEAD: A memorial tribute to the jazz drummer and band leader Art Blakey is to be held on Monday at 7 P.M. at the Abyssinian Baptist Church, 132 West 138th Street.
Mr.
Blakey's ensemble, the Jazz Messengers, will perform along with other jazz musicians.


Senate Guards Bush's Effort To Cancel Egypt's Arms Debt
LEAD: The Senate defeated an amendment tonight to a foreign appropriations bill that would have removed a provision canceling Egypt's $7.1 billion debt for sales of military hardware.


Still Threatening Veto, Bush Seeks Accord on Rights Bill
LEAD: While the White House insisted today that President Bush would go through with his threat to veto a civil rights bill in its current form, the President appeared to be making efforts to reach a settlement that would avoid a politically unpopular veto.


Tekelec reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Tekelec (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
10,376,000
8,217,000
Net inc
1,280,000
735,000
Share earns
.31
.18
Shares outst
4,166,000
4,018,000
9mo rev
29,752,000
25,585,000
Net inc
3,654,000
2,541,000
Share earns
.89
.63
Shares outst
4,118,000
4,034,000


Baltimore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Baltimore Bancorp (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
b5,021,000
c5,019,000
Per share
.39
.39
9mo net inc
b15,540,000
c15,720,000
Per share
1.22
1.23
Shares outst
12,750,436
12,745,236
b-After extraordinary gains from early extinguishment of debt of $1,125,000, or 9 cents a share, for the quarter and $3,453,000, or 27 cents a share, for the 9 months.


Review/Theater;   The Struggle for Love, Gay and Straight
LEAD: In one of the noisier scenes in David Stevens's quiet, affecting drama, ''The Sum of Us,'' Harry Mitchell, a widower in his late 50's, nags his 24-year-old gay son, Jeff, to be more aggressive about finding a lover. ''Don't put off till tomorrow what you should do today!'' he harangues.
One day, he warns,


Jostens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Jostens Inc. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
141,347,000
129,477,000
Net inc
2,795,000
2,510,000
Share earns
.07
.06


CONSUMER'S WORLD: Coping;   With Making Tape Recordings
LEAD: You went to all the trouble of making a tape recording of music you love, but when you played the tape and sat back to savor the sound, it was just not the same music.
It sounded flat and small or peculiar in other ways.
The magic was gone.
Why?


Network Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Network Systems Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
40,034,000
33,856,000
Net inc
5,322,000
4,392,000
Share earns
.18
.15
9mo rev
116,172,000
99,019,000
Net inc
14,561,000
9,669,000
Share earns
.49
.33


United Canadian Shares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* United Canadian Shares
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
13,704,057
14,217,709
Net inc
284,269
611,709
Share earns
.20
.43
9mo sales
47,374,298
50,503,176
Net inc
533,410
2,416,520
Share earns
.38
1.71
Figures are in Canadian funds.


Waterhouse Investor Svcs reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Waterhouse Investor Svcs
Qtr to Aug 31
1990
1989
Revenue
6,962,000
5,591,000
Net inc
674,000
434,300
Share earns
.28
.18
Shares outst
2,394,895
2,440,560
Yr rev
23,497,200
19,642,768
Net inc
1,280,700
1,106,321
Share earns
.53
.45
Shares outst
2,416,247
2,461,888


Grace Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Grace Energy Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
131,400,000
96,900,000
Net inc
6,100,000
5,900,000
Share earns
.25
.24
9mo rev
358,200,000
280,600,000
Net inc
14,200,000
17,900,000
Share earns
.58
.73
Year-ago figures are pro-forma and reported as if the company had been public for all of 1989.


Forschner Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Forschner Group
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
13,425,000
12,592,000
Net inc
1,091,000
1,287,000
Share earns
.27
.32
9mo sales
34,336,000
30,642,000
Net inc
1,948,000
2,005,000
Share earns
.48
.49
Year-ago results are restated to reflect a change to the last-in, first-out method of accounting for inventories, which resulted in reductions of $145,000 and $353,000 in income before taxes and 1 cent and 5 cents in net income per share from that previously reported under the first-in, first-out method for the


Trimble Navigation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Trimble Navigation (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
16,116,000
6,812,000
Net inc
626,000
b168,000
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
15,939,000
11,777,000
9mo rev
39,171,000
20,913,000
Net inc
786,000
b353,000
Share earns
.05
-
Shares outst
13,900,000
10,881,000


Corrections
LEAD: A headline yesterday about currency swindles in Germany referred incorrectly in some copies to the amount involved.
It was reported to be at least $328 million.
In some copies the article also appeared with an incorrect byline.
It was by John Tagliabue, not Paul Tagliabue.


Second National Federal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Second National Federal (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net loss
11,200,000
b2,500,000
Per share
-
.34
Shares outst
7,359,000
7,342,000
9mo net loss
6,800,000
b7,100,000
Per share
-
.97
Shares outst
7,359,000
7,342,000


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''The crisis of the consumer market cannot be eliminated until the machines that produce shoes, fabrics and other goods begin working faster than the mint.''
- President Mikhail S. Gorbachev. [6:6.]


3 White Supremacists Are Convicted in Plot
LEAD: A Federal jury has convicted three white supremacists of plotting to firebomb a gay Seattle discotheque.


Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
91,297,000
107,884,000
Net inc
8,358,000
13,986,000
Share earns
.57
.96
9mo sales
244,743,000
251,759,000
Net inc
22,038,000
29,261,000
Share earns
1.51
2.01


Kimball International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Kimball International (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
144,752,000
154,294,000
Net inc
9,325,000
10,147,000
Share earns
.44
.48


Canada Closing Set By Kelsey-Hayes
LEAD: A Kelsey-Hayes Canada Ltd. steel wheel plant in Windsor, Ontario, will be closed by the end of the month, resulting in the loss of about 450 hourly and salaried jobs, the company said.
The company cited ''grave operational problems and mounting losses due to significant overcapacity in the steel wheels manufacturing industry.


Pope Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Pope Resources
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
7,128,000
3,468,000
Net inc
1,298,000
b710,000
Share earns
1.10
-
9mo rev
20,953,000
15,290,000
Net inc
4,048,000
3,175,000
Share earns
3.44
2.70
b-Net loss


Roll-Call in Senate On Budget Accord
LEAD: Following is the 54-to-46 roll-call vote by which the Senate early today approved a deficit-reduction package.
A yes vote was a vote for the bill; a no vote was a vote against it.
Voting yes were 31 Democrats and 23 Republicans.
Voting no were 24 Democrats and 22 Republicans.
Adams, D-Wash., no; Akaka, D-Hawaii, no; Armstrong, R-Colo., no.


Deposit Guaranty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Deposit Guaranty Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
8,374,000
8,238,000
Per share
1.06
1.04
9mo net inc
17,030,000
24,672,000
Per share
2.16
3.10


Corinna Marsh, 98, Poet and an Author Of Children's Books
LEAD: Corinna Reiman Marsh, an editor and a writer of verse and children's books, died on Monday at New York Hospital.
She was 98 years and old and had lived in an apartment at Le Marquis Hotel on East 31st Street for more than 40 years before moving earlier this year to the Mary Manning Walsh nursing home.


Keating Free on Lower Bail
LEAD: After more than a month in jail, Charles H. Keating Jr. headed home late Thursday evening to prepare his defense against the first criminal charges in one of the nation's biggest savings and loan failures.


Sterling Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sterling Electronics Corp. (AMEX)
Qtr to Sept 29
1990
1989
Sales
23,534,000
20,388,000
Net inc
74,100
b322,700
Share earns
.04
-
Shares outst
3,863,397
3,908,549
6mo sales
46,386,000
42,444,000
Net inc
143,400
b219,800
Share earns
.02
-
Shares outst
3,881,923
3,926,503


Banks of Iowa reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Banks of Iowa (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
6,021,076
6,155,260
Per share
1.97
1.58
Shares outst
2,898,961
2,888,544
9mo net inc
17,467,327
17,523,284
Per share
4.88
4.48
Shares outst
2,895,056
2,883,887


Burlington Northern reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Burlington Northern (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,155,000,000
1,150,000,000
Net inc
58,000,000
73,000,000
Share earns
.75
.95
Shares outst
76,865,000
76,082,000
9mo rev
3,510,000,000
3,430,000,000
Net inc
b192,000,000
162,000,000
Share earns
2.49
2.13
Shares outst
76,655,000
75,691,000


Magna Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Magna Group (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Net inc
5,022,000
4,907,000
Per share
.39
.40
9mo net inc
b13,233,000
14,719,000
Per share
1.04
1.21
Shares outst
12,785,035
12,125,543
b-After income of $1,076,000, or 9 cents a share, from an adjustment in accounting.


Sequent Computer Sys reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sequent Computer Sys (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 29
1990
1989
Revenue
66,548,000
40,409,000
Net inc
5,951,000
b5,184,000
Share earns
.25
.25
9mo rev
175,463,000
97,725,000
Net inc
16,286,000
b11,006,000
Share earns
.71
.58


Empi Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Empi Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
3,930,706
3,070,624
Net inc
230,538
86,355
Share earns
.12
.05
9mo sales
11,555,926
9,053,170
Net inc
646,598
307,200
Share earns
.34
.17


Noranda Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Noranda Forest
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,093,000,000
1,202,000,000
Net loss
40,000,000
b45,000,000
Share earns
-
.40
9mo rev
3,541,000,000
3,669,000,000
Net loss
38,000,000
b162,000,000
Share earns
-
1.50


Coleman's Demands Don't Agitate the Nets
LEAD: The Nets' chairman reacted calmly today to Derrick Coleman's pay me or trade me stance, saying that the team was merely considering its options.
Meanwhile, Coleman's agent conceded that his options were limited as he painted a bleak picture of any imminent signing.


Eagle Precision Technol reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Eagle Precision Technol
Qtr to Aug 31
1990
1989
Sales
5,753,000
6,272,000
Net inc
168,000
397,000
Share earns
.03
.07
6mo sales
10,900,000
11,738,000
Net inc
338,000
521,000
Share earns
.06
.09
Results are in Canadian dollars.


A New Anti-Israel Move at the U.N. Is Vexing U.S.
LEAD: New tensions appeared in the American-led coalition against President Saddam Hussein of Iraq today when some nations sought a new Security Council resolution assailing Israel for not cooperating with a United Nations investigation of the killing of Palestinians in Jerusalem last week.


Europe Hesitates
LEAD: Western Europe's will to consolidate is faltering as Community members reach a moment of decision.
Something happened during the summer to drain off momentum from the intense new drive to change and strengthen the Common Market's Treaty of Rome into the start of a real constitutional union.


Westmark International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Westmark International Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 28
1990
1989
Revenue
118,808,000
112,602,000
Net inc
4,184,000
5,895,000
Share earns
.42
.56
Shares outst
10,033,000
10,503,000
9mo rev
362,192,000
323,138,000
Net inc
14,975,000
13,360,000
Share earns
1.44
1.30
Shares outst
10,427,000
10,265,000


Chemed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Chemed Corp. (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
155,078,000
153,256,000
Net inc
5,051,000
7,878,000
Share earns
.49
.77
9mo sales
450,372,000
446,230,000
Net inc
b14,618,000
20,444,000
Share earns
1.40
2.05
b-Included after tax loss of $668,000 from Chemed's share of Omnicare's loss on disposal of certain operations in 1990 first quarter.


Filenet Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Filenet Corp. (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
22,300,000
18,600,000
Net loss
506,000
1,800,000
9mo rev
73,300,000
56,500,000
Net inc
2,900,000
205,000
Share earns
.28
.02


RESULTS
LEAD:
GOLF
Simpson Leads by 6 Shots
Tim Simpson shot a 65 yesterday to increase his lead to six strokes in the Disney Golf Classic in Orlando, Fla., with a record-tying three-round total of 23-under-par 193.
He had eight birdies and a bogey over the rough greens of the 6,967-yard, par-72 Palm Course.


Sequoia Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Sequoia Systems Inc. (OTC)
Qtr to Oct 1
1990
1989
Revenue
13,038,000
8,407,000
Net inc
1,030,000
342,000
Share earns
.11
.05


Conmed reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Conmed (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 28
1990
1989
Sale
7,916,000
5,020,000
Net inc
584,000
bc232,000
Share earns
.20
-
9mo sales
23,874,000
12,997,000
Net inc
1,801,000
c243,000
Share earns
.61
.08
b-Net loss
c-After losses from discontinued operations of $244,000 and $300,000 for the quarter and 9 months, respectively.


Cuomo Takes Pride in Housing Program, but Criticism Persists
LEAD: Construction workers are busy completing work on 55 single-family houses on a large plot of once-vacant land in this city's near east side, a few blocks from downtown.


SPY SATELLITE AIM IS TO TRACK IRAQ
LEAD: The next space shuttle mission will carry aloft an 11-ton spy satellite meant to peer down on Iraqi troops and military gear involved in the Persian Gulf crisis, an industry journal reported yesterday.


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric Co.  (NYSE)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Revenue
1,462,406,000
1,396,266,000
Net inc
235,361,000
220,509,000
Share earns
4.17
3.98
Shares outst
51,339,000
50,306,000


RasterOps reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30
LEAD:
*3*** COMPANY REPORTS **
*3* RasterOps (OTC)
Qtr to Sept 30
1990
1989
Sales
16,479,000
10,007,000
Net inc
1,411,000
500,000
Share earns
.25
.13
Shares outst
5,671,000
3,995,000


British Clear Company In 192 Deaths on Ferry
LEAD: The trial of a British shipping company and seven employees, charged with manslaughter after a Channel ferry capsized and killed 192 people in 1987, ended abruptly today when the judge ruled that the prosecution had failed to produce sufficient evidence.


Lydia Fitler Wed To D. M. Kimball
LEAD: Lydia Clothier Fitler, the daughter of Mrs.
John S. C. Harvey 3d and William W. Fitler 3d, both of Haverford, Pa., was married yesterday to Daniel Martin Kimball, the son of Mrs.
Loren E. Kimball of Northeast Harbor, Me., and the late Mr.
Kimball.
The Rev.
Timothy D. Dobbins performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Redeemer in Bryn Mawr,


World Markets;   The Market in Moscow's Future
LEAD: John J. Phelan Jr., the chairman of the New York Stock Exchange, made a promise to Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the President of the Soviet Union, on a visit to Moscow just over a week ago.


Miss Cuttita Wed To Dr. Mark Lee
LEAD: Regina Marie Cuttita and Dr.
Mark R. Lee were married yesterday at the Sacred Hearts Roman Catholic Church in New York by Msgr.
Guy Vinci.


RESULTS PLUS
LEAD:
Tennis
Wilander Reaches Final: Mats Wilander reached a final for the first time in more than a year by beating a qualifier, Alexander Mronz of Germany, 6-2, 7-6, yesterday in a semifinal of the Lyons Grand Prix in France.
Wilander, the former No. 1 player in the world, will play Marc Rosset of Switzerland in the final today.


Yale Rallies to Beat Columbia
LEAD: No one among the Columbia sports information staff could recall when Columbia last held an opponent scoreless in the first half, as the Lions did against Yale in taking a 7-0 first-half lead today.


What Steady Knew
LEAD:
TWILIGHT AT MAC'S PLACE
By Ross Thomas.
343 pp. New York:
The Mysterious Press.
$19.95.


Moon: He Wears No. 1, And He's Playing Like It
LEAD: No doubt back in his old neighborhood in Los Angeles, they are still muttering and rubbing their eyes in disbelief over the fabled, meteoric rise of Harold Warren Moon, one of their own who simply goes by Warren now.
But at home he is still known as Harold, and friends remember him as a quiet, shy and polite youth who possessed nice athletic ability but not the flashy skills of so many of his peers.


Taking On the Town
LEAD:
A NEW YORK LIFE
Of Friends and Others.
By Brendan Gill.
Illustrated. 348 pp. New York:
Poseidon Press. $21.95.


Looking Ahead
LEAD: MONDAY: American Bankers Association convention in Orlando, Fla., through Wednesday.


Corrections
LEAD: An article on page 29 of the Arts and Leisure section today about concert-hall music from Turin misidentifies a composer represented in the Settembre Musica festival.
He is Riccardo Malipiero, not Gian Francesco Malipiero.


New Yorkers, etc...
LEAD: Looking back, we're embarrassed at ourselves.
Why in the world do we care about and remember such trivial, ridiculous things?
Why haven't they been long forgotten?


Lifestyle;   A Halloween for Families, With Lots of Tradition
LEAD: There are those who think it's Halloween year-round in New York City, but benign trick-or-treaters and friendly ghosts - whether young or old - seem determined not to let past or present fears keep them from having a good time on Oct. 31.


Cara Somach and Robert Londin Wed
LEAD: Cara Ivy Somach, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Somach of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening to Robert Londin, the son of Barbara F. Londin and Jerome J. Londin, both of New York.
Rabbi Robert S. Widom and Cantor Henry Weintraub officiated at Water's Edge at the East River Yacht Club in Long Island City,


Mourners View Coffin of Girl Found Slain in Bronx
LEAD: The community that mobilized to search for Jessica Guzman last week united yesterday to mourn on what would have been her 11th birthday.


Parade Rest?
LEAD: That gorgeous mosaic Mayor Dinkins talks about sure can march.
New York is home to 178 identifiable ethnic groups, officials say, and most of them, it appears, hold parades.
There were a grand total of 267 parades in 1989 - not all ethnically related - of which 110 required a ''significant police presence'' and 117 required extra cleanup from the Department of Sanitation.


Managing;   Business Meetings by Keyboard
LEAD: Not long ago, about 30 executives from the Greyhound Financial Corporation sat in a meeting room and ''talked'' at once.
Yet no one was shouted down; no one garnered Brownie points or demerits; no one was intimidated into silence, and everyone's comments were given equal weight.


College Football;   Irish Have Final Word With Miami
LEAD: The last word was goodbye.


'Spy Sinker'
LEAD: To the Editor:


TRIAL AND TRIBULATION
LEAD: I want to express my appreciation to Richard Selzer for mentioning the tragic death of my husband, Dr.
George F. Laszlo, in his article.


Liberalism and the Courts
LEAD: To the Editor:


Bush: No Mo Big Mo
LEAD: No matter what kind of Federal budget finally comes out of the unseemly scramble that has so demeaned Congress and the White House in recent weeks, a long-suffering public is more likely to remember the process than the product.
Seldom, if ever, has Washington looked more self-serving and less effective.


Dinkins Calls Board 'Peculiar'
LEAD: For a year beginning in July 1972, David N. Dinkins served as president of the New York City Board of Elections.
For nearly two years before that he served as counsel to his predecessor, Maurice J. O'Rourke.


Unearthing the Secret Lover
LEAD:
POSSESSION
A Romance.
By A. S. Byatt.
555 pp. New York:
Random House. $22.95.


Justice Requires Judges
LEAD: Mayor David Dinkins of New York won deserved praise for the police hiring plan he announced earlier this month, and for acknowledging the need to expand other criminal justice agencies as more police produce more arrests.
The city may or may not be able to afford to implement the whole plan.
But even though the plan is otherwise imaginative and professional, it neglects a crucial need: for more judges.


A Soldier's Tale From the Middle Market
LEAD: Clouds scudded across the early afternoon sky as Richard Donatuti sped down the Bronx streets, whistling past piteous apartment houses, weed-choked lots, sidewalks dominated by idle people, on his way to see someone wanting a million dollars.
His driving stood hair on end.
He regards anyplace as fit for a U-turn and does not feel a one-way sign always must be obeyed.


Indian Rebel Group Is Linked to Train Attack
LEAD: The arson attack on an Indian train in which 47 passengers were killed this month has been linked by the police to a wing of a revolutionary movement that has found new strength in southern India after having been nearly eradicated in the late 1960's.


Q and A
LEAD:
Inheriting a Co-op
Question: If a co-op owner leaves the apartment in a will to an adult son or daughter, is the co-op board obliged to approve the new owner because of the family relationship? . . .
Charles Bannett, Manhattan
Answer: No. According to Stuart Saft, a vice president of the Council of New York


Lost Colony on Sakhalin Strives for New Dignity
LEAD: Representatives of a forgotten colony of Korean slave laborers who were abandoned by the Japanese Army here on the Soviet island of Sakhalin 45 years ago have finally managed to journey out and confront long-grieving relatives in Korea and the Japanese conscience in Tokyo.


Las Vegas: Day for Night
LEAD: EVER PLAYED CHICKEN-IN-THE-POT?
NO?
Tell you how it's done.
You pay the man a dollar and he hands you a mallet with which you hit a spring that catapults a plucked rubber chicken toward a turntable of slowly revolving empty kettles.
You get three tries and win a prize of a stuffed doll if you can get the chicken into the pot.


'Syndrome' Hits the A's
LEAD: A slump in the World Series never seems to go away.


Mercy Cook Has Wedding
LEAD: Mercy Cook and Mark Masters, graduates of Trinity College in Hartford, were married yesterday by Rabbi Charles D. Lippman and the Rev.
George LaPorte, a Unitarian minister, at the United Nations Chapel.
The bride, 37 years old, will keep her name.
A daughter of Adra Cook of New Bedford, Mass., and the late Seabury Cook, Ms.


Moscow Meeting Held to Forge Non-Communist Alliance


A Graceful City of Two Cultures
LEAD: At a recent diplomatic party in Washington, when I was introduced as coming from Hyderabad, I was told by an ambassador that one of the grand crystal chandeliers that hangs in the White House comes from the palace of a nabob in Hyderabad.
I am inclined to believe the story, for much of the splendor of


From the Land of Opera, Concert-Hall Music
LEAD: A century ago, a festival of recent Italian concert-hall music like the Settembre Musica event that takes place this week in New York (see box on page 30) would hardly have seemed a credible proposition.
The energetic cultivation of instrumental writing (and instrument making) by ecclesiastical and aristocratic patrons in Italy during the 17th and 18th centuries was but a ghost of its former self by the Napoleonic era.


Campus Life: Rutgers;   Racial Sensitivity: Fraternities Find Common Ground
LEAD: While visiting a friend at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia in January, Kim Schultheiss, a Rutgers University senior, attended a party sponsored by a group calling itself Campus Organized Lectures on Racial Sensitivity.


Sports Center Not a Good Idea
LEAD: Joseph N. Mondello, presiding supervisor of the Town of Hempstead and chairman of the Nassau County Republican Committee, has proposed that parcels of the Roosevelt Raceway property be offered to the United States Tennis Association for a National Tennis Center on 80 acres of the site [''Revised Plan for Raceway May Retain Sports Role,'' Sept.


Hard Ancestors To Keep Down
LEAD: ''In the darkened interiors of New Guinea's ceremonial houses, when the lights flicker and smoke swirls around the tops of the ancestor figures, they seem no longer earthbound,'' said John A. Friede, a New York collector, in a preview tour of the Oceanic art exhibition which opened last week at the Brooklyn Museum, where it will remain for a year.


Campus Life: Duke;   Scholars' Group, Accused of Bias, Divides Faculty
LEAD: A group that says it is devoted to preserving the traditional Western curriculum has divided Duke University faculty members and students, provoking a sometimes bitter debate on academic freedom.


Residential Resales
LEAD: Closings in the week ending Oct. 6
MANHATTAN
East Village
$550,000
722 Broadway (Astor Place)
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,700-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a renovated loft; dining area, fireplace, exposed brick walls, private roof space; maintenance $1,472, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Charles H.


MARIACHIS AT SUNRISE
LEAD: TO ENJOY MEXICO CITY by dark, the visitor is advised to do as the Mexicans do, savoring the capital at their rhythm and their pace.
That means starting not with dinner, but with a show downtown at the Palacio de Bellas Artes: a concert, ballet, the opera, or whatever happens to be on the bill.
After all, the theater itself, with its Art


Holyfield's Choice
LEAD: If he wrests the world heavyweight championship from Buster Douglas next Thursday in Las Vegas, Nev., will Evander Holyfield abide by the decree of boxing's governing bodies that he must fight Mike Tyson next?
Don't bet on it.
Holyfield has a signed deal that, win or lose, calls for him to fight George


Hunting Season, but Who Are the Hunted?
LEAD: IN an effort to reduce the size of the human hunter population, the deer of northern New Jersey have voted to extend the hunting season.


Aspen
LEAD: Aspen has had a tough time staying a small town.
During the early 1880's it was home to 50 grizzled, tobacco-chewing silver miners in tents.
Within 10 years it became a sophisticated boom town with 12,000 people, a street car system and an opera house.
By 1900 the gleam of silver had faded, and Aspen was a farming and lumbering community.


Comparison Shopping: Which Costs the Environment Less?
LEAD: AS guided tours go, this is an unusual one.
One of the first stops is the aisle of peanut butter jars, comparing the merits of Smuckers to those of Skippy.
But participants are not in the grocery store for a taste test: what is being judged here is the use of glass versus plastic packaging.
This is an environmental shopping tour.


Educating Children Without the 'Trip'
LEAD: In ''Beowulf, Get Off the Sofa,'' (Opinion page, Sept. 9), a mother is surprised that her 9-year-old ''knows'' who Michelangelo is.
Closer questioning reveals that he equates the name of one of the world's greatest artists, a sculptor, architect and poet, with a violent cartoon character.


Streetscapes: 740 Park Avenue;   Repairs for a '29 Luxury Co-op
LEAD: For most people, $258,000 would pay for a perfectly good two-bedroom apartment in a safe but not fancy Manhattan neighborhood.
But for each shareholder at 740 Park Avenue, it's just the cost of keeping the rain out.


Malaysia Ballot Offers a Rare Multiracial Contest
LEAD: Malaysians began two days of voting today in the most contested and bitter election in 20 years.


Congress Deals Near-Fatal Blow to 'Star' of 'Star Wars' Plan
LEAD: The visionary weapon that first aroused White House interest in the ''Star Wars'' anti-missile shield was dealt a near-fatal blow last week by House and Senate negotiators, who voted to end its financing as a separate item in the Federal budget.


Maria Rocco Is Wed To Zachary Lazarus
LEAD: Maria Elena Rocco, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Rocco of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to Zachary Lazarus, the son of Judge Robert J. Lazarus of New York and the late Nona G. Lazarus.
Rabbi Mordechi Genn and the Rev.
Dennis Kean, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Blessed Sacrament Church in New


No Headline
LEAD: They came for him at night, the young man said, summoning him from the street.
The three men wore black masks and long black wigs; one wore police trousers.
They beat him up, he said.


BUSH TERMED OPEN TO TAX RATE RISE ON UPPER INCOME
LEAD: In a break that could lead to a compromise in the budget negotiations, Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady has told lawmakers that President Bush could accept an increase in the tax rate for the wealthy to 31 percent from 28 percent now, staff assistants from both parties said today.


Kathleen Grogan Is Wed
LEAD: Kathleen Ann Grogan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Austin Grogan of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Stuart Hall Deadrick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin Joseph Deadrick of New Canaan.
The Rev.
Richard P. Grogan, an uncle of the bride, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Agnes Church in Greenwich, Conn.


'Carnival' Carries Out a Musical Mission
LEAD: ''CARNIVAL'' may not be one of the American theater's milestone musicals, or even among the more demanded ones, but it spills over with an inviting if imperfect brew of offbeat and conventional audience-winning ingredients.


Flying Blind: An Unexpected Change of Airline
LEAD: The airline name you see on your ticket may not mean you will be flying on a plane of that line, sometimes because of a practice the airline industry calls ''code sharing.'' Code sharing does not signify much to the average traveler.
But like people with hotel reservations who are ''walked,'' or sent elsewhere because of overbooking, passengers quickly learn about code sharing when they end up on another airline.


Breaking Away From the Cult
LEAD:
FINAL ANALYSIS
The Making and Unmaking of a Psychoanalyst.
By Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson.
212 pp. Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. $18.95.


Kristine Lyons Is Married
LEAD: At the Asbury First United Methodist Church in Rochester, Kristine Marie Lyons, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis H. Lyons of Rochester, was married yesterday to Paul Turney Briggs, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Briggs of New York.
The Rev.
Susan Shafer officiated.
Both are graduates of the State University of New York at Geneseo.


Here at Last, Killer Bees Are Met With a Yawn and a Snigger
LEAD: There is no talk of killer bees at Andy's Cafe 2 here, no panicked calls to the City Hall in nearby Alamo, not even a mention of the bee invasion in The Beeville Bee-Picayune.


Ecologists' Foe to Become Amazon Governor
LEAD: Hoisting the banner of an Amazonian backlash against ecologists, Gilberto Mestrinho likes to boast, ''I wasn't elected by the trees.''


A Georgia Island, Mostly Wild
LEAD: In 1566, when the Spanish first dropped anchor off Cumberland Island, they found themselves in a place of almost primordial beauty.
Broad white-sand beaches and fecund salt marshes of an impossible green ringed a dense forest of live oak.
The island's salt-water sloughs and freshwater lakes supported hundreds of species of migratory birds and the inner forest was home to mink, bobcats, deer, armadillos and a small group of peace-loving Indians known as the


Some Say Polenta, But Others Call It Cornmeal
LEAD: WHAT is the difference between polenta and cornmeal?
None.
They are exactly the same.


Public and Private Toll Of Living WIth AIDS
LEAD: SHE said that for nearly 13 years a neighborhood dentist had treated her.
But when the 30-year-old Nassau County woman, a former government employee, told her dentist that she had AIDS, the situation changed.


Wanted: Scoring: And a Lot of It
LEAD: With the last two World Cup tournaments setting records for fewest goals scored, the world governing body for soccer has begun formulating possible changes designed to increase scoring by 1994, when the World Cup will be held in the United States.


The Nation;   For the Man Who Moves 5 Million New Yorkers a Day, 7 Months of Surprises
LEAD: ''When I came to New York in February, I could not have foreseen the vast set of problems and issues that have arisen in the past seven months,'' said Alan F. Kiepper, the president of the Transit Authority.


Its Uneven Nature Lends Drama to Show of Russian Works
LEAD: ONE often runs across exhibitions that are uneven, but rarely does one find a show that has unevenness built into the drama of the subject. ''The Russian Experiment,'' the title of the current show at the Castle Gallery of the College of New Rochelle, embodies that exhibition's volatile character.


For Women, Growing Risks From AIDS
LEAD: ''I WANT to tell my story and I want people to see me so that they realize that AIDS has a face, a middle-class, white face,'' said Emily Varga, 43 years old, of Centerport. ''I became a statistic one of two ways, as a rape victim or a naive lover.


David Peeler to Wed Katherine Kellogg
LEAD: The engagement of Katherine Cissel Kellogg and David Randolph Peeler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Peeler of Charlotte, N.C., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Kellogg 4th of Summit, N.J.
The wedding is planned for next year.


Manager of Troubled Arms Plant Is Removed
LEAD: The manager of the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons plant has been replaced amid revelations about management failures and employees' charges that managers are risking unsafe conditions in a rush to restart the plant.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LEAD:
HAVEL'S DARK COMEDY


Headboard Flap Recalls La Guardia's 'Beaut'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Music;   Maazel's 70-Minute 'Ring' Cycle
LEAD: Lorin Maazel brought his Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra to Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday evening for a relatively brief program of two works, more or less: Marc Neikrug's Flute Concerto, in its New York premiere, and Mr.
Maazel's own symphonic synthesis ''The Ring Without Words,'' a 70-minute distillation of


Not Enough Wind, Too Much Fatigue
LEAD: Alone in the Atlantic Ocean and 1,100 miles from shore, Mike Plant, the only American sailing in the premier class of the BOC yacht race around the world, has his own version of a living hell.
It has nothing to do with fire and brimstone, everything to do with water and ill winds.


Joel McCrea, Actor, Dies at 84; A Casual, Amiable Leading Man
LEAD: Joel McCrea, a tall, trim, ruggedly handsome actor who radiated a casual, amiable image in 80 movies, many of them westerns, died yesterday of pulmonary complications at the Motion Picture and Television Fund Hospital in Woodland Hills, Calif.
He was 84 years old.


The Truth Behind the Mideast's 'Great Lie';   Let's Not Pretend . . .
LEAD: To the Editor:


When Principal Becomes a Parent, Do Answers Disappear?
LEAD: ''WHAT sound does a giraffe make?'' my 3-year-old son asked one morning at breakfast.


Let There Be Lights
LEAD: To the Editor:


Miss Lewis Is Wed to Adam Weinstein
LEAD: Katherine Rush Lewis, a daughter of Mary E. Lewis and Dr.
Alfred Baker Lewis, both of New York, was married last evening at the Cosmopolitan Club in New York to Adam Weinstein, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harry Weinstein of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Cantor Richard Berman officiated.


Rupert Murdoch's Biggest Gamble
LEAD: Rupert Murdoch, who lives in New York but rides planes the way most New Yorkers ride the subway, has been in London for less than 48 hours.
That's long enough to size up the situation at his five national newspapers, part of a $6.7 billion media empire that sprawls across three continents.
A sharp advertising recession, the worst in two decades, is biting.


Data Update
LEAD:
INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Sept.
Aug.
Sept. 89
Rents
163.4
-2.3
9.1
Homeowner's costs
166.2
-o.8
6.2
Fuel and utilities
105.2
2.9
5.7
*4*(Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics)
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk,


Thoughts On Thinking
LEAD: To the Editor:


New Heart Machine Passes Test on Human
LEAD: A woman who collapsed when her heart went into spasms and stopped owes her life to a new device that pumped oxygenated blood through her body for 15 hours while doctors worked to stabilize her heart, without surgery.


Review/Cabaret;   Julie Wilson's Melodious Glamour
LEAD: One of the happiest blendings of a performer and a setting took place on Tuesday evening at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza), where Julie Wilson, who had not played there before, opened a three-week engagement.
Now 66 years old, the singer may be the ultimate embodiment of a kind of sophisticated glamour that has all but disappeared from New York City nightlife.


Why Cole Porter Prevails - Be It Pop, Rock or Even Rap
LEAD: Cole Porter's ''I've Got You Under My Skin'' has been recorded by scores of singers over the years, but the song, which was first heard in the 1936 movie musical ''Born to Dance,'' has never sounded anything like the new hip-hop interpretation by Neneh Cherry.


The World;   Gorbachev Counsels A Prudent Revolution
LEAD: Had Mikhail S. Gorbachev presented his latest economic reform plan a year ago, Western analysts say, it would have been hailed as a daring commitment to free markets, private property and fiscal federalism.
Today, with the Soviet economy in free fall and a half-dozen of the 15 republican governments in open revolt, the new plan is being widely derided as a scheme for saving the bureaucrats and party hacks who led the economy to ruin.





Dinkins's Aides and Officials Meet to Plan Budget-Cutting
LEAD: Heads of some 15 New York City agencies met with administration officials yesterday afternoon in what a spokesman for Mayor David N. Dinkins described as a ''brainstorming session'' to share ideas for budget cuts.


Budapest Winter's Tale
LEAD: IT IS DECEMBER; THE SNOW IS indistinguishable from the fog.
Cocooned in white swirling mists (bone-chilling; delicious to the lips), one sees Budapest -as through an occluded mirror, dimly - as a city of water.
The sky is heavy with water; the Danube, which divides the city in two, is, while shrouded in metallic fog, always present to the senses, and the bridges that span it, from the hills of residential Buda on the right bank to flat commercial Pest on the left, daily claim one's gratified attention.


Beauty
LEAD: Shampoo may seem like a benign enough little item, but even the most hard-bitten characters retain an almost total lack of cynicism on the subject. ''The problem is,'' says one shampoo-obsessed architect, ''no matter what you use, you're dealing with the nasty reality that every shampoo - like certain automobile models - has its own built-in obsolescence factor.


Usual Flurry of Election Ads on Television Becomes a Blizzard This Year
LEAD: Feeling overwhelmed by political advertising this year?
There's a reason: Candidates and their consultants say they are bombarding the electorate with more political advertisements than ever before.


Seeking Art Among the Ruins
LEAD: To the Editor:


Review/Theater Deception and Betrayal In Soviet Triangle Tale
LEAD: There is a surprise plot twist at the end of the first act of ''Theme and Variations,'' a play by the Soviet writer Samuil Alyoshin at the Chelsea Stage that is built solely around a faintly amusing case of mistaken identity.


Iowa Upsets Michigan on Late Score
LEAD: Matt Rodgers, who passed for one touchdown and ran for another, led a brilliant drive to the winning touchdown in the closing minutes today as Iowa upset Michigan, 24-23.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/FOLK TALES
LEAD:
LAND OF THE LONG WHITE CLOUD
Maori Myths, Tales and Legends.
By Kiri Te Kanawa.
Illustrated by Michael Foreman.
119 pp. New York:
Arcade Publishing/Little, Brown &amp; Company.
$16.95. (Ages 8 and up)


Works in Progress;   Ring-a-Ding-Ding
LEAD: Speaking by phone from Moscow, Popovich says that it takes about three years of work to add a ring to his act, that he's mastered eight and has reached the point where he can keep nine rings aloft for about 30 seconds.


Baseball Notebook;   Only Minor Talks; 202 Teams in 3 Countries Will be Affected
LEAD: When the World Series traveled west, from Cincinnati to Oakland, the other day, a group of men moved east to continue a process that could have a far greater impact on many more cities throughout the country than the two whose teams are in the World Series.


Business Diary/October 14-19
LEAD:
THE ECONOMY
An Accounting Change That Raises Health Care Costs
Unions may have an even tougher time holding the line on health care benefits, for corporations now have a greater incentive then ever to skimp on coverage.
The board that makes the nation's accounting rules voted last week to require employers to set up reserves to cover the cost of providing health care to future retirees - an expense that would reduce corporate earnings.


Pitt Is Surprised By Louisville, 27-20
LEAD: Louisville, off to its best start in 19 years, turned a 99-yard first-half drive and John Gainey's second-half interception into two short-range Curtis Lipsey touchdown runs today and upset Pittsburgh, 27-20.


Along the Thames to the Great Port of London
LEAD: BY THE TIME IT REACHES Teddington, the Thames has come of age.
It has left its birthplace 100 miles to the west, in the innocent hills of Gloucestershire; it has attended the university at Oxford, where it calls itself the Isis and carries undergraduates in punts to assignations under Magdalen Bridge; it has played an indispensable part in the Henley Royal Regatta, and visited Windsor Castle and Hampton Court Palace.


Campus Life: Furman;   Trustees Limit Baptist Control Over University
LEAD: The action parallels a decision last month at Baylor University, the nation's largest Baptist college, which moved away from the Texas Baptist Convention after fundamentalists vowed publicly to gain control of the convention and make curriculum and faculty changes at the school in Waco.


Wall Street;   Why Trading Volume Is Up in Germany and Britain
LEAD: London may be making good on its threat to become the European Community's dominant stock market.
Numbers compiled last week by David Strongin, director of international finance at the Securities Industry Association, show that trading in foreign stocks is accounting for a sharply higher share of London's volume.


Sealing Pennsylvania Mine in Effort to Smother Fire Workers hope to smother the fire that started Wednesday by sealing all seven of the mine's entrances. Nearly 250 people have fled a four-square-mile area to escape poisonous carbon monoxide fumes that have been seeping from the mine. (Associated Press)


Leadership Is Changing at Board of Elections
LEAD: A LONG-STANDING impasse at the county's Board of Elections, where voting results have been delayed by what state investigators described as the two Commissioners' ''inability to properly function together as a team,'' appears to have been resolved.


The Nation;   This Year's Campaign Menu Of Venom and Platitudes
LEAD: Nobody claims that 30-second television commercials can tell a voter much about a candidate, but if you watch enough of them, you can glimpse what this season's candidates or their consultants think about the voters.
The opinion cannot be high.


Miriam Halpern Is Married
LEAD: Miriam Gail Halpern, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lester Halpern of Holyoke, Mass., was married last evening to Steven Sosnick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Sosnick of Melville, L.I.
Rabbi Herbert Schwartz officiated at Temple Beth El in Springfield, Mass.
Mrs.
Sosnick, 27 years old, is an assistant vice president at Prudential-Bache Securities in New York.


Hunting Foes Charge Threats
LEAD: A hunter Saturday morning fired three shots over the head of a woman, Klara Lucas, taking part in a group hunting protest at Darien Lake State Park, and he threatened to shoot her and to strike another demonstrator, the protesters said.


Blair Crump Wed To Beth Nichols
LEAD: Elizabeth Ann Nichols and Daniel Blair Crump were married yesterday at the First Presbyterian Church in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Charlotte Sommers performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Crump, who is known as Beth, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Nichols of Greenwich.
She is a graduate of Southern Methodist University and is the office manager at Tullis-Dickerson &amp; Company, a venture capital firm in Greenwich.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our house is covered with a tan cement that is not supposed to be painted.
The tan is now streaked with dirt, and there are gray patches that show.
Can the cement be painted, or should it be steam-cleaned?


Campus Life: Berkeley;   Biochemist, 71, Fights Mandatory Retirement
LEAD: A prominent biochemist at the University of California at Berkeley is fighting the university's mandatory retirement policy on the ground that it constitutes age discrimination.


Deborah Lupkin Engaged to Wed
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley N. Lupkin of Bayside, Queens, have announced December wedding plans for their daughter, Deborah Eve Lupkin, and Emanuel Mark Gross, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joshua Gross of Monsey, N.Y.


Police and Tax Protesters Clash in London
LEAD: At least 9 people were injured and 91 arrested today when violence broke out during protests here against Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's unpopular new local tax.


Pastimes;   Around the Garden
LEAD: For This Week: Keep up with raking.
Pile leaves for compost, but do not forget to sandwich layers of soil for microorganisms and a dash of fertilizer for nutrients; if the old compost pile has not been used up, it can be added to start the new one.
Bulb planting goes on.
Finish shrub planting and perennial dividing.


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our house is covered with a tan cement that is not supposed to be painted.
The tan is now streaked with dirt, and there are gray patches that show.
Can the cement be painted, or should it be steam-cleaned?


A Suffocating and Demoralized Island
LEAD:
CUBA
A Journey.
By Jacobo Timerman.
Translated by Toby Talbot.
125 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.


The Nation;   Where Farmers Would Take a Hit In the Cause of Cutting the Deficit
LEAD: When debate began in January on a farm policy law to replace legislation that expired this year, few members of the House and Senate Agriculture committees thought the Government's 57-year-old program to subsidize basic farm commodities needed to be changed much.


MALAWI CRITICIZED BY A RIGHTS GROUP
LEAD: The Government of Malawi, one of the larger recipients of United States economic and military aid in sub-Saharan Africa, has been harshly criticized in a report by a human rights organization for the killings of political opponents, intolerable conditions in overcrowded jails and ethnic discrimination.


Poll Shows Weicker Maintaining Strong Lead in Race for Governor
LEAD: Lowell P. Weicker Jr., the former Senator campaigning as an independent, continues to hold a commanding lead over his Democratic and Republican opponents in Connecticut's gubernatorial race, a poll released today by Quinnipiac College in Hamden concludes.


Catherine L. Hogan Weds
LEAD: At St.
Mary Star of the Sea Roman Catholic Church in Beverly, Mass., Catherine Lycett Hogan was married yesterday to Robert Revane Dutile.
The Rev.
Stephen Connor officiated.
Mrs.
Dutile, 32 years old, is the daughter of Helene Lycett Hogan-Speck of Montpelier, Vt., and the late William Hogan.
A graduate of Amherst College, she is studying for a master's degree in screenwriting at the University of California at Los Angeles.


S.&amp; L. Crisis Hurting State's Economy
LEAD: THE problems facing the nation's troubled savings and loan associations and the methods used by Federal regulators to solve them are undermining the state's economy in ways that will ultimately be felt by almost all New Jersey residents, experts say.


Where Londoners Seek Out Quality
LEAD: Most shopping enclaves depend on passing trade.
But Chiltern Street, off Marylebone Road and parallel to Baker Street, in London's West End, relies instead on its high-quality factor.
Built at the turn of the century, the small Victorian shops that line the street retain a village atmosphere.
Most have new picture windows and, between each of them, fluted, mock-Corinthian columns make curious dividers.


Operetta Devotees Delight in 'Precious Nonsense'
LEAD: ''NOW is not this ridiculous and is not this preposterous?
A thorough-paced absurdity, explain it if you can!''


Women Still Scarce In the Police
LEAD: This is a belated letter to confirm the main theme of the incisive article ''Women Are Still Scarce as Police Officers.'' The latest (1989) criminal justice statistics were recently released to the public by both the state and Federal Government.


South India's Regional Cuisines
LEAD: Travelers to the Indian south are in for a glorious treat.
They will not be eating tandoori chicken, lamb curry, nan or other standard fare, but exotic foods spiced with cinnamon, tamarind and pepper, or fragrant with coconut and curry leaves.


Eccentric Companions
LEAD:
PROFILES.
By Kenneth Tynan. (Cornelia and Michael Bessie/Harper Perennial, Paper, $14.95.) ''The final test of a man's stature is his capacity for proper exultation,'' writes Kenneth Tynan in his discussion of Graham Greene, one of 50 pieces that make up ''Profiles,'' a collection of Tynan's character sketches, some previously uncollected.


Initiative Movement And 'Mob Rule'
LEAD: Re: ''Initiative Amendment: Dissenting Views,'' Letters to the New Jersey Editor, Sept. 16:


If You're Thinking of Living in: Chappaqua
LEAD: The area now known as Chappaqua was settled in 1720 by a group of Quakers who moved up from Purchase and Mamaroneck to establish a religious community.
It got its name from an enterprising Indian chief who carried on a brisk trade with the early English settlers, some of whose names can still be found on mailboxes.


New York Farms Showed Record Profits in 1989
LEAD: New York farmers earned profits of $807 million in 1989, the highest amount ever recorded in the state, the Agricultural Statistics Service reported last week.


NEWS SUMMARY
LEAD:
INTERNATIONAL/3-21


Linda Eileen Strauss Is Wed
LEAD: Linda Eileen Strauss, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard S. Strauss of Livingston, N.J., was married last evening to Ross Z. Silver, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Silver of Baldwin Harbor, L.I.
Rabbi Barry Friedman officiated at Temple B'nai Abraham in Livingston.
Mrs.
Silver, 27 years old, and her husband, 28, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received law degrees from New York University.


And Now the Hard Part: Making Hussein Give In
LEAD: Eleven weeks after Iraq invaded Kuwait, Administration officials still appear determined to confront President Saddam Hussein, but they are discovering just how difficult their policy is to sustain and showing some signs of anxiety about how the crisis will be resolved.


Maillol's 'Ultimate Muse' Builds Him a Museum
LEAD: Toward the end of his life, the French artist Aristide Maillol became so discouraged by his waning strength that he was considering abandoning sculpture, when a friend claimed to have found him the perfect model.
Always in quest of the ideal female form in his art, and thus the ultimate muse, Maillol wrote to the young Parisienne.


Campus Life: Harvey Mudd;   Women Denounce Handbook Satire As Stereotyping
LEAD: At Scripps College, a liberal arts institution for women, the term ''Scrippsie'' is considered offensive.
No wonder, then, that many Scripps students were incensed when the freshman handbook at Harvey Mudd College, a co-member of the Claremont Colleges consortium, offered a definition of the nickname.


Corrections
LEAD: The gazetteer accompanying an article on Todt Hill on Oct. 14 misstated the Staten Island neighborhood's distance from midtown Manhattan and the cost of the ferry between St.
George and the Battery.
The distance is 12 miles.
The ferry ride costs 50 cents from the Battery to Staten Island and is free the other way.


From Budapest To Rio And Beyond
LEAD: Pleasures of the cooler months range from skating on a frozen pond to steaming in a thermal pool.
Budapest offers both, all seasoned with a generous dash of history and romance (to say nothing of paprika).
Autumnal delights can be as tranquil as a stroll through the medieval beguinages of Belgium or as raucous as a sojourn in Las


Israel
LEAD: To the Editor: The chances of being mugged in Israel are slight, but there are other ways to relieve the unsuspecting tourist of his money.
A friend and I were in the Old City of Jerusalem recently when she realized she needed Israeli currency.
Signs proclaimed money changers, and we went into one near the Jaffa Gate.


Postings: 5 Minutes to the Ferry;   Dormant 18-Unit Condo Project Revived
LEAD: A condominium project in the St.
George section of Staten Island that was mothballed by its developers after the 1987 stock market crash is under way again and headed twoard completion in the spring.


IN ATLANTA, THE BEST IS FREE
LEAD: IN ATLANTA, FOR ALL ITS brassy status as the consumption capital of the New South, the nicest thing to do is free.
My idea of a perfect evening begins with a drive at dusk around the gloriously lush neighborhoods, shrouded in oak and pine, magnolia and dogwood, crab apple and hickory, that snake off Peachtree Street, Northside Drive or West Paces Ferry Road.


Amid Preparations, No One Can Say When War Might Break Out or End
LEAD: Two and a half months after American forces were sent to Saudi Arabia and other Persian Gulf states, military commanders and political officials are finding it difficult to assure achievable goals in an ambiguous conflict whose outcome they cannot easily control.


Morley StreetWins Easily
LEAD: Morley Street, one of the best British jumpers ever sent to this country, humiliated a moderate field to win the $250,000 Breeders' Cup Steeplechase by 11 lengths yesterday at Belmont Park.


Susan A. Epstein, A Lawyer, Is Wed
LEAD: The Brooklyn Botanic Garden was the setting last evening for the wedding of Susan Amy Epstein and Eric Steven Aledort, associates in New York for Chicago law firms, she at McDermott, Will &amp; Emery, and he at Sidley &amp; Austin.
Rabbi Laurence Milder performed the ceremony.


Pact Limits Timber Cutting in Alaska Forest
LEAD: House and Senate negotiators have reached a compromise on a bill to protect an additional one million acres in the Tongass National Forest in Alaska from timber cutting.


Q and A
LEAD:
Normandy Battlefields
Q.
My parents have been trying to find a tour of Normandy that would focus on the beaches and battlefields of World War II.
Are you aware of any such tours? - Barbara A. Kaye, Detroit
A.
Two organizations offer what you're looking for.
Galaxy Tours has been operating a ''G.I.


Corrections
LEAD: A music listing in the Arts and Leisure guide today for the pianist Alexander Shtarkman at the 92d Street Y is outdated.
The concert, part of a series, has been postponed until next fall.


Campus Life: Swarthmore;   'Virus Free Week' Combats Spread Of Disk Disease
LEAD: Swarthmore College held a Virus Free Week last week, but it had nothing to do with medicine.
Instead students and faculty and staff members were invited to have their computer disks checked for contamination.


IN SHORT: FICTION
LEAD:
CANDLE IN THE WIND.
By George Bernau. (Warner, $19.95.) If dragging defenseless Marilyn Monroe's already tattered reputation further down in a sleazy sex novel is your idea of reading fun, then George Bernau's second novel may be for you. ''Candle in the Wind is a work of fiction,'' says the author's note.


Perspectives: New York City Planning;   Shaping a Role in a Time of Transition
LEAD: After six months as chairman of the New York City Planning Commission, Richard L. Schaffer is making his mark as a thoughtful and academically trained professional in a position that in the past has gone to an experienced operator in city affairs.


Photo: Westchester County, which is anticipating a budget deficit for the next year of about $80 million, may be forced to curtail plans for renovations and replacement of rides at the county-owned Rye Playland, above. (Joyce Dopkeen/The New York Times) (pg. 32) As Tax Revenues Drop in Region, Cuts Are Small but Close to Home
LEAD: With tax revenue stunted by the weak economy, state, county and local budgets are being tightened throughout the metropolitan region in ways that are touching nearly everyone in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.


The Women Wouldn't Dance With Her
LEAD:
DON JUAN IN THE VILLAGE
By Jane DeLynn.
240 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $19.95.


America's Best Weapon: Patience
LEAD: The siege in the Persian Gulf is not yet 12 weeks old, but the patience of some Americans already seems exhausted.


Restrained Corporate Political Speech
LEAD: In one of last summer's Supreme Court decision - Austin v.
Michigan Chamber of Commerce - the Court upheld a Michigan law prohibiting corporations from using their treasury funds for independent expenditures to advance or oppose political candidates.
The case involved an attempt by the Michigan Chamber of Commerce to place a local newspaper advertisement in support of a candidate for state office.


Reds Finish Stunning Sweep By Rallying to Beat Reds
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds completed one of the stunning upsets in baseball history tonight when they rallied in the eighth inning in the Oakland Coliseum to defeat the Oakland Athletics, 2-1, and win the 87th World Series in a four-game sweep.


Is NC-17 an X in a Clean Raincoat
LEAD: Picture the person in the trenchcoat, the one staring furtively at the marquee.
The film he wants to see has been advertised as ''completely uncut in its original version,'' and he likes the way that sounds.
So he sidles up to the box office, and he is preparing to buy a ticket when he spies something that rattles his composure.


Technology;   Scientists Are Proving That Natural Plastic Is Not an Oxymoron
LEAD: Brightly colored and maddeningly resistant to breakdown by natural processes, plastic products have become a symbol of the nation's litter and solid waste disposal problems.
And, since plastics are almost universally derived from petroleum products, they represent a drain on what could become a scarce and increasingly costly resource.


World Series;   Red's Pitching Overwhelms A's for Series
LEAD: The Cincinnati Reds, the team that many thought would be swept, instead completed an improbable sweep of their own in the 87th World Series.
With their two best players knocked out by injuries and with Dave Stewart shutting them out, the Reds still rose to beat the Oakland A's, 2-1, tonight to win their first


Quotation of the Day
LEAD: ''Am I more prone to talking about being pro-choice this year than I was six years ago?


TRIAL AND TRIBULATION
LEAD: In the description of his malpractice trial, Richard Selzer is very much a surgeon (''Trial and Tribulation,'' Sept. 23).
The details of what he experienced - the insomnia, grief, humiliation, thoughts of suicide - cut deep into every sinew of my being.
His article should arouse the desire in patient and physician alike to form a more tolerant, more compassionate union.


The Locker Room Revisted ... Again
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


What's Ahead for Europe
LEAD:
REFLECTIONS ON THE REVOLUTION IN EUROPE
In a Letter Intended to Have Been Sent to a Gentleman in Warsaw.
By Ralf Dahrendorf.
164 pp. New York: Times Books/Random House. $17.95.


The Executive Computer;   A Notebook That Can Provide Desktop Power
LEAD: Reinforcing its reputation as the personal computer industry's technolog leader, the Compaq Computer Corporation has become the first company to fit the full power of a desktop PC into a laptop small enough to carry in a briefcase.
In doing so, Compaq has come close to creating a single computer that can meet the needs of an executive both in the office and on the road.


Corrections
LEAD: A record review on page 33 of the Arts and Leisure section today, about women in rap, misattributes a lyric.


Style Makers;   The Forenzas, Pillow-Globe Designers
LEAD: For the Forenzas of Larchmont, N.Y., business is a family affair.
Angela Forenza came up with the idea, which her son, Robert, 35 years old, brought to reality.
Soon, her daughter Patricia, 33, joined him and later, the youngest, Lorraine, 29.
Their business: Hugg-a-Planet, which makes soft-sculpture globes that are both pillows and teaching devices.


Style Makers;   Judy Dearing, Costume Designer
LEAD: She started her career onstage, dancing with Miriam Makeba and acting with The Negro Ensemble Company, but she now works behind the scenes as a costume designer.
On stage and off, it was her style that first brought her notice.
Ms.
Dearing made her own dance costumes and many of her own clothes, a skill she learned as a child.


Martha M. Poillon To Marry in 1991
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
George M. Poillon Jr. of Cos Cob, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Martha Marie Poillon to Francis John Ambrogio 2d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. Ambrogio of Greenwich, Conn.
The wedding is planned for next year.


Alabama Stuns Tennessee, 9-6
LEAD: Philip Doyle kicked his third field goal of the game, a 48-yarder as time expired, to lift Alabama to a 9-6 victory over Tennessee today in a Southeastern Conference defensive struggle.


Hilary Mencher To Wed in Spring
LEAD: The engagement of Hilary Millicent Mencher to Thomas Lee Stark, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Stark of Sands Point, L.I., has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Simon K. Mencher of New York.
A spring wedding is planned.


And Now a Blast From the Past: Stagflation!
LEAD: Pornography, like beauty, may be in the eye of the beholder.
If so, what is happening to the Federal deficit is patently obscene, says Mark L. Melcher, the director of Washington research for Prudential-Bache Securities.


Pastimes;   Coins
LEAD: Bullion coins are gaining in popularity and many nations find them a lucrative way to raise funds.
From the South Pacific, however, comes a different type of bullion coin.


Subway Samaritans Came to Woman's Aid (at Least at First)
LEAD: It was a case of good samaritans versus bad samaritans. The bad samaritans won.


Steinbrenner Lampoons the Boss
LEAD: For someone who has often roamed beyond his more familiar surroundings, George Steinbrenner seemed right at home preparing to be the guest host of last night's ''Saturday Night Live'' on NBC.


A Finale in Elmsford: 'Me and My Girl'
LEAD: ''ME AND MY GIRL'' is inherently a crowd-pleaser.
That's a guarantee, and there is no need to work overly hard at proving it.


Kathryn Gutwillig Is Wed
LEAD: Kathryn Jean Gutwillig, 26 years old, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert D. Gutwillig of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Adam Michael Nick Sandler, 28, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack L. Sandler of Rockville, Md.
Rabbi Harvey Tattelbaum officiated at the Tamarack Country Club in Greenwich, Conn.


Pro Hockey;   Islanders Fall to 1-4-3 Sabres
LEAD: Rick Dudley, in his second season with the Buffalo Sabres, is the only coach in the National Hockey League who wears a beard.


Lifestyle: Sunday Menu;   A Zesty One-Dish Meal
LEAD: Before the potatoes are cooked, the rest of this one-dish meal will be ready.
There are many combinations of vegetables that work equally well in a curried dish like this.
Cauliflower, green beans or carrots could easily replace the peas.
Indian Potatoes, Tomatoes and Peas
1 pound tiny new potatoes
10 ounces onions, chopped
1/4 to 1/2 jalapeno pepper, finely minced
1 tablespoon canola oil
1/4 teaspoon ground turmeric
1 teaspoon ground cumin
1/2 teaspoon ground ginger
1 teaspoon ground coriander
1 pound ripe tomatoes, coarsely cubed
10 ounces peas $


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our house is covered with a tan cement that is not supposed to be painted.
The tan is now streaked with dirt, and there are gray patches that show.
Can the cement be painted, or should it be steam-cleaned?


The Timid Life
LEAD:
A RELATIVE STRANGER
By Charles Baxter.
223 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $17.95.


Headliners;   Unheeded Advice
LEAD: In recent months Felix G. Rohatyn has been complaining that one of the biggest problems facing New York City is that no one - including the Mayor and the unions - will heed his warnings of an impending financial crisis worse than the one he helped to resolve in 1975.
Last week he said he would resign at year's end as chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, the state agency that helped untangle the mess 15 years ago.


Data Bank/October 21, 1990
LEAD:
$
Mfg. Inventory-Sales Ratio
Aug.
July
June
Current dollars
1.46
1.48
1.47
Housing Starts
Sept.
Aug.
July
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,140
1,130
1,150
Industrial Production Index
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.1
0.2
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
83.6
83.6
83.7
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.8
0.8
0.4
Merchandise Exports
Aug.


NO CLEAR LEADER IN CALIFORNIA RACE
LEAD: They have dueled over limits on how long elected state officials may serve, crime and punishment, growth and environment, as well as taxation and spending.
But the race between Pete Wilson and Dianne Feinstein for governor of California stands just about where it started more than four months ago: deadlocked.


The Generals Who Brought Dixie Down
LEAD:
MEMOIRS AND SELECTED LETTERS
Personal Memoirs of U. S. Grant.
Selected Letters 1839-1865.
Edited by Mary Drake McFeely and William S. McFeely.
Illustrated. 1,199 pp. New York:
The Library of America. $35.
MEMOIRS OF GENERAL W. T. SHERMAN
Edited by Charles Royster.
Illustrated.


Ideas &amp; Trends;   A Critique of Pure Reason, A Passion To Survive
LEAD: Suppose you are dying of AIDS and there is only one drug that you believe can help prolong your life.
But this drug is still experimental, and the only way to get it is to enter a clinical trial, a formal study to determine whether a new treatment works.
To make matters worse, you do not qualify for the study because you have already taken another drug that did not help you, but that might throw the test of the new drug out of kilter.


Ada Amy Kolko Is Wed
LEAD: Ada Amy Kolko, a social worker for the Jewish Big Brother and Big Sister Association of Greater Boston, and Michael David Chartock, an associate in the Boston law firm of Hutchins &amp; Wheeler, were married last evening at Temple Beth El in Rochester.
Rabbi Shamai Kanter officiated.
Mrs.
Chartock, 26 years old, is the daughter of Mr.


Iowa State Surprises Oklahoma, 33-31
LEAD: Entering the fourth quarter today, Oklahoma had a 31-20 lead over Iowa State and had knocked the Cyclones' top runner, Blaise Bryant, out of the game with injured ribs.


Miss Iselin Wed to John B. Gimbel
LEAD: Andrea Thornton Iselin was married yesterday to John Bernard Gimbel at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee performed the ceremony.


On Applying Caulking
LEAD: FILLING exterior seams and openings in a house is important for preventing moisture damage and drafts.


Campus Life: Berkeley;   Biochemist, 71, Fights Mandatory Retirement
LEAD: A prominent biochemist at the University of California at Berkeley is fighting the university's mandatory retirement policy on the ground that it constitutes age discrimination.


THE 1990 ELECTION: Political Memo;   In '90 Races, Abortion Is Not the 'Silver Bullet'
LEAD: A year ago, the abortion issue roared across the political landscape like a rough midsummer storm.


The Women Who Talk Back in Rap
LEAD: Rap has its own laws of action and reaction.
Unlike most pop, rap records answer one another, naming names and hurling praise, insults or rebuttals.
Until recently, rapping was almost exclusively a men's club, but a wave of women rappers appeared in the late 1980's and is gathering force.
The first group - Queen Latifah, M.


Telephone Services: A Growing Form of 'Foreign Aid'
LEAD: Americans who make international telephone calls are paying extra to subsidize foreign countries' postal rates, local phone service, even schools and armies.


Chopin Piano Jury Withholds First Prize; American Wins 2d
LEAD: For the first time in the 63-year history of the prestigious Chopin piano competition, the jury has refused to award a first prize.


Fantasy Hotels: Excess Is All
LEAD: EERIE RED lights and steam blasting from the tops of palm trees are the first signs that all is not tranquil amid the waterfalls and stylized rock formations that make up the $12 million frontispiece of the Mirage resort in Las Vegas, Nev.


Campus Life: Furman;   Trustees Limit Baptist Control Over University
LEAD: The action parallels a decision last month at Baylor University, the nation's largest Baptist college, which moved away from the Texas Baptist Convention after fundamentalists vowed publicly to gain control of the convention and make curriculum and faculty changes at the school in Waco.


Capitals Shut Out Devils
LEAD: Twenty-four hours after their most complete game of the season in their triumph over the Rangers, the Devils had their problems in a 4-0 loss to Washington tonight at the Capital Centre.


An Astrological Clock Of Your Very Own
LEAD: THE GREAT 16TH-CENTURY CLOCK IN THE Cathedral of Strasbourg, France, tells the hours and minutes, the phases of the moon, the times of sunrise and sunset, the date of Easter and other movable feasts and heaven knows what else.
Our model (see directions for assembly, below) shows only the upper portion of the clock.


LOON OVER MIAMI
LEAD: I enjoyed Peter Richmond's much too revealing article ''Loon Over Miami'' about humorist Dave Barry (Sept. 23).
I read his column every Sunday in The Tulsa World.
I was surprised Hunter Thompson wasn't mentioned as a possible influence on Barry.
When it comes to illuminating human folly by means of animal scatology, H.


Our Bad Dreams
LEAD: The salvation in the Great Depression, or so I'm told, was the sense that we were pulling together.
For those in trouble in recent years, the poison has become the isolation, the sense of being the lone diminished American in the land of boffo birthday parties and leveraged buyouts.
But even the lucky ones knew this time was coming.


Keeping Alive The Fragile Art Of Song Recital
LEAD: The song recitalist, once so important a member of the concert scene, has declined into secondary status, more notably on these shores than overseas.
That the species has refused to die is thanks in good measure to the unflagging devotion of celebrated artists like Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, Margaret Price, Hermann Prey, Jessye Norman and Christa Ludwig.


Review/Theater;   A Writer's Journey And a Hint of Paranoia
LEAD: One of the sadder scenes in ''Hello, Bob,'' a montage of monologues written and directed by Robert Patrick and set in the late 1970's, features a character named Tennessee who speaks with a courtly Southern accent and bears a striking resemblance to Tennessee Williams.
Talking on the telephone to a playwright named Robert, Tennessee complains about the indignity of peddling his memoirs and offers condolences to


Developer's Suspension By H.U.D. Is Upheld
LEAD: An administrative law judge has upheld a leading developer's suspension from Federal housing programs, saying he allowed numerous problems ''to run amok'' in the federally subsidized apartments that he managed.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/FOLK TALES: BOOKSHELF
LEAD: Additional titles of interest:


Torryne L. Dunlap Weds Christopher G. Choate
LEAD: Torryne Leigh Dunlap, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry D. Dunlap of Dunwoody, Ga., was married yesterday to Christopher Galen Choate, a son of Mrs.
Stephen C. Pool of New York and the late Edward A. Choate.
The Rev.
Dr.
Larry E. Kalb, a minister of the United Church of Christ, officiated at the Community Church of Mountain Lakes, N


The Truth Behind the Mideast's 'Great Lie';   Hypocrisy Abounds


The Truth Behind the Mideast's 'Great Lie'
LEAD: To the Editor:


Burmese Forces in Mandalay Ring Buddhist Monasteries
LEAD: Burmese soldiers today cordoned off monasteries in Mandalay, the country's second-largest city, after the military Government threatened to disband Buddhist groups whose members are refusing to minister to soldiers.


Ideas &amp; Trends;   Mapping the Alien Landscape Of a Newly Fathomable World
LEAD: In the back rooms off the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's deep-space flight control center in Pasadena, Calif., the gray walls are trimmed in beige, like slate with clay outcrops.
The geologists working there may feel right at home.
They are admonished, however, to check their terrestrial prejudices at the door.


Private Firms Run Post Office Branches
LEAD: A NAME that has instant recognition is a good recommendation for a new business.
And Robert J. Grant opened a business last week with a name that has 100 percent consumer recognition.


The Loves of His Life
LEAD:
NORTH OF HOPE
By Jon Hassler.
518 pp. New York:
Ballantine Books. $19.95.


Recent Crises May Help Cause of European Unity
LEAD: Caught off guard successively by the collapse of Communism, the unification of Germany and the Persian Gulf crisis, the 12-nation European Community is now using all three surprises to give new momentum to its search for greater economic and political unity.


Thousands March in 16 Cities to Protest U.S. Intervention in Gulf
LEAD: Thousands of people rallied in New York and 15 other American cities yesterday to protest the United States' military buildup in the Persian Gulf.
It was the largest demonstration against the American presence in the gulf since President Bush first sent troops after Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2.


Valley of the Grapes
LEAD:
NAPA
By James Conaway.
Illustrated. 529 pp. Boston:
A Richard Todd Book/Houghton Mifflin Company. $24.95.


Poor Nations Worried by U.S. Payout in Gulf
LEAD: A plan by the United States to use about half of the roughly $22 billion it hopes to raise toward the costs of the Persian Gulf crisis to pay for American military operations there is causing increasing concern among developing countries and aid experts, diplomats and United Nations officials say.


Museum's Show Puts the Spotlight on the Comeback of Craftsmanship
LEAD: CRAFTSMANSHIP is making a comeback in the craft world.
This is the refined craftmanship that speaks of well-honed skills, a sensitivity to materials and the designs to show them off.


Noted With Pleasure
LEAD:
Earth's Red Covenant


SCIENCE FICTION
LEAD: In her memorable previous novel, ''Grass,'' Sheri S. Tepper led the reader through a nearly book-length deception about a planet whose human inhabitants seemed fanatically devoted to the legendary male occupation of the hunt.
When the truth was finally out, the reader, far from resenting the deception, felt an eerie bond with the hapless characters who were taken in by the same monstrous lie.


Of Belts and Bags and Baby Seats
LEAD: My daughter picked up her first new car last Wednesday.
Her name is Jonalyn, and she and I spent a lot of time in the dealer's lot trying to figure out how well the mechanized seat belts would work with the child-safety seat.


Fashion;   Baby Dolls, Naughty and Nice
LEAD: The baby-doll dress: it's not for babies, nor is it for dolls.
It takes various forms, but mostly it's loose and floaty and soft.
Usually, it has a high waist, though sometimes it has a low waist with a flounce or just flares out from the bosom.
But always it's short, anywhere from midthigh to just above the knee.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: RECENT RELEASES
LEAD:
CLASSICAL
P.D.Q. Bach: 'Wanted: Oedipus Tex &amp; Other Choral Calamities'
The Greater Hoople Area Off-Season Philharmonic &amp; the Okay Chorale conducted by Newton Wayland.
Telarc CD-80239.
CD and cassette.
The music is almost beside the point when P.D.Q. Bach is mounting an attack on music.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
LEAD:
Special Today: The Sophisticated Traveler
Magazine Part 2.


J's Book
LEAD: To the Editor:


Answering The Mail
LEAD: Q. Our house is covered with a tan cement that is not supposed to be painted.
The tan is now streaked with dirt, and there are gray patches that show.
Can the cement be painted, or should it be steam-cleaned?


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Recent Sales


Campuses Fighting Back as Crimes Increase
LEAD: COLLEGES' promotional brochures overflow with photographs of students strolling across lawns, peering through microscopes and studying for exams.
The images depict a life far removed from everyday reality.
But the gulf between the campus and the outside world appears to be narrowing, as several recent criminal incidents show.


Irving H. Stolz, 87; Lawyer Led Merger Of Bronx Hospitals
LEAD: Irving H. Stolz, a lawyer and builder who engineered the merger of Bronx and Lebanon Hospitals to give the Bronx a central medical center, died yesterday at the Hebrew Home for the Aged in Riverdale.
He was 87 years old and lived in Mount Vernon, N.Y.


Can a Tarnished Northrop Regain Its Momentum?
LEAD: Perhaps more than any other military contractor, the Northrop Corporation during the 1980's embodied both the accomplishments and the excesses of the nation's arms buildup.
It grew rapidly and made stunning technological breakthroughs, but it also sank with distressing regularity into procurement scandals.


Pro Hockey;   Mullen's Goal Lifts Rangers
LEAD: He is the master of the schoolyard shot, of the blast from the bizarre angle, of the strange goal from the weird locale.
The reputation is for real, the repertory deep, and tonight Brian Mullen enhanced both with what could only be described as the desperation stab from the corner of the goalmouth and what for the


Rap Band Members Found Not Guilty In Obscenity Trial
LEAD: Concluding that the rap music of the 2 Live Crew is art, a six-member jury today acquitted members of the band of obscenity charges arising from their performance at a nightclub in June.


Romania Stops Financing TV
LEAD: The Government, responding to journalists' complaints it was trying to control the press, said today it would stop subsidizing the country's state-run television.
A Government statement said it respected the right of the press to air divergent opinions, but that freedom of expression ''does not require irreverence toward the Government.


J's Book
LEAD: To the Editor:


Postings: Historic Designation;   Recognizing Riverdale
LEAD: Riverdale, the earliest known railroad suburb of New York City, was long ago enveloped by municipal boundaries.
But it has always remained a separate and special place, thanks to its steep and verdant setting above the Hudson River.
Those were some of the qualities cited by the Landmarks Preservation Commission last week as it created the Riverdale Historic District in the Bronx, bounded roughly by 252d and 254th Streets, Palisade and Independence Avenues.


Corrections
LEAD: The Streetscapes column on Oct. 14 misidentified a Tokyo development firm.
It is Touko Haus, not Touko House.


TRIAL AND TRIBULATION
LEAD: We doctors are bothered not so much by the cost of malpractice premiums or by the occasional exorbitant jury awards as we are by the thought (which literally keeps us awake nights) that many, if not most, of the suits are the result of a poor outcome, but with no negligence involved.


Editors' Notes
LEAD: An article on page 31 of The Times Magazine today about Rupert Murdoch's television ventures reports that ''The Simpsons,'' on his Fox network, has had ''a striking lack of success'' in competition with ''The Cosby Show.'' The passage was inserted during editing; it should have noted that ''The Simpsons'' was in reruns, competing with new episodes of ''Cosby.


Northeast Notebook: New Market, Md.;   Big Mac, Little Town
LEAD: This western Maryland village, which considers itself the antiques capital of the East, is fighting a proposal to build a McDonald's.
Plans for the restaurant have been submitted to Frederick County officials for approval.


Hispanic Aide's Departure Signals Growing Tensions
LEAD: The resignation of Mayor David N. Dinkins's liaison aide with Hispanic groups underscores a growing frustration between Hispanic political and civil rights advocates and an administration that they fear has been taking them for granted.


Ancient Beguinages Of Flanders
LEAD: IN THE KLEIN BEGIJNHOF, THE SMALL BEGUINAGE, IN the Belgian city of Ghent, a child's beach ball drifts eerily back and forth across the deserted courtyard.
The courtyard suggests the Flemish equivalent of a New England village green - a similar scale and a correspondent impression of an austere, pretty public space that in certain lights (or certain shadows) hints at the secretive and cloistered.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester;   Danbury Mall Spreading Retail Ripples
LEAD: A shoppers' bonanza generated by the Danbury Fair Mall on the outskirts of Danbury is expanding, fed by a stream of seemingly recession-proof customers - some 10 million a year.


Allies Say Budget Impasse Could Hurt World Economy
LEAD: For America's allies, the budget fiasco in Washington has created an image of a rudderless, indecisive Government, the prey of special interests.
It is not an image they savor.


Campus Life: U.C., Davis;   A Chance to See The Remaking Of Hungary
LEAD: On their way to class here each morning, students from the University of California and the University of Wisconsin must pass an imposing life-size bronze statue of Karl Marx in the stately foyer of the Budapest University of Economics.


Postings: Gourmet Expansion;   Retail Complex
LEAD: The appeal of Someplace Special, a 1,200-square-foot gourmet food and catering shop that opened six years ago in Vernon, N.J., has gone over well in northern Sussex County, a resort area known for the Great Gorge ski resort.
Now Felipe and Dolores Silva, the couple who own the shop, are creating Someplace Special


Good Reasons to Clean Up Thoroughly
LEAD: YEARS ago, housekeepers followed a ritual of spring and fall cleaning.
But modern-day homemakers clean whenever they can, because so many have joined the work force.


An Accolade for Hattie McDaniel
LEAD: ''GIRL, don't you know actresses are beautiful and white?'' was what young Hattie's friends told her when she voiced her dream of going on stage.


2 Chances to See Anthony Newman
LEAD: ANTHONY NEWMAN would seem to be the man of the week.
The multi-faceted musician appears as harpsichord and piano soloist with Philharmonia Virtuosi today at 3 P.M., in a concert at which his Viola Concerto will also be played, by John Dexter.
He then returns to the State University of New York at Purchase 8 P.M.


Anne Starkweather Weds Michael Karfopoulos
LEAD: Anne Vreeland Starkweather and Michael Haritou Karfopoulos were married yesterday in the Riverside, Conn., home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
James O. Starkweather.
Ann Isaacson, a justice of the peace, officiated.


Axie Gibbons Is Married to William E. Sutcliffe 3d
LEAD: Anne Thomas Gibbons, the daughter of Anne T. Gibbons of Fairfield, Conn., and Maxfield S. Gibbons of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to William Edward Sutcliffe 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sutcliffe Jr. of St.
Petersburg Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Ralph E. Ahlberg, a minister of the United Church of Christ, officiated at the Round Hill Community Church in Greenwich.


Fashion: On the Street;   For Lunch, Suits, Please
LEAD: The special du jour at Manhattan's elegant restaurants is the daytime suit, served up in a variety of styles.
Jackets are both fitted and loose, with padded shoulders and without.


TRIAL AND TRIBULATION
LEAD: Although Selzer tells us he will refrain from presenting an account of courtroom ''flash and clamor,'' that is all we have from him, except for his somewhat irrelevant reasons for becoming a doctor and his rather bizarre suggestion that any dispute he might have with his patient might better wait for adjustment in the next world.


Two in Tune in 'Tune in Tomorrow'
LEAD: ''Tune in Tomorrow'' is a dervish of a film, its maddest doings designed by a radio writer who baits Albanians, impersonates a Hasid and stirs soap operas within soap operas with his roman a clef brand of audio theater.


The Poll Story: Everybody Out
LEAD: In the wake of two well-publicized incidents involving women who cover National Football League teams, a national opinion poll has found that about two-thirds of the American people believe that women should not be allowed inside professional sports locker rooms and that about two-thirds of those holding that opinion believe that male reporters should be barred as well.


Sally T. O'Toole, Has a Wedding
LEAD: Sally Treadway O'Toole, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. O'Toole of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Thomas Lloyd Whitesell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas G. Whitesell of Tarrytown, N.Y.
Msgr.
Thomas P. Guinan and the Rev.
Mark A. Connolly officiated at St.
Agnes Roman Catholic Church.


Corrections
LEAD: A correction in this section on Oct. 7 misidentified the designer of the Auditorium Theater in Chicago.
The architect was Louis Sullivan, not Frank Lloyd Wright.


Skyscrapers Battle It Out Near Carnegie Hall
LEAD: Nothing is more outrageous - or more characteristic of New York - than the clash of new skyscrapers near the southeast corner of 57th Street and Seventh Avenue in Manhattan.
Three huge towers rise together, two of them so close they almost touch, and each represents an entirely different set of beliefs about what urban architecture should be.


Food;   NEW-WAVE INDIAN
LEAD: These days, i no longer spurn food that has been cooked in the microwave rather than under the broiler, any more than I would pass judgment on an onion diced by a food processor.
In my book, the end justifies the means, and what really matters is the meal.
If it tastes right, who cares what you used to make it with?


Correction
LEAD: A report on the Business Diary page last Sunday referred incorrectly to the quarterly dividend at the Travelers Corporation.
Travelers recently announced a cut in its dividend to 40 cents a share from 60, but did not eliminate it.


A TOUCH OF THE TROPICS IN PARIS
LEAD: TO LIVE IN PARIS IS already a privilege.
To plan a perfect evening in this gastronomical paradise seems almost self-indulgent.
Yet to eat well in this city is no challenge, so my thoughts turn instead to music.
There is ballet at the Palais Garnier and choral music at the church of St.-Germain-des-Pres, but my preference takes me straight to the new Opera Bastille.


BEST SELLERS: October 21, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Crown, $24.95.) The experiences of a couple on a trek on horseback across Europe in the Ice Age.
2
1
6
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Four tales of horror.


Layng Pew, an Intern Architect, Wed To Janet Amelia Chaplan, a Lawyer
LEAD: Janet Amelia Chaplan, a daughter of Charmian Reading of New York and Dr.
Abraham Chaplan of Los Angeles, was married yesterday to George Layng Pew 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pew Jr. of Villanova, Pa.
Dr.
Robert J. Berson, the leader of the Ethical Society of Northern Westchester, officiated at the Anchorage Museum at the Brooklyn


Pastimes;   Camera
LEAD: What good is it to use the latest fine-grain film and an expensive camera if you can't see the results?
That's a question recently raised by a professional photographer, who wrote to say that in his opinion, amateur snapshooters should be using 400-speed films.


Alex MacKenzie Weds A. B. Walworth
LEAD: Alex Beyer MacKenzie and Andrew Baker Walworth were married yesterday at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Washington.
The Rev.
Anne Amy performed the ceremony.


The Locker Room Revisted ... Again
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Some Say Polenta, But Others Call It Cornmeal
LEAD: WHAT is the difference between polenta and cornmeal?
None.
They are exactly the same.


Headliners;   Decent Burial
LEAD: ''We will bury you,'' Nikita Khrushchev warned the United States, back in the days when it still seemed that Communism had a fighting chance.
Last week his son, Sergei Khrushchev, took back the threat. ''He proved to be wrong in the sense that socialism would triumph over capitalism,'' he said on a visit to Kansas with a delegation of 290 people from the Soviet Union.


Review/Dance;   Feminist Imagery On 2 Nights
LEAD: A striking tableau opens ''White Dreams, Wild Moon,'' a new theater-dance piece by Paula Josa-Jones presented last Sunday night at Performance Space 122.
Three bare-breasted women, their faces tilted back so they appear to be headless, sprout from a pile of earth that covers them to their waists.
They undulate like pale underwater plants.


Review/Music;   Rameau's 'Castor et Pollux,' a Rarity By BERNARD HOLLAND
LEAD: Any performance of Jean Phillipe Rameau's famous opera ''Castor et Pollux'' is welcome, even one as dim and confused as Concert Royal's unstaged version at Merkin Concert Hall on Wednesday night.


Sad Home Trip for Fordham
LEAD: Fordham's first home game since 1988 was played before a boisterous crowd of 6,827 yesterday at the newly renovated Jack Coffey Stadium, but it was the Rams who needed renovation as their record fell to 1-5 after a 31-7 drubbing by Colgate.


The World;   Meshing the Parts Of the Unwieldy War Machine In the Persian Gulf
LEAD: If talking stops and shooting starts, the first battle in a war with Iraq is likely to be coordinating the unwieldy mix of international forces in Saudi Arabia and other Persian Gulf states.


Athletics No Money Well for Colleges
LEAD: To the Editor:


Design;   Seeing Things In a New Light
LEAD: The world, according to the lighting experts, used to be fairly simple.
There were traditional lamp designs, like the familiar ginger jars, sconces and chandeliers, and there were adventurous ones, which melded cutting-edge silhouettes with state-of-the-art technology.
It was, in fact, a kind of division of church and state: rarely did tradition and technology meet.


Ruzimatov at Impasse With Ballet Theater on Pact
LEAD: Faruk Ruzimatov, the 27-year-old former star of the Kirov Ballet who joined American Ballet Theater last spring, has failed to reach agreement with Ballet Theater's management on a new contract.


Some Loudspeakers Reward the Bargain Hunter
LEAD: In the present economic climate, budget crunching has become a favorite exercise wherever you look.
Audio is no exception.
These days, even formerly profligate audiophiles wonder how to shave costs without cutting quality - or, as one of them puts it, to be frugal without being stingy.


Leading Dissident in South Korea Calls Off His Hunger Strike
LEAD: Kim Dae Jung, the South Korean opposition leader, today ended the hunger strike that he began on Oct. 8 to press the Government to accept his political demands.


Fashion;   Movie-Star Pajamas for a VCR Public
LEAD: What do you wear to curl up and watch an old movie?
For male and female homebodies, it should be versatile enough to wear while entertaining, opening the door to the pizza deliverer, or wearing out in a spur-of-the-moment dash for a pint of ice cream.
And then to bed.


Martha Graham: Up to Her New Tricks
LEAD: Martha Graham continues to be Martha Graham.
She surprised us all with ''Maple Leaf Rag,'' a self-mocking humorous premiere in her company's unusually brief season at the City Center this month.


Mutual Funds;   The Lure of Single-State Munis
LEAD: As budget talks intensify in Washington, investors are diving for cover.
But they don't have to stray far from home.
The prospect of higher taxes has given new luster to single-state municipal bond funds, which invest in debt issued by a state, its municipalities or agencies.


Charles Barbour Wed To Rosemary Ramirez
LEAD: Rosemary del Rosario Ramirez and Charles Allen Barbour were married yesterday at St.
Peter's Roman Catholic Church in Washington.
The Rev.
Michael J. O'Sullivan performed the ceremony.
The bride, 24 years old, is a daughter of Maria Teresa Orantes Castro and Roberto Ramirez Sheran, both of Guatemala.


Robert I. Hume, Accountant, 78
LEAD: Robert I. Hume, a certified public accountant who was an executive with Cowles Communications for almost 30 years, died on Monday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 78 years.


Airline Tickets
LEAD: To the Editor: Regarding airline refund policies in cases of personal emergency (Practical Traveler, Aug. 12): based on my experience with Trans World Airlines, it appears that Sally Johnson's information was incorrect.


Reinstated in Tennis
LEAD: Four tennis players banned from the Stockholm Open 10 months ago have been readmitted into the tournament after pledging not to play in South Africa again.


Traffic Alert
LEAD: George Washington Bridge:


Travel Advisory
LEAD:
Tampa Prepares For a Rush To Super Bowl


Creative Marketing
LEAD: To the Editor:


The Elderly Should Pay Their Share
LEAD: I was angry to read the article ''Elderly Worry About School Tax Revisions'' (Sept. 9).
It quotes Warren Heide of the American Association of Retired Persons, who agrees with the basic premise of the Quality Education Act of 1990 but does not think the elderly should pay for it.


GIANTS CAN'T LOOK PAST THE CARDINALS
LEAD: The Phoenix Cardinals have a new head coach, a new quarterback and a new running back on offense and a new look on defense.
But they are basically the same old Cardinals, a team with less talent and more vulnerable areas of vulnerability than most other teams.
At 4 P.M.
Sunday, the Cardinals (2-3) will oppose the Giants (5-0) at Giants


Laurie Kohn Weds J. B. Parkinson Jr.
LEAD: Laura Beth Kohn and John Briggs Parkinson Jr. were married last evening at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y., by Cantor Raymond Smolover.


Catherine Stewart Weds M. S. Brown Jr.
LEAD: The marriage of Catherine Lou Stewart, an investment officer at the First American National Bank in Nashville, to Martin Shallenberger Brown Jr., a second-year law student at Vanderbilt University, took place yesterday in Frankfort, Ky.
Bishop Sam Byron Hulsey of the Episcopal Diocese of Northwest Texas and the Rev.


On Applying Caulking
LEAD: FILLING exterior seams and openings in a house is important for preventing moisture damage and drafts.


Germans to Shut 5 Atom Plants Built by Soviets
LEAD: The German Government has informed Soviet officials that it will shut down five Soviet-built nuclear power reactors in former East Germany by mid-December because they are unsafe and the cost of adapting them is prohibitive.


Man Drowns as Drunken Friends Hinder Rescuers
LEAD: A Brooklyn man was swept out to sea Friday night when he tried to save another man and their drunken friends hindered police rescuers, officers said.


More Season Openings Than Days in the Week
LEAD: MULTIPLY by nine the Cole Porter pronouncement of ''Another Op'nin', Another Show'', and you'll have an approximation of the seasonal firsts awaiting us this week.
We can start today with a triple header, since Concorde, the Camerata Ensemble and the Chamber Players of the Greenwich Symphony are all ready to start displaying their musical skills.


Hearty Dishes With Teutonic Flavor
LEAD: IN the ethnic restaurant revolution that has hit Connecticut in the past 5 to 10 years, Asia has been the driving force, with new Chinese, Vietnamese, Thai and Indian restaurants at the forefront.
Europe, except for France and Italy, has had short shrift.
That makes the opening, earlier this year, of Restaurant Vienna, in New Milford, something special.


Magazine for the Blind At No Charge
LEAD: In Ronald Gross's fine article [''Where the Elderly Do More Than Connect the Dots,'' Sept. 23]  describing the ''Lively Minds'' program of the Nassau Library System, we noted with great interest his observation that many visually impaired elderly Long Islanders may not know that they can obtain, at no charge, recorded books for the blind.


Social Events
LEAD:
Help for African Children


Review/Music;   Two 17th-Century Operas By Les Arts Florissants
LEAD: Charpentier's ''Acteon'' and Purcell's ''Dido and Aeneas'' belong to the second half of the 17th century, but they take opera in opposite directions.


The Sound of Brazil
LEAD: BRAZIL'S MORNING WELCOME IS PERFECT: less a greeting than an overture, more like a wake-up call for the universe.
The windows and drapes of my Rio de Janeiro hotel room are useless against the percussive onslaught of a marching band gone berserk.
Though this first blast of samba comes from record store loudspeakers offering the neighborhood a free sample, I am not disappointed.


Sponsor Defaults
LEAD: To the Editor:


Leonard Bernstein Remembered by His Friends
LEAD:
Many Lives, Many Deaths


CHAMPAGNE ON A CHINESE JUNK
LEAD: THE BEST PLACE TO SAVOR the beauty and romance of Hong Kong is from the bow of a Chinese junk, cruising the harbor as a white moon rises over the South China Sea.
When the moon is up and the city lights are on, dock the junk at a pier in the heart of Hong Kong and walk to a dazzling Cantonese meal featuring such delicacies as minced quail with lotus bulbs and snow peas.


Ex-Premier Seeks Freeing of British Captives
LEAD: Former Prime Minister Edward Heath of Britain today attempted to make progress toward securing the release of sick or dying Britons trapped in Iraq.


LOON OVER MIAMI
LEAD: Sorry to say I did not think anything about ''Loon Over Miami'' was funny.
Dave Barry may be carried in 300 newspapers but so are ads for used cars.
Big deal.
But then, what do I know?
I have never had the urge to place a furry cat with suction feet on my car window.
PATSY A. RECCHIA
New


J's Book
LEAD: To the Editor:


Postings: Congregate Care in Jersey;   From First-Timers to Old-Timers
LEAD: After decades of making a name as a builder of affordable first-home developments for young families, the K. Hovnanian Company of Red Bank, N.J., is starting a new venture aimed at the other end of the generational scale - a congregate-care rental for retirees planned for Holmdel, N.J.
To be called the Heritage Club at Holmdel, the $14 millon development is planned as the first of several such rental facilities, where elderly residents would live in separate one- or two-bedroom apartments but have the option of eating communally in a central dining hall.


A Pragmatic Idealist
LEAD:
THE COLONEL
The Life and Wars of Henry Stimson, 1867-1950.
By Godfrey Hodgson.
Illustrated. 402 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.


Maggie Jakobson, Actress, Marries
LEAD: Maggie Jakobson, an actress, and Daniel Borden Wheeler, a sculptor, were married yesterday in Los Olivos, Calif.
The Rev.
Paul W. Buckwalter, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Mattei's Tavern.


Yet Another Incarnation for a Versatile Tax Credit: Child Care Aid
LEAD: Embedded in the huge budget packages that have passed the House and Senate is a secret weapon that lawmakers have used for 15 years to give working poor people an income supplement intended to help them improve their economic state and stay off welfare.


Fashion;   Sizing Up Giorgio Armani
LEAD: Giorgio Armani is used to adulation - some would say he even thrives on it.
But at the moment, he has had enough. ''I have never placed myself on a pedestal,'' he says with a finality that shears the morning mist.


INSIDE
LEAD:
New U.N. Move on Iraq
The United States and the other permanent members of the Security Council have agreed to support a resolution seeking a war-crimes investigation of President Saddam Hussein or Iraq.
Washington wants to shift attention from Israel.
Page 12.
Bees? What Bees?
Africanized honeybees' arrival in Texas has left most residents unmoved.


Lawmakers Agree on Immigration Rise
LEAD: Congressional negotiators will meet early next week to work out final details of a bill that would allow a substantial increase in legal immigration to the United States.


No Headline
LEAD: TARTUFI BIANCHI - WHITE TRUFFLES - START TO appear in restaurants throughout the north of Italy some time in October.
They appear first in such areas as Tuscany and Umbria, and especially in the Langhe, the hill country around Alba in the northwestern region of Piedmont, where the underground tubers are most often found.


BAY PARK TO GET A SEWAGE PLANT
LEAD: Reversing itself once again, the Nassau County Board of Supervisors agreed today to begin building a sewage sludge treatment plant in the South Shore community of Bay Park.


U.N. to Weigh Iraqi War Crimes Inquiry
LEAD: The United States has agreed with the four other permanent members of the Security Council to support a resolution calling for the collection of evidence that war crimes have been committed by Iraqi occupation forces in Kuwait.


Sowing the Acorns of the White Oak Project
LEAD: Slender-horned gazelles and wattled cranes range listlessly in the late summer heat over the sprawling nature preserves of the White Oak Plantation on the Florida-Georgia border.
In another corner of the 7,500-acre estate, the home of Howard Gilman, head of the Gilman Paper Company, a one-time equipment shed has been turned into a pristine white dance studio for another exotic species.


Work to Begin on Katonah Bypass
LEAD: RESIDENTS who have waged a 15-year battle to protect this hamlet's historic buildings from truck traffic are celebrating the news that the long-awaited Katonah bypass is about to be built.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/FOLK TALES
LEAD:
THE EYE OF THE NEEDLE
Retold and illustrated by Teri Sloat.
Based on a Yupik tale told by Betty Huffman.
Unpaged. New York:
Dutton Children's Books. $13.95 (Ages 5 to 9)
TIKKATOO'S JOURNEY
An Eskimo Folk Tale.
Written and illustrated by Amanda Loverseed.
Unpaged. New York:
Bedrick/Blackie.


The Dynamics of a Dictatorship
LEAD:
REPUBLIC OF FEAR
The Inside Story of Saddam's Iraq.
By Samir al-Khalil.
310 pp. New York:
Pantheon Books. Paper, $12.95.


Havens for Creatures Great and Small
LEAD: The southern tip of the Indian subcontinent possesses an abundance of wildlife sanctuaries supporting some of the most colorful, exotic and awe-inspiring wildlife in the world.
Three preserves in particular - Mudumalai in Tamil Nadu, Nagarahole in Karnataka and Periyar in Kerala - offer ample opportunities to view a broad spectrum of plant and animal life thriving in a variety of habitats.


Bronx Man Accused of False Suit in Bus Crash
LEAD: A man from the Bronx has been charged with bilking the Transit Authority out of $25,000 for injuries he said were from a bus accident.
Officials said he had only heard about the crash.


The Truth Behind the Mideast's 'Great Lie';   Israel, Look Forward
LEAD: To the Editor:


Corrections
LEAD: A picture caption on Oct. 7 about the play ''The Miser'' included a publicity agent's misidentification of the actor shown with Mia Dillon.
He was Thomas Gibson, not Christian Baskous.


LONG ISLAND GUIDE
LEAD:
BACK TO THE PAST


Italy Sees Hidden Hand Reviving Moro Case
LEAD: The letter was a voice from the grave: ''I have been killed three times - through insufficient protection, through refusal to negotiate, through inconclusive politics.''


Review/Music;   Choral Works From Mexico
LEAD: To capture the true flavor of a past empire's culture, investigate its colonial outposts.
There, shut off from the evolutions of tradition and style, old ideas become frozen in time, encased and preserved by new surroundings.


The World;   In the End, the Spymasters Were Left Out in the Cold
LEAD: The award of the Nobel Peace Prize to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union last week proves that the cold war is definitely passe.
But spies are still hot, as best-sellers by former agents and continual revelations from the files of the dissolved secret police agencies of Eastern Europe also prove.


Getting to Know Some Japanese Dishes
LEAD: The word Heisei sounds current, cutting edge and contemporary, but the food at this restaurant is traditional, mainline and authentic.


Review/Music;   Catherine Comet Conducts Mixed Bill
LEAD: Catherine Comet opened the American Symphony Orchestra's 28th season - and her own first season as its music director - with a showy program that glanced back at the orchestra's history and put its current strengths fully on display.
The concert at Carnegie Hall last Sunday afternoon was a fairly international affair, with works by American, French, German and


A Rare Underdog Sweep for the Reds
LEAD: When the Cincinnati Reds were waiting for the National League Championship Series to begin, Lou Piniella addressed his players. ''The magic number,'' the manager said, ''is now eight.'' With the Reds poised last night for a World Series sweep of the Oakland Athletics, their magic number had been reduced to one.


Budget Pinches Day-Care Assistance
LEAD: AT the Norwich office of Infoline, the state's social-service information center, hardly a day goes by without an inquiry from a parent seeking to qualify for reimbursement for day-care costs for low- or moderate-income families.
But the answer now is always no.
The 16-year-old reimbursement program, which day-care advocates say helps keep working parents off welfare, is accepting no new clients as it struggles to stay within its budget in the state's new era of fiscal austerity.


Sarah Adams to Wed James F. Agnew 3d
LEAD: December wedding plans for Sarah Goodhue Adams and James Franklin Agnew 3d, the son of Capt.
Agnew 2d, U.S.N., retired, and Mrs.
Agnew of La Jolla, Calif., have been announced by the prospective bride's father, Bruce C. Adams of Dataw Island, S.C.


Review/Theater;   Father-Son Rivalry in 'The Mensch'
LEAD: Steven Kronovet's satirical farce ''The Mensch'' is not an especially funny play, but in its unsubtle way it gets to the heart of a sticky subject: father-son rivalry at its most psychologically devastating.


A Female Rake
LEAD:
VIOLET
The Story of the Irrepressible Violet Hunt and Her Circle of Lovers and Friends - Ford Madox Ford, H. G. Wells, Somerset Maugham, and Henry James.
By Barbara Belford.
Illustrated. 351 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster.
$22.95.


The Truth Behind the Mideast's 'Great Lie';   No U.S. Betrayal
LEAD: To the Editor:


A Change in Procedures For Emergency Agency
LEAD: The Federal Emergency Management Agency, which in the last year has helped about 10 times the usual number of disaster victims, is revising its procedures and seeking new legislation to help it cope better in future crises.


It Has Singers Galore, but It's a Symphony
LEAD: Hans Werner Henze recalls that one of the librettists for his opera ''The Bassarids,'' the poet W. H. Auden, ''wanted an opera seria, with arias and all that, but I wrote a symphony.'' Indeed, although there is a libretto and singers, the work is divided into four movements that correspond recognizably to the movements of a conventional symphony.


Accents
LEAD: To the Editor: Why is it when articles about Hungary or Hungarians appear in your travel pages, words for names, places, foods, sights, etc., are never properly marked?
Do the great printing machines of The New York Times lack the proper equipment to spell and mark foreign names correctly?
Do you know that the diacritical signs and marks in Hungarian can completely change a word: var - she sews; var - castle?


An Economist Kicks the Clouds Away
LEAD: Most economists, looking at the future, are gloomy right now.
Not so Mark A. Miles, executive vice president and senior economist at H. C. Wainwright Economics, a consulting firm in Boston.
In a conversation with Joel Kurtzman of The New York Times, Mr.
Miles, who has a doctorate in economics from the University of Chicago, outlined his forecast for strong growth in 1991.


Campus Life: Mount Holyoke;   Take a Computer, Graft on Cartoons, Go Teach Chinese
LEAD: He believes students learn more easily when they can see the action rather than just read it, and when they control a teaching program, going at their own speed.


The President: Read His Slips
LEAD: Most Presidents run into unavoidable trouble by the time they reach midterm, but George Bush is different.
Many of his troubles were not only avoidable but predictable, and this has hurt him because they raise questions about his judgment.


One Good Laugh That Deserves Another
LEAD: Normally, I don't keep track of protracted laughs in the theater, but the production of ''The Miser'' at the Circle in the Square provokes so few that I feel fairly safe in giving you my personal count.


Hertz Defends Its Market Share
LEAD: To the Editor:


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing;   Sunnyside, Where Ghost Stories Were Born
LEAD: The towns along the Hudson River here ripen in October, when they are filled with eerie tales and visitors who come to see the home of Washington Irving's famous legend.


Airline Tickets
LEAD: To the Editor: Either Continental changed its policy recently or Sally Johnson was led down the garden path by their refund department in Houston.
A year ago we had plans to fly to West Palm Beach in Florida, using nonrefundable tickets purchased in February of that year.
A month later my husband became quite ill and was operated on under emergency circumstances and was told by his physician that he could do no traveling for many many months.


A CLEAR NIGHT IN PHNOM PENH
LEAD: FOR ME, AN IDEAL night in Southeast Asia must be in a place where a cellular telephone has yet to ring.
At its end must be a long ride by cyclo-pousse, a three-wheeled pedicab, through the flame-treed, frangipani-touched softness of a clear night in Phnom Penh, where history wails its sad, wrenching song to anyone with an ear to listen.


Canadian Dollar Falls; Yen Rises
LEAD:
$
Last Week
Prior Week
Year Ago
Japanese Yen
125.95
129.10
142.42
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5015
1.5245
1.8578
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1728
1.1471
1.1741
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.9595
1.9670
1.5885
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$372.00
$388.00
$366.50
Republic National Bank


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/FOLK TALES
LEAD:
THE SEVEN CHINESE BROTHERS
By Margaret Mahy.
Illustrated by Jean and Mou-sien Tseng.
Unpaged. New York:
Scholastic. $12.95. (Ages 5 to 8)


Headliners;   Internal Affair
LEAD: For weeks the talk of Brazilian politics was who gave Zelia Cardoso de Mello, the Economy Minister, the gold band on her left ring finger. ''I am in love,'' Miss Cardoso had confided in May to millions of television viewers. ''It's still something sort of platonic.
I don't really have time to date because of my work.


'High and Low' Misses the Ins and Outs
LEAD: From its conception, ''High and Low,'' at the Museum of Modern Art, was a risky venture, that much must be acknowledged.
At a time when the art world divides along ever more sharply drawn ideological lines, nothing could have had quite the same incendiary effect as the announcement, some months back, of an exhibition about the relationship between modern art and popular culture to be organized by the


Jill Lorraine Decker Married to Daniel Carl Nicoll
LEAD: Jill Lorraine Decker, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin D. Decker of Redding, Conn., was married yesterday to Daniel Carl Nicoll, a son of Mary Jo Nicoll of Greenville, S.C. and the late E. Eugene Nicoll.
The Rev.
Thomas E. Nicoll, the bridegroom's brother, performed the Episcopal ceremony at the First Church of Christ Congregational in Redding.


Lynn Briceland, Lawyer, Marries
LEAD: Lynn Elizabeth Neal Briceland, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Briceland of Washington, was married there yesterday to Dr.
Giles Francis Whalen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald F. Whalen of Shrewsbury, N.J.
The Rev.
Gordon Forbes and the Rev.
Anne Stedman officiated at the Westmoreland Congregational


David S. Mitchell Wed To Robin Leslie Karpf
LEAD: Robin Leslie Karpf, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Karpf of Palm Beach, Fla., and Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening to David S. Mitchell, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Albert H. Mitchell of New York.
Rabbi Jerome K. Davidson performed the ceremony at the Pierre Hotel in New York.


HOME ENTERTAINMENT/RECORDINGS: AND KEEP IN MIND
LEAD: Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
Recordings are available on CD, LP and cassette unless otherwise noted.
Classical


Body Count Was Their Most Important Product
LEAD:
THE PHOENIX PROGRAM
By Douglas Valentine.
Illustrated. 479 pp. New York:
William Morrow &amp; Company. $24.95.


The Locker Room Revisted ... Again
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Lisa W. Fuller Plans to Marry
LEAD: Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Fuller of Rochester have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Lisa Wilcox Fuller and Peter Hargrave Sykes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Sykes of Rochester.


The Locker Room Revisted ... Again
LEAD: To the Sports Editor:


Some Say Polenta, But Others Call It Cornmeal
LEAD: WHAT is the difference between polenta and cornmeal?
None.
They are exactly the same.


Campus Life: Bard;   Students Practice Language Skills In New Tutorials
LEAD: Although Kiersten Sigurski's political science professor does not speak German, Miss Sigurski is reading her assignments on Marx in the original German and receiving academic credit for it.


Teresa De Francisci, Miss Liberty Model For Coin, Dies at 92
LEAD: Teresa De Francisci, who was the model for Miss Liberty on the Peace Dollar of 1921, died Saturday morning at Roosevelt Hospital.
She was 92 years old and lived in Manhattan.


PAKISTANIS SEEING FEW HOPES IN VOTE
LEAD: In the Murree Hills northeast of here, villagers have hoisted banners with a blunt message for candidates campaigning for elections next week.
Roughly translated, the handmade signs say, ''Bring us water and electricity before you ask for our votes.''


Review/Blues;   Low-Key Tribute to John Lee Hooker
LEAD: The John Lee Hooker tribute concert on Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden was no tribute to Mr.
Hooker's music or influence.
In a show that lasted more than four hours, Mr.
Hooker had a chance to perform exactly five of his songs, sandwiched between guests who trotted out their own material.
Imagine, by analogy, a Stephen


The World;   In Pakistan, The Judiciary Tries to Keep An Even Keel
LEAD: As Benazir Bhutto campaigns nationwide to defeat the military-backed alliance that now runs Pakistan, the country's judiciary has been propelled into the center of the political fray.
To the surprise of many, the courts have on the whole taken on this task in a spirit of judicial independence.


The View From: Bluff Point State Park, in Groton;   If Deer Are Killing Plants, Should Hunters Kill the Deer?
LEAD: AS Connecticut's deer population continues to grow, new areas are being opened to hunting at a rapid rate.
Nowhere is the debate over this policy more intense than at Bluff Point State Park, in Groton.


The Region;   An Uproar Over Taxes in New Jersey - 55 Years Ago
LEAD: Smarting from angry voter reaction to the $2.8 billion tax package enacted in his first six months of office, Governor Jim Florio now appears to be pursuing a strategy of damage control, hoping that his fellow New Jerseyans will, given time, forgive and forget.


Miss Shakespeare Weds M. S. Manning
LEAD: Fredricka Stefanie Shakespeare, a daughter of Mrs.
Donat O'Brien Green of Palm Beach, Fla., and Frank Shakespeare of La Jolla, Calif., was married yesterday to Mark Scott Manning, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay Wesley Manning of McFarland, Wis.
John Cardinal O'Connor performed the ceremony in his private chapel in New


VASECTOMY VETS
LEAD: Perhaps medical practice is different in Phillip Hoose's area than in Baltimore, where I had a vasectomy a few years ago (About Men: ''Vasectomy Vets,'' Sept. 16).
The preparation and discussion I had with my doctor before the procedure seemed more professional and complete; the surgery well conducted, without the accompaniment of locker-room conversation; the post-operative instructions clearly conveyed, and the pain during and after the procedure less than


On Language;   Bubba, Can You Paradigm?
LEAD: The televised feeding frenzy that calls itself ''The McLaughlin Group'' was dealing with redneck tendencies in one of our Southern states.


BEIJING AND SEOUL SIGN TRADE ACCORD
LEAD: China and South Korea agreed today to exchange trade offices, a move that the Seoul Government hopes will eventually lead to the establishment of diplomatic ties.


The Oyster At Its Best
LEAD: WELL, THAT'S JUST A SUPERSTITION, REALLY, about not eating oysters in summer.
Any time's a good time out here in the Pacific Northwest, we tell ourselves.
But these ''R'' months from September on, they combine the best recipe there is for scenery, weather (sometimes) and them - the oysters.


How to Prepare for a Riot: Rehearse
LEAD: Two United States Navy landing craft reached the island at 1715 hours, and 90 police officers in riot helmets hit the pier in what was believed to be the first amphibious assault by the New York City Police Department.


3 to Stop Racist Talks In 'Mister Rogers' Tone
LEAD: Three men have agreed to destroy recordings of racist and anti-gay telephone messages that imitated the voice and speech of ''Mister Rogers'' from the children's television program.


The Truth Behind the Mideast's 'Great Lie';   Leaders' Regret
LEAD: To the Editor:


SETI, Phone Home
LEAD: It was 3 A.M. and pitch black, Edward T. Olsen recalls, as he carefully made his way across a 500-foot-long metal catwalk suspended high above the tropical forest of Arecibo, P.R.
A radio astronomer, Olsen was heading to a closet-size booth poised above the dish of the world's largest radio telescope.


Rating Threats
LEAD: To the Editor:


Judge Orders Exxon to Trial in Alaska Spill
LEAD: A Federal district judge here has rejected the Exxon Corporation's argument that it should be freed from a criminal indictment and has ordered the company to stand trial in April.


Critic's Notebook;   Fashion in Paris: Irrelevant, but Who Cares?
LEAD: Fashion is different here.
The French seem to take a special delight in pure style, style as an end in itself, independent of business.
So while Seventh Avenue is in a dark mood, amid talk of war and recession, the Paris fashion scene this season retains its ebullient kick and unabashed sense of fun.


To the South, Another India
LEAD: Think of India.
What does the mind's eye see?
The Taj Mahal, the desert fortresses of Rajasthan, the teeming ghats of Varanasi?


CHILDREN'S BOOKS/FOLK TALES
LEAD:
HOW THE GUINEA FOWL GOT HER SPOTS
A Swahili Tale of Friendship.
Written and illustrated by Barbara Knutson.
Unpaged. Minneapolis:
Carolrhoda Books. $12.95. (Ages 5 to 9)


Commercial Property: Upper Madison Avenue;   Three Modest Projects for the 'Best Street in the City'
LEAD: Contrary to the growing quiet in real estate development, upper Madison Avenue may actually undergo a kind of building boomlet in coming months, with three projects approved for construction from 64th to 72d Street.


Is God a Man?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Looking for Growth in the Domestic Market
LEAD: At Mr.
Micro, a three-store personal computer chain in Dallas, sales of the International Business Machine Corporation's sharp new PS/1 home computer have been brisk.
The Texas retailer has sold 200 of the machines since August and its president, Marty Ackerman, says he's looking forward to Christmas.


Cornell Seeks $1.25 Billion in a Fund Drive
LEAD: Cornell University has begun the largest fund-raising drive ever in higher education as it seeks to ''re-endow the university for the 21st century'' with $1.25 billion, Cornell officials said.


Privacy in the Age of Information
LEAD: To the Editor:


Industry Prods Schools On Educating Students
LEAD: GROWING concern that Long Island students are graduating from high school without the necessary skills to enter the work force is prompting educators and business leaders to look at what schools are doing and should be doing to better prepare their students, and how the schools and the business community can work together on the problem.


Start Converting Shoreham to Gas
LEAD: THE final debate over the fate of Shoreham is about to begin.


Good Reasons to Clean Up Thoroughly
LEAD: YEARS ago, housekeepers followed a ritual of spring and fall cleaning.
But modern-day homemakers clean whenever they can, because so many have joined the work force.


Bag With Body Parts Found Near a Parkway in Brooklyn
LEAD: A large green plastic garbage bag containing a torso and body parts was discovered yesterday evening in the weeds alongside the Belt Parkway near Starrett City in Brooklyn, the police said.


The World;   Arabs Ponder Ways To Fix Arab Problems
LEAD: While most of the world is trying just to muddle through the crisis in the Persian Gulf, a few Arab thinkers - some would say dreamers - have begun drafting proposals to meet the widespread yearning of poorer Arabs in this undemocratic and inegalitarian region for greater democracy and a more equitable distribution of wealth.


On Applying Caulking
LEAD: FILLING exterior seams and openings in a house is important for preventing moisture damage and drafts.


Mary S. Humes Has a Wedding
LEAD: Mary Stuart Humes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Calhoun Humes of Philadelphia, was married there yesterday to Cecil Dyer Quillen 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Quillen Jr. of Rochester.
The Rev.
Galbraith Hall Todd performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church of Chestnut Hill.


Talking: Roommates;   Problems Created by Rulings
LEAD: A recent court decision has paved the way for a tenant in a rent-regulated apartment in New York State to charge a roommate whatever the market will bear.
In addition, a regulatory change has loosened the conditions under which a roommate may inherit a rent-regulated apartment.


Lindsley Raines Plans a Wedding
LEAD: The Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
John Curtis Raines of Philadelphia have announced December wedding plans for their daughter, Lindsley Anne Raines, and Dr.
Steven Craig Linn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Linn of Madison, Conn.


U.S. Agency to Be Sued Over Family From Zaire
LEAD: THE County Board of Legislators last week unanimously approved a lawsuit against the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service in the case of a family of illegal aliens from Zaire, whom the county has been housing at a cost of $9,000 a month.


IN TOKYO, A SENSE OF INTIMACY
LEAD: THE JOY OF DISCOVERING perfect evenings in the overgrown village that is Tokyo is that they cannot always be planned, or duplicated, but come in endless combinations that can produce the sense of intimacy that Tokyo, at its best, casts like a spell.


Control of the Ballot Box: For Parties or the Public?
LEAD: Beyond the waste of money and appearance of unfairness, the machine politics and patronage of New York City's election system limit the ability of people to vote and the range of choices before them at a time of broad political evolution in the city.


Editors' Notes
LEAD: An article in the Business section last Sunday described the recent performance of major automobile rental companies.
It said the industry leader, Hertz, had lost market share and had been troubled by debt and computer problems.
A major source of the information was an analyst of the car rental industry at Alex.


Romania's Changeless Land
LEAD: BRAM STOKER, THE DUBLIN-BORN AUTHOR of ''Dracula,'' never visited Romania.
But at the British Museum he did his research well.
In the novel, published in 1897, he located Castle Dracula at the top of the Borgo Pass, on the frontier between Transylvania and Bukovina, ''in the midst of the Carpathian mountains; one of the wildest and least known portions of Europe.


Pastimes;   Stamps
LEAD: Surely the most prolific living artist, a man responsible for hundreds of millions of images - perhaps billions - circulated worldwide is hardly a household name: Czeslaw Slania.


Fred L. Hartley, 73, Built Unocal Into Multibillion-Dollar Company
LEAD: Fred Lloyd Hartley, who joined the small Union Oil Company in 1939 as a maintenance worker and built it into the multibillion-dollar Unocal Corporation while at the helm for a quarter of a century, died Friday at his home in a Los Angeles suburb.
He was 73 years old.


Review/Cabaret;   Swing Piano by Carol Britto
LEAD: Carol Britto has a strong, forthright approach to the piano.
It is a manner that gives her showier pieces a sense of positive mobility and turns her faster selections into potential juggernauts, even in their delicate moments.


40 Years After Attacks, Time Has Softened Zeal
LEAD: One runs a furniture store and another manages a boarding house for university students.
A third got married in her late 60's, and the fourth, the oldest of the group, had a stroke last December and now lives with his 55-year-old daughter.


Court Bars Ex-Dictator From Guatemala Race
LEAD: An appeals court has eliminated a former dictator, Efrain Rios Montt, from the Nov. 11 presidential election by issuing a final ruling that his past activities disqualified him.


Army Overpowers Lafayette
LEAD: The setting for Army's homecoming football game with Lafayette today was neat and clean.
The team colors of black, gold and gray were sprinkled throughout Michie Stadium and the changing colors of fall seemed ready to dominate the rest of the spacious campus.


World Series;   Reds Use Bunt for Finishing Touch
LEAD: In stunning the would-be dynastic Oakland Athletics, the Cincinnati Reds completed their four-game World Series sweep tonight by embarrassing the Athletics with two bunts that turned the final game around.


Wall Street;   Speculating on Bankruptcies
LEAD: The Founding Fathers knew how to make a killing in the market.
Some Northern legislators in the first Congress of 1789 paid 15 to 25 cents on the dollar to buy up the unpaid bills that states had incurred to support the Revolutionary Army - and then, after an epic compromise with Southern lawmakers in 1790, they enacted a law requiring the new Federal Government to pay those state claims in full, with interest.


A. M. Bary Wed To Judith Cohen
LEAD: Judith Lee Cohen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Cohen of Denver, was married last evening to Andrew Merrill Bary, a son of Roberta A. Bary of Brooklyn and Shura Bary of Foster City, Calif.
Rabbi Steven Kaye officiated at the Hyatt Regency Tech Center in Denver.


In the Region: New Jersey;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Freehold
$183,900
18 Hance Boulevard
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 16-year-old contemporary; 2-car garage, family room, c/a, den; taxes $3,274.
Howell
$105,000
7 Canary Circle
2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 3-year-old condominium town house; c/a, 1-car garage, den; monthly maintenance $70; taxes $1,800.


Animals Show Urban Children the Path
LEAD: MORNINGS will soon be frosty on the Green Chimneys Farm, but that won't stop Ossie Green from watering the horses.
Isaac Coriono will still make sure the rabbits have food, and Jerry Nunez won't neglect the sheep.


Headliners;   Star Exit
LEAD: Controversy marked the final days of a Cambodian dance troupe's American tour - the first since the Indochina war ended in 1975 - when five performers stayed behind.
Four chose political asylum, and the other, the star dancer, Kim Devi, said she planned to become a student.
The dispute centers on whether Miss Devi had wished to defect earlier, but been intimidated by the troupe's American sponsor, the U.S.-Indochina Reconciliation Project.


Carter Asks Guatemala to Investigate Abduction of Rights Workers
LEAD: Former President Jimmy Carter has written a letter to the President of Guatemala asking for an immediate investigation of the kidnappings this month of two Guatemalan human rights campaigners.


Salvadoran Officials Criticize U.S. Aid Vote
LEAD: Military commanders and Government officials here say the United States Senate's decision to halve military aid to El Salvador will harm the army's morale and effectiveness against leftist rebels.


Campus Life: Keene State;   Soccer Victory Doesn't Dampen Exchange Plans
LEAD: The Keene State College Owls did not prove the best of hosts as they beat a visiting soccer team from the Soviet Union, 4 to 1, last week.


In the Region: Long Island;   Recent Sales
LEAD:
Albertson
$350,000
42 Amherst Road
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old contemporary; sunroom, den, basement; taxes $5,000.
Garden City
$281,000
19 Maple Street
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; dining room, fireplace, screened porch; taxes $3,700.


Corrections
LEAD: A Posting on Oct. 14 about a condominium complex in Greenburgh, N.Y., misidentified it.
It is Boulder Ridge, not the Boulders.


Good Reasons to Clean Up Thoroughly
LEAD: YEARS ago, housekeepers followed a ritual of spring and fall cleaning.
But modern-day homemakers clean whenever they can, because so many have joined the work force.


Minority Firm Joins Davis, Brody Architects
LEAD: One of the most prominent minority-owned architectural practices in New York, Bond Ryder &amp; Associates, was absorbed last week by the much larger firm of Davis, Brody &amp; Associates.


Syracuse Trounces Rutgers
LEAD: Syracuse, still smarting from a 6-point loss to Penn State last week, catapulted back on the winning track this afternoon and used hapless Rutgers as its launching pad.
The Orange scored three touchdowns in the first half, added three more in the second and crushed Rutgers 42-0.


Vowing to Veto Rights Bill, President Offers Alternative
LEAD: President Bush said tonight that he would veto a major anti-discrimination bill on Monday, but he offered Congress an alternative measure that he said would avoid quotas and limit damage awards to victims of bias.


Stacey Bernstein To Wed in March
LEAD: The engagement of Stacey Lee Bernstein to Philip Malakoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Malakoff of Woodmere, L.I., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Bernstein of Old Westbury, L.I.
A March wedding is planned.


Review/Theater;   Of Convicts, the Stage and Australia's Beginnings
LEAD: Timberlake Wertenbaker's ''Our Country's Good'' is an enlightening exploration of the inhumanity of the penal system in New South Wales, the British colony that became Australia.
Ms.
Wertenbaker's drama is now running at Hartford Stage in a perceptive production directed by Mark Lamos.


Boston Post Road Company Moves to Westport
LEAD: IN what should turn out to be the season's most important change of address, the Boston Post Road Stage Company has moved from the institutional sterility of a school in Fairfield to a historic playhouse in Westport.
The company's official opening in its new residence, which was all decked out for the occasion, took place last weekend with the world premiere of ''Songs of Innocence'' by G.


Sports of the Times: The Locker Room Revisted ... Again;   What's He Doing Here?
LEAD: The locker room can often be an unappetizing place.
As a dewy-eyed cub reporter some years ago, I stood, probably agape, after a baseball game and watched a famous player, now in the Hall of Fame, eat.
He hunkered naked over the buffet table set up in the middle of the room, scratched himself generously as he contemplated the meal, and then with those same nimble, itching fingers plucked a piece of fried chicken here, a slice of tomato there, and some strands of cole slaw, then threw back his head and masticated.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
LEAD:
HAUNTING


The Poet-Politician
LEAD:
BLACK, FRENCH, AND AFRICAN
A Life of Leopold Sedar Senghor.
By Janet G. Vaillant.
Illustrated. 388 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.
Harvard University Press. $29.95.


The Baldrige Badge of Courage - and Quality
LEAD: The envelope, please.
This year's winners are the Cadillac division of the General Motors Corporation, the Rochester division of the International Business Machines Corporation, the Federal Express Corporation and the Wallace Company, a Houston-based distributor of industrial plumbing supplies.


Bernstein on Music
LEAD: Leonard Bernstein was not only a musical genius, but a noted teacher, speaker and writer.
These excerpts are from collections of his works published by Simon &amp; Schuster, except for the material from the Charles Eliot Norton Lectures, published by Harvard University Press.


Underdogs Again, Jets to Face Buffalo
LEAD: Unlike last week, when his team was favored for the first time this season, against the San Diego Chargers, Coach Bruce Coslet of the Jets doesn't have to worry about combating overconfidence this week as the Jets play their first rematch of the season, in Buffalo today.
The Bills are favored by 9 points, for lots of good reasons.


'West Side Story': The Beginnings Of Something Great
LEAD: Several years ago, as part of a book in progress, Mel Gussow began exploring the creative process behind the Broadway musical ''West Side Story,'' which had its premiere in 1957.
Here are excerpts from several conversations with Leonard Bernstein, the composer of that show as well as ''On the Town,'' ''Wonderful Town'' and ''Candide.


Hendeson Does the Job But Gets Little Help
LEAD: Was it really Oakland vs.
Cincinnati in this World Series or was it just Rickey Henderson vs. the Reds?


Evening Hours;   Some High Times For High Causes
LEAD: The Museum of the City of New York celebrated its 67th anniversary Monday night with dinner and dancing for 450 guests at the museum, Fifth Avenue and 103d Street.
The guests also saw a preview of the museum's fall exhibition, ''Within Bohemia's Borders: Greenwich Village, 1830-1930.''


A Prophet Ultimately Honored
LEAD: Leonard Bernstein's death brought into focus one of the many oddities and ironies of his career: he was the quintessential American cultural icon of this century and at the same time a musician who would have been completely at home in the high Romantic age.
Like his idol Mahler, who outlived the 19th century but remained in the grip of the era's obsession with love and death, Mr.


No Quick-Fix Here
LEAD: A state school's practice may not be a professional team's precedent, but if the Browns do lose tomorrow night, Coach Carson could do worse than appeal to the Lobo doctrine.
It was handed down at the Universiity of New Mexico last week when Mike Shepard, the Lobo football coach, was given a new three-year contract after his teams won just 6 of 42 games over three and a half seasons.


Hanging Houses of Cuenca
LEAD: Most Spanish towns faced with Cuenca's need to expand in the 18th century would have spread out along the surrounding countryside.
But Cuenca, perched on the top of a hill, turned not to the earth but to the sky.
Its improbable solution stands all along that part of the town that clings to the side of of the hill and that faces the River Huecar: its hanging houses.


What a Sea of Stories Taught Me
LEAD: Having spent a good part of the last year and a quarter at the task of reading for an annual best-story collection, I've begun to feel like the Professor Irwin Corey of the short story - the world's greatest living authority over a discipline that doesn't exactly exist, a professorship of nothing, tenured in the university without walls.


New &amp; Noteworthy
LEAD: LIGHT CAN BE BOTH WAVE AND PARTICLE, by Ellen Gilchrist. (Little, Brown, $8.95.) In the title piece of this collection of short stories, a Chinese geneticist vacationing in Seattle falls in love with a teacher from Fayetteville, Ark.
Last year our reviewer, Roy Hoffman, said the story ''bristles with new energy.


REPUBLICAN GROUP DEVISES ARTS PLAN
LEAD: Conservative Republicans in the Senate plan to offer a compromise that they believe will resolve a House-Senate dispute over the issue of obscenity and Federal money for the arts.


Hey There, Dudes, the Kids Have Grabbed a Network
LEAD: Many adultS have never heard of it, but there is a new force dominating children's culture - Nickelodeon, the cable television network for young people seen in 52 million homes nationwide.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 21, 1990
LEAD:
$
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
THE DARK HALF, by Stephen King. (Signet, $5.95.) A writer of horror tales kills off his pseudonym, who then goes on a rampage.
2
1
DADDY, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.95.) Unexpected crises wreck the safe, predictable world a man has built for himself and his family.


Jordanian Economy Devastated by Effects of the Gulf Crisis
LEAD: The port of Aqaba is still.
Tourism, which brought in more than half a billion dollars last year, has evaporated.
Fruit and vegetables intended for export are rotting at the border.


Lost For Words;   George Bush's Communication Breakdown On the Budget
LEAD: George Bush liked Ronald Reagan.
And he was so deferential, shrinking into the background in their meetings, that he created the illusion that, though an inch taller than Mr.
Reagan, he was a much smaller man.


Good Reasons to Clean Up Thoroughly
LEAD: YEARS ago, housekeepers followed a ritual of spring and fall cleaning.
But modern-day homemakers clean whenever they can, because so many have joined the work force.


The World;   Special Relationship Reaches Its Limits
LEAD: The acrimony between the Bush Administration and Israel over the recent United Nations resolution on Jerusalem is more than just a passing tiff.
It is the culmination of nearly two years of mounting mistrust and personal animosity between leaders in both countries.
Oded Eran, the deputy Israeli Ambassador to Washington who ended his tour of duty last week, put it bluntly: ''There has been a massive failure of communication, the likes of which we have not seen between Israel and the United States for a long time.


Penn State Sub Gains 208 Yards
LEAD: Penn State never runs out of good football players.
That was apparent again today when the Nittany Lions defeated Boston College, 40-21, after a former defensive back named Shelly Hammonds moved in at tailback and twice broke open the game.
He had three long touchdown runs, two of which counted.


On Applying Caulking
LEAD: FILLING exterior seams and openings in a house is important for preventing moisture damage and drafts.


Encouraging Prenatal Care With Gift Certificates
LEAD: IN an area where infant mortality rates rank among the highest in the nation, an unusual program called Partners in Care is attempting to attract pregnant women to visit health clinics by offering gift certificates.


Review/Music;   A Composer and Some Celebrated Friends
LEAD: Christine Berl, a composer, assembled a starry group of musicians to perform her music at the 92d Street Y on Oct. 13.
Among them were the pianists Peter Serkin, Emanuel Ax, Richard Goode and Andre-Michel Schub; the clarinetist Richard Stoltzman; the violinists Ani Kavafian and Lucy Stoltzman; the violist Paul Neubauer, and the cellist Matt Haimovitz.


Headliners;   Savings and Loan Notes
LEAD: The timing was entirely coincidental.
While Charles H. Keating was exiting the Los Angeles County jail last week with a grateful smile, the Senators who had done favors for the former savings and loan owner and serious campaign contributor were feeling the wilting effects of the scandal.


The Danger of Short-Term Thinking
LEAD: To the Editor:


In Praise of Partridge
LEAD: LIKE THE PASSION FOR GOOD FOOD, THE HUNTING AND serving of wild game, and especially of game birds, is a serious national sport in France, and has been for centuries.


Corrections
LEAD: Because of a mechanical error, a front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section today about Leonard Bernstein includes two scrambled passages in some copies.


Visiting the Vestiges of Jewish Poland
LEAD: An elderly woman, her face as brown and wrinkled as a walnut, approached us one day last June as we stood gazing at the yawning roofless wreck that was once the synagogue in Dzialoszyce, a sleepy village 30 miles or so northeast of Cracow in southern Poland.


More Demands. . . .
LEAD: The heavyweight title bout may not be the only fight on Holyfield's mind next Thursday.
That, by what his lawyer does not believe is entirely a coincidence, is the very day Holyfield has been asked to file a response to a divorce action filed in Atlanta in September by his wife, Paulette Holyfield.


Suriname, in Army's Ever-Tighter Grip, Skids From Tranquillity to Turmoil
LEAD: Ten years after he overthrew the elected Government in this once-peaceful land, the former sergeant who is now commander of this country's small army is using violence to keep control of the country, Surinamese civic and human rights leaders and foreign diplomats say.


Mechanical Separation Instead of Incineration
LEAD: The shortsightedness of many public officials' reliance on incineration as the only solution to trash disposal is increasingly at odds with the population's growing willingness to recycle.
Recycling of 60 to 70 percent of all waste would not be difficult.


Cary Benedict Plans Wedding in June
LEAD: A June wedding is planned by Carolyn Russell Benedict and Claude Lewis Collins, the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Grenville Benedict of Short Hills, N.J., have announced.
Mr.
Collins is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John Richard Collins of Signal Mountain, Tenn.


Pastimes;   Chess
LEAD: Some like it hot and for these worthies to complain about it getting too hot smacks of the insincere.
Thus, a few years ago, the Oakland grandmaster Nick De Firmian grumbled: ''The trouble with 1 e4 is that it turns up some new crisis every week.
I think I'll shift to 1 d4.''


P. A. Kerno Wed To Miss Gallardo
LEAD: Leita Gallardo Rojo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arturo Gallardo Rueda of Madrid, was married there yesterday to Philippe Arthur Kerno, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ivan V. Kerno of New York.
The Rev.
Vincente Martin Sanchez performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of San Fermin de los Navarros.


Hers;   An Age-Old Question
LEAD: I am having lunch with an old friend's son, a dutiful young man paying a courtesy call en route from California to a summer vacation in Europe.
He is concerned about his mother, who recently went on a liquid diet.
At 5 feet 5 inches, she has dropped to under 100 pounds. ''Mom looks like a skeleton,'' he says.


Votes in Congress;   Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
LEAD:
Senate
1.
Civil Rights: Vote on passage of a bill that seeks to reverse recent Supreme Court rulings that weakened Federal laws against discrimination in hiring and promotion.
Approved 62 to 34, Oct. 16.
2.
Budget Deficit: Vote on a bipartisan budget deficit reduction package that provides for tax increases and cuts in benefit programs.


THE 1990 ELECTION: The 1990 Campaign;   California: Candidates From Two Cities
LEAD:
PETE WILSON: Republican


The Recorded Legacy
LEAD: The recordings of Leonard Bernstein (at right, in a photograph taken earlier this year in his apartment) divide into two parts: those of his own music and those conducting the music of others.
His recordings of the music of others fall into two periods: records made primarily for CBS Masterworks in the late 1950's and the 1960's during his tenure as music director of the New York Philharmonic, and subsequently remastered for compact disk, and those made in his maturity, mostly for Deutsche


Social Security Benefits to Rise by 5.4% in January
LEAD: Forty million Social Security recipients will get a 5.4 percent increase in benefits in January, the biggest such increase since 1982.


Shaky in Cleveland?
LEAD: As the coach of a team with a 2-4 record, Bud Carson of the Cleveland Browns would seem to have good reason to worry about his job as his team prepares to play the Cincinnati Bengals (4-2) in Cleveland tomorrow night.


Run for Cover
LEAD: To the Editor:


Where A World Ended
LEAD: SANTORINI IS A COLOSSAL, BACKWARD letter C set in the Aegean.
The island's black-brown-red cliffs are both gorgeous and eerie-sublime.
Thera, the capital city, is ensconced like bright milk teeth on a giant mandible.
But beauty defers here.
While we stood 1,100 feet up mid-C, a stupendous notion had been forming itself in my mind: it formed gradually because it was beyond the proportions of human sense and belief.


Can 50 Million Frenchmen Be Wrong?
LEAD: In France, he is famous. his name is pronounced reverently, much the same way that Peter Sellers's Inspector Clouseau said ''room,'' which is to say with trilled consonants, rich vowel sounds and extended gurgling. ''Rrrheurque.'' ''Rghoorque.'' Rourke.


Jesse Jackson Courts the Viewer/Voter
LEAD: The Rev.
Jesse Jackson, the once and probably future Presidential aspirant who has lately taken up journalism, has quickly climbed the heights of the profession.
Since the last Sunday in September, he has presided over a syndicated hour program called, yes, ''Jesse Jackson.'' The title is accurate.


Lifestyle: Sunday Brunch;   On the Upper East Side And Upper West Side
LEAD: This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times, and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Here are some restaurants in Manhattan that serve brunch.
Baci


VASECTOMY VETS
LEAD: Phillip Hoose didn't mention that men having vasectomies should consider storing several semen samples at a sperm bank.
Men hesitate to have vasectomies lest they remarry or lose their current children to accident or disease.
But sperm banking provides a solution.
Semen can be stored for 10 years or longer, at an average annual fee of $85.


Robert Milligan McLane Jr. Is Wed To Gratia Robertson in Connecticut
LEAD: The marriage of Gratia Lee Robertson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander J. Robertson Jr. of Riverside, Conn., to Robert Milligan McLane Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
McLane of Locust Valley, L.I., took place yesterday.
The Rev.
Brigitta S. Remole performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Old Greenwich,


Rebecca Ascher to Wed C. J. Walsh
LEAD: Rebecca Kathryn Ascher, a writer, and Charles James Walsh, a teacher, plan to marry in December.
Ms.
Ascher is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Ascher of New York.
Her fiance is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles J. Walsh of Pittsburgh.


Some Say Polenta, But Others Call It Cornmeal
LEAD: WHAT is the difference between polenta and cornmeal?
None.
They are exactly the same.


Tech Notes;   Electricity From Wind
LEAD: With oil prices rising and concern about the environment growing, alternative ways to generate electricity are becoming even more attractive.
Now a company in Livermore, Calif., U.S.
Windpower Inc., is developing a wind-powered turbine for generating electricity that according to the California Energy Commission will cost 5.3 cents a kilowatt.


Is Hilary a Woman?
LEAD: To the Editor:


Raising the Standards for Appraisers
LEAD: Real Estate appraisers, under fire for their role in the savings and loan crisis and hurt by a housing recession that has spread from Montauk to Malibu, are facing tough new requirements for education, licensing and scrutiny of their work by state and Federal regulators.


Pastimes;   Bridge
LEAD: The 1991 World Team Championships that will be held in Yokohama, Japan for the Bermuda Bowl and the Venice Trophy, will be larger and more complicated than previous contests.
These events began as serious confrontations between European and American teams, but have grown steadily.
In recent years these two zones have each been entitled to two teams, with one from each of the smaller - in bridge population - continental zones.


Review/Music; From Texas, A Program In Town Hall
Music from Festival Hill at Round Top, Tex., came to Town Hall on a rainy Thursday night last week.
This is a combination school and performing arts center southeast of Austin.
It offers an early-music series in the spring, teaching and performing in the summer and a concert series throughout the regular music season.
Thursday's program, played before a small audience in this wonderful and underused concert hall, was planned with imagination and carried off in style.
An excellent young group from France, the Parish String Quartet, played the Ravel Quartet and joined James Dick, a pianist and the festival's founder, in the Franck Quintet.
This is a tight and intelligent ensemble.
Malcom Arnold's Brass Quintet -- an entertaining, soon-forgotten little three-movement piece -- began the evening and featured some enthusiastic if slightly blurry playing.
The most interesting moments of the concert came in the Britten duo Cello Sonata in C. Here as always Britten has the courage to follow his wit and aural fantasies wherever they take him.
Eugene Rowley was the highly effective pianist.
Peter Rejto, the cellist here, played very well indeed.


Giants Find a Way to Win, 20-19
With 5 minutes 38 seconds remaining today, the Phoenix Cardinals extended their lead over the Giants to 19-10.
The Giants' unbeaten record seemed about to crash at the hands of a 13-point underdog, and many of the 76,518 spectators started to leave Giants Stadium.
They will probably not admit it because they will not want to look foolish.
The team they gave up on won the game.


A Major Design Shift at Digital
Searching for a way out of its two-year financial stall, the Digital Equipment Corporation is continuing to move away from the computer design on which it based it business for more than a decade.
Digital became the nation's second-largest computer maker largely on the strength of software and hardware that was compatible from the top to the bottom of its product line.
But last week, the company, which is based in Maynard, Mass., introduced its second fresh computer design in the last two years.
The latest machines are small-business minicomputers based on a chip made by the Intel Corporation.
Yielding to Unix


Irving H. Stolz, 87; Lawyer Led Merger Of Bronx Hospitals
Irving H. Stolz, a lawyer and builder who engineered the merger of Bronx and Lebanon Hospitals to give the Bronx a central medical center, died on Saturday at the Hebrew Home for the Aged in Riverdale.
He was 87 years old and lived in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
A spokeswoman for the Hebrew Home, Pat Molino, said he died of cancer.


Chronicle
Retiring after 42 years of service with the United Methodist Church, THERESSA HOOVERwas honored Saturday for her contributions to civil rights and the rights of women and children.
For the last 22 years, she was head of the 1.2 million-member volunteer organization, United Methodist Women.
Mrs.
Hoover, whose formal title was deputy general secretary of the women's division of the General Board of Global Ministries of the church, oversaw a worldwide network of educational and projects.
"After all those years, I'm just going to be a retired person," said Mrs.
Hoover, who is 65 years old and the first black woman to head the United Methodist Women.


Comdial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Opera; Alfredo Kraus in 'Rigoletto' at the Met
Alfredo Kraus came to the Metropolitan Opera's current run of "Rigoletto" on Saturday afternoon.
As the Duke of Mantua, Mr.
Kraus remains a model for what operatic tenors should be and an admonishment to the excesses of his colleagues.
Never opulent, the voice is even less so now.
But this is music making that serves language and advances stage action.
The diction was superb, the rhythm tuned perfectly to Guido Ajmone-Marsan's strong conducting.
For a performance with seven castchanges, this was a remarkably tight ensemble.
I suspect Mr.
Kraus's influence on his fellow players had a lot to do it with it.


Reality Sets In for Stunned A's
All day long, players drifted in and out to pack their bags and pick up the pieces.
They did it quickly and quietly, taping boxes, discarding old mail, gathering belongings and then leaving for the last time.
One day after the end of the World Series, the Oakland Athletics were still somewhat disbelieving.
But the sweep by the Cincinnati Reds was over now.
It was time to move on.
"Most of the regrets you have were felt last night," said the A's relief pitcher Rick Honeycutt.
"It's not the way you wanted it to end. But today, it's back to reality. You go home, get the kids in school and try enjoying the winter."
For many, it will not be easy.
The Athletics had won 103 games during the season, squashed the Boston Red Sox in the American League playoff and were favored to beat the Reds and lay claim to their second straight World Series victory.
When it did not come, it made the loss difficult to accept.
In the end, Tony La Russa, the A's manager, spent most of today practicing damage control, than congratulating the Reds.
Canseco's Wife Angry
There were some leftover issues:
Esther Canseco, the wife of the A's outfielder Jose Canseco, was critical of La Russa for benching her husband at the start of Game 4.
"He's a punk," she told The San Jose Mercury News before Saturday's game.
"Let them sweep us. I should have worn a red dress. Tony's going too far. He's putting all the blame on Jose when it's the whole team."
Rob Dibble, the Cincinnati reliever, accused Dave Stewart, the A's starting pitcher, of deliberating throwing at Billy Hatcher in the first inning Saturday, calling it an American League tactic.
Hatcher was forced to leave when he was hit by a pitch on the top of his left hand.
X-rays showed no fracture.
After the game, Stewart insisted the A's were still the best team in baseball, a remark that prompted the Reds' manager, Lou Piniella, to cry "sour grapes." Reply From LaRussa
In his office today, La Russa tidied things up and tried to straighten out the mess that had occurred the night before.
Asked his feelings about the remarks made by Esther Canseco, he answered, "I'd rather not say, except that in importance to this club, it was the slightest shade above zero."
Of Dibble, he was even more emphatic.
"If he'd check with his teammates and his manager," La Russa said, "he'd find out that the pitch was inside and Hatcher dove for it. It happened in the first inning. Stew is not going to give them a run.
"When he shouts that they've got the best team, he has every right. But when it goes beyond that, it's ridiculous."
La Russa had no problem with Stewart's post-game declaration about the A's, although he saw Piniella's point, too.
"If I were Lou, I'd be upset," he said.
"Cincinnati won the prize. Mostly what you should do is give them credit; that's my attitude. But when someone pitches his heart out and gets beat like Stew did, I can see how he would feel. He feels we've got the best team, and I give him credit for thinking that. But Cincinnati did beat us."
Because of it, the A's are likely to begin a winter of moderate changes.
Willie McGee and Bob Welch will become free agents, and Dave Henderson could join them this week when a decision is made regarding a collusion ruling against owners.
As La Russa delivered his parting comments, players packed in the clubhouse.
Some still seemed stunned, others did not.
"I'm still a little bit disbelieving," Mike Gallego said.
"I was expecting to come to work today."
Dave Henderson said: "This is wintertime. I don't care anymore. I shut it down after the season. I'm going to watch football and enjoy my family."
But for La Russa it didn't seem as if it would be that easy.
He still appeared hurt by the loss.
"People underrate how good it feels when you win," he said.
"It feels worse than you think when you lose. But I'd still rather take the chance of getting my heart broken to get to the other side.  "The other side feels real good."


Ghost of Reagan in Connecticut Race
When Toby Moffett moved here from the New Haven area last year to attempt a political comeback, Republicans called him a carpetbagger and predicted his long record of liberalism would doom him in the state's conservative, blue-collar Fifth Congressional District.
But the residency issue appears to be fading in Mr.
Moffett's race against Gary A. Franks, a conservative three-term Waterbury alderman who is seeking to become the state's first black Congressman and the first black Republican to hold a voting seat in the House of Representatives since 1935.


Editors' Note
The Washington Talk column on Oct. 4 described the activities of Lawrence E. Walsh, the independent counsel in the Iran-contra investigation.
Discussing the possible course of the investigation, the article mentioned two men who it said were "under scrutiny": Donald P. Gregg, who was national security adviser to George Bush when Mr.
Bush was Vice President, and Elliott Abrams, the former Assistant Secretary of State for Central America.
The column did not attribute the allegation or amplify it.
Mr.
Abrams has since said that neither he nor his lawyer has been notified that he is under investigation by the independent counsel.
A spokesman for the United States embassy in Seoul, where Mr.
Gregg is now ambassador to South Korea, said Mr.
Gregg had no comment on the matter.


Malaysian Prime Minister Wins by Margin He Sought
Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad has been re-elected to a third term, according to nearly complete results tabulated this morning after one of the most bitter elections in Malaysia's history.
Mr.
Mahathir managed to win a two-thirds majority in Parliament, which he said was crucial to maintain firm government and stability in the multiracial country.


Chambers Development Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Metro Matters; Koch the Critic: Just How Far Should He Go?
"How else," the Mayor demanded, "can you talk about what was done in the past unless you talk about who's in charge?"
The Mayor was Edward I. Koch, and 10 years ago he was defending his pointed criticism of his predecessors, Robert F. Wagner and particularly John V. Lindsay and Abraham D. Beame, when he felt it was warranted.
"You have to give a name to an era -- you know, like the Ming Dynasty," he said impishly.
"But here's what I'll do. I am going to refer to Mayor Wagner as Mayor W. And I will be Mayor Z. And you can decide for yourselves who Mayors X and Y are."


Outdoors: Trout In Cape Cod Ponds
WHILE boarding the ferry from Martha's Vineyard Island, Mass., to the mainland at Woods Hole a short while ago before dawn with fly rod in hand, I felt a bit silly.
Why would someone leave the Vineyard in what is usually one of the prime months for striped bass and bluefish to go after trout on Cape Cod?
Part of the answer was that throughout the summer stripers and bluefish were scarce along the Island's beaches.
During that period, stripers could be consistently caught by those who don't mind deep trolling for them with wire line.
But surf fishermen had encountered few bass and the blues were virtually nonexistent.
There were plenty of false albacore and Atlantic bonito about much of the time, but the former, although magnificent light-tackle quarry, are barely fit for human consumption and the latter are so finicky that they have limited appeal to those -- including me -- who enjoy bringing home several meals of fish.


Desert Live-Fire Exercises Continue


BUSINESS DIGEST
CONOMY
White House officials stormed out of budget negotiations at the Capitol, accusing Democrats of being unwilling to negotiate a fair tax compromise on the $145 billion package of new revenues over five years.
Until the talks halted abruptly, the differences of the two sides appeared to be narrowing.  [ Page A1. ]
Congressional negotiators agreed on new air-quality rules to reduce damage to the environment caused by acid rain.  [ A1. ]
The big New York banks are considering which of their neighbors would make the best merger partners.
The banks need to pool their resources to compete against stronger foreign rivals.  [ D1. ]
The nation's wildcatters are wary about the recent surge in oil prices.
Most have turned from oil to gas and are skeptical that prices will stay high after the Middle East crisis is resolved.  [ D2. ]
The savings industry bailout could cost more because of conflict between Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady and the chairman of the House Banking Committee, Henry Gonzalez.  [ D10. ] COMPANIES
Digital Equipment is moving away from the emphasis on compatibility for its hardware and software.
Its new machines are based on an Intel chip and it is about to announce that its VAX line will be able to run Unix system programs.  [ D1. ]
Pathe Communications agreed to sell the exclusive rights to show some of Hollywood's most popular films to Turner Broadcasting if Pathe finally acquires MGM/UA Communications.  [ D1. ] THE MEDIA BUSINESS
CBS was a big loser in the World Series.
The Cincinnati Reds' four-game sweep could cost CBS $150 million in lost advertising, some television executives say.
Television.  [ D1. ]
El Al Israel Airlines has begun a television campaign in the face of turmoil in the Middle East.
The ads rely on historical footage about the Zionist movement, which laid the foundation for the creation of the state of Israel.
Kim Foltz: Advertising.  [ D1. ]
Many communications companies are running into a troubling fact: Selling magazines, book publishers and other media properties has suddenly become a very arduous task.  [ D12. ]
In troubled times, people turn to prophets and religion.
So for authors, publishers and retailers of books on these topics, the Persian Gulf crisis has brought plenty of good news.  [ D12. ]
Music videos and cassette singles are booming in the music business.
As it becomes more difficult to promote new music groups, record companies are expanding their product lines.  [ D12. ] INTERNATIONAL
Four years of talks on world trade are threatened with collapse as a result of the European Community's failure to accept even a modest plan to reduce farm subsidies.  [ D1. ]
Europe regained lost momentum in its push to create a single currency and central bank, when German Chancellor Helmut Kohl backed the start of a second stage in the process in 1994.  [ D8. ]
The Parisian futures exchange, the Matif, is challenging London's dominance of European trading.  [ D8. ]
U.S. officials are encountering stiff opposition to their efforts to crack the shell of secrecy surrounding Panama's banks.  [ A1. ] TODAY'S COLUMNS
The U.S. economy no longer has the abundance of natural resources that formed the base for the country's industrial might.
Louis Uchitelle: Business Scene.  [ D2. ]
Occidental Petroleum stood to gain from the oil price surge, but it depends more on its chemical business than on its oil operations and has been badly hurt in the broad retreat in the chemical industry.
Market Place.  [ D10. ]
American investors in bonds are following foreigners out of the country's financial markets, some economists and portfolio managers say.
Credit Markets.  [ D11. ]


Trade Talks Stall on Farm Issues
A four-year round of negotiations to liberalize world trade is threatened with collapse as a result of the European Community's failure to accept even a modest plan to reduce farm subsidies, officials from the United States and many other nations say.
These officials say the inability of the 12 community nations to agree even among themselves to put forward a modest proposal to cut farm subsidies is making it more and more difficult to complete global trade talks.
The deadline for an agreement is less than seven weeks away.


Comptek Research Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Wespercorp reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Market Place; Chemical Results Hurt Occidental
THE fortunes of chemical producers typically rise and fall with the nation's economy.
And in the stock market this year, the Occidental Petroleum Corporation has been aligned more with chemical makers that are hurt by surging oil prices than with the global oil producers that benefit from them.
Occidental's chemical unit contributed three-fourths of the company's 1989 profits, or more than $1 billion.
With profits in a broad retreat in the chemical industry, investors have pummeled Occidental's shares.


McClellan's Way
Mission determines strategy.
The recent PBS series on the Civil War was flawed by a misperception held by many historians: that Union General George McClellan agreed with Lincoln's mission of winning the war by destroying the Confederate Army.
By ascribing the military failures of the first two years of the war to McClellan's timidity, the series absolved Lincoln of blame for horrendous military blunders.
That made generals with the killer instinct -- the North's Grant and the South's Lee -- look all the better.


Books of The Times; Prying the K.G.B.'s Secrets Loose
K.G.B.
The Inside Story  By Christopher Andrew and Oleg Gordievsky Illustrated. 776 pages.
HarperCollins. $29.95.
The Cheka, ancestor of today's K.G.B., was intended only as a temporary expedient when it was founded on Dec. 20, 1917.
As the authors of "K.G.B.: The Inside Story" write: "Lenin little dreamed that it would rapidly become both the largest political police force and the largest foreign intelligence service in the world."


Miss Cohen Weds P. H. Apelbaum
Laura Eve Cohen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon S. Cohen of Chevy Chase, Md., was married last evening in Washington to Perry Howard Apelbaum, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jacob Apelbaum of Akron, Ohio.
Rabbi Stephen C. Listfield and Cantor Arnold Saltzman officiated at Adas Israel Synagogue.
The bride, 31 years old, is a graduate of Duke University and George Washington University Law Center and has a master's degree in law and taxation from Georgetown University.
She is a lawyer in the office of the chief counsel of the international division of the Internal Revenue Service in Washington.
Her father, a partner in the law firm of Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius in Washington, is a former Commissioner and also a former chief counsel of the I.R.S.
The bridegroom, 32, is an associate in the law firm of Covington &amp; Burling in Washington.
He is a graduate of the University of Michigan with a law degree from Harvard University.
His father is a builder.


Who Was on First First?
To the Editor: As a historian of early baseball I must respond to your Oct. 4 front-page news article about Edward L. Widmer's discovery of a New York Morning News account of a baseball game played on Oct. 21, 1845.
You report that Alexander J. Cartwright "is said to have drawn up the rules and organized the first game in 1846 for the Knickerbocker Base Ball Club at the Elysian Fields in Hoboken." Actually, Profs.
Harold Seymour, David Voigt, Melvin Adelman and I all contend that the Knickerbockers drew up the first rules of modern baseball on the East Side of Manhattan in the spring of 1845.
Furthermore, in a manuscript entitled "New Jersey: Crossroads of Baseball," James M. DiClerico and Barry J. Pavelec say they had found stories in The New York Herald of Oct. 22 and 23, 1845, on the baseball match between nines from Manhattan and Brooklyn.
You also note there is evidence that at least some of the Knickerbocker rules governed play in that early contest.
But it is important to add that the Knickerbockers played intrasquad games both in Manhattan and in Hoboken during the fall of 1845.
Still, it remains true that Alexander Cartwright and his Knickerbocker team devised the modern version of baseball.
GEORGE B. KIRSCH Bronx, Oct. 4, 1990 The writer is author of "The creaton of American Team Sports: Baseball and Cricket, 1838-72" (1989).


Barclays Said To Plan Split
Barclays Bank P.L.C. is planning to divide into two operations in the most radical revamping ever carried out by a British bank, a newspaper said today.
The Independent said one of the new banks would cater to small and medium-sized businesses.
The other bank would concentrate on services for large international companies and would be formed by merging the corporate lending operation with Barclays de Zoete Wedd.
The report said the two banks would operate independently but continue to be owned by the same parent company.


Ohio Edison reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30


Lawmakers Agree On Rules to Reduce Acid Rain Damage
Breaking a political impasse that had pitted the Middle West against the Northeast for more than 10 years, House and Senate negotiators rewriting the Clean Air Act reached agreement today on new regulations to reduce environmental damage caused by acid rain.
The new rules are intended to allow lakes, streams and forests polluted by the corrosive rain to repair themselves naturally by cutting by about half the amount of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide that can be poured from smokestacks into the atmosphere.
Both compounds have been identified by scientists as important components of acid precipitation.


Dr. Dulit Weds S. W. Feingold, Lawyer
Dr.
Rebecca Ann Dulit, a daughter of Dr.
Elinor Dulit and Dr.
Everett Dulit of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Stephen Wise Feingold, a son of Rabbi Julian F. Feingold of Pacific Palisades, Calif., and the late Shirley H. Feingold.
Rabbi Allan Berkowitz and the groom's father officiated at the Mamaroneck Beach and Yacht Club in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
The bride, who is 33 years old and is keeping her name, is an instructor in psychiatry at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
A cum laude graduate of Harvard University, she has a medical degree from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Her father is an associate clinical professor of psychiatry at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
Her mother, Dr.
Elinor Dulit, is a physician in White Plains.
The bridegroom, 34, graduated magna cum laude from the University of California at Los Angeles and received a J.D. degree from New York University.
He is an associate in the law firm of Spengler Carlson Gubar Brodsky &amp; Frischling in New York.
His father heads the Palmcrest Group, owner of convalescent homes for the aged in Long Beach, Calif.


Reviews/Music; A Tribute to Bernstein In a Plentiful Program
The festive opening of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center's new season on Friday evening at Alice Tully Hall had to wait briefly, while two members of the group paid tribute to Leonard Bernstein, with whom each had once performed.
The cellist Fred Sherry, the society's artistic director, and the pianist Lee Luvisi gave a moving account of the Second Meditation from Bernstein's "Mass," in the composer's own arrangement.
As it happened, this addition merely enhanced the symmetry of an already well-balanced program, which alternated larger European standards with brief contemporary American works.
What's more, another of the recent works, Joseph Turrin's well-crafted "Riffs and Fanfares" for clarinet, horn, string trio and piano, commissioned by the society and receiving its premiere, also made a nod toward the late composer, with a brief melodic figure right out of Bernstein's score for the movie "On the Waterfront." This may, of course, have been inadvertent, in a work completed before Bernstein's death, but perhaps not; as a film composer himself, Mr.
Turrin must surely know the older score.


In Capital, Outsider Has the Inside Track for Mayor
With Election Day less than three weeks away, Sharon Pratt Dixon, a political unknown until a few months ago, seems well on her way to winning the mayor's race here and the job of seeking solutions to the city's pressing fiscal and social problems.
Barring some unforeseen political upheaval, it is considered all but a foregone conclusion that Ms.
Dixon, a 46-year-old lawyer and former utility company executive, will defeat her only major opponent, the former Police Chief, Maurice T. Turner Jr., 55, in the contest to succeed Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.


Violent Crime Up 10% With Cities Hardest Hit
Violent crime rose 10 percent in the first half of the year as police in the nation's largest cities recorded a 20 percent increase in murders, the Federal Bureau of Investigation reported today.
Overall, the number of crimes reported to state and local police departments increased less than 1 percent in the first six months of the year over the same period last year, the F.B.I. said.
But the bureau's Uniform Crime Index showed a 10 percent rise in violent crimes like murder, aggravated assault, rape and robbery.
The rise in violent crimes was the largest since 1986, when it increased 12.1 percent over 1985.
Murders increased 8 percent nationwide but rose 20 percent in cities with more than 1 million people, the bureau said.
By region, the Northeast took the brunt with an 18 percent jump in murders, followed by an 8 percent increase in the West.
Murders rose 4 percent in the South and 5 percent in the Midwest.
Dan Eramian, a spokesman for Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, called the figures "further evidence of the need to pass a crime bill that is tough on criminals."
Rapes were up 10 percent, with the biggest increases occurring in medium-sized cities.
Suburban areas had an 8 percent jump in violent crimes, including a 1 percent jump in murders.
The increase in violent crime also reached rural areas, where it rose 3 percent.


Susan Schneck Weds Charles Sawyers
Susan Gail Schneck, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney H. Schneck of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday at the Baldwin House in Bedford, N.Y., to Charles Lazelle Sawyers, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John L. Sawyers of Nashville.
Rabbi Chaim Stern officiated.
Mrs.
Sawyers, 29 years old, graduated from Grinnell College and studied at the University of Paris.
She taught English in France as a Fulbright-Hayes Scholar.
She is a representative in Beverly Hills, Calif., for Christie's auction house.
Her father is a vice president at Citibank in New York and is a former chairman of the New York State Bankers Association.
Her mother, Sally Roos Schneck, is a writer.
The bridegroom, 31, is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute Research Fellow, specializing in hematology, at the University of California in Los Angeles.
He graduated from Princeton University and received a medical degree from Johns Hopkins University.
His mother, Dr.
Julia Edwards Sawyers, is an anesthesiologist in Nashville.
His father is the chairman of the surgery department at Vanderbilt University.


Legalizing Drugs Would Only Increase Abuse
To the Editor:  I am writing in response to Susan Best's letter of Oct. 3, which was in favor of the legalization of crack and heroin.
Ms.
Best claims to "hate drug abuse" but to "hate drug-related crime more." Yet the plan she advocates would increase abuse and have little effect on crime.
She lauds the British system, in which heroin addicts are forced to register with the Government in order to be entitled to a "free fix" of methadone (not heroin, which is legal only for medicinal purposes).
Methadone is not as powerful a "high," nor is it an effective way to stop opiate addiction.
Recent studies show that at best it is a transfer from the dependency on illegal drugs to a dependency on the state's drugs.
And what of all those addicts who refuse to register, who fear government control or who have criminal records or would lose their jobs if their addiction went public?
What about the large number of doctors who are heroin users?
What about all those people for whom methadone, for one reason or another, is not an attractive option?
The effects of heroin are short-lasting.
If heroin were legal to all comers who registered for it (which, again, it is not in England), they would probably need three or four doses per day, at least (the effects of heroin last six hours as compared with 24 hours for methadone).
The addicts would need to live near the dispensary, and so would never truly get a chance to leave their home neighborhood in which they are known only as addicts, and so the cycle of addiction would have little chance to be broken.
Dispensation is not a rehabilitative policy; it is one that maintains the problem.
But the real problem drug is not heroin, whose popularity, except in speed-balls where it is used with cocaine, is on the decline.
The real problem is crack.
The crack high lasts 2 to 15 minutes, which barely gives the addict time to get on line before his craving starts again.
Finally, the logistics of dispensation are worth more than a passing mention of the Nimby, or not-in-my-backyard, syndrome.
Such problems would create quite a lucrative "black market" for these drugs, much like the one that exists today in England.
England's policy has frequently been reviewed and updated, because the number of unregistered addicts tripled between 1980 and 1987.
Legalization is not the key to the crime problem.
I am not sure that more police are either.
England has less crime because it has a better municipal system and smaller cities (and fewer cities as well).
What would probably help us are laws that require stricter dispensation of guns, rather than of drugs.
It might also help if we improved education, forced Medicare to apply to crack addiction, increased rehabilitation (the wait for a room at a treatment facility can be almost a year), and stopped blaming addicts (England is better on all of these counts than we are).
It is our "crackdown on crack" mentality, which assumes drugs to be a legal rather than a social problem, that is responsible for creating many of our problems.
ETHAN KALETT  Poughkeepsie, N.Y., Oct. 6, 1990


New York Fights Senate Bill Increasing La Guardia Flights
A measure passed by the United States Senate that would increase air traffic at La Guardia Airport while limiting the power of local authorities to impose new noise limits is meeting strong opposition from New York officials.
The measure, an amendment to the budget bill passed Thursday by the Senate, would add 30 take-off and landing slots at the airport between 7 A.M. and 10 P.M. and create noise-control standards that would supersede local limits.


Buchwald Suit: Profit Study Set
The judge in Art Buchwald's lawsuit against Paramount Pictures has named an entertainment accountant to look at the studio's books.
Judge Harvey Schneider of Superior Court is trying to establish how much Paramount owes Mr.
Buchwald and his producing partner for their script that ultimately became the huge Eddie Murphy film hit "Coming to America."
Franklin Johnson, a managing partner of Price Waterhouse of Los Angeles, was chosen last week by the judge to help him make a determination.
The judge previously ruled that Paramount had stolen Mr.
Buchwald's idea and owed him a share of the profits.
Paramount contends that the film, which has grossed about $300 million, has never shown a profit and that Mr.
Buchwald and his partner, Alain Bernheim, are owed nothing.
The two contend that they are owed $6.9 million to $14.6 million.


Ballet Theater Star Returns to Kirov
Faruk Ruzimatov, a star of the Kirov Ballet in Leningrad who left to perform with American Ballet Theater, has returned to the Soviet company.
Mr.
Ruzimatov danced on Saturday night in Houston in "Giselle" with the Kirov, which is currently touring the United States.
Last week, Jane Hermann, Ballet Theater's co-director, and Victor Melnikov, a lawyer in Montreal who represents Mr.
Ruzimatov, said they had failed to reach agreement on a new contract for the dancer.
Ms.
Hermann said financial terms and repertory were the issues.
But Mr.
Melnikov said yesterday by telephone that financial terms were not even discussed because the central point was the reduced number of performances that Ms.
Hermann offered for 1990-91.
He said Mr.
Ruzimatov would arrive in Montreal at the end of this month to dance on Nov. 2, 3 and 8 with Les Grandes Ballets Canadiens, and would return to Leningrad in December.


PANAMA RESISTING MOVE TO CLEAN UP BANKING SYSTEM
American officials are encountering unusually stiff opposition from Panamanian Government aides and businessmen in efforts to crack the shell of secrecy, and presumed illegality, surrounding Panama's multibillion dollar international banking trade.
When United States troops invaded Panama 10 months ago and deposed the leadership of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega, American officials felt that they would get cooperation and information on banking activity, including illegal money-laundering, much of it related to drug trafficking.


Fine Print in the Budget Plans


Palestinian Stabs 3 Israelis Dead; Revenge for Mosque Melee Is Seen
A Palestinian wielding a 15-inch knife rampaged through a tranquil Jewish neighborhood early this morning, stabbing to death an unarmed army woman, a gardener and a policeman who tried to stop him.
The killings come at a time of high tension for Israel, which faces international pressure over the killings of 21 Palestinians by the police at Al Aksa Mosque just two weeks ago.
The Israeli police opened fire that day after stones were thrown at Jewish worshipers at the Western Wall below.


Stewart Can Argue, But Reds Are Best
Defending the honor of his sullied team, Dave Stewart said: "We won 103 games during the season. We didn't win in the World Series. Does that make us a smut ball club? It just means the other team beat us in four games."
In the immediate aftermath of the Cincinnati Reds' stunning victory over the Oakland Athletics, Stewart was having difficulty reconciling the four-game humiliation with his team's dominance of the American League during the season.


Tennessee Lifts Ban on 3 Players
Johnny Majors, the University of Tennessee football coach, met today with the defensive end Kacy Rodgers, the linebacker Dewayne Dotson and the tailback Keith Jeter and reinstated the three as members of the Volunteers' football team.
The players were suspended when a Tennessee student filed a complaint alleging sexual assault in the Gibbs Hall athletic dormitory Oct. 11.
Last week, the woman later told university officials she did not want to pursue the complaint.


Civil Rights Bill Gives Look at White House Split
The turmoil in the White House over the Civil Rights Act of 1990 reflects a deep division among senior officials as they grope for ways to deal with an increasingly combative Democratic majority in Congress and a rift with Republican lawmakers over ideology and tactics.
Even the President's decision on Saturday to veto the job discrimination bill and offer an alternative followed a day of mixed signals.
It did not entirely resolve a debate that went far beyond the merits of the legislation itself.


A Beginning, 20 Years Late
The Class of 1970 at the University of California at Berkeley finally held its graduation ceremony on Saturday, 20 years after the commencement was canceled because of unrest related to the Vietnam War.
About 260 of the 3,300 members of the class attended the belated commencement.
The turnout was larger than expected, and graduates had to share caps and gowns.


New York Banks See The Logic Of Merging
Doubting their ability to prosper as independent companies, New York's largest banks are eyeing their neighbors, each wondering which of the others would make the best partner.
Faced with rising losses on commercial real estate loans, and prospects of even greater losses on loans of all kinds as the economy weakens, executives at several of New York's largest banks are well aware that big changes are needed.
The logic of bank mergers seems irrefutable, offering the combined institutions the cost savings and greater financial strength they need to compete domestically and against more and more powerful foreign rivals.


Question Box
Post-Season Woes
Q.
Having been swept out of the American League Championship Series in four games for the second straight time, the Boston Red Sox now have dropped 10 post-season games in a row, counting the last two of the 1986 World Series against the Mets.
Has any team done worse?
A.
One has been slightly worse and another has been equally as shabby in stringing together post-seasons to forget.
Like the Red Sox, the Kansas City Royals went through a 10-game stretch without victory.
The Royals dropped the last two games of the 1980 World Series to the Philadelphia Phillies, then were swept in three straight by Oakland the next year in the American League divisional playoffs rendered necessary by the strike that interrupted the 1981 season.
In their next post-season appearance, the Royals again were swept in three games, this time by the Detroit Tigers in the 1984 American League Championship Series.
Following that, the Royals lost the first two games of the 1985 league playoffs before beating Toronto, 6-5, to end the 10-game post-season losing streak.
In fact, once those Royals regained the knack of winning, they went on to capture the World Series that year.
Still, Kansas City's string of losses fell short of the major league best for worst, held by the Phillies.
They went 11 straight post-season games without coming away winners and they did it over a span of 61 years.
When the Phillies won their first National League pennant in 1915, Grover Cleveland Alexander pitched them to a 3-1 victory over the Red Sox in the World Series opener, but Boston took the next four games.
When the Phillies won their second pennant in 1950, the Yankees won all four Series games.
And when the Phillies made it back to post-season play by winning the National League East in 1976, the Cincinnati Reds spoiled matters with a three-game sweep in the playoffs.
The waits-till-next year ended the next year as the Phillies again won the division title and finally came out ahead, 7-5, beating the Los Angeles Dodgers in the opener of the 1977 playoffs.
It was the Phils' first postseason victory in 12 games and it probably was too much to take.
For Philadelphia lost the next three games to the Dodgers and the first two to them in a playoff rematch the following fall (making for a 2-16 postseason mark) before winning again.
First All the Way
Q.
Cincinnati was in first place all 162 games this season, matching a trick turned in the American League by the Detroit Tigers in 1984.
Did any team accomplish this seasonlong feat during the 154-game schedule baseball regularly played until 30 years ago?
A.
Three teams did it, from different leagues, in the same city, 32 years apart, with future Hall of Fame managers calling the shots each time.
The first one was John McGraw.
His New York Giants spent the entire 1923 season in first place and won the National League pennant by four and a half games over Cincinnati.
Next came Miller Huggins, whose 1927 New York Yankees never left first place and won the American League pennant by 19 games over the Philadelphia Athletics.
More recently came Walter Alston, whose Brooklyn Dodgers won 22 of their first 24 games in 1955 and won the National League pennant by 13 1/2 games over the Milwaukee Braves.
Both the Dodgers and Yankees went on to win the World Series.
But not so the 1923 Giants.
They lost the Series in six games to a Yankee team managed by Huggins.
Homer in a Pinch?
Q.
Suppose that when Yogi Berra became the first pinch-hitter to hit a home run in a World Series in 1947, the Yankees had batted around and Berra had hit a home run again in his next time up that inning.
Would he have been credited with two pinch-homers?
A.
Sorry, only one pinch-hit appearance permitted per game.
On his second time up, the homer would have been credited to Berra the replacement player, not Berra the pinch-hitter.
Had a player batted for Berra the second time around (a pinch-hitter for a pinch-hitter), then that batter would have earned the second pinch-homer of the inning.
For the record, Berra's milestone turn at bat came in the seventh inning against Ralph Branca of the Brooklyn Dodgers at Ebbets Field in Game 3 of the 1947 Series.
It was the only Yankee run of the inning and the last one in a game won by the Dodgers, 9-8.
When the Yankees took the field for the Dodger seventh, Berra moved in as catcher, replacing Sherm Lollar, the player for whom he had batted the ball over the fence.
Pitcher in a Pinch
Q.
Let's say Don Robinson, the good-hitting pitcher the San Francisco Giants sometimes use as a pinch-hitter, is traded to an American League team and is inserted into a game as a pinch-hitter in the top of the 17th inning on a day he is not scheduled to pitch.
With his team short of pitching, though, Robinson is called on to take the mound and pitch the bottom of the 17th.
Under the American League's designated-hitter rule forbidding pitchers to bat, what would happen to Robinson and his team's lineup?
A.
Robinson would have the green light to pitch, but there would be a stop sign up regarding his team's use of the d.h.
When a pinch-hitter bats for any player, then stays in to pitch, his team's designated-hitter role ends for the game.
Let's assume Robinson batted for a weak-hitting shortstop.
Now, his team would have to use a new shortstop, batting where the designated hitter used to hit in the lineup, and Robinson would bat where the original shortstop batted, the one he pinch-hit for.
In essence, Robinson's team would have sacrificed the glove of its starting shortstop and the bat of its designated hitter for the arm (and perhaps the bat) of Robinson.


Waiting Game For Fans
The first sign that the Reds were near was when Schottzie was paraded in front of the chain-link fence that separated the fans from the runway.
It was the dog's first standing ovation.
By that time, the people would have applauded a batting helmet if it was connected with the Reds.
Many fans had arrived at the airport at 6 P.M. to greet the new world champions of baseball.
Airport officials had withheld information concerning the Reds' arrival, and by the time the team pulled in about 10 P.M., fewer than 1,000 fans were on hand.


Steven Paul Heineman Weds Leslie Ellen Wayte
Leslie Ellen Wayte, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles B. Wayte of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to Steven Paul Heineman, the son of Elizabeth A. Brown of Newtown, Conn., and Ralph A. Heineman of Houston.
Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the ceremony at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Heineman, 26 years old, graduated from William Smith College and is a senior research analyst for Home Box Office in New York.
Her father is the vice president of Mayfair Trucking in South Kearny, N.J.
The bridegroom, 26, graduated magna cum laude from Hobart College, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a J.D. degree from New York University.
He is an associate at the law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton in New York.
His father distributes environmental products in Houston.


Hon Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Rogers Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ellen Levine Is Married
Ellen Marla Levine, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen N. Levine of Monsey, N.Y., was married yesterday to Robert I. Altman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Altman of Marlboro, N.J.
Rabbi Louis Frishman officiated at Temple Beth Tikvah in Wayne, N.J.
Mrs.
Altman, 27 years old and a graduate of Pace University, is a senior tax analyst for the Young &amp; Rubicam advertising agency in New York.
The bridegroom, 31, is a partner in the Mortgage Funding Corporation, a mortgage brokerage in New York.
He is a graduate of Emory University.


Digital Sound Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


W. B. Doner Finds Success in Baltimore
The rest of the economy may be in a bit of a slump, but for W. B. Doner's Baltimore office, the last few weeks have been anything but gloomy.
First, Doner quietly picked up the Jason Pharmaceuticals Medifast diet program account.
Then it added Jos.
A.
Bank, a Baltimore clothing manufacturer and retailer, whose account was handled by Eisner &amp; Associates, Baltimore, for about 16 years.
Total new billings are more than $8 million.
"We are using a whole new-business effort," said Jim Dale, president and chief operating officer of the agency.
"Tough economic times are to our benefit because we deliver very aggressive advertsing."


World Is Shaken, and Some Booksellers Rejoice
For authors, publishers and retailers of books about prophecy and religion, the turmoil in the Middle East has brought nothing but good news.
"The instant United States troops were deployed to the Middle East, I sold out of my stock of Nostradamus books," said Charles Coleman, a book buyer for the four Oxford Book Stores in Atlanta.
"Now I'm having trouble reordering, because the distributors are out of stock, too."


Bairnco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Leader of a Major Christian Clan in Beirut Is Assassinated with His Family
Gunmen posing as army soldiers today shot and killed the head of one of the principal Lebanese Christian clans, Dany Chamoun, and his wife and two sons at their home in East Beirut.
Mr.
Chamoun, whose father was President of Lebanon from 1952 to 1958, was a close associate of Gen.
Michel Aoun, the rebellious Christian military leader who was forced to surrender to the Government on Oct. 13 and has taken refuge in the French Embassy.


Teresa De Francisci, Miss Liberty Model For Coin, Dies at 92
Teresa De Francisci, who was the model for Miss Liberty on the Peace Dollar of 1921, died on Saturday morning at Roosevelt Hospital.
She was 92 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of respiratory failure following surgery, her daughter said.


Capital Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Dance;    Movement, Live and Filmed
Marvel followed marvel in "Dreaming Out Loud," the multi-media show presented by Jo Andres on Thursday night at the Performing Garage.
Ms.
Andres used choreography, films and a collage of taped music to create dreams her audience could watch with eyes wide open in astonishment.
The production was dominated by films projected on three screens.
Cinematic images appeared and vanished.
Upside-down faces rippled on the screens like reflections in water, then were swallowed up by a void.
Bodies seemed to float weightless in space.
A few film sequences were blurs of motion resembling animated finger paintings.


Aerovox Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Jets Learn a Lesson From the Bills, 30-27
While everybody was holding their heads down, searching for answers to explain what happened in the Jets' 30-27 loss to the Buffalo Bills in Rich Stadium today, Brian Washington might have come up with the best summation.
"All I can say is that we showed we know how to play football today and now we've got to learn how to win," said the Jets' strong safety.
"It was disappointing and unacceptable," the Jets' coach, Bruce Coslet, had just said in his post-game news conference.
"We're tired of playing well and then getting beat in the fourth quarter. I think the one thing that happened was our young players showed they had gained a lot of experience since the last time they played these guys. They didn't run roughshod over us this time."
Coslet was referring to the Sept. 24 Monday night game in which Thurman Thomas gained 214 yards in a 30-7 Buffalo romp.
Thomas suffered a knee injury in the second quarter today after gaining only 5 yards on two carries.
The extent of the injury was unclear pending further examination.
Edge on Ground, but So What?
There were no outstanding individual running performances in the game, but the Jets (2-5) outgained the Bills, 150 to 129, on the ground this time by rotating their running backs effectively.
Freeman McNeil carried the ball 12 times for 48 yards and scored on a 5-yard run in the first period.
Johnny Hector gained 44 yards on 13 carries.
Without Thomas, Buffalo (6-1) went to the air, and did so effectively.
Jim Kelly, the Bills' quarterback, completed 19 of 32 passes for 297 yards and four touchdowns.
Kelly hit Andre Reed with scoring passes of 19 and 14 yards in the second period, connected with James Lofton on a 60-yard bomb in the third quarter and with Jamie Mueller for the 14-yard game winner with only 19 seconds left.
Reed, who also gained 38 yards on end-around plays, wound up as the game's leading receiver with 8 catches for 116 yards.
Lofton caught 3 for 99 yards.
Bad Day for Rookie
Kelly, Reed and Lofton burned Tony Stargell, the Jets' rookie left cornerback, so badly in the first half that Coslet replaced him with John Booty to start the second half.
Stargell also committed a couple of key penalties on special teams.
It was Booty, however, who was beaten on Lofton's 60-yarder, which tied the game at 24-24.
All of that might have been forgotten if only the Jets could have won.
They led by 21-7 in the second quarter and were tied at 24-24 going into the fourth.
The Jets, however, have not scored a touchdown in the final quarter of any of their games this season and all they could get today was a Pat Leahy field goal.
His kick, the second of the day, gave the Jets a 27-24 lead with 2 minutes 16 seconds to play, but Kelly brought his team back on a 71-yard drive that culminated with his toss to Mueller.
"The team has gained confidence from doing this," Coach Marv Levy of the Bills said about his team's three straight come-from-behind victories.
"You have to win a number of games like that during the year if you want to say that we're going for it all. But you can't win them all like that."
Buffalo misfired on an opportunity to take the lead for the first time in the game when Scott Norwood's 24-yard field-goal attempt went wide left early in the fourth quarter.
The Jets drove 72 yards on 12 plays and took the lead again on Leahy's 25- yard boot, and they still had a chance to send the game into overtime after Norwood missed the extra-point attempt following Mueller's touchdown.
But they only had 12 seconds to do it and, as Washington said, they haven't learned how to win games that way.
On first down, Jeff Criswell was called for a false start.
On second down, Bruce Smith sacked Ken O'Brien for a 4-yard loss, and that was that.
For the game, O'Brien completed 14 of 28 passes for 210 yards and a pair of touchdown passes: 1-yard to Mark Boyer his tight end, and a 19-yarder to Al Toon, both in the second period.
He was sacked three times for 18 yards in losses.
Toon had 5 catches for 98 yards and stretched his string of games with at least one catch to 69 with his first and his longest, 25 yards, in the first period.
Another Unhappy Ending
It was the third time the Jets had lost this season by giving up the winning points in the fourth quarter, all on the road, at Cincinnati at Miami and now here.
The only consolation for the Jets could be the idea that they are growing.
But it still wasn't enough for Coslet.
"It still goes in the loss column," he said.


A Martyr of Poland's Solidarity Movement Is Honored in Brooklyn


Quotation of the Day
"This is what I started over there in New York. I was a little bitter when I left there. I carried a grudge. I knew I could do a job if I were allowed to do it on fair terms. Lou Piniella, manager of the world champion Cincinnatti Reds [ C6:2 ]


Lindberg Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mannes Students May Play a Piece's Way Into First Place
"This is a competition, so of course I am impartial, and I am doing the best I can for every piece," the conductor Michael Charry said after a rehearsal with the student orchestra at the Mannes College of Music one afternoon last week.
Mr.
Charry, who is in his second year of conducting the orchestra at Mannes, was facing an unusual task.
For the most part, his job is to drill his students in the standard repertory.
But in recent weeks, he has been preparing them for a trip to Washington, where they are to play the four contemporary works nominated for this year's Kennedy Center Friedheim Awards, one of the most prestigious prizes an American composer can win.


American Franchise Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Playing Pebble Beach, in Midtown
MAURICE CASEY had al ways longed to play Peb ble Beach, the legendary California golf course whose scenic twists and turns have been the site of some of the sport's greatest moments.
Until recently, Casey, an advertising salesman in New York for Air &amp; Space Smithsonian magazine, with a handicap of 17, thought he would never realize his dream.


With Dignity: Films by Blacks for Blacks
Elton Fax, an illustrator and author, says he will never forget the first movie with an all-black cast that he saw nearly 70 years ago when he was growing up in a black neighborhood in Baltimore.
The film was Oscar Micheaux's "House Behind the Cedars" and he was "thrilled," he said the other day, "because it was the first time I had seen black performers on the screen who weren't doing Stepin Fetchit roles, not doing the old chicken-stealing scenes and looking scared and seeing ghosts."


THE BUDGET BATTLE Behind the Dealing on Deficit Reduction, Deals That Could Swell the Deficit; While Congress Trims the Budget, It Enlarges Programs (and Debt)
Even as Congress trims some programs to reduce the Federal budget deficit, it is expanding other programs, and lawmakers acknowledge that savings achieved with great difficulty this year may soon be offset by added spending.
The new spending comes about because of old-fashioned pork-barrel projects, policy choices in favor of new or expanded programs and the deterioration of the economy, which is increasing demand for benefits like unemployment insurance and food stamps.


Huffy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Suzanne Marie Jorgensen Weds Walter H. F. Smith
Suzanne Marie Jorgensen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold A. Jorgensen of Westwood, N.J., was married yesterday at Grace Episcopal Church in Nyack, N.Y., to Walter Harold Frederick Smith, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Reuben W. Smith 3d of Stockton, Calif.
The Rev.
Robert A. Jewett, assisted by the Rev.
Brian Lathrop, officiated.
The bride, until recently a tax lawyer with Coopers &amp; Lybrand in New York, is a Cornell University graduate with a J.D. degree from Boston University and a master of laws degree in taxation from New York University.
The bridegroom, a University of Southern California graduate, received a master's degree in geology and a Ph.D. in marine geophysics from Columbia University.
He is to join the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, Calif., as a research scientist and a Green Scholar in November.
The couple met at a retreat sponsored by the Episcopal Diocese of New York in Ossining.


Legalizing Drugs Would Only Increase Abuse; The British Experience
To the Editor:
Susan Best's Oct. 3 letter referring to the "legalization of narcotics" in Britain is misleading.
British physicians with special licenses are allowed in principle to prescribe heroin and cocaine for certified addicts, but since this is not occurring in practice, there can be no influence on crime rates, contrary to her speculation.
Britain did experiment with heroin maintenance during the 70's, but abandoned it because it proved impossible to stabilize addicts on heroin.
Britain, like the U.S., now relies primarily on methadone maintenance for treatment of heroin addicts, although the British use it more creatively, less ideologically and thus more effectively.
There are lessons here, but heroin legalization is not one of them.
STEPHEN MAGURA Deputy Director of Research Narcotic and Drug Research Inc.
New York, Oct. 4, 1990


Legalizing Drugs Would Only Increase Abuse; Legalize, Tax Marijuana
To the Editor:
Isn't it ironic that after launching a major campaign to discourage tobacco and alcohol consumption in the United States, the Federal Government now contemplates making higher taxes on these products part of the "cure" for our national debt, thus implicitly encouraging their continued use?
These two drugs (and yes, Virginia, they
are
drugs) annually cause more 400,000 deaths in the United States.
Isn't it now time to reconsider the argument for the legalization of marijuana, a drug which, when properly taxed, could bring in billions annually and which has yet to be conclusively linked to even one fatality?
BRUCE W.  BOWLIN  Fayetteville, Ark., Oct. 4, 1990


Zero Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


House Votes Limits on Its Members' Mailings
The House voted today to limit how much mail each member can send to constituents and to force lawmakers to disclose how much taxpayer money each spends on postage.
The lawmakers also voted to cut $42 million from the $2.2 billion spending bill that pays for the operations of Congress, including elimination of proposed increases in staff salary accounts.
With the popularity of Congress at a low point and elections 16 days away, the gestures were seen as an effort to shoulder a share of the budget-cutting responsibility.
Hypersensitivity about spending money on themselves led the House members to spend a good part of the day debating whether to spend $500,000 on modular furniture and $350,000 to renovate the House beauty shop.
The furniture was rejected, the beauty shop approved.
Despite appearances that the House was cutting its own spending, the limits on mailing were set high enough that they would not affect most members of the House, and some of the other cuts are likely to be restored next year in a supplemental money bill.
Left unscathed was the part of the bill that would pay for an increase in lawmakers' salaries from their current $96,600 to $125,100 on Jan. 1.
The mail limits, approved on a voice vote, would give the House members allowances sufficient to send three first-class mailings to each residential address in their districts, an average of $178,000.
Members could raise that by as much as $25,000 by transferring money from their office accounts, and each would have to report quarterly on how much had been spent.
Total mailing costs would be limited to $59 million in the year that began Oct. 1.
Some members spend up to $400,000 a year on mail.
Some flood their districts with newsletters and town meeting notices whose main purpose is to get the lawmaker's name and picture into thousands of homes.
It is such mailing that reformers point to as a reason incumbents are able to hold onto their jobs with a 98 percent security rate.
The Senate already restricts and discloses the mail costs of its members.


Dinkins Is to Discuss Pay Cuts for Himself And Other Officials
Mayor David N. Dinkins is expected to discuss pay cuts for himself and top city officials at a press conference today, city officials said last night.
Philip R. Michael, the Budget Director, declined to give any specifics of the Mayor's plan, but indicated that the pay cuts would affect administrators earning more than $70,000.


Ms. Matthews Weds D. M. Stone
Kathleen W. Matthews, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George F. Matthews of Fairport, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Marc Stone, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald E. Stone of Pittsford, N.Y.
Rabbi Judea B. Miller performed the ceremony at Temple B'rith Kodesh in Rochester.
Mrs.
Stone, 27, received an associate's degree from the State University of New York at Alfred and is a secretary at the Fisons Corporation, a pharmaceutical company in Rochester.
Her father is a traffic analyst for Copy Products in Rochester, a division of Eastman Kodak.
Her mother, Margot J. Matthews, is the administrator for the department of mechanical engineering at the University of Rochester.
The bridegroom, 26 years old and a certified public accountant, graduated from Syracuse University.
He is the tax manager for Wilmorite Inc., a developer of commercial and residential properties in Rochester.
His mother, Lois Greene Stone, is an author and poet.
His father is an assistant clinical professor of medicine at the University of Rochester.


Williams Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Advo-System Inc., Windsor, Conn., a direct mail concern, appointed Kay Knight Clarke senior vice president of business development. *
J.
I.
Case, Racine, Wis., a unit of Tenneco Inc., Houston, named Gary L. Tessitore executive vice president and general manager of its agricultural equipment group; Richard L. Wambold executive vice president, and Edward McFadden senior vice president and chief financial officer, succeeding Mr.
Tessitore. *
Federal National Mortgage Association, Washington, appointed William E. Kelvie senior vice president and chief information officer. *
Lehman Brothers, a division of Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., New York, appointed James M. Davin executive vice president and director of worldwide equity sales in its world equity division. *
Viacom International Inc., a unit of Viacom Inc., New York, named Jill Newfield vice president of counsel and enterprises in its law department. *
Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., a division of Ziff Communications Co., New York, appointed Frank Kelcz vice president of international operations.


Ignorance and Posturing on Prison Terms
In 1984, Congress set up a sentencing commission to create a new system of punishment for Federal crimes.
This dramatic reform was designed to bring consistency to a haphazard process.
But lately Congress has behaved as if the commission didn't exist, provoking an intelligent complaint from William Wilkins, the chairman.
For years, Federal courts sentenced criminals to a maximum term -- 20 years, say, for bank robbery -- leaving a parole board to decide the actual date of release.
Though still in effect in many states, the system has drawn much criticism over the years.
It allows extreme disparities in sentences for similar crimes.


Politics Nevermore, Vargas Llosa Says, Embracing Writing
" 'Never,' " the Peruvian writer Mario Vargas Llosa said, "is a word that I use about very few things. But about politics I can say quite definitely: nevermore. Nevermore for any reason will I get involved, nevermore will I quit writing."
Alive and apparently unscathed after three years of crisscrossing his impoverished and terrorist-wracked country in pursuit of the presidency, Mr.
Vargas Llosa says he is disappointed but also "a bit relieved" that the electorate rejected him in June in favor of Alberto Fujimori, a Japanese-Peruvian agronomist.
The author's campaign was born of a sense of responsibility in the face of the tragedy of Peru and a conviction that the country could change and prosper with a free-market economy.
But, switching from his excellent English to his perfect French, this urbane and elegant man with the swift and piercing amber eyes of a cat confesses that "le coeur n'y etait pas," that his "heart was not in it."


Eileen V. Doyle Weds Jonathan David Gilbert
Eileen Veronica Doyle, a daughter of Kathleen M. Doyle of Blauvelt, N.Y., and Edward V. Doyle of Hoboken, N.J., was married yesterday to Jonathan David Gilbert, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul S. Gilbert of Rye, N.Y.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel and the Rev.
Edward Zogby, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Fairview Country Club in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Gilbert, 29 years old, received a bachelor's degree and a law degree from Fordham University.
She is a counsel to the Glemby Company, a beauty salon company in New York.
Her father is the assistant treasurer of the New York Stock Exchange in New York.
Her mother teaches at Ferncliff Manor for the Retarded in Yonkers.
The bridegroom, 30 and a Brown University graduate, received a law degree from Fordham and is an associate in the law firm of Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel in New York.
His mother, Susan Gilbert, is a systems analyst for Kraft General Foods in Rye Brook, N.Y.
His father is a founder and principal of Gilbert, Doniger &amp; Company, an investment firm in New York.


Some Serious Sunglasses
Jean-Claude Killy of France, the Olympic gold medalist in downhill skiing, has helped develop sunglasses designed for serious athletes.
Killy agreed to lend his name to the eyewear with one major stipulation: that the design team create a product that he could wear skiing down a couloir, a steep mountain snow chute.
Made in France, the glasses are designed with a nose piece to absorb shock, rotating tips to keep the glasses from falling off, double springs at the temple for safety and a protective brow bar to absorb a frontal jolt.
The nose piece is made with a free-floating vertical bar that has a miniature spring inside.
The nose pads are coated with silicone, a synthetic compound designed to keep the pads from slipping.
Two-way springs at the temple reduce the risk of injury in an accident, said Jean-Pierre Dorard, executive vice president for the new Killy Technical Eyewear Company.
One side of the eyeglass or the other will break free if you have a sudden fall, in much the same way that a ski binding releases your boot, he said.
The Killy sunglasses are made with two different lenses: Extreme Sun, for eye protection on snow, a desert, or at sea, and Intense Sun, for most other outdoor situations.
Killy says the lenses will block out ultraviolet A and B rays.
The sunglasses, available also with prescription lenses, are priced between $290 and $345.
For more information, phone Killy Technical Eyewear in Novato, Calif., at (415) 883-3017.


Programming &amp; Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Bangor Journal; Death and Hunter's Trial Pose Tough Questions
In the wooded outskirts of Bangor, five black and orange "NO TRESPASSING" signs warn hunters and curious onlookers not to go near the house where Karen Ann Wood lived.
Two years ago, before the signs went up, the 37-year-old Mrs.
Wood, who had recently moved to Maine from Iowa, walked into her backyard and was fatally shot by a local hunter.
The hunter, Donald Rogerson, later said he mistook her white mittens for the tail of a deer.


Pakistani Election Race Looks Close
With less than three days to go until an election that experts are calling the least predictable in Pakistan's checkered political history, the war of the soundtrucks and the battle of marathon rallies began this weekend.
But behind the partisan hoopla lurk the unseen factors that will ultimately make the difference.
Political analysts, who tend to agree that the race between Benazir Bhutto and her military-backed opponents is close, say several variables that are difficult to measure could swing votes in one direction or another.


CBS Is Big Loser in the Reds' Series Sweep
The Oakland Athletics were the visible casualty of the Cincinnati Reds' four-game sweep of the World Series.
The invisible casualty was CBS.
Oakland lost four games -- and a lot of pride. CBS could lose its shirt.
Though the size of CBS's losses on the first year of its four-year $1.06 billion baseball contract have yet to be determined, one network sports executive estimated that CBS would be "lucky to lose only $150 million."


Heath Says Iraq's Leader Agrees To Release Some Captive Britons
Edward Heath, the former British Prime Minister, said today that President Saddam Hussein had agreed to free an unspecified number of Britons held in Iraq.
After meeting with the Iraqi leader for three hours, Mr.
Heath said Mr.
Hussein had given no indication that he would withdraw from Kuwait in accordance with United Nations demands but said he wanted to work for a peaceful end to the Persian Gulf crisis.


THE BUDGET BATTLE Behind the Dealing on Deficit Reduction, Deals That Could Swell the Deficit; Congressional Budget Negotiators Take Care of Some Constituents
Buried in the House and Senate deficit reduction plans that would raise the taxes of nearly all Americans are special breaks to alleviate much of the burden for companies and industries fortunate enough to be represented by the handful of lawmakers negotiating the final compromises.
Thanks largely to the efforts of the Senate Majority Leader, George Mitchell of Maine, the UNUM Life Insurance Company of Portland, the largest private employer in the city, may pay a fraction of the new tax being imposed on the rest of the industry, and other insurers must take up the slack.
Cost to other insurers?
About $1 billion over the next five years.


Technitrol Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Park's Stolen Bronzes Found After 20 Years
Things disappear in New York City, things that are nailed down and things that are not.
Often, they are reported missing.
Rarely do they reappear.
But sometimes things turn up again, as happened recently when two 40-pound bronze sculptures that vanished 20 years ago from Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens were recovered.


Correction
A headline on Friday with an article about a contract to supply voting machines in New York City misstated the value of the contract in some copies.
It was for $50 million.


Amserv Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Communications Transmission reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jefferies Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Penn A.C. Retains Head of Charles Title
The Penn Athletic Club of Philadelphia successfully defended its championship eights title at today's rowing of the 25th anniversary Head of the Charles Regatta.
This year's regatta was actually the 26th rowing in a 25-year span for this "granddaddy of head races," as the organizers dubbed the event in celebrating the anniversary.
Head races originated in England where the more traditional format of side-by-side racing was impossible because of the narrowness of the English rivers.
In head races, crews are timed over the length of the course, which for the Charles River is three miles, and the team achieving the fastest time is called "Head of the River."


THE 1990 ELECTIONS: The 1990 Issues; Candidates Seek Safe Havens In Storm Over Taxes in States
Anyone who finds the politics of taxation complicated in Washington should come here to Illinois.
The tax issue has become so complicated that candidates here are emphasizing positions in ways that defy traditional party definitions.
The Democratic candidate for governor and the Republican candidate for the Senate are running as tax cutters, while the Republican candidate for governor and the Democratic candidate for Senate say taxes are needed to pay for good things, particularly schools.


Big Tackle Set Up Big Kick
No play in the Giants' 20-19 victory over the Phoenix Cardinals today was more important than a Cardinal bootleg that almost succeeded.
It did not because the Giants were waiting for it.
With two minutes left in the game, the Cardinals had third down on their 32-yard line.
They needed 9 yards for a first down.
If they had made it, they could have run out the clock and won.
Johnny Johnson had carried 30 times in the game, and when the ball was snapped, Timm Rosenbach, the Cardinals' quarterback, faked a handoff to Johnson.
While Johnson and all of the blockers ran to the right, Rosenbach, all alone, circled to the left.
Myron Guyton, the Giants' free safety, stopped him with a hard tackle after Rosenbach gained 7 yards.
The Cardinals had to punt, and the Giants went on to their winning field goal.
"We called it in the huddle," said Steve DeOssie, the Giants' inside linebacker.
"On second down, too. We knew they were trying to pound it, pound it, and we knew they would try something there. We did just what we had to do."


Badger Meter Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Under Prague's Revolution, a Princely Renaissance Family Is Restored
For the majority of Czechoslovaks, the return of freedom means at most recreating the democratic ways of the First Republic, which was founded after World War I.
To Karel Schwarzenberg, however, it has meant not only appointment as chief of staff to President Vaclav Havel but also the restoration of a family history that reaches back to the Renaissance.


Dickerson Gets Jeers and Some Cheers
After the capacity crowd in the Hoosier Dome had delivered its long, loud and predictably unfriendly initial welcome of Eric Dickerson on his return to the Indianapolis Colts, the relationship between the people in the stands and their $10 million running back could be reduced to a simple formula.
If Dickerson carried the ball for 5 yards or more, the response was tolerant and even happy noise.
If the gain was 4 yards or less, the people of Indiana seemed to look upon Eric as a four-letter word.


Zero Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Walbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Trial of Arkansas Attorney General Opens Today
State Attorney General Steve Clark goes on trial here Monday on a felony theft charge, accused of using a state credit card for trips and meals at which his family, friends and political contributors were guests.
News reports since January on Mr.
Clark's spending habits and the ensuing criminal charge have had a ripple effect, prompting calls for more accountability of public officials.


Ceradyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York's Recycling Program Is Achieving Its Planned Goals To the
To the Editor:
There have been no cost or tonnage surprises in New York's recycling program so far.
Contrary to what may have been inadvertent suggestions in recent reports (news article, Oct. 12), recycling is achieving almost exactly the tonnage planned (and required by law), at almost exactly the budgeted cost.
The mandatory recycling program is about a year and a half into its five-year implementation schedule, and there are necessarily some start-up costs that cannot yet be compared with regular garbage collection.
These start-up costs were built into all the plans and budgets for this effort.
Some of the costs have been higher than predicted, but some have been lower than predicted by many millions of dollars.
Over the last two years, savings in the multimillions of dollars have been rolled back into the program to help cover deficits.
Marketing the recyclables was expected to prove difficult even in the earliest plans, and everyone acknowledged that marketing would require initiative and imagination.
On the other hand, there have been unexpected positive developments in marketing.
The world's largest paper recycler has announced that it will build its next plant in New York State, and this one plant will handle 25 percent of all the newsprint projected to be recycled in the entire state.
This will completely change the market, as it is now entirely dependent on export, primarily to Asia.
The Department of Sanitation has recently begun marketing recycled plastic collected in several city neighborhoods (including mine).
Plastics marketing was considered the greatest improbability in the plan only two years ago.
When we began the recycling effort in New York City we knew we were taking some risks.
This was the largest effort of its kind in America, the only program that required the cooperation of residents in high-rise, densely populated neighborhoods.
Labor cooperation would be only one of several managerial problems to work on; markets were still very much in their infancy.
The risk we may have underestimated is that this would be no undertaking for the faint-hearted.
To get a huge city to change the way it handles such a basic function is going to take persistence and leadership, and of course, faith that it can really be done.
BRENDAN SEXTON New York, Oct. 16, 1990
The writer, Sanitation Commissioner, 1986-90, is a professor at the Robert F. Wagner Graduate School of Public Service, New York University.


For Breeders' Cup, the Fuss and Focus Falls on 3 Fillies
AS the American racing season staggers to its final battle site Saturday in the Breeders' Cup at Belmont Park, the heroes of the campaign are casualties.
Criminal Type, Sunday Silence, Easy Goer and Golden Pheasant, the best of the older males, all have retired from the racing wars with injuries.
The best of the young warriors, the 3-year-olds Summer Squall and Housebuster, are mending from recent wounds.
Even the next generation has already suffered the lost of Eastern Echo, the unbeaten 2-year-old who broke down after just three starts.


McRae Indus reports earnings for Qtr to July 28


New Products Help to Bolster Music Sales
In an era in which it has become increasingly difficult and expensive to promote new music groups, record companies are aggressively broadening the product lines for the singers they already handle.
Indeed, two new products -- the cassette single and the music video -- are gaining wide acceptance.


Tokyo, Irritated by U.S. Rebuke, Says Furor Over Slur Seems Racist
After weeks of issuing apologies, Japanese officials have reacted with irritation to a resolution approved by a Congressional committee in Washington that reprimands Japan's Justice Minister for comparing foreign prostitutes here with blacks who move into white American neighborhoods and "ruin the atmosphere."
The House Foreign Affairs Committee passed the resolution late Thursday after dropping an earlier version that had called on the Justice Minister, Seiroku Kajiyama, to resign.
The committee changed the text of the resolution after lobbying from Japan's Ambassador, who suggested that the demand for Mr.
Kajiyama's resignation amounted to interference in Japan's domestic affairs.


VMX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Treasury to Sell Bills and Notes This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings this week includes today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, followed on Wednesday by an auction of two-year notes.
On Thursday the Treasury postponed a planned auction of 52-week bills and on Friday held an auction of 69-day cash management bills.
By late Friday the rate for the three-month bill was 7.23 percent; for six-month bills it was 7.19 percent.
With no when-issued trading in two-year notes, investors followed the outstanding issue as an indicator.
The two-year note traded at a price to yield 7.82 percent.
The following fixed-income issues are scheduled this week: TAXABLE WEDNESDAY GTE Northwest Inc., $75 million in first mortgage bonds, due 2030, A+/Aa-3/AA-.
Competitive.
ONE DAY DURING THE WEEK Apache Corp., $150 million in convertible subordinated debentures, due 2000.
Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
First Interstate Automobile Trust 1990-1, about $623 million in certificates backed by auto loan assets, NR/ Aaa/ AAA.
Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
Source: McCarthy, Crisanti &amp; Maffei Inc.
Ratings: MCM/Moody's/Standard &amp; Poor's.
TAX-EXEMPT TUESDAY Los Angeles, $80 million in revenue bonds.
Competitive.
WEDNESDAY Texas Public Finance Authority, $138.4 million in general obligation bonds.
Competitive.
TENTATIVE OFFERINGS THIS WEEK California State Public Works Board, $315 million in lease revenue bonds for Regents, University of California (various University of California).
J.
P.
Morgan Securities Inc.
Connecticut, $75 million in general obligation capital apprecialtion bonds (College Savings Plan).
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Geo.
L.
Smith 2d Georgia World Congress Authority, $200 million in revenue bonds (Domed Stadium Project).
Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.


Bridge
Most of the world's top players can be classified as specialists or generalists.
The specialists have one favorite partner with whom they have developed elaborate bidding understandings, which may be detailed in 50 pages of notes.
The generalists, more adaptable but less scientific, play with a wide range of expert partners and are content to discuss bidding methods for an hour or two before the start of the event.
The most prominent generalist is Zia Mahmood, the Pakistani star.
He has homes in London and New York, but tours the world playing bridge; he has probably partnered more of the world's top players than anyone else.
In Geneva, Switzerland last month he was playing in the World Pair Championship with Masood Salim, his favorite Pakistani partner.
On the diagramed deal he faced a pair of specialists who were using a specialized two-spade opening: East's action was a "two-under" transfer pre-empt showing length in clubs.


Nikkei Gains for 6th Day
Share prices finished higher here today, as the Nikkei stock average rose for the sixth-straight day.
Trading was active as a stronger yen, lower oil prices and gains on Wall Street on Friday had investors seeking out blue-chip issues.
The 225-issue Nikkei index rose 589.37 points, or 2.4 percent, to 25,070.86, on a volume of 600 million shares.
The index ended the morning session up 622.63 points, or 2.5 percent, to 25,104.12.
On Friday, the gauge rose 483.47 points.
"With the Nikkei defying gravity like this, volume is proportional to how many sellers there are," a broker said.
"There hasn't been a shortage of buyers out there for more than a week."


St. Jude Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1990 ELECTIONS: The 1990 Campaign; District of Columbia
MAYOR'S RACE Democrat: Sharon Pratt Dixon, 46 Republican: Maurice T. Turner Jr., 55 ANALYSIS Ms.
Dixon promises to "clean house" in the aftermath of the Barry administration and has repeatedly pointed to the fact that Mr.
Turner, a former Police Chief, was a Barry appointee and was in charge of the police force when a drug and crime epidemic swept the city.
Mr.
Turner plays down his Republican and Barry administration ties and emphasizes his experience as Police Chief and a manager of people and budgets.
He says that crime is the city's main problem and that Ms.
Dixon, who grew up in a well-to-do neighborhood, has naive ideas about how to control it.
REGISTERED VOTERS Democrat: 217,14 Republican: 24,928 Other: 31,272


A Battered and Ailing Mafia Is Losing Its Grip on America
Battered by aggressive investigators and weakened by incompetent leadership, most of America's traditional Mafia families appear to be fading out of existence, law-enforcement officials and independent experts say.
The Mafia remains potent in the New York City area, where officials say the mob is hard to uproot because it has five separate and large crime families, and in the suburbs of Chicago.
But in most other areas, where prosecutors have to contend with only a single family, the legendary mob that once controlled entire labor unions, city governments and criminal enterprises has clearly lost its grip.


Washington Water Power Co. reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Malevolent Boomerang Rules Soviet Economy
What does the price of a Big Mac at the Moscow McDonald's have to do with the gasoline shortage in the Ukrainian capital, Kiev?
And what do both of these things have to do with the feud between Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Boris N. Yeltsin?


Review/Television; A Teen-Ager's Obsession With His Mother's Death
"Extreme Close-Up," the television movie at 9 tonight on NBC , is so beautifully put together that you keep wishing the thing made more sense.
Here, in spades, is a project out of film-making class Sensitivity 101.
Not surprisingly, the main behind-camera personnel come out of the ABC series "Thirtysomething." Ed Zwick and Marshall Herskovitz, creators of "Thirtysomething," developed the idea, and the script was written by Mr.
Herskovitz.
Peter Horton, from the "Thirtysomething" cast, directs, using film and video techniques in a manner not unlike the CBS summer sitcom called "Wish You Were Here."
At the heart of "Extreme Close-Up" is 15-year-old David Toll (Morgan Weisser), a video freak who spends most of his time recording anything that ventures into his line of vision.
We meet David as he is returning to high school after being injured in an unsuccessful attempt to pull his mother, Margaret (Blair Brown), from a burning automobile.
Tring to make sense of her death, David spends the rest of the movie mostly going through his old home videotapes and making life miserable for his grieving father (Craig T. Nelson) and his younger brother and sister.


Lisa Fuentes Wed To Thomas Cohen
Lisa Fuentes, an assistant professor of sociology at Boston College, was married yesterday in Larchmont, N.Y., to Thomas Mark Cohen, an assistant professor of history and the curator of the Oliveira Lima Library at the Catholic University of America in Washington.
Rabbi Uri Herscher officiated at the home of the bridegroom's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Saul Z. Cohen.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of Maria Luisa Munoz-Ledo de Fuentes and Valentin Fuentes Lima of Puebla, Mexico.
The bride is a graduate of the University of the Americas in Puebla.
She has a master's degree in Latin American studies from the University of California at Los Angeles and a Ph.D. in sociology from Stanford University.
Her father is a retired businessman.
Her mother is the registrar at the American School in Puebla.
The bridegroom is a graduate of Amherst College with a master's and a Ph.D. in history from Stanford.
His mother, Amy Scheuer Cohen, is a psychotherapist at the Center for Preventive Psychiatry in White Plains.
His father is a partner in 61 Associates, a private investment company in New York, and a vice president of the UJA-Federation in New York.


Lew Worsham; Golfer, 73
Lew Worsham, winner of the 1947 United States Open golf championship, died Friday after a long illness.
He was 73 years old.
Mr.
Worsham's most notable victory was his triumph over Sam Snead in an 18-hole playoff for the Open championship.
He shot a 69 to win by a single shot at the St.
Louis Country Club in Clayton, Mo., after the two had tied with 72- hole scores of 282.
He won the Tam O' Shanter World Championship in 1953 in Chicago, golf's first $100,000 tournament, with an eagle-2 on the 18th hole.
He is survived by his wife, Virginia.


Keven Hawkins Weds Catherine Fierro
Catherine Ann Fierro, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Louis E. Fierro of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday to Bryan Keven Hawkins, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas B. Hawkins of Cashiers, N.C.
The Rev.
Hilary R. Bercovici, assisted by the Rev.
John R. Lynch, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Mary's Episcopal Church in Scarborough, N.Y.
The bride, who is 27 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Clark University and received a master's degree in social work from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the director of admissions and re-entry at the Bridge, a drug and alcohol rehabilitation center for teenagers in Philadelphia.
Her father is the director of anesthesiology at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.
Her mother, Rebecca Fierro, is a nurse.
The bridegroom, 27 and known as Keven, received a bachelor's degree in architecture from Clemson University and a master's in historic preservation from the University of Pennsylvania.
He is an architect with Ueland &amp; Junker Architects in Philadelphia.
His mother, Connie Hawkins, is a clerk with the Postal Service in Cashiers.
His father is a building contractor.


Seoul Demonstrators Attack Office of Intelligence Agency
Students firebombed the main office of a police intelligence agency in central Seoul today.
The police arrested eight of the protesters at the Agency for National Security Planning.
Government intelligence offices have drawn demonstrators since early this month, after allegations that more than 1,300 dissidents, intellectuals and opposition legislators had been illegally spied upon.


Patrick Is Smiling But It Hurts a Bit
In the air and thus no longer in control, James Patrick hurtled headlong toward the sideboards at the Civic Arena in Pittsburgh on Saturday night.
For any National Hockey League player, it is the scariest sensation imaginable.
For the Rangers, it stood to be among the worst potential setbacks conceivable.
"When I lost my feet, there was a split-second when I watched the boards coming at me and thought I could wind up paralyzed," said Patrick, the Rangers' valuable defenseman who went down midway through the opening period of what would evolve into a dramatic and satisfying 4-3 triumph over the Penguins.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Lendl Defeats Chang: Top-seeded Ivan Lendl rallied to beat Michael Chang, 1-6, 6-2, 6-1, 6-2, yesterday and win the Hong Kong Marlboro Championships.
The 18-year-old Chang started brilliantly, breaking Lendl twice in the opening set.
But Lendl, ranked third in the world, rallied to take the next two sets with ease.
Chang won only one of five service games in the third set.
The third-seeded Chang, who beat Lendl in a five-set match in the fourth round of last year's French Open, could not duplicate that performance.
He lost his serve in the fifth and seventh games of the fourth set, helping Lendl win the set and the match.
Lendl collected $200,000.
Chang, ranked 14th, received $100,000. (AP) Fernandez Wins: Second-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez of the United States beat Barbara Paulus of Austria, 6-1, 6-3, yesterday to win the Porsche Cup tournament in Filderstadt, Germany.
Fernandez, ranked eighth in the world, received $70,000 from the purse of $350,000.
Paulus got $31,500. (AP) Jarryd Upsets Skoff: Unseeded Anders Jarryd of Sweden capped a week of upsets by defeating fourth-seeded Horst Skoff of Austria, 6-3, 6-3, 6-1, in the final of the Association of Tennis Professionals CA Trophy tournament in Vienna.
It was Jarryd's first major victory since 1986.
When the 1-hour-38-minute match ended, Jarryd punched the air in a victory salute, knowing he had recorded his fourth surprise victory of the tournament and staged an important personal comeback.
Because of injury, Jarryd had dropped to 175th in the A.T.P. ranking this year from fifth in 1985. (AP) First Indoor Title for Rosset: Marc Rosset of Switzerland won his first indoor title, beating Mats Wilander of Sweden, 6-3, 6-2, yesterday in the $500,000 Lyons Grand Prix tournament in France.
The 19-year-old Rosset dominated Wilander, a former No. 1 player who is in a two-year slump.
Rosset got off to a slow start in the first set, but a double-fault and forced error by Wilander gave him a service break at 5-3 en route to winning the set.
Wilander managed to save two match points in the second set at 5-2, before losing. (AP) Victory for Ivanisevic: Goran Ivanisevic of Yugoslavia combined lightning serves and booming ground strokes to beat Henri Leconte of France, 6-2, 7-6, 4-6, 4-6, 6-1, yesterday and win the $1.1 million European Community Championship in Antwerp, Belgium.
Ivanisevic lost a two-set lead against the hustling, creative Leconte, before regaining the initiative with his power game in the final set.
The 19-year-old Ivanisevic received $250,000 for his first victory in the exhibition event.(AP) GOLF Goetze Takes World Amateur Title: Vicki Goetze shot a six-under-par 67 yesterday to win the individual title in the women's world amateur championship in Christchurch, New Zealand, and spark the United States to the team crown.
Goetze, 18, a former United States Amateur champion, finished with a 72-hole total of 291, one-under-par over the 6,162-yard, par-73 Russley course, and four shots ahead of the field.
The United States won the Espirito Santo trophy for the 11th time in 14 years with a score of 585, 12 shots ahead of second-place New Zealand.
Pat Hurst, the current United States Amateur champion, backed up Goetze with a 74.
The top two scores of each three-player team counted toward the team total. (AP) Trevino Wins: Lee Trevino made five birdies over the final seven holes yesterday for a two-stroke victory over Mike Hill in the $500,000 Transamerica Senior Championship in Napa, Calif.
Trevino's final-round seven-under-par 65 earned him $75,000.
He finished the 54 holes on the 6,632-yard Silverado Country Club south course at 205, 11 under par.
Hill, who also shot 65, had five birdies on his back nine and entered the clubhouse the leader at nine under.
But Trevino birdied Nos. 14, 17 and 18 to win. (AP) AUTO RACING Kulwicki Outduels Elliott: Alan Kulwicki, taking advantage of a last-minute caution flag, outlasted Bill Elliott to break a two-year streak without a victory and capture the AC-Delco 500 Nascar race in Rockingham, N.C.
In the race for the season driving championship, Dale Earnhardt, in second, gained just 4 points on the leader, Mark Martin.
They started in the middle of the pack and failed to gain on the leaders.
With two races left in the season, Martin, who finished 11th, has 4,120 points.
Earnhardt, who took 10th place, has 4,075 points.
Martin has to finish third or better in the remaining two races, at Phoenix and Atlanta, to clinch the championship.
Martin, who started 21st just behind Earnhardt, got no closer than ninth place during a cloudy and cool afternoon.
Earnhardt was as close as sixth after 180 laps, but he dropped a lap to the leaders late in the race and never got it back. (AP) Sullivan First All the Way: Danny Sullivan cruised to a wire-to-wire victory yesterday in the Champion Spark Plug 300-kilometer Indy-car race at Monterey, Calif., closing out his six-year run with the elite Penske Racing team with a near-perfect weekend.
Sullivan, driving a Chevrolet-powered Penske 90, built leads of as much as 33.25 seconds and lapped all but five competitors on the way to his second victory of the season, his 12th driving for Roger Penske and the 15th of his career.
He averaged 103.556 miles an hour and won $86,908. (AP)


Public Service Enterprise Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


15-Day-Old Boy Is Found; Girl, 13, Is Held by Police
A 13-year-old girl who had recently talked of wanting a child of her own disappeared for 25 hours over the weekend with an infant boy who lived in a Bronx foster home with her, the police said.
Both were were found unharmed early this morning in the home of a relative of the girl's former boyfriend, the police said.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday None Tuesday None Wednesday Durable Goods Sept.
Thursday None Friday None


Blaze in London Hospital
Fire swept through a hospital wing early today, destroying five years of research on muscle disorders and causing damage estimated at more than $1 million, officials said.
Sixty firefighters prevented the blaze at Hammersmith Hospital in West London from spreading to the wards and the adjacent emergency department.
Police said they are treating the fire, which started in the unoccupied research wing, as suspicious.


RMI Titanium Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Topics of The Times; In Vogue
The man knew with mathematical certainty that he was smartly dressed: it had taken days of scrutiny to get this shirt and tie combination; he had checked it out in all sorts of light, and was sure that the colors worked sweetly together.
"Great Shirt. Stupid Tie," the clerk at the dry cleaner's said first thing.
The blow registered quickly.
He felt his face redden and burn.
And the way this clerk underscored the "stupid." He came down hard on the first syllable, so that he said "STOOpid tie," as though this tie were an egregious case of same.
After a deadly silence, the clerk amplified: "Seriously, man. That is one bad tie," dragging out the "bad" to "BAAAD," with three a's.
Of course, the man said to himself: Bad meant good (he remembered this from his boyhood, in the 1950's).
And, of course, he had fallen behind the newest streetwise locutions, the ones from the 1980's.
"Stupid" had come to mean, overwhelmingly wonderful, "out of sight," as might have been said when he was the clerk's age.
Snapping to, the man thanked the clerk for this compliment and struck a model's pose, like one of those square-jawed guys in Gentlemen's Quarterly.


Who Was on First First?
To the Editor:  Your article on baseball's origins reminded me of an evening spent in Cooperstown with the author Samuel Hopkins Adams more than 30 years ago.
Over a drink we discussed briefly the folk tale about the "invention" of baseball in this village in 1839.
Even then we knew that the attribution to Abner Doubleday was myth.
Sam Adams capped the discussion by pulling from his wallet a clipping culled from a Rochester newspaper dated 1828 that described in some detail the baseball game that had been played that week in Rochester.
Dr.
Louis C. Jones, then director of the New York State Historical Association, ended the discussion by remarking, "But if baseball had to be invented, isn't Cooperstown a fine place for it to have been invented in?" We agreed and went on to other topics.
FREDERICK L.  RATH JR.
Cooperstown, N.Y., Oct. 5, 1990


Knick Backcourt Is Looking Good
As the preseason progresses, several members of the Knicks' backcourt are beginning to step forward.
Mark Jackson is slimmer, quicker and more confident.
Gerald Wilkins and Trent Tucker are shooting jump shots in mid-season form.
And the Knicks have two new guards, John Starks and Greg Grant, who are playing well enough to make the Knicks think twice about cutting them.


Micropolis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Reds Turn It All Upside Down for
The Cincinnati Reds left California today with their championship and their new aura as a team of destiny, and with lingering resentment over the somewhat begrudging attitude of the Oakland Athletics, the team the Reds swept in the World Series.
But they also left without Eric Davis, their injured superstar, who remained in the intensive-care unit of Merritt Hospital with severe kidney bruises.


Business Scene; The True Roots Of U.S. Decline
AS the United States struggles to retrieve its golden industrial past, Americans kick them selves for having dissipated the work ethic and the inventiveness that once made them kings in technology and manufacturing.
And now along come some historians who say that the self-flagellation is not justified and the nation's troubles are not the result of a fall from grace.
What actually happened was more mundane, these experts in economic history explain.
Americans in fact never lacked for ingenuity, farsightedness, hard work and good management.
What set them apart and made the United States blossom as an industrial powerhouse was skill at exploiting abundant natural resources.
This special advantage is gone today, through no one's fault, and so is the supremacy that it once bestowed.


With Mideast Travel Down, El Al Is Looking to Its Roots
Travel to Israel dropped substantially after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August and the killing of 21 Palestinians at a Jerusalem mosque by Israeli soldiers earlier this month.
Daniel Multer, the director of marketing and promotion for the Israeli Ministry of Tourism, said his Government had "basically shelved our advertising for the time being."


People
*
John E. Holmes has been appointed president of J. Walter Thompson Latin America, succeeding W. Lee Preschel, who is retiring. *
John R. Spencer is leaving Babbit &amp; Reiman Advertising, New York to become president of the New York office of Earle Palmer Brown.
Jane Maas, who has been serving in that position, has been named chairwoman. *
Michael Mainthow and Stephen Ohler have been appointed senior vice presidents of McCann-Erickson, New York. *
Marcio M. Moreira has been chosen chairman of the judges and advisers for the New York Festivals, an annual advertising awards competition.
Mr.
Moreira is the vice chairman and chief creative officer-international for McCann-Erickson Worldwide.


Thermwood Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Bearings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Telebit Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Boston Acoustics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Office Club Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diceon Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Watkins-Johnson Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Lydia Gayle Grand Is Wed
Lydia Gayle Grand, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael M. Grand of Southfield, Mich., was married there yesterday to Eric Steven Brown, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold P. Brown of Princeton, N.J.
Rabbis Eric Milgrim and Irwin Groner officiated at Congregation Shaarey Zedek.
Mrs.
Brown, 23 years old, and the bridegroom, 25, are magna cum laude graduates of the University of Michigan.


Catherine Lynn Mazer Weds Kenneth Mark Gurny
Catherine Lynn Mazer, a daughter of Lois Seymour of Harrison, N.Y., and Richard H. Mazer of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Kenneth Mark Gurny, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Gurny of White Plains.
Rabbi Norton D. Shargel and Cantor Raymond Smolover officiated at the Metropolis Country Club in White Plains.
Mrs.
Gurny, 29, graduated from the Wooster School and the University of Southern California and received a master's degree in guidance and counseling from Hunter College.
Until recently she was the vocational counselor for adolescents at the Jewish Child Care Association, a foster-care agency in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was an executive vice president of the Hudson Pulp and Paper Corporation in New York.
The bridegroom, 30 and a graduate of Syracuse University, is a vice president of Leo Wolleman Inc. in New York, a gemstone importing concern of which his father is the secretary and treasurer.
His grandfather, the late Leo Wolleman, founded the company.


Evans Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 1


Review/Dance; Against Defilement, Moral and Environmental
Pearl Lang's dancing in her own choreography and, formerly, in the Martha Graham Dance Company, has had a lyrical beauty that masks an underlying passion.
But there is no mistaking the ferocity and intensity that pour out of "Korus," Miss Lang's latest premiere.
It is a splendid and startling work, powerfully affecting within a potentially stereotyped theme.


Piniella Has the Last (and Best) Laugh
OAKLAND, Calif., Oct. 21 --
In the Cincinnati Reds' clubhouse, the World Series trophy was glistening after the sweep that dethroned the Oakland Athletics as champions.
And in the manager's office, Lou Piniella, still wearing his red jacket and smoking a cigarette, suddenly turned and hugged a gray-haired man who departed moments later in tears.
"Who was that?" somebody asked.


Hospital Staffing Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


In Rap Obscenity Trial, Cultures Failed to Clash
As his trial opened in Fort Lauderdale last week, Luther Campbell, the 29-year-old leader of the rap music group 2 Live Crew, was anticipating a clash of cultures.
He said he thought the six jurors, who included three women over age 60 and only one black, might be too old, too white and too middle class to understand his raunchy music.
But the rapper from Miami apparently misjudged the Broward County jurors, who quickly acquitted Mr.
Campbell and two other band members of obscenity charges on Saturday.


Boise Cascade Losing Chief Operating Officer
Jon H. Miller, president and chief operating officer of the Boise Cascade Corporation since 1978, is leaving at the end of the month to pursue personal business interests, the company has announced.
Mr.
Miller, 53, is stepping down as a director as well.
He will be succeeded at the big forest products company by John B. Fery, 60, its chairman and chief executive, who will add Mr.
Miller's responsibilities to his own.


Deals Imperil Budget Gains
Gains in cutting the deficit are being endangered by the expansion of some programs and by tax breaks for negotiators' constituents.
Page A12.


Kohl Plan Breathes Life Into Monetary Union
The drive within the 12-nation European Community to create a single currency and European central bank, seemed to regain momentum last week, when Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany pledged support for speedy monetary union.
Mr.
Kohl said he favored starting a second stage in the process on Jan. 1, 1994, or a year after the community is supposed to have completed its program for creating a single market by eliminating trade and commercial barriers between member nations.


Redskin Defense Squeezes Eagles
The Redskins knew that the Eagles would enter this confrontation today confident that Robert F. Kennedy Stadium could once again become a cozy nest.
The Redskins knew that containing Randall Cunningham was the pivotal goal in their hopes to remain hot on the Giants' heels in the National Conference East.
On both counts, the Redskins were successful, as they sapped the Eagles' offense early and throughout the battle trapped Cunningham before he ran and passed them silly.
The result was a hard-fought 13-7 victory before 52,567 fans that lifted the Redskins to a 4-2 record.
They face the Giants again Sunday in the Meadowlands.


Glatfelter (P.H.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Debate on TV
The New York gubernatorial debate that was held Friday night in Syracuse will be broadcast tonight on these stations: in New York City on WNET-TV (Channel 13), in Syracuse on WTVH-TV (Channel 5) and in Watertown on WWNY-TV (Channel 7), all at 7 P.M.
It will also be broadcast tonight by a Syracuse radio station, WSYR-AM, at 7.
In Buffalo, it will be broadcast on WKBW- TV (Channel 7) at midnight.
Four candidates appeared in the debate: Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the Democratic and Liberal Party candidate; Pierre A. Rinfret, the Republican candidate; Herbert London, the Conservative Party candidate, and Louis Wein, the Right to Life Party candidate.


Crash Helps Senna Win Title
Alain Prost of France and Ayrton Senna of Brazil, intense rivals, crashed at the Japanese Grand Prix for the second time in two years today, and this time the crash allowed Senna to walk away with the 1990 Formula One world championship.
The crash last season gave Prost his third Formula One title.
Winning the race today was Nelson Piquet of Brazil driving a Benetton Ford in 1 hour 34 minutes 36.824 seconds.
His average speed was about 122 miles per hour.
Senna and Prost, locked in a close battle for the title, started at the front of the pack with Senna on the pole for an unprecedented 51st time.
Prost, driving a Ferrari, moved quickly in front, forcing Senna to try to regain the lead by passing from the inside.
But as Prost maneuvered his car to the right for the first turn of the course, he collided with the Brazilian, sending parts of Senna's red-and-white McLaren-Honda flying into the air.
Both drivers spun out into the dirt and later walked off the track.
A team spokesman said Ferrari had no plans to lodge a formal protest.


Tragedy Multiplies in Liberia's Civil War
To the Editor:
The Gulf situation has understandably pushed aside everything else in the news recently.
However, important events continue to occur in many parts of the world.
Among these is the bloody Liberian civil war, where U.S. marines have been stationed off the coast for more than two months.
I doubt if the American public fully appreciates the devastation of this African country, which continues unabated through 10 months of fighting.
The news reports still printed are disappointingly brief, given America's role in founding the nation and the $500 million the U.S. has poured into Liberia since 1980 -- some of it for the arms that are used in battle.
Since Aug. 5, American marines have airlifted several hundred Americans and others out of the country.
Largely untold are the extreme casualties -- for months, you have continued to report the Liberian death toll at 5,000, while the U.S.
Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance estimates conservatively that between 15,000 and 25,000 have died.
Well over one million of the two-plus-million population have become refugees inside Liberia or in neighboring states.
Those who have fled the country have been received with hospitality by people who are often themselves near destitution in Sierra Leone, Guinea and Ivory Coast.
This positive aspect of the story also needs to be told.
STEPHEN G.  PRICE  Takoma Park, Md., Oct. 5, 1990
The writer is director of the Office of Justice, Peace and Environmental Care, Society of African Missions.


Lantau Island Journal; Hong Kong's Giant Buddha Smiles on China, Too
The monks of Po Lin Monastery say they never intended to build the world's largest outdoor bronze Buddha.
But there he sits -- graceful, serene and seven stories tall -- looking across the green hills of Lantau Island, his back to the South China Sea.
Lantau is the largest of 236 outlying islands that are part of the British colony of Hong Kong.
And with Communist China set to take over Hong Kong in 1997, the 30 monks at the Po Lin Monastery here have been pursuing a religious project that might strike some as the height of folly -- building a grand statue of Buddha to promote Buddhism.


Park Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; 'Tibetan Dreams,' New Stephen Dickman Opera
These must be difficult times for opera composers who want to seem exotic.
Now that we have seen operas about everyone from Gandhi to Charles Manson, set in most countries of the world and on a few fictional planets, a work about two Tibetan monastic novices might seem almost commonplace.
And indeed, Stephen Dickman's "Tibetan Dreams," which had its world premiere at the Merce Cunningham Studio on Saturday evening, proved to be more traditional than exotic.
This is not necessarily a bad thing, although one suspects that it is not what Mr.
Dickman wants to hear.
In his program note, he wrote that "the work is explicitly outside the Germanic, European operatic traditions with which most companies and critics are familiar."


Hilary Straat Is Married to Peter Rath
Susan Hilary Straat, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kent L. Straat of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Peter Rath, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
G.
S.
Tim Rath of Stamford.
The Rev.
Anne Kimbell, an Episcopal priest, assisted by the Rev.
Michael Moynihan, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Parish in Noroton, Conn.
Mrs.
Rath, 28 years old and known as Hilary, was presented at the Paas Festival Ball of the St.
Nicholas Society in New York.
A graduate of the Low-Heywood Thomas School and Indiana University, she is a freelance video producer in Los Angeles.
Her father is a vice president at the Gartner Group, a technology market research company, and her mother, Donna M. Straat, an interior designer, owns Straat Design Associates, both in Stamford.
The bridegroom, 35, is known as Peter.
A graduate of the American School in Paris and Syracuse University, he is the corporate engineer with the Fortifiber Corporation in Los Angeles, manufacturers of specially laminated paper used in building .
His father owns and heads Better Lists Inc., a direct mail advertising company in Stamford.


Hubbell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cuomo and 3 Rivals Differ on What to Cut
After two years of record-breaking deficits and history-making tax increases, candidates for governor of New York speak almost in unison about the need for state government to wean itself from new taxes and tighten its belt.
Yet they disagree over how to cut back, and differ over whether further tax increases should be avoided at all costs.
The four candidates who will occupy the top lines of the ballot -- Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, who is running on the Democratic and Liberal Party lines; Pierre A. Rinfret, the Republican candidate; Herbert London, the Conservative, and Louis Wein, the Right to Life Party candidate -- outlined their views on state finances in a series of interviews at The New York Times.
Without exception, they offered a gloomy assessment of the state's fiscal condition, saying next year's budget would be a forbidding one.


Census Confines Venezuelans
Millions of Venezuelans were ordered to stay at home today as an army of 200,000 officials went from door to door throughout the country gathering data for a national census.
The Government ordered civilians, except for census workers, medical personnel and reporters with special passes, to stay in their homes until this evening.
It was the first national census in 10 years.
The streets of Caracas were almost entirely deserted except for isolated groups of people lingering outside their front doors.


Marcie Strasser and Paul Korn, Physicians, Wed
Dr.
Marcie Diane Strasser, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence A. Strasser of Merrick, L.I., was married yesterday in Cincinnati to Dr.
Paul W. Korn, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sam J. Korn of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Robert Barr officiated at the Omni Netherland Plaza Hotel.
The bride, 27 years old, is a graduate of Barnard College.
She and the bridegroom, 33 and a graduate of Sarah Lawrence College, received medical degrees from the State University of New York Health Science Center at Brooklyn.
Both are residents in pediatrics at Children's Hospital Medical Center in Cincinnati.
The bridegroom's mother, Mimi Korn, is a student development counselor at Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn.
His father is the chairman of the psychology department at Hunter College.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11
Panama is offering stiff resistance to American law-enforcement efforts to crack the shell of secrecy, and presumed illegality, surrounding the nation's multibillion-dollar international banking trade.
Page A1
News analysis: El Salvador could see its hard-liners of the left and right fortified by the U.S. decision to cut military aid in half.
But in the long term, the move may push the army to compromise in a peace settlement with the rebels.
A8
Peru detains about 8,000 after guerrilla bombings A3
A Palestinian killed a soldier, a gardener and a policeman, as he rampaged through a tranquil Jewish neighborhood, wielding a 15-inch knife.
Police said he was seeking revenge for the killings at Al Aksa Mosque.
A1 Gunmen killed a Lebanese leader who was the head of one of the nation's Christian clans and a close associate of General Michel Aoun.
The killing raised concern that a new round of violence might erupt.
A3
The residency rights of Yemenis in Saudi Arabia have been suspended by the Saudi Government in response to Yemen's support of Iraq, and a mass migration of at least 350,000 of them has taken place.
A10 Heath says Iraq agrees to release some Britons A10
Soldiers at the fabled Fulda Gap, a former border area separating East and West Germany, say the cold war's end has been very disorienting as they've had to adjust to seeing former enemies walk among them.
A1
Kohl plan breathes life into monetary union D8
The Soviet economic transition to a market economy remains unruly and chaotic, no matter how neat the logic of an economic program.
A tale about a Government plan to raise meat prices exemplifies the situation.
A6
Under Prague revolution, princely family is restored A6
Pakistan's coming election is very close, according to experts, who say that several difficult-to-measure variables could swing the vote to Benazir Bhutto or her military-backed opponents.
A11
Lantau Journal: A Buddha statue, the largest one of bronze in the world, has been built by a group of Hong Kong monks seeking to promote Buddhism even as Communist China sets to take over the territory in 1997.
A4
Malaysian Prime Minister wins by margin he sought A8
Tokyo, mad at U.S. rebuke, says furor over slur seems racist A5  National A12-17, 20, B7
Budget talks were broken off by top White House officials, who stormed out of the Capitol and accused Democrats of being unwilling to negotiate a "fair" tax compromise.
A1
Special breaks for certain companies and industries fortunate enough to be represented by the handful of lawmakers negotiating the final compromises are buried in the deficit reduction plans.
A16
While Congress trims budget, it enlarges some programs A16
State tax issues form a maze of political complications that may even be more confusing than Washington's quagmire.
The message that politicians are hearing in the fall campaigns is subtle, mixed and difficult for government to cope with.
A1
News analysis: White House turmoil brought on by the Civil Rights Act of 1990 reflects a deep division among senior officials who are also struggling with a combative Democratic majority in Congress and angry Republican lawmakers.
A15
Rights leaders reject Bush proposal A15
An accord on acid rain was reached by House and Senate negotiators.
The rules, which tighten limits on certain smokestack emissions, are designed to enable lakes, streams and forests polluted by the corrosive rain to repair themselves naturally.
A1
Tobacco industry urges E.P.A. to reject scientist for panel A14
Most of the traditional Mafia clans, battered by aggressive investigators and weakened by inept leadership and changing times, appear to be fading out of existence, law-enforcement officials and independent experts say.
A1
The trial of the 2 Live Crew may have had the makings of a clash of cultures, but the jurors instead found artistic merit in the music -- so much that they began trying lyrics of their own.
A12
Bangor journal: Hunting states take a look within A12
Regional B1-6
The Love Canal disaster is the focus of a $250 million trial beginning on Wednesday, in which New York State will try to prove that Hooker Chemical knew the risks when it dumped 21,800 tons of hazardous chemicals into the canal.
B1
New York candidates for governor agree that the state needs to wean itself from new taxes and tighten its belt.
Yet they disagree over how to cut back, and differ over whether further tax increases should be avoided at all costs.
B1
Norwood is shrouded in fear after three killings in the North Bronx community in a six-week period.
Residents have responded by curtailing their stoop and street life, as well as by forming a citizens' patrol.
B1 A study of urban high schools identified features that successful ones have in common, and recommended that those qualities be the core of reform efforts around the country.
B1
A 13-year-old girl, who had recently talked of wanting a child of her own, disappeared late Saturday with an infant boy who lived in a Bronx foster home with her.
But both were found unharmed early this morning, the police said.
B1
Two sculptures stolen from a Queens park are recovered B6
New York fights Senate bill raising flights at La Guardia B3
Ghost of Reagan in Connecticut race B4  Business Digest D1 SportsMonday
Sports of the Times: Lou Piniella, the manager whom George Steinbrenner dismissed twice, had much to savor on Saturday night.
His Reds swept the Athletics, even as Mr.
Steinbrenner appeared as a guest host on "Saturday Night Live." A1
Baseball: Reds turn things upside down C1
Why Oakland lost C6
Cincinnati fans celebrate C6
Reality sets in for Athletics C6
Boxing: Hungry Holyfield goes for title C1
Business: Fans upset over possible ticket-price increase at Garden C2
Features: Question Box C7
Football: Giants win on Bahr's kick C1
Bo Jackson sparks Raiders C2
Redskin defense squeezes Eagles C2
Mixed reaction as Dickerson rejoins Colts C3
49ers go to 6-0 C3
Bills rally to edge Jets C4
Crowded field in bid for No. 1 C5
Hockey: Patrick and Rangers are smiling C2
Horse Racing: Fillies are focus in Breeders' Cup C9
Outdoors: Trout in Cape Cod ponds C12 Arts/Entertainment
Vargas Llosa swears off politics C13
Movies by and for blacks C13
Mannes Orchestra to offer composers' works in competition C20
Theater: "Colorado Catechism" C13
"Ninagawa Macbeth" C20
Music: "The Mikado" C14
"Tibetan Dreams" C14
Joe JacksonC16 Obituaries B9
Tom Carvel, 84, founder of self- named ice cream chain Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A18
Bonn and Tokyo: Global police
Posturing on prison terms
Steps, missteps, on smoking
Topics: Too little, too late
Letters A18
William Safire: McClellan's way A19
Anthony Lewis: War in the gulf?  A19
Garry Trudeau: Stupid pet trick A19
Donald P. Lay: Our justice system, so-called A19
Michael Waldman: The S.&amp; L. cover-up, cont'd.  A19


Touring Eastern Canada by Bicycle
IF you can overlook the stand ards created by automobiles and aircraft and think of trans portation as something you do under your own power, a bicycle is an absolute wonder.
Self-propelled modes of travel such as hiking and canoeing can carry a person (with considerable effort) 20 or 30 miles a day.
By contrast, travel by bicycle is so fast in proportion to energy expended that it seems to defy laws of physics.
To someone accustomed to the pace of expedition canoes and hiking boots, the concept of traveling 80 to 100 miles in a day is discomforting.
It seems a bit like cheating.


Dexter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Topics of The Times; Too Little, Too Late
Official letters of apology, as well as individual checks for $20,000, are beginning to flow to about half of the 120,000 Japanese-Americans who were placed in internment camps early in World War II.
The other half?
They're dead -- mute evidence of how shamefully long it's taken the United States to make amends.
Internment was President Roosevelt's panicky response to Pearl Harbor, to racial prejudice and to understandable but wholly ill-founded fears that Japanese-Americans posed a security threat.
The United States also seized property worth $400 million.
After decades of lobbying by Japanese groups, Congress in 1988 authorized a formal apology and payment of $20,000 for each internee.
But it did not appropriate any funds until this year and the survivors won't be fully compensated until 1993.
The $20,000 is little enough, and the long delay adds a further insult to a group of people who, history shows, were wholly innocent.
Not a single case of espionage or sabotage by Japanese-Americans in the United States has ever been documented.


Watts Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Conston Corp. reports earnings for 13wks to Sept 1


New York's Recycling Program Is Achieving Its Planned Goals; The Bottle Mess
To the Editor:
Regarding your news article "Study Says Recycling Effort Could Fail in New York" (Oct. 12), my own informal early-morning surveys of the Manhattan landscape have revealed a flaw in even the much-touted bottle law.
Needy entrepreneurs or para-sanitation people have taken to ripping open the plastic bags that have replaced garbage cans to retrieve returnable bottles and cans.
To put it mildly, the cure threatens to become worse than the problem: to me, at least, the sight of a can is a lot more palatable than week-old moo goo gai pan, for instance.
If people are unwilling to make returns, they should separate the bottles and cans from the other stuff and put them out in an open bin.
They will be collected.
WILLIAM B.  HUBER New York, Oct. 12, 1990


More Wheat for China
China has bought an additional 449,370 metric tons of United States wheat under a price-subsidy program, the Agriculture Department said Friday.
It was the second purchase last week.
On Thursday, the department announced sales totaling 299,740 tons, the first to China since Aug. 1 under the Export Enhancement Program.
The sales were part of two million tons authorized to China under the program.
Only about 10,000 tons remain in China's current allocation.


Pathe Selling Film Rights To Turner
The Pathe Communications Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to sell exclusive rights to show some of Hollywood's most popular films to the Turner Broadcasting System.
The deal is contingent upon Pathe's completion of its planned acquisition of the MGM/UA Communications Company.
The agreement includes exclusive television rights in the United States for 10 years to show films from the library of the United Artists studio along with all movies released by MGM/UA from 1986 through 1988 plus some 1989 releases.


War in the Gulf ?
The Constitution supposes, what the history of all governments demonstrates, that the executive is the branch of power most interested in war, and most prone to it.
It has accordingly with studied care vested the question of war in the legislature.
James Madison, in a letter to Thomas Jefferson, April 2, 1798.
Around Dec. 1, according to the experts, the United States will have in place in Saudi Arabia the military forces and equipment that the Pentagon believes would be required for an attack on Iraq.
By then also, if Saddam Hussein has not withdrawn from Kuwait, there will be pressure to act militarily before political support for President Bush's policy frays.
War is on the horizon.
Sensing that possibility, senators of both parties told Secretary of State Baker last week that Congress should be asked first to declare war.
Mr.
Baker refused to give that assurance.
Before this country goes through another traumatic conflict about the war-making power, the President and Secretary Baker should think more carefully about their real interest.
For it lies, in this instance, in shared responsibility for any military action: shared with Congress and with the United Nations Security Council.
President Bush has shown skill and patience in obtaining the Security Council's support for successive measures against Iraq.
That policy has greatly strengthened the effort to make Saddam Hussein disgorge Kuwait.
To act militarily now without Security Council authorization would be dubious legally.
Prof.
Abram Chayes of the Harvard Law School argues in a paper on the issue that the U.S. has taken the matter to the Council and, since the Council has acted, is committed to that forum by the U.N.
Charter.
In any event, practical considerations strongly argue for seeking Security Council approval for military action.
It would be folly to act without the approval of those who have joined us in the U.N. effort.
The first consequence, Professor Chayes notes, "would be to shatter the international consensus that has so far given legitimacy and strength to the enterprise."
If the United States does act through the Security Council, President Bush should still go to Congress.
The reasons for saying that are found in history and politics.
In 1950 President Truman acted through the U.N.
Security Council to resist the North Korean invasion of South Korea.
He did not ask Congress for a declaration of war, or even an approving resolution.
He was advised that none was needed -- because Congress, in ratifying the U.N.
Charter, had forever authorized Presidents to take military action under it.
Political disaster resulted.
Members of Congress, sharing no responsibility, were free to attack the war as unauthorized when it went badly.
They called it "Truman's war." The political instinct, if nothing more, should make George Bush beware of repeating that history.
Secretary Baker said a commitment to go to Congress first might deprive the President of the ability to act quickly.
But the need for U.N. support already makes a surprise American attack unwise, as indeed does the likely reaction in much of the world.
If Saddam Hussein takes some provocative action, either through his own forces or through terrorists, there would truly be no difficulty in going to Congress.
President Bush would be in the same position as Franklin Roosevelt after Pearl Harbor, asking for a declaration of war on an aggressor.
The more likely prospect is that Saddam Hussein will avoid provocations.
Then, if President Bush decides that military action is unavoidable, by going to Congress he would effectively serve an ultimatum on Saddam Hussein.
The strategy of the American deployment in the gulf has been, from the beginning, to persuade Saddam Hussein that he faces a real possibility of war -- and destruction -- if he does not pull out of Kuwait.
A Congressional declaration-ultimatum would be an effective persuader.
Moreover, Congress should share the responsibility of a decision as grave as this one.
A war in the gulf would not be Grenada.
But the cost of failing to undo Iraq's aggression would also be high, in the devastation of Kuwait and the precedent for other aggressors.
Suppose Congress was asked to declare war and said no?
The answer is that that risk is the price of living under our constitutional system -- and the benefit as Madison understood.


Cognitive Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Supertex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Fight Expected Over Aviation Liability Treaty
Battle lines have formed in the Senate over a new international agreement on payments to air accident victims, with opponents saying they might tie the chamber up in prolonged debate to prevent approval of the treaty.
Arguing that the revised treaty on aviation liability would provide quick and generous compensation to victims of international accidents, the airlines and other supporters are calling for a prompt vote.


Jackson's 2 Scores Lift Raiders to 6-1
Bo Jackson's 1990 debut for the Los Angeles Raiders today proved that less than three weeks after the end of his baseball season with the Kansas City Royals, Jackson is ready to play football.
He carried the ball 12 times for 53 yards against the Chargers, averaging 4.4 yards a carry, and scored two touchdowns as the Raiders won, 24-9.
The outfielder-turned-running back did notice he was playing a different game.


City Holding Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Synex International reports earnings for Year to June 30


Inter-Regional Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Intense Battle at Top of Heap
With more than two months remaining before a national champion is determined, it's amazing to think that the 1990 college football season -- already marked by huge games, huge plays and incredible clutch performances -- may reach an even greater level of intensity in weeks to come.
Virginia celebrated its newly acquired No. 1 status in the news-agency polls by crushing Wake Forest, 49-14 (and Georgia Tech's tie with North Carolina is likely to help the Cavaliers' No. 2 spot in The New York Times's computer ratings).
Nebraska (No. 3 in the United Press International poll of coaches, No. 4 in the Associated Press poll of writers and broadcasters and No. 5 in The Times ratings) remained undefeated by routing Oklahoma State, 31-3.


Former German Front Line Seems Disoriented by Peace
The two watchtowers stand vacant and silent now, the fence between them ripped and the cracked concrete sprouting sharp-thorned hawthorn.
Their confrontation seems all the more obscure in the beauty of a golden autumn afternoon.
The wind whistling through the broken panes brings snatches of a tractor chugging across a distant field or the bark of a dog from the tile-roofed village nestled in the hills.


Apache Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pulitzer Profit Down by 56%
The Pulitzer Publishing Company has reported a 56 percent drop in its third-quarter profit.
It was the third straight decline for the company.
In its announcement on Friday, the media company attributed the drop to soft newspaper advertising.
In addition, the third-quarter profit was reduced by costs related to the purchase in December of a television station, WDSU-TV, in New Orleans.
Net income for the latest quarter amounted to $1.4 million, or 13 cents a share, down from $3.2 million, or 31 cents a share, for the corresponding period last year.
Revenues of $98 million were up 3.6 percent from last year's $94.6 million.
"While our third-quarter results are disappointing, we are optimistic over the long term as we continue to emphasize market share and cost control," said Joseph Pulitzer Jr., the company's chairman.
Pulitzer owns The St.
Louis Post-Dispatch, The Arizona Daily Star in Tucson and newspapers in the Chicago area.
It owns seven network-affiliated television stations and two Phoenix radio stations.


Accounts
*
MacGregor Golf Co., North Palm Beach, Fla., to Lord Einstein O'Neill &amp; Partners, New York, with a budget of about $2 million. *
Dale Carnegie &amp; Associates Inc., a communications training company based in Garden City, L.I., to J. Walter Thompson Direct, New York, with a budget of about $2 million. *
Bank of America, San Francisco, to Font &amp; Vaamonde Inc., Los Angeles, for its Hispanic market advertising.
Billings were not disclosed.


Paris Futures Market Starts New Contract
Seeking to expand its base overseas and to bolster its challenge to London as Europe's leading futures market, the futures and options market here began trading a contract last week that is linked to the European Currency Unit.
The futures market, the Marche a Terme International de France, or Matif, is banking on the new long-term bond contract to increase its international allure and give it an edge over London in a running battle to become Europe's main futures market.


5-Way Tie Unfolds In Ivy
With four games left to play, five of the Ivy League's eight teams are tied for first place with 2-1 records.
Cornell, Dartmouth, Harvard, Penn and Yale make up this deadlock, unprecedented for late October, and if one or more can win three games the crown will be theirs.
But which one?


Police in Peru Detain 8,000 After Series of Killings
The police detained about 8,000 people in roadblocks and neighborhood sweeps in the Peruvian capital over the weekend after a series of leftist guerrilla bombings and killings, police officials said today.
Police officers were seen packing hundreds of detainees into olive-green buses in Lima's outlying shantytowns, which are widely thought to be centers of activity by Peru's two main guerrilla groups.


Puritan-Bennett Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance;  Movement, Live and Filmed
Marvel followed marvel in "Dreaming Out Loud," the multi-media show presented by Jo Andres on Thursday night at the Performing Garage.
Ms.
Andres used choreography, films and a collage of taped music to create dreams her audience could watch with eyes wide open in astonishment.
The production was dominated by films projected on three screens.
Cinematic images appeared and vanished.
Upside-down faces rippled on the screens like reflections in water, then were swallowed up by a void.
Bodies seemed to float weightless in space.
A few film sequences were blurs of motion resembling animated finger paintings.


More Wheat for China
China has bought an additional 449,370 metric tons of United States wheat under a price-subsidy program, the Agriculture Department said Friday.
It was the second purchase last week.
On Thursday, the department announced sales totaling 299,740 tons, the first to China since Aug. 1 under the Export Enhancement Program.
The sales were part of two million tons authorized to China under the program.
Only about 10,000 tons remain in China's current allocation.


Report Outlines Signs of Success In City Schools
Successful urban high schools have sharply defined academic and social goals for students and are strong organizations that solve their own problems, take initiatives and consider themselves more accountable to their community than to higher authorities, a new study has found.
In contrast, the study by the RAND Corporation said, less successful public schools have diffuse programs, allow their students and staff to define their own roles, maintain rigid internal divisions of labor and emphasize compliance with the regulations of central bureaucracies.


Rainbow Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Blunder by a Steeler Helps 49ers Go to 6-0
The San Francisco 49ers took advantage of a blunder by the kickoff-returner Barry Foster to blow open a close game and score a 27-7 victory today over the Pittsburgh Steelers.
The 49ers brought their record to 6-0.
Foster's mistake came late in the third period after Mike Cofer had kicked a 20-yard field goal to give the 49ers a 13-7 lead.
On Cofer's kickoff, Foster, a rookie from Arkansas, started toward the ball, then wandered away, allowing San Francisco's Mike Wilson to grab the free ball at the 5.
Three plays later, Tom Rathman took the ball in from the 1 to make it 20-7.


Diane Greenberg Is Wed
Diane Greenberg, the daughter of Evy Greenberg of New York and the late Sheldon Greenberg, was married yesterday to Edward A. Schube, a son of Corinne Schube and Dr.
Daniel Schube, both of New York.
Rabbi Marshall T. Meyer officiated at the Mark Hotel in New York.
The bride, a Clark University graduate, is a promotion manager for Scientific American magazine in New York.
Her husband, a graduate of Boston University, is an assistant editor at Betelgeuse, a video post-production company in New York.


Review/Theater; Long Road Back That Passed Through Colorado
Until Craig Lucas started shaking up the joint with otherworldly comedies like "Reckless" and "Prelude to a Kiss," a season at the Circle Repertory Company was not complete without a play set on a whitewashed, Victorian, all-American porch.
The porches were always designed by that master of heartland lyricism John Lee Beatty, and they would usually be the setting for moonlit revelations of family scars and ambisexual love triangles, reliably punctuated by the nattering of crickets.
For one playwright -- Lanford Wilson, in the Talley trilogy -- the Circle Rep porches were a platform for myth, history and passion.
You could take the measure of the country in a play like "The Fifth of July." But for lesser writers, the porch was often just a handy place to park adolescent feelings and hope that someone might mistake them for poetic truths.


A Patrician and Populist Clash in Savings Bailout
Last Tuesday evening, the Treasury Secretary called the chairman of the House Banking Committee to turn down an urgent request for an appearance before Congress to justify the Administration's proposal for an additional $40 billion to continue the bailout of the savings and loan industry.
The Secretary, Nicholas F. Brady, said he could not attend because his schedule was thoroughly tied up in budget negotations and he did not want to be a target of more polemics over the savings and loan bailout.
The next day, an already angry Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, the chairman of the Banking Committee, learned that Mr.
Brady, sporting a cap and jacket of the Baltimore Orioles, had found some time to pose for news photographers with baseball players to begin a charity campaign.


Mentor Graphics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dividend Meetings


Scripps Howard Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bronx Cocaine Suspect Held After Child Is Used as Shield
A Bronx man who sold cocaine to two undercover detectives tried to escape last night by shielding himself behind a 3-year-old girl in a stroller, the police said.
The suspect, Ramon Martinez, 24, grabbed the stroller from the girl's mother at the corner of Spofford Avenue and Faile Street in the Hunts Point section when the detectives tried to arrest him, said Sgt.
Edward Burns, a police spokesman.
The child fell from the stroller when Mr.
Martinez ran into a stopped car, the police said.
He was arrested and the girl was taken to Lincoln Hospital for observation.
She did not appear to have serious injuries, the police said.
Mr.
Martinez, of 1038 Rogers Avenue in the Morrisania section of the Bronx, was charged with criminal possession and sale of a controlled substance, assault, reckless endangerment, endangering the welfare of a minor and resisting arrest.


Miss Gaba, Art Dealer, Weds Dr. James Aisenberg
Suzanne Gaba, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Gaba of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
James Aisenberg, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Alan C. Aisenberg of Boston.
Rabbi Ralph P. Kingsley officiated at the summer home of the bride's parents in Ancramdale, N.Y.
Mrs.
Aisenberg is a cum laude graduate of Barnard College and a candidate for a master's degree in fine arts at Columbia University.
She owns Suzanne Gaba Fine Arts, a private art dealer and consultant in New York.
Her father and her mother, Barbara K. Gaba, are lawyers in Garden City, L.I.
Dr.
Aisenberg is a fellow in gastroenterology at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He received an undergraduate degree and a medical degree from Harvard University.
His mother, Nadya Aisenberg, a poet and critic, founded the Rowan Tree Press in Boston.
His father is a professor of medicine at the Harvard Medical School.


Beauty Labs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Comdata Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rising Crude Oil Prices Have Wildcatters Wary
A decade ago, the nation's wildcatters celebrated soaring oil prices in a delirium of borrowing, drilling and sumptuous living.
But now, independent drillers who gathered for their annual convention here this week are cautious, even wary, about the latest surge in oil prices.
Faced with capital and manpower shortages, and anticipating that domestic crude prices will range between $21 and $25 a barrel after the crisis in the Middle East ends, many members of the Independent Petroleum Association of America say they plan to make small increases in their drilling activity next year.


Bonn and Tokyo as Global Police
There's rising sentiment in Germany and Ja- pan, the hated Axis of World War II, to send troops abroad again.
But this time it's in the cause of peacekeeping.
Should the two countries amend their Constitutions so they can help in situations like the Persian Gulf crisis?
Short of that, should they enact laws permitting a non-combat role?
The answer is not easy.
War memories linger.
Few countries are eager to open doors for such powerful, competitive nations.
Yet it's hard to imagine future collective security and peacekeeping operations without them.


Media Market Languishes as Buyers Disappear
Over the last few months, Robert Price, the chairman of the Price Communications Corporation, has been trying to sell The National Law Journal and The New York Law Journal, two fast-growing publications that are among the troubled media company's prized properties.
Although the publications' operating profits have been growing at about 20 percent a year, he has found no buyers.
"We've had some interest from Europe, but we're being offered prices 30 percent below what we could have gotten a year ago," Mr.
Price said.
"There's no liquidity in the media market."


Jennifer C. Antupit Is Wed
Jennifer Carol Antupit, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel N. Antupit of Pound Ridge, N.Y., was married at Conant Hall there yesterday to Duncan Sharp, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John T. Sharp of Tifton, Ga.
Rabbi Leonard Schofer officiated.
Mrs.
Sharp, 30 years old and a graduate of Babson College, is the accounting manager at the Winn Art Group in Seattle, a manufacturer of reproductions of paintings.
Her husband, 36 and a graduate of Kenyon College, founded Sharp Design &amp; Development Inc., health care consultants in Seattle.


Fear Moves Into a Quiet Neighborhood in the Bronx
A year ago, when Mary Grace Wynn moved from downtown Manhattan to Norwood, in the north Bronx, she saw it as a safe bet.
While other city neighborhoods crumbled under shootings and drug abuse, turmoil in Norwood amounted to an outcry over the city's inadvertent hacking of 67 old maple trees that lined Mosholu Parkway.
But in a six-week period, three residents of the Norwood section were killed, and in a community where there was once little crime to speak of, people now seem to speak of little else.


A Hungry Holyfield Gets His Chance
FROM his earliest days as a professional fighter, Evander Holyfield saw his future as a heavyweight.
Never mind that Holyfield, who campaigned first as a light heavyweight and then as a cruiserweight, knew that those weight classes lacked the glamour and the financial prospects of the division that had made household names of Dempsey, Louis, Marciano and Ali.
For Holyfield, the seductiveness of the heavyweight's work day owed as much to the latitude he was afforded at the dinner table as to the lavish purses he could earn.


Strawberry's Next Steps?
On the day after the World Series ended, the baseball marketplace opened to prospective free agents, and they included the most intriguing and maybe the most expensive member of this year's class, Darryl Strawberry of the Mets.
Close friends said that Strawberry had left his home on Long Island in recent days and once more had separated from his wife, Lisa.
He was said to be staying in Los Angeles, where his mother and brother live and where he has maintained a home.


PRESIDENT'S AIDES QUIT BUDGET TALKS OVER TAX DISPUTE
Top White House officials stormed out of the Capitol late this afternoon, accusing Democrats of being unwilling to negotiate a fair tax compromise.
The talks cannot be concluded without the White House.
But lawmakers from both parties said that they expected a resolution of the issues this week and that they saw today's development as merely a temporary setback.
This evening, Representative Richard A. Gephardt and George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Senate Democratic leader, resumed negotiations with Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Senate Republican leader.
And Senator Dole said, "The talks have not broken down."  'We Made Them an Offer'


Winnebago Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25


INSIDE
Beirut Clan Chief Is Slain
Gunmen killed the head of a prominent Lebanese Christian clan, Dany Chamoun, along with his wife and two sons at their home in East Beirut.
Not group took responsibility.
Page A3.
Foreshadowing Love Canal
As Hooker Chemical prepares for trial, company records show that workers warned in 1945 of potential hazards at Love Canal.
Page B1.
Beneath the Rights Turmoil
Underlying the White House turmoil on civil rights are growing partisan problems, both with Democrats and within the President's own Republican Party.
News analysis, page A10.
The Cultures Didn't Clash
A clash between Florida values and raunchy rap lyrics failed to materialize, with the 2 Live Crew jury more amused than outraged.
Page A12.


Alfa Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Miscellany
*
Newsweek and The Washington Post, both owned by the Washington Post Co., have formed a joint advertising program that encourages new and old advertisers to increase their advertising.
Existing advertisers must have spent $340,000 in either or both publications last year to particpate.
New advertisers must spend $100,000 in The Washington Post or $340,000 in Newsweek in the plan year. *
Publicis FCB, the European network of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications, Chicago, has signed an exclusive agreement with Hungexpo Group, a Hungarian advertising agency.
Under the agreement, Hungexpo will handle Publicis FCB's Hungarian clients, and Publicis FCB will work with Hungexpo's European clients.


Garden Fans Shun New Seating Plan
Robert Picciotto has not missed a Ranger game in the 15 years he has been a season-ticket holder in Madison Square Garden, but now he is afraid a plan to charge as much as $70 a seat might cost him a chance to see his dream come true.
"It's really a crime what they're doing," he said.
"They got me. What can I do? I'm afraid if I give up my seat, they'll win the Stanley Cup the next year. I've always dreaded that I wouldn't be there when they win the Stanley Cup."


Aurora Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Reviews/Music; Jackson's Harsh Words for Old Label
Joe Jackson is a performer who even in the best of times brings an edge of feistiness to his concerts.
Although the English-born singer and composer was in a mellower mood than usual on Thursday at the Marquee, where he played the first of several local concerts, he still found time to scoff at his former label, A&amp;M Records, dedicated a new song, "Hit Single," to his former label.
A catchy tune with a scalding lyric, the song mocks the record industry mentality that insists the key to pop success for a serious songwriter like Mr.
Jackson is a hit single.
During his decade on A&amp;M, Mr.
Jackson had only one sigificant hit, "Steppin' Out," in 1982.


Saudi Curbs on Yemeni Workers Sets Off a Migration
The Saudi Government has suspended residency privileges for Yemenis working here in response to Yemen's support of Iraq in the Persian Gulf crisis and set off a mass migration of at least 350,000 of them in the Last three weeks.
Officials say that by early summer the move could force out an estimated one million Yemenis, a quarter of the expatriate labor force here.


President of Navistar Retiring This Month
Neil A. Springer, who was named president and chief operating officer of the Navistar International Corporation in March, plans to retire at the end of the month.
Mr.
Springer, who is 52 years old, has spent more than 30 years with the company, which was formerly called the International Harvester Company.
He is known as an operations man, while the company's chairman and chief executive, James C. Cotting, 57, came up on the financial side.


Ms. Larkin Wed To R. S. Nelson
Kathleen Patricia Larkin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter J. Larkin of Kensington, Md., was married yesterday in Greenbelt, Md., to Robert Stuart Nelson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Z. Nelson of New York.
The Rev.
James R. Reedy, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Charles Davidson officiated at Martin's Crosswinds in Greenbelt, Md.
Mrs.
Nelson, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Maryland and is a sales manager for Spring Street Sportswear, a clothing manufacturer in New York.
Her father is the chief of management services for the Commonwealth Attorney for Arlington County, Va.
Her mother, Patricia A. Larkin, is a retired speech pathologist.
The bridegroom, 29 and a Boston University graduate, is the director of development for Nelson Equities Inc., real-estate developers in New York.
His father is the company's president.


Review/Theater; Universality of 'Macbeth' in Japanese
The central symbol in the image-laden "Ninagawa Macbeth" is a large cherry tree spreading its blossoms and shimmering in the light.
As the play progresses and as Macbeth's plot fails, spring turns autumnal and the petals begin to fall.
When Birnam Wood moves, branches of that tree are carried across the stage.
As directed in Japanese by Yukio Ninagawa, "Macbeth" becomes a tale of tragic loss and of lamentation.
The classically centered experimental Ninagawa Company opened Saturday in the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music with a production that exudes an exotic beauty.


Noland Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Laserscope reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chronicle
American television stars are appearing in the British theater in growing numbers and regardless of what the critics say about their performances, the audiences are flocking to see them.
JOAN COLLINS of "Dynasty" fame is playing the part of Amanda in Noel Coward's "Private Lives" at London's Aldwych Theater.
Thirty miles south of London in Guildford, Surrey, at the Yvonne Arnaud Theater, KATE O'MARA from "Dynasty" and CHARLENE TILTON from "Dallas" have just opened in Edward Albee's "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf." While London theater critics were not particularly kind about Miss Collins, the show is sold out.
DANIEL J. TRAVANTI , who formerly starred in the series "Hill Street Blues," played 15 weeks in "Les Liaisons Dangereuses," now closed.
At London's Wyndham's Theater, "Hart to Hart" stars ROBERT WAGNER and STEFANIE POWERS are making their London stage debuts in A. R. GURNEY'S "Love Letters." Reviews were mixed but the production is attracting full houses.


Parker Automotive reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


BRIEFS
Common Stock *
Comcast International L.P., Philadelphia, an affiliate of the Comcast Corp., announced on Friday the postponement of an offering of its units of limited partnership interest because of unfavorable market conditions.
Ratings *
Bank of Boston Corp.'s senior debt rating has been lowered to B-1, from Ba-2, by Moody's Investors Service. *
CalFed Inc.'s subordinated debt rating has been reduced to B, from BB+, by Standard &amp; Poor's.
The financial services holding company is based in Los Angeles. *
First City Bancorporation of Texas Inc.'s senior debt rating has been lowered to BB-, from BBB-, and commerical paper rating to B, from A-3, by S.&amp;P.
The bank holding company is based in Houston. *
Michigan National Corp.'s subordinated debt rating has been reduced to BBB-, from BBB+, by S.&amp; P. The company is based in Farmington Hills, Mich. *
Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia's power revenue and general power revenue bond rating has been increased to A-1, from A, and subordinated bond rating to A, from Baa-1, by Moody's.


Tom Carvel, 84, Gravelly Voice Of Soft Ice Cream Chain, Is Dead
Tom Carvel, the former chairman of the Carvel chain of 700 ice-cream stores, whose gravel-voiced narration on television and radio commercials for his products made him familiar to millions, was found dead yesterday morning at his home in Pine Plains, N.Y.
He was 84 years old and also lived in Ardsley, N.Y. and Atlantis, Fla.
Mr.
Carvel apparently died in his sleep, but Dr.
Robert J. Athans, his physician, said the cause of death was not immediately known.
Mr.
Carvel had played golf on Saturday at the All-American Sports City, a golf club he owned in Dutchess County, and gone out to dinner before going to sleep, associates said.


Queena Wraps Up Sweep for a Trainer
The trainer Shug McGaughey completed an upset sweep of Belmont Park's weekend stakes races by sending out Queena to score a 2 1/2-length victory over Quick Mischief, A Penny Is a Penny and Feel the Beat in the $85,800 First Flight Handicap yesterday at Belmont Park.
McGaughey, who saddled the undefeated 3-year-old Confidential Talk to beat Rubiano and Sunshine Jimmy in the Jamaica Handicap on Saturday, again won with a low-weighted stretch-runner who ran down the leaders in the final strides.


Investments Flowing Out of U.S.
Foreigners are not the only investors moving money out of American financial markets, some economists and portfolio managers say.
Increasingly, domestic institutions as well as individual investors are looking at foreign bond markets as preferable alternatives to staying at home.
The trend to move offshore was clear in the first half of the year, when American purchases of foreign securities totaled $18 billion, more than double the amount bought in the first six months of 1989.


Reviews/Dance; Big Impact From a Simple Form
The third annual Swiss Dance Festival opened on Friday night at St.
Mark's Church in the Bowery.
That location alone says much about how the festival has progressed over the years.
The first two festivals were held in a gallery of the Swiss Institute of New York, the organization that sponsors these evenings of dances by Swiss choreographers who are currently living, studying and creating works in New York City.
The gallery performances were pleasantly informal.
But they were jammed with dancegoers and the stage area was cramped.


Reviews/Music; Turning to Gilbert and Sullivan for Salvation
Over the last year, two of New York's small opera companies that specialize in the Gilbert and Sullivan repertory, the Light Opera of Manhattan and the New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players, have fallen prey to financial stresses and curtailed their activities.
Both hope to be reborn, and one hopes they will be.
In the meantime, fans of W. S. Gilbert's clever librettos and Sir Arthur Sullivan's witty, hummable music might want to urge the New York City Opera to expand its activities in this well-loved realm.
The company does have its foot in the door: Its Lotfi Mansouri production of "The Mikado," which returned to the New York State Theater on Saturday afternoon, is the most enjoyable of the operetta stagings that Beverly Sills brought to the City Opera repertory.


Winners Circle Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Love Canal: Suit Focuses On Records From 1940's
In April 1945, more than 30 years before Love Canal became a synonym for toxic-chemical disaster, a manufacturing analyst at the Hooker Chemical Company wrote in an internal report that he worried about a "potential future hazard" and a "quagmire at Love Canal which will be a potential source of lawsuits."
In a Buffalo courtroom this week, R. H. Van Horne's prophetic memorandum, along with other yellowing documents from the company's archives, will be at the center of a $250 million trial of Hooker Chemical that lawyers on both sides agree will measure the company's conduct for history.
Mr.
Van Horne's warning is part of the critical evidence in a 10-year lawsuit by New York State that contends that Hooker knew the risks when it dumped 21,800 tons of hazardous chemicals into the canal near the Niagara River.
Contaminated Swimming Hole


General Building Products reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Piniella Has the Last (and Best) Laugh
OAKLAND, Calif., Oct. 21 --
In the Cincinnati Reds' clubhouse, the World Series trophy was glistening after the sweep that dethroned the Oakland Athletics as champions.
And in the manager's office, Lou Piniella, still wearing his red jacket and smoking a cigarette, suddenly turned and hugged a gray-haired man who departed moments later in tears.
"Who was that?" somebody asked.


Reviews/Music; Time Is the Theme, And 5 Is the Number
The principal purpose of the Friday evening Boston Symphony program at Carnegie Hall, which also rather unimaginatively included Brahms's Symphony No. 1, was the first performance of a score by Japan's best-known composer, Toru Takemitsu.
Commissioned by the hall as part of its centennial celebration, it was written for the Canadian percussion ensemble Nexus, and for the Boston Symphony and its Japanese conductor, Seiji Ozawa, who has been a decades-long champion of Mr.
Takemitsu's music.
Although it might sound flip to say so, the best thing about this half-hour score was its title.
That is partly a criticism of the music, to be sure.
But it also attests to the poetic evocativeness of the title, "From Me Flows What You Call Time."


Rights Leaders Reject Bush Proposal
Civil rights leaders and Democrats today denounced a measure that President Bush proposed to replace the anti-discrimination bill passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives.
House Democratic leaders said that instead of considering the Administration's proposal, the lawmakers would attempt to override Mr.
Bush's expected veto of the bill, the Civil Rights Act of 1990.
The civil rights bill was approved by majorities in both chambers over the summer, but the votes fell short of the number that would be needed to override a Presidential veto.


Salvador Arms Aid: Will Congress's Tactic Work?
The vote by the United States Congress to cut in half military aid to this country appears likely to cause political instability here.
In the short run this may fortify hard-liners on both left and right, but in the long term it could also provide a lever to persuade the army to compromise with the rebels.
Many labor unions and grass-roots organizations strongly support the decision to cut military aid as the only way to force the Government and army to accept sweeping political and military changes required to break a deadlock at the peace talks, which are to resume in Mexico by Nov. 4.


Steps, and a Misstep, Against Smoking
A unanimous vote by the City Council's Health committee has moved New York close to becoming the first large American city to ban cigarette vending machines from public places.
Mayor David Dinkins deserves praise for pursuing this sensible initiative as part of a broad anti-smoking drive.
But another part of the plan -- a curb on cigarette advertising is disquieting.
It's of special significance that the plan comes from the city's first black mayor.
The National Cancer Institute reports that while lung cancer among white males has declined significantly since 1965, the rate for black men, and for women -- especially black women -- continues to rise.
The black community also suffers more than its share of heart disease and emphysema, both ailments linked to smoking.


Poe &amp; Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Industry Tries to Bar Scientist From Smoke Study
Because of intense lobbying by the tobacco industry and  opposition in Congress, a scientist who strongly opposes smoking may be eliminated as a candidate for membership on an Environmental Protection Agency panel that is to examine the dangers of secondhand cigarette smoke.
The scientist, Dr.
David Burns of the University of California at San Diego, says he was told by an E.P.A. staff member that he has been taken out of consideration for the panel.
An agency official denies that, saying no final decision on Dr.
Burns's participation has been made.


Lenin at Chernobyl
To the Editor:
In his Oct. 8 Editorial Notebook, Jack Rosenthal described Lithuania's proposal on what to do with all the statues of Lenin: gather them in one place as "fallen idols of the God That Failed." Legislators in the Ukraine considered a similar idea: a park with all the statues lined up as a reminder of the past horrors -- until they realized there were more than 55,000 statues of Lenin in the Ukraine alone!
As Mykhailo Horyn, the popular movement leader, tells it, legislators concluded this would waste arable land and could become an ecological disaster.
Another solution: Why not put the statues on the Chernobyl nuclear power plant site, another memorial to the God That Failed?
KATHERINE CHUMACHENKO Alexandria, Va., Oct. 12, 1990


Hussein Speaks of Freeing Hostages
President Saddam Hussein suggested today that he may release all French hostages and a number of elderly and sick Americans held captive in Iraq.
But the United States said Iraq had also captured two more Americans who were in hiding and confined them to a hotel in Kuwait.
It was not clear whether President Hussein was trying to signal a change in policy or increased interest in a peaceful settlement to the crisis, which began when Mr.
Hussein's forces invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2.
Bush Administration officials said they believed that Mr.
Hussein's gestures had little significance and that the standoff was unchanged.


Deducting From Deductions Of the Wealthier Taxpayers
As Congress rushes to complete a budget package, it has become clear that any final agreement will include a measure taking a sizable cut out of the itemized deductions of upper-income taxpayers.
The prospect has Democratic and Republican lawmakers from New York, New Jersey and California up in arms, contending that such a plan would be unfair to taxpayers living where state and local income taxes, as well as living costs, are high.
The lawmakers also say that taxpayers living in states with no income taxes would greatly benefit.


Careers; Retainer Fees for Management Recruiters
MANY management recruiting firms have been developing a new way to stabilize their revenues, by encouraging client companies to pay retainer fees.
The firms have been doing this quietly in recent years for competitive reasons, but with recession concerns deepening, it is becoming more and more prevalent.


Soviet Lawmen vs. the Black Market
The leaders of Soviet law enforcement described today how harried and ill equipped they are to deal with the current explosion of black-market crime as the nation drifts uncertainly between Communism and the free market.
"We never expected this scale of organized crime," Vladimir A. Kryuchkov, the chief of the K.G.B., said at a news conference in which officials acknowledged their problems in fighting the rampant growth of illicit entrepreneurship that some day would be legalized, if the nation ever adopts the promised market economy.


First Commerce Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tiny Mite Causes Overwhelming Itch: Elusive Scabies
FOR a 90-year-old woman, the itching that began a week after she underwent major surgery in a hospital in New York City was maddening.
The itching was most severe at night, and she could not sleep.
She became depressed, lost her appetite, and her skin reddened and oozed from constant scratching of a rash.
The doctors were baffled.
Initially a dermatologist on the medical team suspected the itching was an unwanted reaction to a drug, and the doctor stopped all the ones she was receiving.
Still the itching persisted.


No Reason to Amend Supreme Court Tenure
To the Editor:
Paul Feiner's proposal (letter, Oct. 5) that the Constitution be amended so that Supreme Court justices and other Federal judges be appointed for fixed 14-year terms is seriously misguided, lacking as it does either a predicate for making such a profound change or any consideration of its possible pernicious effects.
Mr.
Feiner poses the alternatives as fixed-term or life-term appointments.
As Article 3 recites, Federal judges "shall hold their offices during good behavior." Indeed there is ample history of both removal and resignation under fire to bear out that good behavior means just that.
It is all very well to suggest that David H. Souter's appointment may have been a mistake, but according to one's own preferences, so might any other appointment to the Court.
Surely predictability about how a justice will decide a variety of issues -- some not even discernible at the time of appointment -- cannot be a criterion for appointment that can be pursued very far.
One of the eternally fascinating aspects of life in general and of Supreme Court appointments in particular is that human nature cannot successfully be predicted.
Eisenhower, for example, is reported to have said that the biggest mistake he made as President was appointing Earl Warren to the Supreme Court.
To live fully is to evolve.
Picking a Justice who is totally predictable, a task that has defied almost every effort, is to be shortchanged.
Worse still is that if fixed-term appointments are made, one of the cardinal features of our separation-of-powers government, the ability of one branch to check another, would be seriously impaired.
Consider: Suppose a President appoints a Supreme Court Justice for 14 years.
Fourteen years later another President of a different political persuasion, be it party or ideology, has the power to reappoint the Justice in question, in effect has the power to undo the work of a predecessor who proposed and a Senate that advised and consented.
It is not that such work is sacrosanct.
It is simply that under our system it is entitled to a presumption of enduring legitimacy rather than legitimacy of only limited duration.
Moreover, the desideratum of an independent judiciary would be seriously eroded by moving to fixed-term appointments, no matter how long those fixed terms.
How could the courts be truly independent if their members served with an eye cocked on reappointment?
On the other hand, our protection against courts beholden to no one is, as Mr.
Dooley sagaciously pointed out, that "th' supreme coort follows th' iliction returns." An independent Federal judiciary, flawed as that independence could be, resides in the current mandate that judicial terms of office be conditioned on good behavior only.
History has taught us not to amend the Constitution for insubstantial or transitory reasons.
To accept the view that David Souter's appointment somehow represents a compelling reason to abandon a practice established by the Constitution, a practice that has, on balance, served the nation reasonably well for two centuries, is to be beguiled by the false notion that change guarantees progress.
NICHOLAS W. PUNER Chappaqua, N.Y., Oct. 9, 1990


Seaboard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 8


Kansas City Power Keeps Offer Alive
The Kansas City Power and Light Company extended its $875 million tender offer for the Kansas Gas and Electric Company until Nov. 30, keeping alive the hostile takeover effort.
Kansas City Power and Light is offering $27 a share.
The company said that as of the expiration of the previous tender period on Friday, 47 percent of Kansas Gas and Electric's common stock had been tendered.


Ashland Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stargell Get a Rough Welcome to Life in the N.F.L.
Tony Stargell says that he fell in love with the left cornerback position when he was a junior in college.
The way the Jets' third-round draft choice out of Tennessee State has been victimized in his rookie season, however, is enough to make a man hate to report to his job.
Stargell was burned for touchdown catches of 19 and 14 yards by Buffalo's Andre Reed in the Bills' 30-27 victory over the Jets on Sunday and was victimized for 3 passes for a total of 55 yards, including the scoring one, on the Bills' second touchdown drive.


Detrex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Italian Credit to Soviets
Italy plans to set aside $6 billion in credit to hep the troubled Soviet economy.
Senior officials said last week that Italy would guarantee export credits of five trillion lire (about $4.3 billion) through 1994.
The Government has also sent an emergency bill to Parliament that would provide Moscow with a credit line of 2.2 trillion lire ($1.9 billion), the largest in Italian history.
The Foreign Trade Minister, Renato Ruggiero, said Moscow would be allowed to use part of the credit line to repay outstanding debts to Italian companies.
Soviet enterprises are estimated to have fallen behind on about one trillion lire worth of short-term debt to Italian exporters.


Critic's Notebook; In Rap Music, the Beat and the Lawsuits Go On
The box score in 2 Live Crew obscenity lawsuits is now one for the prosecutors and two for the defense.
Charles Freeman, the owner of a Fort Lauderdale, Fla., record store, is appealing his misdemeanor obscenity conviction for selling the rap group's album "As Nasty as They Wanna Be" to an adult customer.
But on Saturday in Fort Lauderdale, the three rappers of the 2 Live Crew were acquitted on similar charges after performing songs from the album for an adults-only audience.
And in February, a record-store clerk in the small town of Alexander City, Ala., was acquitted of obscenity charges stemming from the sale of the group's previous album, "Move Something."
Other actions against the 2 Live Crew's performances and album sales have also proved difficult to carry through.
In Westerly, R.I., the town council passed an ordinance to block a scheduled Oct. 6 performance at the Windjammer nightclub by the 2 Live Crew; the ordinance was overturned on free-speech grounds in a suit brought by the American Civil Liberties Union.


Senate Votes, 97-1, To Give Israel Arms Worth $700 Million
The Senate voted today to give Israel at least $700 million worth of American weapons, despite a complaint by one senator that the United States was becoming "a bottomless pit" of aid for its chief Middle East ally.
The assistance was added to a $15.5 billion foreign aid bill for the new fiscal year that already includes $3 billion in cash for Israel and several other non-cash benefits worth hundreds of millions more.
Israel is the largest recipient of American foreign aid, followed by Egypt and Turkey.


Northwest Illinois Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Deluxe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Television &amp; Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Compromise on Clean Air
Ozone Shield Current Law
No specific provision.
The destruction of the ozone shield was not widely recognized as a problem when the original law New Provisions
Would halt production of these chemicals destroying the ozone shield that protects earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation:
*
Chlorofluorocarbons and carbon tetrachloride - phased out through the 1990's, outlawed by Jan. 1, 2000;
* Methyl chloroform - outlawed by Jan. 1, 2002.
*
Small amounts would still be allowed in medical devices, fire extinguishers, and on airlines.
*
Hydrochlorofluorocarbons, new compounds that have replaced chlorofluorocarbons in some usesm, outlawed for aerosol cans and insulating material by Jan. 1, 1994; production to be ended in 2030.
*
Recycling and disposal -- stricter controls covering ozone-depleting chemcials recovered from air conditioners, refrigerators and other equiment.
Motor Vehicles: Current Law
Maximum tallpipe emission standars are 1.0 grams per mile for nitrogen oxide and 0.41 grams per mile for hydrocarbons New Provisions
*
Tailpipe emissions of hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides to be reduced by 35 percent and 60 percent respectively in nearly half of all new cars starting with 1994 model year and 100 percent of new cars by 1996.
*
Starting in 1998, all cars sold are required to have pollution control equipment that meets new emission standards and is sturdy enough to last 10 years or 100,000 miles.
*
Manufacturers of cars sold in this country would have to produce and experimental fleet to be sold in Southern California market that use new technology to meet even stricter standards: 150,000 cars annually by 1996, 300,000 cars by 1998.
*
Oil companies would be required to offer new kinds of gasoline that burn more cleanly; beginning in 1992, cleaner fuels to be sold in cities with worst carbon monoxide pollution problems.
*
By 1996, 40 percent of all new cars must be equipped to trap volatile organic chemicals that escape in refueling; all new cars would need filters by 1999.
Urban Smog: Current Law
Requires areas to meet health standards for six pollutants, including ground-level ozone, a main ingredient of urban smog.
New Provisions
*
Would establishes 5 categories of ozone non-attainment areas (marginal, moderate, serious, severe, extreme); sets deadlines of 3, 6, 9, 15 and 20 years respectively for attaining standards. (Only one city, Los Angeles, is in the extreme category.)
*
All except marginal areas must achieve 15 percent reductions within 6 years; serious, severe, and extreme (generally) must achieve 3 percent per year thereafter.
*
Would control sources emitting 100 tons per year (tpy) in marginal and moderate areas; 50 tpy in serious areas; 25 tpy in severe areas; and 10 tpy in extreme area.
Acid Rain Current Law
No specific provisions.
Acid rain was not widely recognized as a problem when the original law was passed.
New Provisions
The amount of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide that can be poured from smokestacks into the atmosphere would be cut in half.
*
Sulfur dioxide emissions would be cut by 10 million tons annually by the 2000; half of the reduction would occur by Jan. 1, 1995, when the 111 largest sulfur-emitting electric utility plants in 22 states would be required to meet stricter standards.
*
Nitrogen oxide emissions would be cut by 2 million to 4 million tons annually by requiring utilities to meet the first specific limits on the pollutant ever approved by Congress; first limits would go into effect 18 months after bill is approved with additional limits to be established in 1997.
Toxic Air Pollutants Current Law
E.P.A. required to protect public health from toxic chemicals in the air with "an ample margin of safety." Seven chemicals were regulated since 1970.
New Provisions
*
Would list 189 toxic pollutants and require E.P.A. to establish a list of about 250 categories of hazardous pollutants (chemical plants, oil refineries, steel plants, etc.) for purpose of promulgating stadards.
*
Largest number of polluters would be required to install the best pollution control equipment available between 1995 and 2003.
Regulations are intended to reduce the emissions of toxic air pollutants by as much as 90 percent by 2003.
*
E.P.A. would then set new standards for each chemical to provide an ample margin of safety for nearby residents.
Ample margin is a 1-in-10,000 cancer risk to the most exposed person.
* Coke ovens would get an extension until 2020 if they meet certain interim standards.
*
Would establish an independent agency, the Chemical Safety Board, to investigate chemical accidents to determine their causes; would require industrial plants to prepare formal safety reviews which would be available to the public; would authorize E.P.A to set new safety standards at plants where bulk of toxic chemicals are used.
Worker Compensation Current Law
There is no such provision in the current law. New Provisions
Would establish a program to provide compensation for workers displaced by new law.
Over the next five years, it is estimated to cost $250 million.


A Gamble Helps Lintas Win Maybelline
LINTAS USA yesterday won the $35 million Maybelline cosmetics account, which had been at DDB Needham Worldwide.
The victory is "especially sweet," said F. Stone Roberts, a group executive vice president at Lintas, coming less than a year after Lintas lost the $50 million account for Cover Girl makeup and other products of the Noxell Corporation to Grey Advertising and other agencies.


Time Warner Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Iowa National Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Refac Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Italian Credit to Soviets
Italy plans to set aside $6 billion in credit to hep the troubled Soviet economy.
Senior officials said last week that Italy would guarantee export credits of five trillion lire (about $4.3 billion) through 1994.
The Government has also sent an emergency bill to Parliament that would provide Moscow with a credit line of 2.2 trillion lire ($1.9 billion), the largest in Italian history.
The Foreign Trade Minister, Renato Ruggiero, said Moscow would be allowed to use part of the credit line to repay outstanding debts to Italian companies.
Soviet enterprises are estimated to have fallen behind on about one trillion lire worth of short-term debt to Italian exporters.


Family Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Edward H. Kimball, Magazine Executive, 85
Edward H. Kimball, a retired vice president of Parade magazine, died on Friday at Lawwrence Memorial Hospital in Kansas.
He was 85 years old and lived in Lawrence.
His family said he died of a perforated ulcer.
Mr.
Kimball, a native of Lawrence, was a graduate of the University of Kansas School of Journalism.
He was with Capper Publications before joining Parade in 1946.
He was director of advertising sales for Parade from 1950 to 1963, when he retired but continued to serve as a publisher's representative for magazines, including Parade and Forbes.
He is survived by his wife, the former Hazel Anderson; two sons, James, of Pleasant Hill, Calif., and Dr.
Richard, of Mankatou, Kans.; a daughter, Susan Matisoff of Berkeley, Calif., and four grandchildren.


Net Off 39% at Tribune Co.
The Tribune Company said today that its third-quarter net income declined 39 percent because of operating losses at its Canadian paper mills and The Daily News in New York.
The company said net income fell to $38.2 million, or 52 cents a share, from $62.7 million, or 81 cents a share, in the corresponding period last year.
Revenues slipped five-tenths of 1 percent, to $588 million, from $590.7 million a year earlier.
Newspaper operating profit fell 15 percent in the quarter, to $48.4 million, from $56.7 million last year, because of losses at The Daily News.
The company attributed the losses at The Daily News to weak economic conditions in the New York market and a "burdensome cost structure" that is the subject of labor negotiations.
Profits for the rest of the newspaper group, which includes The Chicago Tribune and The Orlando (Fla.) Sentinel, were down slightly, the company said.
For the third quarter, the company's Quebec and Ontario Paper Company reported a loss of $8.3 million, compared with a profit of $15.2 million last year.
Strikes by paper workers shut down the Quebec newsprint mill for 31 days and the Ontario mill for 47 days.
Beside its newspapers and newsprint operations, the Chicago-based company is engaged in broadcasting and entertainment production.
The Tribune Company's stock gained 75 cents today, to $35.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gateway Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Receives Assurance
The Saudi Defense Minister's suggestion that Kuwait could make territorial concessions in exchange for an Iraqi withdrawal alarmed the Bush Administration, but the United States is now satisfied that the comment did not reflect Saudi Government policy, officials said today.
American officials hurriedly contacted the Saudi Ambassador in Washington, Prince Bandar bin Sultan, after the Minister, Prince Sultan, was quoted by Arab journalists in Riyadh on Sunday as saying Arab countries were ready to grant Iraq "all its rights."


Athey Products Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Penn Central Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day yesterday about world trade negotiations misidentified Frans Andriessen of the European Community.
He is its trade commissioner.
A report in the Currents column of The Home Section on Oct. 4 about the Metro bus tunnel in Seattle misidentified a contributing artist.
She is Laura Sindell, not Laura Sidwell.


Reich &amp; Tang L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Convenience Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Old German Communist Selling Hearing Aids
Gunter Bickel says his new job selling hearing aids demands the same kind of commitment he used to preach as he lectured on Marxist-Leninist economics before the decline of Communism in what used to be East Germany.
"I used to tell my students that if it was their job to make sure socialism didn't collapse, then they had to see to it that productivity increased," said this convert to free enterprise, whose plan for catering to hard-of-hearing Germans in the lands east of the Elbe River envisions the establishment of new shops in half a dozen eastern cities over the next few months.


Patterns
Shy in the Limelight
Romeo Gigli this season abandoned the scene of his greatest triumph, the tents outside the Louvre.
It was there, 18 months ago, that the designer left editors and store buyers on their feet applauding -- some in tears -- after the showing of his first collection.


Transactions
Baseball
TEXAS (AL) -- Assigned David Lynch, pitcher, to Oklahoma City of the American Association.
UNITED STATES BASEBALL FEDERATION -- Appointed Ron Fraser coach of the United States team for the 1992 Olympics.
Appointed Brad Kelly and Jerry Weinstein assistant coaches.
Basketball
NETS (NBA) -- Waived Tom Domako, forward.
ORLANDO (NBA) -- Waived Wallace Bryant, center, and Mark Plansky, guard-forward.
SEATTLE (NBA) -- Released Mike Giomi and Mike Higgins, forwards.
WASHINGTON (NBA) -- Released Ron Draper, forward, and Mike Morrison, guard. Football
HOUSTON (NBA) -- Signed Bruce Matthews, guard, to a four-year contract. Hockey
EDMONTON (NHL) -- Traded Vladimir Ruzicka, forward, to Boston for Greg Hawgood, defenseman.


Union Carbide Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sovereign Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Air Strike on Iraq, the Favored Strategy, Means Big Risks for Both Sides
An American-led air strike against Iraq the Pentagon's favored strategy if war starts -- would be a complex operation risking thousands of civilian casualties and causing billions of dollars in property damage, Defense Department officials and military analysts say.
Military commanders are pondering an array of strategic options -- from pinpoint laser-guided missile strikes to widespread carpet-bombing -- aimed at destroying scores of Iraqi military and industrial targets, and ultimately forcing Iraqi troops to withdraw from Kuwait.


Small Budget, Small Star, Big Hit
In a year that has been unkind to action movies with big names and big budgets, one movie with neither, "Marked for Death," seems marked for success.
Made for a mere $12 million by two independent producers, this violent tale of vengeance has earned $29 million since its release on Oct. 5, including an opening weekend at the box office that was the second best ever for a fall film release.
As a movie, "Marked for Death"is little more than a cavalcade of shooting, stabbing, beheading and bone-cracking.
Starring Steven Seagal, a martial arts expert with meager acting experience, the movie has received largely negative reviews.
But as a commodity and an exercise in successful formula film making, the movie has quickly earned the admiration and the envy of studio executives here, all of whom are acutely aware they could not possibly have made the movie for the same price.


Wrong Signal to El Salvador
In the wake of a guerrilla offensive in San Salvador last year, a Salvadoran Army unit murdered six Jesuit priests.
Despite an outcry in the United States, the crime is still unpunished and an inquiry into involvement of higher-ups has floundered.
Yet the Bush Administration is angrier with Congress than with its Salvadoran allies, and threatens another Presidential veto, at the risk of looking callous -- and foolish.
At issue is an amendment to foreign aid legislation that would cut U.S. military aid to El Salvador in half unless President Bush determines that leftist insurgents are scuttling peace talks or mounting a major offensive that threatens the survival of the Government.
The House adopted the measure in June, 308 to 117.
In the Senate last Friday, even loyalist Republicans like Alfonse D'Amato of New York joined in approving a similar, stronger amendment, 74 to 25.


First Western Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Charter Federal Savings (Va.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Profits Scoreboard
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1990
From '89
American Express Co.
$ 343,800,000
+
3.6
Ashland Oil Inc.
59,100,000
*--
Atlantic Richfield Co.
462,000,000
+
21.9
Consolidated Freightways
11,400,000
+
7.5
Crane Co.
17,100,000
+
10.3
Fieldcrest Cannon Inc.
(6,200,000)
--
General Signal Corp.
6,400,000
-
64.2
Gerber Products Co.
31,700,000
+
19.6
M.A. Hanna Co.
17,200,000
-
20.7
Hershey Foods Corp.
56,600,000
+
8.4
Liz Claiborne Inc.
62,600,000
+
22.5
Maxxam Inc.
34,800,000
-
8.2
Minnesota Mining &amp; Mfg.
336,000,000
+
9.4
Penn Central Corp.
26,700,000
-
8.6
Phillips Petroleum Co.
178,000,000
+
104.6
Reebok International Ltd.
41,000,000
-
17.8
Southwest Airlines Co.
23,000,000
-
6.5
Time Warner Inc.
(91,000,000)
--
Tribune Co.
38,200,000
-
39.1
Union Carbide Corp.
91,000,000
-
34.5
See accompanying notes for special items.
(Loss) *Loss in year-earlier period.


Raritan Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


European Partners For Loral Venture
The Loral Corporation, which is acquiring the communications and weather satellite business of the Ford Motor Company, is taking on three European companies as partners in the venture, Loral announced yesterday.
Loral said it had signed memorandums of understanding with Aerospatiale Societe Nationale Industrielle, Alcatel N.V. and Selenia Spazio S.p.A.
The three are expected to pay $182 million for 49 percent of the new company, Space Systems-Loral.
Loral is buying the business from Ford for $715 million.
Spacy Systems-Loral is expected to design, manufacture and support telecommunications and weather satellites.


Kodak Plans For Desktop Publishing
Following on its effort to combine traditional picture taking with advanced electronics, the Eastman Kodak Company plans to announce today a group of technologies aimed at the desktop publishing market.
The company had said last month that in 1992 it would begin selling a system to allow snapshots to be stored on optical compact disks.
Using a new player that can read both audio and photo disks, customers could view their pictures at home on television sets.


Accounts
*OlympusCorporation, Woodbury, L.I., has put its $12.5 million consumer account into review.
The incumbent, Lowe &amp; Partners, will participate. *
Pillsbury Co., Minneapolis, a unit of Grand Metropolitan Inc., to Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco, for its Toaster Strudel pastry product, with a budget of $5 million.


No Reason to Amend Supreme Court Tenure; Enough Power as Is
To the Editor:
Paul Feiner suggests a constitutional amendment changing the term of a Supreme Court Justice to 14 years (letter, Oct. 5).
I dissent.
As a student of constitutional law at Columbia Preparatory High School, I have come to realize the importance of the Supreme Court in preserving our precious freedoms.
A change in the tenure of these Justices could have unwanted effects and would alter a judicial system that has worked so well for the last 200 years.
Mr.
Feiner worries that the Senate will have made "a lifetime mistake" if it approves an incompetent Justice.
Yet 105 Supreme Court Justices have been chosen and no irreversible damage to the Constitution has resulted.
Would not 14 years of dangerously incompetent justice seem like a lifetime?
There is no reason to give a President who has not appointed the Justice and most probably differs in his or her views the power to end a judge's term.
Would Richard Nixon have allowed Justice Brennan to remain on the bench in 1970 after his 14 years?
This unnecessary power too strongly extends the President's authority to another branch, a condition the Constitution's Framers sought to avoid.
They knew what they were doing when they allowed Federal judges to "hold their offices during good behavior." JEAN-MARC ELLIS New York, Oct. 15, 1990


Chronicle
When he raised his baton to conduct the Cracow Philharmonic in December 1987, GILBERT LEVINE had the distinction of being the first American to become a principal conductor of an Eastern European orchestra.
For Poland, it was a cultural innovation as dramatic as the political upheaval that was soon to engulf the nation.
Tomorrow night in Cracow, Mr.
Levine, who is 41 years old, will conduct "A Concert of Remembrance and Reconciliation" in response to the resurgence of anti-Semitism in Poland.
After the national anthems of Poland, the United States and Israel, the music of Dvorak and Beethoven will be heard in the 100-year-old Temple Postepowa, which has not been used since the Nazis tore down its Star of David in 1939.
The event has been called a "a signal event in the Polish-Jewish dialogue" by the United Jewish Appeal, which is sending 250 people to the concert.
The Polish Government and the Vatican will also have representatives at the concert.


First Financial Management reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Laclede Steel Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Black Hole Theory Gains New Support
OBSERVATIONS of a double star system in the constellation Monoceros have produced what many astronomers regard as the strongest evidence in the sky that one of the two objects in such a system is sometimes a black hole.
Its mass, according to the analysis, is at least 3.82 times that of the Sun and may be 11 solar masses.
Any object with more than three solar masses is widely assumed to have a gravity so strong that it prevents the escape of light or anything else.
Such an object is known as a black hole.


No More Uncertainty For Philips Subsidiary
The North American Philips Corporation has broken off an industrial electronics unit from a military business it is trying to sell and has named Gary D. Clarke to run the subsidiary.
Mr.
Clarke, 49, will be president of the new division, known as the Magnavox Industrial Electronics Company.
It has been part of the Magnavox Government and Industrial Electronics Company, which North American Philips has had up for sale for the last year and a half.
Magnovox has been owned by Philips since 1974.


White House and Congress on Verge of Tax Deal
The White House and Congressional leaders seemed today to be within an eyelash of reaching the tax compromise crucial to a new budget.
They have tentatively agreed on a 31 percent top tax rate, up from the current 28 percent.
These other elements are more or less locked up: a limit on deductions that could be claimed by people with total incomes above $100,000, a modest rise in the gasoline tax, cuts in Medicare payments, a steep increase in the amount of wages subject to the Medicare payroll tax, luxury taxes on expensive cars, boats, private planes, furs and jewelry, and higher taxes on tobacco products and alcoholic beverages.
Real Numbers Not Released


Dr. William Dock, 91, Innovator Who Questioned Medical Beliefs
Dr.
William Dock, a cardiologist whose views of medical treatment were sometimes at odds with accepted practice, died on Wednesday on Guadaloupe, where he had lived for the last year.
He was 91 years old and had lived for the previous decade in Paris.
Dr.
Dock, who was associated for many years with the Downstate Medical Center and other Brooklyn institutions during a long career, frequently took iconoclastic positions.
In the mid-1930's he questioned the then common practice of prolonged bed rest for hospital patients, and in the mid-1940's he warned that high-fat diets could lead to clogged arteries.
He created a stir in 1961 when he chided fellow physicians for shunning the use of alcoholic beverages for therapeutic purposes.


Texas Utilities Co. reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Bridge
There used to be a time when a score of 800 was easy to diagnose.
In practice it was always three down, doubled, vulnerable, because eight down not doubled vulnerable was very rare and 16 down not doubled not vulnerable even rarer.
This is still true in social bridge, although that state of affairs may not continue: The lawmakers will soon consider whether the scoring changes made in 1986 in duplicate should be extended to the traditional form of the game.
In tournaments an 800 score may now represent four down, doubled but not vulnerable.
It can also, less obviously, result from making a redoubled game in no-trump or a minor when not vulnerable.
This was the outcome on the diagramed deal from the National Imp Pairs in Boston in July.
North and South were John Roberts and John Solodar, both of Manhattan, and they arrived in five diamonds doubled after West had doubled four hearts.
That contract might well have succeeded, but North naturally retreated to the known diamond fit.


First Republic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


QSR Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Amcore Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cuomo Is Sued by Rinfret on State Budget Deficit


Humphries Leads by Example
Since 1985, after a 12-year span in which Joe Theismann started 75 games, the Redskins have moved quarterbacks in and out of the starting role as if they were going through a revolving door.
Doug Williams, Jay Schroeder and Mark Rypien preceded Stan Humphries, who helped lift Washington to a 13-7 victory over the Philadelphia Eagles here on Sunday.
Humphries has made three starts in place of Rypien, who is sidelined with a knee injury.
He was sharp against Phoenix in a 38-10 victory and labored against the Giants, with three interceptions in a 24-20 loss.


Old National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Prague Communist Ousted
Parliament ousted the leader of the Communist Party from its upper house today after his criticisms of Government reforms prompted nationwide anti-Communist protests.
The discharge of the Communist leader, Vasil Mohorita, followed President Vaclav Havel's dismissal last week of Gen.
Miroslav Vacek as Defense Minister to regain civilian control of the military after four decades of Communist rule.


Lawmakers Eyeing Clock and Voter
It is not just the voters who are anxious and irritable in the final weeks of the 1990 campaign.
Many members of the House of Representatives, the "people's house" that must at some point adjourn and face the people, do not rest easy.
Rarely in modern times has a Congress dragged on so close to a general election.
Since World War II, the previous record was adjournment 17 days before Election Day, according to House researchers.
That record was broken last weekend, as the House ground through such measures as the spending bill for the legislative branch, with spirited debate over issues like the renovation of the House beauty shop.


Electronic Arts reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


China, Reassessing Its Foes, Views Japan Warily
Japanese proposals to send troops to the Persian Gulf and a territorial dispute about some uninhabited islands are stirring concern here that Japan could emerge in the coming years as China's primary military threat.
The old fears that the Soviet Union might invade China are easing, and few people cast the United States as a military threat.
But Japan and China are longtime rivals, and the octogenarians who run China still have vivid memories of the brutal "War of Resistance Against Japan" from 1937 to 1945."Japan's dispatching of troops abroad is a very sensitive issue both in its own country and abroad," the official New China News Agency reported on Saturday, quoting an unidentified "leading official" of the Foreign Ministry.


Excel Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Consolidated Freightways reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ply-Gem Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hang On! It's the Drive-In Thriller King!!
They were the most chilling but eagerly anticipated credits in drive-ins around the country: "Samuel Z. Arkoff Presents." They meant that an audience full of 1950's teen-agers was soon to be assailed by one, or several, of the following: Cannibalistic leeches.
Ill-tempered aliens.
Pubescent werewolves.
Vulture bees.
Savage delinquents.
Siren vampires.
Ghouls with an attitude.
Although most of the drive-ins have gone the way of beach-blanket movies, Samuel Z. Arkoff is still presenting.
The 72-year-old film maker is hard at work on two new movie projects and is delighted that the more than 500 films he produced or distributed are undergoing a nostalgic revival.


BMC Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sheldahl Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


N.C.A.A. Slices The Big Pie
The National Collegiate Athletic Association, completing its formula for spending the first $69.9 million of the seven-year, $1 billion contract with CBS for coverage of its basketball tournament, decided today to reward schools that offer many sports and award many scholarships.
The plan was designed to eliminate the "$300,000 free throw," rewarding schools for advancing in the tournament rather than for their overall athletic and academic programs, said Dick Schultz, executive director of the N.C.A.A.
Last season, each tournament game was worth $294,000 to each team.
Each "unit" of the tournament under the new formula will be worth $40,000.
A plan to distribute $31.2 million to conferences based on the success their member teams had in the tournament was announced earlier.
Today, the N.C.A.A. announced a formula under which individual schools will share in an additional $31.25 million depending on how many sports they sponsor and how many athletic scholarships they give.
The third part of the plan provides money for programs that aid athletes academically.


Pakistan's Minorities Face Voting Restrictions
At least a tenth of Pakistan's 110 million people, members of the religious minorities, will never get a chance to cast ballots for or against the parties and candidates that dominate the news in elections this week.
Under a system of separate electorates, Hindus, Sikhs, Christians, Parsis and other minority groups are denied the right to vote for Muslims in the Islamic republic.
They may vote only for people of their own faiths.


Washington Talk; No $435 Hammers, but Questions
In the long and fitful annals of Pentagon procurement overhaul, two recent episodes on Capitol Hill deserve footnotes.
Last week, an Air Force brigadier general, Robert W. Drewes, told a House investigative panel that a rare review of the Northrop Corporation, one of the largest military contractors, had found systemic production flaws in every program examined, including the Stealth, or B-2, bomber.


Airlease Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


An Electronic War
Sophisticated electronics would be crucial in Persian Gulf fighting, and the sides are in a secret race for the upper hand.
Science Times, page C1.


SEI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Outside Arabs Barred From Jerusalem
Israeli policemen surrounded Jerusalem with roadblocks today to keep Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza Strip out of the city and away from Israelis who might seek revenge for the slaying of three Jews on Sunday.
It was believed to be the first time the whole city of Jerusalem was closed to Palestinians living outside it.
Thousands of paramilitary border policemen in green berets were sent out to deter violence and appeared in groups at every major intersection and along boundaries between mainly Jewish West Jerusalem and Arab East Jerusalem.
They startled residents in quiet Jewish neighborhoods where military patrols have not been seen for years.


Bad Break for Ciccarelli
Dino Ciccarelli, the Washington Capitals' leading scorer last season, will be sidelined at least six weeks with a fractured bone in his right hand.
Ciccarelli, who did not miss a game during the 1989-90 regular season while accumulating 79 points, including 41 goals, was hurt on a check by Laurie Boschman on Saturday. (AP)


By Design; Structured Handbags
Everywhere you look in Paris, you see what a success the parka -- the hot fashion from last season's shows -- has become.
But while this casual garment is today's look, sharp eyes are catching the first signs of the changing fashion tempo.
A wave of 1950's and 60's feminine style is sweeping the air here.
The spring collections are full of the structured shapes and attitude of that era.
But already the backpacks and even the shoulder-strapped totes that have been a staple of Parisian fashion are disappearing.
The with-it style types are now carrying their essential daily clutter around in structured handbags.
These are usually of medium size, often of suede, and they are meant to be firmly grasped in the hand by one or two rounded handles.
Two of the favorite styles originate in Italy and are sold in those company's boutiques here.
They are Prada 's black suede zip-top with two fat wooden handles and Gucci 's leather flat-closed version with one wooden handle carved to emulate bamboo.
The imaginative box shape -- grasped by a metal upside-down "U" top handle invented by Christian Lacroix -- is also hot.
It is considered O.K. to carry any of these when wearing your parka.


Geodyne to Acquire Oryx Oil Properties
Geodyne Resources Inc. agreed to buy producing oil and natural gas properties and associated production operations from the Oryx Energy Company for $59 million.
The closing is scheduled for December.
Geodyne is acquiring the properties on behalf of partnerships it sponsors under the Paine Webber-Geodyne Energy Income programs.
The properties include interests in 14 fields in Texas, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi and Wyoming.
About 350 wells and related operations are involved in the deal.


Jones Intercable Inv reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Weitek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


'Anti-Incumbent Fever' Threatens Oregon Senator
Nowhere in the country is the nation's sour political mood being tested more directly this year than in Oregon.
Voters here are struggling to decide whether they are so angry at Washington that they want to throw out of office a Senator they have known and elected for a very long time.
Mark O. Hatfield, who after 24 years in the Senate is the body's second-ranking Republican, is in danger of losing his seat to a businessman named Harry Lonsdale, a newcomer to politics who in this year of political discontent is running the quintessential example of an outsider campaign.


Review/Music; Blues With a B, as in Broken and Bawdy
Betrayal, bad luck, broken hearts and shaking hips -- those were the makings of a triumphant concert on Friday night at Avery Fisher Hall, where the Benson &amp; Hedges Blues festival concluded with "Dynamic Divas." Three rhythm-and-blues singers who made their reputations in the 1950's and 1960's -- Etta James, Ruth Brown and Irma Thomas -- and the Chicago blues singer Koko Taylor testified to women's strength and humor, in voices that teased and growled, flirted and shouted.


Magma Power Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Fashion; At Chanel And Dior, New Vigor
After graciously sharing their runways with Japanese, British and Italian fashion houses in the first days of the spring and summer shows in the courtyard of the Louvre, the French designers charged into first place over the weekend.
Christian Lacroix and Claude Montana both showed exhilarating collections, the first focusing on brilliant pattern and color mixtures, the second introducing a streamlined futurism and mostly white clothes with silver accents.


American Exploration To Acquire Conquest
The American Exploration Company announced today that it would acquire another Houston-based oil company, the Conquest Exploration Company, in a deal estimated at $160 million.
American Exploration, an independent oil and gas company, will pay $1.90 a share for about 12 percent of Conquest's common stock and exchange 0.44 share of American Exploration common stock for each remaining share of Conquest stock.
Conquest has more than 44.4 million shares outstanding.


ASK Computer Buys Ingres
ASK Computer Systems Inc. said today that it had completed the acquisition of the Ingres Corporation for $9.25 a share, or bout $110 million, and had concurrently sold 5.6 million of its own shares to the Hewlett-Packard Company and the Electronic Data Systems Corporation.
The sale will give Hewlett- Packard 9.8 percent of ASK and E.D.S. 19.7 percent.
ASK, based in Mountain View, Calif., is the leading provider of computer software for managing manufacturing.
Ingres, based in Alameda, Calif., produces software for managing large databases.
ASK's latest programs are written using Ingres software.
James P. Lennane, a dissident shareholder who opposed the Ingres acquisition and stock sale, has mounted a proxy fight to gain control of the ASK board at the company's annual meeting later this week.
Mr.
Lennane held about 9.7 percent of ASK's outstanding common stock before the sale.
ASK reported first-quarter earnings of $711,000, or 5 cents a share, up 28 percent from $552,000, or 4 cents a share, in the comparable period a year earlier.
Revenues rose 17 percent, to $44.5 million, from $38 million in the first quarter of the 1990 fiscal year.
ASK's shares were unchanged today at $5.625 in over- the-counter trading.


Minnesota Mining &amp; Manufacturing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


So Happy In Omaha
Campaigning in Omaha the other day, President Bush ecstatically told a room full of people, "How nice it is to be out where the real people are -- outside of Washington, D.C.!"
It is true that Omaha is jam-packed with real people.
The latest study shows that real people make up 79 percent of the population.
Still, the city has no reason to be smug.
Five years ago 85 percent of Omaha's people were real, and ten years ago the figure was 91 percent.


Paramaribo Journal; In Suriname's Racial Jumble, a Quest for Identity
At this country's largest mosque, a geaming white structure dominated by four towering minarets, Annette Ayub, a woman of Christian and Hindu parents who practices no religion, watches over the grounds.
Her husband, the mosque's muezzin, who is of Pakistani descent, calls the faithful to prayer.
When asked if she is resented as an outsider by the Muslims who gather nearby for prayer, Mrs.
Ayub said with surprise, "Never, this is Suriname and I am Surinamese."


Tenera L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


LSI Logic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lawmakers Reach an Accord On Reduction of Air Pollution
Settling years of regional political disputes, House and Senate negotiators reached final agreement today on changes in clean air legislation that are intended to strengthen and broaden the Government's authority to reduce air pollution.
The amendments are the first in 13 years.
Lawmakers hailed what they characterized as a breakthrough in setting stricter standards and in establishing new timetables for sharply cutting chemical contamination in the air.
But many also agreed with environmental leaders that the problem is so vast and the required improvements so expensive that the nation is not likely to breathe much cleaner air until the first decade of the 21st century.


Virginia, Now at 7-0, Solidifies Its Position
After trailing top-rated Georgia Tech for the last two weeks in The New York Times computer ranking of college football teams, the University of Virginia yesterday hopped over the Engineers into first place, making the Cavaliers a unanimous top choice.
The Cavaliers spent a second week on top of The Associated Press poll of writers and broadcasters and United Press International's board of college coaches.
The Cavaliers moved up last Saturday by solidly thumping Wake Forest, 49-14, for their seventh victory while Georgia Tech had a five-game winning streak ended with a 13-13 tie at North Carolina.
The Engineers dropped one notch to 12th place in the U.P.I. poll and fell from 11th to 16th in the A.P. list.


Results Plus
FOOTBALL  Bengals Top Browns
Boomer Esiason was a bust most of the night, but he was on target when it counted.
And for the first time in more than a year, Ickey Woods got to do his shuffle as the Cincinnati Bengals defeated the Browns, 34-13, in Cleveland last night.
Esiason, who completed only 7 of 17 passes for 85 yards, failed in a bid to reach 20,000 yards for his career, but he hit Rodney Holman and Mike Barber with touchdown passes.
Woods sealed the victory with a 1-yard touchdown run with 2 minutes 32 seconds remaining, then celebrated by doing his awkward dance before a disheartened crowd of 78,567.
He ran five times for 7 yards in the game, his first since he tore up a knee in the second game of the 1989 season.
As a team, the Bengals rushed for 233 yards, more than doubling their season average of 97.
James Brooks, bothered by a sore neck, darted 28 yards for a touchdown on his first carry in the second quarter.
Cincinnati's defense, ranked last statistically in the National Football League this season, intercepted the Cleveland quarterback Bernie Kosar twice, setting up two short field goals by Jim Breech, and sacked Kosar four times.
The Browns (2-5) fell three games back of the first-place Bengals (5-2) in the American Football Conference Central Division, doing nothing to quell speculation that Cleveland's coach, Bud Carson, is in danger of losing his job.
Cleveland is off to its worst start since 1984, when Sam Rutigliano was dismissed at midseason, the day after a loss to the Bengals.
Carson is 0-3 against Cincinnati since coming to the Browns.
Esiason marched the Bengals 80 yards on their opening drive, capping it with a 19-yard pass to Holman in the right corner of the end zone.
He added a 2-yard scoring pass to Barber with 12 minutes remaining in the final period.
Easiason also had a second-quarter touchdown pass to Holman erased because of a penalty and had to settle for a Breech field goal instead of putting the game away early. (AP)


Cetus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RPC Energy Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nature's Sunshine Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Oil Price Tumbles


T.C.C. Beverages reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 22


Iroquois Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Plaza Commerce Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Banks of Mid-America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Paccar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday on the "On Your Own" page of SportsMonday, about a video golf game, misidentified the stroke shown.
It was an iron shot, not a putt.


Hungary's New Burden: Army of Homeless
As evening falls, dozens of people, including families with children and grandparents, make themselves at home on blankets and cardboard along the corridors of the Keleti train station, hanging out damp towels, opening tins of canned food, getting into position for the night ahead.
They are Budapest's hard-core homeless, whose numbers have surged as Hungary evolves into a capitalist society.
The Government estimates that there are 20,000 Hungarians, mostly single men, with nowhere to live, a figure that by some estimates has risen by more than 6,000 in the last few months.


Lubrizol Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thomas F. Devine, 46, An Investment Banker
Thomas Francis Devine, vice chairman, managing director and chief administrative officer of Allen &amp; Company Inc., New York investment bankers, died on Friday at his home in Wilton, Conn.
He was 46 years old.
Mr. Devine died of a brain tumor, a spokesman for the family said.
Before joining Allen &amp; Company in 1982, he was a partner with the accounting firm of Coopers &amp; Lybrand of New York.
He was a native New Yorker and a graduate of St.
John's University, St.
John's School of Law and New York University's Graduate School of Law.
He was a board member of Boys Hope, a housing and education program for victims of abuse or neglect.
He is survived by his wife, the former Carol Tancredi; his mother, Margaret McDonagh Devine of Queens; a son, Thomas F. Jr., and two daughters, Kerri and Meghan, all of Wilton; a brother, Patrick, of Norwalk, Conn., and a sister, Brenda Morton of Queens.


Review/Theater; A Conservative Judge vs. a Liberal Nun
As he demonstrated in "Two for the Seesaw," William Gibson has a sure touch with two-character plays, but his new dialogue, "Handy Dandy," is less a genuine two-hander than a case of dramatic underpopulation.
When the couple at the center of the piece address unseen characters, one is led to the conclusion that economics rather than artistic necessity determined the size of the cast.
James Whitmore and Audra Lindley are alternating "Handy Dandy" with Tom Cole's "About Time" at the John Houseman Theater.
While the fact of two actors doing two plays in repertory is admirable, one must question the validity of each work, except as exercises for acting.
Mr.
Whitmore and Ms.
Lindley are infinitely resourceful, and as a result, "Handy Dandy" holds the audience interest longer than one might expect.


Suspended Navajo Chairman and Son Sentenced
A Navajo judge today sentenced Peter MacDonald Sr. to five years and 335 days in jail and fined him $11,000 in a court appearance in Window Rock, Ariz., the tribal capital 160 miles east of here.
Mr.
MacDonald, the suspended chairman of the Navajo tribe, was convicted on Wednesday of 41 of 42 counts of soliciting and accepting bribes and kickbacks from businessmen seeking favoritism and tribal contracts, as well as tribal ethics law violation and conspiracy.


Puget Sound P&amp;L reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


KLA Instruments Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sunstyle Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Answers to Crime: Cuomo and 3 Rivals Sharply Differ
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his three opponents cast the crime issue -- the biggest concern of voters, according to polls -- in different ways.
Mention crime to Mr.
Cuomo and he talks about his record of prison construction and his futile efforts to ban assault weapons over the objections of the Republican-controlled State Senate.


Sigma Upgrades Standard Monitors
Sigma Designs Inc., a computer peripheral maker based in Fremont, Calif., said yesterday that it would offer special circuitry, designed to reduce electromagnetic field radiation emissions from cathode ray tube-based monitors and display systems, as a standard feature in all of its monitors for I.B.M.
PC-compatible and Apple Macintosh systems.
The company has been offering the ircuitry, originally developed in Sweden, as a $200 option with its monitors.
In recent years there has been increasing worry about the possible health problems associated with radiation and magnetic fields generated by computer screens.
The company said that the circuitry could reduce radiation by as much as a factor of 10.


Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets  Oil prices plummeted, with crude off $5.41, to $28.38 a barrel.
It was the biggest one-day drop since trading of contracts in crude oil began in 1983.
The plunge may have been helped by speculators bailing out as the November contract expired.  [ Page D1. ]
Blue-chip stocks fell slightly, but the rest of the market advanced.
The Dow slumped 4.70, to 2,516.09.  [ D8. ]
Most Treasury securities prices were little changed, and a Citicorp auction of preferred stock almost failed.  [ D18. ]
The dollar strengthened against all major currencies.  [ D19. ]  Gold prices fell.  [ D19. ]  The Economy
The White House and Congressional leaders seemed to be within an eyelash of reaching the tax compromise crucial to a new budget.  [ A1. ]  Any budget agreement is sure to include a big cut in deductions for the wealthy.  [ A21. ]
House and Senate negotiators reached final agreement on changes in clean-air legislation.  [ A1. ]  Coal-burning utilities said they did not believe the acid-rain proposal differed markedly from earlier ones, which they called feasible but expensive.  [ A18. ]
President Bush vetoed an employment anti-discrimination bill after an unsuccesful effort to have Congress modify it.  [ A1. ]
Federal regulators ordered David L. Paul, former Centrust head, to return more than $30 million they say he spent on his opulent lifestyle and paid for with depositors' money.  [ D1. ]  Companies
A.T.&amp;T. said it would raise rates for night and weekend long-distance calls.
The 2.2 percent price rise is scheduled to take effect on Nov. 2, and follows another small increase last Nov. 29.  [ D1. ]
Time Warner reported a loss for the quarter but said operating profits for most main divisions had reached record highs.  [ D1. ]
Peter and Edward Bronfman, who quietly built Canada's largest corporate empire after being shut out of the Seagram business controlled by their cousins, are running into problems.  [ D1. ]
Bankers Trust said it earned $170 million, or $1.98 a share, in the third quarter, compared with a loss of $1.42 billion.  [ D2. ]
American Express reported a slight increase in earnings, but profits were dampened by a poor performance by Shearson.  [ D2. ]
Kodak plans to announce a group of technologies aimed at the desktop publishing market.  [ D4. ]
Kinder-Care's former president has agreed to plead guilty to two crimes involving securities law violations with Drexel, a Federal prosecutor said.  [ D8. ]
ARCO, Phillips Petroleum and Ashland Oil each reported higher third-quarter earnings, but the reasons varied.  [ D14. ]
Ratings have been lowered on $6 billion in AMR and Delta Air Lines debt.  [ D18. ]
American Exploration said it would acquire another Houston-based oil company, Conquest Exploration.  [ D4. ]
International
Japan's battered financial markets have received a lift from an unlikely source: a sharp appreciation in the value of the yen.  [ D7. ]
Germany's economic growth will slow markedly in 1991, the nation's leading economic research institutes predicted.  [ D7. ]  Today's Columns
Participants in the struggle with ballooning health-care costs are under pressure to accept some kind of change.
Milt Freudenheim: Business and Health.  [ D2. ]
The Big Three auto makers' shares pay high dividends, offering an opportunity to investors.
Market Place.  [ D8. ]
Lintas USA won the $35 million Maybelline cosmetics account.
Kim Foltz: Advertising.  [ D21. ]


Title Bout May Provide Answers on Douglas
In the minds of many boxing experts, the crucial issue in Thursday's heavyweight title match is which James (Buster) Douglas will show up?
Will it be the superior version who hammered Mike Tyson into submission last February to win the heavyweight title in Tokyo?


Witco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Countless Costs to New York From Clean Air Act
For residents of the New York metropolitan region, the push for cleaner air will carry a price tag that will exceed all but a few other parts of the country, reflecting the intractability of the air pollution problem here.
When the new Clean Air Act provisions are phased in several years from now, consumers will probably pay more for gasoline, electricity, dry cleaning, paint, bagels and even restaurant meals.
Much of the country will absorb some of those increases and their like, but only the most polluted places face such an array of price rises.


Dinkins Cutting Pay for Officials And for Himself
Trying to show that the highest levels of his administration were willing to share the pain of fiscal belt-tightening, Mayor David N. Dinkins imposed a 5 percent pay cut on himself and nearly 700 other senior administration officials yesterday and froze salaries for 3,800 managerial employees.
But the move, meant to save about $4.5 million in the current fiscal year, was immediately denounced by the heads of two major municipal labor unions, who called it a public-relations gimmick meant to tilt tense contract negotiations to the city's favor.


University Is Ordered To Halt Nuclear Work
An administrative judge for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission has ordered the University of Missouri to close a nuclear research project, citing a possibility of danger to the public.
Administrative Judge Peter B. Bloch said in an order issued Saturday that the university had failed to comply with nuclear licensing regulations.
"Hence, I presume that the activities are unduly dangerous to public safety," he wrote.
The project involves efforts to separate the most long-lived elements of nuclear waste from short-lived ones.Environmental groups and 10 individuals had challenged the university's request to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission for changes in its licenses.
Mary Still, a university spokeswoman, said the university had complied with all Federal regulations.
She said that the university's lawyers would speak with the judge this week and that they hoped to resolve the problem.
The project began about Feb. 1 and will take four years, said Truman Storvick, the leader of the research.


Lindsay Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


How U.S. Can Pressure Beijing on Rights
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal, in "The Price for Silence" (column, Sept. 28) wisely chides the Administration for failing to hold the Chinese Government accountable for its continued violations of human rights.
Unless Beijing knows that we will not tolerate the executions, jailings and other abuses detailed -- and predicted -- in the new Asia Watch report, we are bound to see even greater repressions mainly at the hands of the newly reinvigorated People's Liberation Army.
After years of giving the military the lowest priority on its list of "four modernizations," Beijing has increased its military budget by a whopping 15.2 percent.
With the cold war ended and the major powers agreeing to reduce their strategic and conventional forces, and with the Soviet and Vietnamese borders quiet, there are hardly any fresh external threats to warrant the increased emphasis on the military.
The only plausible explanation is the post-Tiananmen preoccupation of Beijing's leaders with securing and maintaining control of the country, and their decision to make the army their chief instrument of control.
Until now, army loyalty to the political leadership was not a certainty: some commanders refused to use their troops against the pro-democracy demonstrators at Tiananmen, and afterward there were murmurs of dissension in the ranks over the crackdown's brutality.
This apparently led Deng Xiaoping, Li Peng and their colleagues to conclude that they must be assured of the army's absolute loyalty to be sure of maintaining power themselves.
Accordingly, they recently placed new emphasis on political and ideological indoctrination: troops must now attend daily one-and-a-half-hour political sessions, and officers through the highest ranks must also attend appropriate classes.
Through these measures, and the new infusion of funds to keep the commanders happy, Beijing's leaders expect to have at their command a loyal and powerful military whose main mission will be the suppression of dissent among the Chinese people.
We can do little to prevent the strengthening of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, but we can do things to curb its use.
For example, the greater budgetary allotment to the military means fewer allocations for economic development.
We can therefore make trade, investments and other aspects of economic cooperation contingent upon the tolerance of dissent and the reduction, if not elimination of arbitrary arrests and executions.
We can also stop behaving as if China did us a favor by siding with us in the Middle East crisis: it did so out of desire to better its overall relations with us, and because it did not want to jeopardize its growing ties with Saudi Arabia, which it recently wooed away diplomatically from Taiwan.
We have the ways to put pressure on the Chinese Government to make it observe basic norms of decent human conduct; what we need is the will.
LORNA HAHN Executive Director Association on Third World Affairs Washington, Oct. 3, 1990


United Carolina Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Slowing Economy Predicted for United Germany
Germany's leading economic research institutes predicted today that the economic growth of the united nation would slow markedly in 1991, as the boom in the western part of the country cools and the continuing industrial collapse in what was East Germany sends unemployment soaring.
The annual fall report by the five institutes that advise Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Government on economic matters immediately became an issue in the all-German election campaign, where the cost of unity and how to finance it are the central issues.
National elections will be held on Dec. 2.


Karpov and Kasparov Agree to Draw in 5th Game
Anatoly Karpov and Gary Kasparov played to a toothless draw last night.
The score is Kasparov 3, Karpov 2 after Game 5 of their World Championship Chess Match at the Hotel Macklowe in Manhattan.
After a series of hotly fought battles, tonight's game was shadow boxing.
It may have been that during the three-day break in the play, Kasparov's seconds had persuaded him to settle down to a less hectic pace.
In Games 1, 3 and 4, the champion had taken risks more appropriate for roulette than for chess and was fortunate in not suffering any loss.


SHOWDOWN IS SET
President Bush today vetoed a major anti-discrimination bill after an unsuccessful effort over the weekend to have Congress modify the legislation to his satisfaction.
In rejecting the measure, the Civil Rights Act of 1990, Mr.
Bush becomes only the second President since the modern civil rights era began in the 1950's to veto legislation identified as a civil rights measure.
The other was Ronald Reagan.


Willamette Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Depere Federal Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lyondell Petrochemicals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Business and Health; Cost Trade-Offs On Medical Care
PARTICIPANTS in the struggle with balloon ing health-care costs are under pressure to accept some kind of change.
Congress is tightening regulation on physicians and considering new controls on private health insurance for the elderly.
Many employers who provide health benefits for workers favor special taxes on businesses that do not do so.
Advocates of publicly financed health insurance, meanwhile, blame the medical profession and private insurers for the system's problems.
Trying to shape the debate, and perhaps deflect some criticism along the way, the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company is sponsoring a survey of employers, union executives, health professionals, insurers and Government regulators.
Representatives of each group were asked if they would be willing to make sacrifices "as part of a total plan in which everyone made some concessions."


2 Hell's Angels Are Charged In Death of 14-Year-Old Boy
Two members of the Hell's Angels motorcycle club were charged with second-degree murder yesterday in the death of a 14-year-old boy during an explosion on the Fourth of July, the police said.
The men, John Tannuzzo, 31, of 77 East Third Street in Manhattan, and Anthony Morabito, 42, of Lowell, Mass., were arrested Sunday and charged yesterday, a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, said.
The youth, Angar Hussan, died after being hit in the throat by pieces of flying metal after someone detonated explosives in a steel garbage can near the group's clubhouse on East Third Street.


Xilinx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


First Federal of Western Pa.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


'Big Bang' Unscathed, but Craft's Photos Shake Up Theorists
NEW infrared photographs of the entire Milky Way galaxy, showing the vast clouds of dust among the millions of stars, have been taken by a spacecraft that is surveying the sky for the faint glimmer of radiation from the birth of the universe.
The photographs, released last week by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, not only gave scientists an incomparable view of Earth's home galaxy.
They also demonstrated that the spacecraft, despite the shutdown of a major instrument, was still capable of producing an impressive array of observations of cosmic remnants from the Big Bang, the primeval explosion that is believed to have started the expanding universe.


Samuelson in Marathon
Joan Benoit Samuelson, the gold-medalist in the 1984 Olympic women's marathon and the American record-holder in the event, has entered the New York City Marathon, to be run on Nov. 4.
Among those already entered are Grete Waitz of Norway, a nine-time winner of the marathon; Katrin Dorre of Germany, the 1988 Olympic bronze-medal winner, and three of the top five ranked women in the world -- No. 2 Veronique Marot of Britain, No. 3 Kim Jones of the United States and No. 5 Wanda Panfil of Mexico.


Commonwealth Bancshares Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Valid Logic Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wesbanco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


'90 Cup: Clash of Cultures
When New York's Easy Goer and California's Sunday Silence met in the Breeders' Cup Classic a year ago for what turned out to be their final showdown, they carried the pride and passions of the East and West coasts.
It was hard to find anyone east of the Hudson River who thought Easy Goer less than a cinch, or anyone west of the Rockies who did not think Sunday Silence was the better colt.
On the card for this year's Breeders' Cup, Saturday at Belmont, there are several East-West confrontations but no passionate coastal rivalries.
The nation's top horse, Criminal Type, erased state lines by winning races from coast to coast before being retired, and the top fillies are so dominant that everyone has claimed them as their own.


'Good Men' Cancels Performances Over Fire
Because of an electrical fire on Saturday morning, the performance tonight for "A Few Good Men" at the Music Box Theater has been canceled.
The fire, which started in the lighting system, set off the sprinklers, causing water damage to the theater, said David Roggensack, a spokesman for the show.
Performances on Saturday and last night were also canceled.
Ticket holders for all these performances can exchange their tickets for new ones.
The show is expected to resume tomorrow with its matinee.


A.T.&amp;T. to Raise Weekend and Night Rates
A.T.&amp;T. said yesterday that it would raise its rates for night and weekend long-distance telephone calls, which are mostly made by residential customers.
The 2.2 percent price rise is scheduled to take effect on Nov. 2, and follows another small increase in night and weekend rates on Nov. 29 of last year.
Together, the increases represent a reversal of a six-year pattern of falling prices for the cheapest long-distance calls, and some experts predict further rises.


Southern Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Frank Sinkwich, 70, Heisman Winner in '42
Frank Sinkwich, the University of Georgia football player who won the 1942 Heisman Trophy, died today in his home here after a long illness.
He was 70 years old.
Mr.
Sinkwich became the first player from the Southeastern Conference to win the Heisman, an award that is given annually by the Downtown Athletic Club to the college football player voted the best in the nation.
"We've lost one of the great legends in football history," said Vince Dooley, Georgia's athletic director.
"He was not only a great player but a wonderful person and citizen of Athens."
Mr.
Sinkwich, a halfback, led Georgia to an 11-1 record in 1942 and a 9-0 victory over U.C.L.A. in the Rose Bowl.
In that season, he set S.E.C. records for passing and total offense, rushing for 795 yards and 17 touchdowns and completed 84 of 166 passes for 1,392 yards and 10 touchdowns.
In his three-year college career, he ran for 2,271 yards and 30 scores and passed for 2,331 yards and 30 touchdowns.
He was an All-Pro player for two years with the Detroit Lions.
Then, after his playing days, Mr.
Sinkwich, a Pennsylvania native, owned a beer and wine distribution business in Georgia.
He is survived by a son, Frank Sinkwich Jr. of Athens; a daughter, France Minshew of Atlanta; and two sisters, Violet Flask of Youngstown, Ohio, and Eleanor Shuffelbager of Lehigh, Fla.


Air Products &amp; Chemicals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NBSC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Westmoreland Coal Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New England Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Allied Waste Industries, Houston, promoted Daniel J. Ivan to president.
He replaces Fred Ferreira, who resigned. *
Computer Products Inc., Boca Raton, Fla., promoted Donald Jackson to corporate vice president of information systems.
David Swant was promoted to corporate vice president of human resources. *
Credit Systems Inc., St.
Louis, a processor of credit cards, named Keith A. Roever to the new position of senior vice president and chief financial officer. *
Gradco Systems Inc., Irvine, Calif., which supplies paper-handling devices, named several new officers.
Martin E. Tash was named chief executive; Harland L. Mischler, chief financial officer; Bernard Bressler, corporate secretary, and Joseph C. Sanchez, president and chief operating officer. *
Handleman Co., Troy, Mich., a supplier of home entertainment products, appointed Gerald R. Woodburn vice president and general manager of its Canadian Ltd. division.
He succeeds Dan Whitt, who will assume a position in its U.S. division. *
Mitre Corp., Bedford, Mass., a system engineering company, named Dr.
Barry M. Horowitz president and chief executive. *
Tultex Corp., Martinsville, Va., an apparel company, named Walter J. Caruba vice president of distribution.
James M. Baker was named secretary and treasurer.


Tribune Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Airborne Freight Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gerber Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Colette Audry, 84, Novelist and Critic
Colette Audry, a prize-winning novelist, screenwriter and critic, died on Saturday at Issy-les-Moulineaux southwest of Paris, her family reported.
She was 84 years old.
No cause of death was given.
Miss Audry received wide acclaim in 1946 for her screenplay for the film "The Battle for the Railway," an account of French rail workers' resistance to the Nazi Occupation, and she won the Medicis Prize, a top French literary award, in 1962 for her autobiographical novel "Behind the Bathtub."
Miss Audry was born in Orange in southern France.
She taught letters at the Lycee Moliere in Paris and was an accomplished literary critic, especially on the works of the philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre.
She collaborated with Sartre on the Revue des Temps Modernes, wrote several books and plays, and directed the Editions Denoel publishing house.
She wrote the screenplays for several films directed by her sister Jacqueline, including "Sophie's Unhappiness" in 1946 and "Bitter Fruit," which won the Grand Prix of French Cinema, in 1966.
Miss Audry ran as a Socialist candidate for the National Assembly in 1962 and 1967 and served on the party steering committee from 1971 to 1981.


Miller Makes Quick Work of Maple Leafs
The game, for all intents and purposes, lasted less than nine minutes.
Kevin Miller owned those nine minutes.
And so Miller, the man who stepped in to fill a critical void, at last stood out in doing so, as he last night instigated the early scoring and thereby ignited what for the Rangers became a 5-1 trouncing of the Maple Leafs at Madison Square Garden.


Both Conservatives and Socialists Claim Gains in Greek Local Votes
Both the governing conservative party and the opposition Socialists led by former Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou claimed victory today at the end of the second and last round of local elections, while the Communists conceded losses.
Though the conservative New Democracy Party won Greece's second largest city, Salonika, after its victory a week earlier here in the capital, candidates backed by the Socialists won a majority of the lesser municipalities in elections that were regarded as something of a referendum on the Government's economic austerity policy.


Profits Rise at ARCO, Phillips and Ashland
ARCO, Phillips Petroleum and Ashland Oil each reported higher third-quarter earnings today, but the reasons varied.
Higher crude prices contributed to big profit gains at the production units of ARCO and Phillips, but limited the improvement in refining and marketing earnings.
The companies said they restrained gasoline price increases at the pump during the quarter because of the President's request in early August.
ARCO's net income rose 21.9 percent; profits at Phillips more than doubled.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.81
7.81
8.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.24
7.23
7.52
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.19
7.19
7.50
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.47
8.47
7.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.75
8.74
7.93
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.83
9.83
9.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS*
7.76
7.77
7.33
*Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Colonial Bancgroup reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chronicle
PRINCESS ANNE was fined $295 yesterday and banned from driving for a month after pleading guilty to speeding twice in August near Gatcombe Park, her home in southwest England.
She was also ordered to pay $18 in court costs.
The 40-year-old daughter of QUEEN ELIZABETH II was represented by a lawyer and did not appear in Stow-on-the-Wold Magistrates' Court in Gloucestershire.
She had been charged with driving 77 m.p.h. and 90 m.p.h., each time in a 60 m.p.h. zone on the same road near Stow.
Princess Anne, who drives a Reliant Scimitar, a British sports car, was fined in 1976 for driving at nearly 100 m.p.h. on a British highway.
Five years before that, she had received two official warnings about speeding.


Beckman Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; Swiss Dancers Shine in Mixed Bill
The dancing was better than the choreography Saturday night in the second performance of the third annual Swiss Dance Festival at St.
Mark's Church.
The program, sponsored by the Danspace Project and the Swiss Institute of New York, brought together some well-trained Swiss dancers, all of whom deserved to be seen in more imaginative works.
"Calling You," created by Ray Tadio, a Philippine choreographer, was a love-her-and-leave-her dance in which Mr.
Tadio quarreled with Marie-Christine Giordano, a Swiss dancer.
When he walked out on her, a Bach prelude was replaced by a melancholy pop song in the recorded accompaniment.
After staring at a television set and turning on an electric fan, Miss Giordano rose from a chair, overturned it and let the twistings of her body express her mixed emotions.
The choreography was obvious, but Miss Giordano's intensity was admirable.


Citicorp's Debt Auction Nearly Fails
In a further reflection of nervousness about credit conditions at New York banks, bidders at a weekly auction of money market preferred stock for Citicorp, the nation's largest bank holding company, demanded such high interest rates on its 49-day securities yesterday that the auction came close to failing.
Bids at the auction for $75 million in securities, whose interest rates are reset every 49 days, caused the series of Citicorp preferred to be reset at an average yield of 9.40 percent, a rate that is 115 percent of the rate of top-rated 60-day commercial paper and nearly three percentage points higher than the previous rate.
Most Prices Little Changed


Allied Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


International Rectifier reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Conner Posts Big Gains
Conner Peripherals Inc., a leading maker of computer disk drives that is based in San Jose, Calif., today reported record third-quarter earnings and revenue.
Conner also introduced several new products and announced plans to move from over-the-counter trading to the New York Stock Exchange.Its shares jumped $1.625 today, to $21.625.
The company had earnings of $40.6 million, or 71 cents a share, more than three times the $11.8 million, or 31 cents a share, it reported in the 1989 period.
Sales more than doubled to $380.4 million, from $184.4 million in the third quarter of 1989.


Kleinert's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 1


Civic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First N.Y. Business Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Charts as Taskmasters
ANYONE who has ever tried to coordinate a big project knows how tough the job can be.
In a house, the plumbing must be in before the walls and floors are finished, and the floors must be finished before the carpeting is laid.
For a banquet, the hall must be rented before the invitations are printed and the folding chairs are rented.
And so on.
Of course, really big projects have project managers.
But in most situations the person in charge of coordinating jobs and materials has other responsibilities as well.
Quick Schedule Plus, from Power Up! , has been helping such people since 1987, and its new version, 3.1, adds some niceties.


White Supremacist Leaders Penalized for Inciting Death
A jury today found the leaders of a major white supremacist group liable for intentionally inciting the 1988 beating death of an Ethiopian man and assessed $12.5 million in damages against the leaders, their organization and two of the skinheads involved in the beating.
"This jury has said the hate business will be shut down forever and there will be a new season for justice in the Northwest," said Morris Dees, the lead lawyer for the plaintiffs.
"This verdict will clean his clock," he said, referring to the principal defendant in the case, Thomas Metzger, the 52-year-old head of a white supremacist group that many experts say has become the heir apparent to the Ku Klux Klan, especially through its use of cable television to promote its message of racial separatism.


A Bronfman Empire Stumbles
Peter and Edward Bronfman, the brothers who quietly built Canada's largest corporate empire after being shut out of the Seagram business controlled by their high-profile cousins, are running into problems on a number of fronts.
Among other things, large real estate investments by the complex empire under the Bronfmans' Edper holding company have soured, and the stocks of the main publicly traded Bronfman companies have fallen sharply on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
While the two brothers, once known as the "poor" Bronfmans, continue to avoid the limelight, their senior executives have taken a road show to Bay Street, Toronto's financial district, to try to quell growing fears.
The Bronfman empire is so vast -- more than 360 closely intertwined companies with holdings as diverse as the Toronto Blue Jays baseball team, the Labatt breweries, the Noranda natural-resources businesses, the Trilon financial-services companies and the Carena real-estate concerns -- that if it did suffer a serious setback it would have tremendous consequences on Canadian securities markets and on the economy, some analysts say.
"Any trouble that the Edper group runs into would not be good for Canada as a whole," said Richard Lafferty, president of Lafferty, Harwood &amp; Partners, a Montreal-based money manager.
All told, the Bronfman brothers control companies whose assets are valued in the tens of billions of dollars and that produce yearly revenues in the billions.
By some estimates, the more than 40 corporations in the Edper group that are publicly traded account for about 12 percent of the total capitalization of the Toronto exchange.
Investors are worried not only about the losses at some of the companies, which run into the hundreds of millions of dollars, but also about the labyrinthine structure of the holdings, private transactions among the various companies, and the large amounts of debt they carry.
Preferred shares in each of the companies are regularly shifted to other affiliated concerns and it is difficult to tell how much leverage some of the companies have.
"It's a pyramid scheme," said Stephen Jarislowsky, president of the Montreal-based Jarislowsky, Fraser &amp; Company, Canada's largest money managers, with more than $11 billion (Canadian) from pension funds and investors under management.
He was referring to the flow of cash in the empire, where many of the companies at the top depend on the dividends paid by those at the bottom for most of their cash flow.
If dividends are not paid steadily, cash problems spread upward through the group.
"They seem always to be shuffling paper here and there and I don't think any investor with any brains -- except for them -- can make head or tails out of it," said Mr.
Jarislowsky, who added that it takes months of number-crunching to understand the value of the Edper assets and precisely how and by whom they are held.
The Bronfman brothers declined to be interviewed, but Edper executives took umbrage at this assessment.
"I don't know that pyramid is the right word," said Trevor Eyton, president and chief executive of Brascan Ltd., one of the main holding companies within the Edper group.
"We call it top-down financing," he said, acknowledging that it is the bottom-up cash flow in the empire that worries analysts.
Edper Holdings, the group's top holding company, is 54 percent owned by Peter F. Bronfman, 61 years old, and his family.
The balance is held by the Pagurian Corporation, which holds the interests of top Edper executives.
Edper Enterprises, which falls directly below the top holding company, is 70 percent owned by Edper Holdings and 25 percent by Edward M. Bronfman, 62.
A Family Dispute
Edper, which takes its name from the family trusts set up for the two brothers, was initially financed with cash raised by selling the interests these Bronfmans had in the Seagram Company.
Seagram is controlled by Edgar M. Bronfman and his brother, Charles R. Bronfman.
Their Toronto cousins were shut out from executive management of the family liquor business because of a rivalry between Samuel Bronfman, the founder of the whiskey dynasty and father of Edgar and Charles, and his brother Allan, father of Edward and Peter.
The Edper companies, and indeed most of Peter and Edward Bronfman's holdings, are run by Jack L. Cockwell, a reticent South African accountant who put together most of the empire and is widely regarded as the financial whiz behind its business deals.
Mr.
Cockwell, who is vice president and chief operating officer of Brascan, declined to be interviewed for this article.
The 49-year-old accountant is highly respected in Canadian business circles for his financial skills as well as his vision, but he remains mysterious and aloof.
But as the Edper companies run into trouble, some Canadian analysts and institutional investors have asked him and other top Edper executives to give the public a better view of the companies' dealings and structure so that their value can be better assessed. (Disclosure requirements for public companies in Canada are markedly less demanding than those in the United States.) According to executives, the Edper group has declined such invitations, and that reluctance continues to fuel concern.
Some Debt Downgraded
"We don't know as analysts how much money they have," said Phillip Wright, who is with McNeil Mantha, a small Toronto firm.
He said the companies often mixed cash and securities on their balance sheets without outlining that much of these securities were notes from affiliated companies.
Late last month, major rating agencies downgraded the long-term debt of several interlocked companies, and operating expenses exceed operating income at at least two of the companies in the group.
As a result, the stocks of Edper, Hees International Bancorp Inc., Brascan, Carena Development and Bramalea Ltd. have fallen sharply in the last several weeks.
A few weeks ago the real estate arm of the group was battered when news that Bramalea, a subsidiary of Trizec, would take a $115.2 million writedown on third-quarter earnings because of soured Toronto land investments.
The charge gave Bramalea, which has spent nearly $1 billion over the last two years to acquire land, a net loss of $68.8 million for the first nine months of this year.
Short on Liquid Assets
Trizec reported last month that its income had fallen 60.2 percent from the corresponding nine-month period in 1989.
Trizec holds many highly valuable assets but real estate experts who have worked with the company point out that it is suffering from a lack of liquid assets at a time when real estate values are falling and market financing is scarce.
Beyond the real estate troubles, the Edper group has stumbled in financial services.
Royal Trustco Ltd., the group's trust company (whose main business is making residential mortgages) and the largest trust company in Canada, has seen its bottom line and stock price suffer after it made bold forays into the London real estate market and the United States savings and loan markets.
Royal Trustco's stock, which has been sliding for four months, is now trading below book value, and earnings potential over the near-term is dim, some analysts said.
And Hees Bancorp Inc., the merchant banking operation, has watched its stock fall because of troubled investments in real estate and natural resources.
In addition, the company has had a difficult time drumming up profitable merchant banking deals, said Eric Sprott, head of Toronto-based Sprott Securities.
The Edper group has also garnered unwanted attention from its interests in troubled companies it is trying to turn around, including the BCE Development Corporation, Unicorp Canada, the Enfield Corporation and National Business Systems Inc.
Short on Dividend Cash
In its natural resources and mining group, Noranda Inc. is operating at about break-even, hurt by low commodity prices.
Noranda is controlled by Brascan Ltd., one of the important holding companies, which is itself facing a $50 million cash shortfall.
Brascan reports paper profits based on its share of the profits of companies like Noranda and John Labatt Ltd., the food and drink company it controls.
Even so, Brascan has for many years not had enough cash to pay its dividend commitments and has to borrow to make the payments.
The Edper group has paid very little in taxes for years because the companies and their managers hold their interests in the empire largely through shares of preferred stock.
Under Canadian law in force at the time the arrangements were made, companies that held preferred shares in other companies did not pay taxes on dividend income earned through these holdings.
Hees, for example, paid only $5.5 million in taxes last year on net income of $248 million.
"They've played a lot with smoke and mirrors and they've done it for years without paying any taxes," said Mr.
Lafferty of the money management firm.
While there are some big problems with the Edper group, its resources remain vast, and many Bronfman watchers doubt that the companies will begin to topple -- although isolated assets may have to be sold to raise money.


Rollins Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Negotiator's Quiet Style Elicits Loud Protest
In negotiating his first city labor contract amid the city's worst financial troubles in years, Eric J. Schmertz, New York City's new chief negotiator, placed a premium on avoiding even a hint of incivility.
But now Mr.
Schmertz, an impartial mediator and arbitrator by training, finds that his nonconfrontational approach has offended just about everyone outside the municipal work force.
Former Mayor Edward I. Koch found the first settlement, with the teachers union, grounds for a personal attack.
Felix G. Rohatyn, the chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, said it produced a contract the city could not afford and should repudiate.
Even some administration officials say Mr.
Schmertz gave away too much too soon and never forced the union to grapple with the city's yawning budget gap.  'Quiet Diplomat'


More Than 2,000 Gather in Bronx to Mourn Slain 10-Year-Old Girl


Reshuffling at Banister Brings Back President
Banister Inc., one of Canada's largest construction companies, said yesterday that its president and chief executive, Allan S. Olson, was leaving, and that William M. Bateman had come back from retirement to lead the company.
Mr.
Bateman, 70 years old, who left Banister in 1986 as its president, declined to say yesterday why he was back at the helm.


Chronicle
RICHARD A. LEVINE will be stepping down and RICHARD RAVITCH stepping up as chairman of the Citizens Budget Commission.
The private civic group, which keeps an eye on New York City's spending, announced the appointment yesterday.
Mr.
Ravitch, the former chairman of the New York State Urban Development Corporation and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, was a candidate for mayor last year.
He is currently a general partner in the Blackstone Group, an investment banking organization.
The commission, Mr.
Ravitch said, "has always played a unique role in public discussions on the fiscal integrity of the city, and I hope in the years ahead the public will be well served" by its efforts.


First National Bank-Mich.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Carolina Power &amp; Light Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Body Armor &amp; Equipment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mendon Journal; Down on the Farm, Things Are Looking Up
When Shorty Glad bach looks back, 1985 still seems too close for comfort.
In that year of national farm crisis, his struggles paralleled those of many young farmers, caught in the clutches of enormous debt and depressed farm prices.
But he also acknowledges that in the five years since then, he and his family have come a long way on their grain, cattle and hog farm in this small farming town in north-central Missouri.


Lam Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Varian Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


United Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gold Falls but Holds Up Well Against Plunge in Oil Prices
Prices of gold futures fell yesterday on New York's Commodity Exchange, but analysts said the metal held up well against a record-breaking plunge in oil prices in response to speculation that Iraq would withdraw from Kuwait.
Gold futures settled $3.20 to $3.40 lower in New York, with the contract for spot delivery at $369.60 a troy ounce, down from $372.80 on Friday; silver ended 6.4 cents to 6.9 cents lower, with the spot contract at $4.194 a troy ounce.


Decision Could Delay Nov. 6 Vote in Illinois
A decision by Illinois court officials to keep a black-based political party off the Nov. 6 ballot in Cook County was delayed today by Justice John Paul Stevens of the United States Supreme Court.
Election officials here said the Nov. 6 election might have to be delayed.
The Chicago Board of Elections halted the printing of ballots and suspended absentee voting until the full Supreme Court could decide whether to hear an emergency appeal from the party, which is named for the former mayor of Chicago, Harold Washington.
The court's nine justices are expected to discuss the issue on Friday.
The Harold Washington Party was thrown off the ballot after a ruling by the Circuit Court.
That ruling was upheld this month by the Illinois Supreme Court.
A spokesman for the election board, Tom Leach, said ballots and election materials had already been sent to 10 of 50 wards in Chicago.
Mr.
Leach said that if the Supreme Court reinstated the Harold Washington Party, the Nov. 6 election might be delayed, perhaps costing the county more than $1 million.


Market Place; Are Auto Payouts Likely to Be Cut?
THE depressed state of the Big Three auto makers' shares is sparking a debate among analysts over whether investors now have an opportunity to reap unusually attractive dividends.
The bullish perspective focuses on the relatively strong financial positions and liquidity of General Motors, Ford Motor and Chrysler as evidence that auto makers will be able to pay dividends, despite prolonged softness in vehicle sales.


Hartford Steam-Boiler Ins.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Michigan Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Advertisers Elect New Officers
Philip Guarascio was elected chairman of the Association of National Advertisers yesterday at the group's annual meeting in Naples, Fla.
Mr.
Guarascio, who will head the 29-member board of national marketing and advertising executives, is executive director of corporate advertising and marketing at the General Motors Corporation.
L.
Ross Love, vice president of advertising for the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, was elected vice chairman.
Elected directors were: Richard Costello of General Electric; Charles B. Fruit, Anheuser-Busch; John L. Moorhead, Pepsi-Cola; John O'C.
Nugent, Unilever U.S.A., and Janet L. Soderstrom, Visa USA.
Mr.
Guarascio, who was vice chairman of the organziation last year, is a specialist in automobile marketing.
He begain his career as an assistant media buyer at Benton &amp; Bowles in 1964, where he eventually became senior vice president and director of media management.
He is best known for G.M.'s corporate image campaigns and is also responsible for aggressively pushing G.M. into integrated marketing.
"I think that my main objective as chairman is the brilliant execution of an already-strong and substantial plan," Mr.
Guarascio said in a telephone interview yesterday.
"We want to make sure our membership-retention and programs are more successful and that we bring the A.N.A.'s voice further up the line to more senior levels of management."


Brooklyn Man Is Held In Series of Sex Attacks
A Brooklyn man, who the police said raped or sexually abused at least six teen-age girls in the last year and a half, was arrested on Sunday, the police said.
The man, Jose Garcia, 26 years old, of 20 Essex Street in the East New York section, had a criminal record of sex crimes that dated to 1983, including an outstanding bench warrant, Lieut.
Vito Spano of the Brooklyn Sex Crimes Squad said.
He faces a total of 15 counts for rape, sodomy, sex abuse and other crimes.
Lieutenant Spano described Mr.
Garcia as "a very smooth talker" who would lure girls between 13 and 15 years old to secluded places by pretending to be a truant officer or a movie or video producer.
He never used a weapon.
Instead, he intimidated his victims, the police said.
All the attacks were in Brooklyn.
Mr. Garcia assaulted at least five girls in 1989, Lieutenant Spano said.


Lester Cowan, 83, Film Producer of Works Lighthearted to Weighty
Lester Cowan, an independent film producer in the 1930's and 40's whose credits ranged from comedies and gangster movies to dramas about World War II, died in his sleep on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old.
He apparently died of a heart attack, his family said.
In 1935, Mr.
Cowan, who had been executive director of the motion picture academy, became production supervisor of John Ford's 1935 film "The Whole Town's Talking," which starred Edward G. Robinson and Jean Arthur.
Four years later, he produced the first of his own films, the W. C. Fields comedy "You Can't Cheat an Honest Man." The next year, he produced "My Little Chickadee" with Fields and Mae West.
Of Serious Matters
On the dramatic side he produced "Ladies in Retirement" (1941), directed by Charles Vidor and starring Ida Lupino, Louis Hayward and Elsa Lanchester.
His war films included "Commandos Strike at Dawn" with Paul Muni (1942), "Tomorrow the World" with Fredric March and Betty Field (1944) and "The Story of G.I. Joe" with Robert Mitchum and Burgess Meredith (1945).
Mr.
Cowan, who was born in Mansfield, Ohio, was a student at Stanford University in the late 1920's when he went to Hollywood for a look at the film industry.
He was hired by the motion picture academy in 1928, wrote a book on the advent of talkies and helped to start the annual Academy Awards.
After World War II, Mr.
Cowan produced the musical "One Touch of Venus" (1948) and followed with "Love Happy" in 1950 and "Main Street to Broadway" in 1953.
Organizing a Research Council
In 1929, at the behest of the academy, he originated a lecture series for the University of Southern California: it was the first college course in film studies.
He also organized the film industry's research council, which developed such technical standards as the size and shape of the screen image and which hired George Gallup to undertake the first audience research.
In 1962, Mr.
Cowan went to Moscow to begin the first Soviet-American co-production arrangement.
Work was begun on filming "Meeting at a Far Mountain," from a novel published simultaneously in the United States and the Soviet Union, but the project foundered.
Mr.
Cowan is survived by his wife, Ann Ronell; two brothers, Robert, of San Francisco, and Bernard, of Los Angeles, and a sister, Alice Richmond of Palm Springs, Calif.


Bemis Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rail Freight Can Ease Traffic Congestion
To the Editor:
With the New York metropolitan area facing monumental traffic jams because of bridge and highway repairs (news article, Sept. 24), there is a proven method to alleviate congestion: rail freight transportation.
Every rail car bringing goods in or out of New York eliminates the movement of up to four trucks on public roads and bridges.
Trains are vastly more fuel efficient than trucks (railroads can haul nearly three times more freight per gallon than trucks) and are therefore less polluting.
Unlike the highway, the region's rail freight network has the capacity to handle additional volume and is in good physical condition.
While highways are maintained with public money (the taxes trucks pay do not match the heavy damage they inflict on roads and bridges), private-sector freight railroads like Conrail invest their own funds to maintain rail infrastructure, in addition to paying local and state taxes.
The freight rail renaissance has started in the region.
Backed by renewed interest from shippers of recyclable materials, solid waste, bulk commodities, food products, manufactured goods, building products and paper, Conrail is working with several parties, including the newly formed Harlem River Yard Ventures corporation in the Bronx and state and local government to restore unused and underutilized rail freight facilities in the region.
As these efforts by Conrail, connecting railroads (including the Long Island), shippers, independent entrepreneurs and government succeed in moving freight off the highways and onto the tracks, the region will benefit with fewer trucks clogging roads and bridges, more efficient use of fuel for freight transportation, and reduced air pollution.
PETER D. COHEN Area Mgr., Economic Development Consolidated Rail Corp. (Conrail) New York, Oct. 12, 1990


Chesapeake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Twin Disc Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Justin Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Return of $30 Million Sought From Ex-Chief of Centrust
Federal regulators today ordered David L. Paul, a former savings and loan executive from Miami, to return more than $30 million that they say he spent on an opulent life style using the money of depositors in Centrust Savings Bank, which is now bankrupt.
Recounting his $29 million art collection and Centrust's grandly designed 47-story office tower, complete with 24-karat gold-leaf ceilings and gold-plated toilet pipes, lawyers at the Office of Thrift Supervision said that, as the head of Centrust, Mr.
Paul had recklessly disregarded regulations and used millions of dollars' worth of Government-insured deposits for his own personal benefit.


BMC Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SURROGATE DENIED CUSTODY OF CHILD
In a case that sought to refine the definition of motherhood, a Superior Court judge today denied the request of a surrogate mother for parental rights to the child she bore for another couple, saying she had served in the transitory role of a foster parent.
Declaring that two parents are better than three, the judge, Richard N. Parslow of Orange County Superior Court, terminated the visitation rights of the 29-year-old surrogate mother, Anna L. Johnson.
The child, a boy, is to remain in the custody of his genetic parents, Crispina and Mark Calvert, as he has been since his birth on Sept. 19.


American Express Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Adopt-a-Class Program Helps Prevent Crime
To the Editor:
As an addendum to "Volunteers Can Do Something About Crime" by Joyce Black and Allan Luks (letter, Oct. 6), yet another very worthwhile volunteer program New Yorkers can participate in to do something about crime is the New York City Board of Education's "Adopt-A-Class" Program.
The program links professionals with a junior high school class and asks them to teach the students about their work approximately twice a month.
It provides not only an easy opportunity to show these children a glimpse of the "real world" and some fun, but also gives them critical support in their struggle in New York and teaches the volunteer about education and children in our city.
As such a volunteer in my second semester at Intermediate School 292 in the East New York section of Brooklyn, I have found this activity to be personally satisfying, fulfilling exactly the purpose for which it was created -- an eye-opener to what the most innocent of our young city residents are battling every day.
I encourage anyone who wants to make a direct and positive impact on city youngsters, and in turn against crime, to become involved in this and similar volunteer programs.
The payoff is universal and priceless.
WINSTON R. VON ENGEL Brooklyn, Oct. 6, 1990


Bankers Trust N.Y. Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Television; The Special Horror of Chemical War
All those television pictures of American troops in Saudi Arabia training in gas masks and protective clothing are reminders that even among the 20th century's prodigious array of weapons of slaughter, chemical warfare retains a special horror.
"Poisoned Winds of War," tonight's disturbingly timely offering from "Nova" at 8 on Channels 13 and 49 and at 9 on Channel 21, goes from the use of poison gas in World War I to the use of even more deadly successors in recent years, notably by Iraq.


Communications Satellite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Motorola Modems
Motorola Inc., the world's largest producer of wireless communications equipment, plans to announce today further details of its new wireless modems, which allow high-speed microwave communications among computers in an office building or a complex of buildings.
The company announced in April that the Federal Communications Commission had awarded it some scarce microwave frequencies for the equipment, which is intended to eliminate the need for rewiring when computers are moved in a building.


Walker Percy Memorial
A memorial service for the novelist Walker Percy is to be held tomorrow afternoon at 4:30 at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola, Park Avenue and 84th Street.
Among those to speak are the writers Shelby Foote, Stanley Kauffmann, Mary Lee Settle, Wilfred Sheed and Eudora Welty, and the editor Robert Giroux.


Consortium's New Software
The Open Software Foundation, a consortium of computer makers trying to develop a standard version of the Unix operating system, said yesterday that it plans to announce today that it is shipping the first version of the software program to its members.
The consortium, which includes the International Business Machines Corporation, the Hewlett-Packard Company and the Digital Equipment Corporation, was formed in 1988 to try to seize control of the Unix operating system from the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.
Since then, A.T.&amp; T. has formed its own group, Unix International, which includes Sun Microsystems Inc. and the Unisys Corporation.
Shipping the software to members is only an initial step for the Open Software Foundation.
Members must still rework the program so it runs on their specific computers.
Some industry analysts have said that the foundation's effort is lagging.
Unix International shipped its newest version of Unix earlier this year.


Jules Gueron, 83, Dies; French Atom Scientist
Jules Gueron, a leading French nuclear scientist, died on Oct. 11 in Paris, where he lived.
He was 83 years old.
He died of a heart attack while walking on a street, his son, Henri, said.
A 1935 graduate of the University of Paris-Sorbonne, Dr.
Gueron was a professor at the University of Strasbourg at the outbreak of World War II.
When Paris fell in 1940, he joined the Free French forces and was assigned to the British-Canadian Atomic Energy Project.
In 1946 he joined the French atomic energy agency, the Commissariat a l'Energie Atomique.
When he left in 1958 he was director of general programs and head of the physical chemistry department.
From 1958 to 1968 he was director of general research for the European Atomic Energy Community, known as Euratom.
From 1958 to 1976 he was a professor at the University of Paris-Sud.
Dr.
Gueron was the author of several books and hundreds of articles on atomic energy and was a chevalier of the French Legion of Honor.
He is survived by his wife, Genevieve; three sons, Henri of Manhattan and Maurice and Frederic, both of Paris; two brothers, Georges and Jean, both of Paris, and six grandchildren.


Reebok Net Falls 17.8%
Reebok International Ltd., blaming sluggish sales of its footwear in the United States, reported a 17.8 percent drop in third-quarter earnings today.
Reebok said earnings totaled $41 million, or 36 cents a share, for the quarter that ended on Sept. 30.
That compared with earnings of $49.8 million, or 44 cents a share, for the comparable period last year.
Its sales increased 12.2 percent, to $588.8 million from $524.5 million.
The company said its sales for the Reebok brand outside the United States more than doubled, exceeding $360 million, during the first three quarters.


Common Sense for Common Decency
En route to acquitting the rap group 2 Live Crew of obscenity charges, jurors in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., asked and received the judge's permission to laugh aloud at evidence.
The testimony had them in stitches: prosecutors and detectives reciting, in dull monotone, raunchy lyrics from the performance that got the band arrested.
The trial shows the hazards of bringing obscenity laws to bear on speech.
Speech is slippery and mutable; meanings change, depending on the speaker, the audience and, as this trial showed, the passage of time.
The group's crude sexuality shocked some at the start of the trial.
By the end, as one juror said: "The words were just words."


Mandela to Meet Zulu on Equal Terms
The African National Congress announced today that Nelson Mandela would soon meet with Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, the leader of the Zulu political movement Inkatha, under terms that Chief Buthelezi has demanded.
The concession by the congress seemed to be an indication that it had decided to make peace with Inkatha to avoid more violence between supporters of the two groups and end the divisions that have set into black politics.


Frohnmayer Rejects Grant for Boston Show
Officials of the Institute of Contemporary Art here said today that they had received formal notification of the rejection by the chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, John E. Frohnmayer, for a $40,000 grant for an exhibition of the artworks of Mike Kelley.
The money was to help with the organization and tour of the exhibition, which was to begin in Boston in 1992, and the grant had been recommended by an endowment selection panel.


Quotation of the Day
"A three-parent, two-natural-mom situation is ripe for crazy-making. I decline to split the child emotionally between two mothers." -- Judge Richard N. Parslow, settling a surrogacy dispute in California.  [ A14:1. ]


Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RF&amp;P Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Colonial Data Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nanometrics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Youth, 15, Is Held in Theft And Stabbing of a Boy, 13
A 15-year-old youth was arrested at his home in the Bronx yesterday and charged with stabbing a 13-year-old boy and stealing his bicycle on Sunday, the police said.
The victim was stabbed in the back while trying to fend off his attacker, who was identified by the police as Paul Fludd, of 320 East 156th Street, in the Melrose section.
The injured boy, who was not indentified because of his age, was in serious but stable condition at Lincoln Hospital last night.
After the boy was stabbed at East 161st Street and Melrose Avenue, the suspect fled, said Officer Fred Weiner, a police spokesman.
The youth was traced to his home with the help of information from witnesses.
He was charged as an adult with attempted murder, robbery and criminal possession of stolen property.


Philadelphia Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Preview of a Coming Attraction
OF the three new Macintosh computers recently introduced by Apple Computer Inc., the sleek Mac LC is perhaps the most intriguing.
It is also the least visible, since Apple does not plan to make it available until late January.
The new Mac Classic has a low price, but it lacks color, processing power and expandability; the Mac IIsi has all of these but its price is above the reach of many people in home offices or schools.
The new LC falls in a happy middle ground as Apple's lowest-priced color Macintosh.
It is also the most radical departure from conventional Macintosh design, with a low, slim profile that resembles a high-tech pizza box.
A Mac LC equipped with two megabytes of system memory, a 1.44-megabyte diskette "superdrive" and a 40-megabyte hard disk drive will have a list price of $2,499.
List prices for Apple products are typically discounted 25 percent to 30 percent at retail, so one can expect to pay less than $1,800 for the LC.
The price includes a keyboard and mouse but not a monitor.
With Apple's 12-inch color monitor, the street price would still typically be less than $2,400, making the LC an extremely attractive alternative to comparably powered 386SX PC's.
Apple also introduced a new color monitor last week, the 12-inch RGB Display.
At $599, the new color monitor is $400 less expensive than Apple's slightly larger 13-inch color display.
The tradeoff is that the resolution of the 12-inch display -- the number of picture elements, or pixels, on screen -- is 512 dots horizontally by 384 vertically, as against 640 by 480 on the 13-inch model, so the 12-inch color model can display 36 percent less information.
On the other hand, the new monitor looks pretty good, unless one is accustomed to the sharper 13-inch model.
And for the money, many people may decide that the extra pixels are unnecessary.
If they change their minds, the Mac LC works with the 13-inch color monitor.
It will not work with larger monitors without an optional video adapter.
So, for a discounted cost of less than $3,000, one can have a Macintosh system that is almost equivalent to the original Mac II color system, which sold for more than $6,500.
The LC uses the same 16-megahertz version of the Motorola 68020 chip used in the original Mac II back in 1987.
Apple almost certainly chose to use the older 68020 chip to keep costs down and to keep the Mac LC from eating into sales of the more powerful (and profitable) Mac II family, but it sacrificed some power in doing so.
People who need more power will probably prefer the new 68030-based Mac IIsi or its more powerful siblings, the IIci and the IIfx.
Home and school users, meanwhile, are likely to find the Mac LC more than sufficient.
Apple officials said that the Mac LC has twice the performance of the Mac SE.
Potentially more significant is Apple's assertion that the Mac LC outperforms I.B.M.-style PC's based on the very popular Intel 386SX 16-MHz microprocessor.
We have seen no independent benchmark tests to confirm or dispute this, but technical specifications alone are not enough to determine the better computer.
Unless the potential customer has a substantial investment in DOS-based software, the Mac LC will probably win a lot of people away from the 386SX machines.
The Mac is much easier to set up and operate than standard PC's.
If price and performance are roughly equal, as they appear to be, the Mac LC wins the contest simply because it is less aggravating to use.
Apple is developing a new plug-in card to let the Mac LC run software written for the Apple IIe in addition to its own Macintosh software.
The price for the card, due in March, has been set at $199.
The Apple II family has been a mainstay in education for more than a decade, but it has now been overtaken by the march of technology.
It is to Apple's credit that it has provided a bridge from the old technology to the new, instead of expecting its users to leap to a new standard.


Knape &amp; Vogt Mfg reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13
A Saudi official hinted at a resolution to the gulf crisis that might allow Iraq to keep some Kuwaiti territory as an outlet on the Persian Gulf.
He urged Arabs to seek a peace "through all means." Page A1
Price of oil falls below $30 a barrel amid hints of peace D1
Iraq said it might release hostages being held in Baghdad and Kuwait, including all French hostages and some elderly and sick Americans.
The United States said the gesture has not changed the standoff.
A10
An American-led air strike in Iraq could cause thousands of civilian casualties and $200 billion in damage, officials and analysts say.
Such an attack could also threaten the fragile coalition opposing Iraq.
A10
The Israeli police sealed Jerusalem to keep Palestinians out of the city and away from Israelis who might seek revenge for the slaying of three Jews on Sunday.
A11
Senate votes, 97-1, to give Israel arms worth $700 million A11
Homelessness is growing in Hungary as the nation evolves into a capitalist society.
The Government, facing rising inflation and unemployment, has few resources to help the 20,000 people with nowhere to live.
A1
Soviet black-market crime has risen, and law enforcement officials acknowledged they are ill equipped to fight this sudden explosion of illicit entrepreneurship.
A3
Old East German Communist is now selling hearing aids A9
Conservatives and Socialists claim gains in Greek election A8
Study says the Peace Corps is more needed and less able A6
Nelson Mandela and the Zulu leader, Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, will meet.
The encounter will advance Chief Buthelezi's claim to be a partner in constitutional talks.
A3
China's fears have turned to Japan as the old worries about a Soviet invasion have eased.
Japanese proposals to send troops to the Persian Gulf have heightened its concerns.
A12
Envoys from Taiwan seeking influence on Chinese mainland A13
Pakistan's minority groups face voting restrictions A5
Paramaribo Journal: Suriname's racial diversity A4
National A14-21, B6-7
A tax compromise may be at hand.
The White House and Congressional leaders have tentatively agreed on a 31 percent top tax rate, up from 28 percent, and tax increases on gasoline, luxury items and alcohol.
A1
States claim cut in deductions will hurt wealthier taxpayers A21
Why is the House still at work?
The budget has kept the House in session closer to Election Day than ever before.
Given the mood, some lawmakers said they would rather face their colleagues than their voters.
A21
Negotiators reaffirm decision to cut "Star Wars" A16
Washington Talk: $435 hammers are gone, but questions remain A16
The nation's sour political mood has surfaced in Oregon.
Mark O. Hatfield, who has served in the Senate for 24 years, is in danger of losing his seat to a political newcomer.
A14
The Civil Rights Act was vetoed by the President.
He said the bill, which sought to expand job protections that rights groups say were cut by recent Supreme Court rulings, would introduce quotas into employment.
A1
House accepts most of Senate bill restricting airport noise B6
Changes in the clean air legislation have been approved by House and Senate negotiators.
The amendments, the first in 13 years, strengthen and broaden the Government's authority to reduce air pollution.
A1
In New York, Clean Air Act will make everything cost more A18
Utilities say cleaner air is feasible but expensive A18 Criticism of the Ethics Committee over the investigation into five lawmakers' links to Charles Keating is spreading.
Senator John McCain, one of the five, said the panel is unfairly delaying its decision.
A16
A surrogate mother's custody fight ended when a judge in California denied the woman's request for parental rights to the child she bore for another couple.
A14
Deposed Navajo chairman and son are sentenced A17
White supremacist must pay $5 million to slain man's family B6
Regional B1-5
Mayor Dinkins imposed a pay cut of 5 percent on himself and nearly 700 other administration officials and froze salaries for 3,800 managerial employees.
The move will save $4.5 million this fiscal year.
A1
Dinkins's commuter tax plan gets cool reception on L.I. B2
New York's chief labor negotiator, Eric J. Schmertz, has found that his nonconfrontational approach has offended just about everyone outside the municipal work force.
B1
Crime is an issue in the campaign for Governor but not the same one for each candidate.
Mario Cuomo mentions new prisons and efforts to ban assault weapons.
His opponents mention the lack of a death penalty.
B1
Representative Bruce A. Morrison, the Democratic nominee for governor of Connecticut, is running third in a three-way race.
Some say the breakneck pace of his campaign has failed to convey his message.
B1
Women are being denied abortions at many hospitals and clinics in New York City because they are infected with the AIDS virus, the City Commission on Human Rights said.
A1
The jogger rape trial was disrupted when one of the two defendants screamed and broke down after the prosecutor had completed her opening statement.
A request for a mistrial was denied.
B1
2,000 grieve for a 10-year-old girl killed in the Bronx B3
Kasparov and Karpov draw in fifth game of championship B2


2,000 in the Bronx Mourn At Funeral for Slain Girl, 10
Filling the streets, stoops and sidewalks around a tiny church in the Bronx, more than 2,000 people grieved for a 10-year-old neighbor yesterday, murmuring responses to a funeral liturgy and talking later of the random, violent crime that has stolen into their community.
The girl, Jessica Guzman, who was found dead in a wooded area along the Bronx River Parkway last week, was a stranger to most of those who mourned her inexplicable killing, but her death synthesized their shared fears, anger and panic.


Miscellany
*
Marisa Bolognese, former vice president and management supervisor at Lord, Geller, Federico, Einstein, and several others from the agency have formed Bolognese &amp; Partners Inc.
The New York-based agency has Contel Telephone Operations and the Contel Corporation, Atlanta, as its first clients. *
Reebok International Ltd., Canton, Mass., the footwear maker, will be the exclusive athletic footwear advertiser for the 1992 Olympic Games in Barcelona, Spain, through an agreement with NBC worth several million dollars.


Lone Star Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Path From Exile And Underground To Culture Minister
It is two years since Spain's Socialist Government persuaded Jorge Semprun to accept the post of Culture Minister, yet it still seems odd to find him in an elegant office, decked out in suit and tie, surrounded by secretaries and presiding over a bureaucracy with a $550 million annual budget.
For many a Spanish intellectual, this would be the climax to a career.
But for Mr.
Semprun, whose curriculum vitae includes French Resistance fighter, concentration camp inmate, Communist organizer, left-wing dissident, successful novelist and acclaimed screenwriter of "La Guerre Est Finie," "Z" and "The Confession," it is just another turn in an extraordinary life.


Phillips Petroleum Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Taiwan Envoys Seeking Access on Mainland
Taiwan legislators are slipping into mainland China these days, touting their political influence in hopes of meeting with the highest-ranking Chinese leaders possible, and carrying back messages they believe will play a role in the quiet diplomacy that is taking place across the Taiwan Strait.
The visits are only one way that the barriers between Taiwan and the Chinese mainland are breaking down -- not so dramatically as the destruction of the Berlin wall, but with scarcely less significance for this region.The four-decade ban by Taiwan on official contacts with mainland Chinese authorities is eroding, under the pressure of the legislators' visits and as well as joint meetings on repatriation of illegal immigrants from the mainland.
Last month, Red Cross officials from Taiwan and China met secretly on Quemoy, an island administered by Taiwan off the coast of southern China, to negotiate repatriation of Chinese refugees who had fled to Taiwan.
The news came out after the talks ended.


F.C.C. TV Hearing Set
The Federal Communications Commission said yesterday that it was still considering a variety of proposals to modify regulations governing the ownership of television programming.
The commission said it would hold a hearing on Dec. 14 for further comments on the issue from networks, Hollywood studios and producers and other interested parties.
The commission gave no indication of how it might rule on the issue, one of the most important facing the television industry.


Dominion Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Blue Chips Dip but Most Stocks Advance
Blue-chip stocks fell slightly yesterday, but the rest of the market advanced in the wake of plummeting oil prices, promising signs from the Middle East and what could finally be firm action on the budget.
But many traders seemed too confused by contradictory currents and stayed on the sidelines to wait for new signals.
Dow Off 4.70


Easel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Grossman's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ladd Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Stratus Computer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Zenon C. R. Hansen, 81, Leader Who Restored Life to Mack Truck
Zenon C. R. Hansen, chairman, president and chief executive of Mack Trucks Inc. in the 1960's and 1970's, died Friday at his home in Sebring, Fla.
He was 81 years old.
A spokeswoman for the family said he died of leukemia.


Crane Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BRIEFS
*
Airbus Industrie, a consortium of European aircraft manufacturers, said Austrian Airlines had ordered 13 A320's and A321's and had taken out options for another 13 aircraft.
The deal is worth $2.08 billion.  *
BP Canada Inc., Calgary, Alberta, the oil and gas company, said it would sell $84 million worth of nonstrategic oil and gas assets to an undisclosed purchaser.
BP Canada is a subsidiary of BP Canadian Holdings Ltd. *
Contel Corp., Atlanta, a telecommunications company, said it would sell its Contel Office Communications subsidiary to Opus Telecom Corp., Atlanta, a telecommunications products and systems company.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Lufthansa German Airlines has proposed to the Bonn Government that it be allowed to take over the former East German carrier Interflug, Heinz Ruhnau, the Lufthansa management board chairman, said in an interview with the Sunday newspaper Welt am Sonntag. *
Olympia Holding Corp., Miami, has been granted permission by a Federal bankruptcy judge to use $24.4 million from accounts receivable to keep its P-I-E International trucking company operating until the next court hearing on Nov. 4.  *
U S West, Denver, signed a joint-venture agreement to build the first commercial cellular telephone network in the Soviet Union.
The agreement was signed with the Leningrad City Telephone Network Production Association and the Leningrad Station of Technical Control.
The agreement calls for a $6 million initial investment by a U S West subsidiary.


Helms Vows to Fight on Arts Funds
Senator Jesse A. Helms vowed tonight to fight for an unconditional prohibition on Federal funds for obscene and pornographic works, setting the stage for a lengthy Senate debate.
The issue, among the most contentious in Congress, is headed for a debate on the Senate floor on Tuesday.
It pits those who want stringent restrictions on Federal financing of art they consider obscene against those who say such restrictions would compromise artistic freedom.


It's Official: Strawberry Becomes a Free Agent
Having not ruled out the possibility of remaining with the Mets, Darryl Strawberry became a free agent yesterday for the first time in his eight-year career.
He immediately put himself in position to become one of the highest-paid players, if not the highest paid, in baseball history.
Strawberry, Kirk Gibson, Vince Coleman, Dave Righetti and Tim Leary were among 18 players who filed yesterday, bringing to 21 the number of players on the free-agent list.


Bank of San Francisco reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giants Still Savoring Dramatic Victory
The excitement was high in the Giants' locker room Sunday after their last-play, 20-19 victory over the Phoenix Cardinals.
Today, the excitement turned to pride as coaches and players talked about character, selflessness and pulling together.
There was also relief that Phil Simms's sprained left ankle was not a serious injury.
Simms was walking without a limp, and he was expected to be ready Wednesday when practice begins for Sunday's big game here between the Giants (6-0) and the Washington Redskins (4-2).


Allegheny Power System reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Which Is More, 33%? Or 31+1+1?
After endless posturing and demagogy, Congress is on the verge of reducing the deficit without wrecking the tax code -- a miraculous outcome to a bizarre process.
It now seems clear that Congress will cut the deficit $500 billion over five years through income and medicare tax hikes on higher-income families, excise taxes increases, cuts in defense and agriculture -- and no cut in capital gains taxes.
So what's all the shouting about?
Appearances, mainly, of how to tax the rich.
Much of the debate is silly, with the major dispute boiling down to the difference between 33 percent and the sum of 31 + 1 + 1.
Even so, the bizarre process isn't over yet.
The cosmetic differences, if unresolved, threaten to shut down the Government again tomorrow.


American Express Gains Despite Shearson
The American Express Company reported a slight increase in third-quarter earnings yesterday.
But the company's profits were dampened by a continued poor performance from Shearson Lehman Brothers.
American Express reported that its net income rose 3.6 percent, to $343.8 million, or 74 cents a share, from $331.8 million, or 77 cents a share, in the third quarter of 1989.
Revenues fell 6.8 percent, to $6.06 billion from $6.5 billion.
The earnings per share were higher in 1989 because of a smaller number of shares outstanding.


Suburban Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Suffolk Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No More Uncertainty For Philips Subsidiary
The North American Philips Corporation has broken off an industrial electronics unit from a military business it is trying to sell and has named Gary D. Clarke to run the subsidiary.
Mr.
Clarke, 49, will be president of the new division, known as the Magnavox Industrial Electronics Company.
It has been part of the Magnavox Government and Industrial Electronics Company, which North American Philips has had up for sale for the last year and a half.
Magnovox has been owned by Philips since 1974.


Appointment At Chiat/Day
Don Peppers has been appointed president and chief executive of Perkins/Butler Direct Marketing Inc., a subsidiary of Chiat/Day/Mojo, New York, where he is now executive vice president for business development.
He replaces Robert Perkins, who was recently named president and chief executive of Chiat/Day's flagging New York office.
New business has been a concern for the agency.
The New York office has lost several key accounts in the last year, most recently, the Royal Carribean Cruise Lines business.
Jay Chiat, the agency's chairman, denied that the shift of Mr.
Peppers was related to the decline of billings.
"The reverse is actually true," Mr.
Chiat said.
"His background on the client level and in agency business makes him the best possible candidate."
Mr.
Peppers said that he was "ecstatic" about the new positon.
"I feel it's the job I've been in training for all my adult life," he said.


Thomas Nelson Publishers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Conner Peripherals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Light Can Unmask The Traitorous Cells Of Immune Disease
TO researchers' surprise and initial disbelief, an unusual technique developed for an immune system cancer is emerging as a potential treatment for an important family of ailments known as autoimmune diseases.
The technique seems to work by unmasking the traitorous cells that cause these diseases when they attack the body's own tissues.
The technique, photopheresis, depends on a drug that becomes active only when exposed to ultraviolet light.
After a patient has taken the drug, blood is removed from the body, exposed to ultraviolet light and returned.
The drug, known in shorthand as 8-MOP, occurs in a Nile River weed that was known by the ancient Egyptians for making the skin more sensitive to sunlight.


New Sex Charge Is Added to House Inquiry
The House ethics committee voted today to expand its inquiry into sexual misconduct charges against Representative Donald E. (Buz) Lukens, Republican of Ohio.
Officials close to the committee said they were investigating allegations that the lawmaker fondled and propositioned a young woman who was a Congressional employee.
"The committee has received additional evidence indicating that Representative Lukens may have made unwanted and unsolicited sexual advances to a Congressional employee," the committee said in a statement.
Mr.
Lukens, who lost a Republican primary last year and will leave Congress at the end of this year, would not respond directly to the charges.
"My attorneys have advised me that since little or nothing is known about the new allegations there will be no comment until we have more information," he said in a statement.
The 59-year-old lawmaker was convicted last year on a misdemeanor charge of contributing to the unruliness of a minor.
He was accused of paying a 16-year-old girl $40 to have sex with him at his Columbus apartment in November 1988.
He was sentenced to 30 days in jail and fined $500 but has been free on appeal.
Mr.
Lukens subsequently apologized for "a dumb mistake" and announced his candidacy for re-election in May.
He finished a distant third in the primary.
The House panel, officially the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct, had not acted in the case, since Mr.
Lukens was appealing the charges.


Miami Coach Named
Ron Fraser of the University of Miami, the nation's winningest active Division I coach, was named yesterday to lead the United States baseball team for the 1992 Olympics.
The Barcelona Olympics will mark the first time that baseball is a medal sport. (AP)


SunGard Data Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Blair Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tredegar Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chess Coverage
During the championship match between Gary Kasparov and Anatoly Karpov, the Chess column will not appear on Tuesdays.
Coverage of the fifth game of the championship appears today on page B2.


From U.S., $500,000 for Welk's Birthplace
As part of its $52.2 billion spending bill on farming, nutrition and rural development, Congress has voted half a million dollars to renovate the birthplace of the retired band leader Lawrence Welk and build tourist accommodations nearby.
By voice vote on Monday, the House accepted compromises worked out by a House-Senate conference committee on the appropriations bill, which pays for farm subsidies, most Agriculture Department functions and the Food and Drug Administration.
Among the $14.1 billion for rural development projects is $500,000 for Strasburg, N.D., where Mr.
Welk was born in 1903.
The Senate included the money to help revitalize the community, which has 700 people.
Representatives Silvio Conte, Republican of Massachusetts, and Richard Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, both conference committee members, went on record as opposing the appropriation before signing the compromise bill.


Senate Rejects Moratorium On Cheap Mining Land Sales
Heeding protests from Western states, the Senate late today rejected a proposed one-year ban on selling Federal land containing gold, silver and other minerals to mining companies for as little as $2.50 an acre.
The proposal was sponsored by Senator Dale Bumpers, Democrat of Arkansas, who called the practice a flagrant giveaway of public land.
Western senators, led by Senator Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada, said the bill would devastate the mining industry and stifle economic development in the West.
The measure was defeated 50 to 48 as the Senate debated an $11.7 billion appropriations bill for the Interior Department and other Federal agencies.
The House approved a similar moratorium in its version of the bill.
Differences will have to be reconciled by House and Senate negotiators.


Union Carbide Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Keane Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hallwood Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 1


DSC Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fries Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Constellation Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; Religion in America: Fact and Perception
Under God Religion and American Politics By Garry Wills 445 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.95.
It is the thesis of Garry Wills's new book that "nothing has been more stable" in American history "than religious belief and practice," that "religion has been at the center of our major political crises," and that "the willed ignorance about religion" on the part of political reporters and historians reflects "a refusal to see the connection between Christian doctrine and politics."
In the course of setting up this argument, Mr.
Wills writes at length about the tendency of intellectuals to discount the importance of religion in this country.
He notes that the same commentators who reported on the "death of God" fad that swept certain divinity schools in the 1960's have ignored or played down the potency of the evangelical movement.
He points out that reporters focused on President Ronald Reagan's skills as a communicator, rather than on the fact that he was communicating religious attitudes.
And he argues that "the 'educated' part of America" mistakenly assumed that the Scopes trial in 1925 was a victory for the evolutionary point of view -- when, in fact, Darwinism did not make a strong showing in textbooks until the 60's, when the Sputnik-generated rivalry with the Soviet Union focused new attention on the teaching of science in American schools.
Among the writers Mr.
Wills singles out for their historical myopia are Henry Steele Commager and Arthur Schlesinger Jr., both of whom have written about the essential secularity of the American mind.
"Commager and Schlesinger are to American history what Michael Dukakis was, in 1988, to American politics," Mr.
Wills writes.
"Much of American (indeed, of human) experience is off their mental maps. They have a serene provincialism, dismissive of the ordinary torments of people less optimistic, irreverent, and pragmatic than they."
But while Mr.
Wills presents many of his arguments in this book as a kind of intellectual heresy, those views often represent a synthesis of other scholars' work in this same area.
The historian Sydney Ahlstrom has made a strong case for Americans' sense of themselves as a "religious people"; Henry May has suggested that the vigor of American culture stems from the country's dialectic between secular and religious thought; and Richard Hofstadter has illuminated the links among fundamentalism, anti-intellectualism and right-wing politics in American life.
More recently -- last year, in fact -- two books appeared that underscored the hold that religion continues to exert on Americans' lives: Andrew Greeley's "Religious Change in America" (Harvard University Press) and "The People's Religion: American Faith in the 90's" by George Gallup Jr. and Jim Castelli (Macmillan).
Indeed, Mr.
Wills draws heavily upon the Gallup-Castelli study for statistics demonstrating the extent and nature of American piety:
Nine out of 10 American say they have never doubted the existence of God.
Eight out of 10 Americans say they believe in a Judgment Day.
Seven out of 10 Americans say they believe in life after death.
Thirty-seven percent of Americans say they believe in the Devil.
Forty percent of the American population attend church in a typical week.
Instead of trying to explain the social and historical reasons that make the United States the most religious nation in the developed world, Mr.
Wills launches into a discursive -- and highly arbitrary -- discussion of the interplay between politics and religion in American life.
Considerable space is devoted to James Madison's and Thomas Jefferson's efforts to protect religion by separating church and state (a subject with which Mr. Wills seems fully at ease, having already set forth detailed examinations of both men's works in two earlier books, "Inventing America" and "Explaining America"), but such pivotal events as the Great Awakening are completely ignored.
The Scopes trial and the current debates over abortion and pornography are held up to the light, but the issue of school prayer is mentioned only in passing.
The bulk of this book consists of somewhat dated profiles of candidates in the 1988 Presidential race -- profiles that apparently represent amplified versions of stories Mr.
Wills wrote for various periodicals during the campaign.
In these profiles, Mr.
Wills tries to look at the candidates' own attitudes toward religion and the role that public attitudes toward religion played in shaping their campaigns.
In the case of Jesse Jackson and Pat Robertson, this sort of examination yields fairly obvious insights: the very fact that these two men, representing the extremes of Left and the Right, were ordained ministers forces the reader to acknowledge "the broad stratum of religion underlying American culture."
With the other candidates, this approach devolves into more generalized assessments of character.
Mr.
Wills ends up reciting what are now familiar arguments about Gary Hart's lack of roots and a moral vocabulary, Michael Dukakis's lack of passion, and George Bush's successful exploitation of the themes of patriotism, religion, and law and order.
When he tries to come up with a more original take on these men's personalities, the results tend to feel strained and pretentious.
He compares Mr.
Hart to Don Giovanni, as someone who lives insistently in the present, unable to connect the future and the past. ("Donna Rice is the Zerlina of our story," he writes.) In another chapter, he even more incongruously compares Mr.
Dukakis to Hippolytus, Racine's ascetic hero who runs afoul of the gods. (Of the Dukakis aide John Sasso's fall from grace over campaign improprieties, Mr. Wills writes, "Dukakis's need for a Sasso, for some escape hatch from his own self-containment, is like Hippolytus' involvement, against his nature, with Phaedra, the stepmother who falls in love with him.")
Fortunately, these sorts of passages do not occur frequently in "Under God." For the most part, the writing in this volume is intelligent and fiercely logical.
Mr.
Wills gives a surgical, if highly debatable, analysis of Mario M. Cuomo's stand on abortion (privately against it, publicly pro-choice), and he reveals the ironies contained in the religious Right's opposition to the strict separation of church and state.
Such controversial insights, however, do not add up to a cohesive book.
In the end, "Under God" is a hodgepodge of thoughtful historical analysis and dated journalism, strongly articulated opinions and popularized recyclings of other people's research.


Fieldcrest Cannon reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chronicle
It was a celebration of lyrical nostalgia and long friendships at the Savoy Grill in Manhattan last night as songwriters whose careers began in the golden era of Tin Pan Alley held a surprise party for one of their own.
Appropriately enough, there were 90 names on the guest list for the 90th birthday of GERALD MARKS, whose songs range from the soulful "All of Me" to the rousing "Is It True What They Say About Dixie?"
SAMMY CAHN , 77 ("Call Me Irresponsible"), and CY COLEMAN , 61 ("Hey Look Me Over"), were among those present.


Pathe Moves a Step Closer To a Deal for MGM/UA
The Pathe Communications Corporation said today that it had taken a big step toward completing a $1.3 billion acquisition of the MGM/UA Communications Corporation, but even on the eve of the deal's scheduled completion, the company did not specify the sources of its financing.
Pathe had deposited $353 million into an escrow account as evidence of its ability to complete the transaction, of which $200 million has been distributed to MGM/UA shareholders.
The company said today that it had deposited checks into escrow totaling an additional $967 million, apparently all but guaranteeing that the deal would go through.
Pathe said the deal should close by Friday.


Cray Earnings Off 9.8%
Cray Research Inc., based in Minneapolis, yesterday reported declining earnings and revenues for the third quarter, which the company said had been expected.
New orders fell.
The company reported earnings of $27.6 million, or 99 cents a share, down 9.8 percent from $30.6 million, or $1.04 a share, in the comparable period a year ago.
Revenues fell 11.2 percent, to $186.6 million from $210.2 million.
"While we continue to expect flat revenue this year, we see significant opportunities to improve 1990 earnings over last year," said John A. Rollwagen, the chairman and chief executive.
Cray's stock jumped $2.25 a share yesterday, to $27.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Correction
A report in the Currents column of The Home Section on Oct. 4 about the Metro bus tunnel in Seattle misidentified a contributing artist.
She is Laura Sindell, not Laura Sidwell.


Freymiller Trucking Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Biggest Telescope
Technicians at the W. M. Keck Observatory on the summit of Hawaii's Mauna Kea volcano last week began the crucial step of installing light-gathering mirrors in the Keck Telescope, which will be the world's largest astronomical telescope.
John Gustafson, the observatory's spokesman, said that the first five hexagonal mirror segments were successfully installed in the huge instrument and that when four more are installed next month, the new telescope will achieve "first light" by beginning a series of test observations of astronomical objects.
At that point, the light-gathering power of the telescope will equal that of the 200-inch Hale Telescope on Mount Palomar, Calif., the most productive telescope ever built and second in size only to a somewhat defective Soviet telescope.
The installation of glass mirror segments, each of which is six feet across and weighs 880 pounds, will then continue until all 36 are in place in late 1991.
On completion of the entire mirror, the telescope will have a light-gathering power four times greater than that of the Palomar telescope.
Its setting at an altitude of 13,600 feet will put it above most of the earth's obscuring atmosphere, allowing the telescope to study extremely faint objects near the edge of the observable universe.
The Keck Telescope will cost $87 million, $70 million of which was provided by a foundation created by the late oil magnate William Myron Keck, founder of the Superior Oil Company.
The telescope's light-gathering mirror, much lighter and cheaper than a conventional mirror of the same size would be, is relatively flexible.
To prevent its weight from warping the mirror out of shape as the telescope changes direction, motor-driven support structures commanded by a computer continuously adjust pressures at the back of each segment.


United Illuminating reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


United Dominion Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Reason to Amend Supreme Court Tenure; The Political Factor
To the Editor:
I heartily endorse Paul Feiner's suggestion that the terms of SupremeCourt Justices be limited by constitutional amendment ("Supreme Court Shouldn't Be Lifetime Job," letter, Oct. 5).
However, I do not agree that their terms should be limited to 14 years.
That might do for other Federal judges, but the highest court should have an infusion of new talent every 10 years and terms should be staggered.
In this way no President, no matter how ideological his appointments to the Court, could continue to exercise his influence long after he left office, a violation, I believe, of the constitutional doctrine of the separation of powers.
Once such an amendment was added to the Constitution, there would no longer be any such thing as "the Warren Court" or "the Rehnquist Court." Instead we would have a Supreme Court functioning as the Framers of the Constitution intended, far freer of politics than it is today, far more responsive to the evolving nature of our society and better able to handle the constitutional challenges that such a society engenders.
SOL STEMBER Van Nuys, Calif., Oct. 8, 1990


Time Warner Shows Loss but Has Gains at Most Units
Time Warner Inc., still weighed down by merger debt, yesterday reported a loss for the third quarter, but it also said its operating profits for most of its main divisions had reached record highs.
The company attributed the loss to interest expenses and other costs related to the acquisition of Warner Communications Inc., which was completed on Jan. 10.


Atlanfed Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Japanese Markets Rise With the Yen
Japan's financial markets, battered in recent months by rising interest rates and the leap in oil prices, have received a lift from an unlikely source: a sharp appreciation in the value of the yen.
The rosier sentiment here in reaction to the resurgent yen indicates how much the Japanese have altered their economy since 1985, when the leading industrial nations began a conscious effort to push the dollar lower to ease America's yawning trade deficit.
At that time, Japanese companies complained loudly as the yen soared and their products became more expensive overseas, reducing the exports on which the economy thrived.
But today, the markets have focused not on the negative impact a rising yen might have on exports, but on two big benefits: It has reduced Japan's bill for imported oil, which must be paid in dollars, providing considerable relief from soaring world energy prices in the wake of the crisis in the Persian Gulf, and it has permitted interest rates here to fall after a damaging yearlong surge.
Bond Yield Drops
The dollar has declined from 150 yen in mid-July to as low as 124.40 last Thursday in New York, a 17 percent tumble.
Buffeted by fears of a recession and the budget crisis in Washington, the dollar, although up slightly the last two days to close at 126.02 today in New York, is edging toward its record low of 120.45, reached in January 1988.
The yield on Japan's benchmark 10-year Government bond, meanwhile, has plummeted from 8.7 percent a month ago to 7.75 percent today, as the stronger yen has slightly reduced concerns about inflation.
There is talk now that commercial banks may reduce their key long-term prime lending rate after steep increases in recent months.
That has revived the deeply troubled stock market, which has been through a severe slide, largely because of the higher cost of borrowing.
The Nikkei stock average closed today at 25,070.86, up 2.4 percent, or 589.37 points.
That still represents a 36 percent tumble from the beginning of the year, but it is also a steep increase from its low last month of nearly 20,000.
"You don't hear Japanese companies crying out the way they did when the dollar fell before," added Yoshihisa Kitai, aneconomist at the Long Term Credit Bank.
"Japanese companies have already restructured their businesses to deal with this, and now you are seeing the result."
Until a few years ago, the weak yen had been a big source of economic strength for Japan, encouraging foreign buyers to purchase Japanese goods.
Concern About the Dollar
For the last few years, though, the Government has encouraged industries to cultivate the domestic market and invest heavily to increase productivity and to move more plants overseas.
Japanese Government officials are thus sanguine about the yen's strength, worrying only that it might rise too fast and disrupt the markets.
"It is very interesting and telling that we hear very few complaints about the exchange rate," said a senior Government economic official.
"It reflects the fact that companies have adapted."
Government and industry officials in Japan are more worried by the what the falling dollar signals about the United States.
Many people blame the battle in Washington over the Federal budget and fears of a looming recession for an erosion of confidence in the American economy and American policy makers.
The message is that these officials have fewer concerns about their home market.
Manufacturers have moved a significant portion of their factories overseas to avoid the impact of currency swings.
Toyota, for instance, announced it was building a second auto plant in the United States, just one in a wave of such moves.
The Government has also shown some success in waking up the Japanese consumer and creating a boom at home that has eased further the reliance on exports.
Retail sales have been expanding at a nearly double-digit rate this year, for instance.
And a record level of capital investment by Japanese companies is providing a big impetus for economic growth.
On top of that, the dollar's tumble has offset part of the huge increase in crude oil prices since Iraq invaded Kuwait in August.
"If the dollar falls to 110 yen, then you could begin to see some problems, but most companies have already achieved the ability to deal well with the dollar at 120 yen," said Susumu Kato, the chief economist for Goldman Sachs (Japan).


Lessons From 1989's Quake: New Mysteries Replace Old Ones
SEISMOLOGISTS studying the earthquake that struck northern California one year ago are still trying to solve some of its mysteries: the unexpected power of the seismic waves that reached San Francisco and Oakland, the upward thrust that threw one man in Santa Cruz straight into the air and the strange electromagnetic signals detected hours before the temblor.
Scientists at the United States Geological Survey in Menlo Park had predicted a moderate quake in the Santa Cruz area sometime in the next 30 years.
But the predicted quake was nothing like the one that occurred on Oct. 17, 1989, centered at Loma Prieta in the Santa Cruz Mountains.


Bonray Drilling reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Abortion Clinics Often Reject Patients With the AIDS Virus
Many hospitals and clinics in New York City are refusing to perform abortions on women who are infected with the AIDS virus, according to the City Commission on Human Rights.
In a study conducted in March by the agency and released yesterday, investigators posing as patients called 50 health centers that offer abortions, including both free-standing clinics and abortion clinics in hospitals.
Although the investigators were initially able to make appointments in each case, 20 of the clinics canceled when told that the patient had tested positive for the AIDS virus, HIV.


Manitowoc Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Pistons Recovering
Isiah Thomas and Bill Laimbeer of the Detroit Pistons, who underwent surgery over the weekend, are expected to recover in time for the team's Nov. 2 season opener.
Thomas had surgery for a ruptured tear duct while Laimbeer suffered a fractured left cheekbone.
Thomas was injured in the first quarter of Saturday's game against Seattle when he was poked in the eye by Sedale Threatt.
Laimbeer was elbowed by Olden Polynice. (AP)


Computer Identics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Westwood One reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Detroit Edison reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rwandan Rebels Reportedly Agree to a Cease-Fire


International Broadcast Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Foes Sharpen Tools Of Electronic War In Persian Gulf
AS the United States braces for a possible war with Iraq, both sides are engaged in a secretive race to hone the tools of electronic warfare -- technologies that could be decisive in a battle for the Arabian peninsula.
If the United States and its allies should eventually decide to uses force to drive Iraq from Kuwait, Iraq's radar-directed defense systems could cost the attackers many aircraft and lives, military electronics experts say.
To meet the threat, the Defense Department and electronics industries are striving to improve the countermeasures that could greatly reduce the toll.


Fulton Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chase to Consider Ties To Non-Bank Partners
The president of the Chase Manhattan Corporation said today that he would consider joint business ventures or mergers with industrial companies as a way for Chase to "bust out" of its traditional banking business.
"The financial services industry is broader than banking," said Thomas G. Labrecque, who will become chairman of Chase at the end of the month.
He said many of Chase's businesses could be candidates for joint ventures or some other kind of merger with other companies including industrial companies.


People
*
Alain S. Zutter has been named a senior vice president and media director at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco.


Q&amp;A
Banana Strings
Q. What are the strings in a banana for?
A.
The prominent bundles running the length of a banana are part of the vascular system, expanding to carry nourishment while the banana develops and helping to strengthen the peel tissues, according to botanical reference works.
By the time you peel a banana, however, their function is over and they shrink, leaving marks in the flesh.
The banana is not a tree, but an overgrown herb.
It grows from a rootlike rhizome, with buds along it somewhat like the eyes of a potato.
Furled bundles of leaves ascend like a stem from these buds.
Then a shoot grows up the center of the bundle, emerging as a flower bud that opens into a cascade of blossoms.
Each female blossom is destined to develop into a banana.
Sleep Before Midnight
Q.
Is it true that an hour of sleep before midnight is worth two hours of sleep after midnight?
A.
"No, because sleep isn't that simple," said Dr.
Charles Pollak, director of the Institute of Chronobiology and head of the Sleep-Wake Disorder Center of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center's Westchester division in White Plains, N.Y.
In fact, he said, the hour of rising is probably much more important in keeping sleep cycles normal.
Individuals go through a series of periods of rapid-eye-movement, or REM sleep, and non-REM sleep, Dr.
Pollak said, and both kinds are needed.
There is no evidence that you need more of one than the other, he said, but you do get most of the non-REM sleep in the first three to four hours of sleep and most of the REM sleep after that.
Dr.
Pollak said the amounts of different kinds of sleep are determined by when, within a sleep cycle, a person goes to bed and gets up.
A human being's sleep cycles are also regulated by the amount of sleep needed over a period of several days, he said.
Thus, sleep is regulated both by a system based on "need" for sleep and a system designed to keep the body's time in synchrony with the time of day, so that others are awake at the same time.
"This system allows animal life to coordinated with the environment, food sources and fellow animals," he said.
The second half of the night is crucially important in setting the rhythm of sleep, Dr.
Pollak said.
"Getting up in the morning is the most important act of the day that keeps our biological clocks keeping the right time," he said.
"It resets the clock."


Utilities Call Proposals Feasible but Expensive
Coal-burning electric utility companies around the country said yesterday that they had not seen the text of the House-Senate compromise on acid rain, but that they did not believe it differed markedly from earlier proposals, which they characterized as feasible but expensive.
"Everybody anticipated that something would pass," said Bruce D. Stoecklin, a spokesman for the Cincinnati Gas and Electric Company, which serves 670,000 customers in Ohio and Kentucky, and uses coal for 99 percent of its fuel.
"I wouldn't say we expect to have any trouble meeting the provisions; it's just the expense," he added.


Reebok International Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Foundation Health reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
Nonresident Palestinians Blocked From Jerusalem
Israeli policemen surrounded Jerusalem with roadblocks to keep Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza Strip out of the city and away from Israelis who might seek revenge for the slaying of three Jews.
Page A11.
Peace Move in South Africa
Nelson Mandela is to meet with Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi on equal terms in an apparent gesture to end a rift in black politics.
Page A3.
Anger Over Ethics Case
Implying political motives, Senator John McCain and other Republicans angrily accused the Ethics Committee of delaying his case.
Page A16.
Senator in Peril at Polls
Some debate the sour mood of voters, but not Mark O. Hatfield, the veteran Oregon Republican who is struggling for his political life.
Page A14.
Surrogate Denied Custody
Likening a surrogate mother to the role of a foster parent, a judge awarded custody of a California baby to the genetic parents.
Page A14.


Clary Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Newmil Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The New World Order
Excerpt from an unpublished transcript of questions and answers between President Bush and Lebanese-Americans in Washington, Monday, Sept. 24.
Question.
Our Government has taken every action against Iraq that we have been urging should be taken against Syria for its similar action in Lebanon.
Syria is now apparently allied with our Government and others against Iraq.
This disturbs us greatly unless our Government has some plan to use its new-found leverage on Syria to cause Hafez Assad to conform to the norms of civilized behavior that we are attempting to enforce against Saddam Hussein. . . .


Thomson Advisory Group L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Folk Beliefs Play Role In Taking Medication
FOLK beliefs about a disease can have widely varying effects on a patient's commitment to taking medication for the illness, a study has found.
The beliefs may either help or hinder compliance with a doctor's orders, depending on how the patient visualizes the ailment and interprets the physician's sometimes sloppy description of it.
Studying 54 black women being treated for high blood pressure at a clinic in New Orleans, researchers interviewed the women on their beliefs about what high blood pressure is and then compared the convictions with their willingness to take three anti-hypertension pills a day.


DFSoutheastern Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Congress Stands Firm on Cutbacks for 'Star Wars'
Despite pressure from the Pentagon to modify the military budget bill for 1991, Senate and House negotiators reaffirmed their decision today to reduce spending on the "Star Wars" anti-missile program and restrict how the money can be spent.
The negotiators, however, adjusted the Congressional stance on two other issues that drew objections from the Pentagon: troops cuts and limits on money for the Milstar communication satellite program.


Unisys Contract
The Unisys Corporation said its Defense Systems unit had been awarded a $452.3 million contract by the Air Force Electronic Systems division to produce 40 short-range unattended radars.
The equipment is to be used by a joint warning system operation of the United States and Canada that uses long-and short-range radars to track low-flying aircraft and missiles.


National Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Southwest Airlines Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ServiceMaster L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Seagate Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


St. Joseph Light &amp; Power Co. reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Corrections
A chart in SportsMonday this week showing the Saturday performance of the top 20 football teams in The Times's computer ranking carried an outdated list of teams; it was based on the rankings of Oct. 9 rather than Oct. 16.
A corrected chart appears today on page B10, with this week's ratings.


Safeco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Atlantic Richfield Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Minnesota Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SAUDI PRINCE HINTS AT DEAL WITH IRAQ FOR KUWAITI PORT
Saudi Arabia's Defense Minister, the country's third-ranking official, has raised the possibility of allowing Iraq to have some Kuwaiti territory as an outlet on the Persian Gulf and has urged Arabs to seek a peaceful resolution of the gulf crisis "through all means."
In comments to Arab journalists on Sunday that were widely reported today, the Defense Minister, Prince Sultan, said in an apparent reference to Iraq's claims against Kuwait that "if a sister Arab nation has rights, we all agree these rights can be had, but not by force."


Legislation on Limiting Jet Noise Gains in House
After intense political skirmishing, leaders in the House of Representatives decided today to accept the main elements of Senate legislation that would gradually retire noisy aircraft while restricting the rights of local governments to limit noise around airports.
As negotiations continue, it is unclear exactly what provisions will be adopted, but influential House members are said by aides and lobbyists on both sides of the issue to be working out a bill that would include most of the noise provisions passed by the Senate last week but not the House.


Trio-Tech International reports earnings for Year June 29


Connecticut Democrat Fights to Gather Voters
Over the blare of a country-and-western band at the Sergeant Sakowicz post of the Polish Legion of American Veterans, Representative Bruce A. Morrison shouted out a short history of Federal immigration law.
Too short, as it turns out.
Pulled away by an aide for a dash back to the car and a race to the next campaign appearance, Mr.
Morrison left his questioner, Thomas A. Bozek, unsatisfied with a partial answer on a topic about which Mr.
Morrison is an acknowledged expert in Congress.


Figgie International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shouts of 'Lie' Stun 2d Trial In Jogger Rape
The opening of the second Central Park jogger rape trial was disrupted yesterday when one of the two defendants screamed that he could not "take it anymore" and broke down at the defense table.
"No, no, no," the defendant, 18-year-old Kharey Wise, shouted after the prosecutor, Elizabeth Lederer, had completed her opening statement.


Intercontinental Enterpr.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 27


Dinkins Commuter-Tax Plan Gets Cool Reception on L.I.
Suburban politicians are not exactly lining up to support Mayor David N. Dinkins's proposal for a new tax on people who work in New York City.
Party leaders say they have not met a candidate who admits supporting the proposed tax, which would go toward hiring more police officers.
But even as the politicians rush to condemn the proposal, the people it would affect -- the commuters themselves -- express a wide range of attitudes about the tax and their responsibilities toward a city they say they alternately love, depend on and fear.


Hail the Conquering Heroes


Our Towns; Investor, Author And Arm-Twister Wears a Habit
The other morning 68-year-old Sister Margherita Marchione put on her habit and bonnet, laced up her black round-toed shoes and ran out for her quarterly meeting with the bankers.
The sister and the bankers pulled out computer printouts.
"We're getting 8.7 return; that's good, everybody," said Sister Margherita, studying the newly established retirement fund for her 298-year-old order, Religious Teachers Filippini.
"What's $50,000 N/R?"


Central Pennsylvania Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Howard Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


W. W. Williams Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Xilinx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Dash Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Now Enact Bill on Campaign Finance
To the Editor:
The Senate has passed a strong Congressional campaign finance bill prodded by the savings and loan scandal, in which large campaign contributions from the savings and loan industry influenced oversight of the industry.
The bill establishes campaign spending limits based on a state's size.
For candidates who agree to these limits, it provides public funds for television and mailings.
Contributions from political action committees would be banned, but since this might not hold up constitutionally, a fallback position would limit PAC contributions to 20 percent of the spending ceiling and reduce the amount a PAC can give to a Senate candidate from $5,000 per election to $1,000.
The bill would also end abuses of "soft money," whereby contributions made to a political party are intended to benefit a particular candidate either for Congress or the Presidency.
The House passed a weaker bill, permitting PAC contributions of up to 50 percent of the spending limit and not dealing with "soft money."
To the extent that special-interest contributions can be reduced, members of Congress will have fewer special obligations, freeing them to work for the general public interest.
Also, a strong bill would put challengers at less disadvantage.
It is hoped that the Senate version will prevail in conference committee and that President Bush will not veto this legislation as he has threatened to do.
RICHARD BARSANTI Western Springs, Ill., Oct. 8, 1990


Old Stone Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


General Signal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Legent Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bitter McCain Bids Ethics Panel To End Delay on Deciding Case
Declaring that it "could jeopardize my political career," Senator John McCain rose to the Senate floor today to accuse the Senate Ethics Committee of unfairly delaying its decision in the case against him.
"I do not deserve, and I only speak for myself, to be strung out week after week, month after month," the Arizona Republican said, his voice tight with anger.
"The evidence is there. The American people deserve to know it. The evidence is there, and the judgment must be made. Otherwise, it will reflect very badly, not only on me, but on this institution."


Moody's Lowers Its Ratings On American Air and Delta
Ratings have been lowered on about $6 billion of outstanding debt issued by the AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines, and Delta Air Lines Inc., Moody's Investors Service announced yesterday.
Among the reasons cited by Moody's were higher costs of jet fuel, softer travel demand and heavy investment in modernization and expansion.


Hanna (M.A.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Interim Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ancient Tribes Didn't Vanish, They Just Moved
Rejecting two generations of academic dogma, archeologists now believe that prehistoric Indian tribes of the Southwest pursued an unusual pattern of episodic settlement until the arrival of the Spanish.
They constructed dizzying cliff dwellings or huge settlements in the arid flatlands every few generations, then abandoned them as a snake might shed its skin.
These conclusions, archeologists say, have wide ramifications for understanding how other civilizations evolved.
The early communities of the Anasazi, and the lesser-known Hohokam and Mogollon Indians, waxed and waned in irregular rhythms as their members trekked across a precarious landscape of sagebrush, pinon trees, rocks and sand, stopping every few generations to build towns, irrigate fields and plant and harvest corn and squash before moving on.
Archeologists have long been puzzled by this pattern of abandonment, so different from the lockstep evolutionary progression attributed to the great early civilizations of the Middle East and Europe: from hunting and foraging to farming, from farming to the construction of villages, and from the construction of villages to the rise of city-states and empires.
But George J. Gumerman of the Center for Archeological Investigations at Southern Illinois University said, "We now have the data to show that this was a way cultures evolved before civilization, before the city-states."
"What we're looking at," he went on, "are patterns in which people who had done dramatic building then reverted to simpler forms of existence and didn't have such a dramatic impact on the environment. We've got the data now to see these more ephemeral phases in prehistory."
Paul Fish, an archeologist with the Arizona State Museum in Tucson, said the areas from southern Colorado and Utah to the Mexican border "were like lights going on and off." He spoke at an unusual conference of Southwestern archaeologists at the Santa Fe Institute this month.
The conference, like one a year ago at the School of American Research in Santa Fe, was an attempt to look more deeply into the pulsating patterns of development and retrenchment in Southwestern cultures.
But the format of the recent conference was a deviation from normal academic patterns.
&lt;&gt; To stimulate experts to think differently about the conclusions they might draw from the burials, tools, pottery, dwellings and garbage they have unearthed, 18 archeologists and anthropologists were closeted for a week with physicists, computer scientists, a demographer, a molecular biologist and a businessman.
The result, Mr.
Gumerman said, was "to help set the agenda" for Southwestern archeology for the next few years.
"This kind of thing helps us see things on a bigger scale," said Ben Nelson, an anthropologist at the State University of New York at Buffalo.
"Every other conference I've been to is just populated with archeologists. There's been no programmatic attempt to put people from different disciplines together and force them to talk. This has been really spectacular."
Southwestern archeologists, he added, "used to associate early occupations with subsistence survival strategy, then went along a continuum, with the other end being more complex farming and larger groups." But he said careful study of the evidence shows a different pattern: episodic settlement.
The archeologists' conclusions, now working their way into graduate students' textbooks, have in part solved one of the central mysteries of Southwestern archeology: what happenned to the Anasazi (An-ah-SAH-zi)?
The question has been posed by generations of scholars and laymen awed by the makers of the multi-storied cliff dwellings in Chaco Canyon in northwestern New Mexico and the complex system of roads that radiated out to other smaller Anasazi sites.
The answer seems to be that they kept building communities and deserting them as long as the new European settlers allowed, but the names by which the Indians were known changed as the range of their wanderings decreased.
Instead of "Anasazi," a word from the Athabascan language of the later-coming Navajo Indians which means "enemy old ones," the later generations were known by the names they still carry: Zuni, Hopi, Acoma.
Answers Provoke Questions
Similarly, the Hohokam (Ho-ho-KAHM) cultures of prehistoric Arizona, which built huge ceremonial "ball courts" reminiscent of the ancient cultures of central Mexico, and intricate irrigation systems that supported complex agriculture, eventually were known as the Pima, the name some of their descendants carry today.
The resolution of these questions, however, has left a host of new ones still unanswered.
In particular, archeologists and anthropologists want to know what factors influenced the episodic odyssey of the prehistoric Indians.
Studies over the last decade have combined analysis of tree rings, which can determine annual rainfall, with analysis of water tables to see if the abandonments coincided with periods of drought.
But thus far the studies have proved inconclusive.
Although there is ample evidence for a great drought in northern New Mexico and Arizona in the late 13th century, a time when some of the major settlements were abandoned, Linda Cordell, an anthropologist at the California Academy of Sciences, points out that some sites were being constructed in the dry areas at the peak of the drought.
Other explanations have also proved imperfect.
For much of this century, scholars theorized that the Anasazi had moved into the cliff dwellings for defensive purposes and that these Pueblo people were constantly at war, either with each other or with Athabascan and Ute interlopers from the north.
But Steve Lekson, an anthropologist with the Museum of New Mexico, said he believed there was not much evidence for "organized nastiness." In his view, the archeological sites have not turned up enough skeletons with arrowheads in their rib cages, axes in their skulls or other signs of violent battles and deaths to support a theory of abandonments in time of war.
Few Clues From Skeletons
A third possibility explored at the seminar was that disease became more prevalent the longer a community stayed in one place.
Deborah Martin, a physical anthropologist at Hampshire College, said at the conference that there were sketchy signs of tuberculosis in some skeletons which long predated the arrival of the Spanish.
Overall, Dr.
Martin and Dr.
Nelson said, the amount of skeletal material from any one site at any one time is seldom adequate to draw any general conclusions about disease and death.
"The question is not 'Where did the Anasazi go?' " said Murray Gell-Mann, a physicist at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena and an avid student of Southwestern prehistory.
"The question is, why would many of these complex cultural phenomena disappear and others survive? It happened in 1150, in 1300, in 1425, and curiously enough, the last is the one we know least about."
Chaco Canyon's cliff dwellings were abruptly abandoned in 1150, but the Mesa Verde settlements of the Anasazi on the plateaus of southern Colorado and Utah continued until 1300.Soon thereafter, however, there were only isolated, scattered settlements in this once-flourishing area, and new waves of construction had taken place along the Little Colorado River in northwestern Arizona and along the Rio Grande in northern New Mexico.
Over the next century, however, these central areas of settlement shrank dramatically.
Other widely settled areas, like the Casas Grandes culture in the northwestern corner of Mexico, had virtually disappeared by 1450.
For the Santa Fe Institute, a six-year-old group of computer scientists, mathematicians and biologists who study complex systems, the questions raised by the new findings in Southwestern prehistory have parallels in fields as diverse as linguistics, biology and economics, raising common questions about why systems get more complex and why complex systems disintegrate.
"What I hope for in a conference like this," said Dr.
Gell-Mann, "is that it would have some effect on stimulating people to think about complex systems broadly, whether human systems or biological systems or computer models. Another more modest objective is to come out with some ideas of what the archeologists should study next."


Sunward Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Corrections
A front-page headline in some copies on Saturday about Federal budget negotiations misstated President Bush's position on taxes.
Mr.
Bush was taking a position against increases in income tax rates, not against all tax increases.


Raymond Morris, 86, Yale Divinity Librarian
Raymond Philip Morris, librarian emeritus of Yale Divinity School, died on Sunday at University Hospital in Cleveland.
He was 86 years old and had lived in Cleveland since 1987.
Mr. Morris died of a heart attack, a family spokesman said.
Mr.
Morris joined Yale in 1931 and served as librarian for 40 years, retiring in 1972.
He was also a professor of religious literature.
During his tenure he develped the China Records collection, in which letters and papers of former Chinese missionaries were assembled for students and scholars.
Mr.
Morris was a charter member of the American Theological Library Association and served as president for two terms.
In 1956 he organized the library for the World Council of Churches headquarters in Geneva.
He was born near Garnett, Kan., and graduated from Baker University and Garrett Theological Seminary.
He received degrees in library science from Columbia University.
He is survived by his wife, the former Jean Kelly; two daughters, Thelma J., of Cleveland, and Marcia M. Johnston, of Arlington, Mass.; a son, R. Philip, of High Point, N.C., and two granddaughters.


Plea Agreement Said to Include Testimony in Milken Case
Richard J. Grassgreen, the former president of Kinder-Care, a national child-care operation once recommended in Drexel Burnham Lambert advertisements as a beneficiary of high-yield "junk bonds," has agreed to plead guilty to two felonies involving securities transactions with Drexel, a Federal prosecutor said yesterday.
The prosecutor, John K. Carroll, said that as part of the plea agreement Mr.
Grassgreen would testify in the pre-sentencing hearing of Michael R. Milken, the former head of Drexel's junk bond department.
Mr.
Milken agreed in April to plead guilty to six felonies.


Pittston Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Leonard P. Mahoney, History Professor, 74
The Rev.
Leonard P. Mahoney, a Jesuit priest who was a professor of modern European history and international affairs at Boston College, died last Tuesday at Youville Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 74 years old and lived in Cambridge.
He died of cancer, said a spokeswoman for the college, where Mr.
Mahoney taught for 36 years.
He is survived by a brother, Thomas of Cambridge.


Piccadilly Cafeterias Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Metrobank Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Garden Party: Move Over, Bob Uecker
Just when you thought the Reagan years were over, deregulation has reared its avaricious head.
The friendly folks from Gulf and Western, or whatever that corporation is calling itself these days, are raising prices right through the renovated rafters.
The management of Madison Square Garden is planning to tell loyal Rangers fans and loyal Knicks fans, who have not been rewarded with a championship since 1940 and 1973, respectively, that their services are no longer required, at least not at anything approaching the current rates.


Boulevard Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Flagler Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


British Trade Gap Cut
Britain's trade gap fell sharply in September to the lowest monthly figure in three and a half years, the Government reported today.
The current account deficit declined to $:845 million (about $1.67 billion) from $:1.2 billion in August.
It was the first time the trade gap had been below $:1 billion this year.


Record Fall Puts Oil Below $30
Oil tumbled below $30 a barrel in a record drop yesterday, as traders discerned more peace overtures from the Middle East.
They ranged from statements by the Saudi Defense Minister to reports of a dream in which the Prophet Mohammed appeared to President Saddam Hussein.
A report by a Kuwaiti newspaper in Saudi Arabia that Mohammed had told Mr.
Hussein in a dream, "I see your rockets deployed wrongly," found a rapt audience on the floor of the New York Mercantile Exchange, where traders interpreted the report as an attempt to prepare the Iraqi people for giving up Kuwait.


TCF Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Oct. 1 about a proposal for a Hudson River "greenway" misstated the date for a public hearing on the plan in New York City.
It is scheduled for Wednesday at 6 P.M. at Ferris Booth Hall at Columbia University, at 115th Street and Broadway.


Polaris Industries Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dollar in Worldwide Gains; Yen Advances on Oil's Drop
The dollar strengthened yesterday against all major currencies in worldwide trading.
Currency dealers said internal market influences were largely responsible for the dollar's across-the-board gain, even though the currency remains fundamentally weak.
Some dealers said the dollar had been due for a "correction" after its rapid decline in recent weeks.
Yen Trading Lifts Dollar


Dime Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Progressive Bank Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bankers Trust Posts Profit a Year After $1.42 Billion Loss
The Bankers Trust New York Corporation said yesterday that it earned $170 million, or $1.98 a share, in the third quarter, compared with a loss of $1.42 billion in the comparable 1989 period, when the company recorded a $1.6 billion addition to reserves to cover possible losses on loans to third-world nations.
Without the added reserves, quarterly earnings would have declined 5.6 percent, from $180 million, or $2.18 a share, a year ago.


Coleman Agent Adjusts Contract Proposal
Derrick Coleman's agent has modified his contract proposal to the Nets.
The agent, Harold MacDonald, wanted a guaranteed five-year, $15 million contract for the forward, the No. 1 pick in the National Basketball Association draft, but has now told the Nets he is willing to leave a portion of the contract unguaranteed.
If the proposal is accepted, it is believed that the Nets will be able to waive Coleman after three years and save $6 million.
The option gives the Nets some protection if Coleman does not perform capably.
The money remains guaranteed if Coleman makes the team each session.
"We have enough confidence in Derrick that we're willing to help the Nets make a deal and leave some of the money unguaranteed," MacDonald said.
"In effect, they have protection if he is not performing."


Study of Peace Corps Shows Big Demand but Short Supply
Though its services have never been more in demand, the Peace Corps is hobbled by deficiencies in recruiting and training and is unable to retain its volunteers, according to an assessment by the staff of a Congressional committee made public today.
In an era when the cold war is winding down, fragile democracies are emerging and there is an international push for sustainable economic development, "the Peace Corps has entered an era of unparalleled opportunity for service," the report said.


Ex-Aide Held in G.M. Theft
The authorities arrested a former photo technician for the General Motors Corporation today on charges that he tried to get the auto maker to pay $75,000 for stolen confidential photographs of G.M. cars.
Gregory Charles Hooper, 36 years old, of Royal Oak, Mich., was charged with mail fraud in a complaint filed by the United States Attorney's office, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said.
He was released on bond.
The F.B.I. began an investigation on June 16 after receiving a complaint from G.M. that some photographs of cars it was working on were appearing in magazines.
Mr.
Hooper reportedly tried to obtain $75,000 from G.M. for the return of the photographs, the F.B.I. said in a statement.
In November 1989, G.M. offered a $30,000 reward for information relating to what the auto maker suspected was the theft of photographs from its design studio after photographs of its new Saturn car began appearing in automotive magazines.
A G.M. spokesman said today the $30,000 had not been paid.
Mr.
Hooper faces a maximum penalty of five years in prison and a $250,000 fine if found guilty.


Lawmakers Reach an Accord On Reduction of Air Pollution
Settling years of regional political disputes, House and Senate negotiators reached final agreement today on changes in clean air legislation that are intended to strengthen and broaden the Government's authority to reduce air pollution.
The amendments are the first in 13 years.
Lawmakers hailed what they characterized as a breakthrough in setting stricter standards and in establishing new timetables for sharply cutting chemical contamination in the air.
But many also agreed with environmental leaders that the problem is so vast and the required improvements so expensive that the nation is not likely to breathe much cleaner air until the first decade of the 21st century.


Inco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Liz Claiborne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Hershey Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pikeville National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; Near 19 Now, A Maturing Midori Plays Recital Debut
The violinist Midori has been a presence in the musical world since her 1986 performance with Leonard Bernstein at Tanglewood.
She was 14 years old at the time, and her technique was impressive, as was her poise under fire: she broke two strings during the performance, but coolly borrowed other instruments and continued.
Since then, she has given several performances in New York, and she has released five recordings.
But although her annual schedule of 90 concerts has included recitals in other cities, it was not until Sunday afternoon in Carnegie Hall, four days before her 19th birthday, that Midori played her New York recital debut.


For Senator Bradley in New Jersey
For a champion of campaign finance reform, Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey is setting a prodigal example.
He is spending more than $10 million on his bid for re-election.
It is true that this is a year in which incumbents elsewhere have been knocked off.
And it is true that his Republican opponent, Christine Todd Whitman, is an appealing and worthy challenger.
On the other hand, Senator Bradley enjoys an overwhelming lead in opinion polls -- and he deserves it.
On the basis of his conscientious 12-year record in the Senate, Mr.
Bradley has earned re-election to a third term.


Episcopal Court Voids Conviction of a Priest
The appeals court for the Episcopal Diocese of Newark today overturned the conviction of a priest charged with making malicious and false allegations against Bishop John S. Spong.
The diocesan Court of Review, in the first decision of its 114-year history, found the Rev.
George Swanson not guilty of "knowingly and maliciously making false allegations in a civil action against his Bishop."
"I'm really just very, very pleased, deeply pleased," said Mr.
Swanson, who can now function as a priest again.
He had been banned from practicing his duties since March 1989.
Mr.
Swanson, rector of the Ascension Church in Jersey City, was found guilty in October 1989 by an ecclesiastical court of "conduct unbecoming a member of the clergy." The charges stemmed from a civil suit that he filed in 1988 against Bishop Spong, the diocese and Vice Chancellor Michael Rehill of the diocese over insurance assets after Mr.
Swanson's wooden church burned down in 1986.
Mr.
Swanson charged them with scheming to destroy the independence of his parish by appropriating $600,000 from the church's insurance settlement from the fire for their own uses.
Today's decision held that the evidence against Mr.
Swanson did not meet the standard of "proof beyond a reasonable doubt."


NASA Told to Correct Astronauts' Jet Flying
The National Transportation Safety Board said today that the space agency, whose astronauts have had three close calls while flying jet aircraft since May 1989, should correct problems "before other dangerous situations are created."
The board said at a hearing today that an astronaut flying a T-38 jet trainer passed close to a Pan Am World Airways Airbus flying from Dulles International Airport near Washington to Paris in May 1989.
The astronaut's plane came within 100 feet of the passenger jet, the board said, citing radar data from the airport's traffic control center.
In September 1989 another T-38 jet trainer flown by an astronaut from the National Aeronautics and Space Agency passed within 1,400 feet of a private plane, the board said.
And last May another NASA jet passed within 1,600 feet of an Eastern Airlines DC-9 near Paducah, Ky.
The safety board did not immediately identify the astronauts.
Richard Truly, Administrator of the space agency, said, "The investigative N.T.S.B. report is thorough and constructive and we will seriously consider all of the recommendations." He said the agency was already implementing one of them, upgrading the T-38 elecronic system.


Memorial Service for Art Blakey With Jokes, Memories and Jazz
Every pew, corner and bit of floor space at the Abyssinian Baptist Church was filled at the memorial service for the drummer and band leader Art Blakey on Monday night.
Mr.
Blakey, who died of lung cancer on Oct. 16 at the age of 71, had an enormous influence on the jazz and cultural life of America.
For Ray Bryant, a pianist who occasionally recorded with Mr.
Blakey, it was time to pay tribute to a fellow musician who had helped to further his career.


Holtzman Cuts Estimate Of the City's Budget Gap
Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman released a report yesterday revising her estimate of New York City's budget gap to $2 billion, from $2.6 billion, for the fiscal year that starts next July, but she warned that the city faced losing from 31,000 to 51,600 workers through layoffs and attrition.
The release of the report was the second time this month that Ms.
Holtzman's office had publicly disputed figures put out by Mayor David N. Dinkins's office, but her new estimate comes closer to the Mayor's predictions.
On the day Ms.
Holtzman made her original estimate, Mr.
Dinkins's office estimated the budget gap at about $1.5 billion.
His budget director has warned that the work force might have to be cut by 15,000.


Review/Dance; In Atlantic City, the Russian Ballet
Vyacheslav Gordeyev was a favorite of American audiences when he danced as a star of the Bolshoi Ballet from 1973 to 1979 in the United States.
Now he has come back with his own company from Moscow, the Russian Ballet, in which he has assembled some new and outstanding young Soviet dancers.
There are only a few days, through Sunday, to catch the troupe in Atlantic City, where it has been performing since mid-September at the Copa Room theater in the Sands Hotel.
There is more than curiosity value here, although viewers who saw the American film about the Kirov Ballet school entitled "The Children of Theater Street" (1978) will be pleased to learn that its real-life little heroine, Anzhelina Armeyskaya, has lost none of the charm she had as a child.
As obvious from her performance on Sunday afternoon with Mr.
Gordeyev's group in an excerpt from "La Sylphide," she has grown up into a happily exquisite dancer.
Mr.
Gordeyev has also taken in two recent prize winners: Yelena Knyazkova, who won the top award at the International Ballet Competition this year in Varna, Bulgaria, and Yana Kazantseva, who won first prize and another award, the Vaganova Prize, at a Soviet competition in 1988, the Leningrad Young Dancers Competition.
Her partner and husband, the 22-year-old Andrei Ryabov, is a real find: very tall, very blond, a true danseur noble but with a new contemporary boldness that avoids the old-fashioned mien still found among some Soviet male dancers.
The idea of performing excerpts from the usual chestnuts in 19th-century ballet next to a casino setting is not as bizarre as it could be.
The waitresses in scanty outfits show no more leg than is apparent onstage, and the audiences at the tables were highly appreciative.
The Russian Ballet is the successor troupe to the Moscow Ballet, which was founded in 1979 and which Mr.
Gordeyev headed as artistic director when it toured the United States in 1987.
At that time, the troupe was heavy on guest artists from other Soviet companies and although individual performers made an excellent impression, it had the look of a pickup touring company.
Although Mr.
Gordeyev has kept a few of the same dancers, the Russian Ballet is, for all intents and purposes, a new troupe and more cohesive in style.
Mr.
Gordeyev, Miss Knyazkova and her partner, Oleg Kozlov, did not dance at the Sunday matinee (performances tomorrow through Saturday are at 8 P.M. and at 4 and 8 P.M. on Sunday).
But those who did made a fine showing, although some of the traditional divertissements, including the Grand Pas from "Paquita," were shown in abbreviated form.
Yuri Zastrozhnev partnered the statuesque Natalya Trokai, properly confident in her elongated line here while the corps had both unity and energy.
Miss Armeyskaya and Nikolai Smirnov then did surprisingly well in excerpts from a Danish ballet well outside the Russian tradition.
They danced the pas de deux and solos from Act II of August Bournonville's "Sylphide" with the special attention to the arm positions of the Bournonville style.
Mr.
Smirnov's leg beats in his entrechats were amazingly high and open.
Miss Armeyskaya recalled Carla Fracci's famous ethereality in the title role, and it was not surprising to hear afterward that she had in fact studied Miss Fracci's interpretation on tape.
Miss Trokai returned for a particularly dramatic rendering as the tormented gypsy in the excerpt from "Esmeralda" made familiar in in recent years by Altynai Assylmuratova of the Kirov.
Miss Trokai is not as moving, but her tambourine pas de deux with Yevgeny Amosov, a stocky dancer who is surprisingly light in his leaps, was well danced.
Mr.
Ryabov, partnering a solidly dancing Marina Bogdanova, was miscast in the "Corsaire" pas de deux, but the performance he and Miss Kazantseva offered in Vassily Vainonen's version of the adagio from "The Nutcracker" was breathtaking in its elegance.
Both dancers are perfect in their body placement and they mix refinement and verve.
Mr.
Gordeyev's version of the Gounod "Walpurgis Night" offered a somewhat tame orgy led by Sergei Ankudinov as a bravura Pan, and his contemporary duet to Argentine folk music, "Melody of Love," banked mainly on acrobatics.
It was a crowd pleaser nonetheless, saved by Irina Luzganova's performance, stunning in her long-limbed beauty and ably maneuvered into every lift by Mr.
Zastrozhnev.
Miss Kazantseva and Vitaly Akhundov offered the "Don Quixote" pas de deux shortly before a medley of dancer in costumes from what looked like "Great Hits of the 19th Century" invaded the stage for an exuberant finale.


Rosenthal-Collins Group
The former chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade, Karsten Mahlmann, said on Monday that he had accepted a job as chief of the London office of the Rosenthal-Collins Group, a Chicago-based futures brokerage.
Mr.
Mahlmann resigned as leader of the world's largest commodities exchange in August amid problems at Stotler &amp; Company, the brokerage he headed that is now defunct.
Rosenthal-Collins is run by Leslie Rosenthal, who opposed Mr.
Mahlmann in last year's election for exchange chairmanship.


Assassin or Muslim Avenger, He's a Hero in the West Bank
Villagers in this dusty little town on a jagged hilltop described their most famous son today as friendless and reclusive, a man they never expected would one day become a hero to his neighbors and a potent symbol of Arab evil to Israelis.
The man, Amer Abu Sirhan, a 19-year-old plasterer, is in a Jerusalem jail, accused of stabbing three Jews to death early Sunday morning.


Allegheny Ludlum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12
American military forces may grow beyond the 240,000 troops already facing Iraq.
The White House said it was considering the expansion a day after the Saudi Defense Minister hinted at a compromise.
Page A1
The President remained intransigent on the possibility of a deal with Iraq on Kuwaiti territory and once again compared President Saddam Hussein to Hitler.
A10
News analysis: Hints of concessions made by the Saudi Defense Minister reflect rising second thoughts in Saudia Arabia about the deep rifts the Iraqi invasion has caused among the Arab nations.
A10
Is there a sign of peace in Iraq's new maps of Kuwait?  A10
A 1960's hangout in Cairo for a brawling Saddam Hussein A11
Iranian exile is slain in Paris A10
Prime Minister V. P. Singh of India lost his majority in Parliament but refused to resign in the continuing struggle over plans by militant Hindus to build a temple on a site that is sacred to Muslims.
A3
Is Benazir Bhutto's ouster justified?
In an election that could create more political uncertainties than it resolves, Pakistani voters are being asked to give their verdict.
A3 C.I.A. support for rebels in Cambodia was ended by House and Senate negotiators, who also agreed to trim covert aid to anti-Communist rebels in Angola and Afghanistan.
A7
North and South Koreas meet in soccer match in Seoul A6
U.S. officials met with Ethiopians in an effort to revive peace talks between the Communist Government and Eritrean guerrillas.
A State Department official said that the meeting "was very low key." A9
Tanzania's former leader has no regrets about socialism A8
Arab-Jewish violence in Israel grew, leaving one man dead and at least eight wounded.
The Israeli Government sealed off the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
A12
Assassin or Muslim avenger, youth is a hero on West Bank A12
Frederico Westphalen Journal: Two married men in Brazil have been ordained as Roman Catholic priests with Vatican approval.
Though they vowed celibacy, they have sparked a debate over the priesthood.
A4
Vatican criticizes bishop who met with married priests A5  National A14-26
The compromise on taxes collapsed into partisan squabbling.
Democrats said the package was too much of a Republican plan.
Republicans said the Democrats were using the talks to their political advantage.
A1
A $22.6 billion rise in social programs was approved by Congress.
The increase includes plans to expand Head Start, increase money for education for poor children and subsidize child care for low-income families.
A1
Senate approves bill to prevent terrorist attacks on airplanes A17
Panel approves large cut in AIDS relief bill A20
Senate will try today to override President's veto of rights bill A21
Republicans criticized the President for his part in the budget crisis and his shift on taxes -- even as he stumped for them on the campaign trail in New England.
A1
Is race the only issue dividing House candidates in Ohio?  A14
Washington at Work: The oratory of Senator Alan Simpson A16
The Senate Ethics Committee will hold public hearings next month into allegations that five Senators improperly intervened with Federal officials on behalf of a former savings and loan executive.
A1
Republicans pressure Representative Lukens to resign A21
Labor Secretary Elizabeth H. Dole will resign to become president of the American Red Cross.
She has told friends the job frustrated her because it did not offer enough recognition and room for her initiatives.
A17
Focus of clean air bills now turns to impact on industry A21
New medical technique fights infertility in women A26
A writer who believes in creationism said he was denied a job writing a column at Scientific American magazine because he does not endorse evolutionary theories.
A18
Self-proclaimed expert executioner charged with fraud A14
Philadelphia Journal: A vision in an area without a dream A14
Regional B1-3
A provision of the new city charter barring city officials from holding political party office was upheld by the State Court of Appeals.
The decision ends the long domination of city government by party leaders.
A1
A crackdown on garbage collectors was announced by the Consumer Affairs Commissioner, who said he would revoke the licenses of 40 private haulers of commercial garbage and impose $3.2 million in fines.
B3
Plans to lay off school employees are being considered by New York City's Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez.
While he aims to eliminate hundreds of jobs, he said laying off teachers would be a last resort.
B1
Holtzman lowers estimate of city's budget gap to $2 billion B3
Republicans' grip on the State Senate will be tested in Rockland County.While a Democratic victory in the 38th District would not ensure Democratic control, most equations for a takeover include a victory there.
A1
Health, housing and welfare issues dog the candidates in the New York gubernatorial campaign, but despite their philosophical differences, they are not deeply divided over specific policy prescriptions.
B1
Senator Bradley and Christine Todd Whitman clash in debate B2
Drunken driving by implication?
The New Jersey Supreme Court is debating whether a man who fled the scene of an accident can be convicted based on a bartender's testimony that the man got drunk every weekend.
B1
Three people are shot, one fatally, on the Upper East Side B1
Model wins $4 million in harassment suit against Penthouse B3  Business Digest D1  The Living Section
Food
In lean times, caterers trim parties to fit C1
A 70's restaurant of ideas and ideals C1
Living
Low-key fitness: weeding, strolling C1
Fashion C10  Arts/Entertainment
An ironic view of God C11
Film: "Tong Tana: A Journey to the Heart of Borneo" C11
Music: Slobodyanik's pianism C12
The Pop Life C17
Dance: Swiss Festival ends C12
Art: "Wild Beasts" on display C11
Word and Image: Book Notes C18
A life of Harold Ickes C19
A death is studied, on CBS C20  Education Pages B4-5 Conservative newspapers at colleges across the country are mired in controversy over their perceived attacks on minority groups and women.
The papers say they are merely bucking liberal orthodoxy on campuses.
A1
About Education B4
Pueblo parents feel generation gap B5  Sports
Basketball: Motivation matches Piston talent B9
Column: Berkow on the college polls B9
Football: Hostetler back to biding time B9
Hockey: Devils demolish Islanders B9
Racing: Belmont layout brings controversy B9  Obituaries B6
Zephania Mothopeng, headed South African movement
Louis Althusser, a Marxist who harshly criticized Moscow  Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A24
The rare Republicans
Civil rights eye on the Senate
Campaign finance: still better
Topics: Man at the window
Letters A24
Flora Lewis: Lament for Jerusalem A25
Tom Wicker: Precedent for a veto A25
Roy C. Smith: Japan, land of the setting sun A25
Michael Massing: Mr. Bush, Liberia needs your help A25
Amy Gelman: Down the aisle, surprised A25


Washington Post Net Falls
The Washington Post Company yesterday reported a 16.2 percent decline in its third-quarter profit, citing weakness in its region's newspaper advertising market.
A decline in demand for ad space has taken a toll this quarter at many media companies.
The company said its net income amounted to $37.5 million, or $3.14 a share, in the third quarter, compared with $44.8 million, or $3.50 a share, for the third quarter of 1989.
Quarterly revenue edged up by seven-tenths of 1 percent, to $348.7 million, from $346.3 million a year earlier.
Newspaper revenue fell 7.1 percent in the quarter as ad volume fell 14.7 percent at The Washington Post.
Revenue at Newsweek magazine was up 7.4 percent and there was a 14.1 percent rise in cable while broadcasting revenue was flat.
The company's class B shares fell $4.50 yesterday, to $184, on the American Stock Exchange.
The closing price was the lowest of the year.


In Lean Times, Caterers Trim Parties to Fit
AT a black-tie benefit at the Plaza Hotel last week, a $750 ticket bought a three-course dinner featuring beef Bourgignon, a dish also known as stew; at the same March of Dimes benefit last year, the same price brought four courses, including salmon and duck.
Also this month, a group of formally attired revelers who paid $200 or $350 ate white-bean salad and chicken with tapenade at a benefit for the Prospect Park Alliance in Brooklyn.


The New York Race for Governor: The Candidates on Social Issues
HOUSING
MARIO M. CUOMO; Democrat, Liberal
"I have raised the largest housing program in the history of the United States," but "the state has to do as much more as it can without letting the Feds off the hook." Favors providing land for low-income housing and placing it beyond overpopulated low-income neighborhoods and providing "every advantage you can in financing." Favors a constitutional amendment that would empower counties to build affordable housing.
Opposes means test for tenants in rent-controlled or rent-stabilized apartments.
Opposes letting rents rise to market levels when tenants of those apartments move.
PIERRE A. RINFRET; Republican
"All the projects that go from 96th Street right up to 124th Street, I'd sell every one of those to the residents." Would finance new affordable housing projects, all cooperatives, by public borrowing supported by rents from occupants who would receive subsidized mortgages.
"Build homogenous neighborhoods which are not these very high-rise buildings" and place them outside lower-income areas "if I can't find the land" elsewhere.
HERBERT LONDON; Conservative
LOUIS P. WEIN; Right to Life
Favors more low-density housing "integrated into many communities as opposed to isolated into groups." Favors programs patterned on the H.E.L.P. program initiated by Andrew Cuomo, the Governor's son, tax credits and incentives and providing "all the ancillary services that are required to help these people as part of a society that cares about them." Proposes a means test for rent-controlled apartments.
Philosophically opposed to rent controls as "there would be so much social dislocation and so much panic that the good that may come of that would be a disservice."
ABORTION
MARIO M. CUOMO; Democrat, Liberal
He has supported a woman's right to abortion and Medicaid financing of abortions for poor women, but says "it is too complicated to deal with in 28-second sound bites. It took me 7,000 words to describe it in an adreess to the Department of Theology at Notre Dame University. I can't reconfigure it to meet someone else's editing standards. It is too important for that."
PIERRE A. RINFRET; Republican
"I'm pro-choice. I'm not pro-abortion. Prochoice means giving the owman the right to make the decision. She then has to deal with herself, her conscience, her religion if she has one. I support state funding for the poor who are unable to pay for an abortion because I don't want them doing wire abortions or stick abortions." Would impose a residency requirement, though, "because I don't want ot attract everybody from outside the state."
HERBERT LONDON; Conservative
"I am pro-life. What ennobles the life of the individual woman, ennobles the life she's carrying. I'm willing to tolerate exceptions, incest, rape and the life of the mother. I'm opposed to Medicaid funding for abortion. I don't think that the state should be in the business of promoting abortion."
LOUIS P. WEIN; Right to Life
"I am opposed to abortion without exception. I would do everything I could within the law to get the law changed."
DRUG TREATMENT
MARIO M. CUOMO; Democrat, Liberal
Favors treatment on demand for durg addicts, but says "we're very far away from it" because of financial constraints.
PIERRE A. RINFRET: Republican
Says "we have concentrated on the jails and not on the rehabilitation centers." A backlog of roughly 17,000 people is "waiting to get in, can't get in, so they're still on the streets. If the investigation of the family shows it's totally incapable of affording this, then the state, in my judgement, has to pay. I want them off the streets. I'd rather have them in rehabilitation centers where there's a shot at them."
HERBERT LONDON; Conservative
Supports treatment on demand.
"If you found treatment programs that work, I would be very much in favor o them only because I think you would lower the expense from other areas of the state budget, including crime prevention and the court system." Favors random drug testing of applicants for driver's licenses and denying licenses to those who test positive.
LOUIS P. WEIN; Right to Life
Favors drug treatment on demand while also treating the causes of drug addiction in hospital and other existing facilities.
MENTAL HEALTH
MARIO M. CUOMO; Democart, Liberal
Favors a more "intelligent application of police power" to remove mentally ill people from streets.
"I'm not sure that there isn't more room in the Constitution for an intelligent application of police power that would enable you to protect people from injuring themselves, even if they're not going to kill themselves."
PIERRE A. RINFRET; Republican
Favors some legal provision under which people being treated for severe psychiatric problems can be required to take prescribed medicine.
HERBERT LONDON; Conservative
Says more people should be in mental hospitals.
"The state has abdicated its responsibility largely because I don't understand how it's a humanitarian policy to say to someone with mental illness, here's your Thorazine, take it every four hours and live on the streets of New York City."
LOUIS P. WEIN: Right to Life
"When people are incapable of taking care of themselves you should have some form of commitment."
SUNY TUITION
MARIO M. CUOMO; Democrat, Liberal
Suggests that tuition can be raised, but opposes a means test that would require someone who could afford it to pay the full cost.
PIERRE A. RINFRET; Republican
"I would increase the tuition fees" and would impose a means test.
"And I'm a student who went to C.C.N.Y. and had no money. I woul have a means test. I got in there for free, but I didn't have a nickel."
HERBERT LONDON; Conservative
Favors a policy of basing tuition on a student's ability to pay.
LOUIS P. WEIN; Right to Life
Favors means test that would base tuition on a student's ability to pay.


U.S. IS CONSIDERING ADDITIONAL FORCES TO CONFRONT IRAQ
The Bush Administration said today that it was considering expanding American military forces in the Persian Gulf beyond the 240,000 troops and other personnel already stationed there or soon to arrive.
The disclosure by the Defense Department came as President Bush, on a campaign swing through New England, said there could be no compromises with President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.
"I am more determined than ever to see that this invading dictator gets out of Kuwait with no compromise of any kind whatsoever," Mr.
Bush told a political rally in Manchester, N.H.  [ Page A10. ] Comments Come After Saudi Hint


Senate Backs Bill to Help Prevent Terrorists' Attacks on Aviation
The Senate today approved an aviation security bill codifying many recommendations of a Presidential commission that found serious flaws in security after the bombing of a Pan American World Airways jetliner in 1988.
The bill, which passed on a voice vote, was revised last week after the Bush Administration raised objections to an earlier measure, and its enactment now appears likely.
The House has already passed a companion bill.
Many of the measure's provisions have already been put into effect by the Administration.
Groups representing some of the families of the 270 people who died when the Pan Am jetliner exploded and crashed in Lockerbie, Scotland, on Dec. 21, 1988, welcomed the passage of the legislation.
The bill requires that Federal officials be assigned to major airports to insure that security standards are being met.
It also encourages the Federal Government to notify the public of specific threats of terrorist acts against airlines, although it leaves considerable discretion to security officials about when such warnings should be made public.
Notification of Threats
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, a New York Republican who was a member of the President's Commission on Aviation Security and Terrorism and who drafted much of the legislation, said the bill guaranteed that if some people were notified of terrorist threats everybody would be.
After the Pan Am bombing it was disclosed that the State Department had told diplomats in Moscow of the possibility of such an attack, but that warning was not made public.
The bill also discourages the Federal Aviation Administration from requiring the widespread deployment of the latest bomb detection equipment, like the thermal neutron analysis machine now being installed for tests at Kennedy International Airport in New York until the devices are proved to work.
But it gives the agency leeway in deciding whether to require airlines to deploy such devices more widely.
The Administration contended that the bill's initial language, which prohibited spending money on the bomb detectors, was unduly restrictive, as were other provisions of the bill.
As the legislation moved through Congress, negotiations dragged on over a broader aviation bill that would change airplane noise regulations, expand the numbers of flights at La Guardia Airport in New York and Washington National Airport, and allow local airports to impose taxes on passengers.
Negotiators on this bill met for the third consecutive day today, but reported little progress.
The bill is part of the broad budget package being considered in a House-Senate conference.


Barney Nagler, 78, Writer of the Ring And the Race Track
Barney Nagler, who for almost 40 years wrote a newspaper column devoted mainly to boxing and thoroughbred racing, died of pneumonia Monday night at the CentraState Medical Center in Freehold, N.J.
Mr.
Nagler, who lived in Manalapan, N.J., was 78 years old.
He began writing his column, which was spiced with the argot of the gym and the stable, in 1950 for The Morning Telegraph.
When The Telegraph ceased publication in 1972, the column, "On Second Thought," moved to The Daily Racing Form.


Wine Talk
WHEN Georges de Latour, the founder of the Beaulieu Vineyard in the Napa Valley, tasted his first Private Reserve cabernet sauvignon, the 1936 vintage, he was reputed to have said, "This is the wine I have been trying to make all my life." Tasting that same wine last Sunday, 54 years after it was made, one could still understand his enthusiasm.
The 1936 was one of the stars in two tastings offered by Beaulieu's owner, Heublein &amp; Company, to mark the release of the 1986 vintage of the wine and to celebrate the first 50 years of Georges de Latour Private Reserve.


TSI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; Bold Work on Homeless Ends Swiss Festival
St.
Mark's Church is one of the prettiest theater spaces in town.
Luminous, with an expansive sweep of open space, it proved to be perfect in one way for the excerpt from Estelle Eichenberger's "No Place To Stay" that was performed on Sunday night in the third and culminating program of the Annual Swiss Dance Festival, presented by the Danspace Project in association with the Swiss Institute of New York.
Miss Eichenberger is an invigoratingly bold dancer, full of scattershot high energy with an enjoyably teasing edge.
And the final, building passages of the piece epitomized those qualities and made ambitious use of the space.
Fifteen adult and child dancers joined with three musicians in a wild and rousing explosion of joyous energy, with the high walls over the altar dappled with projections of colored light and photographs.


Civil Rights Microscope on the Senate
Wringing his hands and insisting he really
wants
to sign a rights bill, President Bush vetoed the Civil Rights Act of 1990.
The Senate, which passed this moderate, fair bill by nearly a two-thirds margin, votes today to override or sustain that veto.
It's a rare second chance to preserve a generation of progress against job discrimination.
Presidents can usually depend on their supporters to sustain a veto merely as an act of partisan loyalty.
But this is no free vote for several senators, especially some moderate Republicans.
If they vote to sustain the civil rights veto, it will be with full knowledge that their President offers only the empty slogan "quota bill," not persuasive objections.


CHRONICLE
Last June Leonard Bernstein and four others each won a new $100,000 international arts prize from the Japan Art Association.
In a letter to the group dated Oct. 2, 12 days before his death, Mr.
Bernstein said he would use the money to found a Bernstein Through the Arts Fund "to support further the educational programs in which I so strongly believe and to which I am so deeply committed."
In Tokyo yesterday the awards were presented to Mr.
Bernstein posthumously as well as to the four other winners: FEDERICO FELLINI , the Italian film maker ; JAMES STIRLING , the British architect; ANTONI TAPIES , the Spanish painter, and ARNALDO POMODORO , the Italian sculptor.
"We are touched profoundly by Mr. Bernstein's generosity," said HIROAKI SHIKANAI , chairman of the art association.
The fund, he added, "will be one of many lasting legacies left behind by this towering figure of 20th-century culture."


India's Prime Minister Loses His Parliamentary Majority in Temple Dispute
Prime Minister V. P. Singh lost his majority in Parliament today but refused to resign in the continuing struggle over plans by militant Hindus to build a temple on a site that is sacred to Muslims.
Mr.
Singh's fragile coalition Government was rocked when the Bharatiya Janata Party, a conservative Hindu group, withdrew its parliamentary support to protest the arrest of its president, who was campaigning for construction of the temple.


The Rare Republicans
As New York's voters prepare to go to the polls in little more than two weeks, one question dominates: Where are the Republicans?
Rarely has the party been less competitive, at almost every level.
There are shining exceptions.
But for Republicans -- and indeed for anyone who cares about a vibrant two-party system -- it's hard to imagine a more depressing political season.
True, barring major upsets, most Republican incumbents will be returned to office, as will Democratic incumbents.
The G.O.P.'s special failure has been its inability to field good candidates in races where it might have mounted plausible challenges.


Crystal Brands reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


About Education
Ten years ago, North Carolina engaged in a daring experiment: creating a two-year boarding academy that would select able high school juniors from all over the state and immerse them in mathematics and science.
Initially, the idea of the North Carolina School for Science and Mathematics aroused heated controversy.
It was selective -- and therefore, in the view of some, undemocratic -- and boarding schools were traditionally reserved for children of the rich.


Belmont's Layout Bringing Controversy to Cup Classic
Depending on whether you think Belmont Park is too big or every other American race track is too small, the configuration of the seven Breeders' Cup races Saturday is either peculiar or perfect.
Belmont, which opened in 1905, is the stateliest and largest track in the country, a full mile and a half in circumference.
The six previous editions of the Breeders' Cup -- at Hollywood Park in 1984 and 1987, Aqueduct in 1985, Santa Anita in 1986, Churchill Downs in 1988 and Gulfstream in 1989 -- were all run around ovals measuring no more than a mile and an eighth around.
As a result, this year's races will be run under unique conditions that may favor some horses and styles of running while perhaps handicapping others.


HEARINGS PLANNED FOR ALL 5 SENATORS IN KEATING INQUIRY
The Senate Ethics Committee voted today to hold public hearings next month into allegations that five Senators improperly intervened with Federal officials on behalf of Charles H. Keating Jr., an important contributor who owned a failing savings and loan.
At the hearings, the panel will consider the recommendation of its special counsel that two of the Senators, including John McCain of Arizona, the only Republican in the group, be dropped from the investigation.


Shareholders' Suit Settled by Philips
The Dutch electronics group Philips N.V. said it had paid $9.25 million to settle a lawuit in which American shareholders contended the company had misled them about the health of its business.
The class action suit, filed in May, followed Philips's announcement of sharply lower first-quarter profits.
The shareholders contended the company had been unjustifiably optimistic in comments made before the earnings were announced on May 3.
Philips's stock plunged more than 10 percent on the day of the announcement.
The company said that it believed the shareholders' contentions were groundless but that it had settled the case to avoid a lengthy trial.
The settlement must be approved by a court.


Max Gordon Memorial
A memorial service for Max Gordon, an architect who designed a number of public and private exhibition spaces in many parts of the world will be held on Friday at noon at 150 Wooster Street in lower Manhattan.
Mr.
Gordon, who was 59 years old, died in London on Aug. 23.


Republicans Are Said to Pressure Accused Congressman to Resign
House Republican leaders are pressuring Representative Donald E. (Buz) Lukens to resign in the face of a broadened ethics investigation involving charges of sexual misconduct, Congressional officials said today.
They said members of the staff of the Ohio Republican believed he would step down Wednesday instead of serving out the remaining two months of his term.
The 59-year-old lawmaker was convicted last year of having sex with a minor and has since been defeated in a bid for re-election.
New Allegations
Congressional officials, speaking on condition that they not be identified, said the House ethics committee is reviewing allegations that Mr.
Lukens touched and verbally harassed a young woman who was operating a Congressional elevator.
Phone calls to Mr. Lukens's Congressional office went unanswered tonight.
He has refused to respond to the new charges.
"My attorneys have advised me that since little or nothing is known about the new allegations there will be no comment until we have more information," he said in a statement Monday.
The ethics panel began investigating Mr.
Lukens last year, focusing on the incidents in Ohio that led to his conviction on a misdemeanor charge of contributing to the unruliness of a minor.
He was accused of paying $40 to a 16-year-old girl to have sex with him at his Columbus apartment in November 1988.
He was sentenced to 30 days in jail and fined $500 but has been free on appeal.
The panel's investigation had not acted in the case since Mr.
Lukens was appealing his conviction.
Congressional officials said that after learning this week of the new sexual misconduct charges, fellow Republicans pleaded with Mr.
Lukens today to resign and avoid the embarrassment of an ethics investigation just two weeks before the general election.
"I don't know if he's formally notified the House leadership that he's resigning, but what we're hearing is that it's a done deal," a Republican Party official said.
"He's gone."
A Congressional official said he was told today by a members of Mr.
Lukens's staff that "Buz will be gone by the end of the week."


Unrelenting Devils Demolish Islanders
All alone in front of the net, Pat LaFontaine of the Islanders, usually so poised there, touched the blade of his stick to the ice and gently redirected an errant puck into the right post, causing a reaction that sent the puck into the unguarded goal, LaFontaine's own.
"I'll laugh at that someday, but not right now," LaFontaine, who returned from a three-game absence and scored one goal for the wrong team and none for his own, said later.
It was that kind of night for the Islanders, who performed inexcusably throughout an 8-1 loss to the Devils.
The score matched the worst ever experienced by the Islanders at home in their 19-year history.


Pathe Settles Time Warner Dispute
The Pathe Communications Corporation said today that it had agreed to set aside a legal quarrel with Time Warner Inc. in its bid to acquire the MGM/UA Communications Corporation.
The home-video distribution deal with Warner Brothers will give Pathe the $125 million its needs to complete the acquisition.
The announcement today strengthens speculation that Pathe and its chairman, the Italian financier Giancarlo Parretti, will consummate the $1.3 billion acquisition of MGM/UA, though after many difficulties securing financing. 'No Snags or Problems'


UAL Deal For Routes To London
The UAL Corporation, parent of United Airlines, announced yesterday that it had agreed to acquire one of the most prized assets in the airline industry, the routes of Pan American World Airways between five cities in the United States and London.
The $400 million acquisition pact was a coup for Stephen M. Wolf, chairman of UAL.
Indeed, the all-cash transaction could give United a substantial lead over its competitors, American Airlines and Delta Air Lines, in the race to Europe.
At the same time it strips Pan Am of the core of its European route system.


Clark Equipment Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Peoples Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


General Cinema To Cut Theaters
The General Cinema Corporation, one of the nation's largest movie theater chains, said it planned to sell or close about 20 theaters, consolidate several field offices and eliminate 85 jobs.
Peter Farwell, vice president for corporate relations, said no decision had been made about which of the company's 313 theaters, with 1,498 screens in 20 states, would be sold or closed.
General Cinema has 2,500 full-time employees, including 200 at its headquarters in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
It also owns 60 percent of the Neiman Marcus Group, the retailer.
Earlier this month, General Cinema sold its investment in Cadbury Schweppes Inc., a beverage concern, resulting in an after-tax gain of more than $80 million.
The company's shares slipped 37.5 cents today, to $19.375, on the New York Stock Exchange.


American Expanding Hub
Robert L. Crandall, chairman of AMR Inc., announced yesterday that American Airlines would spend $100 million to upgrade and expand its hub in San Juan, P.R., to about four times its present size.
American entered the Caribbean about five years ago and has greatly expanded its service there, becoming the largest carrier in the region.
Peter J. Dolara, the airline's senior vice president for the Caribbean, Florida and Latin America, said American accounted for about 40 percent of the traffic in the Caribbean and for about 65 percent at San Juan, its leading hub in the region.
Mr.
Crandall acknowledged that traffic to the Caribbean may slow because of the economic downturn that has hit parts of the Northeast, a significant source of travelers to the region.
Robert A. Grinberg, the president of Globetrotters, which provides tours to the Caribbean, said that while bookings have been up in the last year, cancellations were also up about 15 percent over last year.
Mr.
Crandall, however, said that American remained committed to growth even during the current period of soaring costs for aviation fuel and slower increases in traffic.


Castle &amp; Cooke reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 6


On His Social Programs, Cuomo Is Proud, to a Point
When it comes to housing, health, education and welfare issues, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York is being measured as much against his oratory as his record, which he describes in superlatives but acknowledges has not been good enough.
"I've done more for teen-age kids than any governor in history; that's not stopping teen-agers from having babies," Mr.
Cuomo said.
"We spend more on drugs than any state in the union; that hasn't changed that. I spend more on AIDS than anybody; that hasn't kept the AIDS rate down.


New Technique Combats Infertility in Women
A tiny balloon of the type that is pushed through the clogged arteries of heart disease patients can also clear blocked Fallopian tubes, bringing hope to thousands of women who are infertile, researchers say.
Tubal blockage is the principal source of up to 30 percent of female infertility, a report from Mount Sinai Hospital Medical Center in Chicago said.
But in a group of women suffering from the condition, the balloon technique produced a 34 percent pregnancy rate within the first three months after the tubes had been cleared, the researchers said.
The study is being published in Wednesday's issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association.


Food Notes
The Mellow Pages
Like a wine that spends extra time in bottle or barrel, the bimonthly newsletter Wine and Food Companion has become easier to enjoy after two years.
It has a more attractive format, and its approach to matching food and wine is more relaxed.
Instead of deciding which wines are best with a particular dish, David Rosengarten and Joshua Wesson, the publishers, approach whole categories, like Chinese food, with more general and sensible advice.
There are more recipes with wine suggestions and more reviews of restaurants.
But capsule reviews by correspondents in American and foreign cities lack information on prices and, often, wine lists.
And in case wine lovers do not have enough guidance from wine ratings published by Robert Parker and The Wine Spectator and the like, there are still more ratings of the 1989 Bordeaux, among other categories, to chew on.
Mr.
Rosengarten and Mr.
Wesson have also come up with a bimonthly Companion Wine Review, a newsletter that evaluates hundreds of wines.
Subscriptions to either publication are $36 a year, $49 for both.
For information, call (800) 888-1961.
Big Apples
The most gigantic apples in the Big Apple are Mrs.
Prindable's apples on a stick sold at Saks Fifth Avenue.
Each apple is as big as a softball, weighing about a pound.
And the apples under the incrustation of assorted candy coatings are super-deluxe Delicious apples that are indeed delicious, crisp and fairly tart.
But forget about eating them on the stick.
One apple sliced in wedges could easily serve four.
The coatings include toffee, milk and dark chocolate, coconut and cookie pieces.
The apples are $12 each.
Westchester Festival
On Sunday from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M., the Westchester County Center on Tarrytown Road in White Plains will become a food festival.
Chefs Day, sponsored by the local chapter of the American Culinary Federation, involves nearly 100 chefs giving cooking demonstrations.
Sample tastes of cheeses, chocolates, sausages and other foods will be available from about 25 producers.
Admission is $5; children under 12 are free. Venison Sausage
Venison is definitely the new meat on the block, appearing with increasing frequency on restaurant menus and available at some butcher shops.
Now there is a salami-style smoked venison sausage from Millbrook Venison Products, a venison farm in Millbrook, N.Y., that is being sold in many shops throughout the region.
The sausage is being made for the farm according to its recipe.
The venison is dark, rich and tangy, delicious with a lusty stein of good, malty beer to celebrate Oktoberfest.
In Manhattan, the sausage is sold at Ideal Cheese, 1205 Second Avenue at 63d Street, for $19.80 a pound, and at Delmonico's, 55 East 59th Street, for $20 a pound.
On Long Island, it is available at Prime Concern, 17 Middleneck Road, Great Neck, for $18 a pound and at S &amp; D Cheese, 312 Sunrise Highway, Rockville Centre for $20 a pound.
At the Market Basket, 813 Franklin Lakes Road, Franklin Lakes, N.J., it is $15.95 a pound.
The sausage can also be ordered whole or sliced for $11.95 a pound directly from Millbrook Venison Products by calling (914) 677-8457.
There is a shipping charge of $10 an order.
The Deer Hunter
John Doherty, the executive chef at the Waldorf-Astoria, seems to have created a side specialty for himself: giving cooking classes designed to appeal to men.
His latest is for hunters who have bagged a deer.
On Thursday, Nov. 8, at 5:30 P.M., in the hotel kitchen, he will talk about cuts of venison and how to prepare them.
He will even show how to smoke venison.
Although he cannot legally prepare hunted venison in the restaurant kitchen (no commercial establishment can), he will discuss how to combat the gaminess of wild venison.
At the end of the class the participants will feast on an autumn venison dinner.
The cost of the class is $69.
Reservations can be made by calling the chef's office, (212) 872-4866.
PRICES NOW AND THEN
COMPLAINING about higher food prices? It depends on how you look at it.
The United States Department of Agriculture said that in 1989 prices for food increased 5.8 percent, the most since 1981.
For food consumed at home, the increase was 4.2 percent; restaurant prices rose 6.5 percent.
Consumers spent $440 billion on food, or 11.6 percent of disposable income.
But if that sounds like a lot, consider that the Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that at the turn of the century, when life was simpler and the mailbox was not stuffed with car and cable television bills, as much as 40 percent of a family's income was spent on food.
In 1960, it was 17.6 percent.
Last year's increases were higher for poultry than for meat or seafood because of the demand for chicken by fast-food chains.
On average, 24 percent of the price of an item goes to the farmer or fisherman; the rest covers processing, packaging, advertising and distribution, with labor a major part of these expenses.


Bank Funds And C.D.'s Are Mixed
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were narrowly mixed for the week that ended yesterday.
The postponement of the Treasury Department's regular bill auction on Monday of three-month and six-month Treasury bills because of Congress's failure to raise the debt limit meant many interest-rate watchers who follow the bill auctions had to watch trading in the secondary market instead for some indication of movement in short-term rates.


U.S. Says Coastal Can Buy Iraqi Oil
The Coastal Corporation said it had received permission from the Government to import as much as 2.6 million barrels of Iraqi crude oil shipped in July to Saudi Arabia, before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
But the company must obtain permission from Saudi Arabia first, a company spokesman, Jim Bailey, said.
Coastal said it would pay for the oil through an escrow account that would allow access by the United States Government but not the Iraqis.
The company must reach an agreement with the Saudis by the end of the month because the United States has required that the oil be delivered by Dec. 15.
Oil shipments from the Middle East take about 45 days.
The Saudi Government opposes the release of the oil, worth about $75 million, and is hesitant to make exceptions to the United Nations embargo, which prohibits trade with Iraq and Kuwait, Mr.
Bailey said Monday.


Cilcorp Inc. reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30


Pakistani Election: Will the Result Be More Political Uncertainty?
In an election that could create more political uncertainties than it resolves, Pakistani voters are being asked on Wednesday to give their verdict on the dismissal of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto in August.
Voting takes place from 8 A.M. to 5 P.M. here, with final results not expected until Thursday Eastern time.


Prices of Oil Viewed as Stabilized
Oil prices stabilized yesterday after a record drop the day before took futures prices below $30 a barrel.
Crude for December delivery settled at $29.37 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, down $1.04 from the previous day's December bid.
But that price was about $1 higher than the mark set by the expired November contract, which plummeted a record $5.41, to $28.38, on its last day of trading on Monday.
Limits Imposed by Exchange
December contracts did not fall as far as November on Monday because of daily limits imposed by the exchange on contracts beyond the near month.
The December contract was pressed lower yesterday to narrow that gap, but analysts were not sure whether to characterize the move as an increase or a decrease.
"It's tricky," said Ann-Louise Hittle, a senior oil analyst with Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc.
"Stabilization is the best word."
January and February crude contracts fell along with December, but later contract months were higher.
"We're having a little bit of confusion," said Thomas Blakeslee, an energy analyst with Pegasus Econometric Group Inc. in Hoboken, N.J.
"They're not exactly sure where they want to take the market." Peace Called More Likely
Those analysts following crude prices said the market was definitely viewing peace in the Persian Gulf as more likely than war.
Crude's record fall on Monday occurred as traders responded to reports of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq having a dream in which a prophet told him his rockets were pointed in the wrong direction.
Prices also had fallen on statements from a ranking Saudi official that were construed as indicating Iraq might be able to keep some Kuwaiti territory in a negotiated settlement of the crisis.
Some Ground Recovered
Refined petroleum products recovered some ground from Monday's plunge, moving higher for next-month delivery, with later months mixed.
Home heating oil was 5.08 cents higher at 81.06 cents a gallon for November delivery.
Contracts for subsequent months were mixed.
Unleaded gasoline was 3.40 cents higher at 79.90 cents a gallon for November delivery, with later months trading mostly lower.
Natural gas prices were higher yesterday, rising 1.5 cents, to $2.52 for 1,000 cubic feet for December delivery.
Other contract months moved up as well.


Place-Kicker Target of Inquiry
The way Donald Igwebuike has apparently been telling it, all he did was send some money home to his parents in Nigeria.
The way Federal authorities seem to be viewing it, that would have been fine if the friend the Minnesota Viking place-kicker used as a courier hadn't returned to the United States with 31 small bags of heroin in his stomach.
That was a couple of weeks ago, and since the friend's arrest at the Orlando, Fla., airport, Igwebuike, who spent five years with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers before joining the Vikings this fall, has been the target of an investigation by Federal authorities in Tampa, Fla.
The Tampa authorities weren't available for comment last night, but according to a report on ABC's "World News Tonight", they say they have "irrefutable evidence" linking Igwebuike to the drug deal, including his participation in phone conversations indicating that he was aware of the transaction.
Igwebuike was referring all inquiries to his lawyer, who couldn't be reached last night.
The Vikings, who learned about the matter from reporters, would say only that they had not been contacted by Federal authorities, that they had talked to Igwebuike and his lawyer and that they had referred the matter to the National Football League.


Frederico Westphalen Journal; In Footsteps of Apostles: Married Priest's Story
The Rev.
Ivo Schmitt, a Roman Catholic priest here, was discussing celibacy when his wife, Adulina, walked in from the vegetable garden carrying the couple's clean laundry.
"From what we know, at least 10 of the apostles were married," the priest said as his wife heated water for a pot of tea.


History Didn't Begin in Mesopotamia
To the Editor:
"To Endangered List in Gulf, Add Archeology" (front page, Sept. 16) asserts that ancient Mesopotamia -- which spanned the territory encompassing much of present-day Iraq -- "produced the first writing and earliest experiments in agriculture." You also credit the valley of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers in Iraq as "the place where historical time began."


Caffeine Health Study Excluded Women
To the Editor:
I am grievously concerned that the Harvard School of Public Health data on the effects of caffeine, which you report in "Study Disputes Coffee's Tie to Heart Disease Risk" (Health page, Oct. 11) were based solely on the study of men.
This study, funded by the National Institutes of Health is another example of persistent bias against including women in N.I.H. research where the outcome may apply to both sexes.


Miscellany
*
The Ross Roy Group, Detroit, a marketing communications firm, has bought the Colligan Group, a direct marketing company in Rowayton, Conn., with clients that include Time Warner, Home Box Office and Fisher Price.
Colligan will work closely with the Ross Roy subsidiary, Calet, Hirsch &amp; Spector Inc.
Terms were not disclosed. *
The Coca-Cola Co. has obtained exclusive soft drink marketing and promotional rights for the National Football League, through a three-year agreement with undisclosed terms.
Coca-Cola has been the official soft drink for the N.F.L. since 1984.


Turbo Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Book Notes
Small-Press Celebrity
Nominations for the National Book Awards, announced last week, confounded many in publishing, largely because so few nominees had been brought out by the major houses.
One, in fact, was published by a house whose biggest seller was 6,000 copies.
That is the Dalkey Archive Press , which published a nominee for fiction, "Chromos," by Felipe Alfau.
Neither Dalkey, the Lisle, Ill., publisher, nor its 88-year-old author is used to being in such major league company.
In fact, Mr.
Alfau, who lives in a home for the elderly on Long Island, told his publisher he would not consent to interviews.
"We started in 1984, mostly doing reprints, but now primarily originals," said Steven Moore, an editor of the press.
Dalkey modeled itself after Grove Press and New Directions, he said, small houses that published quality literature and experimental fiction.
With only three full-time employees and two part timers, Dalkey publishes about 15 hard-cover titles a year.
Its biggest seller is "Wittgenstein's Mistress," by David Markson, a novel that has sold 6,000 copies.
In 1989, Dalkey reprinted Mr.
Alfau's first novel, "Locos: A Comedy of Gestures." The book, completed in 1928, was finally published in a limited edition in 1936.
Mr.
Alfau was born in 1902 in Barcelona, Spain, and came to the United States during World War I. He wrote music criticism for a Spanish newspaper in New York, and in 1929, Doubleday published his young-adult book, "Old Tales From Spain."
Unable to support himself as a writer, Mr.
Alfau became a translator at a Wall Street bank, where he remained until his retirement in 1954.
"Chromos," he told his publisher, was written at the office between translations, to pass the time.
But when he could not find a publisher, he eventually lost interest in writing.
A Tower Bookstore
Tower Books is putting the finishing touches on the store it plans to open in Greenwich Village this week.
An offshoot of Tower Records and Tower Video, the store, at 383 Lafayette Street at Fourth Street, atop the Tower Video store, is the largest of Tower's 13 bookstores and is its first bookstore in the Northeast.
Company officials say the store, which will be open from 9 A.M. to midnight daily, is already stocked with 70,000 titles (compared with 10,000 titles in the average bookstore).
Nine autographing sessions are to be held during the next six weeks, beginning with Stephen King on Friday and including Jean M. Auel on Nov. 3.
Prompting Rumors  &lt;&gt;
It is more than two months until publication, but "American Psycho" by Bret Easton Ellis continues to be the subject of rumors and speculation.
The novel, the catalogue says, is about a young, handsome and successful Wall Street worker who "can't stop killing people -- women, men, children -- in ever more gruesome ways.".
Mr.
Ellis's agent, Amanda Urban, said that when the manuscript was delivered to Simon &amp; Schuster, "there was some feeling of revulsion on the part of some of the younger women there." But their revulsion eventually dissolved, she said, as had some of the initial revulsion to Mr.
Ellis's 1985 novel, "Less Than Zero," about drugs and bisexuality on a college campus.
If some wonder why a house would publish a book that made some of its own staffers queasy, the answer is that Simon &amp; Schuster, like many other publishers, contends that a book represents the author's expression.
Moreover, Mr.
Ellis's book about drugs and bisexuality was a best seller.
"It probably will upset some readers, because of its quite graphic depiction of sex and violence," said Robert Asahina, the editor of "American Psycho."
A sampling of bookstores did not turn up any that had refused to order the book.
Barbara Morrow, co-owner of the Northshire Bookstore in Manchester Center, Vt., said Mr.
Ellis, who graduated from Bennington College in 1986, had a following in that area.
"But I'm not going to advertise the book," she said, "or put it in the window, but I'll carry it. I don't think we could ever take the position that we wouldn't buy a book by a well-known author, regardless of subject matter, but we're taking a very low profile on 'American Psycho.' "


Burrell the Big Winner Of Black Ad Awards
Burrell Advertising, Chicago, walked away from the C.E.B.A. (Communications Excellence to Black Audiences) awards ceremony with its hands full.
The agency won 18 awards, five of them for excellence, the highest of three categories.
Burrell's winning ads included its campaign for McDonald's.
Uniworld Group Inc., New York, last year's top winner, picked up three excellence awards and nine in the other categories.
Executives from Time Warner Inc. were honored for "a distignuished record of service to new African-American owned companies," said Quincy Jones, who presented the award at the 13th annual C.E.B.A. ceremony this week in New York.


Rayonier Timberlands L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wang Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A 70's Restaurant Of Ideas and Ideals
AT noon on this particular Sunday, the monthly meeting of the Moosewood Restaurant Collective is under way in what was once the boys' detention room of the Boynton Junior High School in this upstate college town.
Fourteen of the collective's 18 members are present, and the discussion is spirited if a little opaque for a late arrival from out of town.
The subject seems to be vipers, not previously considered a problem here at the southern tip of Cayuga Lake.
Wynelle Stein, a collective member for eight years, glances across the table and, catching the visitor's confusion, grins broadly.
"Vipers," she says, "as in vashers and vipers." The dish viper?
No, it's even more arcane than that: the viper makes sure that the basics, from paper towels to salt and pepper, are in place.


Diplomacy Wins as 2 Koreas Compete at Soccer in Seoul
The two Koreas clashed on the soccer field today in a game dedicated to friendship, watched by the largest crowd to see a South Korean sports event since the 1988 Olympics.
South Korea won 1-0, but the score was insignificant beside the diplomatic coup in having two enemy nations share a playing field for only the second time since World War II.
The first time was two weeks ago in North Korea, when the northern team beat the South 2-1.


MDU Resources Group Inc. reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30


What Role Should a Poll Play?
This week's college football polls have come out and, as a nation waited breathlessly for their verdict, we learned, among other things, that Michigan has plummeted in esteem.
What has happened to it is one of the most dramatic of the polls stories, and one that might make strong men shed copious tears.
The Wolverines, No. 1 two weeks ago in both news-agency polls, dropped last week to No. 8 in the United Press International poll and No. 10 in The Associated Press, and this week are 18 in the U.P.I., and 20 in the A.P.!


Unum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wang Has a Profit; 2 Others Decline
Wang said yesterday that it returned to profitability in its latest quarter, but two other computer makers, Control Data and Tandy, said their earnings slipped.


Action Sought On Polly Peck
A bank has moved to force the troubled British conglomerate Polly Peck International P.L.C. into bankruptcy proceedings, the bankruptcy court said.
The court in London said the National Bank of Canada filed a petition Monday against the food and electronics conglomerate, which is suffering a cash shortage.
The petition asks the court to place the company in receivership so that its assets can be liquidated to meet debt payments.
A hearing was scheduled for Dec. 12.
Bankers speculated that the bank intended to set out its claims against Polly Peck in the event of a rush by creditors.
The hearing falls more than a month before a debt-payment standstill agreement between Polly Peck and its key lenders expires on Nov. 9.
A Polly Peck spokesman declined to comment, and officials at National Bank of Canada's London branch office were not available to comment.
Asil Nadir, Polly Peck's chairman and chief executive, has been visiting Turkey and northern Cyprus in search of financial support.
Polly Peck needs about $194 million in short-term financing to get it through its liquidity squeeze, sources have said.


Gunmen Open Fire in Upper East Side Bar, Killing a Man
Two men armed with handguns walked into a popular bar and restaurant on the Upper East Side of Manhattan last night, approached a table and opened fire, killing one patron and wounding two others, the police said.
The gunmen then fled on foot from the bar, T. G. I. Friday's, on the northeast corner of First Avenue and 63d Street, said Detective Joseph Gallagher.


Review/Film; Resisting the Loggers In an Idyll on Borneo
The half-naked man making his way gracefully across the rushing waterfall is an outlaw.
He is Bruno Manser, a Swiss journalist, and he lives in the rain forest of Borneo among the Penan Indians, a nomadic tribe whose language has 40 words to describe the sago palm tree.
The Penans live a hard, simple life shaped by ritual and superstition. ("They don't separate dreams and reality," Mr. Manser says. "If someone dreams the camp is burning, they break camp and move on.") They survive by hunting with blowpipes, which leave the overhead jungle canopy dotted with stray poison darts.


Washington Post Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


High-Velocity Stews
To The Living Section:  Regarding Molly O'Neill's delightful article "Cold Day? Warm Stew, Hot Debate"  [ Oct. 17 ] , I would like to point out that the one way to perform kitchen alchemy -- doing slow cooking fast -- is with a pressure cooker, an appliance that easily produces 2-hour taste in 20 minutes.
For example, coq au vin is done in 9 minutes and a fork-tender lamb stew in 12.
Pressure cookers are making a comeback as more and more cooks realize the truth of Irma Rombauer's words in the 1946 edition of "The Joy of Cooking": "There is a gadget on the market that permits a cook to scoff at time. It is a pressure cooker."  LORNA J. SASS New York, N.Y.
Lorna J. Sass is the author of "Cooking Under Pressure" (William Morrow &amp; Company, 1989).


Bell &amp; Howell Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Copper Prices Stage Rally As Recession Fears Ease
Prices of copper futures surged yesterday on New York's Commodity Exchange in a powerful rally ignited by fading recession fears and fanned by computer-generated buying.
Copper futures settled 3.55 cents to 5.2 cents higher, with the contract for spot delivery at $1.322 a pound.


Zephania Mothopeng, 77, Dies; Headed South African Movement
Zephania Lekoane Mothopeng, the president of the Pan-Africanist Congress, which advocates the return of South Africa to its indigenous inhabitants, died today in Johannesburg Hospital after a long struggle with chest and lung cancer complicated by pneumonia.
He was 77 years old.
Mr.
Mothopeng began his struggle against apartheid in the youth league of the African National Congress in the early 1940's, but quit the congress in 1959 and joined Robert Sobukwe in founding the more hard-line Pan-Africanist Congress.
He was elected its president in 1986 while in prison.


Dow Falls 22.03, but Other Stocks Advance
The 30 blue-chip stocks in the Dow Jones industrial average tumbled yesterday for the second day after a last-minute hitch on the budget.
But hundreds of other stocks advanced -- a sign that analysts took to be bullish.
By the end of the day, the Dow slid to 2,494.06, down 22.03.
But 821 issues were up and 695 were down.


Castle &amp; Cooke Has 88% Gain
Castle &amp; Cooke Inc., the parent company of the Dole Food Company, said today that earnings rose 88 percent, with the opening of markets in Eastern Europe increasing demand for fresh fruit and vegetables.
"Our food business is reporting record profits," David H. Murdock, Castle's chief executive, said in a statement.
"As a low-cost producer, we are well positioned to take advantage of the increased worldwide demand for fresh produce."
Castle &amp; Cooke is in the process of trying to sell Dole, which dominates the worldwide production and distribution of fresh produce, to concentrate on its other business, real estate.
Several big international food companies are reported to have considered buying Dole.
Castle's third-quarter profits were $44 million, or 74 cents a share, against $23.4 million, or 39 cents a share a year ago.


People
*
The League of Advertising Agencies, New York, has appointed new advisers and consultants.
Named as advisers were Douglas J. Wood, legal; Seymour Levenstein, financial, and Ray Heller, credit and collections.
The consultants will be: Jeffrey Sussman, public relations; Bill Weiner, media, and Bernard Zuckerman, production.


Portec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.P.S. Improves Overnight Service
United Parcel Service of America Inc. said it would match the delivery and pickup times of its main competitor in the overnight delivery business, the Federal Express Corporation.
It said it had pushed its guaranteed overnight delivery time to 10:30 A.M. from noon previously, and would offer same-day pickup of packages for shipment instead of the next-day pickup previously offered.
Federal Express, based in Memphis, has used those features to dominate the $8 billion overnight delivery market.
"We knew that this is what we needed to compete in this market," a U.P.S. spokesman, Alan Caminiti, said.
U.P.S., the world's largest package delivery company, sends more than 700,000 packages a day by air for both overnight and second-day delivery, he said.


Iranian Exile Is Slain in Paris
An exiled Iranian opposition leader was slain in his Paris home today, and members of his Flag of Freedom Organization of Iran asserted that agents of the Teheran Government were responsible.
The victim, Cyrus Elahi, a 46-year-old political scientist who graduated from the University of Michigan, was found with numerous bullet wounds to the head and body in the hall of his Montparnasse apartment building shortly before dawn.


Fernando Valenti Tribute
A memorial tribute to the harpsichordist Fernando Valenti is to be at 6 P.M. on Tuesday a the Manhattan School of Music, Broadway at 122d Street.
Mr.
Valenti died of a heart attack on Sept. 6.
The tribute is open to the public, but reservations are necessary.
Information: 265-8111.


Seidman Plan For Banks
L.
William Seidman, the chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, said tonight that he was asking bank regulators to adopt new measures that would improve supervision of the nation's banking system and help reduce the chances of more serious problems for banks in the future.
Under existing bank regulations "the results we have had are not acceptable," Mr.
Seidman said.
He was referring to the losses incurred by the Government-operated Bank Deposit Insurance Fund that result when regulators allow banks to operate imprudently.


Motivation Matches Piston Talent
Before a recent exhibition game, Joe Dumars and Bill Laimbeer were sitting at their lockers reading novels.
Both men had more chapters to finish.
Likewise, the Detroit Pistons think they have more chapters to add to their championship reign.


McDonald's Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
Political Crisis in India
Prime Minister V. P. Singh's coalition lost its majority in India's Parliament when a right-wing Hindu party withdrew support.
But Mr.
Singh refused to resign.
Page A3.
Israel Bars Arab Entry
Israel has temporarily barred Arabs in the occupied territories from entering Israel because of a wave of attacks in which three Jews and a Palestinian have died.
Page A12.
Peace Feelers on Ethiopia
The Bush Administration is trying to revive peace negotiations between the Ethiopian Government and the rebels in the northeastern province of Eritrea.
Page A9.
School Jobs in Jeopardy
The New York City Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, is preparing to eliminate hundreds of jobs, including many through layoffs, to meet new budget demands.
Page B1.
United Gets London Route
United Airlines will be flying to London under a deal with Pan Am to acquire its routes from five American cities to Heathrow Airport.
Page D1.
Milken's Boss Testifies
Without emotion, possibly with reluctance, Frederick Joseph testified that his former star executive at Drexel had probably misled him.
Page D1.
Developing Artificial Bone
A handful of companies are closing in on one of the most exotic goals of orthopedic surgery: artificial bone, grown in a jar.
Page D10.
Dole to Quit Cabinet
Elizabeth H. Dole will reportedly resign as Labor Secretary to head the American Red Cross.
Page A17.


Danaher Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


House Approves a Measure Protecting Indian Artifacts
The House has approved a bill that provides for the protection of Indian remains and other sacred or cultural artifacts on Federal and tribal lands.
By voice vote on Monday, the House adopted the measure, which also requires Federal agencies and museums that receive Federal money to prepare inventories of Indian remains and associated artifacts in their possession.
If the objects are requested by Indian tribes, they must be returned.


Douglas Says His Hat Still Fits Him
James (Buster) Douglas was at a news conference Monday and was asked whether he had become big-headed since he knocked out Mike Tyson for the heavyweight title in February.
Douglas removed his red baseball cap, checked the label designating hat size and said, "No."


The Man at the Window
The man was deep in a dream -- something about a vacation at a peaceful beach -- when gunfire jolted him awake.
He counted five shots echoing up from the street below.
He muttered something unprintable to his wife, now stirring beside him, then donned a robe and started through the house.
The children, both heavy sleepers, remained safe in bed.
The man moved toward the front door.


Eek!
It didn't take long.
The first cool evening, and there it was, scurrying through the woman's Manhattan apartment, seeking a bit of warmth, perhaps a bite to eat.
Furry, gray, pink-nosed and beady-eyed.
A mouse.
Across the kitchen, into the entryway, underneath the couch.
The woman called the superintendent, who set spring traps along the walls.
But the woman couldn't sleep, listening for the sound of claws on linoleum, the ominous snap! of a trap.
Each morning she'd warily peek at the traps, relieved to find them empty.
She plans to fill the holes with steel wool and plaster.
If that doesn't work, she'll adopt a cat, the ultimate in mouse prevention.
Reluctant to kill the tiny critter, she refuses to live with it.
In a year, a pair of the prolific rodents can produce 2,500 progeny.
That many uninvited mouseguests could eat her out of house and home.


Review/Piano; Promising Young Lion of '68 Returns From the Ukraine
The Ukrainian pianist Aleksandr Slobodyanik was regarded as one of the Soviet Union's most promising young lions of the keyboard when he gave his first American concerts, in 1968.
But although he toured the United States regularly until the cultural freeze of 1979 and resumed his American career in 1988, he has never had the international reputation predicted for him two decades ago.
Parts of Mr.
Slobodyanik's concert at Carnegie Hall on Sunday evening suggested some reasons for this.
He is, for one thing, a strong technician but hardly a flawless one.
He is also an interpreter whose quirkiness sometimes borders on perversity.


Making Campaign Finance Still Better
In last year's mayoral race, New York City's new public campaign finance system succeeded in reducing big gifts from favor-seekers.
The City Council's government operations committee can build on that achievement today when it votes on proposed refinements.
The new law saw $4.5 million in public matching funds dispensed to 37 municipal candidates who agreed to strict limits on private donations and campaign spending.
Individual gifts, once as sky-high as $50,000, were capped at a reasonable $3,000.
But the experiment also suggested the need for some adjustments.


Review/Pop; Still Growling and Prowling
Long before Madonna's "Material Girl" became a humorous symbol of upward mobility through sex, Eartha Kitt was toying with the same archetype, imbuing it with a similar attitude of tongue-in-cheek amusement.
Miss Kitt's 1950's version of the gold digger, however, had a more avid edge than Madonna's.
A feline temptress whose trophies of romantic conquest were furs, jewels and Champagne, she was less of a saucy free spirit.
Underneath her caricature, one sensed real rage boiling.
At the age of 62, Miss Kitt, who opened a two-week engagement at the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street) on Tuesday evening, is still playing the same role, though the sense of irony in her performance has broadened considerably.
At a preview performance of her act on Sunday afternoon, the singer sang most of her best-known hits, including "Uska Dara," the traditional Turkish song that was her first hit in 1952, along with "C'est Si Bon," and "Santa Baby," the Christmas hit that Madonna recorded three years ago on a charity album for the Special Olympics.


Management Shifts Set At Poquet Computer
In an exchange of management roles, Robb Wilmot, the chairman and co-founder of the Poquet Computer Corporation, has been named president and chief executive, while Stav Prodromou, also a co-founder, has left those positions to become vice chairman.
Based in Sunnyvale, Calif., Poquet is jointly owned by its founders, employees and Fujitsu Ltd., which holds 47 percent.
Poquet (pronounced "pocket") was founded in 1988 and introduced its first product, a one-pound portable personal computer, in 1989, but expects to broaden its market next year through a series of strategic alliances.


Steinbrenner Gives Piniella a Pat on Back
George Steinbrenner was sitting in a makeup chair in the NBC studios last Saturday night when Lou Piniella walked to the mound at the Oakland Coliseum and pulled his starting pitcher, Jose Rijo, from the ninth inning of the last game of the World Series.
Even the makeup girl was agape.
"There were a bunch of people around," Steinbrenner said Monday by telephone from Ocala, Fla., "and they wanted to know what I thought when Lou came out and took out Rijo. I told them, 'Lou knows what he's doing. I would have done the same thing.' "


Nacco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Imperial Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Support for Reds' Davis
The number of get-well cards and letters to the injured Cincinnati Reds outfielder Eric Davis has been overwhelming, according to Anna Runkle, marketing coordinator for Merritt Peralta Hospital in Oakland, Calif.
Davis, who suffered a kidney injury in Saturday night's final game of the World Series, remained in stable condition in the intensive care ward.
His doctor said on Monday that no surgery would be required and that Davis would probably be released from the hospital by late this week.
"The mail is being taken to his room," Runkle said.
"No flowers are allowed in intensive care. But he has received many, many bouquets, and at his request, they are being sent to Childrens Hospital in Oakland, in his name." (AP)


Silicon Valley Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wellman Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quaker Net Falls 40.4%
The Quaker Oats Company today reported a 40.4 percent drop in net income for its first quarter, noting the costs of spinning off its Fisher-Price toy division.
Quaker's profits for the three months that ended on Sept. 30 fell to $33.2 million, or 42 cents a share, compared with $55.7 million, or 70 cents a share, a year earlier.
First-quarter revenue rose 9.9 percent, to $1.33 billion, from $1.21 billion.
Quaker is in the process of spinning Fisher-Price off to shareholders.
Fisher-Price accounted for $16.1 million of Quaker's net income in the first quarter of 1989.
Quaker's share price fell 87.5 cents today, to $45.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.81
7.81
8.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.22
7.24
7.52
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.18
7.19
7.47
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.51
8.47
7.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.79
8.75
7.88
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.90
9.83
9.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS*
7.76
7.76
7.31
*Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Shell Oil Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allergan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Compromise on Kuwait, Bush Says
President Bush again compared President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to Hitler today and declared that there could never be any compromise with him on Kuwait.
Speaking at a political rally in Manchester, N.H., only a day after Saudi Arabia's Defense Minister, Prince Sultan, seemed to suggest that Kuwait might be wise to cede Baghdad some disputed territory as part of an arrangment to get Iraqi troops to pull out, Mr.
Bush said, "I am more determined than ever to see that this invading dictator gets out of Kuwait with no compromise of any kind whatsoever."


Albany Equation May Hang on a Rockland Race
If any campaign may singlehandedly determine whether the Republicans keep their slim majority in the State Senate this year, and probably throughout the decade, it is the one being waged here in the tax- and crime-conscious suburbs of Rockland County.
Although a Democratic win in the 38th District would not guarantee Democratic control of the Senate, most equations for such a takeover include a victory here.


CHRONICLE
The British actor IAN MCKELLEN will be returning to his alma mater as the CAMERON MACKINTOSH Visiting Professor of Contemporary Theater at St.
Catherine's College, Oxford University.
Mr.
Mackintosh, the producer whose most recent productions include "Les Miserables" and "Miss Saigon," established the chair last year.
STEPHEN SONDHEIM was the first to hold the position.
Mr.
McKellen, an associate director of the Royal National Theater, is currently leading the company in a world tour of "Richard III" and "King Lear." Beginning in January he will work privately with a small group of actors from the university and the Oxford region, and will lead a series of public seminars to debate aspects of modern British theater.


Southland Creditors Favor a Bankruptcy
The Southland Corporation, the nation's largest convenience store chain, appeared today to have lost its fight to avoid bankruptcy.
Creditors voting on a reorganization plan for the parent of the 7-Eleven convenience stores appeared to have rejected a proposal for a debt swap and to have favored instead a "prepackaged" Chapter 11 bankruptcy plan.


U.N. Vote on Israel Is Delayed
At American urging, the United Nations Security Council put off voting on a new resolution criticizing Israel tonight, so the Bush Administration can make an effort to persuade Israel to cooperate with United Nations representatives investigating the killings of 21 Arabs in Jerusalem two weeks ago.
If Israel refuses to accept the United Nations team, many Council members say they think that the United States will allow the Council to censure Israel on Wednesday for the second time in 10 days, either by abstaining or voting in favor of a new resolution criticizing Israel's failure to cooperate with the United Nations investigators.


Wines Nearer Than Greece
To The Living Section:  I am appreciative of the favorable comments that were made by Frank Prial  [ Oct. 17 ]  on my newly released book, "The Wines of Greece." But I would like to bring to the attention of those New Yorkers who do not go traipsing off to Greece each summer that a more than decent selection of Greek wines can be found on their doorstep by hopping over to Queens and visiting stores such as Grand Wine and Liquors (30-05 31st Street, Long Island City).
I do not want to take the fun out of it by naming particular Greek wines out of the numerous ones found there, but I would like wine lovers who are not impressed by the prestige of wines to know that there are several outstanding values available, particularly for the person who is so open-minded as to cellar a Greek red wine for several years.
MILES LAMBERT-GOCS Alexandria, Va.


Quotation of the Day
"I'm so frustrated by Congress's inability to do anything, I don't know what I'm going to do." -- President Bush on the budget process.  [ A1:2. ]


The Dollar Is Mostly Higher After Sale of Yen by the Fed
The dollar traded mostly higher against other major currencies yesterday, rising most strongly against the Japanese yen after the Federal Reserve sold yen to buy dollars, traders said.
Gold prices rose.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold climbed $1.60 a ounce to close at $371.20.
Late in the day, the Republic National Bank in New York quoted gold at $371.25 an ounce, up $1.75.


VATICAN CRITICAL OF A U.S. BISHOP
A Roman Catholic Bishop who met with a group of married priests last summer in California has received a critical letter from a high Vatican official warning that such encounters might lend legitimacy to the effort to abolish the rule on priestly celibacy.
Participants in the meeting said the letter was sent to the Bishop, Donald W. Wuerl of Pittsburgh, who heads the National Conference of Catholic Bishops Committee on Priestly Life and Ministry, by Antonio Cardinal Innocenti, the head of the Vatican Congregation for the Clergy.


Ohio Contest Has a Rare Mix of Race and Politics
The two candidates for Congress from this southern Ohio district are friends and former political allies.
They are both conservative, are well known to voters and are well respected.
They agree on most issues.
In fact, the only difference between the two men, aside from party, is one they are loath to acknowledge: race.
"The only people who seem hellbent on injecting race into this campaign is the national media," said Mayor Charles J. Luken, a 39-year-old Democrat who seeks the seat being vacated by his father Thomas A. Luken, who is 65 and is retiring after representing Ohio's First Congressional District since 1976.  [ Mr.
Luken is not to be confused with another Congressman from Ohio with a similar name, Donald E. Lukens, who resigned his seat yesterday amid a sex scandal.
Page A21. ]


Sun Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American President Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 21


Review/Fashion; Ungaro and Valentino: Lofty Designs
Two of the latest showings here were in the hands of professionals, designers who are relatively secure because they have been around a long time and have established loyal followings.
So there was less hysteria at the spring and summer openings of Valentino and Emanuel Ungaro than there was at the openings of houses jockeying for standing in the fashion world.
What Valentino and Ungaro share for warm weather is a preference for airborne fabrics that seem to float, a variety of prints and a lightness of spirit.
The audience rose to its feet and applauded mightily as Emanuel Ungaro came down the runway between columns of his colorfully dressed models, who were also applauding.
It was the first ovation of the season.
The clothes were pretty, accessible and very well done.


Study Says Public TV Often Features Women
Female correspondents are more often seen on public television than on network and cable television news programs, reports a monthlong monitoring project made public yesterday by Women, Men and Media, a research group that examines such issues in the press.
Only 15 percent of the news stories on cable and network news were reported by women in September, when the study was conducted.
But women reported 40 percent of the news stories on the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" on PBS.
The study also reported that 22 percent of the news makers and experts who appeared on "The World Today" on CNN were women, compared with 17 percent on "MacNeil/ Lehrer," 14 percent on ABC 's "World News Tonight," 13 percent on the CBS "Evening News" and 12 percent on the NBC "Nightly News."


Universal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
UAL acquired Pan Am's routes between five U.S. cities and London, one of the most prized assets in the industry.  [ Page D1. ]
Continental Airlines may soon seek bankruptcy protection, a lawyer familiar with the situation said.  [ D1. ]
Mobil and Shell Oil said their profits declined, with higher oil prices forcing refining and marketing costs higher.  [ D1. ]
Disney will finance most of its future films through a new partnership with Japanese investors and banks.  [ D1. ]
RJR Nabisco said it had narrowed its loss to $86 million from $447 million in last year's quarter.  [ D5. ]
Earnings fell at Salomon and Morgan Stanley.
Salomon's earnings were aided by strong results from oil trading.  [ D6. ]
Sun Microsystems unnerved Wall Street by reporting financial results that were below expectations.  [ D8. ]
Wang Labs returned to profitability, but Control Data and Tandy earnings slipped.  [ D8. ]
A court ruling threw into question A.T.&amp;T.'s practice of offering services to its biggest customers at deep discounts.  [ D9. ]
Pathe set aside a legal quarrel with Time Warner, in a deal giving it cash needed to acquire MGM/UA.  [ D11. ]
Capital Cities/ABC reported lower earnings, blaming a weakened advertising market and losses on sports programming.  [ D19. ]
Southland appeared to have lost its fight to avoid bankruptcy, with approval of a restructuring falling short.  [ D5. ] THE ECONOMY
Frederick H. Joseph testified that he believed Michael R. Milken had violated Drexel policy and perhaps misled him.  [ D1. ]
In the budget talks, the debate over taxes degenerated into partisan squabbling.  [ A1. ]
The Senate Ethics Committee voted to hold public hearings for all five Senators linked to Keating.  [ A1. ]
The House Banking Committee approved spending an additional $10 billion to continue the savings bailout.  [ D2. ]
Elizabeth H. Dole is resigning as Labor Secretary to become president of the American Red Cross.  [ A17. ]
No consumer's wallet will go untouched by the Clean Air Act amendments expected to be enacted within days.  [ A21. ] BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY
Artificial bone is one of the most exotic goals of orthopedic surgery.
A handful of companies are closing in on that goal.  [ D10. ] MARKETS
Oil prices stabilized.
Crude for December delivery fell $1.04, to $29.37, about $1 higher than the expired November contract.  [ D6. ]
The Dow tumbled for the second day, sliding 22.03, to 2,494.06.  [ D12. ]  Long-term interest rates rose.  [ D18. ]
Futures exchanges succeeded in their battle with securities exchanges by blocking Senate consideration of a compromise.  [ D13. ]
The dollar was mostly higher, rising strongly against the yen.  [ D20. ]  Prices of copper futures surged.  [ D20. ] INTERNATIONAL
Japan's Big Four securities houses reported severe declines in their earnings for the first half, when the markets plunged.  [ D11. ] TODAY'S COLUMNS
When the big earthquake hits, who will pay? Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
In Japan in the 80's, many companies played the markets.
Then the markets soured.
Market Place.  [ D12. ]
Advertising to children is anything but child's play. Kim Foltz: Advertising.  [ D19. ]


Congress to End Covert Aid to Rebels in Cambodia
House and Senate negotiators agreed today to end secret nonmilitary assistance by the Central Intelligence Agency to anti-Communist rebels in Cambodia, and ordered that future aid to the rebels be allotted publicly through other Government agencies.
The action, taken as the two sides agreed on a bill to finance intelligence agencies for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1, was part of an unusual package of restraints imposed on three of the C.I.A.'s most controversial programs to affect the behavior of foreign governments, known as covert operations.


About New York; Landlord's War For Enterprise In East Harlem
Harley Brooke-Hitching looked, well, different from most attending Monday's luncheon at the Women's National Republican Club.
She wore jeans and a baggy sweatshirt.
Two young employees accompanying her wore the same.
"We're not going to steal nothing," one of the employees told a nervous woman at the front desk.


Howell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Physicians Overdo Cardiac Resuscitation
To the Editor:
"Rules on Reviving the Dying Bring Undue Suffering, Doctors Contend" (front page, Oct. 4) states that cardiopulmonary resuscitation is being overused primarily because of regulations "to give patients greater control over decisions at the end of life." From what I have seen as a community member of the ethics committees of three major hospitals, the problem is not too much patients' rights, but ethical confusion within the medical community.
The assump tion that cardiac resuscitation is inherently beneficial and should always be applied unless expressly refused was not imposed on physicians, but fostered and embraced by them -- and for the most part continues to be.


Hostetler Goes Back To Biding His Time
Phil Simms said today that his sprained left ankle would "probably be close to 100 percent" this week.
That means that Simms will be back at quarterback when the Giants (6-0) play the Washington Redskins (4-2) Sunday at Giants Stadium.
It also means that Jeff Hostetler will be back in his role of quarterback-in-waiting.


Kerr-McGee Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Balsamic Vinegar: Proof's in the Barrel
IN a little more than 10 years, balsamic vinegar has gone from utter obscurity to great renown, from the precious stocks of families in Modena, Italy, to American supermarket shelves.
That's less time than it takes to make a batch of it at its dark, viscous, deliciously sweet and mellow best.
The Italian name "balsamic" derives from the aromatic quality of the vinegar, whose sudden rise to popularity is an element in the explosion of interest in regional Italian food products like risotto, extra-virgin olive oil and porcini mushrooms.
The vinegar's sweet flavor has added to its appeal.


RJR Nabisco Trims Loss To $86 Million
The RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation, the maker of Camel cigarettes and Oreo cookies, said yesterday that it had narrowed the loss in its third quarter, to $86 million, from $447 million the previous year.
Its sales rose by nearly 18 percent, to $3.53 billion from $3 billion.
Analysts said that the results were in line with expectations and that they were pleased with strong operating earnings that more than covered interest expenses.
"These are excellent figures," said John C. Maxwell Jr., an analyst at Wheat First Securities Inc. in Richmond.
Free Cash Flow


Fuqua Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Art; France's 'Wild Beasts' on View in Los Angeles
From the 175 paintings filling a dozen galleries of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art with unrestrained, sometimes blaring color and the quiet countryside of turn-of-the-century France, it is clear how Fauvism could have seemed to the French art establishment like a punch in the face.
The intensity of its pure reds, oranges and greens and the energy of its brushwork busted up the smooth decorative harmonies of late-19th-century French painters like the Nabis and Puvis de Chavannes.
In some Fauve paintings, color seems to burn up the soft Impressionist landscape and set French air and light on fire.
The Fauves -- or "wild beasts" -- could treat shadows as active light and line as a zone of color.
In a painting like Matisse's 1905 "Sieste," with its woman in green curled up on a bed of white light, no clear distinction between outdoors and indoors exists.
Fauvism must have made many members of the French art public believe that no order or tradition was sacred.


Presidential Life reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pueblo Parents Feel Generation Gap: Where Shall Children Be Educated?
By the standards of New Mexico's vast, angular landscape, the distance between the elementary school on the San Felipe Indian Reservation and the one in the town of Algodones is trivial, a mere six miles.
But for the elders of the reservation, what matters is not miles but millennia.
One school has ties to the Pueblo Indian traditions and the rhythms of a society that was old when the Spaniards came.
The other is part of the world outside.


Accounts
*
Allure magazine, a new Conde Nast woman's publication, to Atlas, Citron, Haligman &amp; Bedecarre, San Francisco.
Billings were not disclosed. *
G.D.
Searle &amp; Co., Skokie, Ill., a subsidiary of Monsanto Co., St.
Louis, to Bozell Healthcare, New York, for its Calan SR hypertension drug and for media placement for all its cardiovascular products.
Billings were not disclosed. *
The Crisis Program, an Albany group established to inform New Yorkers about highway- and bridge-repair financing, to Ketchum Advertising, New York.
Ketchum Public Relations, Washington, will also work on the account, for which the budget is not disclosed.


Deleon Walsh, Manufacturer, 84
Deleon Walsh, a manufacturer of packaging, died on Sunday at While Plains Hospital Center.
He was 84 years old and lived in Greenburgh, N.Y.
He died of pneumonia, his son-in-law, Stephen B. Wilson, said.
Mr.
Walsh, a Cornell University graduate, worked for several packaging makers and in 1946 founded Package-Craft Inc., which makes flexible packaging for food products and pharmaceuticals, in Garfield, N.J.
He was chief executive at his death.
He is survived by his wife, Lorry; three daughters, Delsa Wilson of Irvington, N.Y., and Diana Losche and Carol, both of the Bronx; three step-daughters, Elizabeth Waldrup of White Plains, Carey Gross of Hawthorne, N.Y., and Leslie Chang of Rochester; a stepson, Bernard Waldrup 3d of Scarsdale, N.Y.; five grandchildren, and one step-grandchild.


Tandy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chubb Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Schools to Cut Hundreds of Jobs To Save New York $94 Million
To satisfy new budget cuts of $94 million demanded by City Hall, the New York City Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, is drawing up plans to eliminate hundreds of jobs, including many through layoffs.
He also is strongly considering selling Board of Education television and radio stations valued at a minimum of $15 million.
Mr.
Fernandez and Stanley S. Litow, the deputy chancellor for operations, met over the weekend with city budget officials and were told to find ways of slashing this fiscal year's budget by 2 percent, or $94 million, and cutting the budget for the fiscal year starting July 1 by $245 million.
Along with other city agencies they are to present their budget-cutting plan to City Hall today.
Big Gaps in the City Budget
Their presentations come about a week after Mayor David N. Dinkins told city agencies to prepare cuts of more than $1 billion from their operating budgets to help close projected city budget gaps of at least $300 million for this fiscal year and $1.4 billion for next year.
Most agencies were told to prepare cuts equal to 4 percent of their budgets for the current fiscal year, but the school system was asked to trim about half that amount.
"Obviously there will have to be some cuts in personnel," Mr.
Fernandez said yesterday when asked about what reductions he was planning.
But he added, "The classroom is the last place we want to hit."
Instead of teacher layoffs, he suggestedthat other job categories would be likelier targets.
The Board of Education, school officials said, has already made plans to trim the central board by 350 employees -- about 10 percent of the staff.
Mr.
Fernandez derided a report in The Daily News that quoted unnamed sources who said that 2,000 teachers might have to be laid off in January and another 2,000 in September.
He called it a leak by someone at City Hall whose "motive is to tie the teachers' contract to this story."
Some city officials and such fiscal monitors as Felix G. Rohatyn, chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, have denounced the contract's 5.5 percent pay increase as far too generous at a time of citywide economic anguish.
They are pressing for its abrogation, and Mr.
Fernandez suggested that their case would be strengthened by the specter of teacher layoffs.
While substantial savings were achieved last year by letting jobs of departed or retired employees go unfilled, officials in the Chancellor's office said they could not meet all of the new cuts through a hiring freeze alone and would have to consider layoffs.
However, laying off teachers after raising teachers' salaries would present a particularly prickly public relations problem for Mr.
Fernandez.
Bert Shanas, a spokesman for the United Federation of Teachers, said "the Chancellor's office assures us there are no teacher layoffs in their plans.
"This kind of game-playing goes to the heart of why the City Hall budget people have no credibility with us," he added.
Mr.
Fernandez, following an example set by Mayor David N. Dinkins, said he also planned to talk to a regular meeting of the seven-member Board of Education today about the possibility of cutting his $195,000 salary and the salaries of his top aides by 5 percent.
Problems With Stations
The contemplated sale of the television and radio stations -- WNYE-TV and WNYE-FM -- would eliminate only 30 jobs, but the Federal Communications Commission licenses and the stations' studio equipment would be regarded as attractive properties on the auction block.
The Board of Education established the radio station in 1940 and the television station, a UHF outlet transmitted on Channel 25, in 1967.
During school hours the stations broadcast educational programs with titles like "Newton's Rainbow," "Meet Barney Bookworm" and "The World of Myths and Legends." At other hours they lease time to foreign-language broadcasters and community groups.
The stations have been plagued with serious problems.
The television transmitter in downtown Brooklyn has a weak signal that reaches less than half of the city's schools.
High schools also find it difficult to mesh class schedules with the station's programs.
Mr.
Fernandez made his comments on the budget issues as he waited impatiently to testify at a State Assembly Education Committee hearing in Lower Manhattan on a bill that would give him a greater role in the selection of community school superintendents.
The chairman of the committee, Angelo Del Toro, was 45 minutes late for the hearing, saying he had been stalled in traffic.
Screening Power Sought
The bill would require the 32 local boards to submit to the Chancellor evaluations of the top three to five candidiates for a superintendent's position.
Mr.
Fernandez could disqualify candidates whose records he deemed inferior, forcing the boards to make their selection from the remaining candidiates.
Mr.
Fernandez said he wanted to make sure that local boards hired their chief administrators for their educational talents and not out of concern "about what political club they belong to and what kind of patronage they provide." Still, as an apparent inducement to a committee whose members are in some cases politically entangled with the local school boards, Mr.
Fernandez said he was exploring the possibility of allowing more local districts to have "co-ownership" in the running of high schools.
Generally local boards govern only elementary and junior high schools, but a handful of high schools, like Truman High in the Bronx, are run jointly by the Board of Education and the local school board.
Mr.
Fernandez found himself in a near donnybrook with Edward Griffith, a Democratic Assemblyman from Brooklyn.
The Chancellor had urged that the Legislature approve the bill without further studies about decentralization since, he said, most studies end up on shelves.
A Sharp Exchange
Bristling, Mr.
Griffith said the initial studies that led to decentralization did not end up on a shelf.
He then chided Mr.
Fernandez for taking credit for the elimination of the Board of Examiners when Democratic legislators had fought for its abolition for years.
"If there was a fight, I never saw you in it," Mr. Fernandez retorted.
Speakers at the hearing took different positions on the hiring bill.
Jeanne Frankl, executive director of the Public Education Association, called it a publicity trick since, she argued, the Chancellor could achieve the same aims with powers he now has.
But Msgr.
John Powis, co-chairman of East Brooklyn Churches, a coalition of churches that has fought for improvements in education and housing, said the bill was necessary.
Monsignor Powis, an early warrior in the battles that led to decentralization in 1970, argued that too many boards had proved themselves "unaccountable pockets of contracts, favors and employment."


McDonnell Sets Charge
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said today that it had reduced its third-quarter profits by $58 million to account for problems on its contract to build the C-17 transport plane for the Air Force.
But the company said its net earnings were more than six times as high as in the comparable period a year ago, primarily because of a one-time gain related to the financing of its pension plan.
The company said its third-quarter earnings totaled $248 million, or $6.46 a share, compared with $38 million, or 98 cents a share, in the corresponding period last year.
Revenues increased 12.7 percent, to $4.18 billion, from $3.71 billion.


DEALS
BASEBALL
METS (NL) -- Exercised the 1990 option for Alejandro Pena, pitcher.
ST. LOUIS (NL) -- Announced the retirement of Dave Collins, outfielder.
Basketball


Reflectone Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Capital Cities/ABC Net Off; Weak Ad Market Blamed
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. reported lower earnings for the third quarter yesterday, blaming a weakened advertising market and losses on sports programming.
The company also predicted that it would report a loss in the fourth quarter because demand for television commercial time by advertisers has declined further since Labor Day.


Next: Artificial Bone To Repair Fractures
After years of uncertain progress, a handful of companies are closing in on one of the most exotic goals of orthopedic surgery: artificial bone, grown from proteins in a jar.
To be sure, most of the new compounds will not be commercially available for at least five years.
Even then, doctors will not be able to heal fractures overnight.
But an array of new technologies could strikingly simplify the task of repairing completely broken limbs.
It could also make it easier to reconstruct jaws ravaged by cancer and improve the durability of artificial knees and hips.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Clorox Co., Oakland, Calif., named Henry J. Salvo vice president and controller, succeeding Peter N. Louras, who was apppointed international vice president. *
Columbian Mutual Life Insurance Co., Binghamton, N.Y., appointed Thomas Rattmann vice president and chief investment officer. *
Dotty Smith Corp., Lakeville, Conn., a belt and accessory manufacturing company, named Stephen R. Vaughn executive vice president. *
General Electric Co., Fairfield, Conn., appointed R. Michael Gadbaw vice president and senior counsel for international law and policy. *
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Co., New York, named James P. Neeves corporate executive vice president. *
ICOS Corp., Bothell, Wash., a biopharmaceutical concern, appointed Janice M. LeCocq executive vice president and chief financial and administrative officer. *
Johnson &amp; Higgins, New York, an insurance broker, named David A, Olsen chief executive, replacing Robert V. Hatcher Jr., who is retiring. *
M/A-Com Inc., Burlington, Mass, a producer of radio frequency, microwave and millimeter wave semiconductors, apppointed Victoria B. Dillon vice president in charge of corporate communications. *
Oncogene Science Inc., Manhasset, L.I., named Dr.
John R. Stephenson executive vice president and chief scientific officer. *
Pacific Scientific Co., Newport Beach, Calif., a producer of technology-based products, named Robert F. Aldrich president of its Fisher Pierce division in Weymouth, Mass.
He replaces Charles L. Perry, who resigned.


'Penthouse Pet' Wins $4 Million In Magazine Sex-Harassment Case
A former model for Penthouse magazine was awarded more than $4 million in punitive damages in State Supreme Court in Manhattan yesterday for the sexual harassment inflicted on her by her onetime lover, Robert Guccione, the magazine's publisher.
Legal experts said the award was the largest ever made by a New York court in a sexual harassment case.


Mobil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Economic Scene; Who Will Pay For the Big One?
THE earthquake that slammed through the San Francisco Bay area in October 1989 killed 62 people and destroyed $5 billion worth of property.
The next time the earth's giant tectonic plates slip a few yards, both people and property may be at far greater risk.
By Government estimates, a quake hitting the wrong place at the wrong time of day could kill up to 95,000 and leave a $100 billion cleanup bill.
Los Angeles and San Francisco are prime targets, of course.
But the peril is hardly confined to California: the Federal Emergency Management Agency believes that Seattle, Salt Lake City, Memphis and Charleston, S.C., are also at "major" risk.
If the Big One hits -- make that "when" it hits -- who will pay?
Even in California, relatively few property owners are covered by earthquake insurance.
But Robert E. Litan, an economist at the Brookings Institution, estimates that damage from quake-related fires and injuries could still result in up to $50 billion in insurance claims.
Honoring these claims, he argues, could severely deplete insurers' reserves, driving some into bankruptcy and turning others into risk-taking zombies.
Mr.
Litan's preferred fix, described in the latest edition of The Brookings Review: mandatory Federal earthquake insurance, with premiums set to cover actuarial risks.
Just one California property owner in four carries earthquake insurance; nationwide, the figure is below one in 20.
If such insurance is available and most people choose not to buy it, why should the Government insist?
One reason, Mr.
Litan suggests, is that the private market overprices the product.
Only those atgreatest risk currently buy coverage, and insurers are apparently unwilling or unable to attract lower-risk customers with lower premiums.
Another reason is that owners have insufficient incentives to pay for insurance because the Federal Government stands ready to reimburse them for a portion of their losses.
American taxpayers, Mr.
Litan reckons, shelled out $17 each for disaster relief in last year's San Francisco quake.
Uncle Sam could play hardball, giving legal notice that in the future the Treasury would help only those who help themselves.
But the threat would probably not be credible: Americans are no more likely to deny relief to uninsured victims of an earthquake than they are to deny medical care to injured motorcylists who did not wear helmets.
A third and perhaps most compelling reason is that casualty insurers are poorly geared to bear the earthquake risks already on their books.
A not unlikely $50 billion hit, Mr.
Litan calculates, would drain the industry of about 40 percent of total reserves.
Some insurers would go bankrupt; others would be forced to raise rates sharply to meetregulatory requirements.
The process might be manageable in theory, but would certainly be problematic in practice.
Mr.
Litan, a longtime analyst of the savings and loan debacle, worries that earthquake losses would be injurious to the casualty insurers' financial health, much the way the interest rate squeeze of the early 1980's started savings and loan associations down the path to collective ruin.
When faced with the alternative of double-digit premium increases, he believes, vote-conscious regulators might allow insurance companies to operate with low (or negative) net worths.
And once insurers were deep in a financial hole, they would have powerful incentives to generate premium revenues by taking ever greater chances.
Mr.
Litan favors legislation that would effectively require anyone who wanted a home mortgage to buy Federal earthquake coverage.
The bill, sponsored by Representative Al Swift, a Washington Democrat, and David Dreier, a California Republican, would set premiums according to actuarial risk.
Buildings designed or modified to minimize quake damage would get a break on rates.
The average premium in California for a no-deductible policy, Mr.
Litan believes, would run between $104 and $194.
In Memphis and Charleston, the same coverage would run from $15 to $28.
Federal earthquake insurance would still leave private insurers with enormous exposure to quake-related claims for fire, disability and death losses.
The Swift-Dreier bill would cover the gap with Federal reinsurance, giving private insurers years to spread the costs across their premium base.
Federal involvement is no panacea.
If Washington's record in insuring farm crops is a precedent, setting premiums at actuarily sound levels would prove very difficult.
But one way or another, Mr.
Litan argues, Washington is going to bear a lot of the cost of the Big One.
Any step that forces property owners to protect themselves is probably a step in the right direction.


New York City Seeks to Revoke Licenses of 40 Garbage Haulers
New York City moved yesterday to revoke the licenses of almost 10 percent of the private haulers that pick up commercial garbage, in what a Dinkins administration official described as the first step toward cleaning up a corrupt business.
Mark Green, the Consumer Affairs Commissioner, said he would seek to revoke the licenses and impose up to $3.2 million in fines on 40 haulers who have refused to disclose financial information required by the city.


The Pop Life
New Cash Album
Two years ago, when Rosanne Cash was pregnant with her third child, the Nashville-based singer and songwriter decided on a whim to take up painting.
"I was sick of songwriting and wanted to do something that had nothing to do with words," she recalled in a recent interview.
"But I quickly came to realize that I did the same thing in my painting that I did in my writing. And it helped give me the confidence to produce my next record myself. The record is scaled down as if it were a canvas. Making it was the most satisfying creative experience I've ever had."
The album, "Interiors" (Columbia), is an artistic step forward for the 35-year-old daughter of the country music patriarch Johnny Cash and the wife of the Nashville singer and songwriter Rodney Crowell.
In contrast to the mainstream country-rock of her five previous albums, the sound of "Interiors" is small-scale and intimate.
Only three tracks use a full drum set.
The delicacy of the arrangements coincides with a new depth of lyrical vision in 10 songs that explore the unspoken tensions and sea changes in a long-term relationship.
Although Ms.
Cash is not the only songwriter whose work explores the emotional ebb and flow of a domestic relationship, few songwriters examine the psychic nooks and crannies more intently.
One of the recurrent metaphors in the new songs is the image of a mirror.
"In all our important relationships, I think we're constantly mirroring each other, each always thinking that it is the other one that is doing it to us," she reflected.
"I'm fascinated with that unseen dynamic in my relationship with Rodney and in trying to sort out what's me and what's him."
"For obvious reasons, it's hard for me to discuss what the songs are about," continued the singer, who has been married to Mr.
Crowell for 12 years.
"My songs are not 100 percent autobiographical. There is some poetic license. When I write, it is cathartic and healing and sometimes even self-prophetic. It has even happened that I've written something and months later have found myself going through what I wrote about."
Ms.
Cash, despite her country music lineage, has always been something of an outsider in Nashville.
One reason is that singer, who was brought up in Ventura, Calif., has more in common stylistically with the Southern California country-rock than with the Nashville traditions.
Conversely, Ms.
Cash's label, Columbia, has had only limited success in selling her to a mainstream pop audience.
"I think that those people making country music that is perceived as hipper are ostracized by Nashville's hierarchy," she said.
People like Lyle Lovett and K. D. Lang and Dwight Yoakam weren't embraced by the Nashville hierarchy either.
I say that without any bitterness.
I think the Nashville hierarchy has gotten confused by trying to fit country music into a sociopolitical image.
That's dangerous because it has nothing to do with music."
The singer said she and her husband have decided to move from Nashville to Boulder, Colo.
"I can't take it anymore," she said.
"The music business in Nashville is insidious. Everybody knows what everybody else does. We're always under a microscope. We want to get our kids out of here for a while."
The singer attributed her modest inroads in the pop market to a larger problem she described as "a lifelong fear of success."
"Psychologicaly I've always pushed it away because I grew up thinking that success ruined people," she explained.
"I think fame is so destructive, especially if your self-esteem is wobbly when it hits you. When you put your fame where the self-esteem should be, it can be worse than heroin. I'm only just now starting to accept the fact that you can be successful and keep your marriage and family intact and have peace of mind."  A Family Jam
If it sometimes seems as though members of the Marsalis family are almost anywhere that jazz is being played nowadays, gatherings of the clan on a stage together are exceedingly rare.
At 8:30 P.M. next Wednesday, four Marsalis family members -- the pianist Ellis Marsalis and three of his sons, Wynton, Branford and 13-year-old Jason -- will have a family jam session at Alice Tully Hall.
The proceeds from the concert, organized by the GrahamWindham Services to Families and Children Agency, will benefit the Autism Society of America and the Immunohematology Research Foundation.
Public seating is $50 and $75.
Already this month, Wynton Marsalis and his septet have participated in two Amnesty International benefit concerts in Chile on a bill that included Peter Gabriel, Sinead O'Connor and New Kids on the Block.
He also composed the score for the film "Tune in Tomorrow," which opens in New York and Los Angeles on Friday and whose sound-track album will be released by Columbia in late November.
Hard-Rock Revival
Hard-rock music, which has been relatively absent from the pop album charts this year, is having a resurgence thanks to the nearly simultaneous release of a bunch of albums by veteran hard-rock bands.
The most spectacular success has been that of AC/DC, whose album "The Razor's Edge" has climbed to No. 2 on Billboard's pop album chart in just four weeks.
Among recent releases, this one seems the most likely to unseat M.C.
Hammer's "Please Hammer Don't Hurt 'Em," which has remained No. 1 for 20 weeks.
Other hard-rock albums high on the chart include Warrant's "Cherry Pie" (No. 10), Queensryche's "Empire" (No. 11), Poison's "Flesh and Blood" (No. 14), Faith No More's "The Real Thing" (No. 17), Slaughter's "Stick It to Ya" (No. 19), Iron Maiden's "No Prayer for the Dying" (No. 21), Megadeth's "Rust in Peace" (No. 23), Judas Priest's "Painkiller" (No. 28) and Living Colour's "Time's Up" (No. 30).
That adds up 1 out of 3 of the 30 top-selling albums.


Sweetbreads? A Delicacy?
To The Living Section:
To add to the confusion regarding what sweetbreads are  [ "Sweetbreads: Loved but Misunderstood," Oct. 17 ] , my mother, of blessed memory, said it was the brains.
Sweetbreads were never considered in our home -- and I guess in most Jewish homes -- to have been a delicacy.
We were poor.
We used to eat them every Sabbath as an appetizer.
My, how things have changed -- from a dish that was taken for granted to a "luscious delicacy."  RABBI BERNARD ZLOTOWITZ Director, Union of American Hebrew Congregations New York, N.Y.


Corrections
An article yesterday about remarks by the Saudi Defense Minister, Prince Sultan, suggesting a territorial compromise with Iraq, misstated Crown Prince Abdullah's standing in the line of succession tothe throne.
He is first in line, not second.


Philadelphia Journal; Planners Offer Vision In Area Without Dream
To most out-of-towners, North Philadelphia is a decrepit Amtrak station, a whistle-stop where conductors openly worry about the safety of the few who disembark.
To the people who live there, many of them black, North Philadelphia is a place without a dream.
That was the assessment of a group of urban experts, assembled last weekend from around the country by the American Institute of Architects to evaluate the section and to suggest solutions to its problems.
The 11 volunteers slipped into town last Thursday night, and like a SWAT team searching for suspects, they swept through the area, held meetings, took tours and talked to community leaders.


USLife Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Sampras Pressed to Beat a No. 426
Pete Sampras, playing his first A.T.P.
Tour match since winning the United States Open on Sept. 9, struggled to a three-set victory over a Swedish qualifier, Rikard Bergh, yesterday in the Stockholm Open.
The fourth-seeded American captured the second-round match, 7-6, 6-7, 6-3, from a player ranked 426th in the world.
Michael Chang, seeded 12th, defeated Martin Jaite of Argentina, 6-4, 6-3.
But another American, Jim Courier, squandered five match points and was defeated by 3-6, 6-3, 7-5 to Andrei Chesnokov of the Soviet Union, seeded 10th.
In other matches, Aaron Krickstein of the United States, seeded 11th, was defeated by Magnus Gustafsson of Sweden, 6-2, 6-3, and Guillermo Perez-Roldan of Argentina, seeded 14th, lost to Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia, 6-3, 6-4.(AP)
Graf and Maleeva Advance: Steffi Graf of Germany and Katerina Maleeva of Bulgaria, the two top-seeded players, won their opening-round matches yesterday in the W.I.T.A. indoor tournament in Brighton, England.
Graf beat Cecilia Dahlman of Sweden, 6-2, 6-2, and Maleeva outlasted Petra Thoren of Finland by 6-3, 5-7, 6-3.
Natalya Zvereva of the Soviet Union, seeded fourth, lost leads in both sets and was upset, 6-3, 6-3, by Clare Wood of Britain, who qualified only after Jana Novotna of Czechoslovakia withdrew with influenza.(AP) BASEBALL Seibu Takes 3-0 Lead in Series
The Seibu Lions took a 3-0 lead in the Japan Series in Tokyo yesterday by defeating the Yomiuri Giants, 7-0, on a five-hitter by Tomio Watanabe and a two-run double by Orestes Destrade, a former major leaguer.
The Giants also lost the first three games last year, but came back to win the Japanese version of the World Series over the Kintetsu Buffaloes.(AP) YACHTING Frenchman Is Winner of First Leg
Christophe Auguin of France was declared the winner yesterday in the first leg of the BOC round-the-world race even though Alain Gautier of France beat him to Table Bay Harbor in Cape Town, South Africa.
Gautier's yacht, Generali Concorde, reached the finish line 6 hours 45 minutes ahead of Auguin's Groupe Sceta, but Gautier was given a 16 1/2-hour time penalty at the start of the race last month because he was not at the starting line in Newport, R.I., in time for inspection.
Auguin took 38 days 18 hours 29 seconds to complete the leg of 6,800 nautical miles.
The competitors will spend a month in Cape Town before setting sail on Nov. 24 for Sydney, Australia, on the second leg of the four-stage race.(AP) N.H.L.
First Shutout for Cheveldae
Tim Cheveldae earned his first National Hockey League shutout last night and Sergei Fedorov had two goals and an assist to lead Detroit past the Vancouver Canucks, 6-0.
It was the Red Wings' fifth consecutive victory at home this season.
The Red Wings, who have yet to win anywhere but Joe Louis Arena, moved into a first-place tie with the idle Chicago Blackhawks in the Norris Division.
Cheveldae, who has played in only 40 N.H.L. games, stopped 28 shots.(AP)
Canadiens 5, Penguins 4: Eric Desjardins and Mathieu Schneider scored 38 seconds apart as visiting Montreal rallied in the final three minutes to beat Pittsburgh.
The Penguins had a 4-3 lead before Desjardins tied the score with three minutes left off Denis Savard's pass.
Schneider then beat Tom Barrasso with a 40-foot slap shot on the glove side for the winning goal.(AP)
Capitals 6, Flyers 2: Kevin Hatcher scored two goals and added two assists last night as Washington ended Philadelphia's six-game winning streak.
The Capitals extended their unbeaten streak over the Flyers at the Spectrum to five games, four victories and a tie, since losing on March 30, 1989.(AP)


Profits Fall at Salomon And at Morgan Stanley
Third-quarter earnings fell at Salomon Inc. and at the Morgan Stanley Group.
The earnings at Salomon were aided by strong results from its oil trading operations, but its net was hurt by a one-time charge.
At Morgan Stanley, a volatile trading environment helped offset a decline in investment banking and underwriting activity.
Alex.
Brown Inc., the holding company for the Baltimore brokerage firm Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons Inc., reported a loss for the quarter, in part because of losses on securities in its inventory, including a $2 million loss on shares in a company that it had underwritten.


McKesson Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Martin Marietta Net Up 24.5%
The Martin Marietta Corporation today reported a 24.5 percent gain in net income for the third quarter, with higher sales and earnings in every division but one.
The company's profits totaled $108.7 million, or $2.16 a share, up from $87.2 million, or $1.65 a share, in the corresponding period last year.
The per-share earnings reflect a reduction of 2.7 million outstanding shares because of a buyback program.
Revenues rose nearly 5 percent, to $1.49 billion from $1.42 billion.
Martin Marietta said each of its operating groups had higher sales and income except its electronic and missiles division, whose projects include the Copperhead anti-tank projectile program and the Hellfire anti-armor missile.
Martin Marietta's stock dropped 25 cents a share today, to $39.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Melville Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Genuine Parts Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


USG Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Beach Towel Is 3-2 In Breeders Pacing
Uptown Stable's Beach Towel, the pacer who has 17 victories this season, was made the 3-2 choice in his event as the field was announced yesterday for the seventh Breeders Crown divisional championships at Pompano Harness Track in Pompano Beach, Fla., on Nov. 2
There will be eight harness races worth more than $2.3 million on the program.
Beach Towel, who has already set a record of $1,908,394 for most money won by a standardbred horse in one year, will be favored to win the $366,933 3-Year-Old Colt Pace and become the first harness horse to win $2 million in a season.
Beach Towel, trained and driven by Ray Remmen, will be in a field of eight colts and geldings that includes Kiev Hanover, who handed Beach Towel two of his five losses this year.


Environmental Bond Means Too Much Pain for Too Little Gain
To the Editor:
The New York Farm Bureau, with 23,000 members, New York State's largest farm organization, urges New York City voters to reject the 21st century environmental quality bond.
Though our farm families strongly support efforts to safeguard the environment, we believe this $2 billion bond is long on debt and short on quality.


U.S. AIDES MEETING FOES IN ETHIOPIA
Two senior Administration officials have met secretly with the Marxist Government of Ethiopia and Eritrean separatist guerrillas to revive peace talks that broke off nearly a year ago, State Department officials said today.
American officials said they were not optimistic that a quick solution to the civil war could be found, nor could they be sure that their role would expand to full mediation.
But they added that the meeting could presage a joint involvement by the United States and the Soviet Union in future peace talks at a time when both sides in Ethiopia had reason to explore negotiations.


Racism Has Always Been an Economic Issue; Forgotten Inventor
To the Editor:
In "Inspirational Black History Draws Academic Fire" (front page, Oct. 10), you treat "black history" as "inspirational," rather than of value for the school curriculum.
This dismisses the many African challenges to the Eurocentric curriculum and their vast documentation, and leaves the impression that they are exaggerations or fibs.
This is a disservice to the truth and racial harmony.


Hire a Creationist? A Nonbeliever in Darwin? Not at a Proud Science Journal
Forrest M. Mims 3d has been a science writer for 20 years.
His articles on scientific and technical topics have been published in more than 60 magazines and newspapers, including National Geographic World, a sister publication of National Geographic, Science Digest and The American Journal of Physics.
He is also, by his own description, a conservative Christian who accepts the biblical account of creation and rejects the idea of evolution.
Because of this, Mr.
Mims says, he was denied a job: writing the popular "Amateur Scientist" column for Scientific American magazine.


Ruling Raises Doubts On A.T.&amp; T. Discounts
A Federal court ruling yesterday threw into question the legality of A.T.&amp;T's practice of offering large combinations of services to its biggest customers at deeply discounted prices.
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company has been charging more of its largest corporate and institutional customers one price for a package of services that cost more when purchased separately at regulated rates.
The Federal Communications Commission approved the discounts, but the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia told it to reconsider yesterday.
Tougher Criteria Urged


Once Near Accord, Budget Talks Lapse Into Partisan Squabbling
After budget negotiators were on the verge of a compromise over the weekend, the debate over taxes degenerated into partisan squabbling today.
Rank-and-file Democrats, who have provided the bulk of the votes for the budget packages so far, proclaimed at party meetings that the final compromise being negotiated by their leaders, Senate Republicans and White House officials was becoming too much of a Republican plan.


Freeport-McMoran Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quipp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
KERRY PACKER , the Australian billionaire who had a heart attack Oct. 7 while playing polo, was in satisfactory condition yesterday after heart bypass surgery at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Sydney.
The Reuters news agency quoted a hospital spokeswoman as saying that Mr.
Packer, 52 years old, was recovering in intensive care after the four-hour operation, and that he could be discharged today.
She said Mr.
Packer wanted details of the operation kept private.
Mr.
Packer, reportedly Australia's richest man, owns the country's highest-rated television station and its largest magazine empire.
Australian Business magazine, which is part of his media holdings, last month estimated his worth at $1.7 billion.


Centerior Energy reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30


House Panel Approves More Funds for Bailout
After more than a week of bickering between lawmakers and the Bush Administration, the House Banking Committee today approved spending an additional $10 billion through February to continue the bailout of the savings and loan industry.
The authorization, approved by voice vote, came after disagreements between the committee chairman, Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, Democrat of Texas, and Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady that have centered less on the substance of the financing than on its politics, coming so near Election Day, Nov. 6.


Man Charged in Fatal Beating Of Companion's Daughter, 2
A 21-year-old Harlem man, Kim Maynor, was arrested yesterday on charges that he fatally beat a 2-year-old girl he was babysitting because she would not stop dancing to a music video, the police said.
The girl, Monae Fleming, was found dead in her crib by her mother, Monique Fleming, on Monday night, the police said.
She was left in Mr.
Maynor's care while her mother was at work.
The police said Mr.
Maynor hit the child on her head and shoulders, in the apartment where the three lived at 224 East 116th Street.
He was charged with first-degree manslaughter.


Editors' Note
An article on Oct. 15 reported that a new book by a K.G.B. defector depicted Harry L. Hopkins, the closest personal adviser of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, as an unwitting "agent of major significance" for the Soviet Union.
As quoted, the book viewed Mr.
Hopkins as an agent in thesense that he encouraged Roosevelt to take positions favored by Moscow, but did not portray him as a knowing spy.
The headline, "Roosevelt Aide Called an Unwitting Spy," was thus inaccurate in its use of the word "spy."


The New York Race for Governor: The Candidates on Social Issues
HOUSING MARIO M. CUOMO; Democrat, Liberal
"I have raised the largest housing program in the history of the United States," but "the state has to do as much more as it can without letting the Feds off the hook." Favors providing land for low-income housing and placing it beyond overpopulated low-income neighborhoods and providing "every advantage you can in financing." Favors a constitutional amendment that would empower counties to build affordable housing.
Opposes means test for tenants in rent-controlled or rent-stabilized apartments.
Opposes letting rents rise to market levels when tenants of those apartments move.
PIERRE A. RINFRET; Republican
"All the projects that go from 96th Street right up to 124th Street, I'd sell every one of those to the residents." Would finance new affordable housing projects, all cooperatives, by public borrowing supported by rents from occupants who would receive subsidized mortgages.
"Build homogenous neighborhoods which are not these very high-rise buildings" and place them outside lower-income areas "if I can't find the land" elsewhere.
HERBERT LONDON; Conservative
Favors more low-density housing "integrated into many communities as opposed to isolated into groups." Favors programs patterned on the H.E.L.P. program initiated by Andrew Cuomo, the Governor's son, tax credits and incentives and providing "all the ancillary services that are required to help these people as part of a society that cares about them." Proposes a means test for rent-controlled apartments.
Philosophically opposed to rent controls as "there would be so much social dislocation and so much panic that the good that may come of that would be a disservice." ABORTION MARIO M. CUOMO; Democrat, Liberal
He has supported a woman's right to abortion and Medicaid financing of abortions for poor women, but says "it is too complicated to deal with in 28-second sound bites. It took me 7,000 words to describe it in an adreess to the Department of Theology at Notre Dame University. I can't reconfigure it to meet someone else's editing standards. It is too important for that." PIERRE A. RINFRET; Republican
"I'm pro-choice. I'm not pro-abortion. Prochoice means giving the owman the right to make the decision. She then has to deal with herself, her conscience, her religion if she has one. I support state funding for the poor who are unable to pay for an abortion because I don't want them doing wire abortions or stick abortions." Would impose a residency requirement, though, "because I don't want ot attract everybody from outside the state." HERBERT LONDON; Conservative
"I am pro-life. What ennobles the life of the individual woman, ennobles the life she's carrying. I'm willing to tolerate exceptions, incest, rape and the life of the mother. I'm opposed to Medicaid funding for abortion. I don't think that the state should be in the business of promoting abortion." LOUIS P. WEIN; Right to Life
"I am opposed to abortion without exception. I would do everything I could within the law to get the law changed." DRUG TREATMENT MARIO M. CUOMO; Democrat, Liberal
Favors treatment on demand for durg addicts, but says "we're very far away from it" because of financial constraints.
PIERRE A. RINFRET: Republican
Says "we have concentrated on the jails and not on the rehabilitation centers." A backlog of roughly 17,000 people is "waiting to get in, can't get in, so they're still on the streets. If the investigation of the family shows it's totally incapable of affording this, then the state, in my judgement, has to pay. I want them off the streets. I'd rather have them in rehabilitation centers where there's a shot at them." HERBERT LONDON; Conservative
Supports treatment on demand.
"If you found treatment programs that work, I would be very much in favor o them only because I think you would lower the expense from other areas of the state budget, including crime prevention and the court system." Favors random drug testing of applicants for driver's licenses and denying licenses to those who test positive.
LOUIS P. WEIN; Right to Life
Favors drug treatment on demand while also treating the causes of drug addiction in hospital and other existing facilities.
MENTAL HEALTH MARIO M. CUOMO; Democart, Liberal
Favors a more "intelligent application of police power" to remove mentally ill people from streets.
"I'm not sure that there isn't more room in the Constitution for an intelligent application of police power that would enable you to protect people from injuring themselves, even if they're not going to kill themselves." PIERRE A. RINFRET; Republican
Favors some legal provision under which people being treated for severe psychiatric problems can be required to take prescribed medicine.
HERBERT LONDON; Conservative
Says more people should be in mental hospitals.
"The state has abdicated its responsibility largely because I don't understand how it's a humanitarian policy to say to someone with mental illness, here's your Thorazine, take it every four hours and live on the streets of New York City." LOUIS P. WEIN: Right to Life
"When people are incapable of taking care of themselves you should have some form of commitment." SUNY TUITION MARIO M. CUOMO; Democrat, Liberal
Suggests that tuition can be raised, but opposes a means test that would require someone who could afford it to pay the full cost.
PIERRE A. RINFRET; Republican
"I would increase the tuition fees" and would impose a means test.
"And I'm a student who went to C.C.N.Y. and had no money. I woul have a means test. I got in there for free, but I didn't have a nickel." HERBERT LONDON; Conservative
Favors a policy of basing tuition on a student's ability to pay.
LOUIS P. WEIN; Right to Life
Favors means test that would base tuition on a student's ability to pay.


Memorial Service for Art Blakey With Jokes, Memories and Jazz
Every pew, corner and bit of floor space at the Abyssinian Baptist Church was filled at the memorial service for the drummer and band leader Art Blakey on Monday night.
Mr.
Blakey, who died of lung cancer on Oct. 16 at the age of 71, had an enormous influence on the jazz and cultural life of America.
For Ray Bryant, a pianist who occasionally recorded with Mr.
Blakey, it was time to pay tribute to a fellow musician who had helped to further his career.


Magna International reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Tuscarora Plastics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


London Rating Agency in U.S.
IBCA Ltd., a London-based international credit-rating agency, announced yesterday that it had become the first non-American firm to be authorized by the Securities and Exchange Commission to rate the public securities of banks and securities firms.
The addition of the British firm rounds out to an even half-dozen the recognized rating agencies.
The other five are: Moody's Investors Service, the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, Duff &amp; Phelps, McCarthy, Crisanti &amp; Maffei Inc. and Fitch Investors Service.
IBCA hopes that its application in Japan will be approved in the near future and plans to apply in other countries as well.


An Uneasy Courtroom Encounter
Frederick H. Joseph, the former chief executive of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., testified yesterday that he believed Michael R. Milken, the former "junk bond" financier who was the star of the investment firm, which is now defunct, had violated Drexel policy and perhaps misled him.
In his court appearance, Mr.
Joseph said Mr.
Milken had apparently violated Drexel policy by allowing individual money managers to invest in a partnership, MacPherson Partners, that held equity issued as part of the leveraged buyout of Storer Communications Inc., a 1985 deal financed by Drexel.
And Mr.
Joseph implied that he thought Mr.
Milken subsequently misled him by saying he did not know of any such investments when Mr.
Joseph asked if any existed.
Cites Favored Treatment


An 'Expert' on Executions Is Charged With Fraud
A self-proclaimed execution expert and manufacturer of death machinery was charged today in a Middlesex County District Court with fraudulently practicing engineering.
The man, Frederick A. Leuchter Jr., holds a bachelor's degree in history and is not licensed to practice engineering in Massachusetts, state officials said.
Mr.
Leuchter has identified himself as the chief engineer of his company here, Fred A. Leuchter Associates Inc., which sells lethal injection machines, electric chairs and gallowses.


A Perennial Scrapper Takes On God and the Bible
What is one to make of the idea that the earliest known texts of the Hebrew Bible were not religious writings at all but a sublime work of literature, a comic masterpiece of ironic power?
And what of the view that the unidentified person who wrote this work some 3,000 years ago -- known to scholars for more than a century only by the initial J -- was not, as most have assumed, a man, but a woman?


Enserch Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 19
Oct. 12
Oct. 20
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
7.1
6.8
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.9
2.7
Gasoline stocks
222.6
225.9
223.9
Distillate stocks
136.9
135.9
120.0
Crude imports, daily
4.8
5.0
5.2
Product imports, daily
1.6
1.3
2.0
Crude stocks
340.4
343.3
336.5
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
83.3
85.8
85.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Prudential, Equitable Fill Key Positions
It was musical chairs yesterday in the top ranks of two of the nation's largest insurance companies.
The Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, the nation's third-largest insurer, announced it was tapping Joseph J. Melone, 59 years old, the president of the Prudential Insurance Company, to be its president and chief operating officer.


Computer Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Sun Microsystems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Panel Approves Large Cut in AIDS Relief Bill
The House and Senate have reached agreement on how much to spend on disaster relief for cities and states hardest hit by AIDS, sustaining large cuts made earlier by the Senate.
Both houses authorized $875 million earlier this year for the bill, but when it came to appropriating the money, Congress found only a quarter of that amount in the squeezed budget.


Salomon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Jersey's Senate Rivals Clash (Politely) in a Debate
Bill Bradley and his Republican opponent for the United States Senate, Christine Todd Whitman, clashed tonight in a televised debate, with Senator Bradley trying to show a superior knowledge of foreign affairs and Ms.
Whitman trying to link him to high taxes and government bureaucracy.
In the generally polite exchange, Senator Bradley chided Ms.
Whitman for supporting the B-2 bomber and disagreed with her support of the United States vote in favor of a United Nations Security Council motion criticizing Israel.
He also faulted Ms.
Whitman for not approving a state energy master plan when she was president of the State Board of Public Utilities under former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean.


Senate Candidates Clash in New Jersey Debate


Bombardier Plans Procor Purchase
Bombardier Inc., the fast-growing Canadian multinational company, said it would buy Procor Engineering Ltd., a British maker of railroad cars, from the Marmon Corporation, a Chicago-based industrial company.
It said the purchase, for an undisclosed price, would be completed next month through its Belgian subsidiary.
Bombardier, based in Montreal, started as a snowmobile maker and now generates about half its revenues from foreign operations.
It makes marine engines, railroad equipment, military trucks, aircraft and farm equipment.
Procor Engineering, which also produces heavy rail and road transportation equipment, has annual sales of about $19.4 million.


Kemp Publicity Staff Is Spared Elimination
Jack F. Kemp's public relations operation has apparently been saved.
Mr.
Kemp, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, had been threatened with the loss of his 27-member public relations staff because of a disagreement with Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, the Maryland Democrat who is chairman of a Senate panel that oversees the budget of the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Senator Mikulski, whose aides have criticized Mr.
Kemp as putting public relations over housing policy, drew up legislation that eliminated the department's Office of Public Affairs.
The bill was approved this month by the Senate.
If it had been approved by the House the bill could have left Mr.
Kemp with no one to write his press releases, no one to write his speeches and no one to organize his news conferences.
But, after negotiations in a House-Senate conference committee, the public relations budget was restored, although the compromise H.U.D. spending bill cuts the staff to 20.
The House has already approved the bill; the Senate is expected to vote this week.


BRIEFS
*
Culbro Corp., New York, a tobacco, consumer-products and industrial-products company, will try to sell its Moll Toll and Plastics Corp. unit. *
Cumberland Farms Inc., Canton, Mass., a dairy-products and gasoline concern, will lay off 200 employees, or 2 percent of its work force. *
Conagra Inc., Omaha, a foods processor, intends to acquire the assets of several companies from Elders IXL Ltd., an Australian agribusiness and brewing company, for $175 million.  *
GE Transportation Systems, Erie, Pa., a unit of General Electric Co., received a $200 million, three-year contract from CSX Transportation Inc., Jacksonville, Fla., to build 150 Dash 8-40C locomotives. *
General Mills Inc., Minneapolis, the foods company, will build a 275,000-square-foot breakfast-cereal manufacturing plant in Albuquerque, N.M., for more than $100 million. *
General Motors Corp. will shut its full-size pickup-truck plants in Pontiac, Mich., and Fort Wayne, Ind., on Nov. 5 for two weeks, idling about 6,000 workers. *
Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Co., Montvale, N.J., a grocery-store chain, completed the acquisition of 69 supermarkets in Ontario from Steinberg Inc., a unit of Socanav Inc, as part of a $235.5 million (Canadian) agreement announced earlier.
A.&amp; P. is owned by the Tenglemann Group of Germany. *
Guest Supply Inc., North Brunswick, N.J., a maker of toiletries for the lodging industry, sold its Guest International Australia unit to management for undisclosed terms. *
Jewelmasters Inc., West Palm Beach, Fla., a jewelry maker, purchased the rights to the name of Garfinckel's, the former Washington-based retailer, for undisclosed terms. *
Ziff Communications Co., New York, a publisher, will acquire four publishing companies from the Seybold family for undisclosed terms.


Japan Securities Firms Post Big Drop in Profits
The Big Four securities houses, which enjoy a cartel-like dominance over the financial markets here, today reported severe declines in their earnings for the first half of the fiscal year, when a plunge in the markets hit nearly every line of business.
The pretax earnings of each firm were slashed more than 50 percent in the six months ended Sept. 30, as share prices plunged, volume slowed to a trickle and underwriting activity nearly halted.


Lament for Jerusalem
If there's a living soul who embodies the city of Jerusalem, it's Teddy Kollek.
This is a lament for the city, and for him, because he has made his life's work trying to revive it, beautify it and bring it harmony.
But it has wrenched itself apart in fear, hatred and violence.
Not that Teddy weeps; it isn't his way.
He still storms around, tongue-lashing the arrogant and the fanatic, crowing delight at the greenery, the great art and music brought to give warmth to the old stones and the hopes they symbolize.
Teddy -- everyone calls him that -- has been Mayor since 1965.
When he was first elected, there was a high tin wall next to his office in the Municipal Building, a shield to protect people in the streets from snipers on the Old City walls nearby.
After the 1967 war, all the physical barriers were torn down.
Teddy plunged into ceaseless activity to unite the city, if not in friendship -- that was too much to ask -- at least in mutual acceptance and neighborliness.
For a long time, Jerusalem was a virtual island of calm as waves of bloody anger rose around it.
That was not by happenstance.
Teddy, who is known for falling asleep on public occasions, habitually spent only three or four hours a night in bed so he could look after the hospitals and schools and parks he was building, visit all kinds of people, deliver his message of good will and try to make amends for provocation.
It wasn't surprising that when the Government of Israel refused to receive a United Nations delegation after the recent killings on the Temple Mount, Teddy's was the one voice saying he would be glad to see anyone who wanted to talk to him.
His is a voice of reason.
"The world is a better place when moderates run it," he has said.
He was born in Vienna in 1911 and joined a Zionist youth group as a teen-ager.
He undertook clandestine missions around Europe to help save Jews from Hitler, settling in Palestine in 1935 as a pioneer.
As an aide to David Ben-Gurion, who became Israel's first Prime Minister when the state was founded in 1948, he was closely involved in the dreams and pains of its creation.
He never did well in national politics.
He is too blunt, too demanding and straightforward, too attentive to the details of everyday human troubles to get on with the party apparatus, as Israel's unwieldy system requires for advancement.
But the same qualities brought him such personal admiration and affection that he has always been re-elected Mayor.
It was not without constant quarrels.
Nationalists say he does too much for Arabs.
He bemoans constraints on attending to their needs as fellow citizens.
Worried about youth gangs, he multiplied diversions -- festivals, sports to keep young people busy.
But when he wanted to build a municipal swimming pool, he was called "too Hellenistic."
Still, it worked for a time.
As late as last year, only one Palestinian had been killed in Jerusalem while hundreds died in the occupied territories, and the police had never fired live ammunition at rioters.
Now the toll is mounting.
The ranks of die-hard fundamentalists are growing on both sides.
Meron Benvenisti, his former Deputy Mayor who parted ways with his boss years ago over Teddy's insistence on looking at the bright side, has called him "a hero in a tragedy."
But he also pointed out, "Jerusalem isn't a piece of real estate, it's a symbol for both sides, and symbols are indivisible and exclusive. The Palestinians aren't looking for good government, they're after a political identity, self-esteem, their own flag. If you think they'll settle for better sewers and roads, you're mad."
Teddy refuses to despair.
Undermined, saddened, he seeks reason for consolation.
From the telephone in his car as he raced about, he told me: "It's been a bad few weeks. But fewer people have been killed in Jerusalem than in other cities this size. I hear  [ New York's ]  Mayor Dinkins is talking about a curfew to control crime. Of course it's different; here it's nationalism and there it's crime."
He's still finding practical ways to improve the city's life on both sides of the emotional divide.
There's no question, he said, of a big new settlement for Soviet immigrants in East Jerusalem, as the Israeli Government suggested.
He's planning 7,000 new apartments for Arab housing.
"We're all in a bad mood now. But we all know there's no choice, we'll be together forever. Wait a few weeks until it simmers down, before we can talk and make sense."
But it isn't going that way.
Teddy will be 80 in May.
"It's a different generation, they aren't heard," another Israeli commented.
Not only the story of Teddy's life will seem vain if another generation fails to join his endless work for a Jerusalem at peace.


Saudis' Quandary: Carrot or the Stick for Iraqis?
The Saudi Defense Minister's conciliatory-sounding remarks addressed to Iraq this week were the latest sign that Saudi strategists and military officials are trying their best to offer President Saddam Hussein more of a carrot and less of a stick to persuade him to pull his 350,000 troops out of Kuwait.
This approach stems in part from the deep cracks in the Arab world from the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2 and some second thoughts here about the confrontational attitude that Saudi Arabia has adopted toward Jordan, Yemen, the Palestine Liberation Organization and other Arab supporters of Iraq.


Books of The Times; Unlikely Protector of Wilderness
Righteous Pilgrim The Life and Times of Harold L. Ickes 1874-1952 By T. H. Watkins 1,010 pages.
Illustrated.
Henry Holt. $35.
Writing about his career in Chicago and Washington during the Bull Moose and New Deal years, Harold L. Ickes called his 1943 book "The Autobiography of a Curmudgeon." So he was; but he was also one of the most powerful Cabinet members in any Administration.
Now, in an outstanding biography that is also a major work of social history spanning the first half of the 20th century, T. H. Watkins shows how the ideas of an old-fashioned Midwestern reformer meshed perfectly with the liberal programs of a Hudson Valley patrician, Franklin D. Roosevelt.


Parametric Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Weyerhaeuser Co. reports earnings for 13wks Sept 30


Diamond Shamrock reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RIGHTS BILL VOTE IN SENATE TODAY
Senate leaders today scheduled a vote for Wednesday morning to try to override President's Bush's veto of a major civil rights bill, as supporters of the bill searched for the two votes they said they needed.
The decision by the Senate Democratic leadership came as Bush Administration officials expressed confidence that the veto would be sustained, and criticism of Mr.
Bush's action continued to mount from Democrats and leaders of civil rights and women's groups.


Ingersoll-Rand Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Northern Telecom Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Elizabeth Dole Is Leaving Labor Post
Elizabeth H. Dole has decided to resign her post as Labor Secretary and take a position as president of the American Red Cross, Administration officials said tonight.
Mrs.
Dole reportedly told President Bush on Oct. 10 that she was seriously considering leaving the Cabinet, when she flew with him on Air Force One down to her home state of North Carolina for a fund-raising breakfast for Senator Jesse Helms.


Low-Key Fitness: Weeding, Strolling
LOOKING for the newest low-impact way to cross-train, to stretch and to strengthen muscles?
Something endorsed by svelte celebrities?
Try puttering in the garden.
It is one of many ordinary activities, long dismissed as too wimp-like for serious worshipers at the altar of fitness, that are starting to take on a certain glamour.
Earlier this year, for instance, Longevity magazine promoted gardening in a cover story called "Working Out in Nature's Gym," with testimonials from people like Michael Caine, Martha Stewart, Sam Donaldson and Paul Taylor.


New Jersey's Senate Rivals Clash (Politely) in a Debate
Bill Bradley and his Republican opponent for the United States Senate, Christine Todd Whitman, clashed tonight in a televised debate, with Senator Bradley trying to show a superior knowledge of foreign affairs and Ms.
Whitman trying to link him to high taxes and government bureaucracy.
In the generally polite exchange, Senator Bradley chided Ms.
Whitman for supporting the B-2 bomber and disagreed with her support of the United States vote in favor of a United Nations Security Council motion criticizing Israel.
He also faulted Ms.
Whitman for not approving a state energy master plan when she was president of the State Board of Public Utilities under former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean.


No Classes, No Game
Southern Cal's outstanding sophomore quarterback, Todd Marinovich, has been suspended from Saturday's game against Arizona State because he skipped classes, Coach Larry Smith announced yesterday.
"About four weeks ago, I met with Todd and his family after receiving a report that he wasn't attending class," Smith said.
"At that time we made an agreement that he would go to all his classes and we would monitor his attendance."
Marinovich, who also won't be allowed to practice this week, admitted he didn't hold up his end of the bargain.
Shane Foley will start in his place on Saturday.(AP)


The Right Breeds a College Press Network
At the University of Iowa, The Campus Review recently provoked outrage with a drawing of the cartoon character Bart Simpson holding a loaded slingshot and warning, "Back off, faggot."
At the University of California at Berkeley, The California Review has been campaigning against affirmative action.
And at the University of Florida, The Florida Review caused protests when in a guide to professors it said the history and philosophy departments were full of Marxists.


Pendleton and Higuera Join List
A third baseman the Yankees seem to like and a pitcher they should want, if only in self-defense, declared themselves free agents yesterday.
They are Terry Pendleton and Ted Higuera, and they were among 10 players who filed for free agency, raising the market's number to 31.
While those players prepare to pursue future riches, the Cincinnati Reds will soon be able to count what they earned by winning the World Series.
The Reds, according to figures obtained from various major league sources, will receive $112,533 per man, falling less than $2,000 short of the record winner's share each Oakland player picked up a year ago.
Two members of the Reds' pitching rotation, Tom Browning and Danny Jackson, are expected to become free agents in the next few days.
But Higuera, a Milwaukee Brewer left-hander, put his name on the list yesterday.
So did Pendleton and John Tudor of St.
Louis, Juan Samuel of Los Angeles, Tom Brunansky of Boston, Steve Farr of Kansas City, R. J. Reynolds of Pittsburgh, Jim Presley of Atlanta, Dan Petry of Detroit and John Moses of Pittsburgh.
Gene Michael, the Yankees' general manager, said the club's hierarchy would meet Friday to decide on plans, but, he added, "Two things we're going to look at are third base and pitching." Cards Not Interested?
Pendleton has been considered one of the best defensive third basemen in the National League.
The Cardinals haven't seemed interested in retaining him, benching him for most of the last month so they could try Todd Zeile, their catcher, at third.
Jim Bronner, Pendleton's agent, said he had not heard from the Cardinals about their interest in the 30-year-old switch-hitter, adding, "I don't imagine it's a high priority."
Bronner said he was aware that Michael had spoken with people at the World Series about Pendleton.
Bronner also represents Higuera, the 32-year-old Mexican who has a 12-3 career record against the Yankees.
"He's completely open," Bronner said of Higuera's thoughts on his 1991 employment.
Asked about the Yankees, the agent said, "The Yankees' record would be better if they didn't have to face him."
Michael said the Yankees would like to acquire a starting pitcher, but their plans for their starting rotation also depend on whether or not they can re-sign Tim Leary, a free agent, and whether or not Mike Witt, whom they want to retain, is awarded a second chance at free agency as a result of the collusion cases.
To keep their bullpen intact, the Yankees have to re-sign Dave Righetti, a free agent.
Jeff Robinson, another reliever, is also a free agent, but Michael said: "We probably won't go after him. We think he can be replaced by what we have."
Higuera was a 20-game winner in 1986, then won a total of 34 games the next two seasons.
But he had back surgery before the 1989 season and ankle surgery after.
He had an 11-10 record this year with a 3.76 earned-run average.
Bronner said the pitcher is healthy.
Pendleton batted .230, a career low, and drove in 58 runs.
Two pitchers, Dave Smith of Houston and Jim Gott of Los Angeles, were offered salary arbitration.
Their contracts have expired, but they cannot become free agents because they haven't completed the required five-year waiting period.
Players whose teams finished in the first three places in their divisions are awaiting their post-season checks from a pool of $11,438,462.
That's about $700,000 under last year's record pool of $12.1 million.
Besides the Reds' World Series-winning share, the Oakland Athletics will have a $69,995 share, well under the $114,252 each player gained in a full share for winning last year.
A full share for the pennant playoff losers will be $35,190 for Pittsburgh and $34,775 for Boston.
A full share for the Mets' second-place finish will be $8,478.
The Mets didn't vote Mike Marshall any share, but the Red Sox, to whom the Mets traded Marshall in late July, awarded him a one-quarter share, $8,693.
Other full shares: Chicago White Sox, $8,420; Toronto, $8,308; Los Angeles, $7,966; Detroit, $2,880; Texas, $2,812; Montreal, $2,615, and San Francisco, $2,637.


Review/Television; '48 Hours' Investigates A Preventable Death
Tonight's edition of "48 Hours," the first in its new weekly slot at 8 P.M., focuses on a trial in Iowa this year of a couple accused of being at least partly responsible for the death of their 11-year-old son.
Instead of covering a two-day period in the series' customary manner, "Who Killed Allen Griffen?" takes place over several weeks, from the parents' indictment through the nonjury trial to the judge's decision, building up considerable interest along the way.
Young Allen died in May 1989 of peritonitis apparently caused by a blocked intestine that could have been treated medically.
At his death he weighed 45 pounds, half of that feces.
The autopsy pictures show a wasted distended body, yet his mother, in an interview here, says the illness came on so gradually that "I didn't see it at all." She and her husband were charged with child endangerment.
The prosecutor says in her opening statement to the court, "You ought to know when your child is dying before your eyes."
No religious principles were at issue in the trial, which is the hour's centerpiece.
Most of the attention is given to the parents, Jean and Terry Griffen; they did not take the stand but evidently spent considerable time with the program's reporter, Phil Jones, telling him how much they loved their son and blaming the doctors for his death.
"We shouldn't have trusted those people," Mrs.
Griffen says.
One of the doctors says he found the Griffins "antagonistic, untrusting." Mr.
Jones concludes that "an entire system failed" and asks, "When should society step in?"
The issue of where responsibility lies for the care of children is worth more exploration than Mr.
Jones gives it.
The hour, with its snapshots of a bright-looking Allen at bat, the recollections of his parents and grandparents of his happy early years on the family farm, the pictures of his grave, is aimed more at viewers' emotions than at their understanding.
Few will remain unmoved, but given the nature of the case, that does not take much reportorial skill.
Tonight's program may turn out to be the forerunner of a new CBS series of half-hour reports on trials, inspired perhaps by the recent easing of restrictions on cameras in the courtroom.
How welcome that may prove will depend on the spirit in which it is undertaken.
It is easy to appreciate the attraction to television producers of real-life trials, with their inherent conflict and drama.
But the workings of the judicial system deserve exploration beyond the television-movie approach.
"Who Killed Allen Griffen?" touches the heart but does not do much for the brain.
If CBS News can get serious, it has an opportunity to contribute to the public's understanding of what really goes on in America's courtrooms.
Who Killed Allen Griffen?
A "48 Hours" report; produced by Al Briganti for CBS News; Andrew Heyward, executive producer; Phil Jones, correspondent; Dan Rather, anchor.
Tonight at 8 on CBS.


This Whale's Name Is Spelled T-R-O-U-B-L-E


Unexpectedly Low Earnings at Sun
Sun Microsystems Inc., the leading vendor of computer-engineering workstations, unnerved Wall Street today by reporting financial results that were below expectations.
It attributed the shortfall to a weaker economy and internal factors.
The results, announced after the close of the stock market, were almost certain to hurt Sun's stock in trading Wednesday and could renew Wall Street's nervousness over high-technology stocks after confidence had been beginning to build again.


New Magazine Is Announced
The Association of National Advertisers plans to begin publishing a new trade magazine, The Advertiser, in the spring.
The new publication, which will begin as a quarterly, was announced yesterday at the organization's annual meeting in Naples, Fla.
"This is not to be a magazine about advertising but a magazine for advertisers," said DeWitt F. Helm Jr., president of the association.
"It will reflect the day-to-day need for hard- edged, practical information," he said.
The Advertiser will accept advertising.
Last May, the American Assocation of Advertising Agencies began Agency, a quarterly journal sent to its members.


Johnson Net Rises 18.5%
Johnson &amp; Johnson said today that its earnings for the third quarter rose 18.5 percent, in part because of the dollar's weakness.
The company reported earnings of $314 million, or 94 cents a share, up from $265 million, or 80 cents a share, in the comparable period of 1989.
Sales for the quarter rose 17.1 percent, to $2.87 billion from $2.45 billion.
On the New York Stock Exchange, Johnson &amp; Johnson's share price gained 37.5 cents today, to $68.625.
International sales, from which Johnson &amp; Johnson generates more than 50 percent of its revenues, increased 22.1 percent in the quarter, the company said.
Johnson &amp; Johnson said the weaker dollar increased sales by 5.3 percent.


New York City Wins Right to Bar Officials From Party Positions
Upholding an important provision of New York City's new Charter, New York State's highest court ruled today that city officials could be barred from holding political party offices.
The 5-to-2 decision officially ended the long domination of New York City government by political party leaders.
This domination by figures like Donald R. Manes, who served as both the Queens Borough President and the Queens Democratic leader, was a major theme in the city corruption scandals in 1986.
Mr.
Manes killed himself while the investigations were under way.
A Way of Life


Rosewood Ends Executive Talks
Rosewood Financial Inc. said it had ended talks about a possible recapitalization of the First Executive Corporation.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Rosewood said it had "decided not to propose a recapitalization, reorganization or restructuring" of the beleaguered Los Angeles life insurance company.
Rosewood, which is controlled by Caroline Rose Hunt of Texas and is one of First Executive's largest shareholders, told the S.E.C. that it may sell its First Executive stock, depending on an evaluation of its investment.
First Executive invested heavily in high-yield, high-risk "junk bonds" and was a leading client of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.


Washington at Work; Wyoming's Folksy Senate Orator, Sharp-Tongued Ally of the President
Schoolchildren and tourists who come to Washington expecting to find the Senate a showcase of oratory in the tradition of Daniel Webster or Henry Clay typically find reality a disappointing bore.
Unless, that is, they encounter Senator Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming.
With phrases carefully contrived to make him sound like someone who just rode into town after branding a few dozen head of cattle, the assistant Republican leader modulates his voice to give rich texture to his dismissal of "boobs," "bug-eyed zealots" and "super-greenies," his term for environmental lobbyists.


Long-Term Interest Rates Rise
Long-term interest rates rose and Treasury bond prices fell in light trading yesterday, as dealers sold longer-dated issues after statements by various Congressional leaders made it apparent that further delays in passing a new Federal budget were likely.
Dealers chose to sell bonds after Senator Pete V. Domenici, Republican of New Mexico, and Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the Illinois Democrat who is the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, told reporters in separate interviews they lacked enough votes to pass a budget pact.
Differences were cited on a number of issues, including proposed increases in gasoline taxes and how best to raise taxes on the wealthiest Americans, as the latest reasons for the delay.  'Steam Out of the Market'
Bond prices, which had been up earlier in the session in the wake of a further decline in oil prices, quickly slipped after the budget news flashed across trading screens.
"Domenici took all the steam out of the market," said Joseph Liro, a vice president and money market economist at S. G. Warburg Securities Inc.
Traders said the budget news was bad because the longer the process was delayed, the less time the Government would have to sell an avalanche of new securities.
"The auction calendar is going to be compressed into a frighteningly short period of time," Mr.
Liro said.
"As things now stand, roughly $95 billion worth of securities will have to be sold between now and the first full week in November, and the longer the Congress delays the shorter the period to pre-sell those issues becomes," he added.
"The Government could end up paying for the delay in a big way."  Rise in Yields Forecast
Robert A. Brusca, chief economist at Nikko Securities International, said that "once a budget pact is announced, the Street will rush to sell securities as a way of preparing for the new supply. I think that yields are going to have to go back up quite severely in order for the markets to take on these new securities."
The Government has enough money to honor its obligations until next Wednesday, but the continued delay in passing a new budget as well as authorizing another increase in the Federal debt ceiling makes it highly unlikely that an auction of new two-year Treasury notes will be held today, dealers said.
Next Wednesday the Treasury is expected to announce the size and timing of its quarterly refunding auctions, which are now expected to take place during the first full week of November.
Long-Term Selling Pressure
Most of the selling pressure in the secondary market for Treasury securities was seen in long-term bonds and notes.
Prices of short-term bills and notes were little changed.
By late in the day, the Treasury's 8 3/4 percent 30-year bonds of 2020 were offered at a price of 99 15/32, down 17/32, to yield 8.79 percent, compared with 8.75 percent late Monday.
Among Treasury note issues, the 8 3/4 percent 10-year notes were offered at 100 19/32 in late trading, down 10/32, to yield 8.65 percent.
But the 8 1/8 percent two-year notes showed a rise of 1/32, to a late offered price of 100 17/32, to yield 7.81 percent.
Bill Rates Down a Bit
Short-term Treasury bill rates dipped slightly.
In late trading, three-month bills were offered at a discount rate of 7.21 percent, down one basis point, or a hundredth of a point.
Six-month bill rates fell by a similar amount, to a late offered rate of 7.16 percent.
In the market for investment-grade corporate bonds, traders said that prices of longer-term Citicorp issues swung wildly yesterday.
"The shorter-term stuff is hanging in there," one trader said.
"But bids on the longer stuff are all over the place, and no trades are taking place."
Citicorp bonds have been pounded in recent months as worries about the health of major American banks has risen.
Confidence in the nation's largest bank holding company took another beating on Monday when a Dutch auction of its money market preferred stock came close to failing.
Another auction of Citicorp's 49-day money market preferred is expected to be held today.
Dealers said that prices of most investment-grade corporate issues dipped by about a quarter of a point in very light trading.
Backed by Japanese Credit
In the tax-exempt municipal market, Dean Witter Reynolds acted as lead manager for a negotiated sale of $200 million worth of bonds for the Georgia World Congress Center Authority.
The issue, which is backed by a letter of credit from the Industrial Bank of Japan, consists of serial and term bonds.
The bulk of the securities are in term bonds maturing in 2010 and 2020 and carry coupons of 7.80 percent and 7 7/8 percent, respectively.
The issue is rated triple A by both Moody's Investors Service and the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Centex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Two Who Built Drexel Put Past Between Them
The boss had come to bad-mouth the man who made him famous, and no one seemed entirely happy about it.
Sitting ramrod-straight on the witness stand, in a dark blue suit and with his silver hair carefully coiffed, the polished Frederick H. Joseph was saying yesterday that yes, he believed Michael R. Milken had broken the rules of Drexel Burnham Lambert and had probably misled him.


Texaco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Charles Timmes, 83; General Specialized In Insurgency Battle
Charles J. Timmes, a retired Army major general who served in World War II, South Korea and South Vietnam and was an expert on counterinsurgency tactics, died Saturday at Fairfax Hospital in Falls Church, Va.
He was 83 years old and lived in Falls Church.
His son, Col. Thomas Timmes of Alexandria, Va., said he died of a heart attack.


Smith's Food &amp; Drug Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Northwest to Cut Daily Departures
Northwest Airlines, the nation's fourth-largest carrier, said it would cut 28 of its 1,380 daily departures beginning on Nov. 1 as part of an effort to offset the increase in jet fuel prices.
The airline will eliminate its flight from Memphis to San Diego Bob Gibbons, a spokesman, said.
The carrier will also reduce flights from Minneapolis-St.
Paul International Airport to Memphis; to Midway Airport in Chicago; to Omaha; to Fargo, N.D., and to Louisville, Ky.
It will also reduce flights from Detroit Metropolitan Airport to Milwaukee; to Chicago; to Pittsburgh; to Boston; to San Diego; to Seattle; to Kalamazoo and Lansing, Mich., and to Columbus, Ohio.





Amdahl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Senate to Limit Debate On Arts Restrictions
The Senate agreed tonight to conduct a seven-hour limit for debate on Wednesday on proposals to have the Government set artistic standards and restrict Federal funds for works considered obscene.
The decision ruled out a filibuster by Senator Jesse A. Helms, North Carolina Republican, who is the leading critic of the National Endowment for the Arts.
The debate comes on a spending bill that would provide $170 million in fiscal 1992, and extend the life of the endowment by one year.


Congress: A Status Report
Legislation that the leaders of the 101st Congress say they have to pass before adjourning for electioneering, legislation that they hope to pass and legislation that has few prospects of passage this year.
WHAT CONGRESS MUST DO The Budget: Known as a budget reconciliation bill, this huge measure will incorporate the new taxes and cuts in Medicare and other entitlement programs agreed to by Congressional and White House budget agreement negotiators.
Appropriations: In addition, 13 appropriations bill have to be approved in order to continue funding Government programs and agencies for another year.
These bills range from one that sets defense spending for the Pentagon to one that pays for attorneys and secretaries in the Justice Department.
Clean Air: House and Senate negtiators have agreed on all major issues of the first rewriting of clean air legislation 13 years.
It calls for tougher emission standards on automobiles, and measures that will reduce urban smog, chemicals that damage the ozone shield and release of industrial chemicals said to cause cancer.
The White House expressed concern about the cost but appears prepared to sign the legislation.
Child Care: The White House and the Senate reached an agreement on the first child care package since 1971.
It would give $15 billion in tax breaks to the poor to pay for child care, and grants to states to set safety and health standards for child care centers.
A package is being negotiated with the House.
Farm Programs: Legislation that would extend farm prices supports for five years has become entangled in the budget agreement, because the House and Senate bills would cut farm programs.
Last week a conference agreement was reached that would cut price support programs by $13 billion.
WHAT CONGRESS WOULD LIKE TO DO Crime: Legislation that would reduce the number of appeals and petitions for prisoners on death row and the burden of proof for prosectors seeking to impose the capital punishment has passed both the Senate and House, but has yet to go to a conference.
White House generally pleased with the final product, but one House provision, which would enable a court to overturn a death sentence if the defendent could show a pattern of racial discrimination in that state, could doom the bill.
Immigration: House and Senate have each passed bills that would increase legal immigration.
Senate would set a limit of 630,000, the House, almost 800,000.
Preference would be given to family members of immigrants who have permanent residents status, as well as highly educated workers, in an effort to bring more skilled workers into the country.
In conference, an agreement has been set to increase the current immigration level of 540,000 to 700,000 for the first three years, then 675,000 after that.
Visas for skilled workers would rise to 140,000 annually from 54,000.
Housing: House and Senate conferees have agreed to a bill that would spend $17.9 billion next year on three major new housing programs.
They include the Administration's HOPE program, to help low-income workers buy their own apartments or homes, construction of new low-rental housing units and overhauling of the troubled Federal Housing Administration's mortgage insurance fund by revamping premiums.
WHAT CONGRESS IS NOT LIKELY TO DO Campaign Finance: Both House and Senate passed legislation that would change how political campaigns are financed.
House would cap spending on Congressional races at $550,000 per candidate for the general election, offer free broadcast time and reduce mailing costs.
Senate would ban politicl action committees, require states to set campaign spending limits, and offer low-cost mailing, free television time and extra money for candidates whose opponents exceed spending limits.
The bill is considered dead.
Cable Television: A bill that would have imposed modest new regulations on the cable television industry, and require cable operators to share their programming with competitors, was passed by the House but blocked in the Senate.
While last minute negotiations last week sparked hopes for a revival of the bill, a host of proposed amendments that could consume precious legislative time seemed to doom the bill for this year.
An even bigger obstacle is a threatened veto by President Bush.


Metropolitan Diary
SOME New Yorkers will go to great lengths for a suntan.
Jennifer Lund goes to great heights.
Her particular place in the sun: a narrow ledge outside her bedroom window, 16 floors above East 72d Street.
Ms.
Lund was perched out there in her bathing suit the other day.
This was one of those glorious summerlike days just past, a perfect day to catch the rays with a cup of tea, a couple of magazines and music wafting through her headphones.
Without the headphones, she might have been quicker to discover the drama below.
But it was some time before, glancing up from a magazine, she noticed the large crowd on the sidewalk across the street.
Wasn't that the doorman down there?
Why, yes.
He seemed to be counting floors.
Odd.
Ms.
Lund waved hello.
The doorman waved back, a bit frantically, she thought, and motioned for her to look down.
Peering over the ledge, she saw four police cars and an ambulance.
Obviously an accident.
They'd cleared the street.
And there was something stretched along the sidewalk in front of her window.
What?
It looked like . . . it
was
. . . a huge airbag!
Oh, no.
Ms.
Lund pointed to the airbag and then to herself to ask if it had been placed there for her.
The doorman took this to mean she was about to jump.
He ran into the street to alert the police.
The crowd surged forward.
The headphones were off now.
She could hear a voice broadcasting in calm, measured tones: "Come in off the ledge. We want to talk to you. Come in off the ledge."
Dear Diary:
Last week I interviewed a neat and prim-looking middle-aged woman who had been sent by an agency for domestic workers.
Over tea, I described the job requirements.
She examined the apartment at some length and expressed her willingness to work for me.
"One other thing," she said, heading for the door.
"I want you to know that I'm allergic to dust." --
JANET NUSSDORF
What follows could only have happened on a crowded bus in an age when parents pride themselves on giving textbook responses to children's queries about the mysteries of human reproduction.
Seated in the front of the bus, an M-104, are Ruth Schwartz and her 5-year-old niece Charlotte. ("Charlotte asks a lot of questions about how babies are born," Ms. Schwartz tells us, "and her mother always answers using the correct anatomical terms.")
A woman boards the bus with a infant strapped to her chest in a canvas carrier.
Charlotte stares at the woman, then turns to her aunt and asks: "Is that a uterus?"
Scene:
The Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibit "Mexico: Splendors of 30 Centuries."
Observer:
Norman Edinberg who comes upon a middle-aged couple contemplating a large, stone pre-Columbian urn.
Man:
That's where they put the hearts of the human sacrifices.
Woman (bending to read the accompanying text):
It says here it was used for domestic purposes.
Man (shrugging):
What do
they
know?
I never,
never,
leave a ballgame early. It ain't over till it's over, right?
Still, the 1990 Yankees -- not the devil -- made me do it.
I climbed onto the first car of the southbound No. 4 train in the seventh, leaving my beloved Yankees trailing the Red Sox.
One more lost game in a long-since lost season.
Next to me were a dozen Wall Street traders, ties at half mast, jackets slung over shoulders.
In the middle of the car was a dude with a radio-cassette player the size of a minisubmarine.
Lord, I thought, here comes sound pollution.
Grinning at me, the deejay popped in a tape of Stevie Wonder's "Superstition." As if on cue, the Wall Streeters began to dance a jig and wail along.
Others joined in, but I kept my cool until Petula Clark's "Downtown."
Soon everyone in the car -- me included -- had dropped the subway-riding masks and was bellowing along.
Then came another tune . . . and another.
The last time I'd seen anything like this was a late-night viewing of the musical "Flower Drum Song."
Our deejay got up to leave at 86th Street.
No, no, we cried and dropped tokens into his hands.
Stay with us to Grand Central.
He grinned, sat down and cranked 'er up again.
The M.T.A. missed out on one great commercial. --
PATRICK LACEFIELD
Dear Diary:
My husband's name is Marco Rosales.
A couple of nights ago, a friend called to say: "Congratulate Marco. A hurricane has been named after him." And, indeed Hurricane Marco was heading up the Atlantic coast.
The next morning my husband was in the bedroom, standing in front of the TV and watching the news.
He was stark naked and trying to step into his shorts when a lovely weather woman looked right at him.
"Well," she said brightly, "let's see what Marco is doing now." --
SYLVIA ST. CLAIR


Nyerere and Tanzania: No Regrets at Socialism
Julius K. Nyerere, who led Tanzania for the first-quarter century of its existence as an independent state, struck an unapologetic note as he said he had no regrets, despite the ramshackle condition in which he leaves his country.
"If I had my time over again, I would do it much the same way," said the 68-year-old founding father who is called Mwalimu -- Swahili for the teacher -- by Tanzanians.
He made his comments in an interview while on a recent visit to the United Nations.


Corrections
A fashion review on Oct. 16 about British designers misidentified one.
She is Val Piriou, not Piriot.


Ismail Won't Turn Pro
Raghib (Rocket) Ismail closed the door yesterday on speculation he might enter the National Football League spring draft.
"I thought about it, and I'll be at Notre Dame next year," said Ismail, a junior, who has returned five kickoffs and one punt for touchdowns in his three-year career.
Ismail faced the temptation of quick pro money, but he says he sees the grittier side as well.
"I figure when you're out of college, you're fair game for anyone," he said.
"And everyone's going to want a shot at you, and you're not going to have N.C.A.A. rules to protect you.
"You're not going to be able to go to your coach. You're going to have to have lawyers and all that stuff, and that all sounds like a big headache to me."(AP)


Shell Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Martin Marietta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


60's Hangout for a Brawling Hussein
At the Andiana restaurant and coffee shop on Dokki Street, where trucks and buses compete for decibel highs, Hussein Abdel Meguid remembers his most famous customer like this: He was rough and tough and started altercations -- once with a knife -- and he paid his bills only a decade or so after they fell due.
But when he did pay them, said Mr.
Meguid, the Andiana's 65-year-old owner, he paid them more than double, as befitted a man who had risen from the ranks of the political exiles who clustered to the harsh and fervid flame of Gamal Abdel Nasser's Egypt to the vice presidency and later the presidency of Iraq.


McFerrin Concert Put Off
Bobby McFerrin's Voicetra concert, originally scheduled for Nov. 5 through 10 at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater, has been postponed until the spring of 1991.
Refunds may be obtained from Ticketron customer service, 246-0102.
Information: 247-4777.


Bridge
The longest event in the New York calendar, the Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Teams, will end its 1989-90 season next month just as the next season begins.
One team in the final is led by Steve Sanborn of Stony Point, N.Y., and it will face a group led by Jim Becker of Manhattan.
In one semifinal match, played Monday night at the Beverly Club in Manhattan, the Becker team won handily against a group led by Glenn Milgrim of Whitestone, Queens.
Becker's team was aided by the diagramed deal, in which both teams reached four hearts.


Nintendo Offers Pact to Designers
The Nintendo Company, which has strictly controlled the manufacture of games for its video entertainment systems, has offered United States companies that design the games the chance to manufacture them.
The Japanese company licenses 53 companies to design games for its systems and manufactures the game cartridges itself in Japan, maintaining exlusive marketing rights.
Lynne Gray, a spokeswoman for Nintendo in Los Angeles, said the company sent a letter to its licensees on Oct. 3 offering to let them manufacture their designs.
No one has signed up yet, she said.
Ms.
Gray said the experimental offer was unrelated to a Federal Trade Commission investigation of Nintendo for possible anti-competitive practices.


Union Electric reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Quaker Oats Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Crusty Pizza
To The Living Section:  Florence Fabricant's article "Frozen Pizzas to Feed a Nation of Homebodies"  [ Oct. 17 ]  prompts this letter.
It is almost impossible to get a crisp crust on any microwave function.
We solve this for pizzas by buying our favorite pizzas at a pizza restaurant, wrap each in plastic and freeze them, dated.
A few minutes in a broiler heats it up, with a good crust, with minimum trouble.
NATHAN SHALIT Madison, N.J.


Northern Telecom Gain
Northern Telecom Inc. today reported an increase in third-quarter net earnings and predicted continued strong growth for the rest of 1990.
The telecommunications company said profits rose to $97.7 million in the quarter ended Sept. 30, compared with $80.1 million in the corresponding period in 1989.
Earnings per share rose to 38 cents, up 23 percent, from 31 cents last year.
Third-quarter revenues increased 14 percent, to $1.62 billion, compared with $1.41 billion a year earlier.
Northern Telecom Inc. is the Nashville-based United States subsidiary of Northern Telecom Ltd., which has its headquarters in Toronto.
Northern Telecom sells digital telecommunications systems and provides products and services to telephone operating companies and other institutions.
It has more than 49,000 employees worldwide.


San Diego Gas &amp; Elec reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Disney Turns to Japanese For Future Film Financing
The Walt Disney Company said today that it would finance most of its future films through a new partnership with Japanese investors and banks.
The deal marks the largest investment yet by the Japanese in American films, aside from the Sony Corporation's $3.5 billion acquisition of Columbia Pictures.


Campaigning for the G.O.P., Bush Discovers He's an Issue
It was to have been a routine day of campaigning.
Instead, George Bush got an object lesson today in how the budget crisis has disrupted the Republican Party, and how quickly loyalties can shift when a Presidency is weakened and defiance of the White House becomes a political plus.
Stumping through New England on a trip that had been postponed by the budget crisis, Mr.
Bush was introduced at a fund-raising event in Vermont by a Republican candidate who made a point of opposing the President's veto Monday of a job-discrimination bill.


Tambrands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nets Beat Heat, 112-101
The Nets did not need Derrick Coleman to gain their first preseason victory, against Miami tonight.
Playing in the Carrier Dome, where Coleman developed into the National Basketball Association's No. 1 selection in the June draft while playing for Syracuse, the Nets charged to a 112-101 victory over the Heat.


Ryder System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Genentech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Harold Loren, 69, Dies; A Youth Camp Founder
Harold Loren, a leader in international camping, died on Sunday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 69 years old and lived in Ardsley, N.Y.
He died after a stroke, his family said.
He was the founder of the Lincoln Farm Camp in Roscoe, N.Y., where teen-agers developed skills through work-education programs.
He promoted the exchange of staff members and children with camps in many parts of the world.
Mr.
Loren, who was born in Manhattan and graduated from New York University, taught industrial arts in the New York City public schools.
In World War II, he served in the Army Air Force in the China-Burma-India theater.
He is survived by his wife, the former Beatrice Fykin; two daughters, Shelly Majidy of Glastonbury, Conn., and Susan Keiser of Liberty, N.Y.; two brothers, Jeffrey Hayden of Los Angeles and Bert Levine of Clearwater, Fla; a sister, Fay Levine of Manhattan, and five grandchildren.


Woes and Foes Burden Barcelona Planning
The 1992 Summer Olympic Games, which open here in 21 months, may turn out to be popular and successful, but the lofty expectations have already been tempered by a lack of hotel rooms and omens of traffic gridlock.
Some sports, political and financial leaders here are openly worried that the failure to finish housing and highways could tarnish the country's image in the eyes of many visitors and undermine Spain's efforts to prove itself a modern nation.


Kelly Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hints of Hussein's Strategy in an Iraqi Map
To divine Saddam Hussein's strategy for a negotiated end to the Persian Gulf crisis, some Middle East experts here say, one need only look at the new map of Kuwait drafted by Baghdad days after Iraq invaded its neighbor.
The map labels southern Kuwait a new, 19th province of Iraq.
But above a diagonal line drawn across the nation's northern third -- a region boasting five oilfields and two strategic islands at the head of the Persian Gulf -- Kuwait no longer has any borders.
It has vanished, swallowed and digested by the southern Iraqi province of Basra.


Houghton Mifflin Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Israel Closes Off Its Occupied Territories
Arab-Jewish violence grew today, leaving one man dead and at least eight wounded, and the Government announced tonight that it was sealing off the West Bank and Gaza Strip for several days, forbidding 1.8 million Palestinians to enter Israel.
The occupied territories have been closed before, on high Jewish holy days and at other times when Israel wanted to prevent possible trouble.
But never has the Government forbidden Palestinians to enter Israel because it was unable to control spreading bloodshed by both Arabs and Jews.


Anti-Aircraft Missiles Stockpiled in Saudi Desert


Market Place; Hanwa Suffers A Debt Hangover
AS Japan's financial markets bounded effort lessly upward in the 1980's, many industrial concerns could not resist the temptation to play the markets rather than grind out earnings from making or bending metal.
Financial engineering, or "zaitech," became the rage.
But when the markets turned sour, some of these high-flying companies were brought back to earth with a thud.
There are few better examples than Hanwa, a steel-trading concern whose focus shifted to racier investments from the mature business of buying and selling round bars and steel plates.
Hanwa borrowed heavily against its unexciting but steady steel businesses and plowed the proceeds into securities and bank deposits, winning a reputation as the most aggressive zaitech company.
Today, few companies better illustrate the problems the plunge in the stock and bond markets have created for those who cast their lot with zaitech instead of high tech, or even low tech.
The most visible sign of Hanwa's problems was the company's announcement this week that it expects to report paper losses of 25 billion yen ($197 million) in its stock portfolio for the six months that ended Sept. 30.
The news came as no shock to investors here.
Hanwa's share price has tumbled to 2,680 yen, from a peak of 4,460 yen in March.
Toshio Matsumura, the company's executive director in charge of finance, said in a telephone interview yesterday that Hanwa was hit particularly by the steep decline in the company's largest financial holdings, bank stocks.
One obligation a Japanese company takes on when it borrows heavily is to plow some cash back into the stocks of its lenders, creating the interlocking shareholdings for which Japan is famous.
Thus, not only has Hanwa suffered from the particularly steep drop in the value of bank stocks this year, but it is largely unable to sell the shares, since that would breach the financial bond that sustains the company.
"Even if there were a further drop in the stock market, we couldn't sell," Mr.
Matsumura acknowledged.
Yasuhiro Yamaguchi, an analyst at Barclays de Zoete Wedd, said Hanwa suffered unrealized losses of about 11.5 billion yen ($91 million) in the first half of the fiscal year, just from the fall in the shares of its main lender, Sumitomo Bank.
Led by Shigeru Kita, who became the dean of the zaitech practitioners, Hanwa's balance sheet exploded in the 1980's.
Its borrowings shot up to 5.3 trillion yen, or $41.7 billion, as of March 31 of this year, from 319.3 billion yen, or $2.51 billion, as of that date in 1985.
That pushed the company's ratio of debt to equity -- a key measure of how heavily a company has borrowed relative to its size -- to 1,474 percent this year, from 540 percent five years earlier, Mr.
Yamaguchi said.
In fact, everything at the company seemed oversized.
Its current assets ballooned from a substantial447 billion yen in fiscal 1985, or $3.52 billion, to a phenomenal 5.134 trillion yen, or $40.4 billion, as of March 31.
By contrast, giant I.B.M. had just $35.9 billion in current assets at the end of 1989.
The result for Hanwa: operating income from steel trading meandered up from 8.2 billion yen in fiscal 1985 to 11.3 billion yen in the last fiscal year, Mr.
Yamaguchi said.
Meanwhile, non-operating income, mostly from financial dealings, rocketed to 231.6 billion yen last year from 38.4 billion yen in fiscal 1985.
In addition to investing in stocks, Hanwa has become an active foreign-exchange trader.
Steel trading has become almost a sideline.
More important was how Hanwa was doing its borrowing -- and how it was investing the capital.
In 1988 it began to rely heavily for its financing on commercial paper, or short-term corporate i.o.u.'s.
Its outstanding commercial paper soared to 3.226 billion yen as of March 31 of this year, or 57 percent of the company's total financing.
Meanwhile, interest rates rose sharply, in some instances more than doubling in the last year.
That has pushed Hanwa's borrowing costs up, while the returns on some of its investments have been declining with the steep drop in stock and bond prices.
That has proved a nasty combination.
The company said it still expects a profit for this fiscal year, but Mr.
Yamaguchi says he expects Hanwa to report a net loss of 3.7 billion yen, or $29.1 million.
That compares with a net profit of 22 billion yen, or $173 million, last year.
One positive factor is that Hanwa increased its holdings of cash and bank deposits to 3.9 trillion yen, or $30.7 billion, as of March 31.
That is an astoundingly large figure, but in proportion to its vast borrowings.
That will give it flexibility, Mr.
Yamaguchi said, and help the company return to profitability in the fiscal year 1991 -- assuming the markets do not plunge further.


Eating Well
LAST week, more than 12,000 registered dietitians converged at the Colorado Convention Center here for the 73d annual meeting of the American Dietetic Association to brush up on nutrition issues and to learn about new, healthful products.
Though discussions ranged from setting the nation's health goals for the new century to something called the Pepperoni Pizza Diet, the overriding theme of the week was fat: where it comes from, what it does and how to get rid of it.


Johnson &amp; Johnson reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Weyerhaeuser Co. reports earnings for 13wks Sept 30


Profits Mixed At Four Oil Companies
The Mobil Corporation and the Shell Oil Company said today that their profits declined in the third quarter as soaring crude-oil prices forced refining and marketing costs higher but voluntary programs kept gasoline price increases in check.
Mobil's net income fell 28.9 percent, and Shell Oil's 33.2 percent.
Texaco Inc. and the Amerada Hess Corporation, whose refining units contribute a smaller portion of total revenues, reported gains for the quarter, however.
Texaco's net income rose 24.9 percent over the 1989 quarter.
Amerada Hess had a more than fourfold increase.


Providing Some Guidelines On Campaigns for Children
ADVERTISING to children is anything but child's play, and the Children's Television Workshop, which produces the "Sesame Street" television show and a number of children's magazines, wants to help advertisers learn the ropes.
This help for advertisers, offered at a meeting on marketing to children sponsored by General Foods, comes when a number of critics say some advertising to children is practically a form of child abuse.
Congress last week restricted the amount of advertising allowed on children's television programming, and some consumer advocates and lawmakers are seeking stricter limits on what can be advertised to children and when.
"We've been trying to help set the standards for advertising to children," said Dr.
Renee O'Leary, the director of research for the Children's Television Workshop.
"Depending on their age, children have varying abilities to discriminate about advertising and that makes them very vulnerable."
The Children's Television Workshop, a not-for-profit organization based in Manhattan, has an interest in helping advertisers.
It accepts advertising for its magazines, which include 3-2-1 Contact, Kid City and a Sesame Street parents' guide.
The Sesame Street show, which is broadcast on public television, does not accept ads.
"Children change so quickly, the only way to know what appeals to them and what they will understand is to continually talk to them," Dr.
O'Leary said in a recent interview.
Her research has found that in some ways, children are more sophisticated than many people would imagine.
A recent survey of children 6 to 10 years old found they were concerned about the possibility of war in the Middle East, AIDS, crime and the economy, as well as the lastest adventures of the Teen-age Mutant Ninja Turtles.
Most considered the environment the most important issue.
Dr.
O'Leary cautioned that advertisers should not try to appeal to children by trying to be hip.
Ads that show children who have "super cool" spiked hair and clothing to match may misfire.
"Children generally aren't as hip as the media makes them out to be," she said.
"We've found they aren't growing up faster today than in the past."
Using the slang common to rap music lyrics may also be a mistake.
Dr.
O'Leary said that surveys found that children like rap music because of the beat, but many have no idea what the lyrics are about.
Children also have a hard time understanding ads that rely on parody.
They usually do not get the joke at first, Dr.
O'Leary said, and when they finally do, they feel betrayed.
She said it was generally best to signal children that there was a joke.
"Irony won't work on a lot of children," she said.
"They take things too literally because they're trying to figure life out."
When it comes to print ads, the simplest approach is often the best, she said.
The company's research has found that many children are intimidated by large blocks of type and complicated layouts.
The company's researchers also found that the growing use of so-called kids' clubs in ads -- like the one for Burger King -- may create problems because it can take unfair advantage of most children's natural tendency to want to feel they belong.
Not surprisingly, the images children respond to most readily are cartoons, Dr.
O'Leary said.
But studies found that what is even more appealing to most children is a combination of cartoon and real-life images.
"They like the mix because it's like their lives," Dr.
O'Leary said, "a combination of the real and the imaginary."


Fiat to Lay Off 70,000 for Week
Fiat S.p.A., the giant Italian auto company, said it would lay off 70,000 workers for a week in late November, twice the number originally planned.
A spokesman for the Turin-based group said the temporary layoffs were intended to cut car production by 90,000 units by the end of 1990.
Auto sales in Italy dropped 7.5 percent in September from a year earlier.
Fiat sources indicated that despite a recent slowdown in the domestic market, 1990 is expected to be a positive year for Fiat, with more than two million cars produced.
The layoffs were announced for the plants at Mirafiori, Atese, Termini Imerese, Chivasso, Pomigliano D'Arco and Cassino.
Workers laid off will get about 90 percent of their salaries through a special state fund.


Focus Shifts to Rules on Cleaner Air For Car, Chemical and Steel Makers
No consumer's wallet will go untouched by the Clean Air Act amendments expected to be enacted within days following compromises in the Senate and House.
Much of the burden will fall initially on several industries that have long expected tighter controls on air pollution, including auto makers, steel producers, the chemical industry and public utilities.
How quickly consumers pay for the changes these industries will be asked to make will depend in part on the state of the economy.
If the nation tumbles into a recession, as some economists expect, business will have a harder time passing on the costs.


RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Continental Bankruptcy Study Seen
Stung by unexpected losses and sharply higher fuel costs, the parent of Continental Airlines prepared to file for bankruptcy protection over the weekend but decided against the move -- at least for now -- at the last minute, a lawyer familiar with the situation said yesterday.
Amid the turmoil, Continental said its president and four top executives would leave the company.
The company attributed the move to cost-cutting, but people close to Continental said that its new chairman, Hollis H. Harris, wanted to remove executives who were allied with Frank Lorenzo, who recently stepped down as chairman, or who disagreed with the direction of the airline.


60-Minute Gourmet
ALMOST every Western culture has a variation of meat pie or meat loaf.
In the Middle East it is the kefta, in eastern Canada the tortiere, in France the pain de viande.
Meat pies come in all combinations, some blending pork and beef, some beef and veal, still others combining all three.
It all depends on your tastes and budget.
But any combination can be excellent if it is seasoned correctly.
An inexpensive addition that works very well is ground chicken.
As an experiment I used low-fat yogurt to bind this meat loaf, and the result was better than I expected.
But first the yogurt must be drained in cheesecloth for an hour or so to remove excess water.
The meat is blended in a bowl with sauteed onions and garlic, bread crumbs, nutmeg, Tabasco, cumin, salt and pepper.
It should take about 45 minutes to bake in a 425-degree oven.
For color, a side dish of baked zucchini and tomatoes is good, sprinkled with green peppers, onions, garlic and Parmesan cheese, then gratineed until browned.
Herbed Meat Loaf With Mushroom Sauce  1 tablespoon butter 4 tablespoons finely chopped onion 1 teaspoon minced garlic 2 pounds ground veal 1 1/2 cups fine fresh bread crumbs  1/4 teaspoon grated nutmeg  1/8 teaspoon Tabasco sauce  1/4 teaspoon ground cumin Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste 4 tablespoons chopped fresh herbs, like parsley, dill, coriander or a combination of several  1/2 cup yogurt, drained in cheesecloth or strainer Mushroom sauce (see recipe).
1.
Preheat the oven to 425 degrees.
Heat the butter in a small skillet and add the onion and garlic.
Cook until wilted, and cool briefly.
2.
Place the meat in a mixing bowl and add the bread crumbs, nutmeg, Tabasco, cumin, salt and pepper.
Add the onion mixture, herbs of your choice and yogurt, then blend well.
Pack the mixture into a loaf pan about 9 by 5 by 3 inches.
Smooth the top with a spatula.
3.
Set the pan in a baking dish and pour 1 1/2 inches of boiling water around the pan.
Bake for 45 minutes.
4.
Let rest in a warm place for about 15 minutes before serving.
Serve with the mushroom sauce.
Yield: 4 servings.
NOTE:
Ground chicken can be substituted for the veal, or use a half-and-half mixture of both.
This meat loaf is very good served cold with a salad.
Mushroom Sauce  3 tablespoons butter 4 tablespoons chopped shallots  1/2 pound mushrooms, sliced  1/2 teaspoon salt Freshly ground black pepper to taste  1/4 cup dry white wine 1 cup fresh or canned chicken broth.
1.
Melt 1 tablespoon of the butter in a saucepan and add the shallots, mushrooms, salt and pepper.
Cook, stirring, for about 5 minutes.
Add the wine and broth and reduce by half over high heat.
2.
Transfer the mixture to a blender and blend at high speed until smooth.
Return the mixture to the saucepan and add the remaining butter.
Heat, stirring, until smooth, about 1 minute.
Yield: 4 to 6 servings.
Baked Zucchini With Tomatoes  3 small zucchini, about 3/4 pound 3 ripe plum tomatoes, about 1/2  pound Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste 1 medium-size green pepper, cored, seeded and coarsely chopped 1 cup finely chopped onions 1 teaspoon minced garlic 1 tablespoon chopped fresh oregano, or 2 teaspoons dried 2 tablespoons grated Parmesan cheese 3 tablespoons olive oil.
1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees.
2.
Trim off the ends of the zucchini and core the tomatoes.
Cut each into 10 slices.
Arrange them with edges slightly overlapping, alternating the zucchini and tomatoes in a baking dish.
Sprinkle with salt and pepper.
3. In a bowl, mix well the green pepper, onions, garlic, oregano and cheese.
4. Spread the mixture evenly over the zucchini and tomatoes, and sprinkle with oil.
5. Place in the oven and bake 20 to 25 minutes until the tops are lightly browned.
Yield: 4 servings.


Conferees Add $22.6 Billion For Social Welfare Programs
Pent-up demand for social welfare spending burst forth today as Senate and House negotiators agreed on $22.6 billion more for a wide range of domestic programs in this fiscal year than in the year that ended Sept. 30.
The agreement, on the appropriations bill for the Departments of Labor, Education, and Health and Human Services, was struck by members of both houses' Appropriations Committees.
It would provide $182 billion for the three departments in the 1991 fiscal year, an increase of 14 percent over 1990.


Japan Faulted on Jet Orders
European manufacturers today demanded a larger share of the Japanese aerospace market, charging that United States companies were using political pressure to win a disproportionate number of orders.
Members of the Aeronautics and Space Committee of the European Business Community in Japan made their demands at a news conference.


Morgan Stanley Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Louis Althusser, 72, a Marxist Who Harshly Criticized Moscow
Louis Althusser, a French Communist philosopher who was a prominent critic of French and Soviet Communism in the 1970's, died Monday of heart failure in a geriatric center outside Paris.
He was 72 years old.
Mr.
Althusser had taught for many years at the prestigious Ecole Normale Superieure in Paris and was himself one of its graduates.


Pele Is Honored
The Brazilian media paid homage yesterday to the country's most famous son, Pele, on his 50th birthday in Rio de Janeiro.
Globo, Latin America's biggest television network, recalled Pele's career with a series of film clips showing some of his finest moments on the field.
Newspapers brought out special supplements, packed with adoring articles and dozens of photographs.
But the man who inspired Brazil to three World Cup triumphs and announced 10 days ago that he would run for president of Brazil in 1994, spent the day quietly, with his thoughts turned to next week's special commemorative charity game in Milan where he will lead a Brazilian side against a rest of the world squad. (Reuters)


Precedent for a Veto
Who would have thought that a pedigreed Connecticut Yankee, educated at Andover and Yale, would dabble in white backlash?
But what other plausible explanation can there be for George Bush's veto of the first civil rights bill to come across his Presidential desk?


McDonnell Douglas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Salvadoran Rebel Fire Kills 2 As Shells Fall Short of Target
A 9-year-old boy and his 20-year-old brother were killed this evening when two mortar rounds fired by rebels fell short of their apparent target and landed on a civilian neighborhood next to the Salvadoran military headquarters.
The homemade mortars, which also wounded two civilians, appeared to have been aimed at the Salvadoran high command.
The explosions collapsed several steel-reinforced roofs and cracked the concrete walls of a United States Embassy house half a block from the point of impact.
The attack follows the bombardment last week by a rebel unit of the main air force base on the eastern outskirts of the capital.


Bernstein Remembered
To the Editor:
Re "Leonard Bernstein, 72, Music's Monarch, Dies" (front page, Oct. 15): Our beloved Lenny was driven by his genius, possessed of such manyfold and overwhelming talents that demanded expression.
His was a compelling drive to share, as teacher, as composer, as conductor and not least as a human being, to give of himself with no restraint.
He knew no restraint, and like a fire, he ignited those he worked with, young and old, those he lectured to, explained to, enlightened and admonished, or composed and wrote for, whether on radio, screen, in books or in person, and lived and was consumed by the same fire.
A New Yorker to his last breath, he had the same feverish personality, and the same genius as George Gershwin, who preceded him in epoch and years. (Sir) YEHUDI MENUHIN London, Oct. 19, 1990


Henry Hadad, Lingerie Manufacturer, 96
Henry Hadad, a retired lingerie manufacturer, died on Friday at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 96 years old.
Mr.
Hadad was born in Syria and came to the United States as a child.
He started his own underwear business in Manhattan in the 1920's.
It became the Collegiate Manufacturing Company, a family concern of which he was president.
His wife, the former Werda Dahir, died two years ago.
Surviving are two daughters, Gloria Samaro of Boca Raton, Fla., and Louise Homwi of Brooklyn; two sons, Henry Jr. and Frederick, both of Brooklyn; three sisters, May Rizzuto of Boca Raton, Lillian Hattab of Brooklyn and Adele Hadad of Englewood, N.J.; 12 grandchildren, and two great-grandchildren.


Glanville Hits Casillas With Costly Suspension
He skipped training camp because of a contract dispute, then missed the season opener before coming to terms.
On Sunday he missed the Falcons-Rams game, and so now Tony Casillas, the All-Pro nose guard of the Atlanta Falcons, will miss at least three paychecks.
Coach Jerry Glanville suspended Casillas yesterday for two games without pay for not making Sunday's game against Los Angeles and docked him one paycheck more for that game.
In a letter to Casillas after the two met yesterday, Glanville said the five-year veteran would be suspended for next Sunday's game against Cincinnati and the game Nov. 4 against Pittsburgh.
Casillas's agent, John Maloney, said the player missed the team's charter flight to Los Angeles on Saturday after he became ill on his way to the airport.(AP)


Guilt by Habit: Driver Fights Fatality Verdict
The New Jersey Supreme Court heard arguments today about whether a motorist who fled the scene of a fatal accident can be deemed to have been intoxicated based on the testimony of a bartender who said the man got drunk in his bar every weekend.
The motorist, Petro Radziwil, 68 years old, of South River, was convicted of aggravated manslaughter and causing death by auto in a crash in the early morning of Nov. 25, 1984.
Because he fled the scene and got rid of his car, he was not arrested until a year and a half later.


Racism Has Always Been an Economic Issue
To the Editor:
In assessing David Duke's defeat in Louisiana (Op-Ed, Oct. 9), Leonard Zeskind observes: "Mr. Duke's campaign themes echoed those of George Wallace in his 1968 Presidential bid: racism combined with a resentment of white elites."


Senate to Limit Debate On Arts Restrictions
The Senate agreed tonight to conduct a seven-hour limit for debate on Wednesday on proposals to have the Government set artistic standards and restrict Federal funds for works considered obscene.
The decision ruled out a filibuster by Senator Jesse A. Helms, North Carolina Republican, who is the leading critic of the National Endowment for the Arts.
The debate comes on a spending bill that would provide $170 million in fiscal 1992, and extend the life of the endowment by one year.


Capital Cities/ABC Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


S.E.C. Studies Infotechnology
Infotechnology Inc., the parent of the Financial News Network, the cable television program service, has disclosed that it is being investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission but did not say why.
In a filing on Monday with the S.E.C., Infotechnology said that "the S.E.C. had issued a formal order of investigation with respect to the company" under Federal securities laws.
Infotechnology said the investigation was a "continuation of an informal S.E.C. staff inquiry." The company said it was cooperating with the investigation but gave no details.
A spokeswoman for the S.E.C. would neither confirm nor deny the investigation.
Earlier this month, FNN's chief financial officer, C. Steven Bolen, was dismissed for taking unauthorized compensation and because certain bank accounts under his authority were not properly recorded.
A spokeswoman for Infotechnology said the S.E.C. investigation was unrelated to Mr.
Bolen's dismissal.


Amerada Hess Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


L.I. Youth Gets Maximum in Parents' Murders


Strong Words For Bankers
In a break with the dogged optimism of the American Bankers Association convention here, the Comptroller of the Currency, Robert L. Clarke, chastised the industry today for bringing upon itself a decline in public confidence.
Mr.
Clarke, the nation's top bank regulator, told the convention that the industry's reputation was at its lowest level in 50 years.
The meeting is taking place as the industry grapples with a slumping economy, anxiety over loan losses and political fallout from the savings and loan crisis.
But banking leaders have maintained that the industry over all is strong.
Mr.
Clarke suggested that the industry would have further difficulties if it did not shore up its standing with the general public and legislators.
He said many bankers had lost sight of such basics as sound lending practices and diversification of risks.
"Recent experience has again brought home the lesson that there is no substitute for following the fundamentals," he said.
"But, as banking's current reputation proves, profound damage occurs from the failure to follow it."


New York Race for Governor: The Candidates on Social Issues
HOUSING: Mario M. Cuomo, Democrat, Liberal: "I have raised the largest housing program in the history of the United States," but "the state has to do as much more as it can without letting the Feds off the hook." Favors providing land for low-income housing and placing it beyond overpopulated low-income neighborhoods and providing "every advantage you can in financing." Favors a constitutional amendment that would empower counties to build affordable housing.
Opposes means test for tenants in rent-controlled or stabilized apartments.
Oppose letting rents rise to market levels when tenants of those apartments move.
"Build homogenous neighborhoods which are not these very high-rise buildings" and place them outside lower income areas "if I can't find the land" elsewhere.
Louis P. Wein, Right to Life: Favors more low-density housing "integrated into many communities as opposed to isolated into groups." Favors programs patterned on the H.E.L.P. program initiated by Andrew Cuomo, the Governor's son, tax credits and incentives and providing "all the ancillary services that are required to help these people as part of a society that cares about them." Proposes a means test for rent controlled apartments, based not only on a tenant's salary.
What enobles the life of the individual woman, enobles the life she's carrying.
I'm willing to tolerate exceptions, incest, rape and the life of the mother.
I'm opposed to Medicaid funding for abortion.
I don't think that the state should be in the business of promoting abortion.
Wein: "I am opposed to abortion without exception. I would do everything I could within the law to get the law changed." DRUG TREATMENT: Cuomo: Favors treatment on demand for drug addicts, but says "we're very far away from it" because of financial contraints.
London: Supports treatment on demand.
"If you found treatment programs that work I would be very much in favor of them only because I think you would lower the expense from other areas of the state budget, including crime prevention and the court system." Favors random drug testing of applicants for drivers licenses and denying licenses to those who test positive.
MENTAL HEALTH: Cuomo: Favors a more "intelligent application of police power" to remove mentally ill people from streets.
"I'm not sure that there isn't more room in the Constitution for an intelligent application of police power that would enable you to protect people from injuring themselves, even if they're not going to kill themselves." London: Says more people should be in mental hospitals.
"The state has abdicated its responsibility largely because I don't understand how it's a humanitarian policy to say to someonewith mental illness, here's your Thorazine, take it every four hours and live on the streets of New York City." Rinfret: Favors some legal provision under which people being treated for severe psychiatric problems can be required to take prescribed medicine.
Rinfret: "I would increase the tuition fees" and would impose a means test.
"And I'm a student who went to C.C.N.Y. and had no money. I would have a means test. I got in there for free, but I didn't have a nickel." Wein: Favors means test that would base tuition on a student's ability to pay.


Control Data reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Consolidated Edison Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Valley National Corp.-Arizona reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BCE Mobile Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


N.B.A. Fines Bryant
The National Basketball Association fined a Portland reserve forward, Mark Bryant, $5,000 yesterday and ordered him to sit out the Trail Blazers' regular-season opener for fighting during an exhibition game against Sacramento.
Coach Rick Adelman said he was surprised by the severity of the penalty, adding: "You're dealing with an exhibition game, where people are trying to make teams. The play sometimes gets ragged and gets a little rougher."
The incident occurred Saturday when the 6-foot-9-inch, 245-pound Bryant slugged Marty Conlon of Sacramento.(AP)


Ohio Casualty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Enserch Exploration Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thomas Williams Is Dead at 63; A Novelist and English Professor
Thomas Williams, an award-winning novelist and an English professor at the University of New Hampshire, died on Tuesday at Wentworth-Douglass Hospital in Dover, N.H.
He was 63 years old and lived in Durham, N.H.
He died of lung cancer, said a spokesman for the Pelczar Funeral Home in Newmarket, N.H.
Mr.
Williams published eight novels and a collection of short stories over three decades beginning in 1955.


Oak Indus reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; T.W.A. Said to Be Seeking Small Agency
AFTER Young &amp; Rubicam resigned the estimated $45 million Trans World Airlines account three weeks ago, the airline searched for another large agency to handle its account.
But agency executives said T.W.A. could not find any takers, no doubt because the account would probably not be profitable for a large agency.
Y.&amp; R. dumped T.W.A. because Carl C. Iachn, the company's chairman, insisted on reducing the agency's compensation by several million dollars, making the account unprofitable for the giant agency.


Teck Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Busch Profit Grows 9.4%
The Anheuser-Busch Companies today reported a 9.4 percent increase in third-quarter profits.
Profits in the quarter were $260.7 million, or 91 cents a share, up from $238.3 million, or 83 cents a share, last year.
Revenue jumped 15.5 percent, to $3.12 billion, from $2.70 billion for the third quarter last year.
It was the 55th straight quarter of record sales and earnings at the world's largest brewery.
August Busch 3d, chairman and president, said beer sales had been helped by the introduction of two brands, Bud Dry and Busch Light, in the early part of the year.
"We continue to be extremely pleased with our beer company's performance during 1990," Mr.
Busch said.
Sales of beer to wholesalers were up 4.8 percent from last year's third quarter, the highest volume gain in the industry, the company said.
Mr.
Busch said higher profits at two other Busch companies -- Campbell Taggart bakery and the Metal Container Corporation -- also helped profits in the quarter.
But he cautioned that the weak economy, higher gasoline prices and tougher competition have resulted in lower 1990 attendance at the company's Busch Gardens and Sea World theme parks.
The low attendance and lower profits will probably continue into 1991, Mr.
Busch said.
The company's stock slipped 62.5 cents today, to $38, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Humphrey Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AMP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Ties That Bind
A tie is a pain around the neck.
Neckties -- the flashy strips of silk that give the business to "business attire" -- are an affront to the trend toward ease and wantonness.
I hate 'em.
I wear them only when going to weddings and funerals (but not bar mitzvahs or wakes), or to White House briefings; when representing my company; and when going tieless would make a fashion statement discomforting other guests and cause them to think me a too-secure slob.


Marine Holding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


One Price Clothing Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Southwest National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Inbancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Senate Approves Bill On College Disclosure
The Senate today approved a bill that would require colleges and universities to disclose their graduation rates and the crimes committed on their campuses.
The House passed the measure by voice vote on Monday, and the Senate did the same thing today.


200 on Verge of Soviet Exit Are Stalled
More than 200 Christian fundamentalists who were supposed to inaugurate a new refugee system to America were trapped in a bureaucratic limbo at the airport today, having sundered all ties to the Soviet Union after years of religious persecution, but then finding departure denied to them at literally the last exit.
"I had said farewell to this place -- but now look at us," Pavel Boyko said desperately of the group camped in a tangle of baggage and sleeping babies at passpor control.


Giants Might Revamp Defense
When the Giants squeaked out a 24-20 victory over the Washington Redskins two games ago, the Redskins, a better passing than rushing team, rushed for 162 yards.
When the Giants squeaked out a 20-19 victory over the Phoenix Cardinals last Sunday, the Cardinals rushed for 125 yards.
What is happening to the vaunted Giants defense?
And when the Giants (6-0) play the Washington Redskins (4-2) here in Sunday's key division game, how will they stop the Redskins' running game?


PSI Resources Inc. reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


American Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Warsaw Pact Summit Talks Delayed
With its future in doubt and its membership divided over the last issue it may face as a military alliance, the Warsaw Pact has agreed to postpone indefinitely a meeting of its top leaders.
The meeting had been scheduled to be held here early next month.
The Soviet Union asked for a delay in the Warsaw Pact summit meeting until after the heads of governments involved in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe meet in Paris on Nov. 19, where the issue of future European security arrangements will be addressed, a spokesman for the Hungarian Foreign Ministry said today.


To Belgian Rebels, Life Isn't Seamless
With half the fashion world in Chanel uniforms, there was bound to be a youthful rebellion.
One group of seven Belgian designers has emerged as a force to be reckoned with, and three of them --


Review/Dance; A Harmonious Union of 8 Finds Itself Disrupted
Jennifer Muller is seldom at a loss for clever choreographic ideas.
But she is most satisfying when she is imaginative as well as inventive.
And in "Refracted Light" her imagination was very much on display.
This new dance to recordings of traditional Tibetan music received its world premiere on Tuesday night when Ms.
Muller's troupe, Jennifer Muller/The Works, opened a week's engagement at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street.
"Refracted Light" is one of Ms.
Muller's best works of recent seasons.


Unocal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jerusalem as Tinderbox: Fury and Foreboding Prevail
Soldiers threw up scores of roadblocks at dawn today, barring all Palestinians from entering Israel.
Immediately a tense and angry truce fell over the nation and its occupied territories.
Across the forced separation that some here were calling a "Middle Eastern Iron Curtain," Arabs and Jews still seethed.
Both sides continued calling for revenge and death after an ugly half week in which three Jews and three Arabs were killed in a rush of assaults and counterattacks.


Review/Fashion; Saint Laurent: The Artist, The Enigma
Yves Saint Laurent brought the spring and summer showings to a close here this morning as he has for almost 30 years.
His collection of almost 200 pieces ended with 30 designs based on Leon Bakst's costumes for the Ballets Russes in the early part of this century.
They were a whirling fantasy of colorful beads, Turkish pants and exotic patterns, poised to swing into a production of "Scheherezade." The designer had hovered over these last styles, even sewing on the beads himself, his associates said.
The designs were breathtaking in their artistry, and after they all were shown, the designer strode confidently down the runway in a neatly tailored dark suit.
He kissed the bride, who was wearing gathered lace pants and red roses as she waited for him at the end of the runway, and then seemed to lose his bearings for a minute.
He stood uncertainly, blowing kisses to photographers he recognized in the crowd, and then continued up the runway.
He recovered from his confusion backstage as he greeted myriad enthusiasts, murmuring "Symphony Espagnole, Bakst" to one who seemed perplexed.


Ex-G.I. Returns Manuscript
A former American Army private who said he "picked up" a valuable 14th-century manuscript at the castle of Grossgrundlach, on the outskirts of Nuremburg, while fighting in the closing days of World War II returned it to its owner at the castle yesterday.
The former private, Cameron Anderson, said by telephone that he told Baron Helmut Haller von Hallerstein, whose family has owned the castle of Grossgrundlach for generations: "In 1945 I got it, and now after 45 years I give it to you." Mr.
Anderson, who is 64 years old, then handed an 8-by-12-inch document dated 1382 to the baron.


Alleghany Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Noble Affiliates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


North Side Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Louisville Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CRSS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


California State Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Senate Passes Compromise on Arts Endowment
After an emotional debate about the Government's role in the arts, the Senate today adopted a bipartisan compromise that would leave judgments about obscenity and pornography to the courts.
The vote of 73 to 24 followed a session in which some Senators deplored Federally subsidized "slime and sleaze" and others assailed Government "censorship" as they debated restricting Federal grants for works deemed "obscene" and "pornographic."


One Valley Bancorp of W. Va.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rangers Agree On New Ball Park
The Texas Rangers announced today that they had reached an agreement to build a new ball park in the city, ending speculation that the team would move to downtown Dallas.
The team said the agreement would keep the American League club in Arlington, between Fort Worth and Dallas, for 40 years.


Home Improvement
MANY older sinks and tubs have compression faucets, the kind with a rubber washer at the base of the stem.
Compression faucets are not as common as they used to be, perhaps because they are the ones most likely to leak.
A leak should be fixed as soon as possible.
Besides the annoying drip, it can stain porcelain and waste surprisingly large amounts of water.
Fortunately, with the right tools, this is a relatively easy job.


Compaq Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tee-Comm Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Soviets Renew Bid for Peace By a Negotiated Settlement
Moscow renewed its effort today to find a negotiated settlement to the Persian Gulf crisis, with a special envoy to Arab nations saying there was still hope for peace.
Yevgeny M. Primakov, a personal envoy of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union, addressed the issue when he arrived in Cairo at the start of a journey expected to take him to Saudi Arabia, Syria and Iraq.


Harris Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Medco Containment Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Balkan Nations Gather to Improve Their Ties
The Foreign Ministers of the Balkan countries assembled here today for the first time since the vast changes that swept Eastern Europe in the last year.
The six ministers pledged that their governments would work for neighborly relations and cooperation in a region that experienced four costly wars in the first half of this century and is troubled again by ethnic conflict.


Emergency Child-Care Program Grows
A program for emergency child care that was started a year ago as an experiment by seven large New York City companies is entering its second year with expanded corporate participation.
It now comprises 14 major employers.
"The program has been great," said Elizabeth P. Walters, director of professional personnel at New York's largest law firm, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom , a founder of the program.
"The people who use it are in serious emergency situations, and they have been nicely served."


First Bancorp (N.C.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Freed British Hostage Tells of 'Sadistic Guards'
A British hostage who was freed by Iraq returned home to England today after asserting that Westerners held at an armaments factory outside Baghdad rioted over mistreatment by what he called "sadistic guards."
The hostage, Jim Thomson, was among 32 sick and elderly Britons who were allowed to leave Iraq on Tuesday.
Their release came after former Prime Minister Edward Heath met with the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, on Sunday and negotiated their freedom with Baghdad officials.


Thomaston Mills Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Oct. 16 about negotiations by the Matsushita Electric Industrial Corporation to acquire a plant from the National Semiconductor Corporation referred incorrectly to Motorola Inc.'s manufacturing of static random access memory chips, or SRAM's.
Motorola is still making the chips, which are used in high-performance computers.


ALASKANS TO VOTE ON MARIJUANA USE
Fifteen years after the State Supreme Court legalized the possession of small amounts of marijuana, Alaska voters are caught up in a bitter fight over whether to make it illegal once again.
An initiative on the November ballot to make possession a crime is backed by anti-drug crusaders and large contributions from the oil industry, which has long fought against drug use.


TLC Beatrice International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Atom Plants and Leukemia: French Study Finds No Link
A study has found no extra leukemia deaths among young people living near nuclear plants in France, in contrast to reports from Britain.
Scientists studied cancer deaths between 1968 and 1987 among people younger than age 25 who lived near six nuclear power or reprocessing plants.
The researchers focused on populations living at distances of less than 3.1 miles, 3.1 to 6.2 miles, 6.2 miles to 8.1 miles, and 8.1 miles to 9.9 miles.
The work is being reported in today's issue of the British journal Nature by researchers at the Gustave Roussy Institute in Villejuif, France.


Accounts
*
TNT Skypak Inc., a division of TNT Ltd., London, an express-mail service company, to Lintas MCM, a direct marketing unit of Lintas USA, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


Language Bill Weighed as Slovak Separatists Rally
Demonstrators shouted for a separate Slovak state today as thousands poured into the streets and squares around Parliament for rallies held by opposing groups.
The meetings were called as the Slovak National Council, the legislature of this constituent republic, prepared to vote on Thursday on a bill to make Slovak the only official language and force the population of 600,000 thnic Hungarians to use only Slovak in dealing with the authorities.


Millipore Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pathe Deal Is Expected
The board of the MGM/UA Communications Company said today that it had accepted the solvency opinion of an outside consultant concerning the Pathe Communications Corporation's $1.3 billion offer to acquire MGM/UA.
The decision paves the way for the deal to be concluded Friday after a long and difficult period in which Pathe faced troubles arranging financing.


Brooklyn Democrats Fight for Top Party Post
The state court decision on Tuesday barring top New York City officials from holding political party offices set the stage yesterday for a battle over the Brooklyn Democratic leadership.
The rivals are a close ally of Mayor David N. Dinkins and a supporter of a Dinkins opponent, former Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin, in last year's Democratic mayoral primary.
The contest developed after the Democratic county leader, Borough President Howard Golden, became the first casualty of the Court of Appeals' decision upholding a new City Charter provision.
Given the choice between the two posts, Mr.
Golden has chosen to remain borough president.
Associates say he is expected to resign his party position by Tuesday.


New Sun Clones
Sun Microsystems Inc. is having some success in its effort to make its computers an industry standard.
The LSI Logic Corporation, a semiconductor company in Milpitas, Calif., said 11 computer makers had agreed to use its chips in clones of Sun Sparcstation computers.
The companies include some small American concerns like Compuadd and large companies from Taiwan and Korea that have made I.B.M. clones.
The computers should be available in the next six months, LSI Logic said.


Solar Cell Plant For the Soviets
The Soviet Union and Energy Conversion Devices Inc. will build a factory in Moscow to make solar photovoltaic cells, the company said yesterday.
Energy Conversion Devices said it had received $8.7 million to build the plant, which will turn out enough solar cells each year to generate two megawatts of electricity.
That is enough power to meet the needs of about 1,000 households in this country.
American production of such cells had a total capacity of about 35 megawatts last year.
The joint venture is considering eventually building a plant that would make 100 to 150 megawatts of cells a year, or about double current world production, said Nancy M. Bacon, vice president of Energy Conversion.
The cells will be "for export and for internal use," she said.
"They have remote areas in Russia where they have plenty of sunshine and don't have the infrastructure to get the electricity to the people."


Tokyo Bank Scandal Grows
A financial scandal widened today as officials from a second leading bank were arrested on charges of illegal financial dealings with a well-known takeover artist who was indicted earlier on share manipulation charges.
A former deputy branch manager of the Mitsui Trust and Banking Company, Tsunetaka Seto, and three others were accused of having failed to pay about 1.8 billion yen, or about $14 million, in taxes owed on $24 million they earned from trading shares using inside information provided by Mitsuhiro Kotani, a well-known takeover specialist.


Cold-Fusion Scientist Missing as Key Review Nears
Dr.
B.
Stanley Pons, the University of Utah chemist who startled the science world with claims of achieving cold fusion, has vanished on the eve of a critical review by the State of Utah on whether to continue financing the disputed work, university officials said yesterday.
Dr.
Pons and his British colleague, Dr.
Martin Fleischmann, announced in March 1989 that they had achieved a nuclear fusion at room temperature in a simple table-top experiment.
The announcement held out the hope of a cheap, safe and virtually inexhaustible source of energy.


Exxon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Complaints Overshadow The Draw
As 91 horses were entered yesterday for Saturday's seven Breeders' Cup races at Belmont Park, controversy continued to surround the field and the start for the afternoon's richest race, the $3 million Classic.
A selection committee of five racing officials decided, as they had indicated they would, to exclude Quiet American from the race in favor of Lively One and Ibn Bey.
Most handicappers gave Quiet American, who will start only if there is a scratch by tomorrow, a strong chance and virtually none to Ibn Bey, an English runner who specializes in longer grass marathons and has never started on the dirt.


Atlantic Southeast Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Landmark Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Prime Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Give Tax Incentives to Hire the Unemployed
To the Editor:
Figures released by the Bureau of Labor Statistics through August 1990 show 1.842 million white-collar workers unemployed, an increase of 364,000 in 12 months.
With an average wait between jobs of 7 months, the prospect for most of an early return to employment is not good.
These figures show a large continuing waste of the country's trained intellectual talent.
Much of this talent has been fine-tuned over the years to meet the needs of a particular corporate situation.
This specialization makes job changing at the same level of skill difficult.
The obvious reason for the slow return to employment is an economy in the doldrums, without clear movement toward growth.
The deeper reasons for prolonged unemployment are important to grasp, if the United States is to set its course toward full employment of both white-collar and blue-collar workers.
To be kept in mind are implications of the familiar truism in economics that corporations are governed by short-run self-interest.
With a slump in sales, streamlined operations from mergers or improved technology, corporations cut their employment to make as much profit as they can.
They are unmoved by the problem of those pushed into prolonged unemployment or by the economic principle that such cuts bleed the purchasing power that generates full employment and prosperity.
Why should corporations share economic opportunity with those out of work unless it is profitable to do so?
Somehow, in the decade of the 1990's, we must develop a strategy for using our full work potential within the framework of self-interest.
What started pulling the economy out of the Great Depression was sharing enough money with the jobless through unemployment compensation and made-work projects for consumer spending to rise, and thatbrought the jobless back to their regular work.
Then World War II generated full employment.
Giveaways or wars are costly ways of getting out of a recession.
The same result can be gained by providing immediate incentives for each corporation to hire those out of work and qualified to work.
Such employer incentives are easily understood and readily enacted as part of tax laws.
(1) The incentive can take the form of giving the employer credit against the tax for unemployment insurance for each unemployed person hired.
(2) Or, as a stronger incentive, let the employer receive a tax-credit amounting to 10 percent or 20 percent of salaries paid to the unemployed people they hire.
This credit can be provided as a deduction allowed from the tax on corporation profits during the first year of fresh employment.
The costs of such incentives are not much more than the costs of prolonged unemployment, not to mention the human price paid by families thus unjustly devastated.
In the tax-offset proposal, instead of money handed out to those who are idle, people are paid for productive work, increasing the security and prosperity of others.
What is paid out in increased payrolls generates increased purchasing power and comes back to producers in a rising spiral of corporate profits and higher incomes for people generally.
With a happy, industrious and creative work force, the United States can meet and excel business competition elsewhere on the globe.
PURNELL BENSON  Madison, N.J., Oct. 10, 1990 The writer is professor emeritus of management at Rutgers Graduate School.


Analysis &amp; Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bankers Face Increasing Skepticism Among Investors
The high dividend that Citicorp was forced to pay today on a preferred stock issue served as a reminder that many investors are skeptical about the strength of large banks despite assurances by bankers and regulators that they are solvent.
Bankers gathered here for a meeting of the American Bankers Association noted that data of the Federal Reserve through mid-October show that Citicorp and other large banking companies like Chase and Chemical have not been hit with enough deposit withdrawals to force them to borrow at the Fed's discount window.


Dow Corning Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Roberta Peters Recital
The soprano Roberta Peters is to sing melodies and arias by Antonio Lotti, Mozart, Schubert, Verdi, Richard Strauss, Tchaikovsky, Rimsky-Korsakov and Rachmaninoff in a recital at Carnegie Hall on Nov. 19 at 8 P.M., to celebrate the 40th anniversary of her professional debut.
Warren Jones will be the pianist.
Tickets, at $45 to $12, are available at the box office or through Carnegie Charge, 247-7800.


Knight-Ridder Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dow Rises 10.15; High-Tech Stocks Strong
Stock prices were mixed yesterday, although a sharp rise in profits at Compaq Computer, a high-tech favorite, gave several technology stocks a lift.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 10.15 points, to 2,504.21, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks rose just 0.24 point, to 312.60.


Blahoslav S. Hruby, Minister, Dies at 78; Led a Rights Group
The Rev.
Blahoslav S. Hruby, a Presbyterian minister who headed a human-rights organization that monitors Eastern European countries, died on Monday at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of congestive heart failure, his wife, Olga, said.


Chicago Opera's Chief Has a Mission
Last October the Lyric Opera of Chicago shocked the American opera world with a bold announcement.
Starting this season -- on Saturday, to be exact -- the company would present a decade-long "celebration" of 20th-century opera, offering 20 major scores from both Europe and the United States, including three commissioned American world premieres.
The program, entitled "Toward the 21st Century," was a shock because for most big American opera companies, dependent on presumably conservative subscribers, innovation beyond tokenism has been very rare.
The Houston Grand Opera has a reputation for boldness, but not on this scale.
For the most part, it has been left to such compact, festival-like operations as Santa Fe and St.
Louis to carry the torch for operatic innovation.


Review/Cabaret; Love Songs of the 40's
Early in her engaging new act of World War II love songs at the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel (49 West 44th Street), Andrea Marcovicci reflects on how distant the romantic atmosphere of the 1940's seems from the present.
"There were no co-dependency meetings," she says.
"People liked being dependent. They called it falling in love."
Although Ms.
Marcovicci, like millions of other people, wasn't even born when the war ended, she learned about it from Hollywood movies on television and absorbed its dreamy romanticism through songs that became popular standards, like "I'll Be Seeing You." If she admits to being wildly nostalgic for a time that seems purer and nobler than today, part of her also realizes that it couldn't have been that wonderful.


Kansas Gas &amp; Electric Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Besicorp Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


New York Youngsters Take to Their Chess Boards


Review/Dance; Choreographer's Growth Reverses His Priorities
At one point in "More Myth of Modern Dance," Douglas Dunn confided, "In New York you can do anything and someone will come to watch it." What audiences were watching when he said that on Sunday afternoon at St.
Mark's Church-in-the-Bowery was a witty commentary on Mr.
Dunn's own choreography.
Presented by Douglas Dunn and Dancers under the auspices of the church's Danspace Project, "More Myth of Modern Dance" was simultaneously a treatise and a romp.
Mr.
Dunn could have been a professor delivering a lecture.
Tracing his choreographic development, he explained how his interests had changed in recent years.
When he started making dances, he said, he was concerned with formal structure and tended to minimize connotation, illusion, allusion and characterization.
But these are among the things that now fascinate him.


Sym-Tek Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Another Spanish Event Occurred in 1492
To the Editor:
As the 500th anniversary of Columbus's voyage approaches, it is time to discuss an issue other than whether Columbus's origin was Italian or Spanish, as you do in your Oct. 9 coverage of New York City's Columbus Day parade.
Few know that on the very day Columbus set sail for the Western Hemisphere in 1492, approximately 200,000 Jews living in Spain (half the Jewish population there) began a forced exodus under an edict of expulsion signed by King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella.
Before this edict, particularly in the 11th and 12th centuries, Jews, Muslims and Christians coexisted peacefully -- a rare occurrence in history that has become known as the Golden Age of Judaism in Spain.
This all changed in 1492.
Under the edict, Jews were forced to convert to Christianity or leave their homeland of more than 1,000 years.
Facing tremendous hardships, these exiles were determined to hold on to their faith and beliefs.
They sought a safe haven where they could continue to live according to Jewish tradition and law.
No parades are held for the expulsion of the Jews from Spain in 1492, nor is the expulsion something a particular group can take pride in; yet it is an event that must not go unnoticed from year to year.
Most people could tell you about Columbus and even discuss the debate over his national origin, but most would not be able to tell you how the largest Jewish population of Europe in its day was uprooted and struggled for existence.
Recently, the International Jewish Committee, Sepharad '92 (of which I am vice president) was formed to commemorate the 500th anniversary of the expulsion of the Jews from Spain to celebrate the rebirth and subsequent growth of the Sephardic heritage and its place in history. ("Sepharad" is the Hebrew word for Spain and "Sephardim" refers to Jews of Spanish origin whose ancestors were expelled from Spain.)
Our mission is to not allow the world to overlook the history of the expulsion as it celebrates Columbus, especially as the 500th anniversary of both events approaches.
Because of the Jewish experience as victims of intolerance and group hatred, we have learned and affirmed the virtues of coexistence, mutual respect and harmony between groups and nations.
We hope by telling the story of the Sephardim we can share our experience with the world.
We should continue to celebrate Columbus and the pride the Italians and Spaniards have in him, but let's not forget the Sephardim who share a date in history with Columbus.
ANDRE SASSOON  New York, Oct. 10, 1990


40 Killed in Muslim-Hindu Clash As Politician's Arrest Is Protested
More than 40 people were killed and more than 150 wounded today in fighting between Hindus and Muslims as Hindu revivalists and a right-wing party led a nationwide strike to protest the arrest of the party's president.
The detention of the right-wing party politician, Lal Kishen Advani, which came in the middle of his national campaign to build a Hindu temple on a site where a Muslim shrine now stands, has thrown parliamentary leadership into doubt and society into turmoil.


Imo Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Commercial Metals reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Citicorp Closing Office
Citicorp Mortgage Inc. plans to close one of its processing offices in a move that will eliminate 180 jobs, the company announced on Tuesday.
The office, 25 miles north of Newark, is one of three centers that process mortgage applications from Citicorp Mortgage's 68 offices nationwide.
The office will be consolidated into Citicorp Mortgage's processing center at its St.
Louis headquarters.
The other center is in Shelton, Conn.
Citicorp officials said it made the move to cut costs.
All of the 180 employees were given the option to relocate to the St.
Louis office, but only 40 chose to do so, officials said.


In Case of War, Congress Wants Right to Meet
Congressional leaders said today that they would reserve the right to reconvene Congress in case the Bush Administration decides to go to war against Iraq after the current Congressional session ends.
Under usual procedures only the President can call lawmakers back to Washington.
But the House Speaker, Representative Thomas S. Foley, and the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell, said that a provision would be included in an adjournment resolution allowing them to reconvene the Congress.


Complaints Overshadow Draw for 91 Horses


In Kuwait, U.S. Embassy Strikes Water
The United States Embassy in Kuwait has been able to overcome a water shortage from an unexpected source -- a shallow well dug by staff members in the back yard.
Iraqi occupation forces shut off the water at all embassies in Kuwait two months ago in an effort to force them to close down.
The United States Embassy is one of three that remain open.


Harley-Davidson Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Scana Corp. reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Cordis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Infotechnology Gets New Top Executives
The board of the troubled Financial News Network and Infotechnology Inc., which owns 47 percent of FNN, announced a new management team for the companies yesterday in the face of severe cash-flow difficulties.
The companies appointed Alan J. Hirschfield, and Allan R. Tessler as interim co-chief executives, replacing Earl W. Brian, who had been chief executive of both companies.
Mr.
Brian will continue as non-executive chairman and director of both companies.


Farm Banks Issues Total $2.15 Billion
The Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation yesterday priced at par a total of $2.15 billion in three-month, six-month and one-year consolidated systemwide bonds through various securities dealers.
A $980 million issue due Feb. 1, 1991, was given a coupon of 7.75 percent and $690 million due May 1, 1991, was given a coupon of 7.65 percent.
The remaining $485 million, due Nov. 1, 1991, was given a coupon of 7.70 percent.
Underwriters not with the regular selling group said the spreads over Treasury securities with similar maturities were 31.5 basis points on the three-month issue, 11 basis points on the six-month and 18 basis points on the one-year security.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Student Charged in Stabbing
The police have charged a straight-A student with attempted homicide after he allegedly stabbed his high school physics teacher with a kitchen knife in an argument over a test grade.
The teacher, David Pologruto, of Taravella High School, was listed stable at Coral Springs Medical Center, a nursing supervisor said.
The name of the 16-year-old student was not made public.


Buffett Acquires 9.8% Of Wells Fargo Shares
Warren E. Buffett, the Omaha billionare, and several companies that he controls have acquired 5.03 million shares of Wells Fargo &amp; Company, or 9.8 percent of the San Francisco bank holding company.
Mr.
Buffett disclosed his holding in a filing today with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The purchases were made for investment purposes.
Analysts said the purchase of Wells Fargo stock by Mr.
Buffett was a sign of his confidence in the company even though its stock has lost almost half its value this year as bank stocks generally have lost favor.
Mr.
Buffett, whose successes have been widely publicized, is viewed as a champion of buying fundamentally sound stocks and holding them long-term.
Robert B. Albertson, a banking analyst for Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, said Mr.
Buffett was "willing to buy where he has strong confidence in the management and the prospects of a company, even if the market is an extreme state of fear."
He added that Wells Fargo was among the banks hit hardest by the market selloff, but he said it was also one of "the most solid."
A spokeswoman for Wells Fargo said the bank was "absolutely delighted" with the move.
"The market sees Mr. Buffett as an astute investor." said Mary Essary, the Wells Fargo spokeswoman.
"We're quite happy about it."
Among the investments that are cited as examples of Mr.
Buffett's shrewdness are purchases of shares inGeico, Capital Cities/ABC and the Washington Post Company.
Mr.
Buffett was not required to disclose when he acquired the Wells Fargo shares or their purchase price.
Wells Fargo's stock rose $1.375 a share today, to $50.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Mr.
Buffett is not the only big investor to put money recently in bank stocks.
Earlier this year, Laurence A. Tisch, the chief executive of CBS, and members of his family acquired shares of three bank holding companies whose stock had fallen: Continental Bank, Bay Banks and Equimark.


Freeport-McMoran Copper reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Ashland Coal Inc., Huntington, W. Va., has privately placed $100 million in senior notes with a group of private lenders consisting mostly of insurance companies. *
GTE Northwest Inc., Everett, Wash., a unit of GTE Corp., is offering $75 million in 9 3/4 percent first-mortgage bonds due 2030 at 97.545 to yield 10 percent through Prudential-Bache Capital Funding.
Noncallable for five years, the issue is rated Aa-3 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp;P. *
Utilicorp United Inc., Kansas City, Mo., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a $250 million medium-term note program.
Common Stock  *
New York State Electric and Gas Corp., Binghamton, N.Y., is offering 3.5 million common shares at a price of $24.25 a share through Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.  *
Republic Waste Industries, Houston, has filed for 3.5 million common shares through Paine Webber Inc.
Ratings  *
Continental Airlines Holdings Co.'s senior debt rating has been lowered to CCC+, from B-, by S.&amp;P.
The holding company is based in Houston. *
FPL Group Capital Inc.'s senior unsecured debt rating has been reduced to BBB, from A-, by S.&amp;P.
The company is based in North Palm Beach, Fla.


INSIDE
Compromise on Arts Grants  The Senate passes a bill to extend the National Endowment for the Arts that would leave judgments on obscenity to the courts.
Page C19.
Ohio Congressman Resigns  Donald E. Lukens, a Republican confronted with a second sexual misconduct charge, quit rather than face an ethics panel inquiry.
Page A21.
Alaska to Vote on Marijuana  Fifteen years after Alaska legalized possession of small amounts of marijuana, voters are caught up in a fight on making it illegal.
Page A16.
An Uncommon Alliance  The strong bond between the New York City Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, and the teachers union has benefits, but also perils.
Page B1.


5 Americans Return
An American former hostage who arrived at John F. Kennedy International Airport last night described confinement in Iraq as a day-to-day struggle for survival, scrounging for food, and fighting depressing scenarios the imagination constructed.
"I think in a situation like that perhaps your mind is your worst enemy and you tend to create scenarios, some of which could or could not happen, and, yes, one of those scenarios is that we would not get out," said John Thompson, a 44-year-old construction engineer who had survived a number of days spent in diplomatic safehouses in Baghdad.


Radiothon to Benefit Harlem School of Arts
The sopranos Martina Arroyo and Harolyn Blackwell, the cabaret performer Bobby Short and the composer Luther Henderson are among the artists who are to take part in a live radio broadcast to benefit the Harlem School of the Arts, on Nov. 3 from 2 to 6 P.M. on WQXR AM (1560) and FM (96.3).
Audience pledges will be used for a scholarship program at the school (645 St. Nicholas Avenue, at 141st Street), which offers more than 100 courses in music, dance, drama, art and photography to 1,300 students.


PRETORIA OFFERS MODEL FOR FUTURE
The South African Government today unveiled some of its proposed mechanisms for a new constitution that would extend political rights to the disenfranchised black majority.
A report prepared by a committee of the President's Council, which advises Mr. de Klerk on policy matters, proposed a two-chamber Parliament and a constitutional bill of rights as a starting point for the negotiations that the President has proposed with black leaders.


Westamerica Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cyprus Minerals Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tariff-Cut Plan Is Reported
The United States offered drastic across-the-board tariff cuts today at the global trade liberalization talks and called on other negotiators to reciprocate, a person at the meeting said.
This source said that the chief United States delegate, Warren Lavorel, told a committee meeting that the offer, if fully carried out, would represent a reduction of 43 percent in the average trade-weighted tariff.


Gorbachev on Hand as Trade Union Votes to Dissolve Itself


Raytheon's President Is Elected Chairman
The Raytheon Company, a maker of air-defense missiles and other military electronics products, yesterday elected its president, Dennis J. Picard, to be chairman and chief executive effective March 1.
He succeeds Thomas L. Phillips, who will retire in March after leading the company for 22 years.
Mr.
Picard, 58 years old, signed on with Raytheon in 1955, and, like Mr.
Phillips, has spent his entire career with the company.
Mr.
Phillips, 66, joined the company in 1948.
Mr.
Picard is being succeeded as president by Max E. Bleck, 63, who is president of the Beech Aircraft Corporation, Raytheon's biggest subsidiary.


Stokely USA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rowland Says Weicker Violated Rules on Ethics and Stock Trades
Representative John G. Rowland, the Republican candidate for governor, today accused former Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of violating Congressional conflict-of-interest and ethics rules and suggested that he may have also engaged in insider trading of stocks and bonds.
Mr.
Weicker, who has held wide leads in all public opinion polls over Mr.
Rowland and the Democrat, Representative Bruce A. Morrison, angrily dismissed the accusations, saying they were an effort to scuttle his campaign.


Home Improvement
MANY older sinks and tubs have compression faucets, the kind with a rubber washer at the base of the stem.
Compression faucets are not as common as they used to be, perhaps because they are the ones most likely to leak.
A leak should be fixed as soon as possible.
Besides the annoying drip, it can stain porcelain and waste surprisingly large amounts of water.
Fortunately, with the right tools, this is a relatively easy job.


Ford's Credit Rating Drops a Notch
Moody's Investors Service yesterday lowered by a notch the long-term rating on about $45 billion in securities issued by the Ford Motor Company, the Ford Motor Credit Company and subsidiaries.
The change leaves the car maker's rating at a high investment grade, but still serves as a signal that Moody's is concerned about the weakness in auto operations, the company's large capital requirements and the sizable acquisition debt that Ford accumulated during the year.


Cooper Championed Native Americans Against White Injustice; May's Nationalism
To the Editor:
I disagree with my esteemed colleague, Prof.
Robert E. Norton, who cites Karl May as an early protagonist of a positive image of American natives (letter, Oct. 7).
Karl May (1842-1912) was formed by German Romantic nationalism before unification, when the nation's innate virtues had to be confirmed by tales of good deeds performed by Germans elsewhere in the world, like the North American Wild West, the pampas of Argentina or in the sands of Arabia.
Old Shatterhand and Kara ben Nemsi were representatives of the Germans as the "Menschheitsnation" (the humane nation) par excellence.
Karl May idealized the Apache Indians to show the coarseness of the Anglo-Saxon frontiersmen, and in Winnetou's death scene, the Apache chieftain confesses to his long-time secret conversion to Christianity (and Germandom?).
HSI-HUEY LIANG  Poughkeepsie, N.Y., Oct. 10, 1990
The writer is a professor of history at Vassar College.


Miscellany
*
The Home Furnishings Council has signed Kathie Lee Gifford as a spokeswoman for its multimillion-dollar national advertising campaign, which is handled by Baron &amp; Zaretsky, New York. *
Rowland Worldwide Inc., the public relations unit of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C., London, is opening offices in Salzburg and Vienna.
Harald Ronacher has been named managing director of the Salzburg operation, and Dr.
Christoph Bruckner will head the Vienna office.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a picture caption yesterday about four women in Congress who denounced President Bush's veto of the civil rights bill misidentified Patsy Mink.
She is a current Representative, not a former one.


Drug-Exposed Children Can Need Group Home
To the Editor:
"A New Role for Mother Hale" (editorial, Sept. 30) discusses the conflict between Clara Hale and New York City's Human Resources Administration over placing children of drug-abusing mothers in congregate-care facilities.
When biological and foster parents have the necessary training and support to rear drug-exposed babies, children should be placed in family settings.
But for a medically frail child or one with severe behavioral disorders from drug exposure, even such intensive training may not be enough, and the best setting may be a carefully monitored group home, equipped for skilled professional, medical and therapeutic interventions, as well as loving care.
PHYLLIS SUSSER  Executive Director Herbert G. Birch Services Springfield Gardens, Queens, Oct. 8, 1990


Sterling Chemicals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Congress Votes Bill On Labeling of Food And Health Claims
Congress approved a sweeping bill today to curtail disease-prevention claims on food packages and require more nutrition information for virtually all foods in the grocery store.
The bill, the first comprehensive new legislation on food labels in two decades, is expected to end a three-year period of confusion about what claims food manufacturers could make for their products.


CHRONICLE
PRESIDENT BUSH awarded ANDREW WYETH the Congressional Gold Medal yesterday, the first time the honor has been given to an artist.
"You know, when I'm out in the field painting, I have wild ideas that don't often come out in paintings," Mr.
Wyeth said at a White House ceremony, "but today is the wildest thing that has ever happened to me."
The solid gold medal has a profile of the artist from a portrait by his son Jamie.
In 1963 Mr.
Wyeth became the first artist to receive the Presidential Freedom Award, the country's highest civilian honor.  (Reuters)


The Tax Plan: A Big Increase on the Highest Incomes, a Break for the Lowest
The compromise deficit-reduction plan that appeared tonight to be emerging from Congress would impose only modest tax increases on a broad range of taxpayers, from the lower middle class to many of the well-to-do.
But it is also a plan that would significantly increase taxes on the very wealthy while providing a tax reduction for those of lowest income.
As such, it is a far cry from the failed agreement reached almost a month ago at the end of the budget summit between White House and Congressional negotiators.


John J. Tullman, Lawyer, 86
John J. Tullman, a lawyer who was an expert in medical malpractice litigation, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 86 years old.
A 1924 graduate of New York University Law School, Mr.
Tullman was an early leader in seeking compensation for victims of negligence by doctors.
Colleagues said that he was the first New York lawyer to persuade a doctor to testify against another.
He was a founder of the trial section of the New York State Bar Association and a president of the Metropolitan Trial Lawyers Association.
He is survived by his wife, the former Natalie Kreisberg; two daughters, Claire Kraiman of Redding, Pa., and Paula Ulrich of Alberta; a son, Michael Kreisberg of Missoula, Mont., and four grandchildren.


Southland In Chapter 11
The Southland Corporation, owner of the 7-Eleven convenience-store chain, filed today for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code, clearing the way for a takeover by the Ito-Yokado Company, a Japanese grocery chain, for $430 million in cash.
The filing came after seven fruitless months of trying to lighten Southland's massive debt load, taken on in the $4.9 billion leveraged buyout by its founding Thompson family in 1987.


Norman W. Zaubler, Developer, 86
Norman W. Zaubler, a real-estate developer, died on Sunday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Miami Beach.
He was 86 years old and lived in Miami Beach.
Mr.
Zaubler died of congestive heart failure, his daughter, Jolie Kelter of Manhattan, said.
Mr.
Zaubler, who built apartment houses throughout the Northeast for many years, retired in 1980.
He was born in Brooklyn and graduated from City College and Fordham Law School.
In addition to his daughter, he is survived by his wife, the former Hope Reineke; a son, Leland, of the Riverdale section of the Bronx; two sisters, Ruth Rothman and Bea Altman, both of Miami Beach, and five grandchildren.


Manischewitz Is Sued on Bid
A shareholder of the B. Manischewitz Company, the kosher food company that has received a buyout bid, said yesterday that he had filed a class action lawsuit and was seeking a court injunction to stop the tender offer.
Kohlberg &amp; Company, a merchant banking firm, is offering $800 a share, or $42.5 million, for Manischewitz, based in Jersey City, N.J.
Manischewitz's current management would own part of the new company, which would then own Manischewitz, whose shares are traded on the Cincinnati Stock Exchange.
Last year, another company, Levine, Tessler, Leichtman &amp; Company made an aborted bid of $841 a share.
Leonard B. Tessler, a former principal of that firm, is involved in the Kohlberg bid.
The shareholder, Alan R. Kahn, said in the suit filed in the Court of Common Pleas of Cuyahoga County, Ohio, that he owned 25 of the more than 53,000 Manischewitz shares outstanding.
Mr.
Kahn contends that the Kohlberg price is too low and that Manischewitz's management failed to solicit higher bids.


Reviews/Music; Tureck's 'Goldberg' Variations
Rosalyn Tureck, who has long played the keyboard works of Bach on the harpsichord as well as on the piano, chose the latter for a performance of the "Goldberg" Variations on Sunday afternoon in the great space of Temple Emanu-El.
And appropriately, her approach was unabashedly pianistic much of the time, with dynamics ranging from a barely audible dying away at the end of the Aria to a hearty Rachmaninoffian crescendo at the end of the epic 25th Variation.
But at other times Miss Tureck seemed to adopt willingly the limitations of harpsichord style, determinedly differentiating the dynamic levels of the two hands for long stretches, even when, as in the 11th Variation, this disrupted smooth exchanges of material between hands.
This separation may have stemmed from an analogy to separate keyboards on the harpsichord, as may also the heavy reliance on echo effects in the canonic variations.
But however much these contrasty echoes -- and reverse echoes, with the second voice falling weightily atop an understated first -- may clarify individual entries, they tend to unbalance the continuous contrapuntal flow.


'Sound and Fury'
Lawyers for the court stenographic firm sued by George Steinbrenner charged in papers filed in Federal court yesterday that the lawsuit was intended to embarrass Commissioner Fay Vincent.
They asked that the suit be dismissed on the grounds, Arthur Christy, the lead lawyer, said, that "it's a lot of sound and fury and nothing else."
"It is abundantly clear," Christy wrote in the firm's response, "that this frivolous lawsuit was commenced not to redress actual harm but it was a vehicle for Steinbrenner to lash out at the commissioner of baseball and challenge the proceedings that resulted in his dismissal from baseball."
Steinbrenner, who under his agreement with the commissioner cannot sue Vincent, filed a lawsuit earlier this month against Esquire Reporting Company.
In yesterday's response, the firm's lawyers said that the only damages Steinbrenner allege are the costs incurred in conducting an investigation to determine the changes in the transcripts plus punitive damages.


Home &amp; City Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


19 New Names Bring Free-Agency List to 50
Willie McGee, Mike Boddicker and Bud Black were among 19 players who filed for free agency yesterday, and they are also among 21 players eligible for free agency who have been classified as Type A in the annual ranking statistics.
Fifty players have declared themselves free agents in the first four days of the 15-day filing period.
Pat Tabler of the Mets, Gary Carter of San Francisco and Danny Jackson of the World Series champion Cincinnati Reds also filed yesterday.


Blahoslav S. Hruby, Minister, Dies at 78; Led a Rights Group
The Rev.
Blahoslav S. Hruby, a Presbyterian minister who headed a human-rights organization that monitors Eastern European countries, died on Monday at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of congestive heart failure, his wife, Olga, said.


USBancorp (Pa.) Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cooper Championed Native Americans Against White Injustice
To the Editor:
To paraphrase Mark Twain, it seems to me that it was far from right for Robert E. Norton, assistant professor of German at Vassar, to deliver an opinion on James Fenimore Cooper's literature without having read some of it ("Cooper's Noble Indians Were Savages," letter, Oct. 7).
To regard Twain's essay as the final word on Cooper shows lack of critical understanding.
Certainly, D. H. Lawrence in "Studies in Classic American Literature" comes closer to the essence of Cooper's vision than Twain, with his Injun Joe and his prejudices against native Americans, ever could.
Unlike Twain, Cooper accords even his Indian "villains" a sympathy and understanding still rare today.
The cruelty of Magua in "The Last of The Mohicans" springs directly from his brutal treatment at the hands of the white general Munro.
In Magua's mouth are found some of Cooper's strongest protests against white injustice.
Twain's criticism notwithstanding, the speeches of Magua, Tamenund, Uncas and Chingachgook manage to possess some of the dignity and power of traditional native American oratory (compare "The Portable North American Reader").
As to the Indians being "clearly inferior to the white settlers in intellectual and moral qualities," just what Cooper novel has Professor Norton been reading?
Certainly not "The Last of the Mohicans." There Hawk-eye is noble precisely because he transcends the limits of the other white characters.
Cooper's heroine Cora is shown to be part black.
The "pure" white characters -- Alice, Duncan and David Gamut -- are treated comically throughout, and passage after passage suggests the clear superiority of Uncas and Chingachgook to all the other characters.
Despite Cooper's occasional infelicities of language, he remains worth reading because white America has yet to achieve his vision of a country in which all races are accorded mutual dignity and respect.
KEVIN BARR  Washington, Oct. 8, 1990
The writer teaches English at the Georgetown Day School.


6th Game Adjourned as Edge Seems to Belong to Kasparov
Gary Kasparov and Anatoly Karpov broke off play in Game 6 of the World Championship Chess Match last night in a position where the champion had attacking chances and the challenger, despite a pawn advantage, was confined to passive defense.
Pending the outcome of the game at 5:30 P.M. today in the overtime session, when Kasparov's sealed move will be taken out of the referee's official envelope and play will resume, the score stands at Kasparov 3, Karpov 2.


Hydraulic Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; A Folk Gem With Classical Facets
The Georgian State Dance Company from the Soviet Union has appeared so many times in the United States since the 1960's that one might wonder what this dazzling company could possibly add to the saber-rattling, dagger-throwing, male toe-dancing and serene gliding dances of past visits.
The answer lies at the City Center (131 West 55th Street), where the troupe's opening of a two-week season on Tuesday night might be described in two words: downright terrific.


Reviews/Music; A Father And His Son Share a Style
Raphael and Peter Wallfisch, who are son and father, gave a robust afternoon of cello and piano music at the Frick Collection on Sunday.
They live in London.
This was their New York debut.
Speculating on genetic influences is a tricky business.
Perhaps it is better to say that shared households foster shared values and habits.
This, at any rate, is a very congenial association.
The approach to style and expression is generous and on a large scale, qualities mirrored in Sunday's choice of music.
Both players share also a deep respect for the grammar and rhetoric of their art.


Kinetic Concepts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Opera; Puccini's Passionate Westerners
Martha Thigpen seems on her way to becoming one of the New York City Opera's most appealing Puccini sopranos.
This season, she gave a powerful, sensibly motivated performance in the title role of "Tosca." And on Tuesday evening, she joined the cast of "La Fanciulla del West" and offered a touching portrayal of that work's heroine, Minnie.
Minnie is an odd combination of parts: with the exception of Wowkle, the Indian squaw who serves as her maid, and Nina, a prostitute who is mentioned but not seen, Minnie seems to be the only woman in Puccini's frontier gold-mining camp.
She owns the saloon, but she is also the camp Bible teacher and as of the opera's opening, she has never been kissed.
When she finally abandons herself to passion, it is with the bandit Ramirez, who comes to the camp calling himself Dick Johnson.


Sysco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


VW Head to Stay On
Volkswagen A.G. said today that its chairman, Carl H. Hahn, would remain in his post until the end of 1993.
Mr.
Hahn had been expected to retire at the end of 1991.
He will be 65 years old next year.


Anheuser-Busch Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Norfolk Southern Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Soviets Seek Saudi Aid
A Soviet Government official has urged Saudi Arabia to invest in his country's economy.
The Saudi Press Agency quoted the Soviet Foreign Economic Relations Minister, Konstantin Katushev, as saying in Riyadh: "We are in the course of drawing up new Soviet legislation to encourage foreign investments from all parts of the world. Accordingly, I call on Saudi businessmen and commercial circles in the kingdom to invest their big financial resources in the profitable Soviet economy."


Poughkeepsie Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pitney Bowes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Smith International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Congress From Connecticut
There is hot competition for the seats of Connecticut's two U.S.
Representatives who are running for governor: Bruce Morrison of New Haven, the Democrat, and John Rowland of Waterbury, the Republican.
In the other four districts, capable incumbents face weak, underfinanced challengers.
We support all four incumbents -- the Democrats Barbara Kennelly (First District) and Sam Gejdensen (Second), and the Republicans Chris Shays (Fourth) and Nancy Johnson (Sixth) -- and offer these choices for the open seats:
Third District
(New Haven area): This traditionally Democratic district has been well served by Mr.
Morrison.
The Democrat who seeks the seat, Rosa DeLauro, knows Congress well, having been Senator Christopher Dodd's staff director for seven years.
She also ran a political action committee for pro-choice Democratic women.
An enthusiastic liberal, she exudes concern for the disadvantaged.
Her Republican opponent, Tom Scott, a conservative State Senator, is a clear contrast: he resists gun control and defense spending cuts, opposes abortion and supports the death penalty.
He would also make English the "official" U.S. language and ban flag burning.
We endorse Ms.
DeLauro.


Peter Salm, 71, Dies; Literature Professor
Peter Salm, professor emeritus of literature and German at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, died Sunday at University Hospitals in Clevland.
He was 71 years old and lived in Cleveland Heights.
He died after a heart attack, the university said.
Dr.
Salm was a specialist in the works of Goethe and other European literary figures.
His translation of Goethe's "Faust" was first published in 1962 by Bantam and was revised by Dr.
Salm in 1985.
He was born in Hameln, Germany, and fled to Rome with his family in 1933 when Hitler came to power.
In 1938 he came to the United States.
He was a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of the University of California at Los Angeles and received his doctorate in comparative literature from Yale University.
After holding teaching fellowships at U.C.L.A. and at Yale, he joined the faculty of Wesleyan University in Middletown, Conn., 1958.
He went to Case Western Reserve in 1963 as an associate professor of German and became chairman of the German department and later chairman of the division of modern languages and literature.
He retired in 1986.
Professor Salm is survived by his wife, the former June Macy, and a son, Tony, who lives in Guatemala.


Hamptons Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Copper Prices Fall Sharply As Precious Metals Rally
Copper futures prices fell sharply yesterday, ending a four-day run-up, and precious metals rallied as a bounce in oil prices rekindled worries about the economy.
Copper futures settled 1.4 cents to 3.5 cents lower on New York's Commodity Exchange, with the contract for spot delivery at $1.29 a pound, down 3.2 cents.
The selloff erased more than half of Tuesday's gains, which had been fueled by fears of a tight supply and perceptions that a drop in crude oil prices meant the United States economy might not be heading into a severe recession.
Responds to Signals
The copper market tends to respond to economic signals because copper is used widely in construction and manufacturing.
But oil prices leaped yesterday on several factors, including a reaffirmation by United States and Saudi Arabian leaders of their position that Iraq must withdraw from Kuwait unconditionally.
Tim Evans, a copper trader with Deak International Inc., said copper's decline also reflected profit taking after a gain of about 9 cents a pound in four days.
Anne Orton, Deak vice president, said Far East demand for precious metals had increased as the dollar declined in value against other major currencies in the last few weeks.
Spot Gold at $373.50
Gold futures settled $2.10 to $2.30 higher on the Commodity Exchange, with the spot price at $373.50 a troy ounce, up from $371.20 on Tuesday; silver was 0.2 cent to 0.4 cent higher, with October at $4.223 a troy ounce.
Orange juice futures rose sharply in their fourth straight daily advance on the New York Cotton Exchange as the market continued to rebound from a collapse precipitated by an Oct. 11 prediction for a bumper Florida orange crop.
Orange juice rallied despite a prediction from the Florida Department of Citrus that retail prices for orange juice would drop nearly 12 percent in the coming year because of high Florida production and record world supplies.
Frozen concentrated orange juice futures ended 3.25 cents to 4.10 cents higher, with November at $1.19 a pound.
Rumors Lift Grain Price
Export sales rumors lifted corn and wheat futures on the Chicago Board of Trade but soybean futures fell slightly.
Reports that the Soviet Union has chartered freight vessels were regarded as an indication that Moscow will soon be shopping for grain, said Joel Karlin, an analyst with Research Department Inc. in Chicago.
Wheat futures settled unchanged to 1 3/4 cents higher, with December at $2.64 3/4 a bushel.
Corn was 1 1/4 cents to 2 1/2 cents higher with December at $2.33 a bushel.
Oats were 1/4 cent lower to 1/4 cent higher, with December at $1.24 1/4 a bushel.
Soybeans were unchanged to 3 3/4 cents lower, with November at $6.10 3/4 a bushel.
Cattle futures rose on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, helped by strong cash fundamentals including reports that steers fetched prices as high as $80.50 a hundredweight in western Kansas.


Exxon Net Unchanged; Unocal Up
The Exxon Corporation said today that its net income in the third quarter was unchanged from the period a year ago.
Higher oil prices depressed profits in refining, marketing and chemical operations and increased profits in worldwide crude production.
The Unocal Corporation said earnings in the quarter increased by 53.2 percent, with its production unit benefiting from higher oil prices and its refining, marketing and chemical operations recording modest declines.


Durable Goods Orders Fell by 1.7% Last Month
Orders to factories for "big ticket" durable goods fell 1.7 percent in September from August, the Government said today.
Analysts said the report foretold a further slump in production and employment in the industrial sector, which has lost 500,000 jobs since January 1989.
"It was another report indicating the economy is slowing down," said Elliott Platt, director of economic research at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, New York.
He added that it probably showed "that we're in a recession -- but probably indicating the recession will be mild."


The Bleak Numbers at Continental
Even as Continental Airlines appears at last to be overcoming a reputation for bad service, financial problems are catching up with it.
The airline, the nation's fifth largest, built up a large debt in the mid-1980's as its parent company acquired troubled carriers, including People Express, Frontier Airlines and Eastern Airlines.
But business was good enough for Continental to carry the burden of high acquisition costs, huge expenses to integrate the carriers, the defection of many travelers exasperated by lost bags and canceled flights, and employees still bitter about the mergers.


Buster's Strength Of Will
In the days before Mike Tyson was to defend the world heavyweight title against James (Buster) Douglas in Tokyo, not many boxing people gave the challenger a chance.
Tyson was thought to be invincible.
Douglas was thought to be incapable.
He had an undistinguished 29-4-1 record with 20 undistinguished knockouts.
He also had a reputation for undistinguished desire and undistinguished training habits.
Tyson would surely dispose of Douglas, then Tyson would defend the title against Evander Holyfield.


Delphi Information Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Burlington Stake
The 26,000 employees and managers of Burlington Industries have acquired a majority ownership and voting control of the textile giant.
The company established an employee stock ownership plan last year.
The latest transaction, which was announced on Tuesday, gives employees and management all of the voting stock and 51 percent of the company's common equity.





Let's Stop Spending To Fight Cold War
To the Editor:
Thank you for "The Budget Crisis: Nothing Is Worse" (editorial, Oct. 6), pointing out the "appallingly small cuts in defense, as though no one had noticed that the cold war was over." I was amazed to realize that 47 percent of the Pentagon budget goes to keeping our North Atlantic Treaty Organization troops and equipment in Europe.
An anachronism of our time.
Furthermore, it is shocking that the $289 billion that was recommended for the military by the budget summit does not include the $15 billion estimated for annual expenditure to keep us in the Persian Gulf.
That is a separate account.
When it comes to Pentagon budget appropriations, the changes in Europe are treated like something that everyone sees but that hardly anyone talks about.
Once again, it will be up to the electorate to turn up the heat under our elected representatives to respond to the needs of our society.
We need the money that is being squandered on the military in order to address our social problems, develop alternative energy sources and place us on a competitive footing in the world of consumer, rather than military, goods.
ARLENE VICTOR  Birmingham, Mich.
Oct. 5, 1990


People
*
Lisa Durels, Paul Kraus and Stuart Pearlman have been named vice presidents of J. Walter Thompson, New York, and Alan M. Gross was named senior vice president in Chicago. *
Marty Everds has joined Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, New York, as senior vice president and associate creative director. *
Frank Todaro has been appointed executive vice president and creative director at Buckley/DeCerchio, New York. *
Amanda Dwyer has joined McCann-Erickson, Seattle, as assistant to the general manager. *
John T. Mapel has been named an account supervisor at DDB Needham, Chicago.


Five Journalists to Receive Cabot Awards at Columbia
Five journalists specializing in Latin American or Caribbean affairs are to be presented with Maria Moors Cabot prizes tonight by Columbia University.
The awards, gold medals and honorariums of $1,000, have been given annually since 1939 to journalists living in the Western Hemisphere to honor their contributions to inter-American understanding and the freedom of information.
This year's recipients are Richard Boudreau, bureau chief in Managua, Nicaragua, of The Los Angeles Times; Marc Garcia and Elsie Etheart, editors and publishers of the weekly newspaper Haiti en Marche in Miami, and hosts of radio programs there; Alma Guillermoprieto of Mexico City, who writes for The New Yorker, and Huascar Cajias Kauffmann, founder of the daily newspaper Presencia in La Paz, Bolivia.
The Cabot prizes are awarded by the trustees of Columbia University on the recommendation of the dean of its Graduate School of Journalism.


Centercore Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MCA Stock Trading Is Halted Twice
The New York Stock Exchange halted trading in MCA Inc. twice yesterday as reports circulated, and then were denied, that MCA's buyout talks with the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company of Japan had run into problems.
Its last price was $50, down $8.875 from Tuesday.
The stock of the entertainment company opened at $58.875 on the Big Board, but fell to $54 in early afternoon when a report from the Nikkei News Service in Tokyo said Matsushita wanted a "cooling off" period in its talks with MCA.
The report said that among other problems, Matsushita hoped the stock price would decline so it could buy MCA at a cheaper price.
It had climbed above $63 since the deal was reported in late September.
Matsushita's Statement
But Matsushita issued a strong statement late yesterday saying that "discussions with MCA are proceeding in an orderly fashion, and there are no new developments to announce, and any reports to the contrary are erroneous."
Nevertheless, the exchange halted trading first, as MCA's stock plunged on the reports, and later in the day, when Matsushita denied the reports.
MCA's share price was then at $50, and the exchange did not reopen trading yesterday.
MCA placed 10th on the Big Board's list of most active stocks, with a volume of 1.6 million shares.
Still, the news itself was as odd as was the market's reaction to it.
It appeared about 1 P.M. from the Nikkei News Service, which is taken from the first edition of Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Japan's leading financial newspaper, which cited Matsushita officials as the source.
The exchange stopped trading shortly after the report caused the stock price to tumble.
At one point, it was as low as $48.
Trading was halted again about 3:45 P.M., when Matsushita issued the denial.
Market Watchers React
One media analyst who follows MCA said he found yesterday's activity hard to believe, because both companies had said that no further comments would be made, and because the news of problems in the talks was attributed to Matsushita officials.
A stock trader also noted that prices of put options on MCA's stock did not rise as far as would normally have been expected, given the drop in the stock price.
He said that might indicate that some investors did not believe the deal was dead.
A put option gives a buyer the right, but not the obligation, to sell a stock at a specified price until a certain date.
The buyer is betting the stock price will fall further.


Youth Guilty of Setting Fire To Boy in a Brooklyn Cellar
A 14-year-old was convicted yesterday of setting fire to a Brooklyn boy, David Opont, in an assault that drew wide attention and an outpouring of sympathy because of its viciousness.
The small courtroom in Family Court in Brooklyn was crowded with reporters as Judge Joseph A. Esquirol Jr. read his verdict in the nonjury trial.
He found that the juvenile defendant had committed several felony acts, including attempted murder, kidnapping and assault.
The defendant's name has not been publicly disclosed because of his age.


Landmarks of the Common Folk
"ANONYMOUS was a woman," feminists complain.
"Anonymous was an immigrant," descendants say.


Regan Countering Attacks By Challenger With Vigor
Unlike New York's other statewide elected officials, Edward V. Regan seems to be living with fear as Election Day nears.
"Absolutely, I'm worried," said Mr.
Regan, a trim, compact man who has served as the state's comptroller, its chief fiscal officer, for 12 years.


Chemical Bank Debt Ratings
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation today downgraded the ratings on $5 billion worth of debt of the Chemical Banking Corporation and several subsidiaries.
The downgrading for the nation's sixth-largest banking company followed a similar rating reduction last month by S.&amp;P. for Chase Manhattan.
S.&amp;P. said the move reflected an "expectation of further moderate deterioration in loan quality." But the rating agency also said, 'The company has the liquidity and financial flexibility to deal with the expected loan problems."
A Chemical spokesman, Charles Salmans, said the company was disappointed by the action.
S.&amp;P. lowered by one notch the senior debt rating of the parent company and its Texas Commerce Bancshares and Chemical New York units.
It also lowered by one degree its rating on certificates of deposit issued by Chemical Bank, Chemical Bank-Delaware, Texas Commerce Bank in Houston and Chemical Bank- New York, as well as letter-of- credit issues supported by Chemical Bank.
A lower credit rating can increase a company's borrowing costs.


Corrections
An article on the Media Businesspage yesterday about the third-quarter earnings of Capital Cities/ABC Inc. misstated the company's prediction for fourth-quarter earnings.
The company expects an earnings decline, not a loss.


Meritor Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Times Mirror Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; Bach to Bernstein by London Brass
In the appearance by the excellent London Brass on Sunday evening at the Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, as with so many brass concerts, the point at which the actual program left off and the encores began seemed a bit arbitrary.
Brass ensembles of all sorts, lacking a large and varied original repertory for their specific conformations, have to rely heavily on transcriptions, familiar ditties in unfamiliar and often surprising guise.
Accordingly, the fare here ranged from Brahms's Intermezzo in B minor (Op. 118, No. 2) and the Scherzo from Mendelssohn's "Midsummer Night's Dream" on the program, to the "Badinerie" from Bach's Orchestral Suite No. 2 and "Joshua Fit the Battle of Jericho," as encores.


Greyhound Dial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Community Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nova Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


International Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Affiliated Computer Systems Commercial Services Inc., Dallas, appointed John Cudworth and L. Thomas Olsen to newly created positions as senior vice presidents. *
Chemical Waste Management Inc., Oak Brook, Ill., named Thomas E. Noel president and chief operating officer of its Chem-Nuclear Systems subsidiary.
Dr.
Rodger Henson will succeed him as vice president of the southern region. *
Cimflex Teknowledge Corp., Pittsburgh, a producer of industrial robots, appointed Daniel R. Robusto chief executive officer. *
Donnelly Corp., Holland, Mich., a manufacturer of glass products, named Paul G. Kalkman president and chief operating officer.
He takes over the two positions from Dwane Baumgardner, who will continue as chairman and chief executive. *
Insituform of North America Inc., Memphis, a pipeline reconstruction company, named William C. Willis Jr. chief executive, replacing James D. Krugman, who was acting chief executive and will remain chairman. *
National Westminster Bank U.S.A., New York, a unit of National Westminster Bank P.L.C., London, appointed Morris Danon executive vice president, heading its newly formed Metropolitan Markets group. *
Restaurant Associates Corp., New York, a restaurant and food-service subsidiary of Kyotaru Corp., Tokyo, promoted Nick Valenti to executive vice president, and Phillip Ratner to executive vice president. *
A.
Schulman Inc., Akron, Ohio, a producer of plastic and rubber compounds, named Terry L. Haines president and chief operating officer, succeeding William C. Zekan, who continues as chairman and chief executive. *
Sirco International Corp., Mount Vernon, N.Y., a handbag and luggage manufacturer, appointed Yutaka Yamaguchi chairman and chief executive.
Replacing him as president is Steven Wall.


OHIO REPUBLICAN QUITS HOUSE SEAT
Representative Donald E. (Buz) Lukens of Ohio resigned today rather than face a broadened ethics committee inquiry into charges of sexual misconduct.
The Republican lawmaker announced his decision in a one-sentence letter to Gov.
Richard F. Celeste of Ohio that was read by a clerk on the House floor.


Review/Television; Psychological Thriller Opens 'Mystery' Season
Helena Pratt is as nasty a bit of baggage as you are likely to find on television this year, and Diana Rigg brings her to lip-smackingly vicious life in the BBC's "Mother Love." The three-part, four-hour presentation opens the 11th season of public television's "Mystery," tonight at 8 on Channel 13 and at 9 on Channels 21 and 49.
As Ms.
Rigg, who also happens to be the regular "Mystery" host, notes in her introduction, "Mother Love" is not the standard whodunit usually featured on the series.
It is a psychological thriller, offering, she adds pointedly, "a challenging role that's impossible for an actress to turn down."
This evening's two-hour installment wastes little time establishing Helena's bad-seed credentials.
It opens with a childhood scene, done in black and white, in which little Helena learns that her best school chum has gone to another girl's birthday party.
Helena was not invited.
Treachery!
Disloyalty!
These are the most dreadful of crimes, Helena will tell us again and again, and they deserve the severest punishment.
Subsequent scattered flashbacks will show little Helena painstakingly preparing a poisonous tart for her wayward chum.


Suncor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Revlon Accuses a Supplier Of Sabotaging Its Software
A software supplier involved in a contract dispute with Revlon Inc. brought some operations of the cosmetics giant to a halt last week by disabling some of Revlon's software.
"We regard it as a form of commercial terrorism," James Conroy, special counsel and vice president of public affairs for Revlon, said today.
The company, which is based in New York, makes such products as Flex shampoo and Max Factor cosmetics.


Seacoast Banking Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Granite State Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


International Flavors &amp; Fragrances reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
It is possible to construct a hand in which the only makeable game is in a 4-1 trump fit.
Imagine, for example, that North-South have three small spades each and a 4-1 heart fit with all the honor cards.
Add a bunch of winners in the minor suits, and give the opening leader a strong five-card spade suit and four hearts.
Now four hearts is unbeatable and other games must fail.
The diagramed deal probably represents the closest anyone has ever come to achieving this result.
The occasion was the American Contract Bridge League's Instant Match Point pairs, played a month ago at sites all over North America.
The overall winners in North-South were Bill Kass and Robert Bernstein of Albuquerque, N.M.
East-West winners were Marc Poupart and Suzanne Lapierre of Montreal.
The highest score in the New York metropolitan area, and fourth-highest overall, was by Fran Kugelman and Jeffrey Selbst of Brooklyn.


Old Memory Leads to a Murder Trial
A retired firefighter goes on trial here this week, accused of bludgeoning an 8-year-old girl to death 21 years ago.
His accuser is his own daughter, who says she saw it happen, and his trial will test the credibility of her claim that she repressed her memory of the attack for two decades because it was so traumatic.
The 51-year-old defendant, George Thomas Franklin, was arrested last November and charged with murder after his daughter Eileen, now 29, told San Mateo County detectives that as an 8-year-old she watched her father sexually molest her playmate and then strike the girl over the head with a rock.
The incident flashed into her memory after 20 years of repression, she said; the trigger was a glance from her own 6-year-old daughter.


Royal Bank of Pennsylvania reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Du Pont (E.I.) de Nemours &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Times Mirror Net Off 40.2%; Knight-Ridder Slides 3.2%
The Times Mirror Company said yesterday that its third-quarter earnings dropped 40.2 percent from a year before, while Knight-Ridder Inc. reported its profit for the period slipped 3.2 percent from 1989 results, which included a one-time gain.
Times Mirror cited falling classified and retail advertising at The Los Angeles Times as well as at its newspapers in the economically troubled Northeast.


Gulf Peace: On Tough Terms
Imagine that one fine morning, Saddam Hussein withdraws his occupation forces from Kuwait, unconditionally and unilaterally.
No bloody battles.
No poison gas attacks.
No allied bombing raids against Iraqi cities with huge civilian casualties.
President Bush's explicit public demands for withdrawal would then appear to have been met.
Why do Pentagon hawks call this their "nightmare scenario"?
Because they rightly fear that such a withdrawal would quickly undermine the global alliance of countries that has formed to stand up against Iraq's aggression -- and leave Saddam Hussein's intimidating military might intact.


Operating Net Up 15% At P.&amp;.G.
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, the maker of Tide detergent and Pampers diapers, reported a first-quarter profit yesterday of $555 million, or $1.57 a share.
On an operating bass, that was an increase of nearly 15 percent from $483 million, or $1.36 a share, a year earlier.
The results were in line with analysts' expectations.
The company's revenues in the first quarter that ended on Sept. 30 rose by more than 16 percent, to $6.65 billion from $5.71 billion.


UST Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Menopause Is Found No Bar to Pregnancy
In a remarkable advance, researchers have shown that older women who have gone through menopause can easily become pregnant using donated eggs.
The results, being published today, give women who have been considered hopelessly infertile an unexpected second chance, the researchers said.
"It turned their lives around," said Dr.
Mark V. Sauer of the University of Southern California, who led the group that conducted the study.


Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Firstmiss Gold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Profits Scoreboard
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1990
From '89
Anheuser-Busch Companies
$ 260,700,000
+
9.4
Armco Inc.
(8,800,000)
--
Avon Products Inc.
44,600,000
+
28.9
Compaq Computer Corp.
123,600,000
+
41.9
E.I. du Pont de Nemours
533,000,000
-
2.6
Engelhard Corp.
16,000,000
-
59.0
Exxon Corp.
1,080,000,000
unch.
Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co.
(61,400,000)
--
Greyhound Dial Corp.
32,000,000
+
6.0
Knight-Ridder Inc.
36,600,000
-
3.2
Loral Corp.
20,900,000
+
5.6
National Intergroup Inc.
(1,000,000)
--
Norfolk Southern Corp.
142,900,000
-
5.0
Procter &amp; Gamble Co.
555,000,000
-
1.6
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co.
179,200,000
-
30.4
Times Mirror Co.
41,900,000
-
40.2
Unocal Corp.
121,000,000
+
53.2
See accompanying notes for special items.
(Loss) *Loss in year-earlier period.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.87
7.81
8.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.23
7.22
7.57
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.18
7.18
7.46
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.49
8.51
7.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.77
8.79
7.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.90
9.83
9.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS*
7.76
7.76
7.31
*Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


National Intergroup Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-15  Benazir Bhutto was handed a defeat in elections in Pakistan.
The vote, seen as a referendum on her dismissal as Prime Minister in August, was a decisive victory for the Islamic Democratic Alliance.
Page A1
Hindu-Muslim fighting leaves 18 dead in India A8
Another resolution deploring Israel for refusing to cooperate with an investigation of the killing of 21 Palestinians in Jerusalem two weeks was passed by the United Nations Security Council.
A1
News analysis: Israel's angry peace, enforced by an order barring all Palestinians from entering the country, has not ended calls from Jews and Arabs for revenge.
A13
Congress has the right to reconvene if the Bush Administration decides to go to war after the current session ends, said Thomas Foley, the House Speaker, and George Mitchell, the Senate majority leader.
A12
The Soviet Union renews peace efforts in Persian Gulf A12
Iraq increases forces in southern Iraq and Kuwait, official says A12
Hostages at an arms plant in Iraq rioted over mistreatment by "sadistic guards," a British hostage who was freed from Iraq said.
It was the first account charging mistreatment of the Westerners being held.
A12 Oil rebounds $1.71 a barrel as hope on Mideast fades D1
Exxon's net income is unchanged; Unocal's jumps D1
A new constitution in South Africa that would extend political rights to blacks was proposed by the Government.
The plan, a starting point for talks, includes a two-chamber parliament and a bill of rights.
A5
Bomb attacks in Northern Ireland killed six British soldiers and another person and wounded 37 others.
The attacks, at security checkpoints near the border with the Irish Republic, were the most deadly in years.
A1 A Warsaw Pact meeting was delayed by its top leaders with the future of the pact increasingly in doubt and its members divided over the last issue they may face as an alliance: the future of European security.
A3
A group of Soviet Christians was held in a bureaucratic limbo at an airport.
The group, which was supposed to inaugurate a refugee system to America, has become an political embarrassment for Moscow.
A3
Balkan states meet to forge closer ties A14
Slovaks rally in Czechoslovakia to support language bill A15
Trieste Journal: Reopening Italy's door to central Europe A4 NATIONAL A16-25, B10-11  A compromise on taxes was reached by Congressional and White House negotiators.
The plan, which they said they believed Congress would approve, would raise taxes by $140 billion over five years.
A1
The breakthrough in the stalemate was made in the Oval Office Tuesday night.
The President was told to choose between a deal or a fiasco.
His advisers were split.
Secretary of State Baker tipped the balance.
A1
News analysis: Democrats won the battle; no one won the war B10
Tax proposal includes big increase for the wealthiest B11
The President's veto of the rights bill survived a Senate attempt to overturn it by one vote.
The vote kills the anti-discrimination measure in the 101st Congress.
A1
Elizabeth Dole's many issues left little political impact A18
Rep. Donald Lukens resigns to avoid ethics inquiry A21
A bill limiting claims on food labels was approved by Congress.
The bill will force manufacturers to curtail the disease-prevention claims they make on products and to provide more information on nutrition.
A1
Automakers ordered to alter designs for added safety A23
Older women can become pregnant after going through menopause using
eggs donated by younger women, a new study at the University of Southern California has found.
A1
Cold-fusion chemist has vanished before key review A16
Training welfare recipients to work has been one of the most elusive goals in social policy, but now a California program that stresses tangible job skills, rather than back-to-basics education is winning praise.
A16
Is possession of marijuana a crime?
Fifteen years after the State Supreme Court in Alaska legalized the possession of small amounts, voters are being asked to back a ballot initiative making it a crime.
A17
Father accused of murder by 20- year-old memory A16
Panama files a suit seeking $6.5 billion from Noriega A21 REGIONAL B1-9  New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernanadez has maintained a close relationship with the teachers union -- an alliance that has benefited both sides but that some officials say may pose perils.
B1
Business and labor leaders form fiscal council B9
State Comptroller Edward V. Regan is facing a vigorous challenge from his Democratic opponent, Carol Bellamy, the former New York City Council President.
B1
After ruling, Brooklyn Democrats fight for party post B7
The issue of Connecticut's economy has preoccupied the candidates for governor, often to the exclusion of all else.
But with dire economic reportspouring in from all directions, that is what is on voters' minds.
B1
Rowland says Weicker violated rules on ethics and stocks B2
The first state conference on AIDS offered by New York officials provided experts a lesson that some people might consider a little odd: ways to lobby for more government funds during fiscal troubles.
B1
A 14-year-old is convicted in attack on David Opont B3
Police expand plan to escort students on subways B3
Melee follows arrest of Hasidic Jew on sex charges B3
Court forces oil-and-sludge mover to shut down B4
Sixth game of chess championship adjourned B6 BUSINESS DIGEST D1  The Home Section
Having a wonderful time in Miami C1
Saint Laurent: the artist, the enigma C1
Landmarks of the common folk C1
Parent &amp; Child C8
To young designers, life isn't seamless C10  Arts/Entertainment
Sendak's children's theater C19
A Senate compromise on the endowment C19
Opera chief with a mission C22
Theater: "Gonza the Lancer" C20
Music: Tureck's "Goldberg" Variations C18
Dance: Soviet Georgians C19
Jennifer Muller/The Works C21
Word and Image: Novel of romance and scholarship C24
"Great Books" adds women C26
"Mystery" season opener C26  Health Page B12
Personal Health
New focus on urinary incontinence
Doctors warn of eye damage from microwave popcorn  Sports
Baseball: Strawberry eyes L.A.  B15
Basketball: Coleman's agent says pact is reached B13
Jackson and Vandeweghe look good B15
Boxing: Douglas is heavy for fight B13
Column: Anderson on Douglas B13
Football: Giants may surprise B13
Golf: Levi goes for money record B13
Hockey: Islanders routed again B14
Horse Racing: Cup complaints B17
Obituaries D23
Thomas Williams, a novelist  Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A26
Gulf peace: On tough terms
Why did all 5 Senators pile on?
Send a message on poison gas
For Congress in Connecticut
Letters A26
Anna Quindlen: Grand juries A27
William Safire: The ties that bind A27
Nelson W. Polsby: A healthy duel A27
Paul H. Nitze: Leapfrog into Start II A27


Police Expand Student Escorts On the Subway
A pilot program in which transit police officers escort high school students home on the subways was expanded yesterday to serve almost all students who ride the trains.
Under the expanded program, 71 transit police officers will work overtime to ride with students from 52 high schools, including a handful of parochial schools, whose students rely on the subway, a transit police spokesman, Sgt.
Robert J. Valentino, said.


Magma Copper reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Cabinet With Many Lives
IF there is such a thing as a lovable piece of furniture, the Hoosier cabinet is it.
The cabinets take their name from the Hoosier Manufacturing Company in New Castle, Ind., which started building them in 1898.
By 1920, the company had built more than two million, according to "Hoosier Cabinets," a self-published book by Philip D. Kennedy, an editor of books on computers who lives in Indianapolis.
The name Hoosier cabinet, Mr.
Kennedy said, quickly became generic, since other manufacturers that built similar cabinets -- Sellers, Napanee, Boone and McDougall -- were all based in Indiana, the Hoosier state.


After Nearly 2 Years on a Tightrope, Elizabeth Dole Resigns Labor Post
There were not many workplace issues that Labor Secretary Elizabeth H. Dole failed to make a speech about: the rights of women and minorities, pension rights, child labor abuses, worker safety, worker training, the minimum wage.
And to proponents of workers, she said most of the right things, too.
But little of what Mrs.
Dole said before she resigned yesterday as the highest-ranking woman in the Bush Administration brought noteworthy changes in Government policies.
Mrs.
Dole, who will become president of the American Red Cross, was caught up in the conflict between being part of a pro-business Republican Administration, on the one hand, and the head of a department that historically has served as an advocate for organized labor.
She set a warmer tone toward labor and its Congressional partisans, who saw Mrs.
Dole, rightly or not, more as one of themselves than the White House would let her be.


Disney Forecasts Park Plan's Impact
The Walt Disney Company projected today that a proposed ocean theme park would attract 10 million visitors in its first year and employ 12,400 people.
In July, Disney announced plans for Port Disney to be built here.
The company is also considering building another park in Anaheim, home of the original Disneyland.
Disney said it expected to decide next year whether to proceed with both plans.
The expected economic impact of a park in Long Beach was detailed in an independent analysis delivered to city and port officials.
The Long Beach complex would include at least 3,700 hotel rooms and 250,000 square feet of retail space, the report said.


Warning About Microwave
Microwave popcorn can cause severe eye damage because of the steam released after heating, two opthalmologists have warned.
In a letter being published in today's issue of The New England Journal of Medicine, Dr.
Patrick A. DeRespinis and Dr.
Larry P. Frohman of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey said that if microwave popcorn bags are opened too quickly they release a burst of steam that can burn exposed areas of the body, especially the eyes.


Help for Those With Bladder Trouble
It was not so very long ago that people would discuss their sexual woes, their family strife, even that most intimate of topics, their salaries, before they would confess to suffering from urinary incontinence.
But a series of new studies that underscore the prevalence of the disorder, combined with the phenomenal response generated by letters from sufferers to newspaper columnists, has swept the subject into the open, much to the relief of the millions of Americans who long believed that they were the only adults who occasionally lost control of their bladders.


Newspaper Group Formed
The Newspaper Advertising Bureau, in cooperation with the newspaper industry, has formed the Newspaper National Network, the final phase of a industrywide task force created three years ago to bring national advertisers back to daily journals.
The economic downturn has hampered newspapers' ability to gain a significant portion of national advertisers' dollars.
"Newspapers are the first to feel the pain of the recession," said Len Forman, the bureau's executive vice president.
"But this is a short-run cyclical problem.
"This program is designed to deal with a broader issue, which is convincing national advertisers that newspapers are a good choice," he added.
The new agency will try to persuade national advertisers to switch their media placement from television and magazines by presenting newspapers as an attractive, creative option.
"The timing is not terrific now because the market is bad," Mr.
Forman said.
"But our goal is long term: to reverse the erosion of national advertising in newspapers and increase our share."


Electronic Tele-Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shawmut National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; A Costly Citicorp Move To Win Over Investors
In another sign of investor concern over the safety of investments in many major banks, Citicorp said yesterday that it would pay an unprecedentedly high rate on an important part of the capital it needs.
The move will raise the company's costs substantially.
In agreeing to pay a dividend rate of 12.5 percent on a $100 million issue of preferred stock, the nation's largest banking company accepted a rate that is far higher than the dividend it was legally required to pay.
The move was aimed at bolstering investor confidence, but it led to another drop in the company's stock price, to an eight-year low.


Earthquake Jolts Wide Area in California
A moderate earthquake shook a wide section of Northern California on Tuesday night, knocking loose boulders that blocked one road into Yosemite National Park today and causing rock slides that closed two of the three other highways into the park.
No injuries were reported from the earthquake, which was felt from San Francisco to Nevada and jolted casinos and hotels in South Lake Tahoe and Reno.
It registered a preliminary 5.8 on the Richter scale of ground motion, the United States Geological Survey said .
Six-foot-high boulders forced the closing of Highway 120 on the west side of Yosemite.
A three-foot section of the highway was gone and a retaining wall was lost.
A rock slide half a mile away closed Highway 140 into the park.
A road from the south was unaffected.
The center of the earthquake was in Lee Vining, a town of 400 people east of Yosemite in the Sierra Nevada and about 190 miles southeast of San Francisco, said Pat Jorgenson, a spokeswoman for the survey.
The earthquake that struck Northern California on Oct. 17, 1989, registered 7.1 and claimed 67 lives.


U.S. Joins in 2d Vote At U.N. to Criticize Israel Over 21 Slain
The United States voted with the rest of the Security Council tonight to deplore Israel's refusing to cooperate with an investigation of the killing of 21 Palestinians in a clash with Israeli security forces two weeks ago.
The unanimous council vote, the second to criticize Israel in 12 days, had been postponed for 24 hours at the request of the United States so that President Bush could send an appeal to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel to reconsider his Government's refusal to cooperate with the United Nations inquiry into the Oct. 8 killings.


Lexington Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Advance Ross Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Denison Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sears's Net Fell 30.4% In Quarter
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company released a third-quarter earnings report today that showed faint signs of improvement from a deep slump in its core retailing operation.
But, over all, Sears's sales and earnings remained depressed, and most analysts said they remained unconvinced that the merchandising overhaul Sears began 18 months ago would produce a turnaround soon.
"They are treading water in a difficult economic and competitive environment," said N. Richard Nelson Jr., the retail analyst at Duff &amp; Phelps Inc.


Senate's Vote on Bush's Bias Bill Veto
Following is the 66-to-34 roll-call vote by which the Senate failed today to override President Bush's veto of the Civil Rights Act of 1990.
A "yes" vote was a vote to enact the law over Mr.
Bush's objections and a "no" vote was a vote to sustain the President's position.
Voting "yes" were 55 Democrats and 11 Republicans.
Voting "no" were 34 Republicans.


Loral Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stanhome Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jack Henry &amp; Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aides Say Bush Faced Choice: A Deal on Taxes, or a Fiasco
In a tense Oval Office meeting late Tuesday night, the Senate Republican leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, and the House Republican leader, Robert H. Michel of Illinois, bluntly told President Bush that he had to choose between a deal or a fiasco.
The President's advisers and Cabinet were split on whether to stop talking to the Democrats or continue the search for a path out of the budget impasse.


Hercules Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Money-Fund Yields Mixed
Yields of tax-exempt and taxable money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed for the week ended yesterday.
Analysts at Donoghue's said investors appeared to be unwilling to invest until a Federal budget was wrapped up.
Then, they said, investors will likely wait for some interest-rate direction from the Federal Reserve in the form of some action on short-term rates.


Tecumseh Products Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Community Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coffey Will Sign
The Pittsburgh Penguins averted a scheduled arbitration hearing last night by reaching agreement with their star defenseman, Paul Coffey, on a reported five-year, $6 million contract.
The Penguins would not confirm the length or terms of the contract, only that Coffey had agreed to a multiyear deal.(AP)


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Big Upset for 19-Year-old Kulti Nicklas Kulti of Sweden, the 1989 world junior champion, earned the biggest victory of his pro career yesterday by upsetting third-seeded Andre Agassi, 6-3, 7-5, in the second round of the Stockholm Open.
Agassi was playing his first match in three weeks after straining his lower back earlier this month.
Stefan Edberg, the world's top-ranked player, rallied from a slow start to beat Mats Wilander, 6-4, 6-3.
Boris Becker, seeded second, dropped only two games but John McEnroe was extended to three sets in other second-round matches.
Becker routed Darren Cahill of Australia, 6-2, 6-0.
Louis Blues routed Toronto, 8-3, last night.
The Blues put the puck past the goaltender, Peter Ing, four times on their first five shots.
Hull's hat trick gave him a league-high 10 goals.
Toronto is now 1-8-1. (AP) North Stars 3, Whalers 0: Jon Casey made 33 saves for his fifth career shutout and Dave Gagner scored twice as Minnesota snapped a seven-game streak without a victory.
Gagner's second goal was the 100th of his career.
Brian Bellows earned his 300th career assist with a superb goal-mouth feed.
The game, in Bloomington, Minn., drew a season-low 4,646 fans to the Met Center. (AP) Jets 3, Oilers 1: Stephane Beauregard, a rookie goaltender, stopped 23 shots, including 11 in a strong third period, as Winnipeg won at home. (AP)


Hannaford Bros.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Quotation of the Day
"The limits on childbearing years are now anyone's guess; perhaps they will have more to do with the stamina required for labor and 2 A.M. feedings than with reproductive function." -- Dr.
Marcia Angell, an editor at The New England Journal of Medicine.  [ A25:1. ]


Islanders Repeat a Horror Show
It was a case of repetition of the most embarrassing kind.
One night after being shellacked at home, 8-1, by the Devils, the Islanders, looking and feeling very much like league whipping boys, absorbed an 8-2 thrashing from the Canadiens at the Forum tonight.
"We're probably at rock bottom," said Don Maloney, who after 13 National Hockey League seasons is veteran enough to recognize the dangers inherent in that position.
"We have such a fragile psyche that when we get down by just one or two goals, it becomes a catastrophe. And by the time we're down 5-1 or 6-1, instead of doing the obvious and just protecting our own end, everybody's mind just goes blank. It's so bad you almost have to laugh."


Metro Matters; Project Is Caught In a Crossfire Meant for Trump
When Ruth W. Messinger, the dogged Manhattan Borough President, puts the bite on a developer, that's not news.
But Ms.
Messinger has intervened on a builder's behalf against the wishes of some of her constituents, and therein lies a tale.
Ms.
Messinger has joined with her successor on the City Council, Ronnie Eldridge, in pleading the case of Daniel Brodsky, whose proposal for luxury and low-income housing has been jeopardized largely because of local opposition to an adjacent project proposed by Donald J. Trump.


Miscellany
*
The Home Furnishings Council has signed Kathie Lee Gifford as a spokeswoman for its multimillion-dollar national advertising campaign, which is handled by Baron &amp; Zaretsky, New York.
*
Rowland Worldwide Inc., the public relations unit of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C., London, is opening offices in Salzburg and Vienna.
Harald Ronacher has been named managing director of the Salzburg operation, and Dr.
Christoph Bruckner will head the Vienna office.


Confidence Amid Contradictions
Wayne Levi may be blond, blue-eyed, flat-bellied and given to wearing garish colors, but he is also living proof that PGA Tour players are not predictable clones.
The man is a paradox.
His disdain for playing in cold weather is such that he has never entered the British Open, yet he loves living in a Frost Belt outpost near Utica, N.Y.
The pleasure he derives from hitting golf balls often finds him the last player on the practice range, yet he rarely even picks up a club in his frequent breaks from the tour.
He possesses a tee-to-green consistency that has brought him his greatest success on difficult courses, yet in 14 seasons he has never had a top-10 finish in golf's major championships.


Panhandle Eastern Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Confusion Grows as Soviets Get More Laws
The question of who is in charge of the growing state of confusion in the Soviet Union became murkier today as the national and Russian Parliaments adopted conflicting claims to sovereignty over the other's laws.
The separate actions were taken in the name of easing the public's deepening dismay over the erosion of law and order in the nation.
But the additional laws only fed the sense of confusion.


Fleming Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 6


Dollar Drops Amid Pressure On Oil and Budget Fronts
The dollar fell sharply yesterday against major foreign currencies after a string of recent gains.
"It was another failure for the dollar in its great struggle to go higher," said Robert White at First Interstate Bank.


Brunswick Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Met Opera Appoints An Operations Director
Robert Sirinek has been named operations director of the Metropolitan Opera, the Met's general director, Joseph Volpe, has announced.
Mr.
Volpe, who became general director in August, said the senior assistant position of operations director had been reinstated to "both strengthen and deepen the Met's senior management over the course of the next year."
Mr.
Sirinek, who has been the personnel manager of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra, is to be responsible for the day-to-day operations of the orchestra, chorus and ballet, along with overseeing the Met's parks concerts, recordings and projected tours to Spain and Japan.
Mr.
Volpe had previously handled those responsibilities as assistant manager.
In addition to being the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra's personnel manager since 1986, Mr.
Sirinek was a full-time member of the orchestra's trumpet section.
He joined the orchestra in 1977 and became assistant manager in 1979.


Nucor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Interface Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Personal Health
The vaccine for Haemophilus influenza type b -- HIB infection, for short -- is not nearly as familiar to most parents as the immunizations that protect against once-common childhood infections like measles or mumps.
But this relative newcomer to the list of childhood immunizations should soon become well known, especially to parents with youngsters in day care programs.
Severe HIB infections, which can result in potentially fatal infections of the central nervous system, are as common today as paralytic polio was at its peak, and young children in close contact with one another are most likely to get it.


Benchmark Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Pacific Mint reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BRIEFS
*
Beech Aircraft Corp., Wichita, Kan., said it would slow production of some models and stop hiring new workers. *
Chase Manhattan Corp., New York, said it would cut costs by 20 percent in its Asian banking operations by the end of the year, partly through layoffs. *
Consolidated Rail Corp., Philadelphia, requested binding arbitration to settle its dispute with the Delaware &amp; Hudson Railway over 15 miles of Conrail's track in upstate New York. *
Integrated Resources Inc., New York, a real estate, investment and insurance concern, received approval from Federal Bankruptcy Court to sell stock in its American Property Investors subsidiary to an entity controlled by Carl Icahn for $44 million. *
Loral Corp., New York, a maker of electronic systems, has completed its acquisition of Ford Motor Co.'s Ford Aerospace unit for $715 million. *
Ogden Corp., New York, an environmental services company that owns 68 percent of the shares of ERC Environmental and Energy Services Co., Fairfax, Va., an engineering company, has offered to buy the remaining stake in the company for $14.75 a share. *
Poughkeepsie Savings Bank, Poughkeepsie, N.Y., will sell its banking operations in South Carolina to Republic National Bank, a unit of Resource Bancshares Corp., Columbia, S.C., for undisclosed terms.
It is selling its North Carolina deposits for undisclosed terms to Robeson Savings Bank, Lumberton, N.C. *
D.
S.
Revco Inc., Twinsburg, Ohio, a chain of discount drugstores, said a Federal Bankruptcy Court has denied its motion to extend past Oct. 31 its deadline to file a reorganization plan. *
Summit Bancorporation, Summit, N.J., said its subsidiary banks would purchase two retail banking branch offices in New Jersey from Anchor Savings Bank FSB, Hewlett, L.I.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Sutton Holding Corp. said it would make an offer for the remaining detergent business of DeSoto Inc., Des Plaines, Ill., a maker of chemical coatings and specialty products.


Tridex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Toy 'R' Us Sets Openings in Japan
A subsidiary of Toys "R" Us Inc. plans to open four stores in Japan in October 1991 despite opposition from local toy retailers.
Larry Bouts, president of Toys "R" Us Japan, said two of the stores would be near Tokyo and the others would be in Fukuoka prefecture in western Japan and in Nara prefecture near Osaka.
Last month, Japanese toy merchants formed a trade association to help small retailers compete with big stores like Toys "R" Us.
Toys "R" Us Japan, 80 percent owned by Toys "R" Us Inc. of Paramus, N.J., and 20 percent by McDonald's Japan, plans to open about 100 stores in Japan in this decade.


Vehicle Sales Stay Strong, Up 10.9%
Sales of domestic vehicles rose 10.9 percent in mid-October, in sharp contrast with other indicators that point to a softening economy.
Several analysts said they continued to be puzzled by the relatively strong sales of vehicles since August, particularly when the economy appeared to be slowing down, based on economic indicators like declining disposable income and a sharp drop in housing starts.


7 Killed as I.R.A. Forces 3 Men To Drive Bombs to Security Posts
The Irish Republican Army carried out its most deadly attacks in more than two years early today by forcing people it accused of being "collaborators" to drive cars carrying bombs set to explode at two security checkpoints near the border with the Irish republic.
Six British soldiers and another person were killed and 14 soldiers, 2 policemen and at least 21 civilians were wounded in the attacks.


Using 1975 Tool, Business and Labor Leaders Form Fiscal Council
Amid rising concern about New York City's financial health, a group of leaders of labor, finance and business met privately yesterday to try to help the city weather its financial problems.
The group, convened by Lewis Rudin, the real-estate owner and developer, was self-consciously modeled after earlier coalitions of bankers and union leaders who worked to stave off impending bankruptcy during the city's fiscal crisis of the 1970's.


Procter &amp; Gamble Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Douglas Weighs In At a Surprising 246
When James (Buster) Douglas barefoot and in gray briefs -- stepped onto the scale at today's weigh-in for Thursday night's heavyweight title defense, he did not appear to have a conspicuous pouch or extreme ridges of blubber along his sides.
But when his weight was announced at 246 pounds, it incited a storm of conjecture about whether the heavyweight champion had eaten himself into a predicament.
"We're home free," said Lou Duva, a cornerman for Evander Holyfield, Douglas's challenger in his first title defense, who weighed in at 208 pounds.


Alberto-Culver Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Computer Associates Intl Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Froese to Have Surgery
Bob Froese, the veteran backup goaltender for the Rangers, will undergo surgery to correct his chronically injured right shoulder and be lost for the season, the team announced yesterday.
The 32-year-old Froese, who has not appeared in a game since last Jan. 25, initially injured the shoulder in 1987 and has since suffered from recurring trouble caused by damaged ligaments.
Froese, though, said he did not consider his career over.
"It's not exactly good news on the doorstep," said Froese.
"But there's no sense in me looking too far down the road."


Public Service of New Mexico reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coleman's Agent Reports Accord With Nets
The Nets and Derrick Coleman have agreed in principle to a five-year, $15 million contract that will make Coleman the highest-paid rookie in the history of the National Basketball Association, Coleman's agent said tonight.
Harold MacDonald, Coleman's agent, said that the two sides would make the contract language final on Thursday, and added that his client must also pass a physical examination.


A Dispute Is Said to Cause Dismissal of Aca Joe's Chief
Mark Shulman, a retail-clothing executive who was formerly president of Henri Bendel in New York, has been dismissed as president and chief executive of Aca Joe Inc., the apparel chain that hired him earlier this year.
Aca Joe, which emerged last year from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, issued a brief statement earlier this week saying Mr.
Shulman had been dismissed and that his duties would be assumed by the company's executive and management committees until a replacement was found.


Anatole Broyard Memorial
A memorial service for Anatole Broyard, a book critic, essayist and editor at The New York Times, is to be held on Monday at 11 A.M. at the Southport (Conn.) Congregational Church.
Mr.
Broyard died of cancer on Oct. 11 at the age of 70.


Hocus-Pocus Is Always in Stock
WITH a graceful swoop of his hands, Tony Spina makes balls float and eggs disappear and plucks playing cards out of thin air.
None of this is surprising because Mr.
Spina, who owns Tannen's Magic Company in Manhattan, is a professional magician.
But with a little hocus-pocus and the proper equipment, most customers who visit his upstairs shop can achieve the same feats.
"You'd be surprised how many magic enthusiasts are out there," Mr. Spina said.


Talking Deals; End of a Venture In Optical Disks
WHEN Philips N.V. of the Netherlands and the Du Pont Company announced earlier this week that they would end their four-year-old joint venture to manufacture optical disks, it reflected not only a divergence of interests but also a divergence within the disk market.
Compact disks for music have experienced runaway growth, but growth of optical disks for computers has been sluggish.
Philips's 80 percent owned subsidiary, Polygram, one of the world's largest record companies, has expressed interest in acquiring the consumer division, but the two companies will jointly seek a buyer for the professional division, and have hired the First Boston Corporation to manage the sale.


In Connecticut Race for Governor, the Focus Is Economic
In speech after speech the candidates for governor talk about Connecticut's bleeding economy, often to the exclusion of all else.
It is an obsession, they say, that reflects reality: nothing else comes close in importance, especially in the minds of voters, to the question of which man is best equipped to lead during the recession that all three major candidates agree is here or probably soon will be.


Brooklyn Union Gas reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Susquehanna Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Security Corp. of Ky.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
Some of the biggest names in the television industry from the United States and the Soviet Union will meet in Atlanta in February to discuss the impact of television in both countries, starting with election coverage.
Former President JIMMY CARTERsaid the meeting of the two nations' Commission on Television Policy had grown out of a conversation he had with President MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV.
The meeting will be held at the Carter Center of Emory University.
Soviet participants include EDUARD SAGALAYEV , head of news for the State Committee for Television and Radio Broadcasting and chairman of the new Soviet Cable Association.
Among the Americans are ROONE ARLEDGE , president of ABC News;, BRUCE CHRISTENSEN , president of the Public Broadcasting Service;, TED TURNER , chairman of TBS, MICHAEL GARTNER , president of NBC News, and ERIC OBER , president of CBS News.


Suburban Bankshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bhutto Defeated in Pakistan Vote; President Sees Orderly Transition
Benazir Bhutto, seeking to return to power through the ballot after her abrupt dismissal in August on charges of corruption and mismanagement, was decisively defeated in national elections on Wednesday, according to early results.
With votes counted in more than half the 204 National Assembly seats being contested, Ms.
Bhutto's opponents in the Islamic Democratic Alliance had won 83 seats.
At least 27 more seats went to allied parties, giving the coalition an unassailable lead.


Pacific Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FPL Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Washington Trust Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Freeport-McMoran Oil &amp; Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about crime in the Norwood section of the Bronx misstated crime figures for the first nine months of this year in the 52d Precinct.
Through September, there were 1,425 robberies in the precinct.


American National Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Peru Relaxes Emergency Rule
The Peruvian Government said today it has lifted an eight-year state of emergency in Ayacucho, the Andean city where the Maoist-inspired Shining Path rebels began their movement.
However, the state of emergency was extended in rural areas surrounding the city, as well as in nine other provinces.


Armco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CNB Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Arctic Alaska Fisheries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Melee Follows Arrest of Hasid on Sex Charge
A melee erupted in Brooklyn's 90th Police Precinct Tuesday night when hundreds of Hasidic Jews surrounded the station house to protest the arrest of a Jewish man who, they said, had been falsely accused of fondling a teen-age girl.
Three hundred demonstrators were involved in the pushing and shoving on a rainy night that left 32 police officers slightly injured.
One Hasidic man was charged with assaulting an officer, a police spokesman said.


Panamanians File Suit Against Noriega Seeking $6.5 Billion
The Government of Panama filed a $6.5 billion civil racketeering lawsuit against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega in Federal court today, contending that the ousted Panamanian leader betrayed his country through murder, fraud and theft.
The lawsuit charged that General Noriega and his associates operated the Panamanian Defense Forces -- the military and police organization, now defunct, that was headed by the deposed leader -- as a criminal enterprise that engaged in assassination, torture, diversion of government revenue, illegal sale of visas and other abuses of official power.


Uncovered Short Positions Increase by 10.3% on Nasdaq
The National Association of Securities Dealers yesterday reported a sharp increase of about 10.3 percent in the short interest in actively traded over-the-counter securities in its national market system for the four weeks that ended in mid-October.
A total of 293.3 million shares were held short and not yet covered in mid-October, it said, compared with a revised total of 265.9 million in the period that ended in mid-September.
The October figure, an increase of 27.4 million shares, represents short-selling in 2,298 stocks; in September the short-selling was spread among 2,311 issues.


Court Request By Polly Peck
Asil Nadir, struggling to keep Polly Peck International P.L.C. afloat, today called for the appointment of court administrators to run the British company.
In a bid to stave off one of Britain's biggest corporate failures, Polly Peck's directors decided to petition the High Court to appoint the administrators.
Polly Peck said it believed that "taking this step will result in the survival of the company and its operations as going concerns."
Polly Peck owes its creditors more than $:1 billion, or about $1.94 billion.
On Oct. 12, Mr.
Nadir, Polly Peck's chairman and chief executive, secured a standstill on debt repayments until Nov. 9.
But as a condition, he had to meet working capital needs of some $:8 million a week, or about $15.5 million, and Mr.
Nadir failed to show he had come up with fresh money.
Polly Peck ran up heavy debts after big acquisitions, including Del Monte's fresh fruit business and Sansui electronics.
Polly Peck's stock began to decline in mid-August when Mr.
Nadir withdrew a bid to take the company private.


Books of The Times; When There Was Such a Thing as Romantic Love
Possession By A. S. Byatt 555 pages. Random House. $22.95.
At the opening of A. S. Byatt's wonderfully extravagant novel "Possession," which is pointedly subtitled "A Romance," a young research assistant named Roland Michell sits in the Reading Room of the London Library and is handed what will prove to be a treasure of incalculable scholarly value.


Compaq Net Rises 41.9%
The Compaq Computer Corporation said today that its profits rose 41.9 percent in the third quarter, with foreign sales continuing to account for more than half of its revenue as growth in the North American market remained slow.
Net income for the Houston-based company was $123.6 million, or $1.38 a share, compared with $87.1 million, or $1.01 a share, in the corresponding period a year ago.
Revenue rose 26.4 percent, to $863 million, from $683 million.


Avon Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Acme United Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


National Intergroup
The holding company National Intergroup Inc. said today that it lost almost $1 million in the second quarter after settling with shareholders in a takeover bid.
The $4.2 million settlement brought on a loss of $988,000, on revenue of $700 million in the quarter, National Intergroup said.
That compared with a profit of $8.6 million, or 33 cents a share, on revenue of $561.5 million for the corresponding period in 1989.
The company is moving its headquarters to Dallas.


Talley Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Suspects in Killing of East Side Businessman
Detectives searching for a motive sifted yesterday through the loves and business dealings of a millionaire killed on a quiet Upper East Side street on Tuesday morning.
But late yesterday the police said they had no suspects, and were being hampered in their investigation by the silence of the slain man's estranged wife.


Comparing Tax Provisions
Provisions of the plan reached by White House and Congressional budget negiotions last month, and a plan from House leaders that is serving as the basis for an emerging budget compromise.
BUDGET SUMMIT PLAN -- Sept. 30 New taxes
Income tax rates: No change from current law.
Deductions: Reduce itemized deductions by 3 percent of the amount of adjusted gross income over $100,000.
Gasoline: Increase of 10 cents per gallon at the pump.
Heating Oil: 2 cents per gallon on petroleum fuels including heating oil.
Cigarettes: Raise by 8 cents, to 24 cents a pack, in 1993.
Alcohol: $1.50 cents per gallon of 100-proof alcohol, 16 cents per pack of beer, 22 cents per bottle of win.
Luxury Tax: 10 percent of the amount over $100,000 paid for boats, above $30,000 for cars, and above $5,000 for furs.
Aviation Fees: Raise passenger ticket tax to 10 percent from 8 percent.
Increases other aviation fees.
Insurance: Reduce tax breaks for the insurance industry.
Interest Costs: Cut tax breaks on interest corporations pay to the I.R.S. for underpayment of taxes.
Medicare: Extend health insurance tax to state and local workers.
Social Security: Extend program to state and local workers not covered by government-sponsored plan.
Withholding: Cap on wages subject to a 1.45 percent Medicare tax raised to $73,000 from $51,300.
Telephone: No change.
IRS: Improve auditing and collection efforts. Tax Breaks
The Poor: Increased earned-income tax credits for low-income workers.
Energy Companies: Tax breaks to produce ethanol, stimulate exploration and enhance recovery of oil and gas.
Small Businesses: Tax breaks and enterprise zones that encourage investment, research and production.
Capital gains: No change from current 28 percent maximum rate.
COMPROMISE PROPOSED BY THE HOUSE DEMOCRATS -- Oct. 24 New taxes
Income tax rates: Raise the top tax rate to 31 percent from 28 percent.
Raise alternative minimum tax to 23 percent from 21 percent.
Phaseout the personal exemption for individuals with adjusted gross incomes above $100,000, and is eliminated completely above $200,000.
For joint filers, the phaseout starts at $150,000 and is eliminated at $275,000.
Deductions: For five years only, reduce itemized deductions by 3 percent of the amount of adjusted gross income over $100,000.
Gasoline: Increase of 5 cents per gallon at the pump, to 14 cents.
Heating Oil: No change in current law.
Cigarettes: Essentially the same as the summit plan.
Alcohol: $1 per gallon of 100 proof alcohol, 16 cents per six pack of beer, 22 cents per gallon of wine
Luxury Tax: 10 percent on the amount over $100,000 paid for boats, above $30,000 for cars, above $5,000 for jewelry, above $10,000 for furs, above $250,000 for some planes.
Aviation Fees: Essentially the same as the summit plan.
Insurance: Essentially the same as the summit plan.
Interest Costs: No change in current law.
Medicare: No change in current law.
Social Security: Essentially the same as the summit plan.
Withholding: Cap on wages subject to a 1.45 percent Medicare tax raised to at least $125,000 from $51,300.
Telephone: Open.
IRS: Open.
Tax Breaks
The Poor: Expansion of earned income tax credit. Not yet resolved.
Energy Companies: Open.
Small Businesses: Some tax breaks for small businesses.
Capital gains: No change in current law.


Jackson and Vandeweghe Prove Hard Work Pays Off
Both Mark Jackson and Kiki Vandeweghe worked long hours during the summer, trying to recapture the confidence and effectiveness that once made them All-Stars.
Clearly, that effort is paying dividends.
Jackson (10 assists, 6 points, 27 minutes) and Vandeweghe (16 points) were instrumental in rallying the Knicks to an 89-85 victory over the Detroit Pistons last night at Madison Square Garden.
Patrick Ewing led all scorers with 23 points, while Joe Dumars led the Pistons with 22.


Unocal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A. Louise Brush Dies; Retired Psychiatrist, 79
A.
Louise Brush, a retired psychiatrist, died on Tuesday at Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
She was 79 years old and lived in Greenwich.
Dr. Brush died of pneumonia, her sister, Ruth Seaman Brush of Boston, said.
A life fellow of the American Psychiatric Association, Dr.
Brush was associated with Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center from 1937 to 1958 as a teacher and psychiatric researcher.
From 1936 to 1965 she was an instructor in psychiatry at Cornell Medical School.
In 1950, she became a consulting psychiatrist at Barnard College.
She also maintained private practices in Manhattan and Greenwich until she retired in 1979.
Dr.
Brush was a graduate of Barnard.
She received her medical degree from the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons and practiced psychiatry at the Austen Fox Riggs Foundation in Stockbridge, Mass., now the Austen Fox Center.
She later did postgraduate work at the Columbia University Neurological Institute.
Her husband, John Alexander Frank, an architect, died earlier this month.
Her sister is her only survivor.


Grubb &amp; Ellis Realty Income Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Opera; Ghiaurov In His First 'Boris' At the Met
The Bulgarian bass Nicolai Ghiaurov took over the title role in Mussorgsky's "Boris Godunov" at the Metropolitan Opera on Monday evening.
It was, astonishingly, Mr.
Ghiaurov's first Met appearance in a role that has been one of his specialties for 25 years.
The Met's tardiness in presenting Mr.
Ghiaurov as Boris is not entirely the company's fault.
There were discussions of his singing the role at the Met in the late 1960's, but the plan fell victim to a strike.
When the matter was raised again, in the 1970's, Mr.
Ghiaurov declined because he preferred the Rimsky-Korsakov edition to the Mussorgsky scoring that the Met presents.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Exxon's net income was unchanged, while Unocal's rose 53.2 percent.
At Exxon, higher oil prices depressed profits in refining, marketing and chemical operations.  [ Page D1. ]
Sears's earnings showed faint signs of improvement from a deep slump in its core retailing operation.  [ D1. ]
Even as Continental Air appears to be overcoming a reputation for bad service, financial problems are catching up with it.  [ D1. ]
A small software supplier involved in a dispute with Revlon disabled some of Revlon's software.  [ D1. ]
Procter &amp; Gamble reported a profit of $555 million, or $1.57 a share.
On an operating basis, that was up nearly 15 percent.  [ D4. ]
Goodyear said it lost $61.4 million, citing intense price competition, higher costs and huge debt.  [ D5. ]
The board of the Financial News Network and Infotechnology announced a new management team.  [ D21. ]
Times Mirror earnings dropped 40.2 percent, while Knight-Ridder said its profit slipped 3.2 percent from 1989 results.  [ D21. ]
The Big Board halted trading in MCA twice on reports of troubled buyout talks.
The stock lost $8.875, to $50.  [ D21. ]
Warren E. Buffett and companies he controls have acquired 9.8 percent of Wells Fargo.  [ D4. ]  The Economy
A compromise on taxes believed to have the support of the White House and of a majority in the Senate and House was struck by Congressional leaders.  [ A1. ]
A sweeping bill to curtail disease-prevention claims on food packages was approved by Congress.  [ A1. ]
The decision to hold hearings on Senators linked to Keating marks a triumph of politics over process.
News analysis.  [ A18. ]
The Transportation Dept. issued standards for auto safety intended to protect occupants of cars struck from the side.  [ A23. ]
The high dividend Citicorp was forced to pay on a preferred stock issue served as a reminder that many investors are skeptical about the strength of large banks.  [ D2. ]
Orders to factories for "big ticket" durable goods fell 1.7 percent in September from August, the Government said.  [ D6. ]
Sales of domestic vehicles rose 10.9 percent in mid-October, in sharp contrast to other signs of a softening economy.  [ D7. ]  International
A U.S.
Treasury official told Brazil's central bank president he was worried about more than $8 billion in unpaid interest.  [ D2. ]
Markets Oil prices rebounded as the market sensed it might have been overly optimistic on the Gulf.
Crude added $1.71, to $31.08.  [ D1. ]
Stock prices were mixed, although a sharp rise in Compaq's profits gave several high-tech stocks a lift.
The Dow rose 10.15, to 2,504.21.  [ D10. ]
Prices of Treasury securities moved slightly higher and interest rates dipped in light trading.  [ D18. ]
The dollar fell sharply against leading foreign currencies.  [ D19. ]  Copper futures prices fell sharply.  [ D19. ]  Today's Columns
Citicorp agreed to pay a high rate on a preferred stock issue, another sign of investor concern about big banks.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D1. ]
When Philips and Du Pont ended their optical disk venture, it reflected a divergence within the disk market.
Talking Deals.  [ D2. ]
T.W.A., dumped by Young &amp; Rubicam and spurned by other big agencies, is looking at small ones.
Kim Foltz: Advertising.  [ D21. ]


Gateway Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Syracuse a Giant Problem for Army
The Army-Syracuse game at West Point on Saturday will be one matching the large against the extra large and will be best exemplifed when the Orange has the ball.
John Flannery, the center, will start the play.
He is an all-America candidate, a finalist for the two lineman-of-the-year awards, the Lombardi and the Outland, but more important to Army he stands 6 feet 4 inches tall and weighs 305 pounds.


Patriots Activate Mowatt for Sunday
Zeke Mowatt, who has spent the season on injured reserve and in hot water, was activated yesterday by the New England Patriots.
The tight end's season begins Sunday with a game against the Buffalo Bills.
It could end with a report by an National Football League special counsel on a locker-room incident in which Mowatt and three or four other Patriots are accused of having sexually harassed a female reporter.
Philip Heymann, a Harvard law professor named Oct. 1 to investigate the incident, is expected to issue his report by the end of the month.
Mowatt is the only player who has been disciplined in the incident.(AP)


BancFlorida Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


I.B.M. Unit Notes To Yield 8.36%
A $350 million note offering by the IBM Credit Corporation was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
The size of the issue was increased from $250 million because of good investor demand.
The 8.30 percent notes are due 1993 and are priced at 99.838 to yield 8.362 percent, or about 37 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
IBM Credit, a unit of the International Business Machines Corporation, said the notes were noncallable and were rated Aaa by Moody's Investors Service and AAA by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Restaurant Killing On Upper East Side Is Linked to Drugs
The police said yesterday that the killing of an Upper East Side restaurant patron on Tuesday night was a gang-style drug shooting and that the victim, a 32-year-old Bronx man, had a long criminal record.
Thomas Beauchamp, of 4210 Digney Avenue in the Wakefield section of the Bronx, was shot in the head and died at the scene, said Capt.
Steven Davis, a police spokesman.
Two other patrons were wounded in the shooting, which occurred about 11 P.M. at T. G. I. Friday's, on First Avenue and 63d Street.


THE STRUGGLE IN CONGRESS: Shooting Their Feet; Sure, Some Officials Can Exult Now, But Government Itself Lies Wounded
The Democrats won the political battle over the budget, almost all the Washington score-keepers were saying tonight, and gave President Bush some nasty bruises in the process, but in the deepest sense, there were no victors.
The shaky compromise that apparently ended five months of confusion and conflict between the White House and Capitol Hill, between Democrats and Republicans, came far too late to avoid severe damage to the reputations of President Bush, the Congress and the Government itself.
To a degree unparalleled since the late 1960's, the ability of Washington to discern and promote the common weal -- in effect, to govern -- is being widely questioned.


LEADERS REACH A TAX DEAL AND PREDICT ITS APPROVAL; BUSH AWAITS FINAL DETAILS
After five months of negotiations and partisan bickering, top Congressional leaders said today that they had struck a compromise on taxes that they believed would have the support of the White House and a majority of the members of the Senate and House.
The final details were being nailed down tonight, and the precise legislation remained to be written.
But the basics were presented to rank-and-file lawmakers this afternoon and are not likely to change.


Northeast Utilities reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


When Boys Clubs Meet Girls Clubs
They have been quietly accepted as members of the Boys Clubs of America since the late 1800's (no one knows the exact date).
But now that girls have finally been included in the title of the 130-year-old organization, some of its 605 affiliates still prefer to do things the old way.
Nearly 40 percent of the local affiliates, or 229 clubs, have not followed the lead of their parent organization, now officially known as the Boys and Girls Clubs of America, even though 552 affiliates, or 91 percent, admit girls as well as boys as members.
The national group, which has a membership of 1.5 million young people, 450,000 of them girls, is not requiring local clubs to alter their names.


BankWorcester Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dodger Blue Would Suit Strawberry
Darryl Strawberry is again sounding as if he is ready to move to Los Angeles to play baseball.
"If the Dodgers are really, really, really interested in me, I'll be here," Strawberry said in an interview Tuesday night with a Los Angeles broadcaster, Jim Hill of KABC television.
"That would be my No. 1 choice. I'm very determined to play here at home and if things can work out between myself and my agent and the Los Angeles Dodgers, I would love to be here at home and play. I mean, that's a dream that you always think about."


Toon Played 4 Games With a Broken Bone
Rob Moore, the Jets' rookie wide receiver, left practice today after spraining his left ankle, but it was a month-old injury to the Jets' All-Pro wide receiver, Al Toon, that drew more interest.
The Jets revealed that Toon had played the last four games with a broken bone in his back, an injury he incurred Sept. 24 during a 30-7 rout by the Buffalo Bills at Giants Stadium.


Joan Arboit, Pediatrician, 54
Dr.
Joan Arboit, a pediatrician, died on Friday at her home in Verona, N.J.
She was 54 years old and also lived at Barnegat Light, N.J.
She died of breast cancer, a family spokesman said.
Dr.
Arboit was director of pediatric nephrology at Newark Beth Israel Hospital.
Since 1977, she had been director of the pediatric program at Elizabeth General Hospital.
She was an associate professor of clinical pediatrics at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, and a consultant in pediatric nephrology at Rahway, Morristown Memorial and St.
Barnabas Hospitals.
She was born in Brooklyn and graduated from Hunter College and McGill University School of Medicine.
Dr.
Arboit is survived by her husband, Dr.
Martin Ainbinder; two daughters, Judy and Jane Ainbinder of Verona, and her parents, John and Anna Arboit of Pembroke Pines, Fla.


BankNorth Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Why Did All Five Senators Pile On?
By order of the Senate Ethics Committee, five United States Senators -- the Keating Five -- will appear in an extraordinary session after next month's elections.
They'll be together in the dock, required to explain the favors they did for Charles Keating, the once-imperious savings and loan operator.
The Keating Five remain linked, kept together by a committee that refuses to lift the cloud of ethical suspicion from any of them.
Is this fair when the committee's special counsel, Robert Bennett, has recommended that Senators John McCain and John Glenn be cut loose and that only Senators Alan Cranston, Donald Riegle and Dennis DeConcini be called on for further answers?
Yes: not only fair but virtually essential considering the facts already known.


Oriental Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Treasury Issues Post Small Gain
Prices of Treasury securities moved slightly higher and interest rates dipped in light trading yesterday, as dealers bought some securities on signs that agreement on the Federal budget was imminent.
The generally positive news on the budget outweighed a rise in oil prices.


Star States Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Engelhard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Raises a Question IN Brazil's Dept Talks
A top United States Treasury official told Brazil's central bank president yesterday that he was worried about the more than $8 billion in unpaid interest owed to commercial bankers.
The remark is an indication that Brazil cannot expect to get approval of a $2 billion emergency loan until it reaches an acceptable arrangement with the banks to pay the arrears.


TransCanada Pipelines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wyoming National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Events: Open Houses (Supper, Too)
Open House Times Six,
United Cerebral Palsy of New York City, 105 Madison Avenue (29th Street); (212) 683-6700.
Six residences on the Upper East Side of Manhattan that have been decorated by Vicente Wolf and Georgina Fairholme, among others, will be open for self-guided tours on Tuesday from 12:30 to 4:30 P.M.
Tickets, $60.
Proceeds will benefit United Cerebral Palsy.
Reservations required.
A Manhattan Neighborhood,
Hamilton Grange, 287 Convent Avenue at 141st Street; (212) 234-8206.
A walking tour of the Hamilton Heights neighborhood begins at noon on Saturday.
The tour includes the James Anthony Bailey House, built in 1888; Romanesque revival row houses, and Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic Church, built in 1904.
Meet at the grange.
Fee, $6.
Apartments Plus,
New York Chapter of the American Society of Interior Designers, 200 Lexington Avenue (32d Street); (212) 685-3480.
The society's annual house tour, featuring apartments, lofts and brownstones in Manhattan, some the homes of designers, will be Nov. 3 starting at 1 P.M.
Among the participating designers will be Robert Metzger, Vladimir Kagan, Geoffrey Hassman and Thomas Britt.
Tickets for the tour, $45; $35 for those 35 and under; for the tour and supper in one of the homes of the designers that evening, $125, or $225 a couple.
Proceeds will benefit the Design Industry Foundation for AIDS, the Foundation for Interior Design Education Research and the New York chapter of the society.
Reservations required.
3 Days of Design,
Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, Foundation Building, Third Avenue at Seventh Street; (212) 860-6862.
On Nov. 3 and 4, the Cooper-Hewitt Museum is sponsoring a symposium, "The Modernist Impulse in the Landscape of Invention: Los Angeles Architecture, 1920-1990."
The speakers will include Kenneth Frampton, professor of architecture at Columbia University; Thomas S. Hines, professor of architecture and urban planning at the University of California at Los Angeles; Frank O. Gehry, the architect, and Kurt W. Forster, director of the J. Paul Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities.
Hours: 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Saturday; 1 to 3:30 P.M.
Sunday.
Admission: $45; $35, members and students.
"The Dynamics of Color," another museum-sponsored symposium, is planned for Nov. 7 from 8:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. at the museum, 2 East 91st Street.
Among the topics will be color as it relates to advertising, gourmet foods, architecture and interior design.
Admission: $125; $100, members; $50, students.
Reservations are required for both programs.
Antiques Show and Benefit,
Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street; (212) 777-5218.
The antiques show "Modernism: A Century of Style and Design: 1860-1960," featuring late 19th- and 20th-century items from 71 dealers, will run Nov. 1-4.
It includes "An Eye to the Future," an exhibition featuring contemporary furniture, lamps and decorative objects from the Brooklyn Museum.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Thursday through Saturday; 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sunday.
Admission: $10.
A preview of the show, for the benefit of the decorative arts department of the museum, will be Wednesday from 6 to 9:30 P.M.
Tickets are $125; sponsorship donations start at $250.
All items will be for sale during the preview.
Information: (718) 638-5000, extension 326.


Michael Goldsmith, 68, Foreign Correspondent
Michael Goldsmith, an Associated Press foreign correspondent for 45 years, died today at a hospital in southern France.
He was 68 years old.
His doctor at the Grasse hospital said the cause of death was a stomach hemorrhage.
Mr.
Goldsmith suffered a stroke Oct. 1 and was hospitalized again on Sunday after a relapse.
He joined The Associated Press in 1945 and was based in Geneva and Paris for most of his career, but traveled widely on assignment, reporting on post-independence turmoil in the Congo, Algeria and Yemen; the building of the Berlin wall; the Vietnam War and the Paris peace talks that ended the United States involvement there; the 1973 Middle East war, and the Afghan civil war.
Mr.
Goldsmith was on assignment in the Central African Republic in 1977, covering the ceremony in which Jean-Bedel Bokassa proclaimed himself emperor, when the authorities arrested him and accused him of being a spy.
He was beaten unconscious by Mr.
Bokassa, two of his sons and a group of aides, and imprisoned for a month.
Despite this incident, Goldsmith kept in touch with the deposed emperor while he lived in exile in France.
Mr.
Goldsmith was born in Vienna in 1921 to British parents.
He was educated at London University and served as an intelligence officer in the British Army in World War II.
He is survived by his wife, Roxanne; their son, Andrew, 15; and two sons and a daughter from previous marriages: Martin, Michael and Mary.


Hastings Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TLC Beatrice Net Doubles
TLC Beatrice International, the food company controlled by the New York financier Reginald F. Lewis, said yesterday that its third-quarter net income doubled as a result of higher sales of ice cream products in Europe and favorable exchange rates.
The company, based in New York, reported net income of $23.5 million, or $2.14 a share, compared with $11.8 million, or $1 a share, in the corresponding period last year.
Sales increased 38.1 percent, to $405.5 million, from $293.7 million a year ago.
"Though favorable exchange rates helped us, particularly in the third quarter, these results nevertheless show real unit gains from our operations," said Mr.
Lewis, who is the company's principal stockholder.
He noted that the company's net debt was below $100 million at the end of September, down from $513 million in 1987.
Mr.
Lewis acquired the international operations of the former Beatrice Companies through a leveraged buyout in 1987.
Earlier this year, TLC Beatrice canceled plans for a public offering, citing unfavorable market conditions.


Virginia First Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MAKING CARS SAFER IN SIDE COLLISIONS
The Department of Transportation issued new standards for automobile safety today that are intended to protect occupants when cars are struck from the side, saying the rule would prevent more than 500 deaths and 2,600 serious injuries a year.
The regulation will be phased in over four years, beginning in 1993.
Federal highway safety officials estimate that up to 35 percent of all cars may already meet the new standard, though they have not yet tested all vehicles.


Tanner Has Surgery
The former major league manager Chuck Tanner has undergone heart-bypass surgery at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota, his son Bruce said yesterday.
"He's just real tired and will be that way for a while," Tanner said from his father's hometown in New Castle, Pa.
"The doctors say he will have to take it easy for a couple of months."
Clinic officials said the 61-year-old Tanner, who was a major league manager for 19 years, was doing well.
The doctors say he can function in a normal capacity and can resume regular activities in a few months.(AP)


PRESIDENT'S VETO OF RIGHTS MEASURE SURVIVES BY 1 VOTE
The Senate today fell one vote short of overturning President Bush's veto of a civil rights bill, giving a victory to those who contended that the legislation would have led to the widespread use of quotas in hiring and promotion.
The 66-to-34 vote, one less than the two-thirds majority needed to override the veto, killed the measure in the 101st Congress but is unlikely to quell the debate over whether the proposed Civil Rights Act of 1990, or similar bills almost certain to be proposed next year, would enshrine quotas in the workplace.  [ Roll-Call, page B11. ]


Court Upholds Shutdown of Barge Company
The family singled out by New York State as the worst polluter of New York Harbor failed yesterday to block the state in court from immediately shutting its oil- and sludge-hauling barge business.
Lawyers for the Frank family of New York and New Jersey argued unsuccesfully before Federal District Judge Robert J. Ward that the Department of Environmental Conservation had overstepped its authority and preempted the United States Coast Guard, which licenses the barges.


At Conference on AIDS, The Talk Is of Lobbying
At the first statewide conference on AIDS being held this week, only one session aroused so much interest that it had to be brought back a second day by popular demand.
It was devoted to the topic "Accessing Local Legislators."
A lesson in lobbying might seem a little odd at a meeting called to contemplate the future of a disease, especially when the meeting is sponsored by the New York State Health Department.
Nevertheless, the government has been spending tax dollars to instruct people on the proper way to get their hands on more tax dollars.


William L. Wilson, Executive, 80
William L. Wilson, a retired vice president of the C.I.T.
Financial Corporation in New York and a former mayor of Princeton, N.J., died on Monday at the Medical Center of Princeton.
He was 80 years old and lived in Princeton Township.
He died of a heart attack, his wife, Edna, said.
Mr.
Wilson, a 1931 graduate of Dartmouth College, joined C.I.T. in 1946 as vice president for public relations, retiring in 1975.
Before joining the company, he worked in newspapers and was in public relations.
He was on the Princeton Board of Education from 1954 to 1960 and on the Township Committee from 1962 to 1970.
He was mayor from 1964 to 1965.
In addition to his wife, he is survived by two sons, William Jr., of Houston, and Thomas, of Fairchild, Wis., and a brother, Robert, of New Bern, N.C.


Grand Juries
Stupid prosecutor's trick of the month -- and the competition is fierce for this one -- goes to the assistant state attorney in the 2 Live Crew case who said one of the jurors, a 76-year-old retired professor, was trouble from Day One.
"She was a sociologist, and I don't like sociologists," Pedro Dijols said.
"They try to reason things out too much."
Now there's an indictment if I ever heard one.
You let people go reasoning things out, next thing you know they'll be using logic.
And before you know it the place will be overrun with common sense and then where will we be?


Stepan Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Merry Land &amp; Investment reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Having a Wonderful Time in Miami
LIKE an overgrown Venus flytrap, the village of Coconut Grove seems to engulf its houses.
Here, along the Entrada Inlet that leads from Biscayne Bay, the landscape is a moist thicket of banyans, palms and royal poincianas, a haven for land crabs and the occasional parrot.
The languorous waters of the inlet, which forms the backyard of one of Miami's oldest neighborhoods, are home to pompano, ray and other underwater creatures.
So it is only fitting that when visitors approach the new house designed by Laurinda Spear and Bernardo Fort-Brescia for themselves and their five children, they encounter a front door with snappers etched into its glass.


'East End Sniper' Convicted Of Killing in Riverhead, L.I.
A Long Island man known as the East End Sniper was convicted today of killing one man and wounding three others while pretending he was a commando on a military mission.
A Suffolk County Court jury rejected defense claims that the man, Yusef Abdullah Rahman, 21, of Riverhead, was not guilty by reason of insanity.
He faces up to life in prison.
On Dec. 5, 1988, Timothy Heaney, 30, was killed while working at his auto-repair shop in Southampton.
Prosecutors said Mr.
Rahman fired a .22-caliber rifle from nearby woods.
On each of the next three evenings, he fired through windows of homes in the Riverhead area.
A man was wounded in each attack.


Sendak Is Forming Company For National Children's Theater
Like the plucky young hero of one of his most famous children's books, "In the Night Kitchen," Maurice Sendak is about to plunge into a new and, he hopes, nourishing experience.
After 40 years and many awards as an illustrator and writer, and more than a decade designing for opera and ballet, he is establishing a national children's theater, which he has named the Night Kitchen.
Joining him is his friend Arthur Yorinks, a highly praised author of children's books who has also written for opera, ballet, film and theater.


Profit Slips 2.6% at Du Pont
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company today reported a 2.6 percent drop in its third-quarter earnings, with increases in its petroleum operations offset by slower growth in the company's chemicals businesses.
The company reported net income of $533 million in the quarter, down from $547 million a year earlier.
Earnings per share were flat at 79 cents and reflected the lower number of shares this year because of a stock-buyback program.
Revenues for the quarter were up 15.6 percent, at $9.93 billion, compared with $8.59 billion in 1989.
"Third-quarter results reflect strong performance from our petroleum operations," Du Pont's chairman, Edgar S. Woolard Jr., said.
"At the same time, earnings in several of our chemical businesses continued to be adversely affected by the slowdown in the U.S. economy."
Du Pont said the improvement in petroleum earnings was partly a result of higher oil prices, which soared after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2.
The company said 70 percent of the overall improvement was a result of operations overseas, where there was a strong demand for petroleum products and greater efficiency at the company's refineries.
Du Pont also said its quarterly results included gains of 8 cents a share from the sale of an interest in a North Sea oil property and an instrument systems business.
The company's shares were unchanged today at $34.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Probert Deportation Decision Due
When Bob Probert of the Red Wings stands before a Federal judge in Detroit this morning, he faces several possibilities, two of which threaten his career and his freedom.
On the negative side, Probert could again be ordered to jail.
Or he could avoid jail by leaving the United States and his hockey team.


Iraq Bolsters Force, Saudi Says
Iraq has increased its forces in southern Iraq and Kuwait, amassing as many as 500,000 soldiers there as well as hundreds of anti-aircraft missiles and several thousand armored units, a senior Saudi official says.
Saying this represented an increase over forces monitored there a few weeks ago, the Saudi official also said Saudi Arabia has confirmed reports that armed Palestinians from the Abul Abbas organization have entered Kuwait and are helping Iraqi troops on internal security and border patrols.
The group, which carried out the Achille Lauro hijacking in 1985, is affiliated with the Palestine Liberation Organization and is now based in Iraq,


Boat People Lacking in Teachers of English
To the Editor:
A few days ago I visited the Pillar Point camp in Hong Kong, which houses 5,000 Vietnamese boat people who have qualified for resettlement in the West.
It seems probable that the great majority of the Vietnamese living at Pillar Point will almost certainly be resettled in English-speaking countries.
Between Jan. 1 and Sept. 1, 4,100 of the 5,100 refugees who left Hong Kong for settlement in the West went to English-speaking countries -- Australia, Canada, Britain, New Zealand and the United States.
The accommodation at Pillar Point is adequate, and many of the refugees have obtained temporary jobs in Hong Kong for wages that are opulent by Vietnamese standards.
Unfortunately, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is facing a severe financial crisis in Hong Kong, and all adult education at the Pillar Point camp has stopped.
Many future readjustment problems could be eased if the Vietnamese refugees at Pillar Point could be given training in English.
Many of them are eager to learn, but they have no teachers.
In the past, a number of American organizations concerned with the plight of the Vietnamese boat people have been critical of the way in which the camps in Hong Kong have been run.
If these organizations were now to help finance the provision of a few competent teachers of English at Pillar Point, they would be making a constructive gesture that would help smooth the path of many men, women and children who are going to live in America.
The Government of Hong Kong is otherwise heavily committed to providing basic education in its other camps for the Vietnamese boat people.  (Sir) PHILIP GOODHART  Member of Parliament London, Oct. 18, 1990


Matsushita Deal in U.S.
The Matsushita Electric Industrial Company is likely to buy about 12 billion yen worth of American-made semiconductors as a result of a recent chip-buying mission to the United States, a company spokesman said this week.
The purchases would be worth about $93 million.
Matsushita's total foreign-made chip purchases were worth 27.4 billion yen in the year that ended on March 31 and they are expected to rise to 38 billion yen in 1990-91, he said.
The company used foreign chips in 13 percent of its products in 1989-90 and said it planned to raise this to 20 percent by next July.


USG Plans Cuts To Offset a Loss
The USG Corporation, a building materials company, said it will lay off a significant part of its work force after a third-quarter loss of $11 million.
The company declined to say how many jobs would be eliminated.
USG has trimmed its work force in the last two years from 21,000, to 14,000.
USG said it had suffered because of low prices for its gypsum wallboard.
It announced its quarterly loss on Tuesday.
USG's shares were unchanged today at $1.625 on the New York Stock Exchange.


Fernandez and Teachers Union: Are 2 Sides Too Close?
As New York City Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez has maintained a relationship with the teachers union that strikes some educators as uncommonly close and visible given the city's history of often-fierce labor-management wars.
The alliance has benefited both sides, and it may also benefit the education of New York's children through more attractive salaries for teachers, cooperation in decision-sharing programs between teachers and principals and a number of legislative changes that could improve the accountability for all professionals in the system.


Spinoff Plan In Cable TV
Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable television company, said today that it would spin off its main programming interests to stockholders as a separate company.
The Denver-based company, which provides service to one in four United States cable subscribers, said its board had approved a plan under which stockholders would get the right to exchange some of their stock for stock in the new company, the Liberty Media Corporation.
The deal is subject to approval by Federal and state authorities as well as some of the company's equity partners and lenders.
Under the plan, Liberty will get the programming assets of Tele-Communications, with the exception of interests in the Turner Broadcasting System and the Discovery Channel.
Liberty also will get Tele-Communications' interests -- in most cases 50 percent or less -- in cable systems serving more than 3 million customers.
In return, Tele-Communications will get several classes of Liberty preferred stock that will give it the right to name at least 20 percent of Liberty's directors.


Oil Rebounds $1.71 a Barrel On Gulf Fears
Oil prices, which have plummeted $13 a barrel from all-time highs two weeks ago, rebounded yesterday as the market sensed it might have been overly optimistic about a quick resolution to the Persian Gulf crisis.
Crude oil for delivery in December closed up $1.71, to $31.08 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Prices for gasoline and heating oil also rose.


Trieste Journal; Shades of Hapsburgs! City Sees Splendid Future
Vienna is closer than Rome, and Budapest and Prague are not much farther away.
Local coffee distributors have names like Eisner and Hausbrandt, and in the heart of town it is easier to find beer from Munich than a pizza.
Make no mistake, people in this Adriatic outpost caution; they are as fervently Italian as the next one.
Still, Triestinos stand apart from their southern cousins.


Review/Theater; A Japanese Puppet Classic Is Reworked for People
As the author of 130 plays performed by both Kabuki and Bunraku theaters, Chikamatsu Monzaemon was the first Japanese playwright to make heroic figures out of common men.
His tales often deal with acts of domestic violence, as is the case with "Gonza the Lancer," which opened Tuesday night in a misguided production at the Public Theater.
Chikamatsu's artistry is inextricable from performance and production techniques, that combination of highly formalized acting, movement and scenic panoply that so distinguishes the work of classic Japanese theater.
Specifically, he wrote "Gonza" and other plays for the puppet theater, a choice, it has been said, provoked by his feeling that puppets would be more faithful to his intentions than actors ever could be.
One wonders what the playwright (1653-1725) would have thought of David Greenspan's aberrant version.


'Great Books' Takes In Moderns and Women
Almost 40 years after the "Great Books of the Western World" was published to wide critical acclaim, the collection of many of the seminal works of almost 3,000 years of Western civilization has been given an editorial facelift.
Homer, Shakespeare, Plato and John Stuart Mill are still represented, but for the first time they will share the grandeur with 20th-century writers.
And for the first time, women will be included.
The 60 volumes that make up the revised "Great Books," published by the Encyclopaedia Britannica , is to be introduced this morning at the Library of Congress.
Later today, William F. Buckley Jr. is to lead a panel of scholars in a discussion of the impact of 20th-century authors on Western thought.


Parent &amp; Child
WHEN 4-year-olds get into serious trouble, parents simply step in and take charge.
But their role is less clear if the child in trouble is 24 or 34.
Parental responsibilities and obligations are quite different when children reach adulthood.
When either generation fails to acknowledge those differences, a relatively minor family crisis can leave everyone involved feeling angry and hurt.
Major but solvable problems -- a child's drug abuse, impending divorce or possible bankruptcy -- can turn into disasters.


President for Tektronix Hired From Honeywell
Tektronix Inc., a maker of test and measurement products, said yesterday that it had hired Jerome J. Meyer from Honeywell Inc. to be its new president and chief executive.
Mr.
Meyer, 52, has been president of Honeywell's industrial business, based in Minneapolis.
At his new job, in Beaverton, Ore., Mr.
Meyer will take over from an interim management team that has been trimming the company's operations and succeeding in returning the concern to profitability.


First National Pennsylvania Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Skills-Training Policy Opening Doors to Jobs
For the last eight years researchers have clocked and gauged the experiences of several thousand single mothers here and in three other cities, trying to answer one of the most elusive questions in social policy: how to turn welfare recipients into workers.
As a result they are praising the approach of a San Jose program that stresses tangible job skills, rather than the popular back-to-basics regimen of remedial English and mathematics.
No matter how well the women here are able to read or compute, they quickly get their hands on circuit boards, printing presses, typewriters and frying pans.


Brunswick Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Standing on Ceremony on Poison Gas
For years the United States did nothing while Saddam Hussein used chemical weapons, first in his war with Iran and then against Iraq's Kurdish citizens.
Now U.S. troops face a chemically armed Iraq in the desert and Congress is about to vote to impose mandatory sanctions on countries that produce, acquire or use chemical weapons.
How can President Bush, of all people, be threatening to veto the bill?
Mr.
Bush has pledged to rid the world of the scourge of chemical weapons.
And he's negotiating a global treaty to do just that.
But Secretary of State Baker says mandatory sanctions limit the President's discretion.
What a bizarre time to stand on ceremony.
Congress is right to enact the legislation, and the President would be wrong to veto it.


Paperback Books Given For U.S. Military in Gulf
American book publishers, working through the U.S.O. and the Department of Defense, have donated more than 200,000 paperback books for American military personnel in the Persian Gulf.
The first shipments are to take place on Tuesday.
More than 100,000 of the books will be given through an "Oasis Package," which will also include writing paper, audio cassettes and sunglasses.
Another 110,000 paperback books are being shipped through the auspices of the Defense Department -- 50,000 directly to Bahrain for distribution to troops already in the Middle East, and 60,000 to Fort Lewis, Wash., for distribution to troops embarking for there.


S. Gene Odle, University Provost, 64
S.
Gene Odle, provost emeritus of Alfred (N.Y.) University, died yesterday at St.
James Mercy Hospital in Hornell, N.Y., a university spokeswoman said.
He was 64 years old and lived in Alfred.
The cause of his death was not disclosed.
Dr.
Odle joined the nonsectarian university in 1970 as vice president for student affairs.
He was named vice president for academic affairs in 1975 and provost in 1976.
He retired in 1988.
He was born in Caldwell, Idaho, and graduated from the College of Idaho there.
He served in the infantry in World War II.
He received a master's degree from Columbia in 1951 and a doctorate from Stanford in 1955.
He later taught at the University of Minnesota.
He is survived by a daughter, Andrea McConnell of Millis, Mass.; a son, Shawn, of Washington; and his father and stepmother, Glen and Lucille Odle of Whiteland, Ind.


Johnstown Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Horizon Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cytrx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Burmese Forces Raid Monasteries And Arrest 12 Opposition Leaders
The military Government has raided monasteries and rounded up opposition leaders in a growing crackdown on dissent, opposition contacts said today.
A dozen members of the opposition National League for Democracy were arrested on Tuesday night after the authorities searched its headquarters and district offices in Yangon, formerly known as Rangoon, party members who insisted on not being identified said.


CHRONICLE
Jury selection in the murder trial of CHRISTIAN BRANDO , the 32-year-old son of MARLON BRANDO , begins Nov. 5 in Santa Monica, Calif.
Judge ROBERT W. THOMAS of Los Angeles County Superior Court yesterday ordered a panel of 225 prospective jurors.
Marlon Brando is expected to testify, but Deputy District Attorney WILLIAM CLARK said it was doubtful that the actor's daughter and half-sister of the accused, CHEYENNE BRANDO , will return from Tahiti to testify about the shooting death of her lover, Dag Drollet.
Miss Brando and her father were at the actor's mansion on May 16 when mR.
Drollet was killed.
The police said that Christian Brando had admitted that he fired the gun, but that he had insisted it was an accident.
Deputy District Attorney STEVEN BARSHOP said he was negotiating with French authorities for the return of Miss Brando, 20, from Tahiti, a French territory.
She went there after the shooting and gave birth to Mr.
Drollet's child in June.
Her role in the case is being investigated by French authorities in a separate action brought in Tahiti by the victim's father, Mr.
Clark said.


Comtech Telecomm Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sara Lee Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Sending a $12.5 Million Message to a Hate Group
When jurors in Oregon assessed more than $12 million in damages against a white supremacist group and its leaders this week, they virtually indentured the leaders for the rest of their lives.
Not that the civil rights lawyers who brought the case against the group, the White Aryan Resistance, ever expected to win nearly that much.


Pakistan's Choices, America's Interests
Even in a fair election, Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto might have failed to win vindication in Pakistan.
But her decisive defeat in Wednesday's vote also owed a good deal to her opponents' desperate tactics.
A caretaker Government tried to disqualify her and poured money into swing voting districts.
And she was unfairly assailed as favoring American meddling when a group of U.S. senators signed a letter urging that she be given a chance to run in a free election.
The victorious Islamic Democratic Alliance has the votes to form a government.
But the unbridled nationalism of its campaign spells more trouble in Islamabad's relations with Washington -- especially on the touchy issue of Pakistan's nuclear ambitions, which have already caused a suspension of U.S. aid.


Review/Art; Adrian Piper's Head-On Confrontation of Racism
If the fall season in New York can be said to belong to one artist, that artist is Adrian Piper.
For some months now, her images and words about race and racism seem to have been everywhere: in galleries, in museums and in all kinds of publications.
Her current exhibition of work on paper at Exit Art in SoHo is the second she has had in New York this fall (the first was at the John Weber Gallery).
Her ambitious new video installation, "Out of the Corner," at the Whitney Museum of American Art, is based on "Cornered," a video that was shown at John Weber in March 1989 and at the New Museum of Contemporary Art last summer.
Ms.
Piper is part black and part white.
She was born in 1948 in New York City, where she was brought up and entered the art scene in the late 1960's and early 70's.
Like some of the most influential Conceptual and Minimal art of that time, her work is absolute, highly logical, structured around ideas whose permutations she exhausts.
And she is determined to bring social realities into the art gallery, thereby preventing the gallery from being exclusively a refuge from the world outside it.


Carter Hawley Closing Held
Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., the Los Angeles-based owner of department stores, will announce today the closing of its merchandising and buying unit in New York, retail executives in New York said yesterday.
The termination of about 20 jobs marks the end of a resident buying office in New York, which Carter Hawley has maintained in various forms for several decades.
The office has been operating within the Associated Merchandising Corporation, a leading marketing and research organization.
Laurie Wilson, a Carter Hawley senior vice president, is expected to be retained in the group's offices after the unit closes to serve as a liaison with that organization.
Associated Merchandising will provide product development and other services to Carter Hawley, the retail executives said.
Bill Dombroski, Carter Hawley's vice president for communications, said the company would not comment on the reports.
The largest operator of department stores on the West Coast, Carter Hawley has experienced erratic earnings in the last two years and recently sold its Thalhimer Brothers store division to the May Department Stores Company for $325 million.


Merchants Bank of New York reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rochester Gas &amp; Electric Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ellis Misses Jail Date
Dale Ellis of the Seattle SuperSonics failed to report yesterday for a scheduled day in jail on a drunken driving conviction.
Ellis arrived home about 3 A.M. yesterday after the Sonics played an exhibition game against Chicago in Vancouver, British Columbia, on Wednesday night, his attorney, Jeff Jones, said.
Jones said that since the day in jail includes classes on alcoholism and drunken driving, it was thought that he should not report with only a few hours of sleep.
He said the jail time would be rescheduled for nextweek. (AP)


Ex-Owner Of S.&amp; L. Is Indicted
The former owner of the Western Savings Association, who led the Texas institution through a period of stunning growth in high-risk ventures, was indicted today by a Federal grand jury on 37 charges of bank fraud, misuse of funds and conspiracy.
The failure of the savings institution is likely to cost taxpayers more than $1 billion.
The criminal charges against Jarrett E. Woods, who controlled Western between 1982 and 1986, were announced late this afternoon in Washington, nearly a week after Federal regulators filed a sweeping civil lawsuit seeking $560 million in damages from Mr.
Woods for what it said were actions that defrauded the institution.


Doctors Perform Parent-to-Child Lung Transplant
In a historic operation that could offer new hope to parents of premature babies and children with severe lung disease, including cystic fibrosis, doctors at Stanford University Medical School in California have transferred a portion of a mother's lung to her dying 12-year-old daughter.
The girl, who was born prematurely, had severe scarring of her lung and consequent high blood pressure.
She was expected to live just 12 more months without a lung transplant.


Crestmont Federal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Berthold Lubetkin; Architect, 88, Led In Modernist School
Berthold Lubetkin, an architect who played a leading role in founding the Modernist school in Britain in the 1930's, died on Tuesday in Bristol, England.
He was 88 years old.
No cause of death was given.
The son of an industrialist, he was born in Tblisi, Georgia.
In 1922 he accompanied an exhibition of Soviet art to Berlin and went on to study architecture and engineering in Europe.
He came to London in 1931 and set up Tecton, a co-operative of young architects committed to radical ideas, the next year.
In 1933 he was commissioned to design a luxury apartment block at Highgate in north London.
Highpoint One, as the block was called, was the most conspicuous statement of the new "white architecture" in Britain.
Many of its details, like S-curved balconies, became cliches in the 1950's.
After World War II, he concentrated on designing homes for blue-collar workers.
Tecton broke up in 1948, and Mr.
Lubetkin abandoned architecture to take up farming in Gloucestershire in western England.
In 1982, the Royal Institute of British Architects awarded him its Royal Gold Medal for Architecture.
Mr.
Lubetkin married the architect Margaret Church in 1936.
She died in 1978.
They had two daughters and a son, who survive.


2 Killed as Scaffold Falls From Manhattan Hotel


Imperial Chemical Industries Plc reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Frozen Food Express reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wicor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


At the Bar; An in-gathering of quotations from Marx (Groucho) to Musmanno on the profession.
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. leads the hit parade, with Learned Hand and Benjamin Cardozo at his heels.
But also represented are Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr., Woody Allen, Woody Guthrie, John Brown, Samuel Goldwyn, Art Buchwald, Groucho (and Chico) Marx, Albert Einstein, George S. Patton and Willie Sutton.
The pithy or witty or historic or epigrammatic words of each, along with those of hundreds of others, will appear in the Oxford Dictionary of American Legal Quotations being amassed by Fred R. Shapiro of Yale Law School.


U.S. Securities Prices Up Slightly
With a batch of weak economic data and Congress approaching agreement on a new Federal budget, credit market participants were persuaded to buy Treasury securities yesterday.
Another sharp rise in oil prices was all but ignored.
While market participants fully expect the Federal Reserve to ease short-term interest rates once the budget is passed and signed into law, traders yesterday did not provide a ringing endorsement of the pact.
Bond prices rose only slightly, and long-term interest rates dipped.


Champagne Makers Looking West
Faced with declining sales, the threat of higher Federal and state excise taxes and the increasingly active neo-prohibitionist groups, many California wine makers feel the glass is half empty, at best.
But the French see a champagne flute half full.
Domaine Carneros, the seventh California sparkling wine operation to be built or bought by the French, recently shipped its first wine and is typical of the optimism.
The company is a $13 million joint venture between Champagne Taittinger of Rheims, France, and its American distributor, the Kobrand Corporation of New York.


Washington Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Business Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Who Is George Bush?
Is George Bush the President who understood the danger of Saddam Hussein's aggression and rallied the world against it?
Or is he the man who made Willie Horton an issue in his campaign for President?
The question is raised by Mr.
Bush's veto of the civil rights bill.
For the man with a sure sense of how to bring people together in foreign policy was unsure and unconvincing on this most delicate domestic issue, dividing instead of healing.


Church &amp; Dwight reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crossing the 'T' in Taxes, Lawmakers Turn Eyes to Votes on Deficit Deal
With the end of the budget ordeal in sight, bleary-eyed lawmakers throughout the Capitol tied the last knots in a compromise tax and spending package today in preparation for votes Friday on the biggest deficit-reduction measure in history.
The White House gave the compromise a backhanded endorsement.
Marlin Fitzwater, Mr.
Bush's press secretary, said the President was satisfied with the overall measure, which is supposed to cut the deficit by $40 billion this year and $500 billion over five years.


Accounts
*
Billa-Heute, a food store chain in Austria, to Dr.
Puttner &amp; BSB, Austria, a unit of Backer Spielvogel Worldwide, New York, with a budget of $8 million to $10 million. *
San-J International, a soy sauce-producing subsidiary of San Jirushi Corp., Kuwana, Japan, to Earle Palmer Brown, Richmond, for its industrial and food-service accounts.
The agency's Atlanta office picked up CNET, Atlanta, a credit card processing company owned by the National Data Corp.
Billings were not disclosed.


Keystone Heritage reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Harmonia Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Art; Baselitz and the Aftermath of War
Georg Baselitz, the German Neo-Expressionist known for painting his images upside down -- thereby challenging both his viewers and his own artistic skills -- is having his first New York exhibition of new work since 1987.
It's a two-part affair divided between SoHo and 57th Street that inaugurates his new affiliation with the Pace Gallery.
Unfortunately, the show is only one-part successful.
The gallery's spacious SoHo venue is dominated by an impressive single painting titled "45," which consists of 20 large paintings on wood -- mostly of upside-down women's faces -- installed in a continuous screen of imagery.
The show's lesser half is a group of 11 wood sculptures collectively titled "Women of Dresden" on view at Pace headquarters on East 57th Street.


Tax Protest, Fueled by Talk Shows, Is Getting Steamed Voters Organized
Mary Rothing, a housewife in Yonkers, says taxes have soared so high that "they're not taxes, they're extortion." So when she heard on Bob Grant's radio talk show about a big tax protest, she called the toll-free number -- 1-800-BE-ANGRY -- and signed right up.
So, it appears, have a lot of other people.
Even as President Bush and members of Congress begin to shake off the total political paralysis over the explosive issue of higher taxes in an election year, taxpayers around the country are being urged by radio talk-show hosts to, as Mr.
Grant indelicately put it on the air, "throw the bastards out."


Early Vocal Music
Anonymous 4, an early-music vocal quartet, is to sing music by Johannes Ockeghem at St.
Michael's Church, Amsterdam Avenue at 99th Street, tonight at 8.
The works on the program were composed for the royal chapel at the French court between 1460 and 1497.
Tickets are $10.
Information: 781-7737.


Carmike Cinemas Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On Job Rights Bill, a Vow to Try Again in January
In the wake of the Senate's failure to override President Bush's veto of a major job discrimination bill, the measure's backers said today that they would introduce an even stronger version of the legislation when Congress reconvenes next January.
And conservatives who opposed the measure said its defeat signaled the waning influence of the civil rights movement on Capitol Hill.


Miscellany
*
Ivan Lendl will be the official spokesman for Snapple brand beverages, through a multiyear, million-dollar contract.
Mr.
Lendl will be featured in all television spots and promotional materials, and will wear a Snapple patch on the sleeve of his shirt during all tennis tournaments.


Laventhol &amp; Horwath Seeks 10% Pay Cut
Laventhol &amp; Horwath, the nation's seventh-largest accounting firm with $345 million in revenues last year, told its nearly 3,500 employees yesterday that they would have to take a 10 percent pay cut for three months because the firm is under financial pressure.
The cuts come when several mid-sized firms are struggling under unusual competitive pressures.
Spicer &amp; Oppenheim, a New York firm with $75 million in revenues last year, is said to be reeling.


Nalco Chemical Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Soviet Union, Dizzying Disunion
It was a typical day's Babel of self-determination in the Soviet Union.
The Moldavian Republic was distracted from its own anti-Moscow separatist plans to face the determined rebellion of one of its parts, the Gagauz minority, who were beginning ad hoc independence elections.


Carolyn Bean Publishing Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
MARGARITA PENON DE ARIAS, the wife of OSCAR ARIAS SANCHEZ, a former president of Costa Rica and a Nobel Peace Prize winner, has announced she will run for the Costa Rican presidency in 1994.
Mrs.
Arias, 41 years old, made the announcement in San Jose on Wednesday in a television interview.
Mr.
Arias, who won a the Nobel prize in 1987 for his role in drafting the Central American peace plan that bears his name, left office in May.
Under law, he may not cannot run for re-election.
Mrs.
Arias, a 1970 graduate of Vassar College, said she would will seek the nomination of her husband's party, the National Liberation Party, currently the opposition to the governing Social Christian Unity Party, led by PRESIDENT RAFAEL A. CALDERON JR.
Polls of public opinion polls have consistently ranked Mrs.
Arias as Costa Rica's most popular public figure.
She is the first woman to seek the party's nomination.  (Reuters)


Cade Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cal Rep Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ad About Pantheon Leads to Quarrel Between Publishers
A provocative advertisement in The New York Review of Books has strained relations between two of America's leading publishers, Random House Inc. and Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.
The full-page advertisement, which appealed for new authors to come to Hill &amp; Wang, an imprint of Farrar, Straus, denounced "the sorry destruction of Pantheon Books," an imprint of Random House.
It was signed by Arthur J. Rosenthal, the former head of the Harvard University Press and now the publisher of Hill &amp; Wang.


Financial Center Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


News Summary
International A3-11
American forces in the gulf will grow by 100,000 troops, Defense Secretary Cheney said.
The troops, which might come from troops being withdrawn from Europe, seemed an attempt to put more pressure on Iraq.
Page A1
Iraq does not want to find a solution to the Persian Gulf crisis, the Soviet representative at the United Nations told the nonaligned Security Council members.
A11
Japan in disarray over plan to send troops to the gulf A10
Oil prices rise again, jumping $3.17 a barrel D1
Yemen criticized Saudia Arabia for inviting foreign forces into the kingdom.
President Ali Abdullah Saleh said the kingdom was undermining his nation's stability by forcing 500,000 Yemeni workers to leave.
A1
Israel again rejects United Nations investigation A11
Lebanon's three major militias will pull out of Beirut A10 Indian troops will block nationalists from converging on Ayodhya, where a Hindu party wants a temple built on a site occupied by an Islamic shrine.
The situation has thrown the Government into turmoil.
A3
The Islamic Democratic Alliance claimed a majority in Pakistan's National Assembly, winning 105 of the 217 seats, with 50 more going to political allies.
The alliance led by Benazir Bhutto won only 45 seats.
A3
Burmese dissent is being crushed by the military, which raided the offices of the main opposition party.
The Government is trying to void the elections it lost five months ago in a landslide, diplomats said.
A5
The Soviet Union continues to crack.
The nation's republics -- and factions within those republics -- are issuing proclamations of self-determination on a daily basis.
A6
Top Albania writer seeking asylum in France A6
Durban Journal: A South African prophet of democracy A4  National A12-25
A deal on Medicare was reached that would increase costs modestly and make cuts in payments to doctors and hospitals.
New revenue would come from a rise in the earnings subject to the Medicare tax.
A1
The final details on the budget plan were worked out by bleary-eyed lawmakers in preparation for votes on Friday on the biggest deficit-reduction measure in history.
A20
Budget plan may mean harder economic times next year A21
A nationwide protest against taxes has been scheduled for Saturday by a coalition of lobbyists.
With help from radio talk-show hosts, rallies are being organized in every state.
A22
President Bush tries to quell Republican rebellion A22
Members of Congress sort out the winners and losers A21
Support for Democrats is growing around the country in the closing days of the Congressional election campaign, poll takers said.
A14
Is that a California Republican running against apple pie?  A14
Court orders Cook County to allow third-party slate A14
A new job discrimination measure will be introduced when Congress reconvenes, supporters of the Civil Rights Act of 1990 said.
The new bill is expected to be even stronger than the one the President vetoed.
A25
Senate Ethics Committee orders inquiry into press leak A24
State lawmaker is found guilty in South Carolina bribery A25
A revision of immigration policy was approved by a Congressional conference committee, which at the last minute eased restrictions on entire  categories of people now barred from the country.
A1
The case of General Manuel Noriega is in turmoil.
Congress has complained about his prison privileges, Panama has filed a $6.5 billion suit against him, and legal disputes have delayed his trial.
A12
Detroit says recount of census puts it over 1 million A12
A portion of a mother's lung was transferred to her dying 12-year-old daughter.
The operation could offer new hope to parents of premature babies and children with severe lung disease.
A1
Utah will search for cold fusion scientist A15
Astronomers identify what they think is the largest galaxy A15
Soviets to invest $200 million in U.S. supercollider project A16
Researchers find vaccine for Lyme disease in mice A16
Airlines are fighting bargain hunters who bend the rules on discount flights, using computer programs to catch rule breakers and, in some cases, suing travel agents who promote the practice.
A1  Regional B1-4
Truck drivers struck The Daily News following a melee at the paper's Brooklyn printing plant.
Several delivery trucks were firebombed, and a bus carrying replacement workers was attacked.
A1
The Mayor's plans to cut the budget faced opposition.
The Schools Chancellor said he would cut $50 million instead of the $94 million requested; and the Fire Commissioner cut only $4 million of $13 million.
B1
Sludge-hauling company ordered to close will still operate B3
Staten Island's vote on seccession on Nov. 6 may not lead the borough to sever itself from New York City, but it will let voters express their disdain for the rest of the city -- a Staten Island version of a Bronx cheer.
B1 A defendant in the jogger trial is seeking to replace his lawyer with the civil rights advocate C. Vernon Mason, a move that will probably mean a more confrontational defense.
B1
Detectives are searching for a link in five Bronx killings B2
Hispanic residents in Williamsburg protest at precinct B3
Gambling on an Indian reservation in eastern Connecticut would be allowed under an agreement reached between the state and the Mashantucket Pequots of Ledyard.
B1
Kasparov and Karpov draw in sixth game of chess match B3
The discreet charm of world- class chess kibitzers B3  Business Digest D1 Weekend
New York still fun, but costly C1
Images of a self-built man C1
Hollywood horror from the drive-in era C1
Dealer again ordered to return mosiacs C17
Theater: On Stage, and Off C2
"The Voysey Inheritance" C3
Film: At the Movies C8
"Tune In Tomorrow" C8
Music: Japan Philharmonic C19
Dance: The new BaryshnikovC3
Art: Photographic composites C16
Baselitz on war's aftermath C30
Adrian Piper's angry works C36
Auctions C18
Restaurants C22
Word and Image: "Cop Rock" without the rock?  C32
The French as they see themselves C33
Vampire bats on science program C34 Law Page B20
At the Bar
In the Union capital, war among the Confederates
Sending a $12.5 million message to a hate group  Sports
Baseball: Herr signs with Mets A33
Basketball: Coleman arrives A29
Boxing: Holyfield knocks out Douglas A29
Column: Anderson on promoters A29
Football: Small Giant plays big A30
N.F.L. Matchups A30
Rangers beat Flyers A29
Devils beat Sabres A31 Obituaries A27
John F. Davis, former editor of The Amsterdam News
Berthold Lubetkin, an architect  Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A34
Budget victory, warts and all
For Mr. Morrison in Conn.
Pakistan, and U.S. interests
Letters A34
Anthony Lewis: Who is George Bush?  A35
A. M. Rosenthal: More Arabian Tales A35
Kiren A. Chaudhry: In Pakistan, a candidate flees A35
Gerhard Casper, Saunders Mac Lane: Older, but not wiser A35


Interlake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Detroit Says a Recount Puts It Over 1 Million
Canvassing by city workers and volunteers has yielded the names of more than 121,350 residents who say they were not counted by the 1990 census, Mayor Coleman A. Young announced today.
If the number is accurate, it suggests that the preliminary population estimate for the city, 970,156, is 11 percent short.
John Connolly, a spokesman for the Bureau of the Census, said the number 121,350 "sounds a bit high," but the names will be cross-checked against the list of those already counted.
Detroit's final count will be announced in January or February, he said.


Art Dealer Told Again To Return Mosaics
In an opinion prefaced by a dozen lines from Lord Byron's lament for a crumbling temple, a Federal appeals court ruled on Wednesday that an Indianapolis art dealer must return four sixth-century mosaics to the church on Cyprus from which they were stolen.
The unanimous decision by a panel of three judges of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Chicago stated that the Autocephalous Greek Orthodox Church of Cyprus -- not Peg L. Goldberg, an Indianapolis art dealer -- is the rightful owner of the artworks.


Sam Dolgoff, 88, Dies; Organizer for I.W.W.
Sam Dolgoff, one of the few surviving members of the Industrial Workers of the World, a radical labor organization, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 88 years old.
He died of congestive heart failure, a family spokesman said.
Mr.
Dolgoff, who was born in Russia, came to the United States at the age of 2.
A house painter, he joined the anarchist movement and the I.W.W., which was founded in 1905.
He became an organizer for the I.W.W., known as the Wobblies, a militant, syndicalist rival of the American Federation of Labor.
He was self-educated and spoke six languages.
Throughout his life he worked for and contributed to anarchist publications.
In the 1930's, he was a member of the editorial board of Spanish Revolution, a monthly American publication reporting on the largest Spanish labor organization taking part in the Spanish Civil War.
In later years, he wrote on anarchist and syndicalist themes.
Among his books were "Bakunin on Anarchy" (Alfred A. Knopf, 1972) and "The Cuban Revolution," (Black Rose Books, 1976), a denunciation of Cuban life under Fidel Castro.
He was vigorously opposed to Communism.
Mr.
Dolgoff, a widower, is survived by two sons, Anatole, of Manhattan, and Abraham, of Chicago; a sister, Elaine Brunner of New Rochelle, N.Y., and three grandchildren.


Ogden Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Home Federal Savings (Indiana) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Federal Savings Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


At the Movies
For Women Mostly
Mark Twain happened to notice that everyone complains about the weather but no one does anything about it.
But that was yesteryear in Clemensy.


Utah to Start Search for Cold Fusion Scientist
Miffed at the disappearance of a top cold fusion scientist, the State of Utah yesterday formulated a plan to track down the enigmatic researcher and hold him accountable for his work.
The state's nine-member Fusion Energy Advisory Council said the scientist, Dr.
B.
Stanley Pons, a University of Utah chemist, and his British colleague, Dr.
Martin Fleischmann, would be asked to go to Salt Lake City next month to defend their research before a four-member panel of independent scientists.


Heritage Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Asarco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Anchor Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; The New Baryshnikov, in Pink Pajamas
There was a lot of hype and, better yet, a lot of fun, on Wednesday night in Boston when Mikhail Baryshnikov's new little touring group, the White Oak Dance Project, made its public debut.
The Wang Center was packed with Baryshnikov-hungry fans who had paid up to $500 to see one of the world's greatest ballet dancers tiptoe around the stage in pink pajamas.
Those who expect to see the old Baryshnikov will now have to accommodate themselves to the new Baryshnikov, and especially to Mark Morris, who has choreographed all the existing repertory for the troupe.


First Federal Savings Bank of LaGrange (Ga.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Poll Says Weicker Is Still in Lead
With less than two weeks until Election Day, Lowell P. Weicker Jr. continues to set the pace in Connecticut's race for governor, according to a new poll.
Of 522 people who said they are registered voters, 35 percent preferred Mr.
Weicker, a Republican running as an independent, 24 percent preferred the Republican, Representative John G. Rowland, and 13 percent preferred the Democrat, Representative Bruce A. Morrison, a poll published today in The Hartford Courant shows.
Of those polled, 29 percent said they remained undecided.
When the undecided voters were asked which way they were leaning, Mr.
Weicker's total rose to 42 percent, Mr.
Rowland's to 28 percent and Mr.
Morrison's to 16 percent.
Thirteen percent were still undecided.
Except for Mr.
Rowland's seven-point gain, the levels of support did not differ markedly from those registered in a mid-September Poll.
At Odds With Tracking Poll
The latest poll, which has a margin of error of plus or minus 5 percentage points, was conducted between Oct. 16 and Tuesday by the University of Connecticut's Institute for Social Inquiry.
The level of Mr.
Morrison's support was in dispute Wednesday.
Although the latest poll mirrors the findings of a recent Quinnipiac College poll and surveys done by the Weicker and Rowland camps, it is at odds with a two-day tracking poll completed Tuesday by Stanley Greenberg, a pollster working for Mr.
Morrison.


Sighting of Largest Galaxy Hints Clues on the Clustering of Matter
Astronomers have identified what they think is the largest galaxy ever observed, more than 60 times the size of the Milky Way.
They believe that in its tremendous mass they may find clues to forces responsible for the clustering of matter in the universe.
The galaxy, embracing more than 100 trillion stars, is the extremely bright object at the center of a rich cluster of galaxies known as Abell 2029.
Analysis of new telescopic images indicates that the object is a distinct galaxy more than six million light years in diameter, scientists report in the issue of the journal Science published today.


Timken Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
Resistance to Dinkins On Cutting the Budget On a day of confusion at City Hall, Mayor David N. Dinkins's effort to cut the city's budget by more than $1 billion encountered resistance.
The stiffest came from Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez.
But the defiance spread to the Fire Department and city hospitals.
Page B1.
Showdown Looms in India About 150,000 paramilitary troops were called out to block Hindu militants from marching to a town in northern India that is a focus of Hindu-Muslim tensions.
Page A3.
Burmese Crackdown  After months of refusing to accept the opposition's electoral landslide, the Burmese military Government is moving to crush its critics.
Page A5.
Calling Dr.
Pons Utah officials said they would try to track down a scientist, Dr.
B.
Stanley Pons, and get him to defend his research in cold fusion.
Page A15.


Thorn Apple Valley reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 14


Some Tax Analysts Doubt Rich Would Be Hard Hit
A number of independent tax specialists who have reviewed the budget package negotiated by Congressional Democrats and the Bush Administration said today that the "soak the rich" rhetoric accompanying it was largely a misrepresentation.
These experts did not dispute figures, provided by Congressional tax specialists on Wednesday, showing that the package would raise the level of all Federal taxes on those earning $200,000 or more annually by an average of 6.4 percent, a larger increase than for the average of any income group below them.


Images of a Self-Built Muscle Man
A QUESTION that immediately arises upon first seeing the photographic exhibition of Arnold Schwarzenegger, the muscle person, is: Can he walk?
Do all those bumps and ridges and swellings and shimmering veins inhibit him in an ambulatory way?
Or, when he is finished striking a pose, do a few people pick him up like a statue and transport him to another room?
Some say Mr.
Schwarzenegger can indeed ankle about because they have seen him do it in some of his feature films.
None of which this reporter has seen, unfortunately, not even "Conan the Barbarian," so he cannot attest to the star's movement firsthand.
But one is also aware that special effects are a staple of Hollywood, or, as it was once called, trick photography.


New Lawyer Requested in Jogger Trial
The family of a defendant in the second Central Park jogger trial is seeking to replace its lawyer with C. Vernon Mason, a move that is likely to mean a much more confrontational defense and an aggressive cross-examination of the victim.
The current lawyer, Howard Diller, said yesterday that the defendant, Kevin Richardson, refuses to cooperate with him and asked the judge for a one-day adjournment so he could be replaced.
The jury was not present.


Cooper Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Samuel Horowitz, Rabbi, 72
Rabbi Samuel Horowitz, retired spiritual leader of Temple Zion in Long Beach, L.I., died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 72 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his son, Rabbi Harold Horowitz of Brooklyn, said.
Rabbi Samuel Horowitz was associated with the Orthodox synagogue for over 30 years.
He retired in 1982.
He was born in Kassel, Germany, and grew up in Romania.
After imprisonment in Siberia during World War II, Rabbi Horowitz came to the United States in 1949.
He was a founder of the Hebrew Academy of Long Beach, a co-educational day school, and of the Mesivta of Long Beach, a Jewish high school for boys.
In addition to his son, he is survived by his wife, the former Miriam Brum, and six grandchildren.


Heath Says Iraq Would Use Chemical Arsenal If Attacked
Edward Heath, the former British Prime Minister, has told colleagues that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq warned that he was prepared to use chemical weapons and mistreat hostages if attacked, Britain's national news agency reported today.
The Press Association said Mr.
Heath made the remarks while briefing members of the ruling Conservative Party on his three-hour meeting with President Hussein in Baghdad on Sunday, when he negotiated the release of sick and elderly Britons held in Iraq.


Israel Again Rejects U.N. Investigation
Israel today firmly rejected the United Nations Security Council's latest resolution calling on the Government to reconsider its refusal to accept a United Nations mission investigating the killings at Al Aksa Mosque three weeks ago.
And, once again, the Government leveled particular criticism at the United States for joining what it sees as the anti-Israel pack on the Security Council.


Tenneco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Charges Dropped in Police Case
Criminal charges were dismissed yesterday against a Manhattan book editor who said she had been handcuffed, detained and harassed by police officers last month after criticizing them for taunting a taxi driver, the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, said.
He said the case had been closed even though an investigation had shown that the defendant, Judith Regan, a 37-year-old senior editor at Simon &amp; Schuster, Inc. had "precipitated" her arrest.
Ms.
Regan said yesterday that she was gratified by Mr.
Morgenthau's action.
But she went on to accuse him of "further insult by saying I was abusive toward police officers."
"If I did what he said I did then why did he drop the charges against me?" Ms.
Regan said.
She said she planned to file a civil damage suit against the officers who arrested her.
Ms.
Regan said police officers pulled her from a taxi on Sept. 17, handcuffed her and held her in a precinct station house for five hours after she criticized the police for taunting the taxi's driver.
She said she was subjected to anti-Semitic slurs -- she said she was called "Jew bitch" -- and a torrent of sexual abuse and then freed after being charged with disorderly conduct, obstruction of government administration and resisting arrest.
In a brief statement, Mr.
Morgenthau said, "While the evidence confirms that Ms. Regan was abusive toward the police officers and while her conduct precipitated this incident, the legal standards are sufficiently stringent that her guilt could not be proved beyond a reasonable doubt."
Mr.
Morgenthau also said no criminal charges "were warranted against the officers" who arrested Ms.
Regan.


Tuning In on College Radio Bands at Clubs Around Town
The college-radio industry is something like a small town: it's an insular, self-sufficient community with its own trends, rules, economy and morality.
Within that community, there are different subgroups of musicians who find different ways of addressing what they feel is their particular audience.
This weekend, the College Media Journal Music Marathon, an annual convention focusing on college-radio issues, brings dozens of college-radio bands to clubs throughout New York City.
Some of them, like Redd Kross and Bob Mould, are favorites on the scene; others, like the Shams and Blackbird, are still at its fringes.
Redd Kross, a trio from Los Angeles, is perhaps the archetypal college-radio band of 1990.
Originally formed as a punk band in 1978 when the McDonald brothers were 11 and 14 years old, Redd Kross now plays Monkees-style pop with a harder post-punk guitar edge.
The group's third album and major-label debut, "Third Eye" (Atlantic), is stocked with in-jokes about pop culture that will appeal almost exclusively to people who grew up in the 1970's.


Staten Islanders Brace for Vote on Secession
Waiting in line to drive onto the Staten Island ferry and go home, Gene Redondo drummed his fingers on his steering wheel and offered one indisputable fact about the island's referendum on secession that will take place Nov. 6.
"Maybe it won't lead to secession," Mr.
Redondo said, "but it will at least excite people to pay more attention to us."
The "us" Mr.
Redondo referred to are the nearly 400,000 people of Staten Island who on Election Day will share a cathartic experience all too rare in political life -- a Declaration of Independence that the signers can retract if they later determine that they don't like the terms.
After decades of feeling neglected and exploited, New York City's most isolated borough will for the first time measure how most residents really feel about secession, a move that has been opposed by officials in the rest of the city as long as island residents have dreamed of it.
Long March to Freedom?
But because Staten Island will be obliged to reconsider independence three years down the road, the true weight of marking "yes" on the ballot next month is largely in the eye of the voter.
To some, choosing "yes" would be the first step in a long march toward independence.
For others who fear the economic consequences of secession, "yes" would provide a relatively safe means of expressing disdainfor the rest of the city -- a Staten Island version of a Bronx cheer.
Yesterday, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo told a group of Staten Island citizens, "It's very simple: you deserve the right to study and say whether or not you wish to secede." He explained that as Governor, he would not take a position on secession until a charter, approved by Staten Island, was presented to the State Legislature.
"Should you?" he asked himself, "I don't know."
Mr.
Cuomo, who was speaking at a forum on secession at Wagner College sponsored by The Staten Island Advance, also warned his audience that they should not assume that New York City would freely hand over city prop erty to a newly independent Staten Island.
"The city will be furious with you if you secede," he said, "why should they make it easy for you? Why wouldn't they come down on you like an absolute ton of coal and say you can't have anything?"
Staten Island, which refers to itself as the forgotten borough as automatically as Indiana answers to the name the Hoosier State, has long simmered with discontent.
Residents complain about problems like tolls, unreliable bus service and the presence of the Fresh Kills landfill, the world's largest outdoor garbage dump.
The island and the city seem to be forever at cross-purposes: City Hall recently enraged Staten Island by trying to block the Navy from building a port for warships there in the belief that some vessels would be nuclear-equipped; currently, Staten Island residents are outraged by the city's plan to build a new jail on the island.
The most popular refrain echoed throughout the island's mainly white, middle-class population, is "Why us?"  'Let's Dump the City'
John McLaughlin, a 25-year-old trading floor reporter for the New York Stock Exchange, called it, "the dumping issue." He said caustically: "Whatever the city doesn't want gets dumped here. I say, let's dump the city."
If, as is widely expected, voters reply affirmatively to the question, "Shall a charter commission to provide for the separation of the Borough of Staten Island be created?" theirs would not necessarily be a binding cry for secession.
Many consider the referendum as clearing the way for a serious examination of the merits of independence.
The 13-person commission would have three years to draft a new charter for the City of Staten Island.
Three subcommittees would study the impact on finances, education and municipal employment.
Even then, if Staten Island were to vote in favor of a new charter, independence would have to be approved by the State Legislature.
New York City, moreover, maintains that any legislation putting secession into effect would first have to be approved by the City Council.
"The referendum will only raise false hopes among the people of Staten Island -- secession will not occur," Victor A. Kovner, the city's corporation counsel, said sternly, "That's why it is such an unfortunate misappropriation of public funds." The charter commission's work is expected to cost the state hundreds of thousands of dollars.
The secessionist movement on Staten Island gained noticeable momentum last year when the United States Supreme Court ruled that the city's form of government was unconstitutional because it gave Staten Island, the least populous borough, as much power on the Board of Estimate as Brooklyn, the most populous.
Staten Island residents feared changes in the city's charter that would reduce their voice in municipal affairs.
"It's the same as the Revolution in 1776 -- taxation without representation," said Michael Biondo, a sanitation supervisor at the Fresh Kills landfill.
Mr.
Biondo, 55, who has lived on Staten Island for 25 years, said he thought his tax dollars were being sucked up by the city, instead of improving the quality of life in his borough.
"Staten Island is putting a lot of money in the pot, and we're not getting anything back."
Maria Dawson, a 37-year-old hairdresser who works in a salon in the Staten Island Mall, echoed Mr.
Biondo's sentiments, but proved less eager to gamble on independence.
"Secession would be great, if all our problems could be solved -- but they never will be," she said, "I'll stay undecided until the economics of it are studied further."  Cost of Freedom Unclear
There are no widely accepted assessments of what secession would cost Staten Island -- or the city and state.
Nor are there sure answers to questions about how services, like transportation, or police and firefighting protection, currently provided by the city, would be managed by an independent Staten Island.
The charter commission would be responsible seeking some solutions, but the city would not be included in the process.
Some residents say they are sanguine about the cost of freedom.
"I would be willing to pay more taxes," said Mr.
Redondo, a director of facilities at New York University, "if it would prevent the overflow of city crime and homelessness from washing onto the island."
Even the most ardent secession advocates say they prefer to wait for the charter commission to outline realistic plans before leaping.
"I don't even know if secession is a good idea," said Daniel Singletary, a Staten Island painter who created the Secession Party in 1989.
"I'm just damn sure we should take a look at it."
Mr.
Singletary has seceded from the Secessionist Party -- complaining that his grass-roots organization has been taken over by political candidates -- but he remains an advocate of the referendum.
"We are saying that middle-class voters have a right to study the issue for themselves."
Mr.
Singletary's assumption that Staten Island could have the final say in its destiny is bitterly disputed by opponents of the referendum.
Brendan Sexton, a former city sanitation commissioner, who is now a professor at the Wagner Graduate School of New York University, called the Nov. 6 vote, "an exercise in wishful thinking" that would only lead to disappointment.
"The State Legislature will determine the terms of the separation, and I cannot believe they would be advantageous to Staten Island." he said.
"It's like thinking that Flushing could secede and take Shea Stadium with them."
Mr, Biondo was not as cynical.
"I look at this vote as a pressure-valve release," he said, "for once, and at last, Staten Island will have its say."


American Ecology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Founders Dreamt of a Classless Society; In Rich Company
To the Editor:
Benjamin DeMott (Op-Ed, Oct. 10) describes the price we all pay for refusing to acknowledge that our society is indeed stratified according to income.
However, he unwittingly falls prey to the myth he attempts to debunk.
"Every year," he states, "a Federal housing donation of close to $40 billion" -- in the form of tax abatements -- "is awarded to millions earning more than $50,000 annually." He refers to this group as the "$50,000-plus neediest."
Since when does a household of four, earning $50,000 annually have the same ability to afford housing, not to mention other of life's essentials, such as child care, as a similar household earning two to three times more?
And why point to households earning as little as $50,000 annually as being somehow too wealthy to deserve tax abatements?
By implicitly lumping households earning $50,000 annually with those earning significantly more, Professor DeMott fails to acknowledge the vast differences in life style of the two groups.
When the median price of a home in certain metropolitan areas has soared to close to $200,000, and when a year of full-time day care can cost as much as $12,000 a child, an annual income of $50,000 does not make a man rich.
HOWARD NOVICK Brookline, Mass., Oct. 11, 1990


Unisys Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sonat Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Robin Chu, Legislator And a Sociologist, 71
Robin Chu, a sociologist and a member of Parliament in Taiwan, died on Wednesday at the Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan and in Taipei, customarily spending six months of the year in each city.
He died of stomach cancer, his son, Franklin, said.


Court Asked to Rule Judge Guilty of Speech Curb
The Essex County Executive today asked a Federal judge to rule that New Jersey's Chief Justice violated the First Amendment when he refused to allow the producers of "Bonfire of the Vanities" to film scenes for the movie in the Essex County Courthouse.
The motion comes a week after the Chief Justice, Robert N. Wilentz, appointed a standing committee and gave it guidelines for ruling on future applications to film movies in courthouses around the state.


Puerto Rican Cement Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The U.N. Today
General Assembly POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


D&amp;N Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Founders Dreamt of a Classless Society
To the Editor:
"The Myth of Classlessness" by Benjamin DeMott (Op-Ed, Oct. 10) shows the extent to which much political discourse in this country is made meaningless by the unwillingness, perhaps inability, of Americans to think about issues in terms of class.
Something Professor DeMott does not discuss is the argument that freedom from serious economic inequalities, classlessness of a sort, was central to the constitutional project as conceived in 1787.
The absence of an upper income "bubble" (or of an income tax) is not all that distinguished the political-economic landscape of 1787 from today's.
There is evidence to suggest that economic conditions approaching a state of "classlessness" existed then and that they partly informed decisions made about the Constitution by the Founders.
Charles Pinckney, a delegate from South Carolina, rose at the Constitutional Convention to describe the situation in the country.
Among the people of the states, he said "there are fewer distinctions of fortune and less of rank than of any other nation," and "hence arises a greater equality than is to be found among people of any other country, and an equality which is most likely to continue, because in a new country, possessing immense tracts of uncultivated land, there will be few poor, and few dependent."
More important even than the conditions in 1787 was the outlook the Founders had about America's future and the influence that outlook had on their constitutional project.
To begin, the economic forecast for the young nation in 1787 was generally optimistic.
As long as the frontier and its attendant economic opportunities existed, class distinctions of the sort endemic to Europe were unlikely to arise in the New World.
But the frontier, and its widely dispersed economic benefits, was not long for this world.
As Professor DeMott points out, we are left with the myth of classlessness -- and the corresponding myth of political participation.
ANDREW G. CELLI JR.
New York, Oct. 18, 1990


Integrated Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
A chart on Tuesday showing highlights of clean air legislation misstated a provision on chemical damage to the protective ozone layer.
The ban on hydrochlorofluorocarbons in aerosol cans and other products by Jan.1, 1994, does not apply to foam insulation.


Alliant Computer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Equimark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Iraq Standing Firm, Soviets Tell U.N.
The Soviet Union told nonaligned Security Council members today that it does not believe that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq is interested in a negotiated solution to the Persian Gulf crisis.
Diplomats said that the Soviet representative, Yuli M. Vorontsov, told these third-world countries that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's special envoy, Yevgeny M. Primakov, found no evidence that Iraq was ready to give up any part of Kuwait when he visited Baghdad this month.


Teradyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Regional Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quaker State Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Price of Oil Surges by $3.17, Continuing on Erratic Path
Oil was up sharply yesterday for the second consecutive day, continuing on an erratic path.
Crude for December delivery closed at $34.25 a barrel, up $3.17, on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
In trading yesterday and Wednesday, the price of oil was up $4.88, or 16.6 percent, and many traders expect it to go back toward the $40 range.


The Good, the Bad and the Silly: A Festival Schedule
An annual festival of fantasy, horror and science-fiction films, this year titled They Came From the Arkoff Archive, begins today at Film Forum 2, 209 West Houston Street.
Each screening is $7 ($4.50 for members).
Information: 727-8110.
Here is a schedule.
TODAY THROUGH MONDAY  "I WAS A TEEN-AGE WEREWOLF" (1957), directed by Gene Fowler Jr., 2:20, 6:25 and 10:30 P.M.
"I WAS A TEEN-AGE FRANKENSTEIN" (1957), directed by Herbert L. Strock, 3:45 and 7:50 P.M., with midnight shows today and tomorrow.
"TEEN-AGE CAVE MAN" (1958), directed by Mr.
Strock, 5:10 and 9:15 P.M. today and Monday; 1, 5:10 and 9:15 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday.
Tuesday "BLOOD OF DRACULA" (1957), directed by Mr.
Strock, 4:10, 7:15 and 10:20 P.M.
"HORRORS OF THE BLACK MUSEUM" (1959), directed by Arthur Crabtree, 2:25, 5:30 and 8:35 P.M.
Wednesday-Thursday "HOW TO MAKE A MONSTER" (1958), directed by Mr.
Strock, 3:20, 7:05 and 10:50 P.M.
"THE SPIDER" (1958), directed by Bert I. Gordon, 2, 5:45 and 9:30 P.M.
"THE BRAIN EATERS" (1958), directed by Bruno Ve Sota, 4:40, 8:25 and midnight.
Nov. 2 and 3 "THE DAY THE WORLD ENDED" (1956), directed by Roger Corman, 3:20, 6:10 and 9 P.M. and midnight on Nov. 2.
Also 1, 3:40, 6:25, 9:15 P.M. and midnight on Nov. 3.
"IT CONQUERED THE WORLD" (1956), directed by Mr.
Corman; 2, 4:50, 7:40 and 10:30 P.M. on Nov. 2; and 2:25, 5:05, 7:55 and 10:45 P.M. on Nov. 3.
Nov. 4 and 5 "THE SHE-CREATURE" (1956), directed by Edward L. Cahn, 1, 5 and 9 P.M. on Nov. 4.
Also 5:35 and 9:25 P.M. on Nov. 5.
"THE SAGA OF THE VIKING WOMEN AND THEIR VOYAGE TO THE WATERS OF THE GREAT SEA SERPENT" (1957), directed by Mr.
Corman, 2:25, 6:25 and 10:25 P.M. on Nov. 4.
Also, 4:15 and 8:05 P.M. on Nov. 5.
"THE WASP WOMAN" (1959), directed by Mr.
Corman, 3:45 and 7:45 P.M. on Nov. 4.
Also 3, 6:50 and 10:50 P.M. on Nov. 5.
Nov. 6 "A BUCKET OF BLOOD" (1959), directed by Mr.
Corman, 2, 5:40 and 9:25 P.M.
"ATTACK OF THE GIANT LEECHES" (1959), directed by Bernard Kowalski, 3:15, 6:55 and 10:40 P.M.
"INVASION OF THE SAUCER-MEN" (1957), directed by Mr.
Cahn, 4:25 and 8:05 P.M.
Nov. 7 and 8 "THE AMAZING COLOSSAL MAN" (1957), directed by Mr.
Gordon, 2, 4:50, 7:40 and 10:30 P.M.
"WAR OF THE COLOSSAL BEAST" (1958), directed by Mr.
Gordon, 3:30, 6:20 and 9:10 P.M.
Nov. 9 and 10 "THE COOL AND THE CRAZY" (1958), directed by William Witney, 3:50, 6:30, 9:10 P.M. and midnight on Nov. 9; also 1, 3:50, 6:30, 9:10 P.M. and midnight on Nov. 10.
"SORORITY GIRL" (1957), directed by Mr.
Corman, 2:30, 5:20, 8 and 10:40 P.M. on Nov. 9 and 10.
Nov. 11 and 12  "ROCK ALL NIGHT" (1957), directed by Mr.
Corman, 1, 3:40, 6:20 and 9 P.M. on Nov. 11.
Also 2:30, 5:10, 7:50 and 10:30 P.M. on Nov. 12.
"SHAKE, RATTLE AND ROCK" (1956), directed by Mr.
Cahn, 2:15, 4:55, 7:35 and 10:15 P.M. on Nov. 11; also 3:45, 6:25 and 9:05 P.M. on Nov. 12.
Nov. 13 "GUNSLINGER" (1956), directed by Mr.
Corman, 2, 6 and 10 P.M.
"APACHE WOMAN" (1955), directed by Mr.
Corman, 3:20 and 7:20 P.M.
"OKLAHOMA WOMAN" (1955), directed by Mr.
Corman, 4:40 and 8:40 P.M.
Nov. 14 and 15 "DRAGSTRIP GIRL" (1957), directed by Mr.
Cahn, 2, 5:40 and 9:25 P.M.
"MOTORCYCLE GANG" (1957), directed by Mr.
Cahn, 3:15, 6:55 and 10:40 P.M.
"FEMALE JUNGLE" (1955), directed by Mr.
Ve Sota, 4:35 and 8:20 P.M., with additional midnight show on Nov. 15.


BURMESE MILITARY CRUSHES PROTEST
The Burmese military Government has crushed resistance among the country's Buddhist monks and has moved swiftly to eliminate most other visible signs of opposition, senior diplomats based in the Burmese capital said today.
In the last two days, the military authorities of Myanmar, formerly Burma, have combined raids on political offices with arrests of party leaders and ultimatums to other opposition parties to cooperate with the military, the diplomats said in telephone interviews from Yangon, the capital, formerly Rangoon.


Data I-O Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


'Cop Rock' Minus the Rock?
In an effort to improve ratings, ABC 's chief program executive suggested two weeks ago that the producer Steven Bochco consider dropping the rock from "Cop Rock," his much-praised but low-rated new series, which mixes police drama with musical numbers.
But Mr.
Bochco declined the suggestion, saying that if he was to do a straight police show without music, he would rather start from scratch.
Mr.
Bochco, one of the best-known producers in television, has created and written landmark television shows, including "Hill Street Blues" and "L.A. Law."


Home Port Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yemen's Chief Assails Saudis On Gulf Crisis
The President of Yemen criticized Saudi Arabia today for inviting American-led forces into the kingdom and accused Riyadh of trying to undermine his country's stability by enacting measures that have forced more than 500,000 Yemenis to leave Saudi Arabia and return home.
The President, Ali Abdullah Saleh, also said the United States, the Soviet Union and several Arab countries, had tried -- unsuccessfully so far -- to persuade the Saudi rulers to retract steps it has taken against the estimated two million Yemenis living and working in the kingdom. [Officials in Washington confirmed Mr.
Saleh's account.]


Contel Cellular reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Eastern Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on the Education page on Oct. 17 about the endowment of Macalester College included an erroneous account provided by the college about the ownership of newly available assets.
The assets -- 7.7 million shares of Reader's Digest stock and $50 million in cash, for a total value of some $254 million -- remain in the DeWitt Wallace Fund for Macalester College, an independent organization.
The assets do not belong to the college's endowment, although the income from them benefits the college.


Bruno A. Marangoni, Cardiologist, 83
Dr.
Bruno A. Marangoni, an internist and cardiologist, died on Tuesday at the Hospice by the Sea in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 83 years old and lived in Fort Lauderdale.
He died of cancer of the prostate, a family spokeswoman said.
He began practicing in Manhattan after graduating from New York University College of Medicine in 1933.
In 1975 he moved to Fort Lauderdale, retiring in 1984.
In New York he was affiliated with New York University, Bellevue Hospital, Elmhurst Hospital and New York Medical College.
He was a major in the Army in World War II.
He is survived by his wife, Anna; a daughter, Carol, of Princeton, N.J., and a granddaughter.


Unisys Had Big Deficit In 3d Quarter
Citing "the pronounced softness of demand in the worldwide computer industry," the Unisys Corporation yesterday reported a third-quarter deficit of $356.8 million.
The troubled computer maker also said it would eliminate 5,000 jobs.
The company, based in Blue Bell, Pa., said a fourth-quarter loss was now very possible, contrary to its recent expectations.


Tax Protest, Fueled by Talk Shows, Is Getting Steamed Voters Organized
Mary Rothing, a housewife in Yonkers, says taxes have soared so high that "they're not taxes, they're extortion." So when she heard on Bob Grant's radio talk show about a big tax protest, she called the toll-free number -- 1-800-BE-ANGRY -- and signed right up.
So, it appears, have a lot of other people.
Even as President Bush and members of Congress begin to shake off the total political paralysis over the explosive issue of higher taxes in an election year, taxpayers around the country are being urged by radio talk-show hosts to, as Mr.
Grant indelicately put it on the air, "throw the bastards out."


Karpov, After Delay, Accepts Draw in Game 6
Gary Kasparov waited until 11:45 A.M. yesterday to offer Anatoly Karpov a draw in the adjourned Game 6 of the World Championship Chess Match, but his overnight efforts to squeeze blood out of a stone evidently came to nothing.
Karpov, who had been under attack, accepted, of course, but only after delaying until 2:05 P.M.
The score is now: Kasparov 3 1/2, Karpov 2 1/2.
It seems that whatever dubious adventures Kasparov gets himself into, he finds a way out.
In the first -- and, it turned out, the only -- playing session of Game 6 Wednesday night at the Hotel Macklowe in Manhattan, the champion set up a clumsy, ill-integrated array of pieces against Karpov.
Yet, when he judged that his position was deteriorating, he gave up a pawn to organize his forces for attack.
Despite widespread disbelief -- not only among the grandmasters in the press room but also on the part of Deep Thought, I.B.M.'s acme of computer chess-playing, which rated Kasparov's compensation for the sacrificed material as inadequate -- the champion soon had an attack that everyone had to believe.
Especially Karpov.
There is a warning in this for Karpov: if he cannot win when he gets the advantage, as in this game and Game 1, how is he to win at all?
It has to discourage him to see the titleholder slip through his fingers like quicksilver.
Maybe he is hopeful enough to think that, sooner or later, Kasparov will go too far and drop a point into his lap.
A number of grandmasters, led by the former world champion Boris Spassky, advocated opening up the center with 24 . . . d5!?, and it is not clear why Karpov let the opportunity go.
For example, after 25 ed Nfd5 26 Nb1 f6 (26 . . . Nc3? 27 Qd3! Qg6 28 Nc3 Qg5 29 Ne7! lets white force mate) 27 Bd2, black has a center pawn at e5 and play against the white c3 pawn.
Perhaps Karpov was nervous about White's possible piece play against the king position beginning with a move like 28 Qg4.
In the final position, where play had stopped, Karpov was a pawn ahead, but the white forces were all in commanding positions.
In particular, the white bishop enjoyed open diagonals in almost all directions, but the black bishop was hampered by the black pawn structure.
The black king was exposed but not so much that Kasparov could ram home a mating attack on it.
Had Kasparov given up all ambition, he could have won the pawn back with 42 Re8 Qc7 43 Qc7 Rc7 44 Rd8 because 44 . . .
Rc3 45 Rd6 Kh4 46 Rd7 Rh3? 47 Kg2 Bh6 48 Rh7 Kg4 49 f3 Rf3 50 Rh6 wins a piece.
In sealing the move 42 Re8, Kasparov may have been heading for that.
Game 7 is set for 5:30 this afternoon.


Closing of Sludge Hauler Is Delayed
New York State has been forced to allow a family it called New York Harbor's worst polluter to continue its sewage sludge-hauling operation because three sewage authorities in Westchester County and New Jersey have no other way of transporting the sludge to an offshore dump site.
The State Department of Environmental Conservation had ordered that the oil- and sludge-barge business of the family, the Frank family, be shut by yesterday.
But state officials said late yesterday that the sewage authorities had been unable to line up substitute haulers by the deadline.


Golden Poultry &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Union Electric reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Greenwich Pharmaceuticals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BSB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SOUNDS AROUND TOWN
Anita O'Day at Night
Anita O'Day, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street (533-7902).
Legendary is a word that is thrown around rather casually in the jazz world, but Anita O'Day really lives up to it.
She was one of the most distinctive singers of the big-band era, with a style that mixed suggestions of Billie Holiday with her own hip street smarts.
She made her reputation as a jazz original during two terms with Gene Krupa's band in the 1940's, when she sang such memorable duets with Roy Eldridge as "Let Me Off Uptown." She never lost the commanding quality of her swinging, scatting performances.
Even the aging process (she was 71 years old last week) has not dampened the verve of her singing.
Backed by her regular quartet (Gordon Brisker on tenor saxophone, Biff Hannon on piano, Dave Shapiro on bass, Danny D'Imperio on drums), she sings tonight and tomorrow at 8 and 10 P.M. and midnight for a $15 cover charge and a $7.50 minimum.
On Sunday, her performances are at 8 and 10 P.M., the cover charge is $12.50 and the minimum is still $7.50.
Buddy Montgomery Trio
Buddy Montgomery Trio, Bar Montparnasse, Parker Meridien Hotel, 119 West 56th Street (245-5000).
Buddy Montgomery and his two older brothers -- Wes, a guitarist, and Monk, a bassist -- formed one of the most celebrated jazz families of the 1950's and 60's, and called attention to their hometown, Indianapolis, as a source of jazz talent.
Wes was a very influential guitarist from 1959, when he organized his own trio, until his death in 1968, while Buddy and Monk were the core of the Mastersounds, a quartet that rivaled the Modern Jazz Quartet in the late 50's.
Buddy Montgomery played vibes with the Mastersounds, but for the past 20 years he has concentrated on piano.
He is the pianist in the trio he is leading at the Parker Meridien, with Gerald Cannon on bass and George Fludas on drums.
The trio plays tonight -- Tuesdays through Saturdays are their regular nights -- from 9 P.M. until 1 A.M.
There is a one-drink minimum but no cover charge.


Coastal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Calgon Carbon reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Airlines Curbing Passengers Who Skirt Rules to Cut Fare
Like thousands of savvy fliers, Ronald Gelfuso knows that in the topsy-turvy world of air fares a longer flight can be cheaper than a shorter one.
The New York fashion executive regularly saved $500 round trip by buying a ticket to San Antonio when he was going only as far as the first stop on the route, Dallas.
But last month American Airlines stopped Mr.
Gelfuso in his tracks.
A ticket agent in New York, noticing that Mr.
Gelfuso's bags were checked to Dallas, insisted that he buy a new ticket.
A dispute ensued, and when the dust settled Mr.
Gelfuso had missed his original flight and was forced to buy another ticket for $519.
"I ran into a brick wall," he said.
Travel Agents Sued


Hitox Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Mississippi Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


WPL Holdings Inc. reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


For Bruce Morrison in Connecticut
Republican Lowell Weicker, running as an independent, has complicated the contest for Governor of Connecticut.
In 1988, he was defeated in his campaign for a fourth term in the Senate.
Now, capitalizing on his popularity as a maverick, Mr.
Weicker leads in the polls, but without clearly defining how he would govern.
The Democratic candidate, Representative Bruce Morrison, offers a far sharper vision, a record of accomplishment -- and the best prospect of constructive leadership.
The third man in this three-way race is Republican John Rowland, the state's most conservative Representative in Congress.
First elected in 1984, he gained national attention by bashing a Japanese radio outside the Capitol for photographers and by pressing for the return of G.I.'s missing in action in Vietnam -- but not much else.
He rashly proposes reduced compensation for state employees, and pledges to veto any legislation to establish a state income tax.
He changed from pro-life to pro-choice on the abortion issue just before announcing for the governorship, opening himself to the charge of transparent opportunism.
Lowell Weicker is a hearty, combative man whom The Times has repeatedly endorsed for the Senate.
We greatly admire his lonely courage in defending constitutional principle, disadvantaged minorities and the handicapped.
But his qualifications to lead the state for the next four years are not obvious, and his campaign has been disappointing.
He is sensibly noncommittal about an income tax but vague about a program.
As an independent, he would be in a good position to clean house after 15 years of Democratic control.
But it sounds like bluster to hear him claim he'd be so bold that voters would retire him after one term.
No one, no matter how bold, can conquer Connecticut's difficulties in four years.
By contrast, Mr.
Morrison offers appealing thoughtfulness and clarity about those difficulties.
Neither he nor his opponents can say today just what they would do about the biggest problem, the large and growing budget deficit.
But Mr.
Morrison outlines a plausible agenda.
It includes a hiring freeze, a slowdown in spending on highways and other public works, adoption of cutbacks proposed by a special commission and short-term borrowing if necessary.
He is cautious but not dogmatic about an income tax, or any new taxes.
Indeed, like both of his opponents, he would cut some taxes to improve the business climate.
Bruce Morrison isn't as flashy as Mr.
Rowland or as well known as Mr.
Weicker.
In some voters' minds he may be identified with the establishment Democrats who have long dominated in Hartford, but that's a grossly mistaken identity.
He bravely challenged Gov.
William O'Neill for the party's nomination, helping impel Mr.
O'Neill to retire from politics.
Mr.
Morrison is a serious man.
He wants to develop regional compacts to save desperate cities.
He has thought carefully about state-managed universal health care.
In nine years as a Legal Services lawyer for the poor in New Haven, fresh out of Yale Law School, and eight conscientious years in Congress, he has demonstrated compassion, intellect and vigor.
Mr.
Weicker shares those virtues but, in our judgment, Bruce Morrison would be more effective.
We endorse Mr.
Morrison for Governor.


Tenneco Net Edges Up 1%
Tenneco Inc. said today that its profit rose 1 percent in the third quarter, and it predicted lower fourth-quarter earnings than last year.
The energy and chemical company cited uncertainty in the economy and in the industries it serves in reporting earnings of $91 million, or 70 cents a share.
That compares with $90 million, or 68 cents a share, for the quarter a year ago.
Revenues in the quarter, which ended on Sept. 30, were $3.39 billion, compared with $3.21 billion for the period a year ago.
The results were below analysts' estimates, and Tenneco's stock fell $3.25 a share today, to $41.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.
"The uncertain business environment over all, and deterioration in some of the industries in which we do business, has begun to impact our financial performance and is likely to continue impacting our businesses during the balance of 1990," said James L. Ketelsen, the company's chairman and chief executive.
Farm and construction equipment and chemical businesses of Tenneco were hurt most in the third quarter, he said.
The company reported higher operating income at the Newport News Shipbuilding operation.


India Sends Troops to Stop Hindu March
More than 150,000 paramilitary troops have been ordered to block Hindu nationalists from converging on the town of Ayodhya, where the marchers are demanding that a temple be built on a site now occupied by an Islamic shrine, a Government official said today.
The campaign for the construction of the Hindu temple at Ayodhya is led by officials of the Bharatiya Janata Party, whose parliamentary support has been vital in keeping Prime Minister V. P. Singh in power.
When Lal Kishen Advani, the leader of the Hindu nationalist party, was arrested this week while leading a procession heading for the disputed site, the party withdrew its support. confronting Mr.
Singh with a no-confidence vote that is likely to topple his Government.


Eastern Chief Sees Break-Even Date
Martin R. Shugrue Jr., the court-appointed trustee running Eastern Airlines, said the carrier could break even by February.
The Miami Herald reported on Wednesday that he had said Eastern's push for business travelers had "taken off like a rocket ship."
Eastern has been in Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization since March 1989, and according to its last quarterly report, is still losing $2 million a day.
Eastern has increased the size of the first-class cabins on most of its fleet and has offered corporate fares for first class that are below the industry average for coach.


4th-Largest Credit-Card Unit on Sale
The fourth-largest credit-card business in the country was put up for sale yesterday.
Its owner, the largest banking company in Maryland, is raising cash to compensate for heavy losses on commercial real estate loans.
The sale by the MNC Financial Corporation of Baltimore will be an opportunity, analysts predicted, for large industrial companies like the American Telephone and Telegraph Company and the General Electric Company to dramatically increase their activity in a business dominated by banks.


Bankers First Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Paul Wiesenfeld, Painter, 48
Paul Wiesenfeld, an American realist painter who specialized in portraits and finely detailed interiors, died on Saturday in a hospital in Munich, Germany.
He was 48 years old and lived in Lanshut, a small town outside Munich.
He died of cancer, his son, Daniel, said.
Mr.
Wiesenfeld was born in Los Angeles in 1942 and studied art at the Chouinard Art Institute there, the Kunst Academie in Munich and the University of Indiana.
He had solo exhibitions at the Robert Schoelkopf Gallery in New York in 1973, 1976 and 1981, and is represented in several public collections in Germany and the United States, including one at the Whitney Museum of American Art.
In addition to his son, he is survived by his wife, Karla, of Lanshut; a daughter, Alexandra, of Claremont, Calif., and his mother, May Wiesenfeld of Los Angeles.


Moody's Upgrades Debt of Duquesne
The rating on about $2 billion of debt issued by the Duquesne Light Company, Pittsburgh, was raised yesterday by Moody's Investors Service Inc.
The company's first-mortgage bonds and secured pollution-control securites were increased to Baa-1, from Baa-2.
Moody's cited a strengthening of the company's financial picture and its belief that Duquesne's earnings were likely to remain above the level needed to finance the company's modest construction program and permit steady reductions in outstanding debt.
The rating agency said diversification in the company's service territory should counter the potential effects of a weak economy.


Security Remains Tight in Kuwait


Bird Is Sidelined
Larry Bird, who has had a strong preseason, will miss the next two games with a lower back strain but should return for the Boston Celtics' final preseason game Monday, the team said yesterday.
The Celtics also announced the release of the forward Eric McArthur and the guard Carrick DeHart, two free agents from California-Santa Barbara. (AP)


ELDERLY SHIELDED FROM BIG INCREASE IN MEDICARE COSTS
House and Senate budget negotiators said today they had agreed on how to shield the elderly from any large increase in Medicare costs, one of the last outstanding issues in the deficit-reduction package Congress and the White House have been laboring on for nearly two months.
The agreement involves only a modest increase in Medicare costs for the elderly but substantial cuts in Medicare payments to doctors and hospitals.


State Lawmaker Is Found Guilty In a South Carolina Bribery Case
A Federal jury convicted State Representative Luther L. Taylor Jr. today on charges that he took $4,300 in bribes during a videotaped operation by undercover agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The jury reached its verdict after about six hours of deliberations.
It was the first trial of the 10 lawmakers indicted this summer in the operation.
Four have pleaded guilty to bribery charges.
Mr.
Taylor, a 40-year-old Columbia Democrat who has been in the General Assembly, the South Carolina legislature, since 1983, was charged with six counts of violating the Hobbs Act, a Federal anti-bribery law.
An indictment accused him of accepting five bribes and with conspiring to solicit the bribes in exchange for his support of a parimutuel betting bill.
The convictions carry a maximum penalty of 120 years in prison and a $1.5 million fine.
A $2,500 Recruiting Effort
Ron Cobb, a former House member turned lobbyist, testified that he paid Mr.
Taylor $2,500 to help recruit other lawmakers to support the parimutuel measure, which would have allowed the state's voters to decide whether to allow betting on horse and dog racing.
Mr.
Cobb had begun working undercover for the F.B.I. after getting caught in a drug deal.
Videotapes showed him giving Mr.
Taylor the cash.
The lawmaker testified that Mr.
Cobb was giving him campaign contributions.
But, in cross-examination, Mr.
Taylor admitted that in a meeting in January he slipped Mr.
Cobb a note saying, "For my undivided attention, $2,500."
Mr.
Taylor also admitted he had no documentation of how he spent the money.
State law, he said, allows candidates to mingle personal and political money.
Determent Effect Cited
Dale DuTremble, an Assistant Unites States Attorney, told the jurors in closing arguments on Wednesdaythat a guilty verdict would deter political corruption.
"How long can you allow people like Luther Taylor to sell out?" he asked.
"How long can you allow South Carolina to be disgraced? You're entitled to better."
Joel Collins, a defense lawyer, questioned the credibility of government witnesses, especially Mr.
Cobb, and argued that Mr.
Taylor had no intent to break the law and that he did not violate the anti-bribery law because he had always supported the parimutuel measure.
But in his final argument Bart Daniel, the United States Attorney, reminded the jury that Mr.
Taylor had admitted having more "enthusiasm" for the parimutuel betting bill when he got $2,500 from Mr.
Cobb.


More Arabian Tales
Now let us please resume our studies of the Tales of the Arabian Nights.
The purpose of this ongoing seminar, you may recall, is to examine the rich collection of Middle Eastern myths, hoaxes and spiels and how they are accepted as reality by the West.


Commercial Credit Prices New Notes
The Commercial Credit Corporation, a unit of the Primerica Corporation, yesterday priced $100 million in short-term notes due 1993 through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
Underwriters priced the 9.15 percent three-year notes at par, to yield about 120 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.
The notes, which are noncallable by the corporation through maturity, are rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service and A by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Results Plus
TENNIS  McEnroe Loses in Stockholm
John McEnroe, who had made the finals in each of his five previous appearances in the Stockholm Open, bowed out in the third round yesterday to Goran Ivanisevic.
The big-serving Yugoslav broke McEnroe once in each set for a 6-4, 6-4 victory to set up a quarterfinal meeting with Boris Becker.
Becker, seeded second, beat Richey Reneberg, 6-4, 6-3.
Edberg, making few mistakes, moved into the round of eight after beating Marc Rosset of Switzerland, 6-4, 6-4.
Edberg will face Brad Gilbert today.
The seventh-seeded Gilbert downed Andrei Chesnokov of the Soviet Union, 6-3, 6-4.
Earlier, the United States Open champion, Pete Sampras, squeezed into the quarterfinals after winning a third-set tie breaker over Petr Korda of Czechoslovakia.
Sampras won, 6-3, 3-6, 7-6, on the Globe Arena's fast Supreme Court.
Wheaton, unseeded, eliminated No. 12 Michael Chang, 6-7, 6-2, 6-3.
Also advancing to the quarterfinals were Nicklas Kulti of Sweden and Aleksandr Volkov of the Soviet Union. (AP)
Tauziat to Meet Graf Again: Nathalie Tauziat of France headed for another quarterfinal match with Steffi Graf by beating Catherine Suire, 7-6, 6-4, yesterday in the W.I.T.A. indoor tournament in Brighton, England.
Tauziat has played Graf 11 times in her career, five times in a quarterfinal, and she has never won more than five games in any match against the world's top-ranked female player.
In other second-round matches, seventh-seeded Sabine Appelmans of Belgium was upset, 6-2, 7-5, by Cathy Caverzasio of Italy, and unseeded Sara Gomer of Britain eliminated Pilar Vasquez of Peru, 6-7, 6-4, 6-4.
Graf reached the quarterfinals yesterday by defeating Nathalie Herreman in straight sets.(AP) HOCKEY
Bruins Stop Losing Streak
Reggie Lemelin shut out Vancouver for more than 57 minutes and Boston held on for a 4-2 victory over the Canucks last night, ending a losing streak at four games.
Lemelin, a 13-year veteran who will be 36 on Nov. 19, appeared en route to his 12th career shutout until the Canucks threw a scare into the Bruins.
The Canucks trailed by 2-0 until Trevor Linden ruined the shutout bid by intercepting Jim Wiemer's pass in the Boston zone and scoring his fifth goal with 2:48 remaining.
The Canucks pulled its goalie, Troy Gamble, for a sixth skater and the strategy paid off at 18:33 as Garth Butcher scored his second goal, beating Lemelin from just outside the crease.
Vancouver pressed for the tying goal, but the Bruins checked the comeback bid as Cam Neely fed Bob Carpenter, who scored into an empty net with four seconds remaining.
It was Carpenter's first goal of the season. (AP)
Blues 8, Maple Leafs 5: Brett Hull recorded the first back-to-back hat tricks in Blues history as St.
Louis routed Toronto at home.
Hull got his league-leading 11th, 12th and 13th goals by 1:18 of the second period -- one night after getting three goals and eight shots in the Blues' 8-3 victory at Toronto.
The three-goal performance was the seventh of Hull's career, all in the last two seasons.
He deflected a pass off his skate and into the net at 4:41 of the first period, put a wrist shot between the legs of goaltender Jeff Reese at 15:45 and scored from a bad angle on a rebound during a power play for his third goal early in the second period. (AP)
Blackhawks 3, Capitals 2: Steve Larmer scored eight seconds into overtime to give the Blackhawks the victory at home.
Larmer's second goal of the game and ninth of the season came when he beat the goalie Don Beaupre to the glove side with a 20-foot shot from the left wing.
The Chicago defenseman Chris Chelios knocked in a rebound at 5.53 of the final period to tie the game at 2-2.
Beaupre stopped Wayne Presley's 15-footer from the bottom of the left circle.
But Chelios charged down the slot, picked up the rebound and scored his fourth goal of the season. (AP)
Penguins 6, Nordiques 3: The left wing Kevin Stevens had his second career hat trick and the Penguins scored on their first four shots to make a quick exit for Quebec. (AP)


Corrections
A headline in some copies of Sports Pages yesterday on a brief article about the Japan Series, the championship of Japanese baseball, misidentified the winner.
The Seibu Lions swept the Yomiuri Giants, four games to none.


Warts and All, a Budget Victory
It took four months, a Government shutdown and the threat of two more, and the pressure of public disgust to get the job done.
But now, finally, Congress is about to approve a credible and fair budget bill that will drive the deficit downward over the next five years.
The bill is full of quirks and half steps.
And it makes two glaring errors, on capital gains and public investment.
Yet it achieves substantial deficit reduction without hurting the poor or ravaging domestic programs.
On balance, it will help the economy and open the way for Congress to get on with other pressing business.
The quirks and half steps need candid appraisal.
The bill promises to cut the deficit by $40 billion next year and $500 billion over five years.
It won't.
Next year's hit, counting expenditures in the Persian Gulf, will be closer to $30 billion.
And the $500 billion estimate is based on improbable projections.
The package would hike the gasoline tax by 5 cents a gallon; a boost of 20 cents or more would conserve energy.
The legislation does not eliminate a single weapons system.
Entitlements were barely nicked.
The ugly tax bubble -- whereby some families are hit with a higher marginal tax rate than other families with higher incomes -- remains.
None of these flaws, however, are fatal.
What comes close is the provision concerning capital gains.
Wednesday morning, the Bush campaign to lower the tax on the profit from selling stocks, bonds and other investments was declared dead and buried.
But by evening a strange, stunted version was back on the docket.
For wealthy families, the budget conferees would lower the capital gains tax to 28 percent, even though ordinary income would be taxed at 31 percent.
Why?
No serious economist would argue that a cut this small could raise national saving, investment and growth.
Its only purpose would be to hand wealthy families windfall profits on
past
investments.
At a time when everyone else will be paying higher taxes, this provision is unconscionable.
The other unforgivable provision is a three-year cap on discretionary domestic programs.
A provision that would require Congress to pay for new spending by raising taxes or cutting programs would make sense.
But the budget bill veers irresponsibly in another direction.
It would forbid Congress from spending more on child nutrition even if it would decide to spend less on missiles.
In short, the bill would prevent Congress from doing what it is elected to do: make choices.
Despite these provisions, the budget deal makes subtantial progress.
Over the next five years, it will push the deficit down decisively, and this time the budget cuts are real.
Gone are the one-shot tricks and accounting scams Congress has routinely used in the past.
Six months ago, the agriculture committees were figuring out how to raise farm subsidies; the budget package will
cut
them by a whopping 25 percent.
Well-to-do families will pay more for Medicare, setting a constructive precedent.
And the package denies Mr.
Bush his destructive proposal to cut the capital gains tax all the way to 15 percent.
For all the public disgust over dissembling and delay, Congress labored to make the budget package fair.
It succeeded.
Taxes on the poor will fall.
Taxes on the very rich will rise by more than 6 percent.
Everyone else will face a modest tax increase of roughly 2 percent.
Perhaps the finest part of the package is a decision to heap tax benefits on a segment of the population that hires no lobbyists: the working poor.
Congress is prepared to approve an unprecedented increase in tax credits for poor parents who work as a way of helping them pay for quality child care and insulating them from excise tax increases.
The process wasn't noble.
The product isn't exactly pretty.
But, with the exception of two glaring flaws, Congress has done its duty.


Economic Scene; A Budget Accord None Too Soon
PRESIDENT BUSH and the leaders of Congress have decided to end the bruising battle of the budget, though some right-wing guerrillas have vowed to take to the woods and go on fighting against any tax increases as long as they can hold out.
But the President and Congressional leaders have grown increasingly wary of the anger of voters over the inability to reach agreement on governing the nation's finances.
And they are worried about the danger that the protracted political warfare poses for the weakened national economy.
Legislators who vote for this legislation will do so holding their noses for varying reasons.
Some will say it raises gasoline taxes too much, others that it raises them too little to improve conservation and reduce dependence on foreign oil.
Some dislike the plan because it hits Medicare too hard, others because it does not hit Medicare and other entitlement programs hard enough.
And the plan defers the question of how to reorganize the military budget in light of the reduced Soviet threat and new threats like those in the Middle East.


Higher Price For Journal
Dow Jones &amp; Company said yesterday that it would raise the newsstand price of The Wall Street Journal to 75 cents a copy, the highest price for a leading national daily newspaper.
Dow Jones said the 50 percent price increase, which goes into effect on Dec. 3, reflected higher transportation costs, rising newsprint prices and increased postage rates.


DI Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Oct. 12 about the ozone "hole" over Antarctica misstated an affiliation of Dr.
David J. Hofmann.
He is a faculty member, on leave, at the University of Wyoming, not the University of Wisconsin.


On Stage, and Off
Troubles in 'Abundance'
Life is imitating art at the Manhattan Theater Club, where "Abundance," the new play by the Pulitzer Prize winner Beth Henley about women trying to survive against insurmountable odds, has an offstage resonance all its own.
Now scheduled to open on Tuesday, a week late, the play, directed by Ron Lagomarsino, had been cast with Lesley Ann Warren and Amanda Plummer in the leading roles.
Ms.
Warren, who was finishing work on the new Mel Brooks film, "Life Stinks," missed the first week of rehearsals, which began on Sept. 4.
The actress arrived on Sept. 12 "exhausted," her spokesman said.
She lasted four days.
A company member says she insisted on taking a long weekend to fly to Los Angeles for the Emmy Awards -- she had been nominated for the CBS mini-series "Family of Spies" -- and never came back.


Financial World Will Give New York City Time for a Good Plan
To the Editor:
After Mayor David N. Dinkins reached a settlement with the United Federation of Teachers, outlined an omnibus criminal-justice program, imposed an immediate hiring freeze and instructed New York City agencies to propose options to cut spending by up to $800 million for the Nov. 8 modification of our financial plan, you argue ("New York's Fears Won't Wait," editorial, Oct. 10) that Nov. 8 is too long to wait for a plan that protects the city's financial stability.
"What makes City Hall think a worried financial world will wait?" you ask.
Consider the views of members of that financial world.
Both Moody's and Standard &amp; Poor's have said it is reasonable for the city to be given until Nov. 8.
The private members of the Financial Control Board agree.
You believe we should put all negotiations with municipal unions on hold until fiscal concerns are addressed.
But if we achieve satisfactory settlements, doesn't it make sense to conclude those agreements before Nov. 8?
That insures that the modification is as full and accurate an accounting of our fiscal position as possible.
This is not a planner's esoteric exercise.
The city must enter the credit markets in November to meet its cash flow requirements to pay employees' wages and for services rendered by contractors.
Before it does, doesn't it make sense to have as credible a financial plan as possible?
Uncertainty might ultimately reduce our access to the market and, even worse, spark a resumption of the Financial Control Board in running the city's fiscal affairs.
Having sacrificed so much to restore New York's fiscal independence, we should avoid any steps that might cause us to lose it.
"The surest way for Mr. Dinkins to restore confidence in his administration and in the city," you argue, "is to present a financial plan quickly." Only, if "quickly" is synonymous with "completely." Which it isn't.
In recent weeks, the Mayor has consulted with private members of the Financial Control Board, with his Council of Economic Advisors, with Standard &amp; Poor's and Moody's, with municipal unions, with the Comptroller, the City Council Speaker and daily with his deputy mayors and budget director.
These meetings are proving invaluable as we prepare a complete, credible, achievable and balanced Nov. 8 modification.
You hint such meetings are a waste of time.
The Mayor, you argue, should move full steam ahead, not consulting the experts, ignoring those experienced in fiscal crises.
That approach runs the great risk that the plan will be seen as a new, unconnected event, triggering a new round of criticism and devastating consequences to the city's well-being.
Were balancing a budget like a horse race, your counsel might make sense.
But what wins at the track doesn't necessarily prevail in the financial markets.
NORMAN STEISEL  First Deputy Mayor New York, Oct. 17, 1990


Breckenridge Ski
The Breckenridge Ski Corporation plans to nearly double its ski acreage in a 10-year plan costing about $75 million.
The effort calls for the ski area to add 1,400 skiable acres to its 1,600 acres of skiing.
The expansion would be able to accommodate 18,000 skiers a day, compared with 11,000 now.
Besides adding the acreage, the plan calls for upgrading ski lifts and adding more of them, including an elevated rail system.
Breckenridge is in the Colorado Rockies about 80 miles west of Denver.


Holyfield Flattens Douglas and Takes the Title
Skinny legs or not, Evander Holyfield proved he was enough of a heavyweight tonight.
He became the new undisputed heavyweight champion when he knocked out James (Buster) Douglas at 1 minute 10 seconds of the third round of a scheduled 12-round bout here at the Mirage.


Durakon Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE 1990 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Democrats See Gains In the Polls
Around the country poll takers are recording a swing to Democrats in the closing days of the election.
Incumbent Republican senators in Minnesota and Oregon, who seemed safe a few months ago, are suddenly threatened.
Harvey Gantt, the Democrat seeking to unseat Senator Jesse Helms in North Carolina, was ahead in one recent poll, although the poll takers said skepticism was advisable in this race, as in others where a black candidate faces a white one.


RHNB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Losses at USAir and Delta; UAL Up
Blaming higher fuel costs and weak traffic, USAir Group and Delta Air Lines yesterday reported large third-quarter losses.
But the parent of United Airlines, the nation's second-largest airline, reported a healthy profit, helped a lot by its lucrative Pacific routes.
Following are details of the companies' results:  UAL
The UAL Corporation, parent of United, earned $106.1 million, or $4.87 a share, down 4.3 percent from $110.9 million, or $5.11 a share, a year earlier.
Besides the Pacific routes, United's results were buoyed by aircraft sales of $93 million, compared with only $46 million the year before.
Revenue rose 15.1 percent, to $2.97 billion from $2.58 billion.
UAL stock closed at $96 yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, down 87.5 cents.
Delta Air Lines
Delta Air Lines reported a loss of $51 million, compared with a profit of $133.1 million, or $2.38 a share, a year earlier.
It was Delta's first loss in a September quarter since 1982.
"If these trends continue, the company expects to report a loss for the full calendar year," said Thomas Roeck, the airline's chief financial officer.
Revenue rose 1.8 percent, to $2.21 billion from $2.17 billion.
Passenger revenue at Delta grew only 2 percent, reflecting a soft economy and strong competition from Eastern Airlines in the Southeast.
Eastern has been struggling to rebound from a strike and has cut fares on many routes, forcing Delta to match them.
"Eastern is a black hole that sucks the fares down," said Kevin Murphy, an analyst with Morgan Stanley.
Delta, following the lead of other airlines, said yesterday that it would raise fares 5.8 percent; the increase applies to tickets bought on or after Oct. 31.
Delta's stock closed yesterday in Big Board trading at $61.75, down $3.125.
USAir
USAir Group lost $120.3 million, compared with a loss of $77.7 million a year earlier.
Edwin I. Colodny, chairman of USAir, cited not only higher fuel costs but also a one-time depreciation charge of $36 million for 24 older, less fuel-efficient jets that are being phased out of service.
Still, despite the sluggish economy, USAir's passenger traffic rose 6 percent.
USAir stock closed at $16.625, down 62.5 cents. in Big Board trading.
Revenue rose 7.2 percent, to $1.64 billion from $1.53 billion.
Fuel prices have doubled since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2, although they have dropped in the last week, from about $1.20 to $1 a gallon.
But fuel costs did not surge until the middle of the last quarter.
Many industry analysts see even poorer results for the fourth quarter.
Mr.
Murphy is predicting a $120 million loss for United in that quarter.
The airlines attribute the higher fuel costs partly to what they say is price gouging by the oil companies.
"We think the oil companies have passed on disproportionate higher costs to the airlines as compared to people who buy gasoline for their cars," said Robert Aaronson, president of the Air Transport Association, the industry trade group.


Alpnet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Belo (A.H.) Corp.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Founders Dreamt of a Classless Society; Grow Up, America
To the Editor:
In writing about the myth of classlessness (Op-Ed, Oct. 10), asserting that much of our governmental structure and purpose is heavily biased in favor of wealth and the well born, Benjamin DeMott exhibits proper liberal outrage but blurred focus.
Republican Party adulation for the dollar in the last dozen years has suffered from neither subtlety nor restraint.
Questions of fairness and even logic have not been permitted to interfere with conservative orthodoxy.
Yes, we have become a very classy society.
But where's the myth?
The far larger threat is the direction we have taken, the garden path down which we have increasingly been led, in the manifest and growing immaturity of all of us, leaders and followers, Democrats and Republicans, the United States.
The most interesting example of our immaturity is to be seen in taxation, the necessary lubricant of government.
Hundreds of thousands of the new-rich wallow in a largesse created by a genial benefactor, Ronald Reagan, who had more savvy about make-believe and mob psychology than economics.
He chopped the top income tax rates of our luckiest or wealthiest from 70 percent to 28 percent.
At the same time, he borrowed trillions of dollars from those same  people, as well as from the Japanese and Germans, to pay for the monstrous, quickly ballooning, deficits.
With an ever-growing population in this country, with the almost ceaseless toll of inflation and with ever-developing social needs, taxes must increase.
We cannot avoid or repeal that reality.
But we must, too, accept that the need for hope in our ghettos and homes for our homeless exceeds the need for greed of the most fortunate among us.
George Bush quibbles about whether top tax rates should be raised from 28 percent to 31 percent or 33 percent, while he expresses no concern for increasing the tax burden of the couple struggling with an income of $30,000 or $40,000 a year.
Restoring the top rates to the 90 percent they once were might be a bit too much and too sudden.
But a return to a rate approaching the pre-Reagan 70 percent, for income exceeding $200,000 or $500,000, could signal a return to fairness and adult responsibility.
With those rates we once were the economic world leader, before Ronald Reagan (with the compliance of the Democrats and a supine Congress) gave away the store.
WALTER HEWITT Vincentown, N.J., Oct. 12, 1990


Bank of Boston reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Auctions
Poor Results in Two Sales
The auction results at Sotheby's and Christie's in New York this week were up one day for jewelry and way down on another day for 19th-century European art.
For the first time in years, in fact, dealers described the art sales at the major New York houses as "disasters."
The numbers were indeed grim: the totals realized for the European art auctions at both Sotheby's and Christie's were about half or one-fourth of what these houses had estimated they would be.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 519 money market mutual funds decreased $673.1 million, to $414.44 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 160 institutional funds increased by $10.5 million, to $102.94 billion.
The assets of the 255 general-purpose funds were down $478.3 million, to $146.3 billion.
The 104 broker-dealer funds decreased by $205.3 million, to $165.20 billion, the institute said.


Lawmakers Take Stock Of Winners and Losers
As their leaders put finishing touches on the deficit-reduction compromise, rank- and-file members of Congress today began toting up the winners and losers in the five-month struggle to make the deal.
Although House Democrats loyally praised their top leadership -- the House Speaker, Thomas S. Foley, and the majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt -- many thought the clearest Democratic hero was Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, who heads the House Ways and Means Committee.


Baker Standing Tall As a Giants Starter
In a world of 6-foot-5-inch, 290-pound behemoths, Stephen Baker is almost a put-on.
He is 5-8 and, after dinner, maybe 160 pounds.
When he was randomly chosen for a National Football League steroid test, a deterrent to indiscreet muscle-building, his teammates laughed.
Many people laugh, even the saleswoman at Macy's in Paramus, N.J., when Baker bought a watch as a birthday gift for his mother.
When Baker handed her a credit card, she looked puzzled.


Southdown Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clues Sought in Bronx Killing
Detectives searching for the killer of 10-year-old Jessica Guzman are looking again at the unsolved murders of four other young people found suffocated in lonely spots along Bronx highways in the last two years, hunting for a common thread.
But despite similarities in the deaths and the discovery of a cabdriver who knew four of them, investigators said they had no solid evidence a serial killer was responsible.
And they stressed that the cabdriver, an uncle of one victim, is not a suspect.
"There is no serial killer and there is no linkage between these cases," said Deputy Chief Michael Philbin of the Bronx detectives.
"We don't have a suspect at this time."
All five victims lived within two miles of each other in the Unionport and Parkchester sections of the Bronx, the police said.
All but one were Hispanic girls or young women.
All disappeared mysteriously, apparently abducted off the street, and their bodies were found several days later near highways.
In four cases, autopsies determined that the victims had suffocated, but it was unclear how.
The fifth was clearly strangled.
None appeared to have been sexually assaulted or robbed, and no witnesses to their abductions were found.
In the neighborhoods where the children lived, rumors have swirled around the 29-year-old cabdriver who was an uncle of Nilda Cartagena, one of two youths found on June 21, 1989.
The police have played down the coincidences that link him to four of the victims, saying he has a strong alibi for the night Jessica Guzman disappeared.


Review/Photography; In Search of Perfection, Composites From the 60's
The best works of art accumulate interpretations over time, meaning one thing to one generation and something entirely different to another.
This is the case with Ray K. Metzker's composites: montaged works consisting of strips of images that are often overlapped or double-exposed.
When the composites were first shown, in 1967 at the Museum of Modern Art, they seemed to epitomize the era's formalist impulses.
Their gridlike structures and simplified black-and-white tonalities brought them into a dialogue with the stripped-down work of the likes of Donald Judd and Sol LeWitt.
But because they were photographs, they were thought to be as much about exploring the possibilities of the medium as they were about reducing art to its essentials.


A New Champion


Whirlpool Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quotation of the Day
"It's a crazy time and a lot of people are irritable. They can only hate one of us at a time. One week it was Saddam Hussein, one week it was Newt Gingrich, and me today." -- Edward J. Rollins Jr., co-chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, shrugging off a White House attack on him.  [ A22:5. ]


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Church &amp; Dwight Co., Princeton, N.J., a maker of sodium products and detergents, said its board had authorized the intermittent buyback of up to a million additional common shares. *
Cooper Cos., Palo Alto, Calif., which develops optometric products, has acquired substantially all of the assets of Spectra Pharmaceutical Services Inc., Hanover, Mass., a maker of ophthalmic drugs.
Terms were not disclosed. *
FPL Group Inc., the holding company for Florida Power and Light Co., Miami, said it would write down its investment in its insurance unit, Colonial Penn Group Inc., and three other non-utility subsidiaries. *
General Motors Corp., Detroit, said its new Saturn cars officially went on sale yesterday.
G.M. will also temporarily close plants in Michigan and Indiana because of low demand for its light trucks.
Nearly 10,000 workers will be affected.
The shutdowns take effect Monday. *
Ivaco Inc., Montreal, a maker of steel and other products, has closed its sale of all outstanding shares of Niagra Lockport Quebec Industries Inc. and Niagra Lockport Industries Inc.
The sale was to units of BTR P.L.C., London, a maker of industrial and energy products, for $85 million. *
Maytag Corp., Newton, Iowa, has named William R. Foust, senior vice president of human resources, as managing director of its Hoover unit in Britain.
He succeeds Anthony Williamson. *
McDonnell Douglas Corp., St.
Louis, said KLM Royal Dutch Airlines had taken options on five more MD-11 aircraft.
Earlier this year, KLM took firm orders on 10 MD-11 aircraft for about $1.3 billion. *
Pit Stop Auto Centers Inc., Oklahoma City, said its board had rejected a proposal by Grease Monkey Holding Corp., Denver, an operator of auto-lubricator services, to acquire Pit Stop in a stock swap. *
Tambrands Inc., Lake Success, L.I., a maker of personal-care products, will sell its headquarters to Astoria Federal Savings Bank.
No terms were disclosed.
Tambrands will remain in Lake Success until it moves to a new headquarters in Westchester County next year. *
Tosco Corp., Santa Monica, Calif., a petroleum products company, said its board had authorized the acquisition of up to an additional two million common share equivalents from time to time. *
Turkish Airlines, Istanbul, will lease 10 new Boeing Co. 737-400's.
The airline will obtain the aircraft under long-term lease-purchase arrangements from two leasing companies, GPA Group Ltd. of Ireland and International Lease Finance Corp., Beverly Hills, Calif.
Terms were not disclosed.


Review/Film; When Soap Opera Imitates Life
To the imagination they are glamorous, impetuous, torn by forbidden passions.
To the eye they are plump, dull, sedentary and by turns either bewildered or bored.
These are the radio stars of "Tune In Tomorrow," a film that plays stylishly and at times ingeniously with the marriage of fiction and reality, a marriage it sees as fundamental to the creation of art.
The film itself puts this somewhat more succinctly when Pedro Carmichael (Peter Falk), the flamboyant writer, declares: "Art is two cannibals on a desert island. Eat or be eaten."
Pedro is himself the chief cannibal in "Tune In Tomorrow," which has been adapted from Mario Vargas Llosa's novel "Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter." Originally a Bolivian named Pedro Camacho (Mr. Vargas Llosa's story is set in Lima, Peru), he has been reinvented as an American in the New Orleans of 1951.
This transposition works well -- or at least the story of Pedro, his young protege Martin (Keanu Reeves) and the flirty divorcee who is Martin's aunt by marriage (Barbara Hershey) is as likely in New Orleans as it is anywhere.


NOTEBOOK: Breeders' Cup; Trainers Favor Local Jockeys
More than half of the 42 jockeys who will ride the 91 horses in the seven Breeders' Cup races at Belmont Park have only one mount on the card.
This year, trainers seem to have leaned toward the home team when picking pilots for their cup hopefuls.
The only three riders who are listed to ride in more than five of the seven races are the New York regulars Jose Santos, the lone rider with a mount in every race, and Angel Cordero Jr. and Jerry Bailey with six each.


HBO &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Federal Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sounds Around Town
Sounds of Ethiopia
Mahmoud Ahmed, Kilimanjaro, 531 West 19th Street (627-2333).
Mahmoud Ahmed's "Ere Mela Mela: Modern Music From Ethiopia" introduced the outside world to Ethiopian rock.
On those recordings from 1975-78, the band roils with modal funk riffs whose closest Western equivalent is Miles Davis's dark funk from the early 1970's; above it, Mr.
Ahmed sings with the modal scales and microtonal undulations of Arab music and the grainy urgency of a soul singer.
Twelve years later, New Yorkers have a chance to hear him live.
Tomorrow at 11:30 P.M.; tickets are $15.
Arab-Electronic Fusion
Sussan Deihim and Richard Horowitz, Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street (997-1003).
Here's another fusion of Arab tradition and modern electronics.
Sussan Deihim is an Iranian singer and dancer; Richard Horowitz plays the ney, a reed flute, through an array of synthesizers that also generates rhythms and murky, spooky harmonies and textures.
Their group includes Hassan Hakmoun, a young virtuoso on the Moroccan sintir, a cello-like instrument that can unleash dizzying, propulsive riffs; Mr.
Hakmoun is also an impassioned singer who breaks into acrobatic dances.
Tonight at 8; tickets are $15 and $20.


Rise in Oil Pushes Dow Down 20.05
Stocks slid yesterday in the wake of a steep rise in oil prices and growing Wall Street sentiment that war in the Middle East is once again a strong possibility.
Airline stocks and other big fuel users weakened, with Delta Air Lines dropping sharply after reporting a loss.
Bank stocks continued to drop, except for Wells Fargo, which advanced after it reported that Warren E. Buffett, the Omaha billionaire, had bought a 9.8 percent stake.
The bank's stock rose 1, to 51 1/2.


CDI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Restaurants
Long before bistromania held New York City in its clutches, Quatorze was packing them in down on 14th Street, where its shiny red door stood like a beacon on the seedy-looking stretch.
Six years after its opening, Quatorze has expanded with an uptown branch in an uptown setting with uptown patrons.
It has wisely retained its downtown menu and its downtown prices.


BayBanks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


As a Champ, Buster Is A Big Bust
James (Buster) Douglas was taller and heavier, his 246 pounds at Wednesday's weigh-in evidently much too heavy.
But at 208 pounds, Evander Holyfield never blinked.
"If you can get under a big guy's punches," Holyfield had said, "then you can hurt him with your punch."
And in the third round last night, Holyfield ascended to the world heavyweight championship with a one-punch knockout.
Moving away from a right uppercut that never landed, Holyfield threw a right hand that toppled Douglas onto the canvas.
After landing on his left side, Douglas flopped backward, trying to rub his right eye with his right glove, then twice with his left glove before he was counted out by the Referee Mills Lane while reposing on his back.
"I was trying to focus," the dethroned champion said later when asked why he had rubbed his eyes.
"I got a glove caught in it."
He got Holyfield's glove caught in it, the glove on the right hand that had levelled him.
But for three rounds Douglas had been unable to focus on what he had to do: retain the title he had won so shockingly and so impressively with a 10th-round knockout of Mike Tyson last February in Tokyo.
Over the three rounds, Douglas landed only one decent punch, a hard right hand early in the third round.
During the first and second rounds, Douglas threw the jab that had neutralized Tyson, but most of those jabs never quite reached Holyfield's face.
They were pawing jabs with no snap, with none of his 246 pounds behind them.
As a result, Holyfield, who had opened cautiously, soon had Douglas moving backward.
And downward.
"I was hoping to get some rounds under my belt to get my rhythm going," Douglas said later, "but he caught me with a good shot."
Holyfield's trainer, George Benton, had predicted that his gladiator would outjab Douglas, and he did.
But the Douglas up there in the ring at the Mirage last night in ideally warm weather was not the Douglas who had been on display in Tokyo when he got off the canvas in the 8th round and finished Tyson in the 10th round.
Some people, including the referee, thought that Douglas could have beaten the count.
"I tried to get up," Douglas said. "If I could've gotten up, I would have."
Asked about his weight, Douglas replied, "I was comfortable with my weight; that had no bearing on it." And maybe it didn't.
Maybe he would have been as bad at 236 or 226.
In the days leading up to his $20 million payday, Douglas emphasized how much he wanted to retain the title to show that his triumph over Tyson had not been a fluke, that he was a real champion.
But now he's got to live with the reality that his reign in the ring as champion lasted only 6 minutes 70 seconds into his first title defense.
Unless Douglas somehow redeems himself, his weight of 246 pounds at the weigh-in, and perhaps 250 when he entered the ring, will remain as much an indictment of his trainers, J. D. McCauley and John Russell, as of him.
Douglas didn't appear as blubbery as George Foreman has been in some of his recent bouts.
But any trainer worth the towel over his shoulder knows enough to weigh his fighter every day in the weeks before a fight, sometimes two or three times a day.
After the weigh-in scale showed Douglas at 246, McCauley professed not to be concerned and professed that it wasn't important to have weighed Douglas daily.
"Are they training him," Holyfield's other trainer, Lou Duva, asked, "or is he training them?"
Whatever the case, Douglas has returned to the shadows from whence he came.
His record is now 30-5-1.
His reputation is even worse.
Holyfield, meanwhile, is now what Mike Tyson was: the undefeated and undisputed heavyweight championn with 21 knockouts in his 25 fights, even though only 7 have been against heavyweights.
But just as Tyson kept Holyfield waiting for a title shot, Holyfield now will keep Tyson waiting while 42-year-old George Foreman moves to the front of the line.
Over the weekend the World Boxing Council, the World Boxing Association and the International Boxing Federation decreeed that if Holyfield won, he had to defend the title against Tyson within 120 days.
But when that edict arrived at the Mirage by fax, it appeared on a Don King Productions letterhead.
"King is yelling and screaming that we'd have to fight Tyson," said Shelly Finkel, who is Holyfield's adviser.
"But as the champion, Evander has a year before he has to fight the mandatory challenger."
Finkel spoke of a contract already negotiated for a Holyfield-Foreman title bout worth $20 million to Holyfield and $12 million for Foreman.
As for Buster Douglas, he lost $20 million for a Tyson title rematch.
And as a defending champion, Buster was a big bust.


Hispanic Rally Assails Hasidim In Williamsburg
Hundreds of Hispanic residents of the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn held a spirited, peaceful rally last night in front of the 90th Precinct station house, contending that the police favored Hasidic Jews over other neighborhood minority residents.
The demonstration came less than 24 hours after a melee at the same station house during a protest by about 300 Hasidic Jews over the arrest of a Jewish man who, they said, had been falsely accused of fondling a teen-ager.


Arizona Commerce Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Drexel Deal Is Described By Witness
A former salesman of high-yield "junk bonds" with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. testified yesterday that Michael R. Milken once told him that securities owned by the firm were sometimes secretly held by the Columbia Savings and Loan Association, one of Drexel's largest clients.
The testimony by the salesman, James Dahl, came in the pre-sentencing hearing for Mr.
Milken and was the first public evidence that Columbia may have "parked" securities for Drexel.


Premark International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Our Towns; A Charity Fears That Its Money May Run Out
Tom Karaban can see the future, unfortunately.
For a year it's been arriving in the mail.
He runs the Rainbow Foundation, a small charity he created six years ago to make modest emergency payments to families with sick children.
Rainbow supplies medicine not covered by insurance; plane tickets to fly children for organ transplants; air conditioners for asthmatics.


Saul Rosen, Manufacturer, 84
Saul Rosen, a manufacturer, died on Oct. 15 at Chilton Memorial Hospital in Pompton Plains, N.J.
He was 84 years old and lived in Wayne, N.J.
He died of a heart attack, a family spokesman said.
Mr.
Rosen, who came to the United States from Russia, worked in the silk mills of Paterson, where in 1930 he founded the United Yarn Products Company.
It moved to Wayne in 1980.
He was a past president of the Daughters of Miriam Center in Clifton and of the YM-YWHA in Wayne.
He was on the boards of the Fine Arts Commission of Fairleigh Dickinson University and of Barnert Memorial Hospital.
He is survived by two sons, Martin and Arthur, both of Wayne; two daughters, Elizabeth Berkowitz of Manhattan and Nina O'Connor of Gordonsville, Va.; a brother, Felix, of Wayne, and six grandchildren.


Plant Sale Aids Whirlpool Net
The Whirlpool Corporation said today that its third-quarter profits rose 27.6 percent but that the gain resulted from the sale of a Kentucky plant.
For the quarter that ended on Sept. 30, the appliance maker said net income totaled $60 million, or 86 cents a share, up from $47 million, or 68 cents a share, from the comparable period a year ago.
Without the sale of the vacuum cleaner plant in Danville, Ky., profits would have plummeted 21 percent, to $37 million, the company said.
The plant is now part of a venture between Whirlpool and the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company.
Revenue in the quarter grew 10.6 percent, to $1.66 billion, from $1.5 billion in the 1989 period.
David R. Whitwam, Whirlpool's chairman and chief executive, attributed the decline in profits to the weakening North American economy, which has softened the demand for appliances.
He expects industrywide United States shipments of appliances to be down about 8 percent for the year.
Whirlpool's stock fell 12.5 cents today, to $19.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.


New Group Makes the Case for Black Agencies and Media
SOME of the biggest black-owned advertising agencies and media companies have formed a trade organization, the African American Marketing and Media Association, hoping to increase advertising to black audiences, alter what it sees as stereotyping and find more work for its members.
The group plans to get in touch with advertisers that it thinks could use black representation on the account and creative sides.


Tokyo Plea On Dividends
Japanese companies, sometimes criticized for neglect of their shareholders, are coming under Government pressure to change their ways.
A Finance Ministry official told Keidanren, the Japan Federation of Economic Organizations, Japan's main business group, last week that companies should raise their dividends if they want to keep investors interested in the stock market.
"Companies must look over what their dividend payout ratios should be," Nobuhiko Matsuno, chief of the ministry's securities bureau, told a meeting of Keidanren's corporate finance committee, a Keidanren official said, "We want companies to make dividends commensurate with profits," another ministry official said in an interview.
The dividends of Japan's publicly held companies fell to 27.64 percent of net profits in the year ended March 31, down 0.49 percentage point from a year earlier.
This was the lowest dividend ratio since the Tokyo Stock Exchange began tracking it in 1969.
The ratio peaked in the 1981-82 fiscal year at almost 37.7 percent.


Gen. Noriega: Though Out of Sight, He's Under More Scrutiny Than Ever
In the 10 months since his ouster as the leader of Panama, Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega has settled into the tedium of confinement at a suburban prison, his lawyers say.
But even behind bars, the deposed dictator remains at the center of turmoil.
In the last two days, outraged members of Congress have complained about his privileges in a prison that one Miami columnist has called "Chateau Noriega." The government of Panama has filed a $6.5 billion civil racketeering lawsuit against him.
And his lawyers say they are stymied by their inability to obtain access to their client's money to finance his legal defense.


Bhutto's Foes Win a Strong Majority
When final results were tallied today in an election that former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto had hoped to win to vindicate herself after her dismissal in August, her opponents in the Islamic Democratic Alliance had claimed a clear majority, with 105 seats in the National Assembly.
Up to 50 more seats in the 217-member lower house of Parliament will be held by partners of the alliance.


Ogden Projects reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Contel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Federal Mogul Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Protective Life Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
First Bank System, Minneapolis, named Elizabeth A. Malkerson senior vice president for corporate relations. *
IBJ Schroder Bank and Trust Co., New York, a unit of Industrial Bank of Japan Ltd., Tokyo, appointed Norihide Yoshioka vice chairman, replacing Takeo Kani, who is leaving to join Morgan Stanley. *
Society Corp., Cleveland, named James S. Bingay Jr. executive vice president and group executive of its commercial center. *
Southern National Corp., Lumberton, N.C., a banking company, named L. Glenn Orr Jr. chairman, president and chief executive, succeeding Hector MacLean, who becomes chairman emeritus. *
Southwestern Public Service Co., Amarillo, Tex., named Bill D. Helton chief executive.
It also named Coyt Webb chief operating officer, replacing Mr.
Helton, and Doyle R. Bunch 2d chief financial officer. *
Technology Marketing Inc., Irvine, Calif., a high-technology test equipment company, appointed Guntis Melbardis president and chief operating officer, replacing George Wells, who held the position on an acting basis. *
Union Pacific Resources Co., Fort Worth, a gas and oil exploration subsidiary of Union Pacific Corp., Bethlehem, Pa., appointed Patrick D. Hanley vice president of finance. *
Waters Instruments Inc., Rochester, Minn., a producer of medical and non-medical equipment, named Robert Pitel president, chief executive, treasurer and chief financial officer.


Elmwood Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diamond-Star Plans New Cars
The Chrysler Corporation and the Mitsubishi Motors Corporation of Japan deepened their relationship today by saying they would build a new generation of cars at their joint-venture plant in Illinois.
The companies declined to say when the Diamond-Star Motors Corporation plant in Normal, Ill., would start producing the cars.
They also declined to release details of the new vehicles, saying only that the line would include two- and three-door sports cars and a four-door sedan.
Diamond-Star makes the Mitsubishi Eclipse and Mirage, the Plymouth Laser and the Eagle Talon and Summit.
The Eclipse, Laser and Talon are two-door sports cars, and the Mirage and Summit are four- door sedans.
A Chrysler official said the new cars would use more domestic parts than the current Diamond-Star models, whose parts are about 60 percent American.
The increase will come from more use of Chrysler engines and transmissions, a joint statement from the companies said.
The companies said they would split their share of the vehicles about 50-50.
Chrysler now gets about 55 percent of the cars produced at the Diamond-Star plant.
The companies each own half of Diamond-Star. Chrysler owns 12.1 percent of Mitsubishi.


Xerox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


O New York: You're Mostly Still Fun, but Oh, So Costly
ALL the best songs about New York extol the little pleasures, those carefree, madcap things that lovers do.
There are, for instance, potato chips, moonlight and motor trips.
People still sing about New York, but one wonders whether the city can still be enjoyed for a song.
"How About You?," with music by Burton Lane and lyrics by Ralph Freed, is a familiar 1941 paean to the city's cheaper thrills.
Perhaps better known by its first verse, "I like New York in June," it is a song that salutes the many simple pursuits that bring magic to a weekend in Manhattan.
Some have wondered how much it would really cost to do those things.
How about you?
O.K., it's not June, but then prices in New York aren't what they were in 1941, either.


Chemdesign Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A.T.P. Fines Edberg, Lendl and Agassi
Stefan Edberg, Ivan Lendl and Andre Agassi were fined substantial amounts by the Association of Tennis Professionals Tour yesterday for failing to play in the required number of tournaments this year.
Edberg, the world's top-ranked player, was fined a minimum of $115,496.
Lendl, ranked third, was fined a minimum $95,443 and the fifth-ranked Agassi was fined a minimum of $85,042.
Greg Sharko, an A.T.P.
Tour spokesman, said the amount of the fines would increase proportionally to include any income the players earn during the rest of the year.
"This is more than a financial penalty; I see this as an expression of commitment to play the A.T.P. Tour World Championship," said Mark Miles, the A.T.P.
Tour chief executive officer.
Edberg and Agassi were required to play in 11 tournaments.
Lendl, because he is a 10-year veteran, was required to play one less.
All three are two tournaments short and the Paris tournament next week, in which they all are scheduled to play, is the final event before the season-ending A.T.P.
Tour world championship at Frankfurt from Nov. 13-18. (AP)


Iraq Is Said to Free 700 Bulgarian Captives
President Saddam Hussein has decided to free 700 Bulgarians held in Iraq since the Aug. 2 invasion of Kuwait, Baghdad television reported today.
A joint Bulgarian-Iraqi communique carried by the state-run television said Mr.
Hussein had decided to allow "all Bulgarians working in Iraq or those who have completed their work in the country to travel if they wished to."
The announcement came at the end of a four-day visit to Iraq by the Bulgarian Vice President, Atanas Semerdzhiyev.
Thousands of foreigners are still trapped in Iraq, which this week said it was releasing 330 French captives.
A handful of Americans, Britons and other captives have also been released in the last few days.
AMMAN, Jordan, Oct. 25 (Reuters) -- Iraq is to free 28 Irishmen building a presidential palace for President Hussein because the Iraqi leader was impressed with the quality of their work, a freed Irish hostage said after arriving in Jordan today.
The freed hostage, Michael Sands, a civil engineer, flew into the Jordanian capital from Iraq with a fellow Irishmen and four Swedes.


Profits Scoreboard
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1990
From '89
Asarco Inc.
$ 59,400,000
+
12.7
Cooper Industries Inc.
92,700,000
+
36.1
Delta Air Lines Inc.
(51,600,000)
--
Ogden Corp.
15,800,000
-
44.6
Premark International Inc.
4,200,000
-
68.9
Sara Lee Corp.
106,300,000
+
13.3
Sonat Inc.
14,700,000
-
5.8
Tandem Computers Inc.
31,800,000
-
19.3
Tenneco Inc.
91,000,000
+
1.1
Tosco Corp.
68,400,000
+
282.1
UAL Corp.
106,100,000
-
4.3
Unisys Corp.
(356,800,000)
--
USAir Group Inc.
(120,300,000)
--
Whirlpool Corp.
60,000,000
+
27.7
Xerox Corp.
132,000,000
-
14.8
See accompanying notes for special items. (Loss) *Loss in year-earlier period.


Ferro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Inspiration Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


USAir Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CFS Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bell Atlantic Plans Earnings Charge
The Bell Atlantic Corporation said it would take a one-time charge against its fourth-quarter earnings of about $40 million, or 10 cents a share.
The charge will reduce the value on Bell Atlantic's books of the company's non-telephone financial services, which include equipment leasing and lending to other companies and real estate projects.
Bell Atlantic, based in Philadelphia, said that the businesses were doing well and had no credit problems but that their market value had fallen.
Marion M. Boucher, an analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc., said Bell Atlantic's investments outside the telephone industry now appeared more vulnerable to an economic downturn than many investors had thought.
Bell Atlantic's stock fell 87.5 cents yesterday, to $50.125, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Bush Tries to Quell G.O.P. Rebellion
Hoping to reverse weeks of damage to his political standing, President Bush embarked today on an effort to quell the rebellion in the Republican Party and to blame the Democrats for the tax increases blessed by Mr.
Bush himself as part of the bipartisan budget deal.
With just 12 days until the mid-term elections, Mr.
Bush gathered Republican Congressional leaders around him in the Rose Garden in a display of unity that included a public reconciliation with Representative Newt Gingrich, the Republican whip whose defiance of Mr.
Bush's support for the initial budget compromise sent the process spinning out of control.


Durban Journal; Democracy Is Foretold and a Black Is Its Prophet
Oscar D. Dhlomo was quietly approached by Foreign Minister Roelof F. Botha in September and invited to become the next South African Ambassador to the United States.
Mr.
Dhlomo was flattered but not tempted by the chance to be his country's first black diplomat.
Though he declines to talk about the Government's offer, acquaintances said Mr.
Dhlomo believed there was more important work to be done at home, inasmuch as President F. W. de Klerk's policies of change had already won new acceptance of South Africa abroad.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
8.00
7.87
8.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.21
7.23
7.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.16
7.18
7.47
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.46
8.49
7.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.75
8.77
7.88
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.85
9.89
9.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS*
7.73
7.75
7.34
*Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


N.F.L. Matchups: Week 8; Wyche and Glanville Square Off on Sunday
Sam Wyche, the Cincinnati Bengals' head coach, has a knack of becoming a storm center.
From his no-huddle offense to his snatching a microphone at a home game last season and instructing the Cincinnati fans to stop throwing garbage because "you don't live in Cleveland" to his grabbing the banner in the women-in-the-locker-room issue, Wyche speaks his mind and loves to get involved.
He practices the same philosophy in his tireless efforts to help the homeless in Cincinnati.


UAL Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.N. Resolution on Israel
1.
DEPLORES the refusal of the Israeli Government to receive the mission of the Secretary General to the region;
2.
URGES the Israeli Government to reconsider its decision and insists that it comply fully with Resolution 672 (1990) and to permit the mission of the Secretary General to proceed in keeping with its purpose;
3.
REQUESTS the Secretary General to submit to the Council the report requested in Resolution 672 (1990);
4. AFFIRMS its determination to give full and expeditious consideration to the report.


Administrators For Polly Peck
A judge today placed the troubled Polly Peck International P.L.C. in a form of bankruptcy reorganization.
The move effectively took the conglomerate out of the control of its chairman and chief executive, Asil Nadir, ending weeks of efforts by Mr.
Nadir to raise money as part of a rescue package.


Robin Chu, Legislator And a Sociologist, 71
Robin Chu, a sociologist and a member of Parliament in Taiwan, died on Wednesday at the Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan and in Taipei, customarily spending six months of the year in each city.
He died of stomach cancer, his son, Franklin, said.


In Last Days, Congress Acts on Blizzard of Bills
There was a now-or-never fervor on Capitol Hill today, and Congress responded with a burst of activity typical of the final days of a Congressional session.
Congressional leaders predicted that the 101st Congress would end on Saturday, and senators and House members spent the day casting votes on issues ranging from military appropriations to farm subsidies to the safety of consumer products.


Castle (A.M.) &amp; Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Greater New York Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tosco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Central Maine Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The U.N. Today
General Assembly
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE - 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
DECOLONIZATION COMMITTEE - 10 A.M.


TW Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A NARROW ESCAPE FOR I.R.A. CAPTIVE
A Roman Catholic man said today that he thought he was driving to his death when gunmen of the Irish Republican Army strapped him into a van loaded with explosives and tailed him to a military base near Omagh.
But Gerry Kelly was lucky: He wriggled free and the bomb failed to go off.


Family-Run Westvaco Promotes Son of Chief
The Westvaco Corporation, a leading maker of paper, packaging and chemicals, has announced management changes that put John A. Luke Jr., the son of the president and chief executive, in the catbird seat.
His father, who will be 65 at the end of November, has been asked by the board to stay in his current posts until sometime in 1992, when he expects to retire, Westvaco said.


Slovak Now Official Language
With thousands of angry nationalists besieging its building, the Slovak Parliament approved a bill tonight to make Slovak the official language of the Slovakia republic.
The new law allows the 600,000 ethnic Hungarians in Slovakia, one of two Czechoslovak republics, to use Hungarian in all official business in communities where they make up at least 20 percent of the population.
It was adopted by a vote of 82 to 51, with 10 abstentions.


Ruddick Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lemieux's Rare Disease
Mario Lemieux, the Pittsburgh Penguins' star center, is being treated for a rare bone infection that often leads to debilitating pain and cripples some of its victims.
The disease is a form of vertebral osteomyelitis, which damages the bony portion of the spine, The Pittsburgh Press reported today.
Dr.
Charles Burke, the team orthopedist, said that osteomyelitis was a very serious condition.
He said it could threaten Lemieux's hockey career, but he believed Lemieux should recover completely. (AP)


Dollar Up on Gulf Rumors And Agreement on Budget
The dollar rebounded on world currency markets yesterday to recoup the steep losses posted in the previous session.
As the session unfolded, a flurry of rumors swept the market about American military intentions in the Persian Gulf.
Unconfirmed reports that the United States had entered Kuwait and that President Bush had given Iraq an ultimatum encouraged investors to seek a haven in the dollar.
Traditionally, the dollar is viewed as the currency of choice in times of turmoil.


Hussein Visits Kurds and Pledges Prosperity
President Saddam Hussein promised Iraq's Kurds prosperity today, and told them they would be justified in taking up arms if it did not arrive in five years.
Baghdad television broadcast the Iraqi leader's remarks during a tour of Sulaimaniya, the capital of Iraqi Kurdistan.
It was the only the second trip outside Baghdad that Mr.
Hussein is reported to have taken since Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2.
He visited Kuwait City earlier this month.


Traffic Alert
Hudson Street Fair: Hudson Street will be closed tomorrow from Barrow to Leroy Street from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Safety Note
The New York City Fire Department recommends that smoke alarm batteries be changed twice yearly, at the start and the end of daylight time.
The date this autumn is Sunday.


J. F. Davis, 50, Dies; Lawyer Was Editor Of Amsterdam News
John F. Davis, a former deputy executive director of the Department of City Planning and former executive editor of The New York Amsterdam News, died on Monday at St.
Clare's Hospital.
He was 50 years old and lived in Harlem.
He died of lung cancer, his sister, Mildred Booker of Newark, said.
Mr.
Davis, a lawyer, held many paid and unpaid positions in the public and nonprofit sectors.
He worked with the Community Development Agency, Harlem-East Harlem Model Cities and the State Mortgage Agency.
He also was director of the social services department for the Harlem Commonwealth Council, a community development corporation.
From 1974 to 1980, Mr.
Davis served as secretary, vice president and president of the Community School Board for District 5 in Harlem.
He was also a member of the board of directors of the United Harlem Drug Fighters.
Youngest on N.A.A.C.P.
Board
In 1963, at the age of 22, he became the youngest full-fledged member ever appointed, until that time, to the board of directors of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
He also was a founder of the New York City Black Convention.
From 1981 to 1983, he was executive editor of The Amsterdam News and was credited with having written some of the 81-year-old weekly newspaper's most incisive editorials.
He later contributed articles to The Village Voice
In addition to his sister, Mrs.
Booker, he is survived by four other sisters, Shirley Davis and Lillian Price, both of East Orange, N.J., and Catherine Johnson of Scotch Plains, N.J., and Marion Barnett of Athens, Ga., and a brother, Reuben, of Chicago.
A memorial service will be held today at 2 P.M. at St.
Paul's Baptist Church, at 249 West 132d Street.


Business Records Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Union Capital, War Among the Confederates
Four score and three years ago, at the historically incongruous address of 1322 Vermont Avenue N.W. in the heart of the Union capital, the Confederate Memorial Hall was established.
As the aging rebel veterans who lived there died off, it became the museum and meeting place it remains today.
There, looking down from faded amber portraits, Robert E. Lee, Jefferson Davis and Stonewall Jackson survey the legacy of the Lost Cause.
They would not like what they see.
For Confederacy buffs, things are not quiet along the Potomac tonight.


Quayle Promotes Limit On Lawmakers' Terms
Vice President Dan Quayle campaigned against Congress in the Philadelphia suburbs today, appealing to 1,000 people outside the Delaware County Courthouse to send Republicans to Washington.
Mr.
Quayle spoke favorably of limiting the terms of lawmakers.
"I've been traveling around the country and I can feel the frustration of the voters," Mr.
Quayle said.
"They are cynical, they are frustrated, and they want change. It is time to let the President have a Republican Congress for a change."
Mr.
Quayle also promoted the idea of limiting terms for state legislators, noting that the issue was on several state ballots around the country.
"And it shouldn't stop there," he said.
"It ought to apply to the Congress of the United States."
In an interview after the speech, Mr.
Quayle said that the terms of Presidents are limited by a constitutional amendment, and "what is good for the President is good for the Congress."


Washington Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


10 Writers Receive $30,000 Awards
Ten American writers were named winners of the 1990 Whiting Writers' Awards last night, for which each will receive $30,000.
The annual awards are in recognition of writing achievement and writing promise.
The winners were honored by the trustees of the Whiting Foundation in a ceremony at the Pierpont Morgan Library.


Colorado National Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BancTexas Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cohu Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jean Goldwurm, 97; Distributor of Films
Jean Goldwurm, a film distributor who imported such neorealist classics as "Open City," "Forbidden Games" and "Two Cents Worth of Hope" from Europe after World War II, died in Lenox Hill Hospital yesterday.
He was 97 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Gordon Oppenheimer, a lawyer and family spokesman, said the cause of death was natural causes.
Mr.
Goldwurm's company, Times Film, was involved in two suits -- Times Film vs.
Chicago and Times Film vs.
Maryland -- over attempts to bar the showing of some films.
A ruling by the United States Supreme Court in 1965 made such prior censorhip impractical.
Mr.
Goldwurm brought many art films to the United States, including "To Live in Peace," "One Summer of Happiness" and "The Bicycle Thief."
In 1951, Mr.
Goldwurm acquired the Little Carnegie Theater, closed and renovated it, and reopened with the Japanese classic "Rashomon." He had also owned the World Theater on West 49th Street.
He is survived by his wife, Iva.


Discover Card Certificates Are Priced by Dean Witter
A $500 million issue of pass-through certificates backed by Discover credit card receivables was priced yesterday through Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.
Discover Card Services Inc. and Dean Witter are both units of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.
The pass-through certificates are being offered through Discover Card Trust 1990-D and carry a coupon of 8.85 percent.
They are priced at 99.643 to yield 9.02 percent, or about 108 basis points more than three-year Treasury notes.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.
Underwriters expect the financing to be rated Aaa by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and AAA by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation based on the underlying quality of the receivables and an issue of subordinated debt equal to about 10 percent of the senior securities.
The legal final maturity of the certificates is May 16, 1996, and the expected final maturity is May 15, 1994.
Payments on the principal will be in 12 equal installments beginning June 15, 1993.


Fielder Joins Japan Tour
Cecil Fielder, who led the major leagues in 1990 with 51 homers after he played a season in Japan, was among 26 players named yesterday to go to Japan for an eight-game tour next month.
The team also includes the brothers Roberto Alomar of San Diego and Sandy Alomar of Cleveland and a father-and-son pair, Ken Griffey Sr. and Jr., both of Seattle.
Members of the 1990 All-Stars on the team also include the second baseman Julio Franco of Texas, the reliever Bobby Thigpen of the Chicago White Sox, the pitcher Dave Stewart of Oakland and the third baseman Chris Sabo and the reliever Rob Dibble of the World Series champion Cincinnati Reds.
The team will play Japanese all-star squads Nov. 2-11 in Tokyo, Fukuoka and Osaka.
The Japanese teams will vary from game to game.
The manager will be Don Zimmer of the Chicago Cubs. (AP)


Review/Theater; Edwardian Transplant From England to Boston
Devotees of television's prime-time disasters may well recall "Beacon Hill," the 1975 CBS series that tried to knock off public television's hit English import "Upstairs Downstairs" for fun and profit.
Though lavishly produced with the best New York character actors that network capital could buy, "Beacon Hill" died a sorry Nielsen death in 13 weeks.
The rigorous class distinctions of the British social order looked silly when superimposed even on the snootiest neighborhood of democratic Boston.
As Sally Bedell Smith reports in her new biography of the CBS chairman William S. Paley ("In All His Glory," Simon &amp; Schuster), network surveys revealed that "the American public just didn't believe that one household could have that many servants."
"Beacon Hill," long faded to a dull blur on this television viewer's consciousness, came leaping back to mind during Arvin Brown's staging of "The Voysey Inheritance" at the Long Wharf Theater here.
Written at the beginning of this century, the play is the best-known drama by Harley Granville Barker (1877-1946), the dazzling English director, actor and critic who played a crucial role in modernizing Shakespeare production and in shepherding new plays by his friend and mentor George Bernard Shaw to the stage.
The only thing remotely American about Barker was his second wife, but this has not stopped Mr.
Brown and an adapter, James Luse, from transplanting "The Voysey Inheritance" from England to Boston.
The Voyseys, a large Edwardian family, now talk of Adams instead of Cromwell, refer to such American institutions as Nash Motors and Kidder, Peabody and, of course, have been moved from Chislehurst to Chestnut Hill.
All things considered, it's a wonder that the play's title wasn't changed to "The Kennedy Loot."


Carter-Wallace reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Valley National Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Warren Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


DPL (Inc.N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Framingham Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bailout Plan Is Approved
Federal regulators today approved a plan to sell or close about 192 failed savings and loan institutions.
The proposed action, which involves assets valued at $119 billion, is part of an operating plan for the Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency overseeing the bailout of the savings industry.
Officials of the agency's oversight board approved the plan.
They said the plan would bring to 479 the total number of savings institutions whose financial problems have been resolved by liquidation or other actions since Aug. 9, 1989.
The oversight board would authorize $62.2 billion in new financing.
This would include $23 billion to resolve the financial problems of the 192 savings institutions and $38.9 billion in working capital to be borrowed through the Federal Financing Bank.


Drivers Strike at The Daily News, Ande Most Unions Honor Walkout
The 700-member newspaper deliverers' union local struck The Daily News last night, setting off a climactic labor showdown with the management of the financially ailing paper, the nation's second largest metropolitan daily.
Within minutes, eight other unions representing most of the paper's 2,400 unionized workers announced that they would honor the deliverers' picket lines at its printing plants in Brooklyn, Garden City, L.I., Kearny, N.J., and at The News's main editorial offices in Manhattan.


Gleason Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
When it comes to top salaries in London, American businessmen running British companies are at the top of the scale, according to a recent survey published by Charterhouse, a British merchant banking concern.
The highest paid executive is HENRY WENDT , chairman of SmithKline Beechman, the pharmaceutical company.
His pay, including stock options, was just under $4 million last year.
The chief executive of SmithKline, ROBERT BAUMAN , ranked fifth with $2.5 million.
Other top American earners were MITCHELL FROMSTEIN , the chairman of Manpower, a temporary-help service, who ranked sixth with $2.2 million, and RICHARD GIORDANO , head of BOC, an industrial gas and health-care company, who was in seventh place with $1.7 million.
The survey included a comparison of top executives in various countries that showed that in general, executives in Britain earn well below executive pay their counterparts in the United States and Germany.


Murphy Oil Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tandem Computers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First National Corp. (San Diego, Calif.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Home Resales Decline 8%
Sales of existing homes in September fell 8 percent, to their lowest level in nearly three years, a real estate trade group said today.
It attributed the decline to faltering consumer confidence in the economy.
"Consumers don't know what to expect," said Norman D. Flynn, president of the National Association of Realtors.
"When people don't know what's coming, they tend to delay big-ticket expenditures."
The realtors said house resales totaled a seasonally adjusted 3.22 million, slowest since a 3.2 million rate in January 1988.
The August rate had been 3.5 million.
All regions posted sales declines except for the Northeast, which was unchanged.
The median price of an existing home nationally fell 2.9 percent in September, to $94,300.
The median means half of the homes cost more, half less.
Fixed-rate 30-year mortgages averaged 10.19 percent to 10.22 percent in September, generally higher than in the first half of the year.
Sales fell 10 percent in the South in September, to an annual rate of 1.26 million units.
The median price of a home in the South was $85,900, down 1.2 percent from August.
The West posted a resale rate of 520,000 units, down 8.8 percent.
The median home price was $134,700, a 3.9 percent decline from August.
Sales in the Midwest were off 7.1 percent, to 920,000 units.
The median price was $74,000, a 1.7 percent drop.
Sales in the Northeast remained unchanged at 520,000 units, despite a 5.6 percent drop in the median price to $137,100.


Power Play Falters a Bit But Devils Still Prevail
Except for the power-play units, which failed six times, all the other facets worked effectively for the Devils in tonight's game against the Buffalo Sabres.
From Chris Terreri in goal to the last player on the fourth line, everyone contributed in a 5-1 triumph over the Sabres that kept the Devils undefeated after seven games (6-0-1) this season at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Jets Need Big Plays and Healthy Players
The clock was ticking in the last minute of the Jets' game against the Bills in Orchard Park, N.Y., on Sunday and unfolding on the field was one of those slow-motion scenes like the one from the movie "The Longest Yard."
Jim Kelly, the Bills' quarterback, was fading back for what seemed like an eternity, with Jet defenders closing in on him.
Kelly was picking out one wide receiver after another before finally finding an open Jamie Mueller in the end zone and hitting him for Mueller's first touchdown catch of his four-year career and the game winner in a 30-27 Bills victory.


Pan Am Had Route Inquiry By American
Robert L. Crandall, the chairman of American Airlines, said yesterday that he would have paid more than United Airlines had to obtain Pan American World Airways' routes between the United States and London.
Pan Am and United said Wednesday that the UAL Corporation, the parent of United, would pay $400 million for the five routes and would also provide Pan Am with a marketing agreement under which the airlines would coordinate schedules and share airport space.


Acme Steel Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Under the Small Top in the Big Apple
When the Small Top comes to town today, it will not be circus as usual.
The 140,000 people who flock to the Big Apple Circus in its billowy blue tent at Lincoln Center this season will be seeing the most ambitiously mounted extravaganza in the troupe's 13-year history: a lovingly re-created tribute to the one-ring European circuses of a century ago.
But audiences will also be confronted with a statement about circus itself.
Big Apple's new show, "Ballerinas, Horses and Clowns: The Golden Age," is New York City's homegrown riposte to the challenge of seductive art-circus newcomers like the Cirque du Soleil and Circus Oz.
During their flashy appearances in Manhattan, those visitors from Montreal and Australia, respectively, not only turned the heads of local audiences, but also compelled Big Apple to confront its essential nature.


Oil-Related Inflation Fears Push Gold Prices Up Again
Gold prices continued to climb yesterday as the resurgent oil market fanned inflation fears.
But platinum prices dropped sharply, reflecting declining Japanese investor interest and worldwide economic jitters.


S.&amp; L. Fraud Trial Begins
Donald Ray Dixon used Vernon Savings Association funds for prostitutes, beach houses, a yacht and other expensive entertainment while watching the institution fail, prosecutors said today in his fraud trial.
Mr.
Dixon's Federal trial, one of the most prominent prosecutions in the nationwide cleanup of the savings and loan industry, began with the Government portraying Vernon's former owner as a high-flying Texan who had pleasure on his mind more often than supervising his institution's affairs.
Robert E. Hauberg, a United States Justice Department lawyer, said Mr.
Dixon had used the failed institution's money to pay for beach houses near San Diego, a yacht in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and two hunting trips to Kansas.
But Mr.
Dixon's lawyer, William M. Ravkind, said investigators had put pressure on witnesses to accuse Mr.
Dixon of leading a conspiracy.
Mr.
Ravkind said he would show that Mr.
Dixon did not profit from Vernon's failure.
Mr.
Dixon invested $13 million but was left with a $5 million in debt, he said.
The 38-count indictment also accuses Mr.
Dixon and other Vernon officials of conspiring to give money to politicians, including former House Speaker Jim Wright.


HOPE SEEN IN CURB FOR LYME DISEASE
Researchers at Yale University say they have used a gene-engineering technique to develop a vaccine that protects mice against Lyme disease.
In a report being published in Friday's issue of the journal Science, the researchers said it was uncertain whether the vaccine would be effective in people.
In the experiments, the vaccine stimulated the immune systems of the mice to produce antibodies, which kept in check a type of bacteria called a spirochete that causes Lyme disease.
Many experimental vaccines that are tested in animals are never proven to be safe and effective in humans, but the researchers expressed optimism that the technique could eventually have broader application.
Additional Lab Work Needed
Dr.
Richard A. Flavell, leader of the Yale research team, said said it would take five to eight years of additional laboratory work before an experimental Lyme disease vaccine could be tried on humans.
But Dr.
David H. Persing, a researcher at the Harvard School of Public Health, said the success of a Lyme disease vaccine could not be proven until the immunity was tested against the disease in the way it is naturally spread -- through a tick bite.
Dr.
Persing said that the saliva of ticks infected with Lyme disease also contains substances that depress some immune functions.
A vaccine would be proven, he said, only when it is shown to give protection against the effects of these substances.
Lyme disease was first identified in 1975 and named for the Connecticut town where a Yale study was conducted.
The disease is spread by a small deer tick that passes along the spirochete when it sucks blood from a victim.
Treatment With Antibiotics
The disease can cause heart problems, pain in the joints, skin rash and even brain disorders.
Identified early, Lyme disease can be successfully treated with antibiotics.
Dr.
Flavell said that to develop the Lyme disease vaccine, the researchers first had to find a special inbred strain of laboratory mice able to contract the disease.
The researchers then cloned a gene for a protein, called OspA, that is on the surface of the Lyme spirochete.
The gene was then spliced into a common laboratory bacteria that then produced the OspA protein.
A purified form of OspA was injected into a group of mice, and tests showed that they developed antibodies to the protein.
Inoculated mice then were injected with the Lyme spirochete.
Mice that had been injected with the OspA protein did not get Lyme disease.
Antibodies made by the mouse immune system in response to the OspA protein were able to keep the bacteria in check.
Other mice that had not received the OspA shots developed the Lyme symptoms.


Miami Journal; The Big Uproar Over Little Havana
Mercedes Rodri guez, a clerk, and Willy A. Bermello, a prominent architect, both showed up at a rowdy meeting of the Miami City Commission last week.
Both spoke fervently about Little Havana, the neighborhood where they had begun their exiles from Cuba many years ago.
But Mrs.
Rodriguez, who is 57 years old, was part of a crowd of 350 Cuban-Americans who angrily booed Mr.
Bermello's speech.
Some denounced him, as well as the city's first Cuban-American Mayor, Xavier L. Suarez, as a tick, a traitor, a Communist.


Brite Voice Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Boston Edison Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Where the College Music Concerts Are Being Held
The College Media Journal Music Marathon runs through Sunday at various clubs around New York City.
There is a $225 pass ($95 for students) that allows admission to all events; otherwise, ticket prices are set at the individual clubs.
For ticket prices, call the clubs; in most cases, times indicate when the doors open.
Marathon information: 938-9100, extension 906.
Here is a schedule of concerts this weekend.
TODAY BITTER END, 147 Bleecker Street (673-7030).
Thrill Cat, Danny Flanagan, Michael McDermott, Leslie Spit Treeo, Voice in Time, 8:30 P.M.
BOND STREET CAFE, 6 Bond Street (979-6565).
Vestrymen, Robin Myrick, Hunting Sleeve, Big Barn Burning and Holy Ranger, 8 P.M.
CAT CLUB, 76 East 13th Street (505-0090).
Serious Pilgrim, Social Act and Gunbunnies, 6 P.M.
CBGB, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street (982-4052).
Skunk, 9 P.M.; Happy Family, 10 P.M.; Blake, 11 P.M.; Buffalo Tom, midnight; Liquid Jesus, 1 A.M.; Amanda Kramer, 2 A.M.
CBGB GALLERY, 313 Bowery (982-4052).
Hinterland, 10 P.M.; Brothers Figaro, 11 P.M.; My Dog Homer, midnight.
CHASE CLUB, 98 Third Avenue, at 12th Street (475-1407).
Violets, Hypnolovewheel, Big Wheel, Texas Instruments, Psyclone Rangers, Boneyard, 8 P.M.
CONTINENTAL DIVIDE, 25 Third Avenue, at St.
Mark's Place (529-6924).
Love Camp 7, Picket Line Coyotes and Clang, 10 P.M.
GONZALEZ Y GONZALEZ, 625 Broadway, at Bleecker Street (473-8787), Ululators, 9 P.M.
HOT ROD, 270 11th Avenue, at 27th Street (244-1950).
Delayed close-circuit broadcast of performance by the Cure in London, 7:30 P.M.
Room I, East Ash, Controlled Bleeding and Handful of Snowdrops, 9 P.M.; ROOM II, Condition, September Faces, Acorns, Hordes of Mungo and Gothic Hut, 9:30 P.M.
KENNY'S CASTAWAYS, 157 Bleecker Street (473-9870).
Big Medicine Head, Spin, Cotton Mather, Sloane Rangers, Visigotha, Wishniaks, 8 P.M.
LIVE TONIGHT, 125 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J. (201-795-9606).
Andy Summers, 9 P.M.
LONE STAR ROADHOUSE, 240 West 52d Street (245-2950).
Darden Smith and Lock Up, 7 P.M.
LUDLOW STREET CAFE, 165 Ludlow Street (353-0536).
Styve, 6 P.M.
MARQUEE, 547 West 21st Street (982-3686).
Bob Mould Band, 9 P.M.
Also tomorrow, same time.
MAXWELL'S, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J. (201-798-4064).
Goo Goo Dolls and Naked Raygun, 10 P.M.
NIGHTINGALE'S, 213 Second Avenue, at 13th Street (473-9398).
Soda Can and Spin Doctors, 8 P.M.
N.Y.U.
LOEB STUDENT CENTER, 566 La Guardia Place, at West Fourth Street (998-4999).
Rap Showcase, with Alpha Tribe Squadron, Freshco and Miz, Movement Ex, Brand Nubian, Powetole, Kid Rock, Black Sheep, Harmony, Young Black Teen-Agers, 2 Black 2 Strong, Three Times Done, 3d Bass, 7 P.M.
THE RITZ, 254 West 54th Street (541-8900).
An Emotional Fish, Lemonheads, Redd Kross, 8 P.M.
POOL BAR, 643 Broadway, at Bleecker Street (473-9263).
Selves, This Is It, and Snake Hips, 8 P.M.
PYRAMID, 101 Avenue A, at Fifth Street (420-1590).
Rein Sanction, Toad Stoll, Astronaut and Fluid, 8 P.M.
RODEO BAR, 375 Third Avenue, at 27th Street (683-6500).
Independent Label Alliance Acoustic, Showcase With: Baby Tapeworm, Ritual Tension and Vulgar Boatmen, 6 P.M.
S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street (243-4940).
Tabou Combo, 7 P.M.
THE SPIRAL, 244 East Houston Street (353-1740).
Jean Caffeine, Dumptruck, Maria Excummicata and Strange Cave, 8 P.M.
WETLANDS, 161 Hudson Street, 161 Hudson Street (966-4225).
Video screening at benefit for AIDS Research, 7:30 P.M.; Crazy Ba, Afros and Bop Harvey, 10 P.M.
WOODY'S IN THE VILLAGE, 82 East Fourth Street (982-3688).
A party with Second Self, with Bat Mastersons, Cavedogs, Posies and Affordable Floors. 7 P.M.
ZONE D.K., 540 West 21st Street (463-8599).
Godflesh, Confessor, Corrosion of Conformity, Mind Over Four, Coup De Grace, and Non-Fiction, 7 P.M.
Tomorrow BITTER END, Jill Sobule, Disappear Fear, Joe Parsons Trio, Outriders, Urband Edge and Robert Becker, 8 P.M.
CAVE CANEM, 24 First Avenue, at Second Street (529-9665).
Roger Manning and Dharma Bums, 8 P.M.
CBGB, Blackbird, Flight of Mavis, Posies, Yo La Tengo, Goo Goo Dolls, Buck Pets, 7:30 P.M.
CHASE, Superchunk, Railroad Jerk, Antieram, Shrimpboat and Flying Saucer, 8 P.M.
CONTINENTAL DIVIDE, Meet Cleveland Party: A Jim Cievo Presentation with performances by members of the Outcasts, In Fear of Roses, Terrible Parade, Hot Tin Roof, 6 to 8 P.M.; Last Corvairs, Thick as Thieves and Hannibals, 11 P.M.
GONZALEZ Y GONZALEZ, Zen Mambo, 9 P.M.
KENNY'S CASTAWAYS, 157 Bleecker Street (473-9870).
El Kabong, Elevator Men, Miles Dechmuffin, Herb Hines and the Turbines, Miranda Warning and Crabdaddy, 8 P.M.
LIMELIGHT, Alice in Chains, 8:30 P.M. and King's X, 9:30 P.M.
LIVE TONIGHT, Gimme the Gun and Fear of Falling, 9 P.M.
LONE STAR CAFE ROADHOUSE, 240 West 52d Street (245-2950).
Will Jones and Kelly Willis, 6:30 P.M.
MAXWELL'S, Shams and Robyn Hitchcock, 10 P.M.
NIGHTINGALE'S, Furors, Smokin' Dave and the Premo Dopes and Naomi's Hair, 9 P.M.
PALLADIUM, Action Swingers, Bullet LaVolta, Mudhoney and Limited Entrance, 8 P.M.
POOL BAR, Buttsteak, Stranglemartin, Blips, Colored Greens and White Chocolate, 8 P.M.
RODEO BAR, Made in Austria, Lonesome Val and Big Head Todd and the Monsters, 6 P.M.
S.O.B.'S, a Closing Night Marathon, "Breakfast With Tackhead." Show at 2 A.M.
SPIRAL, Cordelia's Dad, Shrams, High Sheriff Ricky Barnes and the Hoot Owls and Hank McCoy and the Dead Ringers, 8 P.M.
WETLANDS, Harm Farm, Jody Grind and Spin Doctors, 9 P.M.
WOODY'S, Connells, 7 P.M.; Aquanettas and Pussywillows, 10 P.M.


Heritage Media Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bindley Western Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Indians in Connecticut Get Casino Gambling
A 200-member Indian tribe in eastern Connecticut has reached a compact with the state permitting casino gambling on its reservation, including blackjack, poker and roulette, at whatever stakes the tribes chooses, beginning as early as next July.
The tribe, the Mashantucket Pequots of Ledyard, is the first American Indian tribe east of the Mississippi to reach a gambling agreement under a Federal law signed in 1988 by President Reagan, and could be the first in the nation to actually begin full casino-style gambling.


Bell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bush Trying to Quell G.O.P. Rebellion Over Taxes


Calmat Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


JWP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bernstein at Camp
To the Editor:
In the summer of 1938 I was an athletic counselor at Camp Onota in Pittsfield, Mass., and a fellow from Harvard named Lenny (though he preferred to be called Leonard) was the dramatic and music counselor.
Lenny impressed us greatly with his piano playing, and I knew that his interpretations of Beethoven sonatas were considerably better than my sister's, who was a fine pianist.
At the end of the summer the camp put on Gilbert and Sullivan's "Mikado," with Lenny as producer, director and piano accompanist.
The performance by these youngsters (with the help of an amateur musician named Adolph Green from the Bronx) was positively thrilling.
The audience thought Leonard Bernstein was marvelous, without realizing how marvelous he was destined to be.
But although he was to introduce many musical hits, on the baseball field he was hitless and never could advance the runner from first to second.
SEYMOUR WADLER New York, Oct. 17, 1990


BKLA Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Federal Savings Bank (Decatur, Ala.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diner's Journal
Can
New York restaurateurs sound a little like politicians these days.
They bridle at the word "depression," preferring instead to describe the dwindling number of guests in their dining rooms and the new abstemiousness of diners as a "restaurant recession." By any name, the change in the prevailing winds has stirred up wildly varied responses in the form of recently opened dining spots.
Can, which opened two weeks ago in SoHo, is a Spartan, tony place whose artful French-Vietnamese cooking (and steep prices) defies the current belt-tightening, back-to-basics trend.
With its white-washed brick walls and contemplative jazz, the dining atrium looks more like a West Broadway art gallery than a restaurant.
The art buyers and gallery owners who are beginning to trickle in to claim the 65 black lacquered chairs must feel right at home; certainly the food-serious do.
Can's fare is cerebral, carefully crafted and, even for a non-aficionado of East-meets-West cooking, often very good.
At a recent lunch, the translucent rice dumplings were tender and tasty.
Squid was perfectly sauteed on a mound of lettuces, fresh dill and opal basil, tossed with little taste-shocks of shredded ginger.
The spring roll flanked a food sculpture of all its pure-tasting contents: carrots and bean threads, lettuce, shrimp and omelet.
Unfortunately, the tuna-sushi pizza on a Jackson Pollock squiggle of yellow and red pepper puree was a flat-tasting, thick-crusted disk.
Chicken, marinated in orange and raspberry vinaigrette, was nicely grilled.
Smoked salmon was delicious, wrapped around a mousse of fresh salmon, crab meat and shrimp with a caviar sauce.
Lunch, with coffee and dessert, was $140 for two. (Can, 482 West Broadway, at Houston Street, is open for lunch and dinner Tuesday through Sunday; 533-6333.) Cafe Cassis
In closer concert with the current no-frills mood, Cafe Cassis, a Provencal remake of the former Carolina, opened two weeks ago and offers a variety of lusty charcuterie as well as decent pizzas, roast chicken, fish stew and cod cakes at moderate prices (about $60 for two with wine, tax and tip) for pre- and post-theater dinners. (Cafe Cassis, 355 West 46th Street, is open for lunch and dinner Monday to Saturday; 245-0058.) Vince &amp; Eddie's
Farther uptown, a similar back-to-basics mode reaches its apogee at Vince &amp; Eddie's, a cozy neighborhood spot that opened last week.
Mussels baked in garlicky herb butter and a lusty white-bean-and-ham soup recalled simpler times (and less-threatening prices: dinner for two is about $50, with wine, tax and tip).
The soggy crusted onion tart and misbegotten squid salad were forgiven, in fact forgotten, at the first bite of the main courses.
Lamb shank, stewed with dried cherries; garlicky fried pork chops; pan-roasted chicken on a bed of cabbage and a waft of garlic and herbs could not have been better. (Vince &amp; Eddie's, 70 West 68th Street, is open for lunch and dinner daily; 721-0068.)


Fredric Bainnson, 51,Landscape Architect
Fredric H. Bainnson, a landscape architect, died on Tuesday at New York University Hospital.
He was 51 years old and lived in Jersey City.
He died of cancer, a spokeswoman for the family said.
Mr.
Bainnson was co-founder of the Manhattan-based firm of Abel, Bainnson &amp; Associates in 1968.
He was involved in the planning, design and construction of parks, housing developments, college campuses and commercial projects throughout the metropolitan area.
Among them were the 28-acre Riverbank State Park under construction atop the North River Water Polution Control Plant in Manhattan and the landscaping design of the renovated Broadway malls, 43 islands in the middle of Broadway between 61st and 113th streets.
Mr.
Bainnson was the New York chapter trustee of the American Society of Landscape Architects and vice chairman of the New York State Board for Landscape Architecture.
He was a 1963 graduate of the State University of New York.
He is survived by a brother, Elliot, of Plainview, L.I.; three sons, Brian, of Stamford, Conn., Steven, of Jersey City, and Robbie, also of Plainview; a stepson, Jonathan Lieberman, and two stepdaughters, Michele and Debbie Lieberman, all of Ridgefield Park, N.J.


Advo-System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


People
*
Carl Spielvogel, chairman and chief executive of Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, has been appointed to the board of the American Association of Advertising Agencies, replacing William Youngclaus, managing partner of Tathum-Laird &amp; Kudner, Chicago, who resigned. *
Brian M. Kelly was promoted to vice president and senior art director at AC&amp;R Advertising, New York. *
Hans Zucker has been promoted to vice president at Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, New York.


Harmon Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Heartfed Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ohio Judge Dismisses Case Against Men Holding Hands
A judge has dismissed criminal charges against two men who were cited for holding hands in a parked car.
Judge Joseph Luebbers of the Hamilton County Municipal Court dismissed the case Wednesday after a defense lawyer argued that the charge of disorderly conduct by creating an offensive condition was too vague.
"No standard of conduct is specified," the lawyer, Catherine Adams, said of the charge. .
"It does not notify a person what society is requiring."
The two men, Commedore C. Canyon, 29 years old, of Cincinnati, and John K. Harden, 28, of suburban Ludlow, Ky., were cited on Sept. 27 in Eden Park, where a police officer testified the he saw Mr.
Canyon holding Mr.
Harden's hand in Mr.
Harden's lap.
Mr. Canyon said he was consoling Mr. Harden over a death in his family.


Herr Signs With Mets For $1.4 Million Pact
Reluctant to offer him salary arbitration, the Mets reached agreement with Tom Herr last night on a one-year contract for $1.4 million.
Herr, whom the Mets acquired from Philadelphia Aug. 31, was seeking a $1.5 million salary for 1991, but the Mets had offered $1.2 million.
If they had failed to reach agreement, the Mets, under the rules that apply to former free agents in Herr's circumstances, would have had to offer the second baseman arbitration by midnight last night or he could have become a free agent.


Critic's Choice
The Caribbean Cultural Center's annual series Expressions regularly puts together concerts that reach across cultures and continents to reunite the African diaspora.
The finale of the series this year, tomorrow night at the Riverside Church, is to be a gathering of titans that brings together a great songwriter, an indomitable singer and the percussionist and band leader who has long been acclaimed as the king of salsa.


Japanese in Disarray Over Sending Troops to Gulf
Ten days after submitting legislation to send Japanese troops to the Persian Gulf, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu's Government has been thrown into disarray by widespread public opposition to the measure and growing indications that it will be rejected by Parliament.
Mr.
Kaifu, pressed by Parliamentary critics, has been on the defensive for most of the last week, repeatedly assuring lawmakers and voters that any forces sent abroad would avoid combat or even dangerous situations.


Xerox Profit Down 14.8%
The Xerox Corporation today reported a 14.8 percent drop in third-quarter earnings, partly because of a weak performance by the company's insurance and financial services businesses.
For the period that ended on Sept. 30, profits totaled $132 million, or $1.16 a share, on revenue of $4.5 billion.
That compared with earnings of $155 million, or $1.41 a share, on revenue of $4.4 billion in the 1989 period.
Income from continuing operations in Xerox's insurance and other financial services fell 98 percent, to $1 million, from $50 million in the 1989 quarter.
Pretax capital gains totaled $4 million in the period, compared with $207 million a year earlier.
Income at Crum &amp; Forster's property and casualty and life insurance operations dropped 64.5 percent, to $27 million, in the third quarter from $76 million a year ago.
Xerox's stock slipped by 12 1/2 cents today, to $30.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.


California Republican Running Against Apple Pie
Ordinarily a four-term Republican incumbent like Representative Al McCandless could coast to re-election in this desert district, where Republicans outnumber Democrats by 47 to 44 percent and where the constituents include party stalwarts like Gerald R. Ford, Bob Hope, Frank Sinatra and Spiro T. Agnew.
But Mr.
McCandless is running against Ralph Waite, the actor who played the Depression-era father John Walton in the 1970's hit television series "The Waltons." And if voters somehow associate Mr.
Waite, a liberal Democrat, with Pa's family virtues of honesty, hard work and trustworthiness, well, the Democrats would not mind a bit.


Top Albania Writer Seeks Asylum In France, a Blow to His President
A prominent Albanian writer announced in Paris today that he was seeking political asylum in France.
The writer, Ismail Kadare, the author of 10 novels, 3 volumes of poetry and numerous essays, said in a declaration that he had decided to defect because he had become disillusioned with the Government of Ramiz Alia.


U.S. Backing Bloodshed in Afghanistan
To the Editor:
United States officials have stated that the latest offensive of Afghan rebels against Kabul may serve a useful purpose in pushing the government of President Najibullah toward a political settlement ("U.S. Renews Hope for Afghan Peace," news article, Oct. 16).
Unfortunately for the Afghan people, the opposite is true.
The rebel offensive in Afghanistan is the brainchild of Pakistani military intelligence, the Inter-Services Intelligence, known by the initials I.S.I., which has no interest in any political settlement short of putting the extremist rebel leader Gulbuddin Hekmatyar into power.
The cost of that effort will be countless civilian lives.
Support for the fighting from the United States will not lead to peace, but will only prolong Afghanistan's civil war.
Congress is poised to cut aid to the Afghan resistance, at least partly because of the failure of the mujahedeen guerrillas to achieve a military victory.
What should be of greater concern is the I.S.I.'s strategy of indiscriminately attacking civilians.
Since the Soviet Union's withdrawal from Afghanistan, the I.S.I. has pressured guerrilla commanders to attack government-controlled cities with rockets as their main military activity.
Commanders who oppose this strategy because it endangers civilians are denied weapons.
When I visited Kabul the effects of the rocket attacks were clear: schoolchildren, housewives, storekeepers and taxi drivers are the victims, while the military impact is negligible.
With the connivance of the I.S.I., rebel factions have also imprisoned, tortured and murdered their opponents, as well as Afghan intellectuals and relief workers.
For too long, United States policy in Afghanistan has been at odds with our avowed objectives; public statements supporting human rights in Afghanistan, including the right of Afghans to choose their own government, have been countered by United States support for groups that use arms to pre-empt those rights.
The people of Afghanistan deserve the chance to rebuild their country in peace.
But as long as United States officials are willing to support Pakistan's war games, they are not likely to get it.
PATRICIA GOSSMAN Research Associate, Asia Watch New York, Oct. 16, 1990


Corrections
An article yesterday about the effect of the budget compromise on people in various income brackets rendered a comment by Bruce Fisher, research director of the Citizens for Tax Justice, incorrectly in some copies.
It should have read: "This House package makes the tax code more progressive for everyone except people who make the same amount of income as members of Congress. The plan would take money from the superrich in order to give a 2percent tax cut to those earning from $100,000 to $200,000." (He did not use the word "regressive.")


Bic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Donnelley (R.R.) &amp; Sons Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Delta Air Lines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wisconsin Energy Corp. reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


TV Weekend; Fearless Vampire Bats In 'National Geographic'
Are vampire bats, insects and snakes your cup of gore?
If so, tune into "Halloween," the "National Geographic Explorer" hour on the TBS cable network at 9 P.M. on Sunday.
It's an appetizer for the approaching spookery.
The first and most tantalizing segment demonstrates that vampire bats have made it from Transylvania to Trinidad, where they are causing trouble by feeding on farm animals.
Remarkable photographs show the bats sipping the blood from a chicken and a donkey, in what the narrator calls "a 30-minute banquet." Thus fortified, the mother of the brood returns to the family cave to give suck to its young.
The vampires, who look cute from some angles and scary from others, are reported to have strong parental bonds.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE BUDGET MARATHON
Budget negotiators said they had agreed on a way to shield the elderly from a heavy burden of Medicare cost-sharing.  [ Page A1. ]
With the end of the ordeal in sight, bleary-eyed lawmakers tied the last knots in the package in preparation for votes today.  [ A20. ]
Tax specialists said the plan's purported burden on the rich is a misrepresentation.  [ A21. ]
The agreement might make the hard times engulfing the U.S. economy slightly harder next year, economists say.  [ A21. ] THE ECONOMY
Airlines have begun cracking down on bargain hunters who bend rules stated on the ticket.  [ A1. ]
The former owner of a Texas savings institution was indicted on 37 charges involving bank fraud, misapplication of funds and conspiracy to defraud regulators.  [ D1. ]
A former Federal savings examiner recounted how she was harassed by superiors and ultimately dismissed for raising questions about the condition of a large S.&amp; L.  [ D1. ]
The Senate Ethics Committee ordered an inquiry into the release of documents related to the Senators linked to Keating.  [ A24. ]
A former Drexel salesman testified that Michael Milken once told him that securities owned by the firm were sometimes secretly held by Columbia Savings.  [ D1. ] COMPANIES
The nation's fourth-largest credit-card business was put up for sale.
Its owner, MNC Financial, has heavy real estate losses.  [ D1. ]
Unisys reported a loss of $356.8 million and said it would eliminate 5,000 jobs.  [ D3. ]
American's chairman said he would have paid more than United to get Pan Am's routes between the U.S. and London.  [ D5. ]
USAir and Delta reported large third-quarter losses, but UAL posted a healthy profit.  [ D6. ]
Laventhol &amp; Horwath told its nearly 3,500 employees that they would have to take a 10 percent pay cut for three months.  [ D6. ]
An ad in The New York Review of Books has strained relations between Random House and Farrar, Straus.  [ D20. ]
The newspaper deliverers' union struck The Daily News last night, setting off a climactic labor confrontation with the management of the financially ailing paper, Other unions said they would honor the picket lines.
[ A1. ]
Philips said it would slash 35,000 to 45,000 jobs to bolster profits and improve competitiveness.  [ D3. ] INTERNATIONAL
The U.S. has proposed a relaxation of export controls on high-performance computers.  [ D2. ] MARKETS
Oil was up sharply for the second day, continuing on an erratic path.
Crude closed at $34.25, up $3.17.  [ D1. ]
Stocks slid in the wake of rising oil prices and renewed war jitters, with the Dow off 20.05, to 2,484.16.  [ D8. ]
Treasury securities prices rose slightly, and long-term interest rates dipped.  [ D16. ]
The dollar rebounded on world currency markets.  [ D17. ]  Gold prices continued to climb.  [ D17. ] TODAY'S COLUMNS
Legislators who vote for the budget legislation will do so holding their noses.
Leonard Silk: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Fidelity Investments will refuse buy orders if it believes the buyers are following a market-timing service.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D8. ]
Some of the biggest black-owned ad agencies and media companies have formed a trade organization.
Advertising.  [ D20. ]


Firstbank of Illinois Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Avnet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Magazine Ad Pages Fell Again in September
Magazine publishers anxious about ad dollars have received more bleak news: Advertising pages for magazines monitored by the Publishers Information Bureau continue to decline.
In September, ad pages fell 4.5 percent.
For the first nine months of this year, ad pages dropped 3.3 percent from a year earlier.


Fidelity Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
When it comes to top salaries in London, American businessmen running British companies are at the top of the scale, according to a recent survey published by Charterhouse, a British merchant banking concern.
The highest paid executive is HENRY WENDT , chairman of SmithKline Beechman, the pharmaceutical company.
His pay, including stock options, was just under $4 million last year.
The chief executive of SmithKline, ROBERT BAUMAN , ranked fifth with $2.5 million.
Other top American earners were MITCHELL FROMSTEIN , the chairman of Manpower, a temporary-help service, who ranked sixth with $2.2 million, and RICHARD GIORDANO , head of BOC, an industrial gas and health-care company, who was in seventh place with $1.7 million.
The survey included a comparison of top executives in various countries that showed that in general, executives in Britain earn well below executive pay their counterparts in the United States and Germany.


U.S. DECIDES TO ADD AS MANY AS 100,000 TO ITS GULF FORCES
The Bush Administration has decided to expand the number of American forces in the Persian Gulf and may send as many as 100,000 more troops to the region, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said today.
The United States has sent more than 210,000 troops to the gulf, as part of a planned deployment of 240,000 troops.
In announcing that more forces would be sent, Mr.
Cheney said the exact number had not been worked out, and he gave no date for completing the American military buildup in the region, the largest since the Vietnam War.


Execufirst Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Inquiry Is Ordered Over Disclosure Of Data on Senators' S.&amp; L. Ties
The Senate Ethics Committee announced today that it had ordered an investigation into the unauthorized release to the press of confidential committee documents in its inquiry of five Senators' ties to a savings and loan executive.
The committee said it had asked the General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, to make "a complete investigation of the disclosures" about the Senators' links to the Californian, Charles H. Keating Jr.


Leggett &amp; Platt Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Images of a Self-Built Muscle Man
A QUESTION that immediately arises upon first seeing the photographic exhibition of Arnold Schwarzenegger, the muscle person, is: Can he walk?
Do all those bumps and ridges and swellings and shimmering veins inhibit him in an ambulatory way?
Or, when he is finished striking a pose, do a few people pick him up like a statue and transport him to another room?
Some say Mr.
Schwarzenegger can indeed ankle about because they have seen him do it in some of his feature films.
None of which this reporter has seen, unfortunately, not even "Conan the Barbarian," so he cannot attest to the star's movement firsthand.
But one is also aware that special effects are a staple of Hollywood, or, as it was once called, trick photography.


U.S. Proposes Easing Computer Export Curbs
Responding to the new political climate in what once was the Soviet bloc, the United States has proposed a relaxation of export controls covering high-performance computers.
But the proposals fall far short of what American computer makers -- and American allies -- had hoped for.
The United States proposal will be presented at a meeting in Paris next week of the Coordinating Commitee for Multilateral Export Controls, a group of 17 Western allies that grew out of the cold war.
It would open the way for the export of all personal computers to the Soviet Union but would retain tough restriction on the export of work stations and other powerful systems.  'We Are Disappointed'
American industry executives say the American attempt to ease restrictions became bogged down in interagency disputes.
"We are disappointed," said Debra L. Waggoner, a senior manager at the American Electronics Association.
"I think that the conservatism that we're seeing comes out of the Defense Department, and we aren't helped by the situation in the Middle East."
Cocom is trying to develop a new set of export controls for computer and telecommunications equipment.
Under one important measure of computer speed -- processor data rate, or PDR -- the proposed controls would allow exports of machines that can process up to 600 million bits of information a second, up from the current level of 275 million bits.
That level would permit the export of personal computers powered by chips up through the Intel Corporation 486.
The proposed restrictions add a new measure, known as equivalent multiply rate, or EMR, which so far has been applied only to special-purpose computers.
Industry executives said the new regulations would still restrict the export of most advanced work stations, like those made by Digital Equipment, Hewlett-Packard, I.B.M., Silicon Graphics, Stardent and Sun Microsystems.
The two measures focus on different kinds of computer performance, scalar and vector processing.
The term scalar refers to normal data processing, while vector processing involves the ability to compute large sets of calculations, like series of additions or multiplications.
"Some of the apparent liberalizations will be less than they appear at first," said Rozel C. Thomsen 2d, a Washington lawyer who represents work station suppliers.
Security vs.
Commerce
Cocom is trying to cut significantly the lists of goods with military applications that cannot be sold to the Soviet Union or Eastern Europe.
The United States announced on May 1 that it would completely overhaul the system for controlling high-technology exports to give the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe access to Western technologies.
But the Administration has been divided on how far the relaxation should go, with the Commerce and State Departments favoring increased trade and the Pentagon and National Security Agency seeking to retain safeguards.
The restrictions on telecommunications equipment were eased even less than those on computers.
Strict limits remain on gear ranging from fiber optic cable systems to digital transmission equipment.


Conference Committee Takes Up Crime Bill
A House-Senate conference committee began work today on a crime bill that would expand the Federal death penalty but Congressional leaders said they were not sure it could be passed before Congress adjourned.
"I think there are some problems in terms of the time, getting a conference report back," House Speaker Thomas Foley, Democrat of Washington, told reporters.
But the Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, Democrat of Maine, said separately, "we hope to complete the crime bill."


Months of Stalled Talks, Years of Rising Troubles
The labor dispute at The Daily News flared up after 10 months of stalled negotiations.
But the paper's troubles had been brewing for years.
The News -- founded just after World War I and famed in its early years for a gritty daily diet of sensational shootouts and circus murder trials -- was far weaker at the end of the 1980's than when that decade began.
In 1990 The News could no longer boast that it had the largest weekday circulation of any metropolitan newspaper in the nation.


Rangers Run Home Winning Streak to 6
The night for the Rangers began with the streak at 5-0, a sequence of unblemished success at Madison Square Garden that owed itself to great goaltending, good fortune and inspired industry.
The night ended with the streak at 6-0 because of good goaltending, great fortune, just enough hard work and one remarkable goal.


Outdoors; Videotape Is Helpful for Treating Emergencies
Dr.
Paul Auerbach's 48-minute videotape "Medicine for the Outdoors" will give you a good idea of what is involved in successfully dealing with medical emergencies when you are in the bush.
Topics covered include wounds, fractures, head injuries, insect and snake bites, hyperthermia, hypothermia, sprains, strains and even removing a fish hook from an angler's flesh.
This videotape will let you know what a basic backpacking medical kit should contain, and many will find the demonstrations of various procedures, including bandaging wounds and sprains and dealing with dislocated shoulders and fingers, more understandable than textbook descriptions.
Auerbach is associate professor of surgery and medicine at Vanderbilt University and director of the emergency department at the university's medical center.
The tape is mildly flawed by occasional silly dialogue, as when the narrator, as a way to broach the subject, tells Auerbach that he is under the impression that all ticks are harmless.
It is impossible, for this viewer at least, to believe that anyone who can read a newspaper is unaware of Lyme disease or Rocky Mountain spotted fever, both tick-transmitted disorders.
And then there is the doctor's suggestion when dealing with someone suffering from hyperthermia, to, after wetting the victim down, to fan him with an article of clothing or a newspaper to hasten evaporation.
Backpackers don't usually carry newspapers.
But this is small potatoes.
The tape is excellent and crammed with good advice.
The videotape bears the title of Auerbach's first-rate paperback (Little Brown &amp; Co., 348 pages, $12.95), which was published in 1986.
The book was somewhat revised for the second printing of the first editions and a greatly expanded second edition is in the works.
The videotape, which should be regarded as an adjunct to the book, is put out by Centre Films Inc., 1103 El Centro, Hollywood, Calif. 90038, telephone (213) 466-5123, and sells for $29.95.
Although the technique is not mentioned in the first printing of the book, Auerbach's videotape demonstrates how to use the Sawyer Extractor pump, an inexpensive little device that sucks the venom from a snake or insect bite from the victim's flesh.
I have never used the Sawyer pump for a snake bite, but on three occasions have used it to remove the venom from wasp or bee stings.
In all three instances, the victims had previously experienced fairly severe reactions, including swelling and pain, from such stings.
When the Sawyer pump was used -- you can actually observe a droplet of venom emerging from the flesh -- there were little or no such reactions.
There were no reactions when the pump was used within three or four minutes after the sting.
In one instance -- when the pump was applied six or seven minutes after the sting -- there was mild swelling but no pain.
Obviously, the sooner the suction begins the more efficacious it will be.
This is not to suggest that the Sawyer pump is a substitute in the case of those who develop severe and dangerous allergic reactions to insect stings for a subcutaneous injection of epinephrine, which is available in allergy kits, but merely to note that it provides immediate relief in some cases.
At the very least, it can do no harm.
It's worth noting that while honeybees leave their stingers, often with venom sac still attached, in the victim, wasps, hornets, bumblebees and yellow jackets retain their weapons and may inflict multiple stings.
Because the venom sac may be present, one should not try to remove a honeybee's stinger with a pinching maneuver as with fingers or tweezers.
That could result in the remaining venom's being injected into the victim.
Remove the stinger by scraping with a knife or a razor blade, then apply the pump.
If the scraping tool isn't instantly at hand, it would probably be wise to apply the pump and deal with the stinger later on.
The Sawyer Extractor may be had for $11.95 from Sawyer Products, P.O.
Box 188, Safety Harbor, Fla. 34695, telephone (813) 725-1177.
Another unusual and valuable first aid item that Auerbach used in his videotape is the so-called SAM splint.
Made of aluminum that is coated with a closed-cell foam, it is 36 inches long, 4 1/2 inches wide and weighs only four ounces.
It can be quickly formed into a variety of shapes, whether as a splint for an arm or leg or even a collar for a neck injury.
The SAM splint is manufactured by the Seaberg Co., Inc., P.O.
Box 734, South Beach, Ore. 97366, telephone (503) 867-4726.
The firm sells the splint -- and a smaller one for fingers -- through distributors. (The suggested retail price is $12.95.) Literature on the splints and the names of the distributors will be mailed on request.


Unum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


F.N.B. Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tibetan Bowls
The Tibetan Singing Bowl Ensemble is to perform Raphael Mostel's "Music for the October Moon," "Wyrd" and "Wave" at Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, on Sunday at 5 and 8 P.M.
The ensemble's instrumentation includes Tibetan bowls and thighbone trumpets, a shofar and other ancient wind and percussion instruments.
Tickets are $15 to $20.
Information: 355-6160.


C U Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Oryx Energy Sees $29 Million Gain
The Oryx Energy Company said it would have an after-tax gain of $29 million in its fourth quarter from the sale of oil and gas properties for $95 million in four transactions.
The total proven reserves associated with the properties represent about 1.5 percent of Oryx's worldwide proven reserves.
Total daily production from the properties have averaged 7,600 equivalent barrels a day.
The largest of the deals, a sale to Geodyne Resources Inc. for $59 million, involves interests in 14 oil and gas fields in 5 states.
In the other sales, Oryx divested itself of its interests in its offshore California Hillhouse and Henry platforms, along with five nonproducing blocks, its share of the Levelland oilfield in Texas and its interests in the West Moran oilfield in Wyoming.


Cheaper Ford Parts
The Ford Motor Company said it would cut prices 14 percent on 200 selected replacement parts used to repair collision damage.
The company said the price cut, which takes effect on Dec. 1, is part of an effort to give repair shops access to genuine Ford components.
Ford said the cuts were intended to reduce the disparity between Ford-manufactured parts and competing ones, which it called "low quality." This in turn will improve the quality of repairs on Ford vehicles, the company said.


Cyclops Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Film; Sexy Corpse, Silly Siblings And a Tryst
What's even funnier than a corpse?
According to "Sibling Rivalry," it's the sexy corpse of a long-lost brother-in-law, who spends his last moments creating a whopping problem for the formerly very nice Marjorie Turner (Kirstie Alley).
Urged by her sister Jeanine (Jami Gertz) to cheat on her neglectful husband Harry (Scott Bakula), Marjorie obediently allows herself to be picked up for a hotel-room tryst by a stranger in a grocery store.
A film with a premise like this is either uproarious or, like the brother-in-law, dead.
"Sibling Rivalry," directed by Carl Reiner, is mild at best.
At worst, it's dependent on doctor jokes (Carrie Fisher is enjoyably mean-spirited as a gynecologist married to a proctologist), messy-eating jokes, dead-body jokes and other forms of iffy humor.
Part of the problem is that the screenplay, by Martha Goldhirsh, is promising but cumbersome.
The story takes half an hour to be set up fully.
And the film is almost over before its screwball elements, involving three sets of siblings and multiple cases of mistaken identity, have finally come together.


Michelangelo Saw Brain Differently
To the Editor:
I was intrigued by your report of the proposal by Dr.
Frank Lynn Meshberger, a gynecologist at St.
John's Medical Center in Anderson, Ind., that Michelangelo symbolically portrayed the brain as a backdrop to God in the "Creation of Adam" in the Sistine Chapel in Rome so as to suggest the creation of intellect (Arts pages, Oct. 10).
I fear, however, that Dr.
Meshberger not only retrofits 20th-century neuroscience onto the Renaissance, but that he also misunderstands brain research, such as it was, in the 16th century.
When one examines Leonardo da Vinci's sketches of the brain, one is immediately struck by the fact that they highlight not brain tissue, but rather the series of canals, called the ventricular system, through which we now know that cerebrospinal fluid flows.
That Leonardo should have seen these spaces as more important than tissue is not surprising when one remembers that in looking for the seat of the soul -- then assumed to be a pneumatic, literally spiritual, essence -- it is only good sense to pay more attention to open spaces than to dense brain tissue.
Many ideas of brain function current during the Renaissance, in fact, depicted brain tissue as distinctly subsidiary to the ventricles.
What Dr.
Meshberger perceives as symbolically portrayed is a midline view of the forebrain.
What he sees makes sense in terms of the scientific and cultural milieu in which Dr.
Meshberger, and most of us, are imbedded, but Michelangelo, I think, would have been dumbfounded by his conclusion.
THOMAS PARISI Notre Dame, Ind., Oct. 11, 1990
The writer is an associate professor of psychology at St. Mary's College.


The French as They See Themselves
Fragile Glory A Portrait of France and the French By Richard Bernstein Maps. 349 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.
At a reception for the Goncourt prize a few years back, one could have seen a tallish man, over-elegant for the occasion, a note pad conspicuously in hand, moving among the guests to question them about this curious Parisian rite: a prestigious award no one believes in, since it's an open secret that the author jurors vote for their own publishers' candidates.
The man, who, with his starched collar and unadorned spectacles, resembled a young Leon Blum (in his pre-political years as a literary critic), was in fact Richard Bernstein, then the Paris bureau chief of The New York Times, digging deeper than a Times correspondent need do for his daily news file.
We have the product of that deeper probing in the book before us.
Mr.
Bernstein was obviously moonlighting on The Times.
During his three-year Paris stint, as in his student days and on frequent return visits, he threw himself into what may appear a hopeless endeavor: trying to make sense of the French, and not only of Parisians.
For he knew something a less vigilant observer might not: that every Frenchman cultivates his down-home origins.
And to understand the French, who tend to cluster in Paris and to do most of their business and politicking there, one necessarily travels to the hinterlands, to La France Profonde.
Mr.
Bernstein did that, again and again, and put it all down in the most penetrating account of contemporary France we're ever likely to own.
In looking for clues to French character, the author explores everything from wine culture to cultural politics, movies, food and the higher eroticism, with the same punctiliousness.
One can imagine a harassed tourist picking up this book and letting it drop out of his hands.
Too big to carry on a visit to France, "Fragile Glory" is to be read before and especially afterward.
One hopes (vain hope?) that people in the State Department responsible for our European policy will read it, and you can bet that business executives bracing for an approach to the Common Market will consult this primer early on.
Is it giving away the plot to reveal Mr.
Bernstein's conclusion that French civilization is a success?
The nation is up front not only in life's treats like foie gras but also in the development of such contemporary artifacts as the world's first supersonic passenger plane, the fastest regularly operating railway train and a nuclear-energy network in working order.
No longer a first-class power, France makes up for that with a superiority complex; one can travel far on myth, and Mr.
Bernstein has penetrated this "France of the mind." Mr.
Bernstein's Paris "has more of everything -- more museums and movies, more book stores and restaurants, more intellectuals per square inch, more distinguished men and beautiful women, more shops selling designer clothing, more grand monuments and historic places than just about any other urban conglomeration in the world."
And Mr.
Bernstein shows us how Paris achieved that position.
He borrows from the historian Fernand Braudel the notion that Paris owed its military advantage, which soon enough became political and spiritual superiority, to the raising of oats, allowing the Carolingians to feed horses, which, when used with newly invented stirrups, guaranteed victory in battle.
Despite Paris, France remains a nation of peoples, and could easily have become a federation, like Yugoslavia, rather than the centralized nation we know.
Mr.
Bernstein takes us on a rapid tour of what the French proudly call their hexagon, with snapshots of landscapes, and insights on regional particularities.
He also lets us visit Paris with him, quarter by quarter, the way a Michelin Guide cannot (Michelin eschews the dark side).
"Fragile Glory" addresses itself without flinching to the matter of French decline, Paris no longer being the place where things happen first.
Mr.
Bernstein finds redeeming qualities all the same, as in the passionate way Parisians defend their cultural heritage both monumental and literary.
If Parisians are no longer at the top of the heap, they'll continue to act as if they were.
The author deals evenly with French-American relations, which are never as good as one expects them to be (considering how the United States helped to save France in two World Wars and one cold war).
Americans, Mr.
Bernstein shows, are often lumped together with the British, the neighbor the French seem to detest more than they do the Germans.
He offers a tongue-in-cheek description of the belligerent French campaign -- laws and all -- against use of the English language (obviously a sign of a culture unsure of itself).
"Lurking behind" the language crusade, Mr.
Bernstein writes, is "the longing for national glory," and an underlying anti-Americanism.
The author characterizes President Francois Mitterrand as "an opportunist, in the great French tradition of political opportunism," which is almost too kind, for of course Charles de Gaulle twice removed himself from power because he refused to be an opportunist, and Mr.
Mitterrand's chief rival, Jacques Chirac, enmeshed in principles slightly out of step with his times, is losing his last crack at the throne because of them.
Perceiving his countrymen's essential suspicion of things foreign, even of allies, Mr.
Mitterrand has adopted some of the characteristics of Gaullist aloofness.
Significantly, in the prudent manner of this author, Mr.
Bernstein never comes out flatly against Mr.
Mitterrand's "royalist habits," preferring to sum up the arguments of others.
Perhaps it is just as well; it makes "Fragile Glory" a compendium of the best and most useful
French
thinking about France.
Mr.
Bernstein is almost too conscientious in trying to explain everything while covering all exceptions and variants.
But it is nice to have so scrupulous a reporter around when the subject is as complicated as this one: a people not quite ready to sit still for a portrait.


Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Peter Gurtler, Vienna Hotel Owner, 44
Peter Gurtler, the owner of Vienna's most famous hotel and former husband of a former American Ambassador to Austria, Helene Von Damm, committed suicide on Wednesday, the police reported.
He was 44 years old
Mr.
Gurtler shot himself to death in his hunting lodge in Pernitz, 30 miles south of Vienna, the police said.
Mr.
Gurtler owned two top-class Vienna hotels, including the Hotel Sacher, famous for the Sacher torte, the delicately flavored chocolate cake the hotel began producing about 100 years ago.
Ms.
Von Damm was Mr.
Gurtler's second wife.
They were divorced in 1987, and Mr.
Gurtler remarried.


Financial Adviser Is Hired by Avon
Avon Products Inc. said it had hired the investment firm of James D. Wolfensohn Inc. to advise it on ways to increase the value of its stock.
The cosmetics company has been under pressure to increase the value of its shares from Chartwell Associates L.P., the investor group that owns about 20 percent of Avon.
Earlier this month, two Chartwell representatives quit a special committee of Avon's board, contending that the panel appeared unwilling to meet its goal of finding ways to increase the company's value.
Chartwell's members include John P. Rochon, the vice chairman of the Mary Kay Corporation, a competing cosmetics maker; the Fisher brothers of New York, and the Getty Family Trust.
Avon's stock closed up 37.5 cents yesterday, at $25.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Critic's Notebook; Cheap Thrills and Fantasy From the Drive-In Era
OF all the silly images to be seen in American movies from the 1950's, few are more ridiculous than the 20-year-old Michael Landon made up for the title role in the 1957 cult film "I Was a Teen-Age Werewolf." Nowadays, the sight of Mr.
Landon terrorizing the campus of Rockdale High School wearing khakis, a basketball jacket and a fanged werewolf mask doesn't so much conjure horror as suggest a Halloween reveler having a tantrum the morning after trick or treat because his head mask has stuck to his neck.


BCE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First City Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pulse Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Court Orders Cook County To Allow Third Party Slate
With less than two weeks before the Nov. 6 election, the United States Supreme Court ordered officials here today to rewrite the ballot in Cook County and include a third-party slate of black candidates barred earlier by the Illinois Supreme Court.
The Court's one-sentence order sent local election officials here scrambling to reprint ballots and spread confusion among Democratic Party officials, who fear that the presence of the third party on the ballot could siphon off tens of thousands of black votes and imperil Democrats in several state and local races, including the contest for governor.


MNC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Arrow Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Advanta Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Atlantic American reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Whistleblower Details Harassment on S.&amp; L.
A former Federal examiner recounted today in vivid detail how she was harassed by superiors and ultimately dismissed for raising questions two years ago about the financial condition of a large savings and loan that regulators tried unsuccessfully to take over.
The account of the examiner, Lisa R. Walleri, offered a rare insight into the conflicts facing regulators and was supported today by a stunning admission by the Office of Thrift Supervision.
At a Congressional hearing, an official of the agency said an internal review had found "substantial evidence" to support Mrs.
Walleri's account and added that she was owed an apology by the Government.
Faults Examination


Intel to Produce A Speedier Chip
The Intel Corporation said that it planned to introduce more powerful versions of its 486 computer memory chip next year and that it would begin producing the next generation of its 586 chip in 1992.
David L. House, the president of Intel's microcomponents group, said at a securities analysts' meeting that the company would introduce a 486 chip that runs at a speed of 50 megahertz, compared with current speeds of 25 megahertz and 33 megahertz.
The 486 chip, introduced in April 1989, will eventually replace Intel's 386 chip, which is the most popular microprocessor in the personal computer market.
Mr.
House said after the meeting that the lowest-priced personal computer using a 486 chip now cost $4,995.
"We have to get that down to $2,995," he added.


Coast Savings Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Simpson and Norman Charge to the Lead
The PGA Tour's hottest golfer and its richest both took an aggressive step toward the most lucrative prize in golf today in the first round of the Nabisco Championships, the season finale.
Tim Simpson, who shot 24 under par over 72 holes to win the Walt Disney last Sunday, and Greg Norman, the tour's leading money winner with $907,977, each shot five-under-par 66 on the long and demanding Champions Golf Club.


Spiegel Inc.() reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Philips Plans to Cut 35,000 to 45,000 Jobs
Philips N.V., the Dutch electronics giant, said today that it would slash 35,000 to 45,000 jobs, or 12 percent to 16 percent of its work force, in a program to bolster profits and improve competitiveness.
The company, long a forerunner in consumer and commercial electronics, also announced a loss for the third quarter and said it would pay no dividend this year.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
North Shore Gas Co., Chicago, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of $25 million in first-mortgage adjustable-rate bonds due 2020 through Edward D. Jones &amp; Co. *
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co., Chicago, filed for a shelf offering of up to $1 billion in debt securities to be sold from time to time. *
Wackenhut Corp., Coral Gables, Fla., privately placed $25 million in senior unsecured notes due 2000 with two institutional investors.


Bank of Boston Reports Large Loss
The Bank of Boston posted a loss today of $254.9 million for the third quarter, as it continues to experience declines because of the deteriorating Northeast economy and a weak real estate market.
For the corresponding quarter last year, the Bank of Boston's loss was $125.1 million.


WLR Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Review/Film; Crusading Journalist, or a Man Obsessed?
For a time in the 1970's, big-name journalists took on the aura of movie stars and enrollments at journalism schools soared.
Students discovered soon enough that the drudgery of reporting far outweighs the drama, but even now most people envision Bob Woodward as Robert Redford in "All the President's Men."
"The Man Inside" is meant to be a journalistic thriller in the mold of "All the President's Men." Instead, it unwittingly reflects the idea that even the most daring reporter is just a dull guy who goes out to his job every day.
The film's flatness is especially surprising because it is based on the intriguing, true story of Gunter Wallraff.
The Woodward and Bernstein of West Germany, in the 1970's he reported on illegal arms deals, discrimination against migrant workers and the corruption of influential publishers.


Political Warfare in Japan
Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu has been battered by domestic criticism of his proposal to send Japanese troops to the Persian Gulf.
Page A10.


Big East and S.W.C. Talk Football
The commissioners of the Big East and the Southwest Conference will meet in Dallas today to discuss plans for football competition between the two leagues.
Fred Jacoby, the commissioner of the Southwest Conference, and Mike Tranghese, the new Big East commissioner, will hold preliminary meetings on scheduling football games between the eight S.W.C. schools and the four Big East schools that play Division I-A football.
"We're looking at such things as scheduling and television," Jacoby said.
"We want to have more attractive intersectional games and this would accomplish that."
While the Southwest is attempting to recover from the defection of Arkansas, which will join the Southeastern Conference in 1992, the Big East is trying to avoid the loss of important members who want to play in a football conference.


Coleman, Landed by Nets, Finally Touches Down in Jersey
Derrick Coleman strolled through Newark Airport tonight and said he was glad that his days of playing basketball by himself were over.
Coleman said that he was also glad that he did not have to worry about negotiating a contract any longer and that he was eager to play for the New Jersey Nets.
After weeks of negotiations, when the Nets and Coleman's advisers stalled and stumbled, the team is expected to make it official today, signing the No. 1 pick in the National Basketball Association draft to a five-year, $15 million contract today.


LANDMARK ACCORD PROMISES TO EASE IMMIGRATION CURBS
House and Senate negotiators today approved a landmark revision of the nation's immigration policy, voting at the last moment to ease restrictions on the entry into the United States of entire classes of people, including Communists, homosexuals and people with AIDS.
But as they removed flat prohibitions on some immigrants, the negotiators added a new clause, giving the Secretary of State the power to bar the entry of others with unpopular political bents.


20th Century Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Interchange Financial Svcs reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Louisiana Land &amp; Exploration Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
There will be squabbling, shouts and table pounding tonightfri and tomorrow night when a dozen defense lawyers give free rein to their theatrical inclinations.
Instead of playing to the jury, they'll play the jury, in a benefit performance of Reginald Rose's 1955 courtroom drama, "Twelve Angry Men," at the New York University School of Law.
"I've learned some things about reasonable doubt, and actually incorporated a line from the play in a trial I just finished," said ROBERT FOGELNEST , a defense lawyer in the 1987 drug and racketeering trial known as the pizza connection case.
The two performances, produced by the New York State Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, will raise money for Legal Aid lawyers, public defenders and lawyers for the poor.


Picket Signs and Cheers As Drivers Go on Strike
Looking grim, Michael Alvino, the head of the drivers' union at The Daily News, put a bullhorn to his lips last night to speak to more than 100 angry production workers outside the newspaper's Brooklyn plant.
"This is not a happy day," he began.
But the workers cheered when, moments later, he said, "We're officially on strike."
Within minutes, picket signs from the union -- the Newspaper and Mail Deliverers Union of New York -- were being distributed with "N.Y. Daily News" and "unfair labor practices" hastily written in with black felt-tipped markers.


THE 1990 Campaign; Races to Watch: An Update
Major races around the nation that polls how to be close or nearly even.
CALIFORNIA GOVERNOR  No one issue is the central battleground.
A debate was canceled last night because the federal budget battle has kept Senator Pet Wilson, the Republican, in Washington.
Another debate with Dianne Feinstein, the Democrat, is unlikely, so the main factor in the final days will be a new barrage of television advertising.
FLORIDA GOVERNOR  Lawton Chiles, a Democratic and former United States Senator, is running an anti-big money, anti-special interest campaign.
The incumbent, Bob Martinez, a Republican, is using an expensive television campaign that portrays him as a dynamic governor from humble beginnings who can admit he made mistakes.
MASSACHUSETTS GOVERNOR  Things are turning nasty.
John R. Silber, the Democrat, has accused his Republican opponent, William F. Weld, "back stabbing" for having left the Justice Department to protest the policies and leadership of Edwin Meese 3d.
Mr.
Weld is calling the Democratic a "Dr. Know-It-All" who is doing nothing bu "spewing venom." The economy remains the key issue.
Mr.
Weld supports a mandatory cut in taxes; Mr.
Silber opposes it.
NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR  Harvey Gantt, the Democrat, has matched Jesse Helms, the three-term Republican incumbent, in fund raising over the past three months and has managed to do what none of Mr.
Helms' other opponents have done - put him on the defensive on issues like education and the environment.
TEXAS GOVERNOR The Democrat, Ann Richards, who was behind when she was short on funds, raised enough money to keep her ads on television.
Clayton Williams, the Republican, seems to have trouble painting the race as a clear-cut choice between a conservative and a liberal.


Man Acquitted of Slaying Boston Detective
A man accused of killing a Boston police detective in a drug raid was found not guilty today in a case that raised questions about whether investigators had lied and doctored evidence to incriminate the defendant.
After deliberating almost four hours, the Superior Court jury acquitted Albert Lewin, 34 years old, who had been charged with firing the shots that killed Detective Sherman Griffiths, 36.
The detective was standing on the other side of a closed door when he was shot in the raid on Feb. 17, 1988.
The case was moved to this community in western Massachusetts because of pretrial publicity.
A former detective, Carlos Luna, who was a partner of Detective Griffiths, testified that the police had lied in an attempt to cover up the inadequacies of a search warrant used for the drug raid.
Mr.
Luna was one of two officers indicted on charges of participating in a cover-up.
The former detective testified at Mr.
Lewin's trial that his superiors and a Boston prosecutor had encouraged him to concoct a story that a supposed informer named in the search warrant had died or left town.
The police have admitted there was no such informer.
Thomas J. Mundy, an assistant district attorney for Suffolk County, acknowledged that the evidence against Mr.
Lewin, who was in an apartment with several other people, was circumstantial.
The only physical evidence linking Mr.
Lewin with the murder weapon was a fingerprint on the gun.
And the defense challenged the authenticity of the print, which was produced 30 months after the crime.


Review/Music; Japan Philharmonic Tribute
The opening work on the Japan Philharmonic's program at Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday evening, Toru Takemitsu's Requiem for String Orchestra, paid tribute to Akeo Watanabe, the orchestra's music director, who died three months ago at age 71.
The son of a Japanese father and Finnish mother, Mr.
Watanabe founded the ensemble and was for half a century a leading proponent of Western classical music in his country.
The Japan Philharmonic, as a program note put it, is "his living monument."
The Requiem, Takemitsu's first orchestral effort, dates from 1957 and in its avoidance of extremes of tempo, dynamics and instrumental range is as muted and restrained as Faure's essay in the funerary genre, though of course more pungent in harmonic idiom.
Anything but typical of the avant-garde works of its time, the Takemitsu gives the impression of having been written for purely expressive purposes rather than as a demonstration of modish techniques.


Soviets to Contribute $200 Million to Plan On U.S. Accelerator
The Soviet Union has agreed in principle to contribute $200 million for an instrument proposed for use with the Superconducting Supercollider particle accelerator, which is scheduled to be completed in Texas in the next decade.
The tentative Soviet commitment was announced Wednesday by the State University of New York at Stony Brook, which has directed the design of the instrument.
The Soviet draft agreement is the largest foreign commitment to the supercollider so far, the university said.


Schools, Hospitals and Fire Dept. Try to Resist Budget Trims
Mayor David N. Dinkins's efforts to cut the city's budget by more than $1 billion ran into roadblocks on several fronts yesterday.
The stiffest resistance came from Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, who stood by his resolve to provide only $50 million in cuts instead of the $94 million he was asked to make.
He did so even after Mayor Dinkins made an early morning phone call to the Board of Education President, Gwendolyn C. Baker, that prompted her to call an emergency meeting of the board to discuss the possibility of intervening in the dispute.


Raychem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Downstairs, Chess, but Upstairs a World-Class Kibitzer Match
The evening had the feel of a Manhattan cocktail party, with famous people and scintillating banter amid the canapes and clinking glasses.
Around the room were some of the great chess luminaries, former world and national champions, and celebrity fans like the film director Milos Forman and the Spanish anarchist-playwright Fernando Arrabel.
As Gary Kasparov and Anatoly Karpov battled in the sixth game of the World Chess Championship in a theater downstairs, a hundred invited guests gathered in a plush-gray hospitality suite at the Hotel Macklowe Wednesday night to babble in a dozen languages and share the sideline analyses and insights of some of the game's geniuses.


Market Place; Mutual Funds Act To Bar Switchers
DECIDING that the fast money is not worth it, the nation's largest group of mutual funds, Fidelity Investments, has decided to begin treating some shareholders differently from others, refusing their buy orders if it believes they are following the recommendations of a market-timing service.
Stein Roe &amp; Farnham, a smaller group of funds, has taken a similar step.
Mutual fund companies have long had a love-hate relationship with investors who try to time the market.
On the one hand, they cherish the fees that come from managing the assets.
But they resent the havoc that can be created when huge sums of money are moved from fund to fund.


Experts Expect Stimulus to Economic Morale but Little Else
The budget agreement now before Congress might make the hard times engulfing the American economy slightly harder next year, economists say.
But the damage will probably be too small to measure.
What many experts hope is that the budget agreement will have a psychological impact far beyond the economics involved.
Should confidence be restored in the Government's ability to control the budget deficit, this in itself might stimulate the economy, some economists argue.
The stimulation would come in part because lenders, being more optimistic about the economy's health, would demand lower interest rates.


St. Paul Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


3 Lebanon Militias to Pull Out of Beirut, in Move to Aid Army
Lebanon's three major militias said today that they  were ready to pull out of Beirut and its suburbs to help a Government plan to extend absolute army control over the capital, officials said.
The militias of the Progressive Socialist Party, the Party of God and the Lebanese Forces reacted positively to a Government call for a militia-free zone in Beirut, Agriculture Minister Mohsen Dalloul said in an interview today.
Mr.
Dalloul and Defense Minister Albert Mansour head the Government team in charge of carrying out the plan, which is intended to rid the capital of militiamen for the first time since the Lebanese civil war started in 1975.


Michael Baker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Teachers' Pay Raise Tests Our Commitment
To the Editor:
Divisiveness during a time of increasing fiscal crisis in New York is unfortunate.
Nevertheless, the controversy surrounding the 5.5 percent increase in the teachers' contract presents the city and state, the public, and business and civic leaders with the opportunity to make a clear and fundamental choice: What are truly our highest priorities?
Where will we put our money?


Gendex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
Slightly more than half a century ago a young man named Franklin Gould was playing in a duplicate game in Hartford and picked up this hand:  [ DIAGRAM ]
He opened two no-trump and put his cards face down on the table.
He was surprised to hear a three-club bid on his left, and astonished to hear his partner double.
How many clubs were there in this deck?
Not so many after all, as he discovered when he reviewed his hand and discovered that both his black suits were spades.
Combining them produced the hand shown in the diagram, and he electrified the table by leaping to seven spades.
West doubled pityingly and Gould redoubled.
The club ace was led confidently, and South ruffed, crossed to the fortuitous spade eight, and threw his diamond loser on the club king.
The score for North-South was 2,840 -- this was before the days of bonuses for making doubled contracts -- and the opponents screamed for the tournament director.
"How could he open two no-trump with that hand?"
The director was not sympathetic, and, indeed, West was somewhat naive.
If your opponent ever bids in a totally extraordinary fashion, watch out.
It is highly likely that he mis-sorted his hand in the first place.
But if you are ever on the right side of such a drama you will have cause to remember it, as Gould does, half a century later.
"For a 20-year-old," he says, "that was truly the hand of a lifetime."  Final standings in the North American Pair Championships played in Allendale, N.J., on Sunday were:
Open division, 1st, Alexander Allen, New Brunswick, N.J., and Frank Silver, Short Hills, N.J.; 2d, Laura Brill and Rick Goldstein, White Plains, tied Rev.
Maurice Wong, Larchmont, N.Y., and Ron Fischer, Scarsdale, N.Y.
Non-Life-Master division, 1st, Larry Rosen and Steven Shaye, Albany; 2d, Bernie Friedland, Succasunna, N.J., and Betsy Heller, Mountain Lakes, N.J.; 3d, Barry Samuel, Somers, N.Y., and Richard Letourneau, Chappaqua, N.Y.
These players qualify for national playoffs in Atlantic City in March.


Telematics International c reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE STRUGGLE IN CONGRESS: Not a Big Tilt In Tax Policy; Plan Doesn't Revive The Era of Loopholes
On first glance, the income tax changes cobbled together in Washington seem an ungainly mix of partly concealed rate increases and new fiddles for the wealthy -- a return to the old days when the only real issue in tax policy was who got soaked, and a thousand and one tax shelters made a mockery of the progressive tax system.
Certainly the language of the debate fit the mold, as Democrats took every opportunity to tar President Bush as a defender of the privileged, and everybody gave short shrift to questions of how tax changes would affect productivity and growth.
But surprisingly, that is not the way some tax experts see the result.


Utah Fusion Scientist Agrees To Meet State Review Panel
A scientist who pioneered Utah's cold fusion research and then dropped out of sight has belatedly agreed to meet with a state panel to review his work early next month.
Members of the panel, the Fusion Energy Advisory Council, voted on Thursday to try to force the scientist, Dr.
B.
Stanley Pons, to appear for the review on Nov. 7.
Minutes later, Dr.
Pons agreed in a telephone call to show up.
"I told him he was wanted, that it was necessary," Joe Tesch, the chief Deputy Attorney General, told the council.
"Stan Pons committed he would be here on Nov. 7."


Franklin Electronic Pub reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Illinois Power Co. reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


America West Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quotation of the Day
"Having failed as the good example he might have been to the citizens of Washington, D.C. -- and, in particular, to the young who are so much more likely to respond to example than to admonition -- the defendant must now become an example of another kind." -- Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson, sentencing Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.  [ 1:2. ]


Tokos Medical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Intellicall Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tax the 'Rich'? Just Who Are They?
To the Editor:
"Tax the rich!" "Tax the wealthy!" Nary a day goes by that we don't hear those words and more from the lips of placard-toting, presumably "non-rich," as well as from blustering broadcasters and camera-craving politicos.
But just whom, I keep asking myself, are they talking about?


Ex-Drexel Aide Supports Milken on Caesars World
The pre-sentencing hearing of Michael R. Milken apparently shuffled to a close yesterday, with defense lawyers filing their last affidavit from a former executive with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. supporting claims by the former financer.
In the affidavit, John Kissick, the former head of the firm's corporate finance department in California, said Mr.
Milken was unaware of inside information the Government claimed he used in trading Caesars World bonds in 1983.
Mr.
Kissick said that Mr.
Milken joined him in meeting with representatives of Caesars World to discuss options to strengthen the company's balance sheet.
Mr.
Kissick said no decision was made at the meeting about Caesars World, or even whether Drexel would be hired to advise the company.
The Government contends Mr.
Milken knew after the meeting that the company planned to swap debt for equity, leading to Drexel's purchase of Caesars World bonds.
While both the prosecution and defense have indicated they do not plan to proceed futher, neither has used up the time allotted by Federal District Judge Kimba W. Wood, who is overseeing the case.
Mr.
Milken, who pleaded guilty to six felonies in April, is not yet scheduled to be sentenced.
Niether side in the hearing was particularly successful in proving its position about Mr.
Milken in the case.
The Government had difficulty in its central mission proving through the testimony that Mr.
Milken committed a series of crimes in three transactions.
Prosecutors attempted to prove Mr.
Milken committed a series of crimes but were repeatedly stymied by contradictory testimony, as well as failures to directly link Mr.
Milken to some of the illicit activities.
Nevertheless, Mr.
Milken's high-yield "junk bond" department was often portrayed as a manipulative organization, ready to use its influence in efforts to retain control of the junk bond market.
Witnesses repeatedly described illicit stock trading arrangements with other institutions.
They also described scenes of intrigue after the fall of Ivan F. Boesky, the former arbitrager who became a Government witness, with Mr.
Milken quietly issuing cryptic orders amid a cacaphony of running faucets to prevent electronic eavesdropping.
Judge Wood, who has access to evidence that is not public - grand jury testimony and other documents - will be able to use that information in reaching a decision.


Seagull Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cash on Davis Squad
Pat Cash, a former Wimbledon champion, heads the six-man Australian squad that will oppose the United States in the Davis Cup final Nov. 30-Dec. 3 in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
Joining Cash will be Wally Masur, Darren Cahill, John Fitzgerald, Mark Kratzmann and Richard Fromberg. (AP)


Rabbit Software Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ciatti's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.N. Council Appears Close to Accord on a Tougher Stance Against Iraq
The United Nations Security Council appeared close to agreement tonight on a new resolution declaring Iraq responsible for financial losses caused by its invasion of Kuwait and ordering governments to present evidence of war crimes committed by its forces there, diplomats involved in the negotiations said.
This new resolution, designed to increase pressure on President Saddam Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait and focus world attention on the gulf crisis again, threatens Iraq with further punitive mesures if it refuses to obey.
But it also asks the Secretary General of the United Nations to make another effort to find a peaceful solution.


Turmoil Over Sexual Charges Dims G.O.P. Election Hopes in Minnesota
If the troubled campaigns of many Republicans around the country can be compared to a rocky road, the woes facing the party in this state suggest another metaphor -- a train wreck, perhaps.
In the latest embarrassing twist for Republicans here, the party's nominee for governor, Jon Grunseth, whose campaign has been dogged by allegations of sexual misdeeds nine years ago, called a news conference Thursday night to announce his withdrawal, only to change his mind and rip up his withdrawal speech as top Republican officials watched with slackened jaws.


Mayfair Takes Two-Stroke Lead in Nabisco
Billy Mayfair, a second-year professional, treated the richest tournament in golf with matter-of-fact steadiness and fired a near flawless five-under-par 66 today and took a two-shot lead after 36 holes at the $2.5 million Nabisco Championships.
The 24-year-old Mayfair's two-round total of seven-under-par 135 at the ruggedly long, par-71 Champions Golf Club was one shot better than Nick Price, and two shots better than the first-round co-leader Greg Norman, Chip Beck and Jodie Mudd.


Colonial Gas Co.  reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Sierra Tuscon Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Patroons Sign Daniels
Lloyd Daniels, the New York high school star whose career has been plagued by off-court events he would rather forget, has signed with the Albany Patroons of the Continental Basketball Association.
The 6-foot-8-inch Daniels, whom Coach Jerry Tarkanian of Nevada-Las Vegas once called the next Magic Johnson, signed a nonguaranteed contract.
If he makes the team, said Mark Kestecher, a Patroon spokesman, he will earn $580 a week.
The 23-year-old Daniels, who attended five high schools without getting his diploma, last played for Quad City of the C.B.A., averaging 3.8 points and 2.3 rebounds before he was cut after four games.
At the time, he was coming back from a gunshot wound suffered in a dispute with a drug dealer. (AP)


Konin Journal; Let the Voters Decide: Who Speaks Better Polish?
At this whistle stop on the campaign trail, Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki, who is running for President against Lech Walesa, nervously shifted his weight from one foot to the other, trying to think of something to say to the crowd of supporters gathered on the train platform of this small town in central Poland.
Mr.
Mazowiecki had already signed a few autographs and raced through a short speech on why he should be the first popularly elected President of Poland.
Now, he was peering into the damp cold with all the awkwardness of a teen-ager on a first date, unable to find any words that would help him connect with the upturned faces.


Flowmole Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Surgical Care Affiliates reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pacific Telecom reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shares of Pfizer Decline by $3
Shares of Pfizer Inc. fell $3 yesterday after company officials met with Wall Street analysts, some of whom left disappointed about expectations for sales, earnings and growth rates for the 1990's, analysts said.
The stock closed at $74.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.
A Pfizer spokesman, Tony Biesada, confirmed the company had met with analysts in New York but declined to comment on developments.
A Paine Webber analyst, Ronald Nordmann, said some analysts were disappointed with Pfizer's projection for 1991 sales of Procardia XL of between $500 million and $600 million.
Procardia XL is a sustained released dosage form of Procardia, a treatment for hypertension and angina.


Daniel I. Kamesar, Rabbi, 35
Rabbi Daniel I. Kamesar, regional director of Mazon: A Jewish Response to Hunger, collapsed and died on Wednesday while waiting for a train in Philadelphia.
He was 35 years old and was commuting from his home in Philadelphia to his office in Manhattan.
The cause of death has not been determined.
A recent graduate of the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College in Philadelphia, Rabbi Kamesar had been appointed in August as New York regional director of Mazon, an organization that raises money for anti-hunger efforts.
He graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles in 1977 and from New York University School of Business in 1979.
He is survived by his wife, Cynthia; three children, Nathan, Sophie and Henya; his parents, Armon and Barbara Kamesar of San Diego, and a brother, Adam, of Cincinnati.


Waverly Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Beliefs
The Homecrest Presbyterian Church, at 15th Street and Avenue T in Brooklyn, stands only a block from the D train, but the white wooden structure carries its 90 years with an almost rural dignity.
Set back from the street behind a lush yard, it is a relic of a time when this part of the borough was passing from farmland to suburban neighborhood.
Last Sunday morning the church was filled with congregants, sunlight and the blare of a bagpiper, in full Scottish regalia, playing "Amazing Grace." Behind the bagpiper sat the Rev.
Dr.
David Munroe Cory, 87 years old, whose retirement the service was honoring.


Profits Scoreboard
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept
Change
1990
From '89
American West Airlines
(22,000,000)
--
Chevron Corp.
403,000,000
-
3.4
Cummins Engine Co.
(33,700,000)
--
Fort Howard Corp.
(20,400,000)
--
Midway Airlines Inc.
(18,700,000)
--
Monsanto Co.
74,000,000
-
41.3
Pacific Telecom Inc.
18,500,000
-
19.2
Williams Cos.
(15,300,000)
--
See accompanying notes for special items.
(Loss) *Loss in year-earlier period.


New York Elections Bury Democracy
New York State's election system remains, as a series of articles in The Times has underscored, a national embarrassment.
It encourages machine politics and patronage; it discourages new candidates from running and voters from voting.
Yet despite endless outrages, the indifferent State Legislature keeps stalling reform.
The problems start with the state's 369-page election law -- the longest and most involved in the country.
It forces even Presidential candidates to surmount endless hurdles just to get on the ballot and stay there.
Strict rules govern the form of nominating petitions, inviting ritualistic legal challenges that smother competition.


Prison for 3 Northwest Pilots Who Flew Jet While Drunk
Three former Northwest Airlines pilots who flew a passenger jet while intoxicated were sentenced to prison today, two for a year and the other for 16 months.
Federal District Judge James Rosenbaum also imposed three years' probation on each, telling them, "Gentlemen, you are good men who have done a bad thing."


DAILY NEWS DROPS UNION EMPLOYEES
The Daily News, struck by nine of its 10 unions, began dismissing most of its 2,400 unionized workers yesterday and then struggled to publish without them, gathering an army of nonunion employees, some from across the country, to write, edit, print and deliver the nation's second-largest metropolitan daily.
With scores of replacement drivers, pressmen, machinists and others already on the job, officials at the newspaper said more nonunion workers -- including reporters, editors and photographers -- were being flown in from newspapers in Florida and Illinois owned by the Tribune Company, the corporate parent of The News.


Turning Profits Hand Over Wrist
Social scientists have long puzzled over fads, those brief, extraordinarily popular obsessions with peculiar objects and clothing.
They have pondered their causes in late 20th-century America and their meaning for Western civilization.
But Tara Murtha is not puzzled.
The 10-year-old likes the latest fad because it lets her do a neat trick with her big toe.


Knicks Need Wilkins To Be More Consistent
Gerald Wilkins has been called many things in his career with the Knicks.
He has been called talented.
He has been called athletic.
He has been called acrobatic.
Rarely has Wilkins been called consistent.


Polaroid and Kodak Challenge Figures
The Polaroid Corporation and the Eastman Kodak Company filed challenges yesterday to the calculations made by a United States District Court judge in establishing that Kodak should pay Polaroid $909.5 million for infringing its instant photography patents.
Polaroid argued that a correct calculation of Kodak's liability based on Judge A. David Mazzone's findings would result in Polaroid receiving an additional $173 million.
Kodak said that correcting what it described as "clerical errors" in the tabulation would result in a $48 million reduction in its liability.
The motions do not preclude either company from appealing the basic legality of the earlier damages finding, which both are expected to do.
They will have 30 days from the time Judge Mazzone rules on yesterday's motions to file such appeals.


Excerpts From Report On Violence at Mosque
Following are excerpts from the report of an official Israeli commission of inquiry into the Oct. 8 violence at Al Aksa Mosque, as translated from the Hebrew by The New York Times:
The assembly of Muslims on the Temple Mount on Oct. 8, 1990, deviated from the intended purpose of the place and from the norms that a holy site obliges.
Thousands of Muslims were convened by religious leaders and by others, and they did not come to this place meant only for prayers with the intention of praying.
They deviated from the intended purpose of the holy place.


Ryan, Beck &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


KEEP TO HARD LINE, SAUDI KING ORDERS
King Fahd of Saudi Arabia has ordered an end to further conciliatory-sounding remarks to Iraq like those made early this week by his brother, the Saudi Defense Minister.
Apparently seeking to stop speculation about a possible shift in the Saudi position, King Fahd signaled a more hawkish stand on the Persian Gulf crisis when he issued an unusually harsh statement Wednesday night in which he said there could be no compromise in the demand for total Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait.


Sprague Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Joseph Johnson, 84; Headed Endowment For Peace Research
Joseph E. Johnson, a former president of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, died of pneumonia on Wednesday at Virginia Baptist Hospital in Lynchburg, Va.
He was 84 years old and lived in Lynchburg.
Mr.
Johnson's long career in international affairs included service in the State Department and several missions for the United Nations, most notably in the early 1960's as a special representative of the Concilition Commission for Palestine, for which he conducted an extensive study of the refugee problem in the Middle East.
In 1969 he was an alternate United States representative to the General Assembly.


Midway Airlines Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Celestine George Burke, Educator, 81
Brother Celestine George Burke, an educator who was a member of the Brothers of the Christian Schools for 63 years, died on Thursday at Riverview Medical Center in Red Bank, N.J.
He was 81 years old and lived at the Christian Brothers Academy in Lincroft.
He died of a stroke, a spokeswoman for the religious order said.
Brother George was a teacher and administrator at schools in the Bronx, Staten Island and Yonkers for 48 years.
He served as principal at Immaculate Conception School in the Bronx, Sacred Heart School, St.
John's School and St.
Peter's Junior High School in Staten Island.
He was principal of St.
Mary's School in Yonkers for six years, moving to St.
Raymond's School in the Bronx in 1963.
He returned to teaching in 1968 and retired in 1986.
He is survived by several nieces and nephews.


UNR Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sico reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


20 File for Free Agency
Zane Smith and Don Slaught, two players who were instrumental in the Pittsburgh Pirates' conquest of the Mets in the National League East, filed for free agency yesterday along with 18 other players.
Nine who filed were players whose clubs did not offer them salary arbitration by the Thursday midnight deadline.
In that group were Willie Randolph of Oakland, Bob Boone of Kansas City, Wally Backman of Pittsburgh, John Candelaria of Toronto, Gary Ward of Detroit, Danny Heep of Boston, Rick Dempsey of Los Angeles, Rich Gedman of Houston and Tom Niedenfuer of St.
Louis.


Cleaner Air, at Last
After 13 years of official indifference, and against heavy odds, Congress has acted to clean the nation's air.
A bill that would completely overhaul the Clean Air Act of 1970 now needs only formal approval by the Senate and the President's signature.
Both are expected.
Congress has worked too hard to turn back now.
And Mr.
Bush got the ball rolling in the first place.
The 1970 law was a monument, passed early in the new era of environmental consciousness.
It spared the United States the unregulated industrial pollution that afflicts nearly all Communist countries.
But even as amended in 1977, the law ignored some problems and failed to keep pace with others.
Three of five Americans still live in the hundred urban areas that fail to meet air quality standards -- despite annual spending of $35 billion, mostly by the private sector.


Entertainment Publishing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Heritage Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Default Fears Depress Bank Stocks
Banking companies continue to be mauled in the financial markets as investors worry about rising losses from real estate lending and the growing risk of defaults on other loans.
Five of the 10 most active stocks on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday were banking companies, and all of them declined.
Some of the sharpest drops were for California banks, as some analysts warned that losses on real estate loans in that state will soon begin to rise.


Prices of Soybeans Decline As End of Harvest Nears
In a late selloff on the Chicago Board of Trade, soybean futures prices tumbled below $6 a bushel yesterday to a two-and-a-half-month low.
This is expected to be the biggest weekend of the year for harvesters.
Grain futures also closed lower.
Soybean futures settled 4 cents to 10.75 cents lower in Chicago, with the contract for delivery in November at $5.948 a bushel, the lowest daily settlement for a near-term soybean contract since Aug. 8.


Stocks in Doldrums as the Dow Falls 48.02
Stocks dropped sharply yesterday, with traders blaming growing concern over banks, insurers and other financial companies.
Weakness in high-technology stocks -- a big headache to investors looking to I.B.M. and others for leadership -- also contributed to the selloff.


On Dress Code's First Day, Ties Aplenty
They didn't have to, but almost all the senior boys at Boys and Girls High School wore neckties to school yesterday.
Yesterday was Dress for Success Day at the Brooklyn school, the first day of the legally unenforceable but enthusiastically received dress code declared last week by their principal, Frank Mickens.


Can't Sell? Suppose You Rent?
If you decide to rent your house or apartment because you cannot sell it for an acceptable price in the depressed real-estate market, don't forget about the tax effects.
The first thing to keep in mind, experts say, is that when you do sell the house the tax deferment given those who sell a principal residence and buy or build another at the same or a higher price within two years may remain available.
You don't have to live in the house you are selling to take advantage of that break.
Individuals can defer the tax on the capital gain from such a sale until the second or a subsequent home is sold.


Patents; An Oriental Noodle Made More Cheaply
Americans have long nurtured a ravenous appetite for Chinese food.
Now, an American chemical company wants to export a food idea back to Asia: a cheaper way to produce a popular Oriental noodle.
Researchers at the National Starch and Chemical Company in Bridgewater, N.J., a subsidiary of Unilever N. V., have patented a new way to produce mung bean noodles, which are popular in Southeast Asia.
They have a distinctive translucence and a tensile strength when cooked.
Company officials said the problem was that bean supplies were often erratic and the price often high.
The new noodle replaces all or part of the fairly expensive mung starch with a starch derived from either lower-cost potatoes or sweet potatoes.
The company said the key to the new starch was a chemical modification that kept the granules intact when cooked and preserved the noodle's al dente character.
Officials said their primary goal was to sell the new starch to food companies in Southeast Asia.
Researchers at National Starch, Chung-Wai Chiu, in New Jersey, and Hunter Chua, in Singapore, received patent 4,960,604.


St. Lawrence Cement reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aetna Life &amp; Casualty reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mule Holley, Bassist, Dead at 66; A Favorite Among Jazz Musicians
Major (Mule) Holley, one of the greatest bassists in jazz, died Thursday at the home of a friend in Maplewood, N.J.
He was 66 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his brother Oscar, of Detroit.


Johnny Sanders, Football Executive, 68
Johnny Sanders, general manager of the San Diego Chargers of the National Football League from 1976 to 1987, died today at Grossmont Hospital in La Mesa, Calif., after apparently suffering heart failure, said George Dickason, a deputy coroner.
Mr.
Sanders was 68 years old.
Mr. Sanders is survived by his wife, Peggy; a daughter, Pamela, and a son, Rob.


Reviews/Music; Roy Hargrove's Youthful Jazz Trumpet
Roy Hargrove's set at the Village Vanguard on Tuesday night had youth going both for and against it.
Mr.
Hargrove, a 21-year-old trumpeter, is an explosive soloist with an infallible sense of time; piling phrases together, he can get an audience cheering midsolo.
But in his tune selection -- jazz standards mostly -- and in the band's lack of arrangement, Mr.
Hargrove puts himself in competition with the masters of the past.
It is competition he is not quite ready for.
Which doesn't mean that Tuesday night's set didn't have its share of excitement.
Backed by a band that hadn't quite jelled (including Stephen Scott on piano, Chris McBride on bass and Yoron Israel on drums) Mr.
Hargrove spilled out solos that reveled in irregularity.


Review/Film; Underground Horror
Rats are a big attraction in "Stephen King's Graveyard Shift," about the crew hired for night work cleaning out the much too populous basement of a long-abandoned mill.
But the film's human actors are a big attraction, too.
Made as an unabashed B-movie, "Graveyard Shift" has an offbeat, well-chosen cast of unfamiliar-looking actors, and they help to give the film its gritty edge.
No drama with a clawed, slimy, milky-eyed monster for its subterranean villain can be properly considered realistic.
Still, for its genre, "Graveyard Shift" is relatively down to earth.
Among the players who stand out are David Andrews as the clean-cut hero of the mill crew and Kelly Wolf as his tough-talking colleague and quasi-love interest.
When the film halts a chase through dripping, rat-infested underground tunnels so that these two can share a quick kiss, it's pushing its luck.
Especially good is Steven Macht, who plays the much-hated foreman with a wiry, unpredictable intensity that recalls the late John Cassavetes.
Brad Dourif, as an exterminator who puts his heart into his work, sports a mad gleam, an earring and a samurai hairdo.
His manner is so amusingly fanatical that he takes pains to remind the audience that he isn't Bruce Dern.
As directed by Ralph S. Singleton, "Graveyard Shift" works better above ground than below.
The early scenes that allow the actors a little color are more fun than the all-basement episodes, which are visually monotonous despite the fact that the film's monster plot is a multi-media affair.
The rats, the monster and the graveyard next door all conspire to make the mill a highly unhealthy workplace.
But all these separate perils have a way of running together.
The monster itself is so disappointingly filmed that it, too, seems a thing of disparate parts, and the audience never gets a good look at it.
Too many of the monster's effects are supplied by one slimy two-pronged claw and some off-screen growls.
Among the actors who help give the film its quirky appeal are Jimmy Woodard, Jonathan Emerson, Robert Alan Beuth, Vic Polizos and Andrew Divoff, all cast as workers in the mill.
The cast deserves special credit for working alongside a large and lively army of rodent extras.
"Graveyard Shift" is rated R. It includes some gruesome special effects.
Stephen King's Graveyard Shift Directed by Ralph S. Singleton; screenplay by John Esposito, based on the short story by Mr.
King; director of photography, Peter Stein; edited by Jim Gross and Randy Jon Morgan; music by Anthony Marinelli and Brian Banks; production designer, Gary Wissner; produced by William J. Dunn and Mr.
Singleton; released by Paramount Pictures.
Running time: 86 minutes.
This film is rated R. John Hall . . .
David Andrews Jane Wisconsky . . .
Kelly Wolf Warwick . . .
Stephen Macht Tucker Cleveland . . .
Brad Dourif Danson . . .
Andrew Divoff Brogan . . .
Vic Polizos Ippeston . . .
Robert Alan Beuth Carmichael . . .
Jimmy Woodard Jason Reed . . .
Jonathan Emerson


Michael Foods Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Accuses Five Textile Executives
In simultaneous actions today, the United States Attorney for New Jersey and the Securities and Exchange Commission filed racketeering and fraud charges against the officers of Coated Sales Inc., a publicly traded textile company, charging that they bilked lenders and shareholders of tens of millions of dollars between 1984 and 1988, when they filed for bankruptcy.
Michael Chertoff, the United States Attorney for New Jersey, announced the return of a 46-count indictment against Michael S. Weinstein, 46 years old, of Boca Raton, Fla., a founder and former chairman of the company, and four others, who face up to 260 years in prison if convicted on all counts.


Lawter International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reviews/Music; Clurman's Choral Group
The New York Concert Singers, a chamber choir started by Judith Clurman in 1988, offered its first program of the season at Merkin Concert Hall on Wednesday evening.
As in seasons past, Miss Clurman offered a varied program that drew on the European literature but did not neglect contemporary American composers.
This time, in fact, new music dominated.
Miss Clurman's choir has progressed impressively since its early days.
Two seasons ago, intermittent ensemble problems made for inconsistent if enthusiastic performances.
On Wednesday, though, the Concert Singers were a model of choral virtue.
Textures were velvety, diction was clear, phrases were carefully shaped, and there was a sense of unity that never flagged.


Patents; New Composition Said To Reduce Cholesterol
For those who have been consuming too much fried food, researchers at Alpha-Beta Technology Inc., a small company in Worcester, Mass., have patented a new composition to reduce cholesterol.
The composition consists of a highly purified carbohydrate called beta glucan, which is a dietary fiber obtained from yeast.
Company researchers said it was the active ingredient in oat bran and other fiber-rich foods.
There is debate about the effectiveness of foods like oat bran in lowering cholesterol.
The company contends that dietary fiber itself could play a useful role.
D.
Davidson Easson Jr., executive vice president of Alpha-Beta and one of the product's inventors, said he believed that dietary fiber could help carry both fat and cholesterol out of the body before they were digested.
Beta glucan is believed to be the key to that, he said, and it also serves as a supply of short-chain fatty acids, which seem to block production of cholesterol from fat.
In a recent study, the company said, hamsters placed on a high-fat diet and given the new compound reduced their total cholesterol levels by 42 percent.
Hamsters that received the same volume of oat bran achieved a 29 percent reduction.
Human clinical trials have not taken place.
Patent 4,962,094 was issued to Mr.
Easson; Spiros Jamas, Alpha-Beta's president, and Bruce R. Bistrian, an associate professor at the Harvard Medical School.


American Heritage Life reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Terex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Injured Gorgeous to Miss Breeders' Cup Distaff
Gorgeous, the 4-year-old filly who was set to challenge Go for Wand and Bayakoa in the best race today on the Breeders' Cup card at Belmont Park, was officially scratched from the $1 million Distaff after X-rays revealed a bone chip in her left foreleg yesterday.
Gorgeous, who was second to Bayakoa in last year's Distaff, was rated the third choice this year behind that rival and Go for Wand.
The Distaff was to be the final career start for Gorgeous, who will now be retired to Robert Clay's Three Chimneys Farm near Midway, Ky.
She won 8 of 14 career starts and earned $1,171,370.


Korea's Asiana Expanding Routes
The Government has given its approval for Asiana Airlines, the country's No. 2 carrier, to start regular flights to cities in the United States and Asia.
The Transportation Ministry said that under draft guidelines, Asiana would be able to fly to unspecified United States cities and 18 Asian capitals.
The airline now flies domestic routes and to some Japanese cities.
It is unclear when the guidelines will take effect.
Ministry officials said the plan was meant to promote fair competition between Asiana and Korean Air Lines, the country's sole carrier before Asiana was founded in 1988.
Asiana started its first international service earlier this year, flying to four Japanese cities including Tokyo.
Asiana is owned by the Kumho Group conglomerate.


Macy Says It Might Sell Sizable Stake to Trim Debt
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company told its investors yesterday that it might sell a more substantial stake in the debt-laden company than it had previously sold to other investors.
Some speculation centered on a Hong Kong company as a possible buyer.
In a quarterly letter to investors in Macy's 1986 leveraged buyout, top management did not identify a potential buyer.
The company did not say whether it was already negotiating with one buyer or was still exploring the field.
But a Macy spokeswoman said, "This is not a veiled reference to a specific buyer, but it is stronger than merely exploring the possibility."


Ethicizationism
A new kind of bird is turning up on television.
He is called an "ethicist." No television panel stewing over the rights and wrongs of public issues is complete these days without one.
An "ethicist" is someone devoted to the doctrine of "ethicism." What he does at work is called "ethicizing." Sometimes it is called "the ethicization process." If you try pronouncing "ethicist" and "ethicization" aloud, you will see why this profession can never exist in France.


The Terror of Division III
When Jim Shuart matriculated at Hofstra in the fall of 1949, the college was only 14 years old and had just begun to expand from the 15-acre Hofstra family estate on Hempstead Turnpike.
Shuart, a husky lad from Flushing, Queens, and the first of his family to attend college, was there to play football and he had 1 of the 12 athletic scholarships first awarded by the college.
Twice a co-captain of teams that won 14 of 18 games, Shuart was graduated in 1953 and went on to graduate school.
Back on Campus
For the last 14 years he has been Dr.
James M. Shuart, president of Hofstra, a university that now boasts 12,500 students and 98 buildings on 238 acres.
Football still stirs passions for this old lineman, who would never miss a game and still shows up at practice once in a while.
"I don't get as excited as I used to," Shuart said in a recent interview.
"Or as upset when we lose."
There has been no cause to be upset this season.
The Flying Dutchmen have won all seven of their contests and the athletic director, Jim Garvey, has been embarrassed by the magnitude of the scores of the last three away games: 48-0, 55-0, 43-6.
"We're not pouring it on," Garvey said.
"But when we go on the road we take only 56 players. Our second team is almost as good as our first and everyone wants to show what he can do. There is no third team." No Scholarships
At home, Coach Joe Gardi and his eight assistants have 90 players to coach.
None have athletic scholarships and there is no spring practice under National Collegiate Athletic Association regulations because this is small-time football, Division III.
Yet it is difficult to categorize this Hofstra team as small in any way.
After the Flying Dutchmen demolished Fordham, 35-16, in their first game, the Rams' coach, Larry Glueck, said, "That's no Division III team."
The next Saturday, Gardi took 56 players to Lewisburg, Pa., where they beat Bucknell, 42-29, for the Bisons' only defeat in their first six games.
Bucknell, like Fordham, is a Division I-AA team in the Patriot League.
Hofstra has three games remaining, against Albany State here tonight, then with Wagner and St.
John's.
After that comes the Division III national tournament among 16 teams in four regions to be selected Nov. 10 by N.C.A.A. committees.
Since the N.C.A.A. ratings began a month ago, Hofstra has been ranked first in the East, where Division III football flourishes with 67 teams, the most of any region.
Post-Season Problems
The post-season playoffs have been something of anathema for Flying Dutchmen teams.
Five have participated, including the last four, but none has ever won its first-round game.
Would that be a goal?
Gardi, who clings to the one-game-at-a-time premise, won't comment.
Usually loquacious, he said the other day at practice, "All I have to say now is I'm glad to be here."
Gardi, 50 years old, spent 12 years coaching in pro football, 10 with the Jets.
He says that this season, his first as a college head coach, is the most enjoyable he has had.
He inherited a well-organized program put in place by Mickey Kwiatkowski, the coach for nine years, who is now at Brown.
Even though there are no athletic scholarships, the coaches recruit almost every player, a majority of whom come from Long Island.
Financial aid based on need is available to all.
But Hofstra is no Michigan.
Crowds here are small, an average of 3,200 for the last eight games in a stadium seating 7,000.
To attract 5,000 requires a name opponent or a neighboring one like Fordham or C. W. Post.
On a campus of 9,000 undergraduates, the football players are swallowed up.
Brian McGee, a running back from Brooklyn, said: "When I tell someone I'm on the football team they say, 'Oh, really?' And that's about it."
McGee may be a typical Hofstra player.
A size too small or a step too slow, he received no football scholarship offers and came to Hofstra because he felt wanted.
"I knew I could play here," he said.
Savoring It All
He is a senior and football is coming to an end.
"I love this sport," he said.
"I'm tasting, remembering every game, every practice, every moment."
Another senior, the wide receiver Chris Cocozziello of Staten Island, echoed McGee, saying: "Football is as big as anything in my life right now. I spend more hours doing this than anything else. I go to all my classes and I do a lot of work. But I tell you, I'm here a lot of the time."
The university, still growing and without the financial worries tormenting so many others, is ambitious.
Garvey and Shuart have ideas about raising the sports programs to the Division I-AA level, which would mean a grander set of opponents.
"I feel who we play is important," said Shuart.
An opportunity to join the Patriot League would be seized upon.
"We have to be invited," Shuart said.
"We want to be good, as good as we can be in football, in sports, in everything we do here. And I think we're pretty good."


Southam Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dinkins Links A Loss of Jobs To Pay Raises
In its strongest effort yet to pressure municipal unions and reassure business leaders, the Dinkins administration warned yesterday that it could have to lay off 25,000 to 35,000 workers if New York City keeps its commitment for a 5.5 percent raise for teachers and gives anything like comparable raises to other workers.
Senior administration officials acknowledged that the prediction -- similar to one made on Tuesday by Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman -- represented the worst that could happen, not necessarily what will come to pass.


Next Step for Coleman
Five days before the opening of their regular season, the Nets are planning to hold a news conference tomorrow at Byrne Meadowlands Arena and officially announce the signing of their top draft choice, Derrick Coleman, to a five-year, $15 million contract.
Coleman, the No. 1 selection in the entire college draft, passed his physical examination yesterday and his eventual signature will cap a lengthy negotiating process.


Goodrich to Buy Hercules Units
The B. F. Goodrich Company agreed to buy various units of Hercules Inc.'s Hercules aircraft and electronics group for $176 million in cash.
Goodrich will acquire Hercules Aerospace Display Systems Inc., Hercules Aerospace Ltd. and all four divisions of Simmonds Precision Products Inc.
Hercules said the sale was part of its plan to reduce its aerospace business and focus future growth on advanced materials and food ingredients.
Besides being in the aircraft-components business, Goodrich produces plastic compounds and specialty chemicals.
Goodrich's stock rose 37.5 cents today, to $33.75, on the New York Stock Exchange, while Hercules slipped 25 cents, to $26.50.


About New York; M-m-mm, Good! Now, From Kobe, The $100 Steak
Todd and Richard Shane believe that New York has seen better days.
"I think the city's falling apart," Todd said.
The brothers are in the insurance business and call on lots of local companies.
One thing they have been noticing is the way many are firing vice presidents.
They also talk about the scourge of homelessness and the city's fiscal mess.


Use of Stolen Jets Restricted
The International Civil Aviation Organization today condemned what it called Iraq's theft of 15 Kuwaiti airliners and one British plane during the invasion in August and ordered restrictions aimed at making it hard for Iraq to use them.
The resolution prohibits member nations of the United Nations agency from providing parts or services for the stolen planes.
If the planes land on their territory, member Governments must return them to Kuwait's Government in exile.


Primex Forest Products Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cuomo Hoards His $5 Million Fund
After spending $1 million on campaign advertising in the last month, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo still has $5 million available for the last two weeks of his re-election campaign -- and any future campaigns, according to campaign financial reports filed yesterday with the State Board of Elections.
But none of the Cuomo money went to the hard-pressed Democratic candidates for the State Senate, who are borrowing money for the final stages of their effort to win control of the upper house of the Legislature, a campaign in which they have been outspent by the State Senate Republican Campaign Committee by at least 4 to 1.


Tentative Accord Reached on Child Care for Low-Income Families
House and Senate negotiators reached tentative agreement today on a measure that provides grants to states to subsidize child care programs and extends tax credits for low-income families with children.
Because the child care measure is part of the budget reconciliation bill, its ultimate fate remains in doubt.
Congressional leaders hope both chambers will have voted on the reconciliation measure by Saturday night.


Warriors Sign Johnson
The Golden State Warriors have signed 6-10 Steve Johnson, an unrestricted free agent, to a one-year contract.
The Warriors will be the seventh team the 32-year-old Johnson has played for in his nine-year National Basketball Association career, which began in 1984 when he was the first-round draft choice of the Kansas City Kings.
He has averaged 12.1 points and 5.6 rebounds. (AP)


Gulf States Utilities reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Mixed Showing for Dollar; Gold Stumbles in New York
The dollar ended mixed yesterday in quiet trading on world currency markets amid some nervousness over the United States military buildup in the Persian Gulf.
Gold prices slipped overseas, and the decline accelerated in United States trading.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery fell $4.90, to $370.90 an ounce.
The Republic National Bank later quoted gold at $371, down $5.25.


Trenwick Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brad Ragan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chevron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Israeli Panel Faults Police Commanders, But Sees Provocation
A report published today by a Government commission on the stone-throwing and shooting deaths in Jerusalem's Old City this month sharply criticized senior Israeli police commanders, saying they had not adequately prepared for the possibility of trouble.
But the study concluded that the officers who shot and killed 21 Palestinians near Al Aksa Mosque were blameless.
The report puts all of the responsibility for the violence and killing on the Palestinians, saying that "the use of live ammunition on the Temple Mount under the prevailing conditions was found to be justified because the police officers "were afraid for their lives."  [ Excerpts, page 5. ]
It says that Muslim clerics and others incited the Palestinian crowd to violence, and it calls the stoning of Jewish worshipers that resulted in slight wounds to 11 people "a terrible criminal act."
But the report also confirms the findings of independent investigators that Jewish worshipers had long fled out of range of the Palestinian stone-throwers before the police opened fire.
It adds, however, that the authorities feared for the lives of two Arab police employees who were thought to be under siege by crowds on the Haram al-Sharif, which is known to Jews as the Temple Mount.
The report appears to wholly discount the version of events put forth by Palestinians and several independent investigators.
But it also does not substantiate the contention by Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir and other senior officials that the Palestinians who threw stones on Jewish worshipers that day were carrying out a well-planned attack intended to draw world attention back to their cause.
Israel intends to offer a copy of the document to the United Nations Security Council in the hope that the findings will quell international criticism and the demands for an independent United Nations inquiry.
But it seems unlikely that the report will accomplish either goal.
The three members of the investigative commission, appointed by Prime Minister Shamir two days after the incident on Oct. 8, suggested some administrative changes, but they offered no recommendations for disciplinary action against anyone.
The document does, however, include sharp criticism of senior police commanders.
"In the hands of police, there was prior information about the possibility of riots at the Temple Mount," it said, adding that the response of police officials to that information was "routine and mistaken."
The commission was headed by Zvi Zamir, a former head of the Mossad intelligence agency, and included two other former Government officials.
None of them are considered to be clear political partisans.
Arabs Criticize Report
Reaction to the report was limited today, since it was released at the start of the Jewish Sabbath.
But Palestinians called it a whitewash.
"It's one-sided and expresses only the Israeli view," said Radwan Abu Ayash, head of the Palestinian journalists' association.
Faisal al-Husseini, who is widely regarded as the top Palestine Liberation Organization representative in the occupied territories, said: "This was not an investigation committee. It was an editing committee with the purpose of making a formula for the position of the Israeli Government."
Some members of the Israeli political left offered similar opinions, though in less categorical language.
A Chronology of Events
But Mr.
Shamir said the report demonstrated that "the state of Israel examines itself, by an unconditional investigator, something that only few states do, and none in this region.
"We will study the report with great attention," he continued, "and will discuss the conclusions and recommendations without delay."
The report lays out a chronology of events similar to those offered by Israeli and Palestinian human-rights organizations, journalists and others.
But its interpretations are different in several respects.
For example, the report concludes that the police opened fire on crowds of Palestinians long after the Jewish worshipers at the base of the Western Wall and the police had withdrawn from areas where they could be hit by rocks.
But it says that Palestinians continued to throw stones at others in a nearby parking lot.
The report says that when a police force did finally break into the Al Aksa area, after leaving the Palestinians to themselves for more than 15 minutes, the officers were greeted by such a heavy volume of stones that they had no choice but to shoot their attackers.
Victims Are Not Exhumed
The report defies all independent inquiries by saying that the police were justified in firing volleys of live ammunition into the crowds.
It offers several explanations for their actions -- for example, that the police were afraid for the lives of two police employees, an Arab janitor and a clerk, who were trapped inside a police building on the mosque plaza.
Contact with the men was broken off, but officers could see that dozens of Palestinians were storming the building, and knew that firearms were stored there and that the weapons could be turned against the Israelis.
In fact, both men were escorted to safety by mosque officials, and Palestinians never fired on the Israelis.
Palestinian doctors said several of the victims were shot in the back, but the report disputes that without giving the evidence behind its conclusion.
All the victims were buried before the commission started its work, and none of the bodies were exhumed.
Nurse Wounded in Ambulance
Palestinian officials said the police had fired tear gas into the window of a hospital where victims of the shootings were being treated, wounding a patient and several other people inside.
The report explains the episode this way:
"While running, one officer fell down and because of that a tear-gas canister was fired from his gun. During its flight, the tear-gas shell penetrated the hospital. The commander of the patrol immediately apologized to the manager of the hospital about the tear-gas grenade, which mistakenly hit a patient" and "injured women and children who happened to be in the room."
Another investigation, by the independent Israeli human-rights organization B'Tselem, took an affidavit from a nurse who was struck by two bullets while she was inside an ambulance treating a patient.
The Government report says, "It was made clear to the committee that the police who were on the spot did not see the ambulance." NO REACTION FROM U.S.
WASHINGTON, Oct. 26 (Special to The New York Times) -- The State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, said the Administration had no reaction as yet to the report's conclusions because it was still being translated and studied.
Mr.
Boucher added that the Administration still stood by its position that Israel should receive the mission from the United Nations.
Asked if the United States intended to pass the report along to the United Nations, Mr.
Boucher said: "We would hope that the Secretary General will take it into account as an expression of Israeli views. But getting it to the Secretary General is up to the Israelis."
This week, some Israeli officials suggested that the United States might convey the Israeli report to the Secretary General, Javiet Perez de Cuellar, and that the American representative to the United Nations, Thomas R. Pickering, might then visit Israel to follow up on questions the Security Council members might have.
Through such an approach, the Israelis hoped to satisfy the United Nations without having to accept a formal United Nations team in Jerusalem.
The State Department, however, reacted coolly to playing such an intermediary role.
The White House said that Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d would soon visit Saudi Arabis.
Officials said Israel was not on his schedule for now.


Defense Bill Represents Cut in Spending
To the Editor:
"What? Increase Defense Spending?" (editorial, Oct. 13) gives the impression that the Defense Appropriations Subcommittee indiscriminately added $5.3 billion to the fiscal year 1991 defense appropriations bill.
I would like to point out that:
(1) The budget summit, including leadership from both houses of Congress, agreed on a total of $288.3 billion for defense for fiscal 1991.
(2) The House agreed with that amount for defense by a vote of 250 to 164 on Oct. 7.
(3) When I brought the defense bill to the floor of the House on Oct. 12, three separate amendments were of- fered to make across-the-board reductions in the defense bill.
All were defeated.
(4) The defense bill that did pass the House is a reduction of $19.5 billion below the President's request and $14.9 billion below the amount approved in fiscal 1990.
It is also the sixth consecutive annual decrease in defense spending since fiscal 1985 when measured in constant dollars.
In fact, the defense budget requests have been reduced by more than $150 billion by Congress since the start of the Reagan Administration.
Included in the $5.3 billion were additional funds for sealift, an area in which we are clearly deficient.
Sealift has provided about 90 percent of the equipment transported for Operation Desert Shield, and the importance of the requirement for additional sealift is evident.
We added funds for real property maintenance, which has a backlog of $7.3 billion.
If defense facilities are not properly maintained, it will cost more money in the long run.
Additional funds were also provided for the Champus health care program for the military, their dependents and retirees.
Funds were added to clean up environmental problems at bases.
More than 14,000 sites have the potential for hazardous and toxic waste cleanup.
Regarding the funds included for renovation of a carrier, this program is on the Navy's schedule for future work at the Philadelphia shipyard.
We included the total funds required to complete the renovation, but directed that only advanced procurement funds could be expended in fiscal 1991. (Rep.) JOHN P. MURTHA Chairman, Defense Subcommittee House Committee on Appropriations Washington, Oct. 16, 1990


Belvedere reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Monsanto Net Off 41%
The Monsanto Company today reported a 41 percent drop in earnings for the third quarter and announced a wide-ranging reorganization at its second-biggest subsidiary.
For the quarter, the company had profits of $74 million, or 59 cents a share, down from $126 million, or 94 cents a share, for the period a year earlier.
Revenues of $2.14 billion were 4 percent higher than the $2.06 billion last year.


Judge Rejects Lawyer's Plea In Jogger Trial
C.
Vernon Mason's request to become the lawyer for one of the defendants in the second Central Park jogger trial and provide what he contended would be a more confrontational and racially based defense was rejected yesterday by Justice Thomas B. Galligan of State Supreme Court.
Mr.
Mason demanded that Justice Galligan declare a mistrial as a condition for his replacing the present lawyer, Howard Diller, whom he severely criticized as failing to wage an effective defense.
The jury had retired for the weekend and was not present.


German Communists Admit Funds Shift
Leaders of the former East German Communist Party confessed today that party officials had illegally transferred $70 million to Moscow.
Two senior officials were arrested in connection with the incident, the Berlin authorities said.
The confession and arrests came after the party leader, Gregor Gysi, made a one-day visit to Moscow during which he received assurances from Soviet Communist Party officials that the money transfer was not made at the Soviets' request, as the German Communists had said.


Tibet's Borders Reach Beyond Beijing's Map; Against Their Will
To the Editor:
Your articles "To Beijing's Surprise, the Tibetans Are Still Restive" (The Week in Review, Oct. 7) and "In Rural Tibet, a Little Wealth Brings Contentment" (Rangan Journal, Oct. 13) attribute forced sterilization of Tibetans to anti-Chinese propaganda, and say there is little sign of official family-planning programs in Tibetan villages.
As a physician who met a woman sterilized against her will in Lhasa in the fall of 1987, I wondered how the yak wool could have been pulled over your eyes.
Then I remembered some (preselected) Tibetans I had met who, under Chinese purview, said Tibetan women were allowed to have as many children as they wanted and out of the guides' earshot said, "What the Chinese say and what they do are very different."


United Shoppers of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lawson Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Surgical Laser Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


USlico Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Imperial Holly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Patrolling on Foot Will Keep Cops Fit
To the Editor:
"What Will It Take to Make Foot Patrol an Enticing Career?" (news article, Oct. 7) discusses the responses to Police Commissioner Lee Brown's new plan for deploying police officers in New York City.
Some officers say they welcome an assignment change, while others fear the path to the higher paying job of detective may be slower or less available.


Giant Yellowknife reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vacu-Dry Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Williams Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Loss Shown By Cummins In 3d Quarter
The Cummins Engine Company, citing a sharp decline in demand for its truck engines, said yesterday that it had a third-quarter loss of $33.7 million, compared with a loss of $39.7 million in the corresponding quarter last year.
Cummins, the largest independent maker of diesel engines in the world, said that it expected no improvement in the North American heavy-truck market anytime soon and that it planned to continue to reduce its work force.
Painting a grim picture of the future, the company said that truck sales could decline by up to 10 percent next year.


Gretzky Scores Point No. 2,000
Wayne Gretzky didn't have a single shot on goal.
His team lost convincingly, and his sole point -- the 2,000th of his remarkable career -- seemed like nothing special, just a second assist on a relatively meaningless goal.
Yet that assist demonstrated once again why Gretzky will always be known as "The Great One."


Test Tube Hair Prompts Hope on Baldness
Scientists at Cambridge University say they have grown hair in a test tube, a feat that should make it easier to carry out experiments on ways to treat hair loss.
"This is the real thing," Dr.
Terence Kealey, leader of the research team at the department of clinical biochemistry, said today.
"We have for the first time succeeded in getting hair to grow in vitro."
The scientist stressed in a BBC radio interview that growing hair in a test tube "is not in itself a cure for baldness." But, he added, it provides the a medium for experiments and could lead to effective treatment within 10years.
The results of the research are to be published in The Journal of Cell Science next month.
They were announced on Thursday.
Experts said the achievement could lead to preventing hair loss in men who are genetically disposed to baldness.
"Any knowledge of how hair grows and metabolizes could have various offshoots in preventing baldness from happening," said Dr.
Ken Maxted, a dermatologist with the Glasgow Health Board who went bald at 18.
Dr.
John Firmage, a consultant at the Scalp and Hair Hospital in London, said the research was an importantfirst step to understanding what affects hair growth and loss.
"Until now, it has been very difficult to know what happens" except that the process of balding is hereditary, he said.
Dr.
John Romano at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in New York said scientists would be able to test new chemicals on test-tube hair without worrying about injuring someone's scalp.
"Researchers can use many more different chemicals because they don't have to worry about toxicity," he said in a telephone interview.
Dr.
Kealey said the next step is todiscover why many middle-aged men suffer a disruption in the normal mechanism that sets off the growth of new replacement hair.
The successful growth of test tube hair came after a team member, Dr.
Michael Philpott, devised a method for extracting hair follicles from samples of skin left from plastic surgery operations without damaging the roots, Dr.
Kealey said.
This is done by carefully slicing away the top two layers of skin to remove hair follicles with fine tweezers.
The follicles then are grown in a synthetic blood substitute.
Watching hair growing in a test tube is "an amazing sight," Dr.
Kealey said.
"It grows absolutely identical to normal hairs -- at the same rate of 0.012 inches a day and in the same shape."


Patents; Prolonging the Crunch And Freshness in Food
It may be a step away from natural foods, but the Procter &amp; Gamble Company has patented a group of polyester food coatings.
The company says the coatings provide a moisture barrier that can keep the crunch in rice cereals and saltine crackers, while preserving the moisture in fresh fruits, vegetables, meat and fish.
The coatings consist of sucrose fatty-acid polyesters and are somewhat similar to Olestra, the synthetic, nondigestible fat substitute that the company invented and that is awaiting approval by the Food and Drug Administration.
According to the patent, the compounds have long been considered possible fat substitutes, but this is the first time researchers have described their ability to block the transmission of moisture.
According to the patent, the possible uses include keeping cereal from becoming soggy with milk; keeping raisins, prunes and other dried fruit from becoming sticky and clumped together; preventing frozen foods from drying out in frost-free freezers, and keeping bakery products from going stale.
The patent is silent on the key issue of how the coating affects the taste of food, and company officials refused to comment.
P.&amp;G. has not announced any plans to commercialize the technology.
Jeffrey J. Kester, Christian A. Bernhardt and three other researchers received patent 4,960,600.


Allied-Signal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chronicle
PRESIDENT BUSH is doing his bit for the U.S.O. with a televised message that is being shown nationwide, starting yesterday.
"At my request, they are putting together a massive effort to send caring and good cheer to our troops in the Middle East," Mr.
Bush said of the 50-year old service organization.
The President tells viewers to call (900) 820-2876 for more information.
A call will cost $3, most of which will be given to the U.S.O., and will be charged to a caller's telephone bill.


ACCORD REACHED ON RIDDING SKIES OF NOISY PLANES
After nearly a week of intense negotiations, Congressional leaders and the Administration agreed today on major legislation that would eliminate most of the airlines' noisier passenger jets from the nation's skies by the turn of the century.
In return for quieter airplanes, the agreement would restrict the ability of most cities and towns to impose noise regulations of their own.
And local governments could impose arrival and departure fees on passengers and use the money for expansions and improvements at local airports.


Barcelona in Step For the '92 Games
The International Olympic Committee is satisfied with preparations for the 1992 Summer Games in Barcelona, the group's coordinating committee said today.
The committee chairman, Gunnar Ericcson, said members no longer have "butterflies in their stomachs" when thinking of what still has to be done before opening day July 25, 1992.
He also said there was reason for optimism about being able to hold equestrian events after the European Commission's Veterinary Commission found that the four-province region of Catalonia was free of African horse sickness.
There have been four outbreaks of the disease in Spain in the last three years in which more than 1,200 horses died.


Reviews/Music; British View of Irving Berlin and Ragtime
A slight addendum to the tributes to Irving Berlin that followed his death last year, "Irving Berlin and Ragtime America," is being offered at Michael's Pub (211 East 55th Street) through today by Ian Whitcomb, a British student of Tin Pan Alley songs, with the assistance of the American pianist and singer Terry Waldo, who often draws his repertory from the same area.
As Mr.
Whitcomb suggests in his description of the presentation -- "a conducted tour by an English gentleman through the backways of Tin Pan Alley" -- this is pop music of the teens and 20's delivered with a British accent and in terms of a British music-hall performance.
Accompanying himself on the ukulele while Mr.
Waldo plays the piano, Mr.
Whitcomb sings a melange of period songs with bright-eyed enthusiasm.
They bounce from turn-of-the-century ballads that preceded Berlin to British World War I songs and a miscellany of novelty songs, some of which were written by Berlin.
He eventually takes an autobiographical turn with a 1951 song, "Kiss Me, Baby," which lured him to the United States when he heard Tennessee Ernie Ford's recording of it, and a rock song of his own, "You Turn Me On," which made the hit parade in 1965.
Mr.
Whitcomb wisely keeps his helter-skelter program moving rapidly.
But when Mr.
Waldo had the opportunity to move into the spotlight, he makes his piano solo of "Maple Leaf Rag" and his oddly dark, disgruntled singing of Berlin's "Blue Skies" the only strong presentation of the evening's two primary subjects.


Schwitzer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Celtics Extend Hartford Contract
The Hartford Civic Center and the Boston Celtics have signed a new three-year contract that will bring the Celtics to Hartford for three regular games and one exhibition game each season.
The Celtics have played occasional games at the Civic Center since 1975.


TIC International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Patents; Using Mung Bean Meal To Make Fried Chicken
The mung bean, which is a third the size of a pea and contains a yellow starch center, may find new opportunities in the United States.
Satish C. Bhardwaj, a financial consultant in Brooklyn with a fascination for food, recently patented a way to use mung beans for making fried chicken and other batter-fried foods.
Mr.
Bhardwaj said coarsely ground mung beans were an excellent alternative to ordinary flour in batter.
For one thing, he said, they contain more protein and fewer calories.
Equally important, he continued, the mung meal provides an improved coating because it retains water better than flour.
As a result, he said, the crust adheres better and absorbs less grease during frying.
Mr.
Bhardwaj said the batter would be cheap, despite the cost of mung, because it eliminated the need for bread crumbs.
He received patent 4,963,378.


Santa Anita Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Advanced Marketing Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE STRUGGLE IN CONGRESS: Reporter's Notebook; Gaining Speed Near the Finish, Exhausted Legislators Race Through Work
A Senate aide emerged from a House-Senate Medicare conference on the first floor of the Capitol this afternoon and excitedly told a crowd of waiting lobbyists, "Mammography is in," referring to a new benefit for women 65 years old and older.
A dozen staff members sat in a well-upholstered lounge just outside the House chamber, drawing up a last-minute amendment to an education bill, while just off the Senate floor White House officials huddled with Republican participants in a House-Senate conference to put the finishing touches on a budget package.


Cummins Engine reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Panel Finds Voting in Pakistan Was 'Orderly'
Despite charges of vote-rigging from former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, an international observer delegation said today that Pakistan's election, which Ms.
Bhutto's party lost, was "generally open, orderly and well-administered," and that any irregularities "did not significantly alter the outcome."
In a news conference here, one of the leaders of the delegation, Vahit Halefoglu, Turkey's former Foreign Minister, said the delegation received "credible reports of several specific and serious problems" during the polling process but saw "no evidence" of tampering with the vote count.


Jail for Drunken Pilots
Three pilots who were intoxicated when they flew a Northwest Airlines jet were sentenced to a year or more in prison.
"You are a good men who have done a bad thing," the judge told them.
Page 6.


Strong Demand Lowers Rate on One-Year Bills
The Treasury's delayed auction of one-year bills was greeted with strong demand yesterday, which caused the average discount rate on the $10.13 billion issue to drop to its lowest level in almost two and a half years.
With bids totaling almost five times the $10.13 billion being sold, and the Federal Reserve abstaining as a bidder, the average discount rate sank to 7.01 percent, from 7.25 percent at the last auction of one-year bills on Sept. 20, and was the lowest since May 5, 1988, when the average auction rate was 6.74 percent.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the possible appointment of a scientist,Dr.
David Burns, to an Environmental Protection Agency advisory panel on smoking misidentified an agency official who met with members of the Tobacco Institute, an industry group.
He was Donald Barnes, director of the agency's Scientific Advisory Board, not William K. Reilly, the agency's Administrator.


A Reminder
Standard time resumes at 2 A.M. tomorrow. Clocks are set back one hour.


AIDS, Abortion and Fairness
Being infected with the AIDS virus is tragic.
It's more so for a pregnant woman; her fears for herself are compounded by the fear that she may pass on the virus.
The City Commission on Human Rights now reports that many New York hospitals and clinics refuse to perform abortions on HIV-positive women, many of them poor minority members.
That adds cruelty to tragedy.
Two years ago, investigators for the commission called 28 hospitals, physicians and clinics that provide abortion services, identified themselves as HIV-positive and tried to schedule appointments.
More than half the health centers turned them down.
Last spring the study was expanded to 50 more sites; this time 42 percent either refused to provide services or quoted excessive fees.


Jarrett Cancels
Keith Jarrett, who was to have been the soloist in Samuel Barber's Piano Concerto with the American Composer's Orchestra at 2 P.M. tomorrow at Carnegie Hall, has canceled his appearance because of a minor hand injury.
The program, which is to be conducted by Dennis Russell Davies, includes the world premiere of Robert Hall Lewis's Symphony No. 4, the New York premiere of Roberto Sierra's "Preambulo" and Robert Beaser's "Seven Deadly Sins." The bass-baritone Jan Opalach is to be the soloist in the Beaser work.
Replacing the Barber Concerto on the program is the New York premiere of William Bolcom's Fifth Symphony.
Tickets are $9 to $29.
Information: 247-7800.


Leo Casagrande, 87, Engineer and Educator
Leo Casagrande, a Harvard professor and civil engineer who specialized in soil mechanics and foundation engineering, died Thursday at Meadow Green Nursing Center in Waltham, Mass.
He was 87 years old and lived in Winchester, Mass.
He died of pneumonia and Parkinson's disease, a funeral home representative said.
Dr.
Casagrande was born in Austria and received a doctorate from the University of Vienna in 1933.
He taught at the University of Berlin and was later inspector general for German highways.
From 1940 to 1945 he was a consulting engineer and taught at a technical university in Braunschweig, Germany.
From 1946 to 1950 he was a research engineer in Hertfordshire, England, after which he emigrated to the United States.
He was a research fellow and later a professor at Harvard University from 1953 to 1972, when he retired from teaching.
He founded Casagrande Consultants in Arlington, Mass., in 1969 and retired in 1986.
He is survived by his wife, the former Carla Marie Busch; four sons, Christian of Middletown, R.I.; Dirk of Arlington, Mass., Carl of Goshen, N.H., and Ralf of Timmendorfer Strand, Germany; a daughter, Imogen Storrs of Manhattan, and four grandchildren.


Tuckahoe Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Escalation, 1990 Style
Does it make military or political sense to add 100,000 or more American troops to the 210,000 already deployed in Saudi Arabia?
Though the buildup announced by Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney is unexpected, that does not mean it is imprudent.
But if Americans are to support this new commitment, the Administration needs to explain its purposes and to allay fears that the collective forces in the Persian Gulf are becoming excessively Americanized.
The buildup may be essential to persuade Saddam Hussein that he has no choice but to withdraw from Kuwait unconditionally.
But since Vietnam, Americans have been wary of escalation, and slippery official justifications for it.
Pentagon analysts say that even 100,000 additional troops may not be enough, that more backup is required.
As the risks and sacrifices swell, so will the pressure to initiate use of force soon, when the desert is cooler and dark nights favor surprise.


Electromedics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Monsanto Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BMW Lifts Prices
BMW of North America Inc. said its 1991 cars would cost an average 3.6 percent more than comparably equipped 1990 models.
All of the West German-made luxury-performance cars will be covered by a four-year, 50,000-mile limited warranty, the company said.
Prices for 1991 BMW cars range from $19,900 for the 318i to $73,600 for the 850i.


Datakey Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Holyfield Seizes Limelight of Respect
Weeks ago, Steve Wynn, the owner of the Mirage, referred to Evander Holyfield as "the other guy" at a news conference in Los Angeles.
Not once but several times he used that designation, as though Holyfield was a supporting player to the heavyweight champion, James (Buster) Douglas, for their title match.


Zygo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vote Near on Deficit Plan, $10 Billion Shy of Goal
As they approached final votes on a huge tax and spending plan that would affect nearly all Americans, lawmakers found today that the final negotiations had left them $10 billion short of their goal of reducing the Federal deficit by $500 billion over the next five years.
Nonetheless, at midnight they were pressing ahead to finish the bill, with votes scheduled in the House early Saturday and in the Senate later in the day.


Robinson Nugent reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


After Budget Deal's Failure, President Treads Carefully
When some Republican House members urged President Bush two weeks ago to renounce the failed bipartisan budget agreement and go out on the trail, "Harry Truman-style," to bash the Democrats and Washington, he refused.
"You don't understand," Mr. Bush told them. "I'm here to govern."
Now, after cooperating with the Democrats to hash out a new agreement with tax increases that Republican candidates are finding tough to swallow, Mr.
Bush is out on the trail bashing the Democrats and Washington "Harry Truman-style," in the phrase used by a senior White House official this week without a trace of irony. 'Uncontrolled Spending'


Chevron's Profit Falls; Higher Oil Price Blamed
The Chevron Corporation said today that its profit fell 3.4 percent in the third quarter.
Higher crude prices and one-time charges for environmental programs in refining and marketing more than offset rising earnings in the exploration and production unit, the company said.
Net income was $403 million, or $1.14 a share, compared with $417 million, or $1.22 a share, in the corresponding period a year ago.
Revenues rose 32.5 percent, to $10.6 billion from $8 billion.


Bush Meets Troops Headed for Saudi Arabia


Matlack Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


George Nordmeyer, Professor, 78
George Nordmeyer, retired chairman of the Hunter College German department, died on Tuesday at his home in Palo Alto, Calif.
He was 78 years old
He died of colon cancer, his daughter, Alice, said.
He joined the staff of Hunter as chairman of the department in 1965 and remained until he retired in 1978.
Dr.
Nordmeyer was born in Burgorner, Germany, and came to the United States at the age of 20.
He received a Ph.D. from Yale and taught at the University of West Virginia from 1934 to 1939.
From 1939 to 1965, he taught at Yale.
He wrote several textbooks and articles on linguistics.
He is survived by his wife, the former Barbara Thompson; two daughters, Alice Carroll of Santa Cruz, Calif., and Mary Betsy Nordmeyer of Saratoga, Calif.; three grandchildren, and one great-grandchild.


Lone Star Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reviews/Dance; An Alien Intelligence
JoAnn Fregalette Jansen is a choreographer of intelligence and energy with a special sensitivity to the nuances that can be created in dance that is, on the surface at least, abstract.
But a program of four new and recent pieces, performed by J. Fregalette Jansen Dance on Thursday night at the Whitney Museum of American Art at the Equitable Center, had the feeling of a tour through a country with a language other than one's own.
It was clear that something was being said.
But the meaning and syntax were largely unintelligible.
Ms.
Jansen's "Big Bog," a 1989 group work set to music by Bill Ruyle, brimmed with characteristic moodiness and odd buried incident.
But her pairing of a new duet called "Vinnyettes and Noonyisms" with a duet from the 1989 "Frankenstein's Smile" was puzzling.
Each had its own clear tone.
Two lovers were locked tight in a reclining, then standing embrace in "Frankenstein's Smile," performed by Ms.
Jansen and Byron Suber to music by John Zorn.
The two lovers in "Vinnyettes and Noonyisms," danced to "September Song" as sung by Jimmy Durante, looked as if they were still getting to know each other, though very happily.
Parts of the new duet, danced by Margaret Eginton and Geoffrey Nimmer, alternated with parts of "Frankenstein's Smile." It was like mixing eggs and oranges.
And why "September Song"?
Its very specific references were not alluded to in the duet.


Chronicle
In 1988, more than 3,000 elephants were killed by poachers in Kenya, according to Dr.
RICHARD LEAKEY , the paleontologist and director of the Kenya Wildlife Services in Nairobi.
So far this year, he said, after the introduction of an aggressive antipoaching campaign, only 24 have been killed for their tusks.
Dr.
Leakey is now hoping to raise $1 million by offering a seven-day safari party for $10,000 a person.
Starting in Nairobi, the benefit will include personal tours of game preserves, movies, lectures, seminars with wildlife experts and a dozen culinary events, dances and other gatherings, both formal and safari chic.
Hollywood will be represented with GEORGE C. SCOTT , ISABELLA ROSSELLINI , JAMES GARNER and JANE SEYMOUR , among others.
Tickets to the affair, which begins Nov. 27, do not include transportation to Kenya.
'It is only when well-meaning people eyerywhere are willing to say 'No, I will not buy ivory,' that the elephant will truly be saved," Dr. Leakey said.


Michael Cheilik, Professor, 53
Michael Cheilik, associate professor of history at Lehman College, died yesterday at Beth Israel Hospital.
He was 53 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, Jacob Judd, chairman of the history department, said.
Dr.
Cheilik joined the faculty at Hunter College, another City University of New York school, in 1965 and moved to Lehman in 1970.
He was a linguist and spoke fluent French, German, Italian and Russian and read Greek, Latin and early Semitic languages.
He wrote several books, including textbooks on ancient Greek and Roman history and architecture.
He also wrote two books on Bronx architecture.
He was a graduate of City College and received an M.A. and Ph.D. from Johns Hopkins University.
Dr.
Cheilik is survived by a brother, Philip, of Rockville, Md.
His companion for many years was George Vincent.


Reviews/Music; 3 Debuts in 'La Boheme
The principals at the New York City Opera's "Boheme" on Wednesday night were new not only to this year's performances; they were new to the company altogether.
Making their debuts and singing Rodolfo, Mimi and Musetta respectively were Jianyi Zhang, Geraldine McMillian and Lauren Flanigan.
Picking through the debris of this rather jumbled evening of opera, one could find some clues to the qualities of all three.
The frailties of both Mimi and Rodolfo in the opening scene probably had something to do with nerves.
Ms.
McMillian had an episode of sagging pitch that did not repeat itself as the evening wore on.
Mr.
Zhang's technical problems were also at the start, mostly in the rough transitions from register to register.


Safety Railway Service Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Acxiom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Soviet Moves On Economy
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev issued decrees today setting a new commercial rate for the ruble and making the moribund Soviet economy more attractive to foreign investors.
The decrees introduce a higher commercial ruble exchange rate and will allow foreigners to repatriate profits and own 100 percent of enterprises on Soviet soil.
The new orders, published on the front page of the newspaper Izvestia, are the latest use of Mr.
Gorbachev's new emergency powers to set the economy on a course toward a free market.
The new commercial exchange rate, effective on Thursday, will be 1.8 rubles to the dollar.
The new rate will replace a complex scale of exchange rates for foreign-trade transactions.
The official rate of 0.56 rubles to the dollar will continue to exist, but will be rendered almost meaningless by the new commercial rate, a senior Government official said.
The foreign investment decree allows foreigners to reinvest ruble profits in the Soviet Union or transfer them abroad.
Until now, many Western companies have been reluctant to make major investments in the Soviet Union because they could not repatriate profits.


Scientific Measurement Sys reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


HEALTH INSURERS FACE TIGHT RULES IN COVERING AGED
As they worked toward a final compromise on the 1991 budget, House and Senate negotiators agreed today to set tough new Federal standards for private health insurance policies purchased by 23 million elderly Americans to supplement coverage provided by the Government through Medicare.
The legislation, long sought by large numbers of the nation's elderly, would add another strand to the network of Federal programs for the aged by protecting them from buying unnecessary coverage.


Gorbachev in Spain to Seek Support
Leaving behind a country gripped by uncertainty and discontent, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev arrived here today on the first of a series of quick trips abroad aimed at drumming up Western support for his program of economic and political change.
Noting that it was logical for the agitated debate taking place in the Soviet Union to stir "serious alarm" abroad, Mr.
Gorbachev told Spanish legislators that he counted on "the understanding and support of the world" during "the tensest days of our difficult journey."


Ball Loses Bid For Can Maker
Peter Kiewit Sons' Inc. today scrapped an agreement to sell Continental Can Europe to the Ball Corporation because of what the companies called a lack of bank financing for which they blamed recent market turmoil.
The tentative sale was announced in July.
Ball said it was acquiring 33 European metal packaging plants from Continental Can, which would have given it a foothold in one of the world's most rapidly expanding markets.
Continental was to have received $625 million in cash and $400 million in stock, giving it a 29 percent stake in Ball, the fifth-largest producer of beer and soft drink cans in the United States.
But the deal was scrapped today, the companies said in a joint statement.
"Ball has not yet arranged financing, and the certainty of closing the transaction on the agreed-upon terms and time frame have become compromised," the statement said.
Ball still plans to acquire the remaining interest in its 50 percent owned Ball-Incon Glass Packaging Corporation joint venture.
In that deal, also announced in July and scheduled to be completed by the end of the year, Ball will pay $65 million in cash to its joint venture partner, the Holland-American Investment Corporation
Ball's stock fell $1.125 today, to $28.50, on the New York stock Exchange.


Red Lion Inns L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Navy Retires Battleship Iowa for Third Time
The battleship Iowa was decommissioned today, six years after she was taken out of mothballs for the second time and 18 eonths after a gun-turret explosion off Puerto Rico that killed 47 sailors.
Strong winds and rain pushed the decommissioning ceremony from a pier at the Norfolk Naval Base to the ship herself.
Among those on board were several relatives of the 47 crewmen killed in the gun turret explosion on April 19, 1989.
The ship will be moved to nearby Portsmouth for decommissioning work before she goes into mothballs at the Philadelphia Naval Yard next year.
After protecting aircraft carriers in the Pacific in World War II, the Iowa was decommissioned in 1949.
Two years later she was returned to service for the Korean War.
The ship was back in mothballs from 1958 to 1984, when she was recommissioned as part of the Navy plans to build a 600-ship fleet.
The Iowa returned to sea two months after the 1989 explosion, with the damaged gun turret sealed.
But officials estimated repairs would cost $13 million, which led to the decision to mothball her.
The battleship New Jersey will be decommisioned in February, leaving the Navy with two battleships, the Wisconsin and the Missouri.


Mortgage Rates Drop
Fixed-rate mortgages averaged 10.17 percent this week, down from 10.24 percent last week, according to a national survey released today by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 8.17 percent, down from 8.19 percent last week.


Triton Canada Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
A listing by The Associated Press on Oct. 7 for the House of Representatives roll-call on a bill vetoed by President Bush -- to keep the Government running for a week and reopen agencies closed by the budget impasse -- misstated the positions of three California Republicans.
Dana Rohrabacher, Norman D. Shumway and Bill Thomas indeed voted, to sustain the veto.


Daily News: The Combatants
Michael J. Alvino  President, Deliverers Union
Michael J. Alvi no, 54 years old, the president of the 700-member Newspaper and Mail Deliverers Union, is not happy about the walkout at The Daily News.
"I needed a strike this weekend like a hole in the head," he said the other day.
Mr.
Alvino has a specific reason, a family wedding in Maine.
But his irritation expresses the sentiments of most of the employees at The News who are now out of work.
"This is New York City," Mr.
Alvino said.
"It's a union town -- and The Daily News right now is attacking our union, bringing in these hired guns from out of town to take jobs away from my men."
Mr.
Alvino, who has been president of the drivers union for 16 months, has a reputation for outspokenness.
Testifying under immunity at the Federal trial of one of his predecessors, Douglas LaChance, Mr.
Alvino readily acknowledged being a conduit for payoffs to Mr.
LaChance from News wholesalers who wanted to lay off drivers.
Mr.
LaChance, the union's president during the 1978 newspaper strike, later was imprisoned for corruption.
But it was Mr.
Alvino who brought the drivers into the Allied Printing Trades Council, and the drivers are generally acknowledged to be the most powerful of the 10 unions now battling The Daily News.
Charles T. Brumback  President, Tribune Company
Charles T. Brum back, president and chief execu tive of the Trib une Company, which owns The Daily News in New York and The Chicago Tribune, is an ac countant by training who shuns the spotlight and who made his mark in the Tribune organization as a cost cutter, a decisive manager and a tough man on unions.
"Union leaders vilify him. Newspaper analysts lionize him. Shareholders are going to love him," said a profile in Crain's Chicago Business magazine just before Mr.
Brumback, 62 years old, added the title of chief executive on Aug. 1, taking over from Stanton R. Cook, who remains chairman of the Chicago-based company.
Mr.
Brumback, who graduated from Princeton in 1950, won a Bronze Star as an Army lieutenant in infantry fighting in Korea.
Returning to his hometown of Toledo, Ohio, he studied accounting in graduate school at the University of Toledo while working for Arthur Young &amp; Company.
In 1957, he took a job as controller for the Star Sentinel Company in Orlando, Fla.
The Tribune Company purchased the newspaper in 1965.
Mr.
Brumback turned the Orlando paper into a money maker and caught the eye of Chicago headquarters.
He was named chief executive of the Florida company in 1976 and in 1981 was brought to Chicago as head of The Chicago Tribune.
Mr.
Brumback succeeded in breaking three unions at The Tribune in a 1985 strike of pressmen, printers and mailers.
He was named president of the parent company on Jan. 1, 1989.
James Hoge  Publisher, Daily News
James Hoge, 54 years old, be came publisher of The Daily News in 1984 after a mercurial career in Chicago journalism in which he became city editor of The Chicago Sun-Times at 29, managing editor at 31 and publisher at 44.
He came to The News two years after its parent company, the Tribune Company of Chicago, had nearly closed it and has presided over six years of continuing economic difficulty.
Last year he signaled the newspaper's new tough stance toward its unions by retaining the Nashville law firm of King &amp; Ballow to represent it in talks that Mr.
Hoge said could determine the survival of the paper.
The law firm has frequently been used by companies looking to break unions or vastly renegotiate their contracts with them.
He called for renegotiations with the paper's 10 unions that would dramatically revamp work rules and overhaul salaries, benefits and other compensation so that the company could save what has been estimated as more than $100 million annually.
Mr.
Hoge grew up on Park Avenue and was educated at Phillips Exeter Academy and Yale.
He is married to Sharon King Hoge, a former television consumer reporter, and has three children from an earlier marriage.
His brother Warren is an assistant managing editor of The Times.
He has been quoted as saying, "I want to be the man who has on his epitaph that he saved The Daily News." Barry F. Lipton  President, Newspaper Guild
Barry F. Lipton, president of the Newspaper Guild of New York since 1985, rose to power during a period of bitter factionalism and financial difficulties within the union.
He was renominated on Thursday night for another two-year term.
Previously an advertising salesman for The New York Times, Mr.
Lipton became active in the union as a grievance officer.
In 1982, he was elected to the full-time post of secretary-treasurer, which led to the presidency.
Mr.
Lipton, 48 years old, is separated and has one son, and lives in East Hills, L.I.
His local has about 5,500 members working at 33 newspapers and magazines in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
The guild's jurisdiction is broad, covering most white-collar jobs, including those in the news, advertising, circulation and business departments.
Mr.
Lipton has encouraged cooperation with leaders of unions in the industry that represent various production and delivery departments.
Relations between such unions in the past were sometimes characterized by rivalry, at times including crossing each other's picket lines.


West Fraser Timber reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Census Recount Follows Reports Of Faked Forms
The Census Bureau will reopen seven offices in northern New Jersey and begin revisiting some 18,000 households whose census reports may have been falsified by workers.
The bureau will send supervisors from Washington to the offices on Monday to rehire and train 500 experienced enumerators who worked on the recent count, and will start revisitng homes on Wednesday, said John J. Connolly, assistant to the director of the Census Bureau.


Congressional Junket Is Filmed by TV Crew
While millions of Americans were spending last Easter weekend finishing their taxes, members of the House taxation committee were on a taxpayer-paid trip to Barbados -- on something like "Candid Camera."
There to discuss a trade bill, the lawmakers spent much of their time at the pool, being entertained by lobbyists or golfing at taxpayers' expense -- unknowingly under the watchful eyes of a television news crew.
What the lawmakers, aides, spouses and military escorts on the trip did not know is that much of their visit was videotaped by a crew from ABC-TV's "PrimeTime Live," which broadcast a report on the trip Thursday night.
The five-day, four-night stay at the Paradise Village and Beach Club came at the end of a 12-day official committee trip by 34 people that also included stops in several South American cities.
The bill: $100,000, including $40,000 for the Barbados portion.
The eight members of the House Ways and Means Committee were met and entertained on the Caribbean island by lobbyists representing insurance and computer companies with interests before the tax-writing panel.
"I think that this idea that the press thinks these trips are junkets is absolutely ridiculous," said Representative Marty Russo, Democrat of Illinois who is member of the panel.
"The bottom line is we work very hard on these trips."
The Barbados stop was approved by Repesentative Dan Rostenkowski, also an Illinois Democrat and the committee chairman, so the lawmakers could research the Caribbean Basin Initiative, a trade bill before the panel.


Noranda Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Business Digest
The Budget Marathon
Budget negotiators agreed to set tough new standards for private health insurance policies purchased by 23 million elderly Americans to supplement Medicare coverage.  [ Page 1. ]
On first glance, the budget package's tax changes might seem a throwback to the days of tax shelters and abuses.
But experts say the spirit of the 1986 tax overhaul is intact.
News Analysis.  [ 1. ]
As they approached final votes on a huge tax and spending plan that would affect the pocketbooks of nearly all Americans, lawmakers found themselves $10 billion short of their goal.  [ 8. ]
The Treasury Department made it official: the budget deficit surged to a near-record $220.4 billion.  [ 8. ]  The Economy
Banking companies continue to be mauled in the financial markets as investors worry about rising losses on real estate.  [ 33. ]
Legislation to eliminate most of the noisier passenger jets from the nation's skies by the turn of the century was agreed to by Congressional leaders and the Administration.  [ 1. ]
The presentation of evidence in the Milken hearing apparently neared a close, with defense lawyers filing their last affidavit.  [ 33. ]  Companies
Aetna Life said it would eliminate 2,600 jobs as part of a program of broad changes.
The announcement is a sign of continuing problems in the industry.  [ 31. ]
Dime Savings Bank posted a loss and suspended dividends on its common stock.
It said rising losses on residential real estate loans had led to a loss of $153.6 million in the quarter.  [ 31. ]
Cummins Engine reported a loss of $33.7 million, citing a decline in demand for truck engines.  [ 31. ]
Macy told its investors it might sell a bigger stake in the debt-laden company than it had previously sold to other investors.  [ 31. ]
Slap bracelets, like other fads, are almost certainly doomed to a short life.
But Main Street Toy is riding the rocket.  [ 31. ]
Officers of Coated Sales, a New Jersey textile company, were charged with bilking lenders and shareholders.  [ 33. ]
Chevron said its profit fell 3.4 percent, citing higher crude prices and one-time charges for environmental programs.  [ 32. ]
The Daily News began dismissing most of its 2,400 unionized workers and then struggled to publish without them.  [ 1. ]
Two former Northwest Air pilots were sentenced to prison for flying a passenger jet while intoxicated.  [ 6. ]
Henley Group said it might sell its entire 4.2 percent stake in Wheelabrator.  [ 33. ]  Markets
Stocks dropped sharply, with traders citing growing concerns about banks.
The Dow slid 48.02, to 2,436.14.  [ 31. ]
Oil prices seesawed, closing $1.24 a barrel lower, at $33.01, after a rally based on war fears ran out of steam.  [ 32. ]
The Treasury's delayed auction of one-year bills was greeted with strong demand, which caused the average discount rate on the $10.13 billion issue to drop to its lowest level in 2 1/2 years.  [ 34. ]
The dollar ended mixed in quiet trading.
Gold prices slipped overseas, and the decline accelerated in U.S. trading.  [ 39. ]
In a late selloff, soybean futures prices tumbled below $6 a bushel to a two-and-a-half-month low.  [ 39. ]  Today's Columns
The complexity of the tax package could force many well-off taxpayers to scrutinize almost every facet of their finances for possible savings.
Your Money.  [ 32. ]
A U.S. chemical company wants to export a food idea: a cheaper way to produce a popular Oriental noodle.
Patents.  [ 32. ]


Guidepost; To See and Be Seen Darkness will fall an hour earlier tomorrow,
when daylight saving time ends, and whether you commute by bicycle or just ride for pleasure, it pays to have lights.
The more lights you carry, the safer you are.
There is a bewildering variety: front and rear lights, blinking lights, detachable lights, battery-operated lights, and lights powered by small generators driven by the rotating wheels.
Halogen bulbs are brightest.
Here are some of the choices:
BRAND
TYPE
PRICE
CatEye
Detachable halogen front light;
battery powered
$20
CatEye
Detachable rear red light; battery
$9
Silvertine
Generator-driven front light
$10
Union
Rear-mounted generator with
halogen front and red rear lights
$40
Brite Lite
Front and rear detachable lights;
rechargeable battery
$139
Brite Lite
Headlight and rechargeable battery
that mounts on helmet
$119
Belt Beacon
Orange flashing light worn
around waist; batteries
$20
Wonder Evasion
White blinker and red light on
armband; batteries
$13


Some Advice for the Troops: No Need to Mention Judaism
The 210,000 American servicemen and women in the Persian Gulf have been given a Pentagon booklet listing topics to avoid with Arabs, ranging from sensual perfume advertisements to "U.S. strategic cooperation with Israel" and "the Jewish lobby," the Defense Department said today.
The pamphlet drew angry protests from several Jewish organizations that called the advice an affront not only to their beliefs, but to the American way.


Educational Development reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Healthinfusion Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Midland Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Zygo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yielding to Dinkins, School Board Agrees to Try for Deeper Cuts
After a tense meeting with Mayor David N. Dinkins, the Board of Education abandoned its resistance yesterday and agreed to seek the full $94 million in budget cuts requested by City Hall.
The board's surrender, however, may create some friction between some of the seven board members and Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez.
One school official said Mr.
Fernandez symbolized his uphappiness by declining to initial a three-sentence statement that the board issued after the two-and-a-half-hour meeting with the Mayor at City Hall.


Pilot in Mysterious Crash Gets Jail Term
Thomas Root, the lawyer who was found with a gunshot wound after his small plane crashed in the Atlantic off the Florida coast last year, pleaded no contest today to state charges of securities fraud and was sentenced to 15 years in prison.
Under a plea agreement, Mr.
Root agreed to the prison sentence and a $5,000 fine, which will be imposed in January.
He also agreed to testify against others indicted on fraud charges.
The state dismissed 91 charges against Mr.
Root.
Mr.
Root, 37 years old, called the agreement an "offer so attractive to me that I could not refuse it."
The North Carolina Secretary of State, Rufus Edmisten, said the sentence "indicates we're not going to tolerate securities fraud in this state." At the time of the mysterious plane crash, Mr.
Edmisten's office was investigating Mr.
Root and Sonrise Management Services, of which Mr.
Root is an official.
Mr.
Root, a Washington lawyer, contended that he passed out in the cockpit of his single-engine plane during a flight from Washington to Rocky Mount, N.C.
But the plane was shadowed by military planes and eventually crashed in the ocean off the coast of Florida.
He was pulled from the ocean after the crash and rescuers discovered he had been shot in the abdomen.
He has insisted that a pistol he kept in the plane fell out of a compartment and discharged in the crash, but experts have questioned his explanation.
A Nash County grand jury in June handed up 24 indictments that included 2,695 counts against Mr.
Root and other officials of Sonrise Management and Telemedia Inc.
Sonrise helped form partnerships to apply for Federal licenses for low-power FM radio stations.
Mr.
Edmisten said only a few of Sonrise's 1,600 investors ever received a license.


NASA Weighs Mission to Correct Space Telescope's Blurred Vision
Under mounting pressure from astronomers, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is considering proposals for a repair mission by astronauts that could give full observational abilities to the malfunctioning Hubble Space Telescope.
The shuttle mission, tentatively planned for June 1993, would replace the $1.5 billion telescope's main camera with a unit modified to compensate for focusing flaws in the Hubble's primary mirror, a procedure that has already been approved.
Space-walking astronauts would also be asked to install a device with corrective optics for light reaching the other important scientific instruments.


'Godfather III' Is Producing Unrest
Already the advertisements in the magazines and the trailers in the movie theaters are proclaiming that "The Godfather, Part III" is "coming soon." But in the corporate offices of Hollywood film studios and theater chains around the country, executives are asking only one question: how soon is soon?
Millions of dollars and, to a large extent, the shape of the Christmas moviegoing season hinge on the answer.
"The Godfather, Part III," successor to a pair of movies that won nine Academy Awards and have earned more than $800 million, is being touted as the most important picture of the 1990 holidays, and those responsible for releasing and booking many of the other movies jockeying for a place in the nation's theaters are reluctant to make final decisions until they know when "Godfather III" will land.


Independent Printers Provide Cheap Checks
Almost everyone has a personal checking account, but few people think about who prints their checks or what they cost.
Now a battle is shaping up between banks and printers for control of the market, estimated at more than $1 billion a year.
Independent printers are offering to supply checks at rates that are sometimes two-thirds lower than what banks charge.
The banks are nervous about this, saying that if the checks are printed independently, they could clog the equipment that automatically processes checks, thus raising the cost of check-clearing operations.


Fletcher Challenge Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mel Dauernheim, 85, Retired Horticulturist
Mel A. Dauernheim, a horticulturist, died on Oct. 16 at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Islip, L.I.
He was 85 years old and lived in West Babylon, L.I.
Mr. Dauernheim died of congestive heart failure, said his wife, Eleanor.
In 1930 Mr.
Dauernheim left his architectual studies at Cornell University to join his father, Gustave, in opening A. M. Dauernheim Inc., a greenhouse complex in Wantaugh, L.I.
The company was one of the early growers of cultivated sod, supplying much of the plant material used at the New York World's Fairs and cemeteries in the New York area.
Mr.
Dauernheim became president of the company after his father's death in 1956.
The business was sold in 1977, when Mr.
Dauernheim retired.
Mr.
Dauernheim was a former chairman of the executive board of the Nassau County Cooperative Extension and helped establish the Long Island Flower Growers.
He had also been active in the Society of American Florists.
He is survived by his wife, the former Eleanor Koerner; two daughters, Gale Gipson of Lake Oswego, Ore., and Jane-Ellen Trenheiser of Saline, Mich., and four granddaughters.


Paxar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2,600 Jobs To Be Cut By Aetna
The Aetna Life and Casualty Company said yesterday that it would eliminate 2,600 jobs as part of a program of broad changes.
Coming on the heels of similar reports by other leading American insurers, the announcement is a sign of continuing problems in the industry.
The Hartford-based insurer said the move would save the company $50 million next year and more after that.
The job reductions were announced along with the company's third-quarter earnings, which were down sharply.


Stelco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Torstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Perkins Family Restaurants L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Redskin Kicker Feels The Pressure
Chip Lohmiller remembers his pro debut in the Washington Redskins' 1988 season opener.
More than 70,000 spectators were in the stands.
The array of stadium lights and the glare from television cameras and photographers were nearly blinding and sent chills and thrills down his spine.
So this was the National Football League.


Slocan Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Murdoch Shuts Men's Life
Men's Life, the magazine that called itself "an embrace to guys saying it's O.K. to be a guy again," announced yesterday that it would suspend publication.
The only issue of the magazine went on sale in September.
The publisher, Leo E. Scullin, who earlier this week called rumors of the magazine's demise "decidedly premature," said yesterday that it would have taken too much of an investment to put it firmly on its feet.
He said Men's Life, published by Murdoch Magazines, a division of the News Corporation, was a victim of the severe cutbacks in magazine advertising.


Provident Life &amp; Accident Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Major Legislation Moves Ahead in Both Houses of Congress
Clean Air
The House approved a House-Senate-White House agreement to amend the air pollution law for the first time in 13 years.
The action is widely considered to be one of the major achievements of the 101st Congress.
It makes important changes in regulations of emissions of chemicals into the air by factories, electric utilities, automobiles and other sources of pollution.
Economists estimated the cost to industry and individuals at $25 billion to $35 billion a year.
Military Budget
The Senate passed a House-Senate agreement to set military spending at $268 billion, $17 billion less than last year.
Only $3 billion of the $35 billion in research and development goes to the "Star Wars" anti-missile system, the lowest level of spending on it in several years.
The Senate is also set to take up a military authorization bill setting broad policy guidelines and allowing $288 billion in programs, including some money to be spent in later years.
The Stealth bomber program continues, but at sharply reduced levels.
The Pentagon is directed to spend more on fast ships and heavy cargo planes for deployments like the one in the Arabian Peninsula.
The measures would allow money to be spent that had been contributed by foreign nations for the Arabian operations.
Money Laundering
The House passed by voice vote an anti-money-laundering measure that passed the Senate earlier.
It permits Federal agencies to revoke charters of banks and other financial institutions in which an employee is found guilty of obscuring the source of money.
The Treasury Department will complete guidelines by Feb. 15 on discouraging money laundering by electronic transfer.
A study will be performed on whether bar codes on paper money can help track narcotics transactions.
Food Labeling
The House, on a voice vote, adopted the Senate version of the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act, which curtails disease-prevention claims on food packages and requires more nutrition information for virtually all grocery foods.
Foreign Aid
House and Senate negotiators agreed on $15.5 billion in foreign aid, allowing the Administration to forgive Egypt's $6.7 billion military debt, in exchange for Egypt's joining in the buildup in Saudi Arabia.
But military aid to El Salvador would be cut in half, to $42 million, in a blow to Central America policies.
In a break from past practice, a set sum is not earmarked for Pakistan, usually the third-largest recipient of military assistance.
The United States has expressed concerns over nuclear weapons in Pakistan.
Cash military and economic aid of $3 billion is given to Israel , and $700 million worth of military equipment would be transferred from American stockpiles.
Egypt gets $2.1 billion of cash aid.


Compuchem Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bergesch Rejoins Yanks
Bill Bergesch has returned for his third stint with the Yankees, this time as the assistant general manager.
He will work with Gene Michael, the general manager, and be responsible for major league scouting, waivers and major league transactions.
Bergesch was the Yankees' traveling secretary and stadium manager from 1963 to 1967, and director of scouting from 1978 to 1979, before serving as vice president of baseball operations until June 1983, when Murray Cook took over.
The next year, Bergesch joined the Cincinnati Reds as general manager and served there through the 1987 season, again giving way to Cook.
Bergesch was retired the last two years.


Astrcom Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Selas Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tibet's Borders Reach Beyond Beijing's Map
To the Editor:
I am writing with regard to your Oct. 7 Week in Review article "To Beijing's Surprise, the Tibetans Are Still Restive." I am a Tibetan student attending Columbia University's School of International Affairs who has recently come out of Tibet.
From Lhasa, I attended college in Beijing, then worked for the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
While working for the academy, I had the opportunity to travel throughout all of Tibet, and so feel I am in a position to question some of your reports.


Reviews/Dance; Danspace Celebrates Itself
The dance theater at St.
Mark's Church in-the-Bowery has witnessed remarkable work by ground-breaking choreographers in its 60-year history.
But the emphasis was on the performers on Tuesday night when the resident Danspace Project celebrated itself in "Dance/Eats/Money," a pleasantly informal benefit gala at the handsome little theater.
To start, there was Leslie Carothers in "Bathsheba," a solo created for her by Philip Jerry to music by Peter Gabriel from the soundtrack of "The Last Temptation of Christ." Ms.
Carothers and Mr.
Jerry are both former Joffrey Ballet dancers who are seldom seen in New York these days.
And that is a sad cultural loss for the city.
Mr.
Jerry's solo was slight, but it showed off Ms.
Carothers's special lyricism, serenity and flowing classical line.
And "Slake" by Dennis O'Connor, a recently created nude solo performed in silence, was a perfect showcase for his deft agility and oddly astringent sensuality.
Mr.
O'Connor, who recently left the Merce Cunningham Dance Company, negotiates the most subtle shifts of direction and nuance with unforgettable authority.
An excerpt from "Allos Makar (happy in a different way) OK," choreographed by Bill T. Jones, looked as if it hadn't quite settled into itself yet.
But the material seemed intriguing.
Two men folded and unfolded in a kind of sign language for the whole body, each in his own rectangle of white light, as Valeria Vasilevski softly read from the writing of Krafft-Ebing on sexual behavior.
Nicky Paraiso served as master of ceremonies.


Karpov Has Strong Edge In 7th Game
Gary Kasparov blundered on the 27th move and ignominiously struggled to an endgame in which he was a pawn down at adjournment on move 43 in Game 7 of the World Championship Chess Match last night at the Hotel Macklowe in Manhattan.
Joel Lautier, the French grandmaster, said: "He won't play it further. He will want to get it behind him as soon as possible." Pending the doubtful resumption of play this afternoon at 5:30, the score stands at Kasparov 3 1/2, Karpov 2 1/2.
A victory for Karpov would tie it.


William S. Paley, Builder of CBS, Dies at 89
William S. Paley, who personified the power, glamour, allure and influence of CBS Inc., the communications empire he built, died last night at his home in Manhattan.
He was 89 years old.
His death was believed to have been caused by a heart attack related to pneumonia, said a CBS Inc. spokeswoman, Ann Morfogen.


Willcox &amp; Gibbs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RLI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Dredge Severs Bridge to Hatteras Island in North Carolina


Goody Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Into Management Hands; Misjudgment and Accident Come Together To Force Strike Unwanted by News Unions
The strike by unions at The Daily News is just what the paper's management had been hoping for, and from the union perspective, even trying to provoke, but it is a disaster for the paper's labor leaders, who had sought desperately to avoid a strike if at all possible.
Because of what appears to have been a combination of accident and misjudgment by the unions and calculation on the part of management, union leaders found themselves forced to call a strike, even though they realized that doing so played into management's hands by allowing the paper to hire a nonunion work force of permanent replacements.


6 Months in Jail for Mayor Barry In Cocaine Possession Conviction
Saying that an example should be set for other public officials, a Federal District judge today sentenced Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. to six months in prison and a year on probation for his conviction on a misdemeanor charge of possessing cocaine.
The judge, Thomas Penfield Jackson, who also fined the Mayor $5,000 and costs, said Mr.
Barry had abused a high public trust and had "given aid, comfort and encouragement to the drug culture at large" by using cocaine for more than five years and by lying to the authorities about it.


Dime Posts Loss and Halts Payout
The Dime Savings Bank, one of New York City's most active mortgage lenders in the late 1980's, said yesterday that rising losses on residential real estate loans had led to a loss of $153.6 million in the third quarter and prompted the company to suspend its common stock dividend.
"I am fairly pessimistic about a rebound or recovery for the local economy in the near term," said Richard D. Parsons, the chairman of Dime.
As real estate prices fall, he said, the bank suffers larger-than-expected losses when it sells houses and cooperative apartments acquired through foreclosure.


Some Guild Workers Rush to Picket, Some Mourn
For most of the day, Daily News reporters were caught in a small, gloomy air pocket between organized labor and management.
Unlike most of the paper's other nine unions, the Newspaper Guild had not been at war with management, nor had it been accused by the newspaper's owners of protecting unneeded jobs.
So yesterday the Guild needed some time before deciding to strike.
While waiting, almost all the reporters, editors, classified advertising salespeople and others who belong to the Guild had honored the picket line.
Many spent the morning outside the Daily News building on East 42d Street, idly standing apart from the small phalanx of pressmen marching behind blue police barricades nearby.
Seven floors above, higher-ranking editors who are part of management were writing stories in their place.


Maple Leafs (1-9-1) Dismiss Carpenter
The Toronto Maple Leafs, off to the worst start in their long National Hockey League history, dismissed Coach Doug Carpenter yesterday.
"Firing the coach doesn't mean we will go 10-1-1; there's still a lot of problems with this team," said John Kordic, a forward.
Another forward, Ed Olczyk, said that Carpenter wasn't solely to blame for the club's 1-9-1 record, adding, "You have to blame yourself."
Carpenter, who was let go as the Devils' coach in February 1988, compiled a 39-46-5 record with Toronto and last season directed the Leafs to their first .500 record in 11 years.


Joseph Johnson, 84; Headed Endowment For Peace Research
Joseph E. Johnson, a former president of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, died of pneumonia on Wednesday at Virginia Baptist Hospital in Lynchburg, Va.
He was 84 years old and lived in Lynchburg.
Mr.
Johnson's long career in international affairs included service in the State Department and several missions for the United Nations, most notably in the early 1960's as a special representative of the Concilition Commission for Palestine, for which he conducted an extensive study of the refugee problem in the Middle East.
In 1969 he was an alternate United States representative to the General Assembly.


Horizon Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.87
8.00
8.61
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.16
7.21
7.79
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.11
7.16
7.64
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.47
8.46
7.94
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.77
8.75
7.94
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.85
9.85
9.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS*
7.72
7.73
7.40
*Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Maple Leafs (1-9-1) Dismiss Carpenter
The Toronto Maple Leafs, off to the worst start in their long National Hockey League history, dismissed Coach Doug Carpenter yesterday.
"Firing the coach doesn't mean we will go 10-1-1; there's still a lot of problems with this team," said John Kordic, a forward.
Another forward, Ed Olczyk, said that Carpenter wasn't solely to blame for the club's 1-9-1 record, adding, "You have to blame yourself."
Carpenter, who was let go as the Devils' coach in February 1988, compiled a 39-46-5 record with Toronto and last season directed the Leafs to their first .500 record in 11 years.


Castoffs Find Home With Giants
The select club has Ottis Anderson, Matt Cavanaugh and Matt Bahr on offense and Everson Walls, Dave Duerson, Steve DeOssie, Johnie Cooks and Lawrence McGrew on defense.
They are the Golden Oldies, Giants who did well with their previous National Football League teams but had become expendable.
Over the last five seasons, they have found a home with the Giants.
Anderson, Bahr, Walls, DeOssie and Cooks will start Sunday when the Giants (6-0) play the Washington Redskins (4-2) in a key division game at Giants Stadium.
Duerson has acquired additional responsibilities in the nickel defense.
McGrew, a Giant only one week, may get work in the nickel.
On the sideline during a game, Cavanaugh, the third-string quarterback, becomes eyes and ears for Phil Simms, the starter.
They have more in common than age, experience and availability.
They are all "good citizens," players with reputations for working well within a team's framework and staying out of trouble after hours.
Most of them came from the Giants' short list, a list of two or three veteran free agents at each position who are available immediately if a need arises.
The list is the product of weekly meetings between Bill Parcells, the head coach, and Tim Rooney, the director of pro personnel.
"We make sure we have enough veterans on the list to get us by," Rooney said, "people who have done it before and can fit into our system and do it Sunday after Sunday. You'll have a tough time depending on rookies to do it for you. We've taken the best guy at the moment. We've had needs, usually caused by injuries or young kids not ready to play, so you bring in the older guys. They've shown over the years that they're good players, mostly on winning teams." Wisdom and Experience
This year, the Giants signed Bahr, Duerson and McGrew to replace injured players, Walls because he was a wise veteran cornerback and Cavanaugh because they wanted another experienced quarterback.
Bahr and Cavanaugh came to the Giants when they were 34 years old, McGrew at 33, Walls and Cooks at 30, Anderson and Duerson at 29, DeOssie at 27.
Bahr found the Giants different in many ways from his former team, the Cleveland Browns.
"The Giants have a unique personality," he said.
"There's great enthusiasm among the players. Here, it's not so much savoring the win as desiring it. There's great focus on getting that win and great satisfaction when it's achieved."
Walls played nine seasons for the Dallas Cowboys before Jimmy Johnson, after his first season as coach, decided to make changes.
When he waived Walls, the Giants signed him.
He has become the Giants' starting right cornerback.
"Considering how strict and uniform the Cowboys have been," he said, "this is a breath of fresh air. The Cowboys wanted you to dress a certain way. On Saturday, you always had to stay all day in the hotel. On Sunday, you always had to ride the bus to the game. With the Giants, it's how you play.
"Dallas didn't pick up many veterans from other teams, and when they did they didn't get much playing time. They accept new guys here."
The Giants have accepted most new players quickly.
For Cooks, it took time.
When the Indianapolis Colts waived him in 1988 to save money, the Giants quickly signed him.
There was jealousy on the Giants because he had become their third highest-paid linebacker behind Lawrence Taylor and Carl Banks.
And in a two-week span, the Giants dropped Byron Hunt and Andy Headen, both veteran linebackers.
"I wasn't accepted right away," Cooks said, "It was like I broke up the family. They put you in a hotel and nobody is coming to help you. But when you come to a strange place and you just don't fit in, you have to prove yourself. Once they saw I could play, they started to come around. It had nothing to do with me. It was just that I was a new guy." Moore and Townsell Sidelined
HEMPSTEAD, L.I., Oct. 26 (Special to The New York Times) -- Neither Rob Moore, the Jets' rookie wide receiver, nor JoJo Townsell, the team's wide receiver-kick returner, worked out today and both were listed as questionable for Sunday's game in Houston against the Oilers.
Moore has a sprained ankle and Townsell has an injured toe.
Manley Wants to Return
WASHINGTON, Oct. 26 (AP) -- Dexter Manley, the former Washington Redskin defensive end, has applied to Comissioner Paul Tagliabue to lift his lifetime ban for violating the National Football League's substance-abuse policy, Bob Woolf, Manley's attorney, said today.
Tagliabue has said he would consider reinstating the 10-year veteran after Nov. 18, the first anniversary of Manley's ban for using cocaine.


Pathe and MGM Delay Deal Again
The MGM/UA Communications Corporation and the Pathe Communications Corporation said today that they had again delayed the closing of Pathe's $1.3 billion deal to acquire MGM.
The companies said in a statement that the closing would be delayed until Tuesday "to complete the transfer of funds necessary to consummate the merger and to permit finalization of the closing documentation."
The companies had previously said the deal would close today, after extending the initial deadline from last Tuesday.
Both companies have said in recent days that there are no big roadblocks to completing the deal, which has been plagued for months by Pathe's inability to raise all the necessary financing.Pathe, which is controlled by Giancarlo Parretti, the Italian investor, said Monday that all the financing was in place.
Pathe has announced that it is raising $325 million by selling television and home video rights to MGM and United Artists movies, and that it has raised an additional $600 million from foreign affiliates of Pathe.
Pathe said the remaining money would come from a series of as-yet-unannounced deals involving MGM/ UA's assets, but it did not give details of those arrangements.
"We are confident the funds will be in place and the merger will close by Tuesday," said Craig Parsons, a spokesman for Pathe.
Mary Hardy, a spokeswoman for MGM/UA, did not return a phone call.


Uni-Marts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gorman-Rupp Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; De Larrocha, Olde Times And Mozart
On Dec. 29, 1965, a Spanish pianist named Alicia de Larrocha made her debut with the New York Philharmonic.
To celebrate the 25th anniversary of that occasion, the orchestra on Thursday night offered the first of four concerts at Avery Fisher Hall in which Miss de Larrocha plays her debut vehicle, the Mozart Concerto No. 23 in A (K. 488), along with one of her best-known show pieces, Falla's "Nights in the Gardens of Spain."
The program is conducted by Erich Leinsdorf, who chose to preface the Mozart with Wagner's "Siegfried Idyll" and to conclude things with Ravel's "Rapsodie Espagnol." It will be repeated tonight at 8 and Tuesday at 7:30 P.M.


Books of The Times; Man, Nature and Everyday Activities in Verse
Collected Poems 1939-1989  By William Jay Smith  254 pages.
Charles Scribner's Sons. $24.95.
The Eagle's Mile By James Dickey  66 pages.
Wesleyan University  Press/University Press of New England.  20 hard cover, $9.95 paper.
The far-reaching themes and variety of styles in William Jay Smith's poetry prove that commonplace ideas and everyday activities can be reinvented by lyrical language that enlightens and entertains the reader.
His magical "Collected Poems" span a half-century of his life and the life of the nation, adding up to a literary and social history of our times in verse.


Psychemedics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Guilford Mills reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Your Money; Tax Plan Offers More Complexity
The complexity of the long-awaited tax package worked out by Congressional and White House negotiators could force many well-off taxpayers to scrutinize almost every facet of their finances for possible savings, even though there appears to be little they can do to cut much from their bill, the experts say.
Among the dicey sets of alternatives that some very well-off taxpayers would need to consider are accelerating income, like year-end bonuses, into 1990 and paying the tax next April at a lower rate or taking the income in 1991 and paying the tax at a higher rate in April 1992 but having the use of the tax money owed for an additional year.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the first-quarter earnings of Sun Microsystems Inc. referred incorrectly to the company's recent projections for revenue growth.
Sun forecasts growth of 20 to 30 percent for this fiscal year, down from a previous projection, not last year's growth, of 30 to 35 percent.
Sun revenues grew 39 percent in its last fiscal year.


Healthdyne reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coping: With Lighting
Light is an essential element of safety at home.
You don't have to redecorate to improve lighting, but anytime changes are made, it's a good idea to think about how to improve what already exists.
Now that darkness falls earlier, give outdoor lighting extra thought.
Indoors, lighting in kitchens and bathrooms should go beyond utilitarian purposes since these areas have become centers for relaxation.


Anti-Florio Fever Is Giving A Headache to a Democrat
By many traditional political measures, Rob Andrews ought to be running away in the race for the First Congressional District seat.
He has been campaigning virtually nonstop for more than a year, while his opponent, Dan Mangini, took time off from work only this month to campaign full time.
Mr.
Andrews is the Democrat in a heavily Democratic district, and he has raised more than $300,000, to Mr.
Mangini's $30,000.


Review/Theater; Metaphysics and Crime
In the opening sequences of "Polygraph," a play that is billed by its creators as a "metaphysical detective story," many striking but seemingly unrelated images are introduced onto the stage.
A skeleton lies in front of a low brick wall behind which a criminologist (Pierre Auger) engages in an overlapping conversation with a waiter (Marc Beland).
Their monologues merge into a dialogue that compares the flow of blood to the human heart to the traffic routes in and out of East Berlin.
Moments later, an actress (Marie Brassard) auditioning for a movie, confesses that her goal is to play the title role in "Hamlet." The waiter reappears in a restaurant frantically clearing tables and sniffing cocaine and later in a bar practicing bondage and flagellation.
Over the next 90 minutes, the criminologist, the actress and the waiter are revealed to be enmeshed in a triangle.
The actress has been chosen to play the lead role in a movie depicting the unsolved murder of a woman in Montreal several years earlier.
It emerges that the waiter, who lives in an apartment on the other side of a wall from the actress, was originally suspected of the crime.
It also emerges that the polygraph test that helped clear him of suspicion was administered by the criminologist, who in an attempt to trick him had lied to him about the results.
The criminologist, who learned his techniques of interrogation in East Berlin, becomes romantically involved with the actress, who in turn has an affair with the waiter.


Vencor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Asbestos Fibers Force 2 Schools To Double Up
A botched asbestos-removal program has shut down Hempstead High School, forcing its 1,240 students out of the building and into split sessions in the district's middle school.
Many students in this poor, already troubled district have lost up to six weeks of school and are straining to catch up in crowded classrooms with sparse supplies; others have missed out on extra-curricular clubs or have had to quit after-school jobs.


INSIDE
U.S. Warns of Terror Attack On Ship in Mediterranean
In an unusually explicit warning, the State Department said it had "specific and credible" information that there was a possibility of a terrorist attack against a passenger ship or a passenger plane in the eastern Mediterranean and that it could come "at any time." Page 4.
Saudi Bark Conciliation
King Fahd issued a hawkish statement reasserting Saudi demands for an end to the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait and silencing public discussion of compromises.
Page 4.
New Layoff Projections
The Dinkins administration warned of 25,000 to 35,000 layoffs - its grimmest prediction yet.
Page 25.


Princeton Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Result Plus
HORSE RACING  No. 2,000 for Krone
Julie Krone, who has won more races than any other female jockey, won her 2,000th race last night.
She reached the milestone at the Meadowlands by guiding Rainbow Quartz to a 1 1/2-length victory in the seventh race.
Krone broke Rainbow Quartz to the lead and went head and head with Owens Troupe for the first three-quarters of a mile before drawing away in the stretch.
Rainbow Quartz ran the mile in 1:37 3/5 and paid $6.40 for $2 to win.
Krone, the leading rider at the Meadowlands with 50 victories in 241 starts through the seventh race, entered the evening with 1,998 career triumphs.
She won the third race aboard Winter Dream.
Krone, 27, of Eatontown, N.J., broke Patty Cooksey's record of 1,205 victories by a female jockey on March 6, 1988, at Aqueduct.
The record for all jockeys is held by Willie Shoemaker, who won more than 8,800 races before he retired this year.
N.H.L.
Wings Outshoot Stars
Rick Zombo and Sergei Fedorov scored goals eight seconds apart in the third period last night as Detroit beat Minnesota, 8-6, keeping the Red Wings undefeated at home and the North Stars without a victory on the road.
The Red Wings (6-3-2) tied a club record set in 1962 with their sixth consecutive home victory to start a season.
They are 0-3-2 on the road.
The North Stars (2-7-2) are 0-5-1 on the road. (AP) CROSS-COUNTRY  Princeton Runner Wins
Bill Burke of Princeton took the lead at Cemetery Hill and went on to register a 35-yard victory over Jim Gibson of Yale, the defender, in the 54th annual Heptagonal Games Association cross-country championships yesterday at Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx.
Burke covered the five-mile course in 24 minutes 46.49 seconds.
Gibson was timed in 24:53.95.
Dartmouth captured the team title for an unprecedented seventh consecutive year with 62 points.
In the women's race, over a 3.1-mile course, Stephanie Best of Cornell was the individual winner in 17:32.04.
Penn won the team title.
TENNIS  Sampras Advances
Pete Sampras beat David Wheaton, 7-6, 7-5, 6-4, in a tight serve-and-volley duel yesterday to reach the semifinals of the Stockholm Open.
Aleksandr Volkov of the Soviet Union joined Sampras in the semifinals, beating Nicklas Kulti of Sweden, 6-2, 6-1. (AP) Graf in Semifinals: Steffi Graf scored her 12th consecutive victory over Nathalie Tauziat yesterday, winning by 6-2, 6-4 and moving into the semifinals of an indoor tournament in Brighton, England.
Helena Sukova also moved into the semifinals with a 6-1, 6-1 victory over Sara Gomer. (AP)


CTS Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


OHM Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Atlantic Energy reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Delta Woodside Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Digital Systems International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
American General Corp., Houston, an insurance and financial services company, said its board had set a deadline of Dec. 3 for the submission of bids to acquire the company or its Home Services Insurance companies. *
Bankeast Corp., Manchester, N.H., said it had filed voluntary Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization proceedings to protect it from two noteholders who filed suit earlier in the month seeking to secure $13 million in subordinated debentures issued by Bankeast in 1988.
The company said it does not expect the filing to affect its operations. *
CMS Energy Corp., Dearborn, Mich., will repurchase an additional five million common shares beyond the 825,000 acquired since Aug. 1. *
Energy Service Co., Inc., Houston, an oil and gas drilling company, and R. D. Smith &amp; Co. said they had bought the remaining 31.3 percent of senior debt and equity securities of Penrod Drilling Co., Dallas, for about $161 million.
The two companies now own 100 percent of the debt. *
General Motors Corp.'s GMC Truck Division has set a suggested base price of $25,500 on its new high-performance pickup truck for 1991, the Syclone. *
Nerco Inc., Portland, Ore., a coal, silver, gold and energy company, said its minerals unit was suspending mining activities at the Candelaria silver mine in Nevada and has begun to reduce the mine's work force, with about 170 positions to be cut in the next 30 days. *
Ratners Group P.L.C., London, a jewelry retailer, has completed its merger with Kay Jewelers Inc., Alexandria, Va. *
Riverside Group Inc., Jacksonville, Fla., an insurance holding company, said it would acquire American Founders Life Insurance Co., an affiliate of Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, which is currently under the management of the U.S.
Resolution Trust Corp.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Sara Lee Corp., Chicago, a frozen foods and desserts company, will repurchase eight million of 230.8 million common shares outstanding. *
Security Pacific National Bank, Los Angeles, said its warrant to acquire common shares of HAL Inc., Honolulu, an operator of airports and flying fields, had been increased to 2,069,434 shares. *
Tenneco Inc., Houston, an energy company, said its Packaging Corp. of America subsidiary had acquired Dixie Container Corp., Richmond, for undisclosed terms.


Review/Pop; Retrospective By Maniacs Is a First
On Tuesday night at the Beacon Theater, 10,000 Maniacs became the first 1980's band to stage its own retrospective.
That may seem premature, but the band's "Time Capsule Tour" follows the release of "Hope Chest" (Elektra), a compilation of songs originally released on independent labels in 1982 and 1983.
The band is touring with John Lombardo, who quit 10,000 Maniacs just before the band found a wide audience with the 1987 album "In My Tribe." Mr.
Lombardo opened the concert with his current group and sat in with 10,000 Maniacs on older songs.
The concert revealed the differences between early and current 10,000 Maniacs.
It has always been a folk-rock band, steeped in the British folk-rock of the 1970's, with songs that revolve around Natalie Merchant's reedy voice and bookish lyrics.
But where the current 10,000 Maniacs concentrates on stately, chiming songs, the early band was more eclectic, dipping into reggae for one song, garage-rock stomps for another, a Caribbean lilt in a third.


Chronicle
WANG ZHEN, the 82-year old Vice President of China, has been hospitalized, according to The Associated Press in Beijing.
His condition was not described in a brief official report that said Mr.
Wang had received a delegation from the Japanese Friendship Association in his hospital room on Thursday.
An unofficial report circulating in Beijing is that Mr.
Wang, who was last seen in public Aug. 5, broke his leg when PENG ZHEN , 88, the former chairman of the National People's Congress, fell on him.
A former political commissar, Mr.
Wang is a conservative ideologue who rose through the military and is considered one of the most outspoken hard-liners in the Chinese Government.


U.S. Warns of Possible Terrorist Attack on a Ship
The State Department issued an unusually explicit warning tonight of a possible terrorist attack against a passenger ship in the eastern Mediterranean, saying that "such an operation may be undertaken at any time."
Although the department has issued a number of advisories of terrorist dangers since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and the American military buildup in Saudi Arabia, this one was the most direct and detailed.


Curfew and Traffic Bans Set In Temple Dispute in India
Local officials tonight barred all traffic from roads leading to a site in northern India that is attracting Hindu fundamentalists intent on moving a Muslim mosque and beginning construction of a Hindu temple in its place by next Tuesday.
As the deadline set by the Hindu nationalists approached, local officials also imposed an indefinite curfew on the hillside town of Ayodhya, situated 750 miles southeast of here in the populous state of Uttar Pradesh, and on the nearby larger city of Faizabad.
The controversy over the temple is threatening to topple the Government of Prime Minister V. P. Singh.


Hornbeck Offshore Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alaska Air Group To Reduce Staff
Alaska Air Group Inc. said it was reducing its management staff by 46 and leaving 39 other positions unfilled because of high jet fuel costs and a weakening economy.
The cuts, effective Nov. 9, are expected to save about $3.3 million a year.
"Unfortunately, dramatic increases in jet fuel prices triggered this action,' said an official of Alaska Airlines, the company's main operating unit. He said no further reductions were expected. Alaska Airlines currently employs 6,500 people, including 980 managers. The company's stock fell 62.5 cents today, to $16.50, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Married With Taxes
To the Editor:
In response to Charles F. McLaughlin's letter ("Relief for Singles," Oct. 16), the discrimination in the Federal income tax system is against married people, not singles!
Expanding on Mr.
McLaughlin's example of adjusted gross income of $35,000 in 1989, a single person taking the standard deduction would indeed have paid a Federal income tax of $5,954.
Likewise, an unmarried couple earning a combined adjusted gross income of $70,000 ($35,000 each) would have paid a total tax of $11,908 (i.e., $5,954 per person).
A married couple earning the same amount, on the other hand, would have paid a combined Federal income tax of $13,000, or $6,500 each.
In other words, the married couple would have paid $1,092 more in taxes than the unmarried couple.
DONNA A. TROIANO Stamford, Conn., Oct. 17, 1990


Colbert Indicted
A Federal grand jury in San Diego has indicted Nate Colbert, the former Padres slugger, on charges that he fraudulently obtained $138,000 in bank loans.
An arrest warrant, issued Thursday, accused the 44-year-old Colbert of listing real estate he did not own as collateral for loans between February 1988 and September 1989.
If convicted of all charges, Colbert, the Padres' career home run leader with 163 in six seasons, could receive up to 48 years in prison and fines totaling $3 million.
Colbert was dismissed Wednesday as the batting coach of the Padres' Class A California League affiliate. (AP)


Supercomputing Solutions reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reviews/Dance; Rebecca Kelly's Decade of Growth
Rebecca Kelly and her husband, Craig Brashear, were young dancers in 1979 when they formed the Rebecca Kelly Dance Company.
In that period, it was easier to admire their commitment and sincerity than Miss Kelly's somewhat bland choreography, for which the troupe was obviously an outlet.
The distance Miss Kelly has traveled since that time was impressive on Thursday night when her company opened a short season (through tonight) at Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street.
The five pieces were full of ideas, and the best part was that they included movement ideas.
In two trios, "Talata" and "Arbitra," Miss Kelly choreographs with boldness and imagination.


Traffic Alert
Hudson Street Harvest Festival: Hudson Street will be closed today from Leroy to Bethune Street from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Safety Note
The New York City Fire Department recommends that smoke alarm batteries be changed twice yearly, at the start and the end of daylight time.
The date this autumn is tomorrow.


Teppco Partners L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Two Big Cities
Whether or not it's true that New York is dying, as widely advertised, Paris can claim to be proof that big cities don't have to.
It runs well, delivering the amenities and pleasures of urban life perhaps better than any metropolis in the world.
The first time I came to live here, in the mid-1960's, a New York friend commiserated.
"It's dirty," he said.


Niagara Mohawk Power Corp. reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30


Reviews/Music; An Italian Festival Of Contemporary Work
Query an American, even a musically informed one, about contemporary Italian music, and after mention of a few works by Luciano Berio and another compositionless name or two, the response is likely to trail off.
Despite an occasional flurry of interest, as in a week of Italian music presented by New York University two years ago, the field remains little known.
This week brought more concentrated exposure, a New York Festival of Contemporary Music From Italy, presented by Settembre Musica, an annual monthlong event in Turin, founded in 1978.
For a time it looked as though interest might run even higher by now, with three significant Berio offerings scheduled during the month in New York.
But though the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam carried through with the New York premiere of Mr.
Berio's "Rendering" and Continuum is promising an evening of the composer's music on Monday at Alice Tully Hall, Carnegie Hall was forced to cancel the major event, a concert presentation of his opera "La Vera Storia."


Lumex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Baker Visiting Saudis Soon To Coordinate Next Steps
The White House said tonight that Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d would soon go to Saudi Arabia to coordinate with the Saudis on the next steps toward resolving the Persian Gulf crisis.
Speaking to reporters in Los Angeles, where President Bush was on an election campaign swing, the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said the visit would involve "a general discussion of the situation in the gulf."


Homeowners Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fahnestock Viner reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chrysler-Fiat Talks
The chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, Lee A. Iacocca, said he had "nothing to report" on the status of negotiations with Fiat S.p.A. and was surprised by Fiat's indications that a deal might be near.
Mr.
Iacocca, speaking at a ceremony at Chrysler's new technical center, said talks with the Italian company centered on "lots and lots of different projects." He added, "Nothing has come into fruition." Fiat's chairman, Giovanni Agnelli, suggested last week that Chrysler and Fiat were near some sort of business arrangement.


Fort Howard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Opera; Trying to Unravel a Tangled Plot
Every new production of Verdi's "Ballo in Maschera" is an exercise in creative compromise, but the version presented by the Metropolitan Opera on Thursday evening was a reminder that too much exercise can be fatal.
The Piero Faggioni staging, having begun with a feeble cliche (a commedia dell'arte troupe miming away during the overture), stumbled on to one absurdity after another.
The intent may have been to straighten out a famously tangled scenario; the effect was to spotlight every inconsistency in one of the composer's greatest scores.
The heavy-handed direction was a close match, on this night, for the conducting and much of the singing.
James Levine took a pulverizing approach that accentuated the obvious and drove over some of the score's most delicious moments like a runaway truck.
Luciano Pavarotti, as King Gustav, seemed intent on demonstrating that his peerless tenor had lost none of its trumpeting power.
He did so, and that was enough to set off several extended ovations.


Jersey Symphony, Its State Aid Cut, Trims Season
The New Jersey Symphony has announced it is canceling 32 concerts of the 1990-91 season because of cutbacks in state aid.
The orchestra's subscription series of 41 concerts, spread among 7 New Jersey venues, will be largely untouched, as will its 16 chamber orchestra events.
Excised will be 4 pre-Christmas performances of Handel's "Messiah" and the 8 winter pops concerts.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5
Israel's report on the shooting deaths of 21 Palestinians in Jerusalem criticized senior Israeli police commanders for being unprepared but concluded that the police who fired the shots were blameless.
Page 1
Excerpts from the Israeli commission's report 5
Saudi Arabia remains committed against Iraq, King Fahd said, ordering an end to further conciliatory-sounding remarks to Iraq like those made earlier this week by his brother, the Defense Minister. 4
Secretary of State James Baker will go to Saudi Arabia soon to counter Saddam Hussein's efforts to split the coalition confronting Iraq and to coordinate with the Saudis the next steps in resolving the crisis. 4
A warning of a terrorist attack against a passenger ship in the eastern Mediterranean was issued by the State Department.
The warning was unusually explicit. 4
A new Security Council resolution declaring Iraq responsible for financial losses caused by the invasion and ordering governments to present evidence of war crimes moved close to approval. 5
Pamphlet tells American soldiers what to say and not say 4
Pakistan's election was mostly fair, and any irregularities that did occur did not significantly affect the outcome, an international observer delegation said. 3
East German Communist officials illegally transferred $70 million to Moscow, former party leaders admitted.
Two officials were arrested in connection with the incident. 3
President Gorbachev visited Spain on the first of a series of trips abroad aimed at drumming up Western support for his program of economic and political change. 3
Konin Journal: Poland's uncharted campaign trail 2  National 6-10, 24
New standards for health insurance purchased by 23 million elderly Americans to supplement coverage provided through Medicare were established by House and Senate negotiators. 1
News analysis: The tax compromise seems at first glance to revive the comatose tax shelter industry, but experts say it will make it more difficult to exploit tax gimmicks. 1
The budget deal fell short of its goal of reducing the Federal deficit by $500 billion over five years.
As votes on the plan neared, lawmakers found the deal would cut $490 billion. 8
The budget deficit was $220.4 billion for 1990, just under the record of $221.2 billion in 1986, the Treasury Department announced.
The deficit was 45 percent higher than in 1989. 8
Now President Bush hits the trail "Harry Truman-style" 9
A tentative child care measure was approved by House and Senate negotiators.
The plan would provide grants to states to subsidize care programs and extend tax credits for low-income families with children. 10
The 101st Congress lurches toward adjourment -- in a hurry 9
Major legislation moves ahead in both houses of Congress 9
An agreement on aviation legislation was reached by White House and Congressional negotiators that would eliminate most of the airlines' noisier passenger jets from the skies by the turn of the century. 1
Pilots who flew jet while intoxicated are sentenced to prison 6
Mayor Marion Barry was sentenced by a Federal judge to six months in prison and a year on probation for his conviction on a misdemeanor charge of possessing cocaine. 1
The Minnesota gubernatorial race took a strange twist when the Republican candidate, Jon Grunseth, called a news conference to announce his withdrawal amid charges of sexual misdeeds, then changed his mind. 6
A repair job on the Hubble telescope by space shuttle astronauts is being considered by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, which faces pressure from astronomers to fix the $1.5 billion telescope. 7
Scientists say they have grown hair in a test tube 24  Regional 25-28
The Daily News struggled to publish as it began dismissing the members of nine unions that decided to strike.
An army of nonunion writers, editors, pressmen and drivers was flown in from across the country. 1
News analysis: The Daily News had been hoping for and perhaps even trying to provoke a strike that the paper's labor leaders had sought desparately to avoid. 1
Daily News reporters caught between labor and management 26
Layoffs of up to 35,000 workers could be needed if the city keeps its commitment for a 5.5 percent raise for teachers and gives anything comparable to other workers, the Dinkins administration warned. 1
The Board of Education agreed to cut the full $94 million from its budget, as requested by Mayor Dinkins.
School officials have said the cuts could mean hundreds of layoffs and reductions of some programs. 25
After spending $1 million, Governor Cuomo still has $5 million 27 The Dime Savings Bank reports loss and suspends dividends 31
A dress code at a Brooklyn school received a hearty endorsement from the people it affects the most: the students.
Frank Mickens, the principal at Boys and Girls High School, wants all boys to wear ties. 25
C. Vernon Mason's request to be defendant's lawyer is rejected 27
Hempstead High School was closed because of a botched asbestos-removal program.
Students in the Long Island school district have been forced to attend split sessions in the district's middle school. 25
The race for Jim Florio's old seat in New Jersey's First Congressional District ought to belong to Bob Andrews, the Democrat, but his opponent, Dan Mangini, is gaining ground by running against Mr.
Florio. 25
Census workers to revisit homes falsely counted in New Jersey 27
Karpov has advantage as seventh game of match adjourns 28  Business Digest 31  Arts/Entertainment
"Godfather III" produces unrest 11
Jersey Symphony trims season 11
Theater: "Polygraph" 12
Film: "Graveyard Shift" 12
Music: "Un Ballo in Maschera" 11
An anniversary for de Larrocha 13
Italian contemporary festival 15
Clurman's New York Concert Singers 15
10,000 Maniacs retrospective 17
Roy Hargrove, jazz trumpeter 17
Dance: Rebecca Kelly troupe 14
JoAnn Fregalette Jansen 14
Books: Poetry by William Jay Smith and James Dickey 16  Consumer's World 48
How to pay the bills when you can't
The storm over check printing
Coping with lighting for safety  Obituaries
William S. Paley, ex-chairman of CBS Inc.  1
Major (Mule) Holley, bassist 28
Joseph Johnson, headed endowment for peace research 28 Sports
Basketball: Coleman passes physical 45
Knicks need consistency from Wilkins 45
Boxing: "Other guy" now champion 43
Column: Anderson on the fight 43
Football: Castoffs find home with Giants 43
Hofstra a Division III terror 45
Hockey: Gretzky gets 2,000th point 43
Horse Racing: Gorgeous scratched 43  Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials 22
Escalation, 1990 style
Cleaner air, at last
AIDS, abortion and fairness
N.Y. elections bury democracy
Letters 22
Russell Baker: Ethicizationism 23
Flora Lewis: Two big cities 23
Beatriz Manz: In Guatemala, no one is safe 23
Josh Zinner: Not even Guatemala's children are safe 23
Peter D. Salins: New York City will rise again 23


Young People's Concert
David Gilbert is to conduct the New York Philharmonic in a Young People's Concert at Avery Fisher Hall at 2 P.M. today.
The program includes Britten's "Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra," the Waltz from Tchaikovsky's Serenade for Strings, and works by Mozart and Paul Hoffer.
Tickets are $6 to $20.
Information: 874-6770.


U.S. Deficit for 1990 Surged to Near-Record $220.4 Billion, but How Bad Is That?
Closing the books on 1990, the Treasury Department made it official yesterday: the budget deficit, after dwindling to manageable proportions in the late 1980's, surged to a near-record $220.4 billion in the last fiscal year.
But while the prospect of $200-billion-plus deficits is scaring Congress and the White House into working out a record deficit-reduction package, economists say the huge number suggests more damage to the economy and to the well-being of Americans than has actually occurred.


Silicon General Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cross (A.T.) Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Betz Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Superior Teletec Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 23


Hooper Holmes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about the bribery conviction of a South Carolina legislator described the General Assembly incorrectly in some copies.
It is South Carolina's full legislature, not the lower house.


Hanson in Deal With Publicker
Hanson Industries, the United States arm of Hanson P.L.C. of Britain, signed an agreement to sell 10 businesses to Publicker Industries for a total of $36 million in cash.
Hanson said these businesses, which Hanson acquired as part of its acquisition of United States industries in 1984 and of Kidde Inc. in 1987, had revenues of $80.6 million and operating profits of $2.1 million for the fiscal year that ended on Sept. 30, 1989.
The 10 companies, in a variety of manufacturing, distribution and service industries, are Associated Testing Laboratories Inc., Bright Star Industries Inc., Chatas Glass, Douglas Randall, Fenwal Electronics Inc., Greenwald Industries, Kidde Systems Inc, Masterview Windows, Nevco Housewares Inc. and Orr-Shelen-Mayeron Associates.


How to Pay the Bills When You Can't
With layoffs high and money tight, more and more consumers are finding it hard to make their monthly payments on credit cards and installment loans.


Rally in Oil Is Short-Lived; Crude Closes $1.24 Lower
Oil prices seesawed on the futures market yesterday, closing more than $1 a barrel lower after a rally based on war fears ran out of steam and traders began to sell.
"They've taken it all over the place," said Thomas P. Blakeslee, an energy analyst with Pegasus Econometric Group in Hoboken, N.J.
"The market is so hungry for news, and without the rumors and news it's come off slightly."


Anadarko Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


His Trainers Let Buster Be the Boss
On the morning after boxing's Humpty Dumpty heavyweight champion, James (Buster) Douglas, took a great fall, his trainers, J. D. McCauley and John Russell, were trying to put together what Evander Holyfield had put asunder.
But the 246-pound dethroned champion's two trainers hadn't put him together in the first place because each was not what a trainer is supposed to be: the boss.
Ever since Cain and Abel headlined the first main event, a good trainer has been as responsible for raising a boxer to peak form as the boxer himself.
Often more responsible.


Jury Convicts Man Who Locked His Children in Bronx Apartment
A Bronx man who imprisoned his nine children in a filthy one-room apartment for years has been found guilty of torturing and sexually abusing them for three and a half years.
On Friday, after two and a half days of deliberations, a jury in State Supreme Court in the Bronx returned guilty verdicts on all 26 counts against Herman McMillan, a 43-year-old laborer.
He had been charged with 70 counts, comprising rape, sodomy, sexual abuse, reckless endangerment and assault, but the judge combined the counts and charged the jury on 26.
Mr.
McMillan, who is to be sentenced on Nov. 21 by Justice John Collins, faces 30 to 70 years in prison, said Steven Reed, a spokesman for the Bronx District Attorney's office.


Virus Linked to Pollution Is Killing Hundreds of Dolphins in Mediterranean
Hundreds of dead and dying dolphins are washing ashore in Spain, France and Italy, victims of a virus that some scientists believe is linked to the heavy pollution of the western Mediterranean.
The authorities in the three countries are reporting numerous strandings, and observers in aircraft and boats have spotted many other carcasses afloat.
The dolphins are also drifting ashore here along the rocks and beaches around Toulon, some dead, some still alive but moribund.


Sports People; Settlement of Suit
THE lawyer for the former University of Kentucky assistant basketball coach Dwayne Casey said yesterday in Lexington, Ky., that a settlement had been reached in Casey's $6.9 million lawsuit against Emery Air Freight.
The lawyer, Joe Bill Campbell, declined to reveal details of the settlement but Casey, in an interview with WKYT-TV, described it as "healthy." Emery officials could not be reached for comment.
The case was scheduled to go to trial Nov. 6.
The agreement must be approved by United States District Court Judge Karl S. Forester.
Casey sued Emery over its handling of an envelope that allegedly popped open at an Emery terminal in Los Angeles.
Emery employees have said they discovered $1,000 in cash and a videotape inside the envelope, which had been sent to the father of a Kentucky basketball recruit in Los Angeles.
The envelope bore Casey's name where the return address was listed.
The Emery claim sparked an investigation of the Kentucky basketball program by the National Collegiate Athletic Association and led to both the school and Casey being placed on probation.
Casey has said he did not put money into the package, and has contended that Emery defamed his character and invaded his privacy. (AP)


Lawmakers Maintain Coastal Drilling Limits
In the first clear sign that the Persian Gulf crisis has not reversed Congress's aversion to offshore oil and gas drilling, lawmakers agreed to keep vast tracts off limits to exploration.
Environmentalists were elated; the oil industry was dismayed.


Low-Priced Hi-Fi Trots Out Upscale Technical Features
WITH THE ECONOMY sliding under a cloud, the audio industry is adjusting to darker days and more attention is being given to low-cost equipment.
In the past, little thought was squandered on inexpensive models.
Most were designed by rote.
Now, by contrast, some bottom-priced sound gear is being spruced up with top-rank engineering in hopes of attracting otherwise reluctant buyers.


Budget Fight Hinders Races for Congress
THE shortest election campaign period in the modern history of the House of Representatives has frustrated incumbents fearful of an angry electorate, impeded the efforts of challengers facing long odds under the best of circumstances and aggravated the organizers of debates.
Members of Congress, who had planned on at least a month of uninterrupted campaigning in their bids for re-election, have only 10 days to convince voters that the "mess in Washington," as challengers described the bitter and drawn-out negotiations over a Federal budget, was not their doing.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf Additional titles of interest:
ONE GORILLA: A Counting Book.
Written and illustrated by Atsuko Morozumi.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $13.95. (Ages 2 to 6) The smiling gorilla wanders through house, garden, jungle, woods, storm and sea, blissfully counting and being counted till the numbers equal 10.
Delightful.
BENEATH A BLUE UMBRELLA.
By Jack Prelutsky.
Illustrated by Garth Williams.
Greenwillow. $15.95. (Ages 4 and up) The verses are short and generally cheery, the pictures are large and delightfully bright.
This collection of 28 illustrated rhymes is a sequel of sorts to "Ride a Purple Pelican."


Campus Life: Alabama; For Homecoming, A (Charred) Slice Of the Civil War
When fans and alumni converged on the University of Alabama campus for homecoming this weekend, they were able to see more than a football game between the Crimson Tide and Penn State University.
There was also a slice of Civil War history.
Amid the towering oaks and columned buildings that surround the grassy lawn of the quadrangle was the excavation site of and artifacts recovered from Madison Hall, one of the six university buildings burned on April 4, 1865, just five days before Gen.
Robert E. Lee surrendered to the Union Army at Appomattox Courthouse in Virginia.


Cruises
To the Editor: On Aug. 18 my wife and I (with four children and grandchildren) embarked in Vancouver on the Noordam of Holland America Line on a one-week cruise to Alaska.
The highlight was to be a day at Glacier Bay.
A few hours after leaving Juneau, one engine of the Noordam was disabled, and the captain decided to return to Vancouver for repairs.
The day cruising in Glacier Bay and a stop in Sitka were canceled.
We saw very little of Alaska and not one of the glaciers, the principal reason for taking this cruise.
After the captain announced that the ship was returning to Vancouver, the hotel manager, chief purser and other staff members stated that Holland America had the right to change the itinerary and that no concession or refund would be extended.
After the passengers organized in protest, they were offered a refund of three days or a one-week cruise in the Caribbean in October (the hurricane season) or a future four-day cruise from Juneau to Vancouver, the portion of the trip missed.
No compensation would be offered for air fare.
We had borne the expense of six round-trip flights from Baltimore to Vancouver.
If we chose the cash refund, we would also bear the cost of four-sevenths of the aborted cruise.
If we chose a future four-day cruise from Juneau, we would not only have paid the cost of the aborted cruise and air fare, but we would also have been obliged to purchase future transcontinental transportation.
Holland America threatened to refuse any compensation unless the passengers agreed before leaving the ship to accept one of the choices.
We accepted the cash refund -- under protest.
Holland America later extended the deadline, but most passengers had already committed themselves.
GEORGE S. BENTON  Baltimore J. Richard Skinner, director, public relations, for Holland America Line, replies: With the Aug. 16 cruise, a mechanical problem caused an itinerary change.
The passengers spent four days cruising the Inside Passage of Alaska and British Columbia, and they visited both Ketchikan and Juneau (and its backyard Mendenhall Glacier), two of Alaska's most scenic destinations.
Additionally, the Noordam arrived a day early in Vancouver and operated as a floating hotel for an evening.
At sea Holland America captains have complete authority to adjust cruise itineraries for the safety and well-being of our passengers.
Although cruise ticket contracts and all company brochures clearly state that Holland America is not required to make refunds regardless of the reason the voyage cannot be completed, we extended the three offers that Mr.
Benton mentioned.


A Few Well-Chosen Words
"Somewhere," James Salter once wrote, "the ancient clerks, amid stacks of faint interest to them, are sorting literary reputations. The work goes on endlessly and without haste. There are names passed over and names revered, names of heroes and of those long thought to be, names of every sort and level of importance." Salter was writing about his friend Irwin Shaw, whose name, once renowned, has slipped quietly from the first rank.
Where will the tireless, indifferent clerks file the name James Salter?
His readers, few in number but adamant in their conviction that he is a great writer, are confident that the author of "A Sport and a Pastime" and "Dusk: And Other Stories," the collection that won him the 1988 PEN/Faulkner Award (perhaps this country's most prestigious literary prize), will eventually take his place in the canon of American literature.
He is a writer's writer -- in the words of the critic James Wolcott, our most underrated underrated writer.
With hardly a dissenting voice, critics have praised his manifest devotion to craft, the acuity of his observation, the maturity of his vision.
Jaded editors and aspiring writers alike speak his name with reverence.
And yet, of his six books, only one has sold better than 10,000 copies in hard cover.
"Solo Faces," a taut novel about a rock climber who tests the limits of his courage, sold about 12,000 copies when it appeared in 1981.
His admirers insist that all this will soon change; the PEN/Faulkner Award, the brilliant critical reception of "Dusk," the busy proselytizing of his fans and the publication (possibly in 1992 -- Salter writes very slowly) of an eagerly anticipated memoir will push him at last into the limelight.


Alicia O'Brien Wed to Edward Eppler
Alicia O'Brien, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Ignatius O'Brien of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Edward Curtis Eppler, a son of Debora Nye Eppler of Morristown, N.J., and Jerome C. Eppler of Denver.
The Rev.
Jude Fay performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Aloysius Church in New Canaan.
Mrs.
Eppler, 28 years old, was until recently an equity trader at the Algemene Bank Nederland Capital Markets in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is the chief patent counsel for the Union Carbide Corporation in Danbury, Conn.


Club Med at Sea: New Ship, Old Themes
You expect more from a luxury cruise than a tall ship and a star to steer her by, but this is ridiculous.
They steer her strictly by computers, for one thing, all 617 rakish, stylish feet of her; and the seven great sails also go up and down by computer.
Club Med 1 has seven decks with two restaurants, five bars, a gym, two pools, a sauna, a gambling casino and Lord knows what else.
The stern of this dazzling, five-masted high-tech vessel can open up like the spout of a Morton's salt box and become a marina, disgorging a large fleet of Zodiac rafts, water-ski boats, Sunfish and the like.
Club Med 1 sails like a dream -- it never lists or heels or anything like that -- and nobody ever runs up the ratlines or hauls in the mainsail or ducks to avoid the boom.


Apartments Designed For Pragmatic Goals Economics Holds Key to Esthetics
On East 72d Street a new apartment tower of red brick, bristling with balconies, is nearing completion.
It is ringed by decorative courses, with an amply arched entrance at the base, and the four great lanterns at its top are soon to be illuminated, vaguely recalling the residential skyscrapers of the early 20th century.
Thirty-three blocks to the south, work is about to begin on a new apartment tower of green glass, with no balconies at all.
Sleekly devoid of ornamentation, it will have a sheer curtain wall and a flat top that repudiate the architectural trend of post-modern historicizing.


Sports People; Streak of Sorts
BY one measure, Ray Donaldson will set a record when he takes his position at center for the Colts when they take on the Miami Dolphins in Indianapolis today.
It will be Donaldson's 156th consecutive game, which would be a record except for one, or rather three, things.
Donaldson, who has otherwise started every Colts game since 1981, missed three games during the 1987 players strike, and as a result, the National Football League will not recognize his streak. (AP)


A Waste Of Emotion
To the Editor:
While in sympathy with C. Thomas Corwin's letter decrying Presidential assassination as a subject for Broadway musicals  [ Letters, Oct. 7 ] , I must observe that he is wasting his emotions, as this form of entertainment has long since sunk to a level of crudeness and banality.
"Theater," both here and in England in the form of something called "Amadeus," which succeeded in reducing the greatest musical giant of his time to a skinny, petulant, scatological, sex-crazed Wunderkind is capable of, nay, eager to produce obscenity in many forms.
What next?
A $50 million Winter Garden production with an indoor Magic Mountain on the stage?
SHALE DWORAN  New York


Pakistan Seeks Asian Nuclear Nonproliferation
To the Editor:
Allow me to clarify any misperceptions that may have been created about Pakistan's nuclear program by "Pakistan's Bomb: Proliferating Excuses" (editorial, Oct. 7).
Our commitment to nonproliferation is unequivocal and total.
We were among the first to express support for the Nonproliferation Treaty and, despite that treaty's inherent inequities and discriminatory character, Pakistan supported the United Nations resolution commending it.
We fully share your concern about a nuclear arms race and sincerely hope that influential countries will play a more active role in persuading India to accept some form of restraint to prevent nuclear proliferation in the region.
Pakistan firmly believes that genuine nonproliferation can only be brought about by pursuing the regional approach.
To help achieve the objective, Pakistan has offered proposals to India, including signing the nonproliferation treaty, if India agrees to do the same, as also bilateral inspection.
Let me assure your readers that we are prepared to consider any constructive proposal as long as it is nondiscriminatory and does not impinge on our sovereignty.
SHAHID MALIK  Counsellor (Political) Embassy of Pakistan Washington, Oct. 9, 1990


Beyond Bond He's Bigger Than Life
Clark Gable, John Wayne, Gary Cooper and William Holden are gone.
But there is still Sean Connery to remind moviegoers of what real stardom is all about.
At 60 he's one of the few male actors who seem bigger than life and whose very appearance in a new film seems guaranteed to draw both men and women to the box office.
And, best of all, his talent as an actor seems to be growing, with each new outing providing surprises.


Campus Life: Iowa; Soviet Students Enjoy Immersion In U.S. Culture
"Things here and in my country are coming together. That's why nothing has been a shock to us." So says Tatiana Cheremisina, one of 10 Soviet students who are spending a semester at the University of Iowa before returning home to teach English.
The 10 students are the second Soviet contingent to spend the fall semester at the university since it entered into an affiliation last year with the American Council of Teachers of Russian, which arranges foreign-study programs between the United States and the Soviet Union.


Senate Vote on Deficit-Reduction Bill
Following is the 54-to-45 roll-call vote by which the Senate voted today to approve a deficit-reduction bill containing tax increases and spending cuts for the next five years.
A yes vote was a vote to pass the bill; a no vote was a vote to defeat it.
Voting yes were 35 Democrats and 19 Republicans.
Voting no were 20 Democrats and 25 Republicans.
Senator Mark Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, did not vote.
Adams, D-Wash., yes; Akaka, D-Hawaii, yes; Armstrong, R-Colo., no.
Baucus, D-Mont., no; Bentsen, D-Texas, yes; Biden, D-Del., no; Bingaman, D-N.M., yes; Bond, R-Mo., yes; Boren, D-Okla., yes; Boschwitz, R-Minn., yes.
Bradley, D-N.J., no; Breaux, D-La., yes; Bryan, D-Nev., yes; Bumpers, D-Ark., yes; Burdick, D-N.D., yes.
Burns, R-Mont., no; Byrd, D-W.Va., yes.
Chafee, R-R.I., yes; Coats, R-Ind., no; Cochran, R-Miss., yes; Cohen, R-Me., no; Conrad, D-N.D., no; Cranston, D-Calif., yes.
D'Amato, R-N.Y., no; Danforth, R-Mo., yes; Daschle, D-S.D., yes; DeConcini, D-Ariz., no; Dixon, D-Ill., no; Dodd, D-Conn., yes; Dole, R-Kan., yes.
Domenici, R-N.M., yes; Durenberger, R-Minn., yes.
Exon, D-Neb., no; Ford, D-Ky., yes; Fowler, D-Ga., yes.
Garn, R-Utah, no; Glenn, D-Ohio, yes; Gore, D-Tenn., yes; Gorton, R-Wash., no; Graham, D-Fla., yes.
Gramm, R-Texas, no; Grassley, R-Iowa, no.
Harkin, D-Iowa, no; Hatch, R-Utah, no; Heflin, D-Ala., no; Heinz, R-Pa., yes; Helms, R-N.C., no; Hollings, D-S.C., no; Humphrey, R-N.H., no.
Inouye, D-Hawaii, yes.
Jeffords, R-Vt., yes; Johnston, D-La., no.
Kassebaum, R-Kan., yes; Kasten, R-Wis., no; Kennedy, D-Mass., yes; Kerrey, D-Neb., yes; Kerry, D-Mass., no; Kohl, D-Wis., yes.
Lautenberg, D-N.J., no; Leahy, D-Vt., yes; Levin, D-Mich., no; Lieberman, D-Conn, no; Lott, R-Miss., no; Lugar, R-Ind., yes.
Mack, R-Fla., no; McCain, R-Ariz., no; McClure, R-Idaho, no; McConnell, R-Ky., no; Metzenbaum, D-Ohio, yes.
Mikulski, D-Md., yes; Mitchell, D-Maine, yes; Moynihan, D-N.Y., yes; Murkowski, R-Alaska, no.
Nickles, R-Okla., no; Nunn, D-Ga., yes.
Packwood, R-Ore., yes; Pell, D-R.I., no; Pressler, R-S.D., no; Pryor, D-Ark., yes.
Reid, D-Nev., yes; Riegle, D-Mich., no; Robb, D-Va., yes; Rockefeller, D-W.Va., yes; Roth, R-Del., no; Rudman, R-N.H., yes.
Sanford, D-N.C., no; Sarbanes, D-Md., yes; Sasser, D-Tenn., yes; Shelby, D-Ala., no.
Simon, D-Ill., no; Simpson, R-Wyo., yes; Specter, R-Pa., yes; Stevens, R-Alaska, yes; Symms, R-Idaho, no.
Thurmond, R-S.C., yes.
Wallop, R-Wyo., no; Warner, R-Va., yes; Wilson, R-Calif., no; Wirth, D-Colo., yes.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have separate hot- and cold-water faucets on one of my bathroom sinks that drip constantly.
I have changed the washers three times, using a different brand each time, but the faucets still drip.
Otherwise, they seem to be in good condition.
Do you think this means that the faucets have to be replaced?
A.
Although you say you haved changed washer brands three times, there is the possibility that you are using the wrong type for your faucets.
The most likely problem, however, is that the seats inside the faucets are scored or marred.
This is the metal seat against which the washer presses when the water is shut off.
On some faucets, these seats are removable and can be replaced -- a special tool, something like a large Allen wrench or hex wrench, is used -- to remove the old seat and install the new one.
If the seats are not replaceable, then they can usually be ground smooth with a seat-grinding tool.
It can be purchased in all plumbing-supply outlets.
Q.
Several months ago, we developed an unusual problem: Hot water accumulates in the toilet tank when the toilet has not been flushed for some time.
We have hired plumbers and boiler repairmen, but the problem persists.
Our house is about 40 years old, with an oil burner and supplementary solar water heater.
Can you suggest what could be causing this problem?
A.
I can think of two possible causes.
Somewhere, the hot- and cold-water lines are touching each other, and the hot-water pipe is transmitting heat to the cold-water pipe.
Even more likely, there is some place where the solar hot-water supply is "backing up" into the cold-water system, or where a defective valve is allowing hot water to pass into the cold-water pipes.


Debra Rubinfeld to Wed J. M. Wolpov
The engagement of Debra S. Rubinfeld to Jeffrey Marc Wolpov, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael M. Wolpov of New York and Boca Raton, Fla., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Lester Rubinfeld of Englewood, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Rubinfeld, 23 years old, is a graduate of the University of Michigan.
She is the manager of advertising services for Slim Fast Foods in New York.
Her father is the president of Typographic Innovations, a New York graphic arts company.
Her mother, Rosalie Rubinfeld, is a school teacher in East Ramapo, N.Y.


Dipping Into the Deficit: Should We Make a Federal Case of It?
THE year was 1938.
The Great Depression had taken a turn for the worse, and President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who, through the previous five years, had tried repeatedly to balance the Federal budget, finally gave up the effort.
Among other steps, he reversed a cost-cutting order to disband the Public Works Administration.
Instead, he pumped $1 billion into the agency -- all borrowed funds -- to pay the salaries of thousands of newly hired workers.
The story is recounted in "Balanced Budgets and American Politics" by James D. Savage, a political scientist and the author of one of half a dozen books published in the last several years that analyze the present national aversion to deficits.
Rarely in American history has the outcry against deficits been as strong as it is today, especially during this fall's messy battle in Washington over deficit reduction.
In response, most of the authors of this sampling of books try to calm the citizenry.


Postings: Perfuming Monmouth;
International Flavors and Fragrances, a major New York City perfume company, already has a big stake in New Jersey's northern Monmouth County, where its has two plants and a research installation.
Now it is about to increase its presence there with the construction of a 43,000-square-foot, two-story office building on Route 36 in Hazlet.
Groundbreaking ceremonies for the $8 million structure, to be completed by the end of 1991, were held on Friday.
The company said it would make the new building the home of its United States Soap and Household Products Creative and Commercial Center, a division that creates fragrances for soaps and detergents.
It will be one of four facilities operated by International Flavors and Fragrances.
The others are manufacturing plants in Hazlet and Union Beach and a research and development division in Union Beach.
The company also operates a plant, completed in 1987, in South Brunswick, in Middlesex County.
A spokesman said the company had not yet determined how many workers would be employed at the new Hazlet office building, but 100 people will be transferred to it and the other Monmouth County facilities from the Manhattan headquarters, at 521 West 57th Street, just off 11th Avenue.
That would leave 125 in New York City.
The conceptual design for the new building is by Der Scutt Architect of Manhattan.
The architect of record is the Henderson Corporation of Raritan.


Castro Was a Hothead
KHRUSHCHEV REMEMBERS  The Glasnost Tapes.
Edited and translated by Jerrold L. Schecter with Vyacheslav V. Luchkov.
Foreword by Strobe Talbott.
Illustrated. 219 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $19.95.


Postings: 11 Stories, 84 Suites; For Young Cancer Patients
New York City's first custom-built Ronald McDonald House, to house children undergoing cancer treatment at hospitals in the city, will be built at 405 East 73d Street to replace the converted town house at 419 East 86th Street that now serves that purpose.
To be built in part with funds raised through the McDonald's fast-food chain and by tax-exempt bonds sold by the New York City Industrial Development Authority, the 11-story, 82,600-square-foot facility will provide free or inexpensive lodging for young cancer patients and their parents in 84 one-bedroom, one-bath suites.
The design is by the firm of Schuman Lichtenstein Claman Efron.
It was done with the physical and psychological problems of the young cancer patients in mind, according to the Children's Oncology Society of New York, a private, nonprofit group that will operate the house.
The building will have a large central atrium and an enclosed roof garden.
When completed in the summer of 1992, it will be the largest such facility in the country, according to the society.


Responding to Critics, S.A.T. Ponders Change
The Scholastic Aptitude Test, a college entrance exam that is a rite of passage every year for high school students, is facing a potentially major revision after criticism about its validity and perceptions of ethnic and sex bias.
The 64-year-old test, which measures mathematical and verbal skills, has been retooled several times, but never to the extent in proposals being considered by the College Board, a nonprofit organization that owns the S.A.T. and other student tests.


Opportunities in Soviet Disintegration
DESPITE the Soviet Parliament's approval of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's plan to create a market economy, the Soviet Union will not live to celebrate its 70-year anniversary in 1992.
The Soviet Union's political and economic crises are intensifying and if the forces of disintegration continue -- as I expect they will -- the Union will come apart.
By 1992, there will be no country called the Soviet Union.
In place of the old Soviet Union, new states will appear.
These states will welcome foreign investment.
For Europe and the United States, these resource-rich republics could become the new Klondike.
But to take advantage of the opportunities that will arise as the Soviet Union disintegrates, investors will have to think in terms of several diverse markets -- not one country.


Outdoors; Pros and Cons Of a New Shell
RECENTLY developed nontoxic tungsten-plastic polymer pellets for shotgun shells may enable you to use your fine old side-by-side double-barreled shotgun for waterfowling again.
But don't rush to take it from the rack and swing it on an imaginary duck.
Shells containing such pellets are being manufactured in the United Kingdom by Eley Hawk Ltd.
But the present loads, which are light, are suitable only for upland birds like woodcock, ruffed grouse and quail, birds that are smaller than ducks or geese and have less dense plumage.


Pit Bull Politician
The woman in the red dress has a look of terrible pain in her eyes, as if she's living with something too horrid to be fully explained.
"Harvey Gantt is asking you and me to approve of some pretty awful things," she says, looking directly into the camera in a television ad for Senator Jesse Helms.
"Aborting a child in the final weeks of pregnancy. Aborting a child because it's a girl instead of a boy. That's too liberal. Harvey Gantt is asking us to approve of some pretty extreme views to vote for him."


Works in Progress; Chillin'
Jim Chikato of Chikato Brothers Ice in Los Angeles employs three Japanese ice carvers, all full-time chefs who moonlight in the icehouse. (One of them, Maku Yoichi, is shown working on an avian centerpiece.) Ice-carving, apparently, is a subspecialty of many chefs in Japan, a reasonably serious art form in fact, involving rigorous training.
Yoichi, whose English is marginal, "went to school for, like, seven years," Chikato says.
"You know, he'd carve things, and the teacher would come and kick them over, shatter them and say: 'Do it again.' "
The Chikatos' custom-made ice sculptures usually cost less than $1,000.
They tend to fall into two categories: oft-requested shapes, like swans or eagles, that the sculptors can more or less do with their eyes closed ("We can pump you out a swan in an hour," Chikato says); and those that are more individualized.
"We do cars for openings of auto dealerships. Sly Stallone's wife wanted a polo player for his 40th birthday. One couple who met at U.S.C., for their wedding they wanted Tommy Trojan" -- the school symbol.
"Life-size."
Each sculpture is fashioned from 300-pound blocks of ice: 20 inches across, 10 inches thick, 40 inches tall.
The shape is roughed out with a chain saw, then refined with a variety of long-handled chisels, gouges and awls.
If the figure is to be larger than a single block, the sculptors piece blocks together, fusing them, notching them, melting them into shape.
Recently, for the forthcoming film "Edward Scissorhands," Chikato Brothers provided the director, Tim Burton, with four ice angels, likenesses of the actress Winona Ryder, each made from nine blocks of ice and weighing a ton.
"They had to be built on carts in order to transport them," Chikato says.
"We have a record of never having broken one yet. I dread the day when it happens."


Exploring the Heart of Relationships
IN "Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune," the playwright Terrence McNally explores the heart of contemporary relationships in which the easy part is what happens in bed.
It is a romantic comedy about emotional bonding in an era where having sex is a simple way to avoid getting to know the other person.
The play, which is now being presented by Theater Three in Port Jefferson, opens to darkness punctured by an unmistakable crescendo of sexual grunting and moaning.


College Football; Interception Saves Rutgers
The Rutgers defense couldn't help but feel that it had been in this situation before.
Three weeks ago, Boston College had driven 84 yards in the final minutes to overtake the Scarlet Knights with 19 seconds left.
Now, Akron -- needing a touchdown to spoil Rutgers' homecoming -- had a first down at the Rutgers 10 with 44 seconds left.
"The Boston College game was what was going through my mind," the Rutgers strong safety Malik Jackson said later.
"I just wanted a different outcome."


Pumpkins and Other Seasonal Signs
ON Wednesday, the trick or treaters will be out dressed in their Halloween costumes as ghosts, goblins, witches or Ninja Turtles.
Doorbells will ring.
Candies, nuts and fruits will abound.
So will the huge jack-o'-lanterns, which, by tradition, are the best-shaped and often the largest pumpkins that can be found at the local produce stands or in the garden. (Be prepared to lug anywhere from 25 to 30 pounds and more!) The pumpkins' cores will be hallowed out so that faces can be cut into them to shape the eyes and mouths.
And to make the jack-o'-lanterns more ghostly in appearance, the traditional candles (or flashlights) will go inside to provide an eerie glow.


INSIDE
AIDS and African Women
AIDS has put particularly harsh burdens on Africa's already disadvantaged women.
Page 16.
Builder of CBS Is Dead
William S. Paley personified the power, glamour, allure and influence of the media empire.
Page 39.


Pumpkins and Other Seasonal Signs
ON Wednesday, the trick or treaters will be out dressed in their Halloween costumes as ghosts, goblins, witches or Ninja Turtles.
Doorbells will ring.
Candies, nuts and fruits will abound.
So will the huge jack-o'-lanterns, which, by tradition, are the best-shaped and often the largest pumpkins that can be found at the local produce stands or in the garden. (Be prepared to lug anywhere from 25 to 30 pounds and more!) The pumpkins' cores will be hallowed out so that faces can be cut into them to shape the eyes and mouths.
And to make the jack-o'-lanterns more ghostly in appearance, the traditional candles (or flashlights) will go inside to provide an eerie glow.


Despite Tobacco Industry Efforts, Scientist Is Named to Smoking Panel
Despite lobbying by the tobacco industry, a Government advisory board has appointed a scientist with strong anti-smoking views to a panel that will examine the dangers of secondhand cigarette smoke.
The scientist, Dr.
David Burns of the University of California at San Diego, said last week that he had been removed from consideration for the panel, although an agency official responded that no final decision had been made.


Review/Music; Decibels and Whimsy In Fast Forward Show
There were a number of messages floating around P.S. 122 on Friday night.
One of them certainly belonged to John Cage: that the musical worth of an object is measured by the attention we choose to pay it.
The other: words that don't mean anything often mean more than words that do.
Fast Forward and four colleagues were the principal performers.
Anna Homler opened the evening.
The two entities were separated by many decibels and several levels of sonic violence, but they spoke a remarkably similar language.
Ms.
Homler, in her gentle whimsical way, sings, chants, lectures and chats in a tongue perhaps best described to the ear as Ladino heard through a closed door.


A New Respect for Folk - But Black Tie Optional
This Saturday at Weill Recital Hall, a sold-out house is to hear the syncopated clatter of a buckdancer, the plunk and twang of a string band and the fingerpicking guitar and train-whistle harmonica of a blues duo.
The concert is produced by Carnegie Hall itself, the first of a dozen Folk Masters concerts featuring music of the Americas.
It isn't the only traditional music in town; both the World Music Institute and the Ethnic Folk Arts Center will be busy this weekend presenting music from four continents.
But when Carnegie Hall puts its clout behind down-home sounds, it signals a sea change among what Nick Spitzer, the folklorist who assembled the Folk Masters series, calls the "blue-chip institutions."
For those institutions, classical music in the European tradition is still their staple.
But a declining classical audience, changes in urban demographics, new goals set by government and private financing sources and broader ideas of musical quality have made the world's folk music a new resource for concert-hall programmers.
"This year," says Robert Browning, who runs the World Music Institute, "every institution in New York -- Lincoln Center, Carnegie Hall, Town Hall -- bought our mailing list."


Evening Hours; Honors to Writers And Other Artists
Random House laid down red carpeting at the New York Public Library on Thursday to celebrate Alfred A. Knopf's 75 years of publishing.
That same night, James D. Robinson 3d was honored by the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund at the Equal Justice Awards dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Later, the Metropolitan Opera Guild celebrated the premiere of the new production of Verdi's "Ballo in Maschera." On Wednesday, associates of the American Craft Museum held their annual black-tie auction at Christie's East.
Casita Maria, a social-service agency, honored J. Pepe Fanjul and Gayfryd Steinberg and the dancer Fernando Bujones at a dinner dance on Tuesday at the Plaza.
Helen Hayes celebrated her 90th birthday on Monday at the Plaza at a dance that raised funds for the restoration of the Helen Hays/Tappan Zee Performing Arts Center in Nyack, N.Y.


Food; A Timely Tea
NOBODY I KNOW HAS AFTERNOON TEA ON AN occasional, much less a regular, basis, yet practically everybody I know wants to do so.
It's not so much that they are longing to make periodic processions to the Plaza or the Mayfair Regent.
What they want, I think, is the kind of lives that allow for teatime -- as do I, in theory.
The reality, though, is that most of us just slosh down more and more coffee in the office, as a kind of a caffeine goad to flog more work out of ourselves.
But tea isn't about caffeine.
It's about ceremony and civilization (which explains why otherwise of-the-moment urban types would long for the pastime of characters in a Barbara Pym novel).
And for most of us, afternoon tea can only be done during the weekends at home, where, as in the traditional Japanese tea ceremony, every detail can be obsessively controlled.


Sports of the Times; The Maras Meet the Marshalls
NOT all football games are the same.
The coaches may insist they are, but the players are no fools, and besides, the players are the ones wielding the elbows and listening to the yowls from the stands.
They know.
The hardest games are the traditional rivalries, the ones in the same division, twice a season, over the years.
The fans have long memories and the players have short fuses.
It is wise to never turn your back.


The Budget Battle Reflects The Strain in the System
THE 101st Congress began its two-year tenure in January of 1989 with a simple but lofty goal: to govern.
But as the weary and frustrated lawmakers struggled toward a close this weekend, days before the midterm elections, governing seemed almost beside the point.
For some, the question was whether a bitterly divided legislative branch and a frantic White House could even function.


Sin, Fear and Sex
To the Editor:
If you want to determine whether Christianity teaches "the hatred of the body" or that sex, even in marriage, is "dangerous," the surest source to turn to is the sourcebook itself.
If Wendy Doniger had done this, the conclusions in her review of Jean Delumeau's "Sin and Fear: The Emergence of a Western Guilt Culture, 13th-18th Centuries" (Sept. 23) might have been radically different.
Ms.
Doniger would have read the Apostle Paul's admonishment to couples to fulfill each other sexually.
He writes: "The husband should fulfill his marital duty to his wife and likewise, the wife to her husband. The wife's body does not belong to her alone but also to her husband. In the same way, the husband's body does not belong to him alone but also to his wife. Do not deprive each other except by mutual consent and for a time" (I Corinthians 7:3-5).
Such biblical counsel inspired the much-maligned Puritans to chasten those who used the withholding of sex as a weapon.
This is contrary to the widely held belief that the Puritans regarded sex as dirty.
Rather than promoting an idea that the body is "disgusting," as Ms.
Doniger insinuates, the gist of biblical instruction has been that God's physical creation is perfect and is a gift to mankind to be enjoyed.
DANIEL MANN  Brooklyn


Lisa Drucker Marries
Lisa Merrill Drucker, an associate at the law firm of Shea &amp; Gould, and Scott David Henry, an associate at Salomon Brothers, both in New York, were married last evening at the Turnberry Isle Country Club in North Miami Beach, Fla., by Rabbi Ralph Kingsley.
The couple's parents are Dr. and Mrs.
Melvyn Drucker of Miami Lakes, Fla., and Mr. and Mrs.
William Henry of Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Henry, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a J.D. degree from New York University.
Mr.
Henry, 25, graduated from Syracuse University.


A Declaration of Note
A 214-year-old copy of the Declaration of Independence will be displayed 100 days a year, according to an agreement announced here Thursday.
The Society of the Cincinnati, which owns the 18th-century house where the document was discovered several years ago, has agreed to let the state display the copy, which is in mint condition.
It was one an estimated 600 originally printed in Philadelphia.
Only 23 are known to have survived.


A Little Country Comes to the City


School Counselors: The Nature of the Job
THERE are several topics of conversation that can be heard any place in suburban Westchester County.
These can include a discussion of Lyme disease, of one's golf or tennis score, of construction on the Hutchinson River Parkway, of the newest foreign film playing at the Fine Arts Theater -- and of a child's school guidance counselor.


Corrections
Because of an editing error an obituary in late editions yesterday about William S. Paley, who built CBS, referred imprecisely to CBS's size.
From the 1940's through the 1970's, CBS was the world's most powerful communications company; it no longer is.
The obituary is reprinted today on page 39.


College Officials
Don't Look Good  To the Sports Editor:
The last two weekends have seen some of the worst officiating of college football games reported in the past half-century.
First, Missouri loses a ball game because Colorado is inadvertently awarded a fifth down with seconds to play.
Although the error was discovered there was no correction.
Second, Michigan misses a 2-point conversion with seconds left to play when their receiver is tripped in the end zone.
In addition, there was according to the replay sufficient grounds for calling the pass complete since the ground caused the receiver to give up the ball.
Thus, in the second case the outcome of the game was determined by the mistakes of the officials and not the play on the field.
Certainly, the instant replay must be considered to reduce the errors resulting from poor officiating.
In addition, the N.C.A.A. must make endeavors to insure that errors of the officials do not determine the outcome of the game.
JEFFREY JARRETT  North Kingston, R.I.


The Yen Dips; Gold Weakens
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
128.15125.95141.45
per Dollar
German Mark
1.51461.50151.8290
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.16431.17281.1748
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.95801.95951.5790
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$371.00$372.75$377.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Rambling To Victory
GEORGIA TECH, an Atlantic Coast Conference team that had won more respect from a mathematically minded computer than it had from subjective experts this season, continued its winning ways in Atlanta yesterday, while Columbia, an Ivy League team that had won no respect at all, ended its losing streak with an upset in New York.
Georgia Tech (6-0-1) piled up a 48-31 victory over Duke (3-5).
Columbia (1-6) beat Princeton (2-5) by a score of 17-9.


Taping Drywall Seams
GYPSUM wallboard, or drywall, is easier to apply than plaster and most other wall materials, but covering the seams between panels is usually a stumbling block for the inexperienced.
The trick is achieving a smooth surface that will not show beneath paint and wallpaper.


A Directory of Cruises Worldwide; Ships Decked Out With Amenities
Destination: Crown Princess.
Side trips to: San Juan, St.
Thomas and Nassau.
More than ever, cruise ships themselves are the main attraction as sleek new vessels are launched or old ones renovated, each offering constant on-board activities, menus supervised by noted chefs and an increasing number of such amenities as soaring atriums, health clubs and sidewalk cafes.
New or refurbished ships this year will add nearly 11,000 berths, according to Cruise Lines International Association, an increase of 16 percent over 1989.
As a result of this increased capacity, a cruise may be the best vacation value around, with the fall season offering the real bargains.


Pro Football: Giant vc. Redskins; 2 Rival Coaches Remain Reticent Out of Respect
Bill Parcells and Joe Gibbs do not talk to each other before or after their games.
They seldom talk to each other except to compare weight losses from their mutual diet.
It is not that Parcells, who coaches the Giants, dislikes Gibbs, who coaches the Washington Redskins.
It is just that the rivalry between these division rivals has been so intense.


Is Law Scientific?
To the Editor:
In his review of "The Problems of Jurisprudence" by Richard A. Posner (Sept. 9), Calvin Woodard writes: "In the end, Judge Posner comes to an unexpected conclusion . . . law is indeterminate; there are no 'right' answers to legal questions; judges cannot depend on science or logic to give them objective truths; judges inevitably exercise discretion in making legal decisions; and therefore judges cannot avoid insinuating their own values into the legal process."
It has been my observation as a litigator for the last 10 years that most of us who toil in the law sustain the quest for "justice" by engaging in the illusion that judges are objective.
Few of us can reconcile the need to attain control over the judicial process with the evident randomness of judicial decisions.
On the other hand, the average citizen who finds himself or herself before a court in a criminal or civil matter takes for granted the political or economic bias of every judge.
That Mr.
Woodard expresses any surprise about Judge Posner's thesis means that he is deluded by the idea of law as science -- or that he has never been a party to a lawsuit.
JONATHAN RUBIN  West Palm Beach, Fla.


Doing Good Well
MANAGING THE NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION  Practices and Principles.
By Peter F. Drucker. 235 pp.
New York: HarperCollins. $22.95.


Control of Slavery Issue Brought On Civil War Anti-Semitism in Dixie
To the Editor:
Elizabeth Gardner Weddington, in her Oct. 14 letter takes Ken Burns to task for, among other things, failing to mention the generous treatment of Southern Jews in the South.
As evidence for such treatment, she seems to rely on Eli N. Evans's 1988 biography of Judah P. Benjamin (a Southern Jew of Sephardic descent).
She points to the election of Benjamin as a Louisiana senator, his appointment by Jefferson Davis, the Confederate President, to three major positions in the Confederate cabinet and the valued military service of Jews recognized by leaders of the Confederate armed forces.
She neglects to mention that Mr.
Evans devotes an entire chapter to the prevalence of anti-Semitism, especially in Richmond.
That chapter shows far less than an unconditionally warm embrace of Southern Jews in Richmond and elsewhere below the Mason-Dixon line.
Evidently, Benjamin attained his positions despite anti-Semitism, rather than within a gracious milieu of regional religious tolerance.
The military service of his co-religionists was desirable to them as a proof of assimilation and certainly acceptable to the Confederacy where the contribution of every able-bodied male to the war effort was essential.
In a desperate effort to win the war, Benjamin in 1865 proposed freeing the slaves in return for their service in the Confederate military.
Mr.
Burns did not highlight the belated interest of the Confederacy in such emancipation.
Is he to be taken to task for that too?
DAVID I.  OBEL  Bronx, Oct. 16, 1990


Women's Group Seeks Environmental Role
Alarmed by the deteriorating health of the planet, women from around the world have come together to demand a bigger role in all levels of decision-making on the environment and development.
In a four-day session that ended Monday, 50 women met at the United Nations Church Center to establish a worldwide network for bringing their agenda into the environmental debate.
Their immediate goal is equal representation at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Brazil in 1992.


Review/Blues; Phillip Walker and the Cruelty of Women
It doesn't take more than a few notes for a good band to let an audience know it has arrived.
The Los Angeles-based blues guitarist Phillip Walker brought a tight, road-tested band into Manny's Carwash on Wednesday night, and they didn't stop making a fuss for a second; it sounded like music that could cure all ills.
Mr.
Walker tours regularly, and the band, slick and ready to improvise, sounded it.
Mr.
Walker came out and sang a set of songs about women.
He apparently hasn't had much luck with relationships, because most of his songs were about cheating, lying cruel women, women who didn't mean him very much good.
Singing in a high tenor voice, but with a bemused look on his face, Mr.
Walker dealt with personal desolation.
On one tune he mournfully proclaimed that "When I first met you, you said your name was Mary Jane. When I saw you in the police lineup, the heat was calling you by another name."


A Traditionally Insular Community Begins to Reach Out
YU KIM LY was buried last week in his faded blue jeans.
At his wake, near his coffin, the photograph of the winsome-looking 16-year-old and the small crowd of black-clad teen-age mourners offered few hints of the violent death he met the previous week on a street in lower Manhattan.
The boy was shot three times in the head along with two other teen-age friends, all members of the Vietnamese gang Born to Kill, a violent group that has increasingly encroached on the territory of established Chinese gangs, terrifying the Chinese, Vietnamese and Korean communities throughout New York.


Fashion: On the Streets of Paris; The Viewing Wasn't Just at the Spring Shows
All of Paris was a fashion show last week.
So a ticket to the designer spring collections, while certainly nice to have, wasn't absolutely necessary.
There was lots to be seen out there on the boulevards.
The influence of Chanel was strong, especially in the braid-edged tweed jackets and quilted bags, like those at center and far right.
The influence of more avant-garde houses was also in evidence, from the studded jackets from Claude Montana, below, to the ankle-length pleated skirts from Issey Miyake, bottom.
Japanese designer clothes, in fact, seemed to be everywhere.
Among them: Yohji Yamamoto's hoop-skirted jersey dress and Rei Kawakuba's plaid suit, below right.
Then there was the pleated short skirt, which was enjoying a revival.


Susan Becker Engaged To Mark McDermott
The engagement of Susan Jane Becker to Mark Carlton McDermott has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph E. Becker of Darien, Conn.
Mr.
McDermott is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James A. McDermott Jr. of Rye, N.Y.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Becker, 26 years old and a graduate of St.
Lawrence University, was until recently an account executive at Wells, Rich, Green, an advertising agency in New York.
Her father is the president of Television Station Partners, a group of television stations in Greenwich, Conn.
Mr.
McDermott, 26, graduated from Denison University and is studying for an M.B.A. at the University of Virginia.
His mother, Penelope F. McDermott, is a saleswoman at Prince &amp; Ripley, a real-estate brokerage in Rye.
His father, who is retired, was the president and chairman of the Lion Ribbon Company in Secaucus, N.J.


Woodcliff Lake Journal; A Wicked Witch, an Orange Moon and the Snarled Traffic
WOODCLIFF LAKE
ALONG a half-mile stretch of Chestnut Ridge Road, traffic backs up, the lines are long and a steady wind ripples the tattered dress of a wicked witch against the backdrop of an orange moon on display at one of the farms in the distance.
And yet for all the drumming fingers on steering wheels and anxious glances, once the drivers get to the farms, a glass of fresh apple cider, a dozen doughnuts and pumpkins the size of many small children help to relieve the tension.


Campus Life: U.C., Davis; Fellowship Offers Future Professors A Chance to Teach
The young woman who strides confidently into a classroom here and quiets the class of 90 undergraduates is scarcely older than the students themselves.
But the students listen attentively as Denise Isom, one of four graduate students in the Chancellor's Teaching Fellowship Program, begins her lecture.


Style Makers; Hugh McMahonl, Pumpkin Carver
Ordinary people carve pumpkins into snaggle-toothed witches and cross-eyed goblins.
Hugh McMahon, 36 years old, a videotape filmmaker who carves pumpkins into elephants, tigers, owls, cats, birds, frogs, raccoons and monkeys.
Recently at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, he carved a 125-pound pumpkin into a tiger with vampire's teeth.
From a 150-pounder, he carved an elephant, its eyes ringed with wrinkles.
He has carved a likeness of the philanthopist Judy Peabody, an ephemeral work that was a decoration at Mortimer's, a restaurant on the Upper East Side, at a benefit for AIDS research.


Ms. Wattenberg Weds S. M. Gottfried
Wendy Beth Wattenberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Wattenberg of Lake Success, L.I., and Aventura, Fla., was married last evening to Steven Mitchell Gottfried, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley A. Gottfried of Roslyn Estates, L.I.
Rabbi Arthur Schneier performed the ceremony at the Fresh Meadow Country Club in Great Neck, L.I..
Mrs.
Gottfried, 24 years old, a graduate of the University of Michigan, is an assistant buyer in New York at Saks Fifth Avenue.
Her father is the chairman and the chief executive of Adolfo Menswear, Courreges Homme U.S.A. and Leon of Paris, clothing manufacturers in New York.
The bridegroom, 29, a graduate of George Washington University, is the president of Service Contractor Systems, a computer-service company in New York.
His mother, Arlene J. Gottfried, is the vice president and his father is the chief executive of Stanrose Inc., a distributor of women's designer clothing in New York.


College Football; Dash by Ismail Saves the Irish
Just when Notre Dame began to look vulnerable again, with the All-America nose tackle Chris Zorich forced to the sidelines with an injured knee, the Fighting Irish were rescued by the speed of Raghib Ismail tonight.
With one fourth-quarter burst off right tackle, Ismail ran untouched for a 76-yard touchdown, the longest run from scrimmage in his three Notre Dame seasons, to help Notre Dame overcome the passing of Pittsburgh's Alex Van Pelt in a 31-22 victory.


HOME ENTERTAINMENTS/RECORDINGS NEW VIDEO RELEASES
Total Recall  1990.
Carolco/LIVE. $24.99.
Laser disk, $39.95. 1 hour, 53 minutes.
Closed captioned.
R.
Paul Verhoeven's super-violent film melds the "ever-more-workable Arnold Schwarzenegger mystique with a better-than-average science fiction premise." Tortured by inexplicable memories of another life on Mars, Paul Quaid (Mr. Schwarzenegger) goes there to investigate.
Though the number of plot reversals almost equals the body count, "Mr. Verhoeven has come up with a vigorous interplanetary thriller that packs in wallops with metronomic regularity." (Janet Maslin)  Wild Orchid  1990.
RCA/Columbia. $89.95.
LD, $34.95.
CC. 1:57, unrated ; 1:51, R.  Emily (Carre Otis) goes to work for Claudia (Jacqueline Bisset), a tough-talking businesswoman, in Rio de Janeiro, where, after much hemming and hawing, she is at last ravaged by a persistent businessman (Mickey Rourke).
"Early in his career, Mr. Rourke managed this sort of thing very seductively. This time he seems puffy, sleazy, well over the edge into self-parody" in a film that proves "just how tedious and coy a soft-core porn film can be." (Maslin)  Miami Blues  1990.
Orion. $89.98.
LD, $39.95. 1:37.
CC.
R.
In line with Charles Willeford's crackerjack crime novels, on which the George Armitage film is based, the role of peculiar central character should fall to the police detective Hoke Mosely (Fred Ward); instead it's left to the slightly crazed sociopath Junior Frenger (Alec Baldwin), who tries his best aided and fed by a cooking-obsessed hooker (Jennifer Jason Leigh).
"The film is best appreciated for the performances of its stars and its scene-stealing peripheral touches." (Maslin)  Love at Large  1990.
Orion. $89.98.
LD, $39.95. 1:37.
CC.
R.
A band of lovelorn, soft-hearted adventurers rearrange their romantic destinies over and over again.
Tom Berenger is gruffly amusing as a private detective; Anne Archer is the wounded, mesmerizing beauty around whom the story revolves, and Elizabeth Perkins makes a starchy foe of romantic treachery.
The director Alan Rudolph "operates on the cinema's dog-whistle frequencies, emitting a signal that's perceptible to only a select few." (Maslin)  Strapless  1990.
RCA/Columbia. $79.95.
LD, $34.95. 2:12.
CC.
R.
David Hare's film stars Blair Brown and Bridget Fonda as American sisters caught up in injudicious romances, which, by way of the playwrights' social and political concerns, are tied to alleged inequities of life in Margaret Thatcher's England.
Treating the sisters "much in the way a politically liberal housewife might treat her servants," Mr.
Hare "is ruthless in the manner in which he shapes his characters to fit larger points." (Vincent Canby)  Jetsons: The Movie  1990.
MCA/Universal. $22.95.
LD, $34.98. 1:22.
CC.
G.
Despite space-age gadgetry, the futuristic Jetsons on the big screen remain the mid-50's happy family they've been since William Hanna and Joseph Barbera's animated TV show was first aired in 1962.
On evidence of the Hanna-Barbera movie, life decades hence will be several steps behind what it is today.
Bright and perky, the film "isn't any more fascinating than the cartoon series. It's only longer." (Maslin)


A Reminder
Standard time resumed at 2 A.M. today. Clocks were set back one hour.


A Company Gives Up on New York
THE budget agreement that is now working its way toward enactment is a good one.
It will not achieve all that is claimed for it, but it will make substantial cuts in the deficit that are real.
The tax increases and some of the entitlement cuts will be locked into substantive law, and, barring a shooting war in the Persian Gulf, future defense spending is likely to be less than what the budget agreement promises.
We Americans are finally facing up, if only partially, to correcting a decade of public and private profligacy, during which the country borrowed massively at home and abroad to finance a consumption boom.
As a nation we now save and invest only 3 percent of our national income.
Our economic future depends on raising national saving, mainly through getting rid of the Federal budget deficit and ultimately turning it into a surplus.
The budget agreement is a major step in that direction.


Marnie Dawson Plans to Marry Richard Hunt Truitt in December
Marion Margery Dawson of Greenwich, Conn., and Richard Hunt Truitt of New York are planning to marry in December.
Mrs.
Dawson, 49 years old and known as Marnie, is the president of Dearfield Associates, a direct marketing company in Greenwich and Phoenix.
The prospective bride is the widow of Robert Joseph Dawson of Greenwich and a daughter of Sara Scranton Linen of Greenwich and the late James A. Linen 3d, a publisher of Time magazine and a president of Time Inc.
She is a graduate of Columbia University.
Mr.
Truitt, 58, is the president of Gavin Anderson Doremus &amp; Company, a public relations concern in New York.
He is a son of Richard B. Truitt of Chicago and the late Cleon Johnson Truitt.
A graduate of Northwestern University, with a master's degree from the university's Medill School of Journalism, he is a former Chicago Tribune reporter and editor and a retired lieutenant colonel in the Marine Corps Reserve.
His first marriage ended in divorce.
The prospective bridegroom is the author of books about public relations, the Marine Corps and nuclear energy.
His mother was a psychologist in the Chicago public schools.
His father is a senior partner in the Chicago law firm of Truitt, Brown &amp; Truitt.


Kremlin Signals Hope in Standoff By Sending an Envoy to Baghdad
The Soviet Union indicated today that it was mounting a new effort to end the standoff in the Persian Gulf and hinted that it hoped for some progress soon.
The Soviet Union abruptly postponed a Security Council vote on a new resolution pressing for an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, saying that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev had sent a special emissary to Baghdad for talks with President Saddam Hussein.


Paula J. Hess to Wed Jeff Hammond Varner
Dr. and Mrs.
Bennet J. Hess of Rockville Centre, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Paula Joan Hess to Jeff Hammond Varner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold B. Varner of Manhasset, L.I.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Hess, 28 years old, graduated from Niagara University.
She is an account executive at Catalina Swimwear Sportswear in New York.
Her father is the director of obstetrics and gynecology at Mercy Hospital in Rockville Centre.
Mr.
Varner, 30, is an assistant vice president for Shearson Lehman Hutton.
He graduated from New England College.
His father, who is retired, was a divisional merchandise manager for the J.C.
Penney Company in New York.


New &amp; Noteworthy
WONDERFUL LIFE: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History, by Stephen Jay Gould. (Norton, $10.95.) Drawing on the lessons of the Burgess fossils in western Canada, Stephen Jay Gould argues that mankind is not the pinnacle of evolution but the result of a series of unlikely accidents.
"Mr. Gould is an exceptional combination of scientist and science writer" who tells his story "with fervor and intelligence," James Gleick said here last year.
MILE ZERO, by Thomas Sanchez. (Vintage Contemporaries, $10.95.) In this novel by the author of "Rabbit Boss," St.
Cloud, a burned-out case from the 60's, languishes in Key West, Fla., finally finding some direction when he tries to help a young refugee who faces certain death if he is deported to Haiti.
The story's "brilliantly contrived plot uncoils with the suspense of a thriller," Erica Abeel said in The Book Review in 1989.
"Nothing is gratuitous: characters and actions are linked in a hidden web, sometimes with devastating irony."
THE SECOND SHIFT, by Arlie Hochschild with Anne Machung. (Avon, $9.95.) After interviewing 50 working couples, the authors conclude that the social revolution that got women into the work force can go no further until men take more responsibility for child care and other chores.
"It is the best discussion I have read on what must be the quintessential domestic bind of our time," Robert Kuttner said here last year.
THE STORYTELLER, by Mario Vargas Llosa.
Translated by Helen Lane. (Penguin, $8.95.) In the jungles of Peru, an anthropologist is so enchanted by an isolated group of Indians that he becomes part of the tribe.
This is "science fiction at its best," our reviewer, Ursula K. Le Guin, said last year.
"The concerns of 'The Storyteller' are intellectual, ethical and artistic, all at once and brilliantly so. To me this is Mr. Vargas Llosa's most engaging and accessible book, for the urgency of its subject purifies and illuminates the writing." Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux's Noonday imprint has reissued Mr.
Vargas Llosa's novel CAPTAIN PANTOJA AND THE SPECIAL SERVICE ($8.95), which was first published in English in 1978.
Translated by Gregory Kolovakos and Ronald Christ, it tells the story of an officer who is commissioned to organize a contingent of women to entertain the soldiers on Peru's Amazonian frontier.
YOU GOTTA HAVE WA, by Robert Whiting. (Vintage, $10.95.) An American journalist finds that in Japan baseball is taken with a seriousness that might astound even the most avid American fan.
"Put down the heavy tomes on United States-Japan trade policies," Robert J. Collins said here last year.
"Robert Whiting has hit upon a brilliant way of demonstrating the very different psyche of our major trading partner across the Pacific."
SKIN TIGHT, by Carl Hiaasen. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.) A former Florida state investigator trying to lead a quiet life in Biscayne Bay is drawn into a case involving an incompetent plastic surgeon.
Last year our reviewer, Katherine Dunn, called this novel "Carl Hiaasen's latest dangerous weapon -- Uzi satire in 9-millimeter bursts aimed at those classic baddies, vanity and greed. . . . The dialogue is crisp and hot. The logic is clean, and the plot twists with sinewy coherence."
SEEING VOICES: A Journey Into the World of the Deaf, by Oliver Sacks. (Harper Perennial, $8.95.) The author of "The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat" argues that the deaf make up a separate culture that should have the right to develop American Sign Language, instead of English, as its own private tongue.
Last year our reviewer, Paul West, said this book "brings afresh to our attention a problem that is never easily going to be solved."
MOSCOW 2042, by Vladimir Voinovich.
Translated by Richard Lourie. (Harvest/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $12.95.) A dissident Russian writer travels to the future, where the authorities try to get him to revise a book -- called "Moscow 2042" -- that he didn't even know he had written.
This novel "is a comic delight, not least because it is a satire on satires, on itself," Malcolm Bradbury said here in 1987.
"It is, quite simply, a wonderful book."
THE NEW MONEY MASTERS: Winning Investment Strategies of Soros, Lynch, Steinhardt, Rogers, Neff, Wanger, Michaelis, Carret, by John Train. (Harper Perennial, $10.95.) An investment adviser tells the stories of eight people who made fortunes by reacting to events in the news that were ignored by just about everybody else.
"His descriptions are so admiring, I suspect he has overlooked some ugly details, but even so, I was riveted," Robert Krulwich said here last year.
IN TRANSIT: Twenty Stories, by Mavis Gallant. (Penguin, $7.95.) Set in Paris, Moscow, Helsinki and other places, these short stories are about people in transit, misunderstanding and being misunderstood by the people around them.
Last year our reviewer, Ronald Bryden, said Mavis Gallant quietly demonstrates "how much of language, culture and their ideological designs on us is simply noise to most people, in this shifting world where fewer and fewer of us are at home, linguistically or otherwise."
WHOSE BROAD STRIPES AND BRIGHT STARS?
The Trivial Pursuit of the Presidency 1988, by Jack W. Germond and Jules Witcover. (Warner, $12.95.) When this account of the recent campaign for the White House was published last year, our reviewer, Tom Goldstein, said it "provides sustenance for political junkies and a chance to catch up for those who may have boycotted newspapers and television news for the 18 months preceding last year's Presidential election."


Why the Losses At Port Authority?
Richard C. Leone, in his Sept. 16 interview (New Jersey Q &amp; A, "Looking Ahead for the Port Authority"), says that "the cross-river bridges and tunnels are losing money" for the Port Authority.
If that is the case, I wonder whether the losses are linked to mismanagement or confusion in the accounting department.
A recent example of the Port Authority's mismanagement practices can be seen in its revised commuter ticket sales procedures.
The Port Authority has stopped selling commuter tickets at crossings and gasoline stations; has changed a half-minute purchasing experience to a 10-day mail-order wait, inconveniencing commuters without any observable improvement in traffic delays; has increased the costs of commuters using the bridges and tunnels, and appears to have increased the authority's costs for printing and selling commuter books.


Pamela Dreizen Weds
Pamela Lindsey Dreizen, an associate at Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn, and John Jay Cassingham, an associate at Fish &amp; Neave, both New York law firms, were married last evening.
Rabbi Charles Lippman and the Rev.
Henry Fehrenbacher, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 29 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of the University of Texas and the Harvard Law School, she is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Samuel Dreizen of Houston.
Mr.
Cassingham, 33, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jacque C. Cassingham of Joliet, Ill.
He graduated from the University of Illinois and received a J.D. degree from Boston University.


Adventures in the Maine Woods
OLD SOLDIER  By Vance Bourjaily. 169 pp. New York: Donald I. Fine. $18.95.


Community Banking Is Gaining Favor
AT the end of the first quarter of 1990, the earnings of the Hudson Valley National Bank of Yonkers reached a record level.
The bank plans to open three new branches in 1991.
Sound Federal Savings &amp; Loan of Mamaroneck has watched its earnings increase steadily since 1985.
In the last decade, the bank's assets increased more than $52 million, a growth rate of 52 percent.
Such bank performers are not as unusual as they might seem in today's economic climate, said the officer of a market-research concern in White Plains that conducts surveys for the banking industry and for Fortune 500 companies.


Control of Slavery Issue Brought On Civil War Forrest's Slaughter
To the Editor:
Elizabeth Gardner Weddington's Oct. 14 letter makes the Confederate Army sound like history's first equal opportunity employer.
I forget why Nathan Bedford Forrest's troops slaughtered 557 black Union soldiers who had surrendered at Fort Pillow.
Were they violating antismoking regulations?
RON POWERS  Middlebury, Vt., Oct. 15, 1990


Delay in Trial of Suspect Accused of War Crimes Has France Astir
A Government decision that will delay the trial of an aging Frenchman accused of crimes against humanity has stirred a new debate here about France's reluctance to address its role in the deportation of thousands of Jews to Nazi death camps in World War II.
Legal experts say that by assigning the case of Rene Bousquet to a long-moribund Special High Court of the Liberation rather than to an ordinary criminal court, the Prosecutor General's Office may even have insured that he will never be brought to trial.


No Headline
International 3-19
A new initiative toward peace and a settlement of the Persian Gulf crisis is being undertaken by the Soviet Union.
A ranking Soviet official went to Baghdad at the invitation of President Saddam Hussein.
Page 1
Iraq's plan to ration gasoline was a maneuver to persuade Baghdad's enemies to postpone any attack on Iraqi forces occupying Kuwait, several oil industry officials and military affairs experts said. 10
Gorbachev hints Iraq may be reconsidering its position 10
U.S. says it sent no signals to expel Lebanese general 12
The epidemic of AIDS in Africa is raising new questions about women's roles and rights before the law and in their families.
Social workers say the disease has in many ways had a disproportionate impact on Africa's already disadvantaged women. 16
Liberia guerrillas refuse to sign accord at talks 17
Ivory Coast faces first free elections today 18
Four nations to send truce force to Rwanda 11
Hundreds of dead and dying dolphins are washing ashore in Spain, Franceand Italy, victims of a virus that some scientists believe is linked to the heavy pollution of the western Mediterranean. 3
Vatican synod reaffirms celibacy for priests 19
Rise in cost of gasoline sets off protests in Hungary 14
Soviet woman fights for a home for those labeled defective 14
Soviet coal miners set up independent union 14
Secret-police scandals outlive East Germany 14
Women's group seeks environmental role 16
Delay in trial of war crimes suspect has French astir 16
A U.S.
Special Service officer in El Salvador has told the F.B.I. he knew in advance of plans to kill six Jesuit priests, although he has since retracted that testimony. 9
Peru's leader proposes a market to fight coca 12
After six years, Labor is voted out in New Zealand 18
Bhutto looks to provincial elections 5
Beijing condemns pornography as subversive 6
National 22-32
Congress approved the budget bill, the biggest deficit reduction legislation in history, and prepared to adjourn, just 10 days before the mid-term election.
President Bush is expected to sign the measure. 1
The new deficit reduction bill will touch almost everyone in the nation, from children to the elderly as well as farmers, bankers, college students, war veterans and foreign tourists. 1
Most incumbents will be re-elected in the Nov. 6 balloting across the nation, despite all the signs of anger among voters.
They will win either because they are unopposed or because they face opponents so underfinanced as to be out of contention.  1
14 of 15 Jersey lawmakers reject budget plan26
Lawmakers agree to curb exploration for offshore oil 28
Ambitious air pollution bill sent to White House 28
Market forces seen as backbone of new Bush energy policy 28
Retarded people are living longer as a result of medical advances.
But the new generation of people who are both retarded and elderly is posing a host of policy challenges and adding more worry to their aging parents. 1
The Scholastic Aptitude Test, a collage entrance exam that is a rite ofpassage for many high school students, faces potentially major revision in the wake of criticism about its validity and perceptions of ethnic and sex bias. 22
For police, a delicate job of reordering priorities 22
A.C.L.U. says violations pervading foster care system 22
Hatteras Island to rely on ferries up to six months 22
The threat of a strike rises at Chrysler 23
Regional 33-36
Some strikers at The Daily News will be permitted to reclaim their jobs if they cross picket lines tomorrow, management officials announced.
The offer came on the second full day of the bitter strike. 1
The strike underscores new realities for labor and management in New York City, which has long been considered one of the nation's last big union towns, labor experts say. 33
The stalled New York City labor talks are being heightened by the union leaders' growing mistrust in the claims being made about the city's financial plight. 33
Government computer files open to public, court rules 37
A major spill in the Hudson River was caused by a large barge that struck a reef and spewed 163,800 gallons of kerosene into the water 15 miles south of Poughkeepsie. 34
New York Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine is running hard, with his eyes more on the election of 1994 than the one in two weeks.
This is his best chance to become better known before a possible race to succeed Mario Cuomo. 35 D'Amato explains shift on bias bill 34
Defeat certain, Kasparov resigns the seventh game 36  Obituaries
William S. Paley, ex-chairman of CBS Inc.  39
Elliott Roosevelt, World War II general and an author 38
Xavier Cugat, bandleader 38  Arts/Reviews 60, 62
Campus Life 45-49  Fashion 54-55
Life Style 50
Pastimes 61-63
Weddings 56-60


There Is Warmth To Be Found In 2 Gentle Fables
"ONCE ON THIS ISLAND," THE cinnamon-flavored musical at the Booth Theater, is a lovely piece of handiwork, with much to admire.
But I suspect your enjoyment will depend largely on your ability to keep its passing details foremost in your mind.
Although it begins with a booming thunderstorm, its overall effect is more that of a tropical breeze that lulls and caresses, but never threatens to blow off your hat.
Lynn Ahrens, who wrote the book and lyrics, and Stephen Flaherty, who is responsible for the score, aspire to the familiarity of an oft-told folk tale.
That they achieve it may be the evening's chief accomplishment and its principal drawback: there just aren't a whole lot of surprises here.


Technology; Building a High-I.Q. House
IT won't be quite like a scene from "The Jetsons," but a costly, six-year effort here by the home building industry to develop a computer-controlled "smart house" is on the verge of reaching the commercial market.
While smart houses would be adept at saving energy, detecting electrical problems and scanning the premises for intruders, that is just the beginning.
The goal of the smart house project is to set the stage for a whole new generation of programmable household systems that are only now being invented.


Snuffing the Flame of Freedom
THE EARLY ARRIVAL OF DREAMS  A Year in China.
By Rosemary Mahoney. 325 pp.
New York: Fawcett Columbine. $18.95.


Campus Life: Iowa State; Tougher Policies For Athletes Are Rejected
The president ofIowa State University has rejected proposals by a faculty committee to raise admission standards for student-athletes and to bar freshmen from competing.
In one of his last acts before becoming the director of the Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory in Palisades, N.Y., Gordon Eaton adopted several faculty recommendations for the school's athletic program, but rejected the changes in academic requirements.
He said they would put the school at a competitive disadvantage.


Study of Crying Called 'Idiotic'
I was amazed to read in the Connecticut Weekly of Sept. 23 that more than half a million dollars has been appropriated by the National Institutes of Health to find out why babies cry.
This is idiotic.
There are hundreds of uncured and incurable diseases for which this money could be better spent.
People with AIDS, cancer, muscular dystrophy and Alzheimer's disease must be thrilled to read of this grant.


A Directory of Cruises Worldwide; Sources of Information
Abercrombie &amp; Kent/Continental Waterways, 1520 Kensington Road, Suite 212, Oak Brook, Ill. 60521 (708-954-2944; 800-323-7308 outside Illinois).
ACT/Pace Line, 1 World Trade Center, Suite 8101, New York, N.Y. 10048 (212-775-1500; 800-221-8164 outside New York State).
Admiral Cruises, 1220 Biscayne Boulevard, Miami, Fla. 33132 (305-374-1611).
American Canadian Caribbean Line, Post Office Box 368, Warren, R.I. 02885 (401-247-0955; 800-556-7450 outside Rhode Island).
American Hawaii Cruises, 550 Kearny Street, San Francisco, Calif. 94108 (415-392-9400; 800-765-7000).
Bank Line (see Freighter World Cruises).
Bennett Scenic Cruises, 270 Madison Avenue, Suite 1802, New York, N.Y. 10018 (212-447-1520; 800-759-7226 or 800-221-2420).
Bergen Line, 505 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10017 (212-986-2711; 800-323-7436).
Canberra Cruises, c/o Express Travel Services, 350 Fifth Avenue, Suite 7718, New York, N.Y. 10118 (212-629-3630; 800-223-5799 outside New York State).
Carnival Cruise Lines, 3655 N.W. 87th Avenue, Miami, Fla. 33178 (305-599-2600).
Chandris Celebrity Cruises and Chandris Fantasy Cruises, 900 Third Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022 (212-750-0044; 800-621-3446 outside New York State).
Chilean Line (see Freighter World Cruises).
Classical Cruises, 132 East 70th Street, New York, N.Y. 10021 (212-794-3200; 800-252-7745).
Clipper Cruise Line, 7711 Bonhomme Avenue, St.
Louis, Mo. 63105 (314-727-2929; 800-325-0010 outside Missouri).
Club Mediterranee, 40 West 57th Street, New York, N.Y. 10019 (212-977-2100; 800-258-2633).
Columbus Line (see Freighter World Cruises).
Commodore Cruise Line, 800 Douglas Road, Coral Gables, Fla. 33134 (305-373-5502; 800-237-5361).
Costa Cruises, World Trade Center, 80 S.W.
Eighth Street, Miami, Fla. 33130 (305-358-7330).
Crown Cruise Line, Post Office Box 10265, Riviera Beach, Fla. 33419 (407-845-7447; 800-841-7447 outside Florida).
Cruise Company, 33 Lewis Street, Greenwich, Conn. 06830 (203-622-0203; 800-825-0826 outside Connecticut).
Crystal Cruises, 2121 Avenue of the Stars, Los Angeles, Calif. 90067 (213-785-9300).
Cunard Line, 555 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10017 (800-221-4770; 800-458-9000 for Sea Goddess).
Delta Queen Steamboat Company, Robin Street Wharf, New Orleans, La. 70130 (504-586-0631; 800-543-1949.).
Dirigo Cruises, 39 Waterside Lane, Clinton, Conn. 06413 (203-669-7068; 800-845-5520).
Dolphin Cruise Line, 1001 North America Way, Suite 114, Miami, Fla. 33132 (305-358-3005; 800-999-4299 for information; 800-222-1003 for reservations).
Egon Oldendorff Line (see Freighter World Cruises).
Epirotiki Lines, 551 Fifth Avenue, Suite 605, New York, N.Y. 10176 (212-599-1750; 800-221-2470 outside New York State).
Esplanade Tours, 581 Boylston Street, Boston, Mass. 02116 (617-266-7465; 800-628-4893).
Euro Cruises, 303 West 13th Street, New York, N.Y. 10014 (212-691-2099; 800-688-3876).
Exprinter Cruises, 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110 (212-719-1200; 800-221-1666 outside New York State).
Freighter World Cruises, 180 South Lake Avenue, Suite 335, Pasadena, Calif. 91101 (818-449-3106).
Galapagos Cruises, c/o Adventure Associates, 13150 Coit Road, Suite 110, Dallas, Tex. 75240 (214-907-0414; 800-527-2500).
Hapag-Lloyd, c/o Hapag-Lloyd Tours, 1640 Hempstead Turnpike, East Meadow, N.Y. 11554 (516-794-1253; 800-334-2724).
Hilton Nile Cruises, Post Office Box 257, Cairo, Egypt (800-445-8667).
Holland America Line, 300 Elliott Avenue West, Seattle, Wash. 98119 (206-281-3535).
International Cruise Center, 250 Old Country Road, Mineola, N.Y. 11501 (516-747-8880; 800-221-3254).
Ivaran Lines, 1 Exchange Plaza, New York, N.Y. 10006 (212-809-1220; 800-451-1639).
Jahre Line (see Bergen Line).
Julia Hoyt, 5 Ledgewood Way, Suite 6, Peabody, Mass. 01960 (508-535-5738; 800-852-2625).
KD German Rhine Line, 170 Hamilton Avenue, White Plains, N.Y. 10601 (914-948-3600; 800-346-6525 outside New York State).
Laeisz Line (see Freighter World Cruises).
Leonhardt &amp; Blumberg Banana Boats (see Freighter World Cruises).
Lykes Lines, Lykes Center, 300 Poydras Street, New Orleans, La. 70130 (504-523-6611; 800-535-1861).
Mediterranean Shipping Company, c/o Sea the Difference, 96 Morton Street, Fourth Floor, New York, N.Y. 10014 (212-691-3760; 800-666-9333).
Melanesian Tourist Services, 10351 Santa Monica Boulevard, Suite 309, West Los Angeles, Calif. 90025 (800-776-0370).
Mineral Shipping Limited (see Freighter World Cruises).
Norwegian Cruise Line, 95 Merrick Way, Coral Gables, Fla. 33134 (305-447-9660; 800-327-7030).
Ocean Cruise Lines, 1510 S.E. 17th Street, Fort Lauderdale, Fla. 33316 (305-764-3500; 800-556-8850 outside Florida).
Paquet French Cruises (see Ocean Cruise Lines).
Pearl Cruises (see Ocean Cruise Lines).
Polish Ocean Lines, c/o Gdynia America Line, 39 Broadway, 14th Floor, New York, N.Y. 10006 (212-952-1280).
Polynesian Shipping Company (see Freighter World Cruises).
Premier Cruise Lines, Post Office Box 573, Cape Canaveral, Fla. 32920 (407-783-5061; 800-456-1664 for brochures).
Princess Cruises, 10100 Santa Monica Boulevard, Los Angeles, Calif. 90067 (213-553-1770).
Raymond &amp; Whitcomb, 400 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10017 (212-759-3960).
Regency Cruises, 260 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016 (212-972-4499).
Renaissance Cruises, 1800 Eller Drive, Suite 300, Post Office Box 350307, Fort Lauderdale, Fla. 33335 (305-463-0982; 800-525-2450).
Royal Caribbean Cruises, 903 South America Way, Miami, Fla. 33132 (305-379-2601; 800-327-6700 outside Florida; 800-432-6559 in Florida).
Royal Cruise Line, 1 Maritime Plaza, San Francisco, Calif. 94111 (information 415-956-7200; reservations 415-788-0610).
Royal Viking Line, 95 Merrick Way, Coral Gables, Fla. 33134 (305-447-9660; 800-422-8000).
Salen Lindblad Cruising, 133 East 55th Street, New York, N.Y. 10022 (212-751-2300; 800-223-5688 outside New York State).
Sea Air Holidays, 733 Summer Street, Stamford, Conn. 06901 (203-356-9033; 800-732-6247).
Seabourn Cruise Line, 55 Francisco Street, Suite 710, San Francisco, Calif. 94133 (415-391-7444).
Sea Cloud Cruises (see Cruise Company).
Seven Seas Cruise Line, Post Office Box 12078, Vancouver, British Columbia V6B 4N5 Canada (800-661-5541).
Silja Line (see Bergen Line).
Society Expeditions, 3131 Elliott Avenue, Suite 700, Seattle, Wash. 98121 (206-285-9400; 800-426-7794 outside Washington).
Special Expeditions, 720 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10019 (212-765-7740; 800-762-0003 outside New York State).
Starlauro Cruises, c/o Express Travel Services, 350 Fifth Avenue, Suite 7718, New York, N.Y. 10118 (212-629-3630; 800-223-5799 outside New York State).
Sun Line Cruises, 1 Rockefeller Plaza, Suite 315, New York, N.Y. 10020 (212-397-6400; 800-872-6400 outside New York City).
Swan Hellenic and Swan Hellenic Nile Cruises, c/o Esplanade Tours, 581 Boylston Street, Boston, Mass. 02116 (617-266-7465; 800-426-5492).
Tall Ship Adventures, 1010 South Joliet Street, Suite 200, Aurora, Colo. 80012 (303-341-0335; 800-662-0090).
Windjammer Barefoot Cruises, 1759 Bay Road, Miami Beach, Fla. 33139 (305-672-6453; 800-327-2601 outside Florida; 800-432-3364 in Florida).
Windstar Cruises, 300 Elliott Avenue West, Seattle, Wash. 98119 (206-281-3535).
Yugoslav Great Lakes Line (see Freighter World Cruises).


Angela H. Lawrence Has a Wedding
Angela Helene Lawrence, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Lawrence of Greenwich, Conn., was married at Christ Episcopal Church there yesterday to James Ewers Lineberger Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lineberger of Delray Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Sydney A. Woodd-Cahusac performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Lineberger, a graduate of Greenwich Academy and Pine Manor College, is the buyer for the LS Collection and the director and buyer for Objects Lazy Susan, both home accessories companies in New York.
Her father, a sales associate in the Greenwich office of the Coldwell Banker real-estate company, was until recently the group vice president for sales, marketing and service at Pitney Bowes in Stamford, Conn.
She is a great-great-granddaughter of William Van Duzer Lawrence, the founder of Sarah Lawrence College in Bronxville, N.Y., who named the college for his wife.


Pro Football; Redskin Defense Paves a Comeback
As the Washington Redskins slipped in the last two seasons to 7-9 and 10-6 records and failed to make the playoffs, so did their defense slip as well.
The fall defensively was as much in reputation as it was in numbers.
Washington's defensive demise in 1988 in part led to the Redskins' finishing last in the league in takeaway-giveway differential at 23.
In pass defense last season, the Redskins finished No. 21., and no Redskin finished among the league's top 10 in sacks.


Group Says Violations Pervade Capital Foster Care
In an exhaustive study of the foster care system in the District of Columbia, the American Civil Liberties Union says it has found pervasive violations of Federal law that are typical of mismanagement in foster care systems around the nation.
In its study of more than 700 cases, filed as part of a lawsuit against the District, the civil liberties union said District employees had repeatedly violated the law by failing to make reasonable efforts to solve problems in the home before taking children into custody, by failing to review the children's cases every six months once they were in foster care and by failing to carry out adoption plans promptly for those who could not return home.


Letting Environmental Groups Cry Wolf
To the Editor:
The article about Du Pont's environmental strategies ("Ed Woolard Walks Du Pont's Tightrope," Oct. 14) is compromised by poor balance and the use of specious claims by environmental pressure groups.
Du Pont's figures are audited, reflect scientific evidence and estimates and are in large agreement with the findings of appropriate governmental bodies (like the Environmental Protection Agency) and legal decisions.
But the chart and the allegations from patently biased sources, like Citizens Action and Greenpeace,are self-serving and sinister.
The "cry wolf" activists alarm the public unnecessarily, extort money from industry through questionable and unjust legal and propaganda tactics -- and make good copy for media that promote their tilted agenda at the price of good journalism.
Your reporting on Bhopal was terrific, but when you stray too far from facts and scientific evidence, and give undue attention and credence to such partial sources you fail the litmus test.
MARK B. LEEDS  New York, Oct. 15


For God ...
UNDER GOD  Religion and American Politics.
By Garry Wills. 445 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.95.


Lifestyle: Sunday Outing; Gazing At Nature Or Stars
Route 22 carves its way through central New Jersey, from the outskirts of Newark to the Delaware River.
On each side of that highway lie some of the most scenic mountains and woods in the state.
One such oasis, 25 miles from New York, is the 2,000-acre Watchung Reservation, a Union County park with hiking trails, picnic areas, a nature museum, a planetarium and an unusual history.


Campus Life: San Francisco State; Do-It-Yourself Physicists Build a Costly Lab for a Mere Pittance
Before Barbara Neuhauser, an associate professor of physics, and 12 of her graduate students at San Francisco State University began building a dust-free laboratory, their coffers were nearly as empty as the void they intended to study.
For their research on invisible particles called neutrinos, which some scientists theorize are part of the so-called dark matter in the universe, they needed a pressurized "clean room." In such a room, air would be filtered and surfaces not contaminated; the room would have to be equipped with dozens of custom-made tools, including small computers and photographic equipment.


Postings: Sunset Park Strip; New Stores In Pipeline
The storage yard of a pipe company in the heart of Brooklyn's industrial Sunset Park section might seem an unlikely site for a new shopping center.
But next spring the Brookhill Group, a Manhattan real estate development and consulting company, expects to break ground for a 100,000-square-foot strip center near the 38th Street exit of the Gowanus Expressway.
So far, no architect has been retained.
The $20-millon project will rise on a 6.7 acre-site between Second and Third Avenues and 37th and 39th Streets now used by the Davidson Pipe Company, which will move elsewhere in Sunset Park before the start of construction.
"The visibility of the site from the expressway is its greatest asset," said Ronald Bruder, president of Brookhill, which specializes in upgrading distressed retail properties.
"More than 90,000 cars pass it each week and the area gets a considerable amount of pedestrian traffic, too."
Mr.
Bruder said the center probably will have a multiscreen movie theater and up to 10 stores.
He is discussing tenancy with drug, food and toy stores.
The cost of space in the new center has not yet been determined.


Votes in Congress; Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Civil Rights: Vote to override President Bush's veto of a bill intended to reverse a series of recent Supreme Court decisions that civil rights groups say made it more difficult for workers to win discrimination suits.
Failed, with 66 votes in favor and 34 opposed (one vote less than the two-thirds needed), Oct. 24.
2.
Arts Endowment: Vote on an amendment to a measure providing funds for the National Endowment for the Arts that would have barred government grants for materials "that depict or describe, in a patently offensive way, sexual or excretory activities or organs." Rejected 70 to 29, Oct. 24.
3.
Farm Bill: Vote on passage of a major farm bill that calls for expenditures of $41 billion over the next five fiscal years.
Approved 60 to 36, Oct. 25.
1
2
3
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Y
N
N
Lieberman (D)
Y
N
N
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Y
N
N
Lautenberg (D)
Y
N
N
New York
D'Amato (R)
N
N
Y
Moynihan (D)
Y
N
N
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.  House
1.
Farm Bill: Vote on passage of a major farm bill that calls for expenditures of $41 billion over the next five fiscal years.
Approved 318 to 102, Oct. 23.
2.
Budget: Vote on passage of a deficit-reduction package of tax increases and spending restraints that is supported by the Bush Administration.
Approved 228 to 200, Oct. 27.
1
2
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D)
Y
Y
3. Morrison (D)
A
Y
4. Shays (R)
N
Y
5. Rowland (R)
A
N
6. Johnson (R)
Y
Y
New Jersey
1. Vacant
2. Hughes (D)
N
N
3. Pallone (D)
N
N
4. Smith (R)
Y
N
5. Roukema (R)
N
N
6. Dwyer (D)
N
N
7. Rinaldo (R)
Y
N
8. Roe (D)
Y
N
9. Torricelli (D)
A
N
10. Payne (D)
Y
N
11. Gallo (R)
N
N
12. Courter (R)
Y
Y
13. Saxton (R)
N
N
14. Guarini (D)
Y
N
New York
1. H'br'kner(D)
Y
Y
2. Downey (D)
N
Y
3. Mrazek (D)
N
Y
4. Lent (R)
Y
Y
5. McGrath (R)
Y
A
6. Flake (D)
Y
N
7. Ackerman (D)
Y
Y
8. Scheuer (D)
N
Y
9. Manton (D)
Y
Y
10. Schumer (D)
Y
Y
11. Towns (D)
Y
N
12. Owens (D)
N
N
13. Solarz (D)
Y
Y
14. Molinari (R)
Y
N
15. Green (R)
N
Y
16. Rangel (D)
Y
N
17. Weiss (D)
N
N
18. Serrano (D)
Y
Y
19. Engel (D)
Y
Y
20. Lowey (D)
Y
Y
21. Fish (R)
Y
Y
22. Gilman (R)
Y
Y
23. McNulty (D)
Y
Y
24. Solomon (R)
Y
N
25. Boehlert (R)
Y
Y
26. Martin (R)
Y
N
27. Walsh (R)
Y
N
28. McHugh (D)
Y
Y
29. Horton (R)
Y
N
30. Slaughter (D)
Y
Y
31. Paxon (R)
Y
N
32. LaFalce (D)
Y
Y
33. Nowak (D)
N
N
34. Houghton (R)
Y
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


12! 12! 12!
Changing the time, once upon a time, presented no great challenge.
The hardest part was remembering (spring forward, fall back) which direction to turn the hands for the daylight/standard switch.
That was when clocks had hands.
Now they have instructions, and a simple chore has become a minor ordeal.
One might start by restoring standard time in the kitchen, confidently, because the wall clock requires no expertise.
It's battery operated but still there's the familiar knob on the back; turn it counterclockwise and the hands move backward.


Ivory Coast Faces First Free Elections Today
After a brief and bitter campaign, voters of the Ivory Coast will choose a president on Sunday in their first free elections in nearly three decades.
Most political commentators believe that the incumbent, Felix Houphouet-Boigny, will almost certainly come out ahead of his challenger, Laurent Gbabgo, a history professor and leader of the Ivorian People's Front.


Talking: Foreclosure; Lenders Offering Options
IT used to be that when a homeowner failed to meet mortgage payments the lender almost always sought to foreclose on the property.
Now, however, lenders are under financial pressure to find new ways to deal with borrowers' delinquencies, which are becoming far more common.
The aim is to keep a delinquent borrower from simply abandoning the property, as many do when foreclosure seems inevitable.
"In the last six months we've started doing a lot more in the way of preventive medicine," said Len Druger, vice chairman of Citicorp Mortgage.


THE DRUG THAT WORKS
The admiration I have for Dr.
Thomas E. Starzl and his liver transplant team at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center is immeasurable ("The Drug that Works in Pittsburgh," by Barry Werth, Sept. 30).
They recently saved my life through an orthotopic liver transplantation, and I have been taking the immunosuppressant FK-506 without any of the side effects associated with cyclosporine.
Much is made of Dr.
Starzl's alleged mercurial personality, but I have found him to be a compassionate healer whose single-minded purpose is to save as many lives as possible.
Anyone who has witnessed hospital wards filled with jaundiced, bloated and emaciated patients dying of end-stage liver disease knows why Dr.
Starzl valiantly leads the battle for the advancement of transplantation.
But Dr.
Starzl's efforts, and the potential healing power of FK-506, will be futile unless our society creates a national awareness for organ donation, and our health-care system accepts transplantation as standard medical practice.
FREDERICK B. HOOT
New Canaan, Conn.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Milltown 130,000
49 Broad Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 8-year-old colonial; fireplace, new vinyl siding, deck; taxes $2,460.
Monroe 120,000
68 Applegate Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old colonial; new kitchen, deck, pool; taxes $1,176.
Morristown 175,000
96 Ogden Place  5-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old contemporary; flagstone porch, brick fireplace, 1 acre; taxes $3,740.
South River 162,000
63 New Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 28-year-old split level; finished basement, w/b stove, 1-car garage; taxes $3,091.
Tenafly 275,000
22 Surrey Lane  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 52-year-old colonial; eat-in-kitchen, fenced yard, c/a; taxes $4,128.
Westfield 190,000
828 Tice Place  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 55-year-old cottage; fireplace, eat-in-kitchen, front and rear porches; taxes $4,192.
OTHER AREAS Old Lyme, Conn. 152,000
33 Center Beach Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old ranch; w/b stove, bay window in living room; taxes $989.
Somers, N.Y. 296,000
Lee Road
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; family room, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $4,810.
Northport, L.I. 275,000
1 Starlit Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; den, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $5,400.


Out the Door
Elizabeth H. Dole is out of Government work.
After 25 years and six Administrations, she said last week that she was resigning as Labor Secretary to become president of the American Red Cross.
The only woman appointed to the Bush Cabinet, Mrs.
Dole tended to stick to workplace issues rather than labor disputes.
She was credited with helping settle the coal miners' strike against the Pittston Company, but was criticized, along with the President, for not intervening in the Eastern Airlines and Greyhound strikes.
In negotiations with Capitol Hill on minimum wage legislation, which had always been a Labor Department job, it was the White House Chief of Staff, John H. Sununu, who took the leading role.
In fact, according to labor leaders as well as to some of Mrs.
Dole's friends, Mr.
Sununu was constantly butting into her jurisdiction.
But last week Mrs.
Dole turned aside that suggestion, adding, "I can't imagine who was saying this."


Why Frida Kahlo Speaks to the 90's
Like a goddess, she is referred to by her first name only.
Madonna, Isabella Rossellini and Cindy Crawford are fans.
She has captivated everyone from scholars writing dissertations to Chicano muralists, fashion designers, feminists, artists and homosexuals.
According to Sassy, a magazine for teen-age girls, she is one of the 20 women of this century that American girls most admire.
From her death in 1954 until the late 1970's, the Mexican painter Frida Kahlo was virtually unknown outside her native country.
Today she has become an international cult figure.
You can buy Frida Kahlo buttons, posters, postcards, T-shirts, comics and jewelry.
You might even come upon such fetishistic objects as a Frida Kahlo mask or a framed self-portrait into which a silver sacred heart has been inserted.
In 1984, in recognition of Kahlo's pre-eminence among Mexican women artists -- indeed, in the opinion of many Frida is the greatest painter Mexico has produced -- the Mexican Government decreed her art to be national patrimony. (She thus joins an elite company of male artists that includes her husband, the muralist Diego Rivera.)


Corporations Struggle to Sell Transferees' Houses
It's tough enough to have one house to sell these days.
But America's largest companies are ending up with hundreds, as the stagnant real-estate market swells their inventories of houses they buy from employees they are relocating.
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours and Company, , which moves 4,000 employees a year, has watched its inventories double in Delaware and Pennsylvania in the last year, to 160 houses.
To sell those houses without driving prices down further, Du Pont has adopted a program of incentives to lure home buyers, including low-interest mortgages and a chance to win prizes just by looking at a house.


LIVING WITH LABELS
In Penelope Green's beauty article "Living with Labels" (Sept. 30), Mark Dolliver of Adweek points out that "most women would still rather identify with Coco Chanel or a little black dress than Marie Curie and a white lab coat." I say that most men would still rather identify with Joe Montana than with Dr.
Albert Schweitzer.
Too bad.
FABIENNE CHRISTENSON
Cincinnati


Campus Life: Swarthmore; Seeking Women To Protect Others After Dark
As students leave Swarthmore College's library or social center late at night, a woman may offer to walk them home.
This semester, five women are acting as escorts in the college's Safewalk service, a security program in which students offer to accompany men and women back to their dormitories.
While Safewalk has hired women in the past, typically only one or two apply and work each semester.
The low turnout may have been traceable to a belief that only men could become escorts, said Christina M. Saunders, the program's first female coordinator.


Miss Singh to Wed D. M. Danzinger
Mr. and Mrs.
Jogindar Singh of New Delhi have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sheena Jogindar Singh, to David Michael Danziger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick M. Danziger of New York.
A January wedding is planned.
Miss Singh, 23 years old, is studying for a doctorate in political science at Columbia University.
A graduate of the Modern School in New Delhi and Harvard University, she was a correspondent for the Indian Financial Express and the Business and Financial Observer, both in New Delhi.
Her father, who heads an adventure travel group in New Delhi, was formerly the commercial manager for Air India in New Delhi.
Her mother, Sharda Jogindar, recently retired as the headmistress of the Modern School.


Clowns and Voters
Kansas City voters appear to be supporting strongly a local version of a national trend toward getting rid of unpopular legislators by limiting the number of terms they can serve.
Two-thirds of respondents to a poll taken by The Kansas City Star and KMBC-TV say they will vote on Nov. 6 for a proposed two-term limit on members of the City Council.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about letters written in capitivity by Aldo Moro, the former Italian Prime Minister who was killed in 1978, misidentified the Communist leader then.
He was Edrico Berlinguer, not Sergio Berlinguer.


Blunders by Brass
To the Sports Editor:
Frank Cashen, rather than accepting any blame for trading away all of the Mets' speed, spunk and right-handed relievers, attributes the team's poor performance to the failures of his "three, four and five hitters."
Similarly, Philadelphia Eagles owner Norman Braman, who refused to pay All-Star holdout Keith Jackson and has undermined his head coach, takes none of the blame for his team's 1-3 start.
"It wasn't Buddy Ryan's contract that allowed the Indianapolis Colts to go 90 yards down the field," Braman said.
The motto of today's bumbling front office egoists is, "The fault lies not within ourselves but with our stars." RICHARD T. MERMELSTEIN  New York


The Cult Of Otherness
To the Editor:
Richard Bernstein's article "Why the Cutting Edge Has Lost Its Bite"  [ Sept. 30 ]  about the arts in a society in disarray and Neal Gabler's comments on Jews and blacks in Hollywood  [ "Jews, Blacks and Trouble in Hollywood," Sept. 2 ]  analyze perceptively the competing forces that threaten to tear apart our long-established consensus of spiritual tolerance.
Mr.
Bernstein looks at the effects of the civil rights movement and the cult of otherness it spawned, but he fails, not surprisingly, to lay the blame where it properly belongs -- to legislative and judicial imposition of a quota system called "affirmative action."  Civil rights legislation took its cues from the long efforts of B'nai B'rith to end anti-Semitism and discrimination.
But B'nai B'rith never demanded special treatment of Jews beyond the constitutional rights of each citizen.
Yet the development of affirmative action out of the original civil rights legislation has gone far beyond securing individual constitutional rights.
Individual rights have been abandoned in favor of legislatively identified group rights, a concept alien to American constitutional philosophy.
It should therefore not surprise anyone that self-appointed leaders will champion the rights of such entitled groups to their own profit in the name of "the oppressed." Neither should it surprise anyone that pressure groups will take advantage of this climate to advance their own agenda.
Unfortunately, the desire to be fair to all and to redress old wrongs has created an atmosphere that closely resembles the last days of the Weimar Republic, including again a rising tide of anti-Semitism among those who profited most from the efforts of Jews to secure human rights for everyone.
RICHARD HYSE  Oswego, N.Y.
The writer is a professor emeritus of economics at SUNY Oswego.


That's a Terrible Question!
To the Editor:
In an essay entitled "How Much of My Story Is True? That's a Terrific Question!" (Oct. 7), someone claiming to be David Huddle says that it's all right to ask which events in his stories (stories I've loved for years) actually took place, and that he's willing to tell.
I don't want to know, any more than I'd like the bread I eat for breakfast to decompose itself into flour, yeast and salt.
Those stories belong to me, whole, and nothing alters that ownership, not even meeting the man, which I did, years after I'd begun reading him.
He doesn't even look like the fellow in my mind who is his main character.
I too write fiction.
An editor once said to me, "All writers write about themselves." I was alarmed.
I didn't want him to imagine my stories were true -- they almost never are.
Then I had a dream.
I was in the editor's office, and he had me call up one of my characters to prove that she was myself.
He handed me his phone and waited smugly while I dialed.
I was embarrassed: first I'd written about this imaginary woman, now I was disturbing her in person.
She answered the phone and said she was my sister, a sister I never knew I had.
Mr.
Huddle argues that when we say, "I'm reading Flaubert," we mean the person.
He's wrong, but so what -- he's not even real.
I know David Huddle, and he is not the man who wrote that essay.
He's a shelf of books -- all of which, by the way, are 100 percent true.
ALICE MATTISON  New Haven


Taping Drywall Seams
GYPSUM wallboard, or drywall, is easier to apply than plaster and most other wall materials, but covering the seams between panels is usually a stumbling block for the inexperienced.
The trick is achieving a smooth surface that will not show beneath paint and wallpaper.


BREEDER'S CUP: Racing's Darkest Day, a Belmont Disaster; Go for Wand and Mr. Nickerson Dead
The richest day of a thoroughbred racing season already marked by disappointment ended in disaster yesterday when the champion filly Go for Wand and the popular sprinter Mr.
Nickerson died on the track at Belmont Park.
In the midst of her greatest performance in a brilliant career, Go for Wand shattered her right foreleg while courageously holding off Bayakoa in the final 100 yards of the $1 million Distaff, the third of the seven Breeders' Cup races on a $10 million racing card.
As thousands in the crowd of 51,236 fans who had been cheering gasped and watched in horror, the 3-year-old filly crumpled, got up and took her final strides, and then went down in a heap.
Track officials erected some screens, and the filly was destroyed by lethal injection as her handlers, rival horsemen and many fans wept openly.
Go for Wand's jockey, Randy Romero, was not injured in the spill.


BOOKS &amp; BUSINESS: In Short
GRIT, GUTS, AND GENIUS.
True Tales of MegaSuccess: Who Made Them Happen and How They Did It.
By John Hillkirk and Gary Jacobson. (Houghton Mifflin, Paper, $8.95.) "How do you get to Carnegie Hall?" asks the old chestnut, to which the answer is, of course, "Practice, practice, practice." In "Grit, Guts, and Genius," the USA Today business reporters John Hillkirk and Gary Jacobson asked the equivalent question of a number of successful executives in business, sports and entertainment.
The authors found eight common themes: "Trust your gut," "Make the complex simple," "Tap the power of every individual," "Sell fantasy and reassure people," "Tap the power of information," "Master quality," "Target, target, target" and "March at a slow and steady pace." Despite these catchy phrases, many of the answers that come through in the 27 relentlessly upbeat profiles gathered here aren't particularly complex.
The key ingredients seem to be talent, old-fashioned hard work, detailed planning and an emphasis on quality, along with a can-do attitude, a good sense of timing, an ability to gauge calculated risks and a little luck.
Some of the most interesting figures included are offbeat choices: New York City Police Commissioner Lee Brown; the educator Peter Kline; the Pulitzer Prize-winning Philadelphia Inquirer investigative reporters Donald Bartlett and James Steele, and Tom Galla, who coached his Trumbull, Conn., All Stars to the Little League World Series championship.
One only wishes the authors had probed their subjects more deeply.


'Auschwitz Remains Unique'
To the Editor:
Your reviewer of Gunter Grass's "Two States -- One Nation?" (Sept. 30) writes that "it is a pity that he should have come to identify the unspeakable crime of Auschwitz with the nation-state Germany."
Why is it a pity?
It was the legitimate Government of Germany, recognized as such by all the world powers, including the United States, and backed by the overwhelming majority of the German people, a people who fought valiantly to the very end for Adolf Hitler, that carried out this unspeakable atrocity.
But there is a far better authority than I, among the Germans themselves, who has raised this question and answered it once and for all.
Speaking two years ago to a group of mostly revisionist German historians, who like your reviewer also questioned German responsibility for Auschwitz, Richard von Weizsacker, the President of West Germany, declared: "The German nation cannot make others responsible for what it and its neighbors endured under National Socialism. . . . Auschwitz remains unique. It was perpetrated by Germans in the name of Germany. This truth is immutable and will not be forgotten."  WILLIAM L. SHIRER  Lenox, Mass.


Taping Drywall Seams
GYPSUM wallboard, or drywall, is easier to apply than plaster and most other wall materials, but covering the seams between panels is usually a stumbling block for the inexperienced.
The trick is achieving a smooth surface that will not show beneath paint and wallpaper.


Shore Dinners for Ample Appetites
ENTERTAINING MOMENTS -- the restaurant group that brought Bruxelles, Scoozzi, Three Sixty Eight and Gentree to New Haven -- has now ventured a few miles northeast to Guilford with a new place called Schooner's.
Judging by the packed houses on our several visits, the same know-how that made the other places such roaring successes is working its magic here.
Schooner's is not a clone of past triumphs.
Its plain, down-home shore-dinner atmosphere, menu and food might disappoint patrons expecting trendy dishes and the Bruxelles-Scoozzi innovations.
Schooner's, as its name suggests, is of the sea, which is fitting, as it is at the very end of Whitfield Street near the water's edge and across from the Guilford municipal docks.
It replaces the long-familiar Little Stone House restaurant, a mainstay of the neighborhood for years.
The small building, a one-story stone house, dates from 1949.
Schooner's interior, though, has a more 1990's look, its cream walls covered with pictures of ships and its ceiling decorated with oars and sculls.


BOOKS &amp; BUSINESS: In Short
MOUNTAINS OF DEBT: Crisis and Change in Renaissance Florence, Victorian Britain, and Postwar America.
By Michael Veseth. (Oxford University, $29.95.) Both Florence and Britain were, at different times, the most admired economic powers in the world.
Yet both tumbled off their pedestals.
Why?
In his academic study, "Mountains of Debt," Michael Veseth, an economist at the University of Puget Sound, points to public debt and government tax policies.
Renaissance Florence not only borrowed from its citizens to finance wars and government services but even established a dowry fund to insure the marriageability of their daughters.
Eventually the government had to pay such high interest rates that Florentines found it more profitable to invest in public debt than in the productive economy.
Meanwhile, a tax loophole discouraged private savings and encouraged spending on lavish homes.
Ironically, some of the great art of the Renaissance was made possible in part by this misguided tax policy.
By the 1630's, Florence's economy was shattered.
Victorian Britain's problem, Mr.
Veseth contends, was precisely the opposite: a "compulsive need to achieve fiscal balance." As a result, the Government clung to a tax policy with what he calls one "fatal flaw." Because it made no provision for capital depreciation, it stunted the growth of modern industries.
By the 1870's, he contends, Britain was no longer a major economic force.
Both Florence and Britain, Mr.
Veseth writes, could have prevented their falls had they acted at a critical point.
He sees the debt-laden United States at just such a point, teetering on its economic pedestal.
Among his recommendations: raise individual tax rates, remove tax incentives that encourage borrowing and establish a national sales tax.
The new taxes would go toward reducing the budget deficit, improving education and building a high-quality service sector -- the nation's last, best hope for remaining competitive.


Review/Fashion; Color, Cut and All the Trimmings
It's that time again, time for New York designers to show their stuff for spring.
Scores of shows will be held in hotel ballrooms, lofts and showrooms on and off Seventh Avenue this week.
But some of the most promising young designers do not put on formal shows.
Here is a look at the collections of three who have talent and imagination and a commitment to making quality clothing.


Elizabeth Keese Is Married
Elizabeth Ann Keese, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Mumford Keese 4th of Huntington, L.I., was married yesterday to Lawrence Paul Blasius, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Lawrence Blasius of Arlington, Va.
The Rev.
Carlton Lee officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
Mrs.
Blasius, 32 years old, graduated from Ithaca College.
She is an assistant vice president at Paine Webber in New York.
Mr.
Blasius, 35, graduated from Columbia University.
He is the director of national broadcast for the Busch Media Group in New York.


Mandela Arrives in Japan
Nelson Mandela, the South African black leader, arrived in Japan today, avoiding direct comment on a controversy over remarks by Justice Minister Seiroku Kajiyama likening foreign prostitutes to American blacks, who he said ruin good neighborhoods.
On his six-day visit, Mr.
Mandela is to seek financial support for the African National Congress and urge Japan not to lift economic sanctions against South Africa until blacks get the same voting power as whites, a spokesman for the congress said.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman, Taro Watanabe, has said Japan is considering lifting sanctions in view of reforms by President F. W. de Klerk.


On the Stump, Lundine Looks to '94
Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine has been running hard.
For the last four months, he has been scurrying about the state delivering six-a-day speeches in which he urges voters to return the Cuomo-Lundine team to Albany, to approve the environmental bond act, and to elect a Democratic majority to the State Senate.
But the true focus of Mr.
Lundine's rigorous campaign is less the election this Nov. 6 than the one on Nov. 8, 1994.
The Lieutenant Governor, who toils largely in anonymity, views this year's race as his last, best opportunity to become better known before the expected race to succeed Mr.
Cuomo begins.


Nevada-Las Vegas Seeks to Lift Ban
Officials at Nevada-Las Vegas are to meet with National Collegiate Athletic Assocition representatives in Chicago on Sunday, hopeful that a second appeal could allow the Runnin' Rebels to defend their national basketball championship next spring.
"These kids have worked hard to represent our university and I think they deserve the chance to defend their title," said the schools' president, Robert Maxson, on Friday.
"My major concern has always been that our youngsters be treated fairly and that they not be penalized for something in which they were not involved."


Tech Notes; A Flying Whale of an Idea -- Its Name Is Hydro 2000
A FRENCH group is encouraging international aerospace companies to develop a huge cargo seaplane to be called Hydro 2000.
The plane would be about 330 feet long, with a projected payload of 880,000 pounds.
By comparison, the Boeing Company's largest freighter, the B-747-200, is just 231 feet long, with a typical payload of about 250,000 pounds.
The French group, headed by Vice Admiral Yves Goupil, the French Navy's vice chief of operations, perceives the need for such a large, all-cargo aircraft to handle the continued growth in freight projected for the next century.


Xavier Cugat, 90, the Bandleader Who Rose on the Rumba's Tide
Xavier Cugat, the popular Spanish-born bandleader who introduced many Latin American rhythms to North American audiences, died of heart failure yesterday at the Quiron Clinic in Barcelona, Spain, his doctors said in a statement issued there.
He was 90 years old.
Mr.
Cugat popularized the rumba in North America and paved the way for other bandleaders who played in Latin styles ranging from traditional dance music to jazz adaptations.


Bethanne Ryan Weds Keith DeMatteis
Bethanne Marie Ryan and Keith Michael DeMatteis were married yesterday at the St.
Francis de Sales Roman Catholic Church in Belle Harbor, Queens.
The Rev.
John D. Alexander performed the ceremony, assisted by Msgr.
John J. Bracken, the Rev.
Coleman J. Costello and Brother Richard J. Curry.
Mrs.
DeMatteis is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas N. Ryan of Belle Harbor.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfonso L. DeMatteis of Belle Harbor.
The bride, 28 years old, is a graduate of the University of Vermont.
She was until recently a securities trader at Weeden &amp; Company in New York.
Her father is the general sales manager and a vice president at WWOR-TV in New York.
The bridegroom, 29 and a graduate of Villanova University, is a certified public accountant and the assistant treasurer at the DeMatteis Organizations, real-estate developers and builders in Elmont, L.I.
His father is the company's construction director.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
ON the corner of Court Street and what once was known as High Street, now Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Boulevard, in the Central Ward of Newark, there stands one of the grandest houses ever built in that rawboned community, a symbol of what Newark once was and a rallying point for what it might someday become.
It does not look like much now.
The roof, three stories above the sidewalk, is blanketed with black plastic.
Windows are boarded up; brownstone lintels are cracked and broken;, steps list so badly that were they not made of stone they would have slipped into the mud a long time ago.


Crime
The atmosphere in Edward Sklepowich's DEATH IN A SERENE CITY (Morrow, $18.95), a mystery set in Venice, rises thicker than the predawn fog that rolls off the Grand Canal.
Among the gaudy characters are artists and aristocrats, glass blowers and mask makers, pious priests and humble washerwomen -- even the desiccated corpse of a saint.
The action glides (rather too languidly at times) from the cobbled streets and ancient buildings of the living city to the city of the dead that lies across the lagoon on Sant'Ariano, a tour that allows plenty of time for espresso at Florian's.
Despite occasional lapses into guidebook prose, the first-time author takes care to plot a pretty mystery in the orderly classical manner and to resolve it with a nice, macabre touch.
At the center of the story is Urbino Macintyre, an American biographer with a keen interest in dead subjects, including such recently departed souls as an expatriate writer who jumped into a canal and a local washerwoman who was murdered in church, presumably by the thief who stole the bones of its resident saint.
Sad affairs, if hardly mysterious.


Beijing Condemns Pornography as Subversive
China has begun a harsh new attack on pornography, threatening to impose the death penalty for those involved in the business and accusing Western countries of titillating the Chinese prurient interest as a means of subverting the Communist Party.
The campaign, which has strong anti-foreign overtones, has gained force in recent days and culminated today in a biting front-page editorial in the party newspaper, People's Daily.


Gorbachev Sees 'Some Signs' That Iraq May Reconsider Its Position
With a senior Soviet official currently engaged in a new effort to negotiate a settlement to the Persian Gulf crisis, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev hinted today that Iraq may be reconsidering its refusal to withdraw from Kuwait.
"There are some signs the top leadership in Iraq has understood that a solution cannot be found through ultimatums," Mr.
Gorbachev told a news conference during an official visit to Spain.
"Perhaps I am wrong. In the next days, things will become clearer."


The San Francisco Ballet Is Standing Tall
This month, The San Francisco Ballet appeared at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington, for the second time since Helgi Tomasson became artistic director in 1985.
During the opening night, which featured three East Coast premieres, I forgot that I was not watching a company from New York City.
This is the kind of backhanded compliment that sounds like no compliment at all.
What I mean, of course, is that a so-called regional ballet troupe usually impresses itself as such and that the level of dancing in the San Francisco company is now so high that it has jumped out of that category and could be mistaken (favorably) for that of the New York City Ballet or American Ballet Theater.


College Football: The Region; Fordham Is Loser
Bob Strope threw a 52-yard scoring pass to Larry Catalina in the first quarter and went on to finish 20 for 36 for 245 yards as undefeated Washington and Jefferson, ranked fifth in the East in Division III of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, edged Fordham, 20-18, yesterday afternoon at Jack Coffey Field in the Bronx.
Fordham (1-6), a member of the Division I-AA Patriot League, was led by Gary Brennan, who completed 21 of 44 passes for 246 yards.
Hofstra 65, Albany State 7
Rhory Moss threw three touchdown passes and Tim Lynch threw two for the undefeated Flying Dutchmen (8-0), ranked No. 1 in the East in Division III.
Moss finished 25 for 43 for 291 yards and Lynch was 6 for 8 for 94 yards.
The 65 points tied the school's single-game scoring record set in a 65-14 victory over C. W. Post in 1959.
Hofstra also established a single-season scoring record with 369 points, bettering the 353 of 1982.
Ramapo 24, Iona 21
James Grant, quarterback for the Roadrunners (8-0), completed touchdown passes of 2 yards to Gerald Jackson and 4 yards to Chris Womack and also ran 2 yards for a third score as Ramapo rallied from a 12-0 first-quarter deficit.
Chris Della Camera caught scoring passes of 13 and 29 yards from Ted Cooney for the Gaels (4-3).
C.
W.
Post 35, Wagner 12
Dean Carino, quarterback for the Pioneers (7-1) who won their fifth in a row to remain in contention for a playoff bid, ran 27 yards for one touchdown and completed two scoring passes covering 5 and 44 yards to Anthony Pergola.
Derrick Perez established a school record with a 76-yard interception return for a touchdown.
Merchant Marine 25 Stony Brook 18
The Mariners (4-3, 3-1) overcame the Patriots' 19-0 second-quarter lead behind Brett Russell's touchdown runs of 22 and 51 yards in the Liberty Conference Game.
Bill Zagger of Stony Brook (0-7-1, 0-3) raced 100 yards for a score after intercepting the Mariner quarterback Chris Clark.
Marist 26, St.
John's 15
Pat Mullaly, a fullback, scored two touchdowns on runs of 10 and 2 yards for the Red Foxes (5-2-1).
Anthony Russo of the Redmen (5-3), who lost their third consecutive game, rushed for 128 yards on 22 carries and scored on a 9-yard run.


Shaky Numbers Behind China's Rosy Economic Picture
CHINA appears to be easing out of its worst economic slump in a dozen years, but Chinese and foreign economists say the recovery will be slow and painful and that there is no sign of any significant move toward a market economy.
Just a few months ago, there were some tentative hints that China might lift price controls and adopt other market-oriented changes.


As the Retarded Live Longer, Anxiety Grips Aging Parents
Every afternoon at 3, Marie Covello waits for the van that brings her severely retarded 31-year-old son home from his day program.
She takes John's hand to help him up the stairs of their Verona, N.J., house, pats his red hair into place, gives him a glass of water, reminds him to go to the bathroom and settles him in front of the television.
And in the back of her mind, as in those of thousands of other aging parents of retarded children, Mrs.
Covello, who is 73, wonders how long she and her 75-year-old husband, Vince, will be able to take care of Johnny -- and what will happen to him when they cannot.


Iraqi Rationing Seen as Ploy
Iraq's announcement that it would ration gasoline was a maneuver to persuade enemies to postpone any attack, experts believe.
Page 10.


College Football: South; Shutout Is First at Alabama Since '55
Penn State's defense accomplished something that had not been done on Alabama's home field in 35 years.
At Bryant-Denny Stadium, where Alabama lost only two games during the 25-year reign of the late coach Bear Bryant, Penn State (5-2) blanked Alabama, 9-0, today on three field goals by Craig Fayak.


For Police, a Delicate Job of Reordering Priorities
When Louis M. dialed the 911 police emergency number in this eastern suburb of Denver on a recent night, Sheila McEwen answered in the middle of the first ring.
Within one second, the computer told her the caller's telephone number and the address and even that the caller was on an extension phone.
By punching one button, she displayed on her screen all the recent police calls to that address.
Another button told her which patrol car was closest while more lines of colored letters announced what other police calls were waiting or being handled in that area.


Even If Sanctions Are Lifted, Few Will Rush to South Africa
FORCES now seem to have been set in motion for lifting economic sanctions against South Africa -- a prospect acceptable to a growing number of blacks and whites.
The effect this will have on a badly weakened South African economy or on the future of American business there is far less clear.
Events in recent days, if the forces behind them are not reversed, are pointing the way toward lifting the sanctions as early as March, according to a senior United States State Department official.


Coins
One of the prettiest United States coins is due to go on the auction block early next month when Bowers and Merena will sell the Chris Schenkle collection.
That coin, the $4 dollar gold piece struck in 1880, lingers as a reminder of a time when the United States strived to put its coins into international trade.
In the late 1800's the Maria Theresa taler was widely accepted throughout Europe and in countries whose own currencies were poorly defined or non-existent.


A Barge Accident Spills Kerosene Into Hudson
A large barge carrying 31,000 barrels of kerosene struck a reef in the Hudson River 15 miles south of Poughkeepsie on Friday night, spewing 163,800 gallons of fuel into the water in what the Coast Guard classified as a major spill.
Cleanup workers retained by the barge's owner, whom the Coast Guard identified as the Red Star Company of New York City, worked yesterday with Coast Guard supervisors, to contain the two-mile-long spill and to sop it up with giant absorbent pads.
The kerosene was owned by the Amerada Hess Corporation of New York City, of which Red Star is an affiliate.


Chess
No one despises an isolated pawn like Bent Larsen.
The renowned Danish grandmaster cannot see any value whatsoever in having a pawn cut off from support by its comrades.
He has said, "An isolated pawn advanced in the center is supposed to give an advantage in space and that is supposed to give attacking chances against the enemy king. But it is all nebulous."


Ms. Greene Wed To A. M. Flaherty
Sarah O'Brien Greene, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
William D. Greene of New York, was married yesterday to A. Michael Flaherty, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Francis Flaherty of Scituate, Mass.
The Rev.
Harry Boyle performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
The bride, who will be known as Sarah Greene Flaherty, is 28 years old.
She is a research associate at the Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration.
She graduated from the Convent of the Sacred Heart in New York and cum laude from Smith College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received an M.B.A. degree from Harvard.
Her father was the senior partner in the New York law firm of Greene &amp; Bonaguidi.
Her mother, Patricia Clark Greene, was the president of the Rehearsal Club in New York, a low-cost residence for women in the performing arts.
The bridegroom, 29, is the president of Amara Capital Ltd., a merchant banking firm in Boston.
He graduated cum laude from Amherst College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard.
His father is a managing director of the Boston law firm of Rich, May, Bilodeau &amp; Flaherty.


Organized Looting
THE GREATEST-EVER BANK ROBBERY  The Collapse of the Savings and Loan Industry.
By Martin Mayer. 354 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $22.50.


Result Plus
Tennis  Edberg Beats Sampras: Top-ranked Stefan Edberg overcame a shaky start to beat Aleksandr Volkov, 7-6, 6-2, yesterday, setting up a final today against No. 2 Boris Becker in the Stockholm Open.
Becker reached the final with a 6-4, 6-4 victory over the United States Open champion, Pete Sampras.
Edberg struggled with his serve-and-volley game early in the semifinal and had to rally from a 2-5 deficit in the opening set.
He won the tie breaker, 7-4, acing the unseeded Volkov on the final point.
That point gave Edberg the confidence he needed.
After taking the tie breaker, Edberg broke Volkov with a backhand passing shot for a 3-1 lead in the second set and held easily the rest of the way. (AP) Capriati Reaches Final: Second-seeded Jennifer Capriati used an overpowering baseline game to beat No. 6 Gigi Fernandez, 6-2, 6-1, yesterday in the semifinals of the $150,000 Puerto Rico Open in San Juan.
Top-seeded Zina Garrison also advanced to the final with a 6-4, 6-4 victory over Carrie Cunningham to set up a Capriati-Garrison final today. (AP) Soccer  U.S.
Defeats Soviet Team: Troy Dayak scored the only goal midway through the first half to lift the United States National Team to a 1-0 victory over Spartak Moscow yesterday in Blaine, Minn.
Dayak, of Livermore, Calif., split three Soviet defenders at the seven-meter line and beat the goaltender, Viktor Derbunov.
Dayak, at age 19 the youngest player on the field, scored after taking a pass from a forward, Peter Vermes.
The goal was Dayak's second in three career international matches.
He was making his first start.
The Americans were helped by two dramatic saves in the first half by the goalkeeper, Mark Dodd of Dallas. (AP) Dog Show  'Enchilada' Named Best: Ch.
Dabney's Hot Enchilada of Lehigh, Pa., a Doberman Pinscher who answers to the name of Chili, and is owned by Linda and John Krukar of Bethlehem, Pa., yesterday was named best of 1,133 dogs at the Queensboro Kennel Club's 81st all-breed event at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens.
The top award was the sixth for the 2-year-old bitch and among the finalists she defeated was the American Staffordshire, Ch.
Fraja E. C. Winning Ticket, who was best at Queensboro last year.
Golf  U.S.
Team Takes Lead: Ayako Okamoto of Japan rolled in a 90-foot eagle putt on the last hole yesterday and helped the United States move ahead of a Japanese team after the second round of the Nichirei International.
Okamoto is playing for the American team in the competition between L.P.G.A.
Tour players in the two countries because she is a regular on the United States tour.
The American team won six of the eight matches on the second day of the three-day tournament and took the lead with nine and a half points.
The Japanese team, which led by one point going into the second round, have six and a half points. (AP) Douglas Takes One-Stroke Lead: Dale Douglass shot a six-under-par 66 yesterday to take a one-stroke lead after two rounds of the $400,000 Rancho Murieta Senior Gold Rush in California.
Douglass, who had shot a 71 on Friday, is at seven-under-par 137 through 36 holes.
Three golfers trailed Douglass by one stroke at 138 entering today's final round.
They are Bob Charles, who was at 138 after shooting a 70; George Archer, who shot 68, and Bob Betley, with a 66.(AP)


Ambitious Air Pollution Bill Sent to White House
The Senate granted final Congressional approval today to the 1990 Clean Air Act, a measure that transforms the 20-year-old original law from a path-breaking but narrow statute into an ambitious plan to cut contamination from every sizable source of air pollution in the nation.
The Senate vote, 89 to 10, means the legislation now goes to the White House, which has indicated that President Bush will sign it.


Stefanie Scheer, Reporter, Weds
Stefanie Paige Scheer, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Kenneth I. Scheer of Brookline, Mass., was married yesterday to Andrew Wakefield Young, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Young Jr. of Hanson, Mass.
The Rev.
Philip J. Zaeder, a Presbyterian minister, and Rabbi Allan L. Press performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Young, 27 years old, is a reporter at Sports Illustrated in New York.
She graduated from Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., and cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is an assistant clinical professor of gynecology at the Harvard Medical School and an attending physician at the Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.
Her mother, Ruth C. Scheer, is the executive director of the Cabot Family Charitable Trust in Boston.


Western Conference: Many Contenders for the Throne
AS the National Basketball Association begins its 45th season on Friday, parity is in vogue.
At least nine teams have realistic aspirations of winning the championship.
And the majority of the contenders are in the Western Conference.
Even some coaches in the Eastern Conference admit that the balance of power has shifted to the West.
"You could be an awfully good team in the West this year and struggle just to make the playoffs," said Stu Jackson, the Knicks' coach.
Here is a capsule look at all 27 teams.
Statistics are from last season.
WESTERN CONFERENCE: MIDWEST DIVISION San Antonio Spurs Quick Recap: 56-26 record last season, lost to Portland in second round of the playoffs.
New Faces: David Greenwood (free agent from Detroit), Sean Higgins (54th pick in the draft), Tony Massenburg (43d pick), Paul Pressey (in trade from Milwaukee), Dwayne Schintzius (24th pick).
Top Guns: David Robinson (24.3 points, 12 rebounds, 3.8 blocks), Terry Cummings (22.4 pts.), Willie Anderson (15.7 pts.), Pressey (11 pts.), Rod Strickland (10.6 pts.), Sean Elliott (10 pts.).
Game Plan: Robinson should only get better, a frightening thought for the rest of the league.
Depth is the biggest question mark, but Pressey should help in that department.
This team has enough talent to win a championship if it shows the maturity to withstand playoff pressure.
Utah Jazz Quick Recap: 55-27, lost to Phoenix in opening round of playoffs.
New Faces: Jeff Malone (in trade from Washington), Walter Palmer (33d pick).
Top Guns: Karl Malone (31 pts., 56.2 percent field-goal average, 11.1 rebs.), Jeff Malone (24.3 pts.), John Stockton (17.2 pts., 14.5 assists, 2.6 steals, 41.6% on 3-pointers), Thurl Bailey (14.2 pts.), Mark Eaton (2.4 blocks).
Game Plan: Jeff Malone, one of the game's best outside shooters, will give the Jazz more diversity.
Utah still lacks a strong bench, but it may not matter because Stockton and the two Malones are so good.
If this team loses in the first round of the playoffs for a third consecutive season, it may cost Coach Jerry Sloan his job.
Dallas Mavericks Quick Recap: 47-35, lost to Portland in first round of playoffs.
New Faces: Alex English (free agent from Denver), Phil Henderson (49th pick), Fat Lever (in trade from Denver), Rodney McCray (in trade from Sacramento).
Top Guns: Rolando Blackman (19.4 pts.), Lever (18.3 pts., 2.1 steals, 41% on 3-pointers), Derek Harper (18 pts., 2.2 steals), English (17.9 pts.), Roy Tarpley (16.8 pts.), McCray (16.6 pts.).
Game Plan: No team helped itself more during the off season.
Lever, English and McCray will benefit from joining a better team.
If Tarpley's drug problems are behind him, Dallas is a contender.
Houston Rockets Quick Recap: 41-41, lost to Lakers in first round of playoffs.
New Faces: Carl Herrera (30th pick), Dave Jamerson (15th pick), Roy Marble (in trade from Atlanta), Kenny Smith (in trade from Atlanta).
Top Guns: Akeem Olajuwon (24.3 pts., 2.1 steals, 14 rebs., 4.5 blocks), Otis Thorpe (17.1 pts., 54.8% f.g.), Buck Johnson (14.8 pts.), Sleepy Floyd (12.2 pts.); Smith (11.9 pts.).
Game Plan: Houston won 46 games in 1987-88, 42 games in 1988-89 and 41 games last season.
Do you see a pattern?
Olajuwon is one of the game's great players, but his career is being wasted on an average team.
He may carry Houston to the playoffs, but he is unlikely to take them much further.
Denver Nuggets Quick Recap: 43-39, lost to San Antonio in first round of playoffs.
New Faces: Chris Jackson (third pick), Marcus Liberty (42d pick), Paul Westhead (coach, was the coach at Loyola Marymount University), Orlando Woolridge (in trade from Los Angeles Lakers).
Top Guns: Walter Davis (17.5 pts., 91.2% free-throw average), Michael Adams (15.5 pts.), Woolridge (12.7 pts., 55.6% f.g.), Blair Rasmussen (12.4 pts.).
Game Plan: Westhead hopes his high-octane offense camouflages a lack of depth.
Denver traded away its top two scorers, which puts more pressure on Jackson.
The Nuggets may be the first league team to score 200 points or to allow 200 points in a game.
But winning will be much more difficult than scoring.
Minnesota Timberwolves Quick Recap: 22-60, failed to make playoffs.
New Faces: Scott Brooks (in trade from Philadelphia), Gerald Glass (20th pick), Felton Spencer (sixth pick).
Top Guns: Tony Campbell (23.2 pts.), Tyrone Corbin (14.7 pts., 2.1 steals), Sam Mitchell (12.7 pts.), Pooh Richardson (11.4 pts.).
Game Plan: The best of the four recent expansion teams.
Nobody enjoys playing the Timberwolves because of their tenacious defense and enthusiastic fans.
If Glass and Spencer have solid rookie seasons, the 30-victory mark is within reach.
Orlando Magic Quick Recap: 18-64, failed to make playoffs.
New Faces: Greg Kite (free agent from Sacramento), Dennis Scott (fourth pick).
Top Guns: Terry Catledge (19.4 pts.), Otis Smith (13.5 pts.), Jerry Reynolds (12.8 pts.), Nick Anderson (11.5 pts.), Sam Vincent (11.2 pts.), Sidney Green (10.4 pts.).
Game Plan: The Magic lacks two essentials for winning teams: defense and a quality center.
No team in the league surrendered more points last season.
Switch in divisions will mean more travel and more fatigue.
It may also mean fewer victories.
PACIFIC DIVISION Portland Trail Blazers Quick Recap: 59-23 record last season, lost to Detroit in the league championship series.
New Faces: Alaa Abdelnaby (25th pick), Danny Ainge (in trade from Sacramento).
Top Guns: Clyde Drexler (23.3 pts.), Ainge (17.9 pts.), Terry Porter (17.6 pts., 89.2% f.t., 9.1 asts.), Kevin Duckworth (16.2 pts.), Jerome Kersey (16 pts.), Buck Williams (13.6 pts., 54.8% f.g., 9.8 rebs.), Drazen Petrovic (45.9% on 3-pointers).
Game Plan: Many people think Portland's starting five has more talent than any other team's.
The Blazers were the league's best rebounding team; they have the versatility to be effective playing either up-tempo or halfcourt, and adding Ainge gives Portland a three-guard rotation that rivals Detroit's.
Bench depth was the team's only weakness, but Ainge will help, and Cliff Robinson should be more effective in his second season.
A serious threat to end the Lakers' 11-year reign as division champions.
Los Angeles Lakers Quick Recap: 63-19, lost to Phoenix in second round of playoffs.
New Faces: Elden Campbell (27th pick), Mike Dunleavy (coach, was a Milwaukee assistant), Sam Perkins (free agent from Dallas), Tony Smith (51st pick), Terry Teagle (in trade from Golden State).
Top Guns: Magic Johnson (22.3 pts., 89% f.t., 11.5 asts.), James Worthy (21.1 pts., 54.8% f.g.), Teagle (16.1 pts.), Perkins (15.9 pts.), Byron Scott (15.5 pts., 42.3% on 3-pointers), A.: C. Green (12.9 pts.), Mychal Thompson (10.1 pts.).
Game Plan: By acquiring Perkins and Teagle, Jerry West continues to show why he may be basketball's best general manager.
Dunleavy wants the Lakers to run more than last season, and they still have the legs to do it.
If his defense improves, Vlade Divac will start at center in place of Thompson; if it doesn't, Perkins might.
Scott is finally 100 percent again, and Johnson still has tricks up his sleeve.
The team of the 80's remains a championship contender in the 90's.
Phoenix Suns Quick Recap: 54-28, lost to Portland in Western Conference finals.
New Faces: Cedric Ceballos (48th pick), Negele Knight (31st pick), Ed Nealy (free agent from Chicago).
Top Guns: Tom Chambers (27.2 pts.), Kevin Johnson (22.5 pts., 11.4 asts.), Jeff Hornacek (17.6 pts.), Eddie Johnson (16.9 pts., 91.7% f.t.), Dan Majerle (11.1 pts.), Mark West (10.5 pts., 62.5% f.g., 2.2 blocks).
Game Plan: After shocking Lakers in the playoffs, the Suns lost four games to Portland by a total of 12 points.
Phoenix relies on its speed and athleticism, but Nealy was acquired to help it become more physical.
Talent virtually guarantees another 50-victory season, but whether Suns are tough enough to reach league finals remains to be seen.
Los Angeles Clippers Quick Recap: 30-52, failed to make playoffs.
New Faces: Bo Kimble (eighth pick), Mike Schuler (coach, is a former Portland coach), Loy Vaught (13th pick).
Top Guns: Ron Harper (22.8 pts.), Charles Smith (21.1 pts.), Danny Manning (16.3 pts.), Ken Norman (16.1 pts.), Benoit Benjamin (13.5 pts., 2.6 blocks), Gary Grant (13.1 pts., 10 asts.).
Game Plan: Harper is not scheduled to return from knee surgery until January, but Grant has recovered from his broken leg.
Schuler has a reputation for being too intense, but he never had a losing record in 2 1/2 seasons coaching Portland.
Believe it or not, if they stay healthy, the Clippers finally have too much talent not to make a strong run at the playoffs.
The last time this franchise made the playoffs was in 1976, when they were called the Buffalo Braves.
Seattle SuperSonics Quick Recap: 41-41, failed to make playoffs.
New Faces: K.: C. Jones (coach, a former Celtic coach by way of Seattle front office), Gary Payton (second pick).
Top Guns: Dale Ellis (23.5 pts.), Xavier McDaniel (21.3 pts.), Derrick McKey (15.7 pts.), Sedale Threatt (11.4 pts.).
Game Plan: It won't take Jones long to realize he is not coaching Boston anymore.
Seattle lacks an effective center; it is a poor passing team, and the bench is unproven.
Payton may provide leadership at point guard, but he is a rookie.
Again, it looks as if Seattle's season will end when the playoffs begin.
Golden State Warriors Quick Recap: 37-45, failed to make playoffs.
New Faces: Tyrone Hill (11th pick), Les Jepsen (28th pick), Kevin Pritchard (34th pick).
Top Guns: Chris Mullin (25.1 pts., 88.9% f.t.,), Mitch Richmond (22.1 pts.), Tim Hardaway, (14.1 pts., 8.7 asts., 2 steals), Sarunas Marciulionis (12.1 pts.), Rod Higgins (11.1 pts.).
Game Plan: Opponents took advantage of the Warriors' small lineup last season, so they drafted the big men Hill and Jepsen.
Golden State led the league in scoring, so offense is not a problem.
But this division may be the league's best, meaning the Warriors will struggle just to make the playoffs.
Sacramento Kings Quick Recap: 23-59, failed to make playoffs.
New Faces: Anthony Bonner (23d pick), Duane Causwell (18th pick), Bobby Hansen (in trade from Utah), Byron Irvin (in trade from Portland), Eric Leckner (in trade from Utah), Travis Mays (14th pick), Lionel Simmons (seventh pick), Rory Sparrow (in trade from Miami), Bill Wennington (in trade from Dallas).
Top Guns: Wayman Tisdale (22.3 pts., Antoine Carr (12.3 pts.). Game Plan: After seven consecutive losing seasons, the Kings didn't just clean house; they demolished it and built a new one. With so many new players, Coach Dick Motta faces the stiff challenge of molding them into winning a unit. It will take a few years. But give the Kings credit for trying a new approach.


Abandonment
To the Editor:
The real estate industry seems to have the same answer -- higher rents -- for New York's housing problems no matter what the question is.
Now that the 1980's real estate boom is over, landlord groups are threatening building abandonment because of rising operating costs. ("Will Landlords Desert Their Buildings Again?", The New York Times Week in Review, Sept. 30.)
While it is true that some costs have risen recently, New York City's tenants have been much harder hit by the slowdown in the local economy.
Yet we don't see any articles about tenants refusing to meet their already inflated rent bills.
Operating cost increases in the 1980's were extremely limited, interest rates fell and the local economy boomed.
During all this time, the city's Rent Guidelines Board granted rent increases far in excess of the amount that would have been necessary to compensate landlords for increased operating costs, and widespread major capital improvements allowed enormous jumps in rent.
These factors resulted in massive increases in real estate values, which were quickly siphoned off through sales, refinanceing and co-op conversion.
New York's lower- and middle-income tenants have been subsidizing landlords for years enabling some of them to reach the Forbes 400 list of wealthiest Americans.
It's about time that landlords put some of this wealth back into the buildings which have made them rich and famous.
MORT COHEN  Manhattan The writer is president of the 345 Riverside Drive Tenants Association.


Karen B. Levy Weds James K. Finkel
Karen Beth Levy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Levy of Pittsburgh, was married there last evening to James Klee Finkel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David K. Finkel 2d of Pittsburgh.
Rabbi Walter Jacob officiated at the Rodef Shalom Temple.
Mrs.
Finkel, 32 years old, is a vice president and a portfolio manager in New York at Paine Webber.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
Her father retired as the mathematics department chairman at Peabody High School in Pittsburgh, where her mother, Joan W. Levy, is a teacher at Madison Elementary School.
The bridegroom, 29, is an associate with the law firm of Cadwalader, Wickersham &amp; Taft in New York.
A graduate of Colorado College with a master of science degree from the London School of Economics, he received a master of laws degree in taxation from New York University and a J.D. degree from the University of Miami, where he was an associate editor of The Law Review.
His mother, Elaine S. Finkel, is a former speech pathologist with Columbia University.
His father is a retired jeweler.


Roll-Call on the House Vote On a Deficit-Reduction Bill
Following is the roll-call vote of 228 to 200 by which the House of Representatives today approved a deficit-reduction bill including tax increases.
A "yes" vote is a vote to approve the bill.
Voting "yes" were 181 Democrats and 47 Republicans.
Voting "no" were 74 Democrats and 126 Republicans.
Y is a "yes" vote.
N is a "no" vote.
X denotes those not voting.
Present denotes those who voted they were "present" at the time of the vote but did not vote "yes" or "no" on the issue.
There are two vacancies in the 435-member House.
ALABAMA
Democrats -- Bevill, N; Browder, N; Erdreich, N; Flippo, Y; Harris, Y.
Republicans -- Callahan, N; Dickinson, N.  ALASKA
Republican -- Young, N.  ARIZONA
Democrat -- Udall, Y.
Republicans -- Kolbe, N; Kyl, N; Rhodes, Y; Stump, N.  ARKANSAS
Democrats -- Alexander, N; Anthony, Y.
Republican -- Robinson, N; Hammerschmidt, N.  CALIFORNIA
Democrats -- Anderson, Y; Bates, N; Beilenson, Y; Berman, Y; Bosco, Y; Boxer, Y; Brown, Y; Condit, N; Dellums, N; Dixon, Y; Dymally, N; Edwards, Y; Fazio, Y; Hawkins, Y; Lantos, Y; Lehman, Y; Levine, Y; Martinez, N; Matsui, Y; Miller, Y; Mineta, Y; Panetta, Y; Pelosi, Y; Roybal, N; Stark, N; Torres, Y; Waxman, Y.
Republicans -- Campbell, N; Cox, N; Dannemeyer, N; Dornan, N; Dreier, N; Gallegly, N; Herger, N; Hunter, N; Lagomarsino, N; Lewis, Y; Lowery, Y; McCandless, N; Moorhead, N; Packard, N; Pashayan, N; Rohrabacher, N; Shumway, N; Thomas, N.  COLORADO
Democrats -- Campbell, N; Schroeder, Y; Skaggs, Y.
Republicans -- Brown, N; Hefley, N; Schaefer, N.  CONNECTICUT
Democrats -- Gejdenson, Y; Kennelly, Y; Morrison, Y.
Republicans -- Johnson, Y; Rowland, N; Shays, Y.  DELAWARE
Democrat -- Carper, Y.  FLORIDA
Democrats -- Bennett, Y; Fascell, Y; Gibbons, Y; Hutto, Y; Johnston, Y; Lehman, Y; Nelson, Y; Smith, Y.
Republicans -- Bilirakis, N; Goss, N; Grant, N; Ireland, Y; James, N; Lewis, N; McCollum, N; Ros-Lehtinen, N; Shaw, Y; Stearns, N; Young, N.  GEORGIA
Democrats -- Barnard, N; Darden, Y; Hatcher, Y; Jenkins, Y; Jones, Y; Lewis, Y; Ray, Y; Rowland, Y; Thomas, Y.
Republican -- Gingrich, N.  HAWAII
Democrat -- Mink, Y.
Republican -- Saiki, N.  IDAHO
Democrat -- Stallings, N.
Republican -- Craig, N.  ILLINOIS
Democrats -- Annunzio, N; Bruce, N; Collins, N; Costello, N; Durbin, Y; Evans, Y; Hayes, N; Lipinski, Y; Poshard, Y; Rostenkowski, Y; Russo, Y; Sangmeister, N; Savage, N; Yates, X.
Republicans -- Crane, N; Fawell, N; Hastert, N; Hyde, N; Madigan, Y; Martin, N; Michel, Y; Porter, N.  INDIANA
Democrats -- Hamilton, Y; Jacobs, N; Jontz, N; Long, N; McCloskey, Y; Sharp, N; Visclosky, Y.
Republicans -- Burton, N; Hiler, N; Myers, N.  IOWA
Democrats -- Nagle, Y; Smith, Y.
Republicans -- Grandy, Y; Leach, Y; Lightfoot, N; Tauke, N.  KANSAS
Democrats -- Glickman, Y; Slattery, Y.
Republicans -- Meyers, Y; Roberts, Y; Whittaker, Y.  KENTUCKY
Democrats -- Hubbard, N; Mazzoli, Y; Natcher, N; Perkins, N.
Republicans -- Bunning, N; Hopkins, N; Rogers, N.  LOUISIANA
Democrats -- Boggs, Y; Hayes, X; Huckaby, N; Tauzin, N.
Republicans -- Baker, N; Holloway, N; Livingston, Y; McCrery, Y.  MAINE
Democrat -- Brennan, N.
Republican -- Snowe, N.  MARYLAND
Democrats -- Byron, Y; Cardin, Y; Dyson, N; Hoyer, Y; McMillen, Y; Mfume, Y.
Republicans -- Bentley, N; Morella, Y.  MASSACHUSETTS
Democrats -- Atkins, Y; Donnelly, Y; Early, N; Frank, Y; Kennedy, Y; Markey, Y; Mavroules, Y; Moakley, Y; Neal, Y; Studds, Y.
Republican -- Conte, Y.  MICHIGAN
Democrats -- Bonior, Y; Carr, N; Conyers, Y; Crockett, Y; Dingell, Y; Ford, Y; Hertel, N; Kildee, Y; Levin, Y; Traxler, Y; Wolpe, Y.
Republicans -- Broomfield, N; Davis, Y; Henry, N; Pursell, N; Schuette, N; Upton, N; Vander Jagt, X.  MINNESOTA
Democrats -- Oberstar, Y; Penny, Y; Sabo, Y; Sikorski, Y; Vento, Y.
Republicans -- Frenzel, Y; Stangeland, N; Weber, N.  MISSISSIPPI
Democrats -- Espy, Y; Montgomery, Y; Parker, Y; Taylor, N; Whitten, Y.  MISSOURI
Democrats -- Clay, N; Gephardt, Y; Skelton, Y; Volkmer, Y; Wheat, Y.
Republicans -- Buechner, Y; Coleman, Y; Emerson, N; Hancock, N.  MONTANA
Democrat -- Williams, N.
Republican -- Marlenee, N.  NEBRASKA
Democrat -- Hoagland, N.
Republicans -- Bereuter, N; Smith, Y.  NEVADA
Democrat -- Bilbray, N.
Republican -- Vucanovich, N.  NEW HAMPSHIRE
Republicans -- Douglas, N; Smith, N.  NEW JERSEY
Democrats -- Dwyer, N; Guarini, N; Hughes, N; Pallone, N; Payne, N; Roe, N; Torricelli, N.
Republicans -- Courter, Y; Gallo, N; Rinaldo, N; Roukema, N; Saxton, N; Smith, N.  NEW MEXICO
Democrat -- Richardson, Y.
Republicans -- Schiff, Y; Skeen, Y.  NEW YORK
Democrats -- Ackerman, Y; Downey, Y; Engel, Y; Flake, N; Hochbrueckner, Y; LaFalce, Y; Lowey, Y; Manton, Y; McHugh, Y; McNulty, Y; Mrazek, Y; Nowak, N; Owens, N; Rangel, N; Scheuer, Y; Schumer, Y; Serrano, Y; Slaughter, Y; Solarz, Y; Towns, N; Weiss, N.
Republicans -- Boehlert, Y; Fish, Y; Gilman, Y; Green, Y; Horton, N; Houghton, Y; Lent, Y; Martin, N; McGrath, X; Molinari, N; Paxon, N; Solomon, N; Walsh, N.  NORTH CAROLINA
Democrats -- Clarke, Y; Hefner, Y; Jones, Y; Lancaster, Y; Neal, Y; Price, Y; Rose, Y; Valentine, Y.
Republicans -- Ballenger, N; Coble, N; McMillan, Y.  NORTH DAKOTA
Democrat -- Dorgan, N.  OHIO
Democrats -- Applegate, N; Eckart, Y; Feighan, Y; Hall, Y; Kaptur, Y; Luken, Y; Oakar, Y; Pease, Y; Sawyer, Y; Stokes, N; Traficant, N.
Republicans -- DeWine, Y; Gillmor, N; Gradison, N; Kasich, N; McEwen, N; Miller, N; Oxley, N; Regula, N; Wylie, Y.  OKLAHOMA
Democrats -- English, N; McCurdy, Y; Synar, Y; Watkins, Y.
Republicans -- Edwards, N; Inhofe, N.  OREGON
Democrats -- AuCoin, Y; DeFazio, Y; Wyden, Y.
Republicans -- D. Smith, N; R. Smith, N.  PENNSYLVANIA
Democrats -- Borski, Y; Coyne, Y; Foglietta, Y; Gaydos, N; Gray, Y; Kanjorski, Y; Kolter, N; Kostmayer, Y; Murphy, N; Murtha, Y; Walgren, Y; Yatron, N.
Republicans -- Clinger, Y; Coughlin, Y; Gekas, N; Goodling, Y; McDade, Y; Ridge, Y; Ritter, Y; Schulze, N; Shuster, N; Walker, N; Weldon, N.  RHODE ISLAND
Republicans -- Machtley, N; Schneider, N.  SOUTH CAROLINA
Democrats -- Derrick, Y; Patterson, N; Spratt, Y; Tallon, Y.
Republicans -- Ravenel, N; Spence, N.  SOUTH DAKOTA
Democrat -- Johnson, Y.  TENNESSEE
Democrats -- Clement, Y; Cooper, Y; Ford, Y; Gordon, Y; Lloyd, Y; Tanner, Y.
Republicans -- Duncan, N; Quillen, N; Sundquist, N.  TEXAS
Democrats -- Andrews, Y; Brooks, Y; Bryant, N; Bustamante, Y; Chapman, Y; Coleman, X; de la Garza, Y; Frost, Y; Geren, N; Gonzalez, Y; Hall, N; Laughlin, N; Leath, Y; Ortiz, Y; Pickle, Y; Sarpalius, N; Stenholm, Y; Washington, N; Wilson, Y.
Republicans -- Archer, N; Armey, N; Bartlett, N; Barton, N; Combest, N; DeLay, N; Fields, N; Smith, N.  UTAH
Democrat -- Owens, Y.
Republicans -- Hansen, N; Nielson, N.  VERMONT
Republican -- Smith, Y.  VIRGINIA
Democrats -- Boucher, Y; Olin, Y; Payne, Y; Pickett, N; Sisisky, Y.
Republicans -- Bateman, Y; Bliley, N; Parris, N; Slaughter, N; Wolf, Y.  WASHINGTON
Democrats -- Dicks, Y; Foley, Y; McDermott, Y; Swift, Y; Unsoeld, N. Republicans -- Chandler, Y; Miller, Y; Morrison, Y.  WEST VIRGINIA
Democrats -- Mollohan, Y; Rahall, N; Staggers, N; Wise, Y.  WISCONSIN
Democrats -- Aspin, Y; Kastenmeier, Y; Kleczka, Y; Moody, N; Obey, Y.
Republicans -- Gunderson, N; Petri, N; Roth, N; Sensenbrenner, N.  WYOMING
Republican -- Thomas, N.


The Elder Statesman And a Sound No More
WHEN ART BLAKEY DIED two weeks ago at the age of 71, a sound went with him.
Though he made hundreds of appearances on record, under his own name and with a legion of jazz's best-known musicians -- Thelonious Monk, Miles Davis, Herbie Nichols, Milt Jackson and more -- the recording process never quite captured the fat metallic shivering of his cymbals, the interaction of skin and wood.
His genius manifested itself in an idiosyncratic creation -- his style.
His concern for an individual sound, so important to jazz ideology, was a way of staking a claim in a world that wasn't always receptive to a young black man making any claims at all.
Blakey staked that claim successfully, and his legacy is now contingent on the memories, bolstered by recordings, of the musicians who performed with him and the audiences that filled clubs and concert halls where he played.


Giving Older Women A Shot at Motherhood
EVERY infertility clinic routinely comes across desperate couples who spend years and their last dollars trying to have a baby.
But with the publication of a paper last week saying that the seemingly natural termination of the baby chase -- menopause -- is no longer a barrier, doctors and women have to ask when, if ever, they should give up.
Doctors have found that women who have gone through menopause and are willing to accept egg donations from younger women can easily become pregnant.
For some couples, the decision on when to stop trying to have a baby will depend only on their willingness to put up with the emotional and physical trauma and the onerous expense of infertility treatments.


Peru's Leader Proposes A Market to Fight Coca
Peru's new President has proposed a novel approach to fighting coca-leaf production: the creation of a free-market environment where peasants would find alternative crops to be economically attractive.
In a speech in Lima on Friday, the leader, President Alberto Fujimori, rejected military and police repression, which until recently was the dominant anti-coca strategy in Peru, the world's largest source of the raw material for cocaine.


D'AMATO EXPLAINS SHIFT ON BIAS BILL
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, explaining why he supported President Bush's veto of a civil rights bill this week, said he was persuaded that the measure would force businesses to resort to quotas in hiring minorities and women.
The New York Republican was one of 34 Republican senators who voted on Tuesday to sustain President Bush's veto of the Civil Rights Act of 1990.
The attempt to override the veto lost by one vote.
After opposing an earlier version of the bill, Mr.
D'Amato had told supporters of the measure earlier this month that he would vote for a revised version.
But, he said, further discussions with opponents of the bill persuaded him to vote no when the Senate passed it on Oct. 16, and to back the President's veto last week.


Sports People; Eligibility Ruling
WHEN a National Collegiate Athletic Association investigation determined that Eric Manuel, a highly recruited basketball prospect, had cheated on an entrance examination at the University of Kentucky a few years ago, the school was penalized and Manuel was banned for playing for any N.C.A.A. team.
When Manuel, now 22 years old, sought to play for Oklahoma City University, a member of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics, the association ruled that the N.C.A.A. infraction also made him ineligible to play for an N.A.I.A. school.
Now an Oklahoma County district judge has overruled the association's eligibility committee, saying it went too far in relying on another association's rules instead of its own.
"I read the rules they were using and they simply didn't apply to Eric Manuel," Judge William Henderson said on Friday. (AP)


Ban 'Macbeth'?
To the Editor:
Mr.
Corwin deplores Stephen Sondheim's forthcoming musical of "Assassins" because it seems "you  [ cannot ]  publicize assassination without encouraging it."  What about nearly a third of the plays by the man credited with coining the word "assassination," namely, William Shakespeare?
Would Mr.
Corwin have us ban "Macbeth" because the title character kills Duncan, a popular leader?
Should we not censor the tragedy of that deliciously insidious, behind-the-scenes assassin Richard III? -- not to mention other Shakespearean history plays in which kings or future kings are disposed of on stage and off.
If these plays are acceptable because the victims are penned as evil men, we should at least bar that most time-honored of all assassins, Marcus Brutus, in "Julius Caesar." And let's not forget to get the hook for Hamlet, who assassinates his father's assassin in the end.
And do plays about assassins necessarily glorify their deeds?
Conversely, can we diminish an assassin's notoriety, as Mr.
Corwin believes, by speaking of it in whispers, or better yet, not at all?
Mr.
Corwin will probably be horrified to learn that John Wilkes Booth already has a burgeoning cult following, as witnessed by the sold-out busloads of video-camera-toting Boothophiles who yearly follow the assassin's Maryland escape route.
Even more telling is the auction this past summer at the Theater Museum in Boothbay, Me., where Booth memorabilia drew record bids over 10 times those of artifacts of his brother, perhaps the greatest actor this country has produced, Edwin Booth.
It might be nice if the mirror we held before us reflected only the beauty marks of American history, but we are called in some inexorable democratic way to consider the whole of us, blemishes, cancers and all.
Only then can we begin to open our minds to learn, to understand, and, through understanding, anticipate and -- who knows -- perhaps one day even prevent.
W.
STUART McDOWELL  New York
The writer is the author of "The Brothers Booth," a new play about Edwin and John Wilkes Booth.


VCR's Catch Up to Audio With a Dual-Cassette Design
VIDEO FANS HAVE looked enviously at audio tape recorders capable of handling two cassettes simultaneously.
That way, music or speech from one cassette can quickly and easily be copied onto the other.
No such dual-cassette cassette recorders had been available for video -- at least not until now.
Finally, after years of legal wrangling, a company called Go Video in Scottsdale, Ariz., has launched the first VCR designed for two cassettes, so copying can be done on a single machine.
The Go Video GV-2000, priced at $1,000, is only slightly wider than an ordinary VCR; yet two separate tape-loading slots are fitted side by side into the front panel.
You slip a cassette containing the program to be copied into slot 1 and a blank cassette into slot 2.
Then you hit a button marked "Copy Tape," and both cassettes start rolling, transferring the program from the first cassette to the second.


Life With Feathers
A CAPE COD JOURNAL By Erma J. Fisk.
Illustrations by Louise Russell. 304 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.
ERMA J. (JONNIE) FISK was a multisided warbler of some sort.
At 80, she was still worrying about how to keep in shape if she couldn't shovel her own snow, but unnerving friends by saying, "I wished I were small and cuddly, wore ruffles, and got kissed at parties." A serious amateur ornithologist of national note, she worked harder and longer studying one small bird, the Least tern, and spent more money and time trying to protect the species than anyone in the world.
But she bore grudges against grackles, and had been known to describe sparrows as "stripy little brown birds" difficult to identify.
Once she decides to put out a store-bought duck to provide Christmas dinner for a neighborhood Cape Cod fox.


Streetscapes: The Sohmer Piano Factory; Discordant Notes On Landmarking
Queens has a record of hostility to landmark designations, with only 40 of the city's 700-odd approvals.
Many sites have not even been proposed because of expected political opposition.
The latest battle involves the Sohmer Piano Factory on the Astoria waterfront.


Mutual Funds; The Global Strategy of Fiona Biggs
ON Aug. 3, Fiona Biggs received the news in a routine 1:55 A.M. telephone call from her Japanese stockbroker: Iraq had invaded Kuwait.
After she hung up, she stumbled over the freeweight equipment and the Reuters and fax machines that crowd the bedroom of her New York City apartment and sat in the kitchen impatiently until 4:30, when the European markets opened.
Then she quickly sold all of her British stocks and bought shares in Royal Dutch Petroleum.
This bet paid off handsomely, like many others she has placed in the past.
In 1989, her first full year managing the $25 million Dreyfus Strategic World Investing fund, and in 1990, too, Ms.
Biggs far surpassed the other 10 global flexible funds.
Global flexible funds invest in stocks, bonds and money-market securities, with at least 25 percent of the portfolio invested outside the United States.


Janice M. Gunn Weds S. H. Smeallie
Janice M. Gunn and Shawn Harrower Smeallie were married yesterday at St.
Francis Episcopal Church in Potomac, Md.
The Rev.
Mark K. J. Robinson performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Smeallie, 25 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Ridgeway Gunn 3d of Potomac.
A graduate of Lynchburg College, the bride is an account manager for the magazine Museum &amp; Arts in Washington.
Her father is a consulting economist and a senior vice president of Nathan Associates in Washington.
Mr.
Smeallie, 31, is a son of Mrs.
Richard T. Horigan of Amsterdam, N.Y., and the late Peter H. Smeallie.
A graduate of St.
Lawrence University, he received a master's degree in national security studies from Georgetown University.
He is a special assistant to President Bush on legislative affairs.
His stepfather is a senior partner in the law firm of Horigan, Horigan, Pennock &amp; Lombardo in Amsterdam.
The bridegroom is a grandson of the late J. Donald Smeallie, president of the Smeallie &amp; Voorhees Paper Mills and the late Harold P. Harrower, president of the Harrower Knitting Mills, both in Amsterdam.


Style Makers; Eileen Crane, Wine Maker
When Eileen Crane, the wine maker and general manager of Domaine Carneros, talks of how she came to run Champagne Taittinger's new winery here, it sounds like a meeting of minds and palates.
"The Taittinger concept of delicacy was exactly what I was interested in," Ms.
Crane said of her style of sparkling wine.
The location, at the Napa end of the Carneros district, was a factor for Ms.
Crane and Claude Taittinger, director general of the 256-year-old company.
Cooler than the rest of Napa and Sonoma, it "seemed to me an ideal location to produce world-class sparkling wine," she said.


Time Out
So far, only jail keeps Peter MacDonald Sr., the suspended chairman of the Navajo tribe, from politics.
Mr.
MacDonald, convicted of soliciting and accepting bribes and kickbacks, was sentenced last week to almost six years and fined $11,000, and then, along with his son and codefendant, Peter Jr., he was led off to the Window Rock, Ariz., jail.
Between conviction and sentencing, Mr.
MacDonald campaigned heartily for the tribe's presidential election, working the crowd at the close-of-the-season Navajo fair and parade, riding high atop a semi-trailer while the other candidates plodded on horseback.
Although Mr.
MacDonald's name has been removed from the ballot, his wife, Wanda, the only member of the family to speak publicly since father and son were hustled away to jail, promises that he will be vindicated yet.
The two men have not filed appeals.
A second trial, also on corruption charges, is scheduled for Nov. 27.


Vatican Synod Reaffirms Celibacy for Priests
Roman Catholic bishops from around the world ended a monthlong synod today, calling for better-trained priests but firmly ruling out any change in a celibacy rule that has hindered the recruitment of clergymen in the United States and elsewhere.
In a closing speech to the assembly, Pope John Paul II assured the bishops that he was not about to alter his insistence on celibacy or his basic opposition to married priests.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
IN DISGUISE
Face-painting will take a menacing turn today for children who attend the Hudson River Museum's Halloween party, which begins at 1 P.M.
Two specialists in the art of theatrical makeup will transform small visitors into monstrous creatures only a mother might recognize.
Children who prefer disguises that need not be removed with soap and water can construct paper masks under the guidance of two expert teachers.
Tales of witches and Halloweens of centuries past will be told in two performances at 1 and 2 P.M., and at 3 P.M. children will show off their costumes in a parade before judges, who will hand out awards.
Throughout the afternoon the Andrus Planetarium will show "Voyage to the Planets," a roving magician and a juggler will perform continuously, and a fortune teller will predict the future for anyone who asks.
Everything is free for children up to 12 years of age accompanied by a parent, including balloons and refreshments.
The museum overlooks the Hudson River at 511 Warburton Avenue in Yonkers.
Call 963-4550 for directions or more information.
LAFARGE SHOW
Opening today and running through Jan. 6 at the Hudson River Museum is an exhibition of the watercolors and drawings of John LaFarge, the American artist who died in 1910.
The son of French emigres to the United States, he was born in New York City and grew up in a cultured, secure atmosphere that he was unable to sustain for himself as an adult.
When he died at the age of 67 he owed his creditors $500,000 and he had endured a prolonged, painful and self-imposed separation from his wife and children.
He studied law and architecture, but a Grand Tour of Europe as a young man kindled an appetite for painting that persisted for the rest of his life.
His reputation was established in the 1870's and 80's, when he designed the interior decorations for Trinity Church in Boston, and stained-glass windows for several New York City churches including St.
Thomas's, St.
Peter's and the Brick Church.
In this exhibition are a number of watercolors painted during a visit to the South Seas.
Among them, "Diadem Mountain at Sunset, Tahiti" and "Pass and Peak of Vaiaroa, Taiarapu" are considered to be some of his best work.
Illustrations he created for books of poetry include "The Spirit of the Water-Lily" from Abby Sage Richardson's "Songs From the Old Dramatists." The water lily was a recurring theme in his work.
The museum is open Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Thursdays from 10 A.M. to 9 P.M., and Sundays from noon to 5 P.M.
Admission is $3 for adults and $1.50 for children and the elderly.
RACE FORUM
An open forum on the subject of race relations is to be held from 2 to 5 P.M.
Saturday at the Slater Center, at 2 Fisher Avenue in White Plains.
The program, "Building Bridges Between Blacks and Whites," will be moderated by Richard W. Thomas, professor of history and urban affairs at Michigan State University.
Serving on the panel will be Barbara Arrington, member of the Spiritual Assembly of the Bahai Faith in White Plains; Lois Bronz, Councilwoman for the town of Greenburgh; the Reverend Clinton Glenn, former pastor of the First Presbyterian Church of Mount Vernon; Anthony Mazzulo, Superintendent of Schools for the town of Greenburgh; J. T. Childs.
Jr., manager of work-life programs for International Business Machines, and a student, to be selected at White Plains High School.
The audience will be invited to participate with questions and discussion.
Admission is free.
MANY MUMS
None of the chrysanthemums to be seen at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx through Nov. 11 are your neighborhood garden variety mums.
Thousands of the plants, which could not survive outdoors in the New York region, have been imported from Japan and cultivated for exhibition during the last 14 months.
They are on display in the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory.
Small-flowered anemone types, spider mums, "football" mums, 12-foot-high pagodas covered with cascading mums, tree-shaped mums, bushy mums and many other forms in a spectacular range of colors may be seen Tuesday through Friday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission is $3.50 for adults, $1.50 for children, students and the elderly.
For more information or driving directions, call (212) 220-8777.
PORTRAITURE
Those steely eyes, those thin lips, wooden teeth, white wig, and most of all that imperious nose of our first president, George Washington, can be captured by children enrolled in the Washington portrait painting workshop to be held Saturday from 1 to 3 P.M. at Washington's Headquarters Museum in North White Plains in the town of North Castle.
Larry Fleming, the art instructor, will get the creative juices flowing with some slides of various portraits of Washington, after which the children will do their own masterpieces in washable acrylic paints.
Advance registration is required and a fee of $3 covers materials.
The museum, on Virginia Road, can be reached from Route 22 or the Bronx River Parkway.
Call 949-1236 for more information or to reserve a place.
MUSIC SERIES
Two music series, one jazz, one classical, open next weekend at the Rockland Center for the Arts in West Nyack.
The Alexander String Quartet and the guitar duo of Michael Newman and Laura Oltman are scheduled at 8:30 P.M.
Friday, with a program of Handel's Concerto for Two Guitars, Haydn's "Sunrise" Quartet, and works by Francaix, Pierre-Petit, Wolf and a work written for all six members of the two groups by the contemporary Phildelphia composer Arnold Black.
Tickets are $10, or $9 for students and the elderly.
Saturday at 8:30 P.M. marks the first "Two's a Crowd" jazz series.
Vinson Hill and Derek Smith, duo-pianists, will perform a repertoire of standards and original compositions.
Mr.
Hill is a professor of jazz studies at William Paterson College of Wayne, N.J., and director of the "Two's a Crowd" series.
Mr.
Smith's pianistic talent is evident on the sound tracks of "All That Jazz," "Peggy Sue Got Married," and "Crimes and Misdemeanors," and he was the pianist for Doc Severinson's Tonight Show band for five years.
Tickets are $10, or $8 for students and the elderly.
The center is near the New York State Thruway and the Palisades Interstate Parkway at 27 South Greenbush Road.
Call 358-0877 for more information, a series subscription or reservations.
WAGNER LESSONS
Barrymore Laurence Scherer, music critic, columnist and WQXR panelist, will teach a course at Marymount College in Tarrytown called "Wagner Without Tears" on the next three Wednesdays from 7:30 to 9:15 P.M.
Wagner's many moods, from the ribald comedy of "Die Meistersinger" to the the dark majesty of "The Ring of the Nibelungen" to the fantasy of "The Flying Dutchman," will be explored in traditional and new recordings and in slide illustrations.
Mr.
Scherer will also discuss the development of Wagner's style and its undiminished popularity among musicians and audiences.
The fee is $40. Call 332-8334 to register or obtain more information.


CORRECTION
A Posting on Oct. 7 about a Related Companies rental apartment house on the north side of East 96th Street omitted the name of the architect.
It is the firm of Costas Kondylis Architects, of Manhattan.


THE DRUG THAT WORKS
I had a liver transplant earlier this year and am very interested in the development of FK-506.
I have a long life ahead of me, and any reduction in my medicine would be welcome, particularly the steroid treatments.
Yet it is left to the Federal Government, not the doctors or patients, to decide what drugs should be available.
I trust my doctors more than I do the F.D.A. testing procedures.
Let us patients weigh the risks.
M.
J.
VAN WYCK
Morris Plains, N.J.


Stamps
A collector's friends and relations are faced with a problem in selecting gifts: The collector is obviously very much involved in an arcane area that non-collectors may find baffling.
It is probably not appropriate to buy stamps for a stamp collector; who is to know what stamps are wanted, of what quality, or whether they are really wanted.
Nor is it as easy to take back the "wrong" stamp for an exchange as it is to take back gloves of the wrong size.


Joan D. O'Grady Has a Wedding
Joan Deirdre O'Grady and Andrew Henry Barada were married yesterday at St.
Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church in New York.
The Rev.
Timothy B. Brown and the Rev.
Thomas B. McGrath officiated.
Mrs.
Barada, 33 years old, is a daughter of Mrs.
John P. O'Grady of New York and the late Mr.
O'Grady.
The bridegroom, 32, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew S. Barada of New Canaan, Conn.
The bride, a nurse-epidemiologist at New York Hospital, is a graduate of the Convent of the Sacred Heart in Greenwich, Conn., and Georgetown University.
Her mother, Marion Donnellan O'Grady, is the chairwoman of the Donnellan Birdsall Company, a Brooklyn real-estate company.
The bride's father was an electronics consultant and a systems analyst.
The bridegroom, senior project engineer at the Material Research Corporation, a semiconductor manufacturer in Orangeburg, N.Y., graduated from New Canaan High School and cum laude from Lehigh University.
His father owns Andrew Barada Photography, a specialist in aerial photography in New Canaan.


The Editorial Notebook; Were Military Reformers Right?
The United States has two theories about preparing for war -- that of the military establishment and that of the military reformers.
The right place to test them is on the proving ground.
The establishment's doctrine is visible is the prevailing pattern of Pentagon procurement -- build high-tech weapons that can offset the opponents' quantity with quality.
The reformers have no objection to technology, but they believe many weapons carry high-tech features that confer no military advantage.


Palm Beach
After a centurylong binge of glitz and gaiety, Palm Beach is sobering up.
Although the lavish charity balls continue -- in fact, there are more of them than ever -- and celebrities still make appearances in town, few night spots stay open after midnight; several clubs have closed for good.
However, Taboo, a well-known club on Worth Avenue, was recently reopened after having been shuttered for several years, raising hopes that night life might make a comeback on that fashionable street.
Growing numbers of full-time residents, as well as part-timers who are staying longer (in high season, the population hits about 35,500), are focusing on pursuits more enduring than frivolity.
Among them is historic preservation, assuring that Palm Beach remains a visual fantasy, with its monolithic hotels and sprawling oceanside mansion estates that sprang up like regal dandelions in the early 1900's.


Nancy K. Johnson Marries
Nancy Katherine Johnson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Corbet S. Johnson Jr. of Louisville, Ky., was married yesterday to Richard Whitall Walser Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walser of Bay Shore, L.I.
The Rev.
Harry B. Adams, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at the Marquand Chapel in New Haven.
The bride graduated from Amherst College and received a master's degree in management from Yale University, where she is the budget director.
Her husband, a graduate of the State University of New York at Stonybrook, is a manager in West Haven, Conn., of Reserve Rent-a-Car.


Bishop Rebukes I.R.A.  For Car Bomb Attacks
A Roman Catholic bishop, speaking at the funeral of a man who was forced to drive a bomb into a military checkpoint, condemned the Irish Republican Army today as followers of Satan.
Bishop Edward Daly said the I.R.A. and its supporters were "the complete contradiction of Christianity."


A Soviet Agent? Harry Hopkins?
The former K.G.B. agent Oleg Gordievsky seems intent on making the same muddle of history that Kremlin planners have made of the economy.
He has captured headlines by claiming that Harry L. Hopkins, Franklin D. Roosevelt's trusted friend and adviser, was an "agent of major significance" of the Soviet Union.
What is infuriating is how the West ern press is aiding Mr.
Gordievsky's efforts to craft a best-seller.
In the excerpts of his book, "KGB: The Inside Story," I have seen, he never calls Mr.
Hopkins a spy.
Yet headline writers do.
The book says, "Hopkins was an American patriot with no admiration for either the principle or the practice of the Communist state." Absurdly, the author also says, "Hopkins had been an unconscious rather than a conscious agent."
What deeds did Mr.
Hopkins commit that may, in the popular mind, attach the monicker "spy" to him?
According to Mr.
Gordievsky, who was in knickers when Mr.
Hopkins died in 1946, the former social worker advocated positions favored by Moscow.
Under this definition, King George VI and Ronald Reagan could be considered Soviet agents.
More specifically, Mr.
Hopkins is accused of influencing the U.S. to accept Soviet control over Poland, the Baltic states and Romania.
I hope Mr.
Gordievsky provided more accurate information than this to British intelligence during the two decades he was allegedly a double agent.
As Mr.
Gordievsky hits the book promotion trail, perhaps he can explain why he did not identify Winston Churchill as a Soviet agent.
After all, Mr.
Churchill entered into the highly secret, ill-advised "percentages" agreement with Stalin in October 1944, conceding major portions of Central and Eastern Europe to Soviet domination.
Such cynical "spheres of influence" were anathema to Mr.
Roosevelt and Mr.
Hopkins.
Mr.
Hopkins refused to allow the White House to dispatch a cable to Mr.
Churchill -- drafted by the Joint Chiefs and approved by the President -- out of fear that it might be construed as American approval for Churchill to enter into such arrangements with Stalin.
In May 1945, Mr.
Hopkins warned Stalin to his face that "the entire structure of world cooperation and relations with the Soviet Union would be destroyed" if he would not allow a free Poland to emerge from the ashes of war, as he had promised to do at Yalta.
Mr.
Gordievsky indicts Mr.
Hopkins for a post-Yalta euphoria.
But as Sir John Martin, Mr.
Churchill's principal private secretary, who was there told me, everyone, British and American alike, believed in the immediate aftermath of Yalta that they had just fashioned an enduring blueprint for peace and freedom.
After five years of war, maybe they were entitled to a moment of euphoria.
Mr.
Gordievsky is continuing the crusade started by Senator Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin: half truths, innuendo, distortions, third-hand information -- all fused into a grand name-smearing indictment.
Like Senator McCarthy, if Mr.
Gordievsky is to prosper he must make news.
But the other revelations in his long-awaited book are rather thin gruel.
He "solves" the insipid hunt for the so-called fifth man in the Kim Philby, Donald Maclean, Guy Burgess and Anthony Blunt spy circle by offering up an individual who confessed to being a Soviet agent nearly 25 years ago.
And his salutation to Julius and Ethel Rosenberg as "dedicated and courageous Soviet agents" merely echoes the more authoritative voice of Nikita S. Khruschev.
Gen.
George C. Marshall predicted that Mr.
Hopkins's enormous contributions to his country would never be appreciated.
But then, as that renowned savant Senator McCarthy warned us, General Marshall was always in Stalin's hip pocket.


Four Nations to Send a Force to Supervise Truce in Rwanda
Central African nations have agreed to send a peacekeeping force to supervise a cease-fire in Rwanda, where civil war broke out last month after rebels invaded from Uganda.
The agreement by the four nations on Friday prompted the Belgian Government to announce today that it was withdrawing the 500 paratroopers that it sent to Rwanda on Oct. 4 to protect Belgians living there.
Prime Minister Wilfried Martens said the troops would begin leaving the former Belgian colony on Thursday.


What Will Pan Am Deal Mean for T.W.A. Bondholders?
THE proposed sale last week of Pan American World Airways' core London routes raised some intriguing issues for investors in the bonds of Carl Icahn's Trans World Airlines, which have taken a beating in the marketplace.
If United Airlines completes its deal for the routes, as expected, it will emerge as a much heftier competitor for the less robust T.W.A., notes John Clair, an analyst with Salomon Brothers.
But that might also leave American Airlines, which has expressed interest in Pan Am's routes, looking for other London connections -- and T.W.A. has them, and might sell them.
"This both increases T.W.A.'s opportunities and its risks," Mr.
Clair said.
While he gives Mr.
Icahn high marks for handling such situations deftly, he added, "What is good for T.W.A. may not be good for bondholders." One thing, at least, can be said for the bonds: Somebody at T.W.A. likes them.
T.W.A. disclosed it bought up various bonds with a face value of $213 million in the second quarter.


Iraqi Curbs on Gasoline Seen as a Delay Tactic
Iraq's announcement last week that it would ration gasoline was a maneuver to persuade Baghdad's enemies to postpone any attack on Iraqi forces occupying Kuwait, several Kuwaiti oil- industry executives and European military affairs experts say.
The rationing announcement, the experts said, was intended to give the impression that the United Nations economic sanctions against Iraq were working well enough to make an attack by the United States and its allies in the Persian Gulf seem unnecessary.


Pro Foorball; Close Quarters, 4 of Them


About Men; Lasting Commitment
SINCE IT WENT UP last year, Maya Lin's new civil rights memorial in Montgomery, Ala., has become a tourist attraction.
I know how popular her Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington is, but I'm still surprised.
Up to now I've thought the best that could be hoped for by way of civil rights memorials was the plaque in the Mount Zion Methodist Church in Philadelphia, Miss., honoring the murdered civil rights workers James Chaney, Michael Schwerner and Andrew Goodman.
The reception given Maya Lin's memorial has made me think once again of my own rite of passage as a civil rights worker.
Growing up in Ohio during the 1950's, I most admired those men who had served in battle during World War II.
Nothing about these men distinguished the way they looked from those I knew who had taken Government jobs in Washington or worked in a factory during the war.
But there was, I always thought, something deeper about them.
They had seen death firsthand.
They had done what was asked of them in the face of danger.
They didn't have to guess about their courage.


Baseball Notebook; Winfield and Angels Deliver a Message to Yankees: Thanks
DAVE WINFIELD and Mike Port may send the Yankees a joint Happy New Year's card this winter.
Both appreciate the Yankees' decision to banish Winfield from New York last summer, and they look forward to an even better result from that decision next summer.
"This year Dave played at 38, so next year I guess he'll play at 37," Port, the California Angels' general manager, said.
"That's the way it goes with him."


14 of 15 Jersey Lawmakers Reject Federal Budget Plan
With New Jersey's huge tax increases -- and raging taxpayer revolt -- uppermost in their minds, 12 of the state's 13 members of the House of Representatives voted early yesterday against the Federal deficit-reduction plan, as did both its Senators last night.
Representatives said their votes reflected concerns about the economic strains and political repercussions of Gov.
Jim Florio's $2.8 billion in increases in state income, sales and excise taxes.


Turning Used Oil Into Gold
SLOW and steady may win some races, but not the ones where the Safety-Kleen Corporation has been involved.
Safety-Kleen made its mark by moving rapidly to build the only nationwide network for reclaiming waste solvents and other fluids from auto body shops, dry cleaners and other small businesses, then steadily signing up clients to the point that it now makes more than 15,000 pickups daily from about 250,000 customers.


Are the Owls What They Seem?
THE SECRET DIARY OF LAURA PALMER  As seen by Jennifer Lynch. 184 pp.
New York: Pocket Books.
Paper, $8.95.


Horror '90: They're Taking Your Home
"LADY," SNARLS A HIGH-INTEREST moneylender as he refuses to help Melanie Griffith pay the mortgage.
"You're sitting on a $750,000 piece of property. Sell it and keep the change."
Sounds like good advice, but being practical about home ownership is a villainous trait in "Pacific Heights," the sloppily plotted but commercially successful new film about the romance of real estate.
Ms.
Griffith and Matthew Modine play an unmarried couple who buy a Victorian house they can scarcely afford.
Michael Keaton is the tenant from hell, who farms cockroaches on the premises in one of many improbable schemes to steal their property out from under them.


Noted With Pleasure
Reading to Wake Up
The best books, Annie Dillard argues, always carry a summons to us to grapple with the essential questions of our lives.
This is from "The Writing Life" (Harper Perennial, paper).
Why are we reading, if not in hope of beauty laid bare, life heightened and its deepest mystery probed? . . .
Why are we reading if not in hope that the writer will magnify and dramatize our days, will illuminate and inspire us with wisdom, courage, and the possibility of meaningfulness, and will press upon our minds the deepest mysteries, so we may feel again their majesty and power?
What do we ever know that is higher than that power which, from time to time, seizes our lives, and reveals us startlingly to ourselves as creatures set down here bewildered?
Why does death so catch us by surprise, and why love?
We still and always want waking.
The Imperial Tree
The horse-chestnut, a soaring tree that has become closely identified with the boulevards of Vienna, has an exotic past, retold by Charles Fenyvesi in "When the World Was Whole: Three Centuries of Memories" (Viking).
The history of the horse-chestnut tree is a parable on the shifting fortunes of empires and the enduring beauty of plants.
Horse-chestnut trees originate on the hillsides of the Balkans, where a conquering Turkish sultan with an esthete's eye discovered their choice greenery and ordered his pashas to plant them along streets and in parks.
As the Ottoman crescent began to wane, its nemesis, Prince Eugen of Savoy, the brilliant French general who commanded the Austrian imperial forces, was captivated by the stateliness of the trees.
He imported the first saplings to Vienna after his Christians drove the last Moslem Turk out of Hungary in 1699.
The Wrong Vampire
Myths about vampires exist in many cultures, nowhere more vividly than in eastern Europe.
But, Paul Barber notes, the figures in folklore don't look -- or act -- anything like the modern version of the undead.
This is from "Vampires, Burial, and Death: Folklore and Reality" (Yale University, paper).
If a typical vampire of folklore, not fiction, were to come to your house this Halloween, you might open the door to encounter a plump Slavic fellow with long fingernails and a stubbly beard, his mouth and left eye open, his face ruddy and swollen.
He wears informal attire -- in fact, a linen shroud -- and he looks for all the world like a disheveled peasant.
If you did not recognize him, it is because you expected -- as would most people today -- a tall, elegant gentleman in a black cloak.
But that would be the vampire of fiction, a figure
derived
from the vampires of folklore but now bearing precious little resemblance to them.
His classic exemplar is Count Dracula, who in this century has had unparalleled success in the movies.
The count, the villain of Bram Stoker's novel
Dracula,
was not Slavic: he lived in Transylvania and was based, more or less, on Vlad Tepes, a figure in Romanian history who was a prince, not a count, ruled in Walachia, not Transylvania, and was never viewed by the local populace as a vampire.
H.
D.
Thoreau, Jailbird
Paul Brooks supplies the wry details usually missing from the record of Henry David Thoreau's night in jail in July 1846.
This is from "The People of Concord: One Year in the Flowering of New England" (Globe Pequot).
When he was brought in by Sam Staples, the few prisoners were lounging around the doorway in their shirtsleeves, enjoying the evening air.
"Come boys," said Sam, "it's time to lock up." Sam introduced Henry to his roommate: "a first-rate fellow and a clever man," accused of burning down a barn.
Though the man claimed he never did it, he was quite content to get free board and lodging while awaiting trial.
Henry, for his part, seized the opportunity to broaden his own horizons: "I pumped my fellow prisoner as dry as I could, for fear I should never see him again." At last the poor man, no doubt exhausted, managed to show Henry which bed was his and left him to blow out the light.
In the morning, after a breakfast of bread and hot chocolate, Henry reluctantly accepted his freedom, while his erstwhile cellmate was sent off to make hay in a neighboring field.
Appetite Aroused
No one writes with more originality -- or certainty -- about food than the French.
This definition of the forms appetite takes is from "Alexandre Dumas' Dictionary of Cuisine," edited and translated by Louis Colman (Fireside/Simon &amp; Schuster, paper).
There are three sorts of appetites:
1.
Appetite that comes from hunger.
It makes no fuss over the food that satisfies it.
If it is great enough, a piece of raw meat will appease it as easily as a roasted pheasant or woodcock.
2.
Appetite aroused, hunger or no hunger, by a succulent dish appearing at the right moment, illustrating the proverb that hunger comes with eating.
The third type of appetite is that roused at the end of a meal when, after normal hunger has been satisfied by the main courses, and the guest is truly ready to rise without regret, a delicious dish holds him to the table with a final tempting of his sensuality.


Coaching Tenures Proving Tenuous
Looking for coaching security?
Not in the National Basketball Association.
Lose and you are out.
Stay on the job long enough and there is burnout.
The dismissal of Doug Moe by the Denver Nuggets after 10 seasons, Pat Riley's leaving the Los Angeles Lakers after nine seasons and Mike Fratello's calling it quits with the Atlanta Hawks after seven, has left this season's 27 survivors with an average of less than two years as head coaches with their present teams.


A Dreamlike Landscape, a Dreamlike Reality
LAST week a Kuwaiti newspaper now publishing in Saudi Arabia reported that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq had dreamed that the Prophet Mohammed appeared before him and said Iraq's missiles "were pointed in the wrong direction." Middle East experts were quoted as saying that this dream indicated that the Iraqi leader could be preparing for a withdrawal from Kuwait.
But the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, asked for his reaction, responded: "No comment on dreams. I have enough problem dealing with reality."
What the Bush Administration discovered last week, though, was that such stories are part of the reality of the Middle East.
It is a land of circles within circles within circles, where getting at the truth of any particular story or situation can be very difficult for outsiders, as well as insiders.


Baby Found Dead in Brooklyn
A 6-month-old girl was found dead last night in a Brooklyn apartment when her grandmother came to visit, the police said.
The woman, identified as Josephine Crosby, also found her 5-year-old grandson wandering naked and dirty through the apartment, in the Bay View Houses at 1610 East 102d Street in the Canarsie section, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Edward J. Burns.
The medical examiner's office was conducting an autopsy.
The 5-year-old was taken to Kings County Hospital for observation.
The mother of the children "was nowhere to be found," Sergeant Burns said.
"The grandmother went to the apartment because she hadn't see her daughter or the kids for a while and let herself in," he said.


Irving Howe
SELECTED WRITINGS 1950-1990.
By Irving Howe. 490 pp.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $34.95.


Working Out Strategies to Deal With the Difficult Co-Worker
MOST offices have them, in one form or another: the difficult co-workers, the ones that cause you stress, send you home with a headache and sometimes even send you in search of another job.
Fortunately, most people are difficult only occasionally and their fellow workers are willing to chalk up the unwelcome behavior to their having a bad day.
But then there are those people who consistently cause problems.
These chronic troublemakers fall into several categories of "difficult-people types," according to a Scarsdale human resources consultant, Sandra Kassalow.
They are known as the bulldozers, the exploders, the snipers, the chronic complainers, the wet blankets, the know-it-alls and the enigmatic say-nothings. (The last is the type who just folds his arms and perhaps says, "No," but more often just grunts when, for example, you energetically suggest a new idea.) Street Smarts for the Job
In seminars for such corporate clients as CBS Inc., American Express, Prudential Bache, Mobil Oil, Bankers Trust and Lord and Taylor, Ms.
Kassalow works with employees on all levels, from "people in the mailroom to those with graduate degrees."
Her goal, as she explained it is "to teach street smarts for everyday life on the job."
When a difficult type is encountered on the job, the goal is not to change the difficult person, to get back at them or even to get rid of them, said Ms.
Kassalow.
Maybe it is easier said than done, but when one finds oneself the target of a difficult person, Ms.
Kassalow's professional advice is to stay calm, try to analyze the situation first and only then react.
"Most of all, don't be too quick to throw up your hands, blame yourself or even go so far as thinking of quitting," said Ms.
Kassalow, president of Kassalow Training and Development here.
Needed: Human Skills
"A lot of know-how to succeed with difficult people is common sense," she said.
"But then, I have found that common sense is not so common."
More people end up leaving a job because of human factors than because of technical incompetence, she said.
"Human skills are the key."
A company, Ms.
Kassalow said, is like a family, only larger, and many of the emotions and reactions to job problems echo the way we deal with problems at home.
Ms.
Kassalow, who has a master's degree in counseling and has completed postgraduate work in family and organizational systems, applies the principles of transactional analysis, a tool used in the treatment of work-related problems.
"It all comes back to the family," she explained.
"On the job, we take different roles, come from different ego states within us -- like that of the child, the parent or the adult -- especially in times of conflict."  Learning How to Cope
"When we feel threatened," Mrs.
Kassalow said, "we may feel out of control and on the spur of the moment revert to the child in us. But in business it is important not to take things so personally. The ideal is to be the rational adult."
In her on-site seminars, Ms.
Kassalow describes to employees different types of situations that might occur on the job.
She encourages participants to role play and often videotapes their interactions.
She then solicits feedback from others attending on alternative ways to cope.
She might suggest the following scenario: the boss stops by to discuss a meeting and instead criticizes the papers in disarray in your office.
You could apologize, feel embarrassed and never get on to discussing the business at hand.
Or, Ms.
Kassalow said, you could recognize the power of what is called the limited response and say something like, "You are right, my desk is a mess," and then stop talking.
Chances are with that tactic the potentially awkward situation will pass quickly and the boss will take up where he left off.
Another situation might come up when the know-it-all type in the office makes a statement you disagree with but don't want to argue about.
Ms.
Kassalow recommends the limited response in this case also.
She suggests saying, "You might be right," and dropping the subject.
Handling the Sniper
What about a public insult from the sniper?
The scenario might be a meeting where you are about to deliver an important proposal to your department, and the sniper -- also known as the ambusher -- says in a stage whisper, "Oh, here comes Bess's standard cost-saving lecture for the 40th time." Ms.
Kassalow suggests the following type of response: "Bob, that comment certainly deserves a response and I have one. Can we meet privately after the meeting?"  The Importance of Body Language
Body language, too, is important in dealing with difficult people.
In a confrontational situation, Ms.
Kassalow suggests standing with feet shoulder-width apart, well-balanced and in an assured manner, holding one's head straight and not tilted.
In her seminars, Ms.
Kassalow also helps employees recognize different behavioral styles.
"If I am a relator -- warm, caring, nonaggressive and people- oriented -- but my boss is a bottom-line, task-oriented guy, not interested in the entire person, it could be difficult," she said.
"The question is how to keep my own style and still give my boss what he wants in his style," she explained.
"We all have to be our person, but we also have to understand where other people are coming from."
In addition to leading seminars and succeeding with difficult people, Ms.
Kassalow offers corporations courses to help employees build interpersonal relationships in professional settings, develop leadership skills, manage time better and reduce stress.
Next year she will be offering a seminar called "Managing Diversity." During the 1990's, the work force, Ms.
Kassalow said, will become culturally more varied.
The U.S. and Japan
"For example, Japanese companies will need more than ever to understand their American employees and vice versa," she said.
"Americans are individualistic, assertive and want to be promoted. The Japanese on the other hand are more company- oriented and consider the time factor more when looking at promotions.
"Americans look you in the eye when they are talking," she said.
"A Japanese manager might not, and to an American that could send the wrong message."
During the 1990's, she said, more disabled workers will enter the work force, along with people representing a broader age span.
"People who have not been in the mainstream corporate world before are now coming into it," she explained.
"There will be more differences and more of a need to understand and work with those differences."  Customizing the Approach
Ms.
Kassalow, who has run her business from her home here since 1976, took on a partner recently, her daughter, Julie Kassalow Norris, a lawyer.
Kassalow Training &amp; Development has added law firms to the list of its clients.
When meeting with new clients, Ms.
Kassalow typically spends at least a half-day onsite, learning about the organizational structure of the company, its problems and its corporate culture.
"I develop a customized, very personal program for each corporation," Ms.
Kassalow said.
"But as individualistic as each company is, human-relations problems in companies are universal.
"Disagreement among people in relationships, groups and organizations comes with the territory," she said.
"And across the board, if I had to choose the most important skill for making it on the job, clearly it would be good communications. That comes before everything else. Sometimes that is the skill that doesn't come naturally. It has to be learned, practiced and put into action."


Saint-Gaudens Group To Honor Kirstein
Lincoln Kirstein, a co-founder of the New York City Ballet and the School of American Ballet, will receive an award from the Augustus Saint-Gaudens Memorial for his role in highlighting the work of the sculptor, tomorrow at 6 P.M. at the Metropolitan Club, 1 East 66th Street.
Mr.
Kirstein is the author of two books about Saint-Gaudens: "Lay This Laurel," about the Robert Gould Shaw memorial in Boston Commons, and "Memorial to a Marriage," an account of the Marian Cooper Adams memorial in Rockland Park in Washington.
Mr.
Kirstein will receive a gold-leaf palm frond made from the original cast of Saint-Gaudens's statue of William Tecumseh Sherman in Grand Army Plaza.
The statue was restored over the summer.


Looking Ahead
MONDAY: Texas Instruments unveils an advanced laptop computer. *
Chrysler's third-quarter earnings.
TUESDAY: American Petroleum Institute briefing on Persian Gulf situation and impact on U.S. petroleum industry. *
Third-quarter gross national product figures. *
Casino Control Commission hearing to evaluate Donald Trump's financial stability.
WEDNESDAY: September factory orders and personal income. *
Governing board of International Energy Agency reviews impact of Gulf crisis.
THURSDAY: Purchasing managers' monthly survey on the economy.
FRIDAY: September index of leading indicators. *
October unemployment report. *
Sentencing of psychiatrist who pleaded guilty to using inside information from a patient, the wife of Primerica chief Sanford Weill, for stock trading.


A CONSPIRACY LINK IN PRIESTS' KILLING
A United States Special Service officer told the F.B.I. in an affidavit he later retracted that he had prior knowledge of plans to kill six Jesuit priests but made no effort to stop them.
The American psychological operations specialist, Maj.
Eric Buckland, testified that the top Salvadoran military commander, Col.
Rene Emilio Ponce, knew of the army's plans to kill the priests at least 10 days before the slayings last Nov. 16 and ordered Lieut.
Col.
Carlos Aviles to try to stop them.


Cynthia Campbell Plans a Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. Campbell 3d of Gladwyne, Pa., have announced December wedding plans for Mr.
Campbell's daughter, Cynthia Anne Campbell, and Brian Curtis Crochiere, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Crochiere Jr. of Malvern, Pa.
Miss Campbell, 25 years old, is a daughter also of the late Dorothy Robb Campbell.
She graduated from the Agnes Irwin School and the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a founder and a managing director of the Pennsylvania Merchant Group, an investment banking firm in Radnor, Pa., and a former governor of the Philadelphia, Baltimore and Washington Stock Exchange.
Mr.
Crochiere, 25, graduated from the Haverford School and the University of Virginia.
He is a commercial insurance broker with Posse-Walsh Inc., in Blue Bell, Pa.
His father, who is retired, is a former eastern sales manager of Liftex Inc., in Ivyland, Pa., manufacturers of industrial slings.


BUSH SAYS HE'S PLEASED
Meeting almost around the clock, Congress today approved the most important legislation ever written to reduce the budget deficit and prepared to adjourn, just 10 days before the mid-term elections.
The House gave its final approval to the budget bill just before dawn by a vote of 228 to 200.
The Senate adopted the measure late this afternoon, also by a narrow margin, 54 to 45.
A majority of Republicans in both chambers voted against it, but Democratic support was strong enough to carry the day.


On Language; Moving the Goalposts
"These conditions are clear-cut and are not open to reinterpretation," said President Bush, explaining his criteria for opening trade with South Africa, "and I do not believe in
moving the goalposts
."
There's a term that has been popping up of late.
"The Japanese . . . can no longer rely on localization as a means of satisfying Europe's requirements," complained a Japanese lobbyist in London.
"This is a classic case of moving the goalposts."


Lifestyle; As the New Age Ages, Practicality Wins Out
If, as some people believe, the New Age has arrived, at least one thing is abundantly clear.
Its first priority will be dealing with the stresses and strains brought on by life in the Old Age.
At Whole Life Expo, being held at the Penta Hotel in New York this weekend, there are far fewer crystal healers and pyramid wearers than in prior years.
Such psychic tools have given way to practical, and often high-tech, devices to soothe aging joints, tired feet and frazzled minds.


State's First Lady And Her Office
The article about Lucinda Florio on Sept. 16 ("Lucinda Florio Steps Gently Into a Spotlight of Her Own") presents a charming, interesting, dedicated and well-meaning lady.
Mrs.
Florio is to be admired for overcoming the adversities that have visited her life.
It is nice to take a break from reading about the ills of new Jersey.
I hope that she has great swuccess in addressing the issues of women and children.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 28, 1990
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
DADDY, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.95.) Unexpected crises wreck a man's world.
2
5
THE DARK HALF, by Stephen King. (Signet, $5.95.) A writer of horror tales kills off his pseudonym, who then goes on a rampage.
3
4
THE MINOTAUR, by Stephen Coonts. (Dell, $5.95.) The hunt for a mole in the Pentagon.
4
4
THE SECRET DIARY OF LAURA PALMER, as seen by Jennifer Lynch. (Pocket, $8.95.) The journal of a "Twin Peaks" television character.
5 *
5
POSTCARDS FROM THE EDGE, by Carrie Fisher. (Pocket, $4.95.) A drug-addicted actress's battles with her alcoholic mother.
6 *
4
CALIFORNIA GOLD, by John Jakes. (Ballantine, $5.95.) A young man makes his fortune.
7
5
OLDEST LIVING CONFEDERATE WIDOW TELLS ALL, by Allan Gurganus. (Ivy, $6.95.) A 99-year-old woman reflects on her past.
8 *
48
PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) A brutal murder creates a crisis.
9
16
SO WORTHY MY LOVE, by Kathleen E. Woodiwiss. (Avon, $5.95.) The abduction of a woman leads to romance in Elizabethan England.
10
1
REASONABLE DOUBT, by Philip Friedman. (Ivy, $5.95.) A former Federal prosecutor reluctantly defends his daughter-in-law, charged with murdering his son.
11
1
THE CAPTIVE, by Victoria Holt. (Fawcett, $5.95.) A 19th-century woman's adventures while a hostage of North African pirates and as a governess in an English household.
12
23
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) Chinese-American women and their mothers.
13
5
ISLE OF VIEW, by Piers Anthony. (Avon, $4.95.) Adventure in the fantasy land of Xanth.
14
5
NEMESIS, by Isaac Asimov. (Bantam, $5.95.) A girl in the 23d century tries to save Earth.
15
3
COLD HARBOUR, by Jack Higgins. (Pocket, $5.95.) A perilous mission during World War II.
16 *
3
ENEMY UNSEEN, by V. E. Mitchell. (Pocket, $4.50.) A new "Star Trek" novel.
17 *
15
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $5.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights Colombian drug lords.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
49
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
2
5
LIAR'S POKER, by Michael Lewis. (Penguin, $8.95.) Wall Street's tumultuous 1980's, as witnessed by a young bond trader.
3
366
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
4
11
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM, by Thomas L. Friedman. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) The Arab-Israeli conflict as observed by a New York Times correspondent over the past decade.
5
21
A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME, by Stephen W. Hawking. (Bantam, $9.95.) A scientist reviews efforts to create a unified theory of the universe.
6 *
7
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian recalls her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
7
7
AMONG SCHOOLCHILDREN, by Tracy Kidder. (Avon, $9.95.) A year in the life of a fifth-grade teacher in Holyoke, Mass.
8 *
3
EXIT THE RAINMAKER, by Jonathan Coleman. (Dell, $4.95.) The enigmatic case of a successful Maryland college president who disappeared and assumed another identity in Europe.
9 *
114
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Perennial/HarperCollins, $8.95.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
10
16
IT'S ALWAYS SOMETHING, by Gilda Radner. (Avon, $4.95.) The late comedian's memoir describes her battle with ovarian cancer.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
5
THE AUTHORITATIVE CALVIN AND HOBBES, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Cartoons from "Yukon Ho!" and "Weirdos From Another Planet!"
2
112
CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie. (Hazelden/HarperSanFrancisco, $8.95.) Solving your own problems while caring for other people.
3
2
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
25
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
5
1
THE "LATE NIGHT WITH DAVID LETTERMAN" BOOK OF TOP TEN LISTS, by David Letterman, Steve O'Donnell, et al. (Pocket, $8.95.) Humor.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Carol L. Skeuse Weds J. D. Frazier
Carol Lynn Skeuse, a daughter of Mrs.
Thomas J. Skeuse and the late Mr.
Skeuse, was married yesterday to Dr.
Jon Durwood Frazier, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Graydon Frazier of Endicott, N.Y.
The Rev.
Edward M. O'Neill, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
John the Evangelist Church in Lambertville, N.J.
Mrs.
Frazier, 30 years old, graduated from Fairleigh Dickinson University.
She is the president of Springwater Farm Arabians, an importer of Russian Arabian horses.
Her father founded and headed Reagent Chemical &amp; Research Inc. and was the president of White Flyer Targets, a target manufacturer, both in Middlesex, N.J.
Her mother, Rita K. Skeuse, is the chief executive of Reagent Chemical &amp; Research.
The bridegroom, 31, graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.D. degree from the University of Chicago.
He is a fellow in brachytherapy at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
His mother, Lucille S. Frazier, is the secretary and the treasurer and his father is the president of Frazier &amp; Son Inc., a real-estate investment and building company in Endicott.
They also own Stony Ridge Farm, in Forest Lake, Pa., where they breed National Champion Arabian Horses.


Children's Books
FORTUNE  Written and illustrated by Diane Stanley. 32 pp.
New York: Morrow Junior Books.
THE CLAY FLUTE  Written and illustrated by Mats Rehnman.
Translated by Eric Bibb.
Unpaged.
New York: R &amp; S Books/Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.


Dr. Dana S. Kay Wed to Philip Smith
Dr.
Dana Susan Kay, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lewis A. Kay of Moorestown, N.J., was married last evening in Philadelphia to Philip Edward Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond C. Smith of Moorestown.
Rabbi Julie Greenberg and the Rev.
Joseph W. Ruane of the Federation of Christian Ministries officiated at the Warwick Hotel.
Mrs.
Smith, 30 years old, was until recently a cognitive scientist at Carnegie Mellon University.
She is a magna cum laude graduate of Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and has a master's degree and a Ph.D. in psychology from Yale University.
Her father is the president of Pediatric Dental Associates in Haddonfield, N.J., and a former president of the American Academy of Dentistry for the Handicapped.
Her mother, Jo Ann Kay, is the president of Jo Ann K Sportswear, a shop in Moorestown.
The bridegroom, 30, is an assistant counsel at VanGuard Cellular Systems Inc., in Greensboro, N.C.
A magna cum laude graduate of Case Western Reserve University, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, he received a law degree, cum laude, from Georgetown University.
His mother, Anne Marie Smith, is a retired nurse.
His father, who is retired, was the manager of training center operations at RCA in Moorestown.


Threat of Strike Rises at Chrysler
The United Auto Workers union has told the Chrysler Corporation that it is canceling a contract extension under which 63,000 union members have been working since Sept. 15.
The move, which will become effective at midnight Monday unless a new temporary extension is agreed to, raises the possibility that the union will call a walkout at the struggling auto company.


The Governor, the Folk Hero
"The Decade of the Child." "The Family of New York." Government with "a heart and a head." Mario Cuomo's language encapsulates the political man.
He moves audiences with his oratory; he articulates the most humane goals.
It's small wonder, as he runs against token opposition for a third term as Governor of New York, that Democrats consider him Presidential timber.
Closer to home, however, where the problems are great and the Cuomo magic familiar, New Yorkers see a sometimes maddening political figure who is, yes, better than most -- but who could also be so much more.
If he would close the gap between oratory and accomplishment, he might become the folk hero his Democratic champions around the country think he is.
The 58-year-old Mr.
Cuomo is more comfortable with himself and his job than he used to be, less inclined to pick petty fights or to throw his intellectual weight around.
With the economy weakening and tensions high, he is a soothing presence who never divides or appeals to base instincts.
He can be breathtakingly candid.
At the recent dinner of an Italian-American organization, he could easily have given a dutiful speech but instead challenged his audience: "Wouldn't it be a sin if we, having heard those cruel epithets -- guinea, dago, wop -- were to sit back now and talk about 'the spics' and 'the niggers'?" That was Mr.
Cuomo at his best, a moral leader.
Yet he is not, even after eight years on the job, a masterful political leader.
He chooses competent but rarely outstanding staff.
He portrays himself as a reformer but bows to the dictates of patronage.
His policies brim with compassion but his programs often fall short.
Three years into his vaunted Decade of the Child, budget constraints have drained his ambitious plans to help needy children.
It is no small achievement that next year, needy college students will be able to apply for Liberty Scholarships.
But the Decade, so far, does not meet expectations.
The same is true of drug treatment: after announcing he wanted to create drug treatment "campuses" for 2,000 addicts, he backed off in the face of legislative and local opposition.
The 2,000 new treatment beds will become 300 -- if Federal funding materializes.
The Governor's flaws will not prevent him or his sound running mate, Stan Lundine, from winning, nor should they.
The Republican candidate, businessman Pierre Rinfret, has made a mockery of the campaign, failing to show any respect for the elective process.
The Conservative, Herb London, appeals to a narrow electorate.
The public loses because there is no real campaign, no challenging scrutiny of the Cuomo record, so important now that the state is in bad economic trouble.
The Governor has a point when he blames Washington and the Republican State Senate.
But while he has produced some budget reforms, he has chronically underestimated the problem.
He was a year late in seeking an essential delay of an income tax cut, and his failure to produce a convincing budget plan contributed to a reduction in the state's credit rating.
Neither has he helped New York City with its fiscal morass.
He has the stature to mobilize business and labor leaders and politicians, but Mr.
Cuomo has done little more than pronounce.
To do otherwise risks making enemies, not his favorite strategy.
Long Island would be saving 20,000 barrels of oil a day if Mr.
Cuomo hadn't played to the unreasonable fears that closed Shoreham, the nuclear power plant.
On issues of profound principles, the Governor has admirably withstood withering opposition.
He has repeatedly vetoed the Legislature's efforts to reinstate the death penalty and maintains a pro-choice stand on abortion.
On many other matters, though, Mr.
Cuomo is loath to spend his political capital.
He's likely to have many more opportunities.
The economy will demand painful choices about how best to use shrinking resources.
With crime worsening, he will have to go beyond his successful effort to double the state's prison capacity: the problem also demands effective drug treatment and more judges.
In a third term, he can work to meet the perceptions of those who know him only from his words.
We endorse Governor Cuomo with the hope that, whatever the future brings him, he will resolve to match word with deed.


At La Mama, the Avant-Garde Buttons Up
ELLEN STEWART, THE DIRECTOR and founder of La Mama Experimental Theater Club, climbs the stairs leading to the apartment she keeps on the top floor of the La Mama building on East Fourth Street in the East Village in Manhattan.
In jeans, boots and T-shirt, her head crowned with white hair done up in tiny braids, she looks like a queen surveying her realm -- five stories of archives, theaters, offices and apartment in one building, which she owns.
Down the block, in a building owned by the City of New York, is a second theater.
On the way, she salutes playwrights, cajoles assistants, welcomes actors, obviously proud of her proteges.
This week she is launching her new season, her 29th, with the premiere of "Elephant Memories," a theater piece by the experimental playwright and choreographer Ping Chong.
Later this season she will present Richard Foreman's work "Eddie Goes to Poetry City" and Tadeusz Kantor's plays "Dead Class" and "Today Is My Birthday," along with scores of other offerings.
While the furor continues over restrictions on Federal financing, with the Republican Senator Jesse Helms spearheading the movement toward tighter controls on arts grants, it seems to be business as usual at La Mama.
Or is it?


Q and A
Amending a Lease
Question: I recently signed a lease for an apartment for which I paid a sizable agent's finder's fee.
After I signed the lease it was sent back to the landlady by the agent.
But when I got my copy back, which was after I had moved into the apartment, two addditional provisions had been added in ink and initialed by the landlady.
When I contacted her, she claimed the agent had been instructed to advise me of these additions at the time of signing.
He did not.
Had I been aware of them I would not have signed the lease.
Do I have any legal recourse? . . .
Bradley Busker, Manhattan
Answer: Probably not.
According to David L. Smith, a lawyer specializing in real estate matters, you had the right to refuse the lease on the basis that the document you got back from the building owner did not represent the original agreement.
Therefore you were under no obligation to remain in the apartment.
"If the parties are not in agreement," said Mr. Smith, "there is no contract."
However, by remaining in the apartment and continuing to pay rent, the owner could make a case that she assumed you had agreed to the terms of the lease.
"In a case like this one," he said. "the timetable is important."
As far as any claim against the agent is concerned, you would have to prove that he knew the building owner wanted the provisions in the lease and deliberately misrepresented the situation.
Leaky Windows
Question: All the windows in my condominium unit leak during rainstorms.
The leaks come from inadequately installed lintels and improper caulking.
The condominium board told me that the individual unit owners are responsible for correcting faulty conditions.
Is this true? . . .Louis E. De Rosa, Manhattan
Answer: Maybe.
The boundaries for such responsiblities vary from condominium to condominium.
In some high-rise buildings, the condominium association takes care of the maintenance and repair of structural elements like windows and window frames.
However, the responsiblity for these types of repairs in other kinds of condominium communities, like townhouse developments, is that of the individual owner.
Well-written condominium documents will clearly state where the responsiblity lies.
You should check yours to guide you on this matter.
Withholding Maintenance
Question: I live in a cooperative where the management is unreasonably slow in making repairs throughout the building.
Is there an agency one can complain to about this or can a shareholder withhold maintainence? . . .
Edgar Lynk, Manhattan
Answer: No to both questions.
Withholding maintenance in all but the most serious circumstances is risky.
By doing so, you probably would be violating your proprietary lease and jeopardizing your right to occupy your apartment.
When a shareholder joins a corporation it is with the understanding that the maintenance payments are needed to operate the cooperative.
Withholding maintenance could make the matter worse.
It may be that the corporation's funds are being spent on the kinds of repairs that are not visible.
Shareholders dissatisfied with the way the board is doing its job can vote to have it removed.
The Attorney General's office, which monitors co-op and condo offering plans, has no jurisdiction over the


Miss Brainard, Broker, Is Wed
Kimberly Louise Brainard, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Brainard 2d of Edgartown, Mass., was married at the Federated Church there yesterday to Barret Platten Naylor, a son of Katherine P. Naylor of Sudbury, Mass., and Randolph S. Naylor of Edgartown and Prides Crossing, Mass.
The Rev.
John D. Schule, a minister of the Federated Church, and the Rev.
Lawrence M. Horton, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Naylor and her husband are both 28 years old.
She is a graduate of the Kent School and of Denison University, and is a broker with Spelman &amp; Company, a securities concern in New York.
Her father is the president of Brainard Associates, investment managers in Edgartown.
The bridegroom, a graduate of Boston University, is an account executive at Grey Advertising in New York.
His father is the president of Northeast Data Systems in Burlington, Mass.


The Rising Hegemony of the Politically Correct
INSTEAD of writing about literary classics and other topics, as they have in the past, freshmen at the University of Texas next fall will base their compositions on a packet of essays on discrimination, affirmative-action and civil-rights cases.
The new program, called "Writing on Difference," was voted in by the faculty last month and has been praised by many professors for giving the curriculum more relevance to real-life concerns.
But some see it as a stifling example of academic orthodoxy.


Taking Many Little Steps for Music
WHAT IN THE WORLD IS happening to music?
To judge by a major contemporary music festival in Oslo, the most obvious answer is that music continues to grow louder and louder.
But loud or soft, acoustic or electronic, inspired or otherwise, the emphasis was on what could be thought of as the sounds between the black and white keys -- known as microtonality.
Microtonality figured repeatedly through programs featuring synthesizers, percussion, amplification, tape, structured noise, bells, decibels and much more.
The results were by turns arresting, boring, theatrical -- always diverse, sometimes revelatory.


Pro Hockey; Rangers Rally For 4th In a Row
The key parts and lead roles rotate with regularity and impeccable timing, and as a result, the modest machine that is the Rangers keeps steaming through the season's first month.
The Rangers, who can do nothing wrong even when they do only a minimal amount right, tonight scored three goals in the third period to steal a lead and then seal a 4-1 victory over the Nordiques at Le Colisee.


Alysen Dellomo, Teacher, Marries
Alysen Mary Dellomo was married yesterday at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Roslyn, L.I., to Marcus John Lodovico.
Msgr.
Robert M. Harris officiated.
Mrs.
Lodovico is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank A. Dellomo of Old Brookville, L.I.
The bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Lodovico of Palm Coast, Fla.
The bride, 24 years old, teaches at the Multimedia Preschool in New York.
She is a graduate of Catholic University of America.
Her father is the vice chairman of the Crossland Savings Bank in Brooklyn.
Her mother, Patricia Turvey Dellomo, owns the Turvey real-estate company in West Brighton, S.I.
The bridegroom, 29, a graduate of Rutgers University, is the vice president of Arnie Sawyer Studios, an entertainment advertising agency in New York.
His father retired as the chief financial officer at the Lewis, Gilman &amp; Kynett advertising agency in Philadelphia.


Donna Altenpohl Has a Wedding
Donna Elizabeth Altenpohl, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul John Altenpohl of Gladwyne, Pa., was married there yesterday to William Robert Deasey Jr., a son of Mr.
Deasey of Tavares, Fla., and the late Mary Brady Deasey.
The Rev.
Martin J. O'Holleran officiated at St.
John Baptist Vianney Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Deasey, 28 years old, graduated from Colby College.
She is a marketing-communications manager for the Cigna Corporation in Philadelphia.
Her father is the chairman of W. F. Altenpohl Inc., a machinery manufacturer founded by the bride's great-grandfather in High Point, N.C.
Her mother, Peggy L. Altenpohl, is a real-estate broker for Prudential Properties in Gladwyne.
Mr.
Deasey, 42, graduated from Wheeling College and is a commercial real-estate broker for Coldwell Banker in Philadelphia.
His father is a retired senior partner of the Philadelphia law firm of Deasey, Scanlon &amp; Bender.


Fashion; Junk No More, Costume Jewelry Glitters
Once costume jewelry was throwaway stuff, piled on dresser tops and eventually in shoeboxes.
Now vintage reproductions or novelty designs of base metals, paste, rhinestones and coated glass beads add knowing chic to tweed jackets and evening clothes.
"Costume jewelry has gone from being a collectible to a fashion story, from the province of antiques collectors and flea markets into department stores," said Harrice Simons Miller, whose "Identification and Price Guide to Costume Jewelry" (House of Collectibles, $10.95) has just arrived in bookstores.
Ms.
Miller is to sell her collection at Saks Fifth Avenue in December, to go with holiday evening wear.
She also sells by appointment at 300 East 33d Street; call (212) 532-1394.


It Looks Like a C.D., but Wait ...
WHAT'S in a name?
Considerably less than is in a prospectus -- as one can discover by looking closely at the chameleon-like investment products being advertised across the country these days by Welco Securities, a tiny brokerage house in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.
The products, which offer eye-grabbing yields, are called "demand certificates" and "fixed-rate certificates," terms that evoke the popular certificates of deposit, or C.D.'s, offered by banks.
On first glance, the sales material from Welco reinforces that impression with its emphasis on high yields and references to "penalties for early redemption." But look again: These certificates are not being offered by a federally insured bank, but by a company called the Equipment Leasing Corporation of America, also of Bala Cynwyd.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have separate hot- and cold-water faucets on one of my bathroom sinks that drip constantly.
I have changed the washers three times, using a different brand each time, but the faucets still drip.
Otherwise, they seem to be in good condition.
Do you think this means that the faucets have to be replaced?
A.
Although you say you haved changed washer brands three times, there is the possibility that you are using the wrong type for your faucets.
The most likely problem, however, is that the seats inside the faucets are scored or marred.
This is the metal seat against which the washer presses when the water is shut off.
On some faucets, these seats are removable and can be replaced -- a special tool, something like a large Allen wrench or hex wrench, is used -- to remove the old seat and install the new one.
If the seats are not replaceable, then they can usually be ground smooth with a seat-grinding tool.
It can be purchased in all plumbing-supply outlets.
Q.
Several months ago, we developed an unusual problem: Hot water accumulates in the toilet tank when the toilet has not been flushed for some time.
We have hired plumbers and boiler repairmen, but the problem persists.
Our house is about 40 years old, with an oil burner and supplementary solar water heater.
Can you suggest what could be causing this problem?
A.
I can think of two possible causes.
Somewhere, the hot- and cold-water lines are touching each other, and the hot-water pipe is transmitting heat to the cold-water pipe.
Even more likely, there is some place where the solar hot-water supply is "backing up" into the cold-water system, or where a defective valve is allowing hot water to pass into the cold-water pipes.


Deborah Queen to Wed Andrew Seth Hagler
Deborah Allyn Queen, a medical student at Cornell University, and Andrew Seth Hagler, a law student at New York University, plan to marry in December.
Miss Queen is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Queen of Chesapeake, Va.
Her fiance is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Hagler of New York.
The prospective bride, 24 years old, is a magna cum laude graduate of Duke University.
Her father, a surgeon in Chesapeake, is a retired Navy captain.
The future bridegroom, 25, is a cum laude graduate of Duke.
His father is a senior partner in Grant Thornton, accountants and management consultants in New York.


Six Judicial Seats Are on Nov. 6 Ballot
THE voters will be asked to fill six judicial seats in the Nov. 6 election, including three seats for the Ninth Judicial District of State Supreme Court.
The Democratic, Republican and Conservative Parties have cross-endorsed two candidates to fill two of the three State Supreme Court seats: Howard Miller of Pearl River and a Westchester County Court judge, Francis A. Nicolai of Pleasantville.


Rowing; Last Hurrah for East Germans
Year after year they won the medals but with no apparent gratification.
"They were like machines," said Bill Stowe, president of the National Rowing Foundation.
Stowe was describing the East German crews, whose domination of rowing will come to an end at the world championships in Tasmania, Australia, this week.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Starts
1,142
1,325
-13.8%
Completions
1,262
1,437
-12.2%
Sales
550
719
-23.5%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
10.46
10.48
10.20
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
8.31
8.34
8.74
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
10.25
10.29
10.01
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
8.04
8.12
8.55
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
10.36
10.37
10.09
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
8.23
8.29
8.73
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
10.66
10.65
10.46
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
8.54
8.54
8.88
Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
7.58
7.62
7.85
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.70
9.70
9.82
Source: HSH Associates *Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.


Tea Time: Only in America?
NO sooner have Americans discovered the ritual of afternoon tea, than British tabloids are running articles about its demise.
If recent stories are to be believed, it won't be long before real tea will have all but vanished, replaced by an instant variety made of powdered leaves sold in little bags.
While British Rail may no longer provide brewed tea in pots (along with buttered toast and Dundee cake), the real thing is still very much in evidence in England's good hotels and tea shops -- and not just for visiting Americans.


Soviet Woman Fights for a Home for Those Labeled Retarded
The struggle for human rights in the Soviet Union has shifted from celebrated sufferings of individual conscience to the mundane neglect of the least of society.
There is no Sakharov or Solzhenitsyn holding forth at Genriyetta Belous's weekend dinner table, yet the three young men to whom she plays host -- Sergei, Denis and Aleksandr -- slowly speak of freedom and fresh air, of hope and the individual.


Control of Slavery Issue Brought On Civil War The South's Triumph
To the Editor:
In response to Elizabeth Gardner Weddington's (letter, Oct. 14), Lincoln needed no pressure at all to direct General Grant to rescind his order expelling Jews from an area where cotton speculators were harming the war effort -- and that, as the Pulitzer Prize biography of Grant by William S. McFeely says, the General manifested the "routine anti-Semitism of the day."
What is much more worth saying is that a truly magnificent opportunity was missed by the incontestably creative Ken Burns and his writers (and consultants) in "The Civil War," the 11-hour PBS presentation.
The divorce of the war from the great constitutional amendments it made possible (13, 14 and 15) is a heritage of the racist recoupment that won the peace for the Confederacy.
To understand that and the long period of nullification that followed (and hangs over the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1990) is so needed by our nation that a missed chance to remedy in some part, the lack of comprehension must be deeply regretted.
HOWARD N.  MEYER  New York Oct. 16, 1990


Up 'Jacob's Ladder' And Into the Hell Of a Veteran's Psyche
TRAILERS FOR THE NEW FILM "Jacob's Ladder" suggest a horror flick set in a New York City subway.
The film's first sequence, in which helicopter gunships flutter across the yellow-orange sunset of a Vietnamese sky, could open any movie about the war there.
But the director speaks of a psychological thriller, the title points to a biblical allegory and the scriptwriter insists he has sold Hollywood an adaptation of the Tibetan Book of the Dead.
That said, those who go to see "Jacob's Ladder," which opens on Friday, will still be in for some surprises.


World Markets; Escaping the Capital Shortage
THE Bush Administration and leaders in the House and Senate finally cobbled together a budget agreement last week.
And if it sticks, it might even have a real -- although small -- shrinking effect on the nation's budget deficit.
But for the equity investor, the reduction will not be enough, by any stretch, to ease the growing capital supply problem that is coloring the economic outlook for the next year.
Nor will the situation be helped even if the Middle East crisis is resolved relatively quickly.


Palestinians Will Be Allowed to Re-Enter Israel Tomorrow
Palestinians in the occupied territories will be allowed to enter Israel starting Sunday, but they will face new security restrictions, the Defense Ministry announced today.
More than 1.7 million Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip have been confined to the territories since Wednesday, after a wave of Arab-Jewish street violence that left five people dead and 11 injured.


All About/Elevators; Building Business on a Few Seconds' Edge
TODAY'S concrete urban jungles owe their characters not only to architects and engineers, but to the unassuming electric elevator.
Its invention in 1889 by Otis Elevator Inc. ushered in the age of the skyscraper.
The 20-story Flatiron Building in Manhattan, built in 1902 with five electric lifts -- still operating -- was one of the early structures to use the new technology.
Today, elevator researchers are not after revolutionary advances but incremental jumps -- speedier rides for passengers and shorter waits.
For manufacturers, any edge can make a difference in what has become a hotly competitive market.


Why You Can't Teach a Lawyer a New Game
To the Editor:
"Office or Golf Course, the Game is the Same" (The Executive Life, Oct. 14) contained a quote from Jim Jim Flick on teaching golf to lawyers: "Because their work is so detail-oriented, they are too tense and too controlled in their swings . . . Salesmen are among the easiest to teach . . . they tend to look at the big picture."
I don't think Mr.
Flick understands lawyers: they may indeed be difficult to teach, but it should be remembered that they are paid to give advice, not to accept it; they do not take readily to instruction.
Moreover, lawyers are analytical, sometimes even intellectual: they think about what they are doing and -- when it comes to motor skills -- this is a drawback.
Golfing, in particular, requires a totally blank mind, a condition salesmen find easier to attain than do members of my profession.
DANIEL GERSEN  New York, Oct. 15


The Abuse Had to Stop
A HOLE IN THE WORLD  An American Boyhood.
By Richard Rhodes.
Illustrated. 271 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Cruises
To the Editor: We recently took a 12-day cruise on the Crystal Harmony to Alaska.
The ship was beautiful, the food excellent and the staff, with few exceptions, devoted.
Your readers should be aware, though, that there are some serious problems.
We spent $12,000 for a penthouse with private veranda.
The ship has a terrible vibration problem.
When the ship enters or exits a port, the vibration from the engines is such that the entire ship vibrates, causing glasses and other items to go flying.
The vibrating was so close to that of a severe earthquake that passengers would jump from their beds.
Also, any time the ship cruises at more than 19 knots an hour, which is most of the time, there was another type of vibration, just enough to keep you awake.
The other problem is the air-conditioning system.
We had to close the drapes whenever the sun was on our side of the ship, and even then it was
hot.
Ship employees told us that these problems were part of the ship.
The company had just managed to get the air-conditioning in the public rooms to cool sufficiently during our cruise, the third Alaska cruise, after nearly a month of trans-Pacific crossing.
As for the vibration, we were told it would be fixed when the ship entered drydock next year.
When I wrote to complain, the company responded by blaming the vibration on the pilots.
We canceled a trans-canal cruise due to the vibration and the air-conditioning.
Imagine the heat on
that
cruise.  ANDREW J. CARROLLMAN  Los Angeles
Arthur Sharsky, senior vice president, marketing, for Crystal Cruises, replies:
There was a vibration problem during our first summer sailing season to Alaska.
It occurred when some of the Alaska port pilots, who were unfamiliar with maneuvering a ship of Crystal Harmony's size and power (she is second in power only to the Queen Elizabeth 2), gave instructions to our captain, which he was required to follow.
While all ships vibrate when sailing at a high speed, the Crystal Harmony has a minimal amount of vibration at 19 knots and higher.
Most recently, the ship has since been transiting the Panama Canal and no vibration problems have been reported.
As for the air-conditioning, we have had very few reports from guests of problems in this area on any of our cruises.


Commercial Property: 875 Third Avenue; No Longer That 'Building Behind the Liquor Store'
TO say that it has taken a very long time to complete 875 Third Avenue may be understating the matter a bit.
As Madison Equities began assembling the development site, between 52d and 53d Streets, Lyndon B. Johnson was in the White House, a five-room apartment in the Imperial House on East 69th Street rented for $675, Rogers Peet and De Pinna were selling on Fifth Avenue and a new musical called "Hair" was playing on Broadway.
Subway riders were paying 20 cents and looking forward to a new Second Avenue line.


William S. Paley, Who Built CBS Into a Communications Empire, Dies at 89
William S. Paley, who personified the power, glamour, allure and influence of CBS Inc., the communications empire he built, died Friday night at his home in Manhattan.
He was 89 years old.
His death was believed to have been caused by a heart attack related to pneumonia, said a CBS Inc. spokeswoman.


Corrections
A chart on Oct. 14 in the Travel Advisory column misstated the value added tax for Germany.
It is 14 percent, not 12.3 percent.


Sports People; Bruised Champion
HE still has a pain in his side, but Eric Davis is pouting as well as wincing these days.
It seems that the Cincinnati outfielder, who suffered severe kidney bruises trying to make a diving catch in the first inning of the last game of the World Series eight days ago, has a new complaint.
His feelings have been hurt.
On his arrival in Cincinnati on Friday night after spending six days in an Oakland hospital, Davis complained that the Reds' owner, Marge Schott, had treated him shabbily, demonstrating no concern for his well being, failing to return his phone calls and forcing him to pay for the private plane flight that brought him back to Cincinnati.
"If I were a dog, I would have gotten more care, and that's the truth," Davis said after arriving at a Cincinnati hospital where he is undergoing further treatment for the bruised kidney.
"Marge hasn't called me," he said.
"Bob Quinn hasn't called me. I got calls from Bill White," the National League president, "and Jesse Jackson. That's the only down thing I feel now. I didn't get the support I needed from my management."
Schott told The Cincinnati Post that a business trip had kept her from returning a call from Davis.
As for whether the Reds or Davis, who makes more than $3 million a year, should pay for the plane trip, Schott said it was a matter to be settled by Quinn, the club's general manager, and Davis's agent.
Quinn said the Reds "fulfilled our obligations." (AP)


Noise Pollution Is a Serious Problem
I'd like to thank Doris Englemann for bringing to light one of the least-mentioned but most complained-about pollutants ("The Invasion of the Backyard Noisemakers" Opinion Page, Sept. 30).
Urban, suburban and exurban noise pollution is a serious problem deserving of attention.
The Environmental Protection Agency confirms that noise pollution is harmful to your health.
The constant noise that Mrs.
Englemann desribes increases stress levels, blood pressure, irritability, headaches, fatigue, anxiety and other symptoms of distress.
All of this results in violence and lawsuits between neighbors, lower productivity in offices and feelings of frustration with the lack of control of your environment.
A few years ago, I was moved to invent a product called the Quiet Machine, which gave me some relief from noise.
A friend who was also bothered by noise asked me to make one for him, and soon after my company, First &amp; Co., began to market this product for controlling noise pollution.
Ms.
Englemann should not feel guilty; my customers, including many on Long Island, have suffered the slings and arrows of noise pollution.
Fortunately the Quiet Machine has been able to help in homes and offices, and Ican tell you it is truly a remarkable breakthrough for noise relief.
I urge Ms.
Englemann and anyone else bothered by noise pollution to call me at (718) 544-7583 for a free informative brochure.
ALAN LEVINE President, First &amp; Co.
Forest Hills


Doing Time
On Thursday night, more than two months after he was convicted of cocaine possession, Marion S. Barry Jr., the Mayor of Washington, sent a letter to the court admitting that he was a drug addict and asking for mercy.
Just before sentencing on Friday, he suggested that community service would be a more appropriate punishment than prison time.
But Federal District Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson thought otherwise.
Saying that Mr.
Barry had "given aid, comfort and encouragement to the drug culture" by using cocaine for five years and lying about it, the judge sentenced him to six months in prison and a year of probation.
"His prominence inspired others to emulate him and to behave as they believed he did," the judge said.
The Mayor said he wasn't surprised at the severity of the sentence.
"I understand that there are different sets of standards for different people, and that's the American injustice system," he said.
Mr.
Barry will remain free pending the outcome of an appeal.


Fashion Preview;   New York
Tomorrow the big guns of Seventh Avenue start firing, and no one can say American designers aren't set to get off their best shots.
Whatever their inspirations for next spring's collections -- past decades, foreign shores, old movies, new fabrics, antique clothes, former and present celebrities, even their own canny creative urges -- the results are on the upside of style.
A great many of these new fashions seem like buffers against the current bleak business scene.
They sparkle with color, peppy ideas, sophistication and sex appeal.
And in the hands of designers like Geoffrey Beene, Bill Blass or Isaac Mizrahi, all these qualities often merge into one outfit.
Hemlines remain short; many are shorter still.
Shoulders are small, rounded or only slightly padded.
Clothes no longer cling like Band-Aids, but they are still curvy.
Everyone is reviving the dress.
Some version of the semifitted sheath seems to be in every collection.
Maybe that's why the dress, coupled with a jacket or feather-light coat, is the new suit of the season.
Colors are light but bright.
Fall's blazing shades have been whitened.
Navy and white, white and black or -- as at Anne Klein &amp; Company -- black, red and ivory also look sharp and desirable.
To be sure, there will be some limpid, seductive silhouettes.
Calvin Klein, for instance, is specializing in them.
But as a rule, these new designs have, as Donna Karan advocates, "a little perkier structure." Reminiscences of the 1950's and 60's are strong indeed.
Above all, though, these new spring looks somehow have a unique American "feel" to them.
And they are eminently wearable.


Moves at Once Modern and Classical
Emerging from incubation in this interior city, Brazil's first international-caliber contemporary dance company, Grupo Corpo Brazilian Dance Theater, is preparing for a two-week New York season beginning Tuesday at the Joyce Theater.
In Brazil, critical praise has been showered on the troupe and its principal choreographer, Rodrigo Pederneiras, whose work combines the control and discipline of classical ballet with his own energetic movements and startling images.
Word has spread north to New York, where the first week of his engagement at the Joyce is virtually sold out.
"Pederneiras is Brazil's most important choreographer," said Fernando Bicudo, a Brazilian cultural producer and president of the America Artes Foundation, a private group that promotes cultural interchange between Brazil and the United States.


Can a Woman Do a Man's Job In Schubert's 'Winterreise'?
WE HAVE BEFORE US, ladies and gentlemen, a new recording of Schubert's much-recorded "Winterreise," two dozen songs, two dozen solitary way stations of despair (Angel CDC 49846; CD only).
It begins on a winter's night when a down-at-heel young wayfarer passes for the last time by the house of the burgher's daughter who has jilted him.
It ends when he meets a barefoot old organ grinder, cranking out broken tunes on the ice, noticed only by growling curs.
In between, the disappointed lover scours snow-swept meadows for his beloved's footprints, trails will-o'-the-wisps into rocky ravines, staggers exhausted past a deserted graveyard, and weeps to see one last leaf, like the last of his hopes, fall from a bare tree to the ground.
The wayfarer on this occasion is Miss Brigitte Fassbaender, and to get straight to the point, this is no material for a woman.
Can we discuss this like civilized people?
At the ballet, men in the prime of life dance old hags.
At the opera, dowagers cavort as knights in armor.
At the playhouse, a strapping black actor can portray a deformed king of England.
On Broadway, with $25 million at stake, a Welshman may even play a Eurasian.
Wars break out over whether such things should be allowed, encouraged, forbidden or required, but under the paper moon of theatrical illusion, they come to pass.
Outside the theater, no such moon shines.
A singer alone in the spotlight has no alternate self -- no character, no role -- to hide behind, so certain lines are harder to cross.
Oh, sure, a chanteuse in a cabaret can purr "Lili Marlene" to the soldiers.
But in the usual course of things, men don't sing "Bill" or "Mary" or "My Man," and women pass up "Maria" and "Man of La Mancha" and "Just Like a Woman." No one needs to tell you why.
Anyone who likes can do "Amazing Grace," "You're the Top" and "The Battle Hymn of the Republic." But except for purposes of travesty, where the lyrics call for a man rather than a woman or the other way around, what the lyrics say goes.
The sexes are equal but separate, and
vive la difference
.
In classical song, the picture is different, in mostly unexamined ways that turn out to be revealing.
Anyone who listens to lieder recitals soon finds out that, lo and behold, women are forever singing songs that presuppose a male speaker, whereas the opposite case is practically unheard of.
Yet practically the entire repertory of art songs, from Monteverdi to Berio, consists of lyrics by men set to music by men.
Here as elsewhere in our culture, men presume to put words in the mouths of women, and women validate the presumption by lending men's creation their voices.
"Madame Bovary, c'est moi!" declared Flaubert, misleading readers and critics for generations.
In truth, a novelist or a playwright is never one character or another character but a presence dispersed through the work at hand.
The poet's "I," where one exists, is different.
To come into being, it requires an act of unconditional identification.
To be sure, the circumstances of writing and imagining are not those of performance.
In the privacy of their studies, it appears, men are at liberty to identify with whomever they choose.
Mozart's song "Als Luise die Briefe Ihres Ungetreuen Liebhabers Verbrannte" ("As Louise Burned the Letters of Her Faithless Lover") has, as it happens, a text by a woman, one Gabriele von Baumberg, who except for Mozart would not survive as so much as a footnote.
As it is, who even thinks about who wrote the lyric?
Since Ovid, men beyond number have written love letters in the fleeting guise of women.
Goethe was one, and his rapturous sonnet "Die Liebende Schreibt" ("Written by a Woman in Love") served as a text for a rapturous Mendelssohn.
Adelbert von Chamisso wrote nine poems painting the intimate sentiments of a young woman as she falls in love, marries, bears a daughter, loses her husband and lives to see her daughter marry in turn and bear a daughter of her own.
Carl Loewe set the entire cycle but omitted the two last songs (the husband's death and the dreamy address to the granddaughter) from the first edition of his "Frauenliebe" ("A Woman's Love").
Schumann's better-known cycle, composed four years after Loewe's, never did include Chamisso's last poem.
It breaks off with the young wife's bereavement, while retaining Chamisso's more encompassing title, "Frauenliebe und -leben" ("A Woman's Love and Life").
Apparently Schumann felt that with the husband's death, the wife's life, too, is a closed book.
Loewe, like Chamisso, must have known better.
Still, he seems to have judged that his bourgeois audience preferred not to look beyond the sentimental fulfillment of young motherhood.
At any rate, however astutely or partially Mozart, Goethe, Mendelssohn, Chamisso, Schumann and Loewe have penetrated the feminine psyche, no man would dream of presenting their insights in public, any more than they would impersonate the coy nymph of Debussy's Arcadian "Chansons de Bilitis."
In public, we seem to require that a man be a man.
But on the concert stage, there is no corresponding requirement for a woman to be a woman.
Schubert's merry son of the muses (in "Der Musensohn") and his rhapsodic youth Ganymede (in "Ganymed") are constantly being brought to life by female interpreters, as is Wolf's amorous gardener ("Der Gartner").
No one misunderstands when a pretty lady in a frilly dress steps out in front of an orchestra to raise her voice in a love lyric plainly addressed to a woman, as in "Villanelle," the opening song of Berlioz's cycle "Les Nuits d'Ete." With so many instrumental voices contributing to the poetic statement, the singer is in any case less a person than the vessel of some emblematic or universal truth.
And thus sopranos and mezzo-sopranos are forever intoning the emotions of the heartsick swain of Mahler's "Lieder Eines Fahrenden Gesellen" or the grieving father of his "Kindertotenlieder," and no one complains of incongruity; the arrow is pointing in the approved direction.
In certain songs implying a male speaker, a woman's voice is even preferred, and text be damned.
Mahler's "Das Lied von der Erde" concludes with a half-hour nocturne called "Der Abschied" ("The Farewell"), in which a man waits at nightfall to say a last goodbye to a friend -- another man -- who is leaving to await death in the loneliness of the mountains.
The friend arrives.
The friends part.
The words and music are drenched in romantic yearning.
"I long to be at your side to relish the beauty of the evening," cries the friend as he waits.
"Where are you? How long you leave me by myself!"
What might it mean to an audience to hear this outburst from a baritone rather than an alto?
Mahler's score allows either, but in the concert hall the male option is rarely exercised.
Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, though, recorded the work twice -- none too successfully, to tell the truth, since critical passages lie below and above his most effective range.
But apart from that, he shies back, though less than we must suppose most men would, from the pathos, the violence of sentiment.
For the concert stage, a man dons his uniform -- "concert dress" -- and voices feelings that are seemly for a man to express.
Given the anxieties in our culture, that excludes a great many.
Sincerity, authenticity -- these are the virtues we judge him by.
Mutability, moodiness, frank caprice: these are vice in him.
In general, he is not allowed the freedom to sing "in quotes." He must sing as himself; he must make the words his own.
A woman may do the same, if she likes.
But she also has leeway to strike poses and assume disguises.
She may charm, she may tease.
And she may choose, as a man may not, not to sing as a person at all, but rather as a mouthpiece, a pure instrument, as the disembodied voice of the poem, even the voice of poetry, the muse.
Must this be so?
No.
It is mere convention.
But one ignores convention at one's peril.
Take the young baritone Thomas Hampson.
For his first recorded lieder recital (Teldec), he has assembled an imaginative program of songs by various hands to the seminal collection of German folk lyrics "Des Knaben Wunderhorn." What invites comment in this context is his inclusion of two songs that require a female interpreter: "Liebesklage des Madchens" ("The Maiden's Love Lament"), by Brahms; and "Das Bucklichte Mannlein" ("The Little Hunchback"), by Zemlinsky.
The more Mr.
Hampson exercises his wiles on these items, the more they resist.
The singer comes off at once professorial and foolish, his great gifts and admirable ambitions locked in a stranglehold with affectation.
Mr.
Fischer-Dieskau, with whom Mr.
Hampson has been compared, was not one to commit such errors of judgment.
His vast 25-LP survey of Schubert songs left out whatever he felt unsuitable for a man ("Gretchen am Spinnrade," for instance, or "Die Junge Nonne"); and when he undertook to record the complete songs of Brahms, he ceded the women's songs, among them "Liebesklage des Madchens," to Jessye Norman.
So what, in principle, is the objection to a woman in "Winterreise"?
It is not as if Miss Fassbaender were breaking new ground.
Elena Gerhardt and Lotte Lehmann preceded her decades ago.
In the last few years, Christa Ludwig has performed it live and on an exceptionally cultured, rather matronly recording (Deutsche Grammophon) that met with lavish praise in certain quarters.
Other women have been tempted, too, including Elisabeth Schwarzkopf.
When she demanded to know why she should not attempt it, the story goes, she was told, "Because, Elisabeth, you are not a man."
She listened.
But why?
There is, in fact, no reason in principle.
The reasons lie not in principles but in the particular character of this work.
"Winterreise" -- like Schubert's preceding song cycle, "Die Schone Mullerin" and the cyclelike group of Heine songs in his posthumous collection "Schwanengesang" -- is too close to the bone, too irreducibly confessional to permit any hint of artifice.
The presence of a woman in place of a man is patent artifice -- an artifice the conventions of the concert stage generally do not oppose.
But in these songs, not a phrase may be placed in quotes.
They must be real.
Miss Fassbaender, to give her credit, makes them as real as she can.
Along with her accompanist, the composer Aribert Reimann, she has imagined her way deep into the dark heart of Wilhelm Muller's texts and Schubert's settings.
The performance displays a brave ferocity that many male duos would do well to emulate.
The price, it must be said, is steep.
Mr.
Reimann's pianism is often brutal, and the list of Miss Fassbaender's vocal blemishes is long: savage timbres, wild wobbles, sobs fetched -- heaved -- from the chest.
But no one could accuse Miss Fassbaender of prettifying the cycle's relentless despair.
In the opening song, "Gute Nacht" ("Good Night"), she makes a persuasive case for an optional drop of an octave that most men avoid.
The dyspeptic note she strikes in "Irrlicht" ("Will-o'-the-Wisp") is distinctive.
She goes at "Der Greise Kopf" ("The Grizzled Head") in accents that are grand and tragic.
And the exceptionally febrile reading makes more cogent sense of the fey little waltz "Tauschung" ("Illusion") than any other that comes to mind.
Miss Fassbaender needs no instruction in the hues of gloom.
Still, nothing works.
Where we seek to be lost in raw experience, she offers a performance.
It is not a failure of imagination; it is the nature of the instrument.
In full cry, Miss Fassbaender evokes the adolescent hysterics of Octavian toward the end of "Der Rosenkavalier's" first act.
The emotion is not wrong.
But Octavian is a boy -- a boy still smooth-cheeked enough to masquerade as a girl.
The wanderer of "Winterreise" has crossed that threshold.
His voice has changed.
Young, perhaps 20, as we must imagine him, he may sooner be brought to life in a man of 60 than in a woman who can pass for a lad of 17.
"Winterreise" is that exception in the literature: a group of songs that belong uniquely to men.
Whether or not it is Miss Fassbaender's intention, her performance takes up arms against every convention that says so.
And for such an act of daring, we should be grateful; it points the way to a possible future -- a true future, a future that differs from the past and is not just a Xerox copy.
Unlike a failed "Winterreise" by some ill-equipped tenor or baritone, hers tells us something.
It tells us that for now and maybe for good, no matter how far we travel on the road to equality between the sexes, there are some journeys we cannot take for each other.
To express what she has found in "Winterreise," Miss Fassbaender will need to find some other vehicle, something new.
We cannot lean on the classics for everything.
This old world is younger than we think.


The New Tax Package: What Does It Mean to You and Me?
IT could have been worse, much worse and much more painful.
As any taxpayer with a modicum of memory can appreciate, the days of 50 percent tax rates were with us as recently as 1986.


Praise for O'Neill
To the Sports Editor:
Get Molly O'Neill ("Coming to the Plate, One Family's Ethos," The New York Times, Oct. 16) out of the kitchen and into the bleachers.
We need more sportswriting like this.
And people like this to read about on the sports pages.
JUDY TALBOTT Darien, Conn.


Judy Weinstein Weds Stuart Jacobson
Judy Karen Weinstein, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman Weinstein of Easton, Conn., was married last evening to Dr.
Stuart Arthur Jacobson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry A. Jacobson of New Haven.
Rabbi Israel Stein performed the ceremony at Congregation Rodeph Sholom in Bridgeport, Conn.
The bride, who will keep her name, is a principal in the Hartford law firm of Hoberman &amp; Pollack.
She graduated from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from the University of Connecticut.
Her father, a physician, is an assistant professor of pediatrics at Yale University.
Her mother, Marilyn S. Weinstein, is a broker at Nicholas H. Fingelly Real Estate in Fairfield, Conn.


A Day of Champions Turns Into a Day of Tragedy
Racing's day of champions turned to tragedy at Belmont Park yesterday when two highly regarded runners died on the track in separate incidents in Breeders' Cup races.
Go for Wand, one of the greatest 3-year-old fillies in the history of the sport, shattered her right front leg while leading in a spectacular duel with Bayakoa in the Breeders' Cup Distaff.
She was killed by lethal injection as thousands of shaken fans watched with lumps in their throats.
The champion filly appeared to take a misstep just inside the last pole before the finish line and fell down in a tangle.
She got up and limped toward the finish line before collapsing again just a few feet from the winner's circle as Bayakoa won the race easily.


While Children Make Music, Conductors Make Plans
CONDUCTING the Norwalk Youth Symphony is no mere child's play.
Just ask the three men who lead its ensembles how important their Youth Symphony posts are to their career paths.
"I would like to be the conductor of a major American symphony orchestra," said 28-year-old Andre Smith, of New Haven, as he munched on a bagel during a rehearsal break one Saturday morning at the Norwalk Concert Hall.


The Governors Talk About Taxing and Spending
GOVERNORS in states from Alaska to Louisiana say that while they are fundamentally opposed to many of the ways Congress is raising and spending money in its new budget, their overriding concern is whether the effort in Washington can stabilize the slumping national economy.
Their views, given in interviews last week with 17 Governors, indicate how much state economies have become tied into national and international patterns.
Their views also reflect the fact that 33 states are facing budget deficits this year.


New Yorkers,etc.
Ask city dwellers their personal definition of luxury and it's not hard to guess what single thing is so far ahead of everything else that there's no second or third place, but merely a bunch of also-rans.
If wishes for one luxury came true, New York and most urban centers would be a sea of cars and each, large or small, would be operated by a person once known as a chauffeur and now referred to simply as a driver.
"My own special pumpkin with coachman at my beck and call," is how one woman described what she called the ultimate luxury.
"I've seen plenty of people who have great apartments, wonderful clothes and fabulous jewelry standing in the rain or snow, waiting for cabs, and I never could figure out their priorities. I'd take a car, even a small one, and driver, over a diamond necklace or European trips any day."


Social Events
For the Rusk Institute
Oct. 29 -- The Rusk Auxiliary is giving a dinner party at the Scarlatti restaurant, 34 East 52d Street, for the Howard A. Rusk Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine at the New York University Medical Center.
Cocktails at 7 P.M.; dinner at 8.
In addition to a raffle, there will be gift bags for all guests.
Informal.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 340-6196.
At the Winter Garden
Oct. 29 -- The American Friends of the Israel Museum in Jerusalem is giving a 25th birthday fund-raising party at the Winter Garden of the World Financial Center.
Cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing at 8.
Black tie.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 683-5190.
Briefly Noted
Oct. 29 -- The Ms.
Foundation, which provides financial aid to women's groups, is hoping to increase its treasury with a fund-raiser at Caroline's Comedy Club, Pier 17 at the South Street Seaport.
Angela Scott, Joy Behar, Brett Butler and other comedians will entertain, beginning at 5:30 P.M.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 353-8580.
Oct. 29 -- A fund-raiser for the American Horse Shows Association's younger riders programs will be held at Cartier, Fifth Avenue and 52d Street, where champagne will be offered from 6:30 to 8:30 P.M.
Black tie optional.
Tickets, $125, at the door or from (212) 972-2472, ext. 73.
Oct. 29 -- An Evening With Dracula, a costumed and staged reading of the Bram Stoker novel, will benefit Survivor Productions, a nonprofit theater company specializing in melodramas.
The 7 P.M. performance at the Sara Delano Roosevelt House, 47 East 65th Street, will be preceded by a performance of theatrical tricks at 6:30.
Tickets, $10, from (212) 877-2988.
Oct. 30 -- The Fresh Air Fund will benefit from a Halloween dance, buffet dinner and auction to be held at Roseland, 239 West 52d Street, where the party will begin at 7 P.M.
Masks designed for the event by Peter Max and Mark Kostabi will be auctioned.
Tickets, $100 for guests 35 years old and younger; $150 and $300, from (212) 221-0900.
Oct. 30 -- The French-American Foundation is raising money for its early-childhood education projects with a champagne reception and auction of luxury goods, mostly French, at Christie's, followed by dinner and dancing at the French Consulate, 934 Fifth Avenue (75th Street).
Festive attire.
Tickets, $75 for the reception and auction only or $250 for all events, from (212) 737-3850.
Oct. 30 -- The entire New York Knicks basketball team and its coaches are expected to attend a dinner dance for the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Reception at 6 P.M.; dinner and entertainment at 7.
Black tie optional.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 889-7575.
Oct. 30 -- The Aspen Institute, the sponsor of social-affairs forums, will observe its 40th birthday with an awards dinner at the Plaza.
The evening, which will raise money for the institute, will honor William C. Butcher and Marian Wright Edelman.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 735-0721.
Oct. 30 -- The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center is offering a champagne reception, concert and dinner at its annual benefit at Alice Tully Hall.
Reception at 6:30 P.M., concert at 7:30 with Handel, Purcell and Mendelssohn on the program, and dinner at 9:30.
Black tie optional.
Tickets, $325 for the concert and dinner; $20 for the concert only, from (212) 362-1900, ext. 357.
Oct. 31 -- The Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company will benefit from a dinner dance at the Intrepid museum, Pier 86 at West 46th Street.
Mayor David N. Dinkins and Ron Kovic, the author of "Born on the Fourth of July," will be among the people honored as benefactors of Vietnam veterans.
The party starts at 6:30 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 512-5640.
Oct. 31 -- The Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service's 124th anniversary dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria will benefit the bureau's programs for children.
Black tie.
Reception at 6 P.M.; dinner at 7.
Tickets, $500, from (718) 875-0710.
Oct. 31 -- Graham-Windham, one of the nation's oldest child-welfare agencies, will be the beneficiary of an evening of jazz by Wynton Marsalis and Ellis, his father, and Branford and Jason, his brothers, at Alice Tully Hall at 8:30 P.M.
A champagne reception will follow.
Tickets $250, from (212) 529-6445, ext. 319.
Oct. 31 -- The Hospitality Committee for United Nations Delegations is giving an ambassadors' ball at the Plaza to raise money for its programs.
A cocktail reception at 7:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing at 8:30.
Black tie or national dress.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 963-7182.
Nov. 1 -- Highlights from Rita Hayworth movies will be shown at an Arabian Nights party to benefit the Alzheimer's Association.
The actress's daughter, Princess Yasmin Aga Khan, is in charge of the benefit, to be held under a tent at Tavern on the Green.
Black tie.
Tickets, $1,000 and $2,500, from (212) 735-0712.
Nov. 1 -- The Alcoholism Council of Greater New York is giving its annual Amethyst Ball at the Pierre.
A reception at 7:30 will be followed by dinner at 8:30.
Black tie.
Tickets, $350 or $150 for guests age 35 and younger, from (212) 979-6277.
Nov. 1 -- Independent Curators Inc. is observing its 15th anniversary with a cocktail party, fund-raising exhibition and silent auction of works by artists who have participated in the group's shows over the last five years.
These events at the Bess Cutler Gallery, 593 Broadway (Houston Street), will be followed by dinner at the Columns, across the street at 584 Broadway.
Tickets, $300 or $50 for guests age 35 and younger who wish to attend only the cocktail party, from (212) 254-8200.
Nov. 1 -- Ruby Dee, Ossie Davis, Carmen de Lavallade and Geoffrey Holder are expected to attend a dinner dance for the Sickle Cell Anemia Foundation of Greater New York at the New York Hilton.
Joyce B. Dinkins is the honorary chairwoman.
A 6:30 reception will be followed by dinner at 7:30.
Tickets, $100 (reception is $35 additional); $65 for students and the elderly, from (212) 865-1500.
Send In the Clowns
Nov. 2 -- The Big Apple Circus's annual fund-raiser for its community programs will begin with a French picnic at 6 P.M. under the big top at Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center.
Following a performance by ballerinas, horses and clowns, guests will be invited to join the performers for dessert and dancing.
Tickets for adults, $75, $150, $250 and $350; for children, $50 and $100, from (212) 268-2500.
Helping the Elderly
Nov. 4 -- The 74th annual dinner to benefit the Hebrew Home for the Aged in Riverdale, the Bronx, will honor Sanford Weill, a longtime benefactor.
A 6:30 P.M. reception at the Waldorf-Astoria will be followed by dinner at 7:30.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500 and $1,000, from (212) 549-8700, ext. 250.


Foreign-Language Proficiency
The article "Bilingual at an Early Age" (Opinion page, Sept. 9) did not get into the question of what happens in the long run to bilingual children and their proficiency in a foreign tongue.
I would like to address this problem by telling you of my own experiences.
In 1945, I became the doctor in a camp for Polish refugees in Germany, although I did not speak Polish; my native language was German.
I lived in the camp with my wife and our 5-year-old son.


The Man in the Van
A LIFE ON THE ROAD  By Charles Kuralt.
Illustrated. 253 pp.
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $19.95.


Patricia Donelly Is Married to Robert R. Gilbert
Patricia Anne Donelly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norbert E. Donelly of Lawrenceville, N.J., was married there yesterday to Robert R. Gilbert, a son of Leon Gilbert of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Muriel Gilbert.
Rabbi Claire Green officiated at the Edith Memorial Chapel of the Lawrenceville School.
Mrs.
Gilbert graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in international education from Columbia University.
She is a vice president of Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings in New York.
Her father heads his own management consulting company in Lawrenceville.
Mr.
Gilbert, a graduate of Cornell University, received an M.B.A. degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
He is a vice president of Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
His father founded and heads the Continental Connector Corporation in Woodside, Queens.


Q and A
Apartment Rentals in London
Q.
My husband and I and our three children are planning a 10-day stay in London.
We are a looking for accommodations in or near central London that will not require us to take two hotel rooms.
What are the options? -- Laurie Fox, Sunnyvale, Calif.
A.
There are a number of agencies that represent apartments in London.
Most two-bedroom apartments have a sofa bed in the living room and can accommodate the five of you, though there may be a $10 or $15 daily charge for the fifth person.
Or you may prefer a three-bedroom place.
Apartments are generally equipped with kitchens, telephone and television and may provide maid service.
Low season is generally November through March.
Here are some companies representing London rentals.
Hometours International (1170 Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10001; 800-367-4668 or 212-689-0851) says it represents more than 370 apartments in London.
A two-bedroom unit in Hyde Park is about $1,200 a week in low season and $1,500 in high season.
In Kensington, a three-bedroom, with two bathrooms starts at about $1,800 in low season and is about $2,800 in high season). In Mayfair, two-bedroom units are $1,500 or $1,600 a week in low season and $2,400 or $2,500 in high season and three-bedroom apartments are about $2,000 a week in low season and $2,800 or $2,900 in high season.
Villas International (71 West 23d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010; 212-929-7585 or 800-221-2260) says it represents 500 or 600 apartments in London.
A two-bedroom, two-bath apartment near Sloane Square starts at about $1,175 a week in low season and $1,450 in high season.
An apartment in the Pimlico area with three bedrooms and one bath is $1,290 a week in low season and $1,490 in high season.
On the more expensive end, a three-bedroom apartment in Mayfair, is $3,400 a week all year.
Rent a Home International (7200 34th Avenue N.W., Seattle, Wash. 98117; 800-488-7368 or 206-545-6963) represents about 400 to 500 apartments in London.
In Chelsea, a two-bedroom, two-bath apartment is about $1,500 a week all year.
A three-bedroom apartment is about $2,300.
London Apartments Ltd., (51 Kensington Court, London W8 5DB, England; telephone in London, 937 4248) offers about 300 apartments, most in the center of London, from Kensington in the west and about as far east as Bloomsbury.
The least expensive two-bedroom apartments start at about $1,200 in low season and about $1,300 in high season and the more luxurious places in the best areas start at about $2,100 a week.
Three-bedroom apartments start at about $2,400 in low season and go up to around $3,000 in high season.
The company has two representatives in the United States: Post Office Box 810216, Dallas, Tex. 75381 (800-327-1849 or 214-243-6748) and 5 Hidden Valley Road, Lafayette, Calif. 94549 (800-366-8748).
In the English Manner (Post Office Box 936, Alamo, Calif. 94507; 800-422-0799 or 415-935-7065) rents vacation flats in center of London and arranges home stays throughout the rest of Britain.
The company has a three-bedroom house in Bayswater with two baths, for $1,590 a week.
A three-bedroom, two-bath flat is $1,700.
The British Tourist Authority has a 76-page booklet, " Apartments in London 1990-91," that lists agencies through which apartments can be rented and buildings that specialize in short-term rentals.
The booklet may be picked up free at the authority's office (40 West 57th Street, New York, N.Y. 10019); mail requests should include a self-addressed envelope with 85 cents postage.
Iowa to Houston by Train
Q.
My parents live in Bellevue, Iowa, and would like to visit me but cannot fly and do not want to drive.
Is there train service? -- Rose Neitz, Houston
A.
The place closest to their home your parents can get a train is Burlington, Iowa, about 120 miles away.
From there they can get the Zephyr to Chicago, which leaves at Burlington daily at 12:17 P.M., arriving in Chicago at 4:25 P.M.
There, they transfer to the Texas Eagle, which leaves at 5:45 P.M. and arrives in Houston the next night at 9:15.
On the return trip, the Texas Eagle leaves Houston daily at 9:15 A.M., arriving in Chicago the next day at 1:40 P.M.
The Zephyr leaves Chicago at 2:55 P.M. and arrives at Burlington at 6:30 P.M.
The least expensive round-trip fare between Burlington and Houston is the All Aboard America rate, $179 a person in the off-season, early September to Dec. 15 and Jan 2 to April 30; at other times it is $189.
There are a limited number of seats at this fare.
Full round-trip fare between Burlington and Chicago is $71.
The off-season round-trip fare between Chicago and Houston is $152; in high season it is $290.
The least expensive sleeping rooms on the Texas Eagle, including all meals, are $152 one way off-season and $202 the rest of the year.
Amtrak information: 800-872-7245.
Florence Cooking Schools
Q. Are there any cooking schools in Florence? -- Peggy Weiss, New York, N.Y.
A.
Here are two schools in Florence.
Giuliano Bugialli's Cooking in Florence offers weeklong courses May through October plus a course Christmas week.
The courses include half-day classes, eating the meals prepared and tasting wines, restaurant dinners and tours of vineyards and markets and a full day and half day of sightseeing.
The cost is $3,000 a person, which includes hotel, classes, most meals but not air fare.
For companions who take part in all activities except the classes the cost is $2,300.
For information in the United States, write to Post Office Box 1650, Canal Street Station, New York, N.Y. 10013 or call 212-966-5325.
Italian Cuisine in Florence (1 Via Trieste, Florence 50139, Italy; 480041) offers half-day classes year round in the apartment of the teacher, Masha Innocenti.
There is a five-day Gourmet I course; Gourmet II, emphasizing more sophisticated cuisine; a four-day Italian Pastry and Dessert course, and a four-day course that combines elements of all three.
The cost is about $850 for Gourmet I, $890 for Gourmet II and the combination week and $650 for the dessert course.
The United States representative for the school is William Grossi, R.D.1, Ancramdale, N.Y. 12503; 518-329-1141.
To Bordeaux by Ferry?
Q.
We wish to travel by ferry from any port in the south of England to Bordeaux.
Is there such service? -- George L. Robinson, Southbury, Conn.
A.
According to the French Government Tourist Office, there are no ferries into or out of Bordeaux.
If you wish to travel from England to France by ship, you must sail to Normandy or Brittany.


Chemical Warfare Training in Saudi Arabia


Miss Mathieson Has a Wedding
Margaret Adele Mathieson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew W. Mathieson of Pittsburgh, was married there yesterday to David Wayne Conver, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil L. Conver of Lansdale, Pa.
The Rev.
James M. Dix officiated at the Fox Chapel Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Conver, 35 years old, graduated from the Ellis School and Bucknell University.
She is the comptroller of Drexel University.
Her father is the executive vice president of Richard K. Mellon &amp; Sons, which handles the Mellon family investments and philanthropy, and a trustee and the treasurer of the Richard King Mellon Foundation, both in Pittsburgh.
The bridegroom, 35, graduated from Dickinson College and received a law degree from Western New England College.
He is a partner in the law firm of Brunner, Conver &amp; Conver in Lansdale.
His father is the firm's senior partner.


Life With Feathers
A CAPE COD JOURNAL By Erma J. Fisk.
Illustrations by Louise Russell. 304 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.
ERMA J. (JONNIE) FISK was a multisided warbler of some sort.
At 80, she was still worrying about how to keep in shape if she couldn't shovel her own snow, but unnerving friends by saying, "I wished I were small and cuddly, wore ruffles, and got kissed at parties." A serious amateur ornithologist of national note, she worked harder and longer studying one small bird, the Least tern, and spent more money and time trying to protect the species than anyone in the world.
But she bore grudges against grackles, and had been known to describe sparrows as "stripy little brown birds" difficult to identify.
Once she decides to put out a store-bought duck to provide Christmas dinner for a neighborhood Cape Cod fox.


BREEDER'S CUP: Racing's Darkest Day, a Belmont Disaster;   Go for Wand and Mr. Nickerson Dead
The richest day of a thoroughbred racing season already marked by disappointment ended in disaster yesterday when the champion filly Go for Wand and the popular sprinter Mr.
Nickerson died on the track at Belmont Park.
In the midst of her greatest performance in a brilliant career, Go for Wand shattered her right foreleg while courageously holding off Bayakoa in the final 100 yards of the $1 million Distaff, the third of the seven Breeders' Cup races on a $10 million racing card.
As thousands in the crowd of 51,236 fans who had been cheering gasped and watched in horror, the 3-year-old filly crumpled, got up and took her final strides, and then went down in a heap.
Track officials erected some screens, and the filly was destroyed by lethal injection as her handlers, rival horsemen and many fans wept openly.
Go for Wand's jockey, Randy Romero, was not injured in the spill.


Campus Life: Boston College; Theater Course Offers Insights Into Soviet Union
The "Teatralnaya Masterskaya" a Soviet theater course being offered to Boston College students for the first time, does more than teach run-of-the-mill "Russian Theater 101."
The course, conducted entirely in Russian, is intended to imbue the art of Soviet theater with music, dance, poetry and improvisation.
It also explores the Soviet tolerance, or intolerance, of waiting in line for goods and services.


Sports of the Times; There Was a Chill in the Air
THE quiet of the stable area beside barn 12 at Belmont Park shortly before 3 P.M. yesterday was broken by the clop of Bayakoa as she was led out of her stall by her groom, Ricardo Contreras.
Despite the sun that shone through the dappled rust-and-gold leafed maple trees, there was still a chill in the air.


Travel Advisory
Eastern Europe Introduces Rail Pass
The new European East Pass will allow unlimited travel in first class on the national railroads of Austria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland, starting Jan. 1.
The pass will work like Eurailpass, which allows discount travel in 17 countries, including Austria and Hungary.
FrenchRail, the agent for the new pass in North America, will offer two passes valid in first class: one for $160 a person that allows five days of travel within a 15-day period and the other for $259 a person that allows 10 days of travel within a month.
Bernard Frelat, president of FrenchRail, said travelers would be able to travel by train with rail passes from the Atlantic to the Polish-Soviet border.
Austrian officials hope that vacationers will use Vienna as a gateway to Eastern Europe.
The European East Pass, which is expected to be available through travel agents in December, will offer substantial savings to the traveler making several journeys, rail officials say, particularly if some trips are taken in Austria, where train tickets cost much more than in Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland.
It is believed that eventually there will be one pass for the whole of Europe.
Meanwhile, the two passes must be used separately, and there is no discount plan for purchasing both.
Information: FrenchRail, 226 Westchester Avenue, White Plains, N.Y. 10604; 800-848-7245.
Subway Section Opens in Rome
ROME -- A new six-mile section of Rome's slowly expanding subway system opened this month.
An extension of Line B, it links the northeastern outskirts with the central railroad terminal (Stazione Termini), the hub of the Metropolitana subway network.
The old section of Line B, opened in 1955, runs from the rail terminal to the Colosseum, the modern World's Fair quarter and the Cecchignola military barracks, with a branch from the Ostiense stop to the seaside at Ostia, 13 miles from the center.
The 10-year-old Line A runs from the southeastern outskirts near the Alban Hills to the rail terminal and to Via Ottaviano, a 10-minute walk from St.
Peter's Square.
A westward extension is planned.
The new Line B section provides a link between the Tiburtina railroad station in the northeast and the central railroad terminal.
It is welcomed by many rail passengers because some long-distance trains between northern and southern Italy, including Sicily,stop only at Tiburtina, where it is often hard to get a cab, but not at Stazione Termini.
A ride on the Roman subways still costs 61 cents, but the fare will soon go up.
A major reason subway construction in Rome is being competed gingerly is the city's buried past.
Wherever digging starts, fragments of ancient statuary, remains of pagan temples and other finds come to light, and contractors have to suspend work until the archeologists are satisfied. -- PAUL HOFMANN Eastern Starts Flights to Ponce
Daily nonstop flights between Newark and Ponce, P.R., are to be introduced by Eastern Airlines on Thursday, giving travelers a second major gateway to Puerto Rico and the opportunity to bypass the San Juan airport.
The service to Ponce, the port city on the Caribbean on the island's southern coast, is the first from the mainland.
The airport has been expanded to accommodate wide-bodied aircraft such as the Boeing 757 that Eastern will use on the route.
The flights are scheduled to leave Newark daily at 7:15 A.M., arriving in Ponce at 11:45 A.M.
Return flights leave Ponce at 12:50 P.M. and arrive in Newark at 3:40 P.M.
Eastern said fares would be from $248 round trip in coach.
O'Hare Data On 900 Number
FlightCall, an information system on a 900 telephone number, gives status reports for all 2,200 daily flights arriving and departing O'Hare International Airport in Chicago.
Official Airline Guides, the travel information company that started the O'Hare service last month, says it plans similar phone lines at 13 other major airports in the next few months.
Travelers can call 900-786-8686 at 75 cents a minute, and they are promised access to the line after the first ring.
The caller also gets gate and baggage carousel information and news of delays.
The company says the information comes from the airlines' data displays in the airport and is revised every 10 minutes.
Official Airline Guides says it hopes to include the next available departure for travelers whose flights have been delayed or canceled.
Similar services are to be set up for Kennedy and La Guardia Airports by Thanksgiving.
Dallas-Fort Worth, Atlanta, Denver, Boston, Miami, Orlando, San Francisco, Los Angeles National and Dulles will get the service afterward.
Fourth Airport For Queensland
A plan to upgrade the Proserpine Airport in Queensland will offer travelers a fourth international airport when visiting the northeastern Australian state, which includes the Great Barrier Reef.
The project, being developed by Ansett Airlines and Aqua Del Ray International (a Japanese development company), calls for the existing air strip to be extended by about 650 feet and the runway shoulders widened to meet international standards and accommodate long-range aircraft.
Construction of the $5 million first phase, which has yet to receive the necessary governmental approvals, is expected to be completed by 1993.
The upgraded airport, which will be renamed Whitsunday International Airport, will ease the burden on Queensland's three existing international airports at Brisbane, Cairns and Townsville.
Future plans call for construction of a new international arrivals terminal and possibly extending the runway another 3,000 feet to handle longer-range 747 aircraft.
Vietnamese Art In Hong Kong
Hong Kong harbors large populations of Vietnamese boat people, some 55,000 -- a population that is, by most accounts, ignored by most Hong Kong residents.
One step toward creating awareness is an show of art by the boat people, on display through Nov. 8 at the Hong Kong Arts Center, Harbour Road, Wan Chai.
"Still Lives," an exhibit of 70 paintings and drawings by 18 Vietnamese, explores the trials and slim joys of daily life in Hong Kong's detention camps, where boat people await word whether they will be given asylum or be forcibly returned to Vietnam.
The show came together thanks largely to the efforts of Veronique Saunier, a French public relations consultant who spends time as a volunteer working in the refugee camps.
The result is a hauntingly eloquent vision of life in the camps.
A scene of people lining up for their daily rations was painted by a law student, Tran Van Hung.
The scene used for the exhibition's poster was painted by Hoang Quoc Bien.
In it, a young boy stands on an upended garbage can, straining to talk to a girl on the other side of a barbed wire fence -- the Statue of Liberty watches over the lovers' meeting.
A WHALE HABITAT IN BALTIMORE
The National Aquarium in Baltimore is scheduled to open its $35 million Marine Mammal Pavilion on Dec. 26.
The main feature of the 94,000-square-foot addition is a habitat for three beluga whales and six Atlantic bottlenose dolphins surrounded by a 1,300-seat amphitheater.
A 30-minute presentation about whales will be given in the amphitheater several times a day.
The 1.2-million-gallon pool has large acrylic windows that provide views of the creatures underwater.
The new pavilion also houses two classrooms, a laboratory, an arcade with exhibits about whales and dolphins and a life-size sculpture of a humpback whale, plus a gift shop and food counter.
The aquarium is at Pier 3, 501 East Pratt Street (301-576-3860) in the Inner Harbor area.
Among the 5,000 aquatic animals are sharks, ocean rays, large gamefish and seals, and there is a rain forest with Amazon parrots and iguanas and other reptiles.
The aquarium is open daily from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. (to 8 P.M. Friday) through May 14.
Summer hours: 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday to Thursday and 9 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Friday through Sunday.
Admission charges are being increased on Dec. 26 from $9.25 to $10.75; and from $5.50 to $6.50 for children aged 3 to 11.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 7 about the rights of the adopted referred incompletely to the California law that allows those born after 1983 to see their birth certificates at age 21.
The documents would be available only to adults whose birth parents gave their consent at the time of adoption.


Corrections
A picture in the Long Island Weekly today with a review of the play "Frankie and Johnny in the Claire de Lune," in Port Jefferson, was printed in error.
It shows a different production of the play, in East Farmingdale.


Eastern Conference: The Champion and the Pretenders
AS the National Basketball Association begins its 45th season on Friday, parity is in vogue.
At least nine teams have realistic aspirations of winning the championship.
And the majority of the contenders are in the Western Conference.
Even some coaches in the Eastern Conference admit that the balance of power has shifted to the West.
"You could be an awfully good team in the West this year and struggle just to make the playoffs," said Stu Jackson, the Knicks' coach.
Here is a capsule look at all 27 teams.
Statistics are from last season.
EASTERN CONFERENCE: ATLANTIC DIVISION Boston Celtics Quick Recap: 52-30 record last season, lost to Knicks in first round of the playoffs.
New Faces: Dee Brown (18th pick in the draft), Chris Ford (coach, a former Boston assistant), Brian Shaw (returned after season in Italy), Stojan Vrankovic (signed as free agent from Yugoslavia).
Top Guns: Larry Bird (24.3 points, 93 percent free-throw average), Kevin McHale (20.9 pts., 89.3% f.t.), Reggie Lewis (17 pts.), Robert Parish (15.7 pts., 58 percent field-goal average, 10.1 rebounds).
Game Plan: Ford wants the Celtics to use the fast break more, taking advantage of the speed of Shaw, Lewis and Brown.
But the average age of the front line is 34, making Boston susceptible to fatigue in April and May.
Playoff savvy and experience make the Celtics a contender, but only if they remain healthy.
New York Knicks Quick Recap: 45-37, lost to Detroit in second round of playoffs.
New Faces: Greg Grant (free agent from Phoenix), Jerrod Mustaf (17th pick in the draft).
Top Guns: Patrick Ewing (28.6 pts., 55.1% f.g., 10.9 rebs., 3.9 blocks), Charles Oakley (14.6 pts.), Gerald Wilkins (14.5 pts.), Kiki Vandeweghe (11.7 pts.).
Game Plan: Coach Stu Jackson wants to play more of an up-tempo game, hoping for easier scoring opportunities.
If Vandeweghe remains healthy and Mark Jackson returns to old form, New York should win 45 to 55 games.
But despite Ewing's dominance, the Knicks need more from the supporting cast to get past the second round of the playoffs.
Philadelphia 76ers Quick Recap: 53-29, lost to Chicago in second round of playoffs.
New Faces: Manute Bol (in trade from Golden State), Rickey Green (free agent from Indiana), Brian Oliver (32d pick).
Top Guns: Charles Barkley (25.2 pts., 60% f.g., 11.5 rebs.), Hersey Hawkins (18.5 pts., 88.8% f.t., 42% f.g.), Johnny Dawkins (14.3 pts.), Mike Gminski (13.7 pts.), Ron Anderson (11.9 pts.), Rick Mahorn (10.8 pts.), Bol (3.1 pts.).
Game Plan: Barkley is completely recovered from shoulder surgery.
Bol should put a few more fans into the seats, and a few more shots into the basket.
One of last year's biggest surprises, Philadelphia has enough offense to repeat as division champions, but its bench still lacks depth, which will hurt should any of the starters suffer an injury.
Washington Bullets Quick Recap: 31-51, failed to make the playoffs.
New Faces: Pervis Ellison (in trade from the Sacramento Kings), A.: J. English (37th pick).
Top Guns: Bernard King (22.4 pts.), John Williams (18.2 pts.), Ledell Eackles (13.5 pts.), Mark Alarie (10.5 pts.), Darrell Walker (8 assists), Charles Jones (2.4 blocks).
Game Plan: Knee injury to Williams last season ended any hopes for the team to make playoffs.
He has recovered, but trade of Jeff Malone leaves major void in the offense.
The jury is still out on Ellison, whose injury-plagued rookie season earned him the nickname Out-of-Service Pervis.
The Bullets should once again be out of the playoffs.
Miami Heat Quick Recap: 18-64, failed to make the playoffs.
New Faces: Willie Burton (ninth pick), Bimbo Coles (40th pick), Alec Kessler (12th pick), Jeff Sanders (in trade from Chicago).
Top Guns: Rony Seikaly (16.6 pts., 10.4 rebs.), Sherman Douglas (14.3 pts.), Glen Rice (13.6 pts.), Kevin Edwards (12 pts.), Jon Sundvold (44% on 3-pointers).
Game Plan: The Heat's bid for instant respectability failed when Cleveland matched Miami's offer sheet to John (Hot Rod) Williams.
Seikaly is becoming a force, but he needs more help.
Once again, Miami will watch the playoffs from the beach, but they should crack the 20-victory barrier.
New Jersey Nets Quick Recap: 17-65, the worst record in the league.
New Faces: Jud Buechler (38th pick), Derrick Coleman (first pick), Tate George (22d pick), Reggie Theus (in trade from Orlando).
Top Guns: Theus (18.9 pts.), Chris Morris (14.8 pts.), Sam Bowie (14.7 pts.), Derrick Gervin (12 pts.), Mookie Blaylock (10.1 pts.), Lester Conner (2.1 steals).
Game Plan: After bad chemistry, injuries, lack of talent and nonexistent fan support of last season, the Nets figure things can't get worse.
Coleman will help, but he missed virtually all of training camp, which will slow his early progress.
No one knows when Roy Hinson will be back from knee surgery.
This will be another season when the Nets will be fortunate to win 30 games.
CENTRAL DIVISION Chicago Bulls Quick Recap: 55-27 record last season, lost to Detroit in Eastern Conference final.
New Faces: Dennis Hopson (in trade from Nets), Cliff Levingston (free agent from Atlanta).
Top Guns: Michael Jordan (33.6 pts., 2.7 steals,), Scottie Pippen (16.5 pts., 2.5 steals), Hopson (15.8 pts.), Horace Grant (13.4 pts.), Bill Cartwright (11.4 pts.), John Paxson (10 pts.), Craig Hodges (48.1% on 3-pointers).
Game Plan: A serious threat to unseat the Pistons as division champions.
Pippen, Grant, Stacey King and B.: J. Armstrong continue to improve, while Jordan continues to be Jordan.
The Bulls desperately need the home-court advantage to defeat Detroit in the playoffs.
Detroit Pistons Quick Recap: 59-23, won second consecutive league championship.
New Faces: Lance Blanks (26th pick), Tree Rollins (free agent from Cleveland).
Top Guns: Isiah Thomas (18.4 pts., 9.4 asts.), Joe Dumars (17.8 pts., 90% f.t.), James Edwards (14.5 pts.), Mark Aguirre (14.1 pts.), Bill Laimbeer (12.1 pts.).
Game Plan: Chuck Daly is often overlooked, but he is a superb game coach and his players still respect him after eight seasons.
Despite strong personalities, this team continues to avoid the dissension that often destroys great teams.
No team plays better defense, and that gives Detroit an excellent chance to win another title.
Cleveland Cavaliers Quick Recap: 42-40, lost to Philadelphia in first round of playoffs.
New Faces: Milos Babic (50th pick), Danny Ferry (entering league after a season in Italy).


Soviet Coal Miners Set Up Independent Union and Threaten Strike
Soviet coal miners have set up the first national trade union independent of the state and have threatened to call a strike unless the Government improves their working conditions, news reports said today.
After a five-day meeting in the Ukrainian mining center of Donets, representatives of the coal miners voted Friday night to form the Independent Miners' Union and elected an executive to prepare the first congress.
official one, the Communist Party daily Pravda said.


Japan Learns Pluralism in U.S. Schools
To the Editor:
But the winds of change are blowing, uncharacteristically from west to east, and, even more amazingly, among educators.
While some Japanese prime ministers and cabinet officials continue to see the cultural pluralism of the United States as a weakness, each year hundreds of Japanese elementary and secondary-school teachers and university professors observe and comment on the strengths of American schools.
While they are perplexed by the lack of order and discipline in some American classrooms, they are also impressed with democracy in action in many schools: first, that children of every race, ethnic background and religion attend school together; and second, that the individual student is important, creative and inquiring, far beyond the homogeneous Japanese classroom.
Japanese educators are asking questions about research on effective teaching and learning and how American teachers acquire a repertory of skills and techniques to meet the needs of individual students.
More important, they are asking about opportunity and equal access to school and society, questions the Japanese have been unwilling, or perhaps incapable, of asking until now.
While we look to the Japanese model for the numbers -- hours in the school day, days in the academic year, standardized test scores -- Japanese teachers look to their American counterparts on issues of quality and diversity.
The children of butchers and tanners, whose condition Mr.
Fallows describes, may someday gain access to the full range of the wider Japanese society through education.
PETER D.  RELIC  Belmont, N.C., Oct. 16, 1990
The writer is a scholar in residence at Belmont Abbey College.


A Quantum Leap Backward
THE NEW RIGHT AND THE CONSTITUTION  Turning Back the Legal Clock.
By Bernard Schwartz. 310 pp.
Boston: Northeastern University Press. $32.50.


Pro Hockey; Islanders Win With Defense
It was not quite a case of mass soul-searching, said the Islander coach, Al Arbour, but it seemed to work for his world-weary players.
They took one meeting, and then another, and tonight, liberated by all the talk and united by a simple, shared conclusion, the Islanders put up a defensive front that flummoxed the Flyers and delivered a 5-2 victory.
"We had those meetings yesterday and today and realized what kind of team we are," Craig Ludwig said.
"If we worry about defense, we can frustrate any other team, and tonight we went into this game with just one thing on our mind. As far as we're concerned, our regular-season opener was tonight."


BOOKS &amp; BUSINESS: In Short
TWO-FISTED MANAGEMENT: An Arnold Harris Read'n'Lead Manual.
By Mark Marek. (Topper/Pharos, Paper, $7.95.) Arnold Harris is the kind of managerial authority one imagines Leona Helmsley consulted.
"Someone once said, 'You learn from your mistakes,' " he says.
"He doesn't work here any more." Harris is a real capitalist's capitalist: he chomps on his cigar, he bellows memos, and come Christmas Eve he wheedles a deal out of Santa.
The protagonist of "Two-Fisted Management," Harris is the cartoonist Mark Marek's embodiment of the combined corporate and personal profit motive that rings through every how-to business book.
"You'll learn how to survive and succeed with just your own two hands (and the sweaty hands of those who work under you)," he promises.
"I guarantee it or your money ba . . . well, I guarantee it." Harris comes equipped for class war.
To bully employees out of a raise, he counsels you to stare at them silently for seven cartoon frames. ("Mind over money," he says.) To dress for success, he recommends you wear a decoy contract up your sleeve and a semiautomatic staple gun on your hip.
To decorate the power office, he advises you hide metal detectors, cameras and strategically located land mines.
When he commandeers a bus to get to a meeting (the driver won't stop in the financial district), Harris tells a worried employee: "This isn't a game, Davis. This is free enterprise! You're gonna have casualties." Harris is adaptable; he calls business in the 90's "New Age Moneygrubbing," in which "we are one (in all but salary)." Um, well, yes.
Exactly.
As Mr.
Marek -- I mean Arnold Harris -- so aptly puts it: "Buy it, read it, and I'm sure you will profit from it. I know I will."


Once More, At Long Last, Unto the Breach
HE CAME OUT OF NOWHERE, A YOUTHFUL fellow crying things like "Trust none; for oaths are straws, men's faiths are wafercakes, and hold-fast is the only dog, my duck." On Dec. 6, CBS/Fox will issue Kenneth Branagh's acclaimed film "Henry V." Some retailers were surprised by the late video release of a popular movie that began playing in theaters in November 1989 and was nominated for two Academy Awards this year.
"That can happen when a hit film comes out of the blue, especially a foreign one," says Irv Slifkin of the Movies Unlimited video stores.
"People are unprepared. No one has thought too much about video."
But according to George Krieger, the president of CBS/ Fox, the delayed release was to protect the film's long run in theaters, where it has done $10 million worth of business and is still playing.
"We bought the title in February," Mr.
Krieger says.
"We wanted it to reach its highest level theatrically and then find a spot for it."


Northeast Notebook: Burlington, Mass.; Small Town, Huge Project
A COMPUTER software company has leased 70,000 square feet of space space in Burlington Center, a large mixed-use project with five office buildings that is rising in this town of 23,000 people 15 miles north of Boston.
The company, Easel Corporation of Woburn, Mass., will move into the first of the buildings, a $21 million four-story, 125,000-square-foot concrete, granite and glass structure now nearing completion.
The building was designed by the Urban Design Group of Chicago.
Trammell Crow Company of Dallas, the developer of the $95 million project, is planning 635,000 square feet of office space, 35,000 square feet of retail space and 75 to 100 town- house units.
Construction of the town houses is to begin next year, said Richard A. Galvin, vice president of Trammell Crow's Boston office, but no date has been set for the remaining buildings.
Planning for Burlington Center began in 1984 when the developer proposed an office park of about 1 million square feet.
The town denied the permit, objecting that the project was too large.
The developer went to court but decided instead to become the first to use a local planning tool introduced in 1987, the Planned Development District, which allows a variety of uses on land zoned for a single use on a case-by-case basis.
Trammell Crow, town officials and abutting residents came up with the final design, which includes housing on land zoned for industrial use.
The plan added the retail and residential space and, at the town's request, extensive traffic, sewer and drainage improvements.
The plan was approved in January 1988.
There was little commercial or industrial development here until the 1970's.
Since then, businesses and institutions have been attracted by the abundance of commercially and industrially zoned land and the town's convenient location on Route 128, the high-tech beltway around Boston.
In the last two years, about 1.5 million square feet of commercial projects have gone up, according to the Planning Director, Terry S. Szold.
But since 1987 the town has imposed stricter controls to limit the density of some projects and has introduced greater local scrutiny in planning.
Financing for land acquisition and infrastructure work was provided through Kennedy Associates Real Estate Advisers of Seattle.
The Bank of New England provided the $21 million construction loan for the first building and permanent financing will come from the Multi-Employer Property Trust, a pool of union pension funds advised by Kennedy Associates, Mr.
Galvin said.


WHAT HILL &amp; KNOWLTON CAN DO
Hill &amp; Knowlton represents the Governments of Turkey and Indonesia, the Tobacco Institute, Playboy Enterprises and the Upjohn Corporation, which manufactures abortion-inducing drugs ("What Hill &amp; Knowlton Can Do for You," by Jeffrey Goodell, Sept. 9).
Turkey has a P.R. problem because it practices torture and still denies the Armenian genocide.
Indonesia's image is slightly tarnished because it has caused the deaths of more than 100,000 people in East Timor since its invasion in 1975.
The Tobacco Institute needs no comment, while Playboy and Upjohn are clients whose interests would seem to clash with the Catholic bishop's campaign against abortion.
Given this record of marketplace amorality, it is remarkable to find employees at Hill &amp; Knowlton displaying moral qualms.
Perhaps the danger posed to legal abortion affects these employees in a way that no number of tortured Turks, dead Timorese and cancer victims ever could.
DONALD JOHNSON
Nyack, N.Y.


Proposal on Ballot Backed for L.I.
There are few who would argue that one of the most important issues to be faced for our future is the protection and preservation of our natural environment.
This is especially pertinent on Long Island, where our economic and individual survival is dependent upon the protection of our underground aquifer, the only source of drinking water for 2.6 million residents in Nassau and Suffolk Counties, and on the preservation of our environmentally sensitive lands.
In my four years in the State Legislature, I have seen and continue to see an ever-increasing awareness of, and commitment to, protecting the health of our environment by the citizens of New York State.


College Football: East; Boston College Wins, 27-14
Kevin Pearson returned an interception 31 yards for a touchdown and Boston College converted three other turnovers into scores for a 27-14 victory today over West Virginia.
Pearson's score gave Boston College a 27-0 lead with two minutes five seconds left in the first half, and the Eagles were never threatened.
Coming into the game, West Virginia (3-4) had forced 18 turnovers and surrendered the ball four times, the best turnover margin in the nation.
But Boston College (4-3) finished with a 6-3 advantage in that category.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending Oct. 13  MANHATTAN  Battery Park City 359,000
200 Rector Place  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 945-sq.-ft. condominium in a 3-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room; common charge $611, taxes $336 (Broker: D.J. Knight &amp; Co.)  Upper East Side 180,000
45 East End Avenue (81st St.)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 725-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, terrace, East River view; maintenance $799, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Arthur P. Brooks)  Upper West Side 999,000
257 Central Park West (86th St.)  (Orwell House)  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 2,400-sq.-ft. co-op, in a renovated prewar building; 24-hr. doorman, dining room; Central Park view; maintenance $1,800, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: Joffee LaSalle)  Upper West Side 225,000
245 West 104th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, renovated kitchen; maintenance $521, 38% tax-deductible (Broker: Subbud Resales)  Washington Heights 150,000
180 Cabrini Boulevard  (Castle Village)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,045-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; part-time doorman, dining foyer, common roof deck, Hudson river view; maintenance $619, includes gas and electricity, 41% tax-deductible (Broker: Simone Song Properties)  West Side 295,000
50 West 67th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a recently renovated 1912 building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, fireplace; maintenance $774, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: L.B. Kaye/Penthouse Properties)  BRONX  Gun Hill Road Area 175,000
1014 East 211th Street  2-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary duplex, 1 bedroom in other, 1 bath, dinette in each; 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,418 (Broker: Tryax Realty)  Riverdale 247,500
303 West 262d Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Marilyn &amp; Morris B. Sopher)  BROOKLYN  Midwood 210,000
2046 East 28th Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining area, w/w carpeting, front porch, finished basement; 1-car garage, 18- by 100-ft, lot; taxes $1,192 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  Park Slope 98,000
220 Berkeley Place  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 700-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; elevator, dining area, windowed kitchen; maintenance $370, 46% tax-deductible (Broker: John P. Barry Realty)  QUEENS  Elmhurst 230,000
54-32 83d Street  2-family, semi-attached, frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms in other; eat-in kitchen in each; hospitality suite in finished basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Elms Realty)  Forest Hills Gardens 258,500
20 Continental Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. penthouse co-op in a renovated prewar building; part-time doorman, dining area, fireplace, terrace; maintenance $900, 52% tax-deductible (Broker: Madeline Realty)  STAEN ISLAND  Clove Lakes 58,500
1100 Clove Road  (Fountains)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; eat-in kitchen, terrace, Clove Lakes Park view; maintenance $607, 66% tax-deductible (Broker: Key Realty)  Silver Lake 190,000
123 Oxford Place  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, center-hall colonial; dining room, 2 fireplaces, sunroom, rear deck, 40- by 110-ft. lot; taxes $1,250 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency-Rand Properties)


Pumpkins and Other Seasonal Signs
ON Wednesday, the trick or treaters will be out dressed in their Halloween costumes as ghosts, goblins, witches or Ninja Turtles.
Doorbells will ring.
Candies, nuts and fruits will abound.
So will the huge jack-o'-lanterns, which, by tradition, are the best-shaped and often the largest pumpkins that can be found at the local produce stands or in the garden. (Be prepared to lug anywhere from 25 to 30 pounds and more!) The pumpkins' cores will be hallowed out so that faces can be cut into them to shape the eyes and mouths.
And to make the jack-o'-lanterns more ghostly in appearance, the traditional candles (or flashlights) will go inside to provide an eerie glow.


Soothing Bromides? Not on TV
TELEVISION ENTERTAINMENT has a knack for sticking close to current headlines, not only with those inevitable docudramas rolling hastily off the more sensational stories (Leona Helmsley's in "The Queen of Mean" or Charles Stuart's in "Good Night, Sweet Wife: A Murder in Boston") but also in the seemingly pedestrian plotting of weekly series.
If the news is dominated by reports of economic decline, rampant crime, drugs, homelessness and official corruption, many prime-time shows -- especially the law-and-order ones -- waste little time catching up, reflecting what has already happened and, in some instances, anticipating what could happen.
This season, from NBC's "Law and Order" and Fox's "Against the Law" to CBS's "Trials of Rosie O'Neill" and ABC's "Cop Rock," passing images of the nation's social order can be remarkably scathing and unsettling.


Golf; Mudd and Mayfair Tied in 2-Stroke Lead
With several of the PGA Tour's best playing uninspired golf in what is designed to be a climactic season-ending bonanza, two lesser-known players jumped into the lead today after the third round of the Nabisco Championships.
Jodie Mudd, who won the Players Championship last March, and the second-year professional Billy Mayfair finished 54 holes with totals of eight-under-par 205 here at the demanding Champions Golf Club.
They stand two shots better than Nick Price and three ahead of Ian Baker-Finch, Chip Beck and Greg Norman.


Bhutto Now Looks to the Provinces for a Victory
Fresh from a trouncing in parliamentary elections on Wednesday, former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto is trying to avert the destruction of her political power base in provincial elections today.
Most attention is focused on Sind, one of the country's four provinces, where Ms.
Bhutto and her People's Democratic Alliance will be fighting to retain control.
In the last elections, in November 1988, Ms.
Bhutto swept Sind, her home province, winning an overwhelming majority in its legislature and itsparliamentary delegation.
But she lost some National Assembly seats there this week in the landslide victory of the Islamic Democratic Alliance.


Auto Insurance And No-Fault Law
This is in response to "Car Injury Suits Are Declining" (Sept. 16):
The article may give the impression that New Jersey motorists who do not understand the complicated insurance system have been duped into choosing the verbal threshold and giving up a valuable right.
The truth is that limitations on the right to sue should have been part of New Jersey's no-fault law from the beginning.
The 1989 changes in the law mentioned in the article were the best the Kean administration could do against a powerful lawyers' lobby that is loathe to give up its fees from auto injury suits.


Time Stands Still in Bristol, but Only for an Hour
WITH the end of Daylight Saving Time today, Stuart Mitchell is faced with a task that would make most people pale.
This weekend, Mr.
Mitchell is resetting the 350 to 400 clocks at the American Clock and Watch Museum in Bristol to conform to the official time change that took place at 2 A.M.
Mr.
Mitchell, the museum's curator, said he planed to get an early start, since clocks will have be adjusted as well as wound.


About Cars; BMW Dangles Less Costly Lures
In counterpoint to its more expensive cars, BMW has added two four-cylinder models for 1991, the 318i and 318is.
With a base of $19,900, the entry-level 318 is the first BMW to be offered in America at less than $20,000 since 1986.
The car features antilock brakes, a driver's side air bag and central locking, but with leatherette upholstery and a list of options that would normally be standard equipment, the 318 is a bit short on luxury, and it faces heavy competition.


Managing; Just in Time: The New Partnerships
FOR much of the 1980's, productivity experts predicted that just-in-time delivery -- that much-ballyhooed Japanese scheduling technique in which suppliers deliver quality-guaranteed parts on very short lead times -- would be the secret to lower costs, higher quality and a speedier flow of product from concept to marketplace.
It wasn't.
That was in large part because suppliers bore the brunt of the costs for just-in-time delivery while customers reaped most of the benefits.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Chappaqua, N.Y. 600,000
212 Douglas Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, new contemporary; 3 fireplaces, study, family room, Jacuzzi, sauna, 0.6 acre; taxes not yet assessed.
Harrison, N.Y. 1.08 million
7 Muchmore Road  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; family room, pantry, den, 2 fireplaces, sunroom, 1.3 acres; taxes $10,192.
Somers, N.Y. 296,000
Lee Road
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; family room, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $4,810.
Essex, Conn. 360,000
24 River Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 230-year-old Cape Cod; formal dining room, L-shaped porch, 1 acre; taxes not available.
Old Lyme, Conn. 152,000
33 Center Beach Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old ranch; wood stove, bay window in living room; taxes $989.
Westbrook, Conn. 600,000
61 Second Avenue  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 64-year-old waterfront colonial; sunroom, library alcove, private beach association; taxes $2,642.
OTHER AREAS Kings Park, L.I. 225,000
112 Twin Oaks Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; dining room, den, fireplace, pool, 1-car garage; taxes $4,800.
Northport, L.I. 275,000
1 Starlit Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; den, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $5,400.
Milltown, N.J. 130,000
49 Broad Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 8-year-old colonial; fireplace, new vinyl siding, deck; taxes $2,460.


Goldcrest Lays Egg
MY INDECISION IS FINAL  The Spectacular Rise and Fall of Goldcrest Films, the Independent Studio That Challenged Hollywood.
By Jake Eberts and Terry Ilott.
Illustrated. 678 pp.
New York: The Atlantic Monthly Press. $29.95.


From Japan, Tales of Intrigue, Action, Romance
Legendary Japanese deities, battles and romances are vividly depicted in the gold-flecked paintings, handscrolls, screens and lacquer boxes assembled in "Courtly Splendor: Twelve Centuries of Treasures from Japan" at the Museum of Fine Arts here.
The exhibition, which opened earlier this month and remains through Nov. 25, is the first in this country to document the role of the Japanese court as patron of the arts.
The impressive presentation of 60 objects from Japanese public and private collections includes a handscroll and a painting from the Imperial household, 30 cultural properties and the largest number of national treasures -- 11 -- ever shown at one time outside of Japan.
The objects were selected by the Agency for Cultural Affairs in Japan in consultation with three of the Boston museum's representatives: Morihiro Ogawa in Tokyo and, in Boston, Wu Tung, the curator of Asiatic art, and Anne Nishimura Morse, an assistant curator.


The Abuse Had to Stop
A HOLE IN THE WORLD  An American Boyhood.
By Richard Rhodes.
Illustrated. 271 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


Elliott Roosevelt, General and Author, Dies at 80
Elliott Roosevelt, a World War II Air Corps general, a breeder of Arabian horses and an author whose works included a series of mystery novels that cast his mother, the First Lady, as an amateur detective, died yesterday at his home in Scottsdale, Ariz.
He was 80 years old.
Mr.
Roosevelt died of congestive heart failure, his wife, the former Patricia Peabody, said.


How Calvin Trillin Changed My Life
ENOUGH'S ENOUGH  (And Other Rules of Life).
By Calvin Trillin. 251 pp.
New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.


Stacy Lynn Sider Is Engaged to Benjamin J. Robin
December wedding plans for Stacy Lynn Sider and Benjamin J. Robin, both 24 years old and graduates of the State University of New York at Binghamton, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
William Sider of Cos Cob, Conn.
Miss Sider was until recently an assistant managing editor at Pergamon Press in Elmsford, N.Y.
Her father is an executive vice president and the chief financial officer of the Hertz Corporation in Park Ridge, N.J.
Her mother, Barbara Sider, teaches at the New York School for the Deaf in White Plains.
Mr.
Robin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Robin of Hewlett, L.I., is a management associate for Hertz Equipment Rental in Cherry Hill, N.J.
His parents own P &amp; S Stationery in Hewlett.


A 'Stretch' for Long Wharf Audience
THE director declared that several regional theaters wanted to produce the play -- some even came close -- and then backed off because of its incendiary nature.
The playwright recalled that certain actors turned down auditions.
"Morally reprehensible," they called the play.


Lawmakers Agree to Curb Exploration for Offshore Oil
Congressional negotiators agreed today to keep vast tracts of coastal waters off limits to oil and gas drilling, rejecting arguments that domestic fuel production should be increased because of the crisis in the Middle East.
But Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. said he would recommend that President Bush veto the measure if it cleared the full House and Senate.
Because it is attached to the 1991 spending bill for the Interior Department, it is not clear what effect a veto would have on other operations of the department.
In the past, Cabinet members have recommended that Presidents veto bills with similar provisions, but the threat has never been carried out, and appears unlikely to be this time.


For Vietnam, The Price Of Progress Is Cambodia
THERE are two Southeast Asias, Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhavan of Thailand is fond of saying: one thriving and capitalist, the other socialist and stagnant.
So it should be no surprise that even the famously stubborn Vietnamese leadership, despite its divisions over the pace of change, has realized that it must join the development race now or be forever left behind, floundering in a politically unstable swamp of unemployment and inflation.


Valerie Warner Wed To Nathaniel Parish
Valerie Warner and Nathaniel J. Parish were married last evening at the Pierre in New York by Rabbi Arnold Turetsky.
Mrs.
Warner Parish, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ted Kahn of Hollywood, Fla., is a senior vice president at Gilbert, Whitney &amp; Johns, an advertising and public-relations company in New York and Whippany, N.J.
She is a graduate of the Fashion Institute of Technology.


College Football; Yale Suddenly Looks Like a True Contender
Where has this Yale team been all season?
That was an appropriate question for Penn today as the Bulldogs thoroughly defeated the Red and Blue, 27-10, before the largest Ivy League crowd of the year, 32,389 fans, at Franklin Field.
Coach Carm Cozza's squad, which had stumbled and bumbled much of the season, played almost without fault in a contest that helped reduce the crowding at the top of the Ivy League standing.


Lifestyle; Whole Wheat Couscous? Check the Health Food Stores
A few months ago a friend pointed out that it is just as easy to make whole-wheat instant couscous as it is the ordinary kind.
And, he assured me, it is just as easy to find the whole-wheat variety.
That is because he shops regularly in health-food stores.
It is worth making an occasional trip to a specialty market to get the whole-wheat variety, which offers more fiber and more flavor, with no more work.


Barbara Bower and E. R. Kurtz Prohl Jr. to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Harry S. Bower of East Brunswick, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Barbara D. Bower to E. R. Kurtz Prohl Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Prohl of Chappaqua, N.Y.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Bower, 22 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Lafayette College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a consultant at Andersen Consulting in Stamford, Conn., where Mr.
Prohl, 23, is a credit analyst for the I.B.M.
Credit Corporation.
He graduated from the American School of Paris and Lafayette.


National Party Wins New Zealand Vote; Improved U.S. Ties Sought
Jim Bolger, a conservative who has pledged to patch up relations with the United States, easily captured the Prime Minister's job today as his National Party won by a landslide in national elections.
The party capitalized on a faltering economy to end six years of rule by the Labor Party in this South Pacific nation of 3.5 million people.


Cosmological Clues, in a Galaxy Far Away
ONE of the great unanswered questions of cosmology is why the universe is lumpy instead of smooth.
Why, instead of homogeneity, is there structure -- stars, galaxies, clusters of galaxies and clusters of clusters?
In trying to explain how all this scenery formed in the mere 15 billion to 20 billion years that have elapsed since the Big Bang, a few theorists invoke the anthropic principle: if things weren't as they are, we wouldn't be around to worry about it.
But others seek a more straight-forward explanation, and they hope to find clues by studying a particularly unwieldy cosmic clump -- the largest galaxy ever detected -- whose discovery was announced last week.
Including more than 100 trillion stars and measuring more than six million light years in diameter, the galaxy is 60 times the size of Earth's own galaxy, the Milky Way.
The discovery was made by Jeffrey R. Kuhn of Michigan State University, Juan M. Uson of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory and Stephen P. Boughn of Haverford College from 16 photographs taken by the 36-inch telescope at the Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona.
Using a computer, they subtracted light from other sources, leaving only the galaxy and a halo of light surrounding it.
"If we talk about the galaxy and the halo as a single entity, then it is the largest object that we are aware of," Dr.
Kuhn said.
The newfound galaxy is located in the center of an even larger clump, a cluster of some 1,000 galaxies called Abell 2029.
The astronomers said that the even distribution of stars and other matter in the galaxy suggests that it is extremely old, possibly acting as the keystone in the cluster's formation.
They hope that further study will provide clues to the genesis, and the role played by a mysterious substance called "dark matter."
Since there doesn't appear to be enough ordinary matter in the universe to account for the huge gravitational forces that would seem necessary to cause all the clumping, scientists propose the existence of vast amounts of invisible matter that eludes detection because it emits no radiation.
According to the prevailing wisdom, some 99 percent of the universe consists of this missing mass, which means that what is generally thought of as astronomy actually concerns only a tiny subset of particles that happen to be detectable by human nervous systems.


Sports People; Forget Thinking Caps
BASEBALL, with its intricate strategies of time and space, may be known as a thinking man's game, but when it comes time to bat, the smartest hitters leave their brains in the dugout.
That, more or less, is the thesis, or rather the dissertation, of Tom Hanson, a Skidmore College baseball coach who has been studying the mental aspects of hitting as part of his effort to obtain a doctorate in sports psychology from the University of Virginia.
Major league batters, according to Hanson, simply have no time to think during the four-tenths of a second or so it takes a good fast ball to go from the pitcher's hand to the catcher's mitt.
"If you are thinking, you are in trouble," Hanson said.
"Information should go from your eyes to your hands and bypass the brain."
Hanson, who has been interviewing major league greats as part of his research, hopes to publish his dissertation as a sort of "cook book," for hitters when it is finished next summer.
The best hitters, he said, are the most relaxed hitters.
"The key is not to get tense and anxious. That tightens the muscles and a tight muscle is a slow muscle."
All of which would bear out what Yogi Berra, the Hall of Fame catcher, said years ago when asked what he thought about while up at bat.
"How can you think and hit?" Berra replied. (AP)


Hatteras Island to Rely on Ferries Up to 6 Months
Residents of Hatteras Island may have to rely on ferries for six months because of the loss of a 369-foot section of the island's only bridge when it was struck by a dredge, local officials say.
Gene O'Bleness, executive director of the Dare County Tourist Bureau, said Friday that if the bridge was out for three months or more, it would cost local businesses from $18 million to $20 million.
"October and November are prime surf-fishing months on Hatteras," he said.


Corrections
A chart on Oct. 7 in the Travel Advisory column misstated the minimum rate for a double room at Choice hotels in Rome, based on information provided by the hotel group.
The rate is $170 (200,000 lire), not $17 (20,000 lire).


Style Makers; Carol Kropnick, Mask Maker
"Masks are provocative," said Carol Kropnick, a 38-year-old artist who creates hybrids of birds, fish, reptiles and fuzzy mammals with human qualities.
"No one can respond nonchalantly to them."
Her handmade masks have been exhibited in museums and galleries around the country, among them the American Crafts Museum, the Hunterdon Art Center in New Jersey, the International Gallery in San Diego and the Mindscape Gallery in Chicago.
She has designed masks for theater, film and video productions, and has made masks for the holiday windows of Saks Fifth Avenue and Macy's.


J. K. Billock Weds Elizabeth Fortuin
Elizabeth Lyle Fortuin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Nicholas J. Fortuin of Garrison, Md., was married yesterday to John Kenney Billock, a son of Mrs.
George D. Billock of Bryn Mawr, Pa., and the late Mr.
Billock.
The Rev.
Philip B. Roulette performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Glyndon, Md.
Mrs.
Billock, 26 years old, graduated from the Bryn Mawr School in Baltimore and from Smith College.
She is a teacher at Park Avenue Christian Day School in New York.
Her father, a cardiologist, is a professor of medicine at Johns Hopkins Hospital School of Medicine.


Control of Slavery Issue Brought On Civil War Abraham's Bosom
To the Editor:
Elizabeth Gardner Weddington, in her Oct. 14 letter, describes President Lincoln's reaction to General Grant's indefensible General Order 11 of Dec. 17, 1862, expelling all Jews from the Department of Tennessee, which then included Kentucky.
This was researched and written about by Rabbi Judea B. Miller of Rochester.
As soon as General Grant issued his infamous order, a prominent Jewish citizen of Paducah, Cesar Kaskel, hurried to Washington to seek out President Lincoln
Lincoln heard the case and remarked, "And so the children of Israel were driven from the happy land of Canaan?" Kaskel, entering into the spirit of Lincoln's allusions, replied, "Yes, and that is why they have come unto Father Abraham's bosom seeking protection."
Lincoln replied, "And this protection they shall have." He immediately wrote out the order revoking General Order 11.
GAYNOR I.  JACOBSON  New York, Oct. 22, 1990


Susan C. Levy and Bruce P. Pollack Are Married
Susan Carol Levy, the daughter of Joan L. Gerard of White Plains and Richard P. Levy of New York, was married last evening at the Ridgeway Country Club in White Plains to Bruce Glenn Pollack, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lester Pollack of Harrison, N.Y.
Rabbi Maurice Davis officiated.
Mrs.
Pollack, a vice president and the sales manager at Blair Television, television advertising representatives in New York, is a graduate of the University of North Carolina.
She is the stepdaughter of Leslie Levy and of Ronald Gerard.
The bridegroom, a graduate of Brandeis University, is a principal in RSG Partners, merchant bankers in New York.


Ms. Hay to Wed James J. Murren
December wedding plans for Heather Hay and James Joseph Murren have been announced by the prospective bride's mother, Barbara Brown Harmatz of Baltimore.
Mr.
Murren is the son of Jean-Marie Murren of Fairfield, Conn., and the late John Murren.
Ms.
Hay, 24 years old, is a graduate of the Bryn Mawr School and Johns Hopkins University.
She is an analyst in the equity research division of Salomon Brothers in New York.
Her mother is the chairwoman of the art department at the Sparrow's Point School in Baltimore.


Secret-Police Scandals Outlive East Germany
On Oct. 3, the night of German unity, East Germany's police shed their drab gray suits and donned the bright green uniforms of West Germany.
But shedding old ways of doing business is proving to be more difficult in the lingering presence of so many veterans of the defunct Communist police state.
The former Communist secret police, the Stasi, was one of the largest and most efficient political-police operations in East Europe.
It had 85,000 full-time agents and, by some estimates, more than 500,000 part-time informants.


A New Test Of Buffett's Reputation
JUST when oil prices started to fall last week, the United States Government began talking tough and hinting of a possible military action to liberate Kuwait, pushing crude quotes higher again.
And as the week ended, a deal to raise taxes significantly seemed to be near.
With actions like that, one could conclude that the Government wants a recession.
And, from President Bush's perspective, why not?
The 1981-82 recession cost the Republicans some Congressional seats but it paved the way for an economic recovery that made Ronald Reagan the most popular President in a generation.


How Clean Air Became Part of the Bottom Line
IN the jubilant hours before dawn last Monday, lawmakers from a dozen states raised their glasses in a champagne toast to the first agreement in 13 years to strengthen the Clean Air Act, transforming a narrow and outdated law into the broadest, most stringent and most expensive environmental statute ever enacted.
In the halls of the Rayburn House Office Building, lobbyists for oil, auto, chemical and utility companies put down their cellular phones and celebrated the end of weeks of wearying negotiations with handshakes and backslaps.
The bill, which received final Congressional approval on Saturday, is expected to be signed by President Bush.
"It's a recognition of a certain maturity that industry has reached," said William D. Fay, administrator of the Clean Air Working Group, which represents nearly 2,000 companies.
"There are parts of the bill that we don't like, but we support the passage of tough clean air legislation. Company executives tell me they understand that it's part of the cost of doing business."


Pianist's Long Struggle for a Belief in Art
FROM his hometown on the island of Goolangsu in the East China Sea to his present home on the island of Manhattan, Cheng-Zong Yin has followed music's tortuous path.
As a 12-year-old just after the Communist revolution in China, he dodged Chiang Kai-shek's bombs in order to reach Shanghai and piano lessons.
Two decades later, he learned that music itself could be dangerous, when Mao Zedong banned the piano and forbade all forms of Western expression during the Cultural Revolution.


Claire E. Nyland Wed in Yonkers
Claire Elizabeth Nyland, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Donald Nyland of Yonkers, was married there yesterday to Michael Joseph McGarvey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kevin McGarvey of Yonkers.
The Rev.
Patrick H. Barrett, a cousin of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Monastery Church of the Sacred Heart.
Mrs.
McGarvey, 25 years old, and the bridegroom, 30, are graduates of Manhattan College.
She is an account supervisor at KSL Media, a media buying service in New York.
Her father, who has a law office in Bronxville, N.Y., is a former partner in the firm of Lambos, Flynn, Nyland &amp; Giardino in New York.
The bridegroom is a civil engineer for the Town of Greenburgh, N.Y.
His father recently retired as the director of New York City TWU-Transit Authority Health Benefit and Pension Trusts.


Tea Time: Only in America?
NO sooner have Americans discovered the ritual of afternoon tea, than British tabloids are running articles about its demise.
If recent stories are to be believed, it won't be long before real tea will have all but vanished, replaced by an instant variety made of powdered leaves sold in little bags.
While British Rail may no longer provide brewed tea in pots (along with buttered toast and Dundee cake), the real thing is still very much in evidence in England's good hotels and tea shops -- and not just for visiting Americans.


A Directory of Cruises Worldwide; Casting Off in the Spice Islands
There is apparently something about a tropical cruise that encourages a California Republican to put orchids in the tops of his knee-length black socks, a Canadian accountant to don a tribal sarong cum dagger and a New York epidemiologist to sit down to dinner in drag.
Unavoidable collegiality on a small ship, aided by alcohol, will do that to the stiffest of people.
But the extraordinary landscapes of Indonesia's most primitive islands, hugging the Equator in eerie, barren magnificence, must bring out and distort the tribal instincts, no matter how attenuated, in all of us.


Daily News Asks Strikers to Return to Jobs
The Daily News, trying to produce and distribute a Sunday newspaper with nonunion workers, announced yesterday that an undetermined number of its 2,200 striking employees could reclaim their jobs tomorrow if they cross picket lines.
The News, the nation's second-largest metropolitan daily after The Los Angeles Times, said that in accordance with Federal labor law, unionized workers whose jobs had not already been given to permanent nonunion replacements would be entitled to return to work at their regular salaries and working conditions.


U.S. Says It Sent No Signals To Expel Lebanese General
The Bush Administration has taken the view that while Syria's ouster of Gen.
Michel Aoun from the presidential palace in Beirut was particularly violent, it was the only solution that offered any promise of a more stable Lebanon.
Questions have arisen on what signal the United States may have sent Damascus before the confrontation between Syrian troops and supporters of the renegade general.
About 750 Lebanese and Syrian soldiers and civilians were killed in the fighting two weeks ago, and unconfirmed reports say that dozens of the dead were executed after they surrendered, or were victims of revenge killings long after combat ceased.


Control of Slavery Issue Brought On Civil War
To the Editor:
To argue, as Elizabeth Gardner Weddington, New York division president of the United Daughters of the Confederacy, does, that "union, not slavery, was the issue" in the Civil War makes trivial the enormity of the evil of racial slavery, as though African slavery ought not to have been an issue between whites.
I suspect that wars have many causes, that peace has only one, and whatever disputes among whites about slavery, the division between Northern whites and Southern whites over the authority to decide the issue led to conflict.
While, as Ms.
Weddington points out, pro-slavery legislatures in Ohio, Illinois and Maryland did not wish to prohibit slavery, they never sought to re-enslave freed slaves, as did the Confederacy, which, fearing slave revolts in states with sizable slave populations, banned further foreign imports as well.
As for Jewish support for the slavocracy, no historian has demonstrated that one of the causes of the Civil War was Union anti-Semitism.
Nor has anyone besides apologists for the Confederacy, like Ms.
Weddington, suggested that black freedmen in the Confederacy, a few of whom owned other black slaves, supported racial slavery, any more than Confederate leaders would defend the right of freed blacks to own white slaves.
Racial slavery may not have been the only cause -- perhaps not even the main cause -- of the Civil War.
But racism strongly suggests why there are no Jewish or black chapters, North or South, of the United Daughters of the Confederacy to defend the indefensible.
CARL SENNA  Providence, R.I., Oct. 14, 1990


Water Chief Meets Friends and Foes
THE New York City reservoir system occupies 18,000 acres of county land, pays taxes to 20 different communities and for 156 years has affected the development of large parts of Westchester because of its authority over its watershed.
After a long hiatus, the city is on the move again.
Last week, the man who supervises the seven-county reservoir system came here to discuss strict new proposals to protect the quality of the huge water-supply network, the first changes contemplated in 37 years.


Not Her Job
As a "Penthouse Pet," Marjorie Thoreson had some assignments not in the contract, like sex with a couple of business associates of the magazine's publisher, Robert Guccione.
And that sounded like sexual harassment to Acting Justice Elliott Wilk of State Supreme Court, who last week awarded her $4 million in punitive damages under New York State's Human Rights Law.
"Sexual slavery was not a part of her job description," said Justice Wilk.
Ms.
Thoreson, now 37 years old and living in California, also said she was forced to perform sexual acts as a bit player in Mr.
Guccione's 1979 film "Caligula" after he broke a promise to give her the starring role.
She got her job -- she was 1975 "Pet of the Year" under the name Anneka diLorenzo -- after undressing at Mr.
Guccione's request in her interview.
She had sent him a resume, she said, because she had seen him on television and was impressed by "how much he loved women."


Lack of Understanding On Shoreham Closing
The Long Island Weekly recently printed a letter written by Herbert Jaffee of Freeport, a representative of Utility Shareholders of America, which criticizes Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and me for our actions in both closing Shoreham and studying the possibility of a Shoreham gas conversion  [ Oct. 7 ] .
Mr.
Jaffee's letter is replete with factual errors and shows a shocking lack of understanding in just why the Cuomo Administration closed Shoreham as a nuclear-power facility.


Paying the Bill To Live in Madison
As a builder and developer, I keep asking myself, "Why is it so difficult to provide the community with one of its needs, affordable housing?"
In a Sept. 30 article, a picture was painted showing that the community of Madison was discussing the issue of affordable housing as one of its first activities to encourage the building of such housing.


The Challenge Of Titian's 'Senile Sublime'
ALTHOUGH HIS NAME HAS COME to personify the art of painting, perhaps no great artist in the Western tradition has remained quite so elusive as Titian.
We have been taught to appreciate his pictures and to celebrate their maker, but we continue to be frustrated in our efforts to understand both.
His biography seems filled with data -- dates (although not that of his birth), honors (including ennoblement by the Emperor Charles V), friends (including the infamous Pietro Aretino), business transactions (dealings in lumber as well as commissions for pictures), and artistic achievements -- and yet we know little of the man.
Unlike Leonardo da Vinci or Michelangelo, Titian has left us very few words, and those few deal primarily with matters of business and were probably drafted by friends.
Nor do we fully understand his art, especially not the art of his later years.
And yet that art may in fact be closer to us than any other painting of the past.
The exact year of Titian's birth remains undocumented; the two most reliable alternatives, both based on 16th-century testimony, are 1488 or 1490.
Opting for the latter has made this year the 500th anniversary of the Venetian painter's birth and the ostensible reason for mounting an ambitious exhibition of his paintings, the first since 1936.
Jointly organized by the city of Venice and the National Gallery of Art in Washington, the exhibition was on view in the Ducal Palace until Oct. 7; a modified version of the show opens at the National Gallery today and continues through Jan. 27.


Shakespeare Festival's Accomplishments
Over the years, I have read Alvin Klein's critiques of New Jersey theatrical productions with an increasing sense of irritation and dismay.
His latest about the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival ("Festival Completes a Mission," Sept. 16) is a case in point.
Not only does he have little positive to say about the performance of "King John" (which contains in its opening moments as compelling a bit of stagecraft as this viewer has seen), but he manages to undercut the festival's justifiably proud accomplishment of completing ("finishing off" in his phraseology) the Shakespeare canon with this production.


The Best Can Be Too Good
IT IS A SERIOUS MISTAKE EVER TO HEAR A GREAT performance.
Thereafter, the listener's life can become difficult.
During intermissions, old friends begin to look the other way, fearful that they will be harangued about some legendary violinist's patrician way with the Bach Chaconne or some half-forgotten soprano's peerless "Come scoglio." It is true that once exposed to the best, ear and mind are spoiled.
I thought of this problem, which tends to worsen with age, when word came of Leonard Bernstein's death two weeks ago.
It has been more than 30 years since I first marveled at his white-hot performances of Mahler and their uncanny psychic mating of composer and interpreter.
Since then, many excellent conductors have addressed themselves to the same works, some more persuasively than others, but always with the Bernstein performances looming behind them, forcing invidious comparisons.
Don't talk to me about anyone's "Resurrection" Symphony but the first one I heard from Bernstein.
Nor has there ever been, for me, a Mahler Third to match in emotional impact the one Bernstein led in his 1969 finale as the New York Philharmonic's music director.
Always, since then, I listen for the ineffable mingling of sweet innocence and sadness that he found in the final movement and am invariably let down.
No doubt the farewell mood of the occasion contributed to the elegiac effect.


Review/Music; Modern Group's Insights Into an Early-Music Giant
There are those who deplore the incursion of the early-music movement into the standard repertory, fearing that truly early music, from the early Baroque backward, will be forgotten.
Not to worry.
There is still a devoted community of specialists in such music, and its members still congregate to perform its masterpieces.
One might wonder what these musicians could do with more funding, attention and large-scale ambition; not everything before the 18th century was conceived for intimate forces -- far from it.
But music-making of this sort has traditionally proceeded in the modern era in slightly donnish obscurity.
A lot of great early music was in fact intimate, and at least that intimacy continues to be served with sensitivity and even nobility.


Races Are for Congress, but to Voters, Issue Is State Taxes
NEW JERSEY voters will elect a United States Senator and all 14 members of the state's delegation to the House of Representatives on Nov. 6, but their attention is focused more on the $2.8 billion tax increase pushed through the State Legislature this year by the Florio administration.
Broad dissatisfaction with the tax program coupled with difficulties in explaining the reasons for the drastic increases have produced the kind of political atmosphere that challengers pray for when running against incumbents.


Pumpkins and Other Seasonal Signs
ON Wednesday, the trick or treaters will be out dressed in their Halloween costumes as ghosts, goblins, witches or Ninja Turtles.
Doorbells will ring.
Candies, nuts and fruits will abound.
So will the huge jack-o'-lanterns, which, by tradition, are the best-shaped and often the largest pumpkins that can be found at the local produce stands or in the garden. (Be prepared to lug anywhere from 25 to 30 pounds and more!) The pumpkins' cores will be hallowed out so that faces can be cut into them to shape the eyes and mouths.
And to make the jack-o'-lanterns more ghostly in appearance, the traditional candles (or flashlights) will go inside to provide an eerie glow.


The Executive Computer; Will Next Inc.'s New Machines Find a Place in the Market?
TWO years after its first machines generated a lot of light but little heat, Next Inc. has completely overhauled its high-performance, Unix-based personal computers.
The new machines will be available next month, with color versions delayed until early next year, and Next showed them off earlier this month at the Seybold Seminars electronic publishing exposition in San Jose, Calif.
The heavy crowds at the Next booth were evidence that the company retains its exotic cachet, even though analysts say fewer than 10,000 Next machines were sold in the company's first two years.
Yet whether these new computers have a chance of capturing a significant share of the business computer marketplace is far from clear.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have separate hot- and cold-water faucets on one of my bathroom sinks that drip constantly.
I have changed the washers three times, using a different brand each time, but the faucets still drip.
Otherwise, they seem to be in good condition.
Do you think this means that the faucets have to be replaced?
A.
Although you say you haved changed washer brands three times, there is the possibility that you are using the wrong type for your faucets.
The most likely problem, however, is that the seats inside the faucets are scored or marred.
This is the metal seat against which the washer presses when the water is shut off.
On some faucets, these seats are removable and can be replaced -- a special tool, something like a large Allen wrench or hex wrench, is used -- to remove the old seat and install the new one.
If the seats are not replaceable, then they can usually be ground smooth with a seat-grinding tool.
It can be purchased in all plumbing-supply outlets.
Q.
Several months ago, we developed an unusual problem: Hot water accumulates in the toilet tank when the toilet has not been flushed for some time.
We have hired plumbers and boiler repairmen, but the problem persists.
Our house is about 40 years old, with an oil burner and supplementary solar water heater.
Can you suggest what could be causing this problem?
A.
I can think of two possible causes.
Somewhere, the hot- and cold-water lines are touching each other, and the hot-water pipe is transmitting heat to the cold-water pipe.
Even more likely, there is some place where the solar hot-water supply is "backing up" into the cold-water system, or where a defective valve is allowing hot water to pass into the cold-water pipes.


College Football: Midwest; Flowers Nets 208 for Nebraska
Leodis Flowers rushed for a career-high 208 yards and scored three touchdowns today, leading a big-play offense that carried No. 4 Nebraska to a 45-13 Big Eight Conference victory over Iowa State.
Iowa State, coming off a 33-31 upset of Oklahoma, couldn't handle Nebraska's running game, which amassed 557 yards.
The Cornhuskers (8-0, 4-0) also contained the quarterback Chris Pedersen, who had been very effective running against Oklahoma.
A record Cyclone Stadium crowd of 54,475 saw Flowers score on a 70-yard run in the first minute of the third quarter and Joseph break a 70-yard run moments later to set up Flowers's 5-yard touchdown run.
Joseph, who rushed for 123 yards in eight carries, also threw two touchdown passes to the freshman tight end Johnny Mitchell as the Cornhuskers beat Iowa State (3-4-1, 1-2-1) for the 13th consecutive time.
Pedersen ran for 148 yards and two touchdowns against Oklahoma, mostly on quarterback draws.
But Nebraska stopped that play, limiting him to 18 yards in 11 carries and sacking him four times.
Michigan St. 55, Purdue 33
EAST LANSING, Mich. (AP) -- Tico Duckett, a tailback, rolled up 210 yards on 34 carries and scored four touchdowns as Michigan State (3-3-1, 2-2) dominated Purdue (1-6, 0-4) in the Big Ten Conference game.
The Michigan State runners got 423 yards on 69 carries.
Purdue was held to only 6 yards rushing on 22 carries.
Ohio State 52, Minnesota 23
COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) -- Greg Frey passed for three touchdowns and ran for another -- all in the first half -- as Ohio State knocked Minnesota out of a first-place tie in the Big Ten.
Frey completed 16 of 27 passes for 257 yards with one interception.
Minnesota (4-3, 3-1) scored first for a 3-0 lead and then watched as Ohio State (4-2-1, 2-1-1) scored touchdowns on its first four possessions and five of the next six on the way to a 38-17 lead at the half.
Robert Smith, a freshman at Ohio State, rushed for 120 yards on 11 carries, including a 24-yard touchdown run.
Ohio State's coach, John Cooper, who underwent surgery to repair a ruptured spinal disk last Sunday, coached from the press box via a elephone hookup with the sidelines.
Michigan 45, Indiana 19
BLOOMINGTON, Ind. (AP) -- Elvis Grbac passed for 166 yards and three touchdowns and Tripp Welborne, a safety, set up scores with a 60-yard punt return and a pass interception for Michigan in the Big Ten game.
Jon Vaughn, the nation's rushing leader, added a 47-yard touchdown run and finished with 91 yards despite sitting out much of the game with a sore ankle.
Indiana (4-2-1, 1-2-1) came in as the conference's defensive leader, but Michigan (4-3, 2-2) held Indiana to no more than three plays on each of the Hoosiers' first seven possessions.
Illinois 21, Wisconsin 3
MADISON, Wis. (AP) -- Jason Verduzco passed for two touchdowns to lead Illinois (6-1, 4-0) in the Big Ten game.
Wisconsin dropped to 1-6 and 0-4.
Iowa 56, Northwestern 14
IOWA CITY (AP) -- Matt Rodgers threw for two first-half touchdowns and Nick Bell scored three times before the half for Iowa (6-1, 4-0).
The victory set up a Big Ten showdown Saturday at Illinois.
Northwestern (2-5, 1-3) dropped its 17th consecutive game to the Hawkeyes.
The Hawkeyes put the game away early by scoring touchdowns on five of their first six possessions, including 29 points in the second quarter.
Coming into the game, Iowa had outscored its opponents, 79-37, in the second period this season.
Bell, who despite a hip injury played last week in Iowa's 24-23 upset of Michigan, gained 136 yards in 16 first-half carries.
Tony Stewart, who rotates with Bell at tailback, carried 15 times for 122 yards before coming out early in the third quarter.
Kansas 27, Kansas St. 24
LAWRENCE, Kan. (AP) -- Chip Hilleary passed for a career-best 221 yards and led the Jayhawks with 102 yards rushing, and Dan Eichloff kicked a school record 58-yard field goal for Kansas (2-5-1, 1-2-1) in the Big Eight game.
Kansas State fell to 4-4, 1-3.
Air Force 52, Utah 21
AIR FORCE ACADEMY, Colo. (AP) -- Quarterback Rob Perez scored two touchdowns and safety Shanon Yates had two interceptions in the first seven minutes to ignite Air Force (4-4, 2-3) in the Western Athletic Conference game.
Air Force can get an automatic berth to the Liberty Bowl with a victory over Army on Nov. 10 and at least one more victory in its last three games.


New York Fiscal Woe Doubted as Talks Stall
At the core of the stalled New York City municipal labor talks is the union leaders' growing distrust of the claims being made about the city's financial plight.
Union leaders acknowledge that the city has a financial problem, but they are dubious about its extent.
In their eyes, the city's credibility is undermined by the discrepancies in revenue estimates and by work-force reduction warnings that have jumped in the last two weeks from 15,000 to 53,000.


Legislative Races Linked to City Problems
AS if Long Island did not have enough of its own troubles, New York City's fiscal problems have become an issue on the Island, at least among Republican candidates for the State Senate and Assembly.
The Republicans, trying to hold on to their last stronghold in Albany, the State Senate, and to beef up their thin minority in the Assembly, have seized on the city's problems to argue that Democratic legislators will try to give the state store away to the city and increase the income tax on commuters.
It is the latest variation on a familar Republican theme over the years, and Democrats counter that it is a Republican effort to kick up dust around the Republican record on taxes, abortion, gun control and the environment and to divert attention from the erratic Republican gubernatorial candidate, Pierre A. Rinfret.


For Wheelchair Users, Frustrations of Cruise Ships
Strenuous efforts by advocates for the disabled have blown away a lot of the fog about whether cruise ships merely accept wheelchairs or whether they actively provide access for them.
The 1991 edition of an annual chart published by Cruise Lines International Association, an industry trade group, shows that virtually all of 95 listed vessels
accept
wheelchair passengers.
But, these advocates point out, interpreting this to mean that the ship is accessible could be the start of a nightmare: on many ships, wheelchair users would have to be lifted over doorsills and carried into bathrooms.
And even ships that advertise accessible cabins may accommodate only wheelchairs 22 inches wide or less; the average wheelchair for a 150-pound man is 28 inches wide.


Karen W. Vail Is Married
Karen Walthers Vail, a vice president, and Hans Christian Ephraimson-Abt, an assistant vice president, both at the Bankers Trust Company in New York, were married yesterday at Christ King Lutheran Church in Binghamton, N.Y.
The Rev.
Mark Ridley officiated.
The bride, 28 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack DeWitt Vail Jr. of Binghamton.
She is a graduate of Cornell University.
Mr.
Ephraimson-Abt, 26, is the son of Hans Ephraimson-Abt of Ridgewood, N.J., and Christine de Gruyter of Hanover, Ontario, Canada.
He graduated from Syracuse University.


Europeans Scoff at Salesmanship
To the Editor:
Prof.
John Philip Jones observed that European advertising is kinder, gentler and more amusing than American advertising ("Why European Ads Are More Amusing," Oct. 7) because Europeans have fewer brands available to them.
This, he wrote, has a "deadening" effect on American advertising.
I think there's a deeper underlying cultural reason that explains the difference: the attitude toward salesmanship.
Many Europeans distrust salespeople because they don't believe selling is a legitimate career.
Most Americans don't see it that way.
The advertising reflects these differences: charming understatement vs.
"hard edged and brand specific."
It will be interesting to see which model, Old World or New, sets the tone for advertising in the emerging free-market nations.
RICHARD S. SECLOW  Westport, Conn., Oct. 12


Susan Anton Is Married
Susan A. Anton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark J. Anton of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to James P. Clancy, a son of Dorothy Clancy of Morristown, N.J., and Richard Clancy of Boston.
Msgr.
Harrold A. Murray officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of Christ the King in New Vernon, N.J.
Mrs.
Clancy, 27 years old, graduated from the Tobe-Coburn School for Fashion Careers.
Mr.
Clancy, 31, graduated from the University of New Hampshire.
He is a securities specialist at Stokes Hoyt &amp; Company in New York.


Data Bank/October 28, 1990
Looking Ahead
New Orders for Durable Goods
Sept.
Aug.
July
Monthly percent change
--1.7
--0.8
2.7
Lumber Production
Aug.
July
June
Millions of board feet
3,938
3,976
3,747
Steel Production
Oct. 26
Oct. 19
Oct. 12
Thousands of tons (weekly total)
1,862
1,863
1,932
Prime Rate
Most major banks, in percent
10.00
10.00
10.00
Electric Power
Millions of kilowatt hours (weekly total)
51,469
53,517
53,282
Money Supply Growth
3 mos.
6 mos.
12 mos.
M-1, annual percent change
5.1
3.8
4.5
Money Supply Growth
M-2
3.7
2.8
4.8
Money Supply Growth
M-3
1.9
1.1
1.9


Quayle Hasn't Gone on the Defensive About His Job or Future
To the Editor:
In an Oct. 14 news article on Dan Quayle, you find evidence of "defensiveness" by the Vice President during a recent campaign trip.
The evidence consists mainly of two anecdotes with quotes reported in summary, rather than exact, language.
The Vice President isn't defensive, but I am, particularly about writing that distorts what happened.
In one incident, at a Milwaukee grade school, you report that Mr.
Quayle "felt compelled to explain to a 4-year-old girl who asked what a Vice President does for a living that he is in George Bush's inner circle."
What the girl (who is 8, incidentally) asked was this: "How do you govern?" That's quite a different question from "What do you do for a living?" Instead of replying with a civics lecture, Mr.
Quayle told the second-grade class about his typical day, which includes a good deal of time with the President.
Why that should be characterized as defensive escapes me.
In the second incident, you have twice stated that Mr.
Quayle, in Oklahoma City, "snapped an angry denial at a reporter who asked him about 'speculation that Bush might dump you from the ticket in 1992.' " Here is the press conference transcript:
Q.
There has been some speculation recently that Jim Baker's move from Texas to Wyoming was preliminary to dumping you from the ticket in 1992.
Do you have any comment on that?
A. Who said that?
Q. Who said what?
A. That Jim Baker's move to Wyoming was preliminary . . .
Q. He has moved to Wyoming.
A. Yes, but who?
Q. It's the news media . . .
A.
Well, heh, heh, that answers the question.
Don't believe it. (General laughter around the room.)
Later, another reporter suggested that the Governor of Oklahoma had spread the rumor, to which Mr.
Quayle replied, with a smile:
"He passed the word? Well, I'd say, if the Governor feels that way, he's misinformed."
To see this amiable exchange characterized as an "angry denial" was particularly puzzling to me because in nearly two years of working with Mr.
Quayle, I have never seen him lose his cool, or even raise his voice, in public or private.
Even when he's been victimized by imaginative reporting.
DAVID C.  BECKWITH  Press Secy. to the Vice President Washington, Oct. 17, 1990


A Directory of Cruises Worldwide; Sailing the Seas With Mozart (et al.)
The Mediterranean lapped gently against the ship as I settled in for my favorite part of the musical day, the morning rehearsal in the Grand Salon.
Today Vladimir Spivakov and Yuri Bashmet were going over a Mozart duet -- and over, and once again.
With every repetition of a phrase, the nuance was a little different, not dramatically, just a shade, if you were attentive.
Finally, eyes glued, the violinist and the violist finished with a flourish and broke into a celebratory grin.
They'd got it right.
Every passenger smiled too.
We were part of their triumph.


Corrections
An article and a caption last Sunday about campaign advertising misidentified the Democratic candidate for Governor of Rhode Island.
He is Bruce Sundlun.


Market Forces Seen as Backbone of New Bush Energy Policy
The Bush Administration's long-awaited national energy strategy will include incentives for efficiency and for renewable fuels and other fresh Government iniatives, but it will continue the Reagan Administration's fundamental reliance on market forces, Energy Department and industry officials say.
Planning for the strategy, begun at a time of what Energy Secretary James D. Watkins calls energy complacency, is heading toward completion with American troops in the Persian Gulf protecting Mideast oil fields.
An interim report was published in April and some options were added in the aftermath of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.


Tea Time: Only in America?
NO sooner have Americans discovered the ritual of afternoon tea, than British tabloids are running articles about its demise.
If recent stories are to be believed, it won't be long before real tea will have all but vanished, replaced by an instant variety made of powdered leaves sold in little bags.
While British Rail may no longer provide brewed tea in pots (along with buttered toast and Dundee cake), the real thing is still very much in evidence in England's good hotels and tea shops -- and not just for visiting Americans.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 1 of the Arts and Leisure section today misidentifies a painting by the Mexican artist Frida Kahlo.
It is "Self-Portrait as a Tehuana (Diego on My Mind)."


Mixed Bag or Two at Roslyn Newcomer
ON a recent Wednesday evening, it seemed as though everyone in Rosyln was at Buongusto, trying to be the first in town to sample this new Italian restaurant.
Buongusto's striking good looks make a positive first impression: expansive windows, high ceilings, mirrors, extensive green plants and walls of rosy-colored brick.
The setting combines cafe hallmarks of neon, open kitchen and dining-room appetizer displays with uptown cloth-covered tables and appealing floral nosegays.
Although the crowd and decor tingled with life on that Wednesday night, service was as dull as yesterday's spaghetti carbonara.


The Confusing Case of the Keating 5
IT would be much simpler if the Senators under scrutiny in the "Keating Five" case had been caught taking cash-stuffed brown paper bags from lobbyists, or putting call girls on their office payrolls.
Those are the easy questions, and they have happened before.
But there is no legal precedent for the case of the Senators accused of using their political influence to help a political contributor, Charles H. Keating Jr., fend off Federal regulators as his savings and loan neared collapse.


Liberia Guerrillas Refuse to Sign Accord at Talks
The leading guerrilla army battling for control of Liberia refused to sign a cease-fire agreement at peace talks this week, but Bush Administration officials say they are cautiously optimistic that the accord will soon return to the bargaining table.
Three days of talks between the remnants of the late President Samuel K. Doe's army, two rebel factions and a West African peacekeeping force ended late Wednesday in the Gambian capital, Banjul.
As the last session broke up, representatives of the rebelNational Patriotic Front of Liberia said they needed to consult with their leader, Charles Taylor, before agreeing to a cease-fire.


Taping Drywall Seams
GYPSUM wallboard, or drywall, is easier to apply than plaster and most other wall materials, but covering the seams between panels is usually a stumbling block for the inexperienced.
The trick is achieving a smooth surface that will not show beneath paint and wallpaper.


N.B.A. Has Money to Burn in Lean Time
IN 1968, Dick Bloch paid $2 million to put a National Basketball Association franchise in Phoenix.
In 1987, Bloch sold the Suns to a group headed by Jerry Colangelo, the team's general manager, for $44.5 million.
Three weeks later, Colangelo said recently, he was offered $60 million for the team.
"Last December," Colangelo said, "one of the Big Eight accounting firms appraised the team's worth at $98.9 million."


Three String Quartets to Fill the Air
THREE string quartets will perform this week, starting tonight at 8 o'clock when the illustrious Tokyo Quartet ushers in the new season for the Westchester Chamber Music Society.
The program at Congregation Emanu El of Rye brackets Verdi's only work in the form between quartets by Mozart and Brahms.
Later the society's concerts will bring three other noted quartets to the county -- the Shanghai, the Lindsay and the Mendelssohn -- along with the Seraphin Trio.
For subscription details, call 948-6533 or 723-0222.


Carolan Condon Is Married
Carolan Elizabeth Condon, an account executive for Edelman Public Relations Worldwide, and Joseph M. Sommer, an account executive for the American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company, both in New York, were married yesterday in Bay Head, N.J.
Msgr.
William E. McGuire officiated at the Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Sommer, 25 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur P. Condon of Summit, N.J.
She graduated from Lynchburg College.
Mr.
Sommer, 26, is a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
M.
Lloyd Sommer.
He graduated from the University of California at Irvine and received a master's in public administration from New York University.


Still Strangers: My New Neighbors Have Exotic Customs
WHEN my husband and I left Brooklyn and moved to the suburbs 17 years ago to buy a house, to own a backyard and to raise a family, I remember worrying about whether my children would suffer from growing up in such a homogeneous environment.
There was no one around who looked or spoke or dressed any differently than we did.
Even though the children I grew up with in my East Flatbush neighborhood had remarkably similar backgrounds, I was always aware that a bus ride away there existed the colors and accents and economic realities of a larger world.
We traveled the subways and were often exposed to the melting pot that was New York City.
But I feared my children would miss the excitement, the wonder, the spiciness that comes with diversity.


6 Students Arrested in the Bronx After Brawl With Transit Police
Six students from the elite Bronx High School of Science were arrested Friday night after a melee with transit police that started when an officer asked a group of several dozen students waiting for friends in an elevated train station to board a train or to leave.
Several of the students and their parents angrily complained yesterday that the officer, who is white, had harassed the students because they are black.


More Urban Enterprise Zones Sought
A SEVEN-YEAR-OLD program that provides sales tax exemptions to businesses and customers in the state's most economically depressed cities has proved so successful, officials say, that they are considering asking the Legislature to expand the program to include additional municipalities.
The New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act of 1983 exempts qualifying businesses in parts of 11 cities and towns from paying the state sales tax on purchases and allows shoppers in seven of those municipalities to pay a 3.5 percent tax, or half the normal rate, which is then retained by the municipality.


'The Decalogue' Re-Examines God's Commands
The most acclaimed cinematic event in Europe over the last year has not been, strictly speaking, a movie, but Krzysztof Kieslowski's "Decalogue" -- a 10-part series originally made for Polish television.
Whether applauded at film festivals from Cannes to San Sebastian in Spain or heavily attended in a theatrical run in Paris, these one-hour dramatizations loosely based on the Ten Commandments have catapulted Mr.
Kieslowski into the international limelight.
Beginning Friday and continuing through Nov. 10, the Museum of Modern Art will present "The Decalogue" in its entirety.
One can see an episode or two each day or a marathon screening of all 10 segments on Nov. 11.
Episodes Five and Six -- "A Short Film About Killing" and "A Short Film About Love" -- two feature-length segments that have won multiple prizes, may be seen, respectively, on Nov. 13 and 15.


Miss McQuilling Plans Marriage
December wedding plans for Kathleen Vars McQuilling and Peter Ramsay Balderston, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Balderston 3d of Rochester, have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
James A. McQuilling of Manhasset, L.I.
Miss McQuilling, an associate in the law firm of Reid &amp; Priest in New York, is a magna cum laude graduate of Bowdoin College with a law degree from Fordham University.
Her father founded and heads the Midland Marine Corporation, shipping brokers and agents in New York.


Bryna Greenwald and Martin Pomp Are to Wed
Bryna Greenwald and Martin Pomp are planning a December wedding, the prospective bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Alfred Greenwald of New Brunswick, N.J., have announced.
Miss Greenwald, a graduate of Wheaton College, is the product development director of the private label division of Victoria Creations, a New York jewelry company.
Her father is a cosmetic surgeon.
Mr.
Pomp, the son of Clara Pomp of Brooklyn and the late Joseph Pomp, is the director of international fixed income for Credit Lyonnais Global Partners in New York.
He graduated from Columbia University, where he also received a master's in international relations and an M.B.A.


Lack of Understanding On Shoreham Closing
The Long Island Weekly recently printed a letter written by Herbert Jaffee of Freeport, a representative of Utility Shareholders of America, which criticizes Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and me for our actions in both closing Shoreham and studying the possibility of a Shoreham gas conversion  [ Oct. 7 ] .
Mr.
Jaffee's letter is replete with factual errors and shows a shocking lack of understanding in just why the Cuomo Administration closed Shoreham as a nuclear-power facility.


Campus Life: North Carolina; All Student Body Not Entirely Fond Of 'Student Body'
A sculpture at the University of North Carolina, donated by the class of 1985 and put on display for the first time last week, has given rise to criticism that it carries racist and sexist overtones.
The artist says she never intended any.
The sculpture, "The Student Body," was installed Tuesday in front of Davis Library, a spot many students pass each day.


BREEDER'S CUP: Racing's Darkest Day, A Belmont Disaster; No Rejoicing for Winners
On the track where the great Ruffian stumbled and fell 15 years earlier, not far from the finish line where the champion filly lies buried, the Breeders' Cup got off to a violent and foreboding start yesterday when the colt Mr.
Nickerson reared in the backstretch at Belmont Park and dropped to the track.
That was the beginning of a tragic day at the races, and the day grew even more tragic as the afternoon wore on.
Even the people who trained and raced the winners became losers, shocked at the series of spills, the injuries to jockeys and horses, and the death of two of the thoroughbreds gathered for the country's most glamorous day of championship races.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
BACH AND MAN AT YALE
More than 120,000 volumes are stored in the music library at Yale, double the number of 20 years ago, and subject to deterioration in makeshift, overcrowded storage areas.
A new building designed by Cesar Pelli, the architect and former dean of the Yale School of Architecture, is to be built on the campus, with money to be raised by the Friends of Music at Yale.
The first event in the campaign is a concert scheduled for 5 P.M. today in Battell Chapel, featuring William F. Buckley Jr. as harpsichordist in a performance of Bach's "Chromatic Fantasy" and "Concerto in F Minor." Mr.
Buckley will also serve as narrator for Saint-Saens's "Carnival of the Animals," accompanied by the Yale Symphony Chamber Players under the direction of James Ross.
Mr.
Buckley noted that "nobody in the history of the world has attacked the F Minor Concerto of Bach as I have done, extruding my exiguous musical resources with the kind of care you would take with a quart of water embarking in a life raft across the ocean." The author, editor, television personality, political conservative and Yale alumnus suggested that Democrats be charged more for admission than Republicans, but the idea was dropped for possible unconstitutionality.
Tickets are $10, students tickets are $5, and patron tickets, which include a post-performance reception with the artists, are $35.
Battell Chapel is on the Yale campus at the corner of College and Elm Streets in New Haven.
TCHAIKOVSKY LETTERS
A play with musical accompaniment, dealing with the voluminous correspondence of Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky and his patron, Nadejda von Meck, , will be presented this afternoon at 4 in the Greenwich Library auditorium.
Nonie Gilbert, in the role of Mme. von Meck, is the sole actor in "Widow's Might: A Tchaikovsky Love Story," which she wrote based on the book "Beloved Friend: The Story of Tchaikovsky and Nadejda von Meck" by Catherine Drinker Bowen.
Her script will be enhanced by excerpts from Tchaikovsky's music played by Dorothy Happel, violinist, and Lowell Lacey, pianist.
Tchaikovsky and von Meck never met face to face, but they exchanged deeply personal letters for 14 years.
Mme. von Meck supplied Tchaikovsky with an annual allowance, permitting him to abandon teaching and devote himself to composing.
Tickets available at the door are $10, $5 for students.
The library is at 101 West Putnam Avenue (Post Road); the phone number is 622-7900.
A reception will be held following the performance.
ARTS CENTER BENEFIT
Antiques and one-of-a-kind contemporary home furnishings and works of art will be displayed at the Woodway Country Club in Darien on Saturday evening in a benefit for the Silvermine Guild Arts Center in New Canaan.
The event will begin with cocktails and a black-tie dinner at 6:30 P.M., followed by a slide talk, "The Romance of the Auction," presented by Rupert Winters Fennell, vice president and senior decorative arts appraiser at Sotheby's.
Four vignettes -- in classic, contemporary, country and Santa Fe styles -- will contain silent-auction items, to be viewed during cocktails, marked with minimum bids.
High bidders will be announced at the end of the evening.
Tickets are $175, and the proceeds will be used to assist the 68-year-old, nonprofit institution, which has an art school, three galleries, a guild of professional artists and educational programs.
Call 966-6668 for reservations or more information.
CIRCUS POSTERS
Before television, the poster was the most publicly visible form of advertising, and it was used extensively by circuses, which often came to town for one night only and had to maximize publicity by plastering notices on every available wall.
High-wire and animal acts, ringmasters, fire eaters and bareback riders were immortalized in wood or stone engravings.
The Barnum Museum in Bridgeport, named for P. T. Barnum, founder of the circus empire and a former Mayor of the city, features a permanent collection of circus memorabilia.
Some of it, plus pieces on loan from the Big Apple Circus, the Henry Ford Museum, the New York State Museum and other museums, libraries and private collections, makes up a new exhibition opening Friday and running through April 14.
Called "The Circus is Coming! Advertising Art: Posters and Ephemera," the display contains more than 100 items covering the past 200 years of circus activity in America and Europe.
In addition to posters, the show features tickets, handbills, lithographers' stones and tools and an area where children can make their own circus posters.
The museum's Victorian brownstone building at 820 Main Street, was reopened last year after an $8.5 million restoration that included a new wing, designed by Richard Meier, where the exhibition is on view.
It is open Tuesday through Saturday from 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M., and Sunday from noon to 4:30 P.M.
Admission is $5, $4 for students and the elderly, $2 for children.
Call 331-1104 for more information.


Match Tied as Karpov Wins 7th Game
As expected, Gary Kasparov resigned Game 7 of his World Championship Chess Match yesterday against the challenger, Anatoly Karpov, without resuming play.
The champion sent a note with his decision to chief referee Geurt Gijssen at 12:15 P.M. yesterday.
The contest is now all even at 3 1/2-3 1/2.
In the game's first and only playing session Friday night at the Hotel Macklowe in Manhattan, the game was following the type of quiet, positional course that Karpov prefers, but there was no intimation of the awful blunder that the champion was to make at his 27th turn.
He was not short of time and the problems that he faced were not nearly enough to elicit a gross mistake.
Aleksandr Roshal, chess reporter for Izvestia and Ogonyok, said: "When a great player does that kind of thing, the reason is bad nerves. The tension in a championship match is unbelievably severe. No one entirely escapes it."


The Brave New World of Nanotechnology
GREAT MAMBO CHICKEN AND HE TRANSHUMAN CONDITION  Science Slightly Over the Edge.
By Ed Regis. 308 pp.
Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. $18.95.


The News Strike Shows Shifting Labor Relations
With nonunion workers crossing picket lines in large numbers, the strike at The Daily News has underscored the new realities for labor and management in New York City.
Labor experts say these realities illustrate why, 10 or 20 or 30 years ago, the strike would not have unfolded the way it has in what was long considered to be one of the nation's last big union towns.
"There are no union towns any more," said Esther Fuchs, a professor of political science at Barnard College, who is completing a book on labor relations in New York and Chicago.
She and other labor specialists, as well as some labor leaders, said that changing public attitudes have played the largest part in why that is so.
The air-traffic controllers' strike in 1981, crushed by President Reagan, gave credibility to antiunion attitudes that had been growing a long time.


Best Sellers: October 28, 1990
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Crown, $24.95.) The experiences of a couple on a trek on horseback across Europe during the Ice Age.
2
3
4
LADY BOSS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Lucky Santangelo schemes and maneuvers to get control of a major movie studio.
3
2
7
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
4
4
10
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $21.95.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
5
5
20
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
6
6
6
THE GENERAL IN HIS LABYRINTH, by Gabriel Garcia Marquez. (Knopf, $19.95.) The last, sad retrospective days of Simon Bolivar.
7 *
7
2
THE FIRST MAN IN ROME, by Colleen McCullough. (Morrow, $22.95.) The rivalry of two men who want to become consul of the Roman Republic in 110 B.C.
8
1
LONGSHOT, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $19.95.) An author of survival guides finds his know-how taxed when he undertakes to write about the world of horse racing.
9
13
2
BUFFALO GIRLS, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) The end of the old Wild West, seen through the lives of Calamity Jane and two mountain men.
10
9
3
RABBIT AT REST, by John Updike. (Knopf, $21.95.) The fourth and final novel about Harry (Rabbit) Angstrom.
11
11
36
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
12
10
6
HOCUS POCUS, by Kurt Vonnegut. (Putnam, $21.95.) Life in the near future as noted by a college professor and prison administrator in upstate New York.
13 *
8
5
SURRENDER THE PINK, by Carrie Fisher. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $18.95.) The romantic misadventures of a woman soap opera writer.
14
12
25
THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $24.95.) Doomsday brings horrors to America; the uncut version of a novel first published in 1978.
15 *
17
2
UNDER SIEGE, by Stephen Coonts. (Pocket, $19.95.) Chaos in Washington when the kingpin of the Medellin drug cartel is brought there for trial.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
BY WAY OF DECEPTION, by Victor Ostrovsky and Claire Hoy. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) An account of the operations of Mossad, the Israeli spy service, by a former agent.
2
2
3
THE CIVIL WAR, by Geoffrey C. Ward with Ric Burns and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $50.) From Fort Sumter to Appomattox, in words and pictures.
3
3
5
MILLIE'S BOOK, as dictated to Barbara Bush. (Morrow, $17.95.) The memoirs of the English springer spaniel who lives in the White House.
4
4
6
GET TO THE HEART, by Barbara Mandrell with George Vecsey. (Bantam, $19.95.) The autobiography of the country-music singer.
5
5
13
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Morrow, $18.95.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
6
7
8
DARKNESS VISIBLE, by William Styron. (Random House, $15.95.) The novelist's memoir of a period of severe depression.
7
6
7
BOOTLEGGER'S BOY, by Barry Switzer with Bud Shrake. (Morrow, $19.95.) The autobiography of the former football coach at the University of Oklahoma.
8 *
9
2
THE CAT AND THE CURMUDGEON, by Cleveland Amory. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) The continuing contentions of two curmudgeons, one feline, the other a writer.
9
8
4
FRIDAY NIGHT LIGHTS, by H. G. Bissinger. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) A high school football season in Odessa, Tex., and what it reveals about contemporary culture.
10
13
3
LOOKING FOR A SHIP, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $18.95.) A voyage along the South American coast with the United States merchant marine.
11
10
12
EVERY SPY A PRINCE, by Dan Raviv and Yossi Melman. (Jaffe/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A history of the Israeli intelligence community.
12
14
13
THE POLITICS OF RICH AND POOR, by Kevin Phillips. (Random House, $19.95.) How the rich got richer during the 1980's.
13 *
1
AVA, by Ava Gardner. (Bantam, $19.95.) The autobiography of the veteran film actress.
14
12
4
CLOSER TO THE LIGHT, by Melvin Morse with Paul Perry. (Villard, $17.95.) A doctor examines the experiences of young patients who almost died.
15
1
FLEETWOOD, by Mick Fleetwood with Stephen Davis. (Morrow, $17.95.) The memoirs of the drummer for the rock band Fleetwood Mac.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
15
HOMECOMING, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $18.95.) How to find the child you once were that lives within you and use it to deal with today's problems.
2
2
46
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $10.95.) A book of illustrated games.
3
3
89
WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's financial advice.
4
4
4
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $10.95.) A new book of illustrations in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
5
5
2
DR.
DEAN ORNISH'S PROGRAM FOR REVERSING HEART DISEASE, by Dean Ornish. (Random House, $24.95.) A system designed to supplement conventional medical therapy.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
MY SON'S STORY, by Nadine Gordimer. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.95.) The author explores precarious moral terrain in this bold and unnerving novel, in which a black South African freedom fighter leads a secret life of infidelity with his white lover.
THE COLONEL: The Life and Wars of Henry Stimson, 1867-1950, by Godfrey Hodgson. (Knopf, $24.95.) A lucid, penetrating biography of the statesman, a pragmatic idealist who served Presidents from Theodore Roosevelt to Harry S. Truman.
BURNING DOWN THE HOUSE: How Greed, Deceit, and Bitter Revenge Destroyed E. F. Hutton, by James Sterngold. (Summit, $19.95.) The corruption and ruin of an old-line firm, chronicled by a reporter who covered the scandal for The New York Times.
POSSESSION: A Romance, by A. S. Byatt. (Random House, $22.95.) In this witty, skillful novel of literary detection, a scholar stumbles across some dazzling Victorian letters whose mystery leads him to a churchyard on an archetypal dark and stormy night.
FINAL ANALYSIS: The Making and Unmaking of a Psychoanalyst, by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson. (Addison-Wesley, $18.95.) The author's account of how disillusionment and disbelief made him "the Antichrist in the church of psychoanalysis."
CUBA: A Journey, by Jacobo Timerman.
Translated by Toby Talbot. (Knopf, $18.95.) The author's fierce, intelligent account of a visit to Cuba in 1987 portrays an island in shambles, a nation suffocated and demoralized after three decades of revolution.
VLADIMIR NABOKOV: The Russian Years, by Brian Boyd. (Princeton University, $25.) Superbly documented and shrewdly analyzed, this volume traces the novelist's life from his boyhood among the Russian intelligentsia to exile in prewar Europe.


A Few Well-Chosen Words
"Somewhere," James Salter once wrote, "the ancient clerks, amid stacks of faint interest to them, are sorting literary reputations. The work goes on endlessly and without haste. There are names passed over and names revered, names of heroes and of those long thought to be, names of every sort and level of importance." Salter was writing about his friend Irwin Shaw, whose name, once renowned, has slipped quietly from the first rank.
Where will the tireless, indifferent clerks file the name James Salter?
His readers, few in number but adamant in their conviction that he is a great writer, are confident that the author of "A Sport and a Pastime" and "Dusk: And Other Stories," the collection that won him the 1988 PEN/Faulkner Award (perhaps this country's most prestigious literary prize), will eventually take his place in the canon of American literature.
He is a writer's writer -- in the words of the critic James Wolcott, our most underrated underrated writer.
With hardly a dissenting voice, critics have praised his manifest devotion to craft, the acuity of his observation, the maturity of his vision.
Jaded editors and aspiring writers alike speak his name with reverence.
And yet, of his six books, only one has sold better than 10,000 copies in hard cover.
"Solo Faces," a taut novel about a rock climber who tests the limits of his courage, sold about 12,000 copies when it appeared in 1981.
His admirers insist that all this will soon change; the PEN/Faulkner Award, the brilliant critical reception of "Dusk," the busy proselytizing of his fans and the publication (possibly in 1992 -- Salter writes very slowly) of an eagerly anticipated memoir will push him at last into the limelight.


GAS PRICE PROTEST CRIPPLES HUNGARY
Angry taxi drivers and truck drivers blockaded the streets and bridges of Hungary's capital today to protest the government's decision to raise gasoline prices by 65 percent.
Protesters also snarled traffic in dozens of other cities and towns, closed border crossings and brought much of the nation's economy to a standstill.
The protests began on Friday morning when the new gasoline prices took effect, but the Government has vowed not to bow to the protesters' demands to roll back the increases.


Ms. Boulos Plans Winter Wedding
The engagement of Mary Jane Boulos to Timothy Pierce Alexander Kebbe, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Kebbe of New York, has been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred J. Boulos of Houston.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Boulos graduated from Colgate University and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
A certified public accountant, she is an analyst in New York for Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Her father is the senior director of worldwide industry affairs in Houston for the Conoco oil company.
Her mother, Mary M. Boulos, is a nurse and teaches religion at Duchesne Academy of the Sacred Heart in Houston.
The prospective bridegroom graduated magna cum laude from Vanderbilt University and received a law degree from the University of Minnesota.
He is an associate at the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
His mother, known as Sally Gracie, is an actress.
His father is the president of Charles Kebbe Associates, a communications concern in New York.


U.N. Sponsorship of a War in the Gulf Is No Simple Matter
IN the nearly three months since Iraq invaded Kuwait, President Bush has assembled a most impressive international coalition in favor of punishing Baghdad.
But now the United States and the other four permanent Security Council members are beginning to wonder if the United Nations could ever agree on terms that would give sponsorship to the use of military force.
The United States, Britain and France, which have the largest military deployments in the gulf, used to claim that they already had all the authority they needed to fight President Saddam Hussein -- Article 51 of the United Nations Charter, which says one member can ask others for help against aggression.


House Extends Limit On Abortion Financing
The House voted Friday to continue to prevent the District of Columbia from using its own tax dollars on abortions for poor women unless the abortion is necessary to save the pregnant woman's life.
"It is a compromise that is necessary at this time," said Representative Julian C. Dixon, the California Democrat who is chairman of the Appropriations subcommittee for the District of Columbia.
"It is one that I certainly am not happy with."
The restriction was included in the district's spending bill for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1.
A similar provision was in last year's bill.
The Senate still has to vote on the measure.
The restriction was put in the bill by a House-Senate conference committee after the House rejected the bill twice on Thursday because it allowed the district to spend its own money on the abortions.
President Bush had said he would veto the legislation if it contained money for abortion.
The original House and Senate bills prohibited the use of Federal money for abortion, except to save the woman's life and in cases of rape and incest, but were silent on the use of local money.


For Good . . . And Country
GRATITUDE  Reflections on What We Owe to Our Country.
By William F. Buckley Jr. 169 pp.
New York: Random House. $16.95.


Venice's Splendors, With a Stroller
MY husband and I remember every detail of our first trip to Venice.
For days we wandered through narrow streets, eating in tiny trattorias and watching the gondoliers drift by crumbling buildings layered with alfresco paintings.
Almost drunk from the richness of it all, we vowed to return some day to its magic.
Five years later, after we had become parents, we decided to go back to Europe -- this time with our 9-month-old daughter.
Our friends with children tried to warn us against traveling with a baby.
After all, they argued, one had to make certain adjustments with children.
They didn't have to tell us: we had sat in their darkened living rooms watching their vacation slides evolve, in the last few years, from wide angle shots of charming chateaus in Bordeaux and rolling hills in Tuscany to close-ups of the Petting Zoo and Yogi Bear Family Campgrounds.
As the projector click-clicked through endless shots of kiddie pools, life-sized puppets and adorable fawns being bottle fed, my husband and I smirked at each other in disdain.
Not for us a sellout to parenthood.
Not for us Sesame Place in Pennsylvania.
We would travel to Europe with our baby.
What's more, we would take Annie to our favorite city in the world.
We would return in triumph to Venice.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bellport 139,000
11 Reiben Street  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $2,400.
East Meadow 182,000
1737 Noble Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old split level; eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,100.
Kings Park 225,000
112 Twin Oaks Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; dining room, den, fireplace, pool, 1-car garage; taxes $4,800.
Northport 275,000
1 Starlit Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; den, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $5,400.
Wantagh 169,000
869 Woodside Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600.
Westbury 180,000
84 Broadmoor Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $2,800.
OTHER AREAS Old Lyme, Conn. 152,000
33 Center Beach Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old ranch; wood stove, bay window in living room; taxes $989.
Somers, N.Y. 296,000
Lee Road
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 6-year-old contemporary; family room, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $4,810.
Monroe, N.J. 120,000
68 Applegate Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old colonial; new kitchen, deck, pool; taxes $1,176.


Don't Cut Off Funds For Mediation
There is a current proposal by Patrick G. Halpin, the Suffolk County Executive, to cut the $126,000 for the Community Mediation Center  [ "Halpin's Budget: The Costs of Service Cuts," Sept. 30 ] .
We believe it would be in the best interests of the people of Suffolk County, our court system, our Police Department, our District Attorney's office and all the parties involved in disputes, as well as the total financial situation in Suffolk County, to continue financing the Community Mediation Center.


About Cars; BMW's M5: Performance -- at a Price
BMW's M5 has all the elements of the rather neat middle-of-the-line 535i.
And when you get behind its four-spoke wheel with the air bag in the middle you know that it is more than O.K., just as the 535 is more than O.K.
There are the leather seats, the massive dash, the neat appointments.
You look around and smile and you hiss a happy y-e-s-s-s.
But then, continuing to crane your neck, you see the sticker, which says $58,450, including an $1,850 gas-guzzler tax, and what comes out of your mouth is: "What?" I mean, what?


Suzanne London Engaged to Wed
December wedding plans for Suzanne Amy London, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira D. London of Cedarhurst, L.I., and I. Jeffrey Corbin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert L. Corbin of White Plains, N.Y., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents.
Miss London, 25 and a cum laude graduate of the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, is a candidate for a J.D. degree at Yeshiva University.
Her father, a lawyer in private practice, is the president of the American Board of Criminal Lawyers.
Her mother, Phyllis London, owns the Diet Center in Cedarhurst.
Mr.
Corbin, 24, graduated from Cornell University and received a J.D. degree from Yeshiva University.
He is an associate with the New York law firm of Graubard, Mollen, Horowitz, Pomeranz &amp; Shapiro.
His mother, Carol Corbin, is the director of special education in the Elmsford, N.Y., public school district.
His father is a founding partner of Kanan, Corbin, Schupak &amp; Aronow, a public-relations firm in New York.


Lonely Melodies, Lyrical Moods
IN KATE McGARRIGLE'S QUIETLY harrowing new song, "I Eat Dinner," the singer paints an acid picture of herself sitting at the kitchen table with her 13-year-old daughter eating leftovers and contemplating her gray hairs.
"No more candlelight/ No more romance/ No more small talk/ When the hunger's gone," she muses dryly.
The self-portrait of a middle-aged single mother leading a treadmill existence and feeling too old to attract a lover is one of the starkest portrayals of adult loneliness to be found in contemporary music.
Had Emily Dickinson been a late-20th-century songwriter, this stoic rumination, with its clipped melodic phrases and homespun piano accompaniment, might be just the sort of piece she would have written.


Safety Note
The New York City Fire Department recommends that smoke alarm batteries be changed twice yearly, at the start and the end of daylight time.
The date this autumn is today.


Postings: Murray Hill Cinema; Coming Attraction
There were only two dozen people in the audience that night.
But in all its decades of operation -- beginning in 1893 as the Murray Hill Lyceum -- the old playhouse on 34th Street, near Third Avenue, had perhaps never known such notoriety as it did on July 15, 1986.
During a screening of "Psycho III," its original ceiling gave way, fell on to a false ceiling below and crashed down on the patrons, sending three to the hospital.
That prompted a citywide inspection of all theaters built before 1916.
The Murray Hill Theater was reopened about a year later by its new owners, City Cinemas, and operated briefly as a single-screen house before being closed again.
Now it is being transformed into a four-screen cinema with about 1,000 seats, designed by Averitt Associates of Manhattan, and is scheduled to re-reopen in December.
Its upper and lower lobbies will be open to view through a new glass wall, an effect that will be "very dramatic from the street," said Brian Ackerman, vice president of development for City Cinemas.
John Averitt, the architect, said the huge wooden roof trusses had been inspected and found structurally sound.


College Football; Dartmouth Tailback Sets Record
Harvard came into today's big Ivy League game against Dartmouth ranked ninth in the nation in rushing in Division I-AA after yielding an average of only 91 yards per game on the ground.
But the swift Dartmouth tailback, Shon Page, more than doubled that figure by himself, running for 222 yards and scoring on carries of 49 and 28 yards as the Big Green beat the Crimson, 17-0, to retain a share of first place in the league.


College Football; Syracuse Receiver Thwarts Army
A week after scoring a combined 98 points against hapless opponents, Army and Syracuse found themselves locked in a bone-crunching contest that pitted the Cadets' will against the Orangemen's muscle.
Muscle prevailed, but barely.
David Walker scored on a 3-yard run and Rob Carpenter scored on a 43-yard pass play in the fourth quarter today as Syracuse emerged with a 26-14 victory.


College Football; Lions Edge the Tigers With a Fierce Defense
Columbia entered yesterday's game against Princeton with a seven-game losing streak, dating to last season's finale.
Two years ago when Columbia opposed Princeton, the Lions had a 44-game losing streak, college football's longest.
The Lions won to snap the streak in 1988 and they won yesterday, 17-15, before a crowd of 10,750, the largest ever at Wien Stadium.


Tracy Smith Weds A. R. du Pont 3d
Tracy Elizabeth Smith, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Austin Chichester Smith Jr. of San Marino, Calif., was married yesterday to Alfred Rhett du Pont 3d, a son of Judith G. du Pont of Stonington, Conn., and Mr. du Pont Jr. of Woodhaven, Queens.
The Rev.
John Farnsworth performed the ceremony at All Saints Episcopal Church in Pasadena, Calif.
Mrs. du Pont, a graduate of the University of Southern California, is an in-flight supervisor in Los Angeles with Delta Airlines.
She was presented in 1981 at the National Charity League Ball in San Marino and the Valley Hunt Club Ball in Pasadena.
Her father is a partner at the law firm of Kirtland &amp; Packard in Los Angeles.
Her mother, Elizabeth Browning Smith, is the director of volunteers at St.
Vincent Medical Center in Los Angeles.
The bridegroom is a graduate of William and Mary College.
He is an account manager in Los Angeles with American Airlines.
His father is a vice president in New York of Robert W. Baird &amp; Company, a stock brokerage firm.


All the Ways to Solve a Company's Identity Crisis
To the Editor:
Wally Olins's article (Forum, "How a Corporation Reveals Itself," Oct. 14) helped clarify the role identity can play in differentiating companies in the face of growing product proliferation.
And, in this regard, as Mr.
Olin says, identity does involve more than the creation of logotypes.
But two key questions arise that are left unanswered.
If identity is synonymous with a company's "uniqueness," then what other methods exist for managing identity to best advantage?
And what are the particular challenges for companies that do not necessarily go to market in the form of consumer brands like BMW or Apple?
Along with comprehensive design, companies now have at their disposal three additional avenues for managing their identities.
First is language.
By "language" I mean the nomenclature used to communciate special competencies (Alcoa's Materials Science Group), and even "language systems" -- words and phrases that reflect specific cultural values and are deliberately made part of the day-to-day corporate lexicon.
Second are distinctive themes and messages, which, through marketing and communications activities, articulate the definition, direction and uniqueness of the organization on an audience-by-audience basis.
Third are actions that translate identity, in particular the company's underlying values, into human resource policies, systems and procedures, including performance evaluation, basic compensation and incentive programs for all employees.
Taken together, these are the tools of identity management.
Companies whose businesses are not easily defined by consumer brands face the special task of bringing their corporate identities to life as "brands." This requires an understanding of why customers continue to do business with them over their competitors.
Even companies with great consumer products cannot escape the need to understand themselves -- and have others understand them.
For companies that choose to manage it with rigor and care, identity is a rich source of knowledge and power in this global age.
LAURENCE D. ACKERMAN  New York, Oct. 16
The author is a partner in Anspach Grossman Portugal Inc., a firm specializing in coporate identity.


Elmer Bernstein Finds Himself in Tune With Movies
ELMER BERNSTEIN, THE film composer, is sitting at the sound desk in a recording studio that used to be a pool hall, in a decidedly downbeat part of Dublin.
It is an Irish summer, which means that the sky is bright gray instead of dark gray and the rain is tepid rather than chilly.
In another part of town, Jim Sheridan, director of "The Field," the film Mr.
Bernstein is scoring, is still making last-minute changes in the drama of a bitter fight over a parcel of grassy hillside in Connemara.
All of this should have been finished months ago, and Mr.
Bernstein has just noticed that a piece he had written for a scene in the film is now too long because Mr.
Sheridan has changed it.


Lisa Nagy Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Andre L. Nagy of Fairfield, Conn., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter, Lisa Nagy, and Stevens Copeland Sheppard, the son of William Stevens Sheppard of New York and the late Jane Steketee Sheppard.
Miss Nagy, the promotion director of the Catalog Media Corporation in Ridgefield, Conn., attended Green Mountain College.
Her father is a lawyer in Bridgeport, Conn.
Mr.
Sheppard, a graduate of the University of Arizona, is a second vice president of Smith Barney Inc. in New York, where his father is the managing director of the Berkshire Capital Corporation.


Business Diary/October 21-26
THE ECONOMY  A Tisket, a Tasket, Taxes in a Basket
After five months of nettlesome negotiations, Congress and President Bush finally seem to be of one mind about how to reduce the Federal deficit.
And not a moment too soon: After dwindling to manageable levels in the late 1980's, the budget deficit surged in this fiscal year, which just ended, to a near-record $220.4 billion.
The budget accord reached by Congressional leaders on Wednesday, which has the tacit approval of the President, is similar to the rejected plan announced in September, placing a burden on drivers, liquor drinkers, smokers and the wealthy.
But this package would ask the rich to pay more than the first accord did and would give the poor a bigger break.
Among the winners are the energy producers, which get a tax break for drilling and for making ethanol.
One big loser: life insurers, which face the biggest tax increase of any industry.
Cleaner Air, but Count the Cost
Cleaner air is in sight, but it may cost consumers as much as $50 billion.
Settling a decade of differences, Congress was expected to approve this weekend amendments to the Clean Air Act that are intended to clear the sky of smog and harmful fumes by limiting emissions from cars and factories.
The chemical, steel, utility and auto industries will bear much of the estimated $30 billion in compliance costs but may have little luck passing them onto customers if a recession causes demand for their products to shrink.
All-New Labeling for Food
Food packaging designers may be in for boom times.
In the most sweeping revision of food labeling laws in 20 years, the Senate approved a bill, a version of which has already passed the House, that would require nutritional labeling on all packaged foods and strictly regulate disease-prevention claims on labels.
An estimated 40 percent of last year's food product introductions made such promises.
Under the bill, which is bound for Presidential approval, manufacturers have two years to relabel products and grocers would be expected within a year to post nutritional information on 20 popular fruits and vegetables.
Oil-Price Respite Proves Brief
Oil prices dropped to their lowest level in weeks on Tuesday, to $28.38 a barrel, on news that Saudi Arabia was mulling concessions to Iraq to end the Persion Gulf stalemate.
But crude rose the rest of the week, closing at $33.01 on Friday, driven up by President Bush's plan to deploy 100,000 more troops.
Milken Takes the Fifth
Michael Milken may have decided to quit while he was ahead.
Rather than taking the stand in the hearing ordered by Judge Kimba Wood to help decide his sentence for six felonies, Mr.
Milken took the Fifth Amendment on Friday, bringing the two-week hearing to a close.
The hearing cast doubt on the probity of Mr.
Milken's "junk bond" operation at Drexel Burnham Lambert, but whether Mr.
Milken ever traded on insider information is murky.
S.&amp;L. Examiners and 'Bandits'
In further evidence that regulators played a part in the downfall of the savings industry, a former examiner at the Federal Home Loan Bank of Seattle testified in Congressional hearings last week that she was harassed and dismissed for questioning $300,000 in bonuses paid to management by the Far West Federal Bank, the largest savings institution in Portland, Ore., which is now in Government hands.
An official of the Office of Thrift Supervision said the evidence backed up her position.
Described as "one of the biggest savings and loan bandits" by Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, Jarrett E. Woods was indicted last Thursday on 37 charges of bank fraud, misuse of funds and conspiracy in connection with one of the largest bank failures in Texas, Western Savings Association.
Federal regulators had filed a civil lawsuit against Mr.
Woods, its former owner, seeking $560 million in damages, one of the largest sums sought by the Government from a savings executive.
INTERNATIONAL
R.T.C. Finds Japanese Investor
Despite the skepticism among the Japanese about investing in the United States and the decline in the fortunes of Japan's financial firms as the stock market there has slipped, the American subsidiary of the Nomura Securities Corporation is negotiating to purchase $1 billion in commercial loans from the Resolution Trust Corporation.
If the deal is finalized, it would represent the largest sale yet by the agency overseeing the savings and loan bailout and one of its first involving a Japanese investor.
Philips Keeps Trimming
N.V.
Philips is continuing to slim down in an effort to become a more nimble opponent for the Japanese.
The Dutch electronics conglomerate announced a bold plan to eliminate by year-end up to 45,000 jobs, or 16 percent of its work force.
The company also said it would pay no dividend this year and its annual loss would be more than its projected $1.18 billion.
A cost-cutting program to trim 10,000 jobs from its work force of 286,000 was already under way before the announcement, and follows another move by Philips to pare itself down: earlier this year, it sold far-flung operations in toothbrush and a garage-door opener manufacturing.
Little Success in Trade Talks
President Bush has gone to bat for the American farmer.
But Washington's negotiators are striking out in talks aimed at getting trading partners to reduce farm subsidies, as part of a four-year round to liberalize world trade.
Division in the European Community on the level of reductions caused the group to miss an Oct. 15 deadline for a proposal, raising the specter that the talks would collapse.
Washington was pushing for a 90 percent reduction in subsidies, which it says make it difficult for Americans to compete.
But France and Germany refused to shave them by even 30 percent, the level favored by their fellow members.
COMPANIES
Fat Gas Profits? Not Yet
Price-gouging among gasoline marketers?
You'd never suspect it from oil companies' third-quarter results.
For most, refining and marketing operations were a hinderance, not a help.
Analysts say that honoring the President's request for price restraint at the pump allowed oil companies to recover only about half of their higher crude costs through gasoline price hikes.
Companies relying most heavily on outside crude supplies for its refining and marketing operations took the worst hit.
They include the two largest oil concerns: the Exxon Corporation, which, without a one-time gain, would have seen quarterly earnings drop slightly, and the Mobil Corporation, whose profits did drop, by nearly 29 percent.
Both purchase roughly half of their crude from foreign sources.
In contrast, Texaco Inc., which produces more than half of its crude needs, enjoyed a 25 percent rise in earnings.
UAL's New Spunkiness
Despite a downturn in travel and an upswing in fuel prices, the UAL Corporation is splurging.
After the protracted takeover battle for its United Airlines came to a close early this month, the company placed a $22 billion aircraft order, the biggest ever.
And it agreed last week to pay Pan American World Airways $400 million in cash for several vaunted routes from the United States to Europe.
If approved by regulatory authorities, the purchase would give United a big lead in Europe over its archrivals, American and Delta.
United's renewed spunk has perked up its stock, which had dropped to the mid-$80 after the failed buyout bid but closed Friday at $96.75.
And UAL was among the best-performing airlines in the third quarter, noticing only a slight fall in earnings while other carriers took losses.
Continental Sheds Top Brass
The Pan Am Corporation is hurting for cash.
But it is the parent of Continental Airlines that apparently brushed with bankrupty last week.
Although it has been beaten down by unexpected losses, rising fuel prices and a payment of $80.5 million to the pension fund of its sister, Eastern Airlines, Continental decided against filing bankruptcy proceedings after preparing the documents.
But another overhaul took shape.
In an apparent attempt to clear the decks of close allies of Frank Lorenzo, its former chairman, Continental said four top executives would leave the company.
Citicorp, Paying Dearly
Concerns over mounting loan losses are exacting a toll on banking companies' cost of capital.
Citicorp agreed to pay higher dividend rates on its preferred stock to keep its auctions from failing.
Monday, it paid 9.4 percent on a $75 million issue, nearly three percentage points higher than that paid at an auction earlier this month, before Citicorp released disappointing third-quarter earnings.
On Thursday, the bank agreed to another three-point jump, to 12.5 percent on a $100 million issue -- about double the yield paid by one of the strongest banks, J.P.
Morgan.
Weighty loan losses are forcing some banks to part with their most precious assets.
The MNC Financial Corporation of Baltimore, Maryland's biggest banking company, was forced to put its $1 billion credit card business, the nation's fourth largest, up for sale to offset losses.
Pining to expand in plastic, industrialist like A.T.&amp;T. and General Electric may try to pick up the prize.
The Reds' Win is CBS's Loss
The Cincinnati Reds' four-game sweep over the Oakland Athletics in the World Series may saddle CBS with a loss of $100 million or more in the first year of its high-priced, four-year, $1.06 billion baseball contract.
The series ran shorter than the six-game average, depriving CBS of advertising revenues.


Control of Slavery Issue Brought On Civil War Corwin Amendment
To the Editor:
By what tortuous logic can Elizabeth Gardner Weddington assert, in attacking Ken Burns's Civil War documentary (letter, Oct. 14), that merely because Ohio and Illinois approved the Corwin Amendment (prohibiting interference with slavery where it already existed), that "Northern states ratified an amendment approving of slavery"?
Since the Corwin Amendment reflected Lincoln's consistent pre-emancipation position on the subject of slavery in the Southern states, are we also to conclude from this that Lincoln himself approved of slavery?
Ms.
Weddington's excuse for the tragedy of the Andersonville, Ga., prison, that Gen.
Ulysses S. Grant declined to exchange Confederate prisoners for those held in the South, is equally shortsighted.
As James McPherson has convincingly shown in "Battle Cry of Freedom," Grant's refusal arose from the South's unwillingness to return black Union soldiers on the ground that they were property, rather than prisoners.
So  much for Ms.
Weddington's claim that slavery was not an issue for the North.
WILLIAM WESTFALL  Hudson, Ohio, Oct. 14, 1990
The writer teaches history and literature at Western Reserve Academy.
ILS&gt;Drawing


Peter Hark Wed To Miss Finneran
Margaret Noreen Finneran, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Finneran Jr. of Yonkers, was married yesterday to Peter J. Hark, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George E. Hark of Spring Valley, N.Y.
Msgr.
Robert L. Stern officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of the Annunciation in Crestwood, N.Y.
Mrs.
Hark, 28 years old, is a project manager for the Long Island Rail Road capital program management in Jamaica, Queens.
She graduated from the Manhattan College School of Engineering.
Her father is a retired partner in the New York law firm of Shea &amp; Gould.


Review/Theater; A Solo Turn That Aims At Women
When all is said and done, hip is what you make of your life -- that is the message of "The Wizard of Hip (or When in Doubt Slam Dunk)" a fast-moving, funny solo play written and performed by Thomas W. Jones 2d.
Mr.
Jones seems to like to flirt with disaster.
Much of his material might have been picked up in a theatrical second-hand shop; many of his jokes have been recycled for centuries.
But his wizardry turns it all into a kind of magic that seems to surprise even him and that inspires some very vocal spontaneous participation by his audience at Intar 2 on West 53d Street.


Susan Dreier Engaged To David C. Wishnow
Judge and Mrs.
William A. Dreier of Warren, N.J., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter, Susan Alice Dreier, and David Charles Wishnow, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Wishnow of Bridgewater, N.J.
Miss Dreier, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and is studying for an M.B.A. at Columbia University.
Her father serves on the Appellate Division of New Jersey Superior Court.
Her mother, Sandra Dreier, teaches at the Wardlaw-Hartridge School in Edison, N.J.
Mr.
Wishnow, 26, graduated from the University of Vermont.
He is an assistant vice president in New York for the Union Bank of Switzerland.
His mother, Eileen Wishnow, is a real-estate saleswoman for Prudential Pioneer Real Estate in Martinsville, N.J.
His father is a real-estate developer and appraiser in Chester, N.J.


In Some Places Gentrification Is A Weekend Guest
JUST over a decade ago, Frenchtown was simply another boarded-up town on the Delaware River, a greasy spoon and a pizza parlor its only businesses.
Today, it bustles on weekends with tourists who come from the New York and Philadelphia metropolitan areas for a day or two to enjoy its small-town charms and patronize its antique shops, boutiques and cafes.
Frenchtown represents a growing national trend in which once-depressed towns have transformed themselves, sometimes with professional advice, into magnets for lovers of expensive, creative merchandise and historic architecture.
The disposable income of the 1980's, the numbing sameness of shopping malls and a reaction against bruising big cities have all helped feed the gentrification, redefining municipal identities almost overnight and sometimes stoking class frictions.


And in Bergen, Add Anger at School-Aid Loss
THE $2.8 billion tax increase Gov.
Jim Florio whipped through the Legislature in June has cast a long shadow over the contest for Bergen County executive.
The candidates, Jeremiah F. O'Connor, a Democrat, and William P. Schuber, a Republican, have scrambled for weeks to capitalize on the deep voter hostility to the taxes and the millions of dollars Bergen's schools will lose under the state's revised school-aid formula.
In debates, television and radio ads, and fliers, each has extolled efficiency in government, trumpeted his own budgetcutting plan, and painted the other as having willingly raised taxes in the past.


Man, 19, Is Shot and Killed Crashing Party in Brooklyn
A 19-year-old man was fatally shot and his 17-year-old friend was wounded as they crashed a Brooklyn party early yesterday, the police said.
Jonathan Powell of 522 Quince Street was shot once in the chest and died at Kings County Hospital at about 1:30 A.M., said Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a police spokewoman.
Another youth was shot once in the leg and was admitted to Kings County Hospital in stable condition, Sergeant Wrensen said.
His name was being withheld by the police.
Mr.
Powell and a group of friends had apparently tried to crash a party at 671 Gates Avenue, a community center in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section, when they were fired upon, she said.
The police had made no arrests in the shooting and no weapon was found.


4 Decades After Pound, Poetry Prize Is Restored
In 1948, when the Library of Congress awarded a prize in poetry to Ezra Pound, a supporter of the Fascists in Italy, the action so angered the nation that Congress prohibited the library from giving prizes to anyone.
Forty-two years later, with the healing that time brings, the Librarian of Congress, James H. Billington, has persuaded Congress to renew the awarding of prizes; James Merrill will receive the honor tomorrow for his 1988 collection, "The Inner Room."


Corrections
A picture with the New &amp; Noteworthy column in The Times Book Review today was printed in error.
It shows the novelist Rafael Yglesias, not Thomas Sanchez.


The Russian Character
One Saturday evening, when I was working late, alone, in a Moscow office, I heard a knock at the door.
I couldn't imagine who it might be.
It was after 10, and even when I had come in at around 6 the building had been so deserted that I could hear my footsteps echoing in the corridor.
The
dezhurnaya
, an elderly Russian woman working as the 24-hour watchman, had had to unlock the front door for me.
She had emerged from the
dezhurnaya's
room, no bigger than a closet, in which was crammed a cot, small desk, clothes hooks, a hot plate.
Each day, a different
dezhurnaya
was on duty; I'd never seen this one before.


Tea Time: Only in America?
NO sooner have Americans discovered the ritual of afternoon tea, than British tabloids are running articles about its demise.
If recent stories are to be believed, it won't be long before real tea will have all but vanished, replaced by an instant variety made of powdered leaves sold in little bags.
While British Rail may no longer provide brewed tea in pots (along with buttered toast and Dundee cake), the real thing is still very much in evidence in England's good hotels and tea shops -- and not just for visiting Americans.


New Honchos, New Cronies
To the Editor:
Neal Gabler's article bares, with implicit approval, a rarely acknowledged truth about Hollywood: "Put bluntly, the big-budget American movies that drive the industry are made by young white males because they are for young white males."  No wonder so many of this summer's projected Hollywood hits (e.g., "Days of Thunder," "Dick Tracy") failed to meet their producers' box-office goals.
What about the other audiences out there?
Old or middle-aged white males?
Females of all ages?
Blacks, Asians, Hispanics, American Indians of both genders and all ages?
For that matter, is it true that young white males are only interested in entertainment that focuses on them and their more traditional fantasies?
The crossover audience for Spike Lee's films and TV shows like "The Cosby Show," "In Living Color," and "The Arsenio Hall Show" suggest otherwise.
Throughout Hollywood's history, its products have failed woefully to represent the diversity of American life.
This flaw has only been exacerbated by the industry's zealous attachment to an assimilationist ideal and to the "nepotistic" and "incestuous" recruitment of executives that Mr.
Gabler traces so tellingly.
We can take heart that a new generation of independent film makers is breaking with tradition and making films that recognize the new demographics of growing minority populations.
This work builds on the crossover appeal of the common humanity present in "ethnic" themes.
Among these new film makers are Spike Lee, the Hudlin brothers, and Keenen Ivory Wayans.
They do emulate one Hollywood tradition, nepotism.
But, admirably, they employ it for new ends.
With their brothers, sisters, and "cronies" trained, like many of the old Hollywood elite at the most prestigious institutions (e.g., Harvard, Morehouse), they present a more accurate, pluralistic vision of American life.
JAMES LOWELL GIBBS JR.
Stanford, Calif.
The writer, an anthropologist, is Martin Luther King Jr.
Centennial Professor at Stanford University.


Editors' Note
A listing in the Week in Review on Aug. 26 with an article about radioactive wastes produced by American nuclear weapons facilities included one laboratory erroneously among sites of nuclear weapons development.
The Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory has never been part of the United States nuclear weapons program.
Several lists prepared by the Department of Energy listed the laboratory among sites that participated in nuclear development, both weapons- related and for civilian research.
When these lists were consolidated by The Times, the Princeton laboratory was erroneously included.
The Princeton laboratory wrote to The Times about the error on Aug. 30.
The Times further erred in delaying verification and a correction.


Recitals of Uncommon Circumstance
IF you are looking for unusual concert offerings, you will find at least three this afternoon.
At 4, under the auspices of the Fairfield Chamber Orchestra, the Haydn Baryton Trio appears in Norwalk to play the Haydn Baryton Trios.
The baryton -- which is similar to the viola da gamba except that it has a broader neck and 16 to 40 extra strings -- was a favorite of Haydn's patron, Nicolas Esterhazy, so his court composer dutifully wrote some 175 pieces using the instrument in various combinations.
One of the few modern players able (or willing) to master this ungainly contraption is John Hsu, a professor at Cornell University, and with the violist David Miller and the cellist Loretta O'Sullivan, his colleagues in the Haydn Baryton Trio (as well as Aston Magna and the Classical Quartet), he will bring some of this rarely encountered music to their recital at St.
Paul's Church on the Green. (For information, call 255-1160.)


P. A. Giusti to Wed Kathryn Donald
December wedding plans for Kathryn Ellen Donald and Paul Anthony Giusti, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gino Giusti of Stamford, Conn., have been announced by Miss Donald's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Delmar Donald of Hilltown, Pa.
Miss Donald, 31 years old, is a graduate of the University of Vermont and has an M.B.A. degree from Harvard University.
She is a marketing manager at the E. J. Brach Corporation, a candy manufacturer in Oak Brook, Ill.
Her father is a physician.


N.B.A. Challenged On Telecast Limits
Officials of the Chicago Bulls and the Tribune Company, which televises Bulls' games on its superstation WGN-TV, filed a lawsuit against the National Basketball Association on Friday over new restrictions on superstation broadcasts of N.B.A. games.
The Federal antitrust lawsuit, filed in United States District Court in Chicago, challenges the N.B.A.'s decision to reduce from 25 to 20 the number of games a superstation is allowed to broadcast in a season.
A superstation's signal is picked up by an unaffiliated satellite network, which markets the programming to cable operators outside the station's local broadcast area.


Knicks Fall to the Spurs In Final '90 Exhibition
Usually when Patrick Ewing and David Robinson are together on the same floor, great basketball is sure to follow.
That was not the case tonight.
In a game in which both teams were far from their best, the San Antonio Spurs defeated the Knicks, 113-100, at the HemisFair Arena.
It was the final preseason game for both teams.
The Knicks (4-4) can now focus on preparing for their regular-season opener, Nov. 2 against the Hornets in Charlotte, N.C.
The Spurs finished their exhibition games at 5-3.


CORRECTION
An article on Oct. 14 about judicial candidates misstated the role of the Ninth Judicial Committee, a group of lawyers.
The group criticized a cross-endorsement agreement in 1989 but did not file a lawsuit.
It has filed a lawsuit this year.


Republicans From Afar Glare at Washington
REPUBLICANS always knew that history was working against them this year, that a President's party was almost bound to lose Congressional seats in a midterm election.
But before Labor Day, with a popular President buoyed by Americans rallying around the troops in the Persian Gulf, many Republicans hoped to beat the odds.
Since then, in large part because of a worsening economy and the tumultuous budget negotiations, the political terrain has become far more perilous for Republicans.
A week before Election Day, many are dismayed over the losses they expect, disgusted with the lack of political acumen displayed by the White House in the budget talks and deeply divided over their party's philosophical direction.


Focus: Corporate Transfers; The Struggle to Sell Employees' Houses
IT'S tough enough to have one house to sell these days.
But America's largest companies are ending up with hundreds, as the stagnant real-estate market swells their inventories of houses they buy from employees they are relocating.
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours and Company, , which moves 4,000 employees a year, has watched its inventories double in Delaware and Pennsylvania in the last year, to 160 houses.
To sell those houses without driving prices down further, Du Pont has adopted a program of incentives to lure home buyers, including low-interest mortgages and a chance to win prizes just by looking at a house.


'Beautiful LaSalles' Inspired by Legend
ONCE, the beautiful LaSalles Emmy and Nanny, sisters -- sang and danced, mostly danced, in London, Paris, Rome, even for the King of Siam.
They toured around the world 80 times and grew accustomed to Balenciaga creations, caviar and Dom Perignon.
The beautiful LaSalles weren't just a name; they were a way of life.
Emmy had the "highest kick in the Continent." "Ageless goddesses" one reviewer called them.
And so on.
So we're told.
Real theater, however, is not in the telling, and "The Beautiful LaSalles," at the Crossroads Theater Company, is a series of tellings and retellings, with no evocation of glamorous times or glittering talent.
In Michael Dinwiddie's play, Emmy and Nanny are well past agelessness.
Living together, forgotten, amid reminiscenses, scrapbooks and resentments, in a Harlem apartment in 1980, Nanny, still shipshape, has desperate visions of a comeback, but Emmy, walking with a cane after a mysterious illness, won't hear of it.
Mr.
Dinwiddie's plot might feed a soap opera for years, but it can hardly sustain a two-hour play.
In the first act, he has dragged in another old-timer, one Willie Lewis, who is better remembered than the LaSalles but, one is led to believe, not that much better.
She's getting ready for her return to the big time in "Blues on Broadway," a revue in which there just might be a spot for the sisters, but both, not just one.
But Emmy will not speak to Willie.
Hasn't for 50 years.
In the first act, which trades on reiteration, we do not learn why.
In the second act, which is crammed with supposed revelations, we do learn why, and just why we didn't care in the first place.
Mr.
Dinwiddie's crude characterizations and less than mundane writing, which is filled with confounding lines like "Who do you know who's made it through life without getting hurt?" and "The older you get the more things matter" are hardly redeemable.
Perhaps a stirring production could disguise such flaws, but this one, directed by Ellyn Long Marshal, is not haunted by the necessary ghosts.
It remains stuck in the apartment, in spite of between scenes period voices (Ivie Anderson, Lena Horne and the jazzy onstage piano playing of Jimmy Justice, who has the foolish role of a downstairs neighbor).
It's too bad that Emmy (Ethel Ayler) is reduced to scowls and tantrums.
She shreds pages from a scrapbook and rips up a contract.
The accomplished Ms.
Ayler can do little but be disagreeable.
In the play's closing scene, she is allowed a moment of reverie wherein the actress imparts a certain radiance that signifies a potential performance and a talent wasted.
And it's hard to tell whether the affectations of Essene R. as the pushy, neurotic Nanny are rooted in the director's permissiveness or an actor's frustration.
Betty Vaughn, as the dottering, drunken Willie, offers a too oft rehashed caricature.
Lee Dobson as the smooth, two-timing Cliptoe gives the only performance suggestive of a bygone era.
None of the actors are chronologically convincing.
In what seems to be a wholly misguided and puzzling effort, perhaps the makeup artist should be held accountable for that.
What is clear is that "The Beautiful LaSalles" was inspired by legend.
Avon Long and John Bubbles, the late hoofers, were, respectively, the father of the director and a cousin of the playwright.
One would have expected a play steeped in the spirit of a golden age, not a lot of domestic twaddle about a pair of chattering sisters, fussing and feuding.
"The Beautiful LaSalles," a play by Michael Dinwiddie produced by the Crossroads Theater Company, 320 Memorial Parkway in New Brunswick.
Performances continue through Nov. 18.
The box office number is (908) 249-5560.


Bloody And Bowed
Some days it seems that all the troubles in the world are coming through the phone lines into this unprepossessing suite of offices just outside the city limits.
"National Domestic Violence Hotline," says one of the women answering the phones at 1-800-333-SAFE, her face mottled in the glow of the computer screen.
"Are you safe?"
"Do you and your children have a place to spend the night?"
"Have you called the police?"
"How often has he hit you?"
The single largest cause of injury to women in the United States is abuse by the men they live with and, often, love.
This comes as a surprise to many people, but not to the women who answer the hotline.
They know that more than a quarter of the women treated at hospital emergency rooms have been abused, and that a third of the women murdered each year are killed by their husband or boyfriend.
Domestic Violence Awareness Month is drawing to a close.
There have been TV feature reports, proclamations and magazine stories.
Right in there with the silver patterns, Bride's magazine provides advice on how to spot an abuser before the wedding.
Miss America has taken an interest in the subject.
It has become common to cast a bright light on our social problems: rape, incest, child abuse.
This is a good thing, but it convinces us that things are better when they are not.
Years ago women were afraid to say they were beaten because nobody talked about it; today it's talked about so frequently on TV shows and radio call-ins that they may be afraid to tell because they fear their friends would be incredulous.
We assume rape victims go to the police.
We assume children know adults are not to touch them that way.
We assume it because the problem is out in the open.
The problem is out in the open, but the people are still behind closed doors.
Treatment is easier than prevention.
If we really tried to unravel why so many men beat their wives, it would tell us something about ourselves, male and female alike, that we don't want to know, something humiliating and perhaps indelible.
I told a woman in this field that I had heard many men were using their fists because they were threatened by the new liberated woman.
"Yeah," she said, "and before that they were doing it because their dinner was cold."
So we make things better after, after the bruises and the broken bones.
When Debi Cain, who runs a shelter in Pontiac, got started 13 years ago, there were no shelters for battered women in Michigan.
Now there are 48.
On Friday, Congress passed a resolution directing the states to consider domestic violence in custody proceedings.
Many judges don't.
At a time when some corporate sponsors have become penurious and cautious -- A.T.&amp;T.'s cowardly abandonment of Planned Parenthood because of its support of abortion rights comes to mind -- Johnson &amp; Johnson raises $500,000 annually for the hotline, which will provide computerized shelter listings and trained listeners for nearly 100,000 callers this year.
And many women do leave, finding a haven at a shelter, rebuilding a life.
But it requires much more courage than a movie of the week would suggest.
Many of them stay because they suspect they can't raise their children on one income in a two-income world.
So they become adept at the use of foundation to conceal bruises.
It is axiomatic that hardly anyone ever really runs into a door.
Debi Cain still marks the anniversary of the day when a nurse who came to the shelter after yet another fierce beating went home.
Her husband called and told her that if she didn't, he would kill their kids.
Then he put his gun on the hall table, and said, "When Mommy comes, go outside and play." He shot her in the head, on their front lawn on a summer day.
The children watched.
There is a new generation of boys and girls out there who will believe that a relationship between a man and a woman is like a boxing match in which one contestant has no arms.
Teaching them otherwise is the real answer, but the people who could take care of that are at the other end of the phones, knocking the receiver halfway across the room because if he told her once, he told her a million times not to tell, and anyway she drove him to it, and it's only because he goes a little crazy when he gets jealous, or when he's drunk, or when he's had a hard day at work.
And the telephone -- he knows it's her boyfriend, no matter what she says.
It's her fault he has to hit her.
He's sorry.
It won't happen again.
He knows he said that the last time.
But this time he means it.
Don't cry.
And the children listen and watch and learn.


Kevin Kline Discovers There's a Rub in TV Directing
"Could I have some kleenex standing by?"
On a bare sound stage in a cavernous studio in Astoria, Queens, Kevin Kline sniffled deeply.
A moment earlier, he had finished delivering the "To be or not to be" soliloquy from "Hamlet" to four television cameras.
A moment later, he was briskly issuing instructions about tracking shots and camera angles.
These settled, he stretched, vocalized like a jungle bird, waited for his cue from the control room and plunged again into the existential dilemma: "To be or not to be . . ."


HOME ENTERTAINMENTS/RECORDINGS AND KEEP IN MIND
Here are some notable releases of the last few months.
ALL DOGS GO TO HEAVEN -- Don Bluth's film for young viewers "is so overcomplicated that it becomes difficult to follow." (Janet Maslin) 1989.
MGM/UA. $24.98. 1 hour, 25 minutes.
Closed captioned.
G.
BAD INFLUENCE -- As a charming drifter who takes over the life of a Los Angeles yuppie (James Spader), Rob Lowe helps make this "a refreshing exercise in glossy decadence." (Vincent Canby) 1990.
RCA/Columbia. $89.95.
Laser disk, $34.95. 1:39.
CC.
R.
BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY -- Ron Kovic returns from Vietnam a bitter paraplegic.
Oliver Stone's film has "enormous visceral power." (Canby) 1989.
MCA/Universal. $91.95.
LD, $39.98. 2:25.
CC.
R.
THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER -- Peter Greenway's elegant, brutal film is "so esthetically brilliant that it expands the boundaries of film itself." (Caryn James) 1990.
Vidmark. $89.95.
LD, $39.95. 2:03, NC-17; 1:35, R.
CRY-BABY -- John Waters's story of 50's high-school America is a new Presley movie made "in the manner of a teen-crazed Cecil B. DeMille." (Canby) 1990.
MCA/Universal. $91.95.
LD, $34.98. 1:26.
CC.
PG-13.
FIRE BIRDS -- Taught to fly helicopters, Jake (Nicolas Cage) and Brad (Tommy Lee Jones) fly off to confront the drug crowd in a film that "looks as if it were patched together between midnight and 3 A.M." (Canby) 1990.
Touchstone. $89.95.
LD, $39.99. 1:26.
CC.
PG-13.
GLORY -- Edward Zwick's film about a black regiment in the Civil War "celebrates in a manner that insists on acknowledging the sorrow." (Canby) 1989.
RCA/Columbia. $91.95.
LD, $39.95. 2:02.
CC.
R.
THE GODS MUST BE CRAZY II -- Xixo the bushman lopes cross country amid various unrelated subplots.
"As the sun sinks slowly, everyone shares a disappointed yawn." (Canby) 1990.
RCA/Columbia. $89.95.
LD, $34.95. 1:38.
CC.
PG.
THE HANDMAID'S TALE -- Volker Schlondorff's adaptation of Margaret Atwood's novel, starring Natasha Richardson, has a "clear and insidious visual scheme." (Maslin) 1990.
HBO. $89.99.
LD, $39.95. 1:49.
CC.
R.
HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER -- John McNaughton's "intelligent, revolting, artistically made look at a murderer comes close to cinema of pure technique." (James) 1990.
MPI. $79.98. 1:30.
No rating.
HOUSE PARTY -- Reginald Hudlin's effervescent first feature is a "buoyant, perceptive comedy of teen-age manners." (Canby) 1990.
RCA/Columbia. $89.95.
LD, $34.95. 1:40.
CC.
R.
I LOVE YOU TO DEATH -- As a philandering pizza man Kevin Kline gives a bravura performance, "both too much and absolutely right . . . both manic and laid back." (Canby) 1990.
RCA/Columbia. $91.95.
LD, $34.95. 1:37.
CC.
R.
IN THE SPIRIT -- In Sandra Seacat's nervous new-age comedy about a Beverly Hills couple (Peter Falk and Elaine May) in New York, the camera is "never allowed to linger where a performer might be shown to good advantage." (Maslin) 1990.
Academy. $89.95. 1:34.
R.
THE LITTLE MERMAID -- The Hans Christian Andersen story is a marvel of skillful animation.
"The best animated Disney film in at least 30 years." (Maslin) 1989.
Disney. $26.99.
LD, $29.99. 1:23.
CC.
G.
LORD OF THE FLIES -- In William Golding's classic story of mayhem among castaway schoolboys, "there is almost nothing to keep the mind from wandering." (Maslin) 1990.
Nelson. $89.98.
LD, $34.98. 1:30.
CC.
R.
MOUNTAINS OF THE MOON -- In Bob Rafelson's film about the African explorations of Sir Richard Francis Burton and John Hanning Speke, the principals look "somewhat smaller than life." (Canby) 1990.
Nelson. $89.98.
LD, $34.98. 1:30.
CC.
R.
NUNS ON THE RUN -- Two London hoods join the Missionary Brides of Christ in a genial farce with "something of the licentiousness of 'A Fish Called Wanda.' " (Canby) 1990.
CBS/Fox. $89.98. 1:30.
PG-13.
PETER PAN -- The inventions in the animated version of the J. M. Barrie classic are as "skillful as they have ever been in Disney films." 1953.
Disney. $24.99.
LD, $29.99. 1:16.
CC.
G.
PRETTY WOMAN -- Vivian (Julia Roberts) is transformed from a streetwalker to the gracious, lovely woman who fills the void in the lonely life of Edward (Richard Gere).
"Despite a covetousness and underlying misogyny," the film is "giddily, lighthearted escapism most of the time." (Maslin) 1990.
Touchstone. $19.99.
LD, $29.99. 1:38.
CC.
R.
Q &amp; A -- Nick Nolte is the grand, bigoted center in Sidney Lumet's film, which "explores corners of the city that no director has ever set foot in before." (Canby) 1990.
HBO. $92.99.
LD, $44.95. 2:12.
CC.
R.
ROSALIE GOES SHOPPING -- Marianne Sagebrecht is the "shrewd, beatific center" of Percy Adlon's film about merchandise-mad America. (Maslin) 1989.
Vidmark. $89.95. 1:34.
CC.
PG.
STANLEY AND IRIS -- Martin Ritt's love story about two seemingly commonplace people (played by Jane Fonda and Robert De Niro) is "honest and direct and entertaining." (Canby) 1990.
MGM/UA. $89.98.
LD, $34.98. 1:47.
CC.
PG-13.
TEEN-AGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES: THE MOVIE -- The movie "is itself a mutant of sorts, an unsightly hybrid of martial arts exploitation films and live-action cartoons." (Maslin) 1990.
Family Home Entertainment. $24.99. 1:36.
PG.
WHERE THE HEART IS -- John Boorman's film about a New York demolition king and his children has an "undeniable grandeur even in the midst of its broadest lapses of sense, taste and style." (Maslin) 1990.
Touchstone. $89.95.
LD, $29.99. 1:47.
CC.
R.9/16


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Stranger Than Life
ON the block in Farmingdale where Jerry and Liz Wright live, Big Bird, the Statue of Liberty and Santa Claus are as commonplace as the letter carrier.
Neighbors are used to seeing pink bunnies and green teenage mutant turtles running in and out of the Wrights' home.
Mrs.
Wright designs and makes costume.
Along with her costumes, she makes large papier-mache heads.
Three hundred of her creations reside in the family's garage.
"My husband's the organizer," she said.
"He has them all on racks, alphabetically. You want Alf you look under A."
This week the garage will be as busy as a 50 percent-off sale at the pumpkin patch as Long Islanders pick up their Halloween costumes.
But Halloween is not the only busy time for Mrs.
Wright.
Besides renting and selling costumes, she designs school and business mascots.
She also hires people to dress in her costumes and entertain at parties.
Usually those are children's parties.
"I don't do harem girls or French maids," she said.
Her husband, a Nassau County detective, assists in the business, called Buy a Wright Head, Inc.
Papier-mache is big on Long Island, Mrs.
Wright said.
"I see my heads all over."
Her business started 17 years ago when a fire department wanted a Santa Claus costume.
Over the years she has seen costume trends come and go.
In the last three months she has sold 35 teenage-mutant-turtle costumes.
But there are always the old favorites.
High on the list are Mr. and Mrs.
Mouse, who cannot use their first names because a certain Florida theme park would be upset, she said.
The two-person horse is also a favorite.
"A husband rented one recently for his wife's 40th birthday party," she said.
And the Statue of Liberty is still popular.
"It's good on cruises," she said.
"The torch packs well."
There are Wright originals, too.
Mrs.
Wright created the Okey Dokey Restaurant Chicken.
She made a Ground Round teddy bear, the Yellow Pages Talky and the Grumman Carecat.
She has also done high school mascots, like the Hauppauge High School Eagle.
She is working on another mascot, for Holy Trinity High School.
"It's going to be really different," she said.
Clones in Kings Point
Jean Eley will not disclose the location of her elm tree project.
"We have to protect our little elms," said Mrs.
Eley, president of the Kings Point Civic Association.
The location of the 300 young elms recently planted in Kings Point is known by the Boy Scouts who planted them.
But, as Mrs.
Eley said, if you can't trust a Boy Scout, whom can you trust?
Mrs.
Eley is one of several community leaders who has discovered the liberty elm, a hardier strain of elm developed by the Elm Research Institute.
"They are cloning these elms in New Hampshire," Mrs.
Eley said.
"And they are making them available to communities. It's called the Johnny Elmseed Project. It's tied in with the Boy Scouts. I promised our civic association that I would find the Boy Scouts to plant the trees and the nursery land to temporarily put them on."
Seven communities on Long Island have signed up for the municipal-elm program of the institute, the director, John Hansel, said.
"It costs from $200 to $500, depending on the size of the town," he said.
Information is at (800) FOR ELMS.
Because of Dutch elm disease, it has been a long time since a lovely elm arched across a Kings Point road, Mrs.
Eley said.
She is delighted that some soon may.
Seventy-five young elms were delivered to Kings Point in the spring.
"I was so concerned when they arrived, they looked like sticks," Mrs.
Eley said.
"Now they are more than five feet tall."
A second batch of 225 elms arrived this month.
Scout Troop 178 has been busy planting them.
The troop leader is Mike Flood.
One scout, John Benko, has been put in charge of the project and is hoping to become an Eagle Scout with his elm maintenance.
Elms grow to 130 feet tall, Mrs.
Eley said.
Of course Kings Point's will be moved from their secret location before they grow that tall.
At the rate they are growing, however, moving day may not be too far away.
"The spot we picked is so fertile," Mrs.
Eley said.
"I don't know what's been dumped there."  Yiddish Music, Anyone?
Lovers of different music love different performers.
One man's Elvis is another man's Pavarotti.
For Dr.
Deborah S. Bedor, "it's Koussevitzky and Rosenblatt."
"I am a Yiddishist," said Dr.
Bedor, a cantor, and founder and director of the Jewish Academy of Fine Arts in Glen Cove.
Her favorite music is Yiddish music, she said, especially music composed by the great cantors.
Dr.
Bedor is now in Yiddish euphoria.
Her academy has become home to the Island's sole Yiddish sheet-music library.
Six hundred pieces of rare Yiddish sheet music were donated by Harvey and Carol Raff of Roslyn.
"This is the music of the great cantors and the Yiddish theater," Dr.
Bedor said.
The sheet music is a rare find for lovers of Yiddish.
"It's like discovering a piece of music by Bach or Mozart hidden away in a drawer," she said.
"Once you are a cantor, you're always looking for new music. We will open up the library to the clergy and to the public."
The academy director is anxious that the sheet music be seen.
"Music has to touch people," she said "it does no good just sitting on the shelves." The Pool Doctors
It's not only President Bush the Iraqis are angry with.
They are none too pleased with Frank Norberto Sr., a Patchogue pool builder.
Mr.
Norberto of Norberto and Sons designs and builds swimming pools.
Some of those pools are built in foreign countries.
The Japanese may be known for their cars, but Americans are known for their pools, Mr.
Norberto said.
"No one else is that hep on gunite and hydraulics."
Last year when the Iraqis decided they wanted to build a pool, they bought American.
Mr.
Norberto sold them pool parts, $9,347 worth.
This summer as the pool was being constructed -- "somewhere in Iraq I don't know where," Mr.
Norberto said -- the Iraqis called Mr.
Norberto for technical advice.
"I answered their questions," he said.
"It was a courtesy." However, when Iraqi officials called again in September, the invasion of Kuwait had taken place and the trade embargo was in force.
"They had more technical questions," Mr.
Norberto said, "and I told them I didn't think it was proper for me to talk to them. I didn't think it was legal. They told me it was legal because the embargo was for goods, not for questions."
But Mr.
Norberto decided patriotism came before business.
"They're holding our people as desert shields and our embassy staff is drinking swimming pool water. I told them it was un-American for me to talk to them."
Iraqi officials wrote the U.S.
Mission to the United Nations, asking officials there to intervene.
No determination has been made, U.S. officials said.
"Why are they worried about saving a pool?" Mr.
Norberto said.
"They should be worrying about starving people."


Pro Football; Struggling Jets Hope To Rush By Oilers
On paper or on a computer, the meeting between the Jets and the Oilers in Houston today makes for a classic football matchup: the Jets' No. 1 rushing offense in the American Football Conference against the Oilers' No. 1 passing offense.
Houston, 4-3 and on a two-game winning streak, is favored over the Jets, who are 2-5 and on a three-game slide.
Bruce Coslet, the Jets' coach, can recall the unpleasant experiences he had in the Astrodome in his days as a player and assistant coach with Cincinnati, which is in the same division as the Oilers.


Voters' Unhappiness Aside, Most Incumbents Seem Safe
The election is still 10 days away, but in much of the country the races are already over, or never even began.
For all the signs of anger among voters, and the near panic among Republican politicians that the budget debacle has brought the wrath of the electorate down on them, most lawmakers are certain of re-election, either because they are unopposed in the balloting on Nov. 6 or because they face an opponent so underfinanced as to be out of contention.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have separate hot- and cold-water faucets on one of my bathroom sinks that drip constantly.
I have changed the washers three times, using a different brand each time, but the faucets still drip.
Otherwise, they seem to be in good condition.
Do you think this means that the faucets have to be replaced?
A.
Although you say you haved changed washer brands three times, there is the possibility that you are using the wrong type for your faucets.
The most likely problem, however, is that the seats inside the faucets are scored or marred.
This is the metal seat against which the washer presses when the water is shut off.
On some faucets, these seats are removable and can be replaced -- a special tool, something like a large Allen wrench or hex wrench, is used -- to remove the old seat and install the new one.
If the seats are not replaceable, then they can usually be ground smooth with a seat-grinding tool.
It can be purchased in all plumbing-supply outlets.
Q.
Several months ago, we developed an unusual problem: Hot water accumulates in the toilet tank when the toilet has not been flushed for some time.
We have hired plumbers and boiler repairmen, but the problem persists.
Our house is about 40 years old, with an oil burner and supplementary solar water heater.
Can you suggest what could be causing this problem?
A.
I can think of two possible causes.
Somewhere, the hot- and cold-water lines are touching each other, and the hot-water pipe is transmitting heat to the cold-water pipe.
Even more likely, there is some place where the solar hot-water supply is "backing up" into the cold-water system, or where a defective valve is allowing hot water to pass into the cold-water pipes.


Pro Hockey; Devils Extend Home Success
The memories of their visit to Pittsburgh that brought their first loss of the season were fresh on the minds of the Devils when the Penguins visited the Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight.
The Penguins scored four times in 2 minutes 27 seconds in the third period of that Oct. 7 game to break a close game open in Pittsburgh's 7-4 triumph, with Bryan Trottier getting two of the goals.


Can Europe Save Ford's Future - Again?
OVER the years, the Ford Motor Company's European operations have been the goose that lays the golden eggs.
Now, a question being asked inside and outside Ford is whether the goose is ailing and whether potential problems at Ford could cripple it.
In the early 1980's, when Ford's North American car operations racked up billions of dollars in losses, the highly profitable European division saved the world's No. 2 car company.


A Family's Rituals In 'The Cocktail Hour'
FOR an object lesson in how a director can complement a play, attend Joan Vail Thorne's incisive staging of "The Cocktail Hour" at the Emelin Theater here.
In A. R. Gurney's oft-performed, autobiographically tinged and ultimately tiresome work, John, a part-time playwright whose new play "cuts pretty close to home" won't have it produced without parental consent.
"After we're all dead" is his father, Bradley's, pronouncement, and that is that.


Fashion Preview; New York
Tomorrow the big guns of Seventh Avenue start firing, and no one can say American designers aren't set to get off their best shots.
Whatever their inspirations for next spring's collections -- past decades, foreign shores, old movies, new fabrics, antique clothes, former and present celebrities, even their own canny creative urges -- the results are on the upside of style.
A great many of these new fashions seem like buffers against the current bleak business scene.
They sparkle with color, peppy ideas, sophistication and sex appeal.
And in the hands of designers like Geoffrey Beene, Bill Blass or Isaac Mizrahi, all these qualities often merge into one outfit.
Hemlines remain short; many are shorter still.
Shoulders are small, rounded or only slightly padded.
Clothes no longer cling like Band-Aids, but they are still curvy.
Everyone is reviving the dress.
Some version of the semifitted sheath seems to be in every collection.
Maybe that's why the dress, coupled with a jacket or feather-light coat, is the new suit of the season.
Colors are light but bright.
Fall's blazing shades have been whitened.
Navy and white, white and black or -- as at Anne Klein &amp; Company -- black, red and ivory also look sharp and desirable.
To be sure, there will be some limpid, seductive silhouettes.
Calvin Klein, for instance, is specializing in them.
But as a rule, these new designs have, as Donna Karan advocates, "a little perkier structure." Reminiscences of the 1950's and 60's are strong indeed.
Above all, though, these new spring looks somehow have a unique American "feel" to them.
And they are eminently wearable.


Leslie Borzilleri Is Married
Leslie Ann Borzilleri, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Borzilleri of Glen Head, L.I. was married yesterday to Patrick Joseph Cullinan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Cullinan of Southbury, Conn.
The Rev.
Leo O'Donovan officiated at St.
Boniface Roman Catholic Church in Sea Cliff, L.I.
Mrs.
Cullinan, a graduate of Notre Dame University, is a graphic designer with the Blue Chip Marketing Group in Stamford, Conn.
The bridegroom graduated from St.
Anselm College.
He is a financial analyst for American Brands in Old Greenwich, Conn.


Lifestyle: Sunday Dinner; Searching Out Bistros For Unpretentious Fare
This listing is compiled by Bryan Miller from his restaurant visits, his reviews and articles in The Times and entries in his Diner's Journal column.
Review and article dates are in parentheses.
Prices are current.
Here are some bistros on the West Side of Manhattan that are open on Sundays.
Bellevues
496 Ninth Avenue, at 38th Street; (212) 967-7855 -- Talk about a rose among thorns.
This sparkling little diner-like French bistro can be found along a stretch of Ninth Avenue south of the Port Authority Bus Terminal.
Bellevues is immediately likable for its ingenousness in attitude and decor.
The narrow dining room has aqua banquettes, Formica tables, a diner counter, and a gallery of amateur photographs on the walls.
The clientele ranges from local businessmen in dark suits at lunch to young neighborhood types in leather jackets and leopard-skin tank tops at night.
Stick to the simple bistro fare here and you should be content.
Starters on Sunday include chicory salad with goat cheese, potatoes and confit of garlic; escargots with a sauce of Cognac, cream and mushrooms; boudin noir (blood sausage) with apples and onions, and a goat-cheese-and-tomato salad.
Among the current main courses are New England pot roast; grilled lamb chops with puree of garlic and shallot confit; pepper steak with french fries or mashed potatoes, and mussels Morellet -- done in a sauce of white white, garlic, butter and herbs.
Desserts to look for are the profiteroles, creme brulee and apple tart.
Appetizers range from $3.75 to $7.50, entrees $10.95 to $17.50.
Sunday dinner from 5:30 to 11:30 P.M. (Review, Sept. 15, 1989.) Quatorze
240 West 14th Street, off Eighth Avenue; (212) 206-7006 -- Quatorze's unpretentious setting is matched by the homey food.
The long, pale-yellow-toned room has maroon wood trim, Art Deco sconces that cast comforting light, French posters on the walls and neighborly banquettes.
Waiters minimize banal chatter and get right down to business in a genial, professional manner.
On busy evenings, the gregarious crowd can be distractingly loud.
When Quatorze opened in late 1985 on West 14th Street, a Hispanic-flavored commercial strip of bodegas, cut-rate clothing emporiums and bilingual driving schools, it seemed a bold move.
The restaurant is doing so well that it recently opened an East Side branch on 79th Street.
Starters on the fall menu are chicory salad with a warm bacon vinaigrette; saucisson de Lyon on a bed of lentils; pork-and-chicken terrine flavored with Armagnac, and smoked salmon with capers and lemon.
Entrees include cassoulet, braised duck with a green peppercorn sauce and wild rice, grilled salmon with a choron sauce (orange-flavored hollandaise), grilled chicken with herbs, and sirloin steak with a sauce bearnaise and french fries.
Among desserts are the house special, a buttery, thin-crusted apple tart; creme caramel, and chocolate-hazelnut mousse.
Appetizers range from $5.50 to $8.50, main courses $16 to $22.50.
Sunday dinner service is from 5:30 to 11 P.M.  (Article, March 24, 1989).
La Boite en Bois
75 West 68th Street, off Columbus Avenue; (212) 874-2705 -- Proximity to Lincoln Center is a major asset but not the only asset of this snug, upbeat bistro.
La Boite en Bois is the creation of Alain Brossard and Jean-Claude Coutable, a team of seasoned restaurateurs.
Running the dining room and kitchen respectively, they still offer traditional bistro fare at reasonable prices.
The brick and barn-board dining room, adorned with antique farm tools and bucolic paintings, can become cramped.
But even at busy times the waiters keep cool, going through their ministrations with professional aplomb -- and some nimble acrobatics while weaving through the tight confines.
The wine list is well matched to the food, with a good selection of Rhone and Beaujolais, but priced on the high side.
On the current menu you might start with warm sausage with lentils, snails in a Provencal-style sauce, fish soup a la Marseillaise (including red snapper, scallops, lobster and monkfish), and a mousse of cold smoked salmon and trout.
For main courses there are Norwegian salmon with watercress sauce, sauteed monkfish with green peppercorn sauce, baby chicken a l'ancienne (braised with bacon, mushrooms and onions), and sweetbreads with port sauce.
On the dessert roster are creme brulee , frozen praline souffle and caramel ice cream.
Appetizers range from $4.75 to $7.50, entrees $16. to $19.
Sunday service from 5 to 10 P.M.  (Review, Jan. 13, 1989).
Vince &amp; Eddie's
70 West 68th Street, off Columbus Avenue; (212) 721-0068 -- This rustic looking newcomer to the Upper West Side, with a working fireplace, handsome antiques and cozy dining rooms, occupies the former Cafe Destin.
Ivy stencils ring the brick-and-stucco dining rooms.
The so-called yellow room, holding a table for up to 12 diners, is used for private parties or communal dining.
The chefs are Scott Campbell, formerly of Huberts, Le Cirque and Union Square Cafe, and David Raymer, a former sous-chef at the Gotham Bar and Grill.
The Sunday menu starts off with blood-warming white-bean soup built on the foundation of a good hambone stock; tantalizingly sweet onion tart, freshly shucked oysters with anchovy toast and a cooling gravlax (mixed greens and salmon) salad.
Main courses are hearty but not heavy.
Lamb shank served with a braising sauce sweetened with dried cherries is unconventional but appealing; a special one evening, osso buco, was terrific.
Roasted duck with bourbon sauce is another brassy choice.
Rounding out the fall menu are grilled tuna with seasonal greens and a grain salad, pan-roasted chicken, beef stew made with English stout and roasted onions, and zesty pork chops with garlic.
Try some of the soothing side dishes like mashed turnips with shallots crisps, potatoes gratin or savoy cabbage and escarole.
For desserts, there are the likes of fresh plum tart with homemade hazelnut ice cream and "almost flourless" chocolate cake with ground almonds.
Appetizers range from $4.25 to $7.50, main courses from $12.75 to $18.75.
Sunday hours, 5 to 11 P.M. (Visited Oct. 18, 1990).


James Scammon Weds Ms. Deglin
Dorian Reed Deglin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore L. Deglin of New York, was married yesterday at the chapel of the Marymount School of New York to James Howk Scammon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence W. Scammon Jr. of Hopkinton, N.H.
The Rev.
Arthur T. Leone, a Roman Catholic priest, and the Rev.
Edward Horstmann, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Scammon, 27 years old, is the chief of administrative services in the Office of the Mayor of the City of New York.
She is a graduate of the Marymount School and Sarah Lawrence College.
Her father, a public-relations consultant, was the president of Ted Deglin Associates, a New York public-relations company, and the president of Broadcast Associates, which established WBAI-FM in New York in 1955.


Review/Theater; Broad Strokes in Riverside Group's 'Twelfth Night'
The lowlife characters run away with the Riverside Shakespeare Company's production of "Twelfth Night" at Playhouse 91.
Feste the Clown, Maria the Lady in Waiting, Sir Toby Belch, Sir Andrew Aguecheek and Malvolio get all the loud laughs, as they usually do; but in this version Stuart Vaughan, the director, pitches the action of the entire play pretty much on their level.
Such a broad approach obliterates the comedy of manners.
When Duke Orsino, the Countess Olivia and the noble shipwrecked twins Viola and Sebastion are distinguished from the others only by their clothes and not by their action and speech, much of the play's tingling subtlety is lost.


Miss Rose Is Wed To S. K. Musgrave
Lindsay Elizabeth Rose, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Allen Rose Jr. of White Plains, was married yesterday to Scott Kenneth Musgrave, the son of Prof. and Mrs.
Frank Webster Musgrave of Candor, N.Y.
The Rev.
Stan De Camp, a Lutheran minister, officiated at the Scarborough Presbyterian Church in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
Mrs.
Musgrave, 27 years old, graduated from Syracuse University.
Until recently she was an account executive with the Arbitron Company in New York.
Her father is a partner in the White Plains architectural and engineering firm of Rose, Beaton &amp; Rose, which was founded by the bride's great-grandfather Alexander Fraser Rose.
Mr.
Musgrave, 28, is an account executive for WPGR/WSNI Radio in Bala-Cynwyd, Pa.
He graduated from Ithaca College, where his father is the chairman of the economics department.
The bridegroom's mother, Eva Mae Musgrave, is a broker for the Lutheran Brotherhood Insurance Company in Ithaca.


Macao
To the Editor: The article on Macao by Robert Elegant (Travel, Sept. 16) was very interesting and informative.
I would like to point out, however, that it is not necessary to write to the address abroad given at the end of the article.
Your readers can obtain information and literature by contacting the Macao Tourist Information Offices in New York, Chicago, Toronto, Vancouver, Los Angeles and Honolulu, or by calling 800-331-7150.
DOROTHY FURMAN  Manager, North America Macao Tourist Information Bureau  Los Angeles


Toll of AIDS on Uganda's Women Puts Their Roles and Rights in Question
Alice Kironde is an unusual woman in Africa, where the raging epidemic of AIDS is illuminating the sharp inequalities between the sexes.
Her husband, when dying of AIDS, had demanded that she leave their city home and help care for him in his ancestral village.
She refused.


Correction
A film page article on Sept. 30 about the director Barry Levinson and his new movie, "Avalon," misidentified an actor who walks down a Baltimore street at the beginning of the movie.
He is Michael Krauss.


KIDS AND SCHOLARS AT WORK
In this time of fiscal crisis, I was delighted that your publication gave thorough coverage to the importance of libraries in the lives of New Yorkers ("Shhh! Kids and Scholars at Work," by Bruce Weber, Sept. 23).
And thank you for pointing out that the Queens Borough Public Library is a separate system from those of Brooklyn and New York.
I am concerned, however, that many readers who live or work in Queens are unaware that a collection of more than five million items awaits them in 62 neighborhood branches and the Central Library.
This is the highest-circulation library system in the nation, yet nearly half of the residents of Queens do not have borrowers cards.
The Queens Library is "user friendly." An automated circulation system makes it easy for borrowers to register and helps manage the collection so that readers find many new books, including best sellers and "how to" paperbacks.
In the last fiscal year, the English as a Second Language classes enabled more than 1,400 students from 65 foreign countries, speaking 44 different languages, to better communicate in their new homeland.
With the help of volunteers, over 2,000 adult literacy students received tutoring and computer-assisted instruction.
Eight branches of the Queens Library, plus the Central Library in Jamaica, are open on Sunday afternoons.
CONSTANCE B. COOKE  Director, Queens Borough Public Library Jamaica, Queens


A Financier Seeks An Assembly Seat In East Side District
Alan J. Blinken, a prominent fund-raiser for Democratic candidates, has decided to make a run of his own: He is seeking a state Assembly seat from the Silk Stocking District on Manhattan's East Side.
Mr.
Blinken has already spent $390,000, including $225,000 of his own money, in an Assembly district that has been solidly Democratic for 20 years.


Breandan O hEithir, Irish Writer, Dies at 60
Breandan O hEithir, a social critic and author of the first Irish-language novel to lead the country's best-seller list, died on Friday.
He was 60 years old.
Mr.
O hEithir, who divided his time between Dublin and Paris, was admitted to St.
Vincent's Hospital last week and was diagnosed as having cancer.


P.H. Fett Jr. Engaged to Miss Behrins
Kimberlie Jean Behrins and Philip Holden Fett Jr. plan to marry in December.
Miss Behrins is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce G. Behrins of Silver Lake, S.I.
Her fiance is the son of Gloria G. Fett of Rockville Centre, L.I., and Mr.
Fett of Bay Shore, L.I.
The prospective bride, an account executive at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company in New York, is a graduate of Boston University.
Her father is a trial lawyer and a member of the Mayor's Committee on the Judiciary.
Her mother, Judith Behrins, is a New York City special-education teacher.
Mr.
Fett, a vice president at Smith Barney Harris Upham &amp; Company, bond and commodity brokers in New York, is a graduate of Hobart College.
His mother is an executive assistant at Peter Rogers Associates, an advertising agency in New York.


BOOKS &amp; BUSINESS: In Short
THE AGE OF UNREASON.
By Charles Handy. (Harvard Business School, $18.95.) This mild-mannered book is a cousin to the megatrendy future studies popularized by John Naisbitt and Ken Dychtwald.
The central tenet of Charles Handy's philosophy is that society in general, and the work place in particular, are in the grip of "discontinuous" changes, transformations so basic and so profound that the past is of no use in preparing for the future.
The useful thing about this approach, of course, is that it permits one to dispense with entire boxcars of historical experience that might muddle one's arguments.
Perhaps people in the past tended to behave a certain way -- tilling their own fields more assiduously than their landlords', for example, or seeking power at the expense of their neighbors.
But come tomorrow, Mr.
Handy, a visiting professor at the London Business School, says in "The Age of Unreason," we are all going to start behaving differently, because of the inevitable side effects of such profound changes as the telephone line, which permits people in scattered locations to work together.
But is the advent of the telephone truly "discontinuous" change?
Or is it just another stage in an organic continuum that began with drumbeats and smoke signals?
If it is the latter, perhaps some small clues to where we are headed can be found by examining where we have been.
It is this historical sextant that is lacking in Mr.
Handy's various visions of our economic and social future.
The result is that his musings, while compassionate and sometimes imaginative, soon begin to seem like just so much cotton candy: inoffensively sweet, briefly entertaining, but far too insubstantial to chew on.


Preparing for War
To the Editor:
In his letter of Sept. 30, Paul F. Power complains that Daniel Patrick Moynihan's record on international law "is not without a major anomaly. Following Israel's 1981 destruction of Iraq's safe-guarded reactor, then under construction, the Senator effectively endorsed the Begin regime's step as a contribution to nonproliferation."
Mr.
Power is typical of those who are so concerned with the "flouting" of international law and other "illegal behavior" that they would wait until an aggressor nation has actually embarked on war before admitting that the threat of war and the buildup toward it are warlike acts that call for preventive measures.
Mr.
Power seems unaware that from 1948 until the present moment, Iraq has been in a declared state of war against Israel.
Saddam Hussein and his predecessors have sworn to eradicate the State of Israel.
The nuclear reactor that Iraq was building was intended to be used for that purpose.
Does Mr.
Power think Israel should wait until it is bombed out of existence before taking preventive measures?
GERSON SILVERSTEIN  Brooklyn


Around the Garden
For This Week:
Keep those leaves off the lawn: either blow or rake them so they do not smother the grass, especially in winter-spring.
Before putting the mower away, mow the lawn short, one-inch or so; this discourages development of spring lawn fungus diseases and promotes quick comeback of grass when the growing season resumes next year.
Overgrown Yew
Q.
We have two overgrown yews that should be three to four feet high; now they are eight feet high.
Is it possible to cut these plants off at a height of one to two feet from the ground and coax them back to their proper size?
Or should we uproot them and start with smaller plants?
J.A.B., Pittsford, N.Y.
A.
If this question was asked in spring or midsummer, cutting back would be no problem, but pruning is chancy at this time of year.
Conifers are going into winter and this question comes from a snowbelt region where winters can be severe.
Drastic pruning this late in the season could be detrimental to yews.
This question points up the need for keeping plants under control by annual pruning.
Scaled-down yews are available if a new landscape were going to be started in spring.
The recommendation is to wait until spring and then prune the yews hard to reshape them and keep after them once their size has been reduced.
The yews will grow back quickly and new growth will cover any unsightly pruning cuts.
Grapefruit Seedling
Q.
Our 20-year-old grapefruit tree, grown from seed, seems to be getting sparser.
It is wintered indoors in front of a patio window and summered outdoors.
How much longer will it survive?
Should I feed it?
A.M.D., Canandaigua, N.Y.
A.
If the grapefruit has survived in a pot for 20 years, well done.
In the citrus groves, grapefruits are large trees.
They live for several decades.
But when roots are confined in a pot, 20 years is excellent survival time for this large tree.
Why not start another grapefruit "tree" from seed or an orange or a lemon seed.
Or select another type of tropical "tree" such as a Ficus to take its place.
Pot Storage
Q.
We have a large terrace and want to save several large pots, made in Italy, for use next year.
What do you recommend?
Mrs.
T.P., Chicago, Ill.
A.
If they are terra cotta (clay) pots, they should be moved into a sheltered location, that is a garage or cellar for storage.
The soil can be left in the pots and used again next year, if it is mixed with some fresh potting mixture and perhaps a handful of a slow-release fertilizer.
Do not leave any terra cotta or clay pots outdoors.
The freezing/thawing will either crack or exfoliate the terra cotta pots.
By contrast plastic tubs and wooden tubs survive weather extremes and can be left outdoors all winter with the soil left in them.
Odd Shrub Bloom
Q.
Last spring our forsythias and azaleas had flowers only on what I called their skirts -- the lower branches.
Why?
And what can we do to prevent this from happening next spring?
Mrs.
S.S., Putnam Valley, N.Y.
A.
Nothing, just be hopeful for deep snow, nature's blanket.
The plants mentioned bloomed on their "skirts" or lower branches because these branches were protected, maybe with snow or other plants nearby.
The open winter last season did not produce much snow and flower buds on many plants were blasted by the extreme cold.
Snow cover protects flower buds; there is nothing to do.
Winter mulches, after the ground freezes, help root zones and anti-desiccant sprays help foliage, but there is little that can be done to protect flower buds.
Blanketing hardy plants can be detrimental; it acts like a greenhouse.
Plants are warmed by the sun during the day and exude moisture and when the temperature drops at night, cells freeze and often plants are killed.
Address questions to Garden News, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.
Those of general interest will be published.


Perspective: Zoning; Controlling Scale Near Historic Districts
THERE is an uncomfortable relationship between New York City's zoning law and its historic districts.
The shape and scale of the building that zoning permits is frequently considered inappropriate to the already-built environment that the district seeks to preserve and enhance.
The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission can insist on a satisfactory design within the district -- often in lengthy and contentious negotiations -- but it is powerless to encourage "sympathetic" buildings outside the districts.
Jarringly contrasting specimens of new construction have emerged just outside some historic districts.


College Football: West/Southwest; Washington Rolls As Lewis Gains 205
Greg Lewis rushed for 205 yards and 2 touchdowns on 29 carries as Washington continued its Rose Bowl march today with a 46-7 victory over California in a Pacific-10 Conference game.
Lewis became the first Huskies player to rush for 1,000 yards in two consecutive seasons.
He also caught 2 passes for 90 yards.


A Poet Is Missing
DEATH'S DARKEST FACE  By Julian Symons. 272 pp. New York: Viking. $17.95.


In Folk Dress or Fine Brocade, Handmade Dolls of Thailand
EAST of the teeming center of Bangkok, about 45 minutes from the Grand Palace and off the Rajapraprop Road, is a walled lane overgrown with flowering vines and ending in a small cul-de-sac.
There, under a large sheltering tree, the entrance flanked by a sleeping dog and strutting rooster, is a plain frame house that looks much like any other here in the Makkasan district.
This is the home of Khunying (a title awarded by the king and roughly comparable to the British "Companion") Tongkorn Chandavimol, her Bangkok Dolls Museum and the company she started nearly 35 years ago, Bangkok Dolls.
Mrs.
Chandivamol, a distinguished, vital woman of 73, is still sole owner and still oversees every phase of production -- something she has done since the day she took her "personal money" to start this cottage industry.
Her interest in doll-making began in 1945 when she was a teacher at Chulalongkorn Pre-university School and accompanied her husband, who was the Minister of Education, on an official visit to Japan.
The dolls she saw there were beautifully made and had the scrupulous attention to detail that elevated them to art.
Mrs.
Chandivamol enrolled in the Ozawa Dolls School in Tokyo for a five-day course, and she returned to Bangkok determined to add collector's dolls to the list of quality Thai art objects. (She was so successful that, according to Paisan Wangsai, the director of tourism for Eastern North America, the Tourism Authority of Thailand gives Bangkok Dolls as gifts to foreign dignitaries.)
It wasn't until 1956 that she made her first doll, the presentation piece for the Queen's birthday; the doll is now on view in the Museum.
With Her Majesty's encouragement, Mrs.
Chandivamol began Bangkok Dolls.
Asked whether, as a woman, it had been difficult for her to start her own business, she said that women are traditionally entrepreneurial here; it was especially easy to begin as a small home industry, then gradually expand as word-of-mouth brought more and more orders.
Khunying Chandavimol does the research, the designs, the seeking out and buying of materials herself.
Her lifelike collector's dolls are authentic in costume -- in court dress, Thai period dress or simply contemporary dress -- whether depicting farmers, hill tribe people or figures from classical drama and dance.
The antique clothes are based on wall paintings in temples, museum collections and old illustrations.
Mrs.
Chandavimol uses local suppliers, people who know the quality and type of fabric and trim she wants.
Every one of the more than 5,000 dolls produced here annually is entirely handmade from local materials and completed in a day.
Pree Supsomrual, who is both saleswoman and caretaker of the showroom, took me on a tour of the workshops.
There are 20 women at work, all "family" -- children of people who worked for the family as domestics.
All of them were trained here and are longstanding employees. (Naree Teekayu, the production manager, started as an assistant 30 years ago.) Each person does a specific job.
Thanamsri Songsang makes legs.
She was sewing a silklike synthetic into slim, sheer little stockings, connected to one another by thread.
These were stuffed with cotton by a woman at the next table and then passed along to a table laden with cloth bodies stuffed with straw.
Here, a U-shaped wire was threaded through each body and into each leg, allowing it to be bent into the required pose; arms are done the same way.
Miss Supsomrual said that some dolls had been made with plastic bodies, experimentally, but the results were not satisfactory.
The head, however, starts as a bulb-shaped plastic form onto which stiff fabric for the face is glued and then painted.
The doll has to be dressed before the head is attached.
Every jewel and sequin is carefully sewn on; every pleat is carefully placed.
The difficulty lies in keeping folds and gathers in scale, because these dolls are between 8 and 17 inches high.
Sumptuous fabric -- brocade, lame, chiffon, satin, silk -- is guided around each bent arm and leg so that it drapes naturally, and tiny hands clasp tiny objects or each other.
Shoe soles are then glued to the feet and the head is screwed onto the body.
The doll is placed on its stand, a headdress or hair or both are added and shoes are sewn on.
Finally, a tiny "Handmade Bangkok Dolls Thailand" tag is affixed, which is how you can be assured that you're buying one of Mrs.
Chandivamol's very own.
Considering the work that goes into the dolls, prices for them are low.
They range from 200 bahts, or about $8, for an 8-inch country woman to 780 bahts, or about $32, for a 10-inch Khon figure, then jump to about $60 for a 12-inch Kinnaree, a mythical half-human and half-bird female, and about $72 for a 13-inch Thosaganth, the demon king in all his 10 hands, 4 faces glory.
The Khon dolls are the most striking.
Khon is Thai drama performed by masked figures and tells of an episode from the Ramayana, an Indian epic poem.
The Thai version is called the Ramakien; parts of it were written by King Rama I, founder of the present dynasty, and his son, Rama II, who was a great patron of the arts and supporter of Khon performance.
While the dolls may be bought individually, they are most effective in groups, or at least in pairs.
My favorite is the fingernail dancer, the elegantly dressed classical dancer with ultralong gold fingernails, who many think of when Thailand is mentioned.
A 12-inch Norah figure -- in a fringed metallic-mesh bodice, arms upraised to an elaborate jeweled headdress and feet in ballet's second position under a skirt of alternating sheer and embroidered panels -- is about $24.
A 12-inch Rama-- brandishing a serpentlike staff and resplendent in gold epaulets with red tassels, gold and green brocade breeches and tunic and three red-and-black panels richly embroidered and trimmed with gold hung from a gold belt -- costs about $26.
A 12-inch Sida, his wife-- with matching tasseled and jeweled headdress, a gold and white brocade dress and cape lined with red, hands pressed together before her in traditional greeting-- is about $24.
Hanuman-- the 10-inch white monkey general, all in white satin with gold accents and trim, his head a marvelous Khon mask, feet apart and knees bent, one arm up and the other at his waist-- costs about $26.
Thosaganth, the mask-headed demon king, similar in pose and dress to Rama, is a 13-inch doll that costs about $30; these are the principal figures in the epic.
The dolls cost slightly less when bought in pairs or as a group.
Particularly attractive are a 10-inch Hanuman and Nang Madsha, the golden mermaid, for about $62. (An 8-inch mermaid alone is about $27, a 10-inch doll about $32.) A 17-inch trio, Thosaganth against Hanuman and Rama, costs about$82.
Ten-inch demons and monkey generals named in the epic are between $24 and $28.
A set of 30 Ramakien dolls costs about $1,400 and up, depending on the size of the dolls.
The largest set consists of 50 dolls and costs at least $2,000; but it is rarely made.
Indeed, orders for sets and special orders are filled at the discretion of Mrs.
Chandivamol, who checks the stock on hand and whether the material is available to make any necessary dolls.
In the same way, she decides whether a mail order can be filled.
As far as I could tell at my visit, the average order should pose no problem because the difficulty is the customer's -- what to choose from among the great variety of dolls.
The company's color brochure shows nearly all of them and is an accurate guide.
There are 15 dolls in hill tribe costume, priced at about $9 for the 8-inch and about $12 or $14 for the 10-inch.
The women have the intricate headgear and elaborately embroidered clothing for which the tribes are known; noteworthy are the dolls with colorful yarn-streamer Lisu and beaded-and-silver-coin Akha headdresses.
The period dress dolls are all 10 inches tall and cost about $18.
They represent four Thai periods (Dvarati, Sukhothai, Ayutthaya, Bangkok) with bejeweled figures in sumptuous fabrics showing the evolution of dress from the 7th to the 20th century.
The figures representing country people -- farmers, vendors, musicians and "housewives" -- are the least expensive but no less detailed; all are 8inches tall and priced at about $8 to $11.
Most of these dolls hold something: wicker baskets hung from shoulder yokes, carried on the heads or in the arms, filled with fruit, grain or vegetables; sheaves of grain; farm tools; folk instruments.
A group of nine is about $80, a wooden Thai house to complete the setting is about $14.
For less than about $4 you can buy a Thai country dress outfit, with woven-straw field hat, for Barbie.
There's also a charming Nativity set, unmistakably Thai, for about $80, which would be something different under the Christmas tree.
Mrs.
Chandivamol makes another line she calls Cuddley Dolls, which are soft-body cotton cloth dolls ranging in size from 10 to 16 inches and in price from about $13 to $26.
They are dressed in heavily detailed, authentic hill tribe jewelry and costumes and reminded me of Walt Disney's Small World figures.
I'd fight off any kid who wanted mine.
They should be given only to very careful, very appreciative young people.
The Cuddley farm mother and child won first prize at the 1982 Bangkok Bicentennial Celebration; a 16-inch mother doll is about $24 and a 10-inch child about $13.
The arms and legs are jointed, so mother can hold the baby.
Prices at the workshops are slightly lower than in town; cab fare evens it out, but visitors can watch dolls being made and tour the Museum.
Traditional papier mache Khon masks are also made here, handmolded to a form and then painted, taking two weeks to complete: about $6 each.
There is a very charming, inexpensive souvenir that is uniquely Thai and collected by the Thai people themselves: Palace dolls.
These one- to two-inch-long clay figurines were made by ladies of the royal household, not as toys but as decorations, until about 100 years ago.
With the modernization of Thailand under King Rama V (Chulalongkorn, son of King Mongkut of "Anna and the King of Siam" aka "The King and I"), the art disappeared.
According to Phaitoon Paga of the Office of Royal Secretary of the King, Queen Sirikit was responsible for the revival 10 years ago of these dolls.
She was on an official visit to the Pamok District outside Bangkok, where the villagers had turned to brickmaking after rice crop failures.
She suggested they make the dolls to supplement their earnings since the dolls are made of the same material, clay.
Palace dolls are strictly a home industry.
Three parts clay are mixed with one part paper and hand-modeled into the little figures.
They are left to dry and then fired in the cooking stove.
The family rice pot is put on the burner, the dolls are popped into the oven underneath and when the dinner rice is done, so are the dolls.
They are then painted with oils in typical Thai everyday dress and depict everyday activities, like children at play or a band of musicians.
The prices are very modest, about 20 to 30 cents.
They are sold at Chitralada shops, outlets for Support, the Government foundation whose objective is to revive the old crafts and through them supply villagers with an additional source of income.
You can see doll-making demonstrations in the old capital, Ayutthaya, at the Government center run by Support.
WHERE TO FIND AND ORDER THE DOLLS The Shops
The dolls are available from several sources, including the following:  Bangkok Dolls, 85 Soi Rajatapan, Makkasan, Bangkok 10400 (telephone: 245-3008).
The shop and museum are open daily, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; the factory, 8 A.M. to 5 P.M., closed Sundays and holidays.
Mail orders are handled here; write for a brochure, then request a price that includes insurance and shipping; delivery takes about two weeks by air.
If the dolls must be made to order, add another week.
A second shop is near the Regent Hotel: Bangkok Dolls Arts &amp; Crafts, Room 212, second floor, Peninsula Plaza, 153 Rajdamri Road, Bangkok 10500 (252-1492), open daily 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Narayana Phand Company Ltd., 275-2 Larn Luang Road, Saphankao, Bangkok 10100 (282-0120-3), open daily 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
A kind of Government guild shop, profits benefit farmers and craftsmen.
TAT (Tourism Authority of Thailand) Duty Free Company Ltd., 888 Pleonchit Road, Lumpini, Patumwan, Bangkok 10500 (253-6451-9), open daily 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Chitralada has five shops in Bangkok: at the Oriental Plaza, at Hilton International Hotel's shopping arcade, the Decorations Pavilion at the Grand Palace, at Wimanmek Mansion (directly behind the Bangkok National Assembly and said to be the world's largest building made entirely of golden teak) and at Don Muang International Airport.
Branches are in Chiangmai International Airport, the Rose Garden in Nakhon Province and in South Pattaya.
The Bangkok airport shop is open 24 hours every day and the branches from 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. except at the Grand Palace, which closes at 3:30.
Information
It's a good idea to call before you go because the shops do close some days.
If you're checking addresses on a map, remember that there's no standard transliteration for the Thai language; let sound rather than spelling, which varies quite a bit, be your guide.
Thai Airways International has a Visitor's Handbook, available at the Tourism Authority of Thailand office, 5 World Trade Center, Suite 2449, New York, New York 10048 (212-432-0433 or 0435). -- E. D. G.


Deirdre A. Gentile to Wed Poe Fratt in December
Dr.
Louis A. Gentile of Bronxville, N.Y., has announced the engagement of his daughter, Deirdre Alexis, to Charles Kennedy Poe Fratt Jr., a son of LouAnn C. Fratt of Piedmont, Calif., and the late Mr.
Fratt.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Gentile, 29 years old, is a daughter also of the late Isabel McMahon Gentile.
She graduated from Skidmore College and is a vice president of Rascals Unlimited, an agency specializing in child models in New York.
Her father is a physician in Bronxville.
Mr.
Fratt, 29 and known as Poe, graduated from Stanford University and received an M.B.A. from Cornell University.
He is a research assistant at Lehman Brothers in New York.
His father was the partner in charge of executive education at KPMG Peat Marwick in New York, the accounting firm.


The Services Of Hospices
The article "Hospital Agrees to Start AIDS Program" (Sept. 9) fails to mention two creative ways by which the nation's first hospice, the Connecticut Hospice, provides signal service to AIDS patients and their families.
The Connecticut Hospice Cottage provides a residential program for AIDS patients who are eligible for hospice home care but who lack the appropriate environment to enable them to remain at home.
The cottage, which contains five beds, provides the services of a medically directed and nurse-coordinated interdisciplinary team while offering a surrogate family setting.


Congress Acts on Bills Embracing Several Major Issues
Housing
The Senate approved, 93 to 6, a conference report on the omnibus housing authorization bill, which includes $3.1 billion through the 1992 fiscal year for a new housing and home-ownership program.
The measure includes $448 million for a program to enable tenants in public housing projects to buy their own units.
The bill also authorizes $1.5 billion for new public housing, $4.3 billion to modernize existing public housing, $4 billion for housing vouchers and $1.2 billion for housing the elderly and handicapped.
The House approved the bill on Thursday.
Immigration
The House approved, 264 to 118, a major revision of the nation's immigration law after halting consideration of the measure on procedural grounds on Friday night.
The bill would permit 700,000 people to immigrate each year from 1992 to 1994, compared with 500,000 under current law.
The bill also reduces the scope and severity of restrictions on new citizens and other immigrants, eliminating some barriers that dated from the McCarthy era.
The Senate approved the measure Friday night.
It now goes to President Bush, who has indicated he will sign the bill.
Crime
In an effort to make the anti-crime bill more widely acceptable, House and Senate negotiators removed death penalty provisions and curbs on semiautomatic assault weapons.
Liberals had generally opposed the former, and conservatives, the latter.
Negotiators were trying to devise a way to preserve a disputed provision of the bill that would allow the Government to seize the homes of people accused of savings and loan fraud.
Other provisions address victim rights, juvenile justice and prisoner drug testing.
National Endowment for the Arts
The House and Senate appeared headed toward extending financing for the National Endowment for the Arts for three years after conferees from both chambers reached agreement Friday night.
Unlike current law, the bill contains no explicit prohibition against financing obscene art, leaving such judgments to the courts.
The conferees also dropped a proposed ban on support of artistic works that denigrate religion.
Foreign Aid
Both chambers also appeared poised to approve a conference report agreed to Friday night that would provide $15.5 billion in foreign aid, including a provision sought by Mr.
Bush to forgive $6.7 billion of Egypt's military debt to the United States.
The bill would also cut military aid to El Salvador by half, to $42 million, and provide Israel with $3 billion in cash, military and economic aid and $700 million worth of military aid from American stockpiles.
The bill does not earmark a specific amount of aid for Pakistan, normally the third-largest recipient of American military assistance.
The United States has expressed concerns about nuclear weapons in Pakistan.


Pastimes; Bridge
An American poll that asked the cognoscenti to name the best bidder, or the best declarer, or the best defender would attract many answers in each category.
But ask for the player most likely to make an unexpected opening lead and the automatic selection would be John Lowenthal of Manhattan.
One of his regular partners, Henry Bethe, also of Manhattan, once offered this description of the Lowenthal leading style: "The lead of an honor denies a touching honor; the lead of a small card promises an honor sequence somewhere, possibly in the suit led; the lead of a short suit invites declarer to draw trumps; and the lead of a trump promises a ruffing value somewhere."
Bethe's tongue was only slightly in his cheek.


Finding Advantages In Halloween
LOOKING for the perfect holiday?
Try Halloween in New Jersey.
From the purely practical standpoint, just contrast Halloween with those other red-letter biggies, Thanksgiving and Christmas.
Halloween has several advantages.
One, you don't have to decide at whose house you're going to
have
Halloween; you have Halloween on the streets.
Two, you don't need your car to get there.
Three, you don't have to figure out who cooks what, because there's no cooking involved.
Everything edible you need comes in plastic bags.
I grew up in New York City, where Halloween was less important, or at least less visible, and moving to New Jersey opened up to me glorious new levels of Halloweenishness.
After many years, I still marvel.


Quotation of the Day
"I think I hear a loud collective sigh of relief coming from 100 offices in the near vicinity of this chamber." -- Senator Jim Sasser, chairman of the Budget Committee.  [ 1:6. ]


Economics 101
THE AGE OF DIMINISHED EXPECTATIONS  U.S.
Economic Policy in the 1990s.
By Paul Krugman. 204 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.


An Early Victim of the Cold War
THE POLK CONSPIRACY  Murder and Cover-Up in the Case of CBS News Correspondent George Polk.
By Kati Marton.
Illustrated. 369 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.95.


Open Government Computer Files, Court Says
A New York State appeals court has ruled that public access to government records granted under the state's Freedom of Information Law applies to government computer tapes as well as to paper files.
For the Manhattan real-estate company that brought the suit, the ruling means that it can get computer records from the city's Department of Buildings for $46 instead of the "hundreds of thousands of dollars" the court estimated it would have cost if it had upheld the department's insistence that its tape be transcribed onto paper.


Most in U.S. Will Feel Effect Of Shift in Spending Priorities
The deficit-reduction bill passed today by Congress will touch almost everyone in the United States, from young children to frail elderly people, as well as farmers, bankers, college students, war veterans and foreign tourists visiting this country.
The bill has been promoted as a way to help save nearly $500 billion over five years, but it is also a grand statement of social policy and political priorities.  [ Chart of provisions, page 26. ]


A Season of Misfortune Raises Many Questions
More than 50,000 spectators and millions of television viewers came into yesterday's Breeders' Cup at Belmont Park wondering who would emerge as the sport's top athletes.
At the end of a brutal afternoon that claimed the lives of two horses, many were instead wondering why so many of those athletes seem to have fallen in battle this year.
The deaths of the brilliant 3-year-old filly Go for Wand, who shattered a leg en route to what would have been a glorious victory in the Distaff, and of the popular sprinter Mr.
Nickerson, who collapsed and suddenly died after suffering a heart attack or ruptured artery in the Sprint, were a tragic coda to a racing season marked by injury and illness.
The top older horses Sunday Silence, Easy Goer and Criminal Type all were retired with leg injuries this summer, and the prominent 3-year-olds Summer Squall and Housebuster also failed to last the season.


Entrepreneurs Offer an Answer
IN the late 80's, when many people on Long Island were enjoying the luxurious life, we were lulled into a false sense of security.
The seeds of our current problems were all there.
The Shoreham debacle was occurring, with our politicians' jumping on the bandwagon of hysteria, and our business leaders did not take enough initiatives to stem the rising ride.
In my opinion, the closing of Shoreham will one day be marked as the single worst event that affected the Island's economy.


In Panama, Counting The Invasion Dead Is a Matter of Dispute
THE eerie attraction of this city's most controversial tourist sight is that it offers nothing to see.
It is the stretch of vacant downtown land where a lively, chaotic shantytown disappeared in flames during America's invasion of Panama last December.
The once-crowded barrio, known as El Chorrillo, was the scene of intense combat around Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's thick-walled military command post.
The fiery destruction of the teeming rowhouses nearby has loomed as a symbol of American excesses in the midnight invasion.


Warsaw Pact Agrees On Plan to Cut Arms
The member countries of the Warsaw Pact reached agreement here over the weekend on how to divide proposed reductions on tanks and artillery pieces among the pact's six members.
The accord, scheduled to be signed by Warsaw Pact foreign ministers at a Nov. 3 meeting in Budapest, opens the way for a conventional arms reduction agreement with NATO.
Czechoslovak officials said they now expect an agreement significantly reducing the number of non-nuclear weapons in Europe to be signed at a meeting on Nov. 18 in Paris between officials of the two military alliances.
The two alliances had already agreed during talks in Vienna on overall ceilings for various types of conventional weapons, but the signing of such a treaty has been delayed by disagreement within the Warsaw Pact on the ceiling each member should get.
Officials here issued few details of this weekend's agreement.
But they said that one of the concessions that made the accord possible was the willingness of the Soviet Union to reduce by 150 the number of tanks it insists on retaining.


Books of The Times; Further Grim Reflections on the American Mind
Giants and Dwarfs Essays, 1960-1990 By Allan Bloom 395 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.95.
In his preface to this collection of essays, Allan Bloom writes that the title, "Giants and Dwarfs," refers to Jonathan Swift, "who converted size of soul into size of body and thus made the spiritual and its various ranks palpable to us." One can take this to mean that Swift knew something about the scale of ideas, the contemporary loss of which Mr.
Bloom regretted so electrically in his best-selling critique of American education, "The Closing of the American Mind."


U.S. Boards Iraqi Tanker That Ignored Shots
United States marines boarded and searched an Iraqi tanker in the northern Arabian Sea today after it ignored warning shots fired by warships and low-level passes by American fighter jets.
The marines, from the amphibious transport ship Ogden, met no resistance from the Iraqi crew when they boarded the ship to check for possible violations of trade sanctions imposed by the United Nations against Iraq.


Dividend Meetings


Israel's Cabinet Seems Split On Punishment in Shootings
The Israeli Cabinet today endorsed a Government commission's report on Palestinian unrest and fatal shootings by the police in the Old City of Jerusalem early this month.
But opinion was divided on whether anyone should be disciplined over the incident.
Several officials, led by Housing Minister Ariel Sharon, asserted that no one should be punished.
Finance Minister Yitzhak Modai said that dismissing senior-level police officials criticized in the report would be an improper indication that Israel believed it had been at fault.


Quotation of the Day
"If my father was a lawyer, I might have been a lawyer. My father was a pressman, so I became a pressman." Howard Grantz, striking driver.  [ B4:2. ]


Park-Ohio Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
In 1928, JACK RESNICK opened a real-estate business in the Bronx with one employee, an $8-a-week secretary.
He and his wife PEARL recently gave $5 million to the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, on top of a previous gift of $3.5 million, along with several other contributions by members of the Resnick family.
On Wednesday, the medical school will say thank you at ceremonies naming the 23-acre campus of the medical school the Jack and Pearl Resnick Campus.


Treasury to Sell 2-Year Notes This Week
The schedule of Treasury financings this week includes today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills, followed tomorrow by an auction of two-year notes that was postponed last week because of the Government's failure to raise the debt ceiling.
By late Friday the rate for the three-month bill was 7.16 percent and for the six-month bill it was 7.11 percent.
With no when-issued trading in two-year notes, investors followed the outstanding issue as an indicator.
The two-year note traded Friday at a price to yield 7.76 percent.
In corporate bonds, where only a few financings are on the calendar, analysts cite the large amount of potential debt issues that hovers over the market and could come quickly.
The following fixed-income issues are scheduled this week: TAXABLE ONE DAY DURING THE WEEK
Apache Corp., $150 million in convertible subordinated debentures, due in 2000, NR/Ba-2/BB+.
Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
Wetterau Inc., $75 million in convertible subordinated debentures, due in 2000, NR/Baa-2/BBB+.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Source: McCarthy, Crisanti &amp; Maffei Inc.
Ratings: MCM/Moody's/Standard &amp; Poor's.
TAX-EXEMPT TUESDAY
Georgia, $98.6 million in general obligation bonds. Competitive.
New Jersey Wastewater Treatment Trust, $88.8 million in debt securities.
Competitive.
WEDNESDAY
Maryland Department of Transportation, $210 million in general obligation bonds.
Competitive.
Maryland Department of Transportation, $210 million in eight-month bond anticipation notes.
Competitive.
THURSDAY
Glendale Redevelopment Agency, Calif., $65 million in revenue bonds. Competitive.
Greater Chicago Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, Ill., $120 million in general obligation bonds.
Competitive.
TENTATIVE OFFERINGS THIS WEEK
Connecticut, $50 million in general obligation bonds.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
Monroe County, Mich., $55 million in pollution control revenue bonds for Detroit Edison Co.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
New York State Dormitory Authority, $90 million in revenue bonds for Cornell University.
J.
P.
Morgan Securities Inc.
Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission, $60 million in revenue bonds.
Russell, Rea &amp; Zappala Inc.
Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, New York, $160 million in mortgage recording tax special obligation refunding bonds.
Dillon, Read &amp; Co.


Carpenter Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executions Leave Blood on Society's Hands; Holocaust Denier
To the Editor:
I was shocked to see the face of Fred A. Leuchter Jr. on your front page Oct. 13 -- I'm used to seeing his picture on pamphlets and videotapes put out by the Institute for Historical Review, the premier anti-Semitic, Holocaust-denying outfit in the United States.
You mention that Mr.
Leuchter testified at a trial of a Canadian Holocaust denier and his explanation that he was merely an "expert" witness.
He has written of the gas chambers in Poland: "the only conclusion that can be arrived at by a rational, responsible person is the absurdity of the notion that any of these facilities were ever capable of, or were utilized as, execution gas chambers."
You cite technical questions about the effectiveness and painfulness of Mr.
Leuchter's injection method.
You should also have noted that Mr.
Leuchter's views on the Holocaust call into question his expertise on killing people.
KENNETH S. STERN New York, Oct. 15, 1990
The writer is program specialist on anti-Semitism and extremism with the American Jewish Committee.


Speaking About Spending Less, Cuomo Has Spent More
Early in his first term, when the state was faced with a debilitating budget deficit, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo adopted the slogan, "We must learn to do more with less." He recited it to anyone who would listen: to commissioners hoping to expand their agencies, to lawmakers looking to extend the state's largess, even to hospital workers seeking higher pay.
"We must not in this state fall victim to the doctrine that the only way to make progress is to spend massively," Mr.
Cuomo said at the opening the 1984 legislative session.
"We must find new opportunities to domore with less."


Baldor Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Pioneer Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wellman Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Transactions
Basketball DALLAS (NBA) -- Waived Bob McCann, forward, and Kelvin Upshaw, guard.
NETS (NBA) -- Signed Derrick Coleman, forward, to a five-year contract.
Football MIAMI (AFC) -- Activated Shawn Lee, nose tackle, from injured reserve.
Waived Jeff Faulkner, defensive end.


Sports of The Times; When Fred Wiggled His Toes
THE cool, gray morning was brightened by colored balloons in Central Park, at 67th Street, near Tavern on the Green yesterday.
But that was only part of it.
There was a lot of activity in the immediate area because the finish line for the New York City Marathon next Sunday morning was being constructed.
The lanes with pennants on ropes, the gates, the stands, the digital clocks, the wires, the trailer trucks were all part of the noisy scene.
There was also going to be a kind of trial run shortly, a five-mile race called the Computer Run, as well as a quarter-mile romp for children.
"Have you seen Fred?" someone asked.


Lights, Cameras, Agassi
EVEN without the imminent arrival of Andre Agassi in an ultimate driving machine, there is already more than enough here to meet the eye.
The sun is high and molten, attempting to burn a hole in the desert, but one can't actually say that Las Vegas is waking up.
Thanks to its endless canopy of neon and manic casinos that clang night and day like competing belfries, this, and not Sinatra's New York, is the city that never sleeps.
Veneer is what turns heads, excess is what charms.
Only sunglasses spare the eyes from a surfeit of Americana at its gladdest and gaudiest on the shiny strip where Agassi, a favorite son, has picked up right where Liberace left off.


Merle C. Worster, 74, Ex-Television Executive
Merle C. Worster, a former broadcasting executive and mayor of Upper Saddle River, N.J., died in his sleep on Saturday at his home in Upper Saddle River.
He was 74 years old.
He died of bone cancer, family members said.


Review/Music; Leningrad Philharmonic With an American Hero
It may be perverse to inject mourning into crumbling Berlin walls, a defrosted cold war and the reunification of East and West (if indeed the two were ever united in the first place), but when goodness makes great gains, things are lost in the process.
For music and its mysterious subheading -- style -- these are indeed worrisome times.
It took only an hour with Van Cliburn and the Leningrad Philharmonic at the Tilles Center at the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University in Greenvale, L.I., on Saturday night to find out that if peace is bringing us together, it threatens, too, to make us all the same.


Davis's Sack Spurs Jets
In the final game before midterm, the young Jets finally turned in an A-plus paper to Bruce Coslett, their rookie head coach, scoring their first fourth-quarter touchdown of the season and beating the Oilers, 17-12, in the Astrodome.
That fourth-period touchdown wasn't scored by the offense, but Coslet has said all along that his Jets win as a team and lose as a team.
He was just as ecstatic about the sack of Warren Moon by Darrell Davis, the rookie defensive end, that forced a fumble that Davis recovered as he would have been had it been a Ken O'Brien bomb to Al Toon.


Loss of Traditional Base Completes Bhutto's Slide
Provincial election returns announced today apparently confirmed the political eclipse of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto.
Her Pakistan People's Party appears to have lost even its traditional base, Sind Province.
With 95 percent of the governments in all Saturday's elections of provincial legislatures tallied by today, the People's Party apparently failed to capture a majority in any of Pakistan's four provinces.
It won only 15 percent of the 460 contested seats.


Linear Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ugo Tognazzi, 68, a Comic Actor Who Starred in 'Cage aux Folles'
Ugo Tognazzi, a onetime bookkeeper who became one of Italy's leading comic actors and achieved international fame in the film "La Cage aux Folles," died on Saturday.
He was 68 years old.
The Italian news agency ANSA said Mr.
Tognazzi suffered a cerebral hemorrhage on Saturday morning and died late that night.


Nuggets Sputtering Amid Point Splurge
Paul Westhead was sitting in a Boston hotel lobby early last Thursday morning, answering more of what has become an avalanche of questions concerning the controversial style of play he is trying to introduce to the National Basketball Association.
"I don't have any question that it can work," Westhead was saying after his Denver Nuggets had been thrashed by the Celtics, 158-135, the night before.
"I would not venture to say that what you saw last night was a quality production of my system."


David Frederick Wiener Is Wed to Jennifer Kane
Jennifer Kane, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan S. Kane of Charlottesville, Va., was married yesterday at Temple Beth Israel there to Dr.
David Frederick Wiener, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Walter Wiener of Deal, N.J.
Rabbi Dan Alexander officiated.
The bride, 30 years old, is a senior editor for the college-board division of the Education Testing Service in Princeton, N.J.
She graduated summa cum laude from Emory University and earned a master's in English literature there.
The bridegroom, 30, is a resident in orthopedic surgery at the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick, N.J.
He is a graduate of Cornell University and has a medical degree from George Washington University.


Graco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Tultex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Texas, Governor's Race Becomes a Horse Race
Clayton Williams, the Republican candidate for governor of Texas, has been so confident of defeating his Democratic opponent, Ann Richards, that at one point he promised to "head her and hoof her and drag her through the dirt" just like a cow he would rope on his ranch.
Now, suddenly and unexpectedly, the West Texas millionaire finds himself in a horse race.


Next Stop for Irish: A One-Sided Ritual
A 76-yard sprint for a touchdown by the Rocket, Raghib Ismail, in the fourth quarter rocketed Notre Dame past Pittsburgh, 31-22, on Saturday night after the Panthers had drawn close at 17-7.
Earlier in the day, Navy lost by 16-7 to James Madison, a Division I-AA team.
The Irish have a 6-1 record; the Midshipmen, with a less taxing schedule, are 3-4.


New York Needs the Environmental Bond Act
To the Editor:
As you suggest in an Oct. 18 news article, many residents of New York State are undecided about the merits of the proposed 21st Century Environmental Quality Bond Act, which will be on the ballot Nov. 6.
Is it wise to authorize the state to incur long-term debt in these times of economic uncertainty?
On the surface, the answer to this question would seem to be no.
But the facts tell another story.
Failure to pass the bond act would result in the loss of at least $700 million in Federal grants.
This would break the fiscal backs of local communities now struggling to deal with polluting waste-water systems.
In testimony before a State Assembly committee this week, representatives of key local government associations estimated that dealing with the solid-waste crisis alone would cost local taxpayers billions.
Revenues from the environmental bond act may seem like a drop in the bucket compared with these costs.
But over the next 10 years, this investment will pump, it has been estimated, $11.7 billion into the economy of New York State.
And we can finance the debt for 2 cents a day per citizen.
To paraphrase Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the next decade will determine the fate of New York's landscape.
Without the necessary funds, state government will stand by helplessly as opportunities to preserve our special places and expand public access come and then are gone.
The bond act's foes have had center stage lately.
Now it's time for the voters to have all the facts.
New Yorkers need the environmental bond act.
BERNARD MELEWSKI Executive Director Adirondack Council Elizabethtown, N.Y., Oct. 22, 1990


Data Switch Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Universal International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Higher Phone Rate Opposed
Attorney General Robert Abrams of New York State is expected to file legal papers today calling on state regulators to deny the New York Telephone Company's request for higher rates.
According to a copy of the legal brief to be filed with the New York State Public Service Commission, Mr.
Abrams opposes as excessive the $23.6 million rate increase recommended to the commissioners by three commission administrative law judges on Oct. 16.
New York Telephone had sought an $830 million increase.
Mr.
Abrams contends that in calculating the price of telephone service, New York Telephone should not be allowed to include the cost of questionable payments to unregulated affiliates of its parent, the Nynex Corporation.
He also criticized the judges' support for the introduction of late fees for customers who do not pay their bills promptly.


United Investors Mgmt reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mitterrand and Gorbachev Discuss Gulf Crisis


Vie De France reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 22


Court Papers Suggest Overcharges by Hughes
Recently declassified Government and corporate documents appear to support a whistleblower's accusations that the Hughes Aircraft Corporation overcharged the Pentagon on programs to develop in-flight radar systems.
The documents show that Hughes established a system in the early 1980's to shift some costs of developing the radar systems for the Navy's F-14 fighter and the Air Force's F-15 fighter to the Air Force's B-2 Stealth bomber, apparently increasing the Government's payments.


Taipei Journal; War on Crime Makes a Hero of a Hated General
Just a few months ago, Hau Pei-tsun seemed one of the most unpopular men in Taiwan.
When he was appointed Prime Minister, protesters rallied in the streets and warned that his selection would threaten Taiwan's emerging democracy.
But these days most people here approve of Mr.
Hau, a former general and military Chief of Staff, for one reason: they want social order.


Business and the Law; Keeping Track Of Elusive Cash
AFTER more than a year of study and consultation with industry experts, the Treasury Department is moving toward adopting regulations governing electronic transfers of money.
The new regulations, aimed at combating the use of banks by narcotics traffickers to conceal their profits, will be imposed on a system that is moving enormous sums of money between financial institutions.
They will apply to virtually every bank in the nation, since most of them make some use of electronic transfers of funds.


California Water Service reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Versa Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ethics Crossfire in Regan-Bellamy Race
As the tight race for New York state comptroller neared its final week, the two main contenders attacked each other on ethical issues in a testy debate televised yesterday.
The Democratic challenger, Carol Bellamy, asserted that the incumbent Comptroller, Edward V. Regan, had a "record of repeated scandals" in his 12-year tenure.
Mr.
Regan said Ms.
Bellamy, a former New York City Council president, "could not function as comptroller" because she was too beholden to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Mayor David N. Dinkins and other leading Democrats and "wouldn't dare" be critical of them if she got into office.


Vista Chemical Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Reagan's Memoirs Congress Gets Blame For Budget Problems
In his memoirs, former President Ronald Reagan laments his inability to reduce the Federal deficit, but, as he has in the past, he blames Congress for most of the problem.
"Deficits, as I've often said, aren't caused by too little taxing; they are caused by too much spending," he wrote.
"Presidents don't create deficits; Congress does."


The Bond Act: A Price Worth Paying
The spirits of Teddy Roosevelt, Averell Harriman and Nelson Rockefeller -- conservationists all -- must be restless.
New York voters will vote next week on a $1.9 billion bond act to enhance the state's environment.
New Yorkers have approved nine such measures in this century but this one is thought to be in trouble.
Some critics call it a naked land grab.
Others say it's an agreeable but frivolous luxury in a time of fiscal austerity.
It is neither.
The act deserves support.
But its critics have raised serious questions that deserve serious answers.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-11 Iraq will not ration fuel, President Saddam Hussein decided in a reversal.
Mr.
Hussein also dismissed the minister whose apparent miscalculation led to the announcement 10 days ago that the country faced a gasoline shortage.
Page A1
President Gorbachev met in Paris with President Mitterrand to sign a friendship agreement, but the talks immediately turned to the gulf crisis.
A11
No talks on hostages, European leaders vow A10
Israel's cabinet seems split on punishment in shootings A10
Benazir Bhutto's loss was confirmed as election returns were announced from Pakistan's provincial legislatures.
Her party appears to have lost even its traditional base.
A6
Deputy leader of militant Hindu party is arrested in India A6 Beijing student candidates, 10 sad years later A9
Taipei journal: War on crime makes hated general hero A4
Nicaragua is in a volatile state.
Former contra rebels seem on the verge of taking up arms over their dissatisfaction with the Government's concessions to the Sandinistas and its failure to enact certain land programs.
A3
Mexico would receive helicopters from the United States military under a plan that is scheduled to begin this week despite charges that the aircraft will be managed by an official who has been linked to drug corruption.
A5
Bogota's largest oil pipline has been dynamited at least 125 times by the Colombia's most hard-line guerrilla group.
The resulting spills have created significant environmental problems.
A8 NATIONAL A12-19, B8-10 Companies are laying off workers now, rather than waiting to be hit by hard times as they have in the past.
Some economists warn that this outburst of corporate preventive medicine increases the odds of a steep recession.
A1
The 101st Congress adjourned, its legislative accomplishments in the last two years almost lost amid the weeks of bitter tangling over the budget that was finally approved Saturday evening.
A1
News analysis: The Democrats made political gains in the short run because of the budget morass, but the long-term implications for the Democrats as well as the budget process itself are unclear.
A1
Congressional poker chips: judges, oil and beer B9
In Reagan's memoirs, Congress gets blame for budget problems A13
Bush's wes stir G.O.P. grumbling over Sununu B8
Major immigration bill is sent to Bush B10
New standards for health insurance aim at protecting elderly B9
U.S. changing tune on trade liberalization D1
The tax code changes approved by Congress include higher Medicare taxes for the wealthy, a variety of income tax changes and additional excise taxes for gasoline, tobacco and other goods.
D1
Interest rates will probably fall in response to the passage of the new Federal budget, but analysts don't expect a substantial reduction.
D1
The year of the woman in politics?
Female politicians are locked in a number of tough races for governor and Congress that could result in signifcant gains, as well as losses, on Election Day.
A13
The race for Texas Governor is becoming tight, after the Republican candidate, Clayton Williams, led his Democratic opponent, Ann Richards, by double-digit margins in most polls during the last six months.
A14
Republican quits Minnesota governor race A12
The gun used by Jack L. Ruby to assassinate Lee Harvey Oswald -- a macabre piece of American history and bizarre collectible -- is now the subject of a legal tug-of-war.
A12
Cut off (but used to it), a barrier island copes A12
Police shoot man roused from bed A19
Federal grant buys grief for Lawrence Welk's birthplace B8 REGIONAL B1-5, 7 New York City's real budget, after it pays its share for pensions and other costs, could leave the city with a costly budget gap and the need to make difficult choices about what it values most.
A1
Private money is keeping Central Park healthyB3
Two large municipal unions that have been negotiating with New York City plan to break off the stalled labor talks, a spokesman for one of the unions said.
B1
Governor Cuomo advocated thrift in state spending early during his tenure.
Now he finds himself having to defend state spending growth in the last eight years.
B1
Ethics crossfire in Regan-Bellamy race B5
Replacement drivers in the strike at The Daily News have been barraged by obscenities, eggs and coffee cups by striking employees, and some buses have been ambushed.
One replacement driver says that it is scary work, but he needs the money.
A1
News having trouble getting paper out B4
Striking news workers remember inky legacy B4
Mayor struggles with limited role in strike B4
Candor residents know their politics, they say.
The anti-incumbent fervor that is sweeping the nation is just catching up to the eternal mood of this small, rural New York State hamlet, where the voters are as disgusted as usual.
A1
Racial conspiracy theories about black America's ills are being accepted by a growing number of blacks.
The theories vary widely, as do the backgrounds of the blacks who support them and the degree of support each theory receives.
B7
Cost-consciousness has hit Ramsey, a Bergen County suburb whose retail stores prospered greatly in the 80's.
Shoppers, concerned about the economy's direction, have cut their spending drastically.
B1
A former manufacturer of diners, whose numerous roadside creations adorn highways throughout the Northeast, adjusted to falling business by transforming itself into a maker of prefabricated prisons.
B1
Mental patient cleared after 'admitting' killing B3 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 SportsMonday
Auto Racing: Indy takes worldwide view C11
Basketball: U.N.L.V. offers options to ban C3
Coleman getting to work C4
Nugget point splurge C4
Jackson and Strickland meet again C4
Column: Berkow on Fred Lebow C2
Anderson on Reyna Thompson C6
Football: Giants top Redskins C1
Spotlight on Virginia and Notre Dame C3
Big Moment for Giants' Walls C6
Jets beat Oilers C7
Glanville in sweet victory C7
49ers take 15th straight C7 Golf: Mudd wins Nabisco in sudden death C8
Horse Racing: Life goes on C2
Horse Show: The National struggles C5
Outdoors: Harvest for hunter- fisherman C12
Tennis: At home with Agassi C1
Obituaries B6
Maurice B. Hexter, leader in social work
Ugo Tognazzi, actor Arts/Entertainment
Preserving visions of dance C13
Titian in Washington C13
Music: Leningrad Philharmonic with Van Cliburn C14
Performing the blues C13
Theater: "Lucky Come Hawaii" C16
Word and Image:Essays from Allan Bloom C22
How much should television tell?  C20
Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A20
The bond act: worth paying
Rejoice on immigration
For Congress from Jersey
Topics: Truth in troth
Letters A20
William Safire: Polygraph purgatory A21
Anthony Lewis: Warmed-over smear A21
John L. Jackley: The incumbent protection plan A21
Tim Yohn: Desert jeopardy -- or desert mirage?  A21


Consumers Found Gloomier
Confidence among consumers sank this month to its weakest level since the nation struggled through a recession eight years ago, a research group said Friday.
In addition, more and more Americans expect the economy to get worse, the Conference Board said.


Merrill Lynch Revamping Is Expected
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company is expected to announce a sweeping reorganization as soon as today that would dissolve the firm's separate consumer and capital markets groups, Wall Street executives said yesterday.
The reorganization, the largest undertaken by Merrill since 1984, is expected to result in hundreds of layoffs eventually, as duplicative jobs are consolidated.
It would also start the competition to succeed William A. Schreyer, the chairman and chief executive who is scheduled to retire in 1993.
Six Divisions Planned
Merrill would be reorganized into six separate divisions, from investment banking to asset management, with each headed by a single manager.
The result of the planned move, the Wall Street executives said, is that the firm may well be returning to its historic focus on the retail business.


Amax Gold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Industry Acts Aggressively To Increase Prices of Books
PUBLISHING is a conservative business, still in the throes of adapting to such late 20th century practices as marketing and computerization.
"We labor under numerous traditions, which I prefer to call false barriers and myths," said Marvin Brown, the president of NAL/Dutton, a subsidiary of Penguin USA.
Many of these myths, in the view of Mr.
Brown, have related to book pricing.
Among the myths that have enjoyed sway: One cannot sell a children's hardcover book for more than $9.95, a hardcover mystery for more than $16.95 or a new novel for more than $19.95.
As a result of such notions, prices for books in inflation-adjusted terms have remained flat over the last decade.


Utility Deal Set in Kansas
The Kansas Gas and Electric Company said yesterday that it had signed a definitive merger agreement with Kansas Power and Light Company, ending a takeover bid that Kansas Power began in July.
Under the agreement, which was unanimously approved yesterday afternoon by the boards of the utilities, Kansas Gas will become a wholly owned subsidiary of Kansas Power.
According to the agreement, each share of Kansas Gas will be exchanged for $32 or a common share in Kansas Power.
In some instances, shareholders may receive cash and some stock, depending upon how much of each is available.
Kansas Power has said that it will issue a maximum of 28 million shares to complete the transaction and that the total cash it will pay out will not exceed $434 million.


Two Reasons to Rejoice on Immigration
In one bold stroke, Congress has overhauled American immigration policy, making it easier for people with skills or controversial views to enter the United States.
Negotiators first struck an agreement to expand legal immigration and then, in a surprise move, decided to drive a stake through the heart of the McCarran-Walter Act, one of the worst vestiges of the McCarthy era.
It's a wonderful development, but one that imposes on the Administration a duty to act in good faith and be more tolerant of those who hold distasteful views.


Ceramics Process Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Ms. Woods Weds Peter M. Sanders
Donna Jean Wood, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick S. Wood of St.
Louis, was married yesterday to Peter Michael Sanders, the son of Madelyn Sanders of New York.
The Rev.
John T. Meehan performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Transfiguration in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Sanders is the coordinator of external affairs for Philip Morris U.S.A. in New York and is the chairman of the Donna Wood Foundation , a new organization in New York to provide dance instruction for minority students.
She was a lead dancer with the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater from 1972 to 1985.
Her father, who is retired, was an executive vice president at the General Dynamics Corporation in St.
Louis.
The bridegroom, an associate in the New York law firm of Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander &amp; Ferdon, graduated from Wesleyan University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
His mother is a senior advertising representative for Dolls Magazine in New York.


Old Communist Ways Slow Polish Capitalism
Almost 10 months after Poland's crash economic reform program began, the Government has yet to turn a single large state-owned enterprise into a private company.
For months Poland appeared to be Eastern Europe's bold leader in setting up a capitalist economy, beginning its move toward the free market in January.
But it has been hobbled by larger-than-expected obstacles that underline the kind of difficulties facing not only Poland but its neighbors, including the Soviet Union, which are also shedding their government-dominated economies.


Jaguar Battle at a Turning Point
The new leaders of Jaguar Cars Ltd. are hoping that their first major victories are at hand in the battle to turn the antiquated British company into one of the world's biggest, most efficient makers of luxury cars.
Early this week, the company's 9,000 production workers are expected to vote on labor contracts that would do away with practices that are ancient history at most other car companies.
Management seems confident that a generous pay offer will persuade workers to accept the contracts and has hinted that the factories could be closed and Jaguars built elsewhere if they do not.


News Having Trouble Getting Paper Out
There were signs yesterday that management at The Daily News was encountering serious problems producing and distributing the newspaper in the face of a walkout by 2,200 unionized workers that began last week.
At the same time, scores of reporters, editors and other white-collar employees of the 71-year-old newspaper announced that they had decided to ignore a management invitation to return to work.
The offer, issued on Saturday to all striking employees whose jobs had not been filled by permanent replacements, appeared aimed specifically at the 750-member Newspaper Guild.
Most of the guild's newsroom jobs are being temporarily filled by management supervisors.


SFFed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Mystery of Milken: Why Didn't He Testify?
Why won't Michael Milken testify?
That question resounded throughout the former financier's pre-sentencing hearing, in which the prosecution and defense both indicated last week that they had called all of their witnesses.
Even the judge was openly wondering why Mr.
Milken would not take the witness stand.
Mr.
Milken, who pleaded guilty to six felonies in April, has contended through his lawyers that he was not involved in additional crimes.
Government prosecutors said he was and asked Federal District Judge Kimba M. Wood to consider their accusations in sentencing the former financier, who faces a maximum of 28 years in prison.
Taking the Fifth Amendment
That set the scene for the pre-sentencing hearing.
Yet, despite repeated invitations by Judge Wood, Mr.
Milken refused to take the stand, asserting through his lawyers that it would violate his Constitutional rights against self-incrimination under the Fifth Amendment.


No Headline


Colonials and Statues: Diner Maker Ends Era
Anyone who has driven along the Northeast's highways over the last half-century has sped past the creations of the Kullman family: stainless-steel diners evoking railroad cars, "colonial diners" topped with weather vanes, "Mediterranean diners" adorned with statuettes.
But today, in the factory where hundreds of diners were born and then swaddled on flatbed trucks for delivery to suburbia, what used to be the Kullman Dining Car Company has bid the age of diners farewell.
It is a different age, and Kullman Industries is now doing a brisk business in prefabricated prisons.


U.N.L.V. Presents Options to Lift Ban
Jerry Tarkanian, the basketball coach at Nevada-Las Vegas, offered to sit out the national collegiate championship tournament, forfeit a personal stake of as much as $100,000 in playoff revenue and abstain from recruiting for a year if the National Collegiate Athletic Association would reverse a ruling blocking the Runnin' Rebels from defending their national title.
The offer was one of four alternatives Tarkanian and Nevada-Las Vegas officials presented in a two-hour meeting today with the N.C.A.A.
Infractions Committee, which capped a 13-year legal dogfight with the school in July by banishing the Runnin' Rebels from the 1991 tournament.


Taunts but 'Good Money' for New Drivers at News
Obscenities, eggs and coffee cups bombarded a convoy of nine delivery trucks that roared past a phalanx of police officers in helmets and angry picketers early yesterday morning to deliver bundled copies of The Daily News.
Scores of strikers had gathered outside the paper's printing plant in Brooklyn, taunting the workers who had replaced them with cries of "Scab!" and "Mutt!" and worse as the paper tried to put out its Sunday issue.
The war of nerves resumed whenever the police at the printing plant moved barricades to allow vehicles to enter or leave.


Bunker Hill Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Glanville In Sweet Victory
The Falcons routed the Cincinnati Bengals, 38-17, tonight in a victory that provided a measure of revenge for the Atlanta coach, Jerry Glanville.
Coach Sam Wyche's Bengals ran up a 61-7 victory over the Houston Oilers in Week 15 last season when Glanville was their coach.


Geodyne Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Spotlight Turns to Virginia and Irish
Within two weeks, the success of the right arm of Virginia's Shawn Moore, the condition of the right knee of Notre Dame's Chris Zorich, and the sudden bursts of Raghib Ismail, Zorich's Fighting Irish teammate, could help determine a pecking order as officials of major bowls work to produce an unofficial championship game.
On football fields and in conference rooms, high-stakes positioning will lead to bowl announcements three weeks from next Saturday in which the survivors of an already bizarre season will compete for a mythical but desperately sought-after championship.


Market Place; Cellular Stocks Lose Attraction
THE market for cellular telephone properties increasingly resembles the real estate market in the Northeast.
Fewer properties are changing hands in both markets.
Sellers are reluctant to accept lower prices, but buyers are bidding lower, if at all.
And bankers are increasingly nervous about whether floor space in buildings or air time on cellular networks can be rented for enough to insure the repayment of loans.
As a result, cellular phone company stocks on average have lost half their value since the middle of last year.
Shares in McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., the nation's largest cellular company, have plummeted 73 percent, from a high of $47.25 in June 1989, to a closing price on Friday of $12.75, down 25 cents for the day in over-the-counter trading.
The regional Bell companies' stocks have dropped several dollars as interest in their cellular holdings declines, said Stephanie Georges, an analyst at Salomon Brothers.


Preserving Artistic Vision Struck Down by AIDS
The dance world has been hit hard by AIDS.
Many in its ranks who have died in the last few years have been young, with promising careers as choreographers and performers.
To capture their stories while there is still time, the Dance Collection of the New York Public Library at Lincoln Center has started an oral history project devoted to the lives of people in dance with AIDS.
The program has completed three interviews: with Arnie Zane, a dancer and choreographer who helped found the modern-dance troupe called Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane and Company; Jeff Duncan, a choreographer and a founder of Dance Theater Workshop, and a performer whose family has asked that his name not be disclosed.
Since the project started, all three have died of AIDS.


Homplex Mortgage Investments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BII Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Unifi Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


3 Birdies Put $450,000 in Mudd's Hand
Jodie Mudd may still be without a major championship, but today he established himself as golf's premier money player of 1990 by erupting with birdies on the final three holes to take the season-finale Nabisco Championships away from Billy Mayfair.
Trailing by two shots after watching Mayfair birdie the tournament's 71st hole from 15 feet, Mudd matched him with a 12-footer and then tied for the lead by holing a 20-foot birdie on the par-4 72d hole.
On the first hole of a sudden-death playoff, Mudd smoothly rolled in an 18-foot birdie putt to win the $450,000 first prize in the richest tournament in golf.


Weirton Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Santa Fe Energy Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Zurn Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bush Loses a Game, But Stays in Match
As the 101st Congress adjourned early this morning, Democrats were thanking no one more than George Bush himself for a sudden improvement of their political fortunes.
The deficit-reduction package that the President initiated clearly inflicted more political damage on Republicans than Democrats in the short run, which almost certainly includes the eight days between now and the Nov. 6 elections.


Arkansas Freightways reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Maurice B. Hexter, 99, a Leader In Jewish Social Causes, Is Dead
Maurice B. Hexter, a leader in social work for more than half a century before he retired in 1967 as executive vice president of the Federation of Jewish Philanthropies of New York, died in his sleep yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 99 years old.
In addition to raising funds for Jewish causes in the United States, Dr.
Hexter served for several years in the 1930's as an official of the Jewish Agency for Palestine.


Wetterau Inc. reports earnings for 13wks Sept 29


Final Votes in Congress on Key Measures
Crime
Both the House and the Senate approved an anti-crime bill after negotiators removed death penalty provisions and curbs on semiautomatic assault weapons in an effort to make the bill more widely acceptable.
Liberals had generally opposed the death penalty and conservatives opposed the gun curbs.
The vote in the House was 313 to 1, with Representative George W. Gekas, Republican of Pennsylvania, opposing the measure.
Other provisions address victim rights, juvenile justice and prisoner drug testing.
National Endowment for the Arts
The House and Senate extended financing for the National Endowment for the Arts for three years after negotiators from both chambers reached agreement Friday night.
Unlike current law, the bill includes no explicit prohibition against financing obscene art, leaving such judgments to the courts.
The negotiators also dropped a proposed ban on support of artistic works that denigrate religion.
Foreign Aid
Both houses passed a $15.5 billion foreign aid bill.
It includes a provision sought by President Bush to forgive $6.7 billion of Egypt's military debt.
The bill would also cut military aid to El Salvador by half, to $42 million, and provide Israel with $3 billion in cash, military and economic aid and $700 million worth of military aid from American stockpiles.
The bill does not specify an amount of aid for Pakistan, normally the third-largest recipient of American military assistance.
The United States has expressed concerns about nuclear weapons in Pakistan.
Airport Noise
Congress instructed the Federal Aviation Administration to eliminate most of the airlines' noisier jets by the turn of the century.
The action will also allow local governments to impose fees on passengers and to use the money for airport improvement.
Offshore Oil
Congress agreed to keep vast tracts of coastal waters from Alaska to New England off limits to oil and gas drilling, rejecting arguments that domestic fuel production should be increased because of the crisis in the Middle East.
Appropriations
Congress passed all 13 of the bills that are needed each year to actually provide the money for Government activities.
The 13 bills are: Agriculture, Rural Development and Related Agencies; Commerce, Justice, State, Judiciary; Defense; District of Columbia; Energy and Water Development; Foreign Operations; Interior and Related Agencies; Labor, Health and Human Services, Education; Legislative Branch; Military Construction; Transportation and Related Agencies; Treasury, Postal Service, General Government; Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, Independent Agencies.


CHRONICLE
ROSA PARKS, the black seamstress who galvanized the civil rights movement in 1955 when she refused to move to the back of a bus in Montgomery, Ala., received the Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Legislative Achievement Award at the New Yorker Club on Saturday.
The annual award is presented by the New York State African American Political Action Committee to individuals who have had an impact on the quality of life for African Americans.
The award to Miss Parks, 78 years old, was made by ADAM CLAYTON POWELL 4th, a grandson of the late Congressman.


Is Simon &amp; Schuster Mellowing?
One publishing house has largely avoided the public bloodlettings that have wracked book publishing in recent years.
Indeed, Simon &amp; Schuster has been a model of relative publishing stability.
That low-profile approach seems to have paid off: with sales of $1.3 billion last year, six times those of 1983, Simon &amp; Schuster is the largest book publisher in the United States.


Callahan Mining Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executions Leave Blood on Society's Hands; When the State Kills
To the Editor:
There is something bizarre about the issues you discuss in "Making Execution Humane (or Can It Be?)" (front page, Oct. 13).
For one thing, it seems a healthy sign rather than regrettable that prison officials have difficulty finding experienced executioners these days.
Few of us could bring ourselves to administer death personally to one of our fellow beings despite all supposed theoretical justifications for the death penalty.
This seems true even though many Americans still endorse capital punishment.
That there can be some who favor painful methods of execution is a horrifying fact reflecting how much primitive attitudes, unworthy of any citizens of a supposedly civilized country, still remain.
The basic problem, though, lies not with the methods of execution (all of which are inhumane), but with the death penalty itself.
It rests on the two pillars of retribution and deterrence.
As for retribution, the death penalty reflects the primitive retaliatory law according to which punishment must mirror the crime.
Judge or executioner, and society with them, descend to the criminal's level and become the criminal's equal.
As for deterrence, statistical experience in the United States and other countries (the majority of which do not have any death penalty) shows the death penalty to be ineffective.
I believe that the death penalty is bound to make murder and other capital crimes more likely.
When the state kills, killing becomes thinkable for its citizens.
The murderer, rather than being deterred, enters a situation of combat with society, which while risky, implies a certain condition of (perhaps even heroic) equality.
Generally, the odds favor the murderer and are grossly in his favor after murdering the first time.
To limit lawless killing, it must be held as an extraordinary, totally despicable and incomparable deed by the community.
Punishments such as mandatory life sentences, irreversible segregation from the community and ostracism might then acquire weight and serve as effective deterrents.
ERNST PRELINGER New Haven, Oct. 14, 1990
The writer is clinical professor of psychiatry (psychology) at Yale University.


The Polygraph Purgatory
The man responsible for subjecting scores of his fellow State Department employees to the mental torture of polygraph tests confessed at a Senate hearing last week that "I took a lie detector test and did not do well on it, and what I learned from that is that they are very unreliable devices."
Robert Lamb, as Assistant Secretary of State for Diplomatic Security, had asked for a leak investigation -- complete with polygraph "fluttering" -- into the revelation to the press that Felix Bloch was suspected of being a Soviet spy: "We had to find out how this was getting out there."


Colombia Rebels Turn to Ecological Terrorism
The sunlit office of the nature conservancy group could have been in any country -- potted plants, desktop terminals, a poster of the endangered Pauxi Pauxi bird and a staff member wearing a shirt that said: "Plant trees -- plant hopes."
But when asked about an environmental controversy, a biologist drew a finger to his lips in a signal for silence.


Techne Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Auto Racing;   Indy Takes a Worldwide View
JUST as the Disney theme parks have expanded overseas in recent years, the Indianapolis Motor Speedway is trying to create a worldwide network of Indy 500's through licensing agreements in Europe and Japan.
The plan could bring back the top international drivers, who haven't run in the Indianapolis 500 since the 1960's, when world champions such as Jim Clark, Graham Hill and Jackie Stewart made the race a true world-class event.


Synergen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Talks on Hostages, European Leaders Vow
European Community leaders said today that Iraq's selective release of foreign hostages would not erode their unity in the Persian Gulf crisis, and they pledged not to negotiate with Baghdad to bring their countrymen home.
The 12 Western European leaders also seemed to hold out the possibility of eventual military action, saying they were "prepared to consider additional steps" within a United Nations framework if the present economic embargo does not force Iraqi troops out of Kuwait.


Review/Opera; A Hallucinatory Voyage For an Artist at Sea
This evening's offering by the Lyric Opera of Chicago at the Civic Theater was notable in itself: the unveiling of a major new production of "The Voyage of Edgar Allan Poe," a 1976 work by the American composer Dominick Argento.
What made the event truly remarkable was that this production is merely the beginning of a series, Toward the 21st Century, in which, over the next decade, the company is to present 16 more revivals of 20th-century operas, 6 by Americans and 10 by Europeans, as well as 3 new commissioned works by Americans.
The repertory will include some predictable classics, but with "Poe" the company put its most adventurous foot forward.
Commissioned by the University of Minnesota, where Mr.
Argento teaches, the work was presented by the Minnesota Opera in 1976 to considerable acclaim but subsequently had only two productions, in Baltimore in 1977 and in Goteborg, Sweden, in 1986.
In the meantime Mr.
Argento's fame has grown, largely on the strength of the recent operas "Casanova's Homecoming" and "The Aspern Papers."


Republican Quits Governor's Race in Minnesota
The Republican candidate for governor of Minnesota said today that he was dropping out of the race after a newspaper reported that he had had a sexual relationship with a woman while he was married to his first and second wives.
For now, the announcement by the candidate, Jon Grunseth, leaves only Gov.
Rudy Perpich, a Democrat who is seeking a fourth term, on the Nov. 6 ballot.
A Republican Party official, Barb Sykora, said on KSTP television that it normally took five days to convene the party's central committee, which must choose any replacement for Mr.
Grunseth.
The deadline for filing is Friday afternoon.
State Auditor Arne Carlson, the runner-up in the Republican primary for governor in September, re-entered the race as a write-in candidate last week.
The report, in the Sunday issue of the Star Tribune, follows allegations that Mr.
Grunseth, a 44-year-old business executive, had tried to get two teen-age girls to swim nude with him nine years ago.
Mr.
Grunseth denied the allegations, maintaining that they were manufactured by Mr.
Perpich's campaign.  'Pressure on the Family'
Mr.
Grunseth, a political conservative, said tonight at his home here, "There are three things that are extremely important to me: my wife, my family, first and foremost; the Republican Party, the people of Minnesota.
"And the events of the last three weeks have put enormous pressure on the family and, I think, on the political process and on the people of Minnesota. I therefore decided to withdraw as the Republican candidate for governor."
Mr.
Grunseth acknowledged to the newspaper that he had had an affair with the woman, Tamara Taylor, now 32, of Minnetonka, but he said it ended "a long time ago, in the early '80s." He divorced his first wife, Katharine Winston, in 1983, and remarried in 1984.
Ms.
Taylor told the newspaper that she met Mr.
Grunseth at a party at his home in 1979, when he was married to his first wife, and that their affair began in 1980 and continued intermittently.
She said they last had sex together in July 1989, when she met Mr.
Grunseth in Washington.
Mr.
Grunseth has acknowledged what he calls "wild years" in the late 1970's and early 1980's.
But he says such behavior ended when he married Vicki Tigwell, his second wife.


Alpha Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Correction
An article on Friday about a Congressional agreement on immigration legislation misstated in some copies the number of additional immigrants who would be allowed into the United States as skilled workers or managers.
The number would be 140,000 people a year, counting the workers and their families, not 750,000.
The article also incorrectly named and dated the McCarran-Walter Act, enacted in 1952, which banned many categories of immigrants, including Communists.
The article also misidentified the chief House negotiator in the House-Senate conference committee that worked out the agreement.
The chief negotiator was Representative Bruce A. Morrison, Democrat of Connecticut.
An article on further action on the legislation appears on page B10.


James Goodwin, Investment Banker, Married to Babette Tang, a Physician
Dr.
Hope Babette Tang, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hamburg Tang of New York, was married there yesterday to James Strong Goodwin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter J. Goodwin of Montoursville, Pa.
The Rev.
Damian A. O'Connell officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola.
The bride, who is 29 years old, is known as Babette.
She is graduate of the Chapin School and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and has a medical degree from Cornell University.
She is a pediatric resident at the Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
Her father is the president of Hamburg Tang Industries Inc., a holding company in New York, and of Econelectric Ltd., a manufacturer of electrical devices in Sao Paulo, Brazil.
The bridegroom, 34, graduated from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and received an M.B.A. from Stanford University.
He is a managing director of Gleacher &amp; Company, investment bankers in New York.
His father, who is retired, was a vice president and general manager in Williamsport, Pa., of the Avco Lycoming division of Textron.


Bahamas and Sabena No Longer at D.M.B.&amp;B.
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles lost two accounts on Friday, worth a total of about $33 million.
They were the Bahamas Ministry of Tourism, which D.M.B.&amp; B. said it had resigned, and Sabena Belgian World Airlines, which was handled by its Brussels office.
Baltron Bethel, Director General of the Bahamas Ministry of Tourism, denied that D.M.B.&amp; B. had dropped the account.
"We go out to bid on our account periodically, and they did not participate," he said.
"When their contract expires, it will not be renewed."
The American portion of that account, which has billings of $13 million, will be handled by McKinney &amp; Silver Advertising of Raleigh, N.C., which will subcontract part of it to other agencies.
Sabena was picked up by Backer Spielvogel Bates in Brussels, with an estimated budget of $20 million.
D.M.B.&amp; B. has picked up some business.
Its Los Angeles office was recently assigned a portion of the $40 million NBC Olympics pay per view account.
The London office has also won several million dollars in billings over the last few months.
"It's not the end of the world by any means," said Roy Bostock, chairman and chief executive of D.M.B.&amp; B. "It's part of the business. By the end of 1991, I would expect us to have recovered."


Sifco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tokyo Stocks Higher
Tokyo stocks finished higher today, with buying of the cash indexes by futures arbitragers accounting for most of the day's gains, brokers said.
A lack of new market factors had investors seeking low-priced issues for most of the day.
"There was some position-taking at the opening, as investors absorbed news from abroad," a broker said.
"But in the end, the news had very little effect on the price of stocks." The Nikkei index of 225 issues finished up 323.76 points, or 1.2 percent, to 25,329.31, on a volume of 500 million shares.
The index rose 293.18 points, or 1.17 percent, to 25,298.82, in the morning session, with 250 million shares changing hands.
On Friday, the Nikkei fell 346.99 points, to 25,005.64.
The gauge extended its morning gains into the afternoon, climbing as high as 321.29 points.
Arbitrage-related selling then took hold, causing the index to drop nearly 100 points before leveling off.


S. E. Levingston Weds Ms. Allard
Suzanne Mary Allard, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gilles G. Allard of Salem, Mass., was married yesterday to Steven E. Levingston, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert A. Levingston of Beverly Hills and Palm Springs, Calif.
The Rev.
Gary Seibert, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Mordecai Genn, performed the ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Timothy E. Smith in Darien, Conn.
Mrs.
Levingston graduated frm Brown University and she and the bridegroom received master's degrees in journalism from Stanford University.
She was until recently a reporter for the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour." Her father is a retired pathologist.
The bridegroom is a reporter for The Asian Wall Street Journal in Hong Kong.
He is a graduate of the University of California at Berkeley.
His father is chairman of TSP Associates, pension consultants in Los Angeles.


A HINDU MILITANT IS SEIZED IN INDIA
One of India's most colorful political personalities, Vijaye Raje Scindia, vice president of the Hindu party that has put Prime Minister V. P. Singh's Government in jeopardy, was arrested today on her way to Ayodhya, the site of a disputed shrine.
Mrs.
Scindia, the widow of the last Maharaja of Gwailor, is known as the Rajmata, or royal mother.
She was one of as many as 10,000 people detained today in the state of Uttar Pradesh, whose Chief Minister has vowed to stop the march on Ayodhya.


Miller Building Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Confectionary reports earnings for Year to June 30


Prosperous Town Braces for Leaner 90's
From the storefronts of Main Street to the shops along Franklin Turnpike, merchants here can see the end of the 80's across their counters, in sagging sales of everything from lumber to liquor, from bicycles to auto-repair equipment.
With few exceptions, business people in this upper-middle-class Bergen County suburb say their customers have cut spending.
The merchants in turn have reduced their inventories and their orders for goods, creating more drag on the slowing regional economy.


Truth in Troth
Clark Kent has declared himself.
Popped the Question.
Asked the Big One.
"Lois," he says in next month's D.C.
Comics to the woman he has admired for 50 years, "Will you marry me?"
"Yes," says Lois Lane, who maybe knows what she's doing but certainly not what she's getting.
She's marrying Superman.
Only he isn't Superman at the moment because red kryptonite has robbed him of his superpowers.
But is he being fair to Miss Lane?
If he is to be perfectly honest with his intended, shouldn't he tell her that the man on whose arm she'll march up the aisle is the same man who in an earlier, more vigorous time could have sped her around the world on his shoulder?
Yes, he should.
In doing so, Mr.
Kent can demonstrate to Miss Lane that he is a man of honor as well as a Man of Steel.


Century Afterward, Apology For Wounded Knee Massacre
Descendants of the Indians killed and hurt in the Wounded Knee massacre 100 years ago have received their long-awaited apology from the Government.
The House, on a voice vote, gave final Congressional approval Thursday to a resolution expressing "deep regret" for the event that marked the end of the Indian wars.
The Senate approved the measure last week.
Depending on the historical account, about 150 to 400 Sioux Indians were killed by the 7th Cavalry on Dec. 29, 1890, on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in southwestern South Dakota.
The resolution does not provide any reparations to the descendants or declare the remote site a national monument, as the Wounded Knee Survivors Association had requested.


New Chief At Ameribanc
Ameribanc Inc., a bank holding company based in St.
Joseph, Mo., has announced that its chairman, Charles H. Price 2d, has been elected to the additional posts of president and chief executive.
Mr.
Price succeeds Gerald R. Sprong, 57 years old, who is taking early retirement as president and chief executive, Ameribanc said on Friday.
Mr.
Sprong will continue as a director of Ameribanc and the American National Bank of St.
Joseph.
Mr.
Price, 59, was Ambassador to Britain from 1983 to 1989 and Ambassador to Belgium from 1981 to 1983.
Before that he was chairman and president of American Bancorporation Inc. and chairman of the American Bank and Trust Company of Kansas City, Mo.
In 1984, Mr.
Price merged American Bank into Ameribanc and when he left the diplomatic service early in 1989 he became Ameribanc's chairman.


Klan Stages March and Rally in Washington


China Student Candidates, 10 Sad Years Later
It was a decade ago, on the shady grounds of Beijing University, that the nation's best and brightest undertook one of China's first and most famous experiments in direct elections.
In a free election for the position of "people's deputy" in a town council, three students stepped forward in the fall of 1980 and hustled for votes.
The post carried little power, but the race commanded attention because of the vigor of the campaign and because the constituency was Beijing University, the most famous campus in the countryand a training ground for the future leaders of China.


Results Plus
Tennis  Graf Wins 9th Tourney of Season: Steffi Graf won her ninth tournament of the year yesterday, beating Helena Sukova, 7-5, 6-3, in Brighton, England, for her 17th consecutive victory over the Czechoslovak.
Graf, who needed only 68 minutes to beat the third-seeded Sukova, won the $350,000 Brighton tournament for a record fourth straight time.
She had shared the record of three consecutive victories with Chris Evert.
Graf, who did not lose a set in four matches at Brighton, has lost only three sets to Sukova in her seven-year winning streak.
Sukova's only victory over Graf came in their first meeting, when Graf was 14.
Sukova broke the German's serve in the fifth game of the first set, but Graf hit several strong forehands to break back in game six.
The opening set then stayed on serve and appeared to be heading for a tie breaker, but Sukova hit two double-faults and made two volley errors in the 12th game to lose the set.
Sukova repeated that sequence to lose her serve in the eighth game of the second set, giving Graf a 5-3 lead.
Graf clinched the victory in the next game with a topspin backhand down the line. (AP) Becker Beats Edberg: Boris Becker, playing one of the best indoor matches of his career, breezed to a 6-4, 6-0, 6-3 victory over top-ranked Stefan Edberg yesterday to win the Stockholm Open.
Becker turned an early hard-hitting duel into a rout in the second set and destroyed any hopes of what was supposed to be a dream final between the world's No. 1 and 2 players.
The German, who also won the event in 1988, served and returned to near perfection on the fast Supreme Court at the Globe Arena.
In the first two sets, he held six times at love and lost only three points with serve.
He lost two of those points in game 10th of the first set, when the Swede got to 30-all for the only time.
But Becker responded with a deep, hard serve to go to 40-30.
Edberg's lob sailed long on the next point, giving Becker the set.
Edberg will keep his No. 1 ranking on the Association of Tennis Professionals computer despite the setback, but Becker is breathing down his neck.
By next month's A.T.P.
Championships in Frankfurt, Becker could finally achieve it for the first time. (AP) Marathon Mexican First by a Step: Martin Pitayo of Mexico beat Poland's Antoni Niemczak by a step yesterday to win the Chicago Marathon with Ed Eyestone of the United States finishing third.
Aurora Cunha of Portugal led all the way to win the women's race.
Pitayo and Niemczak ran stride-for-stride after they took the lead at the 24-mile mark in the 26-mile-385-yard race.
In the final 100 yards, Niemczak took a half-step lead, but Pitayo caught him and lunged forward at the finish line to win in 2 hours 9 minutes 41 second.
Both winners took home $30,000. (AP) Golf Archer Takes Title: George Archer overcame a four-stroke deficit over the final 10 holes yesterday and beat Dale Douglass by one stroke in the $400,000 Rancho Murieta Senior Gold Rush tournament in California.
Archer, who won his fourth PGA Senior Tour victory this year, finished with a six-under-par 66 for a 54-hole total of 204, a tournament-record 12 under par. (AP) Dog Show Pekingese Is Best: A Pekingese, Ch.
Fidel of Chinatown, owned and bred by Kay Jeffords, was named best in show yesterday at the 58th annual all-toy fixture of the Progressive Dog Club at the Days Inn in Manhattan.
It was the first time the 23-month-old silver-colored dog, handled by Hernan Martinez, had been out since gaining his championship last month in Iowa.
Second was a Manchester terrier, Ch.
Charmaron O'Keefe V. Porcia, best in show last year at Progressive.


Microcom Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vulcan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Small Drop In Rates Predicted
The Federal Reserve Board will probably respond to the passage of the new Federal budget by reducing short-term interest rates, but credit market analysts said neither Congress nor the Bush Administration should expect a substantial reduction as a glittering prize for what the tortuous, confidence-shaking exercise has produced.
"The new budget is a step, but I don't think fiscal discipline has been re-established at all," said William H. Gross, a managing director of the Pacific Investment Management Company, a Newport Beach, Calif., money management firm with a portfolio of more than $16 billion in fixed-income investments.
"Unless we can exert some discipline on spending, rather than taxation, we are probably not going to make much headway in reducing the deficit."
No Comment From Fed
As is their wont, neither the Federal Reserve's chairman, Alan Greenspan, nor other officials of the nation's central bank would speak on or off the record about their intentions on interest rates.
Telephone calls to Mr.
Greenspan and governors of the Federal Reserve on Friday found no one who would comment on Federal Reserve policies and how the budget agreement might affect them.
But through the summer and into the fall, Mr.
Greenspan had offered Congress a carrot -- a drop in short-term interest rates -- if the credit markets responded positively to a budget package.
The message struck a chord with market participants, and in the last week short-term money market interest rates moved down in anticipation of a budget agreement and a subsequent reduction in the overnight Federal funds rate, the market rate controlled most directly by the Fed.
The funds rate -- the overnight rate on bank loans-- has hovered around 8 percent since July.
Drop in Prime Rate Unlikely
While welcome, a minor cut in the funds rate would probably not lead to a decline in the prime lending rate charged by commercial banks, or in other prime-based consumer borrowing rates.
With poor balance sheets, analysts said, commercial banks were not likely to consider lowering the prime rate, currently at 10 percent, until the funds rate fell to 7 1/2 percent.
Yet, even as short-term rates slipped, bond yields, which are the ultimate indicator of how a long-term budget package is judged by market participants, have not budged.
By the end of last week, yields on 8 1/8 percent two-year Treasury notes, securities which are very sensitive to changes in Fed policy, had fallen to 7.76 percent, well under the funds rate.
But yields on the Treasury's 8 3/4 percent 30-year bonds were stuck at 8.76 percent.
"The Fed might be able to cut the Federal funds rate by one-quarter of a percentage point without upsetting the market," said Jerry L. Jordan, a senior vice president at First Interstate Bancorp in Los Angeles.
"But people who think there will be a big payoff on interest rates based on this budget package are in for a disappointment."
The Fed will be reluctant to move faster because market participants, especially long-term investors, see little reason to believe the budget package will generate the advertised $500 billion in savings over the next five years.
Moreover, with the dollar under pressure and fears about inflation still strong, the Fed would be running a substantial risk of pushing up long-term rates if it quickly cut short-term rates by more than a quarter of a percentage point, the analysts argued.
Economic Reports Awaited
A signal from the Fed that it has moved the funds rate lower may come almost immediately, but in order to calm nerves in the long-term bond market, analysts said, the Fed might well delay its move until after a string of important economic reports are released this week.
Those reports, coupled with the announcement late last week that a key measure of consumer confidence had plummeted in October, are likely to reassure bond investors that an easing of Fed policy is justified on economic grounds.
This week will provide a preliminary reading on how the economy fared in the third quarter and reports from the naton's purchasing managers and the Labor Department on how the fourth quarter began.
Rise in Consumption Spending
The Commerce Department's preliminary report on third-quarter growth could well show growth that is considerably above the increase of four-tenths of a percent recorded in the second quarter.
But most analysts said a rise in third-quarter output should not be interpreted as a sign that the economy was regaining momentum.
Much of the increase will probably be from a rise in consumption expenditures, a figure that tends to increase in the third quarter.
"I would hope people will look past the consumption number in the third quarter G.N.P. report," said Donald J. Fine, chief market analyst at the Chase Manhattan Bank.
"Consumption was stronger than it was in the second quarter, but on a year-over-year basis it continues to weaken."
Dimming the outlook for the fourth quarter was the announcement late last week of a record drop in the Conference Board's monthly survey of consumer confidence, which in October fell to its lowest level since the 1982 recession.
Gayle Fosler, chief economist at the Conference Board and an analyst who says the economy will avoid a recession, acknowledged that the results of the survey were troubling.
"I would now be inclined to reduce my estimates on consumer spending somewhat," she said, "but I think this number has more to do with disenchantment over the budget negotiations than with economics."  Manufacturers and Jobs
Other analysts are not so sure.
A report, due Thursday, from the nation's purchasing managers, will probably show that conditions among large manufacturers deteriorated further in October.
October employment data from the Labor Department, expected the following day, will probably be weak, too.
"The data will show that the fourth quarter started off on a very weak note," Mr.
Fine said.
"I have no problem with a forecast which shows economic output declining in the fourth quarter."
Mr.
Jordan of First Interstate said that weakness in the economy would ultimately lead to an aggressive easing in policy by the Federal Reserve.
But constraints on the Fed will not be lifted until the crisis in the Middle East is resolved, he added, and the dollar regains some bouyancy.
"If they were not constrained by the Middle East crisis, the Fed would have already done more to help the economy," he said.
"Assuming there is a solution, we think the funds rate will come down to 7 percent next year."


Mid Atlantic Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Capriati Wins First Title
Jennifer Capriati, the 14-year-old who swept to tennis stardom this year, won her first professional tournament today by beating top-seeded Zina Garrison, 5-7, 6-4, 6-2, in the final of the Puerto Rico Open.
The victory ensured Capriati of the 14th spot in the 16-player field for the $3 million Virginia Slims Championship in Madison Square Garden next month.
Judith Weisner, Conchita Martinez and Barbara Paulus are contesting the final two spots.
"What a way to end the year," Capriati said. "Winning here will always be special."
Garrison started the match playing at the baseline and managed to keep Capriati off balance, but the youngster adjusted in the second set.
Capriati, who usually stays on the baseline, attacked the net 28 times and won 20 points.
"She got her rhythm going in the third set and hit a lot of winners," Garrison said.
"I was just taking the match from point to point."


Promus Cos. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Newsstands Dwindle, But Some Still Thrive
Magazine publishers nervously monitoring the decline in newsstand sales across the country might be cheered by a visit to the Healy News Store in this tiny New England town.
People drive from as far as Massachusetts to buy the 3,000 different magazines stocked by Steve Davis, the manager and son-in-law of the owner, Freeman Healy.
In 1962 Mr.
Healy and his brother, Richard, bought the business, which had been run by one family for more than half a century at a time when newsstands and paper routes were an essential part of the American way of life.


Engraph Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tax Shifts Make Planning More Difficult
In its search for an additional $40 billion to throw at the Federal budget deficit, Congress approved a three-pronged attack on the nation's tax code on Saturday.
The intent is to get that money from the upper class and upper-middle class through higher taxes for Medicare, a variety of income tax changes and additional excise taxes for gasoline, tobacco, alcohol and certain luxury goods.
The majority of taxpayers -- those with incomes below $50,000 -- should be relatively unscathed.
That is, their Social Security and income taxes will not rise.
The working poor will even get money from the Government through the earned income tax credit.
But like everyone else who buys gasoline, alcohol or tobacco, they will pay higher excise taxes.


United Asset Management reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 Unions Said To Plan Halt To City Talks
A spokesman for one of two large municipal unions that have been negotiating together with New York City said yesterday that both unions planned to break off the stalled labor talks today.
"This is our reaction to two weeks of negotations in which nothing has happened," said Ed Handman, a spokesman for the 140,000-member District Council 37 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees.


LAYOFFS ARE RISING EVEN AT COMPANIES IN GOOD CONDITION
Many American companies are laying off workers now, rather than waiting to be hit by hard times as they have in the past.
Some economists warn that this outburst of corporate preventive medicine increases the odds of a steep recession.
The number of people laid off in the United States has increased sharply since June, reaching the levels of the early months of the 1981-82 recession.
While some companies, including Citicorp, Digital Equipment and McDonnell Douglas, are acting because sales and profits have already begun to shrink, many others, including General Electric's appliance division and Nordstrom department stores, are only anticipating such a downturn.


Urcarco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dr. Anne R. Kleiman Wed To Dr. Richard G. Gorlick
Dr.
Anne Reine Kleiman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Kleiman of Middle Village, Queens, was married yesterday to Dr.
Richard Greg Gorlick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey S. Gorlick of Manhasset Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Samuel Geffen performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Shalom in Roslyn Heights, L.I.
Dr.
Kleiman, a graduate of the State University of New York at Binghamton and the New York School of Osteopathic Medicine, is a resident in neurology at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in New York.
Dr.
Gorlick is a graduate of the joint medical program of the State University Health Science Center in Brooklyn and Brooklyn College.
He is a pediatric resident at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.


Laurel Adrian Is Married
Dr.
Laurel N. Adrian, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Shahan A. Adrian of Forest Hills, Queens, was married yesterday to John S. Termini, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Salvatore J. Termini of Bedford, Tex.
The Rev.
Krikor Hairabedian officiated at the Armenian Church of the Holy Martyrs in Bayside, Queens.
The bride, a dentist in New York, graduated from Barnard College and received a master's in dentistry from the University of Pennsylvania.
The bridegroom, a biochemist with degrees from Columbia University, is a professor at the Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope Medical Center in Duarte, Calif.


CGC Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
The average player has plenty of opportunities to play against an expert in open competition, but few to play with one.
Some have the luck to have an expert in the family, and others are able to hire an expert as a professional partner.
Others may do the trick by competing in a Pro-Am event in which they contribute to a charity and their partners contribute their time.
An unusual alternative took place Wednesday in a private duplicate game at the Harmonie Club in Manhattan.
Four experts of international renown circulated among the tables, and each of the 36 players was able to play one deal with two of them.
The party was given by Renee Nelson and Harriet Ballon, and the winners were Fran Harris and Joan Lehman.
On the diagramed deal from the event most North-South pairs reached four hearts.
South had an easy time when the club jack was led and sometimes made an overtrick.
But one West led a diamond, giving the declarer considerable problems.
He decided that West's aversion to a spade lead marked the ace in that hand, so he took the diamond ace, ruffed a diamond and led a spade.
When West ducked and the queen won, South expected to be able to take two spade tricks, a trick in each minor suit and six trump tricks.
Spurning the risky club finesse, he led to the club ace and led another spade.
Unfortunately for South, West was able to take the ace and give his partner a ruff.
East returned the heart queen, and South won in his hand with the king.
He ruffed a club, ruffed a diamond and ruffed another club to reach this ending: [ DIAGRAM ]
South needed two more tricks, and could not be prevented from scoring them when he led a diamond from the dummy.
East put up the heart jack, and South's trumps scored separately.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Many U.S. companies are laying off workers now, rather than waiting to be hit by hard times as they have in the past.
Some economists warn that this outburst of corporate preventive medicine increases the odds of a steep recession.
Since June, the number of people laid off in the United States has increased sharply, reaching the levels of the early months of the 1981-82 recession.  [ Page A1. ]
The Federal Reserve will probably respond to the new budget by reducing short-term interest rates, but credit market analysts say neither Congress nor the Bush Administration should expect a substantial reduction.  [ D1. ]
Congress has approved a three-way attack on taxes.
The intent is to get that money from the upper class and upper-middle class through higher taxes for Medicare, a variety of income tax changes and additional excise taxes.  [ D1. ]
Washington is losing some of its enthusiasm for liberalizing its trade policies.
The reason is political: some American industries are unhappy about giving up protection.  [ D1. ]
Why won't Michael Milken testify?
That question resounded throughout the former financier's presentencing hearing, in which the prosecution and defense both indicated last week that they had called all of their witnesses.  [ D2. ]
Orders for U.S.-made machine tools dipped 4.6 percent in September, rate, according to a report to be released today.  [ D7. ]  Companies
Merrill Lynch is expected to announce a reorganization as soon as today that dissolves the firm's separate consumer and capital markets groups.
The reorganization is expected to result in hundreds of layoffs.  [ D1. ]
Government and corporate documents appear to support a whistleblower's accusations that Hughes Aircraft overcharged the Pentagon on programs to develop in-flight radar systems.  [ D2. ]
The Daily News is encountering serious problems as its management tries to produce and distribute the New York paper three days into a strike.  [ B4. ]  The Media Business
Simon &amp; Schuster has been a model of relative stability amid the recent turmoil in publishing.
That low-profile approach seems to have paid off: with sales of $1.3 billion last year, six times those of 1983, Simon &amp; Schuster is the largest U.S. publisher.  [ D1. ]
Newsstands are disappearing in many cities as single-copy magazine sales decline.
But a few well-stocked newsstands are bucking the trend.  [ D8. ]
Publishers are taking a serious look at increasing book prices to bring their revenues in line with rising costs.
Publishing.  [ D8. ]
The People's Weekly World, a U.S. paper, is trying to revive its sagging Communist fortunes with some decidedly capitalist initiatives: aggressive marketing and prudent cost-cutting.  [ D8. ]
J.
Walter Thompson has created a commercial version of the hit television show "America's Funniest Home Videos" for Toys "R" Us.
Kim Foltz: Advertising.  [ D9. ]  International
The new leaders of Jaguar Cars are hoping to turn the antiquated British company into one of the world's biggest, most efficient makers of luxury cars.  [ D1. ]
Poland has yet to turn a single large state-owned enterprise into a private company, even though it is 10 months into a crash economic program.  [ D4. ]  Today's Columns
The Treasury Department is finally moving towards adopting regulations governing the electronic transfers of money.
Stephen Labaton: Business and the Law.  [ D2. ]
The cellular phone market is beginning to resemble the real estate market.
Both are depressed.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]


Review/Art; Titian and His Sublime Works Of Inevitability and Freedom
As soon as you enter the Titian exhibition here at the National Gallery of Art, you are in the presence of a great painter.
Throughout the paintings he did in his 20's and 30's that open the exhibition, there is a justness, timing and feeling for pictorial relationships that cannot be taught.
Titian seems to have been born knowing how to fix a head, knee or arm in space.
Wherever he painted something, it belongs.
Whatever he painted finds its place.
But along with the sense of destiny in these paintings, there is also free will.
When Titian painted "Il Bravo," in which one young man turns to look at a man in armor who is grabbing him by his collar, or when he painted the five figures conversing silently in "Madonna and Child With SS. Catherine and Dominic and a Donor," everyone seems to be blessed with the capacity for choice.
The figures may be in the only place they can be in these paintings, but they are nobody's puppets or tools.
Each one is a body of light with the capacity to generate thought and movement.


2 Off-Duty Officers Shot in Separate Fights
An off-duty court officer and an off-duty correction officer were shot and wounded yesterday in unrelated incidents, the police said.
Joseph Rocco, 44 years old, a Queens Criminal Court officer, was grazed on the foehead inside the Side Street Cafe at 82-62 Grenfel Street in Queens early yesterday.
He and two other men -- Craig Sobel, 25, of 1405 70th Street in Brooklyn and Anthony Romano, 46, of 580 Main Street on Roosevelt Island -- were wounded in a fight started by Mr.
Sobel and Mr.
Romano, the police said.
The two, who were shot by another off-duty officer with Mr.
Rocco, were in stable condition at Jamaica Hospital.
Mr.
Rocco was treated at Booth Memorial Hospital and released.
In the other incident, a correction officer, Eduardo Rodriguez, 24, intervened in a fight between a man and a woman outside the Grecian Restaurant, 846 Jamaica Avenue in the East New York section of Brooklyn.
The two men traded shots and the officer was hit in the abdomen.
He was in serious condition yesterday at Jamaica Hospital, the police said.
The gunman fled.


Ad Magazine Sale Reported
The Act Three Publishing Company sold Marketing &amp; Media Decisions magazine to Affiliated Publications for an undisclosed amount, people at Act Three said yesterday.
Act Three Publishing, which is owned by the television producer Norman Lear's Act Three Communications Company, has been for sale for several months.
Affiliated, which owns The Boston Globe, The Hollywood Reporter and Billboard and Adweek magazines, had been in discussions with Mr.
Lear's company about buying its entire publishing group.
But Affiliated decided that it only wanted Marketing &amp; Media Decisions, a profitable monthly for advertising executives.
"The magazine as it exists will no longer exist after the December issue," the staff member said.
"It will be a weekly news magazine like Adweek."
Marketing &amp; Media Decisions is almost 25 years old.
It remained unclear whether Act Three planned to sell its other publications, which include Channels for the television industry and The Marketer.


Executions Leave Blood on Society's Hands
To the Editor:
"Making Execution Humane (or Can It Be?)," your Oct. 13 front-page report on the macabre business of Fred A. Leuchter Jr., execution consultant to 16 states, is but the latest chapter in the misguided search for a "humane" manner of execution.
As you say, hanging has proved unreliable.
Botched hanging efforts date at least as far back as the notorious case of John Smith, a British burglar condemned to death in 1702, who swung for 15 minutes until onlookers' chants of "A Reprieve" persuaded authorities to cut him down and release him.
He earned a permanent place in the annals of failed executions, becoming known as "half-hanged Smith."
My interest in this topic began with a look at physician involvement in executions.
Alas, history is filled with examples of physicians who devise instruments of death.
In the late 1700's, two French doctors, Joseph-Ignace Guillotin and Antoine Louise, developed the decapitation device originally known as the louisette, although guillotine is the name that stuck.
In the doctors' day, French royalty and the upper classes had the privilege of the sword; the lower classes were subject to more gruesome executions.
The guillotine was intended to be more humane.
In this country, physicians got into the act in the 1890's with formation of the New York Commission to Investigate and Report the Most Humane and Practical Method of Carrying Into Effect the Sentence of Death in Capital Cases.
The commission reviewed a series of methods intended to replace hanging, including electrocution, cyanide poisoning, chloroform overdosing and intravenous injection of morphine.
The electric chair, favored by such notables as Thomas A. Edison, won out.
Electric chairs were used in hundreds of executions over the next decades in the United States, but not without mishap.
Perhaps the most frightful blunder concerned Willie Francis, a "colored citizen of Louisiana," convicted of murder in 1945 and sentenced to death.
On May 3, 1946, the executioner threw the switch, but Francis got a jolt only large enough to scare him half to death.
He was thereupon unstrapped and returned to his cell.
His lawyers, in a case that went before the Supreme Court, argued that a second attempt to execute him would violate constitutional prohibitions against cruel and unusual punishment or double jeopardy.
Willie Francis lost his case (Louisiana ex rel. Francis v. Resweber, 329 U.S. 459, 1947) and was executed by Louisiana on a second try.
The modern method of choice, lethal injection, has also withstood court challenges.
In a bizarre case, death-row prisoners petitioned a Federal court to disallow the use of drugs in execution because such use had not been approved by the Food and Drug Administration, which must ordinarily certify a drug's safety and efficacy (including drugs for animal euthanasia).
The prisoners lost (Heckler v. Cheney, 105 S. Ct. 1649, 1985), and death by injection has become the preferred method in at least 18 states.
The rush to execution is going to get us back into some very bloody business.
Doctors who doff their white coats for the black hoods of executioners betray their professional heritage.
Newer methods of execution, cloaked in the respectability of medicine and science, are not necessarily improvements on older, seemingly more gruesome means.
As more high-tech methods assuage our consciences and anesthetize our sensibilities, they divert us from the reality of capital punishment.
Capital punishment, however carried out, remains unworkable, reflecting a deep-seated race and class bias and constantly risking irreversible error in the execution of innocent defendants.
JEFF STRYKER San Francisco, Oct. 16, 1990


Talk of Government Being Out to Get Blacks Falls on More Attentive Ears
Until his brother became yet another black man to die of AIDS, Keith Brown never imagined that a disease so devastating would hit so close to home.
Searching for an explanation, he found himself drawn to one his brother had long embraced but that Mr.
Brown used to reject: that AIDS was invented by racist conspirators to kill blacks.
"Because of who's being devastated the most, and growing up in the U.S. and knowing the history of slavery and racism in this country," Mr.
Brown said, "you can't be black and not feel that AIDS is some kind of experiment, some kind of plot to hit undesirable minority populations." Mr.
Brown, 30 years old, virtually apologized for his belief, saying, "I hope I don't sound too radical, because I'm not."


Jack Ruby's Executor And Heirs Battle for Gun
Millions of Americans still benumbed by the killing of President John F. Kennedy two days earlier caught a fleeting glimpse of the gun 27 years ago, when a short man in a hat darted from the corners of their television screens, ran up to Lee Harvey Oswald and fired it into his stomach.
Ever since, the .38-caliber Colt Cobra revolver that Jack Ruby used to assassinate an assassin -- a macabre piece of American history, a bizarre collectible and perhaps the last artifact of that traumatic weekend still at large -- has sat in a $20-a-year safety deposit box here.
Now it is the subject of a legal tug-of-war, one that will land in a court of law Monday morning.


OPEC to Meet Dec. 12
The president of OPEC, Sadek Boussena, said last week that the group would hold a formal meeting on Dec. 12 in Vienna to discuss the oil markets, which have been thrown into disarray by the Persian Gulf crisis.
Mr.
Boussena, who is also the Algerian mines minister, said the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries would probably not be able to meet demand for its oil in midwinter.
He predicted a gap of a million to 1.5 million barrels a day.


More Blacks See Woes As Part of Conspiracy
A growing number of black Americans are turning to racial conspiracy theories to explain the ills affecting black America, including the rise of AIDS and the availability of illegal drugs in their communities.
The theories vary widely, as do their believability, the backgrounds of those who support them and the degree of support each receives.
Article, page B6.


Optimism About Japan
The governor of the Bank of Japan, Yasushi Mieno, said last week that Japan's economy remained buoyant despite higher interest rates, rising crude oil prices and the slump in the stock market.
Mr.
Mieno said Japanese corporations had responded calmly to the Persian Gulf crisis and other changes in the economic environment.


Three Ways for Raising Taxes
Congress hopes to raise $40 billion by increasing income tax rates for higher-income people, Medicare levies and so-called sin taxes.
Business Day, D1.


Warmed-Over Smear
One of the low points of the McCarthy era was an attack made not by Senator McCarthy but by President Eisenhower's Attorney General, Herbert Brownell Jr.
He charged that former President Truman had promoted a Treasury official, Harry Dexter White, knowing him to be a Soviet spy.
White had been dead five years at the time of the Brownell attack.
A grand jury investigating Communism had called him as a witness, and not indicted him.


Question Box
World Series Rookies
Q.
Danny Jackson, who pitched for the Kansas City Royals in the 1985 World Series, was the only member of the Cincinnati Reds in this year's Series with previous Series experience.
When did a team last play in a Series without any of its performers having been in one before?
A.
It doesn't happen often and it hasn't happened in 29 years, since another team from Cincinnati made it to the World Series.
Among the members of the 1961 Reds, National League pennant winners under Fred Hutchinson, every participant was a Series rookie.
It showed.
The mighty Yankees of Mantle, Maris and Ford -- whose participants included only three players without Series experience (Jack Reed, an outfielder; Billy Gardner, an infielder, and Bud Daley, a pitcher) -- won in five games.
Those Yankees were part of a run of 14 Series appearances in 16 years from 1949-64.
Those Reds had won the first Cincinnati pennant in 22 years.
Excluding the first dozen World Series, where many participants were first-timers, only one other team in the last 50 years used players in the Series who had never played in one.
That team, the 1944 St.
Louis Browns, also lost the Series, in six games, to the intracity-rival Cardinals, who had been there the two previous seasons.
For the Browns, relocated in Baltimore since 1954, it was the only time they took part in post-season play.
Origin of Battery
Q.
Why are the pitcher and catcher in baseball referred to as "the battery?"
A.
The term appears to have military roots, though there is also speculation, as noted in "The Dickson Baseball Dictionary," that the baseball "battery" was derived from telegraphy, with the pitcher being the transmitter and the catcher the receiver and the two working on the same wave length in order to be successful.
That sure would fit those pitchers who sometimes throw closely to batters in order to "send a message" to the opposition.
But the military metaphor of a battery resembling the heavy artillery of an army seems to reflect more suitably the role of the pitcher and catcher as the crux of a team's attack.
After all, the pitcher's duty is to "fire" the ball from a mound, frequently with "smoke" on it, to a catcher hopefully equipped with an arm like a "cannon" who could "gun down" the enemy on the bases.
And these days, there's even a "radar gun" to measure the speed of the "bullets" being thrown at the batter.
Sometimes, though, things can backfire for the battery, and if too many pitches are "powdered" by hitters, the pitcher will be "shelled" from the mound, prompting the field manager to call up a reserve pitcher to put out the fire.
Conversion Runback
Q.
In the college football game last month between Syracuse and Pittsburgh, Pitt scored 2 points when one of its players blocked Syracuse's attempt to kick an extra point after touchdown and another Pitt player picked up the ball and ran it downfield into the Syracuse end zone.
If Syracuse had been attempting a 2-point conversion and had passed the ball into the Pitt end zone, only to see a Pitt player pick it off, could the interceptor have returned the ball downfield?
A.
He sure could have, and such a runback of an interception also would have fetched Pitt 2 points.
The rule on turnovers during conversion attempts is the same regarding kicking, running or passing, but in this example, the net effect would have been different because instead of creating a 3-point swing (preventing 1 point by blocking the kick and scoring 2 points by running the ball downfield), Pitt would have achieved a 4-point swing (2 saved on the interception and 2 earned on the runback).
Grounding the Ball
Q.
In the closing seconds of the game between the Giants and the Phoenix Cardinals last week, Jeff Hostetler, the Giants' quarterback, took the snap and immediately spiked the ball, stopping the clock with three seconds to play and setting up the game-winning field goal.
Since there was no potential receiver in the area to which Hostetler "threw" the ball, why weren't the Giants penalized for intentionally grounding the ball?
A.
This deliberate downing demanded no deliberation by the officials, since the play has been part of the National Football League rules since 1987.
Before that, a quarterback in the same pickle would intentionally throw the ball out of bounds to stop the clock.
Extra time was needed to retrieve the ball and realign the teams, so to save time, the rulesmakers gave quarterbacks the time-saving device of merely throwing the ball down immediately after the snap, while under no pressure from the defense.
The rule on intentional grounding of a forward pass applies to throws made under duress to an area with no eligible receiver around.
That thrown ball would draw a penalty.
Hostetler's did not, and the difference in the rulings underlines the fundamental distinction between the two types of deliberate groundings: one seeks to prevent a loss of yardage and the other seeks to prevent a loss of time.


Sunrise Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Metro Matters; Troubled Lawyer And Needy Client Find a Symbiosis
When Sarah Smith, a welfare caseworker from the South Bronx, was referred to a lawyer last year, there were two victims in her case: Ms.
Smith, who had suffered years of abuse from her father and later from her two husbands; and Owen Smith, her second husband, whom she finally shot to death.
Now, as prosecutors prepare to try Ms.
Smith for murder, a third victim has emerged: her defense lawyer, Michael G. Dowd.


Communist Paper in U.S. Feels Capitalist Pressure
The People's Daily World, the American Communist newspaper whose legacy extends back to the 1920's, is trying to revive its sagging fortunes with some decidedly capitalist initiatives: aggressive marketing and prudent cost-cutting.
After years of incurring heavy debts, which were only erased through fund raising, the newspaper's management in June reduced its publication schedule from four issues a week to one and began a campaign to increase circulation.
To reflect the changes, the newspaper early this month was renamed The People's Weekly World.


Roar of the Crowd: A Lift or a Letdown
WHILE weather conditions, training flaws and the cruel winds of physiology make long-distance running unpredictable, participants in the New York City Marathon on Sunday can use one race-day certainty to boost their performances.
They can work the crowds.
The estimated one million spectators who turn out every year for the five-borough event are known for their boisterous and creative enthusiasm.
Past champions like Bill Rodgers and Grete Waitz have given much credit to crowd support.


Mental Patient Cleared After 'Admitting' Killing
Virginia Tooker was leading a reasonably content life in a group home for mentally ill outpatients in Queens when she was arrested for manslaughter in April.
At that time the authorities said she had confessed to the slaying of a former roommate at the home, Gladys Landau, whose decomposed body was found in a closet in a room that the two women had once shared.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
A COMMERCIAL version of the hit television show "America's Funniest Home Videos" has been created by J. Walter Thompson for its new client Toys "R" Us.
The $15 million campaign, which begins tonight, features dozens of candid shots of children -- and adults -- playing with toys.
The results are often amusing and a fascinating interpretation of the company's long-time theme, "I don't want to grow up; I'm a Toys "R" Us kid."


Major Immigration Bill Is Sent to Bush
Congress has passed a major immigration bill that would increase legal permanent immigration to the United States by more than 35 percent, and White House officials said today that President Bush was eager to sign the measure.
The most notable feature of the bill is that it requires the State Department to admit more immigrants with job skills needed in the United States, a step long favored by free-market economists.


POLICE SHOOT MAN ROUSED FROM BED
Police officers checking a report of a prowler entered an apartment at 3:30 A.M.
Saturday and shot a 24-year-old stockbroker to death when he got out of bed to see what was wrong.
The officer who shot the man was placed on paid leave pending an internal investigation and an investigation by a Clay County grand jury, the police said.


Vulcan Materials Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
A Ghost of Dallas, 1963 A legal tug-of-war in Dallas is focused on the revolver that Jack Ruby used to kill Lee Harvey Oswald, the assassin of President John F. Kennedy.
It is said to be worth $100,000.
Page A12.
Another Defeat for Bhutto Provincial elections in Pakistan apparently confirmed the political eclipse of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto.
Page A6.
Some Interest Rate Relief With agreement on the Federal budget, many financial analysts expect a modest reduction in interest rates.
Business Day, page D1.
Close Race in Texas Polls suggest that Ann Richards, the Democratic candidate for governor, has drawn even with the Republican, Clayton Williams.
Page A14.


McCann Names Head Of Special G.M. Office
McCann-Erickson has named Candace M. Robbins manager of its new Troy, Mich., office, McCann/SAS, which it opened to serve the GMC truck division of the General Motors Corporation.
Ms.
Robbins had managed truck advertising at the Chevrolet division at G.M.
"Why Candace?" said John J. Dooner, president of McCann, North America.
"That's simple. She's known to be one of the best in the advertising business as it relates to trucks through her work at Chevrolet."
The deal was worked out with G.M. as part of the agency's effort to have a "partnership" relationship with the auto maker.
"She's not really leaving G.M., she's being given the opportunity to manage a complete operation," Mr.
Dooner said.
"Everyone here is a winner."


Newsstands Dwindle, But Some Still Thrive
Magazine publishers nervously monitoring the decline in newsstand sales across the country might be cheered by a visit to the Healy News Store in this tiny New England town.
People drive from as far as Massachusetts to buy the 3,000 different magazines stocked by Steve Davis, the manager and son-in-law of the owner, Freeman Healy.
In 1962 Mr.
Healy and his brother, Richard, bought the business, which had been run by one family for more than half a century at a time when newsstands and paper routes were an essential part of the American way of life.


Fire Damages High-Rise in Lower Manhattan


Gulf Talk: Gorbachev and Mitterrand
With the Soviet Union apparently frustrated in its latest effort to persuade Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev met tonight with President Francois Mitterrand on France's ideas for ending the Persian Gulf crisis.
The main purpose of Mr.
Gorbachev's 24-hour visit here is to sign a friendship and cooperation agreement with France, but the two leaders immediately turned to the gulf crisis when they held their first talks at Elysee Palace tonight, French officials said.


Elderly Would Benefit From Curbs on Sale of Overlapping Health Insurance
The tough new Federal standards for private health insurance that Congress approved Friday would prohibit the sale of overlapping health insurance to people like Grace and John Kossow, an elderly California couple who were persuaded to buy 29 policies in a 30-month period and billed for $22,011 in first-year premiums, or more than twice the couple's annual income.
"We told Jerry Brecht, the salesman, that we were not interested," Mrs.
Kossow, who is 86 years old, said in a telephone interview from her home in Watsonville, near Santa Cruz.
"But before he left, we had five policies. He kept coming back, and he could always explain why we could take more." Mrs.
Kossow said they have let all the policies lapse.


Accounts
*
Omni Windows, a unit of Alside Corp., Akron, Ohio, to Christopher Thomas Associates, Garden City, L.I., with a budget of $1 million. *
Continental Culture Specialists Inc., Glendale, Calif., to Coen, Kalis &amp; Moiselle, Los Angeles, for its yogurt products.


Seaway Food Town Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 25


Congressional Poker Chips: Judges, Water, Oil and Beer
Nothing quite illuminates the way Congress really does business like the pre-adjournment scramble to cut a deal, save a water project or thwart the pet initiative of a political foe.
Representative William H. Gray 3d of Pennsylvania, the House Democratic whip, cut his deal just minutes before the session ended about 1 A.M. today.
It involved a provision in the transportation spending bill intended to force Pennsylvania to earmark state money for Philadelphia's mass transit system.


Time Air Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fountain Powerboat reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


49er Victory Streak Reaches 15 Games
Mike Cofer's 45-yard field goal with five seconds remaining today gave the San Francisco 49ers their 15th consecutive victory, 20-17, over the stubborn Cleveland Browns.
Joe Montana, after struggling the entire second half, guided the 49ers 44 yards in seven plays to set up Cofer's winning field goal.
After the 49ers got possession at their own 28, a pass-interference penalty against Mike Sherrard pushed the 49ers back 10 yards before Montana got them going again.


Fibreboard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Weldotron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Buckeye Partners LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Campaign Trail; Gains Seen for Women, but Not Without Fights
This was billed as the year of the woman in politics, but nobody ever said it would be easy.
Women are now locked in tough, close races for governor in Texas, California, Oregon, Kansas and Alaska.
Gov.
Kay A. Orr of Nebraska, the only female incumbent running for re-election this year, is in a tight race, while women challenging incumbents in Pennsylvania and Wyoming are in uphill battles..


In the Red in Greener Pastures
After surviving for over a century, the National Horse Show, set to open its 107th edition tomorrow at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena, spent the summer wondering if the time was right for going out of business.
The show lost some of its longtime glitter appeal last year when it abandoned the expensive confines of Madison Square Garden for New Jersey and, somewhat to its surprise, also continued to lose money.
The 1989 National cost upward of $2 million to produce but generated only $1.5 million, a disturbing continuation of a trend toward insolvency, which began three years ago at the Garden.


La Quinta Motor Inns Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Former Borough Chief's Son Is Shot After Nightclub Fight
The 22-year-old son of the former Staten Island Borough President, Ralph J. Lamberti, was shot in the knee and beaten over the head with a baseball bat as he left a Manhattan nightclub early yesterday, the police said.
James Lamberti, of One Sunset Hill on Staten Island, and his friend Timothy Jones, 21, of 52 East Raleigh Avenue, also on Staten Island, had gotten into a fight inside the Rascals Club with a group of men who were then kicked out by the bouncer, Officer Scott Bloch, a police spokesman, said.
At about 3:20 A.M., when Mr.
Lamberti and his friend left the club at 12 East 22d Street, the men were waiting outside.
They attacked and shot the two friends before fleeing.
Mr.
Jones was shot in the stomach and was in serious condition yesterday at Bellevue Hospital, Officer Bloch said.
Mr.
Lamberti was in stable condition at the same hospital.
No arrests were made and no weapons recovered.
Details of the fight were not clear yesterday, the police said.


Islanders Suffer 8-3 Bombardment
For the third time in less than week, the Islanders failed to remember how the tortoise defeated the hare and, after giving up eight goals, were themselves defeated.
On Tuesday, the Devils fashioned a madcap invasion of Nassau Coliseum and dominated the Islanders, 8-1.
On Wednesday, the Islanders, certain that such unflattering lightning couldn't strike twice, traveled to the Montreal Forum only to absorb an 8-2 drubbing.
Tonight at the Civic Arena, it was Pittsburgh's turn to strafe the Islanders, and they collapsed en masse, 8-3.


Medstone International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Familiar Play, Unusual Result
Throughout the 1980's, Everson Walls tried to defend against that same old Washington Redskins play: Charlie Ten Hitch.
"It's a bread-and-butter play that I've seen them use for years; the Redskins stay with things that have been successful," Walls said today.


Machine Tool Orders Decline 4.6%
Orders for American-made machine tools dipped 4.6 percent in September, from August's rate, according to an industry report to be released today.
The decline is the second in as many months.
The report, which is being released by the Association for Manufacturing Technology, a trade association for the machine tool industry, stated that machine tool orders fell to $264.2 million in September, from $276.8 million in August.
The September figures represented a 12.7 percent decline from September 1989.


Down the Road to Fewer Flats
Specialized Bicycle Components of Morgan Hill, Calif., says that its new Airlock inner tube lined with a sealant is designed to eliminate 90 percent of common flat tires.
To back up its contention, the company says it will replace an inner tube that goes flat within six months of its purchase.
The inner tube is lined with a resin compound that "coats the tube evenly and doesn't clump up," said Gabriel Foo, the company's marketing coordinator.
The liner material seals tire punctures from the inside out, before air has time to escape, Foo said.
Some manufacturers market inner tubes with thicker rubber, while others sell plastic barrier strips to insert between the tire and the inner tube.
Specialized says that its new inner tube offers a smoother, more comfortable ride than other fixatives.
The Airlock inner tubes are expected to become available at bike stores in January for about $10.


Jane E. Frieder Weds Mark Wilf
Jane Elizabeth Frieder, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
P.
Richard Frieder of Rydal, Pa., was married yesterday to Mark Wilf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Wilf of Hillside, N.J.
Rabbis Alan Fuchs, Elazar Teitz, Pinchas Teitz and David Wice officiated at Hotel Atop the Bellevue in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Wilf, 25 years old, is an associate producer at MTV's HA TV Comedy Network in New York.
She graduated from the Abington Friends School and attended the University of Colorado and New York University.
Her father is the president of the Keystone Shower Door Company in Southampton, Pa.
The bridegroom, 28, is a partner in Garden Homes, a real-estate development company in Short Hills, N.J.
A cum laude graduate of Princeton University, he has a law degree from New York University.
His father is a real-estate developer and a founder of Garden Homes.


IRAQ IS DROPPING ITS FUEL RATIONING, BLAMING MINISTER
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq reversed a decision to ration fuel today and dismissed his Oil Minister on the ground that a miscalculation by the official had led to the announcement 10 days ago that the country faced a gasoline shortage.
The Iraqi leader's move came as he met twice in Baghdad with a special Soviet envoy sent by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
After two sessions of talks that had raised hopes that a peaceful solution to the Persian Gulf crisis might be imminent, reports from Baghdad quoted Soviet correspondents traveling with the envoy, Yevgeny M. Primakov, as saying the sessions had ended "without having achieved agreement on the issues discussed."


Barnes Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crompton &amp; Knowles Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Private Money Is Keeping Central Park Healthy
In the late 1970's, the broken lamps and dusty lawns of Central Park were an apt metaphor for New York City's fiscal crisis, and its crime-prone backyard was a favorite target for late-night comedians.
But today, as New York City is again facing budget cuts and increasing crime, Manhattan's most famous park is not only weathering the latest tides of urban decay but is flourishing, thanks to an unlikely alliance between a wealthy philanthropic elite and an overburdened city agency.


Amwest Insurance Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


When in Rome . . .


Wyman-Gordon reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Courier Dispatch Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Theater; Pearl Harbor for a Bit Of Fun and Games
Jon Shirota's "Lucky Come Hawaii" is a rambunctious, good-natured romp that deals with a most unlikely subject for comedy, the reaction of people to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
The play, which opened the Pan Asian Repertory Theater's 14th season on Saturday at Playhouse 46, somehow manages to avoid bad taste.
For one thing, the author studiously keeps the war itself far offstage.
The play benefits from both local color and period flavor.
The scene is a bucolic community on the island of Maui, Hawaii, in which, at the outbreak of World War II, a community of transplanted Okinawans tries to come to terms with mixed loyalties.
Some characters retain a close allegiance to their ancestral Okinawa, which is under Japanese control, while others are firmly committed to their new American home.
This was, of course, long before Hawaii became a state.


Color Systems Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amy G. Borress Is Married
Amy Gail Borress, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard J. Borress of New City, N.Y., was married yesterday to Abraham Harold Glass, a son of Ruth S. Earnest and a stepson of Allen J. Earnest of the Bronx.
Rabbi David Fass officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
The bride, 26 years old, graduated from Smith College and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
She is an associate at the New York law firm of Dreyer &amp; Traub.
The bridegroom, 30, a graduate of McGill University, is an energy analyst at Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in New York.


New York City's Budget Gap Is Even Worse Than It Looks
New York City has a budget of more than $28 billion and a projected gap in it for the coming fiscal year of perhaps $2 billion -- in other words, it is short one dollar for every 14.
But the problem is really more severe, because the budget over which the city has full control is closer to $12 billion, and that means it is short one dollar for every six.
That little-understood reality, compounded by a stagnant economy and uncertainties about the cost of wage settlements, is why the city's current troubles have evoked dire threats of thousands of layoffs and the worst cuts in city services since the fiscal crisis of the mid-1970's.


Minorities in Himalayan Bhutan Struggle
To the Editor
"India-Based Groups Seek to Disrupt Bhutan" (news article, Oct. 7) reports that the small Himalayan Buddhist kingdom of Bhutan "has become the target of a well-organized campaign, based in India, to stir up violent opposition to the country's moves to protect itself and its culture from illegal immigration." This disparages the cause of the ethnic and religious minorities of Bhutan.
You should have interviewed the leaders of the pro-democracy movement languishing in Bhutanese jails.
You should have interviewed the illiterate farmers of Southern Bhutan who were harassed by the Census Bureau.
They would tell you that the regime has declared their land-registration records, citizenship cards issued after the first census and the testimony of local authorities to be inadequate evidence of their bona fide citizenship.
The Bhutanese Embassy in New Delhi could well have hired some Indians to pretend to represent us so as to discredit the pro-democracy movement.
The attempt by Sunanda K. Datta Ray, editor of The Statesman of Calcutta, to label our pro-democracy movement as "a propaganda war against Bhutan" is deplorable.
If his reports were true, why did the regime arrest hundreds of Bhutanese citizens during the unrest.
Among the imprisoned are prominent government officers like Teknath Rizal and Dasho Megraj Gurung.
Mr.
Rizal, the highest ranking elected officer, represented Southern Bhutanese in the National Assembly for years.
He was expelled from the Assembly for petitioning King Jigme Singye Wangchuck to consider a list of Southern Bhutanese grievances.
Sonam Tobden Rabgye, First Secretary of the Bhutanese Embassy in New Delhi, did not tell the truth.
The revival of the "Bhutanese way of life" means forcing Druckpa culture, tradition, clothes, language and religion on the minorities.
It is a program to eradicate the way of life of the minorities.
I fear this event is being distorted to strengthen the King's autocratic rule.
The feudal lords, who lost some of their power during the late King's rule, are behind this King to bring back the old Bhutanese way of life.
I appeal to international human rights groups and journalists to investigate the situation and set the record straight.
I hope the free world won't accept the regime's version of this uprising, as written by Mr.
Datta Ray, without conducting an independent study.
HARI SHARMA Prosser, Wash., Oct. 18, 1990 The writer is an exchange student from Bhutan.


No Bailout Funds in Pact
Congress failed to approve an additional $10 billion for the savings and loan bailout before adjourning early today.
The Resolution Trust Corporation, which is handling the effort, had asked for extra money to continue taking over insolvent savings institutions and paying off depositors.
But the bill died in the House after being approved in the Senate.
The failure to act could cost the taxpayer billions of dollars more because insolvent institutions will remain open longer, losing even more money, said Senator Jake Garn of Utah, the senior Republican on the Senate Banking Committee.
Donald W. Riegle Jr., the Michigan Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, said the $10 billion would have kept Resolution Turst operations going on a "tight leash" until February, when Congress would again have to deal with the bailout problem.
The new Congress convenes on Jan. 3.
The Senate quickly passed the bill.
But in the House, Henry B. Gonzalez, the Texas Democrat who heads the Banking Committee, was faced with objections from at least two members to bringing up the bill.
Because the House was suspending its usual rules to bring up bills quickly before adjournment, the objections prevented action on the legislation.
The savings and loan scandal could end up costing taxpayers as much as $500 billion, including interest.
The cost of the bailout and the Congress's role in the crisis are politically touchy issues among many House members, who face re-election on Nov. 6.


U.S. Is Changing Its Tune On Liberalization of Trade
After years of pushing for an end to nations' restrictions on financial, engineering, communications and other services, Washington is losing some of its enthusiasm for liberalization.
The reason is practical politics -- some United States industries are unhappy about giving up protection and could well have the lobbying muscle to block Congressional approval of any agreement that might emerge from the 105-nation trade talks currently under way in Geneva.


Electromagnetic Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


People
*
Salim Bernard Samman has been named managing director and chief operating officer of BBDO's newly established Paris office. *
Donna Noonan has been named vice president of Cramer-Krasselt, Chicago. *
Nat Stein has been appointed vice president at J. Walter Thompson, Chicago. *
Kathy Keenan has been named publisher of Psychology Today, a unit of the New American Magazine Company.


Politicians? Don't Like Them Here in Candor. Never Have.
Candor is not a town that often finds itself ahead of a trend.
Still, when people here heard that the rest of the country was being swept by a new anti-incumbent fervor this fall, they could only chuckle.
In Candor, antipathy toward elected officials is not a passing fancy; it is more a way of life.
And as another election approaches, the mood of voters here can best be described as disgusted, as usual.


Universal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wedco Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Striking News Workers Remember Inky Legacy
"From when we were little kids, my father brought home The Daily News," Howard Grantz remembered.
"That's all we knew."
The father was a pressman at The Daily News and so, as a matter of course, were his two sons.
Howard Grantz has worked on the presses for 31 of his 48 years; his younger brother, Stuart, at 40, has 23 years on the job.


Merit Medical Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Production Operators reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wean Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Caldwell Partners International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


CONGRESS ADJOURNS;
Isolated, windswept and scratching to survive, this dusty farming community, founded a century ago by Volga German immigrants from the Russian steppe, has never had a high profile.
But now, a rash of angry, often snide, remarks are being called in from around the country by people complaining that Strasburg, population 600, has become a vivid symbol of Government waste and special interest politics.


S.&amp;L. Letters Are Missing
Dozens of letters are missing from the special file of correspondence from members of Congress to savings and loan regulators, according to the Office of Thrift Supervision.
Most of the letters were written by lawmakers on behalf of constituents who complained about such problems as accounts that were transferred from one savings institution to another as the result of mergers.
But some letters provide evidence of members of Congress pressing regulators on behalf of savings and loan operators, some of whom contributed to the lawmakers' political campaigns.
There are thousands of letters, all maintained by the Federal agency and filed alphabetically under the names of the senators and representatives who sent them.
The Office of Thrift Supervision keeps the letters for its own use and opens them to the public by appointment.
There is no supervision of the people who look at the letters, which are kept at the Federal agency's Washington headquarters in an area that is out of view of agency employees.
Nancy Cohen, the director of Congressional correspondence, said at least one entire file is missing.
Each file includes dozens of letters written by a member of Congress.
Ms.
Cohen declined to say which file was missing or who might be suspected of taking it.
The agency has only one copy of each letter.
"I know something is missing, and it really bothers me," she said.
She said she had complained about the situation to high-level officials of the agency.


Celutel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Plan on Corporate Crime
A Federal commission Friday proposed a "carrot and stick" approach to deter and punish corporate crime.
The chairman of the United States Sentencing Commission, William W. Wilkins Jr., said the panel favored an "approach that provides incentives for organizations to establish meaningful compliance programs that deter, detect and report criminal conduct by their agents and employees."
The seven-member commission asked for public comment on the guidelines, which could be amended before they are submitted to Congress early next year.
In one set of alternatives, the commission proposed a range of fines from $5,000 to $165 million depending on the severity of the offense.
Businesses could reduce the fines by promptly and voluntarily reporting the offense before a Government investigation, by adopting programs to prevent future abuses and by proving that the company's management was not involved.
The commission, formed in 1985, established sentencing guidelines for individuals in 1987.


Ivory Coast President Leads In First Multiparty Election
President Felix Houphouet-Boigny seemed headed toward a victory today in the country's first contested presidential election, but his challenger accused the governing party of fraud.
Results from 10 of more than 300 administrative areas showed Mr.
Houphouet-Boigny winning 69 percent to 99 percent of the vote.
The opposition candidate, Laurent Gbagbo, maintained that the Democratic Party of Ivory Coast had stuffed ballot boxes, but said he would wait for an official tally before deciding whether to demand that the result be put aside.
Analysts said that Mr.
Gbagbo's share was likely to grow as votes in the capital and his home region in the west were counted.
Mr.
Houphouet-Boigny has run unopposed every five years since the country gained independence from France in 1960.
After pro-democracy protests, he decided in April to accept a multiparty system.


Video Display Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Supermarket Sweep
"The grocery store," observes Dr.
Louis Sullivan, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, "has become a Tower of Babel, and consumers need to be linguists, scientists and mind-readers to understand the many labels they see." New food labeling rules just passed by Congress offer hope for ending much of the confusion.
The measure rewrites food labeling rules.
For the first time, most packaged foods will carry labels revealing the saturated fat, fiber and cholesterol content and the percentage of calories derived from fat.
Terms like "light" and "low-fat," now used glibly to lure the diet-conscious, will be restricted, along with misleading disease prevention claims for products like oat bran doughnuts.
But there are also disappointments.
To win support from the grocery industry, the measure prevents states and cities from enacting tougher labeling requirements -- removing a useful prod for the sluggish Federal bureaucracy.
Much more serious, the new rules don't apply to meat and poultry products regulated by the Agriculture Department rather than the F.D.A.
There's no good reason to require more honest labeling of frozen pizzas laced with cheese while exempting those that are adorned with pepperoni.


Andrew J. Propper Is Wed To Lesley Ann Friedland
Lesley Ann Friedland, a daughter of Josine Friedland of Charlotte, N.C., and the late Morton H. Friedland, was married yesterday at the Sutton Place Synagogue in New York to Andrew J. Propper, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Propper of San Diego.
Rabbi David B. Kahane officiated.
The bride, 29 years old, graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and the Antioch School of Law in Washington.
She is a senior court attorney for Judge Joyce L. Sparrow of Family Court in Brooklyn.
The bridegroom, 35, graduated from the University of California at Berkeley, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and he received a Ph.D. in clinical psychology from Syracuse University.
He is a senior psychologist for the New York City Police Department.


Critic's Notebook; How Much Should TV Tell, and When?
While Mehrdad Dashti was holding 33 people hostage in the bar of a hotel in Berkeley, Calif., last month, he could watch on the bar's television set reports of what the police outside were up to.
Should the stations covering the action have taken that into account?
For example, should they have reported, as at least one station did, that a police assault team had moved into position, even though it was known that a television set was on in the bar?
Shouldn't it have occurred to somebody that the gunman, who had already wounded eight people, one of them fatally, might be provoked to shoot more of his captives?
That was one of the questions addressed by a panel of television journalists, police officials and others brought together recently by the Columbia University Seminars on Media and Society, Fred W. Friendly presiding.
The discussion, shown on public television last week, reached beyond the specific case to more general issues.


Piedmont Mining Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Zurn Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Andrew Redisch Wed to Ms. Rand
Deborah Ann Rand, a daughter of Eleanor Grob Rand of New York and Dr.
Elias Rand of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Thomas Redisch , the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Redisch of Tenafly, N.J.
Rabbi Joel Y. Zion performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Redisch, 25 years old, is a graduate of Woodmere Academy and Vassar College.
Her father, who is retired, is a radiologist and the founder of Nuclear Facilities Inc., a medical imaging concern in Brooklyn.
Her mother is an administrative law judge for the New York City Department of Health.
The bridegroom, 30, graduated from Hampshire College and received a law degree from New York University.
He is an associate in the New York law firm of Heidell, Pittoni, Murphy &amp; Bach.
His father and mother, Helen Redisch, are the owners of Kosco Ltd., designers and installers of window coverings in Tenafly.


A Hilton Hotel Is Demolished
The Parkview Hilton, a modern-style glass-walled hotel that was just 36 years old, was demolished today after its owners were unable to find a buyer for the vacant building.
A festive crowd estimated at 10,000 watched the explosion from Bushnell Park, a sloping green that stands between the hotel and the state Capitol and gave the hotel its name.
The 16-story building was imploded -- exploded from within so that it would fall on itself -- by demolition workers who used 60 pounds of carefully placed dynamite.
The Parkview had been vacant since Dec. 31, when it closed its doors, a victim of the sagging demand for hotel space in Hartford.


The Giants' Not-So-Secret Weapon
HE'S the Giants' weapon that's no longer secret.
Reyna Thompson is slim and swift, a Plan B acquisition a year ago from the Miami Dolphins who has created a cult following at Giants Stadium for his special-teams coverage on kickoffs and punts.
But he's unlike most special-teams tacklers, some of whom might be charitably described as suicidal.
At least when wearing a helmet.
"I'm not a rah-rah, eat-a-worm, butt-my-head-on-a-post-type player," Thompson was saying now.
"I approach it in a tactical manner."


Rothmans Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


76ers Obtain Suns' Williams
The Phoenix Suns traded their disgruntled first-round draft pick Jayson Williams to the Philadelphia 76ers today for a first-round selection in the 1993 draft.
Williams, a 6-foot-10-inch forward from St.
John's, was the 21st over all selection in the June 27 draft despite missing all except 13 games last season with a fractured right foot.
The foot was surgically repaired in January, but he hasn't played a game since Feb. 3.
The Suns announced on Oct. 2 that Williams had returned to his home in New York and had requested a trade to an East Coast team.
In an interview with radio station WFAN in New York, Williams said he expected to sign a contract with the 76ers Monday after his physical and would practice immediately.


101st Congress Wraps Up Work Belatedly and a Little Battered
Finally, the 101st Congress adjourned early this morning, its legislative accomplishments in the last two years almost lost amid weeks of bitter tangling over the budget that kept lawmakers practically captive for weeks in the Capitol.
This was the Congress that passed measures to complete some of the unfinished domestic agenda of the 1970's, including landmark bills to clean up the environment, to make child care more accessible to people with low incomes, to extend protection against discrimination to the disabled and to greatly expand the number of immigrants allowed to enter the country.


Morgan Products Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ex-Contras, Citing Broken Promises, Seize Land and Talk Again of War
Dissatisfaction with President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro among many of her peasant allies has created a volatile, rebellious mood in the northern mountains of this country.
"It's an explosion waiting for a spark," said Roberto Ferrey, director of the Nicaraguan Institute for Repatriation, a Government agency that is having difficulty resettling refugees and former contra rebels.
"The problem of land is eternal, but our time is running out."


American Health Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coleman Getting To Work
Derrick Coleman does not have any elaborate spending plans for the money he will make from the five-year, $15 million contract he signed with the Nets this morning.
The highest paid rookie in National Basketball Association history said he might buy a new car.
What kind of vehicle would a 23-year-old millionaire purchase?


How to Start Waking Up With a Smile
To the Editor:
In "Q &amp;A" for Oct. 9 (Science Times), Dr.
Charles Pollak, director of the Institute of Chronobiology and head of the Sleep-Wake Disorder Center of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, Westchester Division, in White Plains, responds to the question "Why do some people wake up tired after a full night's sleep but feel better as the day wears on?" He says in part, "We have no way of controlling what stage we awaken from." I disagree.
Someone who goes to sleep at a constant time will tend to be in the same part of a cycle when the alarm goes off.
I, for instance, have cycles of an hour and a half, and if I don't have time for seven and a half hours of sleep (five cycles), I'll set the alarm for six hours (four cycles).
Waking up after seven hours, although I would have more sleep, would leave me at the wrong stage.
If you consistently wake up at the wrong stage, slowly adjust your sleep time till you find you wake up with a smile.
RICHARD W. EPSTEIN Cambridge, Mass., Oct. 18, 1990


The Beating Goes On as 7-0 Giants Thwart Redskins
The unbeaten Giants won their big game with the Washington Redskins today, 21-10, by doing what they do best.
In the sort of hard-hitting, well-played game these intense rivals always seem to produce, the Giants made three big plays on defense, all interceptions and all vital.
The first, by Everson Walls in the second quarter, set up the touchdown that gave the Giants a 14-0 lead.
The second, by Greg Jackson with 6 minutes 51 seconds left in the game and the Giants clinging nervously to a 14-10 lead, came in the Giants' end zone and prevented a Redskin touchdown.
The third, by Walls a little more than two minutes later, was returned 28 yards for a touchdown that insured the Giants' victory.


Track Life Goes On After Day of Death
Life went on yesterday at Belmont Park.
Nine races were run without injury or incident around the same oval on which two horses drew their final breaths a day earlier, turning the climactic day of the thoroughbred racing season into the sport's darkest afternoon.
The death toll from Saturday's Breeders' Cup races rose to three with the announcement yesterday that Shaker Knit had been put down late Saturday night.
Nine hours earlier, the 5-year-old son of Blushing Groom suffered severe spinal trauma after falling over Mr.
Nickerson, the colt who was felled, apparently by a heart attack, during the Breeders' Cup Sprint.
Shaker Knit's spine was so badly damaged that he never recovered the use of his hind legs.


Critic's Notebook; Who's Singing the Blues? Just About Anyone Who Wants To
Two strange things happened at the Benson &amp; Hedges Blues series in New York City several weeks ago.
The first was the arrival of the standing ovation based on reputation, something not generally seen at blues shows.
The second was that the festival featured much music only tangentially related to blues as a style; everything from gospel-based soul to rock-and-roll to rhythm-and-blues made an appearance.
The incessant standing ovations hinted at the increased popularity of blues music in the United States and the hagiography that has accompanied it.
And in the diverse grouping of musical styles collected under the term blues, it was clear that the word has become synonymous with older styles of black music.


Cut Off (but Used to It), A Barrier Island Copes
He had just heard that the electricity would be out for at least two more days and that food and fuel supplies were dwindling.
But Bud Ludwig, a resident of this barrier island whose only road link to the mainland was knocked out Friday, remained stoic.
"It's really only a minor personal inconvenience," he said, adding that he is used to electrical blackouts and brownouts, the hardships of winter storms and the other vicissitudes of nature that go along with living on a strip of land sandwiched between the Atlantic Ocean and the Pamilico Sound.


Judge Allows Suit Over AIDS and Dentist
A woman who says her dentist gave her AIDS will be allowed to file a $1 million claim with his malpractice insurance company, a judge has ruled.
The dentist died last month.
The woman, Kimberly Bergalis, got permission on Thursday to pursue the claim when Circuit Judge Robert Makemson denied approval of the dentist's will, which leaves his assets to his mother.


PS Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Modern Controls Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sevenson Environmental Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SJW Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bush's Woes Stir G.O.P. Grumbling Over Sununu
There was one thing that was never supposed to happen to George Bush: He was never supposed to become a prisoner of his Presidential staff and the information and strategy they funneled to him.
Watching in horror as the White House has alienated major segments of the Republican Party, many close associates have already told the President -- or are planning to tell him -- that he should restructure the White House staff after the Nov. 6 elections.


Timberland Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fingerhut Companies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


For Congress From New Jersey
Gov.
Jim Florio, safe in the State House, is a major issue in New Jersey this year.
Republicans rail against his unpopular tax increases while Democrats who supported him strain to focus voters' attention elsewhere.
The Florio issue intrudes on all races, but particularly the two for open seats in Congress:
First District
(Camden area): Mr.
Florio represented this previously Republican district for 15 years until he won the governorship last year.
His tax increases are especially awkward for the Democratic candidate to succeed him, Camden County Freeholder Rob Andrews; Mr.
Andrews says he partially approves and partially disapproves of what his Governor did.


Allstar Inns LP reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Auto Racing; Indy Takes a Worldwide View
JUST as the Disney theme parks have expanded overseas in recent years, the Indianapolis Motor Speedway is trying to create a worldwide network of Indy 500's through licensing agreements in Europe and Japan.
The plan could bring back the top international drivers, who haven't run in the Indianapolis 500 since the 1960's, when world champions such as Jim Clark, Graham Hill and Jackie Stewart made the race a true world-class event.


Helicopters for Mexico Draw Protests in Congress
As part of its war on drugs, the Bush Administration is scheduled to begin delivering military helicopters to Mexico this week despite accusations by three Senators that the aircraft will be managed by a law enforcement official who has been linked to drug corruption.
The Administration hopes the helicopters, from the Defense Department's excess stocks, will improve Mexican efforts to catch traffickers who fly cocaine from Colombia to the United States through Mexico.


Roberta Milston Weds Samuel Kramer
Roberta Jane Milston, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin J. Milston of New York, was married yesterday at the Park Avenue Synagogue to Samuel Gideon Kramer, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Milton Kramer of Cincinnati.
Rabbi David H. Lincoln and Cantor David Lefkowitz officiated.
Mrs.
Kramer, 28 years old, is the director of J. Rosenthal Fine Arts Ltd., a Chicago gallery.
A graduate of the Dalton School and Oberlin College, she received a master's degree in art history from the Institute of Contemporary Art in London.
Her father is a partner in New York in J. H. Cohn &amp; Company, accountants.
The bridegroom, 26, a graduate of Oberlin College, is a law student at Northwestern University, where he is the book-review editor of The Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology.
He is a clerk at the Chicago law firm of Tenenbaum &amp; Senderowitz.
His father is a psychiatrist at the University of Cincinnati and Bethesda Hospital in Cincinnati.


Hungary Softens on Gas Price
The Government backed away from a 70 percent gasoline price increase today after two days of crippling nationwide blockades of roads by taxi and truck drivers.
Industry and Trade Minister Peter Akos Bod said the Government was prepared to accept a 50 percent increase pending passage of a law allowing the market to set the price of gasoline.
The Government had increased gasoline to about $3.80 a gallon.


Cybertek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times;   When Fred Wiggled His Toes
THE cool, gray morning was brightened by colored balloons in Central Park, at 67th Street, near Tavern on the Green yesterday.
But that was only part of it.
There was a lot of activity in the immediate area because the finish line for the New York City Marathon next Sunday morning was being constructed.
The lanes with pennants on ropes, the gates, the stands, the digital clocks, the wires, the trailer trucks were all part of the noisy scene.
There was also going to be a kind of trial run shortly, a five-mile race called the Computer Run, as well as a quarter-mile romp for children.
"Have you seen Fred?" someone asked.


About the Rest Of This Series
This is the last of five articles on Gov. Mario M. Cuomo's record.
The first article, on Oct. 2, detailed Mr.
Cuomo's efforts to improve the criminal-justice system by building more jail cells, and the problems the system continues to have.
The second article, on Oct. 5, described what the Governor has done on environmental issues, including auto emissions, water-quality standards and acid rain, and how despite those efforts, the problems remain.
The third article, on Oct. 9, said that while Mr.
Cuomo had declared the Decade of the Child and invested $1.4 billion in child- related programs, that the condition of much of New York's youth is dismal.
The fourth article, on Oct. 20, said that homelessness has soared, despite several housing programs by Mr.
Cuomo.


A Trip Home


First Union R.E. Investments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Venezuelan Oil Outlook
Venezuela will need about 7,000 new oil wells to reach its goal of having production capacity in 1995 of 3.5 million barrels a day, the chairman of the Senate's energy committee said Friday.
The Senator, Edgar Vallee, said that according to the plan devised by Petroleos de Venezuela, the state oil company, the country would also have to reactivate at least 10,000 idle wells to reach its goal.
Mr.
Vallee said Venezuela was producing 2.24 million barrels a day but should be able to reach its year-end goal of 2.5 million barrels.


CHRONICLE
For PETER A. LEWIS, the old Taft Hotel a few blocks north of Times Square is full of memories, the ideal spot for a Halloween and birthday party.
"I have fond memories of the old Taft and of Times Square," he said.
"It was a nice place to grow up in."
Mr.
Lewis was born in the Taft 60 years ago.
His father was the general manager of the landmark hotel, since renovated and renamed the Parc Fifty-One Hotel, and Mr.
Lewis lived there, between stints at the Loomis School and Harvard, until 1955.
Then came an M.A. in Chinese studies and an M.B.A. from Harvard, teaching English in Singapore, the Foreign Service, appointment as an assistant director of the Bureau of the Budget in the Johnson Administration, and now, a position as a general partner in the investment banking firm of Lazard Freres &amp; Company.
The guest list for the party on Wednesday evening includes leaders from fields as diverse as Mr.
Lewis's background, including JAMES MARCUSE, chairman of the board of the Metropolitan Opera; CHARLES ZWICK, chairman and chief executive of the Southeast Bank Corporation; State Senator ROY GOODMAN of Manhattan, and DR.
RICHARD RIFKIND, chairman of research for the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.


Let's Recycle More And Waste Less
To the Editor:
Do managers have a conscience?
How about designers?
Leaving a midtown Manhattan building recently, I came upon a demolition crew throwing beautiful solid ash doors, complete with hardware, into the back of a garbage truck.
Shivers ran through my body as the compactor crushed those tremendous and expensive doors into splinters.
Leaving a building on the Upper West Side yesterday, I watched as another compactor went to work on a set of filing cabinets that were old yet in great shape.
If you're renovating, chances are that the items you no longer need are just what someone else is looking for.
Partnership for the Homeless will pick up used furniture if it is in good condition.
It can be reached at (212) 947-3444.
Or just put the items on the sidewalk.
My guess is that those doors and filing cabinets would have found their way into someone's apartment.
I don't think they'll do much good at the bottom of the Atlantic.
Recycling isn't just separating cans, bottles and newspapers.
And it isn't something that you do only at home.
WILLIAM J. FRANCKE New York, Oct. 18, 1990


Mayor Struggles With Limited Role in Strike at Daily News
A few hours after the long-simmering labor crisis erupted at The Daily News on Thursday, the Dinkins administration sent telegrams to the newspaper's publisher and its unions, renewing a longstanding offer to mediate the dispute.
The telegrams, sent at the behest of Mayor David N. Dinkins and signed by Eric J. Schmertz, the city's Director of Labor Relations, expressed urgent concern over the wildcat walkout by drivers and the possibility that a strike could escalate if not settled promptly.


Yellow Freight System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jackson Faces a Friendly Foe
A year ago, Mark Jackson was the Knicks' starting point guard.
His backup was Rod Strickland.
Saturday night, their paths crossed again in San Antonio.
But their circumstances have changed dramatically during the past year, and the irony is hard to ignore.


Outdoors: A Harvest Ripe for Pursuit
FOR those who both fish and hunt, the fall transition from the former to the latter is a time of sweet indecision.
This is particularly true in a state as rich in natural resources as New York.
Right now, for example, one might have a yen to go after big stripers in the surf in Montauk, L.I., but this is also the time when most of the leaves are stripped from the trees in the Adirondacks, creating ideal conditions for pursuing ruffed grouse.


Rules on Whales


New Rochelle Development Plan Threatens Long Island Sound; To Exploit and Destroy
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 16 editorial supporting the Xanadu project on Davids Island is not only misinformed, but also misses the point of why New York State's Secretary of State, Gail S. Shaffer, environmental groups and people who care about Long Island Sound are opposed to the project.
Xanadu proposes to build 2,000 condominium units, housing a minimum of 3,700 people in four 31-story buildings and 10 11-story buildings.
The proposal requires a 3,465-foot bridge, rising to a height of 85 feet and touching down on public park land in Glen Island.
The plan calls for a helicopter pad with 24 scheduled flights daily, an 800-boat marina and a sewage-treatment plant that would daily pour at least a half million gallons of effluent into western Long Island Sound.
The western Sound, recent studies say, is already in critical condition with levels of oxygen in the water at all-time lows.
This creates a condition called hypoxia, which in recent years has caused massive fish kills and brown tides; 500,000 gallons of additional effluent will put the nail in the coffin of the Sound.
To allow a small group of wealthy investors to exploit and destroy, for their own financial gain, a treasure as valuable as Long Island Sound is, at best, shortsighted.
WILLIAM J. ADAMS Haverstraw, N.Y., Oct. 17, 1990


Jacques Demy, Film Director, 59; Made 'Umbrellas of Cherbourg'
Jacques Demy, the French master of musical comedies best known for his 1963 film "Les Parapluies de Cherbourg" (' 'The Umbrellas of Cherbourg' '), died on Saturday.
He was 59 years old.
He died of a brain hemorrhage brought on by leukemia, associates said Sunday.


Manville Down 39%
The Manville Corporation said today that its third-quarter profits tumbled 39 percent, in part because of a decline in the domestic construction market.
Manville, a building products and natural resources company, reported net income of $24.5 million, or 17 cents a share, compared with $40.4 million, or 30 cents a share, in the corresponding period in 1989.
For the three months ended Sept. 30, Manville's revenues rose 4.7 percent, to $576 million, from $550 million a year ago.
The company's stock gained 25 cents today, to $4.75, on the New York Stock exchange.
Manville's chairman and chief executive, Tom Stephens, said the company's domestic paper business remained steady, but added: "We're feeling the effects of softening in the domestic construction markets."
Manville said the start-up of new operations had hurt earnings.
In the third quarter, Manville acquired Visypack, an Australian folding cartons maker.
Earlier this year, it acquired DRG Cartons Ltd., a British cartons maker, and Fiskeby Board A.B. of Sweden, a supplier of boxboard products.
The company charged $4.8 million in legal and other professional fees for restructuring a trust fund formed as part of Manville's 1988 reorganization by a bankruptcy court to compensate asbestos disease victims.
Under the restructuring, announced in September, Manville agreed to inject up to $520 million over seven years to help the autonomous Manville Personal Injury Settlement Trust meet more claims.
The trust has run out of cash and all payments to victims have been frozen.


Auto Makers May Take Big Charges
Financial analysts are speculating that the nation's two largest automobile companies will announce substantial quarterly write-offs this week, cutting into their already weak earnings.
The Ford Motor Company, which announces its third-quarter results on Tuesday, may announce a charge against the earnings of First Nationwide Financial Corporation, a savings and loan association acquired in 1985 for $493 million.
Analysts said they expected the First Nationwide write-off might be $100 million to $200 million, possibly depressing Ford's profits.
Ford officials were not immediately available for comment today. Big G.M. Charge Seen
The General Motors Corporation, to announce its earnings on Wednesday, may write off $750 million or more, as a one-time charge against its third-quarter earnings to cover the costs of closing four assembly plants that were idled indefinitely during the last three years.


Substantial Power on Spending Is Shifted From Congress to Bush Procedure Intended to Guarantee Cuts Are Made
Congress has ceded substantial power over spending decisions to the Bush Administration's Office of Management and Budget under procedures approved as part of the $490 billion deficit-reduction package.
The procedures, intended to insure that spending cuts agreed to in the package are made, are a complicated variation on the existing Gramm-Rudman-Hollings budget-balancing law.
Like that law, last revised in 1987, they would require automatic spending cuts if Congress fails to meet its deficit reduction commitments, but there are important differences.


Our Towns; Latvian Jews And Hosts Trade 2 Kinds of Riches
In 1947 Steven Springenfeld, a Jew, left Riga, Latvia, for America.
"I made a resolve never to go back," he says.
He had survived four years in Nazi camps, a year in a Soviet prison.
As with most Riga Jews, his family and their things were turned to ash.
He settled in Queens, became Steve Springfield, worked two jobs and opened Springfield Curtains and Linens, expanding to four convenient locations.


Coca-Cola Bottling Co. Consolidated reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
Representative RAYMOND J. McGRATH , Long Island Republican, remained in the Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington yesterday, four days after he suffered a blood clot in his lung.
"When they discovered it, it was already breaking up," said Dan Zielinski, the Congressman's press secretary.
The Congressman, 48, is expected to be released later in the week, Mr.
Zielinski said, and will remain in Washington for a while for daily blood tests.
Mr.
McGrath, a member of the Ways and Means Committee, has represented southwestern Nassau County since 1981.
He is opposed in next week's election by Mark Epstein, a Democrat of Atlantic Beach.


Needless Breast Cancer Deaths Reported Among New York's Poor
Poor women in New York City are dying of breast cancer unnecessarily, primarily because early detection is not widely practiced in the municipal hospital system, according to a report released yesterday by City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman.
The report said the Health and Hospital Corporation's policy of not performing routine mammograms had contributed to a death rate from breast cancer among its patients that was three times the national average of 24 percent.


Pennzoil Net Drops 25%
The Pennzoil Company, an oil and gas concern, said today that third-quarter earnings dropped 25 percent, partly because higher crude oil prices cut into refining revenue.
Profits of $26.4 million, or 66 cents a share, compared with earnings of $35.4 million, or 87 cents a share, in the quarter last year.
Revenue rose 13.5 percent, to $615.4 million.
"Motor oil sales in the third quarter were at an all-time high, but we were unable to adjust product prices to fully recover the surge in crude costs," said James L. Pate, president and chief executive.


Coleman and Hinson Finally Join Nets' Camp
The first drill at the Nets' training camp here today was simple enough.
The players had to shuffle from one baseline to halfcourt of Jadwin Gym in a defensive stance.
Most of them had done it dozens of times; they knew when to shuffle and when to turn.
Not Derrick Coleman.
He shuffled to the left when he should have been shuffling to the right, and he stopped shuffling about halfway through the drill.
It was a minor transgression, and certainly not one that is going to hamper Coleman's rookie season, but it was noticeable.


Chrysler Posts $214 Million Loss in Quarter
Hit by a softening economy, eroding car prices and lost production of its new mini-van, the Chrysler Corporation today posted a $214 million loss in the third quarter.
That compared with a profit of $331 million, or $1.42 a share, in the period last year.
In addition, analysts speculated that Ford and General Motors would announce substantial quarterly write-offs this week, cutting into already weak earnings.  [ D4. ]


All Eyes On Waitz This Year
She first came to New York in 1978, never having run a road race or a race of any kind longer than 13 miles.
"Unknown territory," she called it, meaning both the city and its fabled marathon, which her husband had talked her into running.
Grete Waitz acquiesced only because she had never visited the United States before and she wanted to see New York, as she recalled yesterday, more than run the New York City Marathon.
"I didn't know what to expect when it came to running," she said.
"Then, I won, setting a world record, and it opened a new door for me."


The Adopted Have the Same Rights as Others; No Need to Hide
To the Editor:
As executive director of an agency that serves hundreds of birth families annually, I disagree strongly with the assertion that large numbers of birth mothers are crying out against efforts by adoptees to obtain information about them (Week in Review, Oct. 10).
Our experience has been quite the opposite.
Each year, 98 percent of the birth mothers who place children for adoption with the help of Golden Cradle sign a waiver of confidentiality.
Almost 100 percent of the birth families we contact after the adoption has taken place willingly provide letters and photographs or other information requested by the adoptive family.
Some go on to speak with or meet the adoptive family and child.
Even without receiving a request from the agency, birth mothers very often send us new addresses and phone numbers with a note that says, "Just in case you need to reach me."
Although none of the nearly 1,000 children adopted through our agency have reached 18, from our experience we believe that when they do, their birth parents will welcome contact.
Our birth parents know that deciding on adoption is painful, but it is never something to be ashamed of or to be forgotten.
It is our hope that today's progressive adoption practices will remove the stigma from all birth parents and replace it instead with the honor that is due to any man or woman who has given the gift of life.
Then perhaps there will not be any need to hide in shame but rather to rejoice when their child, after growing to adulthood, wants to say hello.
MARLENE PIASECKI Exec.
Director, Golden Cradle Cherry Hill, N.J., Oct. 11, 1990


Big Money vs. Small Change in an Unnoticed Race
Both candidates in the most unnoticed political campaign of the year, the race for New York State attorney general, do have policy positions they will explain to anyone who will listen.
But the following may be the most telling facts about the race: the three-term Democratic incumbent, Robert Abrams, expects to spend about $2 million to assure his re-election.
The budget of his Republican challenger, Bernard C. Smith: $20,000.


Cincinnati Microwave Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Iowa Resources Inc. reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30


Planned Parenthood: Quiet Cause to Focus of Fury
Planned Parenthood, once a comfortable charity of the upper middle class, has become something entirely different: a rallying point for women who want to keep abortion legal, and for the anti-abortion movement, something akin to a criminal conspiracy.
Since it took the role as a standard-bearer in the crusade to keep abortion legal, Planned Parenthood has become far richer and more famous than ever before.


Home Nutritional Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


LTV Loss In 3d Quarter
The LTV Corporation today reported a net loss of $30.4 million for the third quarter of 1990, compared with earnings of $85.7 million a year earlier.
The company reported an operating deficit in three of its four divisions, with only energy products showing operating income.
That division cited increased sales in its drilling and distribution divisions in reporting a doubling of quarterly income, to $1.8 million.
But LTV's steel, aircraft products, and missiles and electronics divisions all reported operating losses.
The company also cited lower interest earnings and a drop in other income in reporting the loss of 33 cents a share, compared with a profit of 68 cents a share in the 1989 quarter.
LTV noted that last year's quarter included $42 million in non-recurring income from an investment in a stainless steel-producing company and higher interest income.
LTV sold its investment in that company in the second quarter of 1990.
Third-quarter sales fell to $1.45 billion, compared with $1.51 billion in the year-earlier period.
LTV Steel had a $13.1 million loss, compared with income of $60.1 million last year.
The company's missiles and electronics business recorded an operating deficit of $15.6 million, compared with operating income of $3 million in the third quarter last year.


Ex-Officer Slain Trying to Stop Subway Attack
A 55-year-old retired New York City police officer was fatally shot last night on a subway train in lower Manhattan when he tried to stop two armed men from robbing passengers, the police said.
The retired officer was shot once in the face, said Officer Scott Bloch, a police spokesman.
The men then got off the No. 1 IRT train at the Rector Street station and ran toward the Staten Island ferry terminal, Officer Bloch said.


Latin American Economies Given Brighter Assessments
Latin America's economic prospects have brightened because governments in the region are relying more on market forces and world competition while reducing the state's role, according to new assessments by the Inter-American Development Bank and Washington policy makers.
The policy changes mean that after a decade of stagnation caused by crushing debt burdens, the groundwork is being laid for freer hemispheric trade, the development bank said in a report released on Sunday.


Rig Count Up in Week
The number of working oil and gas rigs in the United States rose by 18 last week, to a total of 1,107, Baker Hughes Inc. reported today.
The count, up from 1,010 a year ago, is a widely watched index of drilling activity and represents the number of rigs exploring for oil.


Johnston Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aydin Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Review/Dance; Creativity by Committee
The Warren Street Performance Loft was founded in 1978 when Richard Bull, Peentz Dubble and Cynthia Novack formed an ensemble devoted to the development and presentation of improvisational dance.
A program by the company, now called the Richard Bull Dance Theater, on Friday night at the charming vest-pocket theater had an air of civility and camaraderie befitting such a history.
It was also an intelligent evening in pleasant company.
"Bull's Bolero," set to the Ravel "Bolero" with a text by the five dancers, is a witty little gem that takes a deadpan but loving look at the kinds of earnest, inane processes that can go into the making of a dance by group decision.
"And we could begin with something minimal that feels good," Mr.
Bull murmurs soulfully at the start, neatly bridging two generations' worth of choreographic fashion as he squiggles through a phrase that looks next to impossible to copy.
Deliciously ingenuous, young George Russell suggests -- and performs -- a roll across the floor at every chance.
"Is it still interesting?" the dancers ask one another hopefully at regular intervals.


Coslet Is Not Concerned About Big Statistics
The Jets were dominated by the Houston Oilers on the statistics sheet, but they made the big plays Sunday, and not a moment too soon for Coach Bruce Coslet.
"Hey, don't even talk to me about stats," said Coslet, the day after the Jets overcame the run-and-shoot offense directed by Warren Moon for a 17-12 victory at the Astrodome.


Networks Map Strategies for the Big Game
Over the next month, the television networks, closely bunched for the first time in almost a decade, will be even more swept up than usual in the ratings game.
It is a sweep month, when the ratings take on added significance because all the stations in the country are rated.
The network programmers make intricate moves in the game of sweep-scheduling.


Non-Communists Win Soviet Georgia Election
Non-Communist parties won elections in the republic of Georgia on a platform calling for independence from the Soviet Union, private ownership of land and a capitalist economy, officials said today.
"We are certainly going to have a majority in Parliament," said Zviad Gamsakhurdia, leader of the victorious Round Table -- Free Georgia bloc of political parties.
With about 90 percent of the regions reporting, Mr.
Gamsakhurdia claimed victory in about 70 percent.
He protested what he called "gross violations" of the election law and said the Communist authorities had "terrorized the non-Georgian population" along the borders of the mountainous southern republic, which is dotted with pockets of Azerbaijanis and other ethnic groups.
A member of the election commission, Aleksandr Kobalia, said preliminary results showed a slightly less sweeping victory for the Round Table, with the bloc winning about 60 percent of the vote, compared with 30 percent for the Communist Party.
A runoff will be held for close races on Nov. 11, he said.


Gibraltar Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hextall Out for a Month
Ron Hextall, the Philadelphia Flyers' goalie, will be out of action for about a month.
Hextall, who missed all except eight games for the Philadelphia last season, suffered a torn ligament on the inside of his left knee in a 5-2 loss Saturday to the Islanders in a collision at the goalmouth.
Ken Wregget will fill in for Hextall. (AP)


Review/Dance; New Solos Of Mourning And Tribute
There were two new solos of mourning on the program presented by Susan Tenney and Company on Thursday night at the Dia Center for the Arts in SoHo.
In "Silent Night," Ms.
Tenney clutched nervously at her hands and bent forward to let her long hair sweep toward the floor to the accompaniment of Leonard Bernstein's recording of Samuel Barber's Adagio for Strings.
This was a show of grief.
But its histrionics were attention getting rather than eloquent.


Rinfret and London Running Even in Polls
After months of erratic campaigning and fighting with his own party and campaign aides, Pierre A. Rinfret, the Republican candidate for governor of New York, has apparently slipped so badly that he and the Conservative Party candidate, Herbert London, are reported to be running even.
Three separate polls, including one by the nonpartisan Marist Institute, signaled a landslide victory for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and a split in the normal Republican vote that could jeopardize every Republican on the state ticket and possibly Republican control of the State Senate.


Help the Passengers
The Soviet ship sinks rapidly now.
The world knows that the Soviet Union is in deep trouble but the depth of the disaster approaching has not taken hold.
Nor has any thought been given to what might be done, if anything, to help save the passengers trapped aboard.


William P. Slichter, 68, Scientist; Helped Develop Semiconductors
William P. Slichter, a former executive director at A.T.&amp;T.
Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, N.J., whose research contributed to the development of the semiconductor, died on Thursday at his home in Chatham, N.J.
He was 68 years old.
He died of cancer, a company spokesman said.


Wishing Pollution Were Unmade in Taiwan
Two plastic bottles and an aluminum can hang out to dry on her porch, and a tall stack of waste papers are piled neatly on a desk, as Mary M. L. Chen does battle against one of Taiwan's most daunting challenges in its entry to the industrialized world: pollution.
For the last two decades, all the energy of this island's people was devoted to economic progress, and now that Taipei is among the most prosperous cities in Asia, people are beginning to realize that for all their wealth they still cannot buy a decent sunset.People like Miss Chen, director of the Homemakers' Union, are trying to preach a cleaner way of living, but she admits that often her words cannot make it through the jungle of sounds that also makes Taipei one of the noisiest cities in Asia.


In This Corner, at 5.7 Pounds
TRYING to re-establish itself as a leader in portable computers, Texas Instruments Inc. yesterday unveiled a slim, lightweight, battery-powered portable computer based on the popular Intel 386SX microprocessor.
The new Travelmate 3000, at 5.7 pounds and $5,499, is nearly two pounds lighter and a thousand dollars less expensive than a comparable machine introduced by Compaq just two weeks earlier.
And other similar laptops are expected soon, including one from Epson America Inc., which is expected to be still cheaper.
At the same time, Texas Instruments introduced a new laser printer that prints 16 pages a minute, twice the speed of the most common personal laser printers.
The Microlaser XL printer will cost $3,499 to $4,499, depending on features; competing 16-page-a-minute lasers cost $5,000 or more.
The printing speed makes the Microlaser XL attractive for offices where several computer users must share a single printer.


Searching for Bodies
A scientist at Texas A &amp; M University has devised a technique using radar for locating buried bodies, notably those of murder victims.
For his body-hunting method, Dr.
Robert Unterberger adapted a technique commonly used by geophysicists to explore underground mineral deposits.
"This non-destructive technique could assist police in finding graves of murder victims in an area where they have received tips one is located," Dr.
Unterberger said in a report at the university.
"It could also ease people's minds about a death, and insurance companies could benefit as well."
A special form of radio emission called ground-probing radar was used in the tests Dr.
Unterberger conducted.
In the radar's corpse-finding adaptation, Dr.
Unterberger said, the radar echoes are affected by changes in the electrical conductivity of air in the soil, and this conductivity shows characteristic fluctuations when soil has been disturbed, as is the case in recent burial sites.
The radar echo does not detect the body itself but responds to disturbed soil.
Dr.
Unterberger said he began testing the radar's applicability to criminal cases last January after receiving an inquiry from a Houston police officer.
The scientist obtained permission to scan 20 graves in a cemetery and detected bodies in all but one -- a grave more than 80 years old, where soil had settled to the point where it was no longer disturbed.
Using one ground-probing radar device costing $50,000, an investigator looking for a body could scan an area the size of a football field in about one day, Dr.
Unterberger said.


Hog and Pork Belly Prices Decline by the Daily Limits
Hog and pork belly futures prices plunged their daily limits yesterday on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, reflecting a sharp downturn in pork demand and expectations for higher hog production in the fourth quarter.
Hog futures settled .18 cent to the limit of 1.5 cents lower in Chicago, with the contract for delivery in December at 51.45 cents a pound; frozen pork bellies were 1.95 cents to the limit of 2 cents lower, with February at 60.95 cents a pound.


American Educational Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hewlett-Packard
The Hewlett-Packard Company said it had cut the prices of its Vectra personal computer by 6 to 22 percent to strengthen its position in the personal computer market.
The company said it had reduced prices on the H.P.
Vectra 286, which uses the Intel 80286 chip, and on the 80386-based Vectra 386 personal computers.
Hewlett-Packard's stock dropped $1.125 today, to $27, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Raymond D. Hodge, Prominent Engineer, Is Dead at Age 68
Raymond D. Hodge, a retired civil engineer who supervised projects in many parts of the world, died Saturday at Sibley Hospital in Washington.
He was 68 years old and lived in Potomac, Md.
He died of complications of rheumatoid arthritis, his son Raymond Jr. of Washington said.
Mr.
Hodge was a senior partner in the engineering firm of Tippetts-Abbett-McCarthy-Stratton and retired in 1987 after more than 30 years with the firm.
He was involved in the planning and design of the Dallas-Fort Worth Airport and the redevelopment of Pennsylvania Avenue and the rehabilitation of Union Station in Washington.
He also directed development of airports in Bangkok; Seoul; Teheran, Iran; Amman, Jordan, and Lisbon.
He directed development of the Mount Newman Iron Ore project in Northwest Australia, which included the planning and design of a 285-mile railroad, two towns and port and industrial complexes.
A graduate of Manhattan College and Cornell University, Mr.
Hodge served with the Navy in World War II and the Korean War.
In 1979, the American Society of Civil Engineers, of which he was a member, awarded him the James Lurie Prize for his contributions to international transportation.
He is survived by his wife, Lorraine; two daughters, Susan and Patricia, of Potomac; another son, Christopher, of Bethesda, Md.; a sister, Lucille De Bellis, of Hartsdale, N.Y.; a brother, Christopher, of Scottsdale, Ariz., and two grandchildren.


Broadcast International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Northern Hemisphere Snow Cover Found to Be Shrinking
THE part of the Northern Hemisphere covered by snow has been shrinking in the last three years, and its expanse is among the smallest since scientists began making reliable satellite observations of snow cover in 1972, climatologists say.
The changes appear to mean that for the most part, the winter snow season now begins a little later and ends a little earlier in the northern United States and Canada, said Dr.
David A. Robinson, a climate expert at Rutgers University who participated in the study.


The Adopted Have the Same Rights as Others
To the Editor:
For many adoptees, access to original birth records is not just a quest for psychic wholeness or genetic history, as you state in "For the Adopted, the Issue of Roots Grows Stronger" (Week in Review, Oct. 7), but a civil rights issue.
The adopted are the only citizens who are denied their original birth records.
You quote William L. Pierce, president of the National Committee for Adoption, who favors the present system, not, as he says, because he wants to protect birth parents, but to protect the adoption agencies he represents.
Adoption agencies have generally not concerned themselves with the rights of birth parents, most of whom were not properly advised of their legal options when they relinquished their children.


News Gets Worse for Rinfret
Polls indicate that the Republican gubernatorial candidate in New York might not even beat the Conservative candidate.
Page B1.


DEVICE IN AIR BAGS PROMPTS RECALLS
The Ford Motor Company and three other manufacturers are recalling more than 55,000 late model cars after the discovery that scores of air bag inflators may fail to work in a head-on crash and may also release dangerous gases.
Federal highway safety officials said late Friday that they knew of no incidents in which the problem air bags had failed.
But they urged owners of the affected cars to limit use of the vehicles until they are inspected or repaired.


Review/Television; 'Broken Minds,' on Schizophrenia
"Broken Minds," tonight's strong offering from "Frontline," is in part an effort to enter the delusional world of the schizophrenic.
Given the mysteries that surround this profoundly disabling disease, which continues to challenge diagnosis and defy cure, it is a remarkably creditable attempt.
The hour program, which also deals provocatively with theories about the disease and its social cost, can be seen at 9 o'clock on Channels 13 and 49.
The producer, DeWitt L. Sage, managed to win enough confidence from David Taggert, one of the thousands of mentally disturbed people who now drift through the streets, railway stations and parks of New York City, to photograph him and tape his ramblings.
Mr.
Taggert, described here as a paranoid schizophrenic, is eluding the efforts of Project Reachout, a private agency that tries to draw in some of the mentally ill for shelter and treatment.


General American Investors reports earnings for As of Sept 30


American Family Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Baldwin Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A.T.&amp;T. in Accounting Pact
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company announced yesterday that it had agreed with Deutsche Bundespost Telekom to reduce accounting rates between the United States and Germany by 17 percent, effective next April.
The accounting rate determines how much phone companies pay one another for handling incoming international calls.
Deutsche Bundespost had refused for years to lower its accounting rate.
Many more calls are made to Germany from the United States than in the opposite direction.This has contributed to a growing American trade deficit with Germany, which in turn has drawn increasing criticism from the American Government.
Over the summer the Federal Communications Commission announced that it would try to drive down the cost of international calls by 50 percent over three years.
The F.C.C. said it would do so by obliging American long-distance carriers to negotiate lower accounting rates.


China Is Increasing Forced-Labor Exports
To the Editor:
In "China Has No Forced-Labor Exports" (letter, Oct. 5), Chen Defu, the press counselor of the Chinese Embassy in Washington, states that China's labor reform departments, which enforce penalties imposed on criminals, "are not allowed to engage in foreign economic and trade activities, and China has never granted any labor-reform department a permit to engage in foreign trade." He adds, "No products made in prison are exported."
The counselor would do well to consult his home country's own published statements.
According to the Law Year Book of China (1989), published last March by Beijing's Law Publishing House, the value of products for export of labor-reform enterprises increased 21 percent in 1988 over 1987, and the foreign exchange earned increased 42 percent.
The Law Year Book's editorial committee attests to the authoritative nature of the publication, as it consists of several high Chinese officials including, among others, the deputy minister of justice, the vice president of the Supreme People's Court and the deputy minister of public security.
China very clearly produces goods for export by using forced labor and seems very glad to earn foreign exchange from this source.
To deny that this is the practice flies in the face of the facts even as they are presented by the Chinese authorities themselves.
TAO-TAI HSIA McLean, Va., Oct. 11, 1990 The writer has taught Chinese law at George Washington University.


New Xerox Issue Has 9.5% Coupon
A $100 million note issue by the Xerox Credit Corporation, a unit of the Xerox Corporation, was priced through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc.
The notes, due in 1994, carry a 9.5 percent coupon and are priced at par to yield about 142 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
Noncallable for life, the issue is rated A-2 by Moody's and A by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Joan Brown, Artist And Professor, 52; Inspired by Ancients
Joan Brown, an artist and professor of art at the University of California at Berkeley, was killed on Friday in an accident in Proddatura, India.
She was 52 years old and lived in San Francisco.
The accident occurred while Ms.
Brown, who in recent years was known for her use of imagery from ancient cultures, was installing her work in a reflecting pool at the new Heritage Museum, still under construction at Proddatura.
Colleagues at the University of California said a concrete turret from a balcony collapsed and fell on her.


Experts Disagree on Effects of Medicare Reduction
Hospital executives said yesterday that the cuts in Medicare payments to hospitals and doctors in the 1991 budget bill may lower the quality of medical care for patients.
But Bush Administration officials said the $34 billion in savings would be achieved mainly by eliminating wasteful practices by hospitals and cutting payments for hundreds of medical procedures that they say are overpriced.
Payments to hospitals would be reduced by $16.8 billion over five years under the terms of the bill, which President Bush has said he will sign.
Physicians would lose $9.5 billion.
About $6 billion would come from requiring private employers to pick up more of the costs of elderly and disabled employees and retirees eligible for Medicare.
Reductions in other areas, like payments to clinical laboratories and for dialysis treatment, account for the rest.


U.N. COUNCIL HOLDS THE IRAQIS LIABLE ON KUWAIT DAMAGE
The United Nations Security Council overwhelmingly approved a resolution today laying the groundwork for a seizure of impounded Iraqi assets.
The latest resolution, intended to increase pressure on Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait, warned that if the Iraqis continued to disregard Council demands, the world organization would take "further measures under the Charter." This could include the use of military force, but this was not explicitly mentioned.  [ Text, page A12. ]


Romania Halts AIDS Drug Test
The Romanian Government has banned the use of a new AIDS drug after a recommendation by the World Health Organization.
Romania's Health Ministry stopped tests of FLV 23-A, an unlicensed drug, on Saturday after a World Health Organization team investigated experiments with it on 83 children in a Bucharest hospital.


Investors Title Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Detroit Journal; City Hoping to Quell Fires of Devil's Night
Under the guise of Halloween cele bration, arsonists and pranksters set hundreds of house and dumpster fires here each year, lighting the night sky in a ghoulish ritual of municipal self-abasement.
But this year city officials and community leaders are fighting back like never before.
They prefer not to use the words "Devil's Night" in discussing the traditional evening of tricks one night before the holiday, instead speaking of the "Halloween period."


At 7-0, Giants Latest Strategy Is to Stay Cool
For overzealous fans who already have the Giants going to the Super Bowl, Coach Bill Parcells today issued a stay-cool warning.
Sunday's impressive 21-10 victory over the Washington Redskins raised the Giants' record to 7-0, keeping them on pace with the San Francisco 49ers as the only undefeated teams in the National Football League.


Mutual Fund Warning
The Securities and Exchange Commission began a campaign today to crack down on the use of certain terms in the names and advertisements of mutual funds that the S.E.C. said could lead some investors to believe their investments were in some way insured by the United States Government.
In a letter dated last Thursday to all mutual funds, the S.E.C. asked funds to change their names if they use the words "insured" or "guaranteed," with references to the United States Government.
The commission said that misuse of the terms violated the antifraud provisions of the Federal securities laws and that it would consider enforcement action against mutual funds using the terms.
The letter was signed by two top S.E.C. staff officials: William R. McLucas, the director of enforcement, and Gene A. Gohlke, the acting director of investment management.
A spokesman for the Investment Company Institute, a trade group of mutual funds, said that fewer than 20 funds, out of 3,016 I.C.I. members, use the terms in their names.


Iowa-Ill. Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30


Fed Acts To Lower Key Rate
Honoring a pledge it indicated would be fulfilled once Congress passed a new Federal budget, the Federal Reserve Board yesterday sent a clear signal that it had lowered interest rates.
Analysts, however, said the drop was modest would do little to spur an economy many contend has fallen into recession.
Additional evidence of economic weakness will be needed before the Fed acts again, they said.


Chess Coverage
During the championship match between Gary Kasparov and Anatoly Karpov, the Chess column will not appear on Tuesdays.
Coverage of the eighth game of the championship appears today on page B3.


Talks Halted As 2 Unions Fault Dinkins
Two major municipal unions broke off formal talks with New York City yesterday and threatened to strike if the Dinkins administration does not make an acceptable wage offer.
The move by the unions increased pressure on Mayor David N. Dinkins, who must prepare a new city financial plan, which is critical to the city's effort to raise $2 billion on the credit market through bonds and notes.


Virginia Rests but Retains No. 1 Spot
Virginia, recognized one week ago as the nation's top college football team by The New York Times computer and both major news-agency polls, retained the No. 1 position yesterday.
The 7-0 Cavaliers did this despite the fact that they did not play on Saturday while their most immediate rivals all won or were also idle.
The margins of victory varied from enormous to narrow, but with only one exception, teams designated in a top 20 justified that classification.
Only Texas Christian (ranked 19th by the computer and United Press International's poll of coaches) fell from grace, losing to Baylor, 27-21.
Tennessee and Florida were teams that rested, with big games coming this week.


Put War to a Vote
Democracy must really have taken hold in the Soviet Union if an astounding news report from Moscow is true: The Soviet Government promised that it would not commit troops to the Persian Gulf without prior approval from the legislature.
Now if only this ultimate democratic check on executive power, conceived by the authors of the Constitution, were regarded as something other than blasphemy by our President.
President Bush, like Presidents Reagan, Ford and Nixon before him, has refused to abide by the War Powers Resolution, which prohibits the President from continuing a war for more than 60 days without the approval of Congress.
Rather, he has asserted that Congress has absolutely no role to play in deciding whether we should go to war.
He maintains his position despite the plain language of the Constitution, which states thatCongress has the "power to declare war."


Barclays Cutbacks
Barclays Bank P.L.C. said it planned to streamline its domestic retail branch operations in the next five years by closing 110 offices and trimming 1,800 employees through attrition.
The office cuts, mostly in urban centers, amount to slightly more than 4 percent of Barclays's network of 2,600 retail bank branches in Britain, while the staff cuts represent 1.5 percent of its total domestic work force of 87,000.
Barclays said 1,300 of the jobs would be cut from clerical staff and the rest from management.


CXR Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For the Multinationals, A Crackdown on Taxes
Besides raising taxes for smoking, drinking and driving, the new deficit-reduction bill cracks down on multinational companies suspected of not paying proper amounts of Federal income taxes.
Internal Revenue Service officials have said in the past that billions of dollars could be at stake.


Hillcrest Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Dundee Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Southland Ruling Permits Operation
A Federal judge has ruled that the Southland Corporation can pay bills owed to its suppliers and keep its 7-Eleven convenience store chain operating while it goes through bankruptcy reorganization.
The order allows Southland, based in Dallas, to pay $220 million to vendors.
Judge Harold Abramson approved the order on Friday.
Southland filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code on Wednesday.
The judge approved a "deposit of payment" with the court in an amount equal to the debts, a Southland spokeswoman, Cecilia Stubbs Norwood, said.
Vendors in return agreed to continue offering Southland normal credit terms while it struggles to reorganize.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Home Products Corp., New York, named Louis L. Hoynes Jr. senior vice president and general counsel. *
Converse, North Reading, Mass., a footwear manufacturer that is a subsidiary of Interco Inc., St.
Louis, appointed Ronald J. Ryan senior vice president of finance and administration. *
Earth Technology Corp., Long Beach, Calif., a technical services consulting group, named Paul E. Vogelgesang and Scott Lin vice presidents. *
Exxel Container Inc., Somerset, N.J., appointed Robert J. Sheils president and chief executive. *
Great American Bank, San Diego, named F. Anthony Kurtz chief financial officer and senior executive vice president. *
Heritage Bancorp Inc., Holyoke, Mass., appointed Frederic Schluter 3d president and chief executive of the company and its Heritage Bank unit. *
Jostens Inc., Minneapolis, a maker of class rings and other youth products, promoted Craig Swarthout to vice president and controller. *
Kellogg Co., Battle Creek, Mich., promoted Holger U. Birkigt, John J. Feeney and Jeanene M. Mallmann to vice presidents. *
Organogenesis Inc., a biotechnology company, appointed Allan B. Beitchman vice president in charge of finance and administration and chief financial officer. *
Sanford Corp., Bellwood, Ill., a maker of pens, named Robert Parker president, succeeding Robert Bergdoll, who becomes vice chairman. *
South Carolina Electric and Gas Co., a unit of Scana Corp., Columbia, S.C., appointed Bruce D. Kenyon president and chief operating officer, replacing Thomas C. Nichols Jr., who is retiring.


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING Devilish Touch and Baylis Win Devilish Touch and Baylis scored their first graded stakes victories yesterday as Belmont Park concluded its 54-day fall meeting.
Devilish Touch, a 2-year-old Devil's Bag filly, won the Grade II Astarita Stakes by 3 3/4 widening lengths over Makin Faces, with Missy's Mirage third as the 7-5 favorite.
Devilish Touch, owned by Burning Tree Farm and trained by Carlos Garcia, ran the six and a half furlongs in 1:18.36 under Craig Perret and paid $5.60 for $2 to win.
Baylis, an Irish-bred Sadler's Wells colt making his American debut, ran down Cozzene's Prince in the stretch and won by 3 1/2 lengths in the Grade III Lawrence Realization Handicap.
TENNIS Mayotte Eliminated in Paris Tim Mayotte, winner of the 1987 Paris Indoor tournament, was knocked out in the first round of the tournament yesterday by Thierry Champion of France, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4.
Amos Mansdorf of Israel, who won the tournament in 1988, defeated Martin Jaite of Argentina, 6-7, 6-3, 6-0, in his first-round match.(AP)


Israel Will Bar Palestinians Who Broke Law or Dissented
Israel today barred Palestinians with records of criminal or anti-Israeli activity from entering the country from the occupied territories.
In other efforts to quell the rising violence between Arabs and Israelis, the Government outlawed a radical Muslim movement, Islamic Holy War, and banned foreign travel by a leading supporter of the Palestine Liberation Organization in the occupied territories, Faisal Husseini.
The tougher conditions for entry would prevent travel by thousands of the 1.7 million Palestinians in the occupied territories, although the Defense Ministry gave no specific figures.
More than 10,000 Palestinians have been jailed in the 34-month-old uprising against Israeli occupation.


Joseph Devorkin, Clothier, 97
Joseph Devorkin, a retired clothing manufacturer, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 97 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure, a family spokesman said.
Mr.
Devorkin served in the Navy in World War I and then opened a men's haberdashery store in Huntington, L.I.
He closed the store in 1930 and joined his brothers in Manhattan, manufacturing men's clothing under the label Philip Morris Clothes.
He retired in 1965 and devoted himself to his avocation, studying and writing about the history of New York City, especially Greenwich Village.
He wrote many articles about the farms, theaters and hotels of Manhattan and in 1987 published "Great Merchants of Early New York."
He is survived by several nieces and nephews.


Graham Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tyson's Assault Trial
A Federal jury in Brooklyn began hearing testimony yesterday in a $4.5 million lawsuit filed by a woman who claimed that Mike Tyson assaulted her at a dance club.
The suit was filed by Sandra Miller, 26 years old, of Brooklyn, who claims that the former heavyweight champion "forcibly fondled" and cursed at her after she refused his advances at a discotheque in December 1988.
Tyson is expected to testify. (AP)


26 Die in South Africa In New Factional Strife
Twenty-six blacks were killed in weekend factional fighting that erupted after a month of relative calm in black areas, the police said today.
Also, nine African National Congress members were charged with terrorism and illegal possession of weapons in a case that could further strain relations between the Government and the black opposition movement.
One of the nine, Mac Maharaj, is on the national executive committee of the congress and is also a top official in the closely allied South African Communist Party.
The nine, all in detention since July, have accused police of torturing them and threatening them with death.
The worst violence of the weekend was in Soweto township outside Johannesburg, where 16 people were killed and 33 wounded in a spate of attacks on Sunday night, a police official, Col.
Tienie Halgryn, said.
He said he did not know whether any of the victims had been members of the congress.
The police said the violence might have been in revenge for attacks Saturday in Soweto on supporters of the Zulu organization Inkatha.
One man was killed and two were wounded.
Fighting between Inkatha supporters and other blacks tied to the congress has taken almost 800 lives in the Johannesburg area during August and September.
There have been only sporadic incidents this month.


Builder in New York Grows Even Bigger As Milsteins Merge
Two of the city's largest residential management and sales companies were merged yesterday, as the Milstein Property Corporation's Douglas Elliman-Gibbons &amp; Ives company acquired Sulzberger-Rolfe, Inc., it was announced.
For the Milstein family of developers, the acquisition will broaden the management and sales roles of one of the city's biggest private residential developers, a role the family only took on last December when it bought Douglas Elliman in a distress sale.


Bennie Oosterbaan, 84, Michigan Sports Star
Bennie Oosterbaan, a three-sport varsity star and the coach of the last University of Michigan football team to finish with the No. 1 national ranking, died Thursday night.
He was 84 years old and had been living in an Ann Arbor nursing home after suffering a broken hip several weeks ago.
At Michigan in the 1920's he lettered in football, basketball and baseball.
As an end, he led the Big Ten in touchdowns in 1925 with eight, catching passes thrown by Benny Friedman under the coaching of Fielding Yost.
He was an all-American in basketball in 1928.
Mr.
Oosterbaan became an assistant football coach in 1928 and head coach in 1948, when Michigan went 9-0 and was ranked No. 1.
During his 11 years as coach, Michigan won three Big Ten championships and achieved a Rose Bowl victory in 1951 over California, 14-6.
His teams compiled a 66-33-4 record.
Mr.
Oosterbaan, born in Muskegon, Mich., in 1906, was director of athletic alumni relations until he retired in 1972.
He is survived by a sister, Grace Hedner; a daughter, Anna Wilson of Traverse City, Mich., and two grandsons.


Notes Due in 1997 Priced by Conagra
Conagra Inc., the diversified food company based in Omaha, yesterday priced $300 million in notes due in 1997 through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
The size of the financing was increased from $250 million because of investor demand.
The seven-year notes, which carry a 9.75 percent coupon, were priced at par to yield about 127 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.
The notes are rated Baa-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BBB by the Standard and Poor's Corporation.
Conagra said it planned to use the proceeds for general corporate purposes, including the refinancing of $251 million of debt of a subsidiary, the Beatrice Company, which pays interest of about 13 percent annually.
Beatrice was acquired on Aug. 14.
Among some of Conagra's food brands are Armour meats, Wesson oils, Orville Redenbacher's popcorn, Butterball turkeys and Peter Pan peanut butter.


New Medical Research Tool: Human Tissues in Lab Mice
In a series of bold experiments, scientists have created laboratory mice with tiny samples of human organs growing in them: lungs, intestines, pancreases, lymph nodes, thymuses, and livers.
The purpose is to study the viruses of human diseases in living human tissues.
The mice provide a singular opportunity to gauge the effectiveness of various antiviral drugs.
They have been successfully infected with the AIDS virus and with two cancer viruses that cause leukemia.


Reader's Digest Has 21.8% Gain
Reader's Digest Association Inc. said yesterday that its first-quarter earnings climbed 21.8 percent from a year ago, as revenues rose 18.6 percent.
The publisher of books and home entertainment products, as well as Reader's Digest magazine and several other titles, earned $50.2 million, or 42 cents a share, in the three months that ended on Sept. 30, compared with $41.2 million, or 35 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenues rose to $524.1 million from $442 million.
The company said revenue from Reader's Digest magazine rose 9.5 percent, to $156.7 million, while revenue from its other magazines, which include American Health, rose 38.9 percent, to $15.3 million.
It said revenue from books and home entertainment products rose 23.5 percent, to $339 million.
"Our strategy of planning globally and acting locally continues to be the right one for Reader's Digest," said George Grune, chairman and chief executive.
Reader's Digest is one of the largest-circulation magazines in the United States.
It is published in 15 languages in 39 countries.
The company's stock, which was publicly traded for the first time in February, fell 50 cents a share yesterday, to $24, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Nonunion Newsroom Staff Is Expanded for The News
The Daily News began to transform its newsroom yesterday, bringing in the first wave of out-of-state replacement editors and reporters to help its hard-pressed in-house staff of management supervisors.
The dozen or so newsroom substitutes, recruited for temporary duty from papers in Florida and Illinois, were said to have been put to work shortly after about 200 striking reporters, editors and photographers -- members of the 750-member Newspaper Guild unit at The News -- reaffirmed that they intended to ignore a weekend invitation by management to return to work.


N.F.L. Ordered To Raise Benefits
The National Football League was ordered by a Federal judge today to increase player benefits by $29.4 million because the league failed to make contributions that were required in 1985 and 1986.
United States District Court Judge Joseph C. Howard, who presided over a jury trial that found the league liable for the payments last July 12, ordered management trustees to increase benefits by $17,848,160 for missed payments and to make other increases stemming from interest costs.
The dispute centered on the management council's claim that it didn't have to pay the money because it would not have been tax deductible in the year it was paid.


Acme Electric Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Concorde Career Colleges reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Adopted Have the Same Rights as Others; Not in Child's Interest
To the Editor:
It is misleading to quote William Pierce in "For the Adopted, the Issue of Roots Grows Stronger" (Week in Review, Oct. 7), the leading opponent of open records for adult adoptees, without explaining who he is and whom he represents.
Mr.
Pierce is both an adoptive father and president of the National Committee for Adoption, an umbrella group of private adoption agencies serving the white Christian community. (Its largest and strongest member agency, Bethany Christian Services, has been denied a license by New York State because of the agency's refusal to handle placement of minority and special-needs children.)
Mr.
Pierce's vested interest is to secure healthy white infants.
He opposes open records for adult adoptees so that he can assure birth parents that their privacy is paramount.
His goals, however, are not germane to  the improvement of current adoption policies or to the basic tenet of adoption: the best interest of the child.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15
A new Security Council resolution against Iraq lays the ground for seizure of impounded Iraqi assets.
The resolution implicitly includes the threat of force if Iraq does not withdraw from Kuwait.
Page A1
The United States would use force to oust Iraq, President Bush and Secretary of State Baker explicitly warned, deploring what they called the rape of Kuwait.
A12
Is Baghdad softening its position?
President Gorbachev said a Soviet envoy reported that President Saddam Hussein signaled a willingness to heed the United Nations.
A13
In U.S. television interview, Hussein rejects a withdrawal A13
Gulf leader says failed overtures could mean war by December A13
A Yemeni exodus from Saudi Arabi is crossing the mountainous border between the countries, which have been torn apart by Yemen's support for Iraq.
Saudi Arabia has forced 500,000 Yemeni workers to leave.
A1
Iraq is running a string of companies in Western Europe that are outwardly legal but are being used to circumvent the United Nations trade embargo, an official said.
A14
Letters from Kuwait tell of fear under Iraqi occupation A13
A group that helped create apartheid in South Africa is now helping President de Klerk dismantle it.
The Afrikaner Broederbond's support for constitutional change has quelled some Afrikaner resistence.
A9
Longtime leader of Ivory Coast leads in open elections A3
Romania's shift to a free market be-gins in earnest this week.
The Government has planned drastic increases for consumer goods and announced that people are going to have to get back to work.
A15
Moscow to let Westerners exchange rubles for currency D1
European Community decides to form central bank by 1994 D1
Norway coalition collapses over nation's ties to Europe A6
American police patrols in Panama will end by late November, and all security operations will be turned over to the restructured Panamanian Public Force, officials say.
A8
Tensions mount in India as troops seal off Uttar Pradesh A3
Whither China's Central Committee?  A7
Kyoto Journal: Opposition to development rises in Japan A4
National A16-23
Congressional power over spending was ceded to the Bush Administration's Office of Management and Budget under procedures approved as part of the $490 billion budget reduction package.
A1
President Bush bashed Democrats, blaming them for everything to stalling the economy to spreading "class warfare garbage." Some advisers worried that his President-turned-politician attack would backfire.
A1
Budget package cracks down on multinational corporations A23
Government and hospitals differ on effects of Medicare cuts A22
Washington Talk: Amid budget crisis, other money concerns A22
Strange political antics in Minnesota have shaken the normally high-minded voters.
Charges of sexual missteps by the Republican candidates for governor and Congress have made character an issue.
A1
The race for governor in Florida is a contrast in styles.
Lawton Chiles is campaigning the old-fashioned way:beating the pavement.
Gov.
Bob Martinez is running a sophisticated television campaign.
A21
Unexpected and contradictory races in the American West A20
A prisoner's right to have a lawyer present while being questioned by the police on a crime separate from the one for which he was already appointed a lawyer will be considered by the Supreme Court.
A19
Planned Parenthood has evolved from a comfortable charity into a rallying point for women who want to keep abortion legal.
In the process it has become far richer and far more famous than ever before.
A16
Automobile makers got big breaks in the new Clean Air Act, meaning that the nation's smoggiest cities will contend with dirty air into the next century, environmentalists say.
A18
Auto makers recall 55,000 cars because of faulty air bags A18
Detroit Journal: City officials fight Devil's Night A16
Regional B1-5
Strikers have warned newsstands throughout the city not to sell The Daily News, frequently threatening violence or arson.
Few stands are carrying the paper.
A1
The Daily News filled its newsroom with editors and reporters on temporary duty from other papers.
About 200 striking journalists ignored an invitation to return to work.
B4
The dispute that led to the strike occurred in the wee hours of an ordinary night shift.
Only by a mix of accident and calculation did the petty dispute become a maelstrom.
B4
The race for State Attorney General is the most unnoticed in New York, but Robert Abrams, the Democratic incumbent, expects to spend $2 million, compared with $20,000 by his challenger, Bernard Smith.
A1
Pierre Rinfret and Herbert London are running even, a poll has found.
The split between the Republican candidate for governor and the Conservative candidate could jeopardize every Republican in the state.
B1 The race for governor of Connecticut is being fought in a barrage of television commercials -- all of which focus, either favorably or unfavorably, on the front-runner, Lowell Weicker.
B1
Bill Bradley's 18-hour, 21-county campaign jaunt B3
Two municipal unions broke off talks with New York City and threatened to go on strike if the Dinkins Administration does not make an acceptable wage offer.
B1
School Board's budget cuts still short of Mayor's goal B3
Two residential management and sales companies merge B3
Breast cancer is killing poor women in New York City unnecessarily, primarily because early detection is not widely used in the city's hospitals, a report by City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman said.
B1
Eighth game of chess championship is adjourned B3
Police officer is fatally shot B3  Business Digest D1  Science Times
Mice with human organ tissues -- from lungs, intestines, pancreases, livers and immune systems -- have been created by scientists studying viruses of human diseases in living human tissues.
C1
Why humans get fat where they do C1
Cold fusion: Mavericks outmaneuvered science community C1
A synthetic molecule hints at the beginning of life C1
A bias toward males, even in sperm C3
Solution to old math puzzle has practical implications C5
Personal Computers C11
Peripherals C10  Obituaries B6-7
William French Smith, Reagan's first Attorney General B6
William P. Slichter, helped develop semiconductors B6
Nobutaka Shikanai, founder of Japanese media group B7  Arts/Entertainment
TV networks gear up for sweep month C13
"Music for Life" C13
Theater: British subsidies C13  Fashion Page B8
Dresses by Blass and Herrera  Sports
Hockey: Rangers shut out Nordiques B9
Football: Giants shift strategy B9
Virginia still No. 1 B12  Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A24
The future squandered?
Iran-contra: secrecy's victim
Blood on its hands
Letters A24
A. M. Rosenthal: Help the passengers A25
Russell Baker: School as spin control A25
Milos Forman: Czech Communists forget so easily A25
Gary M. Stern: Put war to a vote A25


Chrysler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Karpov Holds the Edge as Game 8 Adjourns
After pressing a strong attack throughout most of Game 8 of the World Championship Chess Match at the Hotel Macklowe in Manhattan last night, Gary Kasparov was held to a standstill by the unyielding defensive play of the challenger, Anatoly Karpov.
When play was broken off at move 40, Karpov had won a pawn and obtained winning chances.
The score is now even at 3 1/2 points each, so a victory for Karpov would give him the lead.


Low-Key Chiles Campaign in Florida Runs Up Against a Republican Blitz
Lawton Chiles says he wants to be elected governor the old-fashioned way, by going out and talking to people instead of using a slick television campaign.
"If I had my druthers, I'd prefer not to see 30-second commercials, the way they lend themselves to distortion," Mr.
Chiles, a Democrat, said.


From President to Politician: Bush Attacks the Democrats
It is not easy to run against the Government you are running.
It is not easy to carve up Democrats as "big taxers" when you've been huddling with the Democrats in Washington to raise taxes.
It is not easy to say you need more Republicans in Congress to help push your agenda when the White House-approved budget deal was passed mostly with Democratic votes.


Chicago Rivet &amp; Machine reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Johnson Controls Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kysor Indusrial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dow Drops by 5.94; Trading Is Sluggish
Stocks ran out of steam yesterday, with many traders waiting for better times.
Although the Dow Jones industrial average had been up nearly 29 points just before noon, by the end of the day it had slipped 5.94, to 2,430.20.


Nikko Joins Amex
The Nikko Securities Company International said yesterday that it had joined the American Stock Exchange to expand its United States business to meet client needs.
"With the addition of the Amex membership, Nikko International expects to provide its global client base with more efficient order executions," said Hideo Suzuki, chairman of Nikko International.


Japan Growth Predicted
Japan is expected to overcome the effects of higher oil prices and achieve economic growth of at least 4 percent in the fiscal year that begins in April 1991, the Bank of Japan's governor, Yasushi Mieno, said today.
Speaking at a seminar marking the 40th anniversary of the founding of South Korea's central bank, Mr.
Mieno said Japan was better equipped to handle high oil prices than after the oil shocks of the 1970's.
Japan's dependency on imported oil is much lower than before.


New Rochelle Development Plan Threatens Long Island Sound
To the Editor:
"Bridging Blight in New Rochelle" (editorial, Oct. 16), which asserts that my objections to the colossal condominium development on Davids Island are "misguided," reflects incredible lack of knowledge about New York State's coastal development policies and this project in particular.
For four years, the developer has been informed that the state would encourage the development of Davids Island in New Rochelle Harbor, but not at the expense of long-term adverse environmental and economic impacts, and surely not in a manner inconsistent with the New York State Coastal Program.
It is important for New Rochelle -- and surrounding communities -- that development be responsible and balanced, and that the long-term future of Long Island Sound and its coast not be sacrificed.
For you to contend that the infrastructures and public services in the western end of Long Island Sound are adequate to allow the cramming of four high-rise condos, a half-mile bridge, a sewage treatment plant and a new breakwater with helipad on a small island in an already ecologically stressed body of water takes disingenuousness to new depths.
The proposal's massive scale would overwhelm the very coastal resources intended to house it.
The developer and his promoters can stop pointing their fingers at Albany.
Davids Island can become the boon New Rochelle seeks, but only when the developer stops underestimating the state's resolve and overestimating his influence.
If he is so confident of his project's conformity, I suggest he resubmit it to obtain our decision and then let the courts decide the validity of the state's policy interpretations.
GAIL S. SHAFFER Secretary of State Albany, Oct. 19, 1990


Idaho Power Co. reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30


Passers-by Fingerprinted in Hunt for Killer of Five
The police are questioning and taking fingerprints from people passing through neighborhoods where five college students were slain two months ago.
A spokesman for the State Highway Patrol told The Gainesville Sun that officers are focusing on people on foot, bicycles, mopeds and motorcycles.
The newspaper had reported that investigators believed the killer rode a bicycle to at least one of the crime scenes.
"We're stopping people in the area if there are any questions why they're there," the spokesman, Maj.
Ernie Leggett, said.
"This is not being done in an accusatory way."
Major Leggett said he did not know when the patrols began and refused to say whether they had provided any clues.
The American Civil Liberties Union said it might challenge the practice in court.
Robyn Blumner, executive director of the A.C.L.U. of Florida, said the group wants to talk to people who have been stopped and might challenge the patrols, which she said violate constitutional protections against unlawful searches and seizures.
Doubts Voiced About Searches
"It doesn't sound as though they can articulate any objective criteria for suspicion," Ms.
Blumner said.
"They have to articulate some reasonable suspicion to even stop someone."
Two University of Florida freshmen, both women, were found slain Aug. 26 in the apartment they shared near campus.
A few hours later, a student at Sante Fe Community College was found decapitated in her apartment.
The next day, two more university students were found slain.
Investigators have followed up about 5,000 leads but made no arrests.
Edward Lewis Humphrey, 19 years old, who was convicted earlier this month on a charge of beating his grandmother, has been identified as a suspect in the slayings.
But spokesmen for the police have also said their investigation remains active.
A $941,639 Federal grant paying for the investigation is about to run out, leaving the authorities scrambling for money, Sgt.
Dick Gerard said.
Although students remain apprehensive, most have returned to classes.


Death by the Pack for the Third World
To the Editor:
King James I of England quite succinctly summarized my position on the use of tobacco in 1604:
"A custome lothesome to the Eye, hatefull to the Nose, harmfull to the Brain, dangerous to the Lungs, and in the black stinking fume thereof, nearest resembling the horrible, stigian smoke of the pit that is bottomlesse."


Italy Planning Bank Mergers
Italy disclosed a plan today to merge some of its biggest banks to enable them to compete in the post-1992 single European market.
If the plan goes ahead, it will represent the most revolutionary change in the Italian banking system since Benito Mussolini's bank reforms of 1936.
The Italian state industry holding company IRI announced that it had approved plans to merge its Banco di Roma subsidiary and the publicly owned Cassa di Risparmio di Roma, the country's second- largest savings bank.
IRI also said it was considering pooling the resources of two other banks it controls to create a new group.
Under that plan, the much larger Credito Italiano and Banca Commerciale Italiana would be merged to create Italy's biggest bank and the 20th biggest in Europe with combined customer deposits of 55 trillion lire (about $48 billion) and more than 800 branches.
The move, which will take at least a year to put into place, is one of the first fruits of a new law this year to encourage mergers among Italy's 1,200 banking institutions before Europe forms a single market.


The Pileup of Communications Bills
Wrangling about the Federal budget until adjournment on Sunday morning, Congress did not pass several much-talked-about communications bills.
Over the summer, lawmakers and lobbyists had given three of the bills a good chance of passing.
These were proposals to redistribute some of the Government's radio and microwave frequencies, to construct a national network of fiber-optic cables for high-speed computer communications and to put restrictions on telemarketing.
All three were actively negotiated during the final days of this session and are expected to pass in the next, which begins on Jan. 3.


School as Spin Control
The issue that makes education-minded people see red and gnash their teeth these days is -centrism.
You thought it would be the swinishness of college sports programs, didn't you?
If you're a behind-the-times kind of person, you probably thought it would be college graduates not knowing which country Abraham Lincoln was President of.
You were wrong. -Centrism is where the heat is.
There are many varieties of -centrism.
Among people who like to shout at each other, the most popular are ethnocentrism, Eurocentrism and Afrocentrism.


Interleaf Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Romanians Brace for First Hard Lessons in Market Economy
Ten months after the revolution that freed them from Eastern Europe's harshest Communist Government, Romanians are bracing for their first lesson in free market economics this week.
The Government has planned drastic increases in prices on consumer goods on Thursday, and has also announced that people are going to have to get back to work, including working two Saturdays a month.


Board Quits At Enimont
The board of the Italian chemical giant Enimont S.p.A. stepped down on Saturday after a yearlong battle between shareholders and a state company for control.
Seven directors supporting Raul Gardini, the Italian business executive, resigned in the latest twist to his feud with the state energy group ENI.
The move automatically forced the five directors representing ENI on the board out of office.
The showdown followed Mr.
Gardini's rejection on Thursday of ENI's conditions for selling him its 40 percent Enimont stake.
Mr.
Gardini also owns 40 percent of the company.
A shareholders' meeting was called for Nov. 14 and 15 to appoint new directors.
Mr.
Gardini is expected to try to secure a working majority on the board.
His allies have complained publicly that it was impossible to run Enimont properly because of the deadlock in the struggle for control.


Merrill Reorganization Creates Six Divisions
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company announced a sweeping reorganization yesterday, with the firm dissolving its two large operating entities into six divisions.
The reorganization, the largest undertaken by Merrill since 1984, is expected to result in hundreds of layoffs over time as jobs that duplicate each other are consolidated.
It will also create a new group of possible successors for William A. Schreyer, the chairman and chief executive of the firm, who is scheduled to retire in 1993.


Soviets to Let West Convert Ruble Profits
In a move aimed at easing one of the most formidable barriers to the Soviet market, Western business executives will be allowed to exchange their profits in rubles into foreign currency starting in January, bank officials said today.
Officials at the main state bank, Gosbank, and the foreign trading bank, Vneshekombank, said that all companies, including Western concerns, would be able to take their ruble earnings to new currency exchanges and bid on foreign currencies offered for sale by Soviet businesses and the Government.


Careers; Popularizing Accounting For Students
IN this time of recession concerns, the accounting profession, like many others, is undergoing cutbacks in pay or staffing.
Yet accounting might be one of the best careers for the future.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics, reporting on occupations with the largest growth prospects, says that the army of 963,000 accountants and auditors it estimated in 1988 needs to increase by 22 percent, to 1,174,000, by the year 2000 to meet growing needs from both accounting firms and businesses.


Past Saved. Future Squandered?
For weeks, a bumbling President and stalemated Congress invited ridicule for their endless budget wrangling.
The President seemed to contradict himself by the hour.
Congressional leaders lost control over their colleagues.
It took an unlikely coalition between the Republican White House and Congressional Democrats to close the deal.
But ridicule misses the important story.
This was no usual election-year dithering.
This Congress faced up to the herculean task of controlling deficits that were 10 years in the making.
It passed a $500 billion program of spending cuts and tax increases and approved new procedures that will make Reagan-era excesses difficult to repeat.
Cleaning up these sins of the past presented the hardest set of decisions in a decade.


BRIEFS
*
Air Midwest Inc., Wichita, Kan., an air transportation company, said it would sell 23 aircraft and related assets used in its Trans World Express operations in St.
Louis to Trans States Airlines Inc., another Trans World Express operator, for slightly more than $16 million. *
Black Clawson Co., New York, a maker of paper recycling systems, has acquired Zimpro-Passavant Inc., Rothschild, Wis., a maker of high technology pollution control and sludge disposal systems.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Blount Inc., Montgomery, Ala., a construction manufacturing company, said its Omark Material Handling division had entered a manufacturing and marketing agreement with Oy Norcar A.B. of Finland, a maker of forest harvesting equipment.
Terms were not disclosed. *
CAE-Link Corp., a part of CAE Industries, Toronto, a maker of transportation control devices, said its Link Flight Simulation division was offering an enhanced retirement program to about 425 employees and expected to announce further staff reductions next month. *
Cabot Corp., Waltham, Mass., a specialty chemicals and energy company, said it would offer its shareholders the opportunity to exchange Cabot common stock for shares of the Cabot Oil and Gas Corp. common stock that it owns.
The exchange rate for the offer will be announced in December. *
Corning Inc., Corning, N.Y., a supplier of optical fiber and fiber-optic components, said it would invest more than $100 million to increase the capacity of its optical fiber manufacturing facility by more than 50 percent. *
DeSoto Inc., Des Plaines, Ill., a maker of chemical coating and specialty products, closed the sales of its consumer paint business to Sherwin-Williams Co., Cleveland, a paints and finishes company, for $80 million and its coatings business to Courtaulds P.L.C., London, for $135 million. *
Dow Chemical Co., Midland, Mich., said it and its wholly owned subsidiary, RH Acquisition Corp., had bought an additional 1,013,505 common shares of Marion Merrell Dow Inc., giving it a 68.5 percent stake in Marion Merrell. *
Honeywell Inc., Minneapolis, announced a computer system that will allow companies to combine control of manufacturing with their air-conditioning and heating systems.
The company said the new system could reduce energy costs, cut waste and improve efficiency.  *
Tenneco Inc., Houston, a diversified industrial corporation, said its Packaging Corp. of America subsidiary had acquired Dixie Container Corp., Richmond, a corrugated container company.
Terms were not disclosed.


Customedix Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Striking Drivers Issue Warnings On Selling The News, Dealers Say
The battle for The Daily News was being fought in the streets yesterday as striking drivers warned newsstands throughout the city not to sell the paper, frequently backing up the warnings with threats of violence or arson, newsstand dealers said.
With few newsstands in the city carrying the paper, circulation emerged as the main issue in the struggle between the unions and the management team trying to keep publishing.


Oil Prices Move Above $34 a Barrel
Oil prices increased to more than $34 a barrel in light trading on the futures market yesterday amid concerns that a Soviet peace effort in the Persian Gulf had failed.
"It was perhaps one of the last-ditch efforts to get a peaceful resolution," said Christian Gohler, a vice president with Merrill Lynch Energy Futures.
"As a result, the market moved higher."


Brown &amp; Sharpe Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Ehrlich Bober reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Dahlberg Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Phoenix to Acquire Division of TRW
Phoenix Technologies Ltd. said it would acquire TRW Inc.'s customer service division, which had sales of $120 million last year.
Financial terms were not disclosed for the sale, which is expected to close on Wednesday.
TRW's customer service division provides maintenance and repair of computer systems and peripheral equipment.
It employs 1,250 people across the United States.
Phoenix Technologies said it planned to retain the division's employees and management.


Thomas M. Beggs, 91, An Art Administrator
Thomas M. Beggs, director of the Smithsonian Institution's National Collection of Fine Arts from 1948 to 1964, died on Thursday at his home in McLean, Va..
He was 91 years old.
He died of complications from pneumonia, his family said.
As administrator of the Smithsonian's permanent collection of American paintings, sculpture and decorative art, Mr.
Beggs sought to expose the collection to as wide a public as possible.
He organized more than 50 traveling exhibitions and arranged for artworks that had been in storage to be displayed in the Federal offices, including the Oval Office in the White House.
Mr.
Beggs was born in Brooklyn and graduated from Pratt Institute.
After studying at the Art Students League in New York City, he went to Yale, where he earned a bachelor of fine arts degree, and to the Ecole des Beaux Arts in Paris, from which he received a diploma.
He taught at Pomona College from 1926 to 1947.
He was chairman of its art department when he left to become assistant director of the National Collection.
He became director the following year.
Mr.
Beggs, a painter of murals, received the gold medal of the American Artists Professional League in 1953.
He is survived by a daughter, Patricia Westberg, and a son, Malcolm, both of McLean; a brother, Harry, of Weston, Ga.; a sister, Alice Powers of Minneapolis, and three grandchildren.


Menu of Budget Cuts for School Board Is Shy of Mayor's Goal
Still resisting City Hall's wishes, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez plans to let the Board of Education choose from a menu of budget-cutting strategies that in some cases would fall short of the $94 million Mayor David N. Dinkins wants.
That Mr.
Fernandez would offer the board reductions on a scale smaller than the Mayor's target suggests that he may be trying to capitalize on a sharp division among the board's seven members.


Bruncor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Norwegian Coalition Breaks Up Over Country's Link With Europe
Norway's center-right Government collapsed today after a dispute over how deeply to link the country's economy with the European Community, but Prime Minister Jan Syse said he wanted to form a minority Conservative government.
"It is right to try to form a Conservative government now," Mr.
Syse said in a speech to the Conservative Party tonight.
The Conservatives hold 37 of 165 seats in Parliament.
But such a government, stripped of the formal support of two centrist parties that were members of Mr.
Syse's year-old coalition, might have to make significant compromises.
Another option is for the Labor Party, with 63 seats, to form a government under former Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland.
The Norwegian Constitution limits elections to one every four years, with the next in 1993.
But Mrs.
Brundtland said the non-Socialist parties, with a majority in Parliament, would initially have to try to resolve the crisis, describing herself as a spectator for the moment.
"It's not clear what type of government will be set up," she said.
"It depends on parties other than Labor."
The Center Party, the smallest party in the coalition, had not yet decided tonight whether it would support Labor or the Conservative Party.
The party touched off the dispute over the European Community, and its 11 seats in Parliament could be decisive in handing power to Mr.
Syse or Mrs.
Brundtland.
"The solution is not obvious," Anne Enger Lahnstein, the parliamentary leader of the Center Party, told the Norwegian news agency N.T.B.
Her party, representing farmers, refused to go along with a plan to relax laws limiting foreign ownership in property, industry, banks and other financial institutions.
Mr.
Syse's Conservative Party favors full membership for Norway in the European Community eventually.
It saw the Center Party's stance as a betrayal of Norway's promise to help set up a free market consisting of the community and the European Free Trade Association, of which Norway is a member.
In his speech to the Conservative Party, Mr.
Syse said he hoped for informal parliamentary support from the centrist parties.


William French Smith Dies at 73; Reagan's First Attorney General
William French Smith, who served first as Ronald Reagan's personal lawyer in California and then accompanied him to Washington as his first Attorney General, died yesterday in Los Angeles.
He was 73 years old.
A spokeswoman for the hospital of the University of Southern California, where he died after spending most of the month in treatment, said the cause of death was cancer.


Applied Bioscience International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Navratilova, Connors Sign With TeamTennis
Martina Navratilova and Jimmy Connors have signed multiyear contracts with U.S.
TeamTennis and will compete in team competition beginning in July 1991, Billie Jean King, the chief executive officer of the 10-year-old organization, announced yesterday.
The TeamTennis season, which could conflict with Navratilova's ambition to compete on the 1992 United States Olympic team, runs for four weeks from mid-July to mid-August, currently involves nine teams and offers $450,000 in prize money.
The teams play a 14-match regular season.
The reported six-figure salaries of Navratilova, who will be based in Los Angeles or Texas, and Connors, who will join an East Coast team, will be administered by the league.


Equitable Move Stuns Limited Partners
When 1515 Broadway Associates L.P. filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection earlier this month, its 25-or-so limited partners were stunned.
The partnership, whose sole asset was a Times Square office tower in New York City, had been forced to seek court protection by its general partner, Equitable Real Estate Investment Management Inc., a unit of the insurance giant.
In a twist, the limited partners found that their interests in New York's tough office-building market were not best served by having one of the nation's real estate giants as a general partner, as they would have expected.
And the limited partners are now saying they are considering legal remedies in the courts.


Quotation of the Day
"Like hundreds of other hostages in Kuwait, I remain in hiding. I dare not venture outside. We sit and wait for an end to the suffering."  -- Fritz Cameron, an American teacher in Kuwait.  [ A13:2. ]


Koala Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


India Lifts Its Ban On A320 Flights
Indian Airlines began flying the Airbus A320 on commercial flights again, eight months after the fleet was grounded following a crash in clear weather in which 92 people died.
India's main domestic carrier will begin using the A320's on its international routes because of an increase in demand, an Indian Airlines spokesman, A. K. Sivanandan, said.
The airline has 18 of the Airbus planes.
The Government ordered the plane back into use on Friday, he said.
The fleet was grounded after a new A320 crashed in perfect weather on Feb. 14 in Bangalore.
Airbus Industrie, the four-nation European consortium that makes the twin-engine airliner, said the pilots were at fault.


Woodrow B. Seals, 72, Federal Judge in Texas
Woodrow Bradley Seals, a senior United States district judge who ruled in 1980 that it was unconstitutional to deny children of illegal immigrants access to free public education, died Saturday after open-heart surgery.
He was 72 years old.
His ruling, along with a similar one by Federal District Judge William W. Justice, was upheld in 1981 by the United States Supreme Court.
Known for his humanitarianism, Judge Seals received the World Methodist Peace Award in 1987.
In 1979 he became the first non-Roman Catholic to receive a papal medal for his work with the needy.
He was a graduate of the University of Texas Law School.
In the 1950's he became active in Democratic politics; in 1960 he was a campaign manager for John F. Kennedy's Presidential campaign.
He became a United States Attorney in 1961 and was elevated to the Federal bench on 1966 by President Lyndon B. Johnson.
He took senior status in 1982.
Survivors include his wife, the former Daisy Herman; a son, Bradley, of Austin; two brothers and a sister.


The Rise and Fall of Cold Fusion
March 23, 1989: Dr.
B.
Stanley Pons and Dr.
Martin Fleischmann announce room-temperature fusion reaction, promising cheap energy production.
April 10, 1989: Researchers at the Georgia Institute of Technology say they have duplicated key part of experiment, bolstering claim.
April 13, 1989: Georgia researchers retract report, saying their work was seriously flawed.
April 28, 1989: Scientists at the Brookhaven National Laboratory and Yale University announce that their experiments have failed to confirm the findings.
May 1, 1989: At a meeting of American Physical Society, scientists from five major institutions announce they have failed to validate claim.
May 9, 1989: Dr.
Pons and Dr.
Fleischmann assert at another science meeting that they have new evidence for bursts of energy.
May 23, 1989: Scientists at first Federal conference on cold fusion report they have failed to find key byproducts characteristic of fusion reactions.
June 29, 1989: The General Electric Company announces agreement to cooperate with University of Utah on cold fusion research.
July 12, 1989: A Federal panel says prospects of producing energy with cold fusion are so remote that no new Government laboratories should be built to study it.


Diversified Energies reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Financial Caribbean Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chemists Make Molecule With Hint of Life
MOLECULES that can process raw materials to make copies of themselves are essential components of all living things but are very rare elsewhere.
For the first time, however, scientists have begun to synthesize self-replicating molecules in the laboratory.
Although these synthetic molecules are far simpler than most of the natural biological ones, they mimic important living processes and may offer clues to how organic chemicals acquired the ability to duplicate themselves billions of years ago, setting the stage for life.


Increasing Crop Yields With Synthetic Gene
SCIENTISTS have genetically engineered certain plants to prevent pollen production, an advance that could help farmers produce high-yield hybrid crops more easily.
The technique, reported in the current issue of the British journal Nature, involves introducing a synthetic male sterility gene into plant cells.
Researchers from the University of California at Los Angeles and Plant Genetic Systems NV of Belgium created strains of tobacco and oilseed rape that did not produce pollen but were otherwise normal.
They said their technique could be applied to many other plants as well.
The scientists identified the specific plant gene involved in activating a cell that makes a substance needed for pollen production.
They then fused this gene with ribonuclease, an enzyme, from bacteria.
Introducing this construct into a plant turned off the pollen production.
Farmers prefer to plant hybrid seed, which produces higher-yielding crops, rather than seed derived from self or random pollination.
To make pure strains of hybrid crop plants, seed breeders have had to strip the male pollen-producing structure, the anther, either mechanically or by hand; otherwise an unpredictable fraction of hybrid plants would result.
This new genetic technique could make the process much simpler and more efficient, said Robert B. Goldberg, a molecular biologist at U.C.L.A. who was involved in the research.


Washington Talk; Amid Crisis on Budget, Other Money Concerns
In the waning hours of the 101st Congress,not every lawmaker was consumed with passing the budget or pushing through bills to benefit their constituents.
With little more than a week to go until Election Day, many were thinking about themselves.
Slipping off the floor to find privacy, senators and representatives worked the phones, calling lobbyists and political supporters and imploring them for money.


Steelers Romp Past Rams For a Special 41-10 Victory
The Pittsburgh Steelers' special teams overcame their own bungling and became something special tonight.
Embarrassed a week ago at San Francisco when they allowed the 49ers to recover a kickoff at their own 5, and victimized tonight by Gaston Green's 100-yard return of the opening kickoff, the Pittsburgh special teams made a 180-degree turn in helping the Steelers over the Los Angeles Rams, 41-10.


Parker &amp; Parsley Wins Jury Verdict
The Parker &amp; Parsley Petroleum Company said it had received a jury verdict of $85 million in compensatory damages and $100 million in punitive damages against Dresser Industries, Baker Hughes Inc. and BJ Services U.S.A.
In its suit, Parker &amp; Parsley contended that Dresser and BJ-Titan had intentionally failed to provide the materials and services paid for by Parker in connection with the fracturing and acidizing of 523 partnership wells, and then fraudulently concealed the shorting practice from it.
BJ-Titan is a partnership formed by Dresser and the Hughes Tool Company, and later Baker Hughes Inc.


Review/Music; A Concert of Unity Against an Epidemic
"Music for Life" at Carnegie Hall on Sunday night -- a lavish benefit for the Gay Men's Health Crisis -- made music as much a means as it was an end in itself.
This stately three-hour international parade of singers and musicians was a demonstration that AIDS is a disease to be feared and resisted not just by several enclaves but by people of every sex, nationality and sexual persuasion.
The crowded, mostly black-tie affair mixed corporate heavy-hitters, music-business professionals and gay people.
It was also a musicianly crowd, one that knew when to yell and stamp its feet, when to applaud politely and how to listen in silence.
The absence of Leonard Bernstein, who died Oct. 14, was felt mainly at the end of the evening, when his music from "Wonderful Town," "Candide" and "West Side Story" had its time on stage.


Dynamics Corp of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Fashion; A Breath of Spring in Dresses by Blass and Herrera
Another country, another show.
The spring and summer fashion openings have moved to New York for the week, after making their bid for global attention in Milan, London and Paris.
Around the runway at the Bill Blass show at noon yesterday were many of the same faces that had watched Yves Saint Laurent in Paris less than a week earlier.
The Blass presentation was somewhat more modest than the European shows, because the clothes were more realistic -- no instant museum pieces.
Mr.
Blass's secret weapon was simplicity.
Amazing how soothing a collection can be when there are no distracting garish jewels or accessories of any kind.
Plain civilized beige pumps were the standard footgear.


The News Strike: From Job Dispute to Maelstrom
It began on the graveyard shift with a worker's petty dispute in a battered old newspaper plant in Brooklyn, a place where huge printing presses rumble in the night and bundles of inky paperC move on conveyor belts under bare bulbs to wire-balers and waiting delivery trucks.
In the predawn dark last Thursday, as scores of drivers, mailers, pressmen and other Daily News employees toiled in the plant on Pacific Street in the Fort Greene section, it seemed an ordinary night shift: a noisy, dingy 1930's-era workhouse, far from the city rooms of Manhattan, and a collection of rough workers raised on unions.


Editorial Notebook; Squatters' Rights, and Wrongs
Squatting, the illegal occupation of unused apartments or houses, is a new symptom of an old New York affliction -- bad housing for new arrivals.
Squatters have taken over buildings in the Bronx that were scheduled for rehabilitation and are trying to stop demolition and reconstruction on the Lower East Side of Manhattan.
Generally squatters have, or claim to have, no other place to live.
To force them out, especially as winter comes, seems a cruel, pettifogging way to exercise authority.
To let them stay, though, may be crueler to more people in the long run because it prevents construction of housing for families who need it just as desperately but have refrained from breaking the law.


In Sperm, Men Have Prenatal Advantage
EVEN from conception, males apparently enjoy an advantage over females.
A researcher has discovered that in the average ejaculation, there are slightly more sperm carrying the X chromosome that determines a girl than there are sperm with the Y chromosome capable of spawning a boy.


In the Orchid Room . . . Big Macs
The seen-it-all habitues of the downtown Manhattan art scene had never seen this.
Gathering to fete an avant-garde artist, they were ushered into the restaurant's Orchid Room by a white-gloved doorman.
As a tuxedoed gentleman played a grand piano, the guests sipped cappuccino amid Italian marble tabletops and dark wood paneling.
The Big Macs were swell, too.
"An elegant McDonald's," said Kim Heirston, the director of the Stux Gallery, which organized the reception for Cary Leibowitz.
"We liked the contradiction."


Rangers' Defense Puts A Clamp on Nordiques
By Roger Neilson's calculation, and he is a man who has spent sizable stretches of his life crunching numbers and factoring out equations for success in the National Hockey League, defense is the healthiest of obsessions.
And the Rangers, who showed a taste for it last season under Neilson, are giving nightly indications that they might well have developed a passion for it this season.


Invacare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


3d Timeout in Sherrard's Career Because of   Broken Leg
The hard-luck, bad-break career of Mike Sherrard continues.
Out of pro football for three seasons after twice breaking his right leg, Sherrard broke the leg again in the San Francisco 49ers' 20-17 victory over the Cleveland Browns on Sunday.
He is out for at least six to eight weeks but has a slim chance of returning for the playoffs.
Sherrard was injured while delivering one of the game's biggest plays.
His 35-yard catch on a third-and-14 call with less than two minutes remaining was the big blow that set up Mike Cofer's game-winning 45-yard field goal with 5 seconds left.
As soon as he was hit, Sherrard knew that disaster had struck.


Market Place; California Banks: Bad Times Near?
REAL estate values in California, a bastion of strength compared with New England and other parts of the East Coast, are deteriorating rapidly and may become the next problem for the nation's banking industry, analysts say.
While California bankers and economists have predicted a mild downturn, other analysts have recently begun predicting more severe problems.
When California's weakness hurts local banks and filters through to other sectors of the economy, as occurred in New England, the chances of a severe national recession are greatly increased, they said.


Three Militias Pledge To Pull Out of Beirut
The pro-Iranian Party of God and two Syrian-backed militias agreed today to withdraw from Beirut, a step the Government considers important in securing Muslim-Christian peace in Lebanon.
Security officials say most of the 12 Western hostages believed to be held by the Party of God, a radical Shiite Muslim group, have already been moved out of the city's southern suburbs, where the militia is based.
An envoy from the Arab League, Lakhdar Ibrahimi, arrived in Beirut and conferred with President Elias Hrawi and Prime Minister Selim al-Hoss on ways to promote peace after 15 years of civil war.
Nabih Berri, leader of the mainstream Shiite Muslim militia Amal and George Hawi, head of the Lebanese Communist Party, ordered their forces to prepare to leave Beirut.
The Party of God agreed to withdraw after talks with a Government committee that had contacted Lebanon's militias on ways of disbanding in Beirut, which has long been divided along sectarian lines.
The Government hopes to unite Beirut under one army, disband the country's nine militias and extend its authority across the country.


F.D.A. Moves to Ban Diet Drug Ingredients
The Food and Drug Administration wants to ban the use of 111 ingredients in non-prescription diet drug products, including one it says presents a safety hazard.
That ingredient is guar gum, which is extracted from plant matter.
Three months ago, the F.D.A. told the distributor of one brand of diet tablets, Cal Ban 3000, that contain guar gum to stop distributing the tablets because it had received 17 reports of users suffering from obstruction of the esophagus.
The agency did not give the brand names of other products affected.


Europe's Bank: Dream vs. Reality
Brushing aside Britain's objections, leaders of the European Community decided this weekend to set up a common central bank in early 1994, and thus greatly advance the hope of creating a single European currency.
But many economists questioned whether unforeseen obstacles would prevent the bank's establishment so soon.
The idea of a single European currency has long been a dream.
And with a date on setting up a central bank fixed at the European Community's summit meeting in Rome over the weekend, some European officials say a single currency could become a reality by the end of this decade.
The resounding support of 11 of the 12 community members -- with only Britain opposed -- to form a central bank in 1994 could bode well for a decision three years later on a single currency.


Books of The Times; A Philosopher Because He Had to Be
Ludwig Wittgenstein The Duty of Genius By Ray Monk Illustrated. 654 pages.
The Free Press.
To Bertrand Russell, Ludwig Wittgenstein -- his precocious protege who would swiftly surpass him as one of this century's pre-eminent philosophers -- was "perhaps the most perfect example I have ever known of genius as traditionally conceived, passionate, profound, intense and dominating."


Talking Business with Spiro of Carleton Woolen Mills; Going It Alone In Textile Industry
Amid a flurry of takeovers in the textile industry, Carleton Woolen Mills, of Winthrop, Me., has stood out as a hardy independent.
The company, with annual sales of about $45 million, is owned by Arthur M. Spiro, its chief executive, who grew up in New York City's garment business and has spent more than 45 of his 65 years designing, selling and producing textiles.
Q.
How have you managed to stay independent in the face of many mergers in the textile industry, including the takeover of J. P. Stevens and West Point Pepperell?
A.
We have employed tight financial controls and a relatively low debt-to-equity ratio to keep us afloat in a business climate that is plagued with excessive interest payments due to over-leveraging "junk bonds" -- of which we have none.
We are not subject to hostile takeovers since we are a private company with closely held shares.
We view our size and independence as a strong asset in being able to quickly and flexibly respond to market needs without coping with the large, corporate superstructure that often inhibits such timely action.
Q. So how can the independent textile producer compete?
A.
Simply by being flexible and creative.
We have to quickly respond to market needs and make sure that we are providing the highest standards of quality control, service and efficiency.
But there's no substitute to creativity, which I think is more attainable in an independent company.
Q. How has the rising cost of oil affected your energy-intensive business?
A.
The impact is quite serious because fuel prices have more than doubled since July, with similar increases in propane gas and electricity.
If this continues, we will soon see substantial price increases in man-made-fiber raw materials and in processing petrochemical-based products.
These increases will be difficult to pass along to our customers in a recessionary climate, which has created low confidence and a slower rate of retail buying.
Q.
Have the mergers and divestitures in retailing affected your business or those of your manufacturing customers?
A.
We've been much affected by it, as have our traditional producer-customers who sell to troubled retailers.
Before 1989, we could get relatively clear readings of directions and requirements from our customers.
Now we and they are selling to moving retail targets that change continually.
The ripple effect of the retailing debacle has also hurt healthy retailers whose business has been competitively affected in local markets.
The net result is more confusion for textile mills and garment makers who need to plan effectively for the use of their facilities.
Q.
What direction will the United States textile industry take in the next few years in view of the recent trade negotiations?
A.
The U.S. textile industry will continue to shrink, giving way to imported garments as its customer base continues to erode down to the few remaining, very cost-effective, commodity-type producers and a small group of niche-market, creative manufacturers of specialty designed fabrics.
If and when the focus of U.S. textile trade negotiations shifts from the current battle between alleged protectionism and alleged giveaway, we may see some needed efforts by Government and industry to realistically develop a level playing field.
This will encourage efficient and creative U.S. textiles manufacturers to competitively sell their fabrics in world markets now closed to us by protectionism.
Q. Where are the overseas opportunities for textiles?
A.
The opportunities are in the Far East and Eastern Europe where rapid social and economic changes are occurring and huge consumer markets will develop.
All of these people want to emulate American life styles.
They will want to learn fashion, technology and distribution from us.
With needed new U.S.
Government support to encourage this effort, we should be able to attractively sell our fabrics and know-how abroad.
Q. Specifically, what new U.S. Government support are you seeking?
A.
I am looking for the continuation of reasonable tariffs and quotas comparable to those of all of our other trading partners, nothing more and nothing less.
I am also looking for complete elimination of all non-tariff barriers abroad plus quick, effective and strong countermeasures against all violators of such agreements.


New Chief Is Optimistic At Alliant Techsystems
Toby G. Warson is off and running as president and chief executive of a new public company that makes ammunition and other military products -- just as the nation's military spending flattens out.
But Mr.
Warson, who heads Alliant Techsystems Inc., which until recently was part of Honeywell Inc., said he was optimistic about the business.


BUSINESS DIGEST
MARKETS
The Fed sent a clear signal that it had lowered interest rates, honoring a pledge that it indicated would be fulfilled once Congress passed a budget.
But the message had little effect on the credit markets, where prices of Treasury securities fell.  [ Page D1. ]
Stocks ran out of steam, with many traders waiting for better times.
Although the Dow had been ahead close to 29 points just before noon, it ended down 5.94, at 2,430.20.  [ D8. ]
Oil prices moved above $34 a barrel in light trading.
Crude rose $1.67, to $34.68.  [ D13. ]
The dollar settled mostly higher, and gold prices advanced after falling overseas.  [ D19. ]
Hog and pork belly futures plunged their daily limits, reflecting a sharp downturn in pork demand.  [ D19. ] THE ECONOMY
First things first: Are your taxes going up or down?
There's an easy way to figure it out.  [ D1. ]
Hospital executives said that the cuts in Medicare payments to hospitals and doctors in the 1991 budget bill may lower the quality of medical care.  [ A22. ]
The Bush Administration began scrambling for ways to finance the savings bailout in the wake of Congress's decision not to supply any more money to the limping rescue effort.  [ D7. ]
Congress did not pass several communications bills in its wrangling about the Federal budget.  [ D6. ]
Dropping regulatory barriers to a fiber optic network to deliver electronic information to the nation's homes is the key to restoring U.S. competitiveness, some say.  [ D6. ]  COMPANIES
McDonald's is experimenting with radical changes in location, decor, food and service.  [ D1. ]
Chrysler posted a $214 million loss in the third quarter.
The announcement came as negotiators for Chrysler and the U.A.W. neared a midnight contract expiration deadline.  [ D1. ]
Boeing reported strong growth in sales and earnings, even as high jet fuel prices are hurting airlines.  [ D2. ]
Merrill Lynch announced a sweeping reorganization, with the firm dissolving its two operating entities into six divisions.  [ D2. ]
Analysts speculate that Ford and G.M. will announce substantial quarterly write-offs this week.  [ D4. ]
Ford and three other manufacturers are recalling more than 55,000 cars for possibly defective air bags.  [ A18. ]  Environmentalists say anti-pollution goals in the Clean Air Act were lowered to give auto makers a break.  [ A18. ]
American Express waded into the bitter credit card marketing skirmishes between the nation's largest banks and A.T.&amp;T.  [ D6. ]
The battle for The Daily News was being fought in the streets, as strikers warned newsstands not to sell the paper.  [ A1. ]
When 1515 Broadway Associates filed for Chapter 11, its 25 or so limited partners were stunned.  [ D13. ]
Kansas Gas and Electric shares rose sharply after the utility signed an agreement to merge with Kansas Power.  [ D25. ]
Silicon Graphics will introduce circuit boards today to enable personal computers to display three-dimensional images.  [ D4. ]  INTERNATIONAL
European Community leaders decided to set up a common central bank in early 1994, brushing aside Britain's objections.  [ D1. ]
Western business executives in the Soviet Union will be allowed to exchange profits in rubles into foreign currency.  [ D1. ]
Latin America's economic prospects have brightened because governments are relying more on market forces.  [ D18. ]  TODAY'S COLUMNS
Amid a flurry of textile takeovers, Carleton Woolen Mills has stood out as a hardy independent.
Talking Business.  [ D2. ]
Real estate values in California are deteriorating rapidly and may become the next problem for the nation's banking industry, analysts say.
Market Place.  [ D8. ]
Cover Girl is replacing its all-American marketing theme with a more worldly "Redefining Beautiful" campaign intended to appeal to a more affluent audience.
Kim Foltz: Advertising.  [ D21. ]


Model Missives to Help Sell Anything
IN the broadest sense, selling is everything in business, whether what is being sold is a product, a service, an idea or yourself.
With that in mind, Round Lake Publishing has assembled Sales LetterWorks, more than 300 letters, memos and proposals both in printed form and on disk to serve as models for business letters.
The letters were written by Nate Rosen-blatt, who speaks, writes and consults on business communication and sales.


Court Approves Bonneau Purchase
A bankruptcy court has approved the Bonneau Company's $9 million purchase of the Foster Grant Corporation, less than three months after the eyewear maker sought protection from its creditors.
Eileen Hollowell, Foster Grant's lawyer, said she hoped to close the sale within a week or two.
Federal Bankruptcy Judge Lawrence Ollason on Saturday approved the Foster Grant sale to Bonneau, a Dallas-based manufacturer and distributor of eyewear.
The $9 million will go toward paying off Foster Grant's $19 million debt.


Boeing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Money for Independence Hall
The budget package approved by Congress over the weekend includes $654,000 to pay for a new roof on Independence Hall and for repairs on the sidewalks and benches on Independence Mall, Representative Thomas Foglietta said today.
"Independence Hall is the most precious historical building in our nation," said Mr.
Foglietta, Democrat of Pennsylvania.
"We cannot let any part of this park slide into ruin." Independence Hall attracted 1.4 million visitors last year.
The park superintendent, Hobart Cawood, said the building's leaking roof would be his first priority.


Datasouth Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coral Migration
Pumice erupting from undersea volcanoes 2,500 miles east of Australia act as a raft for corals from that area, providing a means of transport to the Great Barrier Reef, a researcher reported in the Oct. 18 issue of the journal Nature.
The finding by Dr.
Paul L. Jokiel, an assistant researcher at the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology, challenges longstanding beliefs about the origin and dispersal of coral species in the South Pacific.
Coral larvae attach to the inch-wide pieces of pumice that periodically erupt from volcanoes in the Tonga-Kermadec trench, south of Fiji.
The pebbles of pumice form fields miles long and hundreds of yards wide that are carried by the prevailing currents to Australia, a journey which takes over a year to complete.
On the way, the coral, in the polyp form that creates coral reefs, reproduce by budding, often creating colonies covering half the surface of the pumice pebble by the time it reaches the Great Barrier Reef.
There, the coral colonies become part of the reef, either by crashing into the reef itself, or by sexually reproducing to form larvae, which attach themselves to the reef and start new colonies.
The general belief among biogeologists has been that the species is dispersed when larvae swim from a reef to a new habitat, Dr.
Jokiel said.
They also believe that species originate near the Great Barrier Reef, which is rich in coral varieties, and radiate to areas with fewer different species.


Reviews/Dance; New Look At Legend Of Medea's Vengeance
Ann Papoulis's dance-theater solo, "Medea," is a physical and emotional tour de force.
The Greek legend of the sorceress who helped Jason obtain the Golden Fleece and who killed their children when he deserted her for a powerful king's daughter, was distilled into a startling explosion of rage on Friday night in the Danspace Project series at St.
Mark's Church.
Ms.
Papoulis uses a text, spoken or sung passages from Heiner Muller, the German playwright who has become a cult figure in the international avant-garde.
But to say she is only dependent on these passages is to diminish the impact of the formidable compression of emotions -- fury and vulnerability -- that she achieves through the force of her performance.


Cover Girl Is Making Over To Shed Blue-Collar Image
COVER Girl, the leading mass- market cosmetics line, is replacing its all-American marketing theme with a more worldly "Redefining Beautiful" campaign that is intended to appeal to a more affluent audience.
For years, Noxell Corporation's Cover Girl has sold its extensive line of inexpensive cosmetics by telling consumers that "America's look is Cover Girl." The advertising promised that Cover Girl's "clean, fresh makeup" would re-create the kind of girl-next-door glow of say, Christie Brinkley, one model who appears in the company's ads.


U.S. Consumer Panel Warns Of Injury by 'Slap' Bracelets
A popular toy bracelet may cause hand and wrist injuries to children, the Consumer Product Safety Commission said today.
The toy, a slap bracelet, is a thin strip of metal covered by woven fabric or paperand wraps into the bracelet when the wrist is struck with it.
The commission said the toys have passed tests given to items with sharp edges.
But the panel said it was concerned that, over time, the fabric or paper covering may tear, exposing the user to a sharp metal edge.
As a result, cuts may occur.
The panel said parents should alert children to the potential danger and should examine the toys frequently.
In the event a tear occurs, the toy should be discarded.
The commission said it was continuing its investigation into the toy to see if further action is warranted.


Text of the U.N. Security Council Resolution
Following is the text of Resolution 674, adopted today by the Security Council, asking countries to document human rights violations and economic damage resulting from the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait: THE SECURITY COUNCIL,
RECALLING its Resolutions 660 (1990), 661 (1990) 662 (1990), 664 (1990), 665 (1990), 666 (1990),667 (1990) and 670 (1990),
STRESSING the urgent need for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all Iraqi forces from Kuwait, for the restoration of Kuwait's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and of the authority of its legitimate Government,
EXPRESSING grave alarm over the situation of nationals of third states in Kuwait and Iraq, including the personnel of the diplomatic and consular missions of such states,
REAFFIRMING that the Fourth Geneva Convention applies to Kuwait and that as a high contracting party to the convention, Iraq is bound to comply fully with all its terms and in particular is liable under the convention in respect of the grave breaches committed by it, as are individuals who commit or order the commission of grave breaches,
RECALLING the efforts of the Secretary General concerning the safety and well-being of third-state nationals in Iraq and Kuwait,
DEEPLY CONCERNED at the economic cost, and at the loss and suffering caused to individuals in Kuwait and Iraq as a result of the invasion and occupation of Kuwait by Iraq,
ACTING under Charter VII of the United Nations Charter,
REAFFIRMING the goal of the international community of maintaining international peace and security by seeking to resolve international disputes and conflicts through peaceful means,
RECALLING ALSO the important role that the United Nations and its Secretary General have played in the peaceful solution of disputes and conflicts in conformity with the provisions of the United Nations Charter,
ALARMED by the dangers of the present crisis caused by the Iraqi invasion and occupation of Kuwait, directly threatening international peace and security, and seeking to avoid any further worsening of the situation,
CALLING UPON Iraq to comply with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in particular Resolutions 660 (1990), 662 (1990) and 664 (1990),
REAFFIRMING its determination to insure compliance by Iraq with the Security Council resolutions by maximum use of political and diplomatic means,  [ A ]
1.
DEMANDS that the Iraqi authorities and occupying forces immediately cease and desist from taking third-state nationals hostage, and mistreating and oppressing Kuwaiti and third-state nationals, and from any other actions such as those reported to the Council and described above, violating the decisions of this Council, the Charter of the United Nations, the Fourth Geneva Convention, the Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic and Consular Relations and international law;
2.
INVITES states to collate substantiated information in their possession or submitted to them on the grave breaches by Iraq as per paragraph 1 above and to make this information available to the Council;
3.
REAFFIRMS its demand that Iraq immediately fulfill its obligations to third-state nationals in Kuwait and Iraq, including the personnel of diplomatic and consular missions, under the Charter, the Fourth Geneva Convention, the Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic and Consular Relations, general principles of international law and the relevant resolutions of the Council;
4.
REAFFIRMS FURTHER its demand that Iraq permit and facilitate the immediate departure from Kuwait and Iraq of those third-state nationals, including diplomatic and consular personnel, who wish to leave;
5.
DEMANDS that Iraq insure the immediate access to food, water and basic services necessary to the protection and well-being of Kuwaiti nationals and of nationals of third states in Kuwait and Iraq, including the personnel of diplomatic and consular missions in Kuwait;
6.
REAFFIRMS its demand that Iraq immediately protect the safety and well-being of diplomatic and consular personnel and premises in Kuwait and in Iraq, take no action to hinder these diplomatic and consular missions in the performance of their functions, including access to their nationals and the protection of their person and interests and rescind its orders for the closure of diplomatic and consular missions in Kuwait and the withdrawal of the immunity of their personnel;
7.
REQUESTS the Secretary General, in the context of the continued exercise of his good offices concerning the safety and well-being of third-state nationals in Iraq and Kuwait, to seek to achieve the objectives of paragraphs 4,5 and 6 and in particular the provision of food, water and basic services to Kuwaiti nationals and to the diplomatic and consular missions in Kuwait and the evacuation of third-state nationals;
8.
REMINDS Iraq that under international law it is liable for any loss, damage or injury arising in regard to Kuwait and third states, and their nationals and corporations, as a result of the invasion and illegal occupation of Kuwait by Iraq;
9.
INVITES states to collect relevant information regarding their claims, and those of their nationals and corporations, for restitution or financial compensation by Iraq with a view to such arrangements as may be established in accordance with international law;
10.
REQUIRES that Iraq comply with the provisions of the present resolution and its previous resolutions, failing which the Council will need to take further measures under the Charter;
11.
DECIDES to remain actively and permanently seized of the matter until Kuwait has regained its independence and peace has been restored in conformity with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. [ B ]
12.
13.
REQUESTS the Secretary General to report to the Security Council on the results of his good offices and diplomatic efforts.


Bankruptcy For Aancor
Aancor Holdings Inc., including the National Gypsum Company, a wholly owned subsidiary, has sought protection from creditors, officials said today.
The privately held Aancor filed the voluntary petitions in United States Bankruptcy Court on Friday.
National Gypsum was taken private in April 1986 in a $1.64 billion leveraged buyout led by management.
The company subsequently has reduced the face value of its debt from about $2 billion to about $1 billion, said Peter C. Browning, president and chief executive of both companies.
Contributing to the company's debt level were a drop in gypsum wallboard prices to their lowest levels in a decade and declines in housing starts, he said.
National Gypsum had 1989 sales of $1.36 billion.
Aancor's debt reduction remains ahead of schedule, Mr.
Browning said, but the company's efforts to reduce its debt further and insure necessary liquidity had not been sufficient.
The Austin Company, a wholly owned subsidiary of National Gypsum, will be excluded from the filing, company officials said.


Fat on Thighs and Paunches Is the Fate of All Mammals
FEW things in life are as vexing as the talent that fat has for gathering in unsightly pockets and paunches at particular spots around the body: jiggling on the thighs, bulging out from the belly, flapping down from the triceps.
But distressing though such fat deposits are, they may simply be the price people pay for being mammals.


INSIDE
Apartheid Foes Gain an Ally The Afrikaner Broederbond, a powerful white supremacist secret society in South Africa, now supports President F. W. de Klerk's announced intention to end apartheid.
Page A9.
Breaking the Ruble Barrier Soviet bank officials said Western businesses will be allowed to change their ruble profits into foreign currency starting in January.
Page D1.


3d Timeout in Sherrard's Career Because of Broken Leg
The hard-luck, bad-break career of Mike Sherrard continues.
Out of pro football for three seasons after twice breaking his right leg, Sherrard broke the leg again in the San Francisco 49ers' 20-17 victory over the Cleveland Browns on Sunday.
He is out for at least six to eight weeks but has a slim chance of returning for the playoffs.
Sherrard was injured while delivering one of the game's biggest plays.
His 35-yard catch on a third-and-14 call with less than two minutes remaining was the big blow that set up Mike Cofer's game-winning 45-yard field goal with 5 seconds left.
As soon as he was hit, Sherrard knew that disaster had struck.


John Powell Jr. Dies; A Retired Minister, 92
The Rev.
Dr.
John Henderson Powell Jr., a retired minister of the Dutch Reformed Church in New York, died yesterday at a nursing home in Manhattan.
He was 92 years old.
He died of a heart attack after a long illness, his daughter, Diana Powell Ward of Manhattan, said.
Dr.
Powell was the minister of the Reformed Church of Bronxville from 1929 to 1949.
He was later associated with the administrative division of the National Industrial Conference Board and, in 1954, was named director of the Camp Fire Girls Council.
He was also the philosophy and religion editor of the Americana Encyclopedia published by the Grolier Society.
He retired in 1963.
He was born in Kansas City, Mo., and was a graduate of the University of Illinois and Yale University.
He received his Ph.D. from the University of Edinburg.
In addition to his daughter, Dr. Powell is survived by two grandchildren.


Granite Construction reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Watt to Coach Leafs
The Toronto Maple Leafs, the team with the worst record in the National Hockey League, yesterday named Tom Watt as head coach for the rest of the season after the dismissal of Doug Carpenter last week.
The Leafs have made their worst-ever start to a season with only one victory and one tie from their first 12 games.
Watt, 54 years old, was hired during the off season as an assistant to Carpenter. (Reuters)


Health-Mor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gorbachev, in France, Says His Envoy Found Signs of Shift by Iraq
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said here today that he had received fresh information from a Soviet envoy who held talks in Baghdad on Sunday suggesting that President Saddam Hussein was changing his position on the Persian Gulf crisis.
Contradicting earlier reports that the envoy, Yevgeny M. Primakov, had made no progress in his meeting with Mr.
Hussein, Mr.
Gorbachev said there were "some signs emerging that Iraq's leadership might at last heed the voice of the United Nations."


Kinnard Investments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shin Hasegawa, Japanese Official, 71
Shin Hasegawa, who was named Justice Minister in February and stepped down months later because of illness, died of heart failure on Sunday.
He was 71 years old.
Mr.
Hasegawa had been hospitalized since Sept. 3, when he collapsed before an Imperial Palace ceremony for a new Supreme Court judge.
He died at Toranomon Hospital.
He was succeeded as Justice Minister by Seiroku Kajiyama, who created a controversy by comparing foreign prostitutes in Tokyo to American blacks who move into white neighborhoods and "ruin the atmosphere," a remark for which Mr.
Kajiyama later apologized.


Manila Sells Nickel Plant
The Philippine Government has sold a nickel refinery, the Nonoc Mining and Industrial Corporation, for $325 million in the biggest sale in its privatization program, officials said last week.
They said the Asset Privatization Trust had agreed to sell the country's only nickel refinery to a group led by Jesus Cabarrus, a businessman who had owned it before the Government took it over in 1984.


'Godfather, Part III' To Open at Christmas
Putting an end to weeks of speculation, Paramount Pictures announced today that the motion picture "The Godfather, Part III" was ready for release and would open at theaters on Christmas Day.
The long-awaited final chapter of the director Francis Ford Coppola's Mafia tale, filmed at a cost of more than $50 million, had been scheduled to open on Thanksgiving.
But that release date was recently postponed when it became clear the movie would not be completed in time, and rumors that further delays would be required began circulating.
In a statement issued by Paramount, Mr.
Coppola said that thanks to "one of the shortest and most intensive writing-through-post-production schedules in my career," he was now "satisfied and proud that 'The Godfather, Part III' has come together as a true successor to the first two films," which won nine Academy Awards.
Studio executives said a final decision to release the film was made only after the film was screened this weekend in the San Francisco area and was warmly received by those who saw it.


Tokyo Stocks Lower
Stocks in Tokyo closed lower today.
The 225-share Nikkei index ended the day off 86.91 points, or slightly more than three-tenths of a percent, to 25,242.40.


Armstrong World Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Minnesota Politics, a Test of Character
Sinclair Lewis, who grew up here and mocked the sanctimonious provincialism of rural Minnesota in his novels, would have been stunned by the antics of the state's politicians this year.
Arlan Stangeland, who has represented Sauk Centre and the rest of northwestern Minnesota in Congress since 1977, is in trouble because he made several hundred calls to or from the phone of a Virginia woman who is a lobbyist.
He says it was all business.
But in this land of lakes and birches and small towns, where politicians talk constantly about family values and villages of 400 people support three churches, his behavior has raised the suspicion that he was playing around, and has raised questions about the 60-year-old legislator's character.


CHRONICLE
Two names that have long been part of Broadway history are to return to the Great White Way on Thursday night when DAVID MERRICK opens his 88th Broadway production, "Oh, Kay!," and VINCENT SARDI JR.  reopens his restaurant.
"It will be David's party," Mr.
Sardi said, "something we planned for his opening."
While "Oh, Kay!" reprises the Gershwins' 1926 musical, in the new production the story of the moneyed set in "Beachhampton," L.I., has been transformed to Harlem during Prohibition.
The opening-night party for 400 guests will be in a 1920's-style setting in the refurbished restaurant, with an authentic Prohibition touch.
"We don't have a liquor license," Mr.
Sardi said.
The restaurant, founded in 1926 by Mr.
Sardi's father, was sold four years to a group of investors who failed in the venture.
The restaurant closed in July.
Mr.
Sardi re-entered the scene and became the court-appointed receiver of the property in a bankruptcy proceeding.
"I'll be back," said Mr.
Sardi, who is in the process of regaining ownership.
The restaurant opens to the public on Friday.
Diners can bring their own alcoholic drinks until a new liquor license is issued.


Supreme Court Roundup; Case Aims at Ending Disarray on Right to Counsel
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the Constitution protects a prisoner, already represented by a lawyer on one criminal charge, from being questioned by the police about a separate crime without the lawyer's presence.
The case is an appeal by a Wisconsin man who was awaiting trial on robbery charges, on which a public defender had already appeared for him at a court hearing.
Detectives entered his jail cell at night to question him about an unrelated murder.
They read the prisoner his rights under the Supreme Court's Miranda decision, which guarantees a suspect's right to have a lawyer present during police questioning.
The prisoner waived that right.


White, Evans Move On
Frank White, a Kansas City Royals infielder for 18 years, filed for free agency yesterday, the same day that the Boston Red Sox asked waivers on Dwight Evans, who played for them for 18 years.
Both actions came after the teams said they would not offer the players contracts.
Evans waited for his release rather than filing immediately for free agency because he is a Type A player who would require compensation if he signed with a new team.
Once he clears waivers Thursday, he can sign with anyone with no compensation involved.
White is not a ranking player and therefore not subject to compensation.
Tom Brookens of Cleveland and Doug Bair of Pittsurgh also added their names to the free-agent list.


President Leads in Ivory Coast Election
Early returns in the Ivory Coast's first openly contested presidential elections since it achieved independence in 1960, today showed Felix Houphouet-Boigny, Africa's oldest and longest-serving leader, on his way to a landslide victory.
Preliminary results announced on national television this morning gave Mr.
Houphouet-Boigny about 85 percent of the vote in balloting against the opposition candidate, Laurent Gbagbo, a history teacher.


Solution to Old Puzzle: How Short a Shortcut?
TWO mathematicians have solved an old problem in the design of networks that has enormous practical importance but has baffled some of the sharpest minds in the business.
Dr.
Frank Hwang of A.T.&amp;T.
Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, N.J., and Dr.
Ding Xhu Du, a postdoctoral student at Princeton University, announced at a meeting of theoretical computer scientists last week that they had found a precise limit to the design of paths connecting three or more points.


Kansas Gas's Shares Rise On Signing of Merger Pact
Shares of the Kansas Gas and Electric Company rose sharply yesterday after the utility signed a definitive agreement to merge with the Kansas Power and Light Company in a deal worth nearly $1 billion.
The accord, signed over the weekend, is an attempt by Kansas Gas and Electric to end the hostile takeover bid begun in July by the Kansas City Power and Light Company of Kansas City, Mo., but it will not necessarily do so.
Kansas Gas shares rose $1.875, to $26.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Shares of Kansas Power fell $1.375, to $20.50, and Standard &amp; Poor's put the company's outstanding debt on creditwatch.


Iowa Southern Inc. reports earnings for 12mo Sept 30


Apartments for Poor To Be Given by Lottery
New York City will conduct an apartment lottery for low-income families living in overcrowded conditions to discourage families from entering the homeless shelter system to gain city apartments, officials said yesterday.
Last month, city officials said they were overwhelmed with an unexpected rise in the number of homeless families.
They attributed the increase to their success in providing low-cost permanent housing to people who had lived in the shelter system.
Jeffrey Carples, executive deputy commissioner of the city Human Resources Administration, said that families who were living in overcrowded conditions soon learned that the quickest way to get an apartment was by coming into the shelter system.
The lottery will, over the next three years, allocate 3,000 apartments from the Department of Housing Preservation and Development and 2,700 Housing Authority apartments for low-income families.
The lottery is open to families who can prove that they lived doubled up since July of 1989.


All Eyes Are on Waitz


A Scramble for New Bailout Funds
The Bush Administration began scrambling today for ways to finance the bailout of the savings and loan industry in the wake of Congress's decision in its waning hours over the weekend not to supply any more money to the limping rescue effort.
A senior Treasury official, Deputy Secretary John E. Robson, said in an interview today that the department was considering use of an ambiguous provision in last year's bailout legislation that could permit the Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency overseeing the bailout, to borrow an additional $18.8 billion.
But he said it would probably be days or longer before a decision would be made as the Administration evaluated the political and practical consequences of borrowing without Congressional approval.
He added that even if some funds were borrowed, the pace of the bailout would be forced to slow considerably.


Carter Hawley Sets 350 Layoffs
Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., the Los Angeles-based department store chain, said it would lay off 350 workers by Wednesday as part of a previously announced program to cut about 1,000 positions from its 30,000-member work force.
"We're implementing what we said we're going to do," a Carter Hawley spokesman, Bill Dombrowski, said.
He said employee severance packages would vary according to position and length of service.
Carter Hawley Hale said early this month that it would sell its Thalhimer Brothers Inc. unit to the May Department Stores Company for approximately $325 million.


Profits Scoreboard
Net Income
Percent
July-Sept.
Change
1990
From '89
Armstrong World Industries
$ 26,300,000
-
44.0
Boeing Co.
378,000,000
+
56.2
Chrysler Corp.
(214,000,000)
--
Foster Wheeler Corp.
7,800,000
+
27.9
Johnson Controls Inc.
29,000,000
+
21.8
LTV Corp.
(30,400,000)
--
Manville Corp.
24,500,000
-
39.4
National Gypsum Co.
(22,700,000)
--
Pennzoil Co.
26,400,000
-
25.4
Reader's Digest Assn. Inc.
50,200,000
+
21.8
Ryland Group Inc.
5,800,000
-
46.8
Spiegel Inc.
10,100,000
-
6.5
Viacom Inc.
34,700,000
*--
See accompanying notes for special items.
(Loss) *Loss in year-earlier period.


Dollar Is Mostly Higher; Dealers Say Trading Is Dull
The dollar settled mostly higher on world currency markets yeterday, but traders said dealings were dull.
Gold prices advanced after falling overseas.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold bullion for current delivery settled at $373.70 a troy ounce, up $2.80 from Friday's close.
Republic National Bank quoted a late bid for gold of $373.65, up $2.65 an ounce.


British Theaters Clamor for Funds
Dozens of directors, actors and theater administrators, including Sir Peter Hall, Richard Eyre and Vanessa Redgrave, gathered here at the Albery Theater in the West End today to call on Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's Government to give more cash to Britain's subsidized theater.
Under a red-and-white banner proclaiming "Theater Fights Back," about 80 theater professionals from local, regional and national organizations began the Autumn 90 Theater Campaign, which is intended to convince the British Government over the next few weeks that the subsidized theater should get more funds from the Arts Council, the quasi-governmental body that channels public money to the arts.


Assemblyman Is Voted Leader Of the Democrats in Brooklyn
Assemblyman Clarence Norman Jr. was unanimously elected Brooklyn Democratic leader yesterday, making him the first black Democratic leader of the borough and one of the most powerful black politicians in the state.
He succeeded Howard Golden, who had to choose between his borough presidency and the party leadership under the new City Charter.
Mr. Norman, 39 years old, has been a state legislator since 1983.


Chemical Fabrics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bush and Baker Explicit In Threat to Use Force
The Bush Administration stepped up its threats against Iraq today with an explicit warning to President Saddam Hussein that the United States would not shrink from "use of force" if he continued to occupy Kuwait.
In separate but coordinated speeches in California, President Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d deplored what they said was barbarism in its worst form, the rape of Kuwait, as they underscored their resolve to roll back the Iraqi invasion with force if necessary.
They cited incidents like the shooting of children and the use of zoo animals for target practice.


CHRONICLE
MARY MARTIN, who starred in such Broadway musicals as "Peter Pan," "The Sound of Music" and "South Pacific," has been hospitalized for tests, but a spokesman for Miss Martin's son, the actor LARRY HAGMAN , refused to say which hospital the actress was in or the reason for the tests.
"In this case we just don't choose to give out information," the spokesman, Richard Grant, said yesterday in Los Angeles.
Miss Martin, who is 76 years old, became a star with her 1938 appearance in the musical "Leave It to Me." She also played Nellie Forbush in "South Pacific" and Maria in "The Sound of Music." She first played Peter Pan on Broadway in 1954.
Miss Martin was seriously injured in a 1982 automobile accident that killed her manager, Ben Washer.
The actress Janet Gaynor and her husband, the producer Paul Gregory, were also injured in the crash.


Figuring the Tax Impact And Acting to Cut the Cost
With a deficit-cutting plan finally in place, the first question most taxpayers want answered is whether their own income taxes are going up or down.
The easiest way to figure that out is to look at a copy of last year's returns and apply the new rules to a few key numbers.
Few married couples with taxable income below $80,000 or single people with income below $50,000 need be concerned.
Their taxes are not likely to be affected.
For those above those levels, the difference will probably amount to only a few hundred dollars, unless they are really rich.


Bridge
If the opening leader wins the first trick and finds that the dummy has a side-suit with three small cards, it will often be right to shift to it, hoping to develop tricks.
But that play can also be disastrous, and each case must be considered on its merits.
Consider, for example, the diagramed deal from the Women's Pair Championship at the Summer Nationals in Boston in July.
Sitting North and South were Jane Sedlmayr of Manhattan and Patricia Watson of Phoenix.
They reached five diamonds by an abrupt route after West had overcalled one diamond with one spade.


Retired Police Officer Killed Trying to Stop Subway Robbers


Nobutaka Shikanai Is Dead at 78; Founder of Japanese Media Group
Nobutaka Shikanai, the founder of one of Japan's largest media conglomerates and the creator of its most famous art museum, died Sunday of liver failure, his company, the Fujisankei Communications Group, said today.
He was 78 years old.
Mr.
Shikanai was one of a handful of entrepreneurs who built huge business empires from the ruins of Japan after World War II.
But unlike Akio Morita of Sony or Soichiro Honda of the Honda Motor Company, Mr.
Shikanai gained his business success not from technology and marketing but from politics, and he remained a powerful conservative voice in Japan until his death.


Hall (Frank B.) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tourism and Whales' Protectors Collide Over a Hawaii Law
MANY boat operators, sea plane pilots, jet skiers and beach lifeguards have lined up to oppose rules proposed to protected marine life, notably the humpback whales that winter here.
A law passed by the State Legislature in July required motorboats and other so-called thrill craft to stay away from waters frequented by the whales from Dec. 15 to May 15.
In the apparently unending struggle between economics and the environment, opponents say the rules were drafted without proper environmental impact studies and are so strict they unfairly jeopardize tourism; supporters say they are necessary to avoid disrupting the whales.


Datascope Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Foster Wheeler reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.81
7.87
8.75
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.12
7.16
7.78
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.13
7.11
7.62
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.51
8.47
7.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.83
8.77
7.92
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.92
9.85
9.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS*
7.73
7.72
7.40
*Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Blood on Its Hands
The case for stronger Federal gun controls became overwhelming this year.
Yet Congress ignored the evidence, thus condemning thousands to injury or death, millions to lives of fear.
For years, the gun control debate centered on spectacular crimes like John Hinckley's attempt to assassinate President Reagan.
The issue has now grown alarmingly common.
The firepower in the hands of young urban gangsters has generated record high murder rates and made every city dweller a potential "mushroom," a victim of stray bullets.


With Legs As Slender As Wires
How brittle was that bone that was broken in the right foreleg of Go for Wand.
And by extension, we are reminded once again how brittle and mercurial are the fates, for equines as well as humans -- remember, Go for Wand's jockey, Randy Romero, had been thrown and lay motionless in his yellow silks on the track by the railing.
And perhaps the realization of this was the bellows in the subconscious that resulted in the sudden gasps of horror from the crowd of 51,236 spectators at Belmont Park on Saturday afternoon, a crowd that, until then, had been cheering wildly in the stands.
The fall turned the possibility of triumph for Go for Wand, just seconds away, into deadly disaster.
Amid the tragedy, one shard of glory has been understandably neglected.
And that is the great race run in the Breeders' Cup Distaff by Bayakoa, the 6-year-old mare who has become the grand dame of race horses, and Go for Wand, until that spectacular 3-year-old filly shattered her ankle, which cost her her life, just strides from the finish line.
Go for Wand was a champion to the end; Bayakoa, by good fortune, remains a champion.
This race, the fifth of nine Saturday and run for a purse of $1 million, had been billed as a virtual match race between these two stellar bays.
For this long, fall-cool afternoon, an afternoon filled with the running of some of the finest race horses in the world, the race between Bayakoa and Go for Wand was expected to be the most exciting contest of all.
And it was.
Almost from the moment they broke from the starting gate in this mile-and-an-eighth race with five other contenders, the pair ran head to head, with Go for Wand maintaining a slight lead.
And they traveled together, like a bicycle built for two all the way around the track and then into the long home stretch, until that fateful moment about 100 yards from the finish line when Go for Wand misstepped because, according to her jockey, she was trying so hard.
She tumbled, fell, rose, limped toward the finish line, and, just short of it, collapsed, never to rise again.
Romero returned to ride in the ninth and concluding race of the day, finishing sixth aboard Izvestia; Go for Wand, a leading candidate for the Horse of the Year award, was destroyed.
She was shot with a lethal injection while lying on the track; a horse with a broken leg cannot stand during healing, and thus her organs would be misplaced.
To save her the lingering agony, she was humanely and immediately "put down," as the racing euphemism goes.
The yellow-painted wood stall of Bayakoa, in barn 12 in the Belmont stable area, is located not far from barn 41, where her chief rival, Go for Wand, was kept.
At around 9 o'clock on Saturday, with the morning sunlight slicing through the small barn windows and falling at the feet of Bayakoa, she was visited by Joan D'Alonzo, an examining track veterinarian.
At about the same time, a short distance down the road, Go for Wand was being checked in the exact fashion by another track doctor, Neil Clary.
It is a routine followed for every horse racing there that day.
Pulling back the long lip of Bayakoa, D'Alonzo read to her assistant, holding a clipboard, the number tattooed on the inside upper lip of the horse.
This is to make certain that the horse in the stall is the horse that is supposed to be there.
Clary was doing the same.
Sometimes, after all, even the best of us need this confirmation: haven't most of us at one time or another looked into a mirror and wondered just who it is we are?
D'Alonzo called, "29309." Her assistant repeated the number printed on her sheet: "29309." The numbers matched.
Then D'Alonzo slipped under the railing and felt Bayakoa's legs for any untoward bump or warmth, which might indicate inflammation.
"O.K.," she determined.
"Jog her a little bit," she now requested of the groom, Ricardo Contreras.
He took the reins and jogged Bayakoa along shed row for about 50 feet.
D'Alonzo crouched to observe the movement of the legs.
"She's sound," she concluded.
Clary, certainly, was doing the same.
It is always a shock to see close up how very thin are the legs of thoroughbred race horses, nearly like wires.
How they can support the 1,200 or so pounds of the rest of the animal is an amazing thing, especially when they're dashing at 35 miles an hour.
Sometimes they can't.
As Bayakoa was being led through the concrete tunnel to the paddock before the race, her owner, Frank Whitham, walking behind his horse and looking at her so-slender legs, said, with parental concern to his veteran trainer, Ron McAnally, "You checked her shoes, too, I guess."
McAnally retorted, respectfully, "I try to cover all the bases."
So, it seems, did Billy Badgett, Go for Wand's trainer.
And, apparently, so did everyone else involved.
But sometimes, for some of us, it is still not enough.


American Express in Pact on Long-Distance Phone Calls
The American Express Company waded yesterday into the bitter credit card marketing skirmishes between the nation's largest banks and the nation's biggest telephone company.
American Express said its card could be used to place long-distance calls through the MCI Communications Corporation and the U S Sprint Communications Company.
The carriers will offer a 10 percent discount from their regular calling-card rates, the same discount that the American Telephone and Telegraph Company provides for its Universal credit card.
Review Sought by Banks
The Universal card is a Mastercard or Visa card that is sponsored by A.T.&amp;T. and combines the features of a general-purpose credit card and a telephone calling card.
The nation's leading banks have asked regulators to review the legality of A.T.&amp;T.'s sponsorship, have adopted rules to prevent any more non-banks from issuing Visa cards, have added long-distance calling features to their own cards and have even shifted a little of their own long-distance business away from A.T.&amp;T.


Increasing Crop Yields With Synthetic Gene
SCIENTISTS have genetically engineered certain plants to prevent pollen production, an advance that could help farmers produce high-yield hybrid crops more easily.
The technique, reported in the current issue of the British journal Nature, involves introducing a synthetic male sterility gene into plant cells.
Researchers from the University of California at Los Angeles and Plant Genetic Systems NV of Belgium created strains of tobacco and oilseed rape that did not produce pollen but were otherwise normal.
They said their technique could be applied to many other plants as well.
The scientists identified the specific plant gene involved in activating a cell that makes a substance needed for pollen production.
They then fused this gene with ribonuclease, an enzyme, from bacteria.
Introducing this construct into a plant turned off the pollen production.
Farmers prefer to plant hybrid seed, which produces higher-yielding crops, rather than seed derived from self or random pollination.
To make pure strains of hybrid crop plants, seed breeders have had to strip the male pollen-producing structure, the anther, either mechanically or by hand; otherwise an unpredictable fraction of hybrid plants would result.
This new genetic technique could make the process much simpler and more efficient, said Robert B. Goldberg, a molecular biologist at U.C.L.A. who was involved in the research.


All Eyes On Waitz This Year
She first came to New York in 1978, never having run a road race or a race of any kind longer than 13 miles.
"Unknown territory," she called it, meaning both the city and its fabled marathon, which her husband had talked her into running.
Grete Waitz acquiesced only because she had never visited the United States before and she wanted to see New York, as she recalled yesterday, more than run the New York City Marathon.
"I didn't know what to expect when it came to running," she said.
"Then, I won, setting a world record, and it opened a new door for me."


Chesapeake Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


David G. Scanlon, 69, African-Studies Expert
David G. Scanlon, a retired professor of international education at Teachers College of Columbia University, died on Thursday at Boston University Hospital.
He was 69 years old and lived in Orleans, Mass.
He died of cancer, said a spokesman for the Nicherson Funeral Home.
Dr.
Scanlon, who specialized in African studies, directed the Institute for Education in Africa at Teachers College, which trained teachers for the Peace Corps in several African countries, from 1956 to 1970.
He traveled extensively in Africa and lived for a time in Uganda.
During the long conflict between Nigeria and Biafra, Dr.
Scanlon, a Quaker, represented the American Friends Service Committee in relief work.
In 1970 he retired from Teachers College because of an illness.
He later joined Cape Cod Community College in Barnstable as professor of history, and established a program in international studies.
He retired in 1983.
Dr.
Scanlon was born in Leominster, Mass., was a graduate of Fitchburg State Teachers College in Massachusetts and held a doctorate from Teachers College.
He served for two years with Unesco, establishing schools in the interior of Liberia.
He wrote several books on African and international education and was co-editor of the World Yearbook of Education from 1968 to 1970.
He is survived by his wife, Mary, and a daughter, Judith, of Kingston, Mass.


Critics Say Cars Got Break on Clean Air
Residents of the nation's smoggiest cities will have to contend with dirty air well into the next century because the automobile industry got big breaks in the new Clean Air Act, government and private environmentalists say.
In large part, they say, the industry's success in fending off pollution standards that would have been tougher and quicker to take effect than those ultimately agreed to stems primarily from the efforts of one man: Representative John D. Dingell, the powerful Democrat from Detroit who is the automobile manufacturers' leading advocate in Washington.


Unocal Accelerates Drilling Program
The Unocal Corporation said higher crude oil prices would enable it to speed its development drilling program in North America.
The company said it would spend $33 million to drill an additional 93 development wells in the United States and Canada this year, which should increase oil production by 5,700 barrels a day and natural gas by 11 million cubic feet a day by early 1991.
The wells were originally part of Unocal's 1991 drilling program.
But the cash generated by higher oil prices has allowed the company to make its investment now.
Unocal's stock was unchanged today at $28.875 on the New York Stock Exchange.


CHRONICLE
The annual Appeal of Conscience Award was presented last night to AGOSTINO CARDINAL CASAROLI , the Vatican Secretary of State, and JAY A. PRITZKER , chairman of the Hyatt Corporation.
The awards were given at the 25th anniversary dinner of the Appeal of Conscience Foundation, an ecumenical organization founded by Rabbi Arthur Schneier, senior rabbi of the Park East Synagogue.
Scheduled speakers included HENRY A. KISSINGER , Secretary of State in the Nixon and Ford Administrations, and THOMAS J. PICKERING , the chief United States representative to the United Nations.
In his prepared speech, Cardinal Casaroli, who has sought since 1963 to restore the religious rights of Catholics in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, said his mission "took on increasing importance and opened up broader horizons than that of the specific defense of religious freedom" as people sought freedom in many spheres.
Mr.
Pritzker was honored for using his business acumen to further education, mutual understanding and international cooperation.


Southington Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Campaign Trail; 2 Candidates Who Beat Death Itself
The American West is coming to the conclusion of a political season of the unexpected and the contradictory.
Politics has not been the same in Nevada since Sept. 3, when the Republican candidate for state treasurer, Bob Seale, crashed his twin-engine Cessna at Fallon after a campaign stop.
The crash killed his wife, Judy, and seriously injured Mr.
Seale and the Republican candidate for lieutenant govenor, State Senator Sue Wagner.
Mr.
Seale is in a wheelchair and Ms.
Wagner is immobilized by a neck brace.


By Design; New Ways With the Shirt
Here we go again; another piece of classic clothing is going through a chameleon phase.
This time the shirt is being given the glamour treatment.
In Paris last week, practically every collection for spring had at least one version of this newly revved-up basic.
These shirts are anything but quiet background props.
Most are of sinuous silk in screaming colors or are printed in eye-popping patterns.
They are simply cut, single-breasted, worn loose and hanging out and their sleeves are either rolled up or cropped just above the elbow.


British Forces Show Off Their Muscle in the Desert


Fiber-Optic Network Is Urged at Conference
Scientists, business executives and academic researchers meeting here today said the key to restoring United States competitiveness is to drop regulatory barriers to building a fiber-optic network to deliver electronic information to the nation's homes.
The regulated Bell operating companies have argued that they need to be freed to provide electronic information services, including television, to justify the investment in building such a network.
The meeting came just two days after Congress failed to pass a bill that would have provided a half-billion dollars over three years for research and development to build a high-speed computer network to link the nation's supercomputer centers.


Hallwood Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brewers Are Criticized For Use of Halloween
Beer companies that have used Halloween as a theme in their ads were criticized yesterday by the United States Surgeon General and several groups who said the ads exploit a holiday associated with children and encourage beer drinking by those who are under age.
"This year the alcohol industry is serving up new treats and tricks," the Surgeon General, Dr.
Antonia C. Novello, said at a news conference in Washington.
Christine Lubinski, director for public policy for the National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence, said: "The alcoholic beverage industry has made every effort to turn Halloween into a drinking holiday through promotions that substitute beer chugging for apple bobbing."
This was denied by Steve Burrows, vice president of consumer affairs for the Anheuser-Busch Companies, whose Budweiser commercials use a Halloween theme.
"First of all, I would like to see any marketing that promoted beer chugging," he said.
"It's the same tired argument that beer advertising causes alcohol abuse. We're promoting the product within a Halloween context like hundreds of other adult products. We're not in schoolyards giving away Halloween masks with beer on them."
A spokesman for the Miller Brewing Company, a division of the Philip Morris Companies, said his company's Miller Lite ads also were not aimmed at children.
"Halloween is an adult holiday," Dave Fogelson said.
"We use the occasion to market our products in a responsible way to people who are of legal age who already drink beer."


Hussein, in U.S. TV Interview, Rejects a Kuwait Withdrawal
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq said today that he had no intention of withdrawing his troops from Kuwait, despite the forces mounting against him.
"If an embargo would force the American people to withdraw from the last state that was linked to the United States -- say Hawaii -- then the same standards, if they were to be applied, would probably lead the Iraqis to consider withdrawal from Kuwait," he said.
Expresses Confidence
In a wide-ranging interview with correspondents of the Cable News Network in Baghdad, Mr.
Hussein said that Iraq was seeking to avoid war, but that he was "confident of victory in the end" if hostilities broke out.


Kyoto Journal; Dreaming City of Temples Awakes to Bulldozers
Zenyu Asano led the way up the cramped stairway of the five-tiered Yasaka Pagoda.
The affable Zen Buddhist priest was discussing the unusual carvings on its altar, but when he reached the ledge beneath the structure's wing-like roof and took in the view of the city that is Japan's cultural soul, he turned to a more consuming matter: real estate development.
His face bright beneath the stubbled dome of his shaven head, Mr.
Asano pointed out a vacant sliver of land just below.
Only by mobilizing neighborhood opposition, he said, was he able to halt a plan to put up a tall luxury apartment building there, a threat to the pagoda's five-century-long vigil as a spiritual beacon visible from much of the city.


New Circuit Boards From Silicon Graphics
Silicon Graphics Inc. will introduce on Tuesday a set of circuit boards that will enable personal computers to display three-dimensional images, a job that only a few years ago required a computer costing more than $100,000.
Silicon Graphics has been the leading vendor of specialized computers used for displaying and rotating realistic-looking images, tasks that require an enormous amount of computing power.
Using such a graphics work station, for instance, an architect designing a house can rotate an image of the house on the screen and see how it would look from different vantage points.


Cold Fusion Still Escapes Usual Checks Of Science
LAST week the State of Utah found itself in an unenviable position.
One of its star researchers, Dr.
B.
Stanley Pons, failed to appear before a review committee examining his cold fusion research, in which the state has invested $5 million.
Why have the conventional checking mechanisms of science apparently failed to resolve the issue decisively enough to put Utah out of its uncertainty?
Experts say the saga of cold fusion is highly revealing of how science handles sweeping claims, and how that process can be subverted by dedicated mavericks who defy the canons of science.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about an agreement by the Kansas Gas and Electric Company to merge with the Kansas Power and Light Company misidentified the utility company that made a hostile takeover bid for Kansas Gas in July.
It was the Kansas City Power and Light Company, not Kansas Power.
Further developments are reported today on page D25.


Canfor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Salvadoran Retaliates for U.S. Vote on Aid
A senior military officer stopped foreign journalists from going to the northeastern part of El Salvador on Saturday to cover a weekend memorial service for the victims of one the worst massacres in El Salvador's civil war almost a decade ago.
The step was apparently taken in reprisal for a vote by the United States Congress to halve military aid to the Central American country.
The journalists had been invited by several organizations to cover a news conference and memorial service for about 1,000 people who were rounded up and slain by the army on Dec. 11, 1981, at El Mozote in the northeastern province of Morazan, which is largely controlled by leftist rebels.
Only one resident of the hamlet is known to have survived.
Col.
Oscar Alberto Leon Linares, the army commander of the region, allowed Salvadorans into the zone but stopped foreign journalists.
He told some that they could not proceed because of combat in the area, but he informed Thomas Long, a part-time photographer and reporter for The New York Times, that the decision was a reprisal for the action by Congress.
"If they hadn't cut the aid, it would be different," Colonel Linares said.
Congress voted this month to slash American military aid to El Salvador, which last year totaled $83 million and paid for the entire Salvadoran defense budget except salaries.


Keating Data To Be Released
A judge has ruled that thousands of pages of evidence of a grand jury investigation into Charles H. Keating Jr., the former savings and loan association owner, can be made public this Friday.
The defense argued against releasing the material, which it said was inflammatory.
Mr.
Keating, former owner of the failed Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, is free on bail of $300,000 while awaiting trial on 42 counts that he had defrauded investors.
His institution collapsed at a cost to taxpayers of more than $2 billion, the biggest failure in the industrywide bailout.
Arguing against releasing the papers, David Frulla, a defense lawyer, told Superior Court Judge Lance Ito, "We're afraid of this lynch-mob mentality that is developing all around the savings and loan industry and around this country." He said the transcripts contained inflammatory material that could hurt Mr.
Keating's chances of a fair trial.
Judge Ito agreed on Friday to a request by The Los Angeles Times and The Orange County Register to unseal the transcripts, saying he did not believe their release would prejudice the case.


Bradley Tours His State In Nonstop Vote Search
In a kind of scavenger hunt for votes, Senator Bill Bradley departed before dawn this morning for an 18-hour tour of New Jersey's 21 counties, a marathon day of campaigning for a senator freshly freed from the budget deadlock in Washington.
Before it was through, a bleary Mr.
Bradley was to milk a cow, paddle a canoe, carve a pumpkin, and pay visits to a college, a Jewish federation, a wildlife refuge and a used tire dump, among other institutions.


Computer Automation reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aspen Ribbons Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Glum View For Airlines
The world's airlines face increasing troubles because of rising fuel costs caused by the Persian Gulf crisis, the head of the International Air Transport Association said today.
The association's director general, Gunter Eser, said in an annual report that the financial outlook for airlines, which had not been good in the first half of 1990, had worsened because of the crisis.
"Fuel prices have been even more volatile than before, and there have been sharp increases in hull insurance costs for operations in the Middle East," he told airline executives.
Fuel costs range from 10 percent to 25 percent of total operating costs.
Oil costs have almost doubled since Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2.
The association's members agreed in September to raise fares by 5 to 8 percent and cargo rates by 7 percent to offset higher fuel costs.


El Paso Refinery LP reports earnings for Qtr to ept 30


Weicker, Ahead in Polls Stars in Everyone's Ads
As Connecticut's three-way race for governor enters its last week, Lowell P. Weicker Jr. has become the featured player, either as star or villain, of every candidate's television commercials.
The ads, repeated dozens of times a day across the state, have put the former three-term Senator and his independent campaign more squarely than ever at the center of the race.
Is Mr.
Weicker plotting an income tax, as the Republican, Representative John G. Rowland, charges?
Is he vacillating and duplicitous, as portrayed in the ads of the Democrat, Representative Bruce A. Morrison?
Battle of the Spots
Mr.
Weicker, a Republican who has maintained large leads in polls every since forming A Connecticut Party this spring to run as an independent, has not shrunk from being a one-man referendum.
Taking aim at Mr.
Rowland in particular, his own ads have sought to make negative campaigning an issue of character, suggesting that anyone who engages in such techniques is desperate for power and should be rejected by voters.


Death on the Track Offers Glimpse of a Hard Reality
Nearly every day at a race track somewhere, a horse breaks down or pulls up lame and is relegated to at best an uncertain future.
Some can be saved, others cannot, and some of their owners decide they are not worth saving.
If you pass a life around this game, all you can do is rationalize and harden yourself to it, try not to think about it too much and turn the page to the next race.
Then, every few years, the horse that breaks down and dies is a special one, whose talent and courage have made him a hero or a friend instead of 6 in the daily double, and it happens with thousands or millions of casual fans and newcomers watching.
In a heartbeat, the walls of defense, the years of denial, crumble.
When Go for Wand shattered her right foreleg just 100 yards from victory in the Breeders' Cup Distaff at Belmont Park last Saturday, the world wept, in different ways.
For those not accustomed to the sight, it was shocking and brutal.
For those who have seen it all too often, it was a moment of truth.
The filly's handlers were horrified, of course, but so were the rivals and those with no stake in her but admiration.
Ron McAnally, the trainer of Bayakoa, who had dueled with Go for Wand from the start and then won what was left of the race, could not keep his voice from quavering in the year's most somber winner's circle.
Fans crowding the rail forced themselves to watch the fallen filly's final heaves, staring transfixed.
Race-trackers measure time and place by the signposts of their calling.
California means Santa Anita and Hollywood, August is Saratoga, a mile means Dr.
Fager's 1:32 1/5.
Years are associated with Triple Crowns and champions: 1973 is Secretariat, 1978 the year of Affirmed and Alydar.
The last decade has had its share of moments and champions to mark the years -- Spectacular Bid, Devil's Bag, Personal Ensign, Easy Goer and Sunday Silence -- but painful moments and pictures endure as strongly.
Timely Writer taking his final steps on the stretch turn of the 1982 Jockey Club Gold Cup at Belmont, not far from the flagpole where he would be buried that night.
Swale suddenly collapsing during a morning sponge bath, his heart stopped by something that remained a mystery even after an endless autopsy.
And now Go for Wand.
Racing is filled with a keen awareness of life cycles.
Stallions and mares are mated each winter, foals are delivered the next spring, then sold as yearlings the following season and raced as 2-year-olds a year later.
They race a year or a few, then the best of them return to the farm, perpetuate their bloodlines, then grow old and die at pasture.
The intrusion of sudden death breaks the chain.
Instead of returning to the fields where she was born and raised, Go for Wand was buried Sunday night near the infield flagpole facing the winner's circle at Saratoga.
The gesture was perfect.
No filly in 127 years of Saratoga has dominated that meeting the way Go for Wand did this past August, proving herself a brilliant sprinter in the Test Stakes and a classic champion in the Alabama Stakes.
A plaque with her likeness will surely be hung in Racing's Hall of Fame across the street from the track in five years' time, and a memorial marking her burial site will be in the infield as well.
No one who saw Go for Wand break down will ever forget it and no one should.
For those who watch few races, it may be a long while before they can bring themselves to watch another.
For those whose life this is, the tears shed Saturday were not just for Go for Wand, but for the others who were never as fast but who tried just as hard, their reach exceeding their grasp.
It is understandable that people are grasping for explanations about what happened at Belmont on Saturday, not only to Go for Wand but to two other horses who lost their lives in the aftermath of the Breeders' Cup Sprint, Mr.
Nickerson and Shaker Knit.
Danger, though, lies in too quickly embracing notions that are not relevant to what happened.
The deaths of three horses on the sport's championship day of racing may suggest a pattern or trend, but there is none.
Go for Wand was trying so hard that she overextended herself and went off stride, then put her full weight and speed on an ankle at a fatal angle.
Mr.
Nickerson, who had been racing and training better than ever, suffered a heart attack barely halfway through a race.
Shaker Knit, running perfectly, fell over Mr.
Nickerson and landed on the wrong part of his spine.
All three horses were in peak form and full health, trained by superior horsemen who handled them with the same sound methods good trainers have used for decades, and none had raced on medication or had their careers interrupted by injuries.
The Belmont track surface, one of the sport's safest, was a step or two slower than usual Saturday and otherwise fair and uniform.
The races were cleanly run and the horses were perfectly ridden.
Racing has plenty of legitimate problems, like the use of questionable drugs and the excessive length of the racing season, but these issues have nothing to do with the deaths of the three horses.
What happened was tragic and sickening but also unavoidable.
All that the living can do is remain sensitive to the fragility and unquestioning courage of these magnificent horses, and bid them a respectful farewell.


International Microelectronic Pr.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clear Channel Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Boeing's Profit Climbed 56.2% on Strong Sales in Quarter
Even as high jet fuel prices are hurting airlines, the Boeing Company today reported strong growth in sales and earnings for the third quarter.
And despite a weakening national economy, the company said its long-term commercial aircraft forecast remains positive.
Boeing also said its board had given a go-ahead to start production of the 777, the company's new twin-engine midsize airliner.
United Airlines has ordered 34 of the planes, with options for an additional 34.
The 777 will seat 360 to 390 passengers in two classes, and the first will be delivered to United, owned by the UAL Corporation, in May 1995.
Boeing is now seeking other buyers for the plane, which will be bigger than the 767 but smaller than the 747.


INDIA READY TO BAR HINDU MOVE TODAY
The besieged state Uttar Pradesh is all but sealed off from the rest of India tonight as a state government loyal to Prime Minister V. P. Singh tries to prevent a disputed mosque from being overrun Tuesday by 10,000 militant Hindus determined to build a temple on the site.
Mr.
Singh's determination to stop the campaign, which is pulling up from the depth of India a religious fervor that modern leaders had hoped was a thing of the past, has put the Prime Minister's political future in jeopardy.


Joslyn Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Secret Society of Afrikaners Helps to Dismantle Apartheid
The Afrikaner Broederbond, an exclusive, secret society that has long wielded enormous influence in the white supremacist politics of South Africa, has undertaken a startling new role by preparing the ground for President F. W. de Klerk to dismantle apartheid.
The Broederbond, which means Brotherhood in Afrikaans, was an instrumental force behind the creation of apartheid after the National Party came to power in 1948 and has promoted the primacy of the Afrikaner in South Africa.
Now, its support of Mr. de Klerk's announced intentions to pull away from apartheid helps to explain why resistance to change has not come to light in the Government and the governing party.


Yemenis Ousted by Saudis Bring New Burden Back to Their Land
They are coming home.
From this spot on the Saudi-Yemeni border, a caravan of cars, jeeps and trucks, laden with Yemenis and the possessions they have accumulated over years -- for some a lifetime -- of work in Saudia Arabia, winds its way through the port towns and villages and mountain outposts on the often unpaved roads of this stunningly beautiful, poor country.
At least 500,000 Yemenis have crossed the border here, Saudi and Yemeni officials say, since mid-September, when the Saudi Government suspended a series of residency privileges for Yemenis working in Saudi Arabia in response to what the Saudis regard as Yemen's support of Iraq in the Persian Gulf crisis. 750,000 May Have Crossed
Because the immigration authorities on both sides of the border count passports rather than people, the number of refugees, or returnees as Yemenis prefer to call its expelled nationals, could be as high as 750,000, the officials said.
About 30,000 Yemenis have crossed at smaller checkpoints elsewhere on this ill-defined and much-contested border.


Review/Opera; Henze's 'Bassarids,' Dark Tale of Revenge
When it comes to heavy, not to say hard-core, Germanic seriousness, it would have been difficult to surpass Saturday evening's concert at Carnegie Hall.
As part of the Cleveland Orchestra's visit here, and of the hall's lavish series of operas in concert form, the Clevelanders offered the New York premiere of one of the most ambitious scores by Germany's most prolific opera composer, Hans Werner Henze.
"The Bassarids," with a libretto by W. H. Auden and Chester Kallman, was first performed at the 1966 Salzburg Festival.
The conductor then was Christoph von Dohnanyi.
Mr.
Dohnanyi clearly believes in the piece, and now, as the Cleveland's music director, he organized these concert performances (Carnegie's was preceded by two at home).


Koss Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Experts Vary on Impact Of Plan to Trim Deficit
Will the five-year deficit-reducing package of nearly $500 billion of spending cuts and tax increases voted by Congress on Sauturday help or hurt the economy?
Robert M. Solow, Nobel laureate, Massachusetts Institute of Technology:
The short-run impact of this package is almost certainly contractionary.
It almost certainly adds to the 1989 impulse toward recession in the economy.
It is very unlikely that the Fed will act fully and quickly enough to offset the contraction.
I would not be able in five years to point to anything good from the agreement, the one exception being unless the package should induce the Fed and the world to allow substantially lower real interest rates.
The longer-run impact over five to 10 years is probably favorable because then we could get more long-run growth, more investment in social infrastructure, more plant and equipment spending, more spending on research and development and a more skilled labor force.
Isabel V. Sawhill, senior fellow at the Urban Institute:
It will be good for the economy because it will untie Alan Greenspan's hands at the Fed to lower interest rates, and will have positive effects on the financial markets, and long-term rates hopefully will come down.
The package buries "voodoo economics." Instead of assuming that we have to have low tax rates as a sure-fire tonic for the economy, it recognizes that big deficits are a greater threat than higher taxes.
But it doesn't do much to control the growth in spending on the elderly, one of largest and fastest growting components of the budget.
Social Security benefits weren't touched.
Medicare benefits were only nicked.
Medicare and Social Security represent 46 percent of domestic spending and slated to grow to 54 percent by the year 2000.
There's also no effort to address the social deficit.
Sar Levitan, director of the Center for Social Policy at George Washington University:
For the short run, I don't think it will have much of an impact, particularly if the Fed follows it up with a mild reduction in interest rates.
For the five-year period, it is more fiction than reality, because we can't project for five years from now, particularly since a recession may be looming on the horizon.
To a large extent it is just a hope that we will reduce the budget deficit by $490 billion.
Also, the projected deficits for the next five years will far exceed the $500 billion reduction that Congress has just voted.
In case of recession or economic downturn, every 1 percent increase in unemployment will raise the deficit by another $40 billion.
The average increase in each postwar recession was a 2 1/2 percent rise in unemployment.
That would mean that if we have an average recession, the Fed budget deficit might actually increase by $100 billion.
We don't know yet what will happen to the financial system in a recession.
John H. Makin, director of fiscal policy studies at the American Enterprise Institute:
The economy is weak and getting weaker.
It is a modest package of deficit reduction.
Everybody is celebrating because we're taking what we can get in these things.
The previous largest was $25 billion after the 1987 stock market crash.
This is of comparable scale.
We are already so close to a recession that it's not worth arguing about.
This is a very gentle tap further into a recession.
Alice M. Rivlin, senior fellow at the Brookings Institution:
The good things are: one, that it happened; two, that it's a five-year agreement, and three, that it is real.
It is not smoke and mirrors.
I also think it's about the right size for now.
It's as big as they should have done, given the state of economy, though not enough for the long run.
I don't think there will be any impetus for doing more next year, in what looks to be a fairly weak economy.
Maybe in two or three years we will have courage to come back and say we have to do more.
Forty billion dollars in the first year is in the small change of a $5 trillion economy.


Q&amp;A
Green Mammals
Q. If green is such a good camouflage color, why are there no green-colored mammals?
A.
Neither of those assumptions may be accurate, said James Doherty, general curator of the Bronx Zoo and chairman of the mammal department.
In the first place, he said, "Green is not necessarily all that good a camouflage color." Unless it is very dark, he said, it may be more obvious than other colors.
Most mammals are probably color blind, he said, so dark green would come across as black, but a lighter green, depending on the brightness of the color, would come across as gray.
Depending on the background, a light-colored animal might be more obvious to some predators, even if it was green, he said.
In the second place, Dr.
Doherty said, there are some green or at least greenish mammals, including the green monkeys of Africa, which are a greenish-olive color, and a small South American rodent called the acouchi, a very dark animal with a greenish color.
The green monkey is light in color, but it is not a deep-forest animal where a dark color would help it disappear, he said.
Instead, it lives in an area with a lot of light and grass.
"But their predators probably don't see color anyway," Dr.
Doherty said.
Melanoma in Albinos
Q. Can a human albino get melanoma?
A.
Sometimes, said Dr.
John J. Di Giovanna, a dermatologist at the National Cancer Institute.
He said there were at least 10 different types of albinism, or impairment of melanocytes, the skin cells that produce the pigment melanin.
Most albinos do have melanocytes, even if they are not making pigment, he said.
Albinos can develop a kind of melanoma called amelanotic melanoma, or melanoma in the absence of pigment.
As long as melanyocytes are present, they can develop a malignancy that may be unrelated to the impairment of the function of making melanin, he said.
And in some albinos, where the ability to make the pigment is impaired, rather than totally absent, melanomas with pigment can occur, he said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about new Federal standards for health insurance for the elderly referred incorrectly in some editions to the timing of Congress's repeal of the law that expanded Medicare coverage for catastrophic illnesses.
It was repealed in November 1989, not this year.


K-Tron International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gulf Leader Says Failed Overtures Could Mean War by Year's End
The Secretary General of the Gulf Cooperation Council, a regional alliance led by Saudi Arabia, said today that war could break out by the end of the year despite the extensive diplomatic activity surrounding the Persian Gulf crisis.
Asked when he thought fighting might begin, the council's Kuwaiti leader, Abdullah Bishara, said in an interview at the alliance's white marble headquarters here, "I would not be wrong if I guessed that it will be in December."


Yemen Reports Iraqi Offer
Yemen's Foreign Minister said today that Iraq had offered to release all foreign hostages immediately if President Mitterrand and President Gorbachev would publicly endorse their commitment to seek a diplomatic, rather than a military, solution to the Persian Gulf crisis.
Mr.
Iryani, the Yemeni official, said he was told of the Iraqi offer by Tariq Aziz, Iraq's Foreign Minister, who telephoned him from Baghdad today about five hours before the United Nations Security Council voted to hold Iraq liable for damage to Kuwait under Iraqi occupation.
Yemen abstained from voting on the resolution.
Mr.
Iryani denied that Iraq had put pressure on Yemen to vote against the resolution or to abstain from voting.
He said Mr.
Aziz called him today to urge him "not to take seriously" the negative reports emerging from the meeting in Baghdad on Sunday between President Hussein and Mr.
Primakov, Mr.
Gorbachev's personal envoy.
But the Yemeni Foreign Minister quoted Mr.
Aziz as saying today that "we felt the meeting was not as negative as reported" and that Iraq had used the session to express its views about what Mr.
Aziz characterized as the "shortcomings" in the Soviet Union's position.
Moreover, Mr.
Iryani recounted, Mr.
Aziz told him that "to keep the discussions going," Iraq had given Mr.
Primakov a "new proposal" aimed at achieving a peaceful resolution of the crisis.
"If they heard back from France or the Soviet Union," Mr.
Iryani said, quoting Mr.
Aziz, "he said they were prepared to release at once what they called all guests and we call hostages."
Mr.
Gorbachev referred obliquely to a new Iraqi initiative at a news conference today after his meeting with Mr.
Mitterrand, adding that there seemed to be some positive movement on the part of Iraq.


China Puzzle: Why a Panel Doesn't Meet
In a famous Sherlock Holmes case, the key clue was a dog that did not bark.
These days, sleuths who follow China are focusing on a similar indication that something is amiss: the clue this time is the Central Committee that does not meet.
The evidence is mostly circumstantial, but it points to significant disputes among China's top leaders.
The jostling seems to be about power, succession and the political and economic directions the nation will take in the 1990's.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
General Mills Inc. filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $300 million in debt securities. *
Korea Development Bank filed for $300 million in bonds due in 2000 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. *
Sears Receivables Financing Group Inc., Chicago, a subsidiary of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co., filed for $250 million in Sears Credit Account Trust 1990-E pass-through certificates through an underwriting group led by Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.
COMMON STOCK *
Fleer Corp., Philadelphia, filed for an offering of 1 million common shares through Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
RATINGS *
Orion Pictures Corp., New York, had its subordinated debt rating lowered to B-, from B, by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Unisys Corp., the computer systems maker in Blue Bell, Pa., had its senior debt rating lowered to Ba-3, from Ba-1, and its convertible subordinated debt cut to B-2, from Ba-3, by Moody's.


U.S. Yielding Its Police Role In Panama to a Rebuilt Force
Marking the final stage of the military occupation that followed the American invasion here, the United States plans to end the last joint patrols of American and Panamanian police teams throughout the country by late November, officials say.
A senior officer of the United States Military Support Group, Col.
Jack Pryor, said American officials were pleased with the progress of the restructured Panamanian Public Force and with its new civilian commander, Ebrahim Asvat.
He said the American military police who have supervised all security operations since the invasion on Dec. 20 are no longer considered essential to preserve public order.


Adia Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Theater; 'Yiddle With a Fiddle,' Variation on Yentl Tale
Before getting into the sort of profundities that come with the territory of Jewish theater, it must be said that "Yiddle With a Fiddle" is as good a time at the theater as one with an eye and ear for musical comedy might wish.
The show at Town Hall simply sparkles with fun and music, and its star, Emily Loesser, presides over it with an all-embracing bright-eyed impishness.
In staging, performance and music, "Yiddle" is very much its own theatrical bauble and only tangentially rubs against the original that inspired it.
This "Yiddle" is in English and it is live, very live, on a stage.
The original was in Yiddish, a great motion picture made in 1936 in Poland, a musical that starred Molly Picon, she of the flashing ganeyvishe oygn, or fun-loving "thievish eyes."


Raymond DiSalvo, 44, Atom Safety Engineer
Raymond DiSalvo, an atomic safety specialist who was part of the team that sought to control damage at the Three Mile Island plant in Pennsylvania in 1979, died Friday at the Ohio State University Hospital in Columbus.
He was 44 years old and lived in Upper Arlington, Ohio.
His mother, Helen, said she had been told that the cause of his death was an unspecified bone ailment.


Iran-Contra: Secrecy's Victim
Secrecy, which made the Iran-contra affair possible, is now a huge obstacle to its cleanup.
Invoking national security, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh refused to allow classified information for the perjury trial of Joseph Fernandez, a former C.I.A. operative at the Nicaraguan end of the illicit enterprise.
That forced Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel, to drop the case.
Who's at fault?
Mr.
Walsh denounces what he calls the Bush Administration's "overprotective attitude toward classified information." It shows, he charges, "a lack of concern for applying the rule of law to officials of the intelligence community." The Justice Department says Mr.
Walsh's prosecutors, by handling masses of secret documents in bunches instead of item by item, made it hard for the Administration to feel safe in releasing any.


German Terror Expert Says Iraqis Have Front Companies Across Europe
Iraq's intelligence service is operating a network of outwardly legitimate businesses across Western Europe, using them as bases for espionage, weapons procurement and possible terrorist attacks, a former senior West German intelligence official says.
The companies, mostly export-import companies and used-car dealerships, are also working to circumvent the United Nations trade ebargo against Iraq, said the former official, Hans Josef Horchem.
He said he based his assertions on information from officials in German and foreign intelligence agencies.


Florida: Who's More of an Outsider?
Scirpts and photographs of television commercials from the race for governor.
Lawton Chiles - Democrat SCRIPT: "There's a new spirit in Florida. Thanks to you, we're proving that people are more important than money. If we're going to control growth, hold down taxes, and protect the environment, we've got to stand up to the wealthy special interests. That's why we've limited contributions to $100.
Mr.
Chiles is also planning to spend proportionately more money on commercials in the last few days before the election.
Mr.
Chiles has the endorsement of several environmental groups.
But he is vague about the changes he would make to strenghten protection of the environment or to restrain growth.
Mr.
Chiles has promised to monitor tax revenues, assuring voters that it will be spent on services for the people who need them.
But he does not rule out a tax increase.
BOB MARTINEZ - Republican SCRIPT: "For some people, politics is about business. For me, it's about family and values. My grandmother came here from Spain five college and built a successful business. I married my high school sweetheart, Mary Jane, and now we have twin granddaughters.
"Caring about my community grew into leading Tampa as mayor. And when the bureaucrats and politicians in Tallahassee stopped listening to taxpayers like us, I ran for governor. I fought the Tallahassee gang from day one. We've cut waste and saved taxpayers a billion dollars.
"I know I've made mistakes. You've told me I've disappointed you sometimes. I've listened and I've learned and today we're fighting crime and drugs harder than ever, protecting our environment and preserving Florida's special quality of life." PRODUCER: National Media Inc., Alexandria, Va.
ASSESSMENT: This ad tries to confront and deal with the costly mistakes in the governor's term in office, like the reversal on the tax on services after running on an anti-tax platform.
Like many incumbents this year, Mr.
Martinez is trying to portray himself as an outsider in the state capital by referring derisively to "the Tallahassee gang." In fact, however, until the repeal on the services tax the governor's office worked closely with strongly Democratic legislature.
The Governor notes in this ad that he saved taxpayers $1 billion and has published lists of cost-cutting measures he originated or signed into law.
At the same time, though, Mr.
Martinez approved $3.8 billion in tax increases and the state budget grew by 68 percent.


Letters Sent by Americans in Hiding
"We are completely surrounded by Iraqi troops, and we haven't been out of the house since the 18th of August. They are quartered in a house next door and in the field which is on two sides of us. We live in constant fear of discovery."
So wrote Eugene A. Hughes, a 69-year-old man with a heart ailment, on Oct. 14 to Senator Pete V. Domenici of New Mexico.
Mr.
Hughes said that Iraqi forces occasionally knocked on the door of his house, but that he, his son and three other foreigners did not answer the door.


Jayson Williams Signs
Jayson Williams, the former star forward at St.
John's, signed a three-year contract with the 76ers yesterday after being acquired from the Phoenix Suns.
Williams, who broke his right foot halfway through his senior season. was selected 21st over all by Phoenix in the draft.
In exchange for Williams, Philadelphia gave Phoenix its 1993 first-round pick unless that turns out to be a lottery pick, in which case Phoenix would get the 76ers' 1994 first-round pick.
Williams said bargaining between his agent, Bob Wolff, and the Suns' owner Jerry Colangelo "just didn't work out." (AP)


Dreyfus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


WINE TALK
RUMMAGING through his late father's effects recently, Alfred A. (Pat) Knopf Jr. came across the 1963 "pre-holiday wine list" from Sherry Wine and Spirits Company, now Sherry-Lehmann.
Knopf pere was an incorrigible wine collector.
The list was the first offering of the legendary 1961 vintage of Bordeaux.
Three of the first growths, Chateaux Margaux, Latour and Mouton-Rothschild were $7.95; Lafite-Rothschild and Haut-Brion were $8.15, as were Petrus and Cheval-Blanc.


Congress Chiefs Urge Bush To Move Slowly Over War
Congressional leaders urged President Bush today to move slowly on any military action against Iraq, as Mr.
Bush told the lawmakers that he is troubled by the "strong moral threat" posed by Iraq's treatment of hostages and Kuwaiti citizens as well as the potential danger to American embassies.
The hour-and-a-quarter meeting at the White House with the bipartisan Congressional leadership and heads of committees on armed services, foreign affairs and intelligence was part of an attempt by the Administration to include Congress and the public in explaining Iraq policy after a month of focusing on the budget quagmire.


Strike Is Averted at Chrysler With Accord on a New Pact
After a fractious 27-hour negotiating session, leaders of the United Automobile Workers and the Chrysler Corporation said today that they had reached a tentative agreement on a new contract.
Both sides declined to disclose specific terms, pending approval by Chrysler's 67,000 workers.
But Owen F. Bieber, the union's president, issued a statement saying that "we are delighted that we have achieved" a settlement patterned on those reached earlier with Chrysler's two larger competitors, the General Motors Corporation and the Ford Motor Company.


Ford Reports 78.7% Decline In Earnings
The Ford Motor Company turned in its worst quarterly performance since the 1982 recession, it said yesterday, a 78.7 percent drop in third-quarter profit caused by weak automotive business and by a $44.6 million loss at First Nationwide, its savings and loan subsidiary.
Ford's worldwide automotive business was hit by a variety of problems: costly incentives in the United States, production losses in Europe and anti-inflation measures in South America.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
10.00
10.00
10.50
DISCOUNT RATE
7.00
7.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS
7.75
7.81
8.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.14
7.12
7.78
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
7.14
7.13
7.60
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.51
8.51
7.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.81
8.83
7.90
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.95
9.92
9.10
MUNICIPAL BONDS*
7.74
7.73
7.38
*Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


New Fiscal Year Ends Anti-Obscenity Pledge
The first day of October brought the beginning of a new fiscal year and the unobtrusive end of a Federal requirement that artists sign anti-obscenity pledges for grants from the National Endowment for the Arts.
"It was a Federal law that applied to 1990 grant recipients," said Virginia Falck, a spokeswoman for the endowment.
"All of the 1990 grants have been allocated," Ms.
Falck said yesterday.
"As of Sept. 30, the obscenity law expired. If it is no longer a law, it is no longer included in the packet."


BOXING: Notebook; King and Tyson Far From Championship Action
For the first time in years, Don King will not have a promotional tie to the heavyweight title on the night Evander Holyfield defends his crown against George Foreman.
Holyfield is promoted by Dan Duva and Foreman by Bob Arum.
What influence King still has in the heavyweight division stems from his relationship with Mike Tyson.
But King's position with the former champion is fraught with problems.
In a worst-case scenario, Tyson could be frozen out of a title shot until 1992.


Among Striking Reporters, Doubts as a Dilemma Grows
On the fifth day of the strike against The Daily News, Michael Katz, a sportswriter who covers boxing, stood with the men and women picketing behind police barricades yesterday, but his mind kept wandering to the other side of the fence.
"I think the guild made a mistake," he said of his unit's decision to join eight other striking unions.
He followed the Newspaper Guild out of loyalty, he said, but he brought his ambivalence with him.
"Do I really believe that management will return to the negotiating table?" he said wearily.
"Deep down, I don't."


Israel Reports 3 Arabs Killed, and Starts New Ban
A Palestinian was killed while planting a bomb near Tel Aviv this morning and two Arabs were shot and killed in the West Bank, just as the Government took new measures intended to curb violence by banning more Arabs from Israel.
In the Tel Aviv incident, the police said that an unidentified Palestinian was killed and that two others were wounded before dawn when a bomb they were setting in a vegetable market exploded.


Selling Contac, The Grey Way
Grey Advertising begins its campaign for Contac cold medicine today, complete with a new slogan and new strategy, just in time for the season of sniffling.
This is the agency's first effort for Contac since winning the account in February through a merger of SmithKline Beckman and Beecham.
The grim but straightforward tag line, "Until there's a cure, there's Contac," a creation of BBDO, has been replaced with "There's a whole day's work in every Contac." The ads feature the comedians Tim Conway and Harvey Korman, who act characteristically silly and sell hard.


Vitalink Names New President
The Vitalink Communications Corporation, which makes computer networking equipment, said today that it had named Leslie G. Denend president and chief executive.
Mr.
Denend, who is 49 years old, joins Vitalink, which is based in Fremont., Calif., from the 3Com Corporation, where he was executive vice president of product operations.
Before joining 3Com he was a partner with McKinsey &amp; Company, the management consulting firm.


Fuel for Saudi Debate: Opening Society Without Causing Strife
An adviser to the King of Saudi Arabia refers to it as "pre-crisis" and "post-crisis" in the way a historian might define the moment that broke a continuum and forced an opening toward a new era.
He was speaking of the shift in thinking here since Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2, a jolt that has spurred the small political and social elite of this insular Islamic monarchy into a debate in which one word is repeated time and again: change.


EX-WINERY WORKER GUILTY IN 7 DEATHS
A former winery worker was convicted of six counts of first-degree murder today for a killing spree last year that left seven people dead, including his wife and two young daughters.
The 29-year-old defendant, Ramon Salcido, was found guilty of second-degree murder in the seventh slaying.


About New York; Helping Parents Reclaim Children And Leave Drugs
Wards Island in the East River is dreary, particularly in the rain.
There are ugly institutional buildings, razor ribbon draped over fences, gaping potholes.
Sanitation men come here to learn to pick up garbage.
The island is home to patients of the Manhattan Psychiatric Center, residents of a city homeless shelter and participants in several drug programs run by Odyssey House.
One helps parents shake addiction while teaching them how to be better parents.
Their children live with them.
It is an unusual drug program.


Saul Bellow to Receive Special Literary Medal
The National Book Foundation announced Monday that Saul Bellow would receive its medal for distinguished contribution to American letters when the 40th anniversary of the National Book Awards is celebrated at a ceremony and dinner at the Plaza Hotel in New York City on Nov. 27.
Mr.
Bellow, a Nobel laureate, is the only writer to have won three National Book Awards: in 1953 for "The Adventures of Augie March," in 1964 for "Herzog" and in 1970 for "Mr. Sammler's Planet."


Air France to Buy 2 French Airlines
The European Community's competition commissioner, Sir Leon Brittan, cleared the takeover of two French airlines by Air France after negotiating a deal to increase industry competition in France.
The settlement to allow Air France's purchase of UTA and Air Inter, uniting France's biggest airlines, would end months of bitter legal wrangling between the commission, Air France, and the French Government.
The accord will guarantee rivals of state-controlled Air France takeoff and landing slots on key domestic and international routes.
The European Community's Executive Commission has the power to block mergers if it determines that the deals would endanger competition in the 12-nation trade bloc.


Bodies Go Public: It's Men's Turn Now
ONCE more, that which was private has become public.
Gradually, references to men's genitals -- their images and functions -- have been permeating the popular culture.
In the current film "Funny About Love," Gene Wilder and Christine Lahti play a couple eager to have a baby, only to discover that his sperm count has been lowered by the hours he has spent in a hot tub.
After tests, the prescription is specially designed underwear with a plastic ice pack.


Europe Need Not Fear Today's Germany
To the Editor:
"This Is One Party I Think I'll Miss" (Op-Ed, Oct. 15) by Marek Edelman, a Pole, states that he will not make merry over the reunification of Germany, my country.
Dr.
Edelman was a resistance leader at a brave and terrible event: the uprising against German forces in the Warsaw Ghetto.
It is perhaps inevitable, as fireworks and bright balloons celebrate a new Germany, that there should be these dark warnings as we come rising from the mists of history, in our spike helmets and leather coats, to threaten a new century.
War split Germany.
Peace -- and Mikhail S. Gorbachev -- united it.
You may lament that, but union was simply an idea whose time had come.
This new Germany has renounced all claims to former territory in Poland, henceforth and forever.
Europe has nothing to fear from Germany, except those old ghosts in the mist.
I am not a physician.
I am a law student, and German.
But the Hippocratic Oath begins -- "First, do no harm." I am sorry Dr.
Edelman feels as he does.
I am a young man, doctor.
I did not fight at the Warsaw Ghetto.
But if I had, I would have fought for you.
FRIEDRICH ZIEGLER Southington, Conn., Oct. 16, 1990


Bulgarian A-Plant Reactors Are Shut Down After Mishap
Technicians at Bulgaria's sole nuclear plant closed down two of its five reactors today because of a breakdown, the official news agency reported.
The brief dispatch said the mishap had occurred outside the plant's nuclear reactor core, but it gave no other details.
It said the two reactors, one with a capacity of 440 megawatts and another of 1,000 megawatts, were closed down as a precaution.
The breakdown occurred less than a week after international experts expressed concern about safety at the plant at Kozlodui, on the Danube River in northern Bulgaria.
German officials, citing safety problems, have decided to close five reactors of the same Soviet design as the 440-megawatt reactor at Kozlodui.
Prime Minister Andrei Lukanov said on Monday that the plant would be mothballed unless it could meet international safety standards.


Garden Hears Advice on Tickets
The executive director of the New York State Consumer Protection Board has met in recent weeks with Madison Square Garden officials to express his concern over the steepness of ticket-price increases for Knick and Ranger games.
"We can't, clearly, get involved in regulating the prices at the Garden," said Richard Kessel, the state's chief consumer advocate.
"We can, though, have a role in expressing concern. And I have real concerns about the escalation of the ticket prices."


Quotation of the Day
"I'm writing a letter to Rupert Murdoch now saying, 'The wheel of fortune makes me your publisher, as you used to be mine. I think it will be a happier experience for you than it was for me.' " -- Harold Evans, the new publisher of Random House, which is publishing Mr.
Murdoch's memoirs.  [ A1:3. ]


Tarrytown Is Fed Up With Politics, but Not Its Politicians
Like many voters around the nation, people in this Hudson River village say they are approaching Election Day in a fed-up mood.
Socked with taxes, scared about crime, angry at the inertia that seems to grip all levels of government, many say it is time to throw the politicians out.
But not, it seems,
their
politicians."I'm all for this time limit idea," said Lou Jacobson, tie askew, as he stepped off a late-afternoon commuter train at the Tarrytown station.
"If you're a Senator, after two terms, you're out," he said, hoisting his thumb in the air like an umpire.
"A Congressman, 10 years, you're out."


Bridge
One slim chance is better than no chance, and two slim chances are better still.
The problem may then be timing: How can two slims allow you to grow fat?
The diagramed example occurred in a club championship game in Milford, Conn., and North-South, the eventual winners, arrived in a shaky three no-trump contract.
The declarer was Dr.
Yuval Shahar of New Haven, who has frequently represented Israel in European Junior Championships.
When he saw the opening diamond lead and examined the dummy, he wished he had passed three hearts.


German Transition Helps Field For Women
The difference was evident right away, as Katrin Dorre walked into the room yesterday wearing a training suit of pale gray rather than the royal-blue outfits with the "DDR" insignia that East German athletes had worn for decades.
But since the German Democratic Republic passed into history this month through unification with West Germany, more than the uniforms of former East German athletes have changed.
Like their territory, the system in which the East Germans developed to world-class proportions was swallowed up by Western culture, leaving them on their own, bereft of the centralized government support that made Olympic medals a national obsession.


As City Shifted, News Lost Its Punch
It was punchy, it was sensational, it was the largest mass-market newspaper ever to hit the streets of an American city.
And, say newspaper analysts, it might have been doomed.
The rise of television and the rush to suburbia took away much of the working-class audience The Daily News had built with big, black headlines and daring photos that almost made reading the splashy tell-all stories unnecessary.
And that is why, decades later, rocks are shattering delivery-truck windows, reporters are anguishing over whether to cross picket lines and the paper's owners are enduring the excruciating tension of their big gamble.


Robert Alway, 77, Led Medical School At Stanford in 60's
Dr.
Robert Hamilton Alway, a pediatrician and former dean of the Stanford University School of Medicine, which he helped to lead to national prominence, died Friday at his home in Oak Harbor, Wash.
He was 77 years old.
He died of complications of heart disease, a spokesman for the medical school said.


Massachusetts: Accentuating the Negative
Scripts and photographs of television commercials from the race for Senator.
JOHN KERRY, DEMOCRAT


Widow of Alcoholic at Brewery Wins Suit
The widow of a brewery worker who became an alcoholic after taking advantage of free beer at work is entitled to workers' compensation benefits, an appeals court has held.
In its ruling Monday in the case of Casimer A. Gacioch, who worked at the Stroh Brewery Company, the state Court of Appeals said alcoholism is like any disease and workers are entitled to compensation if the work environment aggravates their condition.
While Mr.
Gacioch was predisposed to alcoholism before the brewery hired him, he was not an alcoholic when he got the job, the court said.
The circumstances of the job shaped the course of his disease, it said.
Mr.
Gacioch began working on the assembly line at Stroh's in 1947, said Norton Cohen, a lawyer for Mr.
Gacioch's widow, Wanda.
Stroh's policy permitted workers to drink all the beer they wanted during breaks.
When Mr.
Gagioch was dismissed in 1974, he was drinking 12 bottles of beer a day, Mr.
Cohen said.
Mr. Gacioch died in 1977 in a fire.


60-MINUTE GOURMET
FEW other styles of cooking are more popular today among home and professional cooks than Provencal.
In fact, I have been to a good number of restaurants that toss some garlic and tomato into their repertory and call themselves Provencal; the style is much more involved than that.
For a dish to be Provencal, it should harmoniously combine some of the indigenous herbs of the region -- particularly rosemary, basil, sage, thyme, fennel and oregano -- with other typical ingredients, whether game, fowl, river fish or lamb.
Of course, garlic and tomato are essential.
Olives are common as well.


Moses H. Hoenig, 92; A Young Israel Founder
Moses H. Hoenig, a lawyer and founding member and honorary president of the National Council of Young Israel, died yesterday at his home in Long Beach, L.I.
He was 92 years old.
Mr. Hoenig died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Books of The Times;   New Lesson in Democracy, by Abraham Lincoln


To Visible Couple, Family Is Integral
Marie Brenner, a special correspondent for Vanity Fair, gave a dinner at her Upper East Side townhouse last week that included some well-known writers and other prominent New Yorkers.
At one point, she introduced Harry Evans to her father, Milton Brenner, a San Antonio executive who was probably the least-known person in the room.
Within moments, Mr.
Evans had learned that Mr.
Brenner had been chief of finance for the Air Transport Command during World War II.
Delighted, Mr.
Evans, who is writing a book about America in his spare time, pulled out his notebook, sat Mr.
Brenner down and began coaxing stories out of him about Gen.
Douglas MacArthur and other leaders of the day.
'Wants to Hear Their Stories'
This is vintage Harry Evans, the editor in chief of Conde Nast Traveler, who yesterday was named the president and publisher of Random House.
"Harry looks at people and wants to hear their stories," said Tina Brown, the editor in chief of Vanity Fair and Mr.
Evans's wife, who last week gave birth to their second child, a girl.
"He is also one of those very few people who combines an enormous sense of quality with a sense of box office."


Weyerhaeuser Shifts Include a New Top Job   BYL&gt;By DANIEL F. CUFF
The Weyerhaeuser Company, which has been trying for the last 18 months to improve profitability, yesterday announced a management reorganization that includes the creation of a new office of the chief executive and the retirement of two top executives.
The huge forest-products company, based in Tacoma, Wash., said that its president, John W. Creighton Jr., 58 years old, would share the new office with George H. Weyerhaeuser, 64, chairman and chief executive.


Korean Cigarette Deal
The Tobacco and Ginseng Corporation of South Korea has concluded a deal to export five million packs of Korean-made cigarettes to the Soviet Union next month, officials of the state-run corporation said today.
They declined to disclose further details, including price.
Earlier this year, Philip Morris International Inc. and R. J. Reynolds Tobacco International Inc. concluded deals to send more than 34 billion cigarettes to the Soviet Union.


Dentsu of Japan Acquires 40% Stake in London's C.D.P.
IN the largest advertising investment by the Japanese in Britain, Dentsu, the world's largest agency, has acquired 40 percent of Collett, Dickenson, Pearce &amp; Partners.
The move seems to solidify the notion that the Japanese are seeking to increase their international presence, and is seen as a harbinger for future Japanese shopping sprees.


Herbert Brodkin Is Dead at 77; TV Producer Who Broke Taboos
Herbert Brodkin, a television producer celebrated for his dramas on social issues on such series as "Playhouse 90" and "The Defenders," died on Monday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 77 years old and had homes in Manhattan; Old Lyme, Conn., and Saltaire, on Fire Island.
He died of an aneurysm, said his secretary, Anna May Franklin.


DISMAL FORECAST ISSUED BY CUOMO ON GAP IN BUDGET
Providing further evidence of New York's economic slide, a report released by the Cuomo administration tonight shows the state spending $824 million more than it expects to take in for the current fiscal year.
The report, which offers the gloomiest assessment to date of the state's fiscal deterioriation, portends a new round of agonizing spending decisions for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the State Legislature, who have been grappling with near-chronic budget problems for more than two years.


DeSoto Approves Special Dividend
DeSoto Inc., a maker of chemical coatings and other specialty products, said its directors had approved the payment of a special cash dividend of $24 a share, representing proceeds from the sale of its consumer paint and industrial coatings businesses.
The dividend is payable on Dec. 3 to shareholders of record on Nov. 13.
DeSoto said its board would consider payment of a second special dividend after completion of the sale of the company's surfactant business.
Last month the company said it wanted to sell most of its assets and pay special dividends totaling $35.50 a share.
DeSoto's stock slipped 62.5 cents today, to $40, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Women Priests? Rome Would Sooner End Celibacy; Reformation Needed
To the Editor:
In "Sex Asks Its Due at Vatican Synod on Priests" (news article, Oct. 7), you quote Bishop Valfredo Bernardo Tepe, a Brazilian, pleading the need for married priests in an area and at a time when "needs and expectations exceed all human possibility."
In the 1971 Roman Catholic synod, under a different pope, bold statements were less rare.
Franjo Cardinal Seper of Zagreb could then say, "I am not at all optimistic that celibacy is in fact being observed." At that synod, nearly half the bishops voted in favor of a married priesthood.
My 25-year study of the practice of celibacy among Catholic priests in the United States, "A Secret World: Sexuality and the Search for Celibacy" (New York) demonstrates that Cardinal Seper's misgivings were well founded.
Celibacy is not a very successful discipline.
Other bishops, like Joseph Cardinal Bernardin of Chicago, did speak up recently at the Vatican and are to be commended for their honesty in attempting to address problems related to sexuality and priesthood.
But most statements avoid the key issues -- the celibate structure of the church hierarchy, which defends, encourages and in some cases produces psychosexual immaturity and even sexual aberration in clergymen.
A more sophisticated selection of candidates will not solve that problem.
To concentrate on a "better image" of the priesthood, in the phrase of Bishop John Marshall of Burlington, Vt., or to argue defensively that the church is countercultural, as does Archbishop Daniel E. Pilarczyk, head of the United States Bishops' Conference, misses the point: celibacy in the Roman Catholic priesthood needs a fundamental reformation -- for the whole church, both clergy and laity alike.
A.
W.
RICHARD SIPE Baltimore, Oct. 16, 1990


Iraqi President Warns Of Possible U.S. Attack
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq called a meeting of his top generals today and told them to put Iraq's forces on "extreme alert" against the possibility of an imminent American attack.
The Iraqi leader, responding to American moves that have signaled growing impatience over Iraq's occupation of Kuwait, met in Baghdad with the Iraqi forces' general staff and several top Government officials.
An announcement by the official Iraqi press agency said that Mr.
Hussein had concentrated in part on the need to prepare for "urban fighting" in Kuwait, where Iraq has amassed tens of thousands of troops and several thousand tanks.


Profiteering Is Denied By Oil Group
Oil companies as a group are not profiting from the invasion of Kuwait, the president of the industry's main trade association said yesterday, because gasoline sellers have passed along only about 60 percent of their higher cost of oil.
In a vigorous defense of the industry, which is unloved even at the best of times, Charles J. DiBona, president of the American Petroleum Institute, said that aggregate operating income for the third quarter was nearly identical to that of a year earlier for 18 leading companies.
For the first three quarters, itdeclined 4.9 percent, according to institute figures.


George W. Shine, 80, Leader in M.I.A. Group
George W. Shine, a retired vice president of Avon Products and an official in an organization pressing for information about soldiers missing in Vietnam, died on Monday at his home in Southbury, Conn.
He was 80 years old.
He died of cancer, his wife, Helen, said.


Japan's Vehicle Exports
Japan's vehicle exports fell 4.9 percent in September from a year earlier, the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association reported today.
The companies exported 509,155 cars, trucks and buses in September, the association said.
Exports to the United States and the European Community fell, reflecting increased output from factories abroad.
The auto makers shipped 134,827 units to Europe in September, up 2.8 percent from a year earlier.
But exports to the 12 members of the European Community were down 7.4 percent, to 88,392 units.
Exports to the United States totaled 207,762 units, down 12.7 percent.


Study Finds Many Hispanic-Americans Are Ignorant About AIDS
A new study of Hispanic-Americans has found that many of them lack even basic information about AIDS, and experts say that ignorance is hindering prevention efforts in a group that is seriously threatened by the disease.
The study, conducted by the Boston University School of Public Health and financed by the Federal Centers for Disease Control, found that 60 percent of the Hispanic adolescents who were interviewed did not know how AIDS is usually transmitted and 90 percent had one or more misconceptions about AIDS.


Packaging in Popcorn
A Dutch computer company said today that it was packaging its equipment in popcorn rather than polystyrene to help the environment.
Jeroen Groot of Corblan International B.V. said his company had been using popcorn for three months.
"It's a bit more expensive than polystyrene, but it is better for the environment," Mr.
Groot said.
"Some people eat it afterward, but we don't recommend it."


Becker Threatens Strike
Boris Becker has threatened to call a players strike at next year's United States Open to stop what he called the "dictatorship of television" seeking to achieve high ratings.
"I find it incredible that at Flushing Meadow, we can have only one night of rest between a hard semifinal on Saturday and a hard final on Sunday," Becker was quoted as saying in the German magazine Stern.
Becker said he had already complained to officials of CBS Sports and said the four semifinalists should refuse to play their matches if things do not change next year.
"It would be a strike against television greed and for better tennis," Becker said
Susan Kerr, a CBS spokeswoman, said the network would not comment on Becker's statement.
Ed Fabricius, a spokesman for the United States Tennis Association, also declined comment.(AP)


Market Place; Mutual Funds Report Shifts by Investors
Mutual fund investors poured money into international stock and bond funds this month, seeking to take advantage of the falling dollar, fund managers said yesterday.
A large flow of money into tax-exempt municipal bond funds, as Congress debated and then passed tax increases, was also reported.
Some managers said they also saw a revival of interest in domestic stock funds, which in September had a net outflow of funds, although at a slower rate than in August.


Top Treasury Official Says Dollar's Fall Concerns U.S.
A senior Treasury official said yesterday that the Bush Administration was concerned about the recent sharp decline in the dollar, a comment that runs counter to a belief held by many currency traders.
"The message that was being put out there was that we were totally unconcerned about that, and that is not correct," the official said in an interview in which he sought to counter the view in the currency market.
He spoke on the condition that he not be named.


TV CONCERN FINED IN ADULT FILM CASE
A New York satellite television company, indicted on obscenity charges here last year for beaming adult films into Alabama, has pleaded guilty.
As its penalty, it has paid $150,000 to two children's homes.
The company, Home Dish Only Satellite Network Inc., entered the plea to the misdemeanor charges in a state court on Monday.
The company is no longer in business.


Proposals to Cut School Taxes Drastically Are on Ballots in Several States
The national movement to improve education is in trouble, say education experts and state leaders, basing their grim assessment on major initiatives on the ballot in several states in Tuesday's election.
Antitax measures, if approved, would hobble efforts to improve schools in the states, these experts say.
For example, voters in Nebraska will consider a major rollback in a new tax law to increase school financing while those in Massachusetts will vote on a major tax cut that would drastically reduce money for schools.


Corrections
An article and a table in Business Day on Thursday about Continental Airlines misstated the estimated interest cost this year for ContinentalHoldings Inc., the airline's parent.
It is $300 million, not $475 million.


S.&amp; L. Report Cites Crime
The Resolution Trust Corporation said today that criminal misconduct occurred at half of the insolvent savings and loan associations that are now under Government supervision and that fraud was a contributing factor in 40 percent of the failures of savings institutions.
The figures, contained in Resolution Trust's first quarterly report on investigations into negligent and fraudulent conduct by insiders and others, were slightly higher than earlier estimates by the Justice Department.


A SOVIET MEMORIAL TO THE VICTIMIZED
The Soviet Union held a funeral today for its misbegotten past, dedicating under the very windows of the K.G.B.'s prison-headquarters the first nationwide monument to the "victims of a totalitarian regime."
Thousands of people, some of them survivors of Stalin's terror, others bearing photographs of the lost, converged for the twilight ceremony of tears and hymns.


Platinum Futures Rebound; Biggest Gain in 10 Months
Platinum futures prices posted their strongest gains in 10 months yesterday, rebounding from depressed levels after a Government report indicated that the United States economy grew at a 1.8 percent annual rate in the third quarter.


Gretzky Answers 'Wake-Up Call'
It is unwise to get Wayne Gretzky angry during a hockey game.
Opponents have it tough enough against him under normal circumstances, but when the Great One gets hot under the collar, there's no stopping him.
Gretzky was seething late in the first period tonight at Nassau Coliseum because of what he considered a needless check by Rich Pilon, the rugged defenseman for the Islanders.


Special Interest Groups Begin a Spending Spree
In the final days of the Congressional election campaign, special interest groups are pumping millions of dollars into last-minute drives that they hope will tip the outcome in close races, most notably in North Carolina, where Senator Jesse Helms is fighting for his political survival.
Most of the organizations are operating through their political action committees.
Federal law forbids a PAC from giving more than $5,000 per election to any campaign, but places no limit on the amount it can spend for or against a candidate if it operates independently of the candidate's campaign.


A Battle Won in the Poverty War
Youngsters born into poverty aren't truly born equal, but America is now on the way to reducing that tragic inequality.
Legislation just enacted by the 101st Congress will give poor children, and their parents, a better, healthier life.
As much as the members of this Congress were abused as morons, clowns and incompetents, they leave behind a monumental triumph in the enduring war on poverty.
Take Congress's thoughtful approach to medical care, for instance.
By 2003, all poor children through the age of 18 will be covered by Federal Medicaid health insurance.
The age limit, now 6, will rise by one year annually.
The gain to children is obvious, but there's a gain for their mothers and for society.
It is an inducement to poor women who have been discouraged from getting a job and off welfare because heretofore that meant losing Medicaid benefits.


Shuttles Declared 'Leak-Free' After Fuel Test
The space shuttle fleet today was declared "leak-free" and ready to fly after the shuttle Columbia passed a fueling test without an excessive escape of hydrogen.
Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said the successful test at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida indicates that replacing two defective seals and tightening nuts and connectors in the Columbia's engine compartment had repaired the dangerous hydrogen leaks that have grounded the shuttle since May.


Herbert Brodkin Is Dead at 77; TV Producer Who Broke Taboos
Herbert Brodkin, a television producer celebrated for his dramas on social issues on such series as "Playhouse 90" and "The Defenders," died on Monday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 77 years old and had homes in Manhattan; Old Lyme, Conn., and Saltaire, on Fire Island.
He died of an aneurysm, said his secretary, Anna May Franklin.


Tempers Cool in Japan-China Island Dispute
A longstanding territorial dispute over a tiny chain of islands in the East China Sea has flared into the open, throwing Japan, China and Taiwan into a confrontation underscoring the lingering suspicions of Tokyo's intentions in the region.
The dispute erupted more than a week ago, when Japanese coast-guard vessels and helicopters turned back at least two small Taiwan fishing boats carrying Taiwan athletes seeking to land on one of the islands to plant an Olympic flag as a symbol of Taipei's claim of sovereignty.The islands, known in Japan as the Senkaku chain, and in China as the Diaoyu Islands, are uninhabited and consist of five tiny rock islands and three reefs 100 miles northeast of Taiwan and 250 miles east of China.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 26
Oct. 19
Oct. 27
1990
1990
1989
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
6.9
6.8
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.9
2.9
Gasoline stocks
220.4
222.6
223.2
Distillate stocks
138.1
136.9
118.7
Crude imports, daily
5.1
4.8
6.9
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.6
2.1
Crude stocks
339.5
340.4
345.4
Crude production, daily
7.1
7.1
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
82.5
83.3
86.6
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Chronicle
LEON FLEISHER was described in The New York Times as , "the finest American pianist of his (and probably any) time." But that was more than 25 years ago, before his career took an abrupt detour when he lost the use of his right hand as a result of carpal tunnel syndrome, a stress injury of the wrist nerves.
Mr.
Fleisher stayed in music as a conductor and as a soloist playing with orchestras in a special repertory of brief piano concerti for the left hand.
On Saturday night, Mr.
Fleisher will play six substantial solo works for piano and a suite for piano with three strings at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington.
It will be the first time since his injury that the 62-year-old pianist has attempted such an ambitious program in a major city.
All the pieces are for the left hand only.
One was written by Brahms for Clara Schumann after she injured her right hand.
Another, a solo that is perhaps the most virtuosic, is "Metamorphosis of J. Strauss Themes" by Leopold Godowsky.
Asked why he thought the composer had created such a difficult piece, Mr.
Fleisher replied, "He must have been a sadist of the first order."


Strikers Strive To Block Ads In Daily News
Striking unions at The Daily News moved yesterday to try to starve the newspaper of its advertising revenue, mapping plans for a leaflet campaign against department stores, shops and other clients.
"We're going to do everything possible to hurt management, to get them to go back to the bargaining table and to negotiate in good faith," said George E. McDonald, president of the Allied Printing Trades Council, the unions' umbrella organization.


Four Composers Win Awards for New Work
The composers Ralph Shapey and William Kraft are the first-place winners of this year's Friedheim Awards for New Orchestral Works, given by the Kennedy Center in Washington.
Each composer received a plaque and $4,000 at a performance by the orchestra of the Mannes College of Music on Sunday at the Kennedy Center.
Thomas Broido, the publisher for Mr.
Shapey, accepted the award for the composer, who was ill and did not attend.
Mr.
Shapey won the award for his Concerto for Cello, Piano and String Orchestra; Mr.
Kraft's composition was "Veils and Variations for Horn and Orchestra."
Other winners were Daron Aric Hagen, who won $2,500 for "Common Ground," from his Symphony No. 2, and Frederick Bianchi, who won $1,000 for his "Rauschenberg Variations."


Saving the Everglades From Sugar Cane
To the Editor:
You describe how sugar-cane farm waste water has converted thousands of acres of Florida's Everglades into dense, lifeless stands of oxygen-choked cattails (editorial, Sept. 28).
Florida officials continue to stall despite 15 years of research, a two-year-old lawsuit by the Federal Government and environmentalists, and sympathetic rhetoric from the man who appointed these officials, Gov.
Bob Martinez.
The latest plan proposes engineering studies for 76,000 acres of artificial wetlands to filter the pollution.
But Florida officials make no commitment to construct more than a fraction of these areas and identify only a fraction of the necessary funding.
Meanwhile, they would absolve the sugar industry from all but token contributions, while suggesting that the Federal Government pay the bill.
Officials make no commitment to meet Florida's water-quality standards, set to protect the Everglades.
Meanwhile officials try to use Republican political channels to call off the lawsuit.
The Bush Administration has resisted these calls.
No vital national industry is opposed to the Everglades, but only a sugar-cane industry that exists because of import quotas and billion-dollar consumer subsidies and because of low-paid, seasonal Caribbean labor.
Sugar-cane farming causes such soil loss that many areas can survive no more than 15 or 20 years.
Sugar cane's primary nutritional contribution may be its well-known, generous campaign funding.
An alternative plan is available.
It requires constructing the 76,000 acres of filtration areas in five years, with a fair sugar-industry contribution and the addition of filtration areas as necessary to meet water-quality standards.
By accepting this alternative, Governor Martinez can help save the Everglades from otherwise certain death.
TIMOTHY D. SEARCHINGER Staff Attorney Environmental Defense Fund New York, Oct. 18, 1990


A New Way to Store Solar Power
As technology for gathering the sun's rays improves, engineers are focusing on storage, so the energy can be used at night or on cloudy days.
A storage medium would also help in transporting the energy from the desert, where it is most efficiently gathered, to cities, where it is most needed.
Some Israeli scientists think that the solution is a pair of chemical reactions using methane and water.
The first uses the sun's heat to create a gas from methane and water, a process that absorbs energy.
The other consumes the gas and gives the energy back.


Major Leagues Close To Deal With Minors
Barring an unexpected reversal in the direction negotiations for a new player-development contract have now taken, the likelihood of a drastically altered minor league system has been drastically reduced.
"I'm encouraged by reports of considerable progress," Fay Vincent, the baseball commissioner, said yesterday.
"There is a reasonable prospect of a deal in the next few days."


Jackson Could Start Over an Ailing Cheeks
Maurice Cheeks's sore back may put Mark Jackson back in the Knicks' starting lineup on opening night.
Cheeks, the incumbent starter at point guard, missed the final two exhibition games and was unable to practice again today.
As the Knicks prepare for Friday's opener against the Hornets at Charlotte, N.C., Cheeks's health, coupled with Jackson's strong pre-season play, have increased Jackson's chance of regaining his starting position, at least temporarily.


For Investors Who Waited, Few New Benefits
Having counted on Congress to heed President Bush's call to restore capital gains to favor under the tax code, many investors are likely to feel they were instead dealt a loss in the deficit reduction legislation approved on Saturday.
Now, they must decide how to make the best of the situation in year-end tax planning.
"A lot of people put off selling and got killed by the market," said David A. Berenson, national director of tax policy for Ernst &amp; Young in Washington.
"They walked into an economic loss because they waited."


Pan Am Receives Credit Extensions
The financially ailing Pan Am Corporation said it had obtained short-term extensions on payments due to two of its creditors, Airbus Industrie and United Technologies.
Pan Am said the companies agreed to the delay in payments while they review the airline's agreement last week to sell some of its most desirable trans-Atlantic routes and other assets to the UAL Corporation for about $400 million.
Pan Am did not say how much it owed the two companies or how long the extensions were.
Pan Am, which has been losing money for years, has been forced to divest itself gradually of its assets to remain in the air.


FOOD NOTES
Pasta Party
Tavern on the Green in Central Park has already begun its carbo-loading in preparation for the New York City Marathon on Sunday.
The executive chef, Marc Poidevin, and his crew have begun preparing 5,000 pounds of pasta to feed an estimated 14,000 runners who are expected for dinner on Saturday.
All those who enter the marathon are invited to the annual party, which starts at 4 P.M. and continues until 11 P.M. in a tent and in the Crystal Room of the restaurant.
Ronzoni, part of Hershey Foods , contributed the pasta, as it has for five years.
The pasta will be prepared in a casserole with mushrooms and cream, in a salad with basil and yogurt and in a spicy tomato sauce.
There is no charge for registered runners.
Entrants in the marathon who keep kosher will also be treated to a pasta party at the Second Avenue Deli, 156 Second Avenue (10th Street), on Saturday from 8 to 10 P.M.
On the menu will be kasha varnishkes, made with buckwheat and bow-tie pasta.
Runners must present their credentials at the door and can bring a guest.
A Change in Teachers
Beginning in February, the cooking school at the Greenbrier resort in White Sulphur Springs, W.Va., will be run by La Varenne, Anne Willan's school in France.
Eight one-week sessions will be held from Feb. 24 through May 3.
For the past 13 years the school had been run by Julie Dannenbaum, a cooking instructor from Philadelphia.
The cost, $1,300 a week, includes accommodations.
Call Martha Holmberg at (800) 624-6070.
High-School Cook-Off
With recipes that included spaghetti pie and volaille et legumes grilles au thym frais, 15 high school students from New York City, Westchester and Rockland Counties and Long Island participated two weeks ago in a cook-off sponsored by Waldbaum's.
Steven Gertner, a 17-year-old senior at Sachem High School North in Lake Ronkonkoma, L.I., won with his poached salmon in champagne sauce.
He takes cooking classes at Boces II, a continuing-education program in Islip, L.I.
Each of the participants won a $500 scholarship; their schools will receive equipment for their home-economics classes.
Mr.
Gertner's class will also be treated to an outing to restaurants and food shops in Manhattan.
The cook-off was at the Culinary Art Center of the New York Institute of Technology in Central Islip.
The Shop Next Door
For several years, restaurants have been opening shops into adjoining spaces and selling prepared foods.
The newest in the trend is Corrado, 1373 Avenue of the Americas (55th Street), which has opened Corrado Kitchen next door.
Some of the colorful salads include tricolor pasta sparked with tangy sun-dried tomatoes that contrast with mellow chunks of mozzarella ($11 a pound), white beans in a herbaceous dressing with nuggets of raw vegetables ($7.80 a pound) and a mixture of tender seafood in a slightly underseasoned vinaigrette ($19 a pound).
The cold sauteed chicken breast cloaked in a creamy mustard sauce ($14 a pound) is better than the rather dry grilled chicken paillard, which is available with a salad ($10.95 a portion) or in a sandwich ($5.95).
Desserts are banal, but the classic nut brownie ($1.50) is an exception.
Delivery is free with orders of $8 or more from 48th to 60th Streets, Broadway to Lexington Avenues.
Call (212) 333-7696.
Abracadabra In the Kitchen
A HALLOWEEN trick is not quite the same as "truc," French for trick.
But a new video, "Trucs of the Trade," demonstrates such tricks of the kitchen as putting wine corks into a stew to tenderize meat.
In 72 minutes, the tape shows chefs giving dozens of useful tips.
For example, Lidia Bastianich, owner of the restaurant Felidia in Manhattan, explains the difference between male and female eggplants (the female has more seeds and less flavor).
Antoine Bouterin, chef at Le Perigord, shows how to save a salty sauce by running a sugar cube through it.
The tape, produced by Arlene Feltman, who runs the De Gustibus Cooking School in New York, includes some commercial plugs for its sponsor, the Kobrand Corporation, a wine and spirits importer and distributor.
Some of the proceeds from sales are donated to Share Our Strength, a nationwide organization that feeds the hungry.
The tape is $19.95 in video stores or can be ordered by calling (800) 448-2449.


Who Was That Masked Class?


Reviews/Music; Berio Retrospective by Continuum
Of the avant-gardist composers who came to prominence after World War II, no one has summed up his confused and confusing time more truly than Luciano Berio.
He has been more tirelessly inventive than Pierre Boulez or Karlheinz Stockhausen, more willing to try to please than Elliott Carter or Milton Babbitt, more practical than John Cage or his disciples who believed that the art of the future would somehow resemble a garage sale.
Mr.
Berio's works embrace virtually every contemporary idiom and esthetic viewpoint.
In almost everything he does, one may sense an artist of large, humanistic vision.
A Berio retrospective, presented in honor of his 65th birthday on Monday evening by the valuable group of 20th-century surveyors known as Continuum, could touch on only a few facets of this eclectic composer's work over the last four decades.
Unrepresented at Alice Tully Hall were the electronic experiments ("Momento," "Omaggio a Joyce"), the flamboyant theatricality ("Circles," "Recital"), the extreme instrumental extensions (Sequenza for Solo Trombone) and much else.


Washington Public Power To Offer Refunding Bonds
A $608.7 million refunding by the Washington Public Power Supply System for its Nuclear Project No. 2 was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The maximum yield on the offering was about 8.04 percent for a refunding revenue bond due in 2012.
The financing includes serial bonds with shorter maturities that are priced to yield from 6.45 percent in 1992 to 6.80 percent in 1995; 7.40 percent in 2000, and 7.65 percent in 2003.
For other long maturities, the yields are 7.875 percent in 2010 and 7.60 percent in 2011.


POOR FAMILIES GAIN UNDER TAX ACCORD
The budget agreement produced after months of bitter dispute did not exactly rob from the rich, but it did give to the poor, through both tax cuts and program expansions.
In fact, it made the poor the only income class in America predicted to have more money and services with the deficit-reduction package than they would have had without it.
But the plan does not treat all poor people alike.
The biggest winners are working poor families with children, who will benefit from substantial increases in the cash rebates provided by various tax credits.


West Distorts Food Need, Sudan Says
Two senior members of the Islamic fundamentalist Government accused Western donors today of exaggerating the food shortages in the Sudan and said there was no reason to make a public appeal for international help.
The United States, traditionally the biggest giver of food aid to the Sudan, has said that the country faces a famine next year unless plans are made to deliver large amounts of grain.


Genetics Institute
The stock of Genetics Institute fell $2.50 a share yesterday, to $34.125, and the company attributed the drop to the fact that one of its products would not be reviewed by a Food and Drug Administration advisory committee on Dec. 12 and 13.
The committee is expected to review two similar products by its competitors.
Genetics Institute's product, GM-CSF, raises the count of white blood cells in cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy treatment.


Gas Prices Unchanged
Gasoline prices were unchanged last week, marking the first week since Sept. 18 that prices did not rise, according to a survey released yesterday by the American Automobile Association.
The average price for self-service regular unleaded gasoline was $1.38 a gallon, just below the all-time high of $1.388 reached in the spring of 1981, the group said.


Knight Among 12 Hall Nominees
Bob Knight has been nominated to the Basketball Hall of Fame for a third time, but this time, the emotional and impulsive Indiana University basketball coach will be unable to have his name removed from consideration as he did in 1988 and 1989.
A new rule prevents it.
Upset that he failed to receive the 18 of 24 votes necessary for enshrinement after his nomination in 1987, Knight angrily asked that his name not be acted upon when he was nominated again in 1988.
He was not nominated in 1989.
Although he easily qualified for election on the basis of his coaching record, it was assumed at the time of the 1987 vote that his often controversial actions and comments worked against him.


Milken's Lawyers File Brief, Making Final Arguments
Lawyers for Michael R. Milken filed a brief yesterday with their final arguments in the former financier's pre-sentencing hearing, contending that the evidence had disproved the "Government's portrayal of him as a 'master criminal.' "
Government prosecutors had been scheduled to file their arguments as well with Federal District Judge Kimba M. Wood but were unable to meet the deadline after the court ordered that certain references be deleted.
The Government's memorandum is expected to be filed today.


British-French Linkup Made in Channel Tunnel


The War Option
President Bush and Secretary of State Baker are trying, as they must, to bring maximum psychological pressure on Saddam Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait.
The danger is that they may paint themselves into a corner from which they can escape only through a bloody and ill-conceived war against Iraq.
In separate speeches -- Mr.
Bush's at a campaign rally in California -- they delivered the same message: "We will not rule out a possible use of force if Iraq continues to occupy Kuwait." And both heightened the goosebump effect with lurid tales of Iraqi atrocities.


Developer Pleads Guilty In Lincoln Fraud Case
An Arizona real estate developer pleaded guilty today to participating in a fraudulent land deal involving the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association and agreed to cooperate in the Government's investigation of Lincoln and its former owner, Charles H. Keating Jr.
The guilty plea by Ernest C. Garcia 2d to one count of bank fraud was the first in the Federal criminal investigation into the collapse of Lincoln.
It appears to give a significant boost to Government prosecutors in the case.


Review/Music; Middle Eastern New Age
Friday night's short show at Town Hall by the singer Sussan Deihim and the reed flutist and keyboardist Richard Horowitz was more interesting politically than it was musically.
Ms.
Deihim and Mr.
Horowitz, longtime collaborators, put together a band, including bass and percussion, to perform pieces that drew on their broad musical knowledge.
Mr.
Horowitz has studied the ney, a reed flute, in Morocco; Ms.
Deihim was born in Teheran, Iran, and has the microtonal control found in the vocal music of North Africa and the Middle East.
The music, high-tech and new-age clean, used synthesized samples to fill in percussion and vocal choir parts; based around ostinatos of varying lengths and meters, the compositions built their structure on textural changes.
Keyboards and bass turned the simple patterns into lush and verdant minor-key excursions, while Steve Shehan added various percussion parts.
Ms.
Deihim sang powerfully in various languages, occasionally breaking into English; at times she ululated as if she were North African, at others she sang in a classic Middle Eastern style, or screeched and played with her voice and the electronic sound system until she could have been the sound track for a Grade-B horror movie.


2-Year Treasury Notes Sell Well
A successful auction of new two-year Treasury notes helped to reverse a modest early slide in the credit markets yesterday, enabling prices of most Treasury securities to post slight gains.
Trading was generally sluggish.
Demand for the new notes, which were sold at an average yield of 7.84 percent, was large.
More than $42.8 billion worth of bids were submitted for the $12 billion worth of securities that were sold.
At the last two-year Treasury-note auction, on Sept. 25, the securities were sold at an average yield of 8.18 percent.


No Shift Seen On Oil Stocks
Despite soaring oil prices, the International Energy Agency, the West's energy watchdog, is not expected to call for the release of world oil stocks when it meets on Wednesday.
Officials of the agency, based in Paris, say the meeting will be the quietest since Iraq invaded Kuwait on Aug. 2, setting off panic in world oil markets and doubling prices.


Soviets Erect a Monument to Victims of 'Totalitarian Regime'


Arab Nations Consider Shift in Tactic Used Against Israel at U.N.
Arab countries are discussing a proposal to end the efforts they have made since 1982 to expel Israel from the United Nations at this year's General Assembly, Arab diplomats said today.
The Arabs are considering an alternative under which the General Assembly would reaffirm Israel's obligation to obey resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly.


Corrections
The Eating Well column in The Living Arts on Oct. 17, about calcium, misstated the relationship of minerals like phosphorous, fluoride and boron to the development of osteoporosis.
Those minerals may have a role in preventing the condition, not developing it.


IND and IRT Lines Disrupted
Service on the Lexington Avenue IRT and Sixth Avenue IND lines was disrupted at the end of the rush hour last night as power was shut off so police officers could chase a robbery suspect through the tunnels.
A Transit Authority spokesman said service on the Q train was out from 7:05 P.M. to 8:36 P.M. between 34th Street and Long Island City, and service on the 4, 5 and 6 trains was out from 7:16 P.M. to 7:54 P.M. between Grand Central Terminal and 96th Street.


Bank Sues Equitable Life
The Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company sued the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States on Monday, claiming that Equitable failed to meet its financial obligations to a real estate partnership when it forced the partnership into bankruptcy two weeks ago.
The bank is seeking $100 million in compensatory damages and $500 million in punitive damages.
Equitable Real Estate Investment Management Inc., a unit of the life insurance company and general partner of 1515 Broadway Associates L.P., stunned its limited partners when it filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection for the partnership on Oct. 15.
The partnership's sole asset was an office tower at 45th and Broadway.


Corrections
A report in the Patterns column in The Living Arts yesterday about a decline in news coverage of fashion shows misstated the action of The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Its fashion writer is in New York to attend the showings of the spring collections; the paper did not forgo coverage.


Enterprise Zone For Louisville: Past the Limit?
To its boosters, this city's sprawling, 45-square-mile enterprise zone is a model for local economic development, attracting more than $1.2 billion in new business investment and creating 11,476 new jobs in seven years.
"It has given us opportunities not only in terms of creating jobs in our community, but also retaining jobs in our community," said Mayor Jerry E. Abramson of Louisville.


Nugget Rookie Sits Out
Because of side effects from medication for Tourette's syndrome, Chris Jackson, the third player selected in the National Basketball Asosociation college draft last spring, will miss the Denver Nuggets' first five games of the season.
Jackson, a guard from Louisiana State, was hospitalized on Sunday after team doctors became concerned over his sluggish behavior on the court.(AP).


Congress Changes Spending Rules On Secret Programs for Pentagon
When Congress passed the 1991 military spending bill last week, it imposed little-noticed but significant new restrictions on the President's power to spend billions of dollars on classified programs.
While public attention focused on spending for "Star Wars" and the B-2 bomber, legislators and Administration officials were struggling over a section of the bill requiring the Administration to use money earmarked for secret programs precisely as Congress prescribes.


G.N.P. Up By 1.8% in 3d Quarter
The Government today reported an increase in the gross national product that was hailed by the Bush Administration but labeled by some economists as misleading or even masking an economy in recession.
The Commerce Department said the economy grew at a 1.8 percent annual rate during the July-September quarter, somewhat faster than most analysts had expected and well above the expansion rate of four-tenths of 1 percent posted during the spring.


Here's a Twist: Gains Tax Is Rising
Despite two years of struggle by President Bush and his top aides to cut the capital gains tax rate, the budget legislation passed by Congress on Saturday actually raises capital gains taxes for the country's wealthiest individuals.
Treasury Department officials acknowledge that some wealthy taxpayers will now have to pay a slightly higher capital gains tax, but said it was something that the Bush Administration had to accept to get an agreement on cutting the nation's budget deficit by $492 billion over the next five years.


Bush Trying A New Topic; Is Talk of War Driven By Policy or Politics?
With the Republican Party's candidates thrown on the defensive by talk of recession and taxes, the Bush Administration moved this week to put a different subject on the top of the agenda by talking about war in the Persian Gulf.
On the campaign trail, President Bush continued today to denounce Democrats for their stranglehold on Congress and what he depicted as their love affair with taxes.
But at the White House, the talk was of the mistreatment of the American hostages in Kuwait and Iraq and the rising concern that force would be needed in the Persian Gulf.


Kimball Sentence Cut
Bruce Kimball, winner of a silver medal in diving at the 1984 Olympics, will serve less than five years of a 17-year sentence for a drunken driving accident two years ago that killed two teen-agers, the Florida Parole Commission decided yesterday.
The commission voted to release Kimball on Nov. 24, 1993.
Kimball, who pleaded guilty to two manslaughter charges, has served about 22 months of his sentence for the Aug. 1, 1988 accident.(AP)


Economic Scene; 'Tax Bubbles,' One More Time
CONGRESSIONAL incumbents take heart: those who make it through the November elections are home free.
According to the official 30-Day Rule of Political Amnesia, Americans are too bored with politics and too distracted by personal problems to remember a month from now who voted to raise taxes and who did not.
What the public may longer remember, though, is that 1990 was the year of the "tax bubble" -- the year Congress discovered a new inequity in the tax code, then failed to root it out.
That perception would be a pity, says Senator Bill Bradley, the New Jersey Democrat who led the fight for the 1986 Tax Reform Act.
For while bubbles fit nobody's ideal income tax, they are no invention of the devil.


X-Ray Laser Never 'Star' of 'Star Wars'  To the Editor:   Contrary to your report that Congress has dealt a near-fatal blow to the "star" of "Star Wars" (news article, Oct. 21), the X-ray laser has never been the "star" of what became the Strategic Defense Initiative. While Dr. Edward Teller was enthusiastic about this device, he principally interested some advocates of missile defenses in nonnuclear, antimissile lasers.   As early as the fall of 1981, the X-ray laser was denounced by members of the High Frontier panel, an unofficial group that studied strategic defenses and reported its findings to President Reagan in January 1982. Furthermore, the X-ray laser was also rejected by Adm. James D. Watkins, Chief of Naval Operations. He played a key role in convincing the Joint Chiefs unanimously to recommend a new strategic defense program to the President about six weeks before Mr. Reagan's S.D.I. speech in March 1983.   Nor has the X-ray laser been of major significance in the program developed by the S.D.I. organization beginning in early 1984. Its 1985 report to Congress stated that nuclear-driven directed-energy weapons were being pursued as a hedge against Soviet development of such devices.    The report reiterated that the program was emphasizing nonnuclear weapons for defense. In its April 1987 report to Congress, the S.D.I. organization stated that the "primary candidate for the space-based laser concept uses chemical lasers fueled with hydrogen-fluoride." The 1989 report continued to show that the nuclear-directed energy program was of only minor importance.   The 1989 report also announced progress on a new concept, Brilliant Pebbles (a small, autonomous hit-to-kill interceptor missile). The report noted that this new missile might become the basis for "a highly effective first defense layer." If there ever has been an S.D.I. "star," that role has been played for two years by Brilliant Pebbles.   It is too simple to speak of any one technology as a "star" of "Star Wars." S.D.I. has pursued a balanced program that includes developments with promise for near-term deployment and more advanced technologies that might enhance a strategic defense in the more distant future should the nation decide to field such a system. DONALD R. BAUCOM Alexandria, Va., Oct. 21, 1990   The writer, who retired from the Air Force, was historian for the Strategic Defense Initiative organization.


Book Notes
Elation at Weidenfeld
For a small house that has had more than its share of recent troubles, Grove Weidenfeld has had much to celebrate in recent weeks:
"The Book of J," translated by David Rosenberg and interpreted by Harold Bloom, will appear on the best-seller list of The New York Times on Sunday, as the No. 12 work of hard-cover nonfiction.
Another Grove Weidenfeld book, "Paradise" by Elena Castedo, a first novel, was one of five works of fiction nominated for the National Book Awards.
And although the works of Octavio Paz, this year's Nobel Prize laureate, are published primarily by New Directions, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich and Seaver Books, Grove published and has long kept in print perhaps the most famous work, "The Labyrinth of Solitude."
The three books were acquired before the advent of the new regime, which dates only to this summer, when Ann Getty, the owner, took the house off the sales block and decided to continue going it alone as an independent publisher.
"I cannot claim a scintilla of credit for any of it," said Alan D. Williams, who has been publisher for about a month.
"But after the spring and summer trauma, the success has been a wonderful signal to booksellers and the industry."
Peter Schneider, the sales director, said that when he arrived at Grove Weidenfeld in July, a first printing of 30,000 had already been planned for "The Book of J," in which Mr.
Bloom argues that the texts of Genesis, Exodus and Numbers were written by a woman, although only 7,000 advance orders had been received from booksellers.
So the sales team redoubled its efforts, and when favorable reviews began appearing in the national press the publisher sent a special poster to more than 600 bookstores with a photo of the book jacket, copies of a couple of the reviews and the headline, "Did a Woman Write the Bible?"
The reviews and the extra effort paid off.
The publishing house has already gone back for an additional 15,000 copies and in a few days it is going back for 15,000 t0 20,000 more.
"When we first presented the book to a lot of our national accounts, they asked, 'Who's going to read this?' " Mr.
Schneider said.
"Now we know the answer is, a lot of people." A Libel Suit Ends
It dragged on for more than seven years, but the suit by William J. Janklow, the former Governor of South Dakota, against the author Peter Matthiessen and Viking Press, is finally over.
The end came last week when Mr.
Janklow -- whose 1983 lawsuit charged that he had been libeled in Mr.
Matthiessen's book, "In the Spirit of Crazy Horse" -- let a 90-day appeals period elapse without appealing the dismissal of his suit before the Supreme Court.
After a first printing of 35,000 copies, the book became entangled in litigation and has been virtually unobtainable.
Two days ago Viking said it would publish a new hard-cover edition of the book in May, with an afterword by Martin Garbus, the lawyer who defended the author and publisher.
Two Sakharov Offerings
In a few weeks the Lazear Agency in Minneapolis plans to bring Tanya Sakharov, a daughter of Dr.
Andrei D. Sakharov, the Soviet physicist, to the United States to meet with New York publishers.
The agency will be offering two books: "The Letters of Andrei Sakharov," more than 200 letters to Soviet and world leaders that are now being collected by Miss Sakharov and her husband, Mikhail Liberman.
And the agency will try to sell Miss Sakharov's memoir, which will be illustrated with family photographs and her father's drawings.
Jonathon Lazear, the president of the agency, said he had become involved with Miss Sakharov through another of the agency's clients, Ken Dychtwald, a San Francisco gerontologist who wrote "Age Wave" (Jeremy Tarcher Inc. and Bantam).
Mr.
Lazear does not speak Russian, but Mr.
Liberman, who will accompany his wife to the United States, speaks English.
Dubcek's Prague Spring
Kodansha International has acquired the autobiography of Alexander Dubcek, who was the First Secretary of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia during the Prague Spring of 1968.
The book, expected to be published by spring of 1992, is being written in collaboration with Jiri Hockman, a Czechoslovak dissident journalist and author who teaches at Ohio State University.
The book will disclose, among other things, the details of Mr.
Dubcek's abduction by the K.G.B. in August 1968.
Kodansha, the American publishing arm of the large Japanese house, acquired the book in negotiations with Helen Rees, a Boston literary agent.
Thriller for the East
In February, Viking plans to publish "The Moscow Club" by Joseph Finder, a post-cold war thriller centering on a secret group in the Kremlin that is planning a coup d'etat.
A first novel, "The Moscow Club" has not yet been sold to a Soviet publisher, but it has been sold to publishers in 19 other nations, including Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia.
The sale of a first novel in so many countries is itself highly unusual, but Danny Baror, who handles international sales for the Henry Morrison agency, said he was especially surprised by the sales to Eastern Europe.
"Such a thing would not have been possible only a year or two ago," he said.


Women Priests? Rome Would Sooner End Celibacy; Eastern Rite Priests
To the Editor:
Your otherwise judicious article on the prospect of the ordination of women to the priesthood in the Church of England (Oct. 14) states that Anglican traditionalists oppose ordination of women partly on the ground that such ordinations would inhibit Anglican reunion with the Roman Catholic Church; you then state "that argument overlooks the fact that Anglican clergy members can marry."
The presence of married priests in the Church of England and elsewhere in the Anglican Communion does not affect reconciliation with Rome, because the Roman Catholic Church itself has married priests in good standing within its own jurisdiction.
It is true, of course, that priests in the Roman Rite, the largest of all rites within the Roman Catholic Church, are enjoined to embrace celibacy; however, the Eastern Rite churches (also known as uniates) in communion with Rome are served by priests who have the option to marry or not.
These Eastern Rite churches employ the Eastern liturgies characteristic of the Eastern Orthodox Church, but deviate in recognizing the authority of the pope in matters of faith and morals.
Their priests, like those of the Eastern Orthodox Church, are permitted to marry and have families.
Certainly, clerical celibacy may be defended on many pragmatic and pastoral grounds, and Pope John Paul II has stressed his commitment to maintaining this discipline for priests of the Roman Rite; but there do exist under his jurisdiction priests of other rites who have wives and children and remain members of the clergy in good standing.
In the unlikely event that the Anglican Communion were reconciled with the Roman Catholic Church, such a reunion might establish a separate Anglican Rite, whose priests, like the priests of the Eastern Rite churches, would have the option to remain single or "to marry at their own discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve better to godliness" ("Of the Marriage of Priests," Articles of Religion of the Church of England, 32). (Rev.) WARREN C. PLATT New York, Oct. 15, 1990


EXECUTIVES
*
Ashton-Tate Corp., Torrance, Calif., which produces and markets microcomputer business software, named David R. Proctor executive vice president of product development. *
BCE Inc., Montreal, appointed L. R. Wilson president and chief operating officer. *
Pogo Producing Co., Houston, a gas and oil business, named Paul G. Van Wagenen president and chief operating officer. *
Standard Brands Paint Co., Torrance, Calif., named Steve Lindsey vice president, controller and assistant treasurer.
Edward Drury was elected vice president of the legal department and assistant secretary.


We Don't Reduce Crime by Just Throwing People Into Prison
To the Editor:
I wish to add a few comments concerning Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and New York State's prisons (news article, Oct 2).
His boast of a record number of prisoners under his regime is empty since crime has not declined one bit.
What good is a large number of people in prison if it does not cut crime?
Doesn't this tell us something?
Doesn't the Governor know that most of those who are sent to prison come back out into society, and if they haven't been helped in some way, given some rehabilitation to have a chance of going straight, we have wasted our money?
By emphasizing how many people are in prison, Governor Cuomo panders to the public's fear of escalating crime so he can look tough on criminals.
But just throwing people into prisons, unless they have committed violent crimes, is useless, as proved by our country's having the highest recidivism rate in the world.
Even the Governor's Correction Commissioner, Thomas A. Coughlin 3d, is beginning to see that drug treatment is a more effective way to rehabilitate drug addicts.
But we need to go even further because most people who get into drugs do so because their lives have no hope.
Without a decent education and some sort of skill, there is no way they can get a job that will afford them the basic necessities of life, such as a place to live, a decent diet and health care.
So of course they will be forced to return to criminal activities to live.
The public needs to be made aware that imposing sentences beyond 8 to 10 years does not make prisoners better citizens.
Instead, they become more bitter, more angry and more inclined to return to crime once paroled.
There is no way that just throwing people into prison prepares anyone to return to society.
They are not allowed to practice decision making, nor are they allowed to do anything really except try to protect themselves from being mugged, raped or even killed.
Many of the guards sell drugs and money for favors and sex.
Some are sadistic, taunt the prisoners and make their lives as difficult and ugly as possible.
Then if they get a reaction, they can have the prisoner put into solitary confinement.
How do I know?
I am one of the many trained volunteers who go into prisons as facilitators in the Quaker Alternatives to Violence program.
It is a workshop of two and a half or three days designed ultimately to help prisoners acquire techniques for solving conflicts nonviolently.
It is without a doubt, the most rewarding work I have ever done.
ZELL DRAZ Massachusetts Coordinator, Alternatives to Violence Sherborn, Mass., Oct. 10, 1990


CENSUS BY CHINA FINDS 1.13 BILLION
China announced today that the most thorough census in the nation's history had found that the country's population is 1.133 billion.
The official New China News Agency announced a precise figure -- a population of 1,133,682,501 -- as of July 1, "zero hour" for the fourth national census.
But in the four months since then, China's population has grown by another 5.5 million or so, based on the reported annual growth rate of 1.47 percent that the press agency disclosed.


EATING WELL
PSYLLIUM, a soluble fiber that studies have shown can lower cholesterol levels, has been traced as the cause of allergic reactions in some people who have eaten Heartwise, a cereal made by the Kellogg Company.
The reports of the reactions, ranging from itchy eyes and runny noses to severe difficulty in breathing, are the latest development in a debate over the safety of psyllium as a food additive.
In September 1989 the Food and Drug Administration sent a stern letter to Kellogg raising new questions about its use of psyllium, which has been used for decades in bulk laxatives like Metamucil and Fiberall.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-17
U.S. and British hostages in Iraq have suffered the greatest hardships, several of the 263 French hostages who released by Baghdad said.
The hostages are serving as "human shields" at arms plants.
Page A1
Congressional leaders urged caution on any military action against Iraq.
President Bush told the lawmakers he is troubled by Iraq's treatment of hostages and Kuwaitis.
A16
Iraq orders nation to prepare for imminent American attack A16
Eleven American servicemen die in two accidents in gulf A16
A debate is rising in Saudi Arabia over changes that might come from the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
Many Saudis are calling for more democratic freedoms.
A17
Arabs consider dropping effort to expel Israel from the U.N.  A16
Three Arabs killed as Israel imposes new ban A15
The Government of the Sudan accused Western donors of exaggerating the food shortages in the country.
The United States has said the country faces a famine next year.
A3 Troops in India fought off militants who stormed the city of Ayodhya and tried to takeover a disputed Islamic mosque.
At least 20 people were killed in the confrontation and protests that followed.
A1
Census in China puts population at 1.13 billion A8
As Khmer Rouge gains, Congress turns to Phnom Pehn A14
Dispute between Japan and China over island cools A7
The martyrs to Soviet injustice were honored by the Soviet Union, which dedicated in Moscow the first nationwide monument to the victims of Stalin's purges.
A10
Vodka shortages in the Soviet Union are so intense that Moscow's deputy police chief has come out in favor of legalizing home moonshine to protect civil order.
A10
In Washington, Mayor of Leningrad seeks new economic ties A9
Former head of Vatican Bank retires from papal service A3
London Journal: Does Britain still have a working class?  A4 NATIONAL A18-26, D25
The 1991 military spending bill passed by Congress last week imposes new restrictions on the President's power to spend billions of dollars on classified programs and weapons.
A1
The budget package helped the poor through both tax cuts and program expansions, though it favors working families with children.
Others will lose ground through higher excise taxes.
A20
Despite Bush's efforts, budget increases capital gains taxes D1
News analysis: From talk of taxes to talk of war A21
Washington at Work: Gephardt becomes the Democrats' voice A20
Justice David Souter was skeptical of the Administration's efforts before the Supreme Court to defend Federal rules barring all discussion of abortion in family-planning programs that receive Federal money.
A1
After tests, NASA declares space shuttle fleet "leak-free" A23
Vietnamese fishermen win exemption from 1789 law A26
Can Senator Jesse Helms be beaten?
Harvey Gantt, a black Democrat, has forced the Republican from North Carolina into an angry battle for re-election.
Public opinion polls show that it is a close race.
A1
Massachusetts congressional race becomes nasty D25
Political action groups pumping millions into campaigns D25
At trial, Arkansas Attorney General admits honest mistakes A22
Local economic enterprise zones, part of the Reagan era's urban philosophy, have brought jobs and money to decaying neighborhoods in cities like Louisville, Ky., but critics say they reflect a policy gone awry.
A18
U.A.W. and Chrysler reach tentative accord A18
General Motors idles plants and lays off 43,500 workers D1
Ford Motor Company profits drop in third quarter D1
A new publisher of Random House was named.
After a year of turmoil, Joni Evans was replaced by Harold Evans, the editor of the Conde Nast Traveler magazine.
A1
San Mateo Journal: A ban on breeding cats and dogs?  A18 REGIONAL B1-4
New York State faces a budget gap of $824 million for the current fiscal year, according to a report released by the Cuomo administration.
The report provides further evidence of the state's economic slide.
A1
News analysis: Mayor Dinkins faces a necessary but impossible choice between the financial establishment, which wants restraint, and the groups that backed his election campaign, which have their own agendas.
B1
About New York: Helping parents reclaim children B1
Study says Hispanic ignorance of AIDS slows prevention B2
Striking unions at The Daily News began planning a boycott of stores and other businesses that advertise in the paper.
The News said delivery of the paper had again been hurt by vandalism and threats.
B1 Tension within the Newspaper Guild has arisen as some members express ambivalence about the union leadership's decision to join the other unions on strike against The News.
B2
The News's long slide from the good old days B2
Plans to stop Halloween violence includ tactics from wheedling to bribery to coercion.
The police and school officials want to prevent a repeat of last year's violent sprees.
B1
Not all voters are in a fed-up mood.
In places like Tarrytown, N.Y., many people say they have had enough of crime, taxes and longtime politicians -- but plan to vote for incumbents anyway.
B1
Kean rebukes Florio over plan to end opera program B3
Eighth game of chess championship ends in a draw, finally B3 BUSINESS DIGEST D1
The Living Section
Food
Apple cider, the drink for tonight C1
De Gustibus C3
Eating Well C4
Wine Talk C10
Living
Bodies go public: it's men's turn now C1
Quite simply, Calvin Klein C1
Metropolitan Diary C2
Arts/Entertainment
Filming "Other People's Money" C15
Theater: "Abundance" C15
Music: A Berio retrospective C14
Dance: The Kirov in St. Louis C15
Word and Image: Book Notes C19
"Lincoln on Democracy" C20
BBC and sitcoms C22
Education Pages B6-7
Fresh wind at the civil rights helm B6
In fast-changing world, history textbooks become history B6
Proposals to cut school taxes are on the ballots in several states B7
Clash of symbols at Harvard: pink triangle vs. blue square B7 Sports
Basketball: Jackson may start B9
Knight one of 12 Hall nominees B11
Business: Garden hears advice on tickets B12
Boxing: Notebook B10
Columns: Vecsey on Virginia B9
Football: Looking ahead to Giants-49ers B9
Hockey: Kings beat Islanders B9
Devils lose B11
Marathon: German transition helps women's field B12
Obituaries D26
Herbert Brodkin, a television producer
Robert Alway, ex-dean of Stanford medical school
Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A24
A huge gain in the poverty war
Re-elect Regan, Abrams
Help Yugoslavia look forward
Letters A24
Flora Lewis: To help or not to help A25
Tom Wicker: The war option A25
Robertson Davies: Haunted by Halloween A25
Paul Sheehan: Dial 212-Get-Lost A25


Review/Fashion; Some Subtlety, Some Irony, Some Stretch
AS a fashion designer, Ronaldus Shamask is a rigorous modernist who always manages to keep things interesting.
Both journalists and other designers came out on Sunday to see what he's up to for spring.
The collection that floated down the runway at the New York Public Library was airy and subtle, at times almost insubstantial.
But it had ideas.


Kerry in Nasty Race in Massachusetts
In his re-election battle against Jim Rappaport, a Republican upstart, Senator John Kerry sometimes tells voters, "I'm not Rappaport," a playful political appropriation of the title of the Broadway show by that name.
Mr.
Rappaport, a wealthy anti-tax conservative with no previous political experience, laughs as hard as anybody.
He says Mr.
Kerry, a first-term Democrat, is really Michael Dukakis.


Review/Theater; 'Abundance,' Beth Henley's Revisionist Western
In most American frontier sagas, the thrill is to be found in the relentless drive west of the men who are forging a nation.
Beth Henley, the author of "Crimes of the Heart" and "The Miss Firecracker Contest," has no such brawny celebrations of Manifest Destiny in mind in "Abundance," her new play at the Manhattan Theater Club.
"Abundance" is a Western epic, all right, complete with mountainous scenic vistas, two-fisted brawls, lust in the dust, rampaging Indians and a 25-year narrative that finally deposits its characters in a newly tamed America hurtling by train into the 20th century.
But Ms.
Henley's play begins and ends with paired scenes foreign to her chosen genre -- intimate conversations between two women.
"Abundance" is a revisionist western that no one will confuse with the classics of John Ford and Howard Hawks.


Johnson Sets Schedule
Ben Johnson, the sprinter who was banned for two years after testing positive for steroids at the 1988 Seoul Olympics, will make his first American appearance on the track since then when he competes in the 50-meter dash at the Sunkist Invitation on Jan. 18 in Los Angeles, the meet chairman, Al Franken, announced yesterday.


London Journal; Now It's Noblesse Oblige vs. the Trickle-Downers
The Duke and the Lady are in a working-class struggle, of sorts.
A legal skirmish over whether Britain still has a working class has pitted Lady Porter, Conservative leader of the Westminster City Council and an heiress to the Tesco supermarket fortune, against the Duke of Westminster, the nation's wealthiest man.
The winner -- Lady Porter, who says the working class no longer exists, or the Duke, who says it does -- could be decided next month when Britain's High Court hears each side's arguments.
A Fortune of Billions
But some onlookers say the fight is actually a much larger contest in which the free-market principles and enterprise culture of modern-day Thatcherism are squaring off against the old-school noblesse oblige of Britain's patricians.


With Gains by Khmer Rouge, Congress Looks to Hun Sen
In response to Khmer Rouge advances on the battlefield, Congress has passed legislation intended to press the Administration to broaden ties with the Vietnamese-backed Government of Cambodia.
Ever since Vietnam invaded Cambodia to topple the Khmer Rouge from power and installed a sympathetic Government in 1979, Washington has shunned that leadership in Phnom Penh and instead supported a guerrilla coalition.


Arkansas Aide Says Expense Errors Were Honest
Attorney General Steve Clark, on trial for theft, testified today that he never meant to abuse a state-issued credit card and made honest mistakes when filling out expense forms.
Mr.
Clark faces one charge of felony theft by deception.
He is accused of entertaining friends, relatives, political supporters and even a former fiancee on his state Visa card.


Accounts
*
American Home Products Corp., New York, to Young &amp; Rubicam, New York, for two new American Home Foods products.
The budget will be $10 million. *
Act Media, Norwalk, Conn., an in-store marketing unit of Heritage Media Corp., to Masterson Rothberg, New York.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Hamilton Beach/Proctor-Silex Inc., Richmond, to Arian, Lowe &amp; Travis Advertising, Louisville, Ky., for the Hamilton Beach appliance business.
Billings are $1 million.


Dow Climbs 17.82 Points, To 2,448.02
Wall Street took heart yesterday from the strong reception that investors gave the Treasury's $12 billion auction of two-year notes and pushed blue-chip stocks higher.
But while the Dow Jones industrial average climbed 17.82 points, to 2,448.02, the broader market did not keep pace.


New Nominee in Minnesota
State Auditor Arne Carlson was named the Republican candidate for governor today after the winner of the party's primary, Jon Grunseth, quit the race because of allegations of sexual misconduct.
State law allows a party to replace a candidate who drops out, and Mr.
Carlson, who placed second in the primary, was unanimously selected by the party's 14-member executive committee.
He will face Gov.
Rudy Perpich.
The party had to select a candidate by 5 P.M.
Friday to get a new name on the ballot.


Retaining Warmth For Ice At Garden
"Cut the strings," called out the voice from the back seats of the airplane carrying the Los Angeles Kings into New York City.
"Cut the strings."
Up front, Tony Granato stood and stared out the window, a dip of the wing spreading the city out underneath him, a muted but still spectacular splash of streetlights and dusk's last daylight.


Books of The Times; New Lesson in Democracy, by Abraham Lincoln


Nets' Coach Concerned About Bowie Leg Injury
Even though the Nets seemingly set their team for the season opener by cutting Pete Myers and Anthony Mason today, there could be another transaction before the first game on Friday.
The uncertainty revolves around the sore Achillies' tendon in Sam Bowie's left leg.
Coach Bill Fitch continued to doubt that Bowie would play in the opener against Indiana.
The coach said Bowie might begin the season on the injured-reserve list, leaving Chris Dudley as the starting center.


Autopsy Announced
The trainer of Mr.
Nickerson, the 4-year-old who was one of three horses to die in Breeders' Cup races at Belmont Park last Saturday, said yesterday that preliminary autopsy findings did not show anything unusual.
Mark Reid, the trainer, said he still believed Mr.
Nickerson "had a heart attack." There was one theory that the horse might have broken a bone which was forced into his heart, but Reid contended: "My feeling is he hit the ground with such force he fractured a shoulder. I'd be surprised if anything was found other than a heart attack.


Barbara Creaturo; Editor, 49
Barbara Creaturo, a senior editor at Cosmopolitan magazine, died on Saturday at Doctor's Hospital.
She was 49 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Ms. Creaturo died of ovarian cancer, a spokeswoman for the magazine said.


Clash of Symbols at Harvard: Pink Triangle vs. Blue Square
Two symbols have prompted an emotional debate at Harvard University between homosexuals who have adopted the pink triangle and a student group espousing traditional values that has covered the campus in blue squares.
Last week, members of the Association Against Learning in the Absence of Religion and Morality (Aalarm), a conservative student group formed last spring, chalked blue squares on sidewalks in Harvard Yard and around campus buildings.
Posters on kiosks and dormitories Thursday and Friday said the blue squares represent "faith, family, country and community."


New-Home Sales Fall to 8-Year Low
Led by weakness in the Northeast, sales of new homes in September fell to their lowest level since the recession eight years ago, the Commerce Department said today.
Single-family home sales plunged 6 percent last month, after declines of 1.8 percent in August and nine-tenths of 1 percent in July, the department said.
The latest drop pushed sales to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 503,000 units, the lowest since a 480,000-unit rate in October 1982, it said.


Otto Powers Flames Past Devils, 6-3
Joel Otto scored two power-play goals in the second period tonight for Calgary to help the Flames defeat the Devils, 6-3.
Otto, who had not scored in Calgary's six previous games, now has three for the season.


Stock Repurchase At Union Carbide
The Union Carbide Corporation said it had accepted more than 20.3 million common shares at $17.25 each in a Dutch tender that expired at midnight on Monday.
After the purchase of the shares, the company will have about 124.5 million common shares outstanding.
Under the tender offer, the company had offered to buy up to 20 million of its shares at prices specified by shareholders ranging from $14 to $17.50 a share.
The company ultimately decided to increase the number of shares to be bought under the offer.
All shares tendered and not bought by the company will be returned to shareholders.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
Joni Evans was replaced as Random House publisher, capping a year of turbulence.
The interlocking personalities involved in the change sent the industry spinning.  [ Page A1. ]  Her replacement is Harold Evans, who is no relation.
Mr.
Evans and his wife, Tina Brown, are one of the top power couples in New York.  [ D11. ]
G.M. said it would cut production in the next two months, idling 16 car and truck assembly plants for up to four weeks.  [ D1. ]
Ford Motor turned in its worst quarterly performance since the 1982 recession, a 78.7 percent drop in profit.  [ D1. ]
USX said it would transfer its steel operation to a wholly owned subsidiary.  [ D1. ]
Oil companies as a group are reportedly not profiting from the invasion of Kuwait, because gasoline sellers have passed along only about 60 percent of their higher cost of oil.  [ D7. ]
I.B.M. introduced both its first PC's based on Intel's powerful 486 microprocessor and a more efficient version of its OS/2.  [ D11. ]
Leaders of the U.A.W. and Chrysler said they had reached tentative agreement on a new contract.  [ A18. ]
Striking unions at The Daily News moved to try to starve the paper of its advertising revenue.  [ B1. ]
General Cinema offered to buy the shares of Neiman Marcus it does not already own for $240 million in cash.  [ D5. ]  THE ECONOMY
The Government reported an increase in the G.N.P. that was labeled by some economists as misleading.  [ D1. ]
The budget legislation ended up raising capital gains taxes for the country's wealthiest individuals, despite years of effort by Bush and his aides to cut the rate.  [ D1. ]  Investors must now decide how to make the best of the situation in year-end tax planning.  [ D3. ]
An Arizona developer pleaded guilty to participating in a fraudulent land deal involving Lincoln Savings.  [ D2. ]
The Administration is concerned about the dollar's recent sharp decline, a Treasury official said.  [ D4. ]
Sales of new homes in September fell to their lowest level since the '82 recession, the Commerce Department said.  [ D6. ]
Lawyers for Michael R. Milken filed a brief with their final arguments, contending that he is no "master criminal."  [ D12. ]
An accounting group recommended that the industry's chief rule-making body adopt a standard requiring banks to record on their earnings statements losses on securities investments.  [ D12. ] BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY
As technology for gathering the sun's rays improves, engineers are focusing on storage.
Some Israeli scientists see a solution.  [ D11. ]  MARKETS
Wall Street took heart from the strong reception to a Treasury auction and pushed the Dow up 17.82, to 2,448.02.  [ D12. ]
Oil prices retreated in a market so sluggish traders would not even jump at rumors.
Crude slipped 14 cents, to $34.54.  [ D7. ]
A successful auction of new two-year Treasury notes helped to reverse a modest early slide in the credit markets.  [ D18. ]
The dollar ended mostly lower.  [ D19. ]  Platinum futures prices posted their strongest gains in 10 months.  [ D19. ]  TODAY'S COLUMNS
Mutual fund investors poured money into international stock and bond funds this month, seeking to take advantage of the falling dollar, fund managers said.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D1. ]
Congressional incumbents take heart: those who make it through the November elections are home free.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Dentsu has acquired 40 percent of Collett, Dickenson, Pearce &amp; Partners.
Advertising.  [ D10. ]


Chronicle
The Hunter College Playhouse, with its creaky seats, shabby walls and lack of air-conditioning, is dark now, but construction crews are to enter the 50-year-old structure in January.
Tomorrow, there will be toasts to the theater's new life and the woman who helped make it possible with a gift of $1.5 million.
In two years, when the rebuilt 644-seat theater reopens, it will be named after the benefactor, SYLVIA FINE KAYE , and her husband of 47 years, the late Danny Kaye.
"We will save many of the baroque features that Mrs. Kaye likes," said GERALD SCHIFF , a partner in the New York architectural firm of Abramovitz Kingsland Schiff, which also designed much of Lincoln Center.
The Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse, which is to be the first big commercial theater on the Upper East Side, will cost $6.5 million; the rest of the money will come from the city and state, and from other private donors.


USX to Shift Steel Operation To a Wholly Owned Unit
The USX Corporation, which earlier this year fought a protracted proxy battle against a proposal to separate its steel business from its vast energy holdings, said yesterday that it would transfer its steel operation to a wholly owned subsidiary.
Steel industry analysts speculated that the company was readying its steel business -- the nation's largest producer -- for a potential sale.
USX also said yesterday that its profits for the quarter had fallen 6.8 percent.
On the New York Stock Exchange, USX's shares gained 12.5 cents each, to $31.


New History Being Made At Virginia
Nobody wanted to give a football scholarship to Derek Dooley.
Everybody wanted to give one to Terry Kirby.
That they should wind up as teammates is a sign of the bizarre doings at Thomas Jefferson's school.


Philip Lukin, 87, Dies; Advertising Executive
Philip Lukin, an advertising executive in New York for four decades, died in his sleep on Sunday at his home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 87 years old.
Mr.
Lukin, who was born in Manhattan and graduated from Brown University, specialized in liquor advertising for most of his career.
In 1933, after seven years as executive vice president of Charles Austin Bates, he joined Lawrence Fertig &amp; Company, eventually becoming the president.


Memorial for C.H. Belfrage
A memorial for Cedric H. Belfrage, journalist and author, will be held on Monday at 5:30 P.M. at the headquarters of Local 1199 of the Drug, Hospital and Health Care Employees Union, at 310 West 43d Street.
Speakers are to include Holly Near, Pete Seeger, Jessica Mitford and Paul Robeson Jr.
Mr.
Belfrage, former editor of The National Guardian, died on June 21 in Cuernavaca, Mexico, at the age of 85.


Philippine Labor Chief Faces Charges of Sedition in Strike
The police detained the nation's most prominent labor leader today in connection with last week's national strike after he appeared on a television panel show with Manila's police chief.
He is expected to be charged with inciting to sedition and illegal assembly.
Crispin Beltran, leader of the May First Movement, and Col.
Ernesto Diokno were among the panelists who discussed Wednesday's strike on Station GMA's weekly show, "Viewpoint."
Last week's strike, called to demand a $1.50 increase in the daily minimum wage, paralyzed public transportation in Manila and other cities.
Militants believed to include Communist rebels burned 23 buses, passenger jeeps and other vehicles during the labor unrest.
Mrs.
Aquino refused to grant the 42 percent increase and instead told union leaders to refer demands to a Government-labor wage council.
Later, the unions scaled these down to $1 a day, but Mrs.
Aquino also refused that request.
She promised to punish strike leaders responsible for violence.


Saudi Life Under Stress


Review/Fashion; Quite Simply, It's Calvin Klein
CALVIN KLEIN has put a new spin on minimalism.
Everything that could possibly be distracting is pared away.
Makeup is natural.
So are the coiffures.
So are the clothes.
"I feel so good about the collection," the designer said yesterday after his spring show.
"I feel it's for the modern woman. It's all about softness."


Investigators Raid Polly Peck
Investigators from Britain's Serious Fraud Office today raided the offices of Polly Peck International P.L.C., the troubled British conglomerate.
The raid was conducted with the knowledge of administrators appointed last week to help Polly Peck sort out its debt of $:1.3 billion, or $2.5 billion, a Serious Fraud Office spokeswoman said.


Americans and British Worst Off Under Iraqis, Freed French Say
Several of the 263 French hostages who flew home from Baghdad on Monday night said Americans and Britons in Iraq and Kuwait were suffering the greatest hardships.
"They were watched over much more than we were," said a former captive named Marc who was held in Baghdad.
"They were only allowed out two hours a day. We couldn't count them or approach them. Plainclothes police controlled everything."


Giants-49ers: TV and Fans Lift It to 'Happening' Class
Keep your voices down when talking to the Giants and the 49ers these days.
Mention those 7-0 records in a whisper.
And don't -- under any circumstances -- try to look ahead to that Monday night when these two clubs will meet.
But then again, what's a fan for?
By the time the titans of pro football, the Giants and the San Francisco 49ers, clash in that already anticipated game on Dec. 3, another quarter of the National Football League season will have passed into history, the month of November will have slipped by, and -- ABC forbid -- the clubs might not even be undefeated anymore.


I.B.M. Introduces Products to Bolster Its PC Line
The International Business Machines Corporation tooks steps yesterday to make its personal computer hardware and software more competitive, introducing both its first PC's based on the Intel Corporation's powerful 486 microprocessor and a more efficient version of its OS/2 operating system.
I.B.M. had been selling an upgrade kit that allowed customers to replace older chips with the 486 chip, which is at least twice as fast as earlier microprocessors, and its new machine had been expected.


An Underdog Forces Helms Into a Surprisingly Tight Race
Suddenly, North Carolinians are asking a question that many never expected to be asking a week before the election: Can Harvey Gantt pull it off?
The contest between Mr.
Gantt, a black Democrat who is the former Mayor of Charlotte, and Senator Jesse Helms, an 18-year Republican incumbent who is one of the toughest competitors in American politics, is among the closest of the nation's Senate races in the public opinion polls as the 1990 campaign nears an end.


Massachusetts: Accentuating the Negative
Scripts and photographs of television commercials from the race for Senator.
JOHN KERRY, DEMOCRAT


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY Maple Leafs End Losing Streak Gary Leeman poked in a rebound with 49 seconds left to cap a four-goal Maple Leaf comeback in a 5-4 victory over the Minnesota North Stars in Toronto last night.
Wendel Clark's goal at 13 minutes 36 seconds of the third period had forged a 4-4 tie.
Toronto, 2-10-1, ended a four-game losing streak.
It was the Leafs' first game since Tom Watt was named head coach on a permanent basis Monday.
Neal Broten had two goals for the North Stars, 2-7-4, who remained without a victory in seven road games. (AP) Blues 5, Red Wings 2: Brett Hull broke a second-period tie with his league-leading 15th goal as the St.
Louis Blues extended their unbeaten streak to seven games with a victory over the Red Wings in Detroit.
Dave Lowry added two goals for St.
Louis (8-3-1), which posted its fourth straight victory while ending the Red Wings' (6-4-3) six-game home-ice winning streak.
After Gerard Gallant tied the score at 2-2 midway through the second period, Hull, left unattended in front of the Detroit net, converted a centering pass from Rod Brind'Amour for his 11th goal in the last six games. (AP) Penguins 6, Flyers 2: Mark Recchi had a goal and three assists and Frank Pietrangelo stopped 33 shots for his fourth straight victory as the Flyers' losing streak reached four games.
Pittsburgh (6-6-1) won its second straight game and third in its last four.
The game marked the return of the Flyer right wing Tim Kerr, who played in his first game since his wife Kathy died Oct. 16 from complications of child birth.
He missed the team's last six games.
Kerr, who received a brief standing ovation on his first shift, was stopped by Pietrangelo on a pad save just outside the crease at 7:40 of the opening period.
Philadelphia (6-6-0) outshot the Penguins, 24-10, through the first two periods, but Pietrangelo kept Pittsburgh in the game with numerous key saves.
Kevin Stevens gave the Penguins a 1-0 lead when he took a cross-ice pass from league-leading scorer John Cullen, faked the goalie, Ken Wregget, and flicked a shot past Wregget's stick side at 5:49 of the first period.
A minute later, Rob Brown took a pass from Bob Errey, who had two assists, from behind the net and fired a shot past Wregget in the slot at 6:49.
Joe Mullen scored his 10th goal of the season and seventh on the power play for a 5-1 advantage when he pushed a shot over Wregget's stick side at 6:45 of the final period. (AP) TENNIS Sampras Struggles but Wins Pete Sampras struggled yesterday in winning his Paris Open debut over Carl-Uwe Steeb, 7-6, 3-6, 7-6.
Sampras looked rusty in edging the German Davis Cup player in the second round of the $2 million tournament.
Ninth-seeded Goran Ivanisevic also moved into the third round with a 6-2, 6-4 victory over Magnus Gustafssson.
Mats Wilander made a quick exit, losing to Jakob Hlasek, 6-3, 6-2, in less than an hour.
Hlasek next meets John McEnroe. (AP) Kelesi Upset by Provis: Nicole Provis defeated second-seeded Helen Kelesi in straight sets last night, becoming the fifth player to upset a seeded player in the first round of the $150,000 Virginia Slims of Nashville tournament.
Provis, ranked 52d in the world, overpowered the hard-hitting Kelesi by drawing her to the net for a 7-6, 6-3 victory.
Elise Burgin upset fourth-seeded Claudia Porwik, 6-4, 1-6, 6-4, and third-seeded Raffaella Reggi beat Amanda Coetzer, 6-4, 6-2. (AP)


Delay in Pathe Merger
For the third time in a week, the $1.36 billion merger between the Pathe Communications Corporation and the MGM-UA Communications Company was postponed today, but officials said the deal would close Thursday.
In a joint statement, the companies said the closing was delayed by accounting procedures, incomplete closing documentation and the transfer of funds.


Dinkins Struggles With Fiscal Balancing Act
New York City's fiscal troubles have pitted the groups that backed Mayor David N. Dinkins, and whose agendas for change cost money, against the financial establishment that looked askance at him.
The troubles have made it both necessary and impossible for the Mayor to choose between the two.
In one sense, it is a false conflict, for Mr.
Dinkins has said many times that fiscal stability was his top priority.
He made a series of difficult decisions through the spring and summer -- delaying the hiring of police officers and cutting services -- to keep that pledge.


When Whatever Goes Into the Pot Is Whatever's in the Pantry
MY husband complains that I never serve the same dish twice, even when he likes it.
What he has to understand is that I cook by concocting from whatever lies most readily at hand.
Dinner for the two of us (it's down to that: the children are off cooking on their own) is rarely a result of planning.
I find the idea of following a week's worth of predetermined menus, like those in books and magazines, about as appealing as deciding what to wear days in advance.
What about the weather?
My mood?
An impulse?


METROPOLITAN DIARY
THEY were out for blood, the man and the boy -- Dracula blood.
They found it at a Woolworth's in Greenwich Village for $1.49 an ounce.
Then the boy who would be Count Dracula (he looked about 7 years old) spotted another Halloween accessory.
A set of wonderfully gory fangs.
Could he have fangs, too? Please? The man allowed as how he'd spring for fangs.


Intermark Unit Is Put Up For Sale
Intermark Inc. said it had
etained Bear, Stearns &amp; Company to advise it on the possible sale of its National Airmotive Corporation subsidiary.
Bear, Stearns will assist in identifying qualified buyers and will manage the selling process, Intermark said.
National Airmotive is a commercial franchised distributor and overhaul agency for gas turbine engines manufactured by the Allison Gas Turbine Division of the General Motors Corporation.


Legalize Home Vodka, Soviet Policeman Urges
The hangover from the Gorbachev leadership's ill-fated temperance drive is causing such intense vodka shortages and bootlegging that the deputy police chief of Moscow has come out in favor of the legalization of moonshine to protect civil order.
"The holidays are coming and if the stores do not get more vodka to sell to the people, the situation might become explosive," the deputy chief, Lev P. Belyansky, said as his department conceded that there was an uncontrollable racket in overpriced illicit vodka.


French Pull Back in the Gulf
French troops will complete a move to new positions in northeastern Saudi Arabia this week, pulling back from the front line with Iraqi soldiers, military officials said today.
They said Saudi Arabia had asked the French to withdraw 13 miles to leave Arab forces, believed to be Syrian, facing the Iraqis.


Miscellany
*
W.
B.
Doner &amp; Co. has opened a Dallas office to serve a new Ford dealer association.
It will be headed by Kenny Dean, the account supervisor.


New-Home Sales Fall to 8-Year Low
Led by weakness in the Northeast, sales of new homes in September fell to their lowest level since the recession eight years ago, the Commerce Department said today.
Single-family home sales plunged 6 percent last month, after declines of 1.8 percent in August and nine-tenths of 1 percent in July, the department said.
The latest drop pushed sales to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 503,000 units, the lowest since a 480,000-unit rate in October 1982, it said.


Correction
The Tastings note with the Wine Talk column on Oct. 10 misidentified the makeup of Castello de Gabiano.
It is made entirely of sangiovese grapes, not mostly cabernet.


SOUTER QUESTIONS A CURB ON DOCTORS
Justice David H. Souter was openly skeptical of the Bush Administration's efforts in a Supreme Court argument today to defend Federal rules that bar all discussion of abortion in family planning programs that receive Federal money.
The Justice, who joined the Court three weeks ago, fired a series of pointed questions at Solicitor General Kenneth W. Starr, the Administration's chief courtroom lawyer.
Mr.
Starr was arguing that the 1988 rules were authorized by Federal law and permissible under the Constitution.


People
*
Una Barden and John Marchese have been named senior vice presidents of BBDO New York. *
Chris DeMoulin, Frani Pisano and John Cannon were named vice presidents of DDB Needham, New York. *
Jonathan Giles Daly was promoted to vice president and director of strategic planning of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York.
Cheryl L. Brenner was named an account manager in the St.
Louis office. *
Kathleen Foley has been named to the new position of senior vice president and group direcor at Young &amp; Rubicam, San Francisco.


Police and Schools Try to Head Off Halloween Trouble
Hoping to prevent the violence and vandalism that have marred recent Halloweens in New York City, the police have assigned extra officers to patrol around schools and shopping areas today, and special units will be watching for roving bands of youths like those who rampaged through the city's streets last year.
The Board of Education said the police had agreed to pick up any students found off school grounds during school hours without a reasonable explanation, and take them to the nearest high school, where they will be put in classes, the library or a study hall until dismissal.


Fresh Wind at the Civil Rights Helm
When Michael L. Williams took over the Department of Education's Office for Civil Rights in June, he did something none of his predecessors had done: He called up various civil rights groups.
"It wasn't a secretary asking you to hold for him, either; it was him," said Ellen J. Vargyas, a lawyer for the National Women's Law Center, a nonprofit women's rights legal organization.
"He was hitting the phones himself. It was extraordinary."


Norway's Labor Party Chief Agrees to Form Government
Norway's Labor Party leader, Gro Harlem Brundtland, agreed today to form her third Government after a center-right coalition collapsed in a controversy over Norway's links to the European Community.
Mrs.
Brundtland, 51 years old, told the acting head of state, Crown Prince Harald, that she had won enough backing from other parties to set up a minority Labor Government to replace the Conservative-led coalition of Prime Minister Jan Syse, which collapsed on Monday.
Mrs.
Brundtland was Prime Minister for a brief period in 1981 and returned to power from 1986 until Mr.
Syse took over after the last election, in September 1989.
The Labor Party won just 63 of the 165 seats in Parliament in the 1989 election, but is still the biggest single party.


Construction Index Stagnant
A widely followed index of construction activity remained depressed in September, another piece of evidence that the broader economy is heading into a recession.
The Dodge index of construction contracting stood at 147 in September, just a notch higher than the 1990 low of 146 reached in August.
At this time last year, contracting for new construction was at an all-time peak, 25 percent above the latest rate.


Loser in Ivory Coast to Challenge Election
The opposition presidential candidate in the Ivory Coast, Laurent Gbagbo, said today that he would ask the West African nation's Supreme Court to overturn election results that he says were rigged by President Felix Houphouet-Boigny.
The Interior Ministry announced that Mr.
Houphouet-Boigny, 85 years old and the nation's leader for 30 years, won Sunday's election with 81.67 percent of the votes cast.
It was the country's first contested presidential election.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly
POLITICAL AND SECURITY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
LEGAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.


INSIDE
Budget: For the Rich . . .
Despite President Bush's struggle to cut the capital-gains tax rate, the budget agreement actually raises such taxes for the wealthiest Americans.
Business Day, page D1. . . . and for the Poor
Many of the poor, especially families with children, will gain from tax credits and program expansions in the budget.
Page A20.
A Jump in Economic Growth
The gross national product grew 1.8 percent in the third quarter, but some economists say important signs of weakness persist.
Page D1.
Arab Initiative on Israel
Arab diplomats said they were considering a proposal to drop their annual effort to expel Israel from the United Nations.
Page A16.
Unions at News Ask Boycott
Striking unions said they would hand out leaflets asking shoppers to boycott stores that still advertise in The Daily News.
Page B1.


Review/Ballet; A Classic Troupe Strengthens Its Ranks With Fresh Talent
New York's loss is Iowa City's gain.
The Kirov Ballet from Leningrad, replenished with an unfamiliar crop of splendid young dancers, is currently touring the United States but bypassing New York City.
Over the weekend, the Soviet company filled the huge and wonderfully faux-Oriental Fox Theater here with performances of "Giselle" and a mixed bill.
Gilded lions, red lights aglow in their eyes, guarded the interior staircase of this astonishingly sculptured former movie palace.
That the audience could accept a leap in sensibility from this Hollywood vision of Angkor to the purity of style that is the Kirov's hallmark is all to the dancers' credit.


Pacific Telecom Fills New Post of President
Theodore D. Berns, 41 years old, has been named to the newly created position of president and chief operating officer of Pacific Telecom Inc., a large independent telecommunications company based in Vancouver, Wash.
Mr.
Berns, a lawyer, had previously been vice president and secretary of Pacific Telecom.
He was promoted by Charles E. Robinson, the chairman and chief executive, who had also been president and chief operating officer but wanted help in overseeing operations.


San Mateo Journal; A Crusade to Save Unwanted Lives
The dog in her arms was shaking, its rheumy eyes wide with fear.
"Just relax, sweetheart, it's O.K.," crooned Chris Powell, the manager of the Peninsula Humane Society animal shelter, where 10,000 unwanted pets are put to death each year.


Review/Fashion; A Spectrum for Spring, Hot to Cool
SOME like it hot and some like it cool.
We're talking color here.
Designers' spring shows are either exploding with sizzling pink and orange and green, often combined in one outfit, or playing it cool with white, ivory and a touch of tan.
Randolph Duke went the pastel route, with pistachio, mango, lavender and the palest of pinks interplayed with the whitest of whites.
His show yesterday morning was a breakthrough for the designer, who has always displayed talent but was often restricted by fabrics and workmanship not of the highest quality.
This time, his clothes look beautifully executed.
T


Orion Seeks More Capital
Orion Pictures Inc. said yesterday that it had retained Salomon Brothers Inc. to raise additional equity capital.
The New York movie company has been scrambling to raise cash in recent years as it has had a shortage of successful films.
Unlike its diversified competitors, Orion is solely dependent on its entertainment business.


Saul Bellow to Receive Special Literary Medal
The National Book Foundation announced Monday that Saul Bellow would receive its medal for distinguished contribution to American letters when the 40th anniversary of the National Book Awards is celebrated at a ceremony and dinner at the Plaza Hotel in New York City on Nov. 27.
Mr.
Bellow, a Nobel laureate, is the only writer to have won three National Book Awards: in 1953 for "The Adventures of Augie March," in 1964 for "Herzog" and in 1970 for "Mr. Sammler's Planet."


Transactions
BASKETBALL
CHARLOTTE (NBA) -- Waived Richard Anderson, forward, and Michael Holton, guard.
INDIANA (NBA) -- Waived Dyron Nix and Gary Plummer, forwards, and Greg Wiltjer, center.
KNICKS (NBA) -- Waived Earl Cureton, forward.
LOS ANGELES LAKERS (NBA) -- Waived Keith Smith, guard.
MIAMI (NBA) -- Waived Jeff Sanders, forward.
NETS (NBA) -- Placed Roy Hinson, forward, on the injured list.
Waived Pete Myers, swingman, and Tony Mason, forward.


Mowton Waring, 84, Con Edison Executive
Mowton LeCompte Waring, who retired as an executive vice president of Consolidated Edison in 1968 after almost 35 years with the utility, died on Sunday at his home in Irvington, Va.
He was 84 years old.
He died of renal failure, his family said.


Florio and Kean Clash Over State's Well-Being
Have politics in New Jersey come down to this: the boxing fan verus the opera buff?
The answer is yes, politicians here say, if Gov.
Jim Florio, a former amateur boxer, can portray himself as Everyman by cutting a $1.6 million state program that trains opera stars.


Chronicle
It was tennis that brought the Watkins family of Provo, Utah, to New York in September to attend the United States Open, and today they are to be back in the city to accept a check for $50,000 in memory of their son Brian to establish junior tennis programs in Provo and New York.
LEWIS RUDIN is to present the check at the Grand Hyatt on behalf of the Association for a Better New York.
The Brian Watkins Memorial Fund and New York City Internship Program is named for the Watkinses' 22-year-old son, who was stabbed to death on Sept. 2 as he tried to keep muggers from attacking his parents in a midtown subway station.


Chronicle
DONALD TRUMP joined his estranged wife, IVANA TRUMP , in Prague yesterday to attend the funeral of her father, MILOS ZELNICEK .
Mr.
Zelnicek, a clerk in Gottwaldov, Czechoslovakia, died of a heart attack on Saturday night at the age of 63.
A spokeswoman for the Trump Organization said Mr.
Trump flew to Prague with his mother, MARY TRUMP .
Ivana Trump went to the Czechoslovak capital with the couple's three children on Sunday.
On Monday, with fashion week under way, many out-of-town buyers and journalists in town for the spring showings had been asking, "Where's Ivana?" As president of the Plaza hotel, the site of many of the shows, Mrs.
Trump has become increasingly important in the New York fashion world.


Former Head of Vatican Bank Retires
A scandal-scarred era came to an end for the Vatican today when Archbishop Paul C. Marcinkus, former head of the Vatican Bank, retired from papal service to do parish work in his home archdiocese of Chicago.
Archbishop Marcinkus, who comes from Cicero, Ill., acknowledged that the notoriety he has received in a continuing banking scandal will remain one of "a couple of crosses" that he must bear.
But he said he was leaving the Vatican voluntarily after 40 years and still had unquestioned support from Pope John Paul II.


Torborg Is Honored As Manager of the Year
Jeff Torborg, who transformed the Chicago White Sox into the surprise team of the major leagues, was selected as the American League manager of the year yesterday.
He was the only manager to be named on every ballot in the voting by two members of the Baseball Writers Association of America from each league city.
The White Sox, picked to finish far back in the American League West after finishing last at 69-92 in 1989, improved by 24 1/2 games to 94-68 and challenged Oakland for much of the season.
They were the only team to win a season series from the A's, 8 to 5, and Chicago's 94 victories were surpassed in the majors only by Oakland and Pittsburgh.
Torborg received 23 of 28 first-place votes and finished with 128 points.
Tony La Russa of Oakland got four first-place votes.(AP)


20 Die in India as Hindus Storm Disputed Mosque
Thousands of police officers and paramilitary troops armed with tear gas, riot sticks and guns fought off determined bands of Hindu militants today who stormed this holy city and tried to take over a disputed mosque after raising a saffron-colored flag.
Early reports said at least 20 people were killed nationwide, 11 of them in Ayodhya, a town 300 miles southeast of New Delhi.


BRIEFS
*
Amdura Corp., Denver, a hardware distribution company, said it would file a motion with the United States Bankruptcy Court to extend to Nov. 30, from today, the time under which it has the exclusive right to file its reorganization plan. *
Computing Devices Co., a Canadian unit of Control Data Corp., Minneapolis, a computer company, has received a contract to provide the Canadian military with a communications system worth more than $1 billion (Canadian). *
Consolidated Rail Corp., Philadelphia, said it would sell the section of its Shelbyville Line between Shelbyville, Ind., and Cincinnati to Central Railroad Co., Indianapolis.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Digital Equipment Corp., Maynard, Mass., a supplier of computer systems and services, has acquired the financial services business of Data Logic Ltd., London.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Federal-Mogul Corp., Detroit, a maker of engine parts and components, has completed the acquisition of a 100 percent interest in Glyco A.G., Wiesbaden, Germany, a maker of engine bearings, for $155 million.


Granato Returns to New York and Looks Forward to the Garden


German Growth Seen
German businesses expect continued growth next year despite rising oil prices and pressure on exports, the national chamber of commerce said today.
More than 90 percent of the 17,000 German businesses surveyed said they expected business to be as good in 1991 as in 1990, while 39 percent predicted it would be better.
Only 9 percent expected a decline.
Franz Schoser, managing director of Germany's association of chambers of commerce, predicted the country's growth rate next year would be 2 to 3 percent.


10 U.S. Sailors Die in Shipboard Accident in Gulf; Marine Is Also Killed
Eleven American servicemen in the Persian Gulf region were killed today in two accidents, raising the death toll in the American military deployment there to 43.
A ruptured valve spewed superheated steam into the boiler room of the amphibious assault ship Iwo Jima near Bahrain today, killing 10 sailors; and a marine was killed and three others injured when their vehicle overturned in nighttime maneuvers in the Saudi Arabian desert.


Bribery Case In Jamaica
A former Jamaican Minister of Tourism, Eric Anthony Abrahams, today blamed Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. for falsely implicating him in an indictment for bribery.
The United States Government recently decided to drop the charge.
The racketeering indictment, which United States prosecutors last week asked a Federal court in Connecticut to dismiss, was brought in connection with the 1981 award of the Jamaica Tourist Board's advertising contract to Young &amp; Rubicam, which is based in New York.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, the About Education column last Wednesday, about the North Carolina School for Science and Mathematics, omitted several words, thus misstating the cost for a year at the school.
The sentence should have read, "The cost per pupil is about three times the state's average per-pupil expenditure of $3,715."


Benson B. Sloan Jr.; Stockbroker, 75
Benson B. Sloan Jr., a retired stockbroker, died on Monday at Park View Hospital in Nashville.
He was 75 years old and lived in Tequesta, Fla.
He died of heart failure, his son, Benson B. 3d, of Nashville, said.


Accountants' Group Backs Reporting of Banks' Losses
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants recommended yesterday that the accounting industry's chief rule-making body adopt a standard requiring banks to record on their earnings statements losses on securities investments.
In a letter to the Financial Accounting Standards Board, a committee of the institute urged quick action on the issue of whether to require banks to include in their quarterly earnings the gains and losses from securities in their investment account.


Washington at Work; Journey to Chaos' Edge Invigorates the Fortunes Of a 'Bland' Gephardt
"I went nuts," said Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, a man who has built his Congressional career on a reputation for uncommon self-control.
Whatever he felt then, the Missourian beams with delight now as he recalls an early morning shouting match with Richard G. Darman, the White House budget director.
To some, the temper tantrums and five months of stop-and-go budget talks sum up everything bad about Washington politics.
But they ended up being a tonic for the spirits -- and reputation -- of the House majority leader.
A Dual Role
From an unsuccessful Presidential contender derided as a politician with no substance, no ideas and no eyebrows, Mr.
Gephardt has become the closest thing to Voice of the Party that the Democrats have.
He has won raves as a conciliator who helped keep the budget talks from collapsing and has also got high marks for giving the Democrats some semblance of a partisan spine.
Even his eyebrows seem darker, people say.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about changes in McDonald's restaurants misidentified the owner of the Olive Garden restaurant chain.
It is General Mills Inc., not Pepsico.


The Pop Life
Rap and Peace and Love
"Although I don't believe in censorship, I believe an artist is very responsible for his actions," Al B. Sure said recently.
"Especially if he's a young artist whom young kids listen to, there's almost a sense of his being like the Bible. The kids listen to what he says and live by it. That's why I don't believe in negativity. Music can be an incredible vehicle for helping people, and I'm into peace and love."
The 22-year-old singer, songwriter and producer was commenting on the current controversies surrounding rap lyrics.
Along with Bobby Brown and Keith Sweat, he is one of a trio of young male pop-soul singers who, in the face of rap, are successfully perpetuating an older romantic pop-soul tradition.
Mr.
Sure's 1988 debut album, "In Effect Mode" (Warner Brothers) sold nearly two million copies.
And its follow-up, "Private Times . . . and the Whole Nine" (Warner Brothers) is likely to do even better.
Both records include remakes of 1970's pop hits.
A high point of "In Effect Mode" was Mr.
Sure's lush version of "Killing Me Softly." The new album's opening cut is a rendition of the Eagles' "Hotel California."
Of the pop-soul trio Mr.
Sure is probably the most conservative and musically sophisticated.
His delivery of ballads is very similar in sound to Michael Jackson's at his most whispery and enraptured.
Besides Mr.
Jackson, the singers he most admires, he said, include Johnny Mathis, Marvin Gaye, Stevie Wonder and Donny Hathaway.
The singer, who lives in northern New Jersey, was born in Boston, lived in Leonia, N.J., for several years, then moved to Goshen, N.Y., and went to high school in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
It was while he was in high school that he and his cousin and co-producer, Kyle West, began making basement tapes.
Shortly after signing with Warner Brothers Records three years ago, Mr.
Sure won the Sony Innovator talent contest for promising black artists.
One of the judges was the producer Quincy Jones, who has become something of a mentor.
Mr.
Sure has studied all of Mr.
Jones's albums and has sung on two of them -- "Back on the Block" and "Listen Up! The Lives of Quincy Jones."
"One of the most valuable things that I got from Quincy," he said, "was that when you're producing a song, you don't tell the song what to do -- you let it tell you what it wants." Simon and Puritanism
"There's a lot of coming of age on the record and thinking about what's ahead," Carly Simon said the other day of the songs on her superb recent album, "Have You Seen Me Lately?" (Arista).
"It's probably a measure of being middle-aged and feeling a decaying process starting, but for someone who was brought up nonreligious, I find I have more questions and am trying to find answers more concentratedly than I've ever had to in my life."
The new album's most overtly spiritual song, written by Ms.
Simon with Teese Gohl, is a cheerful folk round whose lyric speculates on the possibility of reincarnation.
"Happy Birthday," another time-obsessed song, is a poignant acoustic ballad in which the 45-year-old singer and songwriter comments wryly on the Puritanism in today's health-obsessed social climate.
At her own birthday celebration, the narrator of the song wistfully ticks off activities that have become risky or frowned upon over the last decade, from drinking to lying in the sun to casual sex.
"We're too good to be happy, too straight to be sad," she observes.
The song ends as the singer tries to think of something to wish for that is not potentially harmful.
Ms.
Simon described "Happy Birthday" as "a reflection on this age of denial we've entered."
"We can't drink or smoke or go in the ocean or have many of the pleasures we got so used to having in the 60's and 70's," she said.
"Nowadays, the only thing that's O.K. to do is to exercise at a feverish pace, and I hate to exercise."
The album's most stunning moment is its title song, which will soon be released as single.
"Have You Seen Me Lately?" was originally written to have been sung by Meryl Streep over the title credits of the movie "Postcards From the Edge," but was dropped.
In the final cut of the film, only instrumental fragments of the tune are heard recurrently in the background.
One reason the song was not used, Ms.
Simon said, was that Carrie Fisher, who adapted the screenplay from her own novel, felt it was too soft and emotional to fit the sensibility of the lead character.
Another was that Mike Nichols, who directed the film, was unhappy with the front credits and decided to remove them, leaving no place for the song.
"The song is about shame, about hiding something and being very self-conscious about it and imagining everyone is noticing," Ms.
Simon said.
"In the film, of course, that something was drugs. The two images that I pulled out that I thought were generic enough were dream images of being naked and dancing in a church choir and of being caught with one's hand in a cookie jar. It's a dreamy, insecure song." The Charts
This week, for the first time, rap albums hold down the top two positions on Billboard's pop album chart.
Also for the first time, a rap single has reached No. 1 on the pop singles chart.
While M.C.
Hammer's "Please Hammer Don't Hurt 'Em" (Capitol) remains No. 1 for the 21st week on the pop album chart, it is being seriously challenged by Vanilla Ice's "To the Extreme" ( SB K) which jumps from No. 5 to No. 2 in its seventh week on the chart.
In those seven weeks, "To the Extreme" has now sold a phenomenal three million compared with Mr.
Hammer's sales of over seven million copies in 35 weeks.
At the same time, Vanilla Ice's single, "Ice Ice Baby," becomes the first rap single to hit No. 1 on the pop singles chart.
Mr.
Hammer's album also becomes the first rap album to have three top-10 singles: "U Can't Touch This," "Have You Seen Her" and "Pray," which jumps from No. 12 to No. 6.
Adding to the Hall of Fame
The Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame has announced its new members, who will be inducted on Jan. 11.
They include seven performers and groups: LaVern Baker, the Byrds, John Lee Hooker, the Impressions, Wilson Pickett, Jimmy Reed and Ike and Tina Turner.
Two non-performers -- Ralph Bass, a producer, and Dave Bartholomew, a producer, writer and arranger -- will also be inducted, along with an early influence on rock, the blues singer Howlin' Wolf.
The announcement was made by Ahmet Ertegun, chairman of the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame Foundation.
To be eligible for the hall of fame, members must have released their first recordings at least 25 years ago.
They are chosen by a panel of more than 300 performers, producers, writers, record-company executives and broadcasters.
A ground-breaking date for the building in Cleveland that is to house the hall of fame and museum has not been announced, but the foundation says that $40 million has been raised for the project.


Isis Enters Pact With Ciba-Geigy
Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc. and Ciba-Geigy Ltd. of Basel, Switzerland, entered a five-year collaboration agreement under which Ciba will invest more than $30 million.
Isis, based in Carlsbad, Calif., specializes in antisense technology, which seeks to treat disease by blocking genetic action.
While no drugs have been developed using antisense, the technology holds the promise of treating viral diseases like AIDS and herpes that have been resistant to traditional drugs.
Ciba will have worldwide exclusive marketing rights for all products except pharmaceuticals in the United States, where it may co-promote the products with Isis.


Communications Satellite Up
A Delta rocket blasted off tonight carrying a satellite that will expand international telephone and facsimile services on ships, airplanes, trains and other vehicles.
The unmanned 125-foot-long rocket roared into a cloudy, moonlit sky on time, at 6:16 P.M. from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station.
The International Maritime Satellite Organization, which owns the $80 million satellite, has more than 12,000 terminals in use around the world, most of them on ships.


Getting a Tale of 80's Avarice on Screen
The camera is rolling at No. 7 World Trade Center, and Larry the Liquidator is strolling purposefully through the lobby of the sleek, high-tech office building, across the pink-and-gray stone floor and past the long, wraparound security desk and the walls bedecked with modern art.
But despite the character's name, this is not yet-another mob hitman gunning for his victim in the newest Mafia-family extravaganza, or half-man, half-robot assassin seeking to destroy the world in the latest Arnold Schwarzenegger high-body-count, blood-and-guts epic.


Leningrad Mayor, in U.S., Seeks Economic Tie
The Mayor of Leningrad met today with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d; the national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, and the Senate Democratic leader, George J. Mitchell, seeking "new forms of economic relations" between the United States and the Soviet Union.
He also had a chance to exchange a handshake and brief greeting with President Bush.


G.M. Sets Plan to Idle 16 Plants
Faced with wary buyers and an uncertain economy, the General Motors Corporation said today that it would cut production in the next two months, idling 16 car and truck assembly plants for up to four weeks.
The move will result in the temporary layoffs of 43,500 hourly workers.
The nation's largest auto maker will cut 81,000 cars, or about 10 percent of what it had planned for the fourth quarter, and 73,000 light trucks and vans, equal to about 13 percent of its planned truck production, according to Ward's Automotive Reports, an industry newsletter.


Correction
A picture caption on Monday about a command change ceremony in Saudi Arabia misstated the First Cavalry Division's link to George Armstrong Custer.
Custer was acting commander of the Seventh Cavalry Regiment when he was killed in 1876.
The First Cavalry Division was formed in 1921 and later incorporated the Seventh Cavalry as a subordinate unit.


For Vietnamese-Americans, a Victory in Congress
Legislation passed in the final hours of the 101st Congress provides an exemption to a 200-year-old law that will for the first time allow fishermen who are not American citizens to legally own and pilot commercial fishing vessels off the California coast.
The legislation, sponsored by Representative Norman Y. Mineta, Democrat of San Jose, was drafted in response to the plight of several hundred Vietnam-born fishermen who earn their living fishing out of harbors here and in Los Angeles and Monterey on refitted old boats bought by pooling the money of several families.
Last year the Coast Guard began stepped-up enforcement of an 18th-century law that makes it illegal for the Vietnamese-Americans and other legal aliens to own and pilot their boats unless they are citizens.


Dilworth Walker, 72, Lever Brothers Official
Dilworth Walker, a retired executive of Lever Brothers, died last Thursday at his home in Jacksonville, Fla.
He was 72 years old, and his family said death was apparently caused by a heart attack.
Mr.
Walker was with Lever Brothers from 1964 until he retired in 1983 as director of distribution and data services.
He had previously been a partner in the management consulting firm of Cresap, McCormick &amp; Paget and commercial research manager for the Continental Can Company.


To Help or Not to Help
Only this summer in Houston, the seven major industrial countries were arguing whether to rush help to Mikhail Gorbachev's distressed economy or wait for reforms.
The question has already shifted.
The seven commissioned a big study, led by the International Monetary Fund, on what the Soviets needed.
The study hasn't been completed, but word is already out that it's going to be irrelevant.


New Bid for Neiman Marcus Stock
The General Cinema Corporation, one of the nation's largest operators of movie theaters, offered today to buy the shares of the prestigious retailer Neiman Marcus that it does not already own for $240 million in cash.
General Cinema, which is based in Chestnut Hill, now owns about 60 percent of Neiman Marcus Group Inc., but controls only 44 percent of the voting stock.
It said it would buy the rest of the publicly held shares in a tender offer for $14.40 a share.


In Fast-Changing World, History Textbooks Become History
Phyllis Henry began a history lesson the other day by setting aside the 750-page textbook her 11th-grade class uses and handing out newspaper and magazine clippings.
"Who can tell me why Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev won the Nobel Peace Prize?" she asked the 25 juniors at Roberto Clemente High School in Chicago.
"What are some of his achievements?"


Dow Jones Debt Is Downgraded
Moody's Investors Service Inc. yesterday downgraded slightly its rating of the debt of Dow Jones &amp; Company, citing lower advertising revenue at the company's publications, including The Wall Street Journal, and lower revenue from its electronic information services.
Moody's downgraded about $200 million of Dow Jones's long-term debt from Aa3 to Aa2.
Moody's said the company had been hurt by the continued downturn in the financial industry, a key customer for Dow Jones's information services.


Dollar Ends Mostly Lower On Fears of Weak Quarter
The dollar ended mostly lower yesterday on what traders said was concern that the economy would weaken in the fourth quarter and speculation that interest rates could again be pushed lower.


In New York: Re-Elect Regan, Abrams
Three statewide offices will be on Tuesday's ballot and for two of the races, the needle on the suspense meter barely flickers above zero.
About the only contest in the race against Gov.
Mario Cuomo is to see who comes in a forlorn second -- the Republican, Pierre Rinfret, or the Conservative, Herb London.
And Bernard Smith struggles on, a plausible but vastly outclassed challenger to Attorney General Robert Abrams.
But the race for State Comptroller is a race indeed, with the three-time incumbent Edward (Ned) Regan facing a formidable foe in Carol Bellamy, the former New York City Council President.
She has appeal as a candidate, not least because her election would put a woman in high state office.
But she does not offer enough in the way of strengths to justify unseating the incumbent, especially not at a time when New York's fiscal problems need experienced oversight.


New Publisher Named in Shift At Turbulent Random House
One of the most prestigious positions in New York's high-profile book world changed hands yesterday, and the interlocking personalities involved in the switch sent the industry spinning.
Capping a year of turbulence at Random House, Joni Evans was replaced as publisher of the country's largest issuer of general-interest books, known for putting out the works of Norman Mailer, William Styron and James Michener.
She was succeeded by Harold Evans, editor in chief of the Conde Nast Traveler magazine, who is no relation to Miss Evans.


Finally, Rivals Agree to Draw In Chess Game
Anatoly Karpov tried to wear down Gary Kasparov in an endgame that went to the 84th move in five hours of play last night in Game 8 of the World Championship Chess Match, but the champion, just as stubborn, held on for a draw.
Thus, the score is still even at Kasparov 4, Karpov 4.
This was a critical battle of the match.
Kasparov had blundered in the first session Monday night and started off down one pawn last night.
Play was resumed when the referee took the champion's sealed move out of the regulation envelope and put it on the board.
Kasparov had lost the previous game on another terrible error and could have been totally demoralized had he not been able to fight grimly through the necessary trench warfare to a deadlock.


Sitcoms With Not Much in Common
To the accompaniment of appreciative guffaws, clips from such programs as "Fawlty Towers" and "The Black Adder" were shown.
Still, the inescapable conclusion of the seminar sponsored here on Monday night by the British Broadcasting Corporation was that comedy has become an increasingly serious business on both sides of the Atlantic.
Called "Joking Apart: Television Comedy in Britain and America," the conference brought together practitioners of the art at the Directors Guild of America building to examine and compare one another's work methods and product.
The American writers and directors on hand proved envious of the creative autonomy given their British counterparts, while two BBC executives expressed admiration for American television's easy access to cash and its informality.


Help Yugoslavia Look Forward
How many countries will there be in Europe after 1992?
Seven, according to the bitter gibe circulating in Croatia: the European Community and the six republics that now make up Yugoslavia.
It's no joke.
Things could turn out that way if Slobodan Milosevic and his Communist cohorts in Serbia continue to hold back constitutional and economic change and stir up ethnic tension.
Ever since Slovenia and Croatia elected non-Communist governments and moved to free the economy, Mr.
Milosevic has accused them of trying to break up Yugoslavia.
Slovenia and Croatia deny any separatist intent but want to turn Yugoslavia into a loosened confederation of sovereign republics.
That would weaken the power of the Serbs, who dominate Yugoslavia's bureaucracy and army.


Horse Show Opening Is Hardly Spectacular
The National Horse Show has been around for 107 years, long enough to qualify for antique status and, if tonight's ponderous opening- night program in front of a near-empty house at the Meadowlands is any indication, long enough to qualify for endangered species status.
The horses were as numerous and luminous as ever, the harness ponies as frenetic as ever, and septuagenarian gentlemen in black top hats and tails still wandered at ringside like throwbacks to a gentler and more genteel generation.
But there was little in the way of electricity, as evidenced by the nearly endless grand prix jumping class that commenced the evening program.
Of 34 horses entered in the World Cup Grand Prix, a qualifying event for the 1991 Volvo World Cup Final, too many, 19, soared flawlessly and easily over the initial course and into a jumpoff.


Oil Prices Drop as Rumors Lose Impact
Oil prices retreated yesterday in a market that was so sluggish traders would not even jump at rumors, as they have for weeks.
Analysts who have witnessed numerous rumor-induced buying and selling binges compared the quiet session on the New York Mercantile Exchange to reaction to "the little boy who cried 'wolf.' "


Bank Funds And C.D.'s Yield Less
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were lower for the week ended yesterday.
At the Treasury Department's regular weekly bill auction on Monday, interest rates on the new three-month and six-month Treasury bills were down sharply, to their lowest levels in more than two years.
The Government has a new budget and the Federal Reserve Board has slightly lowered the Federal funds rate, which banks and other financial institutions charge each other for temporary loans and is the main control the Federal Reserve has over short-term interest rates.
Yields are expected to move gently lower for the rest of the year, said analysts at the Bank Rate Monitor, an interest-rate publication.


It Doesn't Melt in the Desert
American troops in the Persian Gulf are savoring a new dessert in the desert -- Swiss chocolate that does not melt in the heat.
Claude Giddey, its inventor, said today that the new type of chocolate could resist temperatures of up to 120 to 140 degrees.
Mr.
Giddey, of the Geneva branch of the Battelle Research Center, would not say how the new chocolate was processed or how much had been sent to the gulf.
"All I can say is that its makeup is the same as any ordinary chocolate," he said.


Apple Cider: It's the Drink For Tonight
WONDERING just what to serve with that cauldron of eye of newt and toe of frog?
Cider would be perfect.
"Halloween is a big holiday for us," said George Zulkofske, owner of the Jericho Cider Mill on Route 106 here.


May's Debt Is Downgraded
Nearly $2 billion in senior debt issued by the May Department Stores Company and its Associated Dry Goods Corporation unit has been downgraded, the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said yesterday.
The rating change reflects May's pursuit of department store acquisitions, which is eroding measures of credit protection, S.&amp;P. said, noting that examples of May's more aggressive financial policy include the planned $325 million debt-financed acquisition of Thalhimer Brothers Inc. from Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc. and a new $250 million share- repurchase program.


Women Priests? Rome Would Sooner End Celibacy
To the Editor:
An interview with Dr.
Graham Leonard, Anglican Bishop of London, who sees the ordination of women as inevitable (news article, Oct. 14), gives the impression that the ordination of women and the marriage of the Anglican clergy are equal obstacles to eventual reunion with Rome.
This is not the case.
Clerical celibacy has long been practiced in the Western Roman Catholic Church, increasing in popularity after the Cluniac (monastic) reform movement in France in the late 10th century.
The most notable attempts to encourage celibacy were those of the Council of Toledo in 633, which decreed that clerics could marry only with the permission of their bishops, and of Gregory the Great and Leo IX to ameliorate the widespread problem of simony.
Clerical celibacy was not universally imposed on the secular clergy, however, until the reign of Gregory VII (1073-85).
It was further encoded as part of church discipline by the Second Lateran Council of 1139, which nullified any marriage attempted by a cleric.
Hence, the celibacy of the clergy is a matter of discipline, rather than of doctrine, unlike the opposition to the ordination of women, which is held to be doctrinal in nature.
Thus, the Western Catholic Church could change this disciplinary practice at any time to accommodate a married clergy (and indeed it allows Anglican clergymen who join Rome and take orders to retain their spouses, although they may not remarry), but is far less likely to alter what is considered by many to be a dogmatic and therefore a theological opposition to the ordination of women.
EDWARD T.  SHARKEY Washington, Oct. 15, 1990


Brierley Gains Control
Brierley Investments Ltd., an investment vehicle for the New Zealand entrepreneur Sir Ron Brierley, today won control of Britain's second-largest hotel group, Mount Charlotte Investments P.L.C.
Brierley, which now has at least 52.5 percent of Mount Charlotte, had to make its $1.25 billion bid in September after buying a 10.1 percent stake from the Kuwait Investment Office.
That purchase took its holding above 30 percent, a level that compels a bid under British takeover rules.
Mount Charlotte has more than 100 hotels and 14,000 rooms.


